r2304 12293615 58949
PRINCE ROBERTS MESSAGE, to my Lord of ESSEX: With an Answer to his desires touching the con∣struction of the Lawes, and certaine other Points to the great satisfaction of all People. Wherein is Declared his wicked Resolutions, mask'd under the pretention of Loyalty unto his Uncle (our Kings Majesty) Together with his desire of a Pitch-field in Duns∣ore-Heath, with the true relation of his wicked and Tyrannicall proceedings where . Also the true Relation of a Challenge hee gave unto his Excellencie, &c. Together with the Entertainment hee and his Brother (Prince MAVRICE) found in Shrewsbury by the Trai∣ed Bands, and other pious people there inhabiting. ALSO, The wonderfull mercy of God shewed towards his EXCELLENCIE, in delivering his Honour from a fatall Conspirary pre∣tended against his Person at Worcester. London, Printed for THO: BANKES, Octob. 6. 1642.
The discovery of a wonderfull powder-plot pretended against his Ex∣cellencie, at St. Peters Church at Worcester. CErtaine of Sir John Byrons Cavaleers having intelligence of my Lord of Essex his comming to VVorcester, and withall knowing his Piety to be such as that he seldome neglect Gods divine Service, thought there to have un∣dermined his Person, making the Church the place and Sanctuary of their wicked Actions, for there was a certaine Vault under the Church, where they had con∣veyed three Barrels of Powder, upon which they laid heape of dead mens Bones for to blow that side of the Church where my Lord was to Seate himselfe, (but see the won∣derfull mercy of God, who was a watch eye still on his be∣loved) no sooner was my Lord in his Coach comming to the Church but that the Sexton came running to his Excel∣lency and said that he feared some mischief to be hatch a∣gainst his Person, alleaging that there were three men that did often frequent the Church Vault, but he knew not their Intentions, and that the Key of the Vault doore was stole from him, which made the suspition the more, on his words my Lord cause the doore to be broke open, and at their entrance they saw three men stand in Armour, whom they tooke and aprehended, and after further search, they found as aforesaid, Barrels of Powder under a heape of Bones with great store of Pla there hidden, all which my Lord caused to be taken away, ding the three men up to be censured by the Honourable Houses of Parliament.
PRINCE ROBERTS Message to my Lord of ESSEX.
HEere am I faine to speake of a Prince that deserves not the title of a Subject, one who pretends Piety in his tongue, but car∣ries I feare meere Irre∣ligion in his heart, and if his future Actions bee correspondent or any way equivalent to his for∣mer exploits, I shall greatly doubt whether I speak of a Christian or no, it requires an Age nere upon to uncase the whole story of his wicked proceedings acted heere on our Brittish-shore; therefore I will of his late those that were of his Message to my was to this effect, That Generall of the Par∣liaments Army, without the consent of his Soveraigne, but rather to confront and oppose his Maiesties Per∣son; that therefore, hee might with as iust Grounds (though being a orraige) by the Law of  assist Maiesty against any such person, that  a∣ny occasion should disobey His Royall Command, ∣ging that a King though hee raigne ever so Tyranni∣call, impose an vniust Tax on the Subiects bee so heavie, yet notwithstanding are they by the Laws of God not to withdraw their Duty and Obedience from him. To this I answer, That the sacred Writ binds a Subject to obey a good Soveraigne, not (as I thinke) to heare with a one; rather to procure abatement in rigour Authority, than to su a continuall perseverance of a worse [ ∣edientiam] 'tis true [So hc Conditione, si legitime Impert Magistratus non Tyrannicè.] Wee promise obedience to a Magistrate no farther then his acti∣ons are done legally, according to the accustory lawes of the Land and the right meaning thereof, not according to his owne Constructions and In∣ventions; so suppose there should be a double con∣struction in some particular points of Law, who more fitter to decide them then they that made them, who more fitter to Correct and abate the ri∣gour
of th of the fundamentall Spring from whence they flow, and shall  Parliaments ther are the chiefe founders of Lawes be exempted from Construing them (heavens forbid) withall concerning the Taxes hee mentions 'tis not a little knowne to the great griefe of many a poore Sub∣ject, the strickt Monopolyes and quotidian taxati∣ons this Kingdome of England is said for a long time hath beene sheckled and fettred in, but if the corruption of Layers and
Judges be such as to maintaine illegall proceedings in a common wealth by their vnjust exactions, yet may good Subjects (and that with a cleere Conscience) neglect a will∣ing performance of the same; Tributs may well be denied where unjustly exacted, (according to the common and true proverbe) and though the Cava∣leers alledge the Law for all their Actions, tis wil∣lingly granted both to His Majesty then, and all his good Subjects, so farre it tis executed and ground∣ed upon Justice, but no farther; and I could hearti∣ly wish it were in full execution upon all such de∣manders that require Justice from others, when (in all their Actions) who more unjust then themselves why call they not for Justice upon those that pill∣age poore peoples houses without any right or rea∣son for the same, why not for those that Ravish all they meete with, firing and destroying all in their way, murdering poore Infants that scarce have the discretion to call for succour or aid: no, they expect that their owne Tyrannicall Actions must speScot-free; He pleads likewise for the Prorogative of the King (not regarding the priviledge of the Subject) alleaging that in the behalfe of his Ʋ he is Resolved to live and dye: To this, I aske what Prerogative is debarred from His Majesty, ought that remained for the safety, and honour of his per∣son, and the good of this his Kingdome; but I true∣ly suppose that he makes this but a cloake for his proceedings, for tis well known there's no Preroga∣tive for him allotted in this Realme, for the pil∣laging of Townes, and firing of Houses. The true COPPIE and forme of his Message was as followeth. MY LORD, I Heare you are Generall of an Army, sent by the agreement of both Houses of Parliament (under the pretence of Subduing some Malignant per∣sons unto thse parts) but we greatly feare you  at some higher power, namely your owne Soveraigne, if your intents are such, give but the least notice thereof, And I shall be ready in His behalf to give you an en∣counter in a Picht feild, at Dunsmore-heath, the 10. day of October next, and if you thinke it too much la∣bour and expences to draw your Forces thither, I shall as willingly for my own part expect private satisfaction at your hands for the same heere, and that performed by a single Duell; which proffer if you please to accept,
you shall not finde me backward in performing what I have said or promised, I know my cause to be so Iust that I need not, for what I doe is agreeable both to the es of God and man, in the defence of true Religion, a Kings Prerogative, and Vncles right, and a King∣domes safety; Thinke it therefore not strange that a Forraigne should take footing upon your English shore with intention to draw the Sword, when the Law of Armes promps him on to that Resolution, you cannot taxe your King of ought, without too much clemencie and goodnesse shewed towards his people, when that his Person is thus molested by his owne Subjects, suppose that He had swayed his Scepter with a strict hand, rai∣ning in the Bridle of Authority with harsh Taxati∣ons and Tyrannie (which 'tis too well knowne he did e∣ver abhorre as infectious to his Sacred son) yet I say were it so, the Subjects are not thereupon to with∣draw their Obedience and Duty neither by the Lawes of God nor the Lawes of man, for they are however or at leastwise should be still his Subiects; for these rea∣sons and divers others that I could alledge, I am resol∣ved in the defence of so just a Cause to hazard my life and being, ad endeavour the destruction of all those that shall any way oppose my Resolution therein. Now have I said all, and what more you expect of me to be said shall be delivered in a larger field then a small sheet of Paper, and that by my Sword and not my Pen, in the interim I am your friend till I meet you next.
But before this Message was delivered unto his Excellency, newes was brought that Prince Roberthad received a dangerous wound in the head by Sands in a  within three miles of W that this matter  their Consideration. This Prince had  great mischiefe to many  this Kingdome, likewise hee and all his followers ever they goe, leave not a house in their way  they tooke from one Mr. Hambury a Gentleman of ¦cestershire, seaven hundred pound in money beside  and other spoyles they tooke from his House. This P with his Brother Prince Maurice, being drove from ¦cester by Colonell Fines his Souldiers, betooke th with all their forces toward Shrewsbury, where they  such hot Entertainment that they were quickly take a flight thorow Severne for their safety, for S¦bury is so inviron'd with water, that there is but for passage unto the Towne, which the Townesm knowing their advantage did guard that with the Bands, so that the Prince being likewise pursued  Reare by Colonell Fines, was faine to take water his followers. FINIS.
A CONTINVATION Of certain Speciall and Remarkable passages from both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and divers other parts of the Kingdome, from Wendnesday the 5. of October till the Eight of October. 1642. Containing these particulars, viz. 1. A true Relation of the taking of a Shippe at Yarmouth comming from Hol∣land with great store of Ammunition, 150. Commanders, and 400. barrells of Powder and other provisions. 2. The intercepting of certaine Letters in the said shippe by an accident, and their bringing to the Parliament, by which it was enformed that there is a∣nother Shippe comming from the Queene with great store of provisions and Monies, And an Order sent to the Earle of Warwicke to use all possible meanes to intercept the same. 3. A true Relation of the Kings sending for the Masters of the Mint from the Tower, with an Order of Parliament against their going. 4. A true relation of his Majesties sending of the Lord Faulkland into Ireland, with a Relation of the Parliaments proceedings concerning the Earle of Leicester. 5. A vote of the House of Commons for the expelling of one of their members. 6. Of the Commitment of one Master Price to the Gatehouse for speaking of words against the Parliament. 7. A True Relation of Sir Ralph Hopton and some other of his confederates possessing themselves of Sir Nicholas Slanies Castle in Cornewell. 8. Of the Bill agreed upon by the Parliament for the Synod to meete by the fifth of November next. 9. Of the Parliamens sending into Ireland for the Earle of Antrim taken pri∣soner by the Scotts in the Noth of Ireland. 10. A true relation of the Earle of Stanfords securing of Hereford with 500. horse and 2000. foote. 11. A certaine relation of the Kings fortifying of Shrewsbury, and sending of Prince Rober with his maine forces to Bridge North and some further pro∣ceedings of that Army. 12. Of Captaine Stradlings making escape into Ireland. 13. The bringing of the High sheriffe of Lincolne to the Parliament. 14. The Examination of the keeper of the Gatehouse, concerning Captaine Leggs escape. 15. A relation of certaine Letters to the Parliament from Holland.
A CONTINVATION OF Certaine Speciall and Remarkable passages from both Houses of Parliament and divers other parts of this Kingdome, From Wednesday the fifth of October, till Sater∣day the Eight of October 1642. Thurseday the 6. of October. THere came Letters to both Houses of Parliament by one Captaine Iohnson from Yarmouth, Infor∣ming them that they have there taken a shippe comming from Holland with great store of A∣munition about 400. barrells of Pouder, ten pee∣ces of Ordnance and 150. of the Prince of Oranges chiefe Officers & Souldiers, & some Treasure & other Armes which the Queen had procured to assist his Majesty, and they intended to have landed there at Newcastle, but the ship sprang a leake at Sea, and so was forced to come into into Yarmouth, upon the first taking of the shippe they pretending they had brought those provisi∣ons for the Parliament, but upon further examination it appea∣red otherwise, however by good providence they are now likely to be imployed for the service of the Parliament: The ship be∣ing ordered to be safely conveyed up to London by the Earle of Warwicke, and the Prince of Oranges Commanders, also to come
Master thereof and company having certaine Letters which they brought from the Queene; tyed them up in a peece of Sayle cloth, and with a cord tyed a great Cannot bullet to the end thereof to make it sincke, and so threw it into the Sea by the side of the shippe to prevent discovery. But the Letters being found were also brought to the Parlia∣ment and broake open, but the wett had so defaced the writing they could scarsely be read, onely thus much was informed by them, that the Queene hath provided another shippe with great store of Amunition and moneys to come speedily after this shippe to Newcastle to relieve his Maiesties forces. But the Parliament upon consideration of this businesse have sent to the Earle of Warwicke to desire him that withall possible vigilency he would guard the Coasts from Holland, whereby that shippe may be also intercepted in her passage to Newcastle. There was a certaine report made to the Parliament, that the King hath sent to his Coyners of the Mint at the Tower to bring their coyning mould and other implements, and come to his Army at Shrewesbury, but the Parliament have sent ∣der Or∣der to the Masters of the Mint that they shall not goe. There was also certaine information given to the houses by letters that his Majestie hath sent the Lord Faulkland his cheife Secretary over into Ireland, with some private instructions con∣cerning the Army, but the full end, and intent thereof cannot as yet be learned. However the Parliamen have ordered that Master Goodwin, and Maister Reynolds members of their house appointed for that service shall have their speedy dispatches and be sent over to Ire∣land, but the Earle of Leicester it is much feared will scarsely be permited to goe over at all, for that he refused to shew to the Parliament his instructions which he had from his Majestie for the ordering of the affaires of Ireland whereby the Parliament have a great Iealousie of him.
Captaine Price a member of the House of Commons hath been very busie there abouts in puting the Comission of Array in Ex∣ecution, and doeth give out great threats against such as refuse to obey it, where upon it was voted by the Commons that hee should be expelled the house, and a nother to be chosen in his roome. There was also one Master Price a Suffolke man brought be∣fore the Commons and cōmitted to Prison for saying that the Earle of Pembrooke was an Ass, A knave, and a foole, and that the Parliament men, were noe better then a company of beggerly fellowes, chosen out of the very scume of the people &c. The houses received certaine information by letters out of Cornewell that Sir Ralpeh Hopton and some other of the Marques of Hartfords cheife Confederates, that left the Marques to Myard for that they could not gett passage wiih him over the Sev, have been at Plymouth and have pillaged, and spoyled divers ho∣nest men there abouts, and that he and his company are now marched into Cornwell and have possessed them selves of a very strong Castle there belonging to Sir Nicholas Slay, who is also one of theire Confederates, but the Marques of Hartford is Cardife Castle in Wales. The Parliament have resceived the bill for the assembly of the Clergy to consider of the settling of Religion and Ceremonies and they have added to the List divers Scotch Ministers▪ that are sent over by the Kingdome of Scotland, to ioyne with our Assem∣bly for the setling of an uniformitie in Religion in both King∣domes and it is ordered that the meeting shall begin by the 5. of November next. The houses of Parliament have tooke Order for the sending to the Scotch forces in Ireland that they would send up to the Par∣liament the Earle of Antrim an Arch-Rebell whom they touke prisoner in the North of Ireland, that he may be heare examined concerning the Rebells proceedings. It was informed the houses by letters from Hereford-shire that Couny do much repent themselves for theire Malignancie a∣gainst
the Parliament for that so the cring of the Kings Cava∣liers tends to nothing but distruction, and therefore they have sent 400. Voluntiers to the Earle of Essex, and his Excellencie hath sent the Earle of Stanford with 500. horse and 2000 to Hereford, and that they have possessed them selves of that Citty and fortifie it for the Parliament. It was also informed the hovses that the Earle of Bath is  by the Earle of Bedfords Troopes in Devonshire and that he and divers others of the Marquis of Hartfords Cavalliers are bringing up to the Parliament. The Marguis of Hartfords Steward was upon Thursday last brought up to the parliament, and Commited to the Gateho There came more Letters to the Houses from Shrewesbury in∣forming that his Majestie makes great provisions for the ce∣ing of Shrewesbury, but Prince Robert with the maine force is marched to Bridge North a place of speciall Eminencie, where they intend to place them selves for a pitcht battell, the King to stay at Shrewsbury and hath reserved a part of his forces for a Garison there, his Majesty hath caused all the houses without the Walls of the Towne to be taken downe that so he may with more Conveniencie plant his Ordnance to secure the Towne, but the Townesmen doe not relish these proceedings and are much troubled at it. Vpon Friday last the Parliament received further information by Letters from Shrewesbury, that Prince Robert with his Maie∣sties maine forces is matched from Bridge North, and go more neere to the Lord Generalls Army, and that hee is now within 15 miles of Worcester, and that some sudden attempt is expected betwixt the two Armies: It is boasted that the Kings Forces is 20000 strong, but it is thought hee wants a quarter of the number. It was also informed the Houses that upon the Earle of War∣wickes taking of the two shippes before Newcastle Captain ¦stradling Made escape from his shippe in his long boate, and that he is now gone into Ireland.
As also it was informed that the Lord Paukt is of certaine gone over into Ireland with the Lord Faulkeland, and that the in∣tent of their going is to wast over a Regement or two of the forces, there to assist his Majestie. This afternooe Sir Robert Hern High Shreiffe for the Coun∣ty of Lincolne who was lately apprehended by the Parliaments Forces in that Crunty for his great delinquency in opposing the County in their yealding obedience to the Parliament, and a cheife Array man, who upon his first apprehending was so unru∣ly, that the Country was enforced to tie him in a Cart, and carry him to Boston prison, was this day brought with a strong guard to London, and committed prisonor to the Tower, till the fur∣ther leasure of the Parliament to examine him. Also the under Keeper of the Gate-house that had charge of Captaine Legg, was that after-noune brought before the Com∣mons and examined cencerning Captaine Leggs escape, but would not confesse any thing concerning the same onely that the cheife Keeper hath also absented himselfe, and as it is con∣jectured is gone a long with Captaine Legg to his Majesty. Where upon it was Ordered that the under keeper should be Comitted to the Serjeant at Armes, and a more strict course to be taken for his Examination. There came also Letters to the Houses from Master Srickland at the Hague, informing the faire correspondency which the State desire to hold with the Parliament, & that with there per∣mission, there shalbee no supplies sent from thence to his Maies∣tie, But the Queen by underhand dealing, and by the meanes of the Prince of Orange hath procuredsome provisions which shee intends to bring along with her into England, there being 14-sayle of Shipps that lye ready for her Transportation. FINIS.
