R325 12611161 64386
A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE COMPANY OF GROCERS, From their ORIGINAL. TOGETHER, With their Case and Condition (in their present Circumstances) truly stated. AS ALSO How their Revenue is settled, for Payment of their Charities; and Provision made for the well-governing their Members and Mystery, to preserve a Succession in their Society. Designed for Information of all, and Benefit of the Members, and for Satisfaction and Encourage∣ment of their Friends and Benefactors. LONDON, Printed by Eliz. Holt, for the Company of Grocers. MDCLXXXIX.
TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF King WILLIAM AND Queen MARY. May it please Your Majesties, HAVING already presumed to offer to Your Majesties Sacred Hands, a mean Present, (in a small Treatise,) Entitled, NOSCE TEIPSƲM, wherein I have endeavoured to give some account, how I have spent my Holy Days, since I have been Clerk of the Company of GROCERS; with the Reasons and Arguments inducing me to join in the Communion of our National Church, when I had examined and tryed all other different Persuasions. Your Majesties Gracious Acceptance of that, together with You my Dread Sove∣reign's
vouchsafing to become our Supreme Master, have embolden'd me to offer at Your Majesties Sacred Feet the following Sheets, as the Product of my Working Days in the same Service. I may not hope Your Majesties should spare time to look farther; but I most humbly be∣seech Your Majesties to cast Your Gracious Eyes on the few following Lines, which I have recorded in our Register, immediately before the entry of such Your Majesties Gracious Condescention: Whereby I humbly Hope it will plainly appear, no other Company in London, might so justly presume, to beg the Honour of Adoption by a Crowned Head. That Your Majesties Sacred Names may be Illustrious, from this little Orb, through∣out all Your Majesties Dominions, to the ends of the Earth, shall be the daily, and hearty Prayers of, May it please Your Majesties, Your Majesties most Dutiful, Loyal, and Obedient Subject and Servant, WILLIAM RAVENHILL, Clerk of the Company of Grocers.
A short Account of the Grocers. AULA AROMATARIORUM (vulgariter Grocers Hall) olim nominabatur Domus Illustris∣simi Domini Fitz-water, unius è Regni hujus Paribus, quam, regnante Henrico Sexto, Societati Aromatariorum vendidit. Sita est in ipso urbis Meditullio, cui adjacet Hortus, qui Aeri liberiori spatium det, necnon Area prae foribus satis ampla, quâ Senatorum, vice Comitumque, dum Praetori, rebusque publicis inserviunt, Nobilium etiam quacunque de causa huc accedentium, currus recipiantur; ac ea de causa Communitas Aromatariorum, post Conflagrationem Urbis horrendam, re-edifica∣bat, ampliorem fecit, & omnis generis necessariis adornavit, ut Domus ad Summum Magistratum magnificè recipiendum prae omnibus aliis maximè Commoda Videretur: Summus enim Magistra∣tus Vicem gerit ipsius Regis; nullis igitur sumptibus pepercit Aro∣matariorum Societas, ut receptaculum esset tanto Officio, tanto Ma∣gistratu Dignum; nam in hoc opere perficiendo, multa expenduntur Millia Solidorum, ut Aedificium esset Splendidum, aptum, & suis ci∣vibus conveniens, qui in loco hoc sese solemnibus Conviviis, amicitiam suam invicem testantur & augent, & ab omni Civitatis parte congregati huc accedunt, ut mutuam erga seipsos Benevolentiam exerceant. Hoc quoque honori & gloriae totius Regni vertitur, dum egredientes, & Domi redeuntes, Peregrini & Domestici, Aulam hanc conspicuam mirantur simul & amant. Quod ad antiquitatem Spectat egregiae hujus Societatis, Originem suam longâ serie deducit à Mercatoribus Romanis, qui cum Orien∣tali Orbis Regione commercia habuerunt pro Aromatibus compa∣randis, &, devictâ hâc Insulâ, Urbem habitabant. Quibus Nostratium in re nautica peritia Originem suam debere videtur, saltem ab illis multum incrementi accepit, atque adeò Maris
Imperium, quod haec Insula largè latéque per multa retro Secula obtinuit, eisdem aliquo modo acceptum refert. Quapropter in Divitiis, & abundanti rerum Copiâ, caeteras omnes Communitates facilè superabant. Hinc Ortae sunt Familiae illustrissimae, mox Prolem illustriorem daturae. Haec Communitas, Corpus fit politicum, sub cura & guber∣natione quatuor Custodum, qui vocari possint Superintendentes, nomine Magistro excluso, ut Capiti Coronato semper locus relinquetur, quem locum Carolus Secundus (Beatae Memoriae) Rex implere non dedignatus est; Cujus Nomen, ut aeternitati consecraret gratissima Societas, Statuam ejus erexit in Byrsa Regia, & in Registro suo Nomen ejus inscriptum habet, ut testimonium sit posteris gra∣titudinis suae erga Regem tam Benignum, qui Chartam illi fixam red∣didit & firmam; quâ in re Exemplum proposuit Regibus suis suc∣cessoribus, ut favore suo perpetuo Communitatem hanc foverent, ut perpetuum sit Charitatis Diversorium, & fertilissimum Mer∣catorum opulentorum, piorum Civium, & fidelium Subditorum, Seminarium. Which may be thus read in English: GROCERS HALL was once the Mansion-House of the Lord Fitz-water, a Peer of this Realm, of whom the Company purchased the same, in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, being situate in the Centre of the City of London, and having a fair open Garden behind for Air and Diversion, and before it, within the Gate, a large Court-yard, for the reception of Coaches, as the Aldermen and Sherriffs attend the Lord Mayor on Pub∣lick Affairs, especially from Guild-Hall, and the Sessions
at the Old-Baily; or as the Nobility, and other Persons of Quality, shall either pay their Visits, or be thither in∣vited by his Lordship: For these Reasons the Company of Grocers, after the late dreadful Fire, rebuilt and inlarged it with all Offices and Accommodations, far beyond any other Place that ever was, or now is, for the most Com∣modious Seat of the Chief Magistrate, as he is for the time being his Majesty's Representative in this Famous City, at the expence of many thousand pounds, as designing it for encouragement of their Members, and conveniency of the Citizens resorting thither, as to the Fountain of Justice, from all Parts of the City; as it may also redound to the Honour of the Kingdom, being conspicuous (in their transient view) to Embassadors and Foreigners, as well as Natives of his Majesty's Dominions, passing and re∣passing through this City. And as this Society may boast of its Antiquity, deriving its Original from Merchants in Rome, trading in Spices to the Eastern Parts, who from Rome transplanted them∣selves to this City with the Conquest of this Island, and first gave Wings to Navigation here, from whence this Island hath been able to give Law (by Sea) to all the World; so hath it (above all other Companies in London) abounded in wealthy Members, trading both at home and abroad; from whence have sprung many honourable Families, being incorporate by the Name of Four-Wardens, as Super-intendents, without a Master, and so most capable of Adoption by a Crowned Head; King Charles the Se∣cond of Blessed Memory, having been their last Sovereign Master; and, as other Companies have done, in Memory
of the King from whom they have received the like Ho∣nour, so this Company hath set up his said late Majesty's Statue in the Royal Exchange, and recorded his Sacred Name here in their Register, that so the Generations to come may know how far they are Debtors to his Me∣mory, for the Foundation he laid, whereon his Royal Suc∣cessors might build, to carry on and complete their Hap∣piness, in restoring and setling so Pious a Nursery of Cha∣rities, and fruitful Seminary of Eminent Merchants and Good Citizens. God save the King and Queen.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE CHARLES EARL OF Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Houshold. My Lord, THough my Station be but low in this little Province; yet I can (now) without Breach of my good Behaviour, humbly boast of the Honour of being (therein) Your Lordship's Fellow-Servant, under one Sovereign Master, so Good and Gracious, that He delights in nothing more, than to encourage the Diligent and the Faithful. The Company of Grocers, who have suffered an Eclipse of late Years, from the sad Effects of War and Fire, are now, under the Sun-shine of His Ma∣jesty's Gracious Influence, to be restored to their Pristine Lustre, so as with Courage and Comfort they may improve their Privileges and Immunities
for Publick and Diffusive Good, in discharge of their great Trusts, agreeable to the Original End and Design of their Corporation. My Lord, Though this Society had not the Mammon of Profit and Advantage, to Court Your Lordship's Patronage; yet I may adventure to tell Your Lordship, that by implanting Your Self into it, You gave the Grocers no more than their due; for it cannot be doubted, that a Body Politick, that makes out so fair a claim to a Crowned Head, can be defective in their just Title to the most Honour∣able and Heroick Member. This I have here en∣deavoured to demonstrate, as a Testimony, how am∣bitious I am to manifest my self Their Majesties Dutiful and Loyal Subject; and May it please Your Lordship, Your Honours most Faithful, Obliged, and most Humble Servant, William Ravenhill, Clerk of the Company.
To the Right Honourable, Right Worshipful, and the rest of the Worthy MEMBERS of the SOCIETY of the MYSTERY of GRO∣CERY, London. William Ravenhill, their Clerk, humbly offers and prays their Acceptance and Perusal of these following Papers; as a Testi∣mony of his Hearty Desires, and Sincere Endeavours, to vin∣dicate the Reputation, and improve the Interest of this Society. AS soon as by the good Providence of God I obtained the Favour, and had the Happiness to be chosen your Clerk, I resolved with my utmost Diligence, to pursue and perform my Duty in this Place, and thereby gratefully answer the expectation of my Friends, who promoted my Election; and also lay hold on so fair an opportunity, to ingra∣tiate my self into the Favour and Esteem of Good Men: Being convinced, that if I should neglect my Duty, it would render my Folly and Ingratitude more conspi∣cuous to the World: Therefore, that I might in doing the one avoid the other, I endeavoured, in the first place, to inform my self of the true State and Condition of the Company; upon Inquest whereof, I found it plain and manifest, that for want of Knowledge of the Truth thereof, many Reproaches and Reflexions were cast upon this Society, both from Strangers (with whom
they have been no way concerned) and also their Cre∣ditors, who rendred them obnoxious in Courts of Law and Equity, and before the Commissioners for Chari∣table Uses, as if they had been a Company that possessed a great Revenue, sufficient to pay all their Debts; yet were so averse from doing that, that they wasted and consumed their Estate in Feasting themselves, refusing to pay, unless they were compelled by Chargeable Suits; which not only aggravated their Creditors, but alienated the Affections of many good Persons, as well Members as others; and caused many chargeable Suits and vexatious Prosecutions against them, notwithstan∣ding the great Care and Endeavours of some Worthy and Good Members, who used all possible means to avoid the same: Therefore I made it my great Design to ac∣quaint my self with all their Affairs, and past Tran∣sactions, that I might be able to make a true Represen∣tation of the Company's Condition, both what it was before they contracted their Debts, and how they be∣came indebted; what they have already done towards it, and what means and methods they may best use and prosecute to discharge themselves; to the end those great Reproaches and Prejudices (which through Mis-appre∣hensions and false Reports have been cast on this Com∣pany) may be removed. And every true-hearted Mem∣ber, that bears a Christian respect to the Pious Memory of our Ancestors, (who were Worthy Benefactors,) and would in discharge of his Duty commend himself, after their Example, to Posterity, may willingly and chear∣fully
lay to his helping hand. And as a farther Testi∣mony of my hearty desires to serve the Members, having so briefly stated the Company's Case, I shall endeavour to give you a short account of the Antiquity, and first Creation, and Continuance of the GROCERS, as far and clear as I can make Conjecture, or have received any probable Account; also I have regulated and di∣gested the Company's Books into an orderly Method; as also their Evidences to clear their Titles to their several Rents, Lands, and Houses, and the several Schools un∣der their Government: And also the several Ecclesiasti∣cal Livings in the disposition of this Society, with the Names of their Founders, and how they became Vested in their Right; and also other Privileges peculiar to this Society; and how their whole Revenue (as a most righteous Sanction) is settled to secure the due payment of all their yearly Charities; so as it may appear obvious and plain to be understood by every individual Member, of which it will not be proper here to give an account; but I refer to the Books and Records themselves, more fit to be inspected at this Hall, by such as have Right to know them, than to be exposed to view of others, whom it no way concerns. To which I have added a short account of some En∣largement of Privileges, granted them by King Charles the Second, after the Quo Warranto brought against them; which though it were an Invasion of the Subject's Rights, yet, by the over-ruling Providence of God, it became an occasion of advantage to this Company, as it put them
upon searching into, and Examination of their Consti∣tution, so as to discover their Defects and Irregularities; and by advice of Learned Counsel to obtain a subse∣quent Charter, without dependance on, or relating to any Surren∣der; and without injury to, or interfering with any other Company, otherwise than to regulate mis-usage, and to preserve their own Rights; but rather tending to the benefit and advantage of the whole City, as it explains and settles the Species of their Mystery, and incorporates the whole (in London and within three Miles) into one Body, to answer the Original End and Design of their Corporation, and to prevent a Spurious Mixture, (the Cause of all Abuse and Disorder in every Mystery,) by putting in Execution the By-Laws and Ordinances, made and provided, pursuant thereto, for well-govern∣ing and regulating their Members and Mystery; which By-Laws and Ordinances are now examined and approved of (as the Law directs) by the Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners for the Custody of the Great Seal, and the Lord Chief Justice of either Bench, (Sir John Holt, and Sir Henry Pollexfen,) to oblige all Persons using their Mystery, as Grocers, Confectioners, Druggists, Tobacconists, or Tobacco-Cutters, in London and three Miles distant, (as being so incorporate and declared a part of their Myste∣ry,) to a compliance therewith, in order to support their Charities, and to preserve a Succession of Members in the Company.
THE COMPANY'S CASE Briefly Stated. MOST part of the said Company's Revenue is charged with yearly Charities to several Parishes, Places, and Ʋses, amounting to near the yearly Profits they receive; most part whereof consisted of Houses in London, which were all consumed by the late dreadful Fire, when they expected to have ad∣vanced great Summs of Money, by way of Fines, on renewing of Leases, towards Payment of their Debts. They had also heretofore many and great Summs of Money paid into their Hands, as a Fund for the Ʋses following, (viz.) To pay yearly Summs in Coals, Faggots, and Money, to several Parishes and Wards about London, and elsewhere. To several Prisons for Redemption and Release of Prisoners, To the Poor Members of the Company. To be lent to Young Men that had served their Times to Members of this Com∣pany on Security, with little or no Interest, to set up, and to be returned again. To buy Impropriations, for maintenance of Ministers, where their Livings are small. And To maintain several Schools and Alms-Houses. They complyed punctually with all their Trusts, continuing in very great Credit and Reputation, until the sad Effects of War and Fire rendred them uncapable to discharge their yearly Charities, where they have no Fund left. And The remaining part of their great Debts which they contracted, as followeth, viz. Anno 1640. To accommodate the late King Charles the First, in his Exigencies, on Security of some of his Peers, — 4500 l. Anno 1642. To Subdue the Rebellion in Ireland, and Relieve his said late Ma∣jesty's Protestant Subjects there in distress, — 9000 l. Anno 1643. They were compelled to lend the City, for which they had their Common Seal, — 4500 l. All which they took up on the Company's Seal, nor were singular therein, but necessitated thereto, in compliance with all other Companies, and indeed with the whole City.
Ʋpon their taking up this Money, they made a By-Law to levy the same on them∣selves, if their Stock fell short; and so they continued payment of their Interest; and as one Creditor called for his Money in, they took up of others, and paid them off, depending upon getting in their said Principal; all which failed them, till at last their sole hope was of advancing Money by renewing of Leases, many whereof were nigh expired; but the Fire in 1666. consumed their whole Revenue in London; they having already paid for Interest of Money, between 1640. and 1666.—30000 l. As their Debts exceeded any other Companies, so their loss herein was exceeding great, so that now they were uncapable any longer to pay Debts or Charities. They applied themselves to the Parliament, then sitting, on their said By-Law, but were rejected, as binding to no more than were Parties to it, most of whom were dead. They had then no means to raise Money, but by letting their Ground to Builders for Fines, on long Leases, great part whereof they were compelled to, by decree of the Judges at Clifford's-Inn. And by voluntary Subscriptions, both which were set on foot soon after the Fire; and to encourage Subscriptions, Sir John Cutler, erected the first Building in the Garden. They raised considerable Summs, and propounded to pay their Creditors their Prin∣cipal, part thereof down, and the rest at two Payments. And after many Meetings, most of their Creditors inclined to accept of such Pro∣posals, finding how it must be advanced; but some of their Members being backward, and some Creditors ill advised, Sued the Company, and seized their Hall in Ruines, which put a stop to all, though those Creditors themselves repent this; afterwards loosing their Charges, and glad to comply on lower terms, than at first offered. Afterwards the Company raise Money, what they could of kind Members them∣selves, and take up the residue on the Assignment of the Sequestration and Conveyance of all their Estate, to pay off the Creditors that Sequestred, and some other remaining proportions to Creditors, who had not yet received any: And to supply what was wanting, they let their Land in Ireland, on Fine, sinking their Rent to 10 l. per Annum. But the Hall continuing in Ruines, the Company was thereby rendred reproachful. The Apprentices bound at other Halls, and turned over. The Freemen take their Freedoms of other Companies. And all Benefactors decline as despairing of any good to Posterity. So that the Members every year dying and failing, and many removing into the Country, and none to succeed in their Places, It must needs follow, that the Company in few years must dissolve for want of a Succession of Members, which would most reproachfully have rendred the Members then living, who were numerous, and equal, if not more eminent, than any other Company, not only most ungrateful to their Predecessors, who have been so liberal Benefactors, and have left such Grounds (though the Buildings were so consumed by Fire) yet now built on, gives a great hope to Posterity, but also obnoxious to Poste∣rity.
The consideration whereof alone, moved Sir John Moore, another Worthy Mem∣ber, (then next in course to succeed in the Chair,) to repair the Body of the Hall, and also Sir James Edwards, and other kind Members, to enlarge it with Com∣modious Buildings for the Seat of a Chief Magistrate; that it might not only encou∣rage the Freemen, Apprentices, and Benefactors, to preserve the Company a Nur∣sery of Charity, and Seminary of good Citizens, but also answer the Charge of the Building, in improving the yearly Revenue of the Company; and is indeed (if rightly considered) in the Company's present Circumstances, of greater advantage to the Company, than any one thing that hath been done for them. For I. It hath much incouraged the Apprentices and Freemen, so that whereas there used to be bound one, two, or three Apprentices in a Month, and one or two made free before, and those but poor Artificers; they encreased afterwards to a far greater Number, as well of Freemen, as Apprentices; and many of them of good Quality. II. It hath given great satisfaction to several Eminent Members, who have de∣clared themselves very inclinable to contribute largly towards discharge of the Com∣pany's Debts and Charities, if they see but any Encouragement from the rest of the Members. III. This Building, though it amounts to much more than what it was at first de∣signed, yet a great part thereof hath been freely laid down, on purpose for this work; and whatever is farther laid down towards it, (which it is hoped the whole will be raised by kind Members to answer these good ends,) would never have been so given, but for this very purpose. And that the Building and Beautifying the Hall, may not be a bait to Creditors again to seize it, so again to discourage the Members, The Hall, and the Company's Revenue, is, by advice of Counsel, settled by Con∣veyance and Decree. I. Subject to secure the Money so taken up to discharge the Sequestrations, &c. And when those, and what Monies they should be so necessitated to take up to compleat the Buildings, shall be discharged. II. Then to secure (so far as the same will extend) the yearly Charities where∣with the Company is chargeable, by many Benefactors who so heretofore left Money in their Hands, as a Fund to secure the same; no part whereof now remains; as being a trust they are liable in the first place, as a Duty incumbent on them, both to avoid a Curse, and in order to obtain a Blessing from God upon their Endeavours; and also to avoid prosecution of the Commissioners, upon the Statute for Charitable Ʋses, who have yearly put the Company to vast expences already upon that Account. And these things having been made known to their Creditors, who were also con∣vinced (by the ill success of others) how vain and fruitless it would be to put them∣selves and the Company to trouble and charge, whereby they might hazard the loss of their Debts, but not in the least better secure them; the Company have been not only free from Suits and Prosecutions, which they were not at any time before, since their troubles began, but also the Wardens and Assistants have been (in a great mea∣sure) freed from those daily Clamours, which disturbed them in the Company's Service.
And now so fair an opportunity being offered to deliver the Company, and to give Encouragement to Benefactors; it is hoped there is no Member but will chearfully embrace it, whereby they shall not only draw others on, by their Example, to preserve this Society still a Nursery of Charity, and Seminary of good Citizens; but also encourage Benefactors for the future, some in their Lives, and others at their Death, liberally to extend their Kindness towards this Company; and without all doubt, such works as these are acceptable to God, in times of greatest Trouble and Danger; and such Benefactors may hope (on no less Security than God's own Word) for Ease and Comfort on a Sick Bed, and Deliverence in time of Trouble. And moreover their Creditors (being now made sensible of the Truth of the Com∣pany's Condition) are inclined to comply with any reasonable Proposals shall be made by any on the Company's behalf, and (as some have already done) others are willing, and ready to embrace such Terms, as may be agreeable to the Company's Condition in their present Circumstances, for their Satisfaction. I have thus abstracted the Company's Case in these four Pages: To the end all Persons concerned (whether Members, Creditors, or Benefactors) whose time will not permit them to read the following Sheets, may be more readily informed upon all Occasions of the Truth of their Condition: And for their ease, who shall desire farther Satisfaction in any particular, I have added marginal Notes in the following Pages for their Direction. And now having at last by God's assistance, and with unwearied industry, accomplished my design; and having also traced their Revenue to the Ori∣ginal Donors and Purchasers, I did (by order of the Assistants) prepare and cause the several following Tables to be set up in their Hall, which I have here inserted, (as a Monument more lasting) to the end the Names of their Friends and Benefactors, from whom they have received All, may be kept in Memory, that the Generations to come, as well as the present Age, may not only bless God for such a Foundation, but be quicken'd from their Example to build and enlarge thereupon, that their Names may in like man∣ner survive in the blossom of a sweet smelling savour, when their Bodies are turned to dust.
The several Tables, &c. THE Right Ho∣nourable Charles Earl of Dorset and Mid∣dlesex, Lord Cham∣belain of his Ma∣iesty's Houshold, a Faithful Friend and Patron of this So∣ciety; admitted in∣to this Fraternity, October the 22d. 1689. Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King William having been first chosen the same day their Sovereign Master. WILLIAM the III. King of England, &c. by his Majesty's Royal Per∣mission, was on the 22d. day of October, in the First Year of their Majesty's Reign, chosen, &c. Sovereign Master of this Com∣pany, graciously ac∣cepting the Instru∣ment of such his Ma∣jesty's Election and Freedom in a Gold Box. Soon after which, the Ordinances for well-governing and regulating the Mem∣bers and Mystery of the Grocery, were examined, and like∣wise approved of (as the Law directs) by the Right Honourable the Lords Commissio∣ners for the Custody of the Great Seal, and the Lords Chief Justices of either Bench. War∣dens. Sir Ralph Box, Kt. John Butterfield. Richard Peirce. Francis Chamberlaine. CHARLES the II. late King of England, &c. and Sovereign Master of this Company, was graciously pleased by Special Warrant, un∣der his Sign Manual, to ascertain the several Branches of the Mystery of the Grocery, de∣claring Druggists, Confectioners, To∣bacconists, and To∣bacco-Cutters, (as all springing from it) to be a part of the My∣stery; and pursuant thereto, they were af∣terwards by Charter, under the Great Seal, duely Incorporated, and made one Body with the Grocers, (never to be sepa∣rated) to preserve a Succession of Mem∣bers in this Com∣pany. THE Right Ho∣nourable John Earl of Mul∣grave, one of the Lords of the Bed-Chamber to King Charles the Second, and after that Lord Chamberlain, &c. having taken his Freedom of this Company, was most affectionately assist∣ing to procure the Species of the My∣stery explained and settled in order to preserve a Suc∣cession of Members in this Society.
THE Site of this Hall and Garden, with the Ground whereon Sir Robert Clayton's Dwelling-House stands, was for∣merly the Mansion-House and In∣heritance of the Right Honourable the Lord Fitzwater, of whom the Company purchased the same, in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, and soon after built their Hall thereon; for both which, they borrowed great Summs of Money: And afterwards, in their languishing Condition, Sir Henry Keble, Kt. and Al∣derman, some time Lord Mayor, lent them Money, on Security of their Hall and Revenue, to clear their Debts. And, by his last Will and Testa∣ment, dated in the sixth Year of King Henry the Eighth, freely gave all back to the Company for ever, to support their Charities. SIR William Laxton Kt. and Alderman, also some time Lord Mayor, by his last Will and Testament, dated the 17th Day of July, 1556. gave, for ever, to this Com∣pany, all his Lands and Te∣nements in Canning-Street, and the several Lanes adja∣cent, whereon are now erected many fair Dwelling-Houses, by the Lessees, after the late dreadful Fire; To maintain a School-Ma∣ster and Ʋsher, and seven Alms-men, and a Woman to attend them, at Gundle in Northamptonshire; and the Surplusage to support their Charities. The Bodies of these two Worthy Members and Benefactors, were both laid in one Vault in St. Mary Aldermary Church, with fair Monuments over them, demolished by the said late Fire. The said Sir Henry Keble, at his own proper Charges, built the said St. Mary Aldermary Church.
BENEFACTORS, From whom the Company have received their Revenue, designed for the Support and Relief of their poor Members, and Discharge of other charitable Ʋses. BENEFACTORS, Who gave the Company Summs of Money to purchase Lands and Tenements; which (with much more) they laid out in improving the Lands and Tenements so gi∣ven by other Benefactors, that the same might also answer the yearly Charities appointed by those Donors of such Moneys. The DONORS Names, and the Streets and Places where their Lands and Tene∣ments so given are situate. Sir Henry Keble, Broad-Street. Sir William Butler, Thames-Street. Mincing Lane. John Maldon, Botolph-Lane. Thomas Gore, Grace Church-Street. Lombard-Street. John Billesdon, Cornhil. Sir William Laxton, Canning-Street. Bush-Lane. Abchurch-Lane. St. Nicholas-Lane. Eastcheap. Sherborn Lane. St. Swithins Lane. John Wardall, Walbrook. Thomas Knowles, St. Antholins. Emme Bachus, Wood-Street. Steyning-Lane. Sir Thomas Middleton, Baynerd's Castle. William Robinson, Grub-Street. Elizabeth Burrel, Cheap-Side. Peter Bloundell, Donning's Alley. Sir John Hart, Shore-Ditch. Lady Anne Middleton, Montgomery-Shire. Cornwall.   lb Lady Conway 1441 Gilbert Keate 600 William Robinson 400 Alderman Saunders 210 Francis Tyrrel 700 John Heydon 100 Edmond Turvill 1000 Robert Lambert 100 Nicholas Stiles 100 Sir John Peachy 500 Richard Haile 200 Mr. Wheatley 100 Humphry Walwyn 600 Mary Robinson 500 Total Summ 6551 The present Rents (with some small Addition from the casual yearly Profits) do discharge the whole yearly Charities of both kinds; and the Arrears of each Branch are secured to be paid out of the first Fines on renewing Leases, and other Improvement of the same. And to preserve and augment their Revenue, they have made provision to pre∣vent adding to any Term, whilst five Years remain in being; and not to reserve less than 10 l. per Cent. per Annum, of the full improved yearly Value, on Demise of any part thereof.
Benefactors, WHO gave Summs of Money, to be lent to young Members of the Com∣pany, on small or no Interest, at the Discretion of the Wardens and Assistants; wherewith the Company having charged themselves, the same are now decreed to be raised out of the first Fines on renewing Leases, or other Profits arising out of their Revenue, (above their yearly Charities,) imme∣diately after the Arrears of their yearly Charities shall be discharged; and for ever to be continued a Stock for these, and to be applied to no other Ʋses whatsoever.   l. s. d The Lady Slaney 100 0 0 Edmond Turvyll 100 0 0 Henry Anderson 100 0 0 John Newman 100 0 0 Gilbert Keate 50 0 0 Thomas Wheatley 50 0 0 Sir John Lyon 200 0 0 Edward Elmer 50 0 0 Thomas Farmer 100 0 0 Lettice Deane 200 0 0 Richard Lambert 100 0 0 Edward Jakeman 200 0 0 Katharine Hall 100 0 0 Roger Knott 100 0 0 John Heydon 100 0 0 Sir Thomas Ramsey 200 0 0 Peter Houghton 400 0 0 Thomas Ridge 100 0 0 John Grove 100 0 0 Gilbert Keate 50 0 0 Thomas Dawkins 20 0 0 Robert Brooke 100 0 0 Mary Robinson 200 0 0 George Holman 100 0 0 Richard-Hall 100 0 0 Thomas Westraw 100 0 0 Robert Bowyer 50 0 0 John Hudson 100 0 0 Sir Robert Nappier 100 0 0 William Pennyfather 100 0 0 Thomas Moulston 200 0 0 Stephen Abberley 250 0 0 John Mevil 100 0 0 Thomas Gamull 200 0 0 Constance Wrightman 100 0 0 Sir Edmond Wright 50 0 0 Thomas Freeman 100 0 0 William Pennyfather 233 6 8 This was not only a great Encouragement for young Men so to behave them∣selves, during their Apprenticeship, as, by a good Report, to recommend them∣selves capable of such a Favour from the Company; but is a great Obligation on such of them as, by God's Blessing on their Endeavours, shall, from small Beginnings, gain ample Estates, to become themselves also liberal Benefactors.
IN the Reign of King Henry the IV. Henry Chicheley, the Eldest Brother, being then Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, his two younger Brethren were both Aldermen, and Members of this Company, viz. Sir William (the Second) and Sir Robert (the Third) both in their turn Sheriffs, and Sir Robert afterwards twice Lord Mayor, who purchased the Ground whereon St. Stephen's Church in Walbrook now stands, which he built at his own charge, the Advowson whereof remains in the Company of Grocers to this Day; which Church being consumed by the Fire, Anno 1666. The Right Honourabie Sir Thomas Chicheley, (also a Member of this Company,) who descended in a right Line from the said Sir Robert,) late Master of the Ordnance, afterwards Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster; and to King Charles the Second, and (some time) to King James the Second, of Their Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, laid the first Stone, and was a liberal Benefactor towards re∣building thereof. And being their Master, Annis 1686/7. at his own charge built the Company a new Barge, and purchased them the Ten∣nant Right of a Barge-House; in grateful remembrance where∣of they have caused his Picture, and this Inscription to be here set up.
If I were to give a Title to this following Table, I humbly conceive it might be (not improperly) called The Insurance Office. That the Heir may not sooner prodigally waste, than his Ancestor frugally got the Estate. ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ, ιδ. ιγ. Rev. 14.13. They rest from their Labours, and their Works do follow them. . ALthough Good Works (or well-husbanding our Ta∣lent, lent for Improvement) be not Meritorious; yet (in the Dialect of the Apostle) they are esteemed the best Evidence of Faith, and Obedience, and remain a surviving Testimony of a Faithful Steward, when silent in his Grave. And it is observable, that in all Ages, Honour and Estate have been most lasting in their Families, who have most a∣bounded in Works of this Nature. So that if it were modest to assign the Cause why so many great Estates have been sooner wasted by a Prodigal Heir, than gotten by his Frugal Parent; we may (with humble submission) conclude it is from a defect in this great and necessary Duty, so generally Crown'd with a Blessing on Posterity.
SIR JOHN CUTLER, Knight and Baronet, a Worthy Member of this Company, having Fined for Sheriff and Alderman, nigh forty years since, was chosen and held Master-Warden, Annis 1652/3. and did immediately after the dreadful Fire, Anno 1666. at his own proper charge, erect (out of its ashes) the fair Pile of Building, now the great Parlour, and entertaining-Room over it, and again was chosen and held Master-Warden, Annis 1685/6. And also in kindness to the Company, Annis 1686/7. was Assistant, and Locum Tenens to the Right Honourable, their then Master-Warden: And this present year 1688. in their greatest Exigence, (when others, whose turn it was, de∣clined them,) consented to be chosen the fourth time their Master-Warden. Under whose happy conduct, the Company's Revenue hath been settled, (as a most righteous Sanction,) to secure the due payment of their yearly Charities. And the Members now restored to act in their several Ca∣pacities, (according to their Seniority and Merit,) in order compleat the Company's Deliverance.
SIR JOHN MOORE, Knight and Alderman, and late Lord Mayor, a Member of this Company, at his own charge, repaired and beautifyed the Body of this Hall, Annis 1680/81. whose leading Example therein, gave such encouragement to other Worthy Mem∣bers, liberally to contribute towards enlarging and compleating it with additional Building, so as to make it the most Commodious Seat for the Chief Magistrate in this City; in grate∣ful acknowledgement of whose kindness, the Company afterwards caused his Picture, and this Inscription (as a Memorial thereof) to be here set up.
This HALL BEing situate in the centre of the City, was designed and adapted for the Seat of the Chief Magistrate, at the ex∣pence of 4800 l. in new Building and accommodations, added to the Body of the Hall, Kitchen, and Sir John Cutler's Build∣ing, on this Confidence, that as it is every way the most Com∣modious Place for that Publick Use, and would yearly save the Lord Mayor so great and unavoidable Charge elsewhere, so it should be considered accordingly, and in some proportion aug∣ment the yearly Revenue of the Company, for support and dis∣charge of their yearly Charities, and other incident charge of Repairs and Duties, &c. Annis 1679, and 1680. Sir James Edwards, Alderman, and late Lord Mayor, Master-Wardens. John Beale, Warden. Thomas Bourne, Warden. William Buckeridge, Warden. Annis 1680, and 1681. Sir Henry Tulse, Alderman, and afterwards Lord Mayor, Master-Wardens. Ralph Box, Warden. William Winch, Warden. Roger Reeve, Warden.
Justice and Charity Revived. IN a most Righteous and Voluntary Settlement of the whole Revenue of the Company of Grocers, by Inquisition, De∣cree, and Coveyance, (in Trustees,) for ever to secure the due payment of the yearly Charities, appointed by their Donors and Benefactors. Annis Domini 1686, 1687. The Right Honourable Sir Thomas Chicheley, by Sir John Cutler, Knight and Baronet, and Sir John Moore, Knight, Master-Wardens. William Hart, Warden. Thomas Horton, Warden. Edward Sheerwood, Warden. Annis Domini 1687, 1688. Ralph Box, Esq; Master-Wardens. John Banks, Warden. Stephen Coleman, Warden. Jonadab Balaam, Warden. Edward Underhill, Esq; Alderman, Master-Wardens. John Banks continued, Warden. Robert Knight, Warden. Francis Lasco, Warden. Thomas Short, formerly Warden, assisting therein. Samuel Brewster, formerly Warden, assisting therein. All Glory be to GOD.
There are several other Charities (wherewith the growing Revenue of the Grocers will be charge∣able) appointed by pious and well disposed Per∣sons, who in like manner left several Summs of Money, which were laid out in improving the Company's Lands by Building, and consumed by the same unhappy Fate; particularly, FOR support and relief of decayed Members, and their sickly Families; as also for their Widows and Chil∣dren in like distress. For augmentation of maintenance for Godly Ministers, where Livings are small. For encouragement and advancement of Maid-Ser∣vants in Marriage, who have faithfully served Members for a certain number of years. And for defraying the charge of sober Anniversary Festi∣vals, in moderate Entertainment of the Members, to main∣tain and encrease mutual Friendship, and Christian Con∣versation in the Fraternity, as well in Ease, as for Encou∣ragement of the Members who should successively hap∣pen to be Stewards, whose Burthen is in the mean time made light by the present Ordinances, (whereby all other charge of Members is also made very easie,) to the end the Stewards and Members, who are to contribute towards the charge, may be as merry themselves as their Guests, at those Festivals.
All which are faithfully recorded, to take place, and be discharged out of the yearly Revenue of the Company, (which will be very great,) upon expiring Leases, (all decreed and settled, so as to be improved to the utmost,) to answer those great Trusts so reposed in the Members at the Helm, as being first so well designed by the Donors, and now again made Sacred for such uses. And let Anathema be pronounced by every Faithful Member, against every one (and who can be now igno∣rant, that is concerned as a Trustee) that shall (know∣ingly) attempt or endeavour to alien, take away to them∣selves, or again misapply the same. And may the great Pilot of Hearts quicken and in∣cline many others, (to whom God hath lent large Ta∣lents,) from the Example of those worthy Benefactors, whose Names are now here revived with a sweet smelling savour, when their Bodies have so long peaceably slept in the dust, to build on their Foundation, in chearfully con∣tributing towards the support and relief of such numerous Objects of each kind, as the present Age affords, (in whom the voice of God calls aloud for it,) till such help shall arise from the Holy Seed here sown, for a better supply in a future Harvest from thence. There would need no motive to this Sacred Duty, would Men consider that they are no Proprietors, but Stewards (in Trust) of all they have; for which, as well as for what they leave of it to Posterity, (without such allowance as is here spoken of) they shall most assured∣ly render a strict Account.
And therefore the best and surest way, to entail a Blessing on their Children and Posterity, in what they leave them when they die, on like Trust, to improve for the good of others, (for the property can never be al∣tered,) is, by thus taking care, and liberally providing for the miserable and helpless Members of their Masters great Family. And certainly, had many Men (especially such as made profession of Religion) in their life-time, foreseen how soon a Vicious Consumption hath been made, by their Children or Successors, of all they left them, for want of a better insurance of it, by thus disposing some conside∣rable part of their Lord's Estate, according to his own Will, they would (if it were to doe again) most willing∣ly have disposed of more to such uses as these. And therefore, I hope such as are convinced of this Truth, and have been Eye-Witnesses of such sad effects in others, will begin in their life-time, and prevent the fraud or negligence (besides other contingencies) at∣tending their Executors, in disposition of their Charities, when they are dead; for when their own Eyes are Over∣seers of such God-like disposition, they may sweetly taste that Peace and Comfort in their own Bosoms, whilst they live, which the World cannot give; and per∣severing in their Christian Duty, they shall thereby assuredly (though not meritoriously) treasure up to them∣selves Eternal Happiness hereafter, Where neither Moth can Eat, nor Rust Corrupt, nor Thieves break through and Steal, and where they shall be for ever above all necessity of
aid from the fading Enjoyments of this World, when they shall be there entertained with a Well done Good and Faithful Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord and Master: For most assuredly as the succour and relief of the Hungry and Naked, the Aged and Impotent, do daily ascend in silent Prayers to the Ears of the Om∣niscient Father of Mercies, and bring down (at least) Temporal Blessings in this Life, on their Children and Posterity, who thus, as Faithful Stewards, become their Patrons and Benefactors; as we may read to this pur∣pose, that Jehu (for the small Good he did) swayed the Sceptre to the Fourth Generation: So most assuredly, the silent Sighs and Groans of the Widow and Orphans, the Aged, the Captive, and the Impotent, under op∣pression, and in their Want and Misery, do cry as loud in the Ears of the same righteous Judge, for Vengeance (in all the Curses and Miseries attending Mortality) on the Heads and Families, not only of all such as either covet, defraud, take away from, or hinder those poor Objects of their Right, their Portion or Relief, but also of such as come short in their Duty herein, according to their Power, Interest, and the opportunity they have, to shew it towards them; as they themselves are appointed of God, but Stewards in Trust, for those poor Members of one Christian Body.
A short Account of the Original of the GRO∣CERS, and their first Incorporation: And their Condition, in their present Circumstances, truly Represented. Grocers (inquit Minshew) ab initio, ut ex legibus nostris probat, nihil mi∣nutim sed omnia al grosso, by the Great, Magnis sc. ponderibus diven∣dere soliti sunt. In libro Statutorum nostrorum significat Mercatores, Qui aliquod mercium genus totum coe∣munt. Skin. Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae.THE word Grocers was a term at first distin∣guishing Merchants of this Society,Etymology of the Word Grocer. in opposition to Inferiour Retailers; for that they usually sold in gross Quan∣tities by great Weights. And in some of our old Books, the Word signifies Merchants, that in their Merchandizing dealt for the Whole of any Kind:Which after he came more Extensive. But in after times the word Grocery be∣came so extensive, that it can now hardly be restrained to the certain kinds of Merchandizes they have formerly dealt in: For they have been the most Universal Merchants that traded abroad, and what they brought home, many Artists of this Society found out ways afterwards to change and alter the Species by Mixture, Confections, and Compositions of simple Ingredients; by which means many and various ways of Dealing and Trading passed under the Denomination of Groceries:They were the first Merchants trading abroad, and so pro∣lifick, that other Companies have branched from them. And indeed this City and Nation do in a great measure owe the Improvement of Navigation to Merchants, originally exercising this Mystery, as Trading in∣to all Foreign Parts, from whence we have received either Spices, Druggs, Fruits, Gums, or other rich Aromatick Com∣modities. It is well known, this Company hath bred the most Eminent Merchants in this City, and this Society hath been so prolifick, that many other Societies have been branched out from hence, as will be owned by the most worthy of them.Improved Navi∣gation. The Mer∣chants Trading to the Levant Seas, and other Societies, have ori∣ginally been the Off-spring of this Society, as appears by ancient Records of Indentures of Apprentices, to Members of this Compa∣ny. And it is not inconsistent, and may easily be drawn within com∣pass of Belief, That there was amongst the Romans a Society agree∣able to this of the Grocers, who were also Merchants trading into those Seas, as may be Collected from Persius,Their Antiquity. a Poet who wrote in Rome in the time of Augustus, describing the various Inclinations
of Men in their Course of Life. He instances them in these Words, (viz.) Mercibus hic Italis mutat sub sole recenti Rugosum piper, & pallentis Grana Cymini. Sat. 5. With Merchandizing this with Care doth run Ʋnto the East, under the rising Sun, To fetch rough Pepper, and pale Cummin Seeds For Roman Wares, &c. First called Peppe∣rers by way of Emi∣nency for all Spices, as were such like Merchants trading in Rome.Where Pepper, being the most Royal Preservative Spice, is only mentioned by way of Eminency for all the rest: And so we may well conclude, that this was the Reason why the Society of the Grocers (whose Original first here exercised, may modestly be supposed to spring from the Romans) were, long before they were Incorporated, distinguished by the name of Pepperers, al∣though they traded before in all other the former Merchandizes, as well as that. It is impossible to give any other Account of the Original of this Society here in this City, so long at first excer∣cised under the Denomination of Pepperers; for that the City of London it self, at first under the Britains, and successively after under the Romans and Saxons, and at last was over-run by the Danes; no History now remains to give a certain Account of the first Methods of Government therein, farther than what may be collected from some late Writers of our own now extant, who have transmitted to us, what they could then discover by their Enquiry and Search into Antiquity; whereby we may plainly un∣derstand that the first Model of Civil Government, settled in this City, was from the Exemplar of Rome it self; as Mr. Stow in∣stances in the very words of an ancient Writer, who wrote in the Reign of King Stephen,From whence Lon∣don had its first Model of Civil Government. (viz) This City (saith he) even as Rome, is divided into Wards, it hath yearly Sheriffs instead of Consuls, it hath the Dignity of Senators, it hath Ʋnder-Officers, and according to the Qualities of Laws, it hath several Courts and general Assemblies upon appointed days. Some time after the City obtained their Chief Magistrate to be under the Denomination of Mayor,First Lord Mayor in London. which was about the first year of King Richard the First; the first Man we find advanced to that Dignity was Henry Fitz-Alwin, who continued therein 24 years successively: And soon after (to wit) in the 17th. year of King Henry the Third,Their first Member Mayor, Andrew Bockerell. it appears Andrew Bockerell, a Pepperer, was chosen Mayor; and so eminent were the
Pepperers in this Infancy of the Mayoralty,Pepperers Eminent, and frequent Mayors. that before the 36th. year of that King's Reign, a Pepperer had the Chair nine several years, and very frequently afterwards we find the Pepperers advanced to that Dignity: And it appears by ancient Books (now extant) That in the time of King Henry the Fourth, there were at one time no less then 12 of their Members Aldermen,Twelve Aldermen at once Members. of which Number were two Brothers, William Chicheley, afterwards Sheriff, Sir Robert Chicheley, afterwards also Sheriff,Sir Robert Chicheley twice Lord Mayor, and Founder of Wal-Brook Church. Still in their Do∣nation. and twice Lord Mayor, who also was Founder of the Parish Church of St. Stephen Walbrook, upon a Plot of ground by him for that Sacred Use purchased of the Grocers, the Donation of which Church is at this day in the Company of Grocers. Which Society of the Peppe∣rers increasing, and spreading so Universal in Merchandizing, that it appears afterwards they were distinguished by the Name of Gro∣cers, (as being a more comprehensive Name than Pepperers;Afterwards called Grocers.) in∣somuch that before they were incorporated by the Name of Grocers (to wit) in the Third year of King Edward the Third, Anno 1329. John Grantham was chosen and held Mayor by the Title of Grocer. And the first Charter I find of the Corporation of the Grocers, was granted by King Edward the Third, in the twentieth year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 1345. which appears to be long before the Mercers were incorporated,First Charter of the Grocers, and be∣fore the Mercers. though they are now the only Com∣pany have Precedency of the Grocers; yet for the Reasons above∣mentioned, it may be very well presumed, that as the Grocers were long before them the most Eminent Society, so in after∣times renewing their Charter by a more Comprehensive Term,Afterwards Post∣poned to them. they might Post pone themselves. But though they thus March as a forlorn Regiment in the Front, (might the Hopes and Endeavours of many good Members pre∣vail to have the Spirit of our Ancestors revived in the present Generation,) this could no way eclipse the Grocers,But not to Dimi∣nation of their Dignity. who have all the Noble Army of the rest of the Corporations following them, than the Morning Star ushering in Day before it, can eclipse the Glory of the Rising Sun. Afterwards the Charter of this Company was several times renewed; as also it was in the Seventh year of King Henry the Sixth, and they then made a Body Politick,Grocers Incorpo∣rate. by the Name of Custodes & Communitas Mysterii Groceriae Londini. And in the beginning of that King's Reign,Purchase of the Hall of the Lord Fitz-water, men late his Mansion-House. they purchased the ground where the Grocers Hall now stands, with the ground belonging to it, of Walter Lord Fitz-water, a Noble Peer of this Realm,
bounding the same between the Old-Jewry and Walbrook. And so considerable in the City were the Grocers long before that time, that they may be well presumed (time out of Mind) to have had the management of the King's-Beam, as an Office peculiar to them; not only as principally using the same, but as being ori∣ginally vested therein;The Office of the King's Beam. they having had all along (beyond the Memory of Man) the naming of the Weigh-Master, and the naming, placing, removing, and governing of the four Porters, attending that Office, all to be elected out of their own Com∣pany, and to be Sworn at their own Hall; a Privilege allowed them, as their undoubted and inseparate Right, as ancient as that Office it self used in the City. Their ancient Pri∣vileges of Inspection and Correction of Abuses in their Mystery.Also amongst other Privileges and ancient Usages of this Com∣pany, I find recorded, even as high as Edward the Fourth's days, this Company had Power of Inspection and Correction of Abuses and Irregularities of all Persons (though free of this or any other Company) in the City or Suburbs, any way using or exercising any kind of Grocery; and also to assay the Weights they bought or sold by; and to take notice of all their Defaults, and return them to be Fined at the Discretion of this Fellowship, and to take 4 d. of every Person for their Labour therein, as well of such as were offending, as such as were not; which Usage was always continued: And in the Charter renewed to this Company in the fifteenth year of the late King Charles the First, this Pri∣vilege is Gonfirmed,Confirmed and Ex∣pressed to extend 3 Miles from the Li∣berties. and expressed to extend three Miles from the City, as well within Liberties as without, and hath only been omitted for some years past, when the Company began to be first interrupted in their Affairs. The same King Henry the Sixth, by Charter under the Great Seal, granted to this Company the Office of Garbling in all places throughout the Kingdom of England,Garbling-Office. (the City of London only excepted;) which Privilege (though discontinued during the late unnatural War, and almost forgotten) is now ratified by their late Charter and Confirmation, and may be of considerable Ad∣vantage to this Company. In the time of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, the Compa∣ny was greatly indebted,Sir Henry Keble, Sir William Lax∣ton, Worthy Mem∣bers and Bene∣factors, both bu∣ried in a Vault, in Aldermary Church. See Stow's Survey. and Sir Henry Keble, a Worthy Member, (sometime Lord Mayor of this City,) lent them Money on their Hall, and their Revenue, (nigh the full value,) to clear their Debts, and afterwards, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, by his last Will and Testament, freely gave back all to the Company, remitting his whole Debt and Interest: This Sir Henry Keble, at his own Charge, built Aldermary Church. Afterwards,
about the eighteenth year of the same King Henry the Eighth, Sir William Laxton also, a Worthy Member, (and sometime Lord Mayor,) by Deed executed in his Life time, gave the Company, all their Lands and Houses in Canning-Street, and the Lanes there∣unto adjoining. I shall here add but one more, (who may well deserve to be re∣corded among their chief Benefactors,) Mr. John Bilsdon,John Bilsdon, a Worthy benefactor of Houses in Corn∣hill. a worthy Member, by his Will, dated about the fourteenth of King Henry the Eighth, gave this Company all his Messuages in the several Parishes of St. Michael's, and St. Peter's in Cornhill, which being consumed (with the rest of their Revenue in London) by the late dreadful Fire, many very fair Houses have been since built on the same ground, by the Companies Leassees, on long Leases, under small Rents, but of great improvement when expired. Upon part of which ground stood the late Weigh house,Weigh-House. where the Office of the King's Beam was kept, until the time of the same Fire. And in order to prevent any difference, which might other∣wise hereafter happen, between the City and Company, touching the interest of the City in Weigh-house-yard, I humbly conceive it to be my duty herein to insert (in the best manner I can) the Truth of the Case, especially since upon search I could find no certain footsteps of it in their own Books at Guild-Hall, which occasioned some difficulty in settling the draught of the Lease (hereafter mentioned) from the Company to the City: The City claiming Interest in the soil of the Weigh-house-yard, upon some surmise that they had more ground there (than what they claimed under the Company's Title) belonging to them, until I had made the contrary appear, (both by Evidence, and Certificate of the ancient Inhabitants there;) as also, that as well all the ground so demised by the Company to the City, as that whereon the Houses on all parts of the Weigh house-yard are built, (being bounded on the North with the ground of the Merchant-Taylors, and fronting the High Street of Cornhill,) is part of that ground so devised by Mr. John Bilsdon to the Com∣pany of Grocers. So as all the Interest the City hath there, appears to be thus, viz. The Grocers having (as above is mentioned) the management of the Office of the King's Beam, did former∣ly accommodate the City with a Weigh-house there,How the City have Interest in the Messuage in Weigh-House-Yard. conve∣nient for executing the same Office, under some reserved Rent, for that the whole duty arising thereby (the Weigh-Master and Porters Wages deducted) belonged to the City, until
the year 1625. some difference happening between the then Lord Mayor and the Company, touching the Nomination of one to succeed the Weigh-Master, then lately Dead; a Committee of Aldermen was appointed for the City, and a Committee of Gro∣cers for the Company, who determined the same; and the Company, pursuant to that Agreement, were to grant the City a Lease of their Weigh-house, being one great lower room, for 99 years, under the Rent of 10 l. per annum, which the City ac∣cordingly had and enjoyed, and the Company to enjoy their Privileges, so to nominate the Weigh-Master and Por∣ters. The Company afterwards granting a Lease to one Lyonell Newman, of a small Ware-house at one end of the same Weigh-house, and of all the Rooms as well over the Weigh-house, as over the same Ware-house, for a long term, at 40 s. per annum, the City afterwards purchased the said Lyonell Newman's Interest; and the whole being so consumed by the Fire, upon application of the City to the Judges at Clifford s-Inn,The Judges decree a Lease to the City of it. and on hearing the City and Company, they Decreed, the Company (for encouragement of the City to build) should grant the City a Lease of the whole, with additional years, under the entire Rent of 12 l. per annum, which is drawn and prepared accordingly, being one Messuage erected by the City, on the ground whereon the Weigh-house and Ware-house stood, and now in the occupation of Mr. Williams the Leassee of the City. The other part of the Company's Re∣venue, and the seve∣ral Charities and Ʋses wherewith the wle and every branch are charged: As also the Schools and Ecclesiastical Promotions in their gifts digested in Books at the Hall.The other branches of the Company's Revenue, together with the several Charities and Uses wherewith as well Sir Henry Keble, Sir William Laxton, and Mr. Bilsdon's, as also every other branch thereof are charged, as also the several Schools, and Ec∣clesiastical Promotions, in the Company's disposition, and under their Government and Inspection, I have digested into an orderly Method (as most proper there to be seen) in Books for that pur∣pose provided at the Hall. Thus this Company long flourished both before and after that time, with many Eminent and Worthy Members, who became very liberal Benefactors, and had so great a share all along in the Senators of this famous City,Had always an Alderman their Master. Intrusted with ma∣ny Charities; which they faith∣fully discharged,  the Fire Con∣sumed their Re∣venue. that they never wanted an Alder∣man of their Members yearly to succeed Master-Warden of this Company; and so faithfully did they acquit themselves of those Charities they were intrusted withal, that it gave them the greatest Reputation of any Company in London: Insomuch that many well-disposed Persons, did covet to make this Corporation as it were the Corban of their Charities, which in process of
time became their Snare, as in this Discourse will immediately appear; wherein I shall endeavour, by giving a true account of the Nature of those Charities, to remove the reproach that hath been cast on this Company, as if they had mis-imployed them; and make it plainly appear, that the Company of Grocers have, in the Judgment of every impartial Man, (who shall well weigh their Circumstances from the first to the last,) acquitted themselves in all the Trust and Affairs of this Company, as becomes Worthy Citizens, and beyond what the worst of their Detractors might have justly expected from them; especially considering how small a part of their yearly Revenue remained to the Company, when the Yearly Payments issuing thereout, pursuant to the Disposition of the Donors, are deducted. MOST part of all the Land and Houses,Though charged with nigh the va∣lue, and so rather charge than benefit to them. given to the Grocers Company, were by the Donors charged with yearly Charities, issuing thereout to certain Uses, by them limited and appointed, well nigh amounting to as much as the Rent reserved upon long Leases in being, and Let before they contracted any of their Debts, as is hereafter mentioned; all or most part of which lay in the City of London, and the same Leases many of them were nigh expiring about the time of the late dreadful Fire. Those other Charities, which were Summs of Money,In regard many of them were Summs of Money, left them to pay yearly Cha∣rities. given by several Benefactors unto this Company, (there to remain as a Fund,) who charged this Company on that account with yearly payments to certain Parishes, Places, and Uses, well nigh as much as the full Interest thereof amounted to, or very small advantage to the Company, over and above the same, so that the Company were ne∣cessitated to dispose of those Summs of Money at Interest; on the best Securities they could get,Which being put out on Securities, many proved bad. to enable them to make good those yearly Charities; many of which Secu∣rities might in all probability become very backwards in payment, and sometimes quite Desperate; so that the Company having daily Money pressed upon them, were inforced to accept the same at Interest, and thereout con∣tinued constant payment of those yearly Summs; and al∣so
to accommodate Young Men of their Members with Money, on Security, to set up, pursuant to the Wills of several Donors of that kind, (whereof they had not a few Benefactors,) so that in time, by occasion of many Losses and Casualties of this Nature,And so loss ac∣crewed to them. it cannot be imagined but the Company must sustain much damage, notwithstanding all their Care and Endeavours, though they were not in the least sensible thereof, till they had long after, under greater pressure, tryed their Securities, their Credit being very High, and in great Reputation. But their Great Debts they Contracted as followeth, viz. Their great Debts Contracted by Mo∣ney borrowed on their Common Seal, viz. Anno 1640. To Accommodate K. Char. I. 4500 l.ABout the Year 1640. his late Majesty, King Charles, the Royal Martyr, having Occasion for Money in his Exi∣gencies, and making his Condition and Desires known to this Company, as well as others, they did take up Money upon their Common Seal, and to supply him did, on Security of some of his Peers, accommodate his said Majesty with 4500 l, which (the unhappy War Succeeding) is yet unpaid, To relieve his said late Majesty's di∣stressed Subjects in Ireland,—9000 l.Afterwards, about the year 1642. this Company in Compli∣ance with other Corporations, and indeed with the whole City, were again required to raise 9000 l. for the Defence of the King∣dom of Ireland, and Relief of his said then Majesty's di∣stressed Subjects there, which they likewise took up upon Security of their Commnn Seal, and which was never repaid. Anno 1643. Com∣pelled to lend the City of London, — 4500 l.And afterwards, in the year 1643, in Compliance with other Companies, they were compelled to lend the City of London, 4500 l. which they in like manner advanced, and had the Common Seal of the City for Security thereof; some small part whereof they afterwards received, the residue is yet unpaid. These great Loans were the only Means that brought this Com∣pany at last into such Extremity; yet did they appear to be so
just in their Intentions amongst themselves,They made a By-Law to levy that Money so raised on themselves, if their Stock fell short. that having so taken up these great Summs of Money upon their Common Seal, of seve∣ral Persons at Interest, they made a By-Law, in their Court of Assistants, to levy the same by Assessment upon themselves, and their Members, in case their Stock and Estate fell short to pay it. And afterwards from year to year,All which conti∣nued on Interest, duely paid by them. as their Creditors call'd for their Principal, (constantly paying the Interest as it became due,) they took up other Moneys (which was daily offered to the Company) and paid them off. About the year 1661, The Company having sustained many losses, and their Debts (naturally) every year increasing,But despairing to receive either Prin∣cipal or Interest. (they receiving no Interest of any, to whom they themselves had so lent, and despairing of the Principal, and upon Audit of the Wardens Accounts, finding such prodigious Summs every year swallowed up in discharge of Interest,And their Debts every year swelling, they call a Court in 1662. and appoin∣ted a Commitee to consider of means to discharge it.) several of the Members taking the Company's condition into consideration, moved the Court of Assistants, and a Committee was appointed to inspect the same; and to consider of some way how to obviate the farther encrease of the Company's Debts, by discharging them gradually; but (other Matters intervening) no progress was made therein, till afterwards, about the Month of August, 1663.Again the like in 1663. upon the like occasion they were reminded thereof, and the Committee re∣vived, and the farther consideration resumed; but having spent some time in considering which way to advance Money: The fair Prospect they had of advancing Money within a few years, by renewing Leases of their Estates in London,But the prospect of Fines on renewing Leases (then nigh expiring) respited that Consideration till the Fire in 1666. consumed all. to discharge the greatest part of their Debts; and having Monies daily pressed on them to supply their occasions on Security of their Common Seal, they were not hasty to propose the renewing of their Leases, many of them judging it for the Company's Advantage to defer that for some time longer, and to endeavour to get in their own Debts: In which circumstances they continued, till soon after, and before they had renewed any Leases, it pleased God the late dreadful Fire happened, Anno 1666. whereby not only their Hall, but their whole Revenue in London (so highly improvable upon expiring Leases) was consumed; and the several Mem∣bers then at the Helm, who (most of them greatly suffered in their own private capacities) were separated, and so taken up with care of disposing of themselves and Families, that very few could attend the Affairs of the Company; and so that dread∣ful Calamity rendred this Company (which sustained so great damage therein) uncapable to comply any longer with due payment
of their Debts and Charities;Till which time the Books make appear they justly complied with their trust in all things. which plainly appears by the War∣dens Books to have been all along before that time punctually paid and discharged, as they grew due, and were from time to time call'd for and demanded. The Fire having con∣sumed their whole Revenue in Lon∣don, in which their Hopes depend∣ed, to raise great Summs by renewing Leases, then well nigh expired, to pay off their Debts, they applied them∣selves to the Parlia∣ment on the said By-Law, to assess their Members, (having before 66, paid 30000 l. for Interest of 18000 l. they so took up;) but the Parliament reject∣ing it, (as binding no more than were parties,) they were forced to let their Ground to Builders on long Leases, and small Rents: And prepounded to raise by Benevolence what they could not by Fines, and to that purpose, to get Subscriptions of Members.But as soon (after the Fire) as the Members could have free∣dom from their own distracting Affairs, they took the Com∣pany's deplorable condition into their consideration, and found they had no refuge now left, but to propose their Ground to Builders for long Leases, and thereby advance what Monies they could by way of Fines: And that they might leave nothing unat∣tempted, their Stock and Estate (by these Providences) falling short, to pay those great Debts so contracted, they applied themselves (on their said By-Law) to the Parliament then sit∣ting, stating their Case, how great Debts they owed, and how they became so indebted, on the before-mentioned Securities, which were now never like to be repaid; and that although they had received no Interest, yet they had before that time paid for In∣terest of the Monies (they had so taken up) nigh 30000 l. and therefore pray'd an Act of Parliament to put their said By-Law in Execution, by Assessment on their Members; but that was re∣jected as Impracticable, that it should bind any more than those who were Parties to the making of it, who were then most of them dead. Whereupon (as the only means then left) they endeavoured to raise Money by letting their Ground; and what should fall short therein, they propounded to make up among themselves by a Voluntary Subscription of their Members. And to Encourage them in so Good a Work, Sir JOHN CUTLER, a Worthy Member, at his own proper Charges,Sir John Cutler, to encourage them therein, Erected the Stately Building in the Garden. erected the stately Fa∣brick out of its Ashes, which is now their Parlour, and Entertaining-Room over it, in the Garden, that they might the more comfortably meet to consult and debate their Affairs in it, as in their own Council Chamber; shewing himself Zea∣lous, beyond all Expression, to raise and restore this Company out of its Ruines and Calamity.
To whose Memory the Company (as soon as they had afterwards Re-built and Enlarged their Hall) in grateful acknowledgment,To whose Memory (after the Hall was built) they caused his Statue to be erected in the Parlour. caused his Statue, in white Marble, to be erected on the Right-Hand, at the upper end of the Parlour: And that the same may survive the Casual Acci∣dents of Fire, and Canker of Envy, my Desire is hereby to Record the Memory of so Worthy a Benefactor, that when Time,Marmora Maeonii vincunt Monumenta libelli. the Devourer of all things, shall have decayed his Statue, his Name may be hereby fresh and flourishing, amongst the Generations to come, who shall succeed happy Members of this Society. And to carry on so good a Beginning, a general Summons was ordered of the Members,They continue En∣deavours to raise Money by Sub∣scriptions. and a Committee appointed to obtain Subscriptions, (wherein a good Progress was made,) and their ground propounded to Builders, for what Fines they could get under the old Rents, (which they could not much lessen, in regard of their Charities issuing thereout, wherewith their Donors charged them,) in order to advance Money; which accordingly was done, and several Meetings had with their Creditors, to whom they proposed to pay their Principal Money, part down,And prepose to pay their Creditors, part down, and the other by two payments at 5 and 10 years, and great Summs are raised and paid. and the Residue by two Payments, five and ten years, to be secured by their Common Seal; most of their Creditors complying there∣with, for that it was to be raised by voluntary Gift of the Mem∣bers, who many of them liberally contributed; and great Summs were raised and paid, and the Company in a hopeful way of wholly discharging themselves; but the unkindness of some, and backwardness of other Members,But some Members backwardness, and some Creditors (ill advised) sue the Company, which steps the Work, till many Members, who might have been good Bene∣factors, dyed. who should have followed so good Examples, gave such Interruption as occasioned some of their Creditors, unadvisedly, to sue the Company, and the very Ruines of their Hall to be sequestred and seized; although those Creditors were afterwards sensible they had not only put them∣selves to great Charges, (which they could never be re-imbursed,) but had thereby injured the rest of the Creditors, in discouraging so good a design, and obstructing the gifts of so many Worthy
Members, of whom several afterwards dyed, before their help could be again seasonably sought for, which wholly Eclipsed the Reputation of the Company, rendring them (for the present) uncapable of farther paying: But soon after it pleased God to stir up several Worthy Members, who (continuing their Endeavours to carry on so good a Work begun) procured Money to be raised on Security of their Revenue,Yet they used all means possible to raise Money, letting their Land in Ireland, and sinking the Rent to 10 l. per Annum, and discharged such Creditors by that, and their own Benevolence, as stood in most need; and part to many others. to discharge those Sequestrations, and by letting their Lands in Ireland, sinking the Rent to 10 l. per Annum; and by Benevolences and Gifts of their Members, paid off a good part of their Debts; and to supply what they could not otherways, for the present advance they took up Money upon Security of the Equity of redemption of their whole Estate; whereby, it plainly appears, they used all Ways and Means to preserve their Hall, and Ground-rent, as a Seed for their Poste∣rity; they having already paid, of their own Benevolence, and what they have so borrowed on Security of the remaining part of their Estate, far above the real value (to be sold) of what they receive thereout, over and above the yearly Charities, where∣with the same are charged by the Donours: However, the Work went on but slowly;But their Hall (be∣ing in Ruines) was Sequestred by Cre∣ditors, which wholly discouraged both Freemen and Ap∣prentices, they con∣tinue after to bor∣row money on their Revenue, and had Sequestration assigned. All which not∣withstanding dis∣couraged particu∣lar Members far∣ther to contribute (whilst under such Circumstances.) the generality of the Members, that should have now contributed their Assistance to discharge the Whole, being unsatisfied, as looking on the Gifts of some par∣ticular Persons, would signifie little towards so great a Work, un∣less some better Encouragement might be given; as being of Opinion, That so long as the Hall lay thus Ruinous, it would be a vain thing to attempt it. And under these sad circumstances the Company continued till the year 1680. when Sir John Moore, (a Worthy Member) taking into his consideration its deplo∣rable condition, every year lessening in Reputation, by reason of their Hall thus in Ruines, which not only discouraged Men to take their Freedoms, and Apprentices to be bound there, and Bene∣factors from their Liberality, but also rendred the Society almost contemptible;) he was therefore very inclinable, at his own charge,Till Sir John Moore, Anno 1680. begun, and other Worthy Mem∣bers followed, to rebuild and enlarge the Hall, as the only means to re∣move their Re∣proach, and to encourage Bene∣factors Free∣men, and Appren∣tices, to preserve a Succession, to repair the Great Hall, thereby to encourage other Members, by his Example, to contribute their Assistance, to re-edifie and augment it, so as to make it the most Commodious Seat, for the Chief Magistrate, in this City, as the only means to preserve a succession of Members in this Company, which being made known by Sir James Edwards (then Master) in a Court of Assistants, it was referred to the Wardens, together (with some other Members) to consider of, and propound a Model for such additional Building, as might make the Hall Commodious, both for Ornament and Use, to answer so Noble a Design: Upon
Report of which Committee, soon after Sir John Frederick, Sir James Edwards, and several other Aldermen and Worthy Members, agreed to contribute liberally towards so good a Work, as being fully convinced, that if the Hall should long con∣tinue under these circumstances, not only all that had been done would be wholly fruitless,As the only means to preserve the Company. but all that remained (for which they were Trustees to the Generations to come) would soon waste into nothing, which would reproachfully render the present Members most ungrateful to their Ancestors, whose Names still blossom in what remains of those Pious Monuments of their Cha∣rities, and obnoxious to those who should succeed happy Mem∣bers of this Society. And therefore concluded this great Work to be the only leading Means left to preserve the Society;Not doubting but their Brethren would all follow so good Examples to finish this Work and pay their Debts. and that as Sir John Cutler had so long before for those very ends, at his own Charges begun, and Sir John Moore had now undertaken to repair and beautifie the great Hall; so they held themselves highly obliged to pro∣mote and carry on so excellent a Work; and having caused the Scite, and Fabrick of the Hall to be surveyed, and finding, that with some more additional Building, (then already pro∣pounded to be erected,) it might be made a more commodious and convenient Habitation for the Chief Magistrate, than any other ever was before, within the City of London; therefore, that it might answer all these good Ends, and might with all possible speed be carried on and finished, in order to invite and en∣courage all the Members to contribute towards payment of the Company's Debts, and Arrears of Charities, (wherein Sir Wil∣liam Hooker, then one of the sitting Aldermen,And that it may answer the design'd end, the Hall and whole Revenue (being all designed for Charity) is by Conveyance and Decree settled to secure their yearly Charities, where∣with the Company is chargeable. and late Lord Mayor, and many other Worthy Members, had liberally con∣tributed, as good Examples,) they liberally subscribed and paid towards the raising and finishing of such additional Building, declaring themselves (if occasion should be afterwards) to be far∣ther assisting to compleat so good a Work; not doubting but their Brethren, the rest of the Members, would every one follow, ac∣cording to their Degrees and Qualities. And that the beautifying and repairing their Hall might not prove a Bait to such Creditors (if any should be) as formerly seized the Ruines of the same, to endeavour again a Sequestration against it; but might answer those good Ends so by them designed: The Company, by advice of Learned Counsel, after an Inquisition taken before the Commissioners for Charitable Uses, and pursuant to a Decree made by those Commissioners, have conveyed the same, and all their Revenue, and the Equity of Redemption
thereof, (subject to the said former Securities) to Trustees, to se∣cure the yearly payment, not only of those Charities wherewith that Revenue is charged by the Donors; but also with the over∣plus, (as the same will extend) those other yearly Charities, payable by the Company to several Places, Persons, and Uses, by the ap∣pointment of other Benefactors, who heretofore paid into their hands several great Sums of Money for those Uses, (for which now no Fond remains,) that they might also thereby not only discharge their Consciences towards God, and the Memory of such Pious Benefactors, but also avoid the chargeable Prosecutions of the Commissioners upon the Statute for Charitable Uses, who have of late put this Company every year to exceeding great Charges and Expences. The Company's Case thus stated, having been set forth by way of Answer to Bills exhibited a∣gainst them by Creditors, gave satisfaction, so as to prevent others from troubling them in vain.Thus have I endeavoured to lay down the true State of the Company of Grocers, as it relates to themselves and their Credi∣tors, in their present condition; the Substance whereof having been declared by way of Answer to several Creditors Bills, (who to no purpose had put themselves to Charge in Suing the Com∣pany,) seemed to give great Satisfaction unto the Learned Coun∣cil, and other Persons unconcerned, who before were ignorant of the true State of the Company's Case; and may happily be a means to divert others from a fruitless prosecution of any such chargeable Suits against the Company,As also the Com∣missioners for cha∣ritable uses, when they understood their Case, advised their Creditors to desist, and nor waste their Parish-Stock in a vain prose∣cution, and to ap∣ply themselves to the Wardens in a friendly Manner. in the event whereof they cannot promise to themselves so much Benefit, as they may hope to see without it. And the Commissioners for Charitable Uses, having been rightly informed of the Truth of the Company's Condition, did well approve of, and decree such a voluntary settlement, as a most Righteous Sanction to preserve their Re∣putation, and secure their Posterity; and therefore advised their Creditors by Bond to acquiesce therein; and to apply them∣selves to the Wardens and Assistants, (when they may be in a capacity of paying by Benevolence, or other contingent profits,) for their Debts due by Bond,So that several Creditors, who (ill-advised) had given them disturbance, desisted, which gave freedom to the Wardens and Committee to pur∣sue the Building, and to the Mem∣bers attending the Company's Affairs, so as the Hall was finished, and, with incredible Celerity, wholly compleated. rather than in vain to disturb them with Suits, to discourage the Members, and thereby, not only to hazard the loss of their own, but to wrong all others concerned with them, by giving them trouble and disturbance. And several of their Creditors, who before (instigated by some unadvised Persons) gave the Company disturbance, as soon as they were so informed of their Case, better considered their own Interest, and wholly forbore to proceed any farther; which not only afforded great Freedom and Liberty to the Wardens and Assistants to attend the Company's Service, but also great incou∣ragement to the then Wardens, to begin, and to Sir Henry Tulse,
Mr. Box, and Mr. Winch, (the succeeding Wardens,) to carry on that great Work of finishing the Hall, in so short a time, (as is almost incredible to relate,) for reception of Sir John Moore, (the succeeding Lord Mayor,) at Michaelmas following;Which Work, though it amounted to a greater charge than at first propounded, in regard of many additions not thought on, to make it Commodious, yet it answers all in the advantage it gives, being a must free Benevolence, which would have been gotten for no other use. espe∣cially considering the same was many ways (upon farther con∣sideration had) enlarged, and made more convenient (than at first was intended) with many accommodations (not at first thought on) to render it so exact, (as indeed it is,) far excelling any Hall that now is (or probably ever was) in London, so that the whole charge of compleating the same, I believe, with as good Husbandry as was possible to be managed; yet swells to double the Sum which was at first propounded to be disbursed, and there∣fore called for farther assistence of our Members, than at first was designed, to contribute to the same; which Work being so com∣pleatly finished, manifestly appears to have been the only means left to keep the Company upon a Foundation, which otherwise, must in a short time, have naturally dissolved of it self; for that the Apprentices and Freemen, of any estate or value, who before wholly declined, have now daily increased, as having a prospect, by what is visible, of a prosperous carrying on the whole Work answerable thereto: Which work now compleated,And it is a clear augmentation and the best branch of the Revenue; and was the only means to remove the re∣proach, incourage Freemen and Ap∣prentices, and Benefactors. is in it self of far greater value, than all the other part of the Com∣pany's Revenue, (over and above the Charities issuing there∣out;) and that those several Summs so subscribed, were thus freely given by several Worthy Members, on purpose for this great Work; that it might incourage the whole Members, freely and liberally to contribute towards the residue of this Work, and the Debts: To which end I have, to the best of my Capa∣city,That it might Move every good member to contri∣bute towards their Debts and Chari∣ties, this Book is composed for their Information and Incouragement. composed these Sheets for their Information and Encou∣ragement, to follow so good Examples, that so great and good a Work, wherein so many Thousands are and may be concerned, may be chearfully carried on, and they may all (as Fellow-helpers) have the honour to be recorded amongst the Gene∣rations to come, The happy Repairers and Restorers of the Com∣pany of Grocers. THis is a Work wherein those that are most Zealous shall be most Illustrious,The worst, as well as best if Men, esteemed it their chief Honour to de∣rive their Pedigree from such a Bene∣factor. and is that alone which will abide the Scrutiny of the most Malicious and Cen∣sorious in all Changes; and is a root from which the most Avaricious and Luxurious, as well as the Ambitious, after many Generations, will esteem it the Chief Honour
of their Family to derive their Pedigree. 'Tis founded in Obedience to a Divine Command, and anchor'd on such infallible Promises, as will render the sincere Donors impregnable, against all the Malice and Designs of our Common Enemies, who with equal Subtilty and Malice to divide and destroy, have of late years, Characterized the two extremes in each Corporation, by the distinction of Whig and Tory, and though with no less Malice, they endeavoured to blemish Moderation with the squint-eyed Invective of Trimming; yet they could never grass their Poison on the Sacred Stock of Pious, and well-intended Charity, and Good Works. May the Author of Peace, and Lover of Concord, a∣waken every Member of this, and all other Societies, to reflect on what is past, and to consider seriously the sad Effects of our late Heats and Animosities, and the sufferings of many innocent Objects of Charity occasioned thereby, so as to lay aside all prejudice towards one another, for the future, and after the Example, and in obedience to the Command of our Blessed Redeemer, to forgive and forget in the exercise of Charity and Tenderness, as Members of one Christian Body, and Brethren of one Society, striving to excell each other in doing good, and promoting the Honour and Happiness of their Fellowship. And that the Members of this Company, may with Harmony of Hearts and Voice, at their Anniversary Feasts, sitting at Meat in our Great Hall, with a calm temper of Mind, and chearful Countenance, read what I have placed in their view, (as a motive thereto,) in a little Table over the Musick-Room, at the lower end of the Hall, thus Written, Psal. 134. Blest Day! Might I but live to see The Tribes, like Brethren, all agree, Like Brethren striving Who shall the Best Members be.
POSTSCRIPT. THE Company of Grocers, at the time when the Quo War∣ranto was brought against them, Anno 1684. were (of all Companies in London) under the most irregular Go∣vernment, as to By-Laws and Ordinances,The Company, when the Quo Warranto was brought, was very defective, as to By-Laws and Or∣dinances, having none made that are extant since King Henry the Eighth's time; and those (though fitted to the Distempers of that time) were most obsolete, and out of use now; which might have proved fatal, had not the Company had a Quietus by their late Charter; wherein (by aid of our late Master, the Earl of Mulgrave) are several Privi∣leges granted this Company, First, a Confirma∣tion of a Charter granted to this Com∣pany by King Hen∣ry the Sixth of the Office of Garbling, in all places in England, (London only excepted) Secondly, The Mystery of Grocers is explained, and all Druggists, Confectioners, Tobacconists, and Tobacco-Cutters in London, and three Miles compass are Incorporated herein, and never to be separated from this Company. to warrant their Actions and Proceeding, not having any extant (that I could find) made, and legally confirmed, since the time of King Henry the Eighth; in whose Reign (by search) I found on Record, in the Town-Clerk's Office, many suited to the Distempers and Nature of the Mystery of the Grocery in those days; but having taken Copies of them (nigh an hundred Sheets,) on perusal I found them most Obsolete and out of Use, and very defective to cure, or an∣tidote the Diseases or Corruptions of the present Constitution of the Company: So that the Renewing, and Confirmation of our Charter, proved an happy opportunity to this Company, not only to have a Relaxation and Quietus of all Offences and Misprisions that might have proved fatal, through defect of such Sanctions of Government, (which are essentially necessary to every Corpo∣ration;) but by the aid and favour of the Right Honourable the Earl of Mulgrave, then our Master, interceding with his late Ma∣jesty, King Charles the Second, of Blessed Memory, (who graciously condescended to own himself our Master) our Charter was en∣larged with these following advantages, viz. a Confirmation of a Charter made by King Henry the Sixth, granting the Office of Garbling to this Company, in all places in this Kingdom, (the City of London only excepted;) which Privilege, by non-usage for some years, was grown almost out of knowledge to the Members, until by search for other Charters, I found it on Re¦cord in the Tower. By declaring the Species of the Mystery, which before in the former Charters, was expressed generally under the Denomi∣nation of Grocery; but thereby declared to include all Druggists, Confectioners, Tobacconists, and Tobacco-Cutters, as having been branched out of, and bred by Grocers, (there being then no Com∣pany of them, or any of them.) Afterwards that Charter, (so granted upon and after this Quo Warranto) with those Additional Clauses and Privileges, being vacated, a new Charter (by advice of Sir Henry Pollixfen, and
other Learned Counsel) was obtained, (independent of any surren∣der) whereby all Persons using these Species, as well as Gro∣cers, in London, or within three Miles of the Liberties of the same, are incorporated into this Company, and never to be separated from them, or otherwise incorporated; with liberty given to all Persons using any part of the Mystery, whether Free of any other Company or no, to incorporate themselves therein; not judging it reasonable to compel them, (as Men that have born Office in one Parish,And positively en∣joyning all Persons using this Mystery, as Grocers, Con∣fectioners, Drug∣gists, Tobacco∣nists, or Tobacco-Cutters, for ever after to bind their Apprentices to Members of this Company, in order to preserve a Suc∣cession. And for an acc m∣medation of such as have no other Friend, there is an Order of the Court of Assistents, for them to be bound to the Beadle of the Grocers, and turned over to their Masters. The abuse of taking Freedoms by Patri∣mony set forth, and the Error detected; That it is only to extend to the City, but not to the My∣stery, unless the Son n of the same My∣stery, whereof his Father was Free. from thence into any other) to doe the like. But it positively enjoyns them all to bind their Apprentices, for the future, to Members of the Grocers Company, and to be turned over to their Masters, to serve their Apprenticeships, and all (as well those whose terms are expired, as) those that are not to take their Freedoms of the Grocers, in order to preserve a Succession in this Company, which otherwise must in few years have sunk, for want of Members, to the total ruine and destruction of their Charities and Government: And for their Accommodation in that behalf, there is an Order of the Court of Assistents, for the Beadle of the Grocers Company, to be the Medium, (in cases where they have no other Friend of the Company,) for their Apprentices to be bound to him, and so turned over to the Master whom he is to serve; which Clause in the Charter for so doing, was at first much scrupled, by reason of the Custom (supposed to be) in London, for a Freeman's Son to have his Freedom by Patrimony (at his own Election) of whatsoever Company his Father was a Member, though the Son had been bound Appren∣tice to a Member of another Mystery; wherein (upon due Exa∣mination) it was found to be a vulgar Error, and a great Mistake, by long usage, grown into a Custom, extending this Custom of Patrimony (which is restrained only to a Freedom of the City) to every Company in the City; whereas the Apprentice, though he may have his Freedom (whether he serve or no) of the City by his Father's Copy, yet he ought (according to the Original De∣sign and Intent of every Charter of Incorporation) to take his Freedom of his proper Mystery, where there is any Corporation of such Mystery: For that every Mystery hath been incorporated to no other end, but to have all their Members, and all using their Mystery, well governed by proper Judges, viz. by Men best knowing and experienced therein; whereas the contrary practice hath introduced a spurious Mixture in all Societies, and caused all abuses, possibly in the Government of the City, and made Men as lawless and ungovernable, as their corrupt and loose Principles will lead them to.
As for Example, a Member of the Barber-Chirurgions,As for Example, that a Carpenter, or Blacksmith, ought not take his Freedom of the Bar∣ber Chirurgions, though his Father was of this Com∣pany a Member. puts his Son Apprentice to a Carpenter or Black-Smith, or any other Me∣chanick Trade, if the Son (having thus served his Apprentice∣ship) out of Pride, Prejudice, or sinister End, shall take his Free∣dom by Patrimony of the Barber-Chirurgions, (whereof his Father was a Member,) he is thereupon Sworn to observe the By-Laws and Ordinances, made for well-governing of the Barber-Chirur∣gions, which is to bleed, dress Wounds, &c. things unknown to him, and impossible for him to observe, and (which is worse) makes him never after mindful of his Oath, and frees him from all Obligation to take notice of, or to observe those Ordinances made for well-governing the Carpenters, which is his proper Mystery; and so he becomes a lawless Person, and from thence, in that, as in other like Cases, the End and Design of all Corpo∣rations is totally abused and defeated, besides the great wrong done to the Company, which is thus deprived of its Members, which should support the Charge and Grandeur of their Society, of which Injury no Company in London, have more cause to com∣plain than the Grocers; but all other Persons using a Calling, of which there is no Corporation, in being as Norwich-Factors Merchants, &c. are at liberty to take their Freedom of what Company they have served to, or by Patrimony of their Fathers, or by Redemption of what Company they please, but having once made their Election, they are obliged to continue therein, unless they shall be translated thence by order of the Court of Aldermen, and consent of the Company, into another. And whereas two Causes have been assigned for discouragement of Persons to take their Freedom of the Grocers, viz.The Causes discou∣raging Persons from taking their Free∣dom of the Gro∣cers, viz. the great charge and burthen. The reproach of their Hall in Ruines, and under Sequestration, are now removed. First, The great Charge they were incident to bear above other Companies. Secondly, The Reproach contracted, by reason of their Hall lying in Ruines, and under Sequestration, and the great Debts they owe; both which, by the Prudence and Care of our Government, (now blessed be God) are removed, and on the contrary, greater Arguments may be used to incourage such as left us to return, and others to incorporate themselves into this Company,And on the contra∣ry, for their encou∣ragement (besides the many Privileges in this Company) the charge of every Office is not half so much. besides the many ancient Privileges, which the Members of the Grocers Com∣pany are intituled unto: For ease of their Members they do not take Fines to excuse them of Warden or Steward, as heretofore, but in special cases, neither do they call them on the Cloathing, (as in most other Companies,) but when it is most manifest they
have been of long continuance, or are of sufficient Ability, freely to accept it; and so it is (usually) a long time before it comes to a Young Man's turn, to bear any charge or burthen here, and when it doth,And none are suf∣fered to Fine, and if they do, it is not above half so much as it was heretofore. the charge of Livery, Steward, and other Offices, are all reduced to a very low and easie rate; or if they Fine, or Hold, the charge is not much above half so much as it was heretofore; all so settled by the Court of Assistents, for ease and encourage∣ment of their Members. There is provision made for the due payment of all our Charities, which for many years have been too much neglected and oc∣casioned great Cla∣mour, and Reproach on the Company.Our Hall having been new built and beautified, there is a most certain Ground-rent, by Decree settled, to answer all our yearly Charities, as well (where we have, as where before we had no Fond) to secure the due and constant yearly payment of them to their proper Object, to remove all that daily Clamour and Re∣flexion, which for several years past in all places, rendred them reproachful throughout the City and Kingdom. Our By-Laws and Ordinances are with great Care, and by Learned Counsel, prepared for well Ordering and Governing our Members, and all using the Mystery; and for encourage∣ment of all who ob∣serve their Duty; And also for pu∣nishment of all Transgressors, and so to encourage our Benefactors, that this Company be restored, as it was 100 years since, a Nursery of Charities, and Seminary of good Citizens.Our By-Laws by most learned Counsel are settled, and again perused, examined, and approved of, as the Law directs, (in the First Year of the Reign of our now Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary,) by the Right Honourable the Lords Commssioners for Custody of the Great Seal, and the two Lord Chief Justices, Sir John Holt, and Sir Henry Pollixfen, pur∣suant to our late Charter so enlarged, whereby our ancient Usages and Privileges, for well Governing and Ordering our Members and Mystery are in every kind regulated, augmented, and sup∣plyed with addition of new, suited to all our defects, which will without doubt encourage our Benefactors, liberally to contribute towards discharge of the Remainder of our Company's Debts; so that there cannot be a better foundation laid, to raise and restore our Company, as it was 100 years since, a Seminary of good Citi∣zens, and Nursery of the best Charities in London; and so conse∣quently no Apprentice can well, or probably may hope to be planted in a better Corporation, in order to his future advantage. And that this Com∣pany may no longer suffer, either by not observing or trans∣gressing them, the Heads of such as concern all using the Mystery in Lon∣don, and the Pre∣cincts aforesaid, will be Printed and Published, that all may have notice to Conform thereunto.And to the end that all Persons concerned using this Mystery, either as Grocer, Druggist, Confectioner, Tobacconist, or Tobacco-Cutter, in London, and within three Miles of the Liberties thereof, may have notice thereof, and give due Obedience and Conformity to what hath been so designed by the said Charter, By-Laws, and ancient Usages, and this Company suffer no longer by their De∣faults, either in not observing, or transgressing the same; the Heads thereof will in short time be Printed and Published, and left at their several Dwellings, and places of abode, for their Caution and better Information. And certainly, all this considered,
it cannot be doubted but every Member of this Company, will call to mind the great obligation he lies under (if he will mind his Oath, either as a good Christian, or an honest Man,) in and by all things according to his Power, on all opportunities, not only to publish and make known unto all Persons concerned, what is so required of them, but will also move and excite them, by the best Arguments and Ways they can, speedily to comply with their duty herein, and so avoid the Penalties and Charges they will otherwise expose themselves to, in a chargeable way, and be compelled at last to yield Obedience and Conformity thereunto.
THE CONCLUSION, In a few Motives to Good Works, as the very Life and Soul of Religion, and the best Evidence of a sincere Christian. The Conclusion by Address.HAving thus stated the condition of the Company, as it long flourished in Splendor, and gradually through various Pro∣vidences, and the sad Effects of War and Fire; how it groaned of late under so great pressure in its sadder Circumstances: And having set before you the happy encouragement already now given, and the Methods propounded again to raise and restore this Company to its former splendor,Most humbly mo∣ving to the great Work of Charity. I now tu n to the Honourable and Worthy Mem∣bers of whom it consists: And you, my noble and good Masters, under whom I hold my Station in this place, I most humbly pray you (of your wonted Benignity) to bear with my Zeal and Freedom, and the boldness I assume, most humbly to move you, to set to your helping hands in this Work, so excellent and acceptable to God and every good Man. And pressed with a five-fld Argument drawn from the nature of this great Duty. From example of their Pious An∣cestors.1. By remembring you of those eminent good Charities, for which those Worthy Members who went before you in former times, and are to this day celebrated; and have left us such grounds as (being now built) gives us the prospect of a great Revenue when the Leases are out, which (though far distant) are and will be every year (like useful Timber) a more growing hope to Posterity. Whose Foundation they have to build in.2. That you would not only think it enough to praise them, but be provoked by a generous Emulation, to follow their Example, liberally and bountifully to afford your Assistence, not only to secure, but also to increase this growing hope, that our Burthen and Reproach being re∣moved, our Benefactors may be encouraged, and this Society still pre∣served
a Seminary of good Merchants, and as a Treasury of Charity; that so the succeeding Generations may Bless and Honour you, as much as you do those Worthy Members in former times, when your Names shall be recorded, as Raisers and Restorers of the Company of Gro∣cers. 3. That what you doe, you would doe speedily; whereby you will draw on others, that need quickening and encouragement, by your Example; and in so doing, you will not only have the Comfort of what you doe your selves, but be the happy Promoters in others, of what the Company will have cause to bless God, and give you thanks for. 4. That you will consider how great a deliverance you had to escape the late dreadful Fire with your lives; and how Gracious God hath been to you still, to entrust you with his Talents for improvement (as Stewards) in his Work: And that this Company which suffered so much in that Calamity, hath no other Hands but yours to repair her breaches. 5. That you can have no such true comfort in the World on a Sick Bed, or in any other Calamity, as to be conscious of doing good Works of this Nature, when as faithful Stewards of that which is not consigned to you into Property, but into Trust, you have (as Good and Faithful Servants) but well disposed of a Parcel of your great Lord's Estate, according to his own Will. And for your encouragement, this is a Work most acceptable to God, and inviting to every good Man, the Redemption, Relief, and Support of the most Ancient and Illustrious Corporation in this Metropolis, with all her numerous Offspring, the Aged, the Widow, and the Father∣less, the Blind, the Lame, and the Impotent, all that God (who is Wisdom and Goodness) himself commends (after his own example) to your Charity, and as capable of Alms, with most extensive Blessings,Encouraging it. Promises of Rewards, and to be neglected under the most severe Threat∣nings and Punishments. And farther, this your kindness will not perish as a Meals-Meat,As an Object most acceptable to God, and inviting to every Good Man. or a draught of cold Water (though that has encouragement, a Man would think, that will give credit to our Saviour himself,) but this your Cha∣rity will be as a lasting Seed, laid on the purest Foundation of those Holy and Good Men, who were our Pious Founders, and whose Names, after so many hundred years, smell sweet and blossom in the dust; and are now Blessed with God, receiving the Recompense of their Reward, whilst their Works follow them, and praise them in the Gates; so that what you shall here bestow, will be to open and feed those Fountains, as their lasting and refreshing Comforts and Relief. For though Good Works in themselves (as flowing back to the Foun∣tain from whence they spring) can be no way meritorious; yet they have
been always so acceptable to God,And not only as the best means to secure what they shall leave to their Chil∣dren and Posterity, (which without this usually is sooner by them spent, than got by their Pa∣rents;) but will for ever remain. that we find in every Age, Estates and Honour continue longest in the Name and Family of such as have been most diffusive in Works of this Nature, that if it were modest to render a reason, why so many great Estates are sooner wasted by a loose Heir, than gotten by his frugal Parent, it may be well presumed, it is because so little of it was bestowed to such uses, when Men return so little to God, to whom they owe all they have; and most assuredly no Article in your Account at the great Audit, will be sooner allowed toThis to be under∣stood in the Apostle's sence, not otherwise. cover many other Errors, than what is thus disposed. And now as Spice is a great Ingredient in this Mystery, and is a part of your Arms, so I pray con∣sider how Alms in Scripture are called, an Odor of a sweet-smelling Savour;A sweet Perfume in the Nostrils of Men. And an Odor of a sweet-smelling Sa∣vour to God. and it is these Perfumes that will prove acceptable to God, and have a good Savour amongst Men. So I conclude, with my Prayers to Almighty God, to incline all your Hearts, according to your several Degrees and Qualities in this great Work, to acquit your selves as good Men, and as good Citizens and Grocers; and that I may be happy in discharge of my Duty, which alone moved me to make this my humble Address to you all, and shall be my endeavours to perform. FINIS.
