R62A R219715 99831166 35629
MANUA OR MISCELLAN OF Meditations, Apothegm Sentences, Precepts, O¦servations, Character and Essayes. Necessary for every ones Con∣templation. By R. R. Novae aetates, sola vetera, novè semp observant. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook
To the World. WOrld, I do not call thee good or bad; thou art a mixture of both as I my self, and all men else, that live in thee: I here present thee with a Miscellaneous Collection of mine own Thoughts and Observations of dvers years. They are too various for me, to bring into method; as they came into my minde, I set them down, that they might not be buried in mine own Bo∣som; thou hast them delivered in the same order. I commit them to thee, but not commend them. I am neither so self-confident, as to think, that none of them can be dsliked of, nor yet so self-dubious, but that I believe, that
some of them possibly may be allowed ▪ I put them forth, not to please, nor to displease; onely to declare mine own opinion. Such as they are, in thee, the World, I did conceive them; such as they are, to thee, the World, I therefore leave them. Thine, and not thine, R R. Rich Grounds brings forth rich Fruits, and taller Trees: Mine but poor Grass, and such low shrubs, as these.
A Manual, or, Miscellany OF Meditations, Apothegmes, Sentences, Precepts, Ob∣servations, Characters, and Essayes. WIsdome is a Tree that springeth from the heart, whose Root is the Grace of God; whose Sap and Pith are good thoughts; whose Boughs and Branches are good words; whose Leaves and Blossoms are good endea∣vors; and whose Fruits are good actions. A good Nature is a precious Jem; wanting outward, Beauty it is a Jem,
whose vertue consisteth not in shew, but in quality and operation; wanting riches, it is a Gem set in a Leaden Brooche, which of it self is not therefore of smaller va∣lue, because of the baseness of the orna∣ment; wanting education it is an unpo∣lished Gem, which is not less precious, though the luster thereof be outwardly obscured, but an evil Nature enjoying what the other wanteth, is as a base coun∣terfeit; being beautiful, it is a counter∣feit not fit for use, but for shew, onely seeming fair and pleasing to the eye; being wealthy, it is a counterfeit set in gold, the richness of which ornament doth not make that of it self the more precious; being bred up in learning, it is a counterfeit beautified by Art, which although out∣wardly it seems very fair and specious, is notwithstanding in true value little or no∣thing worth. The World is a Volumn written with the hand of God, wherein the greatness of his Majesty is declared unto man by vi∣sible Characters: In which great Book of Wisdom (besides the knowledge of God) man may also learn the knowledge of
himself. There are likewise contained in it Divine Precepts of mans duty towards God, his so glorious Creatour; Civil Pre∣cepts of his duty towards his Neighbour; Moral Precepts of his own vertuous beha∣haviour; Politique Precepts for the well ordering and government of his life; and Mechanicall Precepts for the sustenance of his body: the Spheres and Elements are severall parts of this Volumn; the sundry Species of Creatures in them are severall Chapters of those parts; their severall ages are several pages; every particular Creature is a letter of this Book; every letter contains a sentence, yea, a volumn of Sentences; yea, more then a volumn of volumns. And God, as he is the Au∣thour, so he is the School-master of this Book, Man is the scholar, Meditation is the studying and learning of it, Judgement the spelling of the letters, Understanding the construing of the words, and all Li∣berall Arts the rules to attain the know∣ledge. To speak well is the part of a good Oratour; to do well is the part of a good man; to teach Godliness is the part of a
good Preacher; but to practise Godliness is the part of a good Christian. He that gives good Precepts, and bad Examples, is like a man that first blows the fire to kin∣dle it, and then casts water on it to quench it; one flash of water will presently put out that, which many blasts did before kindle, unless it be grown to an uncon∣querable greatness; so one evil example will soon overthrow the good, which hath been wrought in us by the labour of many vertuous precepts, and godly ad∣monitions unless vertue be grown to that height, that it be able by it self to defend it self against all violent assaults of vices op∣pugning: weak Christians are as fire new kindled of green wood, apt to go out upon the least occasion, & therefore to set them further on fire have need both of good Precepts, as the bellows to blow them, and of good examples, as dry sticks or coles to take hold on; and being therewith suppli∣ed, they not onely continue in burning, but do also infinitely increase to such magnitude and perfection, that the fire of their Spirit is by no means able to be quenched.
A man may content himself with a foolish Wife, if she have but thus much knowledge, as not to be ignorant that she is a fool; for then being conscious of her own weakness, she will attempt nothing of her self, but will readily yield her obedi∣ence to his direction and government. But a wise woman is a most comfortable help∣er to her husband, if she have but so much ignorance, as not to know her self to be wise: for then she will afford him much good and wholesome advice; and yet, as accompting her self the weaker, and doubting of her own wit, will in all things submit to his judgement, as an Advo∣cate to the Judge. Where if a foolish woman want that knowledge, and a wise woman want that ignorance, they are both intollerable Tyrants, who will both seek to govern, and therein usurp the right and power of their Husbands, and will also take to themselves an unbridled liberty, according to their own wills and fancies to do whatsoever they please, be∣ing altogether impatient, as well of any manner of restraint or controulment in their actions, as of gain-saying to their desires.
It much better becometh to be a virgin Man, then a married Boy; and a maiden Woman, then a married Girl. For that, he that is too soon a husband, seldome or ne∣ver proves to be a man; and that she that is too soon a wife, seldome or never proves to be a woman: they both remain in their childish silliness. A thousands Precepts doth not so well inform as one Example; nor a thousand Examples so well as a mans sole Experi∣ence. Wisdom learned by Precept, is as food but heard of; Wisdom learned by Example, is as food onely looked on; but Wisdom learned by ones own Experience, is as food both paid for, and tasted. A poor man that marries a Fool for her wealth, sells himself to be a servant of folly; and a rich man that marries a Fool without wealth, buyes a Fool to be his master. Chuse rather that thy deeds be better then thy words, then that thy words be better then thy deeds: For good words are but as tables or pictures of goodness,
but good actions are the very substance, and life of goodness it self. A Wife to her Husband is bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, and they are both one flesh; yet oftentimes she proves to be a bone so out of joynt, and so sore a piece of flesh, that she puts her Husband to much anguish and sorrow. It is better to buy a Wife then sell an a Husband; that is, it is better for a man to be at much cost, pains, and trouble to obtain for his Wife a vertuous and de∣screet woman, that can wisely order her self towards him, then for great riches to marry a fool, that hath no understanding, nor will endure to be instructed. So likewise it is better to make a man, then mar a woman; that is, it is better for a wealthy woman to marry a poor man, that knowes how in wisdom to governe her, and her estate, then to match her self with a rich fool that can do neither; of whom she shall have no comfort, but shall ever be ashamed. Strive not with a fool in his folly, for
with such there is no end: a man of un∣derstanding, will gladly be instructed, in what he is ignorant; but it is as possi∣ble to wash a Blackamore white, as to bring a fool to be wise; a white man may easily become black, and a wise man may become a fool; but that a Blackamore should become white, or that a fool should become wise, is a work above na∣ture, or art, to bring to pass. At two sorts of men I do much admire at young men forward to shew their wit; and at old men backward to part with their money: the first flow with wit, al∣though they are empty: the last want money, although they abound. Young men are wise new out of the Cradle; old men are covetous almost in the grave; but they in their own eyes, not in others; the in others eyes, not in their own. It is as hard to make a base spirit good, and a contentious spirit peaceable, as to make a horse of a hog, or a lamb of a dog. By A and Wisdom wilde and savage
Beasts may be kept in subjection; the Horse is restrained by the bit, and made serviceable; the Dog by his chains; the Lion is kept in wards; the Wolf is pre∣vented by the Shepheard, and often taken in the snare, but they still retain their own nature, and being left at liberty, will be as before; the Horse will be a Horse still, wilde and head-strong: the Dog will be a Dog still, churlish and mischievous: the Lion a Lion still, fierce and cruell: The Wolf a Wolf still, greedy and devouring. So the spirits of men may be ordered, but not altered: the Proud will never be tru∣ly humble; the Covetous never truly libe∣ral; the Base never truly honest; the Rude and Barbarous never truly civil; the Las∣civious and Wanton never truly modest; the Foolish never truly wise; the Conten∣tious and Froward never truly peaceable; the Cruel and Hard-hearted never truly pittiful: But by good Laws and wise Go∣vernment they may be compelled, and kept under, who otherwise in their own naturall dispositions would be very ob∣noxious: The Proud man would be above all; the covetous man would have all, and keep all; the base and rude abuse all; the
wanton and foolish corrupt all; the con∣tentious and cruel destroy all: Whereas by the power and authority of good laws, and a wise government, the proud are kept down; the covetous ordered; the base are compelled in some sort to be ho∣nest; the rude to be civil; the wanton modest; the foolish to do things that are fit and comely; the contentious to be peaceable; and the cruel and hard heart∣ed to do works of mercy. There are, who in a great measure en∣joying many gifts and blessings of God, admirable good in themselves, do out of self opinion of their own Worth so far transgress the bounds of vertue, thinking it too mean a habit for them to put on, as that they, through their depraved and cor∣rupt natures misimploy those their good gifts to the furtherance and maintaining of all manner of vices. Some are too learned to be religious; some too great to be good; some too wise to be honest and just in their dealings; some too high to be humble & courteous: some too cou∣ragious to be peaceable, some too gene∣rous to be civil: where by the rules of ver∣tue,
the more learned should be more re∣ligious; the more great should be the more good; the more wise should be the more honest and just; the more high should be the more humble and courte∣ous; the more couragious should be the more peaceable; and the more generous should be the more civil. Many men out of a self-opinion of their own merit, either in respect their better Calling, or greater Birth, (as they con∣ceive) do affect to live at so high a rate above their means, as that they not onely hinder their own growth in the world, but oftentimes even run themselves quite out of all; and having so done, yet their height of foolish pride is such, that ra∣ther then they will make known their wants, or submit their persons to any in∣feriour imployment, whereby to relieve them, they will yield themselves ready to perish, through a voluntary, and self-oc∣casioned poverty. And thus whilest they strive to seem more then they are to o∣thers, they neglect to be what they might be to themselves; the more high Calling, indeeed, I acknowledge is the more wor∣thy,
yet the very meanest is not unwor∣thy: I will neither overvalue the one, nor undervalue the other, but to both will ever give their due respect. If a better Fortune might befall me, I should gladly embrace it; if it be not for me, with what I have, I shall rest well pleased, and will be thankful to God for it. The Sun is cloathed with an exceeding brightness, the Stars do give a smaller light, yet all glorifie their Maker. If I cannot be a Master, I shall be content to be a Servant: If I cannot live after a greater fashion, I shall willingly stoop to a lower; and will hold it no disgrace to get a living by any honest endeavours, howsoever mean they are; to be a Gentleman to others, and a Beggar to ones self, is a proud, but no thriving course; for he that will be a gen∣tleman, when he ha's but little, shall soon be a Beggar, and have nere a whit; it is much better to seem poor to become rich, then to seem rich to become poor; he that lives below his means, may rise when he will; but he that lives above his means, must fall when he would not. If thou hatest to be Prodigall, let it
not cause thee to spend less then is neces∣sary, and meet according to thine estate: for this is to refuse thy meat, when it is set before thee, and to famish thy self at a full Table; or if thou hatest to be covetous, let it not cause thee to spend more then thy ability may well afford. For this is to throw away thy meat being full, which thou wilt wish for again being hungry: but so moderate thine expences, that thou mayest both comfort thy self now, and hereafter also; it is not Prodigality to spend somewhat chearfully, but to con∣sume all carelesly; nor is covetousness to save something frugally, but to spend no∣thing willingly. He that repines to spend any thing, pities not himself; and him that hath vainly spent all, no other pities. We should be all excellent wise men, if we could take good counsell, as well as give it. He that will trust every man is a Fool; but he that will trust no man, is an Infidel. Rich folks vanities relieve poor folks miseries.
Nor Wealth, nor Learning makes ei∣ther wise, or honest. A Mans own Mother Tongue with Wisdom, is better then many Languages without Understanding. 'Tis too late to spare, when all is gone: He must needs spare that is quite bare. Abundance of Wealth causeth bold∣ness of Speech: but Wisdom in words proceeds from an understanding spirit. A Knave that is rich, is a surer man to deal withall in matters of Bargains, Con∣tracts, or Securiies, then an honest poor man; but an honest rich man is surer then them both. There are that seem what they are not; there are that are poor, and yet seem rich; there are that are rich, and yet seem poor; there are that are foolish, and yet seem wise, there are that are wise, and yet seem foolish. There is no plague to a Foolish Wo∣man,
nor any sickness so grievous, as her unreasonable and perverse condition, to yield unto her in all things, is to put on a Fools coat; to gain-say her in any thing, is to contend with a Lunatique. He that hath ability, and spends less then is fit, or payes under his due, is a base covetous wretch: he that chearful∣ly spends what is fit, and payes his full due, is a just liberall man: and he that vainly spends more then is fit or payes above his due, is a proud prodigall Fool. Boldness of speech gives reputation, even to folly, but bashfulness and fear makes Wisdom disesteemed. A Liberall Minde doth abound even in want; whereas a Covetous Person doth want in much abundance. The Wealth of this World, in respect of true Riches, is but a stinking Dunghill, Rich Folks are Cocks crowing upon it: and Poor Folks are Chickens scraping about it.
Early Repentance is better then that that is too late; and it is much better to repent the endeavour, then the deed: for what is once done, is ever done; but what is not done, may be never done. Men of deep Judgement are as Cesterns with straight and unpliable Cocks, that will not easily turn, nothing is gotten out of them without much wringing and la∣bour; they have more in the head, less in the tongue: whereas on the contrary, men of lighter wit have commonly more in the tongue, but less in the head, being as Ce∣sterns with over-worn Cocks, ever run∣ning, till all be out. Single Life, and Marriage are as two dishes of meat set before us of a severall Relish: Single Life being placed first, we here feed on that so long as we please, but that State is so sweet, that at last it cloyes us: we remove that our selves, and take up Marriage, which we no sooner taste of, but we finde it so sharp, that it presently dislikes us: then we could wish the for∣mer again, but that too late; for that is set out of our reach: yet peradventure the lat∣ter
may be taken aside, and we may yet again obtain the first: Well, we have it, it cloyes us as before, and then we seek out for a dish of the sharper meat again; thus we are content with neither, and yet one we must have. Oh! that we could have a dish equally tempered of both; surely that could not but be pleasant, but such is not to be had in these inferiour Cottages. That delicate Food is dressed no where, but in the Privy Kitchen of the Court of Heaven: there onely is Marri∣age, and Single Life mixed together. All are single there, in respect of perfection of freedom; all are married there, in re∣spect of perfection of Holiness; all are at once and for ever, both single and mar∣ried there, in respect of fulness of Joy, Happiness, and Glory: which everlast∣ingly there they possess, through the pow∣er of Christ Jesus, the Righteous Lamb that sitteth on the Throne. To the frui∣tion of which Heavenly Benefits, God of his infinite Mery, for Christ his sake, our Blessed Saviour and Redeemer, bring us all. Amen. As there are, that hear much, and learn
little, so there are that learn much, and do little; many are so greedy of hearing, that they are never satisfied therewith; as if the whole duty of a Christian consist∣ed in the onely exercise of that sense; and yet for want of their due regard to what they hear, they profit so little thereby, that they remain as ignorant as ever they were; they are ever learning, but never the wiser; their memory seeming to be as sives, that will hold no water, all running out as fast as it is poured in, the words swiftly passing through their ears, but making no stay at all in their heads: others giving better attention, attain to some good mea∣sure of knowledge, and haply prove good discoursers as well of Religion, as other matters; but if you look into their lives and actions, they seem rather very Atheists then Christians, & oftentimes rather fools then wise men. It is as good not to hear at all, as so to hear, and not to learn; and as good to do neither as to hear and learn, and never to put the same in practice: to be ever learning what to do, and never to do as we are taught, we shew our selves therein right like a covetous man, that is ever scraping and gathering of wealth
with much trouble and care for his living, and yet starves himself to save his money. It is not Knowledge, but Action that makes a man either better or worse. A cunning Artist, that can do neat and curi∣ous works, and neglects to work at all, is worse then a meer Bungler that performs his work so well as he is able: to hear one say, that he can do this or that, may work hope in me that it is so, and peradventure (as I conceive of the man) it may attain to faith: but to see him do that, which before he onely spake of, then both those cease, this hath made me to be fully assured. The ear informs mans Judgement onely what words are spoken; the eye what acti∣ons are done. If I hear a man speaking of Christian duties, and declaring that his conversation is such, I may hope and believe he is a good Christian, or I may doubt it, because I hear but words; but if I see him versed in the actions of Piety, Sobriety, and Charity, then I will rest assu∣red, that that man is indeed a good Chri∣stian; if he be otherwise in his heart, it concerns not me. That is out of mans commission, or power, to medle with, or inquire after; we must give our verdict ac∣cording
to the evidence of our own senses. God onely knows the thoughts and pur∣poses of mans heart, therefore he alone is the Judge of them. This Life is Wayfare, wherein we are all Travellers coming from a mean and obscure place, and journeying to a noble and famous City: the place we come from, a poor clod of earth; what more mean? the City we go to, Heaven it self; what City more glorious? Now in this our passage we all many times go out of the way, and lose our selves through our own folly; many times loiter, and will not go forwards, through our own laziness; many times clog, and make our selves un∣fit for travel, and so cannot go forwards, through our own covetousness. We go out of the way, when we commit evil; we loiter, and stand still, when we do no good; we clog, and make our selves unfit for travel, when we set our hearts too much upon the things of this world. And Satan that grand thief, and enemy of Mankinde, upon all such advantages is ready to surprize us. So instead of co∣ming to that heavenly City of everlasting
Joy, whither unto all our travell should tend, many are taken Captives, and carri∣ed away to a loathsome Dungeon of per∣petuall misery, from whence there is no redemption. If therefore we will shew our selves true Spiritual Travellers, we must avoid all evil, so shall we keep in one right way; we must be careful to do good, so shall we go onward in our right way; we must not set our hearts upon the things of this world, nor desire more riches, then what may conveniently serve us for our journey: so shall we be fit for travel; so shall we not be tired in our way, but holding out to the end, shall chearfully pass even through death it self, which to the Godly is the beautiful gate of Heaven, but to the ungodly, the horrid entrance of Hell. Now because, O Lord God Al∣mighty, we are not able to do these things of our selves, we humbly implore thy Di∣vine Majesty to grant us herein thy graci∣ous assistance. Thou onely knowest what is sufficient for our journey; thou onely canst, and wilt give it unto us; thou onely, O Lord, canst, and will keep us in our right way; thou onely canst, and wilt make us go forward, and willingly lay
down our burthens that clog us, so shall we finish our course with comfort; so shall we freely without hinderance enter into that true resting place, by thee, O Gracious God, prepared for us, in thy Heavenly Kingdom, before thou gavest beginning to this World. Desire of God, by often and earnest Prayer, to give thee Power to withstand the lusts of the flesh; and (if it be possible for thee to contain) presume not to take upon thee the married estate, when thou art not able in all likelihood to undergo the charge of it: for though Marriage be honourable, and Children in Marriage make it more honorable, yet it is better to be without honour, then to have honour, and want means to supply it; and it is better to be without Children, then to have Children, and want means to main∣tain them. For so to be honourable, is to be miserable; and so to increase honour, is to increase sorrow: yet being once mar∣ried, desire not to be without Children, because they bring care and trouble, lest a curse be thy punishment; but desire them with thine heart for the Glory of
God: So God giving thee Children, will make thy burthen lightsom, by crowning thy desires with a gracious Blessing. Whether I have Poverty or Riches, I will hide neither of them for any outward respect. If I am poor, I will confess it with a chearful and contented heart, in that it is the will of God, and will rest my self upon his providence, as knowing that I deserve no better, but worse at his hands. If I am rich, I will acknowledge it with an humble and thankful heart to God the giver of all good things, in that he of his mercy hath bestowed his so great blessings on me, who am the most unwor∣thy of the least of them. To boast of ones own Goodness is evil, to boast of ones own Wisdom is foolish, and to boast of ones own Nobility is igno∣ble; if any thing of worth be in thee, it is fitter to be the subject of anothers dis∣course, then of thine own tongue. Seek onely to excuse and defend thy self from reproach and scandal so far as thou mayst, but never desire to be the Trumpet of thine own fame; for it is no better then
to make thy self infamous, when with a vain-glorious bragging of thine own worthinesse, thou strivest to be accounted famous, Nec teipsum laudes, nec teipsum vituperes, is in my opinion a Precept very worthy to be remembred. Take heed to thy self, have thou no so∣ciety with the lewd woman, she wastes the estate, she diseases the body, she defiles the soul, she destroyes all, and miserable is the man that is ensnared by her. Every one of a subtle wit cannot truly be said to be wise; nor every one of a dull capacity properly termed a fool; but to be good, is to be truly wise; and to be evil, is to be truly foolish; and to become better, is to become wiser; and to be∣come more evil, is to become more foo∣lish. Money, or other worldly Wealth, may in some sort be termed the very life and spirit of a man: for we see, that they who enjoy much of it, are for the most part men of high spirits, their bloud rising with their wealth; and they who have
little, or none of it, are commonly so cast down, and disheartned, that they seem to be as dead men without life. He that will be wise in any thing, must be a fool in many a thing; he that will learn every thing, shall know just no∣thing; for he that troubles his head with over much, shall be sure to remember over little. It is better to save abroad, to spend at home, then to save at home, to spend abroad; to save at home, to spend abroad, is no good Husbandry; but to save abroad, to spend at home, is good for the Family. Though Wit be a thing of great va∣lue, yet it is sold for little; whereas Gold and Silver being but mean and base things are sold for much. Although there are very many that glory much in their out-side, and whose Pride is ever the more or the less, as their Apparell is the better or the worse; yet there are also both they that have humble
mindes in fine and costly Raiment; and they that have proud hearts in poor and beggerly Clothing. It is not comely for young men to be too forward in their speech; but fit it is, that first they inquire to get more wit, before they put to sale that little they have, lest by venting their own faster then they bring it in, they leave their shops quite empty, and unfurnisht. As it is not good so to relye upon our own Judgement, as wholly to neglect other mens, so neither is it good to relye so upon other mens Judgements, as alto∣gether to neglect our own; he that will please no man but himself, is quite beside himself; and he that would please every man as well as himself, shall never please himself. Riches to a man of understanding is a means to increase wisdom: but Wealth makes a fool ever prouder, never wiser. It is good to keep lusty Youth at hard meat, that we may the better cherish
weak old Age; for there is no greater earthly misery then old Age made distres∣sed, through Youths wanton jollity. Friendly advice draweth from evil; but open disgrace maketh impudent. The second blow it is said makes the Fray; but the first blow I am sure breaks the Peace. The Face of a Woman accepts or re∣jects a lascivious motion, before ever the tongue propounds the question: A wan∣ton look sayes, Come and lye with me, but a modest countenance answers, No, to an unchaste eye, and makes the ready tongue of the dishonest Lover more slow to speak, because he hath there less hope to speed in his lewd desires. As there is an honest Poverty, so there is also a poor Honesty; but as great is the difference of the one to the other, as is the difference of the purest white to the darkest black. For he is an honest poor man, that will be poor rather then disho∣nest; but he is a poor honest man, that
would be dishonest, were it not that he is poor. Through the weakness or strength of the body, and the lowliness or lustiness of the spirit, there are generally four sorts of men in the world; there are that have weak bodies, and softly spirits, and these are as Worms, for every one else to tread on, for they have no ability nor courage to defend themselves: and there are that have weak bodies, and high spirits, and these are as Wasps, that will fly in their betters faces, though they instantly dye for it; for they have great courage to stir them up, but want power in their acti∣ons; and there are also that have strong bodies, and softly spirits, and these like Oxen, suffer themselves to be slaugh∣tered, though they need not; for they have much strength wherewith to oppose, but want courage to use it: and there are that have strong bodies, and high spi∣rits; and they are like Lions, will rule over all; for they have great strength to perform their attempts, and a mighty courage to put them forward.
The Spirit of God is a boundlesse Sphere, above all things, and throughout all things; and the spirits of Angels, Men, and Divels, in respect of their pow∣er, and motion, are so many lesser Spheres, contained within that infinite great one, and bounded about such things onely, as he who is the same great Sphere it self, and the worker of all others, hath several∣ly set them. It is a common thing with men, to blame their own vices in others, not to see them in themselves; and we have all naturally so good opinion of our selves, that if thou ask any man, who is a good man, who is a wise man: be he never so wicked, be he never so foolish to whom thou so speakest, his tongue peradven∣ture will answer sparingly, but his heart without doubt will think abundantly in the behalf of his own worth. Yea, there is nothing more common in the world, then for one man to condemn another for his folly, when himself is more foo∣lish; then for one man to condemn an∣other for his wickedness, when he himself is more wicked: every one we see is ready
to correct another, but where is one so wise as to amend himself. The darknesse of Poverty obscures mountains, but the brightness of Wealth discovers motes: rich Knowledge in a poor man is poorly regarded; poor Knowledge in a rich man is richly re∣warded. A competency of means to such as en∣joy it, is as a ready and necessary Servant to his Master: whereas a vaste estate makes the owner even as a Master kept in subjection and slavery by his own Ser∣vant. He that desires Wealth, deserves trou∣ble, and shall not want it; but he that is content, deserveth peace, and shall enjoy it. Experience is a Mistris that teacheth Wisdom to the ignorant; but want of Understanding is a cause of destruction. Every Man is regarded accord∣ing to his Wealth; and a poor mans
Wisdom is accounted as Folly. Husbandry, Manufacture, and Mer∣chandize are the three generall sustainers of mans life: Husbandry makes the Provi∣sion; Merchandize the distribution; and Manufacture attends them in both. He that gains below his necessiy, is a poor man; he that gains equall to his necessity, is a mean man; and he that gains above his necessity, is a rich man. Beggers are too lazy, and Gallants too proud; the middle sort therefore must do all the work. Give freely to the Poor to relieve their necessities, but not beyond thine estate, to thine own undoing; he that gives away all that he has, shall want for him∣self; and he that parts with nothing, when he hath more then he needs, makes others to want. Wholesome meat ill drest, digests not in the Stomach; and needful wealth ill gotten, thrives not in the imployment.
'Tis silly craft, to finde out by devices that which being known, will but vex ones self. Knowledge, Wit, Beauty, Strength, Riches are all the good Blessings of God; but being once corrupted with Pride, are meer simplicity, folly, baseness, vanity, vil∣lany; this scurvy Pride mars all goodness. He that is ashamed of his Ignorance, will never be wise; and he that never doubteth, will never truly understand. He that being Poor, is ashamed of want; full soon were he rich; would be proud, through abundance: for if Pover∣ty onely doth make him ashamed, Wealth sure, if he had it, will make him proud. A rich man no whit proud, is never too rich; and a poor man any whit proud, is not yet poor enough. True it is, all are not proud that are richly attired; yet without doubt, they that delight in gay cloathing, are either proud in flesh, or proud in spirit or in both.
Wealth gotten by honest courses is good for a man when he leaves it, as well as it is comfortable to him when enjoyes it: but Wealth gotten by dishonest cour∣ses (though a man may have some plea∣sure in the enjoying of it) will at the last press his soul in the laying of it down, as it did at the first press his conscience in the taking of it up. Likeness or nearness between a Man and his Wife, or others that live and have so∣ciety together, if it be in bad conditions mutually exercised towards themselves, causeth a greater strife and disagreement; if in good, a firmer peace and union to be between them: some therefore are so like, that they agree the worse for it; and some so like, that they agree the bet∣ter for it. In the puit of goodness, this is the condition of foolish man, to hear much, remember little, and practise less. We are all equally bound to give God thanks as well for wealth, and means gain∣ed by our selves, as given or left unto us
by others: a poor man become rich, is bound to praise God, for that from no∣thing he hath brht him to something: a rich man not become poor, is bound also to praise God, for that from something he hath not brought him to nothing; for as God hath power to give, so likewise he hath power to take away; and all things whatsoever we enjoy, we onely hold at his good will and pleasure, he indeed, and no other, being the onely Lord and dis∣poser of all. Crosses are as necessary to men in their undertakings, as pruning to young Plants in their growings; the  if they be not kept down by the correction of the pru∣ning-knife from an over-hasty growth, do through their own rankness soon waste their power of vegitation, and become sapless, and unfruitfull; those that be not kept back by experimentall Crosses, the Pruning-knife of correction from an over-easie proceeding, do through their own prodigality and looseness, as soon also consume their abilities of operation, and become meer dead stocks, and of no worth. Though I wish not for Crosses,
nor like them when they befall me; yet I heartily thank God, that I have had some; their keen edge indeed, in cutting off my wilde branches, hath made me smart for the present, but afterwards it hath proved much to my advantage: the stumbling at those crosses, as stones and rubs in my way, hath made me look bet∣ter to my footing, and so either to tread more sure, or to chuse a fairer path, which had I not at all met with, peradventure I had lost my self at unawares, and perish∣ed on the sudden: great crosses indeed, like an Ax to the root, may quite over∣throw; but small crosses are great bles∣sings; that good's not lasting, that's ne're mixt with ill; a little sharp Physick takes away the disease, and make the body the sounder. A man that falls from a very great estate, but to a competency, what hurt or los at all has he by it? As he hath less honour, so he hath less trouble; as less means, so less occasions; if he be exercised in Husbandry, he cannot indeed till so many Fields, rear so many Cattel, fill so many Barns; if he be a Merchant, he can∣not
trade to so many places, he cannot furnish a City with so many wares; or if he use Manufacture, he cannot set so ma∣ny hands at work, as he hath formerly done; yet notwithstanding all this, he may still have as wholesome fare, as con∣venient lodging, as warm clothing, and all things as sufficient for his own use, as ever he had; he hath less to give, not less to take; less for others, not less for him∣self; God hath taken away his care, not his living; his office and stewardship for others, not his portion and allowance for himself: and what that great Lord of the houshold had wont to do by him; what hurt, I say, hath he when the same his Lord hath now put it in charge to some other, and hath given him a Writ of Ease. There are three sorts of Men in the World, wherein all are compehended: (to wit) the Liberal Man, the Prodigall, and the Covetous; who (in my opinion) may fitly be termed, and significantly ex∣pressed by the Latine Tongue, as follow∣eth. The Liberall Man may be termed, Vir liberalis; the Prodigall, Homo prodi∣gus;
and the Covetous Man, Daemon ava∣rus. My reason, that the Liberal Man is a true vertuous man, that hath God for his guide; the Prodigal is a meer carnall man, that hath the flesh for his guide; and the Covetous Man is of a most base wic∣ked spirit, that hath the Devil for his guide: the Liberall Man as touching his money, hath Honesty his Receiver to bring in, Frugality his Casheire to keep it, and Charity his Steward to lay it out; what he gets, he gets by honest endea∣vours; what he saves, he saves with dis∣cretion to a good intent; what he spends, he spends freely upon good and needfull occasions: As namely, in the service of God and his Countrey; in provision for his Family; in kinde entertainment of his Friends, and Neighbours; in hospitality to Strangers; in relieving the Poor and Distressed; and in good imployment of himself and others, that so he may not onely avoid idleness on his own part, but may also be a means to keep the Com∣monwealth in action, by giving motion to others in themselves unable, whereby they may all in some measure be profit∣able, and not hurtful one towards an∣other;
he is the Medium between two extreams, Covetousness and Prodiglity; he neither keeps all like the one, nor spends all like the other; but as his gains are moderated by the rule of vertue, so are his expences and savings; he spends where it is not fit to spare; and spares where it is not fit to spend; he affects to be in a lawfull calling, not for greediness of gain, but sometimes for his necessity, ever for his exercise, which he neglects not for his pleasure, nor ties himself so strictly to, that he will take no pleasure at all. For he likes well society, so it be civil, not brutish; and honest mirth and pastime, but that for his recreation, not to make it his vocation; he will spare time for it, but will not spend his whole time in it. Such is the condition of the Liberal Man, whom I love with my heart, and honour for his vertues. The Prodigal hath no Receiver at all, for he is ever pay∣ing out, but never receiving in; he makes Idleness his Cashiere, and Wantonnesse his Steward; he cannot endure the toil of getting, nor indeed can spare time for it, if he could endure it, he is so much im∣ployed in spending that which was gotten
to his hands: his expences also are ever in a high strain beyond his ability: for if his means be a hundred a year, he will be sure to spend two, if two, four; if four, eight; and if his delight be altogether within his own doors, (as few such prodigals there be, though some I confess) then in his house, and furniture, apparel, diet, he must far exceed his betters, or else he likes not that, nor himself. But if he be more loosely given, and his delight be still abroad, (as that is more common with such people) then the Taverns, Brothel-houses, Gaming-houses, and such like are his Rendezvouz; this man will have his pleasure, whatsoever it cost him; it is as sweet to him, as honey to the Bear, which he will never leave licking of, till he hath quite burst himself. And so (though I pitty him) I leave him as a meer carnal man. Now the Covetous Man makes Cruelty his Receiver, for he cares not how he comes by his money, so he have it, and have it he will, either by fire, or sword, usury, or oppression, or by both; his Receiver delivers it over to his Cashiere, which is Hard-heartedness, who is old Hold-sast, and will scarce part with
it; to relieve the owner himself, much less the necessity of others: and as the Prodigall hath no Receiver, so this man hath no Steward, nor indeed needs any; for he keeps no house, nor can away with hospitality at any rate; if he eats, he eats alone, and that oftentimes so sparingly, that he half starves himself to save his money, onely his help is, at another mans table he shewes him∣self a tall Trencher-man, and eats for three meals at once; his desire of gain is the bottomless pit of hell; the more that he hath, the less he is satisfied; and he in nature like the very fiends of hell. For he torments, and tires not onely all that have to do with him, but his own spirit also; and besides is so dangerous, that where he once layes hold, one can hardly be rid of him; his condition therefore being so base, I hate him, and to be quit of him, I fly him as a Devil. To conclude all, Ile set down every one in a short Chara∣cter. The liberall man is good both to himself and others; the Prodigal is good to others, not to himself; the Covetous Man is neither good to himself, nor others.
A good man takes not up Authority with desire, nor layes it down with sor∣row; but being called unto it, he makes it his care, not his benefit; and being re∣moved from it, he accounts it his ease, not his loss. He that labours for nothing, shall not want for imployment, but he will never be the richer; he that ever affords his skill gratis, is a wise man to others, but a fool to himself; he is an asse to bear other mens burthens, and when he has done, he shall have but straw for his pains, com∣mendations and thanks enough, but pro∣fit little enough; and if he accept naught else at their hands, he shall be sure to have more of their work, but never any of their money. Titles of honour, great place or cal∣ing, do not gain a man the more respect, or reverence, but rather scorn and re∣proach from his inferiours, unless he ex∣ceed them also in means and ability, whereby to support his higher state and egree. The Countrey Peasant, or Me∣anick Tradesman disdains the Merchant
or Gentleman, if he conceives himself to be a better man in estate; the like doth a Gentleman or Merchant by a Knight; a Knight by a Lord; a Lord by a Duke; yea, and a Duke in the same kinde holds himself better then a King or Emperour. So much do we attribute to this Idol Wealth, that we value all men by it: and howsoever a man be otherwise well quali∣fied, if he want that, we prize him at lit∣tle or nothing. Be a poor man vertuous, learned, wise, religious, haply we shall account him praise-worthy, but certainly not prize-worthy. It is charitable, and praise worthy to be helpful to others in their good and lawful actions; but he that spends his time in other mens business, and wholly neglects his own, is more charitable then wise. A bold forward Youth is as Summer Fruit, soon ripe, soon rotten; he is wise by twenty, a fool by thirty, and a begger by forty. Knowledge makes not a man to be reli∣gious: yet without Knowledge no man
can be religious: for he that has not true Knowledge in his head, can never have a found Faith in his heart, nor a right Zeal in his actions. There is strength of Body, strength of Wit, and strength of Riches: but he that is strong in them all, is of an exceeding great might: for he that hath two strong holds, is more mighty then he that hath but one: and he that hath three, is equall to them both: and such is the man that is able in Body, Wit, and Wealth: for he hath three strong holds in his possession. Strength of Body is great, Strength of Wit is greater, but Srength of Riches ex∣ceedeth them both, for they are com∣manded by it. A man may stand upon honour, he may stand upon calling, or he may stand upon good conditions and qualities: but say what you will, 'tis Money values the man, and as we have more or less of that, so we esteem of our selves, either better or worse; and so are we also esteemed of by others. A rich Cobler scorns a poor
Shoemaker, and is better respected: yea, let a good man endued with all the excel∣lencies of minde and body weigh them against the rich mans bags, the good man sure will finde his scale filled with commo∣dities lighter then feathers, whereas the rich mans gold is more ponderous then lead: the good mans graces indeed weigh upwards towards Heaven their proper seat, but the rich mans wealth weighs downwards towards Earth, to pos∣sesse it. Every Fool is an ignorant person, but every ignorant person is not a Fool: for as they are both alike void of knowledge, yet they are not alike uncapable to receive it: they are as two empty vessels, but of severall conditions; the ignorant person being not a Fool, is a tight vessel, that is apt to hold liquor, if it be poured in: but the Fool is a vessel full of leaks and holes, that will hold no liquor at all: we are all born ignorant, but not all Fools: for what knowledge we receive, we receive by degrees, either at the first hand, as it is inspired into us, by the immediate working of the Spirit of God; or at the
second hand, as it is taught us by man: and some are vessels so tight, and so good, that they will hold the pure wa∣ter of life, divine and heavenly know∣ledge: others unfit for that, will yet serve for grosser matters, humane and earthly affairs; but such as will hold no∣thing at all, neither of divine, nor hu∣mane knowledge, may be truly said to be very Fools indeed. I cannot but wonder to hear how ex∣cellent many men are in their sayings, and yet to see how contrary they prove in their own doings; as if they surely thought, to speak well, and do well, is two mens businesses: For some men are so discreet in their words, as to hear them, we would account them worthy sages; but so silly in their actions, as to see them, we would judge them very Idiots: and some again are so holy in their words, as to hear them, we would think them Saints on earth; but so wic∣ked in their deeds, as to see them, we would believe them to be Divels incar∣nate: I had rather of the two perform a good action, not knowing the Precept,
then to know the Precept, and not per∣form it; the knowledge indeed of good Precepts may mend our discourse, but the performance of good actions must better our lives; the first makes a good Oratour, but the latter makes a good man; and he that in good things doth know much, and practise little, shall de∣serve more of punishment, but lesse of commendation. As the Wisdom of God is most ex∣cellent in all his works, so it appears most admirable in his government of man, by man himself: wherein that no man may without present controul, in∣sult, and tyrannize over his weaker bro∣ther, as he hath given to every man a power over others, so he hath also left every man in a subjection to others, he hath made some men more strong to keep under the more wise, and the more rich; he hath made some men more wise to keep under the more rich, and more strong; and he hath made some men more rich, to keep under the more strong, and te more wise: The strong man (surely) would oppress all, but that
he fears the wise mans policy, and the rich mans wealth: the wise man (sure) would oppress all, but that he fears the rich mans wealth, and the strong mans might: the rich man (sure) would op∣press all, but that he fears the strong mans might, and the wise mans policy; thus every man being subject to others power, and every mans power making others subject; unity and peace is kept amongst all men; or if at any time bro∣ken through mans insolence, yet at last is concluded on to be the best for them. Society and discourse, as well with men of meaner, as of better education, availeth much to the increase of know∣ledge, for God distributes to every seve∣ral man some several gift, so that be there any two together, it is much, if he who is the more ignorant, cannot in some∣thing teach the other who is more lear∣ned; yea, so manifold and various are the gifts of God unto men, that were there thousands together in company, he that in general knows less then any of the rest, may yet in some particular know more then all the rest. And therefore
though the company of wise and learn∣ed men is rather to be affected: because they can teach much, yet the fellowship of the unlearned is not wholly to be neglected; because they also may teach somewhat. He that will be in place, where there are none but wise men, must first run away from the fool him∣self. Be not so hard of belief, as to trust no man, for that is to distrust God: nor so easie of belief, as to trust every man; for that is to trust the Devil: but be wise to discern, for there are, that being trusted will never fail; and there are, that being trusted will ever fail. Take heed for whom thou art surety, and take especial heed who is surety for thee: For though the first be danger∣ous, yet the last is more dangerous: If thou becomest surety for another man, thou art not onely bound for him, but art also bound to him; for him in re∣spect of his debt; to him, in respect of his care and good will to discharge it: thou must ever be solliciting, ever in∣treating,
and ever assisting him, and at last perhaps must pay it thy self: for there are that take care to borrow, but never to pay; that take care to get Sureties, but regards not to free them: and yet I say, rather be Surety for an∣other, then that another be Surety for thee; for in the former thou mayest know thy utmost time and penalty; but in the latter thou art bound perpetual∣ly, and in sums infinite: that is, when∣soever thy Surety will require thee, and for whatsoever thy Surety will require thee: for if he have first entered into Surety-ship for thee, thou canst never without ingratitude deny him the like good turn, though it be for a greater value, though it may prove to thy grea∣ter dammage: and many there are, that if thou makest use of them for a shilling, they will be sure to make use of thee for a pound. I am not so hard of belief, as to deny every one to be his Surety, that shall ask me; nor I hope shall I be so weak in judgement, as to take every one to be Surety for me, that I may have: but I will be wary in both; and though the best of us all may have
need one of another, so long as we live among men: yet this shall ever be my care and constant rule, Ile know the man well, ere I be his Surety: but I will know him better, ere he be mine: a Surety is in danger for what he is enga∣ged; but he that procures him, knows no end of his own trouble. Ile rather lose a present benefit for want of a Surety, then to procure such a one, as may be to my greater dammage: And if any man seek to procure me, I will not so over∣charge my self for others, as to disquiet mine own minde. Ile be bound for my friend for what I have, but never for what I have not: for what I may con∣veniently spare out of mine estate, in case I am left to answer for him, but not for more, though I would not lose (wil∣lingly) ought for my good will: yet if I do, so I lose not mine own liberty, it shall the less grieve me. We are ever much delayed in our worldly affairs; but when death comes, that gives us all a present dispatch. As Gold is known by the touch, so
are a mans friends: many are excellent friends before they be tried; for till then they seem to be gold, but upon the touch they prove but gilded iron. Multiplicity of words onely about words, is as it were much corn, but no bread; many grapes, but no wine; much stuffe, but no cloathing; many materi∣als, but no building. To be observant and pleasing towards her Husband, richly graceth the Wife; and to be gentle and loving towards his Wife, well becometh the Husband: but nothing is so hateful as either of these, a stubborn she-fool, that will never yield to her head; and an imperious he-cox∣comb, that will ever command his fel∣low. The Husbands will rule, and the Wives would rule, are the causes of mis∣rule: but the Husband I-pray, and the Wives obey, keeps the House in good order. It is no contending against a multi∣tude, be they never so mean: for many small Threds twisted together,
may attain to be stronger then the great∣est Cable. This is the condition of the Fool and the Wise, the learned and the unlearned: they that have knowledge despise them that want it: and they that want know∣ledge, deride them that have it. A man that is truly sober in his diet, and gives nothing, is far more charitable then he that is intemperate, and gives much: For if we well consider it, God himself is the onely giver of our whole sustenance: and if every man take but what may suffice for himself, he cannot do otherwise, but leave enough also for others. Yea, God gives sufficient for all men in a plentiful manner: For rich men and governours in the first place, as his chiefest guests: for poor men and servants in the second place, as their at∣tendants: rich men indeed may first take what is meet for themselves, yet they must leave unto poor men what is also also fit for them: For God allows to every one of his houshold his due portion of meat and drink, and all other
things needfull, and requires not of us to be so strict or austere to our selves, as at all times to eat, drink, or take pat of other his blessings, onely to the sa∣tisfying of necessity: it is his glory that we use them to chearfulness: but he can∣not endure, that we abuse them to Glut∣tony, Drunkenness, or Luxury. When thou sittest down to eat or drink, wheresoever it be, whosoever in∣vite thee, know that thou art a guest at Gods Table, whose wisdom provides neither below bounty, nor above sobri∣ety: thou needest not there to spare, and yet thou must not waste: thou mayest be civilly merry, but not unmannerly rude: the provision is made for thee, as well as for others, and for others also, as well as for thee. Be not therefore a covetous pinch belly, who like the Dog in the Manger, will neither eat any thing himself, nor suffer others. Nor yet a ri∣otous Gorbelly, who like the Dog out of the Manger, will eat and drink till he vomit, rather then another shall have any share with him: for they are ex∣treams that dishonour God the great
Master of the Feast, and will wrong both thy self, and others the guests: but if thou wilt be truly chearful and sober, as thou oughtest, set thy self between them both. Be not so sparing in thy di∣et, as to starve thy self; nor yet so insa∣tiable, as to starve others: he that refu∣seth his own meat, refuseth his own life: and he that takes more then his own, takes away the life of another. The Scarlet Gallant, that is tempe∣rate in his diet, is a less enemy to his Countrey, then the Russet Clown, that is ever cramming, and pouring into his own guts: and though excess in apparel and diet be both blame-worthy, as being opposite to the rules of Piety, Sobrie∣ty, and Charity, yet he that offends in wearing over-costly and gorgeous rai∣ment, doth nothing nere so much hurt in a Commonwealth, as he that eats and drinks more then sufficient: for albeit the proud man wears another mans gar∣ments instead of his own, yet he leaves his own for some other man: but the Glutton or Drunkard not onely eats and drinks his own share, but another mans
also: for what in meats and drinks some men have more then enough, some others there are tht have lesse then enough: and he that eats and drinks another mans sustenance, besides his own, doth no better then tear him in pieces with his teeth, and swallow him down by his throat. Where the Learned differ, how shall the Ignorant be instructed? and where Wise Men doubt, how shall the Unwise believe; it is written, God is mighty, marvellous are his, works, and past find∣ing out: yet, though a wise man thinks to know it, yet shall he not be able to finde it. It is written, God is sure, he giveth understanding to the simple, and guideth us into all truh. It is written, God is gracious, he shineth in the heart, he giveth light to them that sit in dark∣ness, and in the shadow of death, and openeth the door of faith unto them. Yea, it is written, that God the Fa∣ther, Lord of Heaven and Earth, hath hid those things from the wise and pru∣dent, which he hath revealed unto babes: for so (our Saviour saith) it seemed good
in his sight. Yea, further, it is written that we have this treasure, namely the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, in earth∣en vessels, that the excellen of the power may b of God, and not of us. So therefore, though the learned differ, the ignorant are taught the right: so therefore, though wise men remain doubtfull, the simple are made strong in Faith. Study to invent good things, labour in honest actions, strive to be vertuous, shun all idleness, vanity, and villany, to thy utmost power: For Art begets Art, Vertue begets Vertue, and Vice brings forth Vice without ceasing; and the more thou encreaseth in goodness, the more will be thy comfort, thy honour, thy happiness: but the more thou in∣creasest in evil, the more will be thy sor∣row, thy shame, thy wretchedness. As the natural body of man hath its severall parts and members, and every of them their severall office; so hath the Politique Body of the Common∣wealth:
The Prince is the Head, and chief of that Body: his Subjects are the inferiour members, th store and provi∣sion of all things convenient, is the flesh that covers them: Education is te food wherewith it is fed: Industry the stomach that decocts the meat: mens Professions, Trades, and Callings are the blood and nourishment: and the common Coin is the veins, through which the blood is conveyed; and as in the naturall body some bad and dis∣eased member doth oft-time so stop, or otherwise so swell and exasperate te veins passing through it, that the blood becomes putrified, the nourish∣ment hindred, the stomach weakned, the food loathed, and the whole body grie∣ved, and brought into diseases: so it also falleth out with the Body Poli∣tique; for the diseased and corrupt conditions of some men are such, that by their not imployment, or misim∣ployment of their moneys, which in its true nature, is for the conveyance of mutuall benefits from one man to an∣other: Education is neglected, Industry grows cold, and mens Professions,
Trades, and Callings are so hindred and corrupted, that they become not onely unprofitable, but also very hurtful to the Commonwealth: sometimes through defect of convenient supply and provi∣sion, the body thereof falling into want and scarcity, as it were into a daily weakness and consumption: and at other times, through malignant hu∣mours of covetous, and other filthy de∣sires, swelling into Pride, Luxury, Cou∣senage, Rapine, Injustice, Murther, and all manner of wickedness as so many sores, botches, and sharp ulcers. Every man and woman is a member of the Body Politique of some Com∣monwealth; and every Commonwealth a member of the whole Body of the Earth, but Justice is the very soul, which being uncorrupted, doth by the power and faculties of wholesome and godly Laws, both firmly sustain, and prudently govern that great body in all the several parts and members of it. We are all as so many vessels, though of several contents, filled to the brim
with Vertue and Vice, as with air and water: we swim in vice, as in the Sea, we are inclosed with vertue, as with the Air: and these our vessels, or rather we thei vessels (which in our first Pa∣rents were tight, and filled with all ver∣tuous perfections) by the hurt and bruise we received in their fall, occasioned through their own weakness, and the subtilty of the malicious Serpent, do ever since continually leak in all parts: Hence Satan by his temptations draws us downward to all manner of wicked∣ness; and as vice enters in, so vertue flies out; and soon should we sink to the bottom, but that God by his grace lifts us upwards from sin to sanctity, thereby vice runs out, and vertue enters in, the more there is of the one, the less alwayes there is of the other: for as earthly and corporal vessels admit of no vacuiy, so also do the spirituall ves∣sels of our souls: and there is not any man in this life so wicked, in whom, through the raising motions of the good Spirit of God, there is not something of good: nor any so good, in whom, through the down-pulling motions of
the evil spirit of the Devil, there is not something of evil. For where there is a fulness of evil, it sinketh down to the bottomless pit of Hell; where a ful∣ness of good, it raiseth up to the high∣est Heaven: Hence the most wicked man may not despair, nor the most upright man presume of salvation to the very last end, but must labour for the same without ceasing, in all fear and trembling. For be he a vessel so full of wickedness, that he be ready to sink, yet God can raise him up, out of the sea of vice, even unto Heaven it self, the very height of purity: or be he a vessel so full of goodness, that he seem but to touch the top of the water of iniquity, yet if God leaves him, all goodness leaves him, and he instantly sinks down, even into Hell, the very depth of pravi∣ty. O Lord God Almighty, I acknow∣ledge mine own wretchedness, I am even full of sin and wickedness; and did not thy gracious hand hold me up, I also immediately sink down into that pit of perdition, where there is no redempti∣on. O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, assist me still by the grace
of thy holy Spirit, and by the power of the merits of thy dear Son, and my Sa∣viour Christ Jesus in his sufferings and death here upon earth, raise me up (I beseech thee) in thy due time from this gross, and brackish sea of filthiness, un∣to that pure Heaven of glory and hap∣piness prepared by thee, for all thine elect people before the beginning of times. Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen. Amen. Not the Wisdom of the Wise, nor the Strength of the Mighty can find out the works of the Lord: But God sets them forth, by whom onely he will, that he, and not man may ever have the glory. Pride and Covetousness are the worlds Cart-Horses, Pride is the Fore-horse, and covetousness is the Fill-horse: Pride carries his head aloft, and wears a gawdy Feather in it: Covetousness hangs down his head, and bears up a fil∣thy Dung Cart with his shoulders, and both of them so moyl to draw the muck of this world, that they tire themselves at length out of their skins, and leave their carcasses even a prey to the greedy ound.
He that will be a true proficient in the way of Godliness, must not onely have the eyes of Knowledge to guide him, but also the feet of Devotion to carry him forward. For Knowledge and Devotion being together, are ever perfect; but being apart, are never but defective: Knowledge without Devo∣tion, is like a seeing Cripple, that be∣holds his way, but cannot stir: and De∣votion without Knowledge, is as a walking Blinde-man, that goes on, but he knows not whither: but Knowledge and Devotion together, is as a man that both perfectly sees the way that he goes, and readily goes the way that he sees. We are here in this life in a continuall Warfare, and did not God himself stand fast for us: our case were most despe∣rate. Satan is an open profest enemy never ceasing to invade us: the World a false friend, taking part with him against us: and the Flesh a trayterous servant, ready to deliver us up unto him. But God being on our side, who ca stand against us: the flesh is readily
brought unto true obedience to us, the world to undoubted amity with us, and though Satan continue still our enemy, because he is also Gods enemy; yet have we so strong a tower of defence, even the Lord Christ Jesus, that Satan by his subtle trains, and wicked practices, shall never be able so to prevail against us; but that in the great day of battel we shall most assuredly by Gods all power∣ful, and all gracious assistance to his own eternall glory, and our everlasting peace and happiness, give an utter overthrow to all his designs and forces whatso∣ever, which God of his infinite mercy, for his onely Sonnes sake, and our alone Saviour grant unto us. Amen. Amen. We may not expect to thrive in spiri∣tual, or temporal things, unless we both pray to God to give them, and endea∣vour our selves also by our own labour to obtain them: For as zealous Prayer is an earnest begging of God to bestow his blessings on us; so honest Labour is the door, by which we receive them at his hands: he that prayes much, but la∣bours
not, is as a Beggar that begs ear∣nestly, but so far from the door, that he is quite out of hearing: and he that labours much, and prayes not, is as a Beggar that stands at the door, and sayes nothing; neither of them are heard, neither of them are regarded: but he that both prayes, and labours also, is as a Beggar that begs at the door with so loud a voice, that the master of the house∣hold hearing his cry, hath compassion on him, sends out unto him, and bestows on him a large and liberall alms to re∣lieve him. O Lord God Almighty, thou art the sole Master of the great Houshold of the whole world, and I am a poor and miserable Beggar, one of thine own Alms-men, that have con∣tinually need of thy feeding, that have continuall need of thy cloathing. Suffer me not therefore, I beseech thee, whilest I am here in this life, either so to pray, as to neglect my labour, or so to la∣bour, as to neglect my prayer, lest praying, and not labouring, or la∣bouring, and not praying, I be al∣together neglected of thee, and so nei∣ther of them at all avail me: but teach
me, O my God, so to pray unto thee, and so to labour for my self to obtain thy blessings, that thou hearing my complaint, mayest graciously answer my wants, whereby my poor soul and body, that ever stand in need of thy help, may at the last, O Father, through thy a∣bundant mercy and goodness be fully satisfied and refreshed, with the com∣fortable Alms of thy Princely bounty bestowed upon me, that so, O Lord, I may not dye, but may live and praise thy name now and evermore, Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen. As the Stomack is to the Body, so is the Memory to the Soul: by the Sto∣macks holding, and good digesting of wholesome food, the Body growes up, otherwise it pines away, or becomes diseased; by the Memories retaining and well applying of good precepts, the Soul thrives, otherwise it starves or be∣comes corrupted. By unwholesome food taken into the Stomack, the whole Body is poisoned; by unwholesome knowledge received into the Memory, the whole Soul is defiled. A strong Me∣mory
is like unto a strong Stomack, and a weak Memory like unto a weak Sto∣mack; the best way to strengthen both, is to work it by degrees: a weak Sto∣mack must have light meats, and light meals; and a weak Memory must be ex∣ercised with easie matters, and those, but few at once, great meals, and strong meats, do soon overcome a weak Sto∣mack, that all comes up again; and many things at once, or a few that are difficult, do soon confound a weak Me∣mory, that all is forgotten; but as the Stomack becomes more strong, it will also be more apt, to take in, and more able to hold and digest, both greater meals and stronger meats; and as the Memory also waxeth more strong, it will likewise be more apt to receive, and more able to retain and apply, both larger lessons and deeper knowledge. To feed therefore the Memory, that it may grow in strength more and more: First of all, it behoveth to commit unto it easie matters, and those but a few (as a little quantity of milke unto a Babes stomack) those things being firmly re∣tained, then to exercise it with larger
lessons or deeper matters; (as great meals or strong meat unto a mans sto∣mack) so shall the Soul thrive by the Memories perfect retaining, and well applying of things learned, even as the Body growes up by the Stomacks hold∣ing, and good digesting of food recei∣ved: onely herein the Memory and the Stomack differ, the Memory in content doth exceed the Stomack, as far as the Soul doth in limitation exceed the Body: a small place contains the Body, and the Stomack contains but a small measure; whereas the Soul is not limit∣ed, within the compass of the whole world; nor is the Memory filled with the worlds whole knowledge; the Souls bounds are onely there set up, and the Memory's content is onely there measured where is Infiniteness it self, be∣yond all bound, where is Immensity it self, beyond all measure. To hear a mans wisdom is good, but to see a mans wisdom is better; he that speaks well may be said to be a good Painter, but he that performs well, may be termed the good Builder; for good
sayings and good precepts, are but as fair pictures of more fair buildings: but good actions and good examples, are as true real buildings themselves. He therefore that discourses of vertue, draws onely the model of the house, but he that puts it in practice, sets up the house it self; and he that hears such dis∣course, onely sees a picture, but he that knowes of the performance, beholds a building. An honest man is wise enough to speak truth, but not cunning enough to dissemble; and wise enough to deal rightly, but not cunning enough to de∣ceive; the bad man shall overcome by the judgement of the world, but the good man shall be justified in the sight of God. He that will be servant to other mens affections, must himself be master of his own passions, else ill shall he please o∣ther men being many, that knows not to rule himself, but one. Desire not to hear all that is spoken,
nor to see all that is done, but with di∣ligence and honesty apply thy self to thine own business, and seek not after other mens: yet if thou meet with any thing by the way worthy of remem∣brance forget it not; but withal have a care, that thou beest ever also minde∣full to make a right use of thy know∣ledge. There is no sort of men in the world, whom I honour more, and dare trust less then Divines and Physicians: their charge and care is of great weight, the former for the soul, the latter for the body: and therefore they are to be ho∣noured before all men; but their opini∣ons are so different in the rules of Faith and Health, that of all others they are most dangerous to be trusted: by trust∣ing the Physician the body may be quite overthrown; and by trusting the Di∣vine, both soul and body may perpe∣tually be cast away; wch that we may prevent, God give us understand∣ing to know our own estates; God give us ability to order our own lives; and God give us grace to save the whole
man, through Jesus Christ our Lord and onely Saviour blessed for evermore. Amen, Amen. If a rich man be a good man, I ho∣hour him, because God hath honoured him, and he honours God: but if an evil man, I regard him not, because he dishonours God that hath honoured him. Direct thy Son in a Trade, which he may be able to mannage: It is better that his Stock be above his profession, then his Profession above his Stock: by the former he may gain, and go on with delight; by the latter he may tire out himself, but shall hardly increase. It is better to have money without gay cloaths, then gay cloaths without money: gay cloathes without money has but small credit; but money without gay cloathe commands much. Let thine Apparel be agreeable to thine estate, not rich above it, nor yet poor below it: good clothes will gain
thee some respect from them that know thee not; but over good will procure thee disdain from them that know thee; and on the contrary, fitting garments, though mean, will cause thee more to be esteemed with thine acquaintance; but over mean, the more to be contemned amongst strangers. When I behold the works of God, I admire him, the most wonderfull, the Creatour of them; but when I see the works of man, I admire God (as I may say) even beyond admiration, in that he hath made such an excellent Creature, that in some sort is another Creatour, though not of life and nature, which is the sole work of the supream Creatour. God himself; yet in Art and imitation, which is the proper work of man, for which he may truly be called a Sub∣creatour. Art thou of high calling? Lift up thy self to God by thankfulness, and cast down thy self to man by humbleness; be not puffed up with pride, either to glory in thy self, or to despise another,
though his calling be the meanest, and he therefore thy inferiour by many de∣grees: for the greatest of earthly Princes stands in need of the help even of a bruit Beast that is far below him, much more of a poor man, who in respect of creation, is wholly his equal. The Merchant is the man, but Money is the Merchant: small skill with store of money brings in profit apace; whereas much skill with little stock, but seldom thrives. Hath God given thee good parts? set them forth to his glory, thine own be∣nefit, and others good. Bold Igno∣rance (though undeservedly) gains more then bashful Knowledge: be not impudent to profess skill which thou hast not, lest thou offend God, wrong others, and shame thy sel: be not ti∣morous to put in practice that skill which thou hast, lest by keeping back Gods gift, thou dishonour him, hinder others, and thy self also. It is Gods will by strong Medicines
to cure the body of strong diseases; so by grievous punishments to cure the soul of grievous sins. He that will shew himself a good Phy∣sician, must as well warily consider the condition of mens bodies, as their dis∣eases: and carefully observe as well the nature of the times as their bodies: and therefore he ought ever to be ready both speedily to finde out, and wisely to apply another way of cure for the same disease, in every other man: yea, and for the same disease in the same man at every other time: because every man has a body in something differing from every other mans body, and every other time in something differs, one and the self same body. If thou beest addicted unto Drunken∣ness, thou puttest thy self into the way of many mischiefs; thy person thou sha∣mest, through the ugliness of thy sin; thy body thou surfeitest, through thy excess in drinking: and if these thou escape, as hardly thou canst, yet thy bloud thou enflamest, which pro∣vokes
thee to lust, thy lust brings thee to the harlot, the harlot to uncleanness, thy uncleanness to loathsome disease, thy disease to the torture of sharp and grie∣vous medicine, and which is yet worse, unless God the all-perfect Physician of the whole man do in his gracious mercy afford his saving health unto thee: thou bringest thy self thereby to the greatest mischief of all mischiefs, even thy soul and body to the sufferings of the most insufferable terrour, pain and misery ne∣ver to be ended, never to be relieved. Keep thy self out of the hands of the Physician to thy utmost power: yet if necessity require, neglect him not, lest in so doing thou neglect thy life: and yet again have a care of thy choice, lest through thine own rashness thou hasten thy death: the learned and judi∣cious Physician is a means to preserve life, but the unlearned and injudicious is a means to bring on death: the for∣mer will be careful to order thee with judgement, the latter will destroy thee through his ignorant presumption: the well studied Physician doth seldom
erre, but the overforward practicer is a ready murtherer. Heat and Cold are the two hands of nature; Purity and Density the materi∣als of her work: times shorter and lon∣ger are the necessary spaces, wherein to perform it: and the greater and the lesser heats and colds are the more sudden and forceable; and the more slow and weak strokes, or workings of natures hands, according to the condition of the ma∣terials to be wrought on, and the things and forms to be wrought of them. He that eats and drinks less then enough, makes of his stomach a lazie servant, unapt for his work: he that eats and drinks more then enough, tires out his servant with too much work: but he that eats and drinks what is fit and needful, keeps a good servant that perfoms his work: for nature is a ser∣vant that both cleaneth the house, and∣dresseth the meat; doth she want im∣ployment? she waxeth dull, and for∣gets her office: Is she too much op∣prest?
the meat is ill cook't, and the house becomes sluttish: hath she such a proportion of imployment, as agrees with her strength, the diet is well or∣dered, and the house kept sweet and clean. I take much pleasure in beholding the works of nature, in that they are the most excellent, truly perfect, and imme∣diate works of God the great Creator of all things: and I also delight in the seemly works of art, that are either fit for use, or may serve for ornament, in that they are the works of God by man, even man on earth his chiefest Creature, whom he of his especiall grace hath made a Subcreator under him, to con∣ceive and finish other forms out of na∣tures materials. The life of every man here upon earth is but his day, live he never so long: his Birth is his Morning, his mid∣dle Age his Noon, and his last Age his Evening; his Sickness is but his weari∣ness after his travel; his leaving of his worldly estate, but the putting off of his
clothes; his departure out of this life, but the closing of his eyes; his death but his sleep; and his grave but his bed of rest: and though we all go not to bed together, but some at one hour, and some at another, yet the next morning when the Sun shall return, and the great Master of the Family shall once call, we must all rise together; yea, even all at an instant. Then must we give un∣to him an account of our day past; then shall the godly for a gracious re∣ward enter into an everlasting day of rest with fulness of joy, glory, and endless felicity: and then shall the un∣godly for a just punishment enter into a perpetual night of unquietness, full of horrour, shame, and endless misery. Now that we may enjoy the former, and so be sure to avoid the latter, God of his infinite mercy, by the grace of his holy Spirit work in our hearts an un∣feigned detestation of all our sins with a true sorrow and repentance for them, and a lively faith in Christ Jesus, by the merits of his death and suffer∣ings; to receive a free and absolute for∣giveness of them. Amen Lord Jesus. A∣men.
The more I see of Gods Creatures, the more I admire that God the Creatour, but less comprehend the essence of his God-head. Let no man despair for want of means to supply his necessity, but let him do his endeavour in an honest way, put his trust in God, and serve God, and God will surely provide for him. The children of poor men, if the children of God, have a Father rich above all to sup∣ply them, God hath a portion sufficient for them. Does the Plague increase? our danger is not the more, nor our safety the less: does the Plague decrease? our safety is not the more, nor our danger the less. God strikes whom he pleaseth, and spares the rest, God spares whom he pleaseth; and strikes the rest: do thousands fall? I may be safe: be others all safe? I alone may fall. Man troubles himself to shut man in for fear of infection; but who can shut God in? or who can shut God out? It is onely he (O man) that smites thee: and is there ought can rule his
actions? The skill'd Physician cannot save himself, when others without Phy∣sicks help are safe: mens persons God no whit regardeth, he visits the rich as well as the poor: he visits the noble as well as the ignoble; he visits the old as well as the young; all times and sea∣sons are to him alike, heat, cold drought, rain: the Winter, Summer, Spring, and Autumn. Sometimes the Plague in summer is at the height: at other times in winter it is as much: the like sometimes in Autumn: at other times in the Spring. Sometimes the number of the dead abates in fair dry weather, riseth in the wet: at other times in wet it falls, and riseth in the dry. In hot and cold we see the like: here the disease sweeps onely youth away, the aged escape; here one∣ly aged, not one youth it takes; of many in this house it taks but one, that we may see Gods power of saving; in that house all it takes, and leaves not one, that we may likewise see his power of slaying: no place whatsoever can with∣stand his force; his rod is felt in the open air, as well as in the closest dwel∣ling: his rod is felt in the Princes Pa∣lace,
as well as in the poor mans Cot∣tage. Stay in the City, God is there; fly into the Countrey, God is there; be upon land, be upon water, be within doors, be without doors, be where thou wilt, yet God can reach thee; he puzzles thy thoughts, he thwarts thy wayes; thy strength (poor man) is all but weakness, and all thy wisdom is but folly. O then admire the great Gods doings, trust in his mercies, yet not tempt him, fear his judgements; fear thou his judgements, yet be not faith∣less: trust in his mercies. Is a place vi∣sited, shun it not, if there be thy calling; for God can protect thee, God can re∣ward thee. Hast thou no such warrant? come not there; for God can destroy thee, God can punish thee; his arm is strong to cherish thy faith, his arm is strong to crush thy presumption. Who can defend from him that is above? Who can prevent the works of the Almighty? Who can withstand the will of God? Will he preserve us, what Fort more sure? Is death his appoint∣ment? Who can avoid it, when man
through sin draws down Gods ven∣geance? Sorrow for sin, true repen∣tance, and earnest prayer, are the onely means to procure Gods mercies, are the onely meanes to remove Gods judgements. Death is certain, though the time be uncertain; if it comes not now, yet it comes at last: though we chance to escape disease and misfortune, age not∣withstanding in its due time will be sure to surprize us. God works with means, and God works without means, by nature, and against nature, to shew that man should use the means, and yet he must ever rely upon God, to shew that man should rely upon God, and yet he must ever use the means. The good man sins as well as the bad, yet herein they differ: the good man sins, and is sore grieved, yet still he ho∣peth: the bad man sins, and yet rejoyceth, if not, he despaireth: the former of∣fendeth through his own weakness, the
rebellious flesh overcoming the spirit: the latter offends through his own wil∣fulness, the wicked spirit misleading the flesh: the first hath a will to do good, yet he often erreth: the last hath a will bent wholly to evil, so he never but erreth. Physick is the Besome that cleaneth the house, but Nature is the Huswife that does the work: a sory Besome will serve a good Huswife, and a small means a strong Nature: but a sorry Huswife must have a good Besome, and a weak Nature a powerful Medicine. Life is the way to Death here, and Death is the way to Life hereafter. Our Bodies are like Houses ever de∣caying, ever repairing, and do all what we can, they will at last to the ground. Gather wealth, climb to honour, live at ease, take thy pleasure, use all means that may be thought of, thou canst not keep thy life from fading, thou canst not keep death from invading: stay within
doors, death comes to thee: be without doors, there it meets thee: art thou standing, death stands nigh thee: art thou running, death runs by thee. Trouble not thy self to gain unquiet∣ness: seek not with greediness a vaste estate, but having enough be contented: what needs any more? the competent estate is of all others the most comfort∣able, the least carefull, too high to be trod on, and too low to be shouldered is growth sufficient; yea, it is the best height. A Shepheard will defend his Sheep from the Wolf: but when the Lion comes, he leaves the Flock to save him∣self. Every good work, and every good word proceeds from God the universall goodness: no man can speak any good with his tongue; no man can do any good with his hands, which God hath not first infused into the heart, which God hath not first by his Spirit directed. Evil I speak, and evil I do through mine own
corruption; evil I speak, and evil I do through the worlds provocation; evil I speak, and evil I do through the de∣vils temptation: but if good I speak, if good I do, it is by Gods motion, it is by Gods direction. O Lord I am sinful, let thy mercy▪ forgive me. O Lord I am weak, let thy power support me. O Lord I am foolish, let thy wisdom instruct me. The poor mans labour should be the rich mans usury; and the rich mans im∣ployment the poor mans living: if the Law will not suffer the poor to beg, the rich should be ordered to make them al∣lowance sitting to live by: if the Law will not suffer the poor to be Inmates, the rich should be ordered to build them houses, that their means may attain to; when rich men build for their own plea∣sure, they should also build for poor mens necessities; great and small hou∣ses should be mixed together, that rich and poor may dwell together, the bet∣ter to supply and help one another: for as the poor canot live without the rich, so the rich cannot live without the poor. God maketh both, for both are
needfull; the poor are the labourers to do the work; the rich the Work-masters to set them to it: and if poor men la∣bour, and do rich mens work, rich men in justice should allow them a living: they are not to work and starve; for their labour rich men in justice should allow them a dwelling; they are men like others, and have Gods image, they may not be exposed unto the open air. It is certainly true, there is but one God; so there can be no more then one true Faith concerning God: That Reli∣gion should differ is therefore unfit∣ting, if it might be otherwise; yet if difference were not, there would scarce be Religion; for such is the froward disposition of man, that if none did oppose, he would scarce continue to agree with himself; and if controversie ended, and ceased to be hot, zeal also would end, and soon wax cold: for a mans dislike to a contrary opinion doth more confirm him, to like of his own, then all mens judgements and opinions whatsoever with him agreeing.
He that judgeth of a mans weakness by the stillness of his lips, or of a mans ability by the noise of his tongue in any act to be done, save onely of speech, may judge amiss; for many a man that can speak but little can perform much; and many a man that can prattle much, can perform but little. As a fair Porch to a sluttish House; so is a comely Person with base condi∣tions. He that wrongeth another, wounds his own soul; but he that doth right, God will reward him. He that takes from the needy shall receive a curse; but he that giveth to the poor shall gain a blessing. This is a custome, none more gene∣ral, all men are forward to condem one another, but no man takes care to amend himself. Fret not thy self at Women, Fools or Children; for in so doing, tho
wilt shew thy self to be one of them. There is a foolish generation that de∣sire praise, yet want desert: and there are wise people that deserve much, yet seek not commendation. Every Fool thinks he hath wit, and grows proud; but a wise man doubts of his own wisdom, and is truly hum∣ble. Answerable to thy trimming let thy house be suited, with a decent family, competent diet, and sitting entertain∣ment: if a table be wanting to thine own bravery, thou makest but a shew of what thou art not; thou seemest a man, yea, a man to be honoured; thou art but a Puppet, a fool to be laught at. Wealth and Health do well together, the one provides meat, the other a sto∣mach; as good no meat, as no sto∣mach to eat it; and as good no stomach, as no meat to feed it.
He that begins proudly shall end poorly; but he that is humble and di∣ligent in his calling obtains a blessing. Early rising is good and profitable, it not onely preserves, but increaseth the estate, both of inward knowledge, and outward riches: a man gets neither wealth, wisdom, nor worship by lying a bed; but early rising affords them all. To the rich there is a continual plen∣ty, and to the poor a continual dearth; nothing is dear to those that have mo∣ney enough; and nothing is cheap to them that want it. The world is full of misery, and is likely so to continue; those that can help, will not for want of a heart, those that would help, cannot for want of ability. To a quiet minde, and gentle disposi∣tion troubles are easie; but to a froward heart, and perverse condition all thing are troublesome.
He that hath a Stock, but no Trade to imploy it, hath a left hand to hold with, no right hand to work with: his Stock will waste: he that hath a Trade, but no Stock to mannage it, hath a right hand to work with, no left hand to hold with; his Trade may fail him: but he that hath a Trade and a Stock together, hath both hands perfect; he is able to work, and hold his materials; he may mannage his Trade, and imploy his Stock to a good advantage: he that with a Trade and a Stock cannot thrive, has a bad wit, or a grievous bad fortune. Nothing that may be learned of Law, Physick, or Divinity, should be kept from any man willing to know it: but as it is meet that those Sciences be the more particular studies and professi∣ons of some for the common good, so it behoveth, that generally they be known, and exercised by all, in what conveniently they may, for their own private necessities. Every man should be a Lawyer for the peace of his life, and safety of his estate: every man
should be a Physician for the govern∣ment of his body, and ordering of his health: and every man should be a Di∣vine, for the behaviour of himself, and care of his future being. Young mens wits are very quick, but they want seasoning: old mens wits are somewhat slow, but they are well tempered. Great Towns, Cities, and other Fairs, and Markets are of so much necessary use for the Commonwealth, that they cannot well be wanting: the Countrey (indeed) provides for all; but those a the places that readily make a distributi∣on to every one. The duty of rich men is to relieve the poor: but the world (alas) is all over a tyranny of the rich oppressing the poor; they will be sure to provide the best for themselves, but the poor shall pay for it to their utmost abilits. Much knwledge makes not a fool wise; much strength makes not a Co∣ward
valiant; much wealth contents not a covetous man; nor great poverty humbles a proud man: But a fool will be a fool, had he knowledge like Solo∣mon: a coward will be a coward, were he as strong as Sampson: a covetous man will be covetous, had he wealth like Cressus: and a proud man will be proud, were he as poor as Job. Not a Beaver on thy pate, nor a Sword by thy side, nor Roses on thy shoes, nor a Cloak to thy heels, nor a Coat to thy hips, nor any other time-fashioned dressing will make thee one jot the better man; these indeed will shew thee more apparently proud, but godly behaviour, sober living, vertuous actions, these are things that set forth thy goodness: these are the things that make thee more worthy. Train not up thy childe in the foot∣steps of pride, lest thou utterly spoil him: if thou makest him rich, he will soon be proud, but hardly good: if thou makest him proud, he will soon be bad, but hardly rich.
So to thy friends, see thou give en∣tertainment, that thou weary not them, nor tire out thy self: have them oft at thy table with a dish or two for com∣fort and delight, but never provide such excess of fare, as to make it a busi∣ness. It is not good to spend all whilest we are alive, lest so doing we want wher we are dead: he that hath childre, must not onely care for his own liveli∣hood and theirs, whilest he is here, but for their livelihood also after his death. Do good to glory, and glory to do good: but prefer the latter before the former, as the purest Gold before the basest mettal: he that doth the first, may pleasure others, shall not profit himself: but he that doth the last is a friend of God, and hath God his friend, who will surely reward him. Drunkenness and Covetousness are much alike, the more men drink, the more is their thirst: the more men
gain, the less they are satisfied; when once they have too much, they never have enough. We all have faults, but we know not how to mend them; and the most men want wit, to do as they should do; but every man has too much to be ad∣vised. Though a fool be even empty, and know but little, yet he is ever proud, and scorns to be taught. Is a Turk of a sober and charitable disposition? I honour the man, but I like not his Religion: is a Christian uncharitable, or his life uncivil? I ho∣nour his Religion, but I like not the man; the former doth appear as a man of great worth in beggarly cloathing: the latter as a person of base condition in prince-like apparel. He that sayes but little, payes it with thinking, and thinks what he lists with∣out controulment: but he that sayes much, sayes oft-times too much, and
smarts for his labour: he that has his brains in his tongue is the louder man: but he that has his tongue in his brains, is the wiser man. Let thy speech be ever with modera∣tion, let it not be much, but enough to the purpose: a word spoken in due season, is like unto seed sowen in due season, both may be fruitful: but im∣pertinent babling neither becometh the speaker, nor profits the hearer: much talk in a man is no proof of his wisdom, it rather discovers his folly and weak∣ness; a wise mans thoughts go before his words, but a fools mouth is ever running; a fool throws about his words without care, but a wise man considers before he speaketh. Sorrow doth teach a man of under∣standing; but mirth destroyeth the soul of the simple. The afflictions of the godly make for their good; but the pleasures of the un∣godly are as so many snares for their own souls.
We are all poor Chickens ever scambling, and scrambling for the things of this life, till at last comes the Kite and sweeps us away: we are all silly worms, ever creeping about, and sucking these earthly vanities, till at last deaths foot treads us fast to the ground. Is thy Debtour in prison scarce able to live? Why dost thou detain him? How is he able to give satisfaction? If not in compassion to him for his wants, (which well should be thought of) yet at leastwise discharge him in point of discretion for thine own advantage. Be not cruel to him, be not cross to thy self: if he have but his liberty, hope will secure that in time he will pay: (yet rather forgive him) If he still be shut up, what can be expected from him that has nothing, and nothing can come by. Pride feels neither heat nor cold, but the body is the worse for it, and the soul is not the better.
The thirst of a Drunkard, the appe∣tite of a Glutton, and the lust of a wan∣ton, are easily satisfied; but their gree∣dy desires are soon renewed, their wills and affections remain unsatiable. He that undertakes to hug with a Bear, had need to be a strong man; and he that undertakes to make a fool wise, had need to be wiser then ever was So∣lomon. We all of us do fear to dye an ill death, but few (alas) do care to live a a good life. It is very necessary that there should be darkness as well as light, that there should be ignorance as well as know∣ledge: If there were no folly, how could wisdom be seen, if there were no errour, truth were not so glorious. All things by their contraries are best discerned; the benefit of light is best known by darkness; the benefit of health is best known by sickness; the be∣nefit of plenty is best known by want;
he that hath seen no folly, cannot be wise; and he that never knew the base∣ness of of vice, cannot truly conceive of the noble worth and excellency of vertue. A Giants coat becomes not a Dwarf, nor a spacious dwelling a small Fa∣mily. Curious Gardens are unfit for Swine, so is great Wealth for a fools posses∣sion. A rich trapping is not meet for a Pack-horse, neither costly raiment for mean people. Content is worth a million, he that has content has enough; he that has more then enough, is still in want. A comely Woman, though she please the flesh, if she be not good, she will vex the spirit. A Husband and Wife should be both Yoke-Fellows; where the Husband
draws one way, and the Wife another, they will soon draw all in pieces. Keep company with the best, yet re∣fuse not the worst: a Pearle sometimes is found in a Dunghil. Industry, Patience, and Perseverance overcome many difficulties. Wouldest thou pass through this life with the least auxiety? Be rather a servant, where thou mayest be provided for, then a Master of others: when thy means will not bear it, the first, though a bond-man, is free from care; the last, though a free-man, is bound to trou∣ble. Let Religion be thy food, as well as thy cloathing, else warming thy body, thou wilt starve thy soul, he is not holy that wears it in obedience to man, but he that feeds on it in faith to God. Though Justice be pictured without eyes, as seeing none, yet she is ever sup∣posed to have large ears, to hear all: for
such is her office, she must judge the party by hearing the cause, not judge the cause by seeing the party; she must know no mans person, all; but the cause is to be unknown to upright Ju∣stice. A little is enough to a well tempered minde, but to thoughts immoderate even all is too little: these yet would have more, had they many miles; the former desires but a few acres: a whole world contents not Alexander, a sorry tub sufficeth Diogenes. He that possesseth a competent estate, is neither a drudge of the Kitchin, nor a Lord of the Parlour, but one that may freely sit down in the Hall; for whom the latter takes care, and the former labours, whilest he himself is at peace, and quiet without either much care, or much trouble. Rich Honesty set in honest riches, is a Jewel worth a Kingdom; and he that wears it, deserves a Kingdom.
A poor man sometimes attains to be rich; but he findes he possesses gray hairs with his riches. The inside of the purse is better then the outside of the person; he that hath the inside may soon have the outside; but he that hath the outside cannot al∣wayes have the inside. Not saying, but doing is the proof of a man; good words (indeed) do shew what we should be, but our deeds do ever shew what we are. If a Preacher live not according to his Doctrine, he mars as fast as he makes, and throws down as fast as he sets up; he that preaches well, and does ill, what he piles with the tongs, spreads abroad with the fork; what he kindles with the bellows, doth quench with the bowl; what he builds with his hands, pushes down with his feet. Art thou before others in place or riches, it is a foul shame to thee, if thou goest not also before them in goodness.
Let thy carriage be so tempered, that it may please others, and not displease thy self; let it be with gentleness not without austerity; let it be with auste∣rity not without gentleness: the mix∣ture of both will keep thee upright, ei∣ther of them apart will unequally poize thee; he that is too rigid may live by himself, none will regard him; and he that is too easie, may have com∣pany enough, but shall soon be ab∣used. Hast thou better gifts then another man? despise not him therefore, but give God thanks, whose creatures we are all: God might (had he pleased) have given to him, and not unto thee; yea, and yet (if he please) he may take from thee, and give unto him. Poverty is a chain that keeps back de∣sert, but riches is a key that readily opens to every preferment. He that speaks much is not more wise, but he that speaks enough to the purpose.
We all see our own vanities, and we all sometimes do sharply reprove them, and yet notwithstanding all this, we are wanting of power to wean our selves from them. Know a wise man by his deeds, mens words oft-times are not their own. He is not onely cruel that takes away life; but he also that unjustly takes away that which should maintain life. Experimentall Wit is the best Wit, but it costs dear. Have we all things at will? we wax proud, and forget God; have we no∣thing to content us? we become despe∣rate, and forsake our selves; God leaves us to want, that we may see our own weakness, and look up to heaven; God gives us supply, that we may see his greatness, that we may see his good∣ness, and not fall down to hell. Prosperity layes open the nature of affection, adversity conceals it; adversity
sets forth the measure of patience, 'tis not known in prosperity. Fulness makes us dull and lazie, need ever sharpens the wit, and sets us all to work. Seldom times is a man compleat in judgement, will, and memory, but in some, or all, is lame or wanting: if his judgement be good, his will is bad, or else his memory, if not both: if his memory be good, his judgement s bad, or else his will, it may be both: if his will be good, his memory is bad, or else his judgement, perhaps both: yea, most men want the good in all; but he that possesseth a sound judgement, a strong memory, and a will that is good; he indeed (if such can be found) is the very man of men. Learning is not good, nor bad in it self, but a thing indifferent; it enables a good man in that which is good; it strengthens a bad man in that which is evil: I could wish to be learned and good together, that I might be great in knowledge, and rich in goodness:
but wanting ability to be both, I had rather be good, and not learned, then learned, and not good. A good man without learning is heavens gem, though unpolisht: and a wicked man with much learning is but hells trash with a beautified outside: a rough Diamond is of more price then a smooth counter∣feit: and though a good man learned be the best of men, yet an unlearned Saint is far better then a learned De∣vil. A riotous master is not to be pitied, for he pities not himself: and a poor wretched saver deserves not love, for he bears not love either to God or man. The rich Miser is a most miserable poor man, as good no meat, as no sto∣mach to eat it: and as good no wealth, as no heart to use it. There is no continual abode in this world, but an end is set to all our be∣ings: there is a birth, a growth, a matu∣rity, a decay, a death to every creature.
There is both humble riches and proud poverty: much riches makes not some men proud, nor doth great pover∣ty humble others. Despise not the dirt, from thence we receive both food and raiment: nor the Plough nor the Cart, by them are main∣tained the Crown and the Chariot, dut∣ty muck yields dainty morsels, but too much cleanness brings forth leanness. As a penny saved is better then a pen∣ny ill spent; so a penny spent is better then a penny ill saved; a penny saved is a penny got, but a penny ill saved is a pound lost; and a penny spent is a pen∣ny lost; but a penny well spent is a pound gotten. Wouldest thou live in health, and preserve thy strength, and thy abilities of nature: let natures need provoke thee, do not thou provoke nature. He that will have a wholesome house, must keep his door, his porch, and his entry clean; his kitchen, his clossets, and
his other rooms clean; his sink, his gut∣ters, and his yard clean; and he that would have a healthful body, must keep the like parts of his body clean. To be ashamed of sin, is to cover a mans Leprosie; but to boast of sin, is to be proud of scabs: the man that falls down, and repenteth him of his sin, earth pities, heaven forgives, hell has no hope of: but the man that stands up, and glories in his wickedness, the earth is ashamed of, heaven despises, hell gapes for. 'Tis base to sin, worse to delight in it, but to boast of sin, or to glory in it, is of all things the most filthy, and odious in the sight of God and man. Our first Parents Adam and Eve sinned; but as they hid their nakedness with fig-leaves, for they covered their sin with shame, therefore the Lord spared their lives, al∣though he punisht them for their sin. But the Sodomites sinned, and gloried in their wickedness, theref the Lord had no compassion on them, but utterly destroyed both them and
their Cities with Fire and Brim∣stone. Is a sinner truly humbled and grieved for his sin? Be not thou exalted to grieve him with reproach. For what∣soever thou art, know this, there is but one God, one Judge, one Saviour, both of him and thee. Take heed to thy self, be not more cunning then righteous, for be thou well assured God liveth, and he is truly righteous; and though men are not able to finde thee out, because thou art wary, yet God seeth thee more appa∣rently then thou canst any wayes hide thy self obscurely. He that has learned all things, want∣ing humility, has much knowledge to little good purpose: To be proudly learned, is to be devilish subtle; but to be humbly learned, is to be heavenly wise. He that will do no courtesie, is un∣friendly, but he that does all whatso∣ever
is required, is more friendly to others, then wise to himself. He that is over frugal, shall ever be poor; and he that is over liberal, shall never be rich: but he that is frugal li∣beral, and liberally frugal, though he distribute much, shall want nothing. He is a loving father, not a wise man, that cares not though he damn himself to hell, so he makes his children to be great on earth. A little Wealth honestly gotten will be lasting to thee and thine: (Gods blessing goes with it) butWhat a Father hath got by knavery, The Childe full soon doth spend in bra∣very. A good man has a moderate care to provide for his children, but he is a fool that tires out his feet to set his son on horse-back. To give away all is madness, to part with nothing is unkindeness; he that
doth the former is his own foe, he that doth the latter is no mans friend. Some men so greedily hunt after gain, toiling in the day, dreaming in the night, caring in both, as if they were born for no other end, but to moil like slaves, and heap up riches: and some are of gain so exceeding careless, eat∣ing and drinking, loitering and lazing, sporting and playing, as if the end of their being were to live at ease, and take their pleasure. A moderate care is good and commendable; immode∣rate care, and careless security are nei∣ther of them good. He that cares with discretion shall have profit with plea∣sure, and pleasure with profit; he that cares too much shall have pain and sor∣row, but no comfort of his labours; and he that cares too little, may have plea∣sure for a time; but before he is aware shall have nothing to comfort him. To confess our sins to Almighty God is to open our wounds, that the Physici∣an may cure them: but to confesse our sins to sinful man, is to wound our
selves worse, or to infect other men with the same disease. Money is the coin of earthly Princes, a dead coin of mortal men, but children are the coin of the King of kings, a li∣ving coin of the eternal and ever-living God, the God of heaven, the God of earth, the God of all that ever was, is, or shall be; mans coin bears mans image, on Gods coin God hath set his own most glorious image. He that has a vaste estate hath a bur∣then on his shoulders, but he that hath not something over, has short of enough. Let thy goodness exceed thy great∣ness, rather then thy greatness thy good∣ness; greatness may make thee be feared amongst men, but never beloved, unless with thy greatness thou also hast good∣ness. Art thou great, and not good? men through fear will seem to love thee, but in their hearts they will truly hate thee; many a great man is blest with the tongue, when in the heart he is curst bitterly.
There are three sorts of Gravities a∣mongst Men, Gravity in Years, Gravity in Manners, Gravity in Estate; which may otherwise be tearmed Gravity of the Body, Gravity of the Minde, and Gravity of the Purse; and of these three, though Gravity in Years should be the best, and Gravity in Manners is the best, yet Gravity in Estate, as ac∣counted the best, has place of all. So carry thy self towards thine Ene∣my, as supposing in time he may be thy Friend; so towards thy Friend, as sup∣posing in time he may be thine Enemy; if thou trust not thine Enemy, because he is thine Enemy, yet use him courte∣ously; if thou trust thy Friend, because he is thy Friend, yet be wary of him. When the Flesh is strongest, the Spi∣rit is weakest; when the Flesh is weak∣est, the Spirit is strongest: a young mans Flesh overcomes his Spirit, but an old mans Spirit overcomes his Flesh. No Art can alter a crooked body, nor any Instructions a wrong minde, but a
streight body is easily ordered, and a good disposition, though it want the forme, cannot want the substance of honest behaviour. If Anger be a madness (as it seems no other) then a froward person, for the most part, is mad; for he is seldom but angry. There is no labour to the labour of idleness; it wearies the Soul and diseases the Body, through want of imploy∣ment; and there is no idleness to the idleness of labour, in a foolish action, it wearies the Body and diseases the Soul, through base imployment. There is no peace to the peace of Conscience; in greatest war that peace abideth, that peace refresheth, and there is no war to te war of the Conscience, continually accusing, in greatest peace, that war assaulteth, that war molest∣eth. There is no Cordial to the Cordial of Sobriety, it preserves the health d
giveth rest; and there is no Poison to the Poison of Luxury; it fills with disease and torments the spirit. O the joy that's in health and sound∣ness of body, they give a stomack and freedom to eat of the blessings of God ordained for food in a competent mea∣sure whatsoever is desired: and O the great misery of sickness and disease, they not onely torment with their own an∣guish, (which is too too grievous) but they oft take away the stomack from eating, that nothing it likes of, if not, yet they stint it to wearisom diet, and binde it to take those potions of Phy∣sick, that are odious and loathsom. Through much folly men are made wise, and great sorrow giveth instru∣ction: he that's come safe to the haven of Wisdom, hath first had his passage through the gulf of Folly; and he that is fraught with abundance of Know∣ledge, hath first undergone much sorrow and labour. Do the Poor steal for want of food?
the rich are too blame in not giving them succor; God daily gives to comfort all with great abundance, but faithless man, but graceless man so ill divides it, that some have all, some ne'r a whit. There cannot be a drunken Saint, yet there may be a sober Devil; the former may in time amend, but little hope is of the latter; the good spirit doth weaken more the base body; the sober body adds more strength to the base spirit. Gluttony, drunkenness, and disho∣nesty of the body are grievous sins, that defile the man with noisom foulness, yet they savour but of earth and humane in∣firmity, so there is hope of amendment: but a proud heart, an unpeaceable dispo∣sition, a malitious spirit, a covetous, cruel, and uncharitable minde are inherent fil∣thiness, that savour of Hell and the De∣vils malignity, and these being such they will hardly be changed. It is fit for a man to go like himself, but better to go below himself, then above his betters: if a man go below himself,
what he loses in Credit, he saves in his Purse; if above his betters, his Purse and Credit may both crack for it. Pride and folly go ever together, but wisdom with pride holds no society: there was never yet a wise man proud, there was never proud man but a fool. The more that a man attains to be wise, the more he discernes his own folly: this surely makes a wise man humble; but the less knowledge a man has, so much the less he knows himself: no marvel then if pride doth swell him; young men are more proud for their small under∣standing, old men are more humble for their great experience. The body feels not his own weight, the eye sees not its own web, vice per∣ceives not her own foulness: the covet∣ous man thinks not himself covetous, but truly frugal; the prodigal man thinks not himself prodigal, but truly li∣beral; the man of proud carriage thinks not himself proud, but grave and dis∣creet; the man that is basely submissive,
thinks not himself basely submissive, but humble and curteous: So vice conceiving it self a vertue, abandons vertue as a meer vice; the covetous man abandons libe∣rality, as prodigality; the prodigal man abandons frugality, as covetousness; the man of proud carriage, abandons humi∣lity and curtesie, as base submissiveness; and the man that is basely submissive, abandons grave and discreet carriage, as foolish affected pride, and austerity. Use the Serpents wisdom, not to offend others unjustly, but justly to de∣fend thy self, and thy neighbour as thy self; be wise in this, as is the Serpent; be innocent in that, as is the Dove. A proud person out of his dress thinks worse of himself then any that sees him; a proud person in brave apparel, holds himself better then God ever made him. He that has a busie head, can never have a nimble tongue; where the brains are working, the tongue lies still; where the tongue runs, the head is idle; he that
speaks much suddenly, considers but lit∣tle discreetly; and he that is evermore venting his wit, but seldom or never doth set forth his wisdom. Let not the Court envy the City, nor let the City envy the Court; happy is that Kingdom where both do prosper. The flourishing Merchant makes a flou∣rishing Gentry, the flourishing City a flourishing Court, and both are helpful each to other; the power of the Court defends the City, the riches of the City supplies the Court; this is the flesh, that is the sinnews: the Countrey the bones of the Body Politique; and the bones are the vessels that hold the marrow of strength and nourishment. Take heed by all means of fond affe∣ction, it's near and dear, but full of dan∣ger; it blindes the eye of sound judge∣ment, it darkens the light of true un∣derstanding, and it's ever the subject of foul abuse: yea, it's easie (alas) to a∣buse affection, for affection helps to a∣buse it self.
A rich man liberall enjoyeth his wealth, and enjoyeth himself: a rich man prodigal loseth himself, and loseth his wealth: a rich man miserable pos∣sesseth not his wealth, but his wealth possesseth him. When the sink runs, the house is the cleaner; when the sink is stopt, the house is unwholesome: even so it is with mans body, the passages open, the health is preserved; the passages shut, diseases follow. Adversity humbles some, but not all; and Prosperity puffs up some, but not all: I have seen a man humble in adver∣sity, and proud in prosperity; I have seen a man humble in both, and I have seen a man humble in neither, so various is the condition of mankinde. A bad nature is oft-times hid, at least kept in through fear of punishment, or fear of loss; but the restraint being gone, it soon breaks forth, and shews it self. Many excellent servants when they come to be masters, do prove stark
naught; and many good children in outward appearance, (their Parents alive) their Parents dead, and the estate and power in their own hands, are found ungracious. Be courteous, loving, and friendly to all men, for so it becomes thee; yet ever let discretion go along with thy love, lest by being too much a friend unto others, thou prov'st in the end a foe to thy self. If a man will but once go the same way, he shall never know what way he goes; if but once perform the same work, he shall never make a perfect Workman; if but once read the same thing, he shall ever profit by his read∣ing: but by going again the same way, he shall know it the better; by doing again the same work, he shall do it the better; by reading again the same thing, he shall minde it the better. Re∣petition is like the stroak of a hammer, every stroak strikes the nail in further, till it comes to the head; and every re∣peating makes faster and faster the things
repeated, till it settles them wholly and firmly in the memory. Wise men regard not to hear of their worth; Children and Fools love to be praised. Let a rich man live like a rich man, let a poor man live like a poor man, let every man live as becometh himself, let no man spend all, if he may with conve∣niency save somewhat; wretched is that man, whose excess makes him want, when a little frugality would have made him abound. To spend all may be pleasant, can never be profitable; but to save a little every day will amount to much one day? For a rich man to live after the rate of a poor man, is unthankfulness to God, and ab∣surd baseness; for a poor man to live after the rate of a rich man, is foolish pride, and the way to beggary. Nourish acquaintance as much as thou mayest to advance thine estate, but not to wrong it: In every Profession a mans acquaintance is his chief upholder.
Hast thou none? thou mayest sit still for all thy cunning: the more thou hast, the more thou shalt thrive, if thou rightly dost use them: yet may thy ac∣quaintance little or great, unless thou beest careful, quite undo thee. Take heed of thine enemies, is a need∣less Precept: every creature that has but sense takes heed of his enemy; much moe will man the chief of all, endued with reason: But take heed of thy friends, is a Precept of note fit to be thought on: no man knows a friend, but he that tries him: and but few friends there are of many that seem so; therefore to be sure take heed of all. It becomes Age to be adorned with Gravity; and Youths best decking is modest Behaviour. An ill disposition takes all at the worst; but a good spirit judgeth chari∣tably. As God hath given man several sen∣ses, so to every sense he hath also ap∣pointed
several objects to mans great benefit, comfort, and contentment. To the hearing he hath appointed severall sounds, voices, and tunes: to the see∣ing several forms, colours, and beauties: to the feeling several touches: to the smelling several odours: and to the ta∣sting several sapours, that man being sa∣tisfied and delighted by them, may with a joyful and thankful heart look up to him the All-creatour, praising and glori∣fying the greatness of his Name for those blessings bestowed upon him in so wonderful variety. To him therefore the all knowing, powerful, good God, be all honour, glory, praise, and thanks∣giving, both now and for evermore. Amen. Sullied Beauty is better then beautifi∣ed Deformity; and a good spirit in rags better then a bad spirit in robes: yea, the most crooked body with a right minde, doth far excel the come∣liest person of a crooked disposi∣tion. Comeliness and Beauty adorn the bo∣dy;
Learning and Experience inform the understanding; but Grace and Ver∣tue surpass them all: by these the will is rightly ordered. A wise man doubts of his own wayes, but the deeds of a Fool (in his own opinion) are all excel∣lent. To be too late wise, is to be too soon a fool; for that wisdom never profits which sees a mans folly hath bred a mis∣chief beyond a remedy. The cure of one disease brings on another; and a Medicine to the Malady, is oft-times a poyson to the Party. Give not thy self to immoderate drinking of strong drink, it besots the understanding, and consumes the estate. In goes the wine, out goes the wit, and away goes the money. If thou wilt shew thy self truly wor∣thy, let not prosperity lift thee up, not yet adversity cast thee down; think in
prosperity (as thou art a man) thou art no more then he that's poorest: think in adversity (as thou art a man) thou art as much as he that's richest. Mens pover∣ty or riches may be more or less, yet every man is a man, and every man is but a man. Have a care that thy belly be not big∣ger then thy purse; eating and drinking are great consumers. Delights are costly, and pleasures waste time, set not thy heart too much upon them: abundance of pleasure brings abundance of sorrow; but the end of labour is rejoycing. Why should vain man be proud of his wealth? Why should he scorn his poorer Brother? they both are made of one mould: a mould (alas) of poor condition, and differ onely in their weight, not in their matter; the rich man is heavy durt, the poor man is light durt; the rich and poor are both but durt.
Hast thou done a worthy act, thank God who gave thee ability; be not proud, it is not thine, but Gods doing. If it be in good, it is better to per∣form then to promise, better to do, then to say; if it be in evil, it's bad to pro∣mise, but worse to perform; bad to say, worse to do. Children must be under the correcti∣on of the rod; men must be under the correction of the law: Parents and Tu∣tours must govern by the former, but Princes and Magistrates should rule by the latter. When thou eatest and drinkest, eat and drink with moderation, not with excess; moderate eating, and mo∣derate drinking doe comfort nature, and preserve the health; but exces∣sive eating, and excessive d inking, do burthen nature, and destroy the health. Age is more costly then Youth, but
Youth is more prodigal then Age. Age needs more, but Youth spends more. The body is young, and the body is old, it corrupts and decayes, because it's a body; but the spirit is neither young nor old; it's ever the same, because it's a spirit. A wise man though rich, is humble to all men; but a wealthy fool takes state upon him. The filling of the belly empties the purse, diseases the body, and dulls the wit; but a spare diet encreaseth riches, preserves the health, and quickens the understanding. It's a more manly part to forgive an injury, then to revenge it: he that does the latter, loseth himself: he's over∣come of his own passion: he that does the former, doth conquer himself, and certainly that's the most noble conquest. It's nor good nor profitable in many cases to trust thy self with thy self; in case
of conscience, inquire of the Divine; in case of health, advise with the Physi∣cian; in case of justice, consult with thy Lawyer: he's no wise man, (whatsoever he thinks) that ever trusts to his own judgement. Does a man not acknowledge his fa∣ther or mother, because they are poor, and he rich? does a man disdain to confess he was poor, being grown rich? God surely will never acknowledge that man, God surely will never love that man, though he be rich. Learning and Experience are several things, yet both conduce to the further∣ance of Knowledge: Learning is that Knowledge, that a man obtains out of the observations of other men, either by reading their works, or by instruction from themselves: Experience is a know∣ledge that a man gains by his own obser∣vation, and not at all from other mens documents. Some there are that have great Learning, but small experience; and some also that have much Experi∣ence, but little Learning; and both these
may fail in most things: he that hath neither Learning nor Experience, is a meer ignorant man: he that hath Lear∣ning without Experience, or Experience without Learning, is a man of unper∣fect knowledge: but he that is stored with ample Learning, and ample Ex∣perience, is a man of great judge∣ment. In evil things speak nothing, do as little: in good things speak much, and do much, yet rather speak less, and do more, then speak more, and do less; ma∣ny good deeds, and a few good words, are better far, then many good words, and but few good deeds; outward speech in good things, is but the colour and shadow of goodnesse, perhaps where none is: but performance of good, is the very body and substance, the very heart and life of goodness it self. It is a hard matter to give eyes, or ears, or a right understanding to a set∣tled affection, yet all these affection hath need of: affection is blinde, she
sees no faults: affection is deaf, she hears no complaints: affection is sim∣ple, she perceives no errours: affection is willful, she will not be advised; affe∣ction is easie, she will be abused: affecti∣on (alas) is her own foe, in all things she helps to abuse her self. Some are awake being fast asleep, their care is so much: and some are asleep being broad awake, so little they care. Alii dormientes vigilant, alii vigilantes dormiunt. It is altogether unpossible for a man to be an Atheist: for though he may easily doubt what God is, (because he is un∣searchable) yet he cannot but fully know that there is a God. If he have eyes he may see it: if he have ears he may hear it: if tasting, smelling, feeling, by every of those he may well perceive it; yea, if he have but life and understanding, he can∣not but conceive it. God is every way without him, and in every part within him; without him in the other crea∣tures, and within him, even in man him∣self, God doth most plainly appear. Can I
take notice of the creatures without in their several shapes, beauties, and quali∣ties, and not confess that there is a God who hath made them? Can I take no∣tice of my self in the several parts and faculties of my soul and body, and not acknowledge that there is a God, who hath made me? All things that come by chance are confused, and without settled form; but where we see most beautious pieces, we cannot but judge, that some excellent Workman is the Authour and Finisher of them. There is a way (indeed) of generation in the creatures themselves, the means by which God is pleased to work: but the cause and effects thereof are onely of God himself, the sole Creatour of all things, and nothing of them is either of chance, or of the creatures will. Great wits are subject to great es, and great good in man is commonly mixt with greater evil. God suffers him to fail, God suffers him to fall, to shew unto him that he is but man; to shew he hath all his good from God.
I will not trouble my self curiously to search what God is, or what mans foul is, but will rest my self stedfast up∣on this general Faith, That God surely is, because every way I see him in his works: That he is Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, because I have it so in his Word, that he is eternally living, and that all things living and moving have in him onely their life and motion; that he is the all-wise Creator, Governor, and Disposer of all things, and the univer∣sal, infinite, and eternal being of all be∣ings, beyond other comprehension, but in himself alone; and that the soul of man is a most excellent creature of that wonderful Creatour, and a finite, yet everlasting being in that infinite, and eternal being, living and subsisting; but what manner of being God is, or what manner of being mans soul is, are things too too immense for mans thoughts, too too intricate for mans expression; every man in the world may attempt to finde it, but not all men in the world shall ever effect it: for great and exces∣sive have been the studies and labours of men, about the disquisition and demon∣stration
but of mans shell, or outside, the fabrick of his body; yet in all ages past hath it not been found out, nor in all to come shall it ever be to absolute perfection. If therefore to finde out what mans inferiour, and earthly part his body is, be so hard a matter, it is much more difficult to finde out what his sublime and spiritual part his soul is: And again, if it be so difficult to finde out what mans soul is, being but a single creature, it is far much more difficult (for it is infinite above mans reach) to finde out what God himself is, the sole and universal Creatour; yea, as impos∣sible it is for man himself, though endu∣ed with life and understanding, and fa∣culty of speaking, so to define what God is, or mans soul, as it is for a Pot∣ters liveless vessel to define what it self is, or what man is that made it. With that Faith I have said I will herein there∣fore content my self, instead of greater knowledge, and I hope it will be suffici∣ent for me; further I will not inquire concerning God, or mine own soul. I am but clay, God is my maker: the best thoughts, and the best discourse of God
and his works, is an holy admiration, not a curious speculation, not a curious disputation. It is better with the Athe∣nians) to worship (indeed) the un∣known God, then with prying eyes of vain thoughts to be too bold to gaze upon him; then with petulant wings of nice arguments, and dubious expressi∣ons to be over bold to come too near him: so like foolish people, staring at the Sun, we quite deprive our selves of sight: so like silly flies sporting with the taper, we burn our wings, and de∣stroy our selves in the flame we play with: a just reward of such presum∣ption. O the admirable variety of the works of God, not onely in the innu∣merable species of his creatures, but in every creature of the same species. Take man for the example, Gods chiefest creature. All men are alike in the lineaments of their bodies, that they may be discerned at first to be men; yet all so unlike in that likeness, that in every one there ap∣pears
a difference: no man in the world, since the world began, hath at any time found one like to himself in face or condition. Knowledge and power without good∣ness, is dead knowledge, dead power: power & goodness without knowledge, is silly power, silly goodness; good∣ness and knowledge without power, is feeble goodness, feeble knowledge: but knowledge, power, and goodness in one united, is the onely wisdom. Know∣ledge and power without goodness in the pursuance of good actions, is head and hands without a heart, knowing, and able, not willing to perform: pow∣er and goodness without knowledge, is hands and heart without a head, able, and willing, not knowing to perform: goodness and knowledge without pow∣er, is heart and head without hands, wil∣ling, and knowing, not able to per∣form; but knowledge, power, and goodness all conjoyned, are head, hands, and heart of one body, both knowing, able, and willing to perform.
A knowing memory, an able under∣standing, and an active will moving to good, is the very image, and yet but the image of God in man. Gods knowledge is his memory, he knoweth all things: Gods power is his understanding, he can do all things: Gods goodness is his will, he doth all things. Gods know∣ledge begets his power to do: from his knowledge and his power, proceeds his goodness in doing: so all that he doth, is good. His Omniscience in order, is the Father begetting: his Omnipotence in order, is the Son begotten: and his All-goodness in order, is the Holy Spi∣rit proceeding: and these three are one; One coeternal, and coequal God, Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity. In the beginning was the Word, the Word our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, is the power of God his Father; this Word was conceived by his will, the Holy Spi∣rit: In his will he saith, Let it be done, and it was so. And God the great God, that knoweth, can, and willeth all, saw that it was good. O the infinite power of the all Crea∣tour!
His creatures are great to man immeasurable: his creatures are small, to man scarce discernable. By the for∣mer we see God is quite beyond great∣ness; no greatness includes him: And yet by the latter we see he's in small∣ness, no smallness exclude him: the lit∣tle Mite shews the Almighty, as well as doth the great Leviathan. Doth God take pleasure in diversity of creatures? Why then should not man delight to behold them? why then should not man have his thoughts upon them. By them we see Gods wisdom is infinite; by them we see mans knowledge is nothing. Hast thou store of money? 'twill no∣thing avail thee, if God give not food, if God give not raiment; for we are not able of our selves to help our selves in the least measure; God onely the great worker and disposer of all things be∣stows freely on us whatsoever we en∣joy. He, O he continually defends us, continually sends his supply unto us; in him we live, in him we move, in him we
have our being; he feeds us, he clothes us, he, and onely he supports and main∣tains us: should he forsake us, we were utterly lost. He being for us, Oh happy being! He seeth our necessities, for he is all knowing: He is able to relieve them, for he is all-powerful: He doth relieve them, he will relieve them, for he is all-good. To him therefore be all Glory, to him be all Praise, to him be all Thanksgiving, now, and for ever. Amen. Amen. Let all men heartily say, AMEN. FINIS. The Reader is desired to pardon, and correct these Faults. PAge 12. line 20. for their read these. p 15. l. 10. r. respect of. p. 17. l. 14. r. is it. p. 24. l. 5. r. is a way∣fare. p. 32. l. 21. r. want. l. 23. for they are r. these. p. 38. l. 15. for those that r. those, if they. p. 39. l. 18 r. makes. p. 41. l. 2. r. reason is. l. 10. r. bring it. p. 44. l. 12. r. is like. p. 55. l. 21. r. Wives I obey. p. 56. l. 24 dele also. p 61. l. 13. dele or. p. 63. l. 5. f. their r. these l. 21. r. corporeal. p. 83. l. 27. r. openest air. p. 89. l. 6. the; at starve, put it at labor in the next line. p. 95 l. 18. r. are the. p. 108. l. 13. for master. r. waster. p. 110. l. 20. for for r. so. p. 112. l. 5. r. frugally. p. 114 l. 17. r. greatness exceed.
Books very lately Printed for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. THe Saints Tomb-stone; or, the Re∣mains of the Blessed. A plain Nar∣rative of some remarkable Passages in the holy life and happy death of Mistris Dorothy Shaw, wife of Mr. John Shaw Minister at Kingston upon Hull. The accomplisht Cook, the mystery of the whole Art of Cookery, revealed in a more easie and perfect method, then hath been publisht in any Language: ex∣pert and ready wayes for the dressing of flesh, fowl, and, raising of pastes, directi∣ons for all manner of Kickshaws, and Sauces, with the terms of Carving and Sewing: Bills of fare, an exact account of all dishes for the season, with illustra∣tions of necessary Figures, as are referred to practice: approved by Robert May, in the time of his attendance of severall persons of Honor. The so long expected work, the New world of English Words; or, a general Dictionary, containing the Terms, Ety∣mologies, Definitions, and perfect In∣terpretations of the proper significations of hard English words throughout the
Arts and Sciences, Liberal, or Mechanick; as also other subjects that are useful to the Language of our Nation. By E. P. The deeply learned Comentary, on Psalm 15. by that reverend Divine Mr. Christ. Curtwright Minister in York. The way to bliss in three Books, being a learned Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, publisht by Elias Ashmole Esq. Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly publisht; by Sir John Men∣nis, Mr. Smith, and others. The Modern Assurancer, the Clerks Di∣rectory, containing the Practick Part of the Law, in the exact Forms of all man∣ner of Presidents for Bargains, Sales, Bonds, Bills, Covenants, Indentures, &c. And all other Instruments intended for all yong Students of the Law, by J. Hern. Naps upon Parnassus, a sleepy Muse nipt, though not awakened. Such Jovial Co∣pies of Verses, as were lately received from the Wits of the Universities, in a Frolick; deditated to Gondibert's Mistress by Captain Jones and others. Whereun- is added his Epistle to the University, with the Answer. With two Satyrical Characters, one of a Temporizer, an∣other of an Antiquary.
The School of Physick; or the gene∣ral Experimental Practice of the whole Art: So reduced either into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the free-born Students of the three King∣doms may in this Method finde perfect wayes for the operation of such Medi∣cines, so Astrologically, and Physically prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent Judges of the Cures of their Patients. By Nich. Culpeper Gent. Student in Physick and Astrology. To this Exquisite Work the Narrative of the Authours Life is prefixed, together with his Nativity calculated by himself. These Golden and Perfect Remains be∣ing now Publisht from his original Co∣pies; with the Acknowledgement an Approbation of his late Wife, Mistres Alice Culpeper. Vivit post Funera Virtus. FINIS.
