R96 13586513 100555
Ferguson's Remonstrance TO THE Council of SIX, Upon the First DISCOVERY Of the late Horrid Conspiracy. A SATYR. Had Cain been Scot, God wou'd have chang'd his Doom, Not forc't him Wander, but consin'd him home. Cleavland. LONDON, Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-Lane, 1684.
To his ever Honoured Friend WILLIAM BRIGGS, Esq SIR, I Beg leave to present you with this short unpo∣lish'd Satyr, not only for the Advantage of your benign Patronage, but to gain an op∣portunity of acknowledging the many Favors you have been pleased to heap upon me; and partly too as a kind of Bribe to beget your good Opinion of it, knowing that what you but barely say you like, is sufficient Reason to make the rest of Man∣kind admire, believing it has past the Test of your never failing Judgment. This I can assure you of it, 'twas writ with a Loyal Heart, caused by an ut∣ter Abhorrence and Detestation of the Villanous Practises (brought to light by the discovery of the late Horrid Conspiracy) of the ungovernable Faction, who have lately and long Hector'd it in this our Nation, and liv'd (and I fear still do) in opposition to the Commands of the best Monarch and best Government in the Universe. And now ac∣cording to the method of our modern Scriblers, I shou'd give you a kind of an Essay upon Satyr, and Rail at the most considerable part of Mankind; but I hope you will Excuse me, wanting Learning for
the one, and the Discontents of Old Age for the other, scraps of Greek and the Fagg end of an Old Latin Author will be wanting too; nor will I give you one word of French to shew my Breed∣ing, no nor so much as find any fault with the Poe∣tasters of the time, to shew my Judgment; (though the World has bin sufficiently of late Banter'd by things of this Nature,) and all that I can say for this, is, that 'tis new and all my own, and if you are pleas'd to Judg favourably of it (and no Loyal Man offended) I have both my Wish and my Design, Who am Your most Faithful Obedient Servant, W. R.
Ferguson's Remonstrance TO THE Council of SIX, Upon the First DISCOVERY Of the late Horrid Conspiracy. A SATYR. Ferguson speaking to the Council of SIX. I. ROUZE up, Great Men! what makes ye Droop? Tho our Designs be Crost, Why will ye thus dispair? we are not wholly lost: Nor must we stoop To any thing our Angry Fates can do, 'Tis great to think like you! And can such men submit to slavish fear? Who dare Resolve to do, what others dare not hear.
II. Ten thousand Curses on that Tim'rous Sot, That Bankrupt Ideot! Who had not Sonl enough, to Act his part o'th' Plot; Had he not been of all that's good Bereft, Had he but had one thought of Glory left: His Coward heart, cou'd ne're have stoopt so low, As basely to Betray! and swear for Bread, Who might have rul'd i'th' head Of thousands fighting 'gainst our common Foe, Base Treacherous Foolis Millions of furys seize thy Guilty Soul. III. So God-like Cataline was too undone, Who durst design (almost alone, He was so wond'rous brave) T'ave given all the Rulers of the World, at once one Grave: Had I been Curius, when I had had my will, And ta'ne of Lust my fill; Fulvia shou'd have own'd, she'ad ly'd, And all she had said, upon her Knees deny'd, And at that Instant by my Peinard dy'd: So shou'd our Villain too have far'd, Had my advice bin heard, And of his Blood, like noble Cataline, I wou'd have made our Sacramental Wine. IV. Mischief begun must be pursu'd, In Ills no middle state can be, Th' Extream is only good, Stop at no Cruelty; But still drive on through Rapine, Fire and Blood, Fathers and friends, all that Oppose must die,
Not Sex, not Age, must pity find To what they say, and feel be deaf and blind; Let Ruin overwhelm 'em like a Sea, And to the height, practice all Villany, For th' end must be a Crown or everlasting Infanty. V. Had we obey'd our Noble Peer, We had not now been here: Consulting what to do, And when, and how, to give the Mighty Blow, Our Foes had all been Dead, And we Triumphing too: And he our Matchless Patriot, Marching at our Head; Success had Crown'd our cause, And made the Action good; While we had with our Swords, prescrib'd new Laws, And writ them too in Characters of Blood. VI. What is 't I have not done? To carry on Our Pious Cheat, our holy Cause? Have I not labour'd how to set ye free, And prov'd our very Laws, Plain Tyranny! And by my Preaching too, I'ave shew'd ye all; Who 'tis ye must obey. No King but Jesus, must our Empire sway; And under him each Saint's a General, All do Vsurp whom Heaven does not call, And we the Saints are only free, the rest are Aliens all. VII. Thus, thus you know, I 've often talkt aloud, To Gull th' unthinking, and unletter'd Croud:
For them we must deceive, And make them all our holy Trumpery believe; They are the Tools we work with still, and we To make 'em last, And bind 'em fast Tell 'em fine stories of Eternity. Tell 'em, our Governours are Arbitrary, And their Religion Is all Idolatry; And Superstition: Then cry down Hierarchy, And prove by Gospel Text each Bishop is a Pope, When all we do design or hope, Is how to get again into our hands, The Goverment, the Nobles, Crown, and Bishops Lands. VIII. How bravely 'till of late, has our great Cause went on, How near our Foes have been to be undone: That was a happy time when we cou'd do And safely too, What 'ere our Spleen, or Inst'rest lead us to; Treason commit to make us Popular, By Villany grow Famous; And against Common sense, and all the Laws make War. Visit the Tower for our Ease, And when we please▪ Be freed again by Jury-Ignoramns, Then spight of all, Glory in what we do, While all the Town, with Bells and Bonefires, add to th' Triumph too. IX. The mighty Theame was Liberty, And that stale Bugbear Property: Our Libells like a furious stream O're run the Town,
Sedition might be heard in ev'ry Place And seen in ev'ry face: Nor wou'd we spare things Sacred, Church, or Crown, And all (as we did still Alledge) Was by our Liberty and Priviledge; Priviledge! that mighty Atlas of our Cause, That knew no bounds, nor wou'd submit to any Laws. By the Priviledge of our Infallible House, We cou'd make any thing a Man, or Man, a Mouse: Profligate Villains, Men of Fashion With any thing Dispense, Make Ideots too speak sense, And teach 'em how to save a sinking Nation. X. Oh happy time! Oh bless'd security! What is't we might not then have done? Then, then we shook the Crown, And might have thrown That Ancient well built Fabrick down; So Vniversal was the Nations Lethargy, A Popish Plot was the Falatious Sham▪ That Plot in Name! That was the cunning Charm 'Gainst which we all did Arm; That was the word! That, that alone, Which whetted up the Old True-Prot'stant Sword Of Fourty One; By which the second Charles must fall, And we the Actors In'cent be For whomsoe're we Papists pleas'd to call, Must bear the Villany: While we, to Scower the Nation, And make a thorough Reformation; Leave not a Loyal Man alive, But so Revenge that fatal Stroak upon 'em all.
XI. What ever we were pleas'd to say, or do, No man durst be so bold as disbelieve, Or think we cou'd deceive: 'Twas true as Gospel, or we'd have it so, And who but doubted or at least so said, We straight deliver'd over to be Buffetted; Then Satan like seeking whom to Devour, Our Topping Serjeant walkt the Nation o're: Thus we, when e're we pleas'd, The Loyal Subject teaz'd: Especially those who came too nigh, And wou'd too far into our Actions pry: They must Submit, (While you like Petty Gods did sit) And own their No-faults on their Knees, And so their fellow slaves adore, And glad they were T' Emplore. (For to be clear) To pay their Arbitrary fees, Tho Indian like, they did it out of fear: This was a Glorious Act, I still admire, The Devil himself when on the Temple spire To be Obey'd and Worshipt onely did Desire. XII. Hypocrisy had ne'er so fair a face as then, Mischief and you were truly Great, And wou'd you now Retreat? You that were so Admir'd as mighty Men; You that so boldly durst withstand▪ A Monarchs great Command, And tell him (almost to his Face) You' keep him very Poor,
And never give him penny more: Without he' Disinherit all his Race, After all this d'you start! no more, Ye shall not, must not, cannot now give o're, Wou'd ye lie Lirking in some Loathsome Cell? And be content, T' endure perpetual Banishment, Or more Contemn'd Imprisonment: For want of Resolution to car'on, What you so bravely have begun? Sure't must be Terrible To think how very much you'l be undone, Besides your Coward souls must Doubly merit Hell. XIII. The Treason's still the same, If you were in the right when you begun, Sure you must be to blame: If to the utmost now, you do not push it on, For to Refuse must be To own the Villany, And ruin both your selves and your Posterity. Think what great things you've brought about, How you have made th' unthinking Rabble Rout Burn in mock Effigie The best of Loyal Men, And round the Mimick Pageant bawl'd aloud, No Y— no Y— no Papist neither, Burn, Burn them all together, While ev'ry Mouth Eccho'd it round the Crowd. XIV. Think, think agen, how you to serve your ends, And private hate, Have voted from the State:
The Nations Bulwark and most able Friends, And when you found that wou'd not do (I must be plain with you,) Such Perjur'd Villians you had got, That Swore them all into a Popish Plot. They Swore that they design'd to be The Bringers in of Popery; And that they did Incuorage too, Those who design'd to Assassinate Majesty. And those that did (such was your Skill Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey kill; Then ye were Valiant too, And any thing wou'd do: To make your selves and your designs seem Famous, One Traytors Oath against a Foe Wou'd make ye find a Bill, But 'gainst a Friend Ten shou'd not do; All sorts of Treason there, must still be Ignoramus. XV. Nay more then this ye durst; ye voted down All that secur'd the Crown: And did design of Power to deprive Each branch of its Prerogative: Upon the Kings Revenue ye did Vote, No Man shou'd lond a Groat, And from a Popish Knife to keep his Throat; His Guards by you Indicted were, As grievous to the Subject too, Thus the Old Cause ye did Pursue: And bravely like your selves appear: Then, then ye cou'd Resolve great things to do, And vow'd our Common Foe shou'd fall by none but you; And for to Crown this work, tho't prov'd in Vain. You my L— D— were voted great Again.
XVI. The Church and Bishops too, must suffer all, Beneath your Rage did fall: The Thirty fifth of that fam'd Heroin, Elizabeth great Brittains Queen; I thank ye all by my Perswasion, Ye voted Prejudicial To the Nation; A Persecuting Law, and too severe, More than a well tun'd Conscienee e're cou'd bear: While Popery was the formal stale. To keep that Serpent out, it was no sin To break the Churches Pale; Altho you let at the same time, ten thousand Monsters In. XVII. But that which pleas'd me most, After our other great designs were Crost, Was that Goliah of our Plot! th' Association! Which wou'd alone, Have all our Enemies o'erthrown; And made us Rulers all, of our so Ruin'd Nation. For ever live that great Man's Fame, The God-like Shaftsbury, That Phineas of our Cause! Whose very name Sufficient was, to give what e're we did applause; Who in the Gap so firmly stood, He stem'd the growing Flood: Of thin Jaw'd Honour, and lean Loyalty, And had the Devil play'd us fair, So Vniversal was the thing, So cunning was the Snare, He' ad stab'd at once the very Laws, as well as Church and K—
XVIII. After all this can ye such Cowards be? As once to shrink at any Villany? You that in Ills have still so Practis'd been, What wou'd to others be a Crime to do, Must be in you: If you Refuse (such is your case) a deadly sin Now, Now's the time, be not deceiv'd, For tis Impossible Our Horrid Treason's to Conceal, For at that time our Villain is believ'd, We're all undone: Therefore Resolve to push; this Instant, now! The Mighty Busness on. XIX. Thus spoke the Damn'd Impostor; when, A Sudden hasty Noise of Men: Surpriz'd their List'ning Ears, And struck them all into a Panick Fear; Keelling was all Believ'd, he had clear'd each doubt, Officers were abroad, and Warrants Issued out; Then like Belshazar, trembling and afraid, They stammer'd, star'd and Gap'd, and knew not what they said: So all disperst Murmuring 'gainst the State, And as they went Curst their unhappy Fate. FINIS.
