S2627 12771833 93677
A FRIEND TO THE SICK: OR, THE Honest English Mans Preservation. Shewing the CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, and CURES Of most Occult and Dangerous DISEASES Which afflict the Body of Man. WITH A PARTICULAR DISCOURSE OF THE DROPSIE, SCURVY, AND YELLOW JAUNDICE And the most Absolute Way of Cure. Whereunto is added, A True Relation of some of the most Remarkable Cures effected by the Author's most Famous Cathartique and Diuretique PILLS, wherewith was cured his late Grace GEORGE Duke of ALBEMARLE, &c. Set forth for the Publick Benefit, By William Sermon Doctor in Physick, One of His Majesties Physicians in Ordinary. LONDON: Printed by W. Downing for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1673.
To His Illustrious Grace, Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Tor∣rington, Baron Monk de Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes, &c. My Lord, AS Your Grace is both a Po∣pular and Publick Peer, I have humbly made bold to offer this Publick Treatise at the Altar of Your Illustri∣ous Name: And if, my Lord, the Offer∣ing be too mean for so magnificent an Al∣tar, Let it be Burnt, and the Flame thereof may give me light to see my present Pre∣sumption. My Lord, Other Apollogy or Plea I have none, besides that never-dying Ob∣ligation I owe your most Renowned Father of Blessed Memory, whose Diffusive Good∣ness
hath not only made Me, but indeed three Kingdoms to be his Debtor. Since then, My Lord, Bonds which are so justly due, must in all Equity be discharged, and the sublimity of his pre∣sent Station cannot Permit me to Cancel them to Himself; Yet Give me Leave then to Confess them to His Magnanimous Son, your Thrice Noble Self, the Inhe∣ritour of his Heroick Spirit, as you are of his Paternal Possessions. To the Plenitude and full Fruition of both which, that your Grace may Gradu∣ally Arrive, and with your Years increase your Heirs and Honours, is the most Cor∣dial Prayer of Sir, Your Graces most Humble and most Faithfully Obedient and Devoted Servant, William Sermon.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Worthy Reader, IT may perhaps be thought an high Presum∣ption (especially by such that judge no∣thing well done, but what they have the ho∣nour to do themselves) for me that may be accounted the least of all men, able to put my self to such a publick Censure of those most Learned and great Proficients in this Honourable and most Noble Art. However, because I would not hide my Talent that the Lord hath given to me, and so be termed an unprofitable Servant, having through the wonderful goodness of God, found out those and such like Remedies, and that by a diligent Care, and long Study, have had thereof large Experience, (which is the Daughter of Time, the Mother of Wisdom, the true Rewarder of Travel, though the Jewel
of a few) and not doubting but that they will prove very profitable, not only to the Di∣seased Patient, but to the young Student in Physick; for whose sakes I could by no means neglect the Publication hereof. Another, and the most principal Obliga∣tion, was from a serious Consideration of the Great Necessity, and Lamentable Misery that I daily behold, some of the meaner sort of people, being intollerably tormented with most dangerous and grievous distempers, and must absolutely perish having not wherewith∣all to be at great Charges in long and tedious courses of Physick. Neither to give to old Dives his large fee before-hand, without which he will not put his foot into the Styrup, nor his horses in the Coach. These Reasons seriously considered, were the absolute Motives to force me more to the publishing of this small, and I hope be∣neficial Treatise. And that the Honest English Man may reap thereby the greater Benefit, I have purposely omitted all Philosophical, Eloquent, and hard crabbed words, (though not Ignorant thereof) which more affright the honest and harmless Patient, then Cure his languishing Disease.
Yet notwithstanding the real and best of my Endeavours to promote the Interest of my Countrymen, and to do them service, in giving them some certain Rules how to help themselves in times of Necessity. Black mouth'd Envy, that severely Barkes though, cannot Bite, will still Snarle, and look upon me with a squint Eye, as if I had done some Injustice to the very Laws of Friendship, and common Society. And the grand Reasons are, that my Pills in the Dropsie, have wrought more won∣derful effects then any other Medicines yet have done. Since which time, to defraud the Ignorant, every fracturated fellow in their Pamplets pretend to Cure the Dropsie, though it be but with Aloes, and Sena, &c. infused in Brandy, and the Lungs of an Oxe applied to the Belly, which preposterous Courses have of late killed many, some of good worth. But perhaps some of the fore-mentioned will be apt to Judge that I have published this Treatise purposely to promote my own Interest, because I have in some Chapters made mention of my Cathartique and Diure∣tique Pills; in answer to which, I will assure the Reader I have not made mention thereof
but where they are absolutely necessary, and I question not, but those that are acquainted with me and them, will believe that what I have here imparted, is to the utmost of my power really to promote the well-fare of my Country, and not my own Interest, (Which in Duty to God and Man I am bound to do) this being first intended not for private use, but for a publick good. So not valuing the Threats of some of the same faculty, knowing the snares they have laid for others, themselves will be ta∣ken in: When I shall be from their rigid Malice shelter'd under the Wings of the Al∣mighty, and there live above the Praise or Dispraise of Men. But yet must humbly acknowledge my self, Dear Countrey-men, Your most humble and faithful Servant to Command, W. Sermon From my house in East∣harding-street near the Sign of Goldsmiths hall, between Fetter-lane and Shoe-lane London July 12. 1673.
In Libellum Laboresque Gulielmi Sermon, Med. Doctoris. SAlve Paeoniae non portio parva Palaestrae, Successus; novos priscu succssibus adde; Ʋt, Qui, Sanatum Magnum stupuere Monachū, Heìc Sanatrices miretur Amice Medelas. Quam Populi commune bonum, communibus instas Instaurare Bons, Aglo testabitur Orbi Iste Tuus Sermone liber, Qe liscutis omnes Morborum occultas casa, calamoque Mederis. Se auspiciis debere Tais, Natura Senilis Agnoscit tandem, & ventura fatebitur aetas Laudum quanta Tuo debet Monumenta labori. Tunc cum morbiugs vestris Sermone Medelis Vanescet sensim, vacuas{que} facesset in auras Invidiae Malesana Cohots; & lurida Famae Latricis, Dignisque Comes Detractio Factis Hydra retundetur, vulsisque venefica linguis Spicula sublato praetendet Vana Veneno. Sic vaticinatur, Tuissimus P. Fisher.
To his Worthy Friend Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, Upon his Publishing a Treatise, Entituled A Friend to the Sick, or, The Honest Englishmans Preservation. VVHen DROPSIES did Sick Nature seek to Drown, And SCƲRVIES too like a Beleagur'd Town, Surrounded her, and call'd in the Wild Rout Of that French Moth, the Pox, the sullen Gout, And other Rude Distempers Man to Win, And She her self thus Blockt up to take in Then Sir, that Active Balm your healing Pill, Into these crumbled Ruines did Distil; Peic'd up those Breaches, which these Foes had made, And Beat back those that did the Fort Invade. Whilst your brisk Pen such noble Rules Compiles, They will Redeem Man from their future wiles, And make him with just Gratitude Confess, Faint Nature can, then Vigorous Art do less. Thomas Philipott.
To the most worthily well Deserving of both Rich and Poor, W. Sermon, Doctor in Physick, one of his Majesties Physitians in Ordinary, on his so Beneficial Tractate, and Treatise, Entituled, A Friend to the Sick, or, The Englishmans Preservation. VVHen Books speak Loud, and Learnedly Confute Fond SCIOLISTS, 'twere Malice to be Mute And stifle that acknowledgment is due, Dear Sir, to this most useful Peice, and you Whose safe and Soveraign Rules prevent our Ills And prove your Pen as powerful as your Pills. Hipocrates and Gallen here are shut Like Homers Iliads couch'd up in a Nut: Since in these few Octavo sheets are shewn Most Maladies and Medicines which are known, And by your Dextrous Skill, confirm'd your own. On then succesful Sir! and ne're Regard Detracting Tongues, Vertue's her own Reward. And your Miraculous Cures, both old and New, Can testifie them not more strange then True, And Maugre Malice, speak your Crown'd success In most Distempers, either Great or Less. So Believeth the Admirer of your skil∣ful Industry, and true Honourer of your much obliging Self W. Faldo, Hospitii Grayensis I. C.
To my Honoured Friend, Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, One of His Majesties Physicians in Ordinary. REnowned Sir, had I an Argels Quill, 'Twere sit to write Encomiums on your Skill. Your admirable Skill, whose Fame resounds From shore to shore of this vast lands Bounds. Physicians all admire, and none dare se At Your Great Cure wrought on Great ALBEMARLE. Which lent swist motion to Fames spreading Wing, And gain'd you favour with our LORD the KING. Yet not this high particular can raise Sufficient Trophies to your General Praise. Your Knowledge Universals, and ies Through all the Sphears of Physick's Mysteries. The Plague, that Generalissimo of all Diseases, by your Skill's vast Power does fall. The Dropsie, Jaundice, Scurvy, and the Gout, Your valiant Pills put to a Total Rout. These drain Hydropick ens, make that Ground good, Which worse than useless under Water stood. How many thousands, who had made their Wills, Do yet survive by these Life-saving PILLS!
Diseases which in Ambuscado lie To ruine Man, your Medicines make fly. Yea, the whole Host of Maladies you Rout, Strong fortify'd Distempers you sorce out. Diffusive, Noble Soul! Ev'n all these rare Secrets of Art, sreely as GOD gives Air, You do communicate to all Mankind, That in this BOOK the SICK their HEALTH may find. Art's long, Life's short, said wise Hippocrates: Which Aphorism your power inverts with case. Great be your Profit, many be your Days, And may your Honour still increase. So prays Honoured Sir, Your Humble Servant, Edward Cocker. July 7. 1673.
To His Honoured Friend, The Worthily Accomplished AUTHOR, On this his no less Acurate than Useful Treatise; Intituled, A FRIEND to the SICK: or, The English Mans Preservation. PHysick it self grew desperate Sick of late, And languish'd under an unhappy fate. To its Assistance all the Sons of Art Were call'd, their Choice Arcanums to impart. First some in State, and Coaches gilt, advance, With Reverend Plush, and Learned Ignorance; Who view their Magick Glass, the Ʋrinal, And make it more their Bus'ness how to call Diseases, than to Cure them; such as still Act by Old Book, and in rare Method Kill. But these prov'd so unable to restore Art's former Health, they but afflict it more. For Nature no such Mystique Course affords, To Cure Diseases only with hard words. Of Swaggering Quacks there next appears an Host, With lying Bills on ev'ry Pissing Post.
Fellows that scorn to Dose it by Retail, But Cure by Wholesale, whatsoe'er you ail. Such silly Dog-Leaches, a Man would scarce Entrust them to give Physick to an Horse. The Healing Art, by Factions thus opprest, Retd a while, Brave Doctor, to your Brest; And those that now would find it out, must look In This Rich Magazine of Health, your Book; In whose small Volumn (you so much have wrought) Cause, Symptoms, Cure, of each Disease is taught. He that alone could cure Great MONCK before, Was sit Decaying Physick to restore. Which by your pains lifts up its drooping Head, And Liberally for Common Good is spread. Your well-try'd Med'cines here in Publick hurld, (Like Sol) at once enlightens half the World. Though sneaking Envy nibble at your Name, In Golden Leaves 'tis Registred by Fame. And after Ages shall admire that Skill Which thus Compos'd Your BOOK and matchless PILL. So assuredly prophesies, Worthy Doctor, Your most Humble and Affectionate Servant Hen. Care, ♂ Julii 1673. 6 H. P.M.
To my Worthy Friend Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, On his New and Excellent Piece Entituled, A Friend to the Sick, or, The Honest Englishmans Preservation. LEt Zoylus Roar, and Envy Mount above The Spheres, and there those mighty regions move Ʋntil they Burn, Resolving to defeat Thy rare Productions, by their scorching Heat, Their threatning Power shall then be narrowed by An Awe from Thee, Great Ingenuity! Sit still brave Sir, and only Laugh to see The Poor Attempts of Silly Enmity; Hurt thee they can't, for Nature promis'd thee Her best Assistance, in Epitome. Thou hast brought forth unto the Publick View, A sparkling Light that scorns an empty shew. Its Nature's Store to which she may resort In her worst Exigents, as to a Fort That will secure her from the Painful Threats Of Dropsie, Gout, and from the Foppish Cheats Of Base Pretenders, whose dull Fancies pry Not to th' Centre, but superficially
Do flutter up and down they know not where, Ʋntil dark Error takes them in his snare. In ev'ry Line the Judge Experience sits; Trying the Causes, Symptoms, and then sits Some brave Balsamick, that commands the Rage Of Natures Foes to quit that Noble Stage Whereon they thought to muster up such Aid, As quite the Microcosm to invade. Go on brave Sir, and fly on th' Wings of Fame, Th' unparallell'd Attempts have got the Name, Preserver of Great Natures Noble Frame. M. S. On this Elaborate WORK OF Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, Intituled, A FRIEND to the SICK: or, The English Mans Preservation. AVant, dull Quacks, you that pretend to Skill, Yet scarce know how to write a Pocky Bill. Whose Lines, as well as Art, is all so base, Fit onely to adorn a Pissing Place. Who by pretence of a most Cordial Liquor, Do cause the Grave-maker t' earn money quicker.
Such as St. Hugh's Bones did produce of late, Near to the place yleped Aldersgate. But here's Arts Master-piece in few lines writ, Shews the Diseuse, likewise the Cure of it. A General Good! and who can more assure, Than he who our late General did Cure. More might be said, but when all is set forth, All things come short in all things of its worth. WILL. WINSTANLY To His Honoured Friend, Dr. WILLIAM SERMON, One of His Majesties Physicians in Ordinary, On his Book now Published, Intituled, A Friend to the Sick, or, The Honest Englishmans Preservation. VVElcome, Brave SERMON! to the Publick Stage; The Glory and the Envy of the Age. When call'd by Soveraign Command to heal That Grand Physitian of out Commonweal, The Matchless MONCK, Bristol (whose throning Poor Were cur'd each day at your Bethesda-door)
In Tears and Sighs took a constrain'd Adieu, And parted both at once with Health & You. So shivering stands the Forlorn Muscovite, When Sol with-draws his all-refreshing Light, And dooms him to a dismal half-years Night. 'Tis now twelve years since first I took your Pill, And prov'd the virtue of your mighty Skill. By whatsoe'er Disease I'm set upon, I fly to That as my CATHOLICON. But 'tis in vain, and does but make thee less, To think a Verse thy Praises can express. Let thousand's which thy wond rous Med'cines save From Deaths assaults, & the devouring Grave, With general Acclamations bless your Name, And build you Monuments of lasting Fame. Long may you live, and when at last you fly To glorious Mansions of Eternity, Forget not Languishing Humanity. No matter for a Tomb or Epitaph, Leave your Receipt, your Memory is safe: That, that alone your Fame shall celebrate, And make you known to Times extreamest date. Go on, and prosper to a Glorious End, Circled with all kind Wishes from Your Friend and Servant, RICH. BULL.
The English Mans Preservation. SIr, You surprize me! If this Book of Cures Health in distempers of each kind procures 'T will make men bold to sin: some do ab∣stain From Vice, not for its own sake, but the pain. Knew these the means of health which you pre∣scribe, Doubtless, sans fear, the vice they would imbibe. Those Golden Virtues which in Youth were shown, Will Vices seem, when once your Cures are known. Calista laughs at Socrates, when he With cloudy brow condemns her Venery. Your Book's her Buckler; nothing dreads her Spirit; Sh' hath faith in that; let Papists preach of Merit. Thus whilst you keep their Bodies from decay, Their Souls neglected are, as Pluto's prey. Sir, Let your Wisdom stoop, and take from me, With leave I'll say't, a better Recipe Than's in your Book, a Dose will men advance More than your Pills or Prescripts, Temperance. To all your Cordials in the Prime Prescribe true Aqua-Vitae tak'n in time. And every morn let Herb of Grace Amongst the rest your Recipe's take place. This done, my Muse shall stile you to the end, The Sick Mans Preservator, and her Friend.
THE CONTENTS. Chap. 1. OF the Pain in the Head through Heat. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the pain in the Head through cold. P. 6. Chap. 3. Of the pain in the Head through the French Pox. P. 10. Chap. 4. Of the Vertigo. P. 14. Chap. 5. Of the Falling-Sickness. P. 21. Chap. 6. Of the Apoplexy. P. 33. Chap. 7. Of the Palsey. P. 40. Chap. 8. Of the Convulsion or Cramp. P. 49. Chap. 9. Of the Catarrhe. P. 55. Chap. 10. Of the Eyes. P. 65. Chap. 11. Of the Ears. P. 74. Chap. 12. Of the Nose. P. 77. Chap. 13. Of the Tooth-Ach. P. 85. Chap. 14. Of the Blackness and Rottenness of the Teeth, and Exulceration of the Gums, &c. P. 89. Chap. 15. Of the Ʋlcers of the Mouth and Throat. P. 93. Chap. 16. Of the Quinzy. P. 97. Chap. 17. Of the Kings Evil. P. 104.
Chap. 18. Of the Asthma, or Difficulty of Breathing. Page 109. Chap. 19. Of the Pleuresie. P. 113. Chap. 20. Of the Ptisick or Consumption, p. 118. Chap. 21. Of the pain in the Stomach, p. 125. Chap. 22. Of the weakness of the Liver, p. 130. Chap. 23. Of the stoppage of the Liver, p. 137. Chap. 24. Of the Dropsie, p. 143. Chap. 25. Of the Scurvy, p. 159. Chap. 26. Of the Jaundice, p. 168. Chap. 27. Of the Stone in the Kidneys, p. 174. Chap. 28. Of the Ʋlcers in the Reins, p. 181. Chap. 29. Of the Stone in the Bladder, p. 186. Chap. 30. Of the Ʋlcers in the Bladder, p. 191. Chap. 31. Of the Gonorrhea, or Running of the Reins, p. 194. Chap. 32. Of the French Pox, p. 200. Chap. 33. Of the Plague, p. 211. Chap. 34. Of the Gout, p. 223. Chap. 35. Of the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout, p. 230. Chap. 36. Of the Invention and most Remark∣able Cures Effected by those most Famous Ca∣thartique and Diuretique Pills, p. 234. ERRATA. PAge 2. line 5. for suffisticated read sophisticated, p. 10. l. 2. for Chap. II. read III. p. 23. l. 2. for Mumme read Mu∣mia, p. 26. l. 2. for affected read effected, p. 103. l. 5. for stronger read strong, p. 247. l. 23. for Mr. John Ford, read Sir Henry Ford.
A FRIEND TO THE SICK: OR, The Honest English Mans PRESERVATION. CHAP. I. Of the Pain in the Head through Heat. PAins in the Head through Heat, are often caused through the immoderate heat of the Sun, or by standing near great flames of Fire, through hot Baths, and violent Motion, strong and hot Scents, and many times through hot Distem∣pers,
sometimes through over much drink∣ing of Brandy, and other strong and hot Spi∣rits, and also by drinking of Wine; especi∣ally that which is suffisticated; and sometimes this Disease is caused through furious passi∣on, anger, wrath, &c. The Signs through heat are not only Pains; for if you but touch the outward part of the Head, you may perceive it to be ex∣ceeding hot, and the Skin more dry then or∣dinary, and the Eyes become Red, &c. The Cure of which Disease may be performed as followeth. The Patient ought to for bear all sorts of Meats that are of hard digestion, and Milk, and all such Food that fume up into the Head; also let him abstain from Carnal Copulation, trouble of mind, malice, anger, wrath, and let his Body be kept open with the following Glister. Take Mallows, Sage, Strawberrie, and Vi∣olet-leaves, of each one good handfull. Being Cut and Bruised, Boil them in one Quart of Water, to the consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto of the Lenitive Ele∣ctuary one Ounce and a half, Diacatholicon one Ounce, Oyl of Lillies and Violets, of each six Drams, Sal Prunella one Dram; mix them
well together, and give it to the Patie n Glister-wayes. Or make use of the Pills made as follow∣eth. Take of the Pills of Cochia, and Alaephangine, of each one Dram, Tartarum Vitriolatum, one Scruple and a half, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Betony, make them up into twenty Pills; whereof take two at night, and three in the morning, once or twice a week. You may also take Conserve of Roses two Ounces Manus Christi Simple, half an Ounce, Pearl prepared, one Dram; with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Violets, make then up into an Electuary, and take the quantity of half a Wallnut first and last. Or make use sometimes of the following Potion; for it doth not only cool, but miti∣gate the pain. Take Syrup of Violets, and Syrup made with the Juice of Citrons, of each one Ounce, with the Distilled Water of Cichory and Endive, of each four Ounces; mix them, and make a Potion thereof, and take one part in the Morning, and the rest at Night warm, repeating the same as need shall require.
And you may apply outward Medicines made as followeth. Take Rose Water, four Ounces, Vineger of Roses, half an Ounce, Oyl of Roses, two Ounces, the White of two Eggs; mix them well toge∣ther, and with double Linnen Clothes apply it to the Temples, and sore part of the Head. Or take white Poppy Seeds, and beat them to Powder; being mixed well together with the Yelkes of new laid Eggs, apply it to the parts aforesaid; for it giveth ease in the most extream pain of the Head, coming of heat, as I have one hundred times experienced. Or take one good handfull of House-leek, Oyl of Roses and Womans Milk. of each a small quantity; being beat well together, apply it to the part grieved. Or take the leaves of Mallows, and the leaves of Willows, of each two handfulls, Flowers of Me∣lilot and Camomil, of each one handfull, the Flowers of Poppies, half a handfull; boyl them for the space of half an hour in a sufficient quantity of Water, and apply it to the part pained, as afore directed. Or take the Flowers of Lillies, Violets, and Roses, of each two handfulls, Vervain, Camo∣mil and Mallows, of each one handfull, Powder of Red Sanders, two Drams, Camphir, one Scruple;
being Cut and Bruised, put them into a Bag, and boil it in a sufficient quantity of Water with a little Vineger of Roses, and apply the Bag warm to the fore part of the head, and to the Temples, when cold, make it warm in the foresaid Liquor, and repeat it as need require. You may annoint the fore-head and Tem∣ples with the Oyntment, or Oyl of Roses, or with the Oyl of Night-shade, made as followeth. Take May Butter without Salt, one Pound, Oyl of Roses, eight Ounces, Night-shade, half a Peck; being bruised, boil them well together in an Earthen Vessel, after which strain it hard, and keep it for use; for it is of wonderful virtue Or take the distilled water of Night shade, House-leek, and Letuce, of each one Ounce, the Water of Camomil, six Drams, Viniger, half an Ounce; mix them together, and make moist a Linnen Cloth therein, and apply it to the fore-head, and to the Temples, and doubt not of help; but let none of the fore∣said cooling Medicines be applied to the hin∣der part of the head, least you do harm; for that part of the head cannot suffer cooling without damage'
CHAP. II. Of the Pain in the head through Cold. THE cold pains in the head are often cau∣sed through the extream coldness of the Air, especially when the Patient is constrain∣ed to continue long therein with his Head bare, &c. and many times by applying of cold Medicines. The signs of pains in the head caused of cold are quite contrary to those of heat; for though the pain be violent, yet by touching you cannot perceive the head hot, neither are the Eyes red, nor the Face dry, but pale and full, and the Eye-lids swell, and are somewhat Black, or of a Leaden Co∣lour, &c. and the Patient seldom desires cold things, neither can he receive comfort thereby. Such that are troubled with this Distem∣per, must use exercise and motion, as walk∣ing or riding; but let not the Air be too cold, the head must be kept warm. Let the Patient labour to be merry, and cast a∣way
Melancholly and sadness, and all pertur∣bations of the mind. Let him abstain from Milk and Fish, &c. which are cool in operation, and drink thin Wine, or such Liquors as do but moderate∣ly heat; the Body must be kept soluble with Glisters, or Supositors, &c. You must not apply to the head Medicines that are extream hot, neither such that are exceeding cold; least you hurt the Brain. In order to the cure of this Disease. Take Oyl of Rue, one Ounce, the Chymical of Rosemary and Lavender, of each one Scruple; being mixed well together anoint the fore part of the Head and Temples therewith, and likewise the Nostrils, and the Orifices of the Ears, Or take the Oyl of Dill and Orris, of each one Ounce, Oyl of Marjorum, Rosemary and Amber, of each one Scruple, Oyl of Euphorbium, ten Drops, mix them well together, and use it as afore directed. Take Betony, Mints, Marjorum, wild Be∣tony, of each one handfull, the Flowers of La∣vender, of each half a handfull, Caraway Seeds, half an Ounce, Cloves, two Drams; being cut small, make a quilt thereof with Silk,
or Linnen Cloth, and apply it to the Head warm, sprinkled first with a small quantity of the best Vinegar, and with some Spirit of Lavender, if you can with conveniency have it. And let the Patient take Camomil, Be∣tony, Sage, Origan, Bay Leaves, Staechaes, Rosemary, and Melilot Flowers, of each one handfull; being boiled in a sufficient quan∣tity of Water, let the fume thereof go up in∣to the Nostrils and Mouth. Or take Bay-berries, two Drams, Zedvary, half an Ounce, the tops of Rosemary, half a hand∣full; being cut and bruised, boil them in one Quart of white Wine, to the consumption of half, and bath the head therewith, and apply it warm to the same, with double Cloths. Or take Juniper-berries, Camomil, Rue, the Flower of Gray Peas, of each one handfull; being quilted in a small Cloth, boil them in Wine, and apply it to the Head warm, repeating the same as need require. Or take Lavender and Rosemary Flowers, of each one Ounce, Marjorum, half an Ounce, be∣ing put in a convenient Glass, pour thereto two Quarts of Rose Water; and stop it up close, and let it stand for the space of nine days in a
cold Seller, after which distill it, and keep it for use; for it taketh away the cold pains of the Head, &c. to admiration, the fore part of the Head and Temples being bathed there∣with every Morning for some time together. I told you before it would be necessary in this Disease to keep the Body soluble, in order to which you may make  of the Glister, or some of the Pills directed in the Chapter of the Vertigo, and assure your selves that they will prove very profitable.
CHAP. II. Of the pain in the head through the French Pox. THose that are infected with this Dis∣ease, have a perpetual pricking and sharp pain in the head. The cause of which ariseth from the Pu∣trifaction of the Blood, contained in the Veins and Meninges, or of a Windy Spirit in the Arteries of the same. The sign of this Disease is manifest and accompanied with the rest of the signs of the French Pox, as tumours in the Muscles, and skin of the head, &c. Which Disease being cured ceaseth; in or∣der to which make use of the following Medicines. Begin with the Glister; for it will draw back the matter that causeth the pain in the head. Take Nettles, Bay-leaves, Mercury, Rue, Marsh Mallows, Betes, of each one handfull, the Roots of Pollipody, one Ounce, the bark of Broom, and the Seeds of Carthami, of each half an Ounce, the Flowers of Camomil and Staechas, of each one
Pugil; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, to the con∣sumption of half, strain it and take thereof one Pint, to which add Confectio Hamech, and the Juice of Orris Clarified, of each one Ounce, Hiera simple, half an Ounce, Oyl of Castor, Rue, Dill, and Honey of Roses, of each one ounce, common Salt, one Dram; be∣ing mixed all well together, make a Glister thereof, which administer to the Pa∣tient in the morning fasting. The next day it will be necessary to open the Cephalick Vein in the right Arm, which will also be a means to take away the vitious humours. After which make use of the following Pills. Take Pills of Arabick; and Pills of Faetida, of each one Dram, Troches of Alhandal six Grains, the Chymical Oyl of Marjorum, twelve Drops; mix them together, and make them up into twenty Pills, of which take five every second or third morning six hours before Dinner. Or take Extractum Rudij, and the extract of Black Helleber, of each two Drams, Mercurius Dulcis six times sublimed, four Scruples, Gum Guaicum, two Drams, Oyl of Guaicum,
Scruple, the Pills of Arthriticae, four Scruples, mix them together, and of every Dram make six Pills, whereof take two at night, and three in the Morning twice or thrice a week. Or you may take of my Cathartique and Diu∣retique Pills, (of my own invention,) one at night, and two in the morning (more or less) according to the age and strength of the Patient; for they do not only expel pain in  head, caused through the French Disease, but most other violent pains, es∣pecially those caused by taking Mercurial Medicines for the Cure of the aforesaid Di∣stemper, and that from Idle fellows that are ignorant of the nature and quality of Mer∣cury; but much more how to dispel it when got in the head. Notwithstanding taking of the Pills, let the Patient apply to his Head the Pla∣ster of Betony; which he may have made up by the honest Apothecary, and let him also make use of the following Li∣quor. Take Betony three or four good handfulls, the Flowers of Rosemary and Lavender, of each one Ounce, boil them in four quarts of running  in a Vessel close stopped, to the con∣sumption
of half, then strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar Candy, of which let the Pa∣tient take a quarter of a Pint hot first and last. Or take the tops of Rosemary, one handfull Betony two handfulls; boil them, and sweeten it with Sugar Candy, and take thereof as a∣fore directed. With this very Method I have cured ma∣ny sorely tormented not only with pain in the Head alone, but with corrupt and pocky matter issuing forth of the Eyes and No∣strils. You may anoint the head with the follow∣ing Oent, the hair being first shaved off. Take age, Rue, Staechas, Lignum Vitae rasped, o each one handfull, Renish Wine, eight Ounces, old Oyl, one Pound; boil these together till the Wine be consumed, then strain it, and if you please mix therewith a little Wax, and anoint the head often with it. Or take Peny oyal, Wild Betony, Origan, Sage, Savin, Savory, of each two Drams Bay∣berries, Olibanum, Costus's Pellitory of Spain, Caster Euphorbium, of each one Scruple; mix them and make it into an Oyntment. Or take Venice Treacle, Mithridate, C Rue, of each half an Ounce, with a sufficient
quantity of the distilled Water of Juniper-berries; make them into an Oyntment, and annoint the head therewith as afore directed. CHAP. IV. Of the Vertigo. THE Virtigo is a preternatural Motion of the Animal Spirit, in the farther Ven∣tricle of the Brain. The principal cause of this disease ometh from the Brain it self, being distend, or evil assected, or from the mouth of the Sto∣mack or Womb, &c. offending the Brain, and sometimes by over much drinking, (es∣pecially) that destructive Liquor called Brandy, do cause this distemper, the Stomack being poisoned therewith, from which win∣dy and noxious Vapours affect the Brain; causing a giddiness in the Head, so that all Objects seemingly turn round, the Patient being not able to stand, but fall down except he laid hold on some thing to bare himself upon, which Disease if not timely prevent∣ed; will change it self into several other
deadly Distempers, as the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, &c. being somewhat related there∣unto. The Cure may be performed as followeth, as soon as the fit is over, and the Patient ha∣ving recovered a little strength, if the Body be costive or bound. Forthwith make use of the following Sup∣positor. Take Honey and Salt, and mix therewith one Scruple or half of a Dram of Troches Alhandal: boil them together, and make thereof a Sup∣positor according to Art, and thrust it up in∣to the Fundament. Or take the Leaves of Mercury, Wormwood, Betes, Mallows, Centaury, Betony, Dill, Ca∣momil Flowers, of each half a handfull; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of half, then strain it, and to one Pint of the Liquor add Oyl of sweet Almonds, Oyl of Dill, of each one Ounce and an half, Heira simple, ten Drams, common Salt, one Dram; mix them together, and make a Glister thereof, which put up into the Fandament according to art. If the Vertigo come of a cholerick humour; it will be necessary for the Patient to drink
of the Liquor made as followeth, three day together. Take Syrup of Cichory, insusion of Roses,  each two Ounces, Distilled water of Endive an Cichory, of each four Ounces, the distilled Wat of Wormwood three Ounces. Mix them together, whereof take on part in the morning, the rest one hour before Supper. After which the more to evacuate chole∣rick humours. Take the bark of Mirobolanes and Citrons, of each three Drams; being bruised, boil them in the distilled Water of Cichory and Burage, of each three Ounces, after which strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Roses, Solutive, one Ounce, Diacatholicon, and the Lenitive Electuary, of each half an Ounce. Being well mixed, and a Potion made thereof, take it betimes in the morning, and fast after it six hours. If the Vertigo come of a crude and me∣lancholy humour, the Pills following will be very proper. Take the Pills of Arabick, Cochiae and Aurea, of each 15. or 20. Grains, Troches of Agarick, ten Grains, with a sufficient quantity of Honey of Roses, make them up into seven Pills.
Which are to be taken three at night go∣ing to Bed, and the rest in the Morning if need require. Or, Take the Pills of Inde, and Lapis La∣zuli, of each 15. or 20. Grains, make them into seven Pills, with a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of Fumatory. And take them as afore directed. Or, Take Heira Picra Simple, and make it up into Pills as big as Gray Pease. And take thereof three at a time every second or third night at the hour of sleep; for they are of excellent use, and good against vi∣cious Juice, which oftentimes Furr the Tu∣nicles of the Stomack, and for such idle fan∣cies as the Brain suffers thereby. The Pills of Faetidae taken once or twice aweek, are also a very good remedy against the Vertigo. So are my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, taken two or three at a time, more or less, ac∣cording to the age and strength of the Pa∣tient. For they above any yet found out, are of most excellent use to cleanse the Stomack of all pituitous matter, so hinders the ascen∣sion of Vapours from thence, that so fre∣quently hurt the Brain: The like Vertue
they have in all other Distempers that affect the same, which in the following dis∣course shall be more plainly demonstra∣ted. Medicines which strengthen the Stomack and Brain in this distemper, are made as fol∣loweth, and are exceeding profitable. Take Misselto of the white Thorn or Oak, Gal∣lingal, Mace, of each one Dram and a half, Nutmegs, Rosemary, of each one Dram, Cloves half a Dram, Sugar one Ounce, mix them, and beat them into fine Powder, and take the quanti∣ty of one Dram every night going to Bed for four∣teen days together. Or, Take Mustard Seed and Hemp Seed, of each a like quantity, and infuse them in Vinegar 24. hours, then strain it, and take thereof one or two Spoonfulls at a time every morning fast∣ing. Or, Take Cummin Seed, and infuse it for the space of 12. hours in the best White Wine Vinegar, after which dry it very well, then take two Drams thereof, Fennel Seed, Anniseed, Anacardii, of each half an Ounce, Hysop, Mar∣joram, Cardamoms, Cubebes, Rosemary, of each two Drams, Gallingal, Mace, Nutmegs, of each one Dram, double refined Sugar five Ounces.
Mix and make all into fine Powder, and take a small quantity thereof every day after Meals upon toasted Bread so long as it lasts; or make it up into an Electuary with Syrup of Betony, and take it as afore di∣rected. To strengthen the Brain if the Vertigo come of a cold cause. Take dry Marjorum, Cinamon, Cloves; of each one Scruple, Cubebes, Mace, Nutmegs, of eech one Dram, Rocket Seed two Drams; be∣ing cut into small pieces, mix them well to∣gether, of which let the Patient take a small quantity, and chew in his mouth every morn∣ing fasting as long as need shall require; and each time let the Nostrils be stopped, till the tast thereof be gone forth of the Mouth. If Flegm be the cause of this Disease, the following Gargarisme will prove of special use: However it will be requisite if Flegm be not the cause. Take Rocket Seed half an Ounce, Pellitory of Spain, three Drams, Betony and Marjoram, of each half a handfull; cut and bruise them, and boil them in White Wine and Water, of each half a Pint, to the consumption of half, strain it, and add thereto three Ounces of Honey of Roses, and gargle therewith once
or twice a day; for it doth most wonder∣fully attract or draw the pituitous matter from the Brain, &c. So doth the Juice of Black and Red Beets, or the Juice of Sow Bread, being snuffed up into the Nostrils. If the Disease prove violent you may safe∣ly bleed in the Cephalick Vein, not too much at a time; but take it forth at several times, least the Patient faint. When the body is purged according to the aforesaid directi∣ons, apply blistering Plaisters to the Nape of the Neck, and Hand-rists; or apply Cupping Glasses to the hinder part of the head, with scarification.
CHAP. V. Of the Falling Sickness. THe Falling Sickness is a Convulsion, or for the most part a praeternatural motion of the whole body, and most com∣monly depriveth the Patient both of Reason and Sense. There are three differences in this Di∣stemper. The first is caused when this Disease cometh only through the disease in the Brain, as it falleth out, when sharp Choler, or gross and tough Flegm doth obstruct the passage of the Spirit in the Ventricle of the Brain; and if this distemper cometh of a gross humour, it doth suddenly seize upon the Patient, and is quickly gone again. The second Cause is through an evil affect in the Orifice of the Stomack, that may be when the Brain laboureth to expel the Vapours that arise up to it from the Stomack.
The third cause is from Vapours which, ascend by consent from most parts of the Body, or else from some particular Member, which the Patient may perceive like to cold Air creeping up to the Brain, but this doth but seldom happen. The signs of the Falling sickness are many; in some sadness and forgetfulness, &c. in others a foolish state both of Body and Mind; troublesome dreams; the Head∣ach; and fullness in it; more especially in passion or anger, the Face commonly pale, and the motion of the Tongue inordinate, and oftentimes they bite it. As soon as this Disease seizeth upon the Patient, he falls down and is plucked up to∣gether, he snorts, and sometimes cries out, many tremble and turn round. The only sign of this Disease is foaming at the Mouth, which happens most to Children and young people. In the fit of the Falling Sickness, as soon as the Patient falleth down, open his Mouth with a stick, the haft of a Knife, or with the handle of a Spoon, and after his Mouth is made clean by taking away the foam with a Rag or Feather, give him to drink the follow∣ing Julip.
Take the distilled Water of Lavender, three Spoonfulls, Syrup of Cowslips, one Ounce, Spirit of Vitriol, or the Oyl of the same well rectified, 20. Drops; beingmixed together give it as afore directed. The Chymical Oyl of Angelica given in the foresaid Water, and Syrup, doth also take away the Fit. Or, Take Red Coral, Pearl prepared, of each half a Scruple, Ʋnicorns Horn two Scruples, the Skull of a man hanged, or killed by chance, half a Dram, the Roots and Seeds of Peony, of each half a Scruple, Musk three or four Grains; being mixed and made into fine Powder, give to the Patient in the Fit from half a Dram to two Scruples, or a whole Dram to the stronger sort, first infused for a small time in the distilled Water of Lavender. Or, Take white Helleber, Marjoram, of each one Scruple, Castor and Euphorbium of each four Grains; being mixed and made into fine Powder, blow a small quantity at a time through a Quill up into the Patients Nostrils. Or, Take the Seeds of Nigella, half a Dram, Nutmegs, Peony Roots, Mumma, of each 10 Grains, dryed Marjorum, six Grains, Musk,
two Grains; all being made into Powder, blow it up into the Nostrils as afore di∣rected. Those and such like I will assure you are of excellent use in the very fit of this Dis∣ease. How to prevent and Cure the Falling Sickness, Take Syrup made with the Juice of Betony and Cichory, of each half an Ounce, the distilled Water of Lillies of the Vally, two Drams, Musk, twelve Grains, mix them well together, and take a small quantity thereof first and last with a Liquorice stick. Or, Take Rosemary, Betony, Sage, of each one Ounce, the Roots of Cichory, and Citron Pills Candied, cut in very small pieces, of each half an Ounce, Species Diamoschi dulcis, Diambra, of each one Dram and a half, Mis∣selto of the Oak or White Thorn, Red Coral prepared, the Skull of a Man, and the Ashes of a Cuckow, of each one Dram, the Seeds of Peony two Drams, Oyl of Cynamon, 10 drops; with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup
of Betony, make it up into an Electuary according to Art; whereof let the Patient take every morning fasting the quantity of half a Wallnut. Or make use of the following Powder. Take the Roots of Cichory and Red Mugwort, of each one Dram, Misselto of the White Thorn, the Skull of a Man, of each four Scruples, Peony Seed two Scruples, Red Coral prepared, Unicorns Horn, of each one Scruple, Pearl prepared half a Scru∣ple, Musk ten Grains; being mixed and made into very fine Powder, let the patient take the quantity of one Dram at a time, about the Full and Change of the Moon, or near the approach∣ing of the Fit, in three or four Spoon∣fulls of the distilled Water of Lavender. Or take young Swallows, burn them in their Feathers, altogether in a new Earthen Pot, covered very close, and after they are taken forth of the Pot, add thereto as much Castor, and beat them well together, and put it into a Glass, and add thereto sour Vineger, and let it so stand three days, after which distill it in a Glass according to Art; of which
precious Water give to the Patient one Spoonfull at a time every Morning forty days together, and doubt not of a good success. Or, Take Assafaetida, Galbanum, Castor, of each one Dram, make them up into 30. Pills, with the best Oyl of Amber, whereof take one every third morning, after which fast two or three hours, Or, Take Misselto of the White Thorn, Peony Roots dryed, and beat into fine Powder, of each one Ounce the best Castor in Powder two Drams, Leaf Gold one Scruple, with a sufficient quantity of the best old Mithridate, Mustard, and Oyl of Amber in equal parts; being beaten all together in a Marble Morter, make it up into Pills as big as white Peas, of which take three or five every day first and last for three Months together, &c. With this very Medicine (with the use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, to keep the body soluble.) I cured Mrs. Elizabeth Hampton in the Year 1662. then belonging to Sir Robert Byrons Lady, who Lodged at the Countess of Peterbrough's in St. Martins Lane in the Fields: This Cure was perfectly affected in one Spring and Fall, though some years most horribly afflicted therewith, often
falling suddenly down, sometimes in the Church, at other times in the fire, &c. to the great hazard of her life, who ever since remains well and free from the least Symp∣toms of those Fits. Many have been cured by opening the Vein in the Forehead, called Vena Frontis, and by drinking first in the Morning from two Drams to one Ounce of Vinegar of Squills. Some have been cured by Vomits made with the Salt of Vitriol, which may safely be given from two Grains to seven in any convenient Liquor; every fourth or fifth day, till the Patient have taken it six or seven times, Or, Take Conserve of Rosemary, Betony and Lavender Flowers, of each two Ounces, Mi∣thridate and Ringo, Roots Candied, of each one Ounce, the Powder of Saxafras six Drams, Castor three Drams, Elkes Hoof, and the Powder of a mans Skull that was never buried, of each two Drams, the Seeds of Gith, and the Roots and Seeds of Peony, Wild Rue and Pelitory, of each one Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Oxymel of Squills; make it up into an Electuary, and take as much as a large Nutmeg every Morn∣ing.
Many have received much good by Vesi∣catories or Blistering Plaisters applyed to the proper parts. And by a Seton or Skein of Silk drawn through the Neck. Others (as it were) past all hopes of re∣covery, have been perfectly cured by opening part of the Skull with a Trepan, some distance from the Sutures, to let the evil Air forth. But the last cannot be safely attempted without good advice, and a very skilfull Chirurgou.
For the Falling Sickness in Chil∣dren. In the first place if need require make the body soluble with a gentle Glister, or with a Supositor, after which give to the Child some gentle Purge. Take the Syrup of Cichory, with Rubarb from half an Ounce to an Ounce, or the Electuary of Diacarthamum, from a Dram to two Drams. Or, Take the Tincture of Hiera Picra, from ten drops to twenty, and give to the Child in some proper Liquor, as the distilled Water of Cowships, Black Cherries, Peony or Lavender, sweetned with Sugar. And take the fresh roots of Peony, cut them in small pieces, and hang them about the Childs Neck, and bind them upon the Hand-rist, and repeat them as they grow hard.
Or, Take the distilled Water of Black Cherries two Ounces, the Syrap of Peony one Ounce, Pearl prepared one Dram, Spirit of Rue ten drops, and give thereof to the Child one Spoonfull in the fit. Or take a small Mouse, the Skin and the Guts taken away; only the Liver, Heart and Lungs remaining therein, which put together in some Earthen pot close covered, and burn it to Ashes, then powder it very small, and divide it into three parts, and give one part thereof to the Child every Morning in a small quantity of the distilled Water of Beech-tree Flowers. The Juice of Rue is also very good, being given four or five drops at a time with the di∣stilled Water of the Flowers of Hogs Fennel, called Mathern, or May Flowers. In the same Water you may give to the Child the Powder of the middle Claw of the fore Foot of a Hare. The After-birth of a sound Woman which is delivered of a Male Child, dryed and made into fine Powder, and one Scruple thereof
given to a Child at a time in Black Cherry Water, is a present remedy. Half a Grain of Musk given in Wine or the foresaid Water twice a day, will also help: or take the Powder of the Roots of wild Vale∣rian, and give thereof ten Grains at a time in Milk, or in any of the foresaid Waters, and it Cureth. Or, Take the Flowers of Lillies of the Val∣ley, the Flowers of Lime-tres or Tile, May Flowers, of each one good handfull, Lavender Flowers half a handfull, Peony Roots two Ounces; being cut small, boil them in one Quart of Water, with half a Pint of white Wine, and one pound of white Sugar, in a stone Bottle close stopped, and set in a pot of water for two or three hours; but open not the Bottle till it be cold, then strain it and keep it for use; of which give to the Child one or two Spoonfulls at a time; for I will assure you it is a very excellent remedy, and has cured many which have been lest past reco∣very. Or give to the Child in the very Fit, all the Gall of a Black sucking Puppy (being choaked)
in the distilled water of Tile-flowers; but for a Girl take the Gall of a Bitch Whelp. There may be safely Blistering Plaisters applyed to the Nape of the Neck, Cup∣ping Glasses to the Shoulders and Loins, with Scarification, provided the Child be a year and half, or two years of Age.
CHAP. VI. Of the Apoplexie. AN Apoplexie is a sudden privation both of the Sense and Motion of the Body, and an interruption of the Animal Functions. There are two sorts of Apoplexies, the one strong, the other more mild; the strong is a most sharp Distemper, and strangleth a Man forthwith, (or if not presently prevent∣ed, turneth to a Palsey) and is seldom cured. But the milder sort is curable; for in it both Motion and Sense remain, but both very stupid heavy, and exceeding dull. The cause of the Apoplexie is (too fre∣quently in these dayes) drunkenness, falls from high places, blows, &c. also it hap∣neth of Flegmatick Humours which doth fill and obstruct at one time the principal Ventri∣cles of the Brain; very cold Air which congeals or thickens the moist Excrements of the Brain, is also oftentimes the cause of
this distemper, and it frequently cometh through gross melancholy humours. The Symptoms or Signs of this deadly distemper, are violent pains in the Head, swelling of the Neck Veins, a Vertigo, and a brightness or a kind of glittering before their Eyes, panting of the Body, a coldness of the extream parts, without any cause vi∣sible, dull and slow in motion, and in sleep oftentimes gnaw their Teeth, their Urine lit∣tle in quantity, and black, much like to Rust, and the Canker in Mettals, and hath a setling in the bottom like to flower. Such that are troubled with the Apoplexie have not always evil Symptoms perceived before hand, but fall down suddenly as if they were struck with Thunder, and they lie with their Eyes fastned, and snort with∣out Sense, Motion or Understanding, differ∣ing from the dead only by Breathing, and that with much difficulty. This Disease for the most part happens to old men that are decrepit, and of a Flegma∣tick Complexion, and to the great drinkers of Brandy, and decayed Wine, too much made use of in these dayes, were the Truth known.
The Cure of the milder sort of Apoplexie may be performed as followeth. If the Cure be not too desperate in ple∣thorick or full Bodies, where strength will permit, open the Cephalick Veins; but take not away too much blood at a time, but rather at several times: I have often seen the Jugular Veins on both sides the Neck open∣ed not without wonderfull success: However bleeding ought not to be attempted without very good advice. But give to the Patient the Glister made as followeth. Take Lavender, Hysop. Pennyroyal, Cen∣taury, Marjoram, Betony, Rue, Origan, Sage, of each half a handfull, Seeds of Fennel, Carawayes, Seselis Agarick, Pollipody, Pulp of Colocynthis, of each two Drams: cut and bruise them, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, to the consumption of half, then strain it, and to one Pint of the strained Liquor; add thereto Sal Gemme one Dram and a half, Hiera Picra one Ounce and a half, Oyl of Rue, Castor and Bay-berries, of each half an Ounce, the Extract of black Hellebor one Scruple; mix them altogether, and make a Glister thereof.
Or, Take hard Honey, half an Ounce, Eu∣phorbium half a Scruple, the Powder of Colocin∣thys twenty Grains, Sal Gemma two Scruples; boil them together, and make Suppositories thereof, and fix Threads thereto, that after they are put up into the Fundament, you may draw them forth at pleasure. When you have done thus, provoke the Patient to Sneese with the following Powder. Take Pellitory of Spain, Marjoram, white Hellebor, of each half a Scruple, Euphorbium and Castor, of each five Grains; being made into fine Powder, snuff it up into the Nostrils, or blow it up through a Quill, but a little at a time. Or make use of the Powder directed in the Chapter of the Falling sickness, made as followeth, Take the Seeds of Nigella half a Dram, Nut∣meg, Mumia, Peony Roots, of each ten Grains, dryed Marjoram six Grains, Musk two Grains; all being made into fine powder, blow a small quantity thereof up into the Nostrils. For it is most wonderfully effectual in the Fit of the Vertigo, Falling Sickness, and Apoplexie,
In places where such ingredients cannot be soon obtained; take Nutmeg, Ginger and sweet Marjoram, or Ginger alone, and blow it up into the Nostils, as afore directed. Or let the Patient smell to Galbauum Castor, Opoponax, or Sagapenum; which will be a means to raise and stir him up. It will also be necessary to annoint the Pa∣tients Back bone with the following Oynt∣ment. Take Oyl of Euphorbium, Castor, of each one Ounce, Oyl of Costinum one Ounce, the Oyl of Petraeleum and Juniper, of each two Drams, with a sufficient quantity of Virgins Wax, make it in∣to an Oyntment. And take every Morning fasting the quan∣tity of a Nutmeg of the Electuary made as followeth; for it is a great preseruative against the Apoplexie. Take the Conserve of Sage, Betony, of each half an Ounce, Rosemary one Ounce, Venice Treacle, three Drams, the Confection of Anacardit two Drams, Diambra and Diamoschi Dulcis, of each one Dram, Powder of Castor, and Seeds of Rocket, of each half a Dram with Syrup of Betony; make them up into an Electuary, to which mix Oyl of Vitriol two Scruples, Oyl of Cina∣mon ten drops stirring it well together.
Or, Take Rosemary and Lavender-flowers, of each one handfull, Roses, Violets, Staechados, Origan, of each half a handfull, Pellitory, Peony Roots, Gallingal, of each half an Ounce, Sea or Mountain Onign, two Drams, Cubebes, one Dram, Cloves, Cardamoms, Cinamon, of each twenty Grains; being cut and bruised, boil them in one Pint of the distilled Water of Mar∣joram, and a Pint and a half of Betony Water mixed together, after which strain it, and sweeten it with half a pound of the best Sugar, or with eight or ten Ounces of the Syrup of Staechados; and take thereof three or four spoonfulls every Morning fasting. Purging Medicines proper in this Disease are made as followeth. Take Extract of black Hellebor, from 10 Grains to 15, Rosin of Colocynthis three Grains, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, six drops, Tartar Vitriolatum, Powder of Castor, of each ten Grains, with a sufficient quantity of the distil∣led Water of Sage; make them into a Potion which you may take every third Morning if need require. Or, Take Pills of Euphorbium, Cochiae, Aureae, of each 15 or 20 Grains, Troches Alhandal three Grains, with the distilled VVater of Marjoram, make them up into seven Pills, of which
take three at night, and four in the Morning; especially near the Full and Change of the Moon. Or take the Pills directed in the Chapter of the Vertigo. Or make use of the following Liquor. Take the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Betony and Lavender, of each one good handfull, Castor two Drams, Sugar-candy four Ounces; boil these in one Gallon of Water to the consumption of the third part, strain it, and drink there∣of at any time hot; for it is of excellent use to prevent the Apoplexie.
CHAP. VII. Of the Palsey. THe Palsey is a distemper wherein the one half of the Body, either the right or left doth lose both Sense and Motion, and then it may be called a general Palsey. But sometimes it hapneth in one Member only, as in the Head, the Tongue, the Hand, and the Yard, Leg, &c. In the Palsey sometimes Sense is only lost, and sometimes Motion alone, and at other times both Sense and Motion. The cause of this Disease is through abun∣dance of gross, tough and clammy Humours, which obstruct or stop the Sinews, hindering the Animal faculty, that it cannot come from the Fountain to the Members. Some∣times it is caused through immoderate Cold, at other times through excessive heat or in∣flamation; or by some Schirrus or hardness in the Back bone, or in the parts adjacent, or in other Sinewy parts over much pressed
or crushed; by which means the Animal fa∣culty cannot pass: Many times it is cau∣sed through a Feaver, and that principally ingendred of melancholy, possessing the mind, and changing the temperature there∣of: It is frequently caused three manner of ways, sometimes of Melancholy it self, and sometimes by the alteration of the Blood in the Brain, and through inflammation and evil affect of the Stomack and Sides. The signs of the Palsey are many, as sad∣ness, fearfulness, envy, hatred, strange fan∣tasies or imaginations, This is no acute Disease, but Chronical, or of long continuance, and for the most part curable, especially in young people, or when the paralitick Member doth not become less, or change his Colour; for if so, it is hardly curable. In this Distemper his Diet ought to be slender and drying, and for the first two or three days let him altogether abstain, or be content with Broath made of Barley unhusk∣ed, or with Mede, &c. after let him have Meat of good Juice, and of light digestion, and that well Roasted. Let him eat Partridge, Larks, and such like, Pine-nuts, and Al∣monds.
Let him take of Savory, Sage, Parsley, Fennel, Hysop and Marjoram. And forbear all things that are cold and moist, as Fish, Fruit, &c. and drink spa∣ringly, except of Honey and Water, wherein is boiled Sage and Cinamon. Or of the drink made as followeth. Take Gallingal, long Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace, of each one Dram, Carda∣moms one Dram and a half, Ginger half an Ounce, the best Cinamon two Ounces; boil them altogether in three or four Quarts of running Water, to the consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto eight Ounces of the best Sugar, and drink thereof a small quantity at a time first and last. In the time of Cure drink no Brandy; neither any other strong Spirits of that Na∣ture: Also forbear Wine, except a small quantity towards the latter end of the Cure. Exercise and motion is good, also mirth; sleep in the night, but not in the day. The Cure ought to be began with Blood-letting, if age and strength will permit; (es∣pecially where fullness abounds) but it ought to be taken away with moderation, least the Body should be over much cooled, and also observe to open the Veins on the well and
whole side, and a day or two after cleanse the Bowels with the following Glister. Take Sage, Betony, Camomil, Mercury, both sorts of Mallows, of each one handfull, Calamint and Rue, of each half a handfull, Staechados half an Ounce, the Seeds of Ammeos and Fen∣nel, of each two Drams; Cut and Bruise them, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Wa∣ter, to the consumption of the third part, strain it, and take a Pint thereof; to which add the Electuary called Benedictum Laxativum, and Diacatholicon, of each half an Ounce, the Extract of black Hellebor 20 Grains, Oyl of Rue, Oris and Bayes, of each six Drams, Sal Gemmae two Scruples; being mixed together, and a Glister made thereof, put it up according to Art. You may make use of the Pills directed in the Chapter of the Vertigo; for they are uery proper in this Distemper. The next day after Purging make use of the sweating Potion made as followeth. Take Venice Treacle one Dram, the Powder of Virginia Snakeweed, one Scruple, Oyl of Vitriol well Rectified, ten drops, Syrup of Cowslips, one Ounce, Carduus Water three Ounces; mix them all well together, and make a Potion there∣of, which take in the Morning, and sweat
as strength will permit, repeating the same as need require. To comfort and strengthen the Vital and Animal Spirits; especially in persons afflict∣ed with this Disease, make use of the follow∣ing Cordial Julip. Take of the distilled Water of Cowslips and La∣vender, of each three Ounces, Syrup of Betony and Cowslips, of each two Ounces, Spirit of Lavender, and Castor, of each one Ounce and a half, Oyl of Vitriol Rectified 20 drops, or as much as will cause it to be of a sharp tast; of which take one Spoonfull first and last, or at any time when ill or fainty. Anoint the Region of the Back with the following Oyntment. Take Oyl of Nutmegs, Nard Oyl, and Oyl of Foxes, of each one Ounce, the Juice of Sage and St. Johnwort, of each three Drams, Sagapenum dissolved in Juniper Water, two Drams, Pow∣der of Castor and Euphorbium, of each one Dram; with a sufficient quantity of Wax make it up into an Oyntment. Or, Take the Oyl of Juniper berries, Euphor∣bium and Castor, of each half an Ounce, Oyl of St. Johnswort and Terpentine, of each one Dram, the Water of Juniper, three Drams; mix them all well together, and anoint the parts affect∣ed
therewith; for it is also of excellent vertue. Or, Take Oyl of Earth-worms, Foxes and Ca∣stor, of each one Ounce, Lucatelles Balsom, two or three Ounces, Spirit of Sack, half an Ounce, the Chymical Oyl of Rosemary, one Dram and a half; mix them well together, and anoint the Back therewith hot, and the o∣ther parts affected, and cover them with warm Cloths. Another Oyntment of excellent use in t he Palsey, and weakness of the Limbs, pains in the Joynts, &c. Take Bay-leaves, Rue, St. Johns-wort, of each three handfulls, Camomil, Sage and green Rosemary, of each one handfull, cut and bruise them very small, then add thereto Neats-foot Oyl three Pints, Caraway Seed bruised one Ounce and a half, after which boil them all together over a gentle fire, till the Oyl become Green, and the Herbs dry, then strain it, and add to the strained Liquor one Bull or Steers Gall, six Ounces of the best Aqua Vitae, Oyl of Turpentine three Ounces; boil it again two or three walms, and keep it for use. With which precious Balm anoint the pa∣ralitick Member twice a day.
How to Cure the Palsey in the Tongue. First, let the body be well purged with the Pills afore directed. Or, Take of the Pills of Assaiereth, Cochia, Troches, or Extract of Agarick, of each two Scru∣ples, with a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of Sage, make them up into Pills, ten in number; whereof take two at night and three in the Morning. The next day take Mustard made with Elder Vinegar, and often chew in your mouth, in the same manner you may use Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Seed, or hold in your mouth half an Ounce of Spirit of Lavender; mixing therewith one or two Grains of the Powder of Euphorbium; all which have been known of wonderful effect. In such cases some apply blistering Plaisters to the Nape of the neck. For the Palsey in the Hands. Take Elder-leaves, and make a decoction thereof in strong Beer, add thereto good store of Mustard, and bath your hands therein hot. Some rub the Hands with Camomil with good success. Or anoint them well with the Oyntments afore directed, and wear Hare Skins upon the parts affected.
For the Palsey in the Bladder and Yard When the Palsey is in the Bladder, the Urine is stopped, and sometimes it passeth away without the consent of the Patient. So annoint the lower part of the Belly and Privy parts with the following Oyntment. Take Oyl of Nard, Rue, Cummin, of each half an Ounce, Opoponax, Castor and Galbanum dis∣lolved in Butter, of each a quarter of an Ounce; being mixed well together, use it as afore di∣rected, and inject a small quantity thereof into the Bladder warm; but if the Urine be stopped, then first force the Patient to make Water, by putting up into the Yard a Ca∣theter. The Palsey in the Yard doth also stop the Urine, the Sperme, and doth hin∣der Copulation: So make use of the same Remedies directed for the Blad∣der. Or take the Oyl of Pepper, Euphorbium, and Costinum, of each an equal quantity with Wax, make them up into an Oyntment, and anoint the Yard therewith. You may anoint the Hips and Loins with the Oyntment directed for the Back, and give the Patient to drink Medicines
that will provoke Urine: Also the Spirit of Castor, or the Powder thereof in the distilled Water of Lavender, is very ef∣fectual. Or let him make use of the Medicines made as followeth, that have power to erect the Yard. Take Diasatyrion one Ounce, Powder of Castor one Dram; being mixed together, take the quantity of a large Nutmeg at a time: And Bath the Yard with Wine wherein hath been boiled Sage and Elder, with a small quantity of Pellitory of Spain.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Convulsion or Cramp. THe Cramp is a Disease in which the Si∣news are drawn or pluckt up against the Patients will. Of which there are three sorts. The first is called in Latine Distentio; and that is when the Neck doth remain altoge∣ther without motion, and not to be turned to either side; but must be held upright. The second is called Tensio ad Anteriora, in which Disease the Head and Neck are drawn down to the Breast. The third is called Tensio ad Posteriora; in which Distemper the Head is attracted or drawn backward down to the Shoulders and Back. The Causes of this Disease according to Hypocrates, are supposed to be two; that is to say fullness and emptiness of the Sinews in the body, and sometimes it hapneth through the biting and stinging of venemous Creatures, and the over much use of Venery,
more especially when it is made use of upon a full Stomack, is the cause of this Disease, and many times it is caused through Embecil∣lity or weakness, and by the loss and want of Blood. If the Convulsion or Cramp be caused of fullness, give to the Patient Diet that is hot and dry. But if it be caused of emptiness, his diet ought to be moist; therefore let him be nou∣rished with fat Broths, and Flesh of easy and light digestion. Let his Drink be small and thin Wine, &c. except he chance to be in a Feaver, then let him make use of Barley Water, and the decoction of Cinamon; and let him also be provoked to sleep with Dia∣codium, or with the Syrup of Poppies, &c. He ought to use no exercise, neither Medicines that empty the body, and let his drink be such that is frequently given in Hectick Feavers. The following Glister will also prove of excellent use. Take Betony, Marjoram, Sage, Mercury, wild Betony, and the lesser Centaury, of each half a handfull, Caraway and Coriander Seeds; of each half an Ounce; being bruised and cut small, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of half, strain it,
and take one Pint thereof; to which add Hiera simple one Ounce and a half, Diaphaenicon one Ounce, Oyl of Rue two or three Ounces, Sal Pru∣nella one Dram; mix them well together, and make it up into a Glister, which admini∣ster warm to the Patient. After which if the body be Plethory or full, let blood, and that in a large quantity out of the middle Vein, but take it forth by degrees, and not all at once. After which give to the Patient the Drink made as followeth, five Ounces at a time first and last. Take Betony, Marjoram, Sage, Hysop, of each one handfull, Carduus Water, Germander, the lesser Centaury, of each half a handfull, Annis and Caraway Seeds, of each half an Ounce; cut and bruise them small, and with three Pints of Mede or Metheglin mixed there∣with, boil them for an Hour and a half, after which strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Stae∣cados and Betony, of each three Ounces; and take it as afore directed warm. After which make use of the following Pills. Take the Troches of Agarick, Sagapen, Pills of Faetida, of each one Scruple, Troches of Al∣handal five Grains, with Honey of Roses; make
them up into five Pills, which let the Pa∣tient take after his first sleep. You may anoint the parts affected espe∣cially the Nape of the Neck and Back with the Oyntment and Oyl directed in the Chap∣ter of the Palsey. Or bath the parts with the following Bath. Take Ground-Pine, Sage, Betony, Camomil, Origan, the Roots of Marsh Mallows, Eli∣campane, of each two Ounces, Seeds of Faenu∣greek, three Ounces, Sulphur one Pound, Alum half a Pound; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, and make a Bath thereof, with which bath the Patient in the Morning before dinner, and rub it well in over all his body if need re∣quire; or else in the particular Member that is affected. After which anoint the Nape of his Neck and Back, and all parts affected, with the Oyntment made as followeth. Take Oyl of Earth-worms, white Lillies, of each half an Ounce, Oyl of Costinum, Turpentine, of each three Drams; with a sufficient quanti∣ty of white Wax make it up into an Oynt∣ment.
Or take Oyl of Roses, Violets, of each three Drams, Oyl of Foxes, Camomil, of each two Drams, with a sufficient quantity of white Wax make them into an Oyntment; to which add the Mueilages of the Roots of Marsh Mallows, Linseed, Fanugreek, of each half an Ounce. And anoint the parts therewith as a∣fore directed, and after you have anointed them, cover them with a hot Sheep Skin, Lamb or Cat, and when it is cold make it hot again with Oyl of Lavender, and Dill, &c. You may give to the Patient Cordial Julips, wherein is mixed Spirit of Ca∣stor, and Spirit of Lavender, and such like. And purge the Head with the following Gargarisme. Take Roots of Pellitory of Spain, and the Seeds of Rocket, of each half an Ounce; being bruised, boil them in one Pint of Wine to the consumption of half, and add thereto Oxymel of Squills, two Ounces, Hiera Piera half an Ounce, wherewith let the Pa∣tient Gargle his Mouth every Morning fasting.
And make use of the sneesing powder made as followeth. Take Marjoram, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, of each two Scruples, and dry it; being beaten to a fine Powder, snuff a small quantity thereof up into the No∣strils.
CHAP. IX. Of the Catarrh. ACatarrh is an unnatural defluxion of an excrementitious Humour falling from the Head to the inferiour parts, as to the No∣strils, Mouth and Throat, &c. and doth cause Appilation; it is caused Coryza; and when it doth descend to the parts of the Throat, it is called Branchus; and when it falleth to the Breast; or to the Lungs, then it is called the Catarrh. The cause of this Disease is often, either through outward coldness or heat, also of Vapours arising from too much or evil nou∣rishment; sometimes by the Odor or Scent of hot and cold things, also by the over much use of Venery, especially in those who are animated thereunto through the use of pro∣voking Medicines, other violent Exercises, and too much sleep, &c. also doth cause this Distemper. The Symptoms or Signs are heaviness in the Head, dulness of the Senses long sleep, and
much snorting, a snotty running Nose, more then ordinary spitting, the body often or altogether Costive, and much troubled with Wind. If this Disease come of a very cold Humour, the Patient will be sensible of much cold, the Face pale, the Spittle sweet sour Belchings, slimy and watry Matter, and a general Fleg∣matick constitution of body. If the Humour distilling is hot, it will appear by the redness of the Face, thirst, salt, and very sharp inflamations, pains and Ulcers in the Mouth, and most commnoly a cholerick constitution of the whole body. There are two sorts of Catarrhs, the one hot the other cold. The hot Catarrh is cured by Medicines which discharge the Matter found offending, which doth thicken and take away, as also by Correcting the distemper of the parts, sending and receiving the same. So forthwith let Blood, (especially where the Body is full, if age and strength will permit) and take it by degrees forth of the Liver or middle Vein in the right Arm; or as occasion serves open the Vein under the Tongue. After which give to the Patient the fol∣lowing Potion.
Take Rubarb four Scruples, Myvabelans rubbed with Oyl of sweet Almonds one Scruple and a half, Yellow Sanders ten Grains, infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Purslain and Letuce Water; after which strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Roses Solutive and Manna, of each eight Drams; make it up into a Potion, and give it in the Morning all at once. Or make use first of the following Glister. Take the Flowers of Violets and Camomil, Dill, Mallows, Mercury, wild Betouy, of each one handfull, Cut and Bruise them small, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of half, then strain it, and to one Pint of the strained Liquor, a Hiera simple one Ounce and a half, Oyl of Camomil three Ounces, common Salt one Dram. Mix them well together, and put it up into the Fundament Glister ways. You may give to the Patient to drink a decoction made of Tamarinds and cold Herbs, to which you may add some purging Medi∣cines, as Senna, Rhubarb, &c. Or make use of the following Julip. Take the four great cold seeds, white Poppy Seeds, of each two Drams, Plantain, Purslant and Letuce, of each one handfull, Red Poppies, Violets and Water Lillies, of each half a handful;
boil them in a sufficient quantity of running Water, to one Pint, strain it, and add thereto Syrup of dryed Red Roses and Violets of each one Ounce and a half; being mixed together, divide it into three parts, and drink one part thereof first and last so long as need require. Or instead thereof use the distilled Water of the forementioned Herb, or the Emulsions of the four cold Seeds, which are all of a specifick vertue to thicken the Humour. And also make use of the Oyntment made as followeth. Take Oyl of Roses and Water Lillies, of each one Ounce, Rose water half an Ounce, Vinegar of Roses two Drams. Mix them well together in a Silver Dish over some Coles, and anoint the Head therewith, and with Lint apply it warm to the Temples. An excellent Foot Bath for the Catarrh. Take three Quarts of Lye made of wood Ashes, red Wine one Quart, add thereto Camomil and Bay Salt, of each one handfull. Let them boil together for a small time, and bath the Feet therewith first and last. Or, Take Betony, Dill, and Camomil Flowers, the Leaves and Flowers of Poppies, and willow Leaves, of each a good quantity; and make a Bath therewith, and bath their Feet therein
as afore directed; after which apply to the Soles of the Feet warm, the green Buds or Leaves of the Oak bruised and beat well to∣gether, with a small quantity of Salt and Vi∣negar. The more to restrain the flux and thicken the Humour. Take Syrup of Poppies, dryed Red Roses and Syrup of Violets, of each two Ounces; of which take an Ounce thereof every night going to Bed. Or, Take the Species called Diatragacanth frigid. one Dram, Conserve of old Red Roses three Drams, fine Bole washed in Rose Water, and the Powder of Mastick of each one Scruple and a half, with the Syrup of dryed Red Roses; make it into an Electuary according to Art; whereof take as much as a small Nut every night last. Another to spose the Gatarrh or defluxion of Rheume. Take the finest Bole washed in Rose Water, and prepared, two Drams, the best white Starch one Dram, Gum Arabick, and Gum Tragacanth, White Poppy Seed, of each half a Dram; beating all into fine Powder, add thereto Conserve of Red Roses two Ounces, and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Poppies, make them up into an Electuary; whereof let the Patient take
often the quantity of half a Wallnut. The Cure of the cold Catarrh consists in the preparing and evacuating of the offend∣ing Humors, and by the clear taking away that which flows to the Breast. In the first place if the Liver be hot, breath a Vein; for oftentimes it is observed, that Men troubled with a Catarrh have a hot Li∣ver, but a cold Brain; but if the Liver is not hot, and the Patient in Years, and no great  of Humours to be sent to the Brain from other parts, you may well forbear bleeding. And make use of the following Glister. Take Origan, Marjoram, Betes, Mallows, Nercury of each half a handfull, Dill, Camomil, d Melilot Flowers, of each one Pugil, Rosemary owers two Pugils, Caraway Seeds half an Ounce; Cut and bruise them small, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of half, strain it, and to one Pint herof; add of Benedicta Laxativa, half an Ounce, Hiera simple one Ounce, common Salt me Dram; mix them, and make thereof a Clister, and put it up warm. After which make use of the following Potion.
Take the Roots of Fennel, Liquorice, Sparagus, of each half an Ounce, Balm, Betony, Hysop, Rosemary, Dill, of each half a handfull, Flower of Staecados, and the lesser Centaury, of each two Pugils, Ginger half a Dram Cinamon one Dram, Caraway Seed two Drams; cut and bruise them, and boil them in four Pints of Hydromel in some convenient Vessel, for the space of two hours, then strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Betony, Hysop & Staecados, of each two Oun∣ces; being mixed well together; take five Oun∣ces warm every day three hours before supper The Pills made as followeth are also good in this Distemper. Take Pills of Agarick and Cochia, of each half a Dram, with Honey of Roses make then up into five Pills; whereof take two at night and three in the Morning. Or, Take Diacatholicon and Diaphanicon, of each half an Ounce, the distilled Water of Be∣tony and Hysop, of each two Ounces; being mixed together, make a Potion thereof, and take it in the Morning six hours before Dinner. Or, Take my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, one at night and two in the Morning; more or less according to the age and strength of the Patient; for they byond all Medicines
carry off sharp, salt, and watry Humours: so helps the Catarrh, and all other defluxi∣ons of Rhume, either hot or cold. The day following, after you have purg∣ed according to directions, it will be necessary that you make use of the following sweating Potion. Take Conserve of Rosemary and Venice Treacle, of each two Drams, the distilled Water of Juniper Berries two ounces; Mix it, make it into a Potion, and take it in the Morning fasting, and sweat as strength will permit. When the defluxion falls upon the Jaws, Lungs and Stomack, make use of the Medi∣cines that causeth sneesing, which are made as followeth. Take the Juice of Red Betes, the Juice of Marjoram, of each half an Ounce, Virgin Honey one Dram; Mix it together, and make it warm, and snuff it up into the Nostrils two or three times every Morning a small quantity at a time. Or, Take the Powder of black Hellebor and Sugar in equael parts; being made in fine Powder, snuff it up into the Nose. But if the defluxion falls upon the Eyes and Nose in particular, then make use of the owing Gargarism.
Take Sage, Hysop, Roses, of each half a handfull, Cubebes two Drams, Roots of Pelli∣tory of Spain, Rocket Seed, of each half an Ounce, Passularum one Ounce; Cut and Bruise them, and boil them in Vinegar and Water of each one pound to the consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto Honey of Roses two Ounces; Make it into a Gargarisme, and Gargle the Mouth therewith every Morning fasting. And to dry up the superfluous moi∣sture that falls from the Brain upon the Lungs. Take Diambra, Diamoschi Dulcis, of each half a Dram, Conserve of Rosemary one Scruple, the best Cinamon, Mace, Cu∣bebes, of each two Scruples, white Sugar dissolved in the distilled Water of Juniper four Ounces; being all mixed well together, add thereto Chymical Oyl of Aniseed ten drops, the Chymical Oyl of Cinamon two drops, and take a small quantity thereof first and last. Laudanum is also of most excellent use, given from two Grains to five going to bed, likewise you may give an Ounce, or an Ounce and a half of Syrup of Poppies in the manner aforesaid.
Blistering Plaisters rightly applyed, and Issues made behind the Ears, are very profitable to help distillations from the Head. there are many other Distempers that spring from the Brain, which here I must omit.
CHAP. X. Of the Eyes. THE affects of the Eyes are many, as inflamations, or hot impostumes, &c. Caused of a Distillation from the Brain, or of corruption of Blood mixed with Chol∣ler, and oftentimes by stripes or blows, and such like. The Cure of some Distempers in the Eyes may be performed as followeth. For inflamations in the Eyes, in the first place it will be necessary, if strength and age will permit, to open a Vein, taking forth a sufficient quantity of Blood. After which let the Patient make use of the following Potion. Take the bark of Mirobolans, two Drams, the choisest Rhubarb one Dram, white Ginger one Scruple; being bruised, infuse them one night in six Ounces of Goats Milk, then strain it, and add thereto half an Ounce of the Lenitive Electuary, and make it into a Potion,
which take in the Morning six hours before Dinner. Or, Take Pills of Cochiae and Aureg, of each one Scruple and a half, with three or four drops of the water of Fennel; make them up into seven Pills; whereof take three at night going to bed, and four in the morning; but first annoint the Eyes with a drop or two of the Oyl of Fennel. Or, Take the Pills called Pilulae Alaphanginae, and the Extract of Rudij, of each one Scruple, with two or three drops of the Chymical Oyl of Fennel; make them up into five Pills, where∣of take two at night and three in the morning, repeating either of them as need shall re∣quire. For the inflamation of the Eyes. Take Oyl of Roses three Drams, Tutia and Camphir, of each one Dram, with a sufficient quantity of white Wax make them up into an Oyntment; and going to bed, annoint the little Corner of the Eye therewith, and let as much go in as a Lin-seed, and close your Eyes till it be dissolved. Or, Take the White of one new laid Egge, and as much Rose water, of Camphir one Grain; being mixed well together, spread it upon fine Hemp Towe, and apply it to the Eyes,
and when it is dry, make it moist again with the foresaid Medicine. This draweth forth the inflamation, and mitigateth the pain. Or, Take Rose Water and Womans Milk, of each two Ounces, Camphir four Grains; mix them together, and drop thereof into the Corners of the Eyes first and last, or make Lint or Wool moist therein, and apply it to the Eyes going to bed. Or, Take of the great Flies, that in the Spring time creep forth of hard Walls, and distill them; of which Water drop into the Corners of the Eyes, and it will take away the inflamation and redness. Or, Take the distilled Water of Beech∣tree Flowers, and make Rags moist there∣in, and apply them to the Eyes. Or, Take the Water distilled from the Flowers of Hogs Fennel, Garden Fennel, Celendine, and Elder Flowers, of each a like quantity, and make Jews-ears moist therein, and apply them to the Eyes. Or make use of the water of Hogs Fennel a∣lone in the foresaid manner; for it is of excel∣lent use. Or, Take white Vitriol half an Ounce, white Sugarcandy one Ounce, Camphir two Drams;
being beat to Powder, add thereto of the distilled Water of Eye-bright and Fennel, of each one Pint; and in a new Earthen pot, be∣ing covered close, let it boil gently to the consumption of the fourth part, when cold put it into a Glass, and keep it close stopped for use. And dip a Linnen Rag therein, and apply it to the Eye-lids, being first shut; for it is of wonderfull vertue in such cases. How to Cure the Cataract, or Pearls in the Eyes. Take a Copper Bason, which is not Tin∣ned, and spread in the bottom thereof a suffi∣cient quantity of Salt, then a quantity of Strawberries, then Salt, so do till the Bason be full; after which cover the Bason very close, and put it under ground one foot or more deep, for the space of a Month, then take it forth and distill it, of which precious Water drop into the Eyes Morning and Evening. Or take the Roots of Burr-docks, Cichory and Celandine, of each a like quantity, bruise them; and sew them up into a piece of Cloth
or Silk, and hang them about the Neck, and when they are dry, take fresh, and when you are well burn the Boots. Some have found good by wearing the Roots of water Pepper, seven or eight in number, hanged about the Neck, which Roots must be gathered upon St. Batholo∣mews day before the Sun rise. Or, Take Hemlock one small handfull, Bay Salt two Ounces; being beat well together, and apply it to the contrary Hand-rist for the space of 24 hours; which will take away the Pin and Web at four five times dressing. Take Borau, and burn it till it be very white and dry, then beat it to fine Powder, and with a Quill blow a small quantity thereof into the Eyes. Or, Take white Vitriol two Drams, one Clove of white Ginger, Camphir one Scruple, dissolved in one Spoonfull of Aqua Vitae; put them all together in six Ounces of Rose Water in a Glass well stopped up, and so let it stand for three Weeks, then drop it into the Eyes as afore directed, and you will find it to be a very good remedy to take off the Ca∣taract.
Or, Take the Stone called Lapis Judaicus, white Vitriol, of each a like; beat it to fine Powder, and put it into the hollow part of an Egg roasted hard, first being cut through the middle, and the Yelk only taken forth; after which joyn the Egg together again, and so let it continue certain days in a Glass, or some Earthen Vessel well glazed, then strain it, and add thereto a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of Penyroyal, and stop it up very close in a Glass, and cover it with Past, and set it into an Oven with Brown Bread, and when it is cold take it forth, and keep it for use, and with Lint or fine Linnen Rags apply it to the Eye-lids, (being close shut) repeating the same till the filme or spots depart. Or, Take Red Ants Eggs, and put them into a glazed Vessel, and stop it close, then cover the same with Rye Past, and Bake it with Brown Bread, and when it is cold break the Pot, and take forth the Water very carefully, and keep it for use; of which drop into the Eyes as cause requires; for it doth not only help the Cataract, but most infir∣mities of the Eyes.
For Blows in the Eyes. Take the Roots of Cichory, and bruise them very well, and mix therewith the White of an Egge, and apply it to the Eye. Or take Celandine and Agrimony, of each a like quantity; bruise them well together, and apply the same to the Eyes, repeating it as often as need require. This is good for most Diseases in the Eyes, and abateth the pains caused by inflama∣tions. For swelling of the Eyes. Take a fine Linnen Rag, made moist in Wine, and apply it to the Eyes, and upon that another made moist in Sorrel or Rose Water. For the Pin and Web. Take one Dram of the fine Powder of Liquo∣rice, Ginger half a Dram; being mixed well together, blow a small quantity thereof in∣to the Eyes, and it helpeth. Another excellent Remedy for the Cata∣ract, Pin, and Web. Take good store of Crickets, which com∣monly are in Bake-houses, &c. bruise them well, and strain forth the Juice, and drop one drop into the Eye thrice a day; and though
the Patient be as it were blind, he shall be re∣stored. Ear Wax put into the Eyes is also of ex∣cellent use, so is the Oyl that may be taken forth of the great Bone in a Gooses Wing. The Gall of a Cock, mixed with the like quantity of Honey, and the Eyes annointed therewith, clears the sight. The Gall of an Hare, and the Gauls of Eles are also very good. Or, Take the Juice of Alehoof, (which is the right ground Ivy) the Juice of Celandine, and Field Daisies, of each a small quantity; and after you have clarified it, mix therewith a little fine Sugarcandy, and drop it into the Eyes first and last; for it is not only a good Re∣medy for all pains, redness, and waterness of the Eyes; but for the Pin and Web, and all manner of Filmes growing over the sight. The Juice of Alehoof alone, mixed with two or three Corns of Bay Salt, and a little Honey will effect the same. Much more might be said touching the Diseases of the Eyes, and the several Cures thereof; which I shall leave to the skillfull Oculist.
Only for all Rhumes, hot, sharp, salt and Watry Humours, which deflux or fall upon the Eye,s; though caused through the worst of Distempers, as the French Pox, &c. make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, ac∣cording to Directions. Or if possible, of a better Medicine, which did I but know, I would inform you of.
CHAP. XI. Of the Ears. THE Ears are incident to many infir∣mities, as violent pains, sound and noise, deafness, thick and slow hearing, in∣flamations, &c. The pain in the Ears is often caused through cold taken in Journeys, cold Baths, also it happeneth to many through not distem∣pers, and sometimes through inflamations, and many times sharp Humours coming of the French Pox, &c. do absolutely cause pains and pricking in the Ears. The sound and noise in the Ears is for the most part ingendred of a windy Vapour, or of tough and gross Humours, and many times through the weakness of the Members, as it often happens upon the recovery of a Disease, some Humours affecting the Sinews thereof; it may also be caused of outward things, as of cold, heat, or by a Fall, or Blow on the Head.
Deafness, thick and slow hearing, the Original of which is often from the very Birth, and many times afterwards, which happen either through cholerick Humours, ascending to the Ears, or through gross and raw Humours, stopping the Instruments of hearing. Inflamations often break forth in the Ker∣nals, which are by the Ears, and is caused of abundance of hot Blood, being mixed either with Choler, Flegm, and Melancholy, and sometimes it is caused of Humours com∣pact in the Head, and the rest of the Body through Diseases, especially Feavers. How to Cure the Pains of the Ears caused through Cold. Take Pills of Cochiae, Rudij, and Alaphan∣genae, of each one Scruple, the Chymical Oyl of Rosemary, six drops; mix them together, and make it up into ten Pills, whereof take two at night and three in the Morning till they are all taken. After which apply to the Ears the follow∣ing fomentation,
Take Mallows, Marsh Mallows, the lesser Centaury, wild Marjoram, Sage, Mints, Wormwood, Camomil and Penyroyal, of each one handfull, Melilot, Staechas, Camomil, and Rosemary-flowers of each half a handfull, Cloves and Cinamon bruised, of each five Drams; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Wine and Water in equal parts to the consumption of half, and often bath the Ears therewith hot with a Spunge, and apply thereto some of the Herbs at a time hot, repeating the same as need requires, and take not cold. For it doth not only help pains in the Ears, but deafness. Or take a hot Loaf, made with one part of Caraway Seeds, and cut it through the middle, and apply it so to the Ears. Or, Take Oyl of Rue, Nard, Dill, Spike, Euphorbium and Lillies, of each alike, with which annoint the Ears, or black Wooll made moist therein, and stop the Ears up with it. Or boil Rue, Rosemary or Garlick in Water, and let the Fume thereof go up into the Ears through a Funnel. Or take the Oyl of Rue and bitter Almonds; being mixed together, put it hot into the Ears, and stop them up with black Wool, made moist with the same.
How to Cure Pains in the Ears caused through Heat. Take Violets, Mercury, Mallows, of each one handfull, the Flowers of the lesser Centaury, Camomil and Melilot, of each half a handfull, being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of half, then strain it, and add to one Pint thereof, Hiera simple one Ounce, Oyl of Camomil and Violets, of each one Ounce and a half, of the Lenitive Electuary half an Ounce, Sal Prunella one Dram, be∣ing mixed well together, put it up Glister ways, And the next day open the Cephalick Vein, especially if there be inflamation. And take Oyl of Roses and Womans Milk, of each three or four Drams, the White of an Egg, being well mixed toge∣ther, drop it into the Ears warm. Or take the Oyl of Roses wherein have been boiled the Flowers of Willows, half an Ounce, Vinegar of Roses two Drams; being mixed to∣gether, make black Wooll moist therein, and apply it hot to the Ears.
And Purge with the Medicine made as fol∣loweth. Take the Lenitive Electuary one Ounce, the Electuary of Roses two Drams, the distilled Water of Cichory six Ounces; mix them together, and make a Potion thereof, which take in the Morning, and fast after it six hours. And the more to ease the Pain. Take the best Opium one Scruple, Castor two Scruples, being dissolved in three Ounces of Womans Milk, and warmed, drop it into the Ears; for it is a very excellent and safe Medicine. How to help the sound and noise in the Ears, and deafness. Take Bay-berries one Ounce, bruise them, and boil them in one quart of white Wine, and let the fume thereof go up into the Ears hot through a Funnel in the Morning, and at night going to bed. Or take Ants Eggs, and boil them well in sweet Oyl; being strained; add thereto a small quantity of Neats-foot Oyl, and drop it into the Ears. Or take Salt Peter two Drams, Pellitory of Spain one Dram, Saffron one Scruple; being beat to fine Powder, mix therewith a little
Vinegar, and make them up into small Cakes, then dry them, and keep them for use, and when need require mix a small quantity thereof with Vinegar, and drop it into the Ears; for it cleanseth and purifieth them to admiration, so helps hearing. Another excellent remedy for noise in the Ears. Take VVomans Milk, Oyl of Roses, of each three Drams; in which dissolve two Grains of the best Opium, and drop thereof into the Ears. Or take the Juice of sweet Marjoram two Drams, Oyl of Cloves one Scruple, in which mix two Grains of Musk, and drop it into the Ears warm. Or take Rosemary, and boil it very well in Spring VVater, and let the Fume thereof go up into the Ears through a Funnel, and Syringe the Ears therewith, after which put into the Ear a small piece of the middle of a roasted Onion, and stop them up with black Wooll, repeating the same as need shall re∣quire. You may also Syringe the Ears with stale Urine, or with the Urine of a young Whelp that can hardly go. Or take a small quantity of the fat from the Kidney of Mutton, and tye it up in a
very thin Rag, and infuse it three days and three nights in your own Water, and put it into the Ears, changing the same as need re∣quire, The Juice of Aleho of or ground Ivy drop∣ed into the Ears, takes away the noise and deafness, so doth a Goats Gaul. The Chymical Oyls of Rosemary, La∣vender, Nutmegs, Castor and Amber, &c. are also of wonderfull virtue to help deafness, being dropped into the Ears, first mixed with a Womans Milk.
CHAP. XII. Of the Nose. IN the Nose are several distempers, as filthy rotten stinking Ulcers, caused through corrupt sharp and salt humors, &c. Bleeding at the Nose proving destructive to many, is oftentimes outwardly caused by Falls, Blows, or by violent Exercise, or heat of the Sun, &c. The Polypus is a fleshy matter growing in the Nostrils, caused through gross humors falling to the same, and oftentimes it happen∣eth through a melancholly humour, &c. The Nose is also affected with putrid or rotten Ulcers. Caused by the French Pox, or Venerial sports. For the cure of deep and rotten Ulcers in the Nose, called Ozene, take the juice of Calamint, and with a feather put it up into the nostrils, or blow the powder of the same therein with a quil, or anoint the nostrils with honey, which will bring them to a scurf or scab, that will fall of in four or five days, and when they are fallen of take the oyntment
of Roses and anoint the Ʋlcers therewith, and the more to Cleanse the same, dissolve Egyp∣tiacum in Barly water, and syring the no∣strils, or snuff it up therein. Or anoint them with the juice of Pome∣granats boyled first in a Brasen Vessel to the consumption of half. Or take a whole Pomegranate, and boyl the same in wine, and snuff it up into the no∣strils. Or take Sugar of Lead dissolved in Plan∣tain water, and syring the nostrills which will both dry and heal. Or make tents of dried Gentian, and put them up into the nostrils, for they will di∣late or open themselves. Then take salt of Gemme two drams, Mastick and Frankinsence of each one dram. Being made into powder, add thereto the juice of Celandine one ounce, oyle Olive half a pint, and let them be boy∣led to an ointment, after which anoint the tents therewith, putting them up as afore directed. And sometimes with a feather touch the Ulcers with strong Vinegar, wherein is mix∣ed the powder of Album Graecum; if after all this there remain pains in the nostrills, Take oyle of Mirtles, Roses, of each an ounce,
Litharg of Gold and burnt Lead of each two scruples, fine Bole, Venus white Lead, the pow∣der of Pomgranate peels, of each one scruple, white Wax as much as is sufficient to make them up into an oyntment which annoint the part af∣fected therewith. In the cure of these Ulcers, and such like, in the beginning the head ought to be strength∣ened, and dried, because they often happen through corrupt humors flowing from the head to the nostrils, so in the first place shave the Head, and apply thereto the Plaster cal∣led Emplastrum Stephaniaion, &c. Or anoint the head with oyle of Roses, where∣in is mixed a small quantity of Roch Allum in sine powder. Or take unripe Galls, and Willow leaves bruised and mixed with Vinegar, and apply to the head, by which means the foresaid Remedies shall have the better effect. For the bleeding at the Nose, if strength and fulness permit, open the vein in the Arm and take it forth at several times, and not all at once, it is also good to put the Pati∣ents feet in hot water, rubbing them up and down, &c. and strong binding of the hand wrists, and above the knees, &c. is also of ex∣cellent use: let large Cupping-glasses be fasten∣ed
to the sides; if the Blood flow from the right nostril, fasten the Cupping-glass upon the Liver, and if from the left nostril upon the Spleen, if from both nostrils apply Cup∣ping glasses to both places, you may also apply them to the Shoulders with Scarification. Apply to the Forehead juice of Lettuce, Sor∣ral, Plantain, Sheppards purse, and knot Grass, with a spunge, &c. Or apply the Herbs bruised to the foresaid place, or the distilled waters of the same with linnen Cloaths made moist therein, or apply to the privy parts linnen Cloaths made moist with Vinegar or cold water, blow into the Patients Nostrils a small quantity of the Powder of a Toad prepared, or mix a little of the same with Paste, and apply it to the Pallate with your fingers. If that take no effect, give to the Patient four Grains of the Powder thereof in two or three spoonfuls of Plantain water, or in the distilled water of Hogs Dung, for it hath been found effectual where no other Medi∣cine would prevail. Or take the juice of the leaves of Nettles, a quarter of a pint at a time sweetened with Sugar; for it is also a certain remedy against bleeding at the Nose, &c.
Or make Tents with Lint, and dip them in the juice of Nettles, and put them up in∣to the Nostrils. Or you may burn the blood that cometh forth of the Patients Nose, and blow thereof up into the Nostrils, for it is also of excellent use. Or take Egge-shells wherein Chicken have been hatched, being made into fine Powder, blow it up into the Nostrils. Or take the Powder of the best Aloes, and roll it up with Wool. Or the hair cut off the belly of a Dog, make Tents there∣with, and put them up as afore directed. How to cure the Polypus, which is a fleshy matter growing in the Nose. After you have applied the forementioned remedies, &c. to the head, and purged suf∣ficiently, Take the juice of the Cyprus Tree, and dip Tents therein, and often put them up into the Nostrils. The juice of Aron-roots, commonly called Cuckow pint, roots, used as afore directed, will effect the same. The juice of Garden Dragons, are also very good for the purpose aforesaid, &c.
Or take three ripe Pomegranates, the one sower, the other sweet, and the other between both, bruise them in a Wooden or Marble Mor∣tar, strain it, and boil the juice to an Oint∣ment, and dip a rag or lint therein, and put it up into the Nostrils, for it dryeth and con∣sumes the matter without pain or sharpness. Or take the flowers and peels of Pomegra∣nates, Shumach, of each one pound, Grapes that are not ripe one pound and a half, infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Vinegar, 24 hours after which distil it, then add thereto Roch, Allum half a pound, White Vitriol one ounce and a half, and distil them altogether the second time, and touch the part often therewith: but if you perceive that it is not strong enough, add to the fore-mentioned wa∣ter a small quantity of Orpiment and Sanda∣rach. Or take red Precipitate one scruple, Honey of Roses half an ounce, being mixed well to∣gether, apply to the part affected with a Tent. Or take the white Ointment of Roses one ounce, red Precipitate one dram, mix them well to∣gether, and apply it as afore directed, for they are both of wonderful virtue to consume proud flesh.
You may also take Plantain water one ounce, Spirit of Vitriol two drams, and mix them together, and touch the Polypus often there∣with. Or in the same manner use the water that the Goldsmiths separate Gold withal, called the second water. How to cure the putrid or rotten Ulcers in the Nose, caused by the French Pox. Take Plantain water two ounces, Syrup of Mulberries and Honey of Roses of each half an ounce, Sugar of Lead two drams, and siringe the Nostrils often therewith. And often anoint the Nostrils with a fea∣ther made moist in the Ointments afore di∣rected, mixed with red Precipitate, with which I have cured many. Or firinge the Nostrils with the distilled water of Cucummets, and strong Vinegar, in equal parts, sweetned with syrup of Mul∣berries, and the syrup made with the Bram∣ble-berries; after which apply Tents dip∣ped in the following Ointment. Take Album Graecum three drams, Vinegar of Squills and Honey of Roses of each half an ounce, Mercurius Dulcis one dram, mix them very well together, and apply it as afore directed, changing the same as need require.
Or take springe water, and boil therein a suf∣ficient quantity of the inward bark of an Elm-tree, strain it, and make it somewhat sharp with spirit of Vitriol, and often siringe the Nostrils there∣with. Or wash the Ulcers three or four times a day with the water made as followeth. Take Mercury sublinate (commonly called White Mercury) half a dram, Roch-Allum one dram, both in fine Powder, Red-Rose-water four ounces, Plantain water twelve ounces, boil them altogether in some new-glased Vessel, to the consumption of the third part; after which strain it, and keep it for the foresaid use. Or take Plantain water and Red-Rose-water of each one pint, Roch-Allum and Mercury sublimate of each two drams, Camphir one dram and a half; powder what is to be powder∣ed, and boil them altogether in a glased Vessel to the consumption of the third part as afore directed, which keep close stopped for use, for they both dry exceedingly, you may sometimes anoint the part with the forementioned Ointment, or with the Oint∣ment of Roses alone to keep the Ulcer sup∣ple, &c.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Tooth-Ach. THe Tooth-Ach is caused several ways, either from a flux of humours cold and flegmy, or hot and watry, sharp and salt, &c. And those humours deflux to the Membranes of the Jaws, and to the holes wherein the Teeth are, and to the Nerve placed in the root of the Jaw, &c. and sometimes the pain in the Teeth is cau∣sed through inflammation of the Gums, &c. but when a swelling riseth upon the Gums or Jaws, the pain of the Teeth cease. Much more might be said as touching the pains of the Teeth, &c. which here I must omit. If the pain comes of hot humours, open a Vein on the same-side in the Arm: but if the pain come through cold, bleeding will not be profitable. And the day following let the Patient purge with my Pills, &c. and if need require, apply blistering Plaisters to the neck, or be∣hind the ears, which do much draw back the humours.
Or take of the best Aqua Vitae and Sallet-Oyl of each one good spoonful, Pepper beat to fine Powder from two scruples to a dram, being mixed well together, drop two or three drops into the contrary ear, and stop it up with black wool dipt therein, and lie upon the other side. This is most proper if the pain come of cold. Or take of the best Opium and Bees Wax of each a like quantity, and work it well together before the fire with your fingers, wherewith mix a small quantity of Lint and put it up into the hollow Tooth: for if the pain come of heat, it will give present ease, and cureth in a short time. If the pain come through cold, take Sugar and Pepper beat in fine Powder, being melted together in a Brass, Copper, or Silver Ladle, and made up in round Balls while hot, held between the Teeth, gives present ease. To hinder the defluxion, apply to the Temples the Plaisters made as followeth. Take Gum Elemi and Mastick of each alike, melt them together, being spread upon Silk, ap∣ply them to the Temples. The Plaister called Emplastrum ad Herni∣am applied as afore directed. Or the Plaister of Mastick is likewise effectual.
An excellent remedy for all manner of pains in the Teeth. Take Pellitory of Spain two ounces and a half, cut and bruise it small, after which put it in∣to a Glass-Vessel, and add thereto one pint of the best Sallet-Oyl hot, shake them well together, and stop the Vessel close, and let it stand in the Sun, or some other warm place for 14 days, stirring or shaking the same once a day: after which strain it, and add thereto white Vitriol half an ounce, Amber five drams, both in very fine Powder, and put it up in the Glass again: being close stopped, let it stand for one week, shaking it every day as afore directed; and so keep it for use, and upon occasion with a feather drop one drop thereof upon the aking Tooth or Gums, keeping the same for a small time in the mouth, and it will help. Or dissolve in a quarter of a pint of Spring∣water one dram of the Powder of Roman Vi∣triol, and hold thereof in the mouth. Or take the distilled water of Rosemary, and keep the same hot in the mouth, and it will give ease. Or take red Sealing-Wax two drams, Roche Allum burnt one dram, mix them well together, and apply it to the Teeth, or
put thereof into the hollow Tooth. Or take the Powder of double refined Su∣gar, and Powder of White Pepper of each alike, being melted in a Brazen or Coppet Ladle, make it up into small Balls, and hold them between your Teeth, and it gi∣veth present ease in all cold causes.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Blackness and Rottenness of the Teeth, and Exulceration of the Gums, &c. BLackness and Rottenness in the Teeth, is often contracted by the evil humours sticking to them, which in process of time doth corrode and cause them to be rotten, &c. The cause is through defluxion of vitious humours, &c. or of filthy vapours that as∣cend, that are ingendered of evil nourish∣ment from the distemper of the stomach, &c. which corrupt the good nourishment, some∣times falls or blows causeth the Teeth to be corrupt, and often times by taking too much Mercury inwardly or outwardly applied to cure the Pox, &c. And there are many wo∣men that frequently make use of Mercurial waters to beautifie their faces, or to make themselves more fair, by which means their Teeth are made black, and corrupt, &c.
To make them white again, Take Spirit of Vitriol, and dip there in brown Paper, and roll the Paper up into little Balls, and rub the Teeth therewith. Oyl of Sulphur used in the like manner will also cause the Teeth to be exceeding white. Or you may take Spring-water, and drop therein a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Vitriol, or Oyl of Sulphur, and so gargle the Mouth and Teeth therewith. Some take Aqua-fortis and dip Paper there∣in, and rub the Teeth therewith; but you must have a care that you touch not the Gums. Or take white Corral and Pearl of each two drams, beat them into fine Powder, and rub your Teeth therewith, and they will become very white. Or take the ashes of Vine-branches, and rub your Teeth therewith. Or take the hard Crusts of Rye or Barley bread, burn them, and make it to Powder, and the Teeth rubbed therewith will cause them to be white. To make rotten Teeth sound, Take the juice of Water-Cresses and White-Wine in equal parts, mix them together, and rub the Teeth and Gums therewith, and often gargle the Mouth with the same.
The ashes of Tobacco is of excellent use to cleanse the Teeth, and to make them white. Or take Allum, white Corral, the Roots of Snakeweed, of each half an Ounce, beat them to powder, and often rub the teeth. Or take Pumestone, white Corral, Alabla∣ster, fish Bones, Tarter, Orris-Roots, Pebble∣stones, of each two Drams, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each one dram and a half, Sal-Armoniack, half a dram, Amber-greese and Musk, of each five grains, being mixed and made into fine powder, rub the Teeth therewith, and wash your mouth with Rose-water and Vinegar, or with Spring-water and Vinegar, which will serve as well. Or take common Salt, white Marble, Pome∣stone, white Corral, of each two drams, Mastick, Citron-peels, of each one dram, Musk three grains, being beaten and mixed altogether, rub your Teeth therewith, for it will not only cause the Teeth to be white, but clean∣seth the Gums, &c. Another certain remedy for corrupt Gums. Take Hony one spoonful, Nutmeg and Cloves in powder, of each one dram, Juice of Sage two spoonfuls, beat them well toge∣ther till it be like to an ointment, wherewith
anoint the Gums and Teeth, after which, take Mastick and Myrrh of each two draws, and boyl them in half a pint of Red-wine to the consumption of half, and wash the Gums and Teeth first and last therewith. Or take Allum two drams, powder of Red-Corral, one dram and a half, Pumestone, and Fish-bones, of each one dram, burnt Harts∣horn, Mastick and Frankinsense, Cls, Myrrh and Nutmegs, of each half a dram, beat them into fine powder, and  them together, with which rub your  and Teeth. Or take Barly Meal, Salt and Hony, and rub the Teeth, and wash your mouth after with Vinegar and water. Notwithstanding all this, you ought to purge with proper Medicines, and to Bleed if need require, and to scarifie the Gums.
CHAP. XV. Of the Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat. THe Ulcers of the Mouth, are cau∣sed through sharp and salt Humours, or of Vapours from several parts ascending to the Jaws. They often happen to those that have hot Livers, or malignant Feavers; and to such that are tormented with Venereal distem∣pers, &c. If Age and strength will permit, this Cure ought to be began with Blood-letting, for it draweth back the humours, and mo∣derateth their sharpness by cooling the Body. You may also apply Horse-leeches behind the Ears, and under the Chin, and Blistering Plasters to the Neck-pit, and the next day after Bleeding, and as need shall require, purge with my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, &c. (for they beyond any, doth expel sharp, salt humors, and also the evil and poy∣sonous Humours offending the Nose, Mouth, and Throat, too often caused by Mercurial
Medicines) after which make use of the Gargarism made as followeth. Take the distilled water of Honey-suckles, Plantane and Rose-water, of each two ounces, Syrup of dried Red-Roses, and Syrup of Mul∣berries, of each one ounce, Sugar of Lead two drams, mix them well together, and often Gargle the Mouth therewith. Or take Knot-grass, Plantane-leaves, and Bramble-leaves, of each two good handfuls, Pom∣granate-flowers, red and yellow Sanders, of each one ounce, boyle these in a sufficient quantity of Running-water to the Consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Mulberries, and dried Red-Roses to make it sweet, and use it as afore dire∣cted, if there be any inflamation, you may add thereto some juice of Purslain, House∣leek, and Night-shade, and a small quan∣tity of Sal Prunellae, or raw Allum, but let it not be made too sharp with either. And if there be no Inflamation, you may touch the Ulcer with a stick with a ragg tied to the end thereof dipt first in the Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, and it helps forthwith, if the Ulcer be simple; but to Children, mix with these Spirits Honey of Roses, so that it may be but a
little sharp, and with a little Lint fastened to the end of a Stick, &c. apply it. Or take the juice of Housleek, and fresh Cream, mix them well together, and anoint your Mouth therewith. When the Mouth and Almonds are so much Ulcerated, that the Patient cannot swallow. Take the distilled water of Elder-flowers, Plantane-water, and the water distilled from the Black-Thorn-flowers, of each alike, dissolve therein as much Venus sope as a Walnut, sweeten it with a small quantity of the Syrup of Mulberries, and gargle the Mouth often therewith, if these take not effect, add to either of the Gargarisms a small quantity of Egypti∣acum, and gargle therewith. Another excellent remedy for the Ul∣cers in the Mouth and Throat, &c. Take Vine-leaves, or the tops when the Leaves are not to be had, the inward bark of the Elm-tree, of each one handful, Roch-Allum, Ginger grosly beaten, of each half an ounce, Album Graecum one ounce, boyl all these in one quart of water, to the consumption of half, strain it and sweeten it with hony or Syrup of Mulberries, and gargle the Mouth and Throat often therewith; this
is most proper where there is no Inflama∣tion. Or take Plantane-water eight ounces, Honey of Roses, and Syrup of Mulberries of each two ounces, Sugar of Lead six drams, Roman-Vitriol one dram, mix them together, and use it as afore-directed, for they are of wonder∣ful Virtue to help the Ulcers in the Mouth, Pallet, and Throat, caused by the French-Pox, &c. Those and such like Gargarisms, will prove the more effectual if the body be well purged with my Cathartique and Diu∣retique Pills, with which I have cured many, that for some years before had been sorely troubled with red and watry Eyes, and full of filthy matter caus'd through the fore∣mentioned disease.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Quinzy. THe Quinzy is an Inflamation of the Throat and Jaws, of which there are (according to Authors) four sorts: The first is when the Jaws are inflamed. The second is when neither the Jaws nor other parts either inward or outward are in∣flamed, and yet the Patient in danger of choaking. The third is when the inward and outward parts about the Throat are inflamed. The fourth is, when the Joynts between the Head and Neck are loosened, and the part appear hollow, and the Patient sensible of pain when but touched. The Quinzy is caused through some flux of Humours which fall from the Head to the Throat, &c. or from abundance of Blood preternaturally flowing to the foresaid parts; and sometimes it may be caused from vapours arising from the Stomack to the Throat, &c. The Quinzy is known by the Signs follow∣ing:
The Patient breathes with much difficulty, except the Neck be held upright, and can hardly swallow without violent pain. In some there appears redness in the face and Neck, and a Fever, &c. This Distemper often kills in four and twenty hours. Therefore without delay open a Vein in the Arm upon the same side, or open the Vein under the Tongue. Some with good snccess open the Jugular Veins. But take not the Blood forth at once, but at several times, lest the Patient faint, &c. Let the Incision be somewhat large, lest the thinner part of the Blood come forth, and leave the grosser part behind, which is many times the absolute Cause of this deadly Di∣stemper. If the Patient be of the Female Sex, open the Vein in the Anckles; more especially if her Monthly Sickness be obstructed. When Bleeding cannot with Conveniency be admitted, Give to the Patient the Glister made as followeth: Take Calamint, Rue, Sage, Betony, Ori∣gan, Peny-Royal and Hysop, of each half a handful; the Seeds of Annis, Fennel, and Seselis, of each three drams; the lesser Cen∣taury
one handful, the Roots of Polipody four ounces, Agarick two drams, Pulp of Colocinthi∣dos one dram and a half; Boyl these in a suffi∣cient quantity of water, to the consumption of half, strain it, and take thereof one pint: To which adde, Benedicta Laxativa, and Hi∣era Piera, of each one ounce, Honey of Roses one ounce, Diaphenicon four drams, Oyl of Rue, Bays, and Castor, of each half an ounce, Salt Gemme one dram: Mix them all well toge∣ther. And give it to the Patient Glister-ways. Or instead thereof let him take the follow∣ing Potion: Take of the Lenitive Electuary one ounce, Cream of Tartar ten grains, Rosin of Jallap six grains, the distilled Water of Fumatory or Cicho∣ry four Ounces. Being mixed together, give it in the morning to the Patient fasting. Or take of the best Senna in very fine Pow∣der one ounce, Ginger one dram, Clarified Ho∣ney two ounces; let them be well mixed toge∣ther by simpering over the fire: of which let the Patient take as much as a large Nutmeg at a time, which will keep the Body open, and in such cases be of excellent Use. And often take of the Drink made as fol∣loweth, especially if inclinable to a Feaver.
Take the best Pruins two pounds, Wood-Sorrel and Dandelion, of each one handful and a half; being cut and bruised, boyl them in a suffici∣ent quantity of running water, to the con∣sumption of half: Strain it and keep it for use. And let the Patient gargle his Mouth and Throat with the Gargarism made as follow∣eth: Take Oaken Leaves one handful, Flowers of Roses and Pomegranates, of each one pugil and a half; the Rind of Pomgranates half an ounce, Burnt Allom twenty grains. Being cut and bruised, boyl them in a pint of Plantane or running Water, to the consumption of half, strain it, and adde thereto Syrup of Mulber∣ries two ounces; mix them together, and gargle therewith. Or take Ground-Ivyor Ale-hoof, the Leaves of Violets, of each half a handful, Dandelion one handful and a half; boyl them in a pint and half of Barley-water, strain it, and dissolve therein Honey of Roses one ounce and a half, Spirit of Vitriol twenty drops; mix them well together, and make use thereof as afore-di∣rected. Or take Night-shade, Plantane, Woodbine∣leaves and Bramble-leaves, of each one handful;
boyl them in one quart of water, to the con∣sumption of half, strain it, and adde thereto Syrup of Mulberries three ounces, Sal Prunella one dram and a half; mix them, and make a Gargarism thereof. And to heal the parts excoriated, Take Honey of Roses, and Syrup of Mulberries, and Album Graecum, and let it dissolve in your mouth, swallowing the same. Or take the Bark of Pomgranates two drams, the Flowers of the same one pugil, Liquorish three drams, Jujubes in numbertwelve, three Figs, Raisins three drams; being cut and bruised, boyl them in a pint and a half of Barly-water; strain it, and dissolve therein Syrup of Mai∣den-hair and Honey of Roses, of each one ounce, and gargle your Mouth therewith. Or take Elder-Flowers and the Flowers of Red Roses, of each one handful, Album Grae∣cum one dram; boyl them in a sufficient quan∣tity of thin Beer or Ale, then strain it, and adde thereto Sugar of Lead and Sal Pru∣nella, of each one scruple, sweeten it with the Syrup of Mulberries, and gargle your Mouth &c. therewith, for it heals to admiration. You may apply to the fore-part of the Throat outwardly the Plaister made as fol∣loweth:
Take the Powder of Album Graecum and Wheat Flower, of each alike, Oyl of Camomil half an ounce, with a sufficient quantity of the best Honey make them up into a Plaister. Or take the Roots of Marsh-Mallows, White Lillies, of each one ounce, the Powder of a Swallows Nest and Album Graecum, of each half an ounce, eight or ten Figs; boyl them in Beet or Ale, strain it, and adde thereto the Flower of Linseed, Wheat Flower, of each one ounce, the Flower of Fennugreek, and the Flower of the Seeds of Marsh-Mallows, of each two ounces, the Yolks of two New-laid Eggs, Saffron two drams, Oyl of Camomil two ounces, mix them, and make Plaistrrs thereof, and apply them hot, as afore directed. Or take Oyl of White Lillies, and Oyl of Or∣ris, of each one Ounce and a half, the Juice of Onions two ounces, being boyled two or three walms, adde thereto two drams of the Powder of a Swallows Nest; and with a sufficient quan∣tity of Wax and Pitch, make a Plaister thereof according to Arr, and apply it to the fore-part of the Neck.
And sometimes you may anoint the Neck with Oyl of Lillies, Camomil, and Dill, &c. And let the Patient drink no Bran∣dy, neither any other stronger Liquors, for they inflame the part, and oftentimes prove mortal.
CHAP. XVII. Of the Kings Evil. THe Kings Evil is a Distemper that possesses the Throat &c. with pre∣ternatural Tumours. The Cause of this Disease is Flegm, often∣times mixed with Melancholy; also the eat∣ing of gross and raw Diet, drinking filthy wa∣ters, &c. may be the Cause thereof. Of those Tumours, in some there are but few, in others many. Such as have but few, moveable, slight, shallow and thin, may be resolved, or be taken out by incision, or be broke without danger, by Causticks, &c. but such as are hard, malignant, and fixed, or being near the Weasand or Wind-pipe, large and joyned with the Veins, are perilous. This Disease commonly possesseth the El∣bows, Hands, and Feet, and many other parts of the Body besides the Throat. For the Cure of this Disease: In the first place let the matter offending be evacuated, and a Diet of light Digestion directed for the Patient.
If the Body abound with fulness, it may be necessary to open a Vein, and purge very well with the Medicines made as follow∣eth: Take of the Pills called Arthriticae, and Extractum Rudii, of each one dram, Rosin of Jallap and Mercurius Dulcis six times sublimed, of each one scruple, with a suffi∣cient quantity of the Juyce of Fumatory, make them up into twenty Pills, whereof take two at Night and three in the Morning, (more or less according to the Age and Strength of the Patient) repeating the same as need requires. Or take Hermodactils, Turbinth, of each two ounces, the Roots of Sope-wort one ounce and a half; the Roots of Angelica one dram, the best Senne one ounce, fine Scamony four scruples. Be∣ing made all inno fine Powder, and mixed well together, take thereof in the Syrup of Roses, from one dram to two drams, adding to every dose four or five grains of Mercurius Dulcis. Give this every second or third morning for fifteen or twenty dayes toge∣ther. Or take of Hiera with Agarick one dram, Pills of Cothia two drams, Troches Alhandal and Myrrhe of each one scruple, the Chymical Oyl of
Fennal two drops, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Stechados, make them up into twen∣ty Pills, and take them as afore-directed. Or take of my Cathartique and Diuretick Pills twice or thrice a week: for they abso∣lutely help this Disease, because they purge Flegm, &c. to admiration. During the Cure, let the Patient drink of the following Liquor as of Ordinary Drink, Take Elder-Bark, Smallage, Clivers, Herb Robert, Sope-wort, Fumatory, the Leaves and Roots of Pilewort, of each three good handfuls, Polipody half a pound; being cut and bruised in a thin Cloth, hang them in some convenient Vessel, and pour thereto a sufficient quantity of New Beer or Ale (you cannot well make it too strong of the Herbs) and let it work to∣gether; when fit to drink make use thereof as occasion serves, and you will have no cause to find fault with me. Or take the Roots of Filipendula and Pilewort, of each two drams, Tansie, Mouse-Ear, Pimpernel, of each one dram, Round Birthwort, the Roots of Radishes and Sope∣wort, of each half a dram: Cut and bruise them, and boyl them in three Pints of white Wine to the consumption of the third part;
strain it, and add thereto of Oxymel simple three Ounces. Of which let the Patient drink a quarter of a pint at a time, three times a day. Plaisters and Oyls proper to dissolve the Swel∣lings, hard Knots and Kernels, are as followeth: Take the Plaister of Frogs with Mercury, spread it upon Linnen Cloth, and apply it to the parts affected. But be sure to purge now and then in the use thereof. Or make use of the Plaister of Diachylom with Gum, or the Plaister of Galbanum, for they are all very good to dissolve the Tumors. But the first neglect not. To anoint the Tumours, take the Oyl of Elder; for with that alone (with the use of the internal Remedies) I have known many perfectly cured. Or take the Oyl or Ointment made of Bri∣ony-Roots, and use it as afore directed. If those Sores chance to break, as often∣times they do, foment the Sores with a Spunge dipt in Lime-water. Or take the Roots of Briony, Marsh-Mal∣low-Roots, and the Roots of Figwort and
Dwarf-Elder, of each one ounce, Flowers of Dwarf-Elder, Camomil, Melilot, and Com∣mon Elder, of each one handful, Seeds of Annis and Fennugreek, of each half an ounce. Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of half or more, and apply it hot to the part for the space of half an hour. After which, anoint it with the Ointment made as followeth: Take the Fat of a Man, or the Fat of a Bear, Goose and Cock's Fat, of each half an Ounce; the Ointment of Marsh-Mallows two ounces, Oyl of Lillies and Aqua-Vitae, of each one ounce. Mix them well, and make an Ointment thereof. Or when it breaks, wash the Sores with Crab-Verjuice and Butter, and sometimes touch the Ulcers with Oyl of Vitriol or Sul∣phur. And to heal the Sores after the Body is well purged, Take Letharge of Gold what quantity you please, make it into very fine Powder, and with a sufficient quantity of Sallet Oyl and strong Vinegar, being beaten well together, ap∣ply it to the Sores Plaister-ways, repeating the same as need require.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Asthma, or Difficulty of Brea∣thing. DIfficulty of Breathing is commonly cau∣sed of a Flegmatick Humour which falls from the Head to the Lungs, and stops the Winde-pipe, &c. And often times by wa∣tery Humors conveighed into the Lungs, (as in hydropical persons) causeth an Asthma, or difficulty of Breathing. As touching the Cure of this Disease, (Especially in Hydropical and Scorbutical Constitutions) In the first place make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they do not only make thin and cleanse, but perfectly expel all tough and gross humours which (for the most part) ingender this Disease. Or take of the choisest Agarick two drams, Ginger one scruple, Salt Gem three grains; be∣ing grosly beaten, infuse them all night in two oun∣ces of sweet White-Wine, and the distilled Wa∣ter of Fennel and Wormwood, of each one ounce,
strain it, and adde thereto Oxymel of Squills half an ounce, and the Electuary called Indi Majoris two drams; make it into a Potion, and drink it off all at once in the morning fast∣ing. Pills of Cochia and Agarick, and Pills of Hi∣era Picra made up with Honey, are also very profitable in such cases. Sometimes strong Glisters will be of excellent use. And notwithstanding making use of the aforesaid Medicines, (especially upon the intermitting days) take of the following Ju∣lip, for to my knowledge it is of excellent use. Take the Distilled Water of Scabios, small Cinamon-Water, of each three ounces, Syrup of Liquorish, Syrup of Hoarhound, Oxymel of Squills, and Lohoch Sanum, of each one ounce, Spirit or Oyl of Vitriol twenty drops; mix them well together, and make a Julip thereof, which take one or two Spoonfuls first and last, two hours before Dinner, and two hours af∣ter. Or take Blew Currans one pound, the Tops of Nettles two handfuls, boil them in two quarts of Water to the consumption of half, strain it, and let the Patient drink often there∣of.
Or take off the Syrup of Colts-foot, Liquorish, Hoarbound, of each one ounce, Oxymel simple half an ounce; mix them, and let the Patient take thereof often. Or take the Roots of Elicampane, Juniper-berries, and Bay-berries husked, of each half an ounce, Sugar-candy one ounce, being made into fine Powder with a sufficient quantity of Ho∣ney or Syrup of Hysop, make them up into an Electuary, of which take as much as a Nut∣meg first and last, &c. Or take White Sugar-Candy one ounce, Oyl of sweet Almonds three ounces, mix them, and give it as afore-directed. Or take Flower of Sulphur half an ounce, Ci∣namon in fine Powder one dram, with a suffici∣ent quantity of Hogs Fat, make them up into Pills as big as gray Pease, and take thereof three at a time, first and last. A Sea-Onion roasted, and beaten well with a sufficient quantity of Honey, and given to the Pa∣tient so much as a Nutmeg at a time, is of ex∣cellent use. Or take the tops of Rosemary, Hysop, of each one handful, Figs, Liquorish, of each two ounces. Being cut and bruised, boil them in one quart of Spring Water to the consumption of half, then strain it, and add thereto of the best Ho∣ney
eight ounces; let it just boil up again, scum it, and keep it for use, of which take two or three spoonfuls first and last, and at any other time. This Method is not onely proper in the Asthma, or difficulty in Breathing, but for the Cough. Bleeding is very necessary in this Distem∣per, therefore open a Vein in the Fit (espe∣cially) if the Blood seem to abound. But if the Disease be of long continuance, bleed not without good Advice, lest the Natural Heat should thereby be diminished, and Flegm in∣creased, &c. The Ointment made as followeth will also be very profitable. Take Duck's and Hen's Fat, of each one dram, Oyl of Rue and Dill, of each two drams, Oyl of Orris half an ounce; mix them together, and anoint the Brest there∣with, first tubbing the same with a hot course Linnen Cloth. Or take Oyl of Orris, Camomil and sweet Almonds, of each one ounce, Hens Fat, one dram, the Powder of Orris and Marsh-Mal∣low-Roots of each one dram and a half, the Meal of Fennugreek and Linseed, of each two drams, Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Wine, one
dram; with a sufficient quantity of Wax, make it into an Ointment, and anoint the Brest therewith as afore-directed: for it doth not onely molifie but discuss the matter offend∣ing. CHAP. XIX. Of the Pleuresie. THe Pleuresie is an inward Inflamma∣tion or a Postumation of the upper Skin girding the Ribs, &c. This Disease is often times caused through abundance of hot Blood, flowing preternatu∣rally to the fore-mentioned upper Skin. The principal Signs are, Difficulty of Brea∣thing, a very troublesome Cough, a conti∣nual Feaver, and a violent Pricking pain, a sharp and hard Pulse. As touching the Cure, In short, if the Body do abound with filthy Humours, or be full of Blood, forth∣with open the Liver-Vein on the same side, for with so doing, Blood is not onely drawn, but the part grieved quickly purged.
After Blood-letting (especially the Body being Costive) make use of the following Glister; or if the Disease be not violent, make use of the Glister before Bleeding. Take the Leaves of Spinage, Mallows, Mer∣cury, both sorts of Endives, and the Leaves of purple Violets, of each one handful, Barley not bruised one ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the consumption of the third part, strain it, and to one pint thereof add of Cassia newly drawn one ounce and a half, fresh Butter half an ounce, Oyl of Violets and Ca∣momil, of each two drams, Common Salt one dram; being well mixed together make a Glister, and put it up according to Art. Or take of the Lenitive Electuary six drams, Syrup of Violets and Roses, of each half an ounce, Cream of Tartar two scruples, the Distilled Wa∣ter of Cichory or Fumatory four ounces; being mixed together, take it in the morning all at once. And if the Patient have still a Feaver, Take fresh Pruuns one pound, Blew Currans half a pound, Wood-Sorrel one good handful; boil them in three quarts of Spring Water to the consumption of the third part, and strain it, and let the Patient drink often thereof.
Take one Pippin the Core being taken out, and fill the hole with the Gum called Olibanum; af∣ter which toast it till it become soft, then take off the skin from the Apple, and mix them well together, and take it all at once, for to admiration it removes the pain, I having made trial thereof one hundred times. The Powder of Olibanum taken from one scruple to one dram, in the Pap of a roasted Apple at night, doth the same, and with less trouble. Some to ease the violent pain in this Dis∣case, give Laudanum and Syrup of Poppies, &c. but they must be taken in small quanti∣ties, lest they stop spitting, and bind the brests, from which sometimes death follows, so at∣tempt them not without good advice. Take Horse-dung, and infuse the same in the distilled water of Carduus for a small time, then strain it, and give thereof to the Pati∣ent, for it also powerfully disperses and abates the pain. Or take the powder of Hens-dung (which is white) one dram, Carduus water four oun∣ces, Syrup of Violets half an ounce, and give it to the Patient warm, for it hath the afore∣mentioned virtue.
Or take Hempseed bruised one ounce, white Hens-dung and Stone-Horse-dung, of each half an ounce, infuse them for twelve hours in six ounces of Carduus-water, strain it and drink it off warm all at once. Or take from one scruple to a dram of prepared Goats Blood in the aforesaid water, for it doth effect the same. Or you may take the Spirit of Soot, from five drops to ten, in Carduus-water, and the bright flakes of Soot made of wood fire, beaten in∣to fine powder, and given from two scruples to one dram, is of excellent use, and very safe. You may apply outwardly the following Fomentation, &c. Take the Flowers of Dill, Melilot, and Ca∣momil, of each two or three handfuls, Bran, the Powder of Fennugreek, Linseed and Melons, of each an ounce and a half, boil them in a suf∣ficient quantity of water, and bath the part grieved therewith; or put some of the De∣coction with the Herbs into Bladders, or dip therein a large spunge, and apply it to the part affected hot. Or make use of the Plaister made as fol∣loweth: Take the Flowers of Tapsus Barbatus, Ca∣momil and Dill, of each half a handful, Fen∣nugreek,
Anniseed, and Linseed, of each a quar∣ter of an ounce, Barly-flower two ounces; being all bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, till they become somewhat thick, after which add thereto the Oyl of Camomil and Dill, of each one ounce, boil them a∣gain, and then add the Yolks of two new-laid Eggs, and Saffron beat into Powder one scru∣ple and a half, and make a Plaister thereof, which apply warm to the part affected. Some use Cupping-glasses with Scarifica∣tion, which I shall leave to the discretion of the Ingenious Physitian.
CHAP. XX. Of the Ptisick or Consumption. THough the Ptisick signifies a Consum∣ption, yet it may be most properly taken for that Leanness of Body which follows an Ulcer in the Lungs. This Disease is commonly caused through sharp fretting and gnawing Humours, which falls from the Head upon the Lungs. It is also caused through Blood and mat∣ter, which continue after the breaking out of the same in such that have the Pleuresie, and sometimes the Dropsie and French Disease, &c. are the very principal Causes of the Consumption. The chief Signs of this Distemper are known by flowing of flegm from the Head upon the Lungs, which causeth a Tickling and small Cough, the Spittle somewhat hot and bitter, the whole Body wasteth, and the flesh becomes exceeding loose, the Hair falls off, the Nostrils very thin and sharp, the Temples fallen down, the Eyes hollow,
the Balls of the Cheeks swarthy or Leaden coloured, the Shoulder-Bones stick out, the Patient often vexed with a Hectick or burn∣ing Fever, and breathes with much difficulty, the Nails become pale and crooked, the Sto∣mach and Belly often tormented with violent pain, and much troubled with thirst, and if the Lungs are ulcerated, what the Patient spits will be of a strong foetid or stinking Smell. And the Cure often proves very difficult. However in the first place, let the Patient (if possible) be removed into some whole∣some place where the Air is clear and tem∣perate, neither too hot nor too cold. And if you perceive the Lungs to be ulce∣rated, purge once a week with the following Medicines, especially where the Body is not become very lean. Take Cassia newly drawn one ounce, the fine Powder of Liquorish two scruples, and make a Bolus thereof, which give to the Patient in the morning. Or take of the choicest Manna from one ounce to two ounces, and dissolve it in Chick∣en-Broth, &c. and drink it off as afore-di∣rected. Or take Liquorish, Raisins of the Sun sto∣ned,
Flowers of Bugloss and Violets, of each three drams, Barly one ounce and a half, Jujubes four in number; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to three or four ounces, to which add two ounces of the distilled water of Scabios, wherein have been first infused Yellow Sanders and the best Rubarb, of each four scruples, Manna one ounce, Syrup of Roses three drams, (add the two latter last) being mixed together, make a potion thereof, which take in the morning. But in the beginning of this Disease you may give stronger Purges, nothing more pro∣per than my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they above all purging Medicines carry off the salt and sharp Catarrh which is the prin∣cipal Cause of such Ulcers. After which make use of the following Medicine, with which I have done wonders in such cases. Take White-Rose-water, one ounce, white Su∣gar-Candy six drams, the Yolk of one new-laid Egge, new Milk warm from the Cow, or made so, a quarter of a pint; being beaten well together, let the Patient drink it all at once, repeating the same morning and evening for some time together. You may believe me, this very Medicine
is worth an hundred times the price of the Book, which I freely communicate. To young Children you may make use of a wholesom Womans Milk; and being mixed as aforesaid will serve three or four times; but the best way is still to make it up fresh, so take but the third or fourth part of each. Goats Milk is also of wonderful use, more especially if taken as afore-directed. And be assured that Milk is one of the best Medi∣cines against the Ptisick or Consumption. Another Excellent Remedy against the Consumption. Take all the Blood that will be had forth of a Pig or Swine in his full strength, and stir it as it is drawn forth that it may not congeal; to which add the Powder of Cloves, Cinamon, Mace and Ginger, of each one ounce, Saffron, and the Flowers of Rosemary, of each two drams; and forthwith distil it in a Glass with a very gentle fire: The Dose is from three Spoonfuls to six or eight, in so much Tent or Sack, three times a day. Or take the Powder called Pulvis Haley one ounce, Conserve of Red Roses two oun∣ces, Conserve of Cowslips one ounce, with
a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Violets, make them up into an Electuary, and make it some∣what sharp by mixing therewith some few drops of Oyl of Vitriol or Sulphur. And take thereof first and last as much as a Walnut, for it is of wonderful profit to such that are Hectick. Or take Flower of Brimston, and the pow∣der of the best Frankincense, of each one scruple, Saffron three grains, put them into an Apple, the Core being cut forth, and roast it, after which let the Patient eat it with White Sugar-Candy for ten or twelve dayes together. New strong Ale wherein is boiled Bur∣dock-Roots, Liquorish and Honey, is of Excellent Use, as I have often proved; and the Poor may with much ease attain to this Drink. The Herb Burnet made into fine Powder, and White Sugar-Candy, of each one dram, taken often in Broth, is also very good. Or take White-Wine three pints, Sugar-Candy four ounces, the Roots of Elicampane one ounce, Green Coltsfoot two ounces, Violet Flowers one ounce and a half, the Roots of An∣gelica ten drams, being cut and bruised very small, boil them in a Stone Bottle close stop∣ped,
(the Cork tied down with a piece of strong Linnen Cloth) for three hours in a pot of water, and open it not till it be cold; after which strain it, and take three or four spoonfuls first and last, and at any time of the day. With this very Medicine after I had gently purged a Painter, I perfectly cured him in few days, though he was by all his friends left for a dead man, he was so much consu∣med, and did stink that none could endure to come near him. I know an eminent Physitian and several other persons that have for these many years been preserved by the foresaid Medicine, ta∣king it according to my Directions, and by taking the old Conserve of Red Roses when he took not the former. Sugar of Roses drunk in New Milk, made as followeth, is also of most admirable Use. Take of the best Red-Rose-Buds, the whites being cut off, and dried suddenly in the Sun, two ounces, Double-Refined-Sugar two pounds, being melted in the Juice of Roses and Rose-Water, of each four ounces. Be∣ing by degrees consumed, put in the pow∣der
of the Rose-Leaves, and mix them well together, and put it upon a Marble Stone, and make it up into Lozenges according to Art. Natural Balsom is of excellent use for such that have Ulcers in the Lungs, if you make White-Sugar-Candy up into Pills as big as Gray Pease therewith, and take one fast∣ing every Morning, for some Time to∣gether.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Pain in the Stomach. PAin in the Stomach is commonly cau∣sed through corrupt and poysonous fretting Humours contained therein; and oftentimes by Worms gnawing the Tu∣nicles thereof. Sometimes through sharp and salt flegm, and through putrid mat∣ter sent into the Stomach, from some impo∣sthume broke either in the Brest or Liver. Sharp Vapours from close corrupt Humours sometimes cause pain, sometimes wind con∣tained in the hollow part of the Stomach, doth not onely cause pain therein, but swel∣ling, &c. If the pain of the Stomach be caused through flatulent or windy matter, make use of the Glister made as followeth. Take Calamint, Penniroyal, Rue, Origan, the lesser Centaury, of each one handful, Co∣min-seeds, Annis, Fennel and Carrot-seeds, of each two drams; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the
consumption of half, then strain it, and adde to one Pint thereof Benedicta Laxativa one ounce, Diacatholicon half an ounce, Oyl of Rue and Dill, of each one ounce, the Chymi∣cal Oyl of Juniper and Bay-berries, of each se∣ven drops; being well mixed together, make a Glister thereof, and put it up according to Art. Or take Hyppocrass and Sack, of each half a pint, Oyl of Rue and Aqua-vitae, of each one ounce, Oyl of Cinamon and Juniper, of each six drop; being mixed well together, put it up Glister-ways. Or take of the best White-Wine twelve oun∣ces, Oyl of Amber, Cloves, Juniper and Cina∣mon, of each five drops; mix them together, and put it up warm, for it giveth present ease. After which, Take of the Pills of Hiera with Agarick two drams, Oyl of Nutmegs and Jani∣per-berries, of each five drops: mix them to∣gether, and make thereof fifteen Pills, of which let the Patient take two at night, and three in the morning, until they are all ta∣ken. But if the pain cometh from sharp and Cholerick Humours, or Flegm, Imposthumes or Ulcerations, there is no better Medicine
than my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills. The more to ease the pain, Take Diaphaenicon three or four drams, Phy∣lonium Romanum two scruples, the distilled Wa∣ter of Camomil four ounces, Syrup of Mints half an ounce; being mixed together give it to the Patient going to Bed, for this very Medicine hath done much good. Or take Diasatyrion one ounce, Sal Prunella half an ounce, Oyl of Cinamon three drops, mix them well together, and take as much as a Nutmeg every morning in Wormwood-wine or Beer, repeating the same, as need re∣quire. If the Stomach be cold, or full of viscous and tough flegm, drink sometimes (notwith∣standing taking the Pills) the Liquor made as followeth: Take Pellitory of Spain two drams, Gallin∣gal one dram, bruise them grosly, and boil it in a pint and a half of the best White-Wine, to the consumption of the third part, after which strain it, and drink a quarter of a pint at a time, for four mornings together, fasting af∣ter it each time two hours; and with so do∣ing you will have cause to give me thanks. Or take Cinamon half an ounce, Cardamom∣seeds, Cloves and Gallangal, Saffron, White-Pepper,
Bay-berries, of each one dram, Dou∣ble-Refined-Sugar three ounces, beat all these into fine Powder, mix therewith a small quantity of the best Sack, stirring it well to∣gether, and eat thereof with a little Bread first and last, &c. Or take Carduus, Centaury and Balm, Worm∣wood and Agrimony, of each a like quantity, boil them in new Milk, after which turn it with White-wine or Ale; then strain it, and drink a good dranght thereof hot, as afore∣directed; for it taketh away the pain of the Stomach to admiration. Or take Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinamon, Ginger, of each two drams, Gallingal one dram, Mace three drams, Sugar one pound, being all beat to very fine powder, take thereof a small quan∣tity at any time, for it is very profitable. Or to take away the pain of the Stomach, make use of the Medicines following. Take Oyl of Nutmegs, Cloves, and Oyl of Mace, of each a like; being mixed together, anoint the pit of the Stomach therewith. Or you may take red Mints, being cut small, mix them with Rye Paste, and warm it in a Frying-Pan, and apply it to the Sto∣mach, and when it is cold make it hot again, and do as afore-directed.
Or take white Frankincense, being spread upon Sheeps Leather apply it hot to the Sto∣mach, and let it there remain four or five days. Or apply to the Stomach the following Plaister: Take Bread four ounces, and boyl it in a sufficient quantity of Milk, with half a hand∣ful of Spermint cut small; and towards the latter end of the boyling, add thereto the yolks of two or three Eggs, Saffron in powder one dram, and apply thereof hot to the pit of the Stomach. These and such-like I have often known to take away the violent pain in the Stomach. And after the pain is gone, take now and then a dose of the foresaid Pills, lest it return again.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Weakness of the Liver. THe weakness of the Liver is caused by Distempers which are either hot, cold, moist, or dry. The hot Distemper doth not only burn up the humours which were before in the Liver, but the Humours conveighed thereunto by the Mesentery-Veins. The cold Distemper doth cause the crude and flegmatick humor that already is contain∣ed in the Liver, to be gross and very tough, and exceeding hard to be removed; and the Humours conveighed to the Liver are left many times but half digested. The dry Distemper doth cause the Hu∣mours to be the more dry and thick. And the moist Distemper of the Liver doth cause the Humours to become more thin and watry, &c. The Signs of this Disease are many, which I shall here omit. And so come to shew the
way to cure the hot Distemper of the Li∣ver, &c. In the first place let the Patient make use of such Diet as will by degrees cool, as Wood-Sorrel, Endive, Lettuce, Sow-thistles, and Succory; being boiled in equal parts of white∣wine and water, strain it, and sweeten it with the Syrup of Violets, whereof let the Pati∣ent take as often as he pleaseth. Or take Liverwort, Endive and Succory, of each two or three handfuls, Barly husked one pound; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the consum∣ption of the third part; after which strain it, and keep it for the foresaid use. You may adde there to some Syrup of Pom∣granates, or Syrup of Vinegar-Simple. Let the Patient eat Raisins of the Sun, Oran∣ges, Lemons, and sweet Almonds, and let his meat be of light digestion, as Chickens, Larks, and Veal, &c. And abstain from all Meats or Drinks wherein is Honey mixed. And let him make use of the Lozenges made as followeth. Take Raisins of the Sun one ounce, Powder of Diatrion Santalon, Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each one dram and a half, the Flowers of Endive and Red Roses, of each two scruples, White
Sanders, Flowers of Squinant, of each one scruple, White Sugar Double-Refined, five or six ounces, and make them up into Lozenges with the distilled VVater of Cichory and Endive, for they much strengthen and cool the Liver. Or make Pulvis Haly into an Electuary with Syrup of Violets, and take as much as a Nut∣meg first and last. Or let the Patient take once a week one scruple or half a dram of Phylonium Roma∣num at night going to Bed. Or take the Distilled Water of Strawberry-Leaves three Pints, Liverwort one good hand∣ful bruised; being boiled to the consumption of the third part, strain it and sweeten it with the Syrup of Spermint, and take thereof first and last, and at any time, for it wonderfully cools the hot Distemper of the Liver. Or take the Distilled Water of Woodbind-Flowers, Cichory, and Sorrel-Water, of each a like, and sweeten it with Syrup of Quinces, and drink often thereof. Or take the Liver of a Calf, and one peck of Sage, being cut small distil them in a Glass Lim∣beck, and drink thereof every night last going to Bed. Or take Harts Tongue, and Bramble-leaves,
of each alike; being boiled in water to the con∣sumption of half, strain it, and drink there∣of. You may also anoint the Region of the Li∣ver with Oyl of Lillies and Roses mixed toge∣ther, or bath with the decoction of Roses, Ca∣momil and Quinces. Or take Oyl of Quinces, Water-Lillies and Roses, of each alike; or boil Dates and a small quantity of Wormwood in the aforesaid Oyls, and make a Spunge or Wool moist therein, and apply it to the part above-men∣tioned. In the Cold Distemper of the Liver: Take the Confection called Diacinamomi, Diasatyrion, of each one ounce, Syrup of Mints half an ounce; being mixed well to∣gether, take as much as a Nutmeg first and last. Or take of the Conserve of Sage two ounces, Powder of Gallingal half an ounce, make them up into an Electuary with Syrup of Worm∣wood, and take thereof as afore-directed. Or take the Roots of Smallage, Parsly, Fen∣nel, of each two drams, Asarum, Calamint, Wormwood, Succory, Origan, Agrimony, Hy∣sop,
Spermint, of each one handful, Seeds of Caraway, Fennel, Annis, Daucus and Comin, of each half an ounce, Cinamon and Squinant, of each three drams, Flowers of Camomil and Roses, of each one handful, Mastick one dram; boil these in three pints of the best White-wine, mixing therewith one quart of Spring-water, to the consumption of the third part. After which strain it, and add thereto Syrup of Wormwood one ounce and a half, Syrup of Agri∣mony six ounces. Being well mixed together, let the Pati∣ent drink four ounces at a time twice a day, first in the morning, and two hours after Din∣ner. Or let him take often of the Conserve of Wormwood, mixing therewith each time a drop or two of the Chymical Oyl. Or drink some drops of the Spirit in Wine first and last, two hours before Dinner, and two hours after. Outwardly you may use the Oyl of Worm∣wood, Nard, and Oyl of Camomil mixed toge∣ther, making it hot. Or take Nard Oyl, Oyl of Wormwood and Rue, of each one ounce and a half, Spicknard, Squinant, Cinamon, Cloves, Mastick, Wood
of Aloes (all made into fine Powder) of each two scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the best Wax, make them up into an Ointment. And let the Patient make use of such meats as are of light Digestion, which are with all somewhat heating, and let him drink Wine at Meals that is thin, and hot broth wherein is boiled Sage, Savory, Sauthern∣wood, Hysop, Fennel, and Parsly, and such like. In the moist Distemper of the Liver, Let the Patient make use of drying Medi∣cines, as the Decoction of Sasaphras, Sasa∣perilla, Lignum vita, and China, &c. and let him eat flesh well roasted, and let him make use of dry Baths, or hot Houses. Or take Venice Treacle one dram, Diaphore∣tick Antimony ten grains, Chymical Oyl of Worm∣wood five drops, mix them together, & drink it off in a Glass of Sack, and sweat moderately. Thus do once or twice a week. Or take Dialacca, Diacurcuma, and Syrup of Wormwood, of each one ounce, mix them to∣gether, and take as much as a Nutmeg at a time morning and evening, for it is not onely good against the over-moistness of the Li∣ver,
but very good against the Dropsie, be∣cause it strengthens the Liver, &c. In the dry Distemper of the Liver, The Patient ought to make use of moist Medicines; therefore if the Body be costive, take at night going to Bed one ounce of the Lenitive Electuary, or of Cassia newly drawn; with either of which mix two or three drops of the Chymical Oyl of VVormwood, for that will strengthen the Liver. You may take the powder of a VVolfs Li∣ver well prepared, one dram; the distilled VVater of Strawberries four ounces, Syrup of Violets half an ounce; being mixed to∣gether drink it all at once in the morning, re∣peating the same as need require. The Livers of young Rooks washed in White-wine, and after dried, and made into fine powder, as aforesaid, is very profitable in such cases. Or take half a dram every morning of Dia∣margaritum frigidum, or Diatragacanti frigidi, or Pulvis Haly, as afore-directed, for I will assure you it is also very profitable.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the Stoppage of the Liver. THe Stoppage of the Liver is a continual straightness of the Branches of the Gate and hollow Vein, &c. The cause of which stoppage is oftentimes viscous, gross and clammy Excrements; some∣times the over-plenty of Humours causeth stoppage, more especially when they are tough and clammy, and cannot find a free passage. The Signs are known by Grief and Heavi∣ness about the right side, and stretching forth. If this stoppage come of gross and tough hu∣mours, then followeth heaviness with sense of pain; but sometime ease, and then pain a∣gain. Sometimes the Patient hath a Fever, and sometimes no Fever. Oftentimes the breath is short and very difficult, especially when the Patient goeth up a hill, or up a pair of stairs, or walketh fast; because the parts stopped do draw the Midriff downwards, and so hinders its free motion.
The Cure of this Distemper ought to be begun with Medicines that will cause plentiful Evacuation of the whole Body by a potion or Pills agreeable to the nature of the Di∣stemper. Therefore make use of the following Potion. Take of the Electuary of the Juice of Ro∣ses six drams, Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb three drams, Salt of Tartar ten grains, Salt of Wormwood twelve grains, with a sufficient quantity of the distilled Water of Cichory, make a potion thereof, which take in the morning fasting. Or take Rosin of Scamony, and Rosin of Jal∣lap, of each ten grains, Extract of Rhubarb fifteen grains, Tartarum Vitriolatum twelve grains, Salt of Wormwood five grains; with a sufficient quantity of the foresaid water, or the distilled VVater of Fumatory, make a Potion thereof, which drink as afore-di∣rected. Note either of these potions may serve the weaker sort twice, being equally divi∣ded. Or if you please take of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they very power∣fully
open all manner of Obstructions, and strengthens the Liver besides. And after the Patient hath taken of either of the Potions, or the Pills afore-directed, if the Body abound with fulness, open the Li∣ver-Vein in the right Arm, and draw forth such a quantity of Blood as may be thought requisite. After which, make use of the following Broth: Take Roots of Sparagus, Smallage, and Parsly, of each half an ounce, Agrimony, Mai∣den-hair and Hysop, of each one handful, Cry∣stal of Tartar that is rightly prepared one dram; boil them with a Neck of Mutton, or with a Chicken, and make broth therewith every morning, for a week or nine days toge∣ther. Every second or third day you may in∣fuse into this broth one dram of Anni∣seed, which will keep the Body very so∣luble. Or make use of the following Pills, for they also are good to remove Ob∣structions. Take of the Pills of Hiera with Agarick one ounce, the Troches of Agarick one dram, the Powder of the lesser compound of Senne half
an ounce, Aloes Rosate two drams, the Powder of Steel one ounce and a half, the faecula of Briony, Aron and Piony, round Birth-wort, Madder, Borax, Cloves, of each half a dram, Salt of Mugwort one scruple, Spirit of VVormwood fif∣teen drops, the Powder of Turpentine one dram; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Cicho∣ry, with Rhubarb, make them up into a mass for Pills. The Dose is from two scruples to one dram. Or take Filings of Steel one ounce, Eli∣campane and Eringo-Roots, of each half an ounce, Senne one ounce and a half, the in∣ward Rind of Tamarisk two drams, Epithi∣mum half an ounce, Cinamon and faecula of Briony, of each one dram, the Powder of white, yellow and red Sanders, of each twenty grains, VVhite-wine, and the distilled water of Agrimony, of each half a pint; being in∣fused three days in Balneo Maria, strain it, and take thereof three ounces every day, two or three hours before Dinner. Or make use of the following Syrup. Take of the Filings of Steel infused in Vinegar two ounces, the middle Rind of Tama∣risk half an ounce, Cinamon three drams, Cete∣rach half a handful, the distilled Water of Agri∣mony and Wormwood, of each half a pint, White-Wine
sixteen ounces, infuse them in some warm place for six or seven days; then strain it, and add to the strained Liquor of the best double refined-Sugar one pound and a half, and make a Syrup thereof according to Art, of which let the Patient take two or three spoonfuls every morning fasting. The following Pills are also of excellent use. Take Rhubarb, Senne, Aloes, Succatrina, Agarick, Jallap, of each one dram, Steel prepa∣red with Sulphur half an ounce, Diarrhodon Abbatis half a dram, Saffron ten grains, Mer∣curius Dulcis one dram; with a sufficient quan∣tity of Syrup of Roses solutive, make them up in a mass, and of every dram make six Pills; of which take two at night, and three in the morning for fifteen or twenty days to∣gether, if need require. The more to strengthen the Liver, and take away the obstructions of the same, Take the Roots of Ground-pine and Orris, the Seeds of Smallage and Annis, of each two drams, Asarum two drams and a half, Camomile Flow∣ers, Ginger, Cinamon, and Carraway Seed, of each one dram, Red-Nettle-seed, Gentian, Hoarhound and Stacados, of each two drams; be∣ing all made into fine Powder, make them
up into an Electuary with a sufficient quantity of Oxymel of Squills. This Medicine purgeth by Urine power∣fully, and hath done strange Cures. You may take the quantity of a large Nut∣meg at a time, first in the morning and last at night; the stronger sort may take more. You may apply outwardly the Ointments directed in the Cold Distemper of the Liver, &c.
CHAP. XXIV. Of the DROPSIE. THe Dropsie is a preternatural Collection of a thinnish Wa∣ter, &c. There are in general three sorts of Dropsies: The first is called Ascites. The second Tympanites. The third Anasarca. Ascites is a swelling of the Belly, and some∣times the Legs and Feet, caused by a serous Humour, and being of the Nature of Wa∣ter it is cold, but as it is salt it hath in it heat, caused by the nearness of the Bowels, and the more by the putrifaction which is gathered by long continuance, from whence comes a fever and thirst, namely from the stinking salt vapours which do infect the Orifice or mouth of the Stomach.
The Dropsie called Tympanites hath its Name from a Drum, because the Abdomen is extended or stretched forth like to a Drum; and being struck with your hand it sounds like it. This extention is from Wind shut up in the hollowness of the Abdomen, and some∣times in the hollowness of the Guts. The wind which causeth a Tympany is seldom contained in the Belly alone, but most com∣monly mixed with water; as in Ascites not only water, but wind also is contained. Both which Dropsies have their Name of that which predominateth; if more wind than water, it is a Tympany; if more water than wind, an Ascites; but if equal, between both; they cannot always be discerned one from the other. The chief cause of wind is a raw Humour and thick, whether Flegm or Melancholy, which being stirred and made thin by heat, sends forth thick vapours, which are called flatus, and are hard to be dissolved. This thick raw Humour is partly in the Stomach and Guts, but more especially between the Membranes of the Midriff and Guts. So the more hard to be removed, than from the hol∣lowness of the parts aforesaid; Hippocrates saith, They who have pains and gripings about
the Navel and Loins which cannot be removed, have a dry Dropsie, &c. The Dropsie called Anasarca comes of a flegmatick Humour dispersed through the whole Body, and therefore the Body is swel∣led and puft up, and seems white, from whence the Disease is called Leucophlegmatia. This Flegm comes from a cold Liver, which instead of good Blood produceth raw and flegmatick, and when it cannot be turned into the substance of the parts, leaves the raw part thereof unfit for nourishment upon them, and so makes them swell, from whence comes Anasarca, or Leucophlegmatia: this Disease in the beginning is called Cachexia, &c. Most Dropsies are caused through great coldness of the Liver, or through other parts over-much cooled, which doth bring the Li∣ver oftentimes into the same affect. The Li∣ver is affected by the Spleen being cold, and by the Stomach and Bowels; likewise by the Lungs, the Reins, and Diaphragma, and some∣times by the immoderate flux of the Hemor∣thoids, or through the superfluity of Wo∣mens monthly Sickness, but commonly through the obstruction or stoppage of the same: and often through some other great
affection of the Womb. And in all these the Liver is found without unnatural swelling, and yet the Body affected with the Dropsie, caused through the over-coldness of the Liver affected in the first place; but afterward it groweth hard, which may be seen in them which by drinking over-much small Beer and cold water have their Liver cooled, so that the Dropsie forthwith followeth, before the Li∣ver is puft up with knotty swelling; some fall into this Distemper through the loss of much Blood, others after long-continued Agues, &c. ☞ But thousands in these days through the excessive drinking of Brandy, which beyond all other Liquors commonly drunk, Burns and dries up the Radical Moisture, hinders the circulation of the Blood, and turns it into a serous matter, &c. from which follows sud∣den death: for I have not yet hardly seen an old Brandy-Drinker to receive a perfect Cure. Some fall into the Dropsie after the Gout, or through the violent pain of the Huckle-Bones, commonly such whose Stomachs are dejected, and have no good Digestion, and have an evil habit of Body, and troubled with the Jaundice, forthwith follows the Dropsie.
Sometimes those who have a Dysenteria and the French Pox, the Dropsie also fol∣lows. The Symptoms or Signs of the Dropsie are in brief as followeth: In that Dropsie called Ascites, the whole Belly is swelled up; and if it be but stricken, there is heard such a kind of sound as a Bot∣tle maketh that is not full of water; but the other parts, especially the upper parts of the Body, are not swelled not puffed up. In that Dropsie called Tympanites, the Bel∣ly is puffed up, and extended forth; and be∣ing stricken, it maketh a noise much like to a Tabor or Trimbrel: but the other parts of the Body becomes lean. In that Dropsie called Anasarca, &c. all the whole Body waxeth loose, and as it were like to a Spunge, so that it swelleth up, and is like to a dead Body. In most Dropsies, the Feet, Ankles, and Legs, especially upon the Shin-Bones, com∣monly swell first; sometimes the Belly and Privy Members, &c. so that if you thrust your fingers thereon, the part will pit, and leave an impression; the colour of the Skin,
especially the Face, is pale and swarthy, the Urine little and thick, and oftentimes very red, the Breath short, the Appetite de∣jected or altogether lost, a troublesom thirst, by reason of the sharpness and saltness of the humour in which the Stomach swimmeth, (and if not in time prevented) then follows a lingering Fever, &c. from the corruption of the water, which at length doth corrupt all the Bowels swimming therein. ☞ As touching the most infallible Cure of Men in Dropsies ever yet found out, ob∣serve truely the following Method, and take my word for it you will never have cause to repent, neither have need to fool your selves with Medicines that are not in the least pro∣fitable. So in the first place know that one Diet may properly be made use of in all sorts of Dropsies, provided it be of light digestion, and dry; for that meat that is loose and moist, is apt to turn into water: there∣fore make use of Partridges, Black-birds, Thrushes, Larks and Chickens, especially the extream parts; also of Rabbets, Hares, Goats and Mutton well roasted.
And let the Patient abstain from Milk, But∣termilk, Cheese and Whey, &c. and from all sorts of Fish except Crabs, and from Eggs if not well roasted; and from all kinds of broths, except such that have Parsly, Smallage, Pen∣niroyal, Garden-Cresses, Elder-Buds, Leeks, Onions and Garlick boiled therein; and from all manner of Fruits except sweet Almonds, Nuts, Pomgranates, dry Figs, Pippins roasted, and Pears baked, especially Wardens, and these to be taken moderately. Let the Patient forbear drinking of Bran∣dy, and all other hot Spirits, sophisticated VVines, small Beer and VVater of all sorts, for that destroys many labouring under the Dropsie, witness the VVells. Let your Drink the VVhite-VVine and Rhenish Wine, or Wormwood-Ale and White-wine mixed together: Beer not too strong, nor too small, but for the most part make use of the Drink directed hereafter; but be very sparing in all, and indure thirst as much as possible; in order to it, mix Vine∣gar and steeled VVater together, and wash your mouth there-with, and often chew Ma∣stick therein, and eat of Sea-Biskets or hard Crusts of Bread, for it draws water forth of the Stomach to the Mouth, so quencheth thirst.
And when you perceive any of the Signs made mention of in page 147, &c. ☞ Forthwith make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills; for they are the Only Famous and Safe Medicine (ever yet known in the world, to combat the Dropsie) whose Composition is without Mercury or any other poy∣sonous Ingredients, as many other Medicines are (to the great damage of the Patient) too frequently given in this deplorable and per∣nicious Distemper. The Patient newly taken with the Dropsie may take of those Pills every second or third day. But where the Disease is stubborn and of long continuance, begin with two Pills, more or less, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient, and take them every day, if strength will permit, and so continue for a month or six weeks, if need require. And be not perswaded by any means to the con∣trary; for I never yet knew them fail, where the Distemper was really accounted cu∣rable. You may take them in the Spring and Sum∣mer at night going to bed, or after your first Sleep, or take one at night and two in the morning.
But in the Winter-season take them al∣ways about five or six of the Clock in the morning, lest by rising in the night you take cold. If you have any Inclination to rest, you may lie in your Bed two or three hours after the taking thereof, and they will work the better. You may swallow them in the Pap of a roasted Apple, or in the Skin of a Raisin or Prune, or in a preserved Cherry, or with Beer or Ale, or any other way. Such that cannot take them whole as they are, may cut them very small, and make them up into an Electuary, or into a Bolus, with a small quantity of Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, or Diascordium, or with any Cordial Syrup, especially if the Stomach be cold. Such whose Bodies abound with heat, and notwithstanding the Dropsie are Hectick, may take them with a small quantity of the Leni∣tive Electuary, Cassia newly drawn, or with Syrup of Roses or Violets. And if the Sto∣mach be very hot, they will operate the bet∣ter. You need not drink Posset or Broth, as with other Physick, but if dry what you please, as VVhite-wine, Beer, or Ale, &c. warm; but, as afore-directed, be moderate.
☞ Such that take my Pills against that Dropsie called Ascites, who through weak∣ness of Body, by reason of long Sickness, cannot make use thereof so often as need re∣quire, the Belly being subject to Costiveness, let them sometimes make use of the follow∣ing Glister. Take the Flowers of Camomile and wild Laurel, of each two drams, Agarick and Polli∣pody of the Oak, of each one dram and a half, Doder half an ounce; being bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of VVater or VVhite-wine to the consumption of the third part; then strain it, and add to one pint there∣of Honey of Roses one ounce and a half, the E∣lectuaries of Nidum, and Benedicta Laxitiva, of each three drams, Oyl of Camomile, Rue and Orris, of each one ounce; being mixed together, make a Glister thereof. ☞ In that Dropsie called Tympanites, notwithstanding taking my Pills, the Patient may also make use of the Glister made as followeth: for it is of excellent use to dis∣solve and discuss wind, &c. Take the Roots of Fennel and Smallage, of each one ounce and a half, Seeds of Co∣min, Lovage, Parsly, Annis, Fennal, and Daucus, of each two ounces, Caraway-seeds
half an ounce, Deanwort, Rue, Asarum, and Melilot, of each one handful, being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, to the consumption of half, then strain it, and take thereof three quarters of a pint: to which add the Electuary of Bay-berries, Be∣nedicta Laxativa, and Hiera Picra, of each half an ounce, Oyl of Dill and Rue, of each one ounce, Sal Prunella four scruples; mix them well together, and make thereof a Glister, which put up according to Art. ☞ And not only in the Dropsie Ascites and Tympanites, but in that Dropsie called Ana∣sarca, the more to provoke Urine, and to expel VVind, with the use of my Pills make trial of the following Powder. Take the Seeds of Cithory, Ash-Keys, Bur∣dock and Red Nettles, Parsly, Fennel, Alexan∣der, of each half an ounce, Pellitory of Spain three drams, Sal Prunella, and Juniper-berries of each one ounce, being beaten into Powder, take one dram in four ounces of VVhite-wine first and last, except the days you take the Pills. You may apply outwardly the following Plaister, &c. Take the Flowers of Melilot and Camomile, of each two drams, Savory, Mints, and Asa∣rum,
of each half a dram; Seeds of Fennel, Rue, Annis, Comin, Daucus, of each one dram and a half, Cardamoms one scruple, Mirrh and Castor, of each one scruple and a half; be∣ing made into fine powder, add thereto Oyl of Dill two ounces, Oyl of Rue three oun∣ces, with as much VVax and Rosin as is suffi∣cient, make them up into a Plaister, accord∣ing to Art, which apply to the Belly, repeat∣ing the same, as need require. Or take the Plaister of Bay-berries, and the great Plaister of Diachylon with Gumm, of each a sufficient quantity, adding thereto the Chymical Oyl of Bayberries and Juniper, of each one scruple, being mixed together spread it upon Sheeps Leather, and apply it to the Belly, as afore-directed. You may anoint the Belly often with the following Ointment. Take the Flower of Linseed, Fenugreek, Beans and Barly, of each two ounces, the Ointment called Ʋnguentum Agrippae one ounce and a half, the seeds of Negella, Daucus and Marsh-Mallows, of each one dram, Euphor∣bium, Roch-Allum, Frankincense, of each one dram and a half, fine Bole and quick Brim∣stone, of each two drams, Orris Roots three drams, Oil of Rue, white Lillies, Orris,
Elder and Camomile, of each one ounce, Oil of Turpentine ten drams, with a suffici∣ent quantity of Bees VVax make thereof an Ointment, and anoint the Parts swelled there∣with before a good Fire. Or take the Ointment of Sowbread, Marsh-Mallows, the Ointment called Ʋnguentum Mar∣tiatum, of each one ounce and a half; Oyl of Ro∣ses, Rue, Sage, Elder and White Lillies, of each half an ounce. Mix them together, and anoint the Parts therewith, as afore-dire∣cted. For they are not onely beneficial in the Tympany, being the worst of Dropsies, but in Ascites. And in that Dropsie called Anasarca, &c. But assure your selves where my Pills are made use of in time, there will be little or no need of outward applications. ☞ For they alone have in them a Specifique or Particular Vertue totally to root out the Dropsie of all kinds, and to strengthen the Liver, and the rest of the Principal Bowels (through the Coldness and VVeakness of which, most Dropsies proceed.)
Yet notwithstanding (instead of ordinary Drink) make use of either of the Drinks made as followeth; seeing that oftentimes they conduce much to the Cure. Take the Bark of Elder, Red Sage, Ground Ivy, or the Herb called Alchoof, Smallage, the Roots of Fennel, Aron, and Pollipody of the Oak, Scurvygrass and Brook-lime, of each half a pound, the best Juniper-Berries one pound, Ginger one ounce, being cut and bruised, tie them up into a thin Cloth, and hang it in an Earthen Stein, and pour thereto a sufficient quantity of New Ale or Beer, (such that are abse may add some Rhenish or VVhite-wine) so let it work together; when fit to drink, make use thereof. Or take Clivers and Elder-Bark, of each three or four good handfuls, Galsingal one ounce, being cut and bruifed, boil them in six Quarts of small Ale, to the consumption of half, then add thereto three Quarts of the best White-wine, and let it just boil up the second time; strain it, and drink thereof when dry, as of ordinary Drink. Or take the Bark of the Roots of Elder two handfuls, Sasaphrass, Sarsaperilla, of each two ounces, Winter Cinamon, and Winter Cherries, of each one ounce and a half, the Seeds of A∣lexander
one ounce; being cut and bruised very small, boil them in six quarts of White∣wine, to the consumption of the third part; strain it, and sweeten it with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows, and drink thereof a quarter of a pint hot first and last. Or take White-Wine four quarts, the best Nutmegs and Winter-Cherries, of each twenty in number; being cut and bruised, boil them to the consumption of the fourth part, then strain it, and keep it for use: of which Liquor let the Patient drink a small quantity at a time, when he pleaseth; for it will not only com∣fort the Spirits, and strengthen the Liver, but with My Pills cause much Urine. Or take Diacurcuma, Dialacca, of each two drams, Troches of Rhubarb one dram; with a sufficient quantity of the Conserve and Syrup of Wormwood, make them up into an Electu∣ry, and let the Patient take the quantity of a Nutmeg at pleasure, for it strengthens the Li∣ver to admiration. To eat often of the Conserve of Sea-Worm∣wood, is also very profitable. Sweating is of wonderful profit in this Dis∣ease: So if it cannot be gained through exer∣cise, as by walking in the Summer time in the Sun, or in a warm room in the Winter-sea∣son;
make use once a week, upon a day you take no Pills, of the Medicine made as fol∣loweth. Take Venice-Treacle one dram and a half, Diaphoretique Antimony ten grains, Salt of Wormwood and Salt of Tartar, of each five grains; being mixed together, take it upon the point of a Knife, or in a Glass of hot Sack, and sweat as strength will permit. Or take Carduus-Water three ounces, the Spi∣rit of Saffron and Treacle-Water, of each one ounce, Syrup of Balm and Clove-Gilliflowers, of each six drams, the Chimical Oyl of Sulphur ten drops; mix them, and make a Potion there∣of, which take in the morning, and sweat as directed.
CHAP. XXV. Of the SCURVY. SCORBƲTI, as Authors say, is a barbarous word, and for∣merly unknown to most of the Ancient Physicians, (especi∣ally those of the Southern Parts) and derived from the Danes: Which Disease was supposed to be that which Pliny maketh mention of in his Natural History. The Principal Causes of the Scurvy comes from a thick and saltish Constitution of the Air, being corrupt, as the Air near the Sea, fenny, foggy, or moist places, which infect by the unwholesome Vapours coming from the same.
Also the eating of salt Meat, and Bread twice baked, Fish over-much dried in the Smoak, rusty Bacon, and many other sorts of Diet which are of corrupt nourishment: de∣cayed Beer and stinking Water do cause this Disease. Likewise it comes through the Obstruction of the Spleen; the course of Melancholy being hindred, and mixed with the rest of the Blood, infecteth the whole Body with Cor∣ruption and violent wasting: The grosser part falling down, staineth the Legs with spots of divers colours; the thinner part being carried up, doth defile the Gums with sharp, salt, and fretting humours, and filthy growing of flesh between the Teeth. The Symptoms or Signs of the Scurvy are in chief as followeth: A pricking and grievous pain in the Head, a stinking Breath or evil savour of the Mouth, Jaws and Teeth, the Gums bleed, and are often red, and itch, and soon corrupt, the Teeth loose, black, and rotten. Spots in the Face, Body, Thighs and Legs, at first commonly Red, but afterwards Blew, Purple-colour, or Black, sometimes Yellow,
&c. which proceeds from the serous, corrupt and filthy part of the Blood, which being un∣fit to nourish the Body, is sent forth. The Patient is often troubled with a suffo∣cation, and as it were choked up; the Heart panteth, the Stomach is puffed up, the Left Side is commonly swelled; there are percei∣ved frequent Sighings, Belchings, Cramps, and Windiness, motions to Vomit; some∣times the Patient is feverish, at other times tremble and shiver with cold, and upon a sud∣den hot again; sometimes heavy, dull, and melancholy, disability to walk; upon a sud∣den their Breath fail, and it is with very much difficulty, if they use but the least motion; when they offer to rise, or sit but upright, they are almost ready to die, their Spirits so much fail them; but when they lie down, they seem to be much refreshed, and breathe not with so much difficulty; and for the most part their Appetites are sharp, and greedy of Meat, and desire to eat often; the Stomach seldom failing; but the Belly often costive or bound; and yet I have known many subject to a continual Flux. And sometimes the Spots in the Legs are broad, and are very black, leaden-colour or blew, and they often swell; and sometimes
the Legs become so much ulcerated, that the Shin-bones lie bare: which Disease, if not timely prevented, in some Constitutions will turn into a kind of Leprosie, &c. In this Disease there are also pains in the Shoulders, Arms, Back, Sides, Hips, Thighs, and Legs, especially upon the Shin-bones, which are much like those of the Pox, and may perhaps deceive the Physician, where the Scurvy is Rare, and the Pox common. But they may with ease be distinguished: For the pains of the Pox are between the Joints; and if they continue long, there fol∣lows Nodes or Knots; and there are or have been other signs, as the Running of the Reins, Ulcers in the Privy Parts, sometimes in the Throat, Pallat, Mouth and Nostrils; Buboes in the Groin, all which come most commonly from Unclean Women. But the pains in the Scurvy seiz upon all parts indifferently, and there are many other Symptoms of it, as aforesaid, at least a me∣lancholy Constitution: and the matter is tru∣ly known, if the Patient will in truth affirm that he hath not had Carnal Copulation with Ʋnclean Women.
There are many other Symptoms of the Scurvy, which for Brevity-sake I shall here omit. And so Demonstrate a Certain, Safe, and Alsolute Way of Cure, which is as fol∣loweth: If the Body be Plethorick or full, Let Blood if strength will permit, but in small quantity, and that chiefly in the Hemorrhoid-Veins, by Leeches; but if you perceive the Spleen affected in particular, then open the Middle-Vein in the Left Arm; but if the Liver be more affected, open the Liver-Vein in the right Arm, or the Basilica, or Middle-Vein. But be sure not to attempt Phlebotomy, if it be not in the beginning of the Disease. For when the Distemper is deep rooted, and hath spread it self over the whole Body, Bleeding may then prove destructive. So begin with the Medicine following, which doubtless will prove to be very profi∣table. Take the Bark of Ash Tree, the Bark of Cap∣pers, of each two drams, Pollipody two drams and a half, the Roots of Black Hellebore, first boiled in the distilled Water of Balm, and dried, three drams, Fennel-seeds, Annis-seeds, of
each half a dram, the Roots of China two drams, of the Four Great Cold Seeds, of each one dram, the Leaves of Wormwood, Betony, and the lesser Centaury, Germander, Cetarach, of each half a handful, Thyme, Epithimum, of each one Pu∣gil, the Leaves of Senna, and the best Rhu∣barb, of each two drams, Conserve of Burrage, Balm, and Fumatory, of each one ounce; be∣ing cut and bruised, boil them in three pints of Water to the consumption of the third part, strain it, and let the Patient drink a quarter of a pint two hours before Supper, repeating the same as need require. Or take of the best Senna two drams, the choi∣cest Rhubarb one dram; being bruised, infuse them in five or six ounces of the Distilled Water of Wormwood, for the space of one night; af∣ter which strain it, and add thereto Diacatho∣licon two drams, the Electuary of Roses one dram, Syrup of Epithimum half an ounce; mix them together, and take it warm in the morning, fasting after it six hours. ☞ But the most infalliblest way that I can in truth direct you to for the Cure of this now Common Disease, is to make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they so highly Purifie and Sweeten the Blood, that no other Medicine can be compared to them in
the Cure of the Dropsie and Scurvy, with all other sharp, salt and watry Humours. And with them make use of the Diet-Drink directed first in the Chapter of the Dropsie, page 156. Or sometimes make use of the following Medicines: Take Brook-lime, Water-Cresses, the lesser Celandine, Wormwood, and Fumatory, of each one handful, Red-Dock-Roots one pound, Horse-Radish four ounces; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of small Ale, with a quart or more of VVhite-wine, to the con∣sumption of the third part; being strained, keep it for use: of which let the Patient take a quarter of a pint first and last. Or take Hysop, Germander, Betony, Ceta∣rach, Carduus, Asarum, Agrimony, Burrage, and Bugloss, of each one handful, the Flowers of Tamarisk, and Doder of Time, of each one ounce, the Bark of Cappers, Tamarisk, and Ash, of each two ounces, Pollipody of the Oak, and Red-Dock-Roots, of each two ounces and a half; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of small Ale mixed with VVhite-wine, to the Consumption of the third part, and drink thereof, as afore-dire∣cted.
Or take the Juice of Water-Cresses and Brook∣lime, of each one ounce, the Juice of Fumatory two ounces; mix them, and make a Potion thereof; which drink every morning fasting. Or take the Juice of both sorts of Scurvy-grass, White-wine and the Juice of Oranges, of each one pint; being mixed together, drink thereof first and last three or four spoonfuls at a time. Or take the Juice of Lemons, Sorrel, Brook∣lime and Water-Cresses, Fumatory and White-Wine, of each an equal quantity; being mixed together, take thereof as afore-directed. Always observe to drink it warm, so you may take thereof, notwithstanding the taking my Pills, which with them will prove cer∣tainly effectual in this Distemper. After you have purged sufficiently with my Pill, if much broke out, make use of the following Ointment: Take Ointment of Roses three ounces, the white Ointment with Camphire two ounces, Sal Prunella one ounce, Mercurius Dulcis, Ginger, Burnt Al∣lum, of each half an ounce; make them into an Ointment with Oil of Roses and Juice of Lemons, according to Art. Or take Red-Dock-Roots and Elicampane, of each one pound, the Buds or Leaves of Elder two handfuls, Rosemary and Bay-Leaves, of each
one handful, Cloves one dram; being cut and bruised, boil them in May-Butter or Hogs-fat to an Ointment; and if you please, to every pound thereof add two ounces of the Flower of Brimstone, and anoint the Pustules or Scabs therewith, for it will heal the greatest Scab or Itch, with the use of my Pills. Such that have the Scurvy in the Gums, notwithstanding taking of my Pills, let them take Vinegar of Squills, and Plantane Water, and gargle therewith. Or take Crab-Verjuice and Scurvygrass-Wa∣ter, of each alike, and add thereto a small quanti∣ty of Honey and Allom, and gargle therewith as afore-directed. Or make use of some of the Medicines di∣rected, p. 91, 92, &c.
CHAP. XXVI. Of the JAUNDICE. THe Jaundice (according to most Authors) is nothing but a Yellow Colour of the whole Body, proceeding of Choler spread all over the Skin; and yet the Liver safe; as in the Crisis of Diseases often-times the Jaundice is caused, and doth happen when the Blood is corrupted without a Fever, or some external Cause, and is made Cholerick; as it falleth out by the biting of Venomous Beasts. It also may be caused through inflammation or change of the temperament of the Liver. Sometimes it is caused through Embecillity or Weakness of the Bladder that receiveth the Choler, which doth not attract or draw, as it formerly did, the Cholerick Humour
from the Liver unto him, and so leaveth the Blood impure. Sometimes it is caused through Obstruction and Weakness of the Vessels whose Mouths are derived from the Gall to the Liver, and therefore attracteth not the Cholerick Humour. And oftentimes through obstruction or stoppage of the Passa∣ges that do go to the Bowels. The manifest Signs of the Jaundice are in short as followeth: A Yellow Colour throughout the whole Body, more especially in the Vvhite of the Eyes; the Balls of the Cheeks and near the Temples are of a pale colour; the Tongue seems bitter, and oftentimes Hiccoughs, and Cholerick, Vomits, also Laziness, and Itch∣ing about the Body, &c. The Jaundice is various, according to the va∣riety of the Causes. That which comes from the stoppage of the bag containing the Gall, because its passages are nearer the Guts, the matter cleaving thereunto is with much ease sent into them; if the stoppage proceed not from a Stone, for
that sometimes renders the Disease uncurable, because it cannot be dissolved. If the Jaundice come from an inflamma∣tion and hardness of the Liver, it is most dan∣gerous, for oftentimes one ends in an Impost∣hume, the other in a Dropsie: If in the lat∣ter, if taken in time, it is certainly cured. The Cure of the Jaundice may be perfor∣med as followeth: Take the best Rhubarb fifteen grains, Saffron twelve grains, Diaprunis solutive, the Electuary of the Juice of Roses, of each three drams; make them up into a Bolus with fine Sugar, and take it two or three times one after the other, espe∣cially if the Body be of a very ill Habit. Or take my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, according to Directions: for therewith I have cured several past all hopes, with the use of the following Drink. Take Celandine one handful, the Tops of Sea-Wormwood, Centaury, of each half a handful, the Roots of the best Madder half an ounce, Cina∣mon half a dram, Saffron twelve grains, infuse them for the space of twelve hours in eight ounces of the best White-wine; strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar, and drink it every morning three or four hours before Dinner.
Or take the Leaves and Flowers of St. Johns∣wort, the Leaves and Roots of Celandine, of each half a handful, the Bark of the Barbary Tree, Goose-Dung, Ivory, of each three drams, Saf∣fron one scruple and a half; tie the Saffron and Goose-dung up into a Cloth, and boil them all together in equal parts of the distilled VVa∣ter of VVormwood and VVhite-wine, to the Consumption of half; then strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar. Being divided into three parts, drink one part thereof every morning fasting, and repeat the same Deco∣ction, if need require. Or take Castile-Sope, scraped very small, half an ounce, the best English Saffron one dram, dried and rubbed to Powder; mix them together, and put it into three or four Pippins, the Cores being first taken forth; then rost the Pippins by degrees; after which take off the Skins, and mix them well together, and take thereof as much as a large Wal∣nut first and last, until it be all taken: and if need require repeat the same: For I will assure you that it is a very Excellent Medicine. Egg-shells dried before the fire till they are almost black, beaten to Powder, and the quantity of a dram given in VVhite-wine first and last, with ten grains of Saffron, is also very good.
Or dry the Livers of Rooks, and make thereof Powder, which give to the Patient, the quantity of a dram at a time in VVhite∣wine. Or take the fresh dung of a Goose that eats Grass in the Spring time, and dry it, and make it into fine powder; or the Dung of a Hen, the white part thereof being reduced to pow∣der, and a dram at a time taken as aforesaid, have given help in few days. Or take Sheeps-Dung one handful, the Bark of the Barbary-Tree half a handful, and infuse them for one night in one quart of Ale and White∣wine mixed together; strain it, and drink it off in the morning fasting. This do for six or se∣ven days together, if occasion require. The same virtue hath Stone-Horse Dung infused as aforesaid; and to my knowledge have both done great Cures. So hath Hogs Lice brui∣sed, and about forty or fifty infused all Night in VVhite-wine, and strained and taken in the morning fasting, for some time together. Or take Album Graecum and Akorns, of each two drams, being in fine powder, give it at at three times to the Patient in VVhite∣wine. A Live Trout or Tench cut open and applied to the pit of the Stomach for some
time, is an infallible Remedy against the Jaundice. The Jaundice being as it were cured, and yet the Eyes remain Yellow, give to the Pa∣tient two drams of Venice-Treacle, and let him sweat as strength will permit. After which let his Face and Eyes be washed with the Distilled VVater of Bean-Flowers and Rose-Water in equal parts mixed together, and it will cause the Yellowness to depart.
CHAP. XXVII. Of the Stone in the Kidneys. THe Stone in the Kidneys is caused through a perpetual crudity or rawness of the Stomach, whereby abundance of tough, gross and earthy Humours are heaped together; and being of a fiery heat about the Reins, parcheth the Humours, and baketh them to∣gether into a Stone. They differ much both in figure, colour, and sharpness, for they are often found to be black, sometimes pale, or of a whitish co∣lour. The Sign of this Disease is violent pain in the Reins, insomuch that the Patient can hardly turn his Back-bone; there is also ab∣horring of Meat, and motion to Vomit, the Urine is made but in very little quantity, and many times wholly stopped; sometimes there is voided Blood; the bottom of the Urine gravelly, which shews some motion of the Stone from the Reins. The Stones that are light, smooth, and round, pass forth with
some ease; but those that are long, sharp, and jagged, are sent forth with violent pain. To help this most violent Distemper, if the Body be full of Excrements, make use of the following Glister. Take Pellitory of the Wall, Maiden-hair, Mercury, Mallows, and Marsh-Mallows, of each one good handful, Water-Cresses, one hand∣ful and a half, Smallage, Fennel, Parsly and Linseed, of each two or three drams, Bran and the Roots of Flower-de-luce, of each one ounce; being cut and bruised, boil them in a suffici∣ent quantity of water, to the consumption of the third part; then strain it, and take there∣of one pint: to which add Honey of Roses, and Cassia newly drawn, of each one ounce, Hiera Picra half an ounce, Oyl of Rue, Camomile, and Dill, of each one ounce, Sal Prunella one dram and a half; mix them together, and make a Glister thereof, which minister to the Patient as need require. Or take Mercury, Mallows, Marsh-Mallow-Roots, Camomile, of each one handful; being cut and bruised, boil them in one quart of new Milk, to the consumption of half; after which, turn the Milk with Ale; then strain it, and take one pint of the strained Liquor, to
which add the Lenitive Electuary and Diaca∣tholicon, of each six drams, Venice-Turpentine half an ounce, Syrup of Marsh-Mallows one ounce and a half, Oyl of Lillies, Dill, Rue and Camomile, of each half an ounce, Chymical Oil of Juniper twenty drops; being mixed well to∣gether, give it Glister-ways; for it giveth ease, and causeth the Patient to void small stones, as I have often seen. Instead of the Glister, if the Belly be not costive, administer to the Patient the follow∣ing Potion, for it is of Excellent use. Take of the Lenitive Electuary one ounce, Sy∣rup of Marsh-Mallows two ounces, Cream of Tar∣tar and Holland Powder, of each one scruple, Salt of Tartar ten grains, with four ounces of the Di∣stilled Water of Oaken Leaves; make a potion thereof, which let the Patient take all at once in the morning warm. Or you may take of Cassia newly drawn, and Oyl of sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce, Diaphaenicon two drams, Powder of Rhubarb fifteen or twenty grains, Liquorice in Powder half a dram, Syrup of Violets one ounce; with a suffi∣cient quantity of the Distilled Water of Mal∣lows make a potion thereof, which take as afore-directed.
Or take of my Pills once or twice a week; in which course drink small White-wine sweet∣ned with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows. Or some of the Liquors made as followeth taken with them, they do much good; for they cause the Stone and Gravel to be voided with much ease, and also preventeth the Ge∣neration of the same. Take the Distilled Water of green Walnuts and Saxifrage, of each one pint, the best White-Wine one quart; sweeten it with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows, and drink thereof a quarter of a pint first and last hot, repeating the same if need require. In every drought take ten drops, or more, of the Spirit of Vitriol, and it will prove the more effectual. Or you may take the Distilled Water of Pellitory and Saxifrage, of each alike, and sweeten it with Syrup of Violets and Marsh-Mallows, adding thereto Spirit of Vitriol, and take it as afore-directed. The meaner sort of People may boil a good quantity of Saxifrage, Couch-grass, and Pelli∣tory of the Wall, in running Water, and sweeten it with Honey, and drink thereof: for it is very effectual, for it mollifieth the
passages, and causeth the Stone to come away the more freely. Holly-Berries bruised and boiled in Wine or Ale, doth the same to admiration. Or being dried and beat to power, and a dram thereof drunk in White-wine, is also very good; but such that cannot get VVhite∣wine, must be content with Ale. Or take Pigeons-Dung, and fill a large Glass therewith half full; after which fill it up with the best VVhite-VVine, then cover it very close, and let it stand for seven days; after which, distill in Sand. Of which let the Patient drink two ounces at a time, repeating the same as need re∣quire: for it is a very Excellent Reme∣dy to Break and Bring away the Stone and Gravel. Or take Goats Blood prepared, one dram, VVhite Amber one scruple, VVhite∣wine, and the Juice of Radishes, of each two ounces; being mixed together, drink it off, often repeating the same. The Juice of Radishes and Mouse-Ear being drunk, two or three ounces every day first and last, is also very good.
Or take one dram of the Salt of Ca∣momile in Radish-VVater, as afore-di∣rected. Outward Medicines proper to ease the pain in the Fits of the Stone, are made as followeth: Take Oyl of Camomile, Elder and Vi∣olets, of each six drams, Seeds of Dill and Camomile bruised, of each half an ounce, fresh Butter, and Ducks grease, of each two drams; being boiled two or three walms, strain it, and add thereto the yolks of two New-laid-Eggs, and beat them well together, and anoint the Reins of the Back therewith. Or take the Oyl of sweet Almonds and Dill, of each three drams, Oyl of Camo∣mile one ounce, Goose, Duck's and Hen's fat, of each one dram, fresh Butter one dram and a half: with a little Bees VVax make thereof an Ointment, and anoint the Reins and Loins therewith. Or take fresh Butter, Oyl of Lillies, and Hens Fat, of each one ounce, the Oyl of Scorpions compound, two ounces, Oyl of Sweet Almonds one ounce and an
half; being mixed well together, anoint therewith, as afore-directed. Or, Take Diachylon Simple three ounces, Oyl of Scorpions one ounce; melt them together, being spread upon Sheeps Leather, apply it to the Reins Plaister-ways; and there let it remain for fourteen days.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Ulcers of the Reins. ULcers of the Reins are caused often∣times through breaking of the Veins of the same; also it is caused through pu∣trid or rotten Inflammations, and through sharp, gnawing or fretting Humours carried into the Reins. The Signs of Ulcers in the Reins are hea∣viness and pains in the Loins. In the Urine there is perceived little pieces of flesh, and sometimes hairs or little rags swiming there∣in; blood, and matter, &c. The Cure of Ulcers in the Reins caused through sharp gnawing Humours, ought to be begun with such Medicines as will purge the same. None more proper than my Pills: for a large dose thereof will cause the Patient to vomit, which will not only be beneficial to carry off viscous Humours, but withal be a
means the sooner to heal the Ulcers of the Reins. And with the Pills, the more to stop the sharp Humours, Take Purslain, Endive, Sorrel, and Mal∣lows; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and strain it, after which sweeten it with the Syrup of Violets, Roses, and Water-Lillies, and drink thereof as of ordinary Drink. Or take the Seeds of Cucumbers, Melons, and Gourds; being beat into Powder, mix them with the aforesaid Syrups. The Conserve of them are also very good, which the Patient may take at any time, after the viscous Hu∣mours are well purged. Or take the Seeds of Fenugreek four ounces, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water, strain it, and sweeten it with honey, whereof take a good draught first and last. Or take one ounce of the best Honey, new Milk hot from the Cow, one pint; being mixed toge∣ther, drink it off hot first and last, for some time together. Or take Raisins, Barly and Liquorice, of each a like quantity; being cut and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of half; then strain it, and swee∣ten it with Honey, and drink thereof, for it is of very excellent use.
And when the Ulcers are well purged and cleansed, (which may be known by the Urine being without Dregs, Moats, and filthy mat∣ter, &c.) Give to the Patient of the Medicines made as followeth: Take the best Venice-Turpentine washed in Plantane-Water, four ounces, the Powder of Cinamon, and Nutmegs, of each half an ounce; being well boiled together, make Pills thereof, which let the Patient take at his pleasure. Or take fine Bole, White Starch, sealed Earth, and make them up into Pills with Gum-Dragon, first dissolved in Plantane-Water: which take as the former. Or take the Roots of Tormental, being dried and beat to fine Powder, the quantity of one dram, in four ounces of Plantane-Water, every morning fasting. Or take Terra Lemnia, fine Bole, Dragons Blood, Spodium burnt, Gum Dragon, of each one dram and a half, Linseed, Cucumbers and Melons, of each two drams, the Seeds of Smal∣lage, Starch, and Pine Nuts roasted, of each one dram; being beat all well together, and a very fine Powder made thereof; give
to the Patient two drams at a time in new Milk. These and such like do not onely dry, but Conglutinate. You may take one dram of the Troches cal∣led Cordonii in fine Powder, first and last, in four ounces of Plantane-VVater, sweet∣ned with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows: for it is of excellent use in such cases, as I have often proved. Or, Take Sanicle and VVound-wort, of each three or four handfuls, Plantane-Roots and Leaves two large handfuls: Being cut and bruised, boil them in Two Gallons of VVater, to the Consumption of half, and sweeten it with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows or Honey. And let the Patient drink there∣of, as of Ordinary Drink, for one whole month: And doubt not the Cure, if you purge well first. The Reins may be strengthened, and made more dry, with the Ointment or Plaister made as followeth:
Take Oyl of Quinces, Myrtles, and Roses, of each a like quantity; being mixed together, anoint the Reins therewith every night going to bed. Or, Take Frankincense, Mastick, and of the fore-mentioned Oyls, of each one ounce, the Powder of Red-Rose-Leaves and Barly meal, of each a sufficient quantity; and make a Plaister there∣of, which apply to the Reins.
CHAP. XXIX. Of the Stone in the Blader. THe Stone in the Blader doth not only ingender in Children, but in Persons of middle Age, and in old People: And that is when gross and very thick Urine is carried into the large space of the Blader, and there retained, like to the dregs of VVine, or filthy muddy Water, and at length through heat compact together breedeth a Stone. The principal Cause of the Stone in the Bladder is thickness of Ʋrine, and many times violent heat. The Signs of this Disease is a continual itching in the Privy Members, and sometimes swelling of the same; and the Patient is al∣ways making of water, though but by drops, as in the Strangury, &c. The Cure of this Distemper doth not much differ from that of the Reins, but that it must
be performed with stronger Medicines, and their application, for the most part, to other places. To help the Stone in the Bladder, Take of the Distilled Water of Winter-Cher∣ries two ounces, Salt of Camomile one dram, Sy∣rup of Marsh-Mallows half an ounce, Salt of Am∣ber ten grains; mix them, and make a potion thereof, which let the Patient take in the mor∣ning lasting, repeating the same, if need re∣quire; for it is a very good Remedy. Or take the Stones of the wild Hips, being well dried beat them to fine Powder, and take thereof a quarter of an ounce at a time in four ounces of White-Wine, which will provoke Ʋrine much, and bring away the Stone and Gravel. Or take the Powder of Ivy-Berries, Red-Nettle-Roots, of each one ounce, Sal Prunella half an ounce; being mixed together, take three or four scruples every morning in four ounces of White-wine. Or take the Seeds of Camomile, Smallage, Parsly, Black Piony, Fennel, Lovage, Marsh-Mallows, Burdoch, and the Seeds of Ash-Keys, of each two drams; being dried and beat to Powder, take thereof one dram and a half,
or two drams, every morning in Rhenish or VVhite-wine. Or take the Distilled Water of Onions two ounces, Spirit of Juniper one ounce, the Powder of Wood-Lice prepared one dram, Syrup of Marsh-Mallows one ounce; mix them, and make a potion thereof, which drink every morning fasting for some time together. Or take one dram and a half of the Pow∣der of the aforesaid Lice in the distilled VVa∣ter of Onions and VVhite-wine in equal parts. Or make use of the Liquor made with Vi∣negar and Pigeons Dung, directed in the Cha∣pter of the Stone in the Reins. Or take Cantharides well prepared one scruple, the Powder called Diatrag. frigidi one dram, the distilled Water of Winter-Cherries two ounces; being mixed together, drink it in the morn∣ing, repeating in the same, if need require. The ignorant ought not to meddle with Cantharides, for it must be calcined according to Art, before it be made use of, lest the Pa∣tient suffer damage thereby; for not being rightly prepared, it excoriates the parts, and causeth a bloody Urine. Goats Blood is not onely good to break the Stone in the Reins, but in the Bladder al∣so; which you may take in VVhite-wine, or
in the the Distilled VVater of Radishes or Winter-Cherries, as afore-directed. Outwardly to give ease when in extream pain, caused by the Stone in the Bladder: Take common Mallows, Marsh-Mallows, and Mellilot-Flowers, of each alike; being bruised and boiled in VVater, bath the part therewith hot. Or take Wild Time, Broom, Rue, of each two handfuls, Figs half a pound, Bran one hand∣ful; being boiled in a sufficient quantity of VVater, to the consumption of the third part, strain it, and adde thereto Honey, Oyl of Dill, Camomile, and Oyl of Lillies, of each one ounce, and bath the Privy Members there∣with, as afore-directed. Or take Camomile, Red-Nettles, Roots and all together, the Tops of the Juniper Tree, the Leaves of an Oak, of each a like quantity; be∣ing boiled in water to the consumption of half, strain it, and bath often therewith. After which, anoint the bottom of the Belly and Privy Parts with the following Ointment.
Take the Gum called Opopanax, and Bdel∣lium, of each one ounce and a half, Ducks Greafe half an ounce, Oyl of Lillies, Dill, Turpen∣tine, and Oyl of Scorpions, of each three drams, with Bees VVax make them up into an Oint∣ment, and after bathing anoint therewith, or make use of the Ointments directed in the Chapter of the Stone in the Reins. And if the Patient have a suppression of Utine, syringe up into his Yard the Urine of a wholesome person; which will not onely cause him to make Water freely, but ease the violent pain.
CHAP. XXX. Of the Ulcers in the Bladder. THe Ulcers of the Bladder are often∣times caused through Boils or Bot∣ches, sometimes swelling by reason of some kind of Rupture, and sharp gnaw∣ing Fluxes doth many times cause this Di∣stemper. The Signs are violent sharp and pricking pains in the Bladder for the most part; the Patient with his Urine voideth dregs & slimy matter, and in the bottom appears a sediment like to Bran, or small Pieces of thin Skin; and if the Ulcers are deep, the Urine is bloody, and full of stinking Pus or matter; and then the more difficult to be cured. But if they are not deep, nor of too long standing, the pains may be eased and the Ul∣cers cured by the Medicines made as follow∣eth: Take Turpentine washed in Plantain-Wa∣ter one ounce, the choicest Rhubarb in fine Powder one ounce and a half; Mercurius
Dulcis two drams; being mixed well toge∣ther by beating them in a Mortar, make Pills thereof as big as gray Pease, of which let the Patient take two at night, and three in the morning. Or take Cassia newly drawn, Syrup of Ro∣ses and Manna, of each one ounce, the best Agarick, Rhubarb, and Jallap, (all in fine powder) of each two drams, mix them toge∣ther, and take as much as a VValnut every morning fasting. Or take Venice-Turpentine washed in Rose∣water two ounces, Powder of Liquorice half an ounce; mix them well together, and di∣vide it into four parts, of which let the Pati∣ent take every morning one part at a time fast∣ing. If these and such-like purge not sufficient, make use of the Directions in the Chapter of the Ulcers in the Reins, with which purge till you perceive the Urine to be clear from dregs, pus, or matter. After which, to heal and strengthen the parts, Take Dragons-Blood, Sealed Earth, of each half an ounce, Camphire one dram: be∣ing made in fine Powder, make it up into Pills with Venice-Turpentine washed in Plan∣tane-Water,
whereof take three first and last. Or take Powder of Juniper-berries, and Liquorice, of each a like, and make it up into Pill with Venice-Turpentine washed in Plan∣tane-VVater, for they are of excellent use. Or take the fore-mentioned Pills made up with Turpentine, Cinamon and Nutmegs, for they strengthen very much. You may boil the Roots of Plantane and the Leaves of the same with the like quantity of the inward Bark of Elm in Spring-VVa∣ter, and in this course drink often thereof.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Gonorrhea, or Running of the Reins. OF this Distemper there are three sorts. The first is, VVhen the Sperm or Seed is shed against the Patients consent, and for the most part is caused through weak∣ness of the Retentive Virtue in the Vessels containing the same, and sometimes through a Flux of the Spermatick Vessels, which is many times watery, and very thin, and with∣out any Appetite to Carnal Copulation; yet sometimes it doth come forth with a kind of pleasure. The second is a Nocturnal Polution through Dreams, &c. which men are most subject to, whose Liver, Reins, and Seminary Vessels do abound with heat. The third is a virulent Gonorrhea, and of∣tentimes a Symptom that doth follow the French Disease. VVhich Distemper is known by an issue from the secret parts, not of Sperm,
but of corrupt and poysonous matter of di∣vers colours, which excoriates and ulcerates the Urinary passages, from whence follows a very sharp and scalding heat and violent pain in making water, the Patient not able to endure the erection of the Yard; between the Glans and Prepuce, &c. often grows several pieces of Flesh much resembling Warts or Strawberries; all being of evil consequence, if not timely prevented, or perfectly cured. In order to which, in the first place make use of the cooling Bolus made as follow∣eth. Take of the best Rhubarb one scruple, Sal Prunella, Mercurius Dulcis, and Tartarum Vi∣triolatum, of each ten grains, Cassia newly ex∣tracted, or the Lenitive Electuary, from six to eight drams; being mixed well together, let the Patient take one part at night going to bed, and the rest in the morning fasting. Thus do every day, or every second, for ten days to∣gether. Or take Extract of Rudii two drams, Mer∣curius Dulcis well prepared two scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the Juice of Fu∣matory, make them up into twenty Pills, which take two at night and three in the morning.
Or take Rosin of Jallap and Scamony pre∣pared with Sulphur, of each two drams, Mercurius Dulcis one dram; make them up into Pills with Venice-Turpentine washed in Plantane-VVater, and let the Patient take thereof from one scruple to half a dram eve∣ry day, if strength permit. Or take Rosin of Scamony, Jallap, Liquo∣rice, and Salt of Tartar, of each two drams, Mercurius Dulcis one dram, make them up into a mass for Pills with Turpentine, as afore∣directed; and take thereof from one scruple to half a dram, or two scruples. There are several Medicines that are com∣pounded of crude Mercury, &c. which I know to be of excellent use, if administred with discretion. But those that are not willing to take Mer∣curial Medicines, may in this Distemper also make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, not doubting of good success; for therewith I have cured hundreds, and very commonly without Astringent Medicines. In the use of either of the Medicines above directed, the more to ease the pains, and to abate the violent sharpness and heat of Urine, make use of the following Liquor.
Take Plantane, Night-shade, Mallows and Wood-Sorrel, of each one handful, the inward Bark of Elm half a handful; boil them in one gallon of Running VVater, to the con∣sumption of half; strain it, and sweeten it with Honey, and drink thereof three or four times a day. Or take the Distilled Water of Red Roses, Purstain, Lettuce, Mallows, and Water-Lillies of each two ounces, Syrup of Violets and Pop∣pies, of each one ounce and an half, Sal Pru∣nella one dram and a half; being mixed toge∣ther, take thereof three or four spoonfuls at a time, often repeating the same. Or take the distilled Water of Winter-Cher∣ries four ounces, the distilled Water of the Sperm of Frogs two ounces; mix them together, and sweeten it with Syrup of VVater-Lillies, and drink thereof as afore-directed. Or give to the Patient one dram of the powder of the Troches of VVinter-Cherries, in half a pint of the Decoction of the Leaves and Flowers of Common Mallows. The Distilled Water of the Sperm of Frogs and thin Milk, of each alike, sweetned with Sy∣rup of Poppies or with Diacodium, giveth ease in a short time. The Patient may drink Milk and VVater mixed together, sweetened
with Syrup of Marsh-Mallows, or the De∣coction of Mallows alone, is of great profit, drunk as ordinary drink. Or take the four Cold Seeds, and the Seeds of Quinces and White Poppies, of each alike, being boiled in a sufficient quantity of Spring-wa∣ter, sweetned and took as afore-directed, is also very beneficial. After you have purged sufficiently,  the pains abated, if need require, make use of the astringent Medicines made as followeth. Take old Conserve of Red-Roses, Venice-Tur∣pentine washed in Plantane-Water, of each half an ounce, the Powder of the Bark of Black Thorn one ounce, sealed Earth half an ounce; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Pomgranates, make an Electuary thereof, which take as much as a Nutmeg at a time, every third or fourth hour. Or take of the Seeds of Hemp, Lettuce, and Agnus Castus, of each half an ounce, the Powder of the best Sarsaperilla one ounce and a half; with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of VVater-Lillies make an Electuary thereof, which take as afore-directed. The astringent Medicines directed in the Chapter of Ulcers in the Reins, are also very profitable in this Disease.
Or take Mastick, Red Corral, Dragons-Blood, White Amber, Camphir, of each two drams, Ag∣nus Castus three drams, two Nutmegs, Cinamon one dram; being made into fine Powder, mix them together, and make it up into Pills with one ounce of Cypress-Turpentine, whereof let the Patient take five at a time first and last. Or take Gum Guaicum, and Turpentine washed in Plantane-water, of each one ounce, the Powder of Galls, so much as is sufficient to make the rest up into Pills, which you may take as afore directed. But attempt none of these or such-like Me∣dicines, until such time the Body be very well purged, lest the Remedy prove worse than the Disease. And to avoid trouble, purge with my Pills, for they will effect your desire.
CHAP. XXXII. Of the FRENCH POX. THe POX is a Contagious or Infectious Disease, and undoubtedly for the most part gotten by Carnal Copulation with cor∣rupt and unclean VVomen, and may well be called, The very Plague of Venus. Some years past, there was but little know∣ledge of it among us, but now it is become frequent, and daily bringeth with it many hor∣rid and detestable Evils, and very sad and troublesome accidents, which in the begin∣ning is but small, yet in process of time (the Patient wanting an honest and able Physician) groweth to such a height, that it doth not on∣ly corrupt the Humours and Spirits, but ex∣ceedingly offend the Nerves, Membranes, Tendons, Flesh and Bones, and at length de∣stroys all other parts of the Body, pervert∣ing the Temperature and whole substance thereof; from whence proceedeth divers sorts of Excrements.
This most sinful and cursed Disease is very occult, and doth lie hid in the Body many months before it is perfectly discovered. And the principal Part affected is the Liver, as may appear by the natural Actions: for in the Stomach there is an evil Concoction, from whence ariseth a vast alteration of Colour, a great indisposition of Body, the Appetite to the sports of Venus as it were altogether de∣jected or lost; it hath relation to the whole substance of the Liver, rather than to the Heart or Brain; and it doth assault the natu∣ral spirits (rather than the vital and animal) which being corrupt, must needs infect the Li∣ver; from whence followeth shedding of hair, itching about the privy parts, filthy stink∣ing Ulcers and virulent Gonorrhea's, &c. The Cause of this most silthy Disease Is a sordid and malignant quality containing in it self a very profound Contagion, commu∣nicated from one person infected to another, by Carnal Copulation with foul Women (as afore-mentioned) and the parts serving for Generation are for the most part infected first, by reason of their tender and pure substance,
and in the like manner this malignant quality is communicated to the Mouth and Throat, and to the Skin: and the more weak the na∣tural Faculties and Virtues of the Liver are, the sooner doth it infect; from whence it of∣ten falls out, that many using one filthy VVo∣man, are as it were all infected; but such men who have their natural Faculties vigo∣rous or strong, are not so soon infected. The Signs of this most horrible Disease Are Buboes in the Groin, Pustules and Ul∣cers in the Yard and Urinary Passages; after which doth follow a light poysonous matter, with a kind of Distillation, and burning or scalding heat in the Urine, sometimes accom∣panied with a Gonnorrhea; the Patient most commonly is sorely tormented with violent pain in the Head, Neck, Shoulders, Arms, Back, Knees, Legs and Shin-Bones; spots not onely in the Head, and about the Temples, but in several other parts of the Body do often arise, which are sometimes red, and some∣times yellow, which will for a short time be gone, and then return again, and then become more virulent, which doth at last corrode or eat the Skin, from whence ariseth many other
filthy Ulcers, not only in the Throat, but in the Mouth, Tongue, Jaws and Nostrils, &c. Commonly the Hair of the Head and Beard falls off, and there doth frequently appear in the Forehead, and other parts of the Head, Joynts, and upon the Shin-Bones, Nodes, Knots, or hard Tumours, not easily to be dis∣solved nor cured, which doth in time corrupt the very Bones and Marrow contained there∣in, the Patient takes little rest because the pains are more violent in the night than in the day. These and such like are in brief the true Symptoms or Signs of the Pox, which doth not appear in all alike, but in some Constitu∣tions after one manner, and in others after ano∣ther. Which Disease, if newly taken, admits of an easie Cure. In order to which, observe the following method. Take Cassia newly extracted, Syrup of Roses solutive, of each half an ounce, the Electuary of the Juice of Roses two drams, Mercurius Dulcis ten grains; with a sufficient quantity of the Distilled Water of Fumatory, make a Potion thereof, which take in the morning fasting.
Or take Confectio Hamech six drams, Venice-Turpentine well washed in Rose-Water two drams, Mercurius Dulcis well prepared ten grains; mix them and take it as afore-directed. Or take the Lenitive Electuary, and Benedi∣cta Laxativa, of each three drams, Mercurius Dulcis ten grains, Salt of Tartar five grains, being mixed together, take it as aforesaid; repeating the same (or either of the former) two or three times. After which, open the Liver Vein in the Right Arm, the Patient not having Bu∣boes in the Groin; if so, Bleeding will do much harm, in drawing back the Contagion to the Liver, causing the Disease to be more dangerous and painful, &c. Whether Bleeding may be safely attempt∣ed or not, the matter is not great. However let the Patient be purged sufficiently with ei∣ther of the fore-mentioned Electuaries. ☞ Or with my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, which by large Experience are well known to be most powerful (with the Use of my Arcanum Vitae) to expel this contagious Disease; not onely at the beginning thereof, but in such that have been tainted therewith some years.
Many make use of the Pills made as fol∣loweth: Take Pills of Exduobus, and Extract of Ru∣dii, of each one dram, Mercurius Dulcis two scruples; with a sufficient quantity of Oyl of Cloves, make them up into twenty Pills; whereof take two at night and three in the morning, repeating the same as need re∣quire. Or take the Powder of Colocinthis, Jallap, Diagredium, and Crude Antimony, of each half an ounce, Crude Mercury run through Sheeps Leather, six drams; being mortified with a sufficient quantity of Venice-Turpen∣tine, by beating them in a Mortar for three or four hours, with a small quantity of the Oyl of Cloves, make thereof a mass for Pills. Or take Crude Mercury run through Lea∣ther, as afore-directed, one ounce and a half, the best Aloes, Diagredium, Colocinthis, and Jallap, of each half an ounce, Saffron three drams, the sweet Oyl of Lavender-Flowers one dram; with a sufficient quantity of Ve∣nice-Turpentine washed in Rose-VVater, make them up into a mass for Pills, according to Art. There are several other Pills made use of in this Disease, not much differing
from the former, as those Pills called Bar∣barossae, &c. The Dose of either are from twenty grains to thirty, more or less, according to the age and strength of the Patient: Which have been often made trial of, not without good suc∣cess. ☞ But My Pills, having not one grain of Mercury in the whole Composition, doth more sweeten and purifie the Blood, than any other Medicine yet found out; by which means they are no less effectual in this Di∣stemper than in the Dropsie and Scurvy, &c. But in that let the Patient use his own discretion. And after he hath purged very well for a week or ten days together, if strength will permit: Let him sweat three days gently with my Arcanum Vitae, or with the following Liquor; the third day purge again, and then sweat: Thus do for twenty days together, if need require. Take Sarsaperilla and Lignum Vitae, of each four ounces, the Bark of Lignum Vitae and the Roots of China, of each one ounce, Burdock-Roots and Liquorice, of each two ounces; be∣ing cut and bruised, boil them in six quarts
of Running Water, in a Vessel close stop∣ped, to the consumption of the third part, after which strain it, and take thereof one pint hot in the morning, and lie three or four hours in a breathing sweat. To every dose of this Liquor, you may add ten or twelve drops of the Chymical Oyl of Sulphur. The second Decoction of the foresaid In∣gredients will serve to drink, as of ordinary Drink. Another Excellent Medicine to provoke Sweat in this Case. Take the best Sarsaperilla cut in small pieces, what you please; which put in a Glass, and add thereto Spirit of Sack, that it may lie above it the breadth of two singers. Let it so stand, be∣ing covered close till the Spirit become Yellow; then strain it, and put it into another Glass, and to half a pint of this Spirit add two ounces of Gum Guaicum in fine Powder; that being dis∣solved, add thereto one spoonful of Natural Balsom; then keep it for use. Whereof take two spoonfuls in Rosemary Posset, and sweat as afore-directed. And purge with my Pills eve∣ry third or fourth day. And doubt not the
Cure, if the Disease be not of too long continu∣ance. There are several other ways made use of in the Cure of this desperate Disease, as Mercurial Ointments, and Fumigations with Ciniber, &c. to cause Salivation. Medicines inwardly given to cause the same, are Turbith Minerale, Arcanum Corallinum, Red Precipitate, Mercurius Vita, and Mer∣curius Dulcis, which is the most safest of all, being well prepared, and given at the begin∣ning fifteen grains, and increasing every day five grains, till the Flux is sufficiently raised: in which course the Patient ought not to eat or drink any thing except Posset-Drink, or Mutton-Broth, and such-like. And after the Flux is raised, he may drink of the De∣coction of Sarsa, China, &c. keeping him∣self therewith sometimes in a breathing sweat: for Purging and Sweating is the best Cure for this Disease, and most safe. And to heal the Sores in the Mouth, make use of some of the Waters directed in the Chapter of the Ulcers of the Mouth and and Throat. For the Ulcers in the Secret Parts, make use of the Waters directed pag. 84. especi∣ally the two last.
And apply the Powder of Album Graecum with Vinegar thereto, for it doth not onely kill the Ulcers, but heal. You may anoint the part with the White Ointment with Camphir, mixing therewith a small quantity of Mercurius Dulcis, or White Precipitate in fine Powder. To take away the Warts that often grow within the Fore-Skin of the Yard and Glans, &c. Take Orpment, Quick Brimstone, and Lime, of each two drams, the Powder of Sa∣vin half a dram; mix them together, and touch the Warts therewith, or anoint them with Balsom of Sulphur. Oil of Antimony, and Oil of Quicksil∣ver, are of wonderful use in such Ca∣ses. So is the Oil drawn from Mans Excre∣ments. In this Distemper, You must remember to eat Meats of Light Digestion, as Chickens, Rabbets, Mutton and Partridges, well roasted.
For supper you may eat Raisins of the Sun stoned, or blew Currans, with Bread only, and drink very sparingly. But use as much exercise as possible, for thereby many young men that have been able to indure sweating through the same, as dan∣cing, playing at Tennis, &c. have been with the least Physick imaginable, in the beginning of the Disease, perfectly cured.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the PLAGUE. THe Plague is a Disease that falleth upon many, which we have had too large experience of, and hath its original or begin∣ning from a deadly putrifaction, which in a very high measure doth exceed the Com∣mon. Many times this deadly quality hath its be∣ginning in our selves, for it often times com∣eth to pass that the humours of our Bodies do so much degenerate from the natural temperature, that at last it taketh unto it self a deadly venomous quality, and so is forced to strive with pernicious poyson: Sometimes it ariseth from external means, as malignant and putrid Exhalations which are communicated to the Air; and sometimes from dead Bodies not buried, and from the Roots of Cabbages stinking above the Earth; from standing corrupt Waters, Fens, and foggy places, the stinking smells from slaugh∣ter-houses and Butchers Shambles doth cause
Or take the Essence of Venice-Treacle, and Tincture of Saffron, of each a like quantity; be∣ing mixed together, give to the Patient one or two spoonfuls in the distilled VVater of Sca∣bios or Bugloss, every morning, as afore-di∣rected. Or take Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, of each one ounce, the Confection of Alkermes two drams, the Conserve of Wood-Sorrel two ounces; mix them together, and take the quantity of a Walnut every morning. Or take the Spirit of Sack one pint, Venice-Treacle one ounce and a half, Saffron two drams, mix them together, and let them stand close stop∣ped for three days; then filter it, and keep the clear Spirit for use: of which let the Patient take one spoonful every morning in the distil∣led VVater of Rue or Carduus. Or take one dram of Venice-Treacle every morning in the distilled Water of Wood-Sorrel, or alone if you find it not too hot. Or take the Seeds and Bark of Citrons, Zedu∣ary, Angelica, Gentian, Tormental, Pimpernal, and the Roots of Dittany, of each a like; being made all into fine powder, take the quantity of one dram thereof in the distilled VVater of Carduus or Borrage, every morning fast∣ing.
Or take Juniper-Berries, the Leaves of green Rue, of each one ounce, the Kernels of Walnuts two ounces, Venice-Treacle, Saffron, of each two drams, ten or twelve Figs; beat them all well together, then mix therewith a sufficient quantity of the best Vinegar, and make an Electuary thereof, of which take the quanti∣ty of a large Nutmeg every morning. Outwardly to prevent this Disease, Take Venice-Treacle one ounce, Conserve of Cowslips two ounces; being mixed together, make Plaisters thereof, which apply to the Region of the Heart, repeating the same as need require. Let the Patient always be smelling to Tar, Oil of Galbanum, or Amber, Camphir: It profiteth much also to smell to Roses, Worm∣wood, Rue, &c. Or make use of the following Pomanders. Take Storax, Labdanum, Camphir, of each half an ounce, Cinamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each two drams, Wood of Aloes, Spikenard, Myrrh, Mastick, Frankincense, of each one scruple and a half, Musk and Amber, of each
three or four grains; being made into fine Pow∣der, with a sufficient quantity of distilled VVater of Marjoram and Liquid Storax, make them up into Pomanders. Or hang about the Neck the Amulets made as followeth, and believe me, for they are of excellent use. Take a Hasel-Nut, the Kernel being taken forth, and fill it with Quicksilver; after which, close up the hole with Wax, then cover it with Silk, and hang it about your Neck, that it may touch the Pit of the Stomach. Or take the Head of a Toad well dried, and covered with Silk, and hang it about your Neck as afore-directed. Or take Venice-Treacle one ounce, Toads dri∣ed and grosly beaten two ounces, Virginy Snake-Weed, and Contra Yerva, of each half an ounce; with a sufficient quantity of Gum-Dragon dis∣solved in Rose-VVater, make Amulets there∣of, mixing them with a little Cotton to keep them from breaking; and gild them with Gold, and wear them about your Necks. Those and such-like Medicines may with Gods blessing be sufficient to prevent the Pest.
The Cure may be performed as followeth. If this Disease doth invade the Patient at Dinner or Supper, when the Stomach is full of meat, it will be necessary to make use of the following Vomit. Take the infusion of Crocus Metallorum half an ounce, Oxymel of Squills one ounce, Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers six drams, being mixed together, drink it off warm. The stronger sort may take of the foresaid infusion from half an ounce to six drams, &c. Or take from three grains to six or seven of the salt of Vitriol. Or from two grains to five of the red powder of Antimony. Or take the Emetique powder made as fol∣loweth. Take the distilled water of Rosemary one pint, wherein dissolve one ounce of Cream of Tartar, to which add the powder of Crocus Metallorum one ounce, and let it stand altogether for the space of one night, after which filter it through paper, and Eva∣porate the humidity, and keep the powder which re∣mains in the bottom for use, for it is not only good to Vomit in the Pest, but in many other distempers. The Dose is from two grains to six, in white wine or Posset.
And after the Patient have made empty his Stomach with either of the foresaid Vomits, administer to him the following Diaphoretique Potion. Take of the Electuary of Eggs one dram, the powder of a Toad truly prepared six grains, Treacle∣water two drams, with four ounces of Carduus-water; make thereof a Potion, which let the Patient take, and sweat as his strength will permit; re∣peating the same as need shall require. If the Electuary of Eggs cannot be obtained, take instead thereof two drams of Venice Trea∣cle, and mix therewith the powder above dire∣cted. Or take Dr. Starkies Pill, and Diaphoretique Antimony prepared from the Regules thereof, of each ten grains, Tincture of Saffron two drams; mix these together, which give to the Patient in any Convenient Vehicle. With these and such like Medicines, I cured many in the year 65. not only in the City of London, but in the City of Bristol in the year 66. not one person dying under my hands that would be perswaded to make use of those Medicines as soon as possible after they were infected, as many worthy persons of that City can testifie, they not being ignorant of the good success I had in
the Cure of most other diseases during my abode with them. The Patient in the time of sweating, or at any other time in this sickness (to comfort his spirits) may make use of the Cordial Julip made as followeth. Take the distilled water of Marigolds and Cowslips of each three ounces, the water called Aqua Cordialis frigida Saxoniae, Tincture of Saffron and Trea∣cle water, of each one ounce, Syrup of Clove-gilli-flowers two ounces, Oyle of Vitriol 20 or 30. drops, being mixed well together, take one or two spoonfuls at any time when more then ordinary ill or faint. And take sometimes the quantity of a Nut∣meg of the following Electuary. Take Conserve of Violets Cowslips, Marygolds, Bugloss, and Roses, of each one ounce and a half, Bole Armonick well prepared two drams, red Coral two scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the juice of sharp Citrons, make them up into an Electuary according to Art. If the Patient be Extream Thirsty, Take the distilled water of Wood-sorrel, Syrup of Violets, and Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, and the distilled water of Buglos of
each two ounces, mix them together, and take a spoonful thereof now and then. Or take the Decoction made with Wood∣sorrel, Scabios, and flowers of Buglos, and sweeten it with Syrup of Citrons and Violets. Or take Barly-water, sweeten the same with the Syrup of Lemmons, and add thereto the Juice of Wood-sorrel, or unripe Grapes, and let the Patient take moderately thereof. The Manner how to break and heal the Car∣buncle or Plague Botch. Take Pidgeons-dung, Elder-leaves, and Mustard-seed, of each one handful; beat them all very small, then add thereto Venice-Trea∣cle one ounce, and two ounces of the Urine of a young Child, miring them all well together; after which spread it upon a Cloath, and ap∣ply it to the Botch. Or make a Linnen Cloth moist in the di∣stilled water of Ale-hoof, and apply it to the Botch hot. Or take a Live Cock, and pull off the Feathers off his Brest, and apply him to the Botch, keeping him there till he die; after∣ward bury him, for he will have drawn the poyson to himself.
Or take a large Toad, thrust him through with some sharp Stick, after which dry him in the Sun, and apply him to the part; for this will in a short time break the Sore. Or take the best Venice-Turpentine one ounce, the Yolks of two new-laid Eggs, mix them together, and apply it to the Botch, for it causeth any hard Tumor to open. Or take a green Frog, and tie him alive upon the Botch, till such time he dieth; by which means all the poyson will be drawn forth. Or take six or seven Figs, large Raisins one ounce, Sal Gem two drams, Honey ten drams; with a little Oil of Camomile make them into a Plaister, and apply it hot to the Botch. Or take the Plaister of Diachylon Sim∣ple two ounces, Gum Ammoniack and Galbanum, of each one ounce; mix them together, and apply it to the Part. Goose-Dung dissolved in Oil of Ca∣momile, or Common Oil, and applied to a Plague-Sore, doth to admiration break the same.
To heal the Sores, Take Juniper-berries, VVall-Pepper, and Sarasens VVound-wort; cut and bruise them very small, and add thereto one pint of VVine, and another of VVater, and boil them to the consumption of the third part, and wash the Sore therewith twice or thrice a day; after which, apply thereto Oaken Leaves every time fresh; and if the Oaken Leaves chance to be dry, make them moist in the aforesaid VVater. Or boil the Inward Bark of Oak and Elm in water, with a little Salt, and wash your Sores therewith often, for it doth not only dry, but heal. Or you may apply thereto the Plaister of Red or VVhite Lead, fresh twice a day.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the GOUT. THis Disease is frequently ingendred through perpetual Crudities and Drun∣kenness, and through the immoderate use of Venery, by vehement riding and walking, and sometimes by standing long still; also through obstruction or stopping of accustomed Purga∣tions, Fluxes, &c. and through intermitting of common Exercise. Grief, or Sorrow, Care, VVatchings, or sitting up all night, and several other Perturbations of the Mind, doth not only breed this miserable Distemper, but doth ingender other violent and cor∣rupt Humours. And many times the Cho∣lick is turned into the Gout, being not well cured. But for the most part a disposition to this Distemper is hereditary, or from the Pa∣rents to the Children, and to their Posterity; and in especial manner from such Parents that have been tainted with the Pox, whose Chil∣dren, at least, must be troubled with the
Gout, being (in my opinion) somewhat re∣lated thereunto. The Signs of the Gout are many, which here I must omit; but only when it is near at hand the Patient hath a more than ordina∣ry sense and quickness in his Joints, in so much that the smallest matter will hurt him. And at the very beginning of it there will be found in the Joints a sense as it were like to crawling Pismires, with a kind of unusual heat, &c. This Disease is known to be present by a violent pain in the Joints, which for the most part is attended with swelling and redness; if not at first, it appears presently after, and the pain commonly seizes upon the great Toe upon the left Foot, and often times it spread∣eth it self to the other Joints. The Gout that is Hereditary, or very long contracted, the Patient having hard and stony knots about the Joints, and more than ordi∣nary subject to be costive and bound, is sel∣dom or never perfectly cured. But those that have the Gout, and not over-much stricken in years, and are inclina∣ble to exercises, and are without the fore∣mentioned stony knots, may be cured.
☞ In order to which Cure, Let the Patient make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, and of the sweating Bo∣lus made as followeth. Take Venice-Treacle one dram, the Powder of Virginia-Snakeweed, Gascoign-Powder, Dia∣phoretique Antimony, of each ten grains, Saf∣fron, Salt of Scurvygrass, Wormwood, and Salt of Ash, of each five grains: make them up into a Bolus with the Syrup of Groundpine, which take every third or fourth day in Rose∣mary Posset or burnt Sack, and sweat as strength will permit, rubbing the Patient with clean hot Cloths. Or take Venice-Treacle one dram and a half, Diaphoretick Antimony ten grains, Salt of Tar∣tar seven grains; mix them together, and take it as afore-directed, and sweat. Or take the Roots of Asarum four ounces, Car∣duus and Centaury, of each two good handfuls, the Roots of Groundpine two ounces; boil these in six quarts of Running VVater to the consum∣tion of half, strain it, and let the Patient take half a pint at a time hot, and sweat as above-directed, for some days together.
☞ But first let the Body be sufficiently purged with my Pills; and once or twice a week, upon a day that you sweat not, purge therewith also, for they will not only keep the Body soluble, but expel all acrimonious sharp and fretting humours from the Joynts; by which means, with the use of the sweating Medicines, the Gout I have often known cu∣red. And after you have purged and sweat, so that you have found Ease or Cure thereby, make use of the following Pills, for they much strengthen the parts made weak, and prevents the return of the same. Take Venice-Turpentine made into Powder, two ounces, Turmarick, and the Roots of Ground∣pine, of each one dram and a half, the Powder of Ash-Keys one dram, the Salt of Ash and Scurvy∣grass, of each twenty grains, Salt and Spirit of Wormwood, of each ten grains; with a suffici∣ent quantity of Syrup of Groundpine make them up into Pills as big as VVhite Peas, and take thereof five at a time every morning fast∣ing.
There are several Remedies to ease the violent Pain of the Gout; some of which are made as followeth: Take a new white penny Loaf, Powder of Saffron, and Opium, of each one dram, make it moist with the Oyl of Scorpions, and ap∣ply it to the part pained plaister-ways. Or take the Leaves and Flowers of Mari∣golds; being bruised apply them warm, as a∣fore-directed. Or boil the Crums of white Bread in new Milk, and add thereto some Yolks of new-laid Eggs, and apply it to the part grieved. Some bath the part with warm Goat or Cows Milk, not without good success. Or take Red Poppies and beat them small, and mix therewith a little Vinegar, and apply it to the part plaister-ways. Or take VVheat-Bran what you please, and Elder-Leaves two or three handfuls, if you can get them, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of a wholesome Childs Urine; after which, adde thereto the fat of a Loin of Mut∣ton, or some Hogs fat, and apply it warm as afore-directed, changing the same twice a day.
Or take the Distilled VVater of the Sperm of Frogs, or the VVater of Earth-Worms, or the Distilled VVater of Oxe Blood, and bath the part pained therewith before the fire. Or take dry Salt, and powder the same ve∣ry small, to which add Sallet Oil, with a small quantity of the Oil of Juniper-berries, and anoint the part affected therewith. Or take the Chymical Oil of Wax and Myrrh, of each a like; being mixed together, and the parts anointed therewith, have done won∣ders, especially in the cold Pains of the Gout. Or take the Oyl of Camomile, St. Johns-wort, and Turpentine, of each one ounce, the Oint∣ment of Marsh-Mallows, one ounce and a half; mix them together, and anoint therewith. Or take the sine Powder of Bay-berries and Ginger, Sallet Oyl and White-wine Vinegar, of each half a pint; boil them together to the con∣sumption of the Vinegar; after which, add there∣to a sufficient quantity of White Wax and Harts Fat, and make thereof an Ointment; which use as afore-directed, for it easeth the pain in any part. The following Plaister is also of wonderful use. Take Diapalma, Paracelsus, Oxycrocium, of each one ounce, the best Opium six drams; and
make a Plaister thereof, which apply to the part grieved. Or take the Plaister of Paracelsus and Dia∣palma, of each half an ounce, Camphir two drams; being mixed together, apply it as afore-dire∣cted. Or take Frankincense, White Wax, Bur∣gundy Pitch, and Harts Fat, of each one ounce; melt them together, adding thereto one spoon∣ful of Linseed Oil, after which strain it into a Bason of cold water, and with your hands rubbed with Sallet Oil, make it up into a Roll, and keep it for use; for it giveth ease in most pains of the Joints, being applied thereto.
CHAP. XXXV. Of the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout. THe Sciatica is a violent pain in the Huckle-Bone, which is caused for the most part through a gross fleg∣matick humour, and being congealed, is re∣tained in the foresaid Bone. Sometimes violent Exercise, the stoppage of the Hemorrhoids, and other accustomed Evacuations, as the Mensis, &c. may also be the Cause of this Disease. As touching the Cure, In the first place let the Patient forbear drinking Brandy, and sophisticated Wines, and the unmeasurable use of Venery. ☞ And make use of my Cathartique and Diuretique Pills, for they with much ease purge all flegmatick humours from the Joints, if not of long standing, there congealed. Or take Oxymel of Squills, from half an ounce to six drams, at night going to Bed.
The next morning take the following potion. Take the Electuary called Caryocostinum half an ounce, Troches Alhandal five grains; mix them with two or three ounces of White-wine, and drink it off fasting, repeating it as need shall require. Or take the Powder of a Mans Skull that was never buried, Hermodactils, Senna, and Tur∣bith, of each two drams, Scamony prepared with Sulphur one dram; being made into very fine Powder, give to the Patient one dram at a time in the Distilled VVater of Fumatory, or in Broth or Posset-Drink. Or take Scamony prepared with Sulphur two scruples, Mercurius Dulcis one scruple; mix them, and make it up for three doses: The stronger may take it at twice, as afore-dire∣cted; which will eradicate or root out the Humour causing this Distemper; but nothing near so powerfully as my Pills: However, let the Patient use his own pleasure. Outward Medicines of Excellent Ʋse in this Disease, are made as followeth: Take a Bull's, or an Oxe's Gall, and cla∣rifie the same; after which add thereto the like quantity of Aqua Vitae, and gently boil
the same till it come to Ointment, with which anoint the part pained well before the fire. Or take the Chymical Oil of Wax one dram and a half, Oil of Myrrh, and the Chymical Oil of Salt, of each half a dram, Oyl of Scorpions two drams; being mixed together, anoint therewith, for it is of wonderful efficacy, and to my knowledge hath helped many. Castle-Sope is also of Excellent Virtue, if it be first dissolved in the true Spirit of Sack, and the Hip anointed therewith well before the fire. You may also take the Oil of Foxes half an ounce, Oil of Tiles, and Earth-worms, of each one ounce, Oil of Turpentine, and Saint John's wort, of each one ounce and a half; with a sufficient quantity of Virgins VVax, make an Ointment thereof, and use it as afore∣directed. Or take the Oil called Petrolei, Oil of Tiles, Juice of Dane-wort, Turpentine, of each one ounce, Oil of Earth-worms, one ounce and a half, Spirit of Sack half an ounce; melt all these together, and anoint the grieved part hot there∣with. Or apply to the part the Plaister made of Fran∣kincense, White Wax, &c. in the Chapter of the Gout, page 229.
Or take Rosin, Burgundy Pitch, the Plaister of Paracelsus, and Bees Wax, of each one ounce, Verdigrease in fine Powder half an ounce; being melted altogether, spread it upon Sheeps Lea∣ther, and apply it to the part. Some apply with excellent success Blistering Plaisters to the Huckle-Bone, which doth attract or draw forth the matter to admiration, keeping it running two or three days, by the applying thereto a little Butter and Wax melted together, and spread upon a Linnen Cloth.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Invention and most Remarkable Cures effected by those most Famous CATHARTIQUE and DIU∣RETIQUE PILLS. ABout March in the Year 1661. many Persons sorely torment∣ed with the Dropsie, &c. com∣ing to me for Advice, and then being ignorant of any Medi∣cine (though I had made trial of many) that would combat the same, put me upon a severe Study; and soon after, by searching the Great Volume of Nature, ob∣serving the Property and occult Quality of Metals, Minerals, and Vegetables, I arrived
to the Knowledge and true Preparation of this most Incomparable Medicine. And the first Pill that ever I gave thereof, was to a very worthy Person, a Good Friend of mine, at which instant of time I took ano∣ther my self, which wrought upon us both ve∣ry strange effects, expelling not onely viscous or tough flegmatick Humours, that lay fur∣ring the Tunicles of the Stomach, but all sharp salt and watry Humours that were found of∣fending. And I will assure thee, Reader, that this Gentleman and many others, with my self, ever since the year 1662. upon the least indis∣position of Body, have made use of those Pills, and thereby preserved our Bodies in Pristine Health. Which may be a sufficient Argument to convince the People that this is a very Safe Medicine, leaving no evil Qualities behind it, as some of the same Faculty (falsely to de∣fraud the Patient) do report. In the year 1663. I effected many strange Cures upon persons very dangerously afflicted with the Dropsie and Scurvy, &c. Amongst which, Captain Matthew Hall, now belonging to Her Majesties Life-Guard, being much troubled with the Dropsie and
Scurvy; for which he drunk plentifully of Tunbridge-Waters, being there to wait upon Her Majesty; but finding it rather destru∣ctive, than to do him the least good against the Dropsie, he forthwith made use of my Pills, by which he had present help, and will upon request testifie the same. About September the same year, I was cal∣led to a Gentleman then living in Black Friars, sorely tormented with the Dropsie, and from some other cause had Buboes in his Groins, which were newly broke, putting him to ve∣ry great misery; which with the Dropsie, were soon cured with my Pills: Onely he kept the Sores clean with White-wine where∣in was dissolved a small quantity of Egyptia∣cum, and applied thereto the Plaister of white Lead. One Mr. John Powel a Taylor, living then near to the aforesaid place, troubled with a Tertian Ague, his Legs much swelled, who had a great Pain in his Back, was in a very short time cured with my Pills. The following Winter I was called to a Gentlewoman then living in Newgate-Market, who had been for some years troubled with a violent pain in her Stomach, and had made trial of many Medicines for help, but found
none, till she made use of my Pills; and drinking with them the Decoction of Pellito∣ry of Spain and Gallingal, as you have dire∣cted pag. 127. was perfectly cured, and in a short time conceived with Child, though she had had none before, though married seven years. About August or September 1664. Mr. Qual∣let, then living in Field-Lane near Holburn, sorely afflicted with the Dropsie, Scurvy, and Gout, was in three weeks time perfectly cu∣red with my Pills, and Sweating Bolus, dire∣cted in the Chapter of the Gout, pag. 225. who lived till the year 1669. though well stricken in years, and at last supposed to shor∣ten his days by drinking of Brandy. In the Easter-week 1665. I was called to a person of Quality, who had been married five or six years at least, which by reason of the over-much moistness and slipperiness of the Womb, could not conceive with Child, and by taking four and twenty of my Pills, with the use of a Cordial Liquor I directed her to take upon the intermitting days, she conceived before Whitsunday next following, and she was brought to Bed of a Girl about Christmas; which is very well known to Per∣sons of Quality living now in this Honourable
City, who will be ready to declare the truth hereof, if demanded. Many other Great Cures I could inform you of, but must here omit. About April 1666. my Occasions called me to Bristol, and the Physicians there leaving the City, I was by the desire of John Wil∣loughby Esquire, then Mayor of the City, shut up at the Mermaid-Tavern upon the Back, and after that, at Mr. Richard Winstone's house in the County of Gloucester near the City afore∣said, in which infected Houses I continued the space of three months, and cured all of the Pest that took my Directions. And after I had my Liberty, the first news I heard was of the unhappy Fire in London, which was the absolute Cause of my Settlement in that Honourable City, where it is still known that I had a sufficient practice upon the worst of Diseases, attended with a wonderful and good success. The first Patient of the Dropsie in that Ci∣ty, was Mr. James Perry, who lived then at the White Lion in Broad-street, who was most horribly afflicted with that pernicious Distem∣per: His Belly, Thighs, and Legs extream∣ly swelled, and very hard; insomuch that he could not go: He had a great Cough and
Suffocation of the Lungs, loathed his Meat, who for the space of seventeen Weeks used all means imaginable, and had the Advice of Fifteen Physicians; some caused him to be Cupt, others used Scarification, &c. but took no effect; so they all left him for a dead man: Yet by Gods Blessing with my Pills, which caused him to evacuate by Stool at se∣veral times about sixteen Gallons of disco∣loured Water; besides, forced Urine freely, all his Swellings forthwith abated, his Ulcers (unskilfully procured) healed, and he was perfectly cured in thirty six days. About February 1666. I was called to one Richard Bush near St. Nicholas Gate, being in∣tolerably afflicted with the Yellow Jaundice, Dropsie, and Scurvy, and left by all void of help, was through Gods mercy, and the use of my Pills, in a very short time perfectly cured, though he was near seventy years of age: and lived two or three years after. About which time I cured one Mr. Hodges, who lived then in Broad-Mead, that was ve∣ry far gone in the Dropsie, &c. Also Mr. Chandler near the Pity-Gate, long troubled with the Dropsie, was perfectly cured in a short time, with my Pills.
About Easter 1666. I was called to one Mr. Robert Lancaster then living at the Bell in St. Nicholas-street, who was afflicted very much with a Dropsie, being much swelled in his Belly and Legs, also hectique; under Cure for six months, but to no purpose, who had been at great expence in Doctors Fees, &c. whom I cured under thirty days, with about 20 s. worth of my Pills. Mr. Robert Lisson of Bristol, far gone in the Dropsie, and had a Cough that sorely vexed him, was Cured with one 12 s. Box of my Pills. Upon Whitsunday 1667. I was called to Mr. William Kinton Copper-Smith, former∣ly living at the Red Lion in Castle-street, who was troubled with the Dropsie, and extraor∣dinarily swelled, especially in his Belly, and had a great Cough; was at last Cured by two 8 s. Boxes of my Pills. In January 1667. I was called to one Mr. Richard Davies, belonging then to the Sugar∣house in Temple-street, very far gone in the Dropsie; his Belly and Members much swel∣led, which I cured in a short time. And not Many weeks since, coming to London from Ireland, came to my House, to return me a second thanks, continuing very well ever since the date hereof.
Also Anne Estridge aged near 22. in St. Pe∣ters street in the City aforesaid, for want of her monthly Sickness fell into a Dropsie, and so extreamly swelled, that her Belly, Thighs, and Legs were ready to split, who for some time lay speechless: Yet by Gods blessing and my Pills, was perfectly cured. One Phillis in Wind-street, in the same City, aged near Fifty, her monthly Courses had left her, and being full of Excrementiti∣ous Humours, fell into a violent Dropsie, &c. very much swelled, and in great pain, whom I cured in few weeks. And for the future, to prevent such Acci∣dents, I counsel the female Sex about the time that those are leaving them, to take some of my Pills, (as directed in this Book) for cer∣tainly it hath been found, and still will be, the best Medicine under the Heavens in such ca∣ses, not only to prevent the Dropsie, but se∣veral Distempers that beget Mortality before the appointed time; which none shall pass, neither can Physick then take the least effect. The Wife of Mr. Arthur Baker in the Parish of Cromwel in the County of Gloucester, af∣flicted much with the Dropsie, and sorely tormented with a Spasmas, a Disease in which
the Sinews are drawn or plucked up against the Patients will, was cured by my Pills, though in the Winter-time, and very much Frost and Snow. Mr. William Ʋnderhill's Son in the Parish of Bitton five miles from Bristol, afflicted much with the Dropsie, was cured with two or three Boxes of My Pills. Mr. James Russel of Bath was cured of the Dropsie with a small quantity of my Pills. About August 1668. I was called to a per∣son of the Female Sex, sorely afflicted with sharp Humours falling upon her Eyes, Pallet, and Throat, several Ulcers near the Ʋvula, and the Privy not free; who was salivated, but to no purpose; and at last perfectly cured with two 12 s. Boxes of my Pills, with the use of the Gargarisms directed page 95. Another young person of the same Society having for ten or twelve months a violent bur∣ning pain in her Head, was cured by taking eight or 12 s. worth of my Pills, with the use of the Poppy Seed, and the Ointment made with Housleek, Oyl of Roses, and Wo∣mans Milk, directed page 4. About the latter end of March 1669. I was called to Mr. Peter Grant, now living at the Sign of the Blew Bores Head in the Sham∣bles
in Bristol; being brought exceeding low with the Dropsie, who also had a violent pain in his Stomach, his breath very short; his Relations and Friends gave him over, ha∣ving no hopes of Life, aged near Sixty. He at last making use of about 16 s. worth of my Pills, was in a short time perfectly Cu∣red. The Daughter of J. P. in the County of Gloucester near Bath, aged 37. for seven years troubled with an ill Distemper, which she cal∣led the Whites; also a great weakness and pain in her Back, sharpness of Urine, &c. and broke forth over all her Body much like to a Leprosie; the Humour salt and sharp; by taking my Pills one Spring and Fall, was perfectly cured. The days she took no Pills, I advised her to drink the Decoction of Plan∣tane, Yarrow, Knotgrass, and the middle Bark of Elm. And sometimes she anointed the Sores with the Ointment directed p. 166. A good old Woman, formerly a Souldier in the Wars of Venus, not living many miles from the place aforesaid, sorely afflicted with the Scurvy, &c. with a kind of Pocky Hu∣mour in her Eyes, and a filthy stinking Ulcer in her Throat, by reason of which she could not speak, and when she went to drink, it
would run out at her Nostrils; was at last perfectly Cured by taking four 4 s. Boxes of my Pills, with the use of the Gargarism page 95. Another woman, aged about Sixty, living very near the City of Bristol, troubled long with an Ulcer in her Throat, and had violent pain in her Legs in the night season; was in a short time cured by the foresaid means, on∣ly she sweat three or four times, with the Bolus directed page 225. One Deborah Jones living in Kings Wood near the City aforesaid, having the Wind-Gout, Dropsie and Scurvy, was by my Pills, with the use of the Bolus afore-directed, be∣yond expectation restored to her former health; the Pills once bringing from her by vomit a filmous substance the length of a mans hand. Mr. Theophilus Mascal, formerly of the Gilders-Inn-Tavern in the City aforesaid, much troubled with the Dropsie and Scurvy, was in a very short time cured with my Pills.
UPon the Eighth day of June in the year of our Lord 1669. I took my Journey forth of Bristol towards New Hall in the County of Essex, to Cure his Grace GEORGE MONCK, late Duke of Albemarle; who through the wonderful Goodness and Mercy of God, by taking nineteen or twenty Doses of my Pills, in twenty eight days eva∣cuated by Stool twelve gallons of water; up∣on which his Swellings all abated, and he be∣came perfectly cured of the Dropsie, as you may understand by what follows, being a true Copy of the Certificate under his own Hand and Seal. These are to Certifie all whom it may concern, That Mr. WILLIAM SERMON, Professor of Physick, was the Person, by Gods Blessing, who did Perfectly Cure me, with much ease,
and in a short time. Given under my Hand and Seal at New Hall this 12th day of July 1669. ALBEMARLE. And to prove that at last his Grace died not of the Dropsie, as some of the most rude still maliciously report, be pleased to read the Book intituled, The Life and Actions of General Monck, page 246, 454, 476. written by that Reverend Divine, Doctor Thomas Gumble, Chaplain to his late Grace. The first that made use of my Pills in the time I had his Grace in Cure, those of his Honourable Family excepted, VVas that worthy Person, Captain Wod∣low, of the Sun Tavern in Thredneedle-street London; who found wonderful good thereby, and at certain seasons have made use thereof ever since.
I was my self for the space of two years and upwards sorely troubled with a flatulent or windy Humour, which did arise from the Mesenteries to the Stomach, and there gnaw me very violently; and falling down again vvould dravv my Head to my Knees, and could not have the least ease till I vomi∣ted. Being perswaded against purging Me∣dicines, I forbore taking my own Pills, until such time the fits seized upon me with such vi∣olence, that none thought it possible for me to recover, they continuing for ten or fifteen days together without intermission; upon which came the Yellow Jaundice. And at last, by taking often of my own Pills, (especi∣ally when I was at New Hall in the presence of many Noble men, to shew that in them was no danger) I was restored to my perfect Health: And to continue the same, upon the least indisposition ever since, have made use thereof. About September 1669. Mr. John Ford a Member of the Honourable House of Com∣mons, then Secretary to my Lord Roberts, having a great Indisposition of Body, no Pur∣ging Physick agreed with his Constitution, until such time he took of my Pills, by which he found present help.
Near the fame month Captain Anthony Langstone, much troubled with the Dropsie, and very much swelled, had present help by taking of my Pills. In the like manner that worthy person Mr. Edmond Saunders Barrester of the Middle Temple, much inclinable then to the Dropsie and Scurvy, had help thereby. Soon after, being in the City of Gloucester, sent for one 12 s. Box of my Pills, and gave them freely to the wife of one Watkins in Wotton, near the City aforesaid, by which means she was forthwith perfectly cured, though in an extraordinary manner swelled, and very far gone in the Dropsie. About the same time Mr. John Pit living then at the Dun Cow in Dunchurch, horribly afflicted with the Dropsie, was perfectly cu∣red with 20 s. worth of my Pills; who in a year and half after, destroyed himself with drinking Brandy. Mr. George Child near Cople in Bedfordshire, aged near Sixty, very far gone in the Dropsie, was soon cured with three or four Boxes of my Pills. Mr. John How near Ridge-hill between Bar∣net and St. Albans, aged Seventy Three, very sorely afflicted with the Dropsie, his Belly
and Members much swelled, was cured with my Pills, in six or seven weeks time. Mr. Richard Mills his Son, John Mills, of Entfield, then aged about Fourteen, his Head, Belly, and Members, &c. very much swel∣led; his Father sought all means imaginable, but found none, till he took of my Pills, with which he received a perfect Cure. Near the same time were Cured of the Dropsie the Persons following, with a small quantity of my Pills. Serjeant Granger, living in Bishops-Head-Court in Grayes-Inn-Lane. Mr. Thomas Harrison, then living at the Mermaid in Red-Lion-Fields near Hol∣bourn. Corporal Davies, then quartering at the Six Bells in Grays-Inn-Lane. Mr. Robert Shipton at the Sign of the Hors∣shoe over against Clarendon-House. Mris. Dobson, at the Jacob and Twelve Sons in Red-Cross-street. Mr. Thomas Refould and Mris. Anne his Wife, at the Prince of Orange in Cannon-Row Westminster.
Mr. Baggot, Yeoman-Porter to the Gate and Park-Stairs at Whitehall. Mris. Anne Buckridge, &c. Mr. Lewis Reme, Painter to his Grace Christopher Lord Duke of Albemarle, much troubled with the Dropsie, had help by my Pills. Captain John Wharton, in George-Yard in King-street Westminster, sore troubled with the Dropsie and Scurvy, became very weak, was perfectly cured with two or three Boxes of my Pills. Mr. Joseph Haylock, Servant to Mr. Alderman Gray of Enfield in the County of Middlesex, was most violently afflicted with the Dropsie, and had a great Cough and Suffocation of the Lungs. He spet abundance of corrupt and foetid matter, and was left off by all for a dead man: and at last I Cured him for three and twenty shillings, though in the midst of his Cure (as many have been to their utter ruine) was perswaded against me and my Pills, so that in plain terms he left me off for six weeks, but at length begg'd me to take him again, be∣ing very unwilling (when he had got a pair of Spectacles) to be perswaded to his Grave.
About the same time a Gentlewoman aged near Forty One, not far from the Town afore∣said, sorely tormented with violent pain in her head, and great stoppage in her Stomach, full of wind, and exceedingly troubled with the Scurvy and Dropsie, by taking three or four small Boxes of my Pills, was very strange∣ly Cured, by voiding a monstrous Worm by stool, very large, and seven foot in length; by which means she was altogether freed of that long-continued misery, and withal per∣fectly Cured of the Dropsie. Since which time she hath cured several with my Pills, and many of them out of Charity. The latter end of April, I was called to a Person of good Quality, who for the space of seven years, notwithstanding making use of several courses of Physick, as Salivation, &c. was still troubled with some violent Symptoms of the French Pox, as sharp pains in the Head, pus, and watry matter of a stinking smell, perpetually running forth of his Eyes and Nostrils, who by taking of my Pills once or twice a week, and by sweating with my Arcanum Vitae, was perfectlie cured in twelve months time, since which he re∣mains free from all Symptoms, and hath since married, and by his Wife hath very
lovely Children, though no person thought ever to see the same. Mr. John Walker Attorney, living near the Royal Exchange, being troubled with a violent straining, and every morning subject to vomit, also had Vapours arising from his Stomach, which did very much offend his Head; but could receive no benefit by any Medicine what∣soever, until he took my Pills, with which he was perfectly cured in a short time. Mr. Day, formerly living in Chappel-street in the City of Westminster, violently afflicted with the Dropsie, and full of sharp humours, his Belly and Members extreamly swelled, was with seven 4 s. Boxes of my Pills cured. Mr. Christopher Brenam, then living at the Christopher in Duffins Alley, near the Mitre Tavern in Kings-street Westminster, being ve∣ry far gone in the Dropsie, his Belly, Thighs and Legs very much swelled, his appetite as it were altogether dejected or lost; by ta∣king of my Pills, had help in a short time: But about ten or twelve months after, by rea∣reason of taking cold, &c. fell into a relapse, and then became so extraordinary swelled and suffocated in his Lungs, that he could hardly breathe; so accidentally seeing him, proffered
to serve him; and that I did not doubt, but from a second use of my Pills would result a second Cure: But by his Discourse I found he had an inclination to try some other means; which he did accordingly, and finding all at∣tempts of that kind ineffectual, himself and friends then concluded it a matter impossible ever to recover him; then were my Pills their ultimum refugium; with two or three Boxes whereof, he was again restored to his health, to the admiration of many, that will testifie this to be a truth. Since which time, for want of a due regard to his own health, he fell into a Consumption, and lately expi∣red. A young Lady having the Small Pox, and being recovered of the same; in few months after, by reason of some Obstructions, had four Ulcers broke in her left Leg, and could not by any means be healed, until she took my Pills, though it had cost her before thirty odd pounds, and had drunk plentifully of the Waters too; which by taking three or four Boxes, and keeping the Sores clean with a Liquor I prescribed, was in thirty days per∣fectly cured. Therefore I counsel such, that often drink the Waters, not to be without some small quantity of my Pills, and take
thereof once or twice in a week, though in the aforesaid course; for I well know that those waters are destructive to many; more especially to Hydropical Persons, and such of them that have been great drinkers of Sack and Claret, &c. For certainly nothing can be more pernicious to them, then to for∣sake rashly their wonted custom, and fall to drinking of crude or raw Water, which over much cools the Blood (the very Balsam of life) when by taking of my Pills it will be made sweet, and soon brought to its first purity, by which means the Dropsie, with many other violent Diseases, are cured. A Gentlewoman aged near 25, being mar∣ried six or seven years, by reason of over-much humidity or moistness of the Womb, &c. could not conceive with Child; hearing of my Pills, she took two or three Boxes there∣of, which caused her to evacuate much wind and water, and within three months concei∣ved. I could give an account of several others that have received the like benefit. Mr. John Rives having an indisposition of Body, at last fell into a Dropsie, & Scurvy, &c. But taking it in time, was cured with one Box of my Pills.
Mris. Seawel, in Well-Yard in Little Saint Bartholowmews, very dangerously afflicted with that Dropsie called Tympanites, her Belly ex∣treamly swelled; she had lost her Appetite, and was very weak; but through Gods mer∣cy by taking of my Pills was perfectly restored to her former health. Mr. John Brice Shoo-maker at the Half-Moon in Shear-Lane near Temple-Bar, long troubled with an indisposition of Body, and a violent pain and weakness in one of his shoul∣ders, had help by taking a Box or two of my Pills. Mr. John Key, now living at the Sign of the Peacock in Portugal-street, much troubled with the Dropsie, was cured with my Pills. Mris. Anne Brinley, the VVife of Mr. Al∣derman Brinley, in the City of Worcester, most horribly afflicted with the Dropsie and Scur∣vy; her Belly, Thighs, and Legs, extreamly swelled, and almost deprived of Breath; she had made use of many eminent and able Phy∣sicians, (who questionless used their best en∣deavours) yet to no purpose; and so left by all her nearest Relations for a dead woman; But accidentally hearing of my Pills, and ma∣king use thereof according to Directions,
forthwith evacuated abundance of Water by Stool, &c. her Swellings all abated in a short time, and she became perfectly well to ad∣miration. This Great Cure was effected a∣bout Midsummer 1670. Since which time many more of Good Quality, in and ad∣jacent to that City, have found wonderful good thereby. Mris. Mary Jones, the wife of Mr. John Jones, now living in East Bargholt in Suffolk, very far spent in the Dropsie and Scurvy, and extream∣ly swelled all over her Head, Face, Arms, Bo∣dy, Thighs, and Legs, and the swellings ve∣ry hard; her Legs were swelled above half a yard about, and sometimes her Eyes would be puft up that she could not see; she was also troubled with a violent Cough, and a ri∣sing in her Throat, insomuch that she was as it were suffocated or choaked up; many times she was deprived of her Speech: She had a violent pain in her head, and oftentimes almost distracted therewith: Her condition was so dangerous, that she had made use of all the ablest Physicians that she could hear of, but found not the least benefit by them; and at length they all left her off, and said that she could not live many days; And then it plea∣sed God that she was directed to my Pills,
which perfectly cured her in two months; which wonderful Cure was effected in June and July, in the year 1670. Mr. Isaac Key of Neyland in the County of Suffolk, aged Sixty Nine, sorely afflicted three or four years with a violent Ague and Fever, first shaking him for an hour or two, and then followed an extream burning, which continued each Fit 24 hours, and at length he fell into the Dropsie, and was very much swel∣led and troubled with sharp humours, which broke out, and put him to much pain; he made use of all means he could hear of, but found nothing that took the least effect: So hearing of my Pills, and the great Cures ef∣fected thereby in the same County, he forth∣with made use thereof, which brought abun∣dance of water from him, and also abated his Fits in so great a measure, he scarce knew when they came, which before he took of my Pills, wholly deprived him of his strength, so that he was not able to turn himself in his Bed; but in this course he lost no strength, and in a short time those intollerable fits quite left him, and his Dropsie also perfectly cu∣red. A notable Cure effected upon Mris. Key with nine of my Pills; her Distemper at first
was supposed to be a Pleurisie; for which she had been let Blood sufficiently (though anci∣ent) but found no benefit thereby; she was so exceeding weak, that the Physicians and all her Relations gave her over for a dead VVo∣man. Her complaint was of Burnt Choler in her Stomach; and said to her Husband, If it could not be removed, she must forthwith die: so he gave her three of my Pills, which for the present caused her to be very sick; but when she had had two or three Stools, she per∣ceived the aforesaid Choler to be carried off, and wholly to be expelled; after which she perceived more than ordinary hollowness in the part before-mentioned; so she took three Pills more, which caused a good Appetite to eat; and in few days after took the other three, and so became perfectly well, to the admira∣tion of all that saw her. A Kinswoman of Mris. Keys, aged about Eighteen, was intollerably afflicted with the Dropsie, and had made use of all means she could hear of, but to no purpose; and at the last by taking of my Pills, was strangely re∣covered. First she took two, and then three, which caused her to vomit; afterwards she took four, and then five, which operated somewhat stronger, and so broke a congealed
substance that lay in her Body, much in form like to a Cake, which in pieces came forth by Stool, and so she became perfectly well, and free from the Dropsie. Not many weeks af∣ter, by reason of a Surfeit, she broke out all over her Face, Body, Thighs, Legs, &c. and was so lame she could not go; she had also a rising in her Throat, which every hour was like to choak her, and a violent Fever every night, insomuch that all her Relations and Friends gave her over for dead. But through Gods blessing, by taking some more of my Pills, was again perfectly cured in the latter end of the year 1670. of all those pernicious infirmities, and now as well or better than ever in health. About the latter end of April 1671. Mr. William Burt at the Red Lion in the Butcher-Row near Temple-Bar, most dangerously tor∣mented vvith the Dropsie, his Face, Belly, Thighs, and Legs, &c. horribly swelled and puft up; he was also Asthmatical, or troubled with shortness of Breath, insomuch that it was thought he could not live 48 hours; yet through Gods goodness, by taking my Pills according to directions, was as it were changed from death to life, and perfectly cured in a short time, though before he had made use of
all means possible, and was purged sufficient∣ly: But not with Medicines of the Nature of my Pills, (for I challenge the whole World to produce the like) which are not only Cathartique or Purging, but withal fortifies or strengthens the Principal Bowels, &c. and that is one Reason they so perfectly cure the Dropsie. ☞ A Persons Daughter of Quality about eight years of Age, never having the perfect use of her Limbs; by taking twenty five 4 s. Boxes of my Pills, in the space of two years received perfect help thereby, and remaineth to this day free from the least Symptoms of Ach or Pain, and groweth fat and very come∣ly; who before the making use thereof was supposed never to have perfect help. The wonderful Cures effected upon Mr. James Major, Mr. William Hobs, and Mr. John Wear, you may read in their following Let∣ters under their several hands, which upon request I am ready to produce, with many more.
Mr. James Major's Letter. Honoured Doctor, WHen the Microcosm my Body was over-flowed with a vast Deluge of the Dropsie, in so extraordinary a manner, as that I despaired of all hopes (as to Life) expecting nothing but that I should be drowned in so great a Floud: It pleased God then to direct me to You, (whom I would the World Knew Better) who under Him was an Ark to preserve me safe, to keep me from sink∣ing; And now Mankind is Restored, not as the Poets feigned, by throwing Stones over my Head, but by swallowing your Pills down my Throat, which produced strange effects; I had almost said, as that Stones should become Men. A strange Metamorphosis, that from such a Chaos of Con∣fusion, from such a Mass of disordered Matter, from such a Heap of Indigested Humours, I should by your Art, as if Nature had been new moulding me, be wrought into so goodly a Fabrick, and re∣duced to my wonted Feature; that whereas I was Monstrum horrendum, I am now Corpus Hu∣manum. It seems to me even a Paradox, that
whereas I was Dead, (for so I was counted to be) I should by your Pills alone be Revived: Nay, which is the most wonderful, I was buried alive; for so small were my Relations hopes concerning me, that they looked upon me really as dead, wait∣ing daily for my Dissolution: Even then with Gods Blessing accompanying your Pills, I was rescued from the Jaws of Death, I was raised as it were out of my Grave; and am yet alive, and shall ever bless God on your behalf. That you may live long, and do much good, is the desire of him who is, Yours, because you have Ransomed me, JAMES MAJOR. From Ipswich, Septemb. 27. 1671. About October 1671. one John Far, then living at Mr. Langhleys house at the two Rab∣bets and Pigeon in Greens Lane near Charing-Cross, extreamly troubled with the Dropsie, very much swelled, left off by all for a dead man. His Wife related his sad Condition to me: I abhorring to take money where I judge no good to be done, vvas very unvvil∣ling to let her have a Box of my Pills, but she would not go without them: So it plea∣sed
God that one Box thereof perfectly cured him of the Dropsie. Mr. Michael Hobbs's Letter. Noble Doctor, BEing not known unto you in the least, more than by the Description of the Book you have set forth for the taking of your Pills, which are for the Curing of the Dropsie and the Scurvy; Yet Sir, I am bound in Honesty and Civility to give you many hearty and humble Thanks for the great Cure (by Gods assistance) that your Pills have made upon my Son William Hobbs, who was most sadly afflicted with the Scurvy, which had been growing upon him al∣most three years, and brought him so weak, that he could hardly go or stand, neither could he lie in his Bed, but sit therein, being boulster'd up with Pillows to keep him bending forward, other∣wise his breath would so much fail him, that he could not live, if he lay in his Bed as others do, and as now he doth; his Gums were almost eaten away, and he became so cold that it was a great deal of care and diligence taken to keep heat within him for almost a quarter of a year; and then it was
my fortune to light upon one of your Books; and after my self and Son had perused it, my Son had a very great desire that I should buy one of your 4 s. Boxes of Pills, and prepare him the Diet-Drink according to your Directions: So every thing being made ready, he began to take the Pills, and in twice or thrice taking, he found a little a∣mendment, which made my Self and Wife much to rejoyce: For none that saw him in his weakness did think he could have lived, but all concluded he was a dead man. He followed taking the Pills, until he had almost taken the first Box; and still by degrees he mended: and then he desired another 4 s. Box, and by that time he had taken them, he was able to lie in his Bed, and to walk down out of his Chamber; then being so much taken with the Pills, he desired another Box of 8 s. and before that was taken, he was so well and lively, that now I do think he is near as strong as ever he was, and I judge there is hardly a stronger man in the Parish. If any should question the Truth of this my Letter, you may be pleased to shew it to Richard Dowdeswel Esq one of the Members of the House of Commons, who knows the same to be true, so doth his Son Mr. Charles Dowdeswel. Sir, I am but a plain Countrey-man, and not able to express my self in such Language as you de∣serve,
but my Self, Wife, and Son, do all pray to God to bless you in your Practice; and so hum∣bly desiring that you would be pleased to write two words to me of the Receipt of this, for I shall not be satisfied till I know that you have received our thanks for your brave Cure; some few of the 8 s. Box of Pills are yet remaining: Besides, two or three other Persons have taken thereof, and much good they have sound by them. So I humbly take my leave, and rest, Your most humble Servant, to serve you, MICHAEL HOBBS. Longdon, near Ʋp∣ton upon Severn in the County of Wor∣cester, Octob. 18. 1671. Mr. Parkeson at the upper end of Chick-lane, near West-Smithfield, extreamly troubled with shortness of breath, his Appetite lost, his Legs swelled, and very little hopes of Re∣covery, was in, a short time cured by taking a Box or two of my Pills. Mr. Nicholas Waight in St. Johns Court in Cow-Lane, by reason of a great Surfeit cau∣sed by over-much drinking, was reduced to a very weak condition, a violent Cough, and stopping in his Stomach, his Appetite deject∣ed;
insomuch that all his Friends judged it impossible for him to live; who had Remedy by taking ten of my Pills, with a Medicine of small value that I directed for his Cough. Mr. John Scarvil Distiller, at the Sign of the Green Man near Holbourn-Bridge, sorely troubled with the Dropsie and Scurvy; his Stomach, Belly, Thighs, and Legs, much swelled; He was also suffocated or choaked up, that he could hardly breath; yet through Gods blessing he had help by two or three 4 s. Boxes of my Pills, though near 60 years of age. Mr. Allen not far from the sign aforesaid, sorely troubled with the Dropsie and Scurvy, so weak that he could hardly go, was also cu∣red with two or three Boxes thereof. Richard Jenkins a Waterman, living in Lambeth-Marsh, troubled with a violent pain and stoppage in his Stomach, loathed his meat; by taking two or three times of my Pills, which caused several Worms to be voi∣ded upward, and much watry and slimy mat∣ter by Stool, forthwith became perfectly well.
Mr. John Wear's Letter. William Sermon, ☞ THese are to certifie thee and any other to whose view these Lines may come, that about the 8th Month, 1671. my body was afflicted with such a pain in my stomach, and through the tediousness thereof so bowed me down, that I could hardly bear my body up, at which time it came into my mind to make use of thy Pills, and took for the first dose sive, about the 5th hour in the morning being in my bed; and about one hour after drunk one Pint of very warm Ale; whereupon they began to work (procuring divers Stools, consisting of a slimy waterish stuff, and my pain being much mitigated thereby, en∣couraged me to take the like dose next morning in like manner, which operated no less then the former, and expelled out of my body by Stool abun∣dance of Worms, in form like unto the Prickles of an Hedge-hog shaven off: So I forbore taking any more for a full month: and then taking the like dose, which operating like unto the former, expelled in Operation no less number of Worms, of like form those the second dose produced; and since that time through the mercy and goodness of the Lord to me, I have been as well as ever I was in my life. And have given this testimony
for the encouragement of all persons that may be troubled with the like distemper, to make use of the same Pills; giving those to understand, that in the time of their working, I took but little food besides broth: And so with my true love to thee, I rest and remain, Thy loving Friend, JOHN WEAR. Bristol 22. of the 1st month 1672. ☞ Captain John Pim of Hackthorn in the County of Lincoln, most horribly afflicted with the Dropsie and Scurvy; his Body from the Stomach downwards, Belly, Thighs, Legs and Feet, most infinitely swelled, so that he could not in any measure help himself; but lay on his back in bed, not able to turn therein, with a weight upon his Stomach to hold down the swelling, and to abate the violence of the pain: expecting every hour that his Body would have broke asunder, the course of Nature being almost stopped, insomuch that he could not make water, to give the least ease. He had given himself over for death, and was supposed by all that that saw him to be a dead man, all thinking it useless for him to make trial of my Pills, though he had by the Post sent for them; but living in such great misery till they came, he took two; and in few hours after had much ease, and received thereby the
benefit of Nature; he continued taking them every night two at a time for ten days, then took three at a time for six weeks together, after which, he could go about his house, and did increase in strength, to help himself in all necessary occasions. He took eight or nine 4 s. Boxes before his swellings were taken away, by reason his Liver, and the rest of his principal Bowels had received much da∣mage before he had made use of my Pills. He had at first a very violent Fever; and after that, a Quotidian Ague; then followed a Tertian Ague, attended with a suppression of Urine, which was conceived (notwithout good reason) to be the Cause of the Dropsie. He was also girt about with Stitches, and al∣most choaked up with tough flegm, his Spleen much swelled and very sore; with many other infirmities too tedious now to insert. By ta∣king fourteen 4 s. Boxes of my Pills, in few months was restored to his former Health. September 24. 1672. I had news brought of a woman near Ipswich, about Forty years of age, that had not been out of her Chamber in six years, by reason of great weakness and pain in her Limbs, &c. and by taking two 4 s. Boxes of my Pills could walk seven miles; and
since by taking a few Boxes more, she is resto∣red to her perfect health. A Gentleman of good worth being terri∣bly tormented with the Scurvy, and withal a virrulent Gonorrhea, or Running of the Reins, who had for a considerable time made use of Physick, especially Pills cried up for such Di∣stempers; but all proving useless, he grew vvorse, and began to swell both in his Sto∣mach, Belly, and Privy Parts, so that he con∣cluded himself to be poysoned, and imagined nothing but death to follovv; but being per∣svvaded to make use of my Pills, forthwith sent for an 8 s. Box, and found thereby pre∣sent ease, and aftervvards for two 4 s. Boxes, by which he received a perfect Cure in a short time, with the use of a small quantity of the Astringent Pills, directed page 199. ☞ A Gentlewoman sorely troubled with the White Flux, great pain and weakness in her Back, Ulcers in her Throat and Privy Parts, by taking my Pills every second or third day for one month together, was per∣fectly cured. To the Ulcers she made use of the Water directed page 96. and the days she took no Purging Pills, she took of the Strengthening Pills before-mentioned, page 199.
Mr. Christopher Pound, next door to the Maiden-head in St. Johns-street, very much swelled, who had a great pain and stoppage in his Stomach, given over for a dead man, was perfectly cured by my Pills. Mr. William Virgin of the Half-Moon in Bartholomew-street in Newbury, violently tor∣mented with the Dropsie, &c. had help by my Pills. Mris. Elizabeth Rodes, sorely afflicted with the Green Sickness and Dropsie, received perfect Cure by the foresaid means. Mris. Elizabeth Ward in Tenter-Ally in St. Tooly Street Southwark, sore troubled with the Dropsie and Scurvy, much broken out in seve∣ral parts, great pain in her Knees and Legs, &c. she lay exceeding weak for many months, notwithstanding she had very often made use of many able Physicians, but to no pur∣pose, and at last Cured in a short time, with two or three Boxes of my Pills. About the latter end of March 1673. Mr. Brogden, at the sign of the Horse-shoe in Sheer-Lane near Temple-Bar, was cured of the Dropsie with one Box of Pills. Mr. John Overton living at the Cross-Keys in Grace-Church-Street, sorely tormented with the Dropsie and Black Jaundice, was
perfectly Cured with two or three Boxes of my Pills, and with a small quantity of the Powder directed page 171. Mris. Brewster of Billericay in the County of Essex, by reason of taking cold in lying in, &c. fell into a violent Dropsie extreamly swelled, and withal deprived of the use of her Limbs, insomuch that she was not in the least able to help her self; her Physicians and all her Friends leaving her off for a dead wo∣man; but accidentally being directed by a worthy Person, a Minister of the same Coun∣ty, not long before cured by my Pills, to take thereof, was also with four or five Boxes re∣stored to the use of her Limbs, and the Drop∣sie cured, to the admiration of all her Friends. A Merchants Wife of this City being for a long time troubled with a grievous pain and stoppage in her Stomach, and had made use of several Medicines, but found no ease there∣by; by making use of my Pills, especially three that she took upon the 17th of May 1673. which then by vomit caused her to void a strange Worm, the Body thereof square, and of a grass-green colour, the neck round and very white, and the head blood∣red, who so swiftly run about the Bason, that
it could hardly be taken, which put the Lady into a great fright; and the next day she sent it to me: My Counsel was, that she should take more of my Pills; by which she became well, and free from her former pain. About the same time Mr. John Phelps, a Butcher, living near Redriss Church, being for a long time troubled with a violent pain and stoppage in his Stomach, loathed his meat, and was grown so weak that he could hardly stand, having a reluxation and trem∣bling in his Joints, attended with grievous pain, himself and friends not having the least hopes of his Life. Complaining to my Bro∣ther at the Golden Fleece near to the fore∣said place, who presently gave to him five of my Pill, that had lain up and down his house in a Box musty for three or four years, which brought from him by Vomit and Stool abun∣dance of filthy corrupt and stinking slimy mat∣ter; by which means he became perfectly well in few days, and as strong as ever. A Person of good worth, a Merchant, whose Name I must here conceal, through over-much drinking, especially that destru∣ctive Liquor called Brandy (which, were the truth known, kills more English-men than the Sword) was most terribly afflicted this
Summer 1673. with the Dropsie▪ Scurvy, Gout and Palsey, having such a Reluxation and Trembling in all his Joints, that he was not able to go without help, had help by ta∣king four 4 s. Boxes of my Pills; and since with much joy came to my house, and gave me Thanks. Another person near the Strand, very far gone in the Dropsie, came to my house for one Box of Pills, by which he was perfectly cured. Not long after he fell to drink his part of Two or Three Quarts of Brandy, and in few days died. Therefore in kindness to all Persons that have not an utter disregard to their own safety, by this Example, I do caution, that they do (as much as in them lieth) forbear the over∣much drinking of Brandy, and other strong Liquors. For be assured upon my long Expe∣rience, that under their Conduct marcheth the Dropsie, Scurvy, Consumption, and other mor∣tal Diseases. And were it necessary, I could mention hundreds more (some of which falling to their old course of drinking Brandy and so∣phisticated VVine, have destroyed them∣selves, that in all probability might have li∣ved many years) being perfectly cured of the
Dropsie, &c. with my Cathartique and Diu∣retique Pills. The wonderful Virtues and miraculous Cures effected thereby, is very well known to many Noble and Honourable Persons throughout the whole Kingdom, &c. So let me counsel all Hydropical and Scor∣butical Persons, and such that are inclinable thereunto, (not for my own Interest, but for their Welfare) to make use of my Pills in time; and not to be fooled out of their Lives by meer Pretenders that rail against them; nor by such that (the more to deceive the Patient) do falsly pretend to know the Composition thereof, through the wonderful goodness of God of my own Invention, wholly locked up in my own Brest, as yet, not communicated to any, my Wife excepted. And that the World may know that this Great ARCANƲM shall not die with me, the whole Secret, and true Preparation thereof, is faithfully demonstrated in a large Piece of Parchment under my own Hand and Seal, and safely reserved to be delivered to some honest Person or Persons, that the Ages to me may through the Assistance of the Al∣mighty God receive Benefit thereby. FINIS.
Advertisements. THe Ladies Companion, or the Engli  wife: Wherein is demonstrated the Mer and Order how Women ought to Govern them∣selves during the Whole Time of their Breed∣ing Children. Of their Difficult Labour, Hard Travail, Lying in, &c. By Dr. Wiiam Sermon, one of His Maesties Physician in Ordinary. Sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little-Britain. Price bound 2 s. ☞ THe Author's most Famous CATHAR∣TIQUE and DIURETIQUE PILLS, to well known for the absolute Cure of the Dropsie and Scurvy, with all other sharp, salt and watry Humours, &c. are sold by Edward Tho∣mas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, who is solely deputed by the said Doctor to make sale thereof; which are to be had in most of the eminent Cities and Towns in England, and in the City of Edenburgh in Scotland, and the City of Dublin in Ireland, and at his own House in the City of London. And that none may be deceived in buying other Pills for his, they are sealed up in Wooden Boxes with his own Seal. The Numbers and Prices are as followeth: The least Box, containing 20 Pills, sold for 4 s. The middle Box, containing 40 Pills, sold for 8 s. The large Box, containing 60 Pills, sold for 12 s. And with each Box is delivered a Printed Book of Di∣rections with the Authors Name at length in the Title-Page.
