S5501 12728916 66405
Florus Britannicus; Or, an Exact EPITOME OF THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, From WILLIAM the Conquerour to the Twelfth Year of the Reign of his Sacred Majesty CHARLS the Second, now flourishing. Illustrated with their perfect Portraictures in exact Copper Plates, very delightfull to the Reader: As also, every King and Queens Elegie, with a Pa∣negyrick under the last Plate, upon his Majesties happy Returne. By Mathew Stevenson, Gent. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis. LONDON; Printed by M.S. and are to be sold by Thomas Ienner at the South Entrance of the Royall Exchange. 1662.
To the every way accomplisht Gentlewoman my ever Honoured Cousin. Mrs Grace Killingbeck, of Baroughby Grange, near Weatherby in York-shire; here and hereafter happinesse. DVring the time (Dearest Cousin) I had the happinesse for some years, not long since, (through your more then generous goodnesse) to call your house, my Home; I could not but take notice how much you were addicted to History, out of a noble desire of acquaintance with former times: insomuch, that the vast bulk of Mr Fox his Martyrologie, a volume to be Chronicled for its unweildi∣nesse; Sr Walter Ralegh's History of the World; Purchas his Pilgri∣mage, a Book Treating of all the Religions, Lawes, and Customes of eve∣ry Nation under Heaven; together with severall other large and tedious Authors, could not deterre your eager eyes, but into these they would ven∣ter, though as into Groves and Labyrinths (without Ariadne's clew) inextricable; Books that like China dishes, or the walls of Jericho, are begun in one Century, and scarce gone through with, in the next; or as it is in curious and long-breath'd Romances, or Sr Philip Sidney's ingeni∣ously insinuating Meanders, the fancy Travels all day in the paths of expectation, and at night cannot rest on the bed of satisfaction. In consideration whereof (worthy Cousin) and at present not being able to serve you with other devoire, I thought good to offer something (though but a mite) in order to acknowledgment of your innumerable fa∣vours, (to wit) this Epitome of the Annalls of England, being as it were a glance upon the Reigns of all the Kings, with the two Queens of this Realme, from William the Conquerour, to the twelfth year of the Reigne of his sacred Majesty Charls the Second (God be thanked) now flourish∣ing; together with the exact and lively Portraicture of every King and Queene in Copper Plates: As also, their severall Elegies in twelve ver∣ses, which indeed contein as it were a summary and Compendium of the Epitome; all which (not without much pains) I have drawn within the Circle of your eye, so that at once you may read both Lines and Lineaments, which cannot but be of great advantage to your memory, without which reading is but like a mans beholding his face in a glasse, and turning his back to forget what manner of person he was. To avoid therefore prolixity, both ingratefull to the Reader, and destru∣ctive
to the Memory, I have perused and compared many vast and volu∣minous Authours, such as were the most authentick and best approved, and out of them have presented you here Truth, as she ought to be, naked; and by leaving behind those various dresses, the Wardrobe of her needlesse ornaments, that her Authors had set her forth with, I shall render her to you, though not so glorious, yet more memorable. In a word, I have here presented you with much in a little, Homers Illiads in a nut-shell; or (if I may say so) the Pater Noster in a penny, Chronicle in Shorthand: you have the Marrow, the Graine, the Kernell, let who will take the bones, the husks, and the shells: There is nothing remarkable, but I touch it so farre as the narrow confine of half a sheet will permit, which is enough to enforme and satisfie concerning truth, and in vaine are many words, where one will suffice; for let the Proverb say what it will, The furthest way about is not the nearest way home: Moreover, this advantage accrues to our concisenesse, That before you can read the circumstantialls of one Kings Life in a volumne, you may here run over the atchievments of them all since the Conquest, and thereof give a landable account. But least whilst I thus complement with your patience in illustrating the advantages of brevity, I forget my self, and let my so much talkt of Epitome (like that little City) run out at the Gates of my Dedication, I will shut up all, and make this an Oblation to your memory, not your me∣rit, which is so vast and unfathomed it would swell it self into such a vo∣lumne of obliges, that my whole work would scarce look big enough to be∣come an Epistle to it. To summe up all your particular goodnesses and my severall engagements, were to baffle Arithmetick with the Sands, and to lay the first stone of a work of eternity; for I know neither where to begin nor where to end: but as with many, acknowledgment of former favours is a tacit begging of future; so it is with me, while I stalk with one cour∣tesie for another, making my gratitude for what I have, a Preface to what I would have. In plain English, I thank you for your first kindnesse, and betray you to a second, which is, That you would pardon me, in that I have unknown to you presumed to make this Book publick under the honour of your name; hich if you shall vouchsafe, I am all gratitude: and as∣sure your self, when any thing more worthy your judicious view shall is∣sue from our riper Genius, 'tis vow'd to you by Your ever gratefull Votary & Kinsman. Mathew Stevenson. From my study in F. Sreet, London, Mar: 12. 1661.
WILLIAM the Conquerour. EDward the Confessor ere he dyed, promised the Kingdome of England to William Duke of Normandy after his deceas, in regard he was his Kinsman, & near of bloud to him, how∣beit William was a Bastard, begot of one Arlot a Country Maid, in respect of which, the abused English to this day call light Wenches Harlots, only adding an aspiration to Arlot. But Harold the Son of Goodwin Earle of Kent, a bold man, and a good Souldier, possessed him∣self by force of the Kingdome, during the Inter Regnum, not waiting the consent of the Nobility, though his Brother Tosto strove against him all he could, and waged War with him; But at York Tosto lost his life in a pitcht battel; in the mean while William Duke of Normandy depending on his right, raised an Army, and came for England to the South Saxons: Harold hearing of his arri∣vall, though his Souldiers were tired in the late fight, sets up his Standard against his new Enemy William: Not far from Hastings they fought a sore Battel, but Fortune turning against the English; Harold driven forward with a warlike fury, riding into the midst of his Enemies, and fighting vali∣antly was slaine, and a great number of his men fell with him. William the Conquerour presently brings his conquering Banners to London, and is proclaimed King by the people that remained, having got a Kingdome by a lawfull Victory, which (as he said) was given him of God. This King (as commonly Conquerours doe) abolishing forthwith all the Customes of the English Nation, and most of their Laws; brought in immediately his own Coun∣try Fashions, and commanded that all Causes should be pleaded in French: And excluding all the English that had boarn Armes against him out of their Patrimonies, he disposed of all their de∣meanes and Fields, and the rest of their Goods among his Souldiers, for a Reward of their Victory; reserving to himself the direct principallity and homage, held to himself and his Heirs, as a Tenure from the Crowne; so that none but the King should be the right and true Lord of any thing. Also he caused a Seal to be made for himself, wherein was engraved, By this acknowledge William of Normandy to be your Patron; but on the other side was engraven, By this Seal you must know that the same is King of England. Having thus subdued the Laity he turns himself to the Clergy, and made an Edict, that no English Monk should be capable of any secular dignity; disdaining the facilnesse of Canutus, who was for∣merly King, who had continued the honours, entreating the people whom he had subdued; by which Lenity the Inhabitants growing bold, after his death easily expelled Forreigners, and redeemed their former Liberty. Then he appeased the approaching War of the Danes, by giving them money that he might en∣joy it peaceably at any rate: And hence it was that the English were in no fear at all of the Danes, who formerly so infested them; yet they were not so free from troubles, but that here and there arose some tumults among the people, that were hardly suppressed and overcome; but the windy Faction was easily dispersed. The greatest matter was the Rebellion of his Son Robert in Normandy, because it was most against Nature. This Son at the Instigation of Philip King of France, demanded this Dukedome of his Fa∣ther as his proper Right; and without more words enters upon Normandy by force of Armes. It is true, his Father had promised him this Territory, but the Son was weary of delay, nor would he longer forbear from the Government he looked for: The King hearing of his Sons Enterprize, sud∣denly goes against him with a strong Army; they meet in Battel, the Son unhorses his Father, and wounds him in the arme; but when he knew his Fathers Voyce, alighting from his horse he raiseth his Father from the ground, and kneeling down before him, craved pardon for his boldnesse, which he obtained presently, his Father embracing him in his armes: however he seemed thus to have ap∣peased his Fathers wrath, yet God never suffering such faults to escape unpunished, he had no good luck ever after. Having conquered the Rebels partly by Sweetnesse and partly by Sword, he endeavours to en∣large his Kingdome, bringing Wales under his Command; and causing Malcom King of Scots to doe him homage, and so adding new Countryes, he (in some measure) rewarded England for the Crown they gave unto him: Yet least the frowardnesse of his newly conquered Subjects should grow in∣solent, he laid upon them Taxes and Tributes, that differed them little from slaves; seeking by all means to weed out and keep under hatches the Nobility, and with continuall Battels to wast and wear out the Commonalty. Only the men of Kent held their old Customes: For the King upon a certaine time journeying toward Dover, was handsomly circumvented by the Inhabitants of Kent, carrying Boughes cut down from Trees, nor would they suffer him to depart untill he had granted them the enjoyment of their ancient Customes; also he was indulgent to the Londoners to let them enjoy the priviledges they had in the Time of Edward the Confessor; but he forbad the Nobility rom hunting of Deer, reserving those sports for himself only.
About the end of his Life he placed his two Sons, Robert and Henry, almost in equall power over Normandy. There happened on a day a quarrel between Henry and Lewis the Dolphin of France, playing at Tables, which was the cause of great Contention betwixt the French and the Nor∣mans; the Dolphin drawing Robert on his side, enters Normandy with an Army: William forthwith having his Navy ready, sails into Normandy, and with no difficulty reducing his Son Robert to obedi∣ence; he marched to Roan that he might find the French men work. When he was weary with toyi∣ing, being very fat, he made a halt a while: The French derided him for his fat belly, speaking scof∣fingly that he was with Child, and ready to be delivered; when William heard thereof, he answered, If please God I ever recover of this Child-birth, I will burn a thousand lights to God in token of my thank∣fulnesse; nor was it long before he entered the Territories of France, and wasted all before him with Fire and Sword. Yet shortly after he fell sick and dyed at Roan: His followers not only forsook him being dead, but spoyled him of what he had, and his body unfortunately thrice forsaken, was at last let down into his own Monument at Cane in Normandy, but not entire. William the Conqueror Duke of Normandy after he had in Battaie slaine Harald toke vppon him the Crowne of England He raigned 19 yeares 11 months  at the age of 74 yeares And lieth buried at Caen in Normandy William the Conquerour resigns his breath Vnto a greater Conquerour, grim Death: I doe not say when he for England fought, That any other then his right he sought: But to the English he no Bowells had, Whence his own Bowells served him as bad. With what contempt these troublers of the World, When breath forsakes into the earth are hurl'd, A man may see in him; who scarce could have 'Midst all his Realms & friends, a sorry grave; As if the very Earth scorn'd to entombe The Son of so much slaughter in her Womb.
WILLIAM the Second, King of England. WIlliam the Conquerour being Deceased, the Crown of England by right of succession fell to Robert his Eldest Son; but he being in Germany, Lanfrank then Arch Bishop of Canterbury (who by reason of his great Learning and singular vertue, was in high and reverend esteeme with the people) so prevailed with the dying Conquerour William the first, that instead of Robert (the true Heir by Primogeniture) William surnamed Rufus, because of his Ruddy or Red Complexion (though the younger Brother) was Crowned King of England, Sept: 9. 1087. The Beginning of his Reigne was very troublesome and unquiet: For his Brother Robert took great offence at his attempt to take advantage of his ab∣sence, (honestly employed in his fathers service) to intercept his Crown and dignity, which in his Conscience belonged justly, and only to him. But not long after, enraged Robert entered with a very puissant Army of valiant Normans, and many French, whom Philip their King had waged for his ayde, the Confines of England resolving with his Presence, to regaine what he had lost by his Absence; abhorring that his Right should be made a prey to any Usurper: But such, and so flexible was the Dukes disposition (though in boldness, and valour he were second to none) that he rather enclined himself to a tranquill and peaceable condition, which was gently craved by his Brother, then (by the effusion of much bloud, which of necessity must have followed) to possesse himself of this Crowne: So that in the end, being fairly promised, that in case he survived, he should succeed: He accepted the grant of three thousand Marks per Annum from his Brother, and took a friendly leave, and returned safely home into his own Dutchie of Normandy. Presently after this, Malcom King of Scots denyes homage, but William enters his Territories with an Army, and subduing him, takes Hostages for his future Obedience. The King by these Victories more strongly footed him∣self in his Realme of England; and being better assured of his establishment than heretofore, began to tread in his Fathers steps, and with like severity and oppression to humble the haughty spirits of the English, and put a check to their courage: and finding by pollicy that plenty puffeth up, also, that penury prevents the danger of opposition, by bereaving them of those requisites that might promote his fear, and their hope: falls to imposing on them many intollerable taxes, which by his greedy Ministers, he levied with such despite, and cruelty, that they might well perceive that he meant nothing more then to cut the nerves and sinews of their strength, making it his grand design to dash the hopes of their Redemption. Now againe, Robert the Kings Brother once more proclaimes Warre against him, for lack of the Money he promised him in lieu of the forbearance of his Kingdom of England; and the King of France taking his part, he took some Towns by force from his Brother which of right belonged to him: But the King of France (bribed by William) forsook Robert, so that being deprived of assistance, he compelled him to crave pardon. In the sixt year of his Reign his prosperity was interrupted by the obstinate Rebellion of Rees the last King of the Welch men, who so infested him with broken Wars, that for many Months together, being urged to fight with Moun∣tains (to which upon all enforcements they fled) instead of combating with men, he could find no rest: But such was his Resolution and undaunted Courage, to withstand the strongest push of all extremities, that in the end he slew their King, and obtained a glorious Victory, and thereby better secured the subjection of the Welch men, then any his predecessors heretofore. But Malcom finding William embroyled in new troubles, again invades England, and is slain by Mowbray Earle of Northumberland. Now came the King (after many covetous and ingratefull oppressi∣ons of the English Nobles and Commons, to whom he owed his rescue from many perils of his Crowne and Life) to use the same hard measure to the Clergy; for such was his impiety, by all possible means to enrich himself, that he sold for money the greatest promotions in Church and Common-weal; and did prohibit the Arch Bishop of Canterbury to assemble any Convocation or Synod, for the well ordering of the Clergy; by means whereof he secretly filled his Coffers with Treasure. The Bishop complains to Pope Vrban, who having newly excommunicated the Emperour Henry the Fourth (the first Christian Prince that ever was excommunicated) durst not have too many Irons in the fire at once, not knowing what would become of the first; forbears his Bull, and sends a Command to the King to redintegrate with the Bishops, which the King slights, nevertheless, at last a reconciliation is made. This William was as valiant a Prince as the World ever had; and a great opposer of the indirect courses of the See of Rome. Many fearfull things hap∣ned in his Reigne, as Earthquakes, dreadfull Lightnings, and Apparitions, blazing Comets in strange Figures, great Inundations to the destruction of many of his people, and very much Land overwhelmed with the Sea, never to be recovered; amongst the which Earl Godwins Lands were drowned, and never to be recovered, and are now called Godwins Sands. At Finchamstead in Berkshire there was a Well that flowed blood fifteen dayes. The signs of his unfortunate end were many, but not regarded.
In the thirteenth year of his Reigne, as he hunted in the New Forrest (that his father had pulled downe Towns and Churches for) he was slain with an Arrow, by a French Knight, named Sir Walter Tyrrel, who shot at a Deer, but it unfortunately glanced on a Tree, and pierced the King into the Body, whereof he fell down dead, and in a Colliers Car was carryed to Winchester and there buried: Not long before, Richard his Nephew, and Son to Duke Robert of Normandy was there slaine. Thus ended the troublesome, yet Victorious Reigne of King William, third Son to the Conque∣rour; who being of a wanton Disposition, and neglecting Marriage, and dayly solacing himself among his Whores and Concubines, dyed without any lawfull Issue of his Body: His Stature was Comely, his Limbs firmly compact, active, strong, and healthy, exceeding Leacherous and Cove∣tous, of high courage, constant in his Resolutions, scorning Fortune and troubles: Thus he lived, and thus he dyed, getting much, and suddenly leaving all. William Rufus King of England and Duke of Normandy He was slaine being shot into the body by misfortune in new Forest in Hamshire, after he had raigned 12 yeares, and 11 monthes, at the age of 43 and lieth buried at Winchester Anno 1100. R E scul William the Father being dead and gone, William his Son usurps his Brothers Throne: They call him Rufus; why, you need not study, Either his hair was red, or count'nance rddy. Fortune his Reigne continuall Warre alots, From the Welch, from his brother, or the Scots. Still he was Victor, till the fatall Dart In the new Forrest once his the wrong H'art. Why there he fell in Iudgment so seuere, If a Religious House be left? ask there: The father there invades the Churches hedg, And the Son suffers for his Sacriledge.
HENRY the First, King of England. WHen King William the Second dyed, Robert was valiantly warring at the Holy Land, by means of whose absence, Henry his youngest Brother got a fit opportunity to sit as King in his Throne, whereunto without any difficulty he ascended, through the fa∣vourable affection of the Nobles and Common people, whose hearts were the more firmly engaged to him, because he was born in England after his father was Crown∣ed King; and also because his singular wisdome, care, learning, mild disposition, and Princely ver∣tues were apparent demonstrations that his Government would be accompanied with honourable atchievments, gracefull, safe, and profitable both to the Church, and also to the Common-wealth. Now the Kingdome he had obtained by fraud, he means to confirm by gentleness, good deeds, and just punishments: He every where prefers learned men to places in the Church, and removed such as were unworthy and unlearned from Church preferment: He mitigates the more severe Laws, and abolishes hard Customes: He grants the Nobility free leave to hunt, and to enclose Parks for Deer, and free Warrens for their Conyes, and such like Game; and as Traytors to his vertues, state and Kingly government, he banished from his Court all Flatterers, and all nicenesse in behaviour, Luxuriousness and gorgeousness in apparel, and superfluity in dyet: He ordained punishments by death for such as rob by the high way; and with wonderfull travel and industry he reformed the mon∣strous pride, avarice, and secure sloth and negligence of the Clergy: He recalled from banishment Anselm the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, giving him full power to assemble Synods and Convocations at his pleasure, for the rectifying of such things that were amisse in the Church: He piously and free∣ly bestowed on godly sober grave Divines, all such livings and Ecclesiasticall promotions, as his Bro∣ther unjustly detained, by the lewd advice of Reynulph Bishop of Durham, whom he sent prisoner to the Tower of London, from whence not long after, the said wicked Bishop escaped and fled into Normandy to Duke Robert, whom he eagerly perswaded to claim his Crown with his Sword, who thereupon levies a great Army, which he intended with all expedition to transport into this Realme; but as King Henry by his former clemencies had rooted himself in the peoples love; so to assure himself the better of the Scots, he takes Maud the Sister of King Edgar to be his Wife, who was daughter to Malcom by his Wife Margaret, who was Sister to Edgar Adeling, who dyed without issue, and Daughter to King Edward the Son of Edmund Ironside, the victorious and valiant King of the Saxons. Robert was now arrived in England with a puissant Army, and the day for Battel ap∣pointed, and the Heraulds were sent up and down; but at last, as a thick lowring cloud is somtimes dispersed by a fair shining Sun; so by the discreet mediation of worthy friends, there was a friendly peace concluded between the two brothers, on the same terms agreed on in King Rufus days, where∣upon the Norman Lords were much discontented, and returned home with the Duke. This danger dispelled, Beliamy Earl of Shrewsbury with the Earl of Mortain and Cornwall rebell, but are soon sub∣dued. But now Henry (who was hitherto on the defensive part) takes up Armes of his own accord against his Brother (whether out of some distast for some scoffe his Brother gave him, or which is more like, stirred up with ambition and avarice to inlarge his Dominions) and joyning with the Norman male-contented Nobles, with little adoe chased the forsaken Duke from place to place, and won from him the Cities of Roan, Cane, Valoyes, & indeed all Normandy, & presently in great honour and triumph he returns for England. Robert having thus made tryall of his brothers severity, he re∣solvs now to make tryall of his lenity; whereupon he follows after his Brother into England, and very submissively deprecates his error, and begs his pardon: But Henry either offended with the now fresh injury of his brother; Or affecting the Dukedome of Normandy, departs unkindly from the per∣plexed and distressed Duke his Brother; Coily refusing to accept of his submission, which in all hu∣mility by him was prosfered. But Robert being impatient of that scorn his distress had begot him; returns in all speed into Normandy, and once more levies an Army, resolving rather to dye manfully fighting in the Field, then to follow the funeralls of his own Honour: but his brother was prevalent and prevents him with a greater force, suppressing the mischief in the Birth, but not without bloud, bringing his Brother Captive into England, where for that he (at Natures enticement) practised his escape, at his brothers Commandement both his eyes were pluckt out, after which he lived as a miserable and wretched Captive, the space of more then twenty years; at length he dyed and was buryed at Gloucester. This success made Henry magnificent, but envied, whence arose a foraigne War, which by power and pollicy he quieted, granting to William the Dukedome of Normandy upon condition of Homage. But Charls Earl of Flanders being wickedly slain at Brussels, leaving no other Heir, William the Son of Robert, who was the next right Heir to it (for that he was of the Bloud of Maud Daughter to Baldwin, and Wife to William the Conquerour) was elevated to this Dignity; who growing insolent with this prosperity, endeavours to recover Normandy his Patrimony by his Grand∣father,
which he brought to passe with no great difficulty by the assistance of the French King, but receiving a slight wound in his hand, and suffering it to rankle, he lost his life and his Patrimony. Next, the Welch Rebell, but the end of that War was a prey of Oxen and Sheep taken by Henry. He seldome taxed the Land, or never but once for a portion for his Daughter Maud. He was the first that called a Parliament. In the Year 1020 William his Son, with his Wife the Duke of Anjou's Daughter, his Sister Maud, the Lady Lucy a Neece of the Kings, the Earl of Chester, with divers' other Noblemen and Ladies, and others to the number 160, crossing the Seas from France to England were all most miserably drowned, not any one saved but a poor Butcher, who like Iob's servant was spared to bring the sad News; the King having no children left but his Daughter Maud the Empress, who, after the Emperors death, marryed Ieffery Plantaginet: With these and other griefs the King languished; at last eating Lampreys he surfeited and dyed, and was buryed in Reading Abby after he had reigned 35 years. In this King ended all the issues Male of the Conquerour, and the Crowne of this Realme devolved on his generall Heirs. HENRY the first surnamed Beau-clark King of Eng∣land and Duke of Normandie: He raigned 35 yeares and 4 monthes died the 2 of December 1185. at the age of 67 yeares. and lieth buried at Reading. 1135. R E. sculpsit Robert's abroad, still roving for renowne, And now a second time forfeits his Crowne; Which Henry his Brother means to weare, At the old rate three thousand Marks a year; Whose Eyes he now puts out incontinent, Lest he should see his bargain and repent. He that allows his Brother none now dyes, Surfeiting of a Fish abounds with Eyes. Crowns no Relation know; they oft have stood Close cemented to Caesar's Head with bloud. Thus to the Crown the third Descent does fail The Conquerour, and all his Issue Male.
STEPHEN, King of England. MOnday, December the 26, 1135. being St. Stephen's Day; Stephen Earl of Mortaign and Bulloyne, Son of Stephen, Earl of Bloys and Champaine, and of Adela Daughter to William the Conquerour, notwithstanding all his Vowes and publick Protestations to Henry the First, to further the Right and Succession of Maud the Empress, being his Daughter, and of her Children, yet (when the King was dead) he finding that the Nobility (though sworn as deep and solemnly as himself was) applyed themselves totally to his devotion, he presently shook off the memory of his former plighted Vowes and En∣gagements whatsoever, and forthwith usurps the Kingdome, and was Crowned at Westminster by William Corbel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, for the which his whole Reigne was continually infested with forraigne and domestick troubles. But he was not to learn the pollicy of his Progenitors, who having attained soveraignty by unjust and foul attempts, have endeavoured by all fair means to settle their tottering Diadems upon their doubtfull Heads; so did this King by wisdome and pollicy endea∣vour to lay a sure foundation to his estate: And because riches are the strength of Kings and sinews of War, He therefore to enrich himself, seized upon the great and vast Treasure of his Uncle, the late deceased King, which he closed not up in Chests, or in Bags, as idle Archers doe their Arrows in Quivers; but with a munificent hand he bountifully disposed of them among such, as by Armes or by Counsell he judged most like to stand him instead at his need. Then advancing the Nobility and remitting Dane-gelt to the Vulgar, and honouring the Clergy, he won the hearts of all; grant∣ing liberty to hunt to the Nobility and Clergy. Moreover, to win the good Will of strangers, he obtained for his Son Eustace, Constance the Daughter of Lewis King of France; yet did he not more by this marriage, than by treasures strengthen himself in the Kingdome, of which he spent not luxuriously, but to levy Soldiers with, and wage war, which he too soon had occasion for: Scarce was he Crowned before he was forced to fall to his Armes; for David King of Scotland striving to assert the interest of Maud the Empresse, proclaimed War against him, and possessed himself of the Towns of Carlile and New-Castle; but Stephen presently marched against him with a great Army, and granting Cumberland to David, and the County of Huntington to his son, he put by a great storm, without any bloud-shed at all: Yet notwithstanding, not long after (in pursuance of Maud his Neeces Quarrell) he again enters and resists the Northern Parts of this Kingdome with fire and sword: but in the end he was encountered by Thurston Arch-Bishop of York, who compelled him, being pursued with unspeakable dangers, to fly into Scotland, and leave behind him dead upon the ground, more then ten thousand of his Army. Scarce had he composed domestick Commotions, but he is saluted with an Alarum from abroad, from Maud the Empresse, who accompanied with Robert Earl of Gloucester, her base brother, landed with an Army in England, and was quickly strength∣ened and emboldened in her enterprise, by the wonderfull access of many of the English, and of Raynulph Earl of Chester, with a lusty Crew of bold and foward Welch-men: Hereupon the King (thinking it neither safe, nor for his credit to make any demurre or delay) forthwith levied a strong Army, and marches resolutely against the Empress, and her Forces; who greeted him with such Musick as Warlike Troops are wont: so that a cruell and a bloudy battel for many hours was fought between them, Victory hovering with doubtfull wings, not knowing where to light: But at length the Kings Common Soldiers wearied with battel, begun to cast about for their own escape, and plainly run away, and left their King, who with his Nobles and Gentry, scorning to run away, fought Gallantry, expressing wonderfull tokens of their high spirits, and puissant valour, till in the end the King was taken. The Victory thus falling to Maud, Stephen is brought before her, and commit∣ted to Bristoll Castle; and she in the mean while possesseth the Kingdome, and as Conqueresse the enters London in Triumph. But Mathilde the Wife of Stephen humbly beseeches the Empress to let her live a private life with her husband, for she was weary of the Government. The Londoners also require their ancient Lawes they enjoyed under the Confessor, but the Empresse would grant neither: Whereupon Mathilde not enduring the high tomach of the Empresse, and detesting igno∣ble servitude, calls Eustace her Son with a choyce Company of Souldiers out of Kent to London, who joyning with the Londoners that were wonderfully offended that their suit was denyed; also fortify∣ing himself with the Bishop of Winchester, they fall upon the Army of the Empresse, which fled pri∣vately to Oxford, and asked not in vain help of David, King of Scotland, by whose assistance she be∣sieged Winchester; but the Queen with her Son Eustace falling on her fortress, overcame the Queen in a pitcht Battel, and took Robert Son to the Empress, but she her self ecaped. A Treatie for Peace followed this Fortune, whereby Robert on the one hand, and Stephen on the other are set at Liberty. There was another condition agreed upon, whereupon Stephen now being free besieges the Empress in Oxford, who escapes through his Army by night aparrelled in White, by reason of much Snow newly fallen.
In the mean while Ieffery Husband to the Empresse dyes, and leaves to his Son Henry the Duke∣dome of Anjou, and Aquitane, who befoe had with his Wife Eleanor the County of Poictiers. This Henry besieged Malmsbury, but in vaine. Not long after, Henry is again invited over by some of his friends, and comes with a gallant Army, bravely conducted by noble Captains: King Stephen and his Son had an Army in readiness to encounter them: Great was the confidence on both sides; somwhat they did, but little. But now happens a thing much to be wondered at; amongst drawn Swords peace began to shew her self; for in this expedition, Eustace the only Heir of King Stephen, is unfortunately drowned, which overcame the King with infinite sorrow; but it made a quiet end of this quarell: For now the King (wanting an heir to succeed him) was pleased to accept the proffer of a friendly peace; thereupon he adopted Prince Henry for his son, and heir of his Crown, gave him many Kingly gifts, and assured him of his unchangeable love. The Princes and all his fol∣lowers return into Normandy with all imaginable Joy; and next year King Stephen dyed when he had reigned nineteen years lacking one Month: He dyed at Dover, and was buried at Feversham in Kent. Stephen a Valiant Prince, sonne to Stephen Earle of Blois, Charters, and Champaigne: and of Adela daughter to William ❧ Conquerour: Vsurped the Kingdome of England, which caused him to b vexed with continuall warres. He raigned 18 yeares. 11 months died at the age of 49 yeares, and lieth buried at Feversham, 1154 Stephen next usurps the throne, for when he drew His Sword, he cut the Gordeon in two. Valiant he was, but vitiously inclin'd: He is too strong a man, Oaths cannot binde. Maud had the Right, Stephen Power; Princes take Any advantage when a Crowns at stake. He made no Laws, he so in Wars did live; He seemed rather to receive then give. At last his Son dies; now all storms blow fair Whilst Stephen adopts his enemy his heir. What War could not, a happy peace hath done, This has a Kingdome got, and that a Son.
HENRY the Second, King of England. STephen having now paid his debt to Nature, it remained that his Engagements also be dis∣charged to his adopted Heir, which in like manner was in a short time performed, for Henry Duke of Anjou, the Empress Mauds son, according to agreement succeeded him in the Throne, who with the great applause and generall liking of all men, was rightly Crowned at Westminster by the hands of Theobald Arch-Bishop of Canterbury: He was also Crowned at Lincolne, and Thirdly at Worcester; Malcome King of Scots joyning with him confederate. He behaved himself wisely in the beginning of his Reigne, making election of the wisest men he could get for Counsellers: he expelled strangers, such as came in hope of rapine; especially those of Flanders; demolishing the Castles that the Nobility had built at the Connivance of King Stephen which they had often abused to sedition. The Laws also that were faulty during the War, he reduced to their former integrity. The Demeans bestowed by King Stephen on such as were unworthy, he took away to himself, and so spared his subjects from Tribute and Taxes, deeming it safer to offend a few then many. Singular was the zeal this King bare to the furtherance of Justice and equity; for he divided his Kingdom into six several Circuits; and for the better administration of Justice, together with the tryal of Causes between man and man, and for the greater ease and comfort of his subjects, he appoynted severall Judges twice in every year to ride those Circuits; which course and order is continually observed to this day. He also resumed into his own hands the Province of Northum∣berland, together with the Earldome which David King of Scots, and Henry his Son had received Giftwise of King Stephen, because they should not further intermeddle in the interest of his Mother Maud the Empress to the Crown. In the thirteenth year of his Reign he marryed Geofrie (one of his younger sons) to Constance the daughter, and heir apparent to Conaccus Duke of Britain, who dyed not long after, and left to them that Dutchie. He also affied his younger son Richard unto Adela, one of the Daughters of Lewis the King of France; and marryed his Daughter Maud to Hen∣ry Duke of Saxony: Much about this time dyed Maud the Empresse, his Mother. In the Nineteenth year of his Reign, for that the Irish Nation attempted to deprive him of cer∣tain Territories in that Island (left him by his Predecessors) he sailed thither with a mighty Army, and fought many victorious Battles against Five Kings, which at that time reigned there, all which he did subdue, and made subject to himself, and became sole Lord of all that Country, and annexed that Title unto his Crown; and returned loaden with honours into this Kingdome. If he managed all things wisely hitherto, now does he shew as much weakness and infirmity, making his Son Henry and his Wife Margaret, daughter to the French King, to be twice solemnly crowned in the presence of his people (himself the second time for that day leaving the Title of a King, and serving as a sewer at his Sons Table) whereat his proud Son made no wonder, but publickly affirmed that his Father was thereby no whit dishonoured, for that he was only the son of an Empress, but he himself was the son both of a King, and also of a Queen. In the mean time Lewis King of France his fa∣ther in Law, fell to upbraid his pusillanimity, that he being entered into the Government and crown∣ed King, would permit his father to be equall with him in the Kingdome, contenting himself to be a Titular King only; he easily enflamed his youthfull mind too ready to be set on fire with unlawful desires. This secret Envy began now to break forth into open hate, and the son constantly cavilled at every thing the father did, or said; Nor was the sons horrible ingratitude unknown to the Father; wherefore Messengers were sent to Lewis to oppress and extinguish those so sad beginnings of discord. But Lewis instead of doing good offices of reconciliation, laught at the Embassadors, asking them scornfully, why they called him Mater, who had freely delivered up his right to his son? But these things ended not thus, for many jarrs and quarrels arose betwixt King Henry the Father and Lewis the French King, which at length were decided by sharp and bloudy Wars: In all which most un∣naturally Henry, Geofry and Iohn, and most undutifully Robert Earl of Leicester, and Hugh Earl of Chester, together with William then King of Scots, took part with the French against the King; in all which (notwithstanding) King Henry by noble courage and princely prowesse did still prevaile; and upon submission granted pardon to his sons and all their Complices. Yet were his sons after grievously punished by God▪ for Henry dyed before his Father, in the prime and flower of his youth; and Iohn, who after was King, was poysoned by a Monk in Swinstead Abbey in Lincolnshire: Yet these unnaturall Rebellions of his own Children (to whom he had been so indulgent a father) moved such a passion in his perplexed mind, as it suddenly struck him into a Feaver, extream dangerous; and hearing that his son Richard had raised a new broyl against him, he could no longer sustain the wounds of his spirit, but within a day or two breathed out his last, when he had reigned almost 25 years, and was buryed at Fontenward in Normandy. The History of this Kings reign approveth him to have been wise, learned, just, politick, and valiant, (save in that over-indulgence to his graceless children)
and what not a little addeth to the number and splendour of his commendations, was, that albeit he were often engaged in business, some of them concerning his Wars in France, Normandy, Anjou, Ire∣land, and in other places, and some of them respecting his Politick Rule, and government at home; yet he never imposed upon his subjects any extraordinary Tax or payment whatsoever; yet left he unto his Successor more than 900000 pounds in silver and gold, besides Plate, Jewels, houshold-stuff, and plentifull provision for the War. And though in most things prosperity made him happy, yet in three things he was unfortunate: The 1. was the unnaturall disobedience and revolt of the fruit of his own Loyns: The 2. was his unquenchable lust to his inseperable Concubine the beautious Rosa∣mond, who being admirably fair, and wantonly condition'd, too much estranged his affections from Eleanor his renowned Queen, and made his desires subject, nay slavish to the others wanton Will. The 3. was the irreconcileable dissention betwixt him and Thomas Becket, the insolent Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. The King is accused of his death by the Pope, which he denyes upon oath; yet the Pope enjoyns him for pennance 3. years War in person in the Holy Land, which he redeemed by ere∣cting 3. houses of Religion; and to go from London to Canterbury bare-footed to visit Beckets shrine, which he did, & suffer'd himself to be scourg'd by every Monk. Thus this King ended all his troubles. Henry the 2d surnamed Shortmantle King of England, Duke of Normandy, and Aquitaine, Earle of Poicteres and Anjou Lord of Ireland. He raigned 34 yeares 9 months. died the 6th. of Iuly 1189 at the age of 61 yeares, and lieth buried at Fonteverard in Normandy. He that shall read thy Reign (great Henry) must Conclude thee truly valiant, wise, and just; Who from the Treasury of thine own braine, Didst Forreign and Domestick Wars maintain. Thou never didst unusuall Tax impose Vpon thy subjects, to subdue thy foes: Yet did thy Son in ready Coyne receive Nine hundred thousand pounds which thou didst leav. Hadst thou not Becket, nor thy Syren seen, Thy Love had ne're turn'd Lust; nor Anger spleen. Thy Son with woe had ne're opprest thy life; No Rosamond is like a Royall Wife.
RICHARD the First, King of England. RIchard the Eldest Son living of Henry the Second (being in Normandy when his Father dyed) succeeded in his Throne; and (because those countries wanted settlement, and required a longer time of his presence) above all other things he was most carefull for the enlargement of Queen Eleanor his Mother, who by her deceased Husband was com∣mitted to straight imprisonment, because she loathed and would not indure his lascivious course of living with his wanton Paramour Rosamond, but sharply reproved him for the same: And because she was every way vertuous, discreet and wise, he committed the whole Government of this Realm in his absence to her care and management: and (because her own experience had informed her what anguish and sorrow poor helpless Captives did endure) she set at liberty all such as were impri∣soned for ordinary offences, or for small debts, which she her self did pay for them; And administred the Common-weals affairs with wonderfull moderation, integrity, and Judgment, untill her Son the King came home, who was with all solemnity and strange Triumphs anoynted and Crowned King of England. The King (imitating the mild and gentle disposition of his Mother, and commi∣serating the troubles of such as were afflicted) freed out of prison all such as were his debtors, or were enthralled for any transgression which concerned himself, and whom, without injustice done to others, he might acquit: And through the whole course of his Government, he so provided, that Justice with mercy might be extended to all. Many were the honourable and profitable promoti∣ons he heaped upon his brother Iohn, whom he created Earl of Lancaster, giving to him moreover the Provinces of Nottingham, Devonshire, and Cornwall, and marryed him to the sole and only daugh∣ter and Heir of the Earl of Gloucester, from whom he received the Lordship of that Country. Too great favours conferred on subjects make them aspire too high: Just so was it with the King and his Brother Iohn; for when the King had poured upon him plentifull showers of his bounty, and had ad∣vanced him to honour and estate above all others, his thoughts mounted above the Moon, and made him unnaturally and unthankfully to affect the Crown. This King (for his invincible valour and haughty courage) was esteemed to be most matchless in the Christian World, so that he was surna∣med Cuer de Lion, or Lyons heart. His Fathers Coffers enriched him with great store of Gold and Silver; and such was his contempt of riches, and bounty to such as either deserved well, or were men of any noble worth, that he bestowed on them great gifts with such alacrity, that in short time he unbowelled all his bags, little foreseeing that future business might require the expence of more then the great plenty which was left unto him, and that when he wanted he should be driven to hard shifts to relieve himself. This King was Crown'd at Westminster, Sept. 3. 1189. by Baldwin Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, namely on that day so memorable for an accidentall slaughter of the Iewes, whose insolence he abundantly restrained, by giving License to Weed out that odious kind of men, which for their blasphemies he hated. No sooner was he crowned, but at the instigation of the Pope he was engaged with Philip King of France, and Leopald Arch Duke of Austria, and many other Christian Princes, to win Ierusalem, which he did. These things concluded (although the Kings profuse bounty and great expenses had made him bare and needy) yet would he not burthen his people with any tax to supply his wants; but rather chose to raise mony out of his own Estate, which he did by selling Priviledges, Demeans, Immunities and Cities, among which sales he sold Barwick Castle and Rokesborough to the King of Scots, for ten thousand pounds: and the Lordship and Earldome of Durham to Hugh then Bishop of that See, for much money: and he did protest, that for the performing of so great and honourable a Service, he was not unwilling to sell his City of London it self (if any were able to purchase it) rather then he would be chargeable unto others. And thus the King having furnished himself with all provisions necessary for his Journey; he for the time of his absence entrusted the Kingdome of England to Hugh Baldulph Bishop of Durham, and to William Prunellus, and William Longo Scampius Chancellor of the Kingdome, dividing to each his part and Proportion; he set Robert Earl of Leicester, a man of honesty and integrity, over Nor∣mandy and Aquitane; yet to prevent the ambition of Iohn, he was minded to send him into Nor∣mandy, but his Mother interceding for him, and becoming surety for his fidelity, he was left in Eng∣land: Lastly, appoynting Arthur his brother Ieffery his Son to be his Successour in case he should dye in this Expedition. He enters upon his Voyage accompanied with many Gallant Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, whose Resolutions much increased his hopes of good successe. In the way contrary Winds drive him upon Cyprus, assails and wins it; of which Philip of France demands a share. Richard denies him, and thence arose a great feud between the two Kings, which put a great stop to the whole Enterprize. Richard got great renowne; but being forsaken by
the French, and the Burgundians forsaking him, he makes peace with Saladine upon unjust tearmes, and returning home is betrayed to Leopaldus, then to the Emperour, is imprisoned, and with a mighty Ransome redeemed, which afterward lost the Emperour his Life, and Leopaldus the breaking of his Legs, and lastly the losing it. Lastly, after four years he arrives in England, where he met with treasons and troubles on all sides by the French, by home-bred thieves and the Iewes which he suppressed, and marches against the French, and at the siege of a City received a shot in the Arme, whereof he dyed, and was buryed at Fontenward in Normandy: He Reigned nine years, nine months, and twenty two dayes. The right Valiant Prince RICHARD surnamed Coeur-de-lion King of England and Hierusalem Duke of Normandy and Aquitanè, Earle of Poeters and Anuou. Lo: of Ireland. &c. He died at the age of 43 yeares Ano 1199. after he had raigned 9 yeares. 9 months and 22 dayes and lieth buried at Fonteverard in Normandy. Richard the First no Lion ever fought, But was call'd Lion's heart cause he was stout. From Prison he his Mother did release, And setled his Dominions in peace: Then levying men and money, did prepare All that was needfull to the holy Warre. He forc'd King Tuncred buy his peace with Gold, And twice won Cyprus for Jerusalem sold. The Turks and Saracens he overthrowes, Whilst prostrate Palestine to his Prowess bowes. Philip and Leopald their envy bend Against that valour even the Foes commend.
JOHN, King of England. NExt, Iohn by blowes and bribes usurps his Brothers Crown and Treasury to maintain his un∣just Title; which was the cause the whole Course of this Kings government was accom∣panyed with continuall troubles; and his two persecutors were Pope Innocent the Third, and Philip the Second, King of France. But the first Tempest was depending from his Cousen Arthur, whose Kingdome he had not only taken from him, but also had drawne the Duke∣dome of Normandy to himself, leaving to Arthur only the Dukedome of Anjou. But his Mother Constance, finding her self too weak for the English, flyes to the French King, and craves aid of him, who promised not only to restore all Normandy, but all England to Arthur, and forthwith received the young man into his Protection: Wherefore Phllip listing an Army first made good the Dutchy of Anjou to Arthur, and then invaded Normandy. But Iohn sailing into Normandy, upbraids Phi∣lip for perfidiousness, because he had very foully broken the peace he had made with his Brother Richard; yet for all this they goe not to Armes: For while they discourse, and each defends his Right, they agree on fifty dayes cessation of Armes; Baldwin Earle of Flaunders being utterly against it, who therefore forsaking Philip makes his peace with the English; and takes Counsell by what means (when the truce was ended) they should wage war with Philip; but when Iohn was free from care of war, he strikes hands with the French King upon unjust tearms. Baldwin hating his sluggish∣ness, once more joyned with the French, and restored the War of Ierusalem. The English are glad and returne home, but are very ill received by the Nobility, who hated those base Conditions they had made with the French. But Iohn now free from War turns all his study to Pole his Subjects, and to follow his pleasure. Also he deprived the Arch-Bishop of York, his brother, of all his For∣tunes for nothing, but because he dehorted him from such injury. Then going into Normandy he divorced his Wife Avis, and marryed Isabell, daughter and heir to the Earl of Engelestne; she was Crowned at Canterbury. Bt the dayly oppression of King Iohn prevailed so farre; also his base Luxury (not without murther and Man-slaughter, for he destroyed Matilda a beautifull Maid, mak∣ing her to drink Poyson, because she would not yield to his entreaty to be corrupted by him. And William Bruce with his Wife, for speaking somewhat too freely, he killed with Famine, taking all their estate from them. He demanded Subsidies, but his Nobles altogether denyed him, nor would they follow him in his Wars untill those heavy Imposts laid upon them were taken away: Yet he wen afterward into Normandy, and thence to Paris, where he and his Wife (to outward appearance) were friendly received by King Philip. But Hugh Earle of Marsh, to whom Isabella the Kings Wife was first betrothed; being angry with the King for taking his Wife from him, joynes with Arthur, and begin a new War; Philip takes part with them, so joyntly those of Tours first, then they of Anjou invade; they take the Towns of Mirabellum, King Iohn reproves Philip for his falseness, and begins eriously to think upon revenge; and coming upon the Forces of the enemy suddenly and unlooked for, destroyed them with a great slaughter, taking those prisoners that could not escape, among whom was Arthur, who shortly after dyed of hunger in prison; but some say, that endeavou∣ring his escape he was drowned in the River; but, as it is Vulgarly thought, he dyed of meer sorow: His Sister Eleanor followed him shortly after the same sad way. And thus ended Arthurs Life, Ti∣tle, and those Wars. Next Year the French King takes all Normandy by Force. And now be∣gan the Kings other enemy, Pope Innocent the Third, to vex him more then Philip had done; the occasion is this, Hubert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury died, and the Monks of St. Augustines in that City (without the Kings License or knowledge, and about midnight) elected Reynold a brother of their own to succeed him, and took of him an oath forthwith to travell to Rome, there to procure his investiture, and to receive his Pall from the Pope. Tidings hereof coming to the Kings ears, he presently made known his inward dislike of their rash and unadvised doings; so that (upon his motion, and to appease his wrath) they elect Iohn Gray then Bishop of Norwich: Incontinently the King (upon his own charges) dispatches Letters, and Embassadors to the Pope, entreating him to ratifie the last choyce. But the Pope neglects the Kings Entreaty, and confirms him that was first Elected; at which the King fretted, and stormed much to see himself so slenderly regarded: The Monks also (to please the King) refuse to receive their own first election, because it was made in the night. At last the Pope would (whether the King would or no) make choyce of one Stephen Langton (one of his Creatures) to succeed in the Arch-Bishoprick: The King stoutly keeps him off, and confiscates all the Lands and Goods of such as partake in the election with Rome, and for∣bids all appeals thither. The Pope after a proud letter or two, interdicts him and all his Kingdome, which he very frankly gives to Philip the French King; who coming to invade and possesse himself of the Popes gift, lost three hundred of his Ships, and returned home as he came.
Nevertheless, Iohn basely on his knees tenders his Crown for the Popes use, which his Legate keeps four dayes; but the Nobility hating his poor spirit, revolt to the French, whom Iohn not able to resist, flyes, and is poysoned by a Monk in Swinstead Abbey, who drank to him in these words, Wassall my Liege. He was buryed at Worcester, having Reigned seventeen years and odd months. He left behind him four sons, viz. Henry, who succeeded him; Richard, who was elected King of the Romans; William of Valentia; and Guido Disnay: And three Daughters, viz. one marryed to Frederick the Emperour; the second to William Marshall Earl of Worcester; and the third to the Earl of Leicester. The right Valiant Prince RICHARD surnamed Coeur-de-ion King of England and Hierusalem. Duke of Normandy and Acuitanè, Earle of Poeters and Annou. Lo: of Ireland. &c. He died at the age of 43 yeares Ano. 1199. after he had raigned 9 yeares. 9 months and 22 dayes and lieth buried at Fonteverad in Normandy. O what a lushie morsell is a Crowne? That right or wrong Princes will gusle't downe, John to the Throne will o're his Nephews neck, Although his own in the attempt he break. What follow'd this Vsurper at the Helme? A three years Curse on him, and his whole Realme. At last base fears impossibles foresees, And to the Pope bends his unprincely knees: In Swinstead Abbey death did him besiege In Sacramentall Masse; Wassall my Liege. Who pities him a safe estate that scorns, And wounds his Temples with a Crowne of Thorns?
HENRY the Third, King of England. AFter the Death of King Iohn, Henry his eldest Son (about the age of nine years) was Crowned King, but not without some controversie of the Nobles; some of the Nobility falling off to him, who a little before had made a defection, and swore to King Lewis. Yet Lewis with an Army of twenty thousand men won many Towns, till at last he came to the Castle at Lincolne, which a certaine Noblewoman did bravely defend, and caused him to stop; and an Army of the English coming on in the mean time, he was repulsed and conquered, many of the English Nobility being taken that stood with him, besides the Count of Perch that stood with him till the last, preferring an honourable Death, before a dishonourable Life: Yet he did not de∣spair, but sent for more Forces out of France, which were all almost destroyed in a Fight at Sea. By these misfortunes he was forced to take Conditions of a hundred and five thousand Franks in re∣spect of the charge he had been at; he renouncing all right to the Kingdome of England: And pro∣mising faithfully to prevaile with his father to restore all the Provinces in France belonging to the English. The King restored to the rebellious Nobility all the Lands belonging to them: And Lewis at Dover set Saile for France, having warred unhappily in anothers Land. Then a Parliament was summoned, and Magna Charta ratified, also the Court of Wards was revived, and a Tax grant∣ed the King to Levy an Army under the Conduct of his Brother Richard, for the recovery of his Rights in France. The Parliament being ended, the said Tax with great celerity is collected with∣out any the lest grutch or contradiction; so that the Kings Coffers were replenished with Gold and Silver; and all requisites were carefully provided, and a gallant Army of couragious men of War were assembled, and safely transported. With which Richard the Kings Brother did (almost) wonders, subduing where he found resistance, and seizing upon Lordships, Forts, Towns, Castles, and other defenced places, quietly and without blowes, no Head being made against him; so that within few Months (such was his valour and good Fortune) he recovered both those Provinces wholly for the King, and returned with much honour into England. But the Kings absence from those Places gave opportunity to the French King to infest them, which he unfriendly laid hold on, and suddenly led a new Army into Poicters, and easily made himself Lord thereof. From thence marcht to Perigott, and Alverne, and other places in Guyan, where he did the like. But King Henry sent thither an other Army under the Conduct of his Brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, with which he encountered the French, and fought many sharp Battels, in which for the most part his Fortune con∣tinued prosperous; and all things seemed to promise him the recovering of whatever (in his absence) had been lost: But in the height of all these broyles a friendly peace was concluded betwixt the two Kings, and Richard returned safe into England. This Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings Brother, at the suit of the Princes of Germany, is elect∣ed King of the Romans; but not long after being charged with insolence and oppression, he was put out of the Office, and returns to England a poor King, that went out a rich Earle. And now began those mischievous broyls and turmoyls in this Realm, which (until the Kings death) daily vexed him more and more, and the whole Kingdome also; for the King lending too ready and pleasing an ear to lewd and evill Officers about him (whom above all Officers he loved and favou∣red, and by whose Counsell and advice both himself and his whole Kingdom was ruled and directed) made little account of his best Subjects Love: And took from them (in divers things) such Liber∣ties as by the Lawes and Ordinances of this Kingdome they justly claimed, and ought to have enjoyed. He also pinched his people with many unnecessary and grievous Taxes, which by those lewd and bold Officers were levied with much rigour and sharpness, to their great distast. The King also took to Wife Eleoner Daughter of Raymond Earle of Province, whereby there grew no profit to his affairs, but rather suffered great detriment by reason of her thread-bare and beggarly Family; and her poor kindred flocking from all Parts as Crowes to the Prey, which, nevertheless, were highly entertained by the King, and enict with money, and placed in Offices of greatest honour and profit, and the English hrust ou, a which he Nobles stormed, and the people every where much murmured. But whil the King goes about to overthrow his Subjects Rights, which they labour to preserve; all the Nobiliy being offended at the promotion of strangers, they enter into a Conspiracy. The King calls a Paliament: The Nobility refuse to be present, unless he would command the Bishop of Winchester, Peter de Rupbus and all his Gang to forsake the Court, threatening withall, that unless satisfaction were made to them they would depose the King, and drive away all strangers his adhe∣rents, and choose another King. In fine both Sides, King and Barons fall to Armes, and with various success fight severall fierce and cruell Battels; at length at the battel near Lewis, after the fall of twenty thousand men, The two Kings and the Prince, with many Knights and Gentlemen of great account, were all taken prisoners by the Barons.
Then a peace is concluded between them; a Parliament being called, the King confirmed the Government of the twelve Peers, which by Hand and Seal he had assigned them in a former Parlia∣ment at Oxford, called the Mad Parliament; and Prince Edward who was Hostage for his Father, is set at liberty. But the Prince not enduring to see his Father thus a titular King, raiseth a fresh Army; and about Evesham near Worcester fights the Barons, whom by reason of a mortall jarre be∣tween Leicester and Gloucester, their two Generalls he overthrows. Then the Kings call another Parliament, and repeals and nulls all former Decrees touching the Authority of the twelve Peers: and thus the King got again the staffe into his own hand, by the vertue and valour of his princely son. The King much incensed with the Londoners for taking part with the Barons, could hardly be disswaded from burning the City; but at last the Prince made their peace; and after tht marches with an Army to the Holy Land, where the King dyes, having reigned fifty six years. HENRY the III. King of England: Duke of Aquitane. Earle of Poic tiers and Anjou. Lord of Ireland. He died at the age of 65 yeares, after he had raigned 56 yeares and lieth intombed at Westminster. 1272. The groaning Kingdome being rid of John, Has found his very Image in his Son. King Henry the Third nine years of Age Enters a troubled and a doubtfull Stage The Realme he found Rebecca like become With divers Nations strugling in her Womb; All which he clear'd at last with promise fair, With Oaths & Vowes which prov'd nothing but Ai He pill'd his subjects so, that at his need Give him they nothing would, nor could indeed▪ He marries then with a mean Family, And spoyles his Realme to lard their Poverty.
EDVVARD the First, King of England. WHen King Henry died, Edward his son and heir was in Palestine, very intent a∣bout the holy war, where he underwent a grievous danger, having received 3 desperate wounds from his adversary with a poysoned weapon: But he was cured by the wonderfull Piety of his Wife, who with her mouth in time suck∣ed out the venome from his wounds. In his way, being made more certain of his fathers death, he made great journeyes and travelled in all hast into England, where (with the generall applause both of his Nobles, and Common-people) he was crowned King when he was of the age of 35 years. At the beginning of his Reigne he used the No∣bility well; but to abate the insolence of the Clergy, he commanded their wealth to be brought into his Exchequer, and he afflicted them otherwise, and so drew upon himself their envy. The Welch rise against him, but he luckily intercepts Eleoner, Monfort's daugh∣ter, espoused to Lluellen their Prince, upon surrender of whom that storm blew over, and obedience was promised by the Welch to King Edward. But within few years, three or four at most, Lluellen puts an end to his Oath and obedience, for his wife Eleoner being dead he breaks forth into new Rebellions; also David forgetting the great love of King Edward to him, falls off to his brother, and so with joynt forces they enter England, and does some mischief to Edward; both of them wonderfully inflamed by a false prophesie of Merlin, whereby the Crowne of Brutus was promised to Lluellen; but the battle being set, Lluellen was killed by a private Soldier, and his Head brought to King Edward; his Brother Da∣vid also was taken, and had his Head struck off, and with his Brothers it was set upon the Tower of London, where it remained a long time after, but his four Quarters were sent to four Principall Cities in England, to be set up for a terrour to all Traitors hereafter: so Ed∣ward revenged the Rebellion of the Welch, and the death of Alphonsus his first Borne, who was slain in the same battle. In the eighteenth year of King Edward's Reigne, Alexander the King of Scots (not having any Issue of his body) fell with his horse, and unfortunately brake his neck: He had three sisters; the eldest of which was married to Iohn Balioll, Lord of Gal∣loway; the second to Robert le Bruse, Lord of Valley-Andrew; and the third was married into England to Iohn Hastings, Lord of Abergavenny: amongst these three (each of them backed with his best friends) sharp bickerings and civill wars arose, to the destruction of many wor∣thy persons on all sides: Whilst the matter thus was handled, King Edward promises the Kingdome of Scotland to Bruse for ever, so he would do him homage for it; but Bruse refu∣seth it, preferring his Countries Liberty before his own honour. Yet Balioll yields to those conditions, and so got the Kingdome of Scotland, but the ill will of all his Country-men. Envy against him increased for refusing Justice upon the death of the Earl of Fife, who was slaine; for Baylioll exempted Albermeh from punishment that slew him; whereupon Baylioll cited before Edward's Tribunall is forced to plead his cause; he was angry at this dis∣grace, and denies Homage to Edward, and proclaims warre, (making a Covenant with the French King.) Hence arose the cause of a most bloudy warre between the two Nations, which lasted for three hundred years, only some feigned cessations passed between. No lesse than four times did this victorious King Edward subdue the false and fraudulent Scots, compelling them with extraordinary tokens of subjection and humility, to submit themselves to his mercy. In the mean time a new warre breaks forth between King Edward and the French King Philip the fair, by a controversie between the subjects of either King, for Kings that envy one another, easily break forth into open Hatred: but Edward had other grudges against the French, for conniving at the death of his Cousen Henry the Emperors Son. Edward therefore when a day was appointed him, hath a stipendary to plead his cause before King Philip, he refused to appeare; whereupon a great Army being raised, Philip enters upon the Territo∣ries of King Edward in France by force of Armes; the King of England by the assistance of neighbour Princes, the Earl of Flanders; the Duke of Brabant, with Adolphus of Nassaw; the Roman Emperour presently marches against the King of France, but finding the French di∣vided in two parts and defrauded with the Emperours delayes, when he had held his win∣ters quarters at Gaunt not without the murmuring of the Citizens, and great want of his souldiers; At the beginning of the spring, truce being made with the French for three years: the King tooke Margaret (the Dukes sister) to wife, (for Eleoner died in the former Ex∣pedition against the Scots) And the daughter of Philip being betrothed to King Edwards sonne he retreated for England.
About the same time Doctor Langton, then Bishop of Chester, complained grievously to the King upon Edward the young Prince, who (by the lewd advice of Pierce Gaveston, his loose and gracelesse Companion) brake forcibly into his Park, and made havock of his Game; for which the Prince was committed to Prison, and Gaveston banished for ever. Lastly, making an incursion into Scotland he is taken with a Disentery and dies of it, and lies buried at Westminster. He was very tall, of Countenance somwhat sorrowfull, of Chastitie like his Father, but in fortitude farre before him; Religious he was and wise. The noble and Victorious Prince EDWARD the first (surnamed Long-shanks) King of England, Duke of Aquitaine, Earle of Poictices, and Anjou: Lo: of Ireland &c: He Conquered Scotland, and brought from thence the Marble Chaire He subdued and overcame llewelyn Prince of Wales, and made his sonne Edward Prince Hereof. he died at the age of 68 yeares. 1307. after he had raigned 34 yeares 8 monthes. buried at Westminster. King Edward, Saraceus, Head, & Sholder sunders; Where Christ wrought miracles this Prince did wonders. His wife with such so pious love abounds, She sucks the venome from his poysoned wounds. 'Twere Treason to their merits to conceal So great a Valour, and so sweet a zeal. The haughty Welch he soon did over-run, And left them Vassalls to his Princely Son; And by his sword so weighed down Fortunes scales, That Englands heir succeeds stil Prince of Wales. He paid the Scots for all their Treacheries, And 4 times brought them on their humbled knees
EDVVARD the Second, King of England. EDward the Second succeeds his Father in the Throne; who was too unmind∣ull of his athers commands in his ast Will and Testament, in which he was enjoyned, and solemnly protsted to performe three things especially; namely, that he should carry his fathers Bones along with him till he had conqured Scotland; Secondly, that he should expend thirty thousand pounds in the Holy Warre; and Thirdly, that he should never recall Peirce Gave∣ston, whom for just reasons his Father had banished for Life. But he never performed any of these; for his fathers bones he did well enough to let them rest; but for Gaveston he re∣called him, and bestowed on him all the money designed to the Holy War, longing more to brake his Oath touching him, then to take his Coronation Oath. The Noble men (who perfectly knew how wickedly this Gaveston was enclined) per∣ceiving that the King doted on him, and that his affections towards him were unlimited, being perplexed with inward grief, and foreseeing that his insolence would be the ruine of the Realme, emboldened themselves to put the King in mind of his Oath: But as his con∣science nothing troubled him for the breach thereof, so their disliking encreased his desires towards Gaveston, and to make him great, which was the next thing he took in hand: and now none but Gaveston must rule all in all; frown who would the King cared not, Gaveston must and shall be great; and therefore first, he is Lorded with the Baronie of Wallingford, and soon after he is created Earl of Cornwall; and if this was not enough to make him rich, he is made sole Commander over the Kings Jewells and Treasures; in which Ofice, so absolute was his power, and so cunning his crafty pate, to provide in the time of his pro∣sperity for adverse Fortune which might ensue, that secretly he conveyed beyond the seas a fair Table and Tressells all made of beaten Gold; and many rich and precious Orna∣ments, to the great hurt of the King and dammage of this Realme. He also took much pleasure to feed the Kings fancy with great variety of delights, and by his example he inured him to excessive banqueting and drunkennesse; and his vile and un∣chast all urements, made him carelesse of the bed and society of his Religious and Vertuous Queen Isabel the Daughter of the French King Philip the fair, & Sister to Charls his successor, and trained him to the adulterous Consortship of wanton curtizans, and shameless Whores. The Queen (who sorrowed hereat beyond measure) reposed all her means for redresse of those unsufferable wrongs, in her prayers to God, and her modest wooing for her Kngs love: but all endeavours came to nothing; for the beams of her excellent vertues could not pierce the thick clouds of his vanities; neither could her pious tears mollifie his heart, hardened in too much variety and plenty of loathsome sins. The Nobles and those of the Kings Counsell secretly, and severall tims enformed the King what notice at offence strangers and his own people (even the Vulgar) at the lewd and vicious courses of Gaveston; and how strangely they spoke of him, and of his Govern∣ment, altogether eclipsed by the interposition of his fowle vices betwixt himself and it; but all availd nothing with him, who was resolved rather to lose his Crown than his Compa∣nion. Then at the Lords Petition the King sends him into Ireland, not as a person proscri∣bed, but a President; at length the Nobles perceiving the Kings heavinesse for his absence, petition his recall in hope of his amendment and to please the King, but he growes more insolent the before. At last the Barons (hopelesse to redresse and unable to support so despised a burthen) besige this wicked Gaveston in a strong castle, win it, and cut off his head. Then the King to vex his Nobility, he entertained into his Society and Counsels the two Spencers, father and son, men as gracelesse and odious to the Nobles and common people as the other was. They advised him to Whores and Concubines, and to forsake the sweet Company of his modest and vertuous Queen, which made him a scorne to forraigne Princes, and all honest men: yet the King in spight of his greatest Lords supported the Spencers in all whatever they took in band. But this evill Government begets him envy and contempt at home and eneies abroad▪ or Rliruse being re-crowned in Scotland invades England, four or five dayes marcheth with fire and Sword, making havock of all before him. But King Edward had behavd himself so ill a home, in over-favouring his Minions, & altogether neglecting his Nobles, that his athers bones could stand him now in little stead, for no lesse then three imes is he overthrwne by the Scots, yea with numbers farre inferiour to his own, to the shame of this Realme, famous for the best Souldiers in the World.
At home he became too fortunate, for he overthrows his Barons Army, & beheads 22. Lords by the advice of these villanous & perfidious Spencers. But the Queen with the Prince her Son saile beyond Sea, obtains assistance of her Cousin Sr. Iohn Henault and his friends, returns into England, and joyning with the Nobles and the City of London overthrowes the Kings Forces; and besieging him and the Spencers in Bristoll Castle, takes it and them, and executes these miscreants the Spencers, father and Son, and other their Confederates, and committed the King to Prison, whence he never escaped. Then a Parliament is called wherein they consulted to depose the King and to Crown his Son; but he was so piously conscientious, that he would not accept the Crowne unlesse his father willingly resigned it, which he freely did, being glad they would Crowne his Son in his stead. And not long after he miserably ended his dayes in Barkly Castle, by piercing his bowels with a red hot Spit through his fundament; and at the Age of 43 he was buried at Gloucester. He was tall and comely of Stature, but of immoderate dotage on his Minions, and given to drunken∣ness, which made him too open of his Counsels, too much addicted to lasciviousnesse, his own nature being rather corrupted by his vicious Minions, than otherwise. Edward the 2d. King of England Duke of Aquitaine Earle of Poictou, Anjou, and Pontieu, Lord of Ireland. He raigned 19. yeares. 7 moths: and was deposed the 25th of Ianuary 1327. and shortly com∣ted to prison in Barkley Castle, and there cruelly murdered.  the age of 43 yeares. huried at Glocester. Edward the Second doth deserve to have All his Remembrance buryed in his grave. He lead to Scotland many thousand men, And having seen it e'ne came home agen. Pierce Gaveston enthralled his jale heart So close, that nothing but the axe could part. Next come his dearling Spencers to his view; Rid of one Rakeshame, now he must have two. Honour and Princely prudence are thrown down, And Dotage takes her lodging in the Crowne. Curs'd be the luckless minute that did bring, A Minious subject to be Englands King.
EDVVARD the Third, King of England. EDward the Third being fifteen years of Age, was crowned by Reynold Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, his deposed father being yet alive: In his younger years he was chiefly directed by the advice and counsell of the Queen, and his Un∣kle Edmund of Woodstock, Earl of Kent, and of Sr Roger Mortimer, who to in∣teresse himself more especially in the Queens favour, traiterously conspired and procured that murther of the last King, in that horrid and butcherly manner before spoken of, in the 2. year of this Kings Reigne. The Court in those dayes was seldome or never without a Viper; for as Gaveston was the fore-runner of the Spencers in ambition, lasciviousnesse, pride, rapine and confusion: so the Spencers were the ushers of the Mortimers in intollerable aspiring, avarice and destruction; the ill laid foundations of all whose greatness was attended by certain and sudden ruine. There fell out a war with the Scots, in which Edward got the better: then a Parliament is called, in which the two Spen∣cers and Stapleton Bishop of xeter are attainted of high Treason. Then the King (by the directions of his Mother and Sr Roger Mortimer) concluded a dishonourable peace with the Scots, and released to them their homage, fealty, and services to him due for that Kingdom, and delivered up to them the grand Chatar or Instrument called Ragman, which under the Hands and Seals of their late King and of the Nobillity of Scotland, testified their tenure and subjection to the Kings of this Realme, and then he married his Sister Iane unto David the Son and Heir apparent to Robert le Bruce, the Usurping Scotish King; and created Sr Roger Mortimer Earl of March, whereat his Nobles were exceedingly discontented: and such was the new Earls mallice and hatred unto the Kings Unkle, the Earl of Kent, and so pow∣erfull was he with the King, by reason of his too much familiarity with his mother Queen Isabell, that he never desisted from his wicked and ungodly plottings, till he had bereaved him of his head. But God permitted not this wretched man to persist long in these mischie∣vous courses; for within few months after he was accused by the State for horrid and hai∣nous crimes; for which his wicked Treasons and horrible transgressions he was condemn∣ed to die, in the same manner which he had devised for Sr Hugh Spencer the younger: and Queen Isabell (being most honourably attended on) was sequestred into a strong Castle, where she lived more than 30 years after, and then died. After this the French King re∣quires homage for the Dutchy of Guian, which Edward offers by proxy, but not otherwise: The French cite him again to a personal appearance; Edward unwilling to controvert with him, sends it him under the great Seal, whereat his Nobles are much offended, telling him that the Crown of France in right of his Mother belonged to him, and that therefore he might justly refuse to doe him any homage at all, and deny all fealty whatever. Then Edward enters Scotland, and crowns Baylioll King thereof. But now instead of do∣ig homage, King Edward claims the Crown of France in right of inheritance from his mo∣ther Isabell, and in spite of their Salique Law entitles himself King of France, and quarters the Armes of France with the Armes of England. And levying much money and all neces∣sary Provision, with a strong Army he fails into France, winning many Cities, Forts and Castles, so that the English Army becomes rich with spoiles. The French King solemnly swears & potests that King Edward should not return home without a battle between them. But Edward marches on still winning Gizours, Vernon, St. Germans in lay Mountrell, St. Cloud, Rely, ad the whole country about Roan, point de L'arch, Naples, Nwlench, Robboi, Fountain, Poi, and Vimewer; at last King Philip of France having certain intelligence that King Edward with his Army was within two Leagues of Paris, left the City, telling the Parisians that King Edard dared not to look them in the face; but they believed him not, but were grie∣vously araid; but he turned off to find out the French Army, still Provinces in his way, for I have nt room to particularize. Now to the English glory, the never to be forgotten Bttll of Cress, where the French with all the Flower and prowesse of their Realme, with Swords whet with malice, with numbers six to one, met the English, weakened with a dif∣fering Clime, their bodies tired with tedious marches, wounded with Assaults, their swords broken or blunted with continual skirmiges: & now is the time to try the difference between French and English mettal. The French begin the battell with a Forlorn (of 15000 Genoways (an Army bigger then the English) but they have their Errant quickly, and returned with such terrour, that in their flying they routed and confounded their own main battle; yet the French emboldened with multitudes, continued the Charge with number upon number, but their disorder and confusion was such, they came but up as so many sacrifices to the
hungry swords of the King and his renowned Son the black but the brave Prince: at last the French flie amaine, and are so eagerly pursued by the English that their souls are too nimble for their bodies, the greatest part lying breathlesse on the ground; and in the chase the two Marshalls of England encountered with a multitude of Bevoys Reigner, Roan and Anbe∣vile, and slew 7000 of them; and the next day slew and put to flight a strong Army under the command of the grand Prior of France, who (not knowing the battel) were coming to aid their King, that run away the day before, leaving behind him slain in the field 11 of his Princes, 80 Barons, 1200 Knights, and more than 30000 common Souldiers; the French King himself hardly escaping death by speedy flight. Then marched the King and Prince to Callice, besieges and takes it, notwithstanding the French King endeavoured with 200000 men to raise the siege, and could not, but went away as he came. At the battel of Poictiers the Prince did overthrow the French, took their King, and infinite Nobles, Lords & Knights, and brought them prisoners into England; so that this King had two Kings at one time prisoners in England. He reigned 50 years. The true pourtraicture of EDWARD III. borne at Windsore, of the age of 15 yeres was crowned at Westminster the 2 of Februarie 1326. he tooke the tittle of King of France, as dew vnto him both by Ciuill Lawe, and order of succession: being the Nephew and next heir male of K: Charles IIII. his mothers brother, in regard wherof he quartred the armes of France with Englands. He raigned 50. yeres. 5. mo: He died at the manor of Shene in Surrey. Ano. 1377. buried in Westminster. R.E. Scul Edward the Third did at the Throne arrive, Whilst his deposed Father was alive: But till hit Father willingly resign'd it, Though Queen and Peers all urg'd it, he declin'd it. Scotland he first subdu'd, and made it reele Vnder the force of his victorious steel. France askt him Homage, but he told her plain, Homage was due to him, her Soveraign. Let her to Cressey, and to Poictiers look, And Callice, which 'fore Philip's face he took: And what does more than this his fame evince, He was the father to the brave BLACK PRINCE.
RICHARD the Second, King of England. RICHARD the Second (being the Son and Heir of the black Prince, and aged 11 years, and somwhat more) was crowned King of England, in the year of our Lord one thousand three hundred and seventy seven. The Kingdome was in an Eclipse the most part of this Kings Reigne: his youth with all the frailties in∣cident thereunto, with bad Governours both of his kingdome and person, were the main ruines of the King, and almost the Realme: For in the whole course of his Government he neglected his Nobillity, and taxed his subjects to enable him to give prodigally to his Sycophants and ill deserving Favourites. He was too too resolute in his wayes, and refu∣sed to be reformed, be they never so indirect. He also despised the sage advice and good directions of his best counsellers; and wholly plotted all his courses by the wicked & grace∣lesse projects of his base and loose companions, whom he raised to more honourable estates than befitted the meannesse of their Conditions; so that they fell by their own weight: and he himself (in the end) was enforced to endure the extremity of his hard fortune. For be∣ing first disgraced by his Cousin Henry Bullingbrook Duke of Lancaster, and Son and Heir to his Unkle Iohn of Gaunt; he was at length by him (with the generall consent of a whole Parliament) deposed from his Crown, committed to prison, and afterwards wickedly murthered, as in this discourse of his disorderly government more amply shall appear. In the first year of King Richards Reigne, Charls the French King (presuming much on his minority, and being aided by the Spaniard, landed in the South-east, and South-west parts of this kingdome, and ransacked and burnt the Towns of Plymouth, Rye, Dartmouth, Portsmouth, and some other Towns and Villages coasting upon the Sea; and would have done more mischief, if by the Kings Unkle, Edmund of Langley, Earl of Cambridge, and by the Earls of Buckingham and Salisbury they had not been fought with, and beaten to their Ships. At the same time one Ramsey a Scot cunningly surprised the Castle of Barwick, but was soon beaten out again, all the desperadoes being put to death but himself. Again the French infest the Coasts of England, even unto Graves-end; whereupon Richard with Poll-money levies an Army, and revenged himself, which caused after mischief. And now fell out a Rebellion in England, exceeding hazardous to the whole kingdome, occasioned by one Iohn Wall, a factious Priest; who perceiving the meaner and baser sort of people much murmuring & repining at the last Tax, took an unhappy occasion to move them to sedition, telling them we are all by nature the children of Adam, born of one and the same condition, and equall worth; and that the Laws of this kingdome were unjust, to set so great difference between men, making some Peers and Potentates, and others poor and penurious. Thus they begun to grow mad and implacable against the Nobillity, for the basest dregs of men commonly being uncapable of honour themselves, are envious a∣gainst those that are. Hereupon (together with the hope of pilfering) arose a formidable tumult, who for their Leader took one Watt Tyler, and for other chief Officers had Iack Straw, Iack Shepheard, and the seditious Priest Iohn Wall, stiling themselves the Kings men, and the Servants of the Common-weal of England. They marched towards London, beating down and rifling of houses, and all before them. They make all Knights and Gentlemen forsake their houses, which they burn or rifle at lest; They send also to the King, who then lay in the Tower, requiring him to come and speak with them. Whereupon the King pur∣posing to prevent mischief, went to Graves-end, but seeing their rage and madnesse, he ar∣ed to put himself into their hands, and returned back again to the Tower of Londo. Next day came this rabble to Southwark; and finding the Bridge fortified, and the Gates shut, they resolved to kill all the people & burn the Burrough; but to prevent mischie, they were let into the City, who were fain to entertain them with gifts and good words: Then they rifle th Savoy, and kill all they light on: they robbed all the Inns of Cours, and burnt their Law books, nor spared they the Churches, but sacrilegiously stole all they could lay hand on. Watt Tyler commands his Masters head to be carried before him on a Lance▪ mer∣ly because he had given him some small correction when he was his servant. The Rebels send o the King, who goes to Mile-end Green to them, freely pardons them all, & gives them his Banners for their security; whereupon many forsake Tyler, who with about 20000 mar∣ches into Smithfield, resolving to ransack and burn the City. Then the King courteously per∣swades them to desist; but Tyler commanded the Esquire (that bare the sword before the King) to give him his Dagger; but the Esq told him it was the Kings Sword, and should not be givn to a knave: whereat Tyler swore e're he would eat or drink the Esq should lose his head. The King loth to have the Esq endangered, bid him give him the Sword;
but the Esq would not; then stept in William Wallworth Major of the City and clapt his Dagger to Tilers heart, commanding him to submit to the King; presently about a thousand armed Citizens came and routed them. Thus did the storme blow over by Gods goodnesse and the Majors Courage; and ever since the City carry the Dagger in their Escutcheon. Ball and Iack Staw were executed, the rest pardoned. The French prepare a great army pur∣posing to invade England. King Richard rayseth a mighty power to conquer Scotland, which designes had no good events. Mischeife and Misery (having sate long abroad) began now to hatch at home; The insulting Peers and rebellious people bandy the regall Power into hazard. The Scots enter England under the Command of Sr. William Dowglasse, and are encountered by the Noble Lord Henry Hotspur: Dowglasse is slain, and Hotspur taking Ire∣land rebels: The King goes against him in person, and the mean while loseth his Kingdom, which with himself and Crown he is forced to surrender to his Cousin Henry Bullingbrook, Son to Iohn of Gant, Duke of Lancaster, Anno 1400. The true pourtraicture of Richard the 2. King of England, and France, Lord of Ireland, and Prince of Chester he raigned 22 yeres, was deposed and murther'd at Pomfraict Cast: at the age of 33 yeares. Buried first at Langley. and 14 yeares after by K. Henry th  and their wa honourably uerred. Richard the Second (son to such a Prince The World has never had his equall since) Instead of aiming at anothers Crown, As did his Father, tamely yeelds his own. Has Mars begot Clineas then? O strange! Sure all the world is moulded up of Change: And to the Waves we may compare them well▪ One threatens Heaven, another sinks to Hell. Such is the State of sublunary things; Nothing is fixt, no not the Throne of Kings. Peace out of doubt would be perpetuall, But that our sins, our sins for battels call.
HENRY the Fourth, King of England. THe Crowne of England (Richard the deposed King dying without issue) did right∣fully descend upon Edmund Mortimer Earl of March (the Son and Heir of Ed∣mund Mortimer, by Philip his Wife, who was the Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third Son of Edward the Third) Yet his Cousin Henry Bul∣lingbrook Duke of Hartford, and Son and Heir of Iohn of Gaunt, younger brother unto the said Lionel, was elected and crowned King, & forthwith he created his Eldest Son Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester; and summoned his high Court of Parlia∣ment, in which an order was taken for the safe keeping and honourable attendance and maintaining of Richard the late King; but his deposing, imprisonment, and all former pro∣ceedings against him, were in the same assembly publickly condemned and reproved by Iohn Bishop of Carlile, as hatefull unto God, traiterous towards the King, and infamous among good men: for he averred boldly, that if he were not a good King, yet more wrong was done to him then ordinarily is done to theeves and murtherers; because they are not (as he was) condemned before they had made their answer to the Crime objected, before Judges who were indifferent, and pronounced their Judgment upon good proof. But so soon as he had ended his speech he was attached by the Earl Marshall, and committed to strait prisonment in the Abbey of St. Albans: and then (among many other things in the same Parliament done) the Crown of England was entailed to King Henry and his Heirs for ever. No sooner was this Parliament ended, but a conspiracy of some of the greatest Lords, that outwardly made much shew of joy for the high dignity and advancement of King Henry: The Confederates were the Kings Cousin, Edward Plantaginet Duke of Aumarle, and Heir apparent to Edmund of Langley Duke of York; Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, and Iohn Holland his Brother Duke of Exeter (both which were halfe Brothers to King Richard) Iohn Montague Earl of Salisbury, Hugh Spencer Earl of Glocester, Sr Thomas Blunt, and one Mag∣dalen, who was somtime a Chamber-waiter to the deposed King, and who both in Sta∣ture, and in Countenance and Behaviour was not much unlike him. The Plot was to take away the Kings Life at solemne jests held at Oxford, whither the King was invited, and promised there to be present, because he supposed that triumph was appointed only for his honour and delight. The Treachery was cunningly contrived by the Conspirators, who by Indentures under their hands and seals bound themselves each unto other, both for secrecy, and for the resolute effecting and performing thereof to their utmost power: all which they solemnly confirmed by their Oaths. The Conspirators all mt at the time and place appointed but the Duke of Aumarle; who being at dinner, his Father perceiving a Lay-bill hang out of his Bosome, took hold of it, and drew the whole writing out, which being he takes Horse and hasts to the King; but the Duke his Son bing bave∣ly mounted, and perceiving his imminent danger posts after, and geting to the King fist, confessed the conspiracy, and obtains his pardon. The King being thus certified of the Treason, turns his journey to the Tower of London, where he prepares for his defence: He levies a strong power, and marcheth against the Traitors: But when the Conspirators understood that all the Plot was revealed, they attired the said Magdalen in Royall Robs, and caused him to affirm himself King Richard; and with him and all their Troops (which were very warlike and strong) they resolve to oppose themselves to the King in the open field. But the King speedily marching towards them with 20000 men, at the noise of whose approach the Companies under command of the Conspirators cowardly forsook them, and left them a prey to the King, who took and executed them in severall places; some few escaped, but over-oppressed with fear and sorrow soon after died. The French King his Father in Law resolves to redeem him from imprisonment, but as∣certained of his death desists. Yet for all this King Henry still distrusting the weaknesse of his usurped Title, and endeavouring to support it with a more firm foundation, entreats Charls the French King to give in marriage his Daughter Isabel, somtime King Richards Wife, unto his eldest Son Henry Prince of Wales: But her Father (observing that marriages be∣twixt Egland and France were seldome fortunate) denied the Kings request, whereupon she was honourably sent back into France. The Welch and Scots rebell, and are overthrown by the Piercies, who take many Noble Prisoners, which the King demands and is denied. In the 3. year of his Reigne the King demands the Scotch Prisoners of the Piercyes, but is denied, whereupon unkindnesse arose, and they extended to joyne with Glendor. They get the Earl of Stafford, the Arch-Bishop of York, & a great company of Scots & English to
joyne with Owen Glendor; but before they proceed to Battel they publish an accusation against the King, consisting of severall Articles: 1. That he usurpt the Crown and murdered the King: 2. He unjustly detained the Crown from Edm: Mortimer: 3. That without any need he oppressed the people with grievous Taxes: 4. No justice was to be expected from him, who contrary to his coronation oath had in sundry Shires forestalled Elections, and pro∣cured Burgeships, and bestowed them on his own creatures: Lastly, that he would not re∣lease his Cousin Mortimer from Prison. For which Treasons they defied him as a Traytor. The King with a strong Army fights the Conspirators near Shrewsbury, where the King wins the day; and the Prince marching against Glendor, is forsaken by his Welch, and dies of famine in the woods, where he hid himself. The Duke of Burgoyne attempts to regain Callic in vain. Presently another conspiracy is plotted, detected, and the Traytors executed. Lastly, the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolph rebelled, and are taken and beheaded. Thus was King Henry's Reign a majesticall misery, and a soveraignty of sorrow; so having reign∣ed 13. years, and 6. months, wanting 5 dayes, he died, and was royally buried at Canterbury. The right noble Prince Henry the 4th. King of England and Fraunce: Lord of Ireland. &c. Who died at te age of 46 yeares in Anno 1413. after he had raigned 13 yeares 6 moneths and 4 dayes and lieth buried at Canterbury Was't not enough thy Cousin's Crown to take, And it a prey to thy ambition make? But that his Bloud, his Royall Bloud must be A Sacrifice too, to thy jealousie. Henry look back, and in his Tragick Scene, There thou shalt see what all thy troubles mean; Nor did it, though thou thoughtst it faster stood, Cemented to thy Temples with his Bloud. You that your Lives, your Souls, what dearest is, Venture for Thrones, do but consider this; Princes descend unto the shades beneath, And pyle their Crowns up at the Gates of Death.
HENRY the Fifth, King of England. THe King was inaugurated with wonderfull applause and desire of the Lords and Commons; and he not willing to disappoint his subjects of the hope they con∣ceived of him, gave them a signe of his excellent Government, sending from him those Ministers of lascivious youth, his former associates. And not willing his valiant heart should give place to sloath, claims his right in France: First he sent Heraulds, and demanded his Kingdome from King Charls, promising to marry the Lady Katherine his Daughter; and threatened also, that if he denied, he would take his patrimony by force: Char▪ laughed at his Embassadors, whereby he so enraged King Henry, that he musters a mighy Army, with about 120. Ships he sailed into France. First he takes Harefleet, and after many skirmiges with the French fought that memora∣ble battel at Agencourt, to the eternall honour of the English; which done, he and all his Army on their knees gave praise to God for their glorious Victory. About this time Sigismund the Emperor came into England to Treat of Peace between the French and English, nor was Henry slow in the business; but when the French besieged Hare∣fleet, he was so angry that he sent the Duke of Bedford to raise the siedge, with the Earl of Marsh, Oxford and others, and 200 ships, and fought a bloudy fight in the Haven of Hare∣fleet, with Burbon the French Admirall, where the English wan the day, sinking 500 of the French ships, and so relieved the Town. But the Emperour perceiving the perfidiousnesse of the French, made a firm League with the English against all opposers, and so returned back into Germany. The French in the mean time hired great ships of Genoa, and again be∣siedging the Haven of Harefleet, endeavoured to hinder all provision from coming to the Town: but the Earl of Huntington suddenly vanquished them. He took the Duke of Bur∣bone a bastard, and so returned Conquerour for England. Then the King with his Nobility sailed into Normandy, and took the Fort Tueha, whilst the Earl of Salisbury wan Abervile, which place the King freely gave to him and his Heirs. Afterwards he wan Caen, and for their obstinacy punished some of the principall with death, and gave the plunder of the Ci∣ty to his Souldiers. Then he sent the Duke of Clarence to beleager the Town of Bayon, which he quickly wan; thence he removed to Corfen, and in three dayes became Master thereof; then he subdued Argentaniam; after that Aleucon, Falesia, and returned victor to Caen. In the mean while▪ the Earl of Warwick conquered the Castle of Dumfrise; and Clarentius ma∣stered Curton, and many other Towns. Then the King layes siege to Roan, and forced the Citizens to submit; which Town being the Chief, was an example for the rest to follow, so that shortly he wan all Normandy, lost by the carelessnesse of his Predecessors. The Duke of Burgundy perceiving all things to succeed to K. Henery's mind, procured a meeting between him, and the Queen of France (for King Charls her husband doted) yet there was nothing done. The Queen brought with her, her most beautifull daughter Ka∣tharine, purposely to ensnare the Kings mind with her allurements; nor was it in vaine, for the King no sooner saw her, but he was wonderfully taken with her elegant beauty: and when they departed doing nothing, the King charged the Duke of Burgundy to do his best to satisfie his desires; for unlesse all he demanded, together with the Lady Katharie, were granted him, he would by force take from the Duke his Dukedome, and from the King his Kingdome. The French were so frighted with these threats, that they fell to a new Parlie; but now the Dolphin caused the Duke of Burgundy to be basely slain presently after, though he begged his life on his knees; and so the slaughter of the Duke of Orleance, committed be∣fore by Burgundy, was expiated. Nor is peace yet concluded till the French were constrained by another losse to seek it seriously. A meeting is appointed at Trecas, and there was Ka∣tharine betrothed to Henry, and the right of succession confirmed to him ater the decease of Charls; whereupon all the Nobillity of France swear to be loyall to him: and so the salique Law is broken. The Dolphin also is cited to appear before the Marble Table in Paris, and not coming is banisht. Henry also caused money to be coyned with the Arms of France and England, which he called the Soveraigne. Then leaving the Duke of Clarence Governour of France and Normandy, he returned for England with his Queen, whom in February following he crowned at Westminstor with great solemnity, and much honour. But the Duke of Clarence making an Expedition against Anjou, and taking great spoils; as he came back laden with prey, was betrayed by one Andrew Forgusa, a treacherous Lombard; and although he fought valiantly, yet was he slaine by the Duke of Alenson, with the chief Nobillity, and 2000 Eng∣lish men; the Earl of Somerset, Suffolk and other Lords are taken Prisoners.
The King to revenge his brothers death, lands in France with a mighty Army, and freed Chartres from a siedge of the Dolphin, whom he pursues from place to place, but cannot overtake him, though he take all Towns in his way: So that in a short time he joyned all the Island of France to the rest. In the mean time the Queen is delivered of a Son at Windsor, named Henry; of whose birth the King said to the Lord Fitz Hugh his Chamberlain; I Henry born at Monmouth shall remaine but a short time, and gain much: but Henry born at Windsor shall Reign long, and lose all. About this time the Dolphin besiedges those of Narbon; Henry goes to their relief: but in his overmuch hast takes a feavor, of which he dies, having dispatched the Duke of Bedford, who not only frees Narbon, but drives the Dolphin into Aquitane, who in mockery was called King of Aquitane. While he lay sick he made his Brother the Duke of Bedford Regent of Normandy and France, and his Brother the Duke of Gloucester he made Go∣vernour of England. He died at 36 years old, reigned 9 years, 5 months and 24 dayes. HENRY the v. began his reigne, the 20 of March, and was crowned at Westminster the 9, of Aprill following 1413. He reigned gloriously 9 yeres, 5 monthes, he died in the Castle of Boys Vincent by Paris, the 1. of September. 1422. and lieth intombed in the Abbey of St Peters at Westminster being of the age of 36 yeares when he departed this world R. E. sculp His Royall head no sooner Henry Crowns, But his debaucht associates he disowns: He showes them now whereto he does incline, The God of Warre, and not the God of Wine. He claims his right, & sues for Charls his daughter: Whilst the proud French retort with scorn & laughter. In short he did their Towns and Towers so batter, The French soon found it was no laughing matter. They sue for Peace, and the fair Katharine bring, Who more then all their weapons wounds the King. They are espous'd, and so conclude the jarrs, Where Mars & Venus are auspicious Stars.
HENRY the Sixth, King of England. NOt yet was Henry the sixth nine months old when his father died; yet was he so fortunate in his beginning, that his youth and Government were worthily sup∣ported by his three Uncles; Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, who when the King was crowned was made Protector both of his Person and Realme, Iohn Duke of Bedford, who was established Regent of France; and Thomas Duke of Exeter, who graced all his actions with much wisdome and great valour. And needfull it was that the new Pro∣tector and the Regent should make the utmost tryall of their sufficiencies to the World▪ for whereas in the end of the Kings Fathers days, the Nobillity of France incorporated them∣selves to the English Nation, and heartily envied the Dolphin; King Charls about this time died, and the unconstant French men began to play an Irish Game: For on a sudden many of the hypocriticall French, renounced their Duty and Obedience to King Henry, and utterly neglecting all their Oaths of Allegiance made unto him, revolted to Charls their new King, endeavoring all that in them lay, totally to extirpate the English, & root them out of France. The Protector at home seeing this, supplies the Regent with store of Soldiers, Silver and Gold. The Regent in the mean while levies a strong Army; and on the other side Charls the new King was as active to do the like, in so much that nothing but war tyranniz'd and tore up the entralls of France: And to begin these troubles the French King sent the Lord Grandevile against Pont. Melance, which he surprised, and slew the most part of those he found there, which place is again retaken by the valour of Thomas Mntacute, the Noble Earl of Salisbury, together with the Lord Grandevile, who by solemne Oath promises faith∣full and perpetuall service to King Henry; but no sooner is this false French man released, but he revolts. About this time the Regent renews a League with the Dukes of Burgoyne and Britaine, and marries the Lady Anne of Burgoyne, whereupon Paris revolts, and is redu∣ced. Then the Earl of Salisbury wins a great victory before Cravant, and is made Vice-re∣gent of France, &c. The Protector at home for a small matter ransometh Iames the young King of Scots, and marries him to the Kings Cousin Germane; but he proved a right Scot false and treacherous. In the mean while the French gain by fraud what the English regain by force. In England the Dutchesse of York is accused of witch-craft by the proud Cardinall her husbands Brother, and unjustly suffers for it. Now by the intercession of Christian Princes they began to treat of peace between the French and the English; peace was not rati∣fied, but a cessation was granted for eighteen months: In the mean time the Earl of Suffolk, by his own authority contracted a marriage between King Henry and Margaret, Daughter to the Duke of Angiers; boasting much of the Ladies beauty and dowry; at last he perswa∣ded the King, though he had passed his word to the daughter of the Duke of Britaine. This Matrimony contracted gave but small help to the English affairs; when for commutation great part of Normandy was yielded to the French: and the Duke of Britaine in revenge of his wrong, drove all the English out of Aquitane. Now the hatred of Sommerset and York, be∣gan again to bud; he by fraud and injustice deposed York from the Authority of Vice-Roy, and made himself Vice-Roy in his place, York being not a little offended at it; for the King did nothing lesse then mind his Kingdome. All the authority was between Margaret and the Marquesse of Suffolk; also, by the contrivance of his enemies; the Duke of Gloucester (cal∣led the good Duke) was put out of his place; and unknown to the King, a Parliament be∣ing privily called, they question him for his Life; he was cast into prison, and the next day (how it is not known) miserably murthered. In the mean time all goes to wrack by the negligence of Sommerset, all Normandy in a manner lost and revolted, and all France made good to Charls, except Callice. Now the King wants his two good Uncles, the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester to stand by him. But Sommerset is called to account, found guilty, and banished for 5 years; but being upon the Seas is beheaded, and his body left on the shore. The Duke of York, who now should help the English in France, is fain to goe to still the Irish that were up; he quickly pacified them, whereby he won the peoples hearts, and much aug∣mented his own affairs: thus he began to end the difference between the White Rose and the Red; and for a beginning of his own right to the Crown, for he descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence. King Henry being wholly unfit for the Government, by whose foolish neg∣ligence France and Normandy was lost; the men of Kent vote for Iohn Mortimer (by Yorks perswasion) and with a well appointed Army they march toward London, Mortimer being their Commander; between Eltham and Greenwich they stay, and send up their complaints to the King and Parliament: amongst the rest they Petition that York, Buckingham and Ex∣eter may be restored to their places, and the Kings savour: The King sends Forces against
the Kentish-men; Mortimer overthrows the Kings Forces, whereupon the King flies to Kil∣lingworth in Warwickshire; but Mortimer comes to London, and displeasing the City by his arro∣gance, they rise upon him, and he is slain, his men forsaking him. The Duke of York raiseth an Army to bring Sommerset to a triall, he is defended by the King; but the Duke raiseth a greater Army, and now in open field claims the Crown; and having assembled to him the Earls of Salsbury and Warwick, and others; Trollop and Blunt fly to the Kings Army, and dis∣cover all. The Duke and Lords are proclaimed Traitors; but the Armies meet near Nor∣thampton, the King is overthrown and taken, but the Queen with the Duke of Sommerset flies. The Tower of London is delivered to the Lords. A Parliament is called, which pronounced York heir apparent to the Crown, and Henry to continue the Title of a King during life, and York to be Protector of King and Kingdome; but the Queen comes with an Army, York meets her near Wakefield, but in vain expecting his Son is overthrown and slain: His Son the new and brave Duke of York fights the Queens Army at Towton, and wins the day and Crowne. HENRY the VI borne at Windsor being of the age of eight Monthes beganne his reigne the 31 of August 1422. and crowned King of England at Westminster the 6. of Nouember. 1429. and of Fraunce the 7 of December 1432. he reigned 38 yeres. 6 monthes, he died by violence, May 21. aged 52. Anō 1471. first buried at Chertsey Abbey thence remoued to Windsore. wher he was solemhley interd. R E. Mars begets Clineas, Henry a Son That has lost more then all his Father won; For he lost Normandy, and France put to't, England and Ireland, and his Life to boot. Twice crown'd and twice depos'd, at last he took Deaths fatall Errand from Yorks desperate Duke. He was a Prince (do Rebels what ye will) Like Archimedes drawing Figures still: Who (not unlike some Gamesters I have seen) Winning and losing still the same has been. He was not Politick in the Worlds controle, But he is wise enough that saves his Soul.
EDVVARD the Fourth, King of England. EDward Duke of York having overthrown the King and Queen, and having overthrown and executed many of his greatest enemies at Towton field, retur∣ned triumphantly to the City of London, and was proclaimed King of this Realme the 4 of March, 1461. and was crowned the 19. day of Iune, then next following. In the beginning of his Reigne he removed from all Offices all such as op∣pressed the people; and to strengthen his part with powerfull and faithfull friends, he cre∣ates his two brothers, George Duke of Clarence, and Richard Duke of Gloucester; and Sr. Iohn Nevell brother to the Earl of Warwick he created Lord Montacute: and Henry Bourchier (who had married the Lady Elizabeth, Aunt unto the King, and was brother unto Thomas Bour∣chier, Arch-bishop of Canterbury) was created Earl of Essex; and William Lord Fawcnbridge was made Earl of Kent. The Duke of Sommerset, and Sr. Ralph Percy, with divers others the Kings professed ene∣mies, finding no further hope for the house of Lancaster, came voluntarily in, and submit∣ted to the King, and were received to pardon and favour: but hearing that the Queen by the assistance of the Scots had raised an Army, they slank away, and revolted to her, and afterwards taken at the battel of Exham were executed. The Lord Montacute (to whose valour the fortune of that day was ascribed) is created Marquess Montacute, to whom and others Edward gave great gifts. After this Henry is taken in a disguise, and sent to the Tower: Then Warwick is sent to the Duke of Savoy, and prevails for a Match between Edward and Bona the Dukes daughter; but Edward in the mean time marries Elizabeth the widow of Sr. Iohn Grey; at which War∣wick vexed calls to his part his two Brothers, and Clarence the Kings Brother, and the King at Banbury. The King notwithstanding these evill tidings, marched confidently against Warwick, and his northern Rebels; but to prevent mischief, many of the Nobillity endeavoured to con∣clude a peace, so that Letters, and Heraulds of Armes passed from one Army to the other, for both were glad of peace: by means of this Parlee King Edward became more carelesse of himself then was fitting: whereof when the Earl of Warwick was informed, he with some other well appointed rushed into the Kings Army, slew his watches, and surprised the King in his bed, and secretly sent him to Midleham Castle in York-shire, there to be safely kept by the Arch-bishop of York his brother; who (either repenting him of what he had done against the King, or being won by large promises of great favour, and good rewards) suffered him with his Guarders to hunt and hawk; by means whereof he made his escape, and got to London; where between the King and the Rebels another Parlee was had in Westminster Hall, in which nothing was done, but objections of good deserts, and unthankfull requitals were proudly and insultingly urged by the Earl of Warwick: in conclusion they departed each from other in great fury; the King went to Canterbury, and the confederated Lords to Lincolne: Armies are raised on both sides; they fight, and the King wins the field. The Lords Clarence and Warwick fly to the King of France, who honourably entertains them, and aids them with all necessaries for the levying of another Army, with which they fight, and drive King Edward out of the Kingdome; who by the help of the Duke of Burgoyne, returns with a small Army into the City of York, where he is received upon solemn Oath, that he claimed nothing but the Dukedome of York, and that he would work no Treason against King Henry (now again re-established in his Throne:) but he presently forfeits his faith, and raising another great Army beats Warwick, recovers the Crown, and re-imprisons King Henry, who soon after was murdered by the bloody hands of Richard Duke of Gloucester. The King having through much trouble obtained peace, betakes himself to dalliance with Iane Shore, in the mean while his brother Duke of Clarence is drowned in a Butt of Malmsey. The Scots threaten Warre; and Richard Duke of Gloucester is sent against them: a Peace was procured; and King Edward dyed, having reigned two and twenty years, and is buried at Windsor.
He was doubtlesse a brave Prince: however, the clearest day is not without some clouds; his perjury at York, when he swore to the Citizens he would claim nothing but that Dukedome, which was his right by inheritance, and that he would in no sort interrupt King Henry's peace; all which he falsified, which afterward his innocent Sonnes sadly suffered for; His lustfull Embraces with Shores wife, got him the envy of his owne, who was a chast and vertuous Lady, in whom he got a good Wife, though many enemies; and though unfortunate in her Sons, yet in her Daughter is composed all the fewd of York and Lancaster. The right noble Prince EDWARD the 4th King of England and Fraunce Lord of Ireland. He raigned 22. yeares and 5 weekes. Died at the age of 52 yeares: buried at Windsor. 1483. R. Elstracke sculpsit Now sixty years out, York obtains the Crowne, And Lancaster with all his friends puts down; Betwixt which Houses while the difference stood, Fell more then fourscore of the Noble Bloud; For which, but think how many thousands bled, And you will Iudge the Roses both were Red. Warwick advances Edward to the Crown, And in distast againe he pulls him down But Edward to the Duke of Burgoine flyes, And with his aid, and his own perjuries Reerowns himself; for Kingdomes men will dare A thousand Oaths, and count them solemne Aire.
EDVVARD the Fifth, King of England. EDward the Fourth being dead, his Eldest Son Edward succeeded him; but he in his Reign was under Governors, Anthony Lord Rivers, Thomas Wagham Cham∣berlain, and Richard Grey, Knights; who being sent for by the Queens Letters, came in hast to London with the Prince. Then also Richard Duke of Gloucester being at York, and hearing of the Kings Death came to London with a small Army, and being mindfull to usurp the Kingdome, he overtook the young King Edward on his way to London, and takes him into his own charge, sending his Tutors Rivers, Wagham and Grey to Pomfret Castle to be kept safe, all whom by the Practise of the Lord Hastings, he soon after caused to be put to death: which thing known at London, the Queen (who well knew the perverse mind of Richard) with her other son Richard and her daughters, took Sanctuary at Westminster to secure themselves from Richards violence. Richard in the mean time came to London with Edward, and went to the Bishop of London's house to reside; but he not content with Edwards being in his power, that he might the more safely look to his businesse, endeavors to get the other brother out of Sanctuary from his mother the Queen, under a colour of comforting the Kings sorrowfull mind; and drawing the Lords to his opinion, he sent thither amongst others Thomas Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, who with fair speeches mingled with threats, brings the poor innocent Child from his Mothers arms. When the Arch-bishop had delivered the child into the Protectors hands (who with many other Lords attended the Queens answer in the Star-Chamber) he before the whole Assembly took him in his Armes, hugged him, and kissed him again and again, protesting upon his soul, that no worldly thing (his Majesty only excepted) was so dear unto him as that young child; when as indeed he meant nothing more than the de∣struction of them both: and having brought him to the King, who was infinitely joyed with his Company, he within few dayes after conveyed them with princely Pomp and At∣tendance through the City of London to the Tower, under the Pretence of an especiall care and Providence, that they should there remain in safety untill the troubles of the Common∣wealth were appeased, and quieted, whereas in truth nothing was out of order but himself, and his confederacy. When he had thus cooped up the King and his brother, he draws Buckingham to his Treason, but Hastings could not be won, therefore he pretended he sought to take away his life, with which he charged him; to which after a long silence the Lord Hastings as most familiar with him, made answer, They that so trangress the Law, de∣serve what punishment the Law can inflict upon them, and all the Lords ascented thereun∣to; Then quoth the Protector, That Sorceress (meaning the Queen) and that Strumpet Shores wife, have conspired together to take away my life by witchcraft, and that you may be right well assured it is true, Behold I pray you, and see how their villany hath allready seized on my body, for by it my left arm is already wasted and consumed, and therewith∣all he struck up his sleeve, and shew them his arme naked; this did he impudently dare to do, albeit all there present were well assured it was never otherwise from his mothers womb. Moreover no man was so simple, to beleeve that if the Queen had intended such a mischief, she would have consorted with Shores wife above all other women, she having been her husbands Concubine, besides this they all knew that the Queen was religious temperate, mild, charitable and vertuous, and not given to revenge. The Lord Hastings (who after King Edwards death conversed with Shores Wife, using her as his concubine; and but the same morning left her in his own bed) being desirous if he could to appease the Pro∣tectors rage to her, and (in some sort) being willing to excuse her, replied thus, My Lord, If the Queen and she have so done? and therewithall the Protectors rage waxing intemperate interrupted him thus, Thou Traytor, quoth he, tellest thou me of Iff's and Ands? I tell thee they have done it; and as he spake those words, he clapt his hand rudely upon the Table, at the noise whereof the whole chamber was suddenly filled with armed men, and one of them struck down the Lord Stanly with a Holbert, and the Protector himself did arrest the Lord Hastings and charg'd him of high Treason in generall tearms and forthwith without any proceeding or judgment, caused him to be carried out into the Green, and his head upon a Logg to be chopped off; and it is noted that this execution was done on him the same day, and in the same Lawlesse manner, that he had commanded to be done to Rivers, Grey and Wagham. Thus when this impious Protector had murdered those Lords that stood in his way, he
caused Doctor Shaw (a man more learned than vertuous) publickly in a Sermon at Pauls Crosse, to blaze on his honourable birth and Parentage, his valour, his vertues, and to in∣veigh against the deceased King for his lasciviousnesse with Shores wife, to bastardize all his Children, as born in adultery; for that King Edward, as he affirmed, was solemnly contra∣cted unto the Lady Elizabeth Lucie, whom he got with child. He also accused the Protectors own mother: but Shaw was afterward so ashamed of his flattery, that for very shame and grief he died soon after. Then he sets Buckingham to deal with the City, who with many Citizens come to Baynards Castle, where the Protector was, and chose him for their King, desiring him to take the burden upon him, which he oft-times refused, but was perswaded at last to take it. The picture of Edward the 5. who at the age of 13 yeares was deposed and cruelly murdered, by the procurement of Richard Duke of Gloucester his vnnaturall vnkle when he had raigned 2. moneths and 11. dayes and obscurely buried in the Tower 1183. Edward the Fifth at thirteen years of Age Is sacrific'd unto his Vncles rage; Whose thirst for honour not be withstood, Could soarce be slak'd in a whole sea of bloud. Poor pritty blossom, how thy Fate I pitty, Thus to be murther'd in thy Royall City; That in the Tower thy soul should be sent hence, That ought have been a Tower of thy defence. How many mourning dayes did the Queen keep? When eyes ne're saw thee could not choose but weep. Sure this doth not with heavens direction sute, To fell the Tree before we see the fruit.
RICHARD the Third, King of England. RIchard having gotten the Ensigns of the Kingdome, forthwith Crowns him∣self and his Wife Anne, but still fearing the Londoners, he caused Iames Tyrrel to stifle the young King and his Brother, which he did, and obscurely buried them in the Tower. The Childrens death was divulged, Richard not being againt it; and it was wonderfull how great amazement seized on the minds of all men, every one lamented the unhappinesse of the Children with much pity; and now they be∣gan to say, what hopes have we of him that spared not his own near kinsmen, but shed their innocent bloud? To say nothing of the Mother and her Daughters, certainly the immortal God, who will not suffer great sins to goe unpunished, revenged on the innocent children the perjury of their father committed at York, and the Death of the Duke of Clarence, whom he wickedly suffered to be murdered. But Buckingham (Richards former friend) now detesting his wickednesse, conspires with the Bishop of Ely, how to restore Henry Earl of Richmond, to whom of right the Crown belonged, as he was descended of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, with these joyned the Duke of Britain, with whom Henry then resided. Richard in the mean time, who had notice of the consultations of Buckingham, sent for him again and again to come to him, but when he flatly refuses to come to him, they fall to their Arms on both sides. The Duke presently mustering some Welch Forces came to Gloucester to meet Richard that had a mightier Army with him, but the Soldiers he had pro∣cured voluntarily rather then for pay all forsook him, before he came in sight of the ene∣my; and having none left with him but his Lacky (who was forced to flie to shift for himself) he went to his servant Humfrey Banisters house, who unmindfull of all former favours delivered him afterward to Richard, who cut off his head, and all the Conspirators presently ran One one way, Another another way, some to places of refuge, and some into Britanny to the Earl. Richard in the mean time heard that the Duke did not only not hurt the Earl, but had resolved to assist him; wherefore he provides a great Fleet to intercept the Earles Landing here; Henry in the mean time with forty Ships and five thousand Britains Sails for England, but a Tempest arose and scattered his Ships; and he almost quit of all his Forces, was driven on Cornwall, where coming ashore, and seeing a great Army, he was forced to retire to his Ships; and being very pensive when he heard of Buckinghams death, void of all Counsell he return'd again to Britanny in France, but by the coming of the No∣billity he took heart once more, and promised before the Altar to marry Elizabeth King Edwards Daughter, if the businesse succeeded according to his mind, and so a fresh Oath of fidelity was taken by them all. In the mean time Richard did fiercely rage against all such as followed the Earl, wheresoever he could lay hold on them: Thomas Earl of Dorset, who fled to him, he banished both by Sea and Land; also he made a Covenant with the Scotch King, giving his Sister Anne in marriage to his Son. Richard layes new Traps for Henry by corrupting the Dukes Treasures with money; but he escapes them, the matter being detected by Bishop Morton: When the fraud was made known to the Duke, he was so en∣raged against the Treasurer, that he caused him for that & other wicked deeds to be hanged. But Richard to hinder Henry's Marriage with Elizabeth, partly by flattery, partly by fear, and partly by promises, he prevailed so farre with the Queen, that she should entrust her daughters with him, and should write her Letters to her son the Marquess of Dorset, that was near the Earl, that without delay he should return home, and leave the society of the Earl Henry, that all things were now pacified, and their family in favour with the King. Richard all this while having gotten the Queens Daughters, that he might totally destroy the design of Marriage with Henry, resolved himself to marry her his own Brothers Daugh∣ter, his own Wife being yet alive, whom to that end he privately packed away by poy∣son. In the mean while he tryes all wayes he can to make Elizabeth affect him; he was also resolved to joyne violence to his prayers, if he could not otherwise obaine her: but he was so much urged with care and forraigne fear, that he had no time for Courtship. In the inerim, Stanley had a Command to Muster an Army; but he must not goe forth before he had given to Henry his Son the Lord Strange for a pledge of his fidelity. A fame was also spread abroad on purpose, that Henry had implored help of the French in vain, and that there was no fear of his coming, which made Richard deal somwhat carelesly, and un∣warily discharging the Navy he had to Scour the English Coasts.
Henry was advertised how things stood, and arrived in England with but two thousan Soldiers in pay; presently Rice Thomas and Iohn Savage, two of the most Potent men i Wales, having collected some forces, came to joyne with Henry; Pembrook with some other did the like. Stanley though he wished well, yet for his sons sake delayed his intention, til fit opportunity presented it self. Richard all this time was wonderfull sluggish, but when he heard how his subjects revolted to Henry, he raised what men he could scrape up, and went against him; he Pitched his Tent in Bosworth field, and both sides make ready; at last they fall on: but Stanley, who came late, and brought fresh forces, joyned with Henry, whereby he was not a little animated. The King himself after wonderfull tokens of his valour, is slain hand to hand by the Earl, to whom, by Gods blessing, that day and Crown fell: Richards body all naked and miery, is found among the dead, and trussed up like a Calf behind a Pursevant, is buried at Leicester with as much honour as his Nephews in the Tower under the Stairs. The portraict of RICHARD the 3. King of England and Fraunce, Lord of Ireland. He was slaine at Bosworth feild the 22th of August 1486. and homelye bured at the Graye friers Church in Leicester when he had vsurped 2 yeares 2 monthes and one day Monster of men, Thou son of Belial, Shall not thy Nephews bloud for vengeance call? Shall it think'st thou with them in silence dye? No; hough their mouths be stopt their blood shal cry; For which when God shall inquisition make, Rocks cannot hide thee, nor the Stigean Lake. Thou that didst publish all the World before, Thy Brother Bastard, and thy Mother Whore. Thy barbarous hand did take away the Life Of two great Kings, and thine own dearest Wife. Two Princes thou and many Peers didst murther: Had Hel broke loose it could have gone scarce further.
HENRY the Seventh, King of England. HENRY both by right and true valour came to the Kingdome, and was crowned at Westminster, Anno 1486. the day before the Calends of November: Then cal∣ing a Parliament, he is discharged of the Treason that Richard laid to him: and he gave honors and rewards to some that were grieved. Then according to his Oath and Promise he married the fair and vertuous Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the Fourth, thereby joyning in one the two great Families of Lancaster and York; betwixt whom for principallity and the Crown, infinite contentions and mortall wars had formerly consumed and destroyed many thousands of noble brave and valiant men. Now that the State of the Kingdome might be confirmed in its happinesse, by the safety of the Kings person, and by other requisites, King Henry (taking example by the Kings of France) selected a certain number of warlike men, in all places to attend him, whom he tearmed the Yeomen of his Crown. He elected the most Noble, Grave, and wise men of this Kingdome to be of his privy Counsell, by whose sage directions and advice the Government of this Kingdome was settled in peace and tranquillity. He bountifully re∣compenced the Duke of Britaine for all his former love and kindnesse to him, and also re∣paid unto him all such sums of mony, as at any time he had disbursed for him, for his main∣tenance and relief. The like he did to the French King, and so redeemed his Hostages, the Lord Marquesse Dorset, and Sir Iohn Bourchin, whom he left there. But while King Henry was thus carefull to please all men, and to preserve peace, a Re∣bellion is raised in the north by Francis Lord Lovel, Humfrey Stafford, and Thomas his Bro∣ther: but the King with great celerity marches against them, and their Leaders hearts fail∣ing them, they steal from their Army by night: Lovell was shrouded by Sir Thomas Brough∣ton, and the two Staffords took Sanctuary; but because no Sanctuary could protect malefa∣ctors in case of high Treason, they were pulled out by violence, and arraigned, condemned, and Humphrey the elder brother executed, but the other was pardoned by the Kings favour, it being supposed he did it not out of malice, but was drawn in by his unpeaceable brother. But this flame being quenched, a greater is kindled: For a certain Priest named Symond, erected a mock Prince called Lambert, who joyning with the Dutchesse of Burgoyne and the Irish, invaded England, but was routed, and being taken, Lambert was put into the Kings Scullery, who not long after was made chief Faulconer to the King. Then was the Kings wife with all honour and princely solemnity crowned Queen: and Thomas Bourchier Arch-Bishop of Canterbury dying, he is succeeded by Iohn Morton, Bishop of Ely, who was also made Lord Chancelour of this Kingdome: and not long after he was dignified with the Hat and Habit of a Cardinall by Pope Alexander the sixth. A difference falls between the French and the Britains; the King having been beholding to both, mediates a peace, but in vain; they fall to Arms, and the King aids the Duke of Britain with eight thousand men, for maintenance whereof a Parliament gives the King the tenth penny of all moveable goods and chattels; but the Duke dyed, and those wars ended. But this Tax begot a Rebellion, for the rustick swads about York and Durham would not pay a penny of the Tax; but being numerous, they rifled severall places where they came, and barbarously murdered the Earl of Northumberland, imployed by the King to levy the tax but the King soon routed them, and executed the Ringleaders of them in severall places. The French King by his gifts corrupts the attendants of the Duke of Britains Daughter & heir of the Dukedome, and though affianced to the Emperors Daughter before, yet he returns her to her father, and marries the Young Heir of Britain, wo was contracted to the Emperour, making both contracts void, and nullities by proclamation. But the Emperor scorning to be thus disgraced, sends to King Henry, and craves aid; whereupon the King, partly for love he bare to the Emperour, and partly because he saw the French King was become Lord of Britain, and endeavoured to subject the low Countries also under him, promised his assistance, for support of which he spared the poor, and got great sums from the Nobles and richer sort. The King sends a well appointed Army over, under the conduct and command of the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Oxford; whom the King in person followed with a Royall Army; but the French King sues for peace and gave him for his charges in that expedition, almost two hundred thousand pounds Sterling; so Henry and his Army returned safe into England, having concluded an honou∣rable and profitable Peace.
But the Kings ancient enemy the Dutchesse of Burgoyne, with another upstart counter∣feit, named Perkin Warbeck, whom she pretends to be Richard Duke of York, Edward the Fourth's Second son: The Burgoyns, Irish, French and Scots favour him, some out of mischief, others out of mistake, which begets great troubles to King Henry, but he is taken, imprison'd, and for endeavouring an escape is executed. The Scots invade England under pretence of aiding Perkin, he drives them out; and another Tax is levied, which begets a rebellion, which the King overthrows, and hangs up the Heads of it. Prince Arthur about this time married Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinand King of Aragon. King Henry's eldest Daughter marries the King of Scots, Iames the Fourth; but Prince Arthur five months after his Mar∣riage died, to his Fathers great grief: about his latter end he grew covetous, but repented of it. He died soon after, and was buried at Westminster in his own Chappel: he died at 52. years old, and reigned 23. years. The most Mighty and Prudent Prince Henry the seaventh by the grace of god King of England Fraunce and Ireland &c; As after a sharp Winter Birds do sing Encomiums to a Comfortable Spring; So did this Kingdome entertain with joy, Great Lancaster, and sung Vive le Roy. Henry from Britain came, and claim'd his due By Vertue, Valour, and by Title true. And that he might becalme all stormy weather, He joyn'd the White Rose and the Red together▪ He was a prudent Prince, and govern'd well, But that to be too Covetous he fell: At last he much restor'd, and gave among The poor; which mercy cancel'd all his wrong.
HENRY the Eighth, King of England. KIng Henry the Eighth being of the age of eighteen years, began to Reigne the two and twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord God, 1509. And being dispensed with by the Pope, he married the Lady Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinando King of Aragon, Aunt to Prince Charls of Castile, who afterwards was Emperour; whenas not long before she had been his brother Prince Arthur's Wife: by which match much trouble afterwards ensued. In the beginning of his Reigne he was very gracious and tender to his people, in rescuing them from the greedy Jaws of their oppressors, that toward the end of his Fathers Reigne had so vexed and tormented them; and the more freely to content such as had been justly offended by those extreamities, he caused the Heads of those two devouring Caterpillars, Empson and Dudley, to be stricken off at the Tower Hill; and the rest of that rascall rabble were disgracefully corrected by the Stocks and Pillories, in sundry places of this Realme. Thus when the King had well buied himself in the settlement of his Kingdome, for the first two years of his Reigne, he was by his wifes father Ferdinando, King of Aragon, entreated to assist him against the Moores; but by reason of a cessation of those Jarres, returned out of Spain, having been rudely entertained, and spent all. About the same time the King of France invades Italy, making great havock; but Henry in favour of the Pope led an Army into France (Maximilian the Emperour fighting under the English Banner) and took many prisoners, and Towns. In the mean time the Scots upon the French account infest the North parts of England with sixty thousand men, but the Earl of Surrey encountered them with six and twenty thousand, and slew Iames their King with many Lords and Earls, totally routing all that vast Army. Henry returning out of France, Surrey for his good service was created Duke of Norfolk, and Thomas Wolsey, a man of mean parentage, was made Bishop of Lincolne, and at last was made a Cardinall. At this time the Pope sent to Henry a Cap of maintenance, a Sword, and the Title of Defender of the Faith; which Grace Henry received with Tiltings and great Pomp. Cardinall Wolsey is made Chancellour of England. Charls the Emperor comes to London and is received with great honour, and graced with the Order of the Garter. But Behold, Henry who had lived lovingly with his Wife Katharine 20 years, began now to find a scru∣ple in his Conscience, whether he might without incest live with his brothers wife? Judges were chosen to end this question; but Wolsey not having dealt prudently for Henry, had all his authority taken away, and his estate was confiscate; but at last other new dignities be∣ing granted him, his great losse was somwhat repaired. Then a Parliament was called, and he was charged with many faults; among the rest, that he was wont to write I and my King, and had stamped the Cardinalls Hat on the Kings Coyne; of which he was convicted, and again deprived of all honour and Estate: a wonderfull example of the inconstancy of hu∣mane affairs: he that but lately ruled all, and the King too as he pleased, made Laws, swayed Courts of Justice, taxed the people, oppressed both Clergy and Laity; he is now cast down from the high Pinnacle of honour, and which is worst, hated by all: afterwards sent for to make his personal answer at Court, he died by the way, 'tis thought with poyson. In the mean time Henry not abiding the Popes delayes, with the advice of Divines di∣vorceth his Wife Katharine, and marries Anna Boloyne; and being angry with the Pope for this disoffice, he abollisheth forthwith all his authority over the Church of England, and takes Oath of the thanks of England and Ireland to acknowledge himself next under Christ, supreame Head of the Church; for refusall whereof Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancelour of England, and Iohn Fisher of Rochester, lost their heads. Henry now using his own Authority, invades the goods of the Church, and expels the Monks out of the Monasteries: Nor was he herewith content, but he cuts off the heads of his second Wife Annae Boloyne, together with her Brother the Lord Rochfort, on suspicion of incest between them. Then he married Iane Seymer, who died in child-birth of Edward the sixth. Then he divorced from him Anne of Cleve newly married; and for her sake he beheaded Thomas Cronewell, who made that match (this was a man fortunately risen from a mean to a vast estate:) also, Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, had his head chopt off for privily marrying Margaret, daughter to the King of Scots, Henry's Neece. Henry now mar∣ries his Fifth Wife, the Lady Katharine Howard, whom he shortly afterward beheaded for
her lasciviousnesse. At that time Henry was stiled King of Ireland, of which before he was but Lord. About this time the Scotch King dies, leaving Mary Stewart (a child of eight dayes old) heir of his Kingdome, whom Henry endeavours to espouse to his Son Edward; but the Cardinall of St. Andrews so prevailed, that she was married to the Dolphin; where∣at Henry enraged burns Leith: Then he married his sixth Wife, Katharine, Latimers widow, who was brought in danger of her Life, but by her prudence and humility escaped. Henry next makes an expedition into France, and wins Bononia, which was redeemed with eight hundred thousand Crowns. The Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Surrey are accused of Treason, and the father lost his head. Henry died presently after, having reigned 38. years, he was buried at Winsor. The most high and mightie Prince HENRY the VIII by the grace of God King of England France and Ireland Henry the Eighth began his Reigne so well, Few Predecessors were his Parallel. Empson and Dudley he did soon dismisse, Those Engines of his Fathers Avarice. A comly Prince he was, but him I fear The Hangman made too oft a Widower. Many for no desert he would exalt, And ruine them as quickly for no fault. He never spar'd (if you my Author trust) Man in his wrath, or Woman in his Lust. And yet his vices did not so prevaile, But that his Vertues still did Even the Scale.
EDVVARD the Sixth, King of England. HENRY the Eighth being deceased, Edward his Son succeeded him in hi Throne, Ianuary 28. 1547. He was all the Issue Male of King Henry, who had six Wives, whereof two were beheaded, two divorced, and Iane Sey∣mer mother to King Edward dyed in Travell. This King began his Reigne in the ninth year of his age: and the same day that he was publickly proclaimed King in London, he came from Enfield to the Tower; as (perhaps) for other reasons, so chiefly that ac∣cording to the manner of the Kings of England, he might passe in solemne and magnificent sort from thence to Westminster, where he was to be inaugurated: The day following, the Lords, to whose care the deceased King had committed his Son and heir by Will, assemble themselves to consult of the affairs of State; they all with one consent appoint Edward Sey∣mer Earl of Hertford, the Kings Uncle, Protector of the Kings person, and Governour of his Majesties Realms, untill the King came of age, mature enough for to hold the Reins of Government: hereof publick proclamation was made through London and Westminster. The first Act of this Lord Protector after his investiture was, that he created the King Knight (who remained then in the Tower) and he rising up, took the same Sword of the Earl of Hertford, and conferred the same honour upon Henry Hoblethorne, Lord Major of the City of London. February the 15. the funeralls of King Henry are solemnized in all princely sort, and his Body entombed in the midst of the Quire of the Cathedrall Church of Windsor; and two dayes after certain of the Peers are adorned with new Titles of Honour: Seymer Lord Protector and Earl of Hertford is created Duke of Somerset; William Par Earl of Essex created Marquesse of Northampton; Dudly Viscount Lisle, Lord high Admirall of England, created Earl of Warwick and high Chamberlain of England; Sir Thomas Wriothsley Lord Chancellour was created Earl of Southampton; Sir Thomas Seymer Brother to the Lord Protector was advanced to be Lord Sudley, and also high Admirall of England (for as much as the Earl of Warwick was contented to resigne.) Sir Richard Rich was made Lord Rich, and Sir William Willoughby Lord Willoughby of Parham; and Sir Edmund Sheffeild was made Lord Sheffeild of Butterwike. Now was great provision made for the Kings Coronation, who rode with great Royalty and splendor through the City of London to Westminster the 4 of Feb. and the day following was in due form and order inaugurated by Cranmer Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. About four years since in a League concluded between England and Scotland, and upon the discharge of some Scotch Lords, Prisoners in the Tower of London, a mar∣riage was promised between Edward and the young Heir of Scotland, which afterward was falsified, and she married to the French King; whereupon the Duke of Somerse with a well provided Army enters Scotland, and fought the Scots at Musselburgh, and slew of them mre than 14000, amongst whom (besides the Lord Lohemore and the Lord Fleming) fell almot all the young Nobillity of Scotland. There were taken in fight Earl Huntley, Chancellour of Scotland: The Lords Hester, Hobbey and Hamilton, and 1500 more of good account, pos∣sessing themselves of many strong Forts and Castles with abundant spoile; and then be∣taking themselves homewards they not a little recreated the minds of the dejected Scots by their departure. While these things thus fell out in Scotland, there happened great alterati∣on in the Ecclesiasticall State at home, divers of the Kings Tutors being earnestly bent to a Reformation of Religion, and especially the Lord Protector himself; and it was there∣fore Resolved by the Kings Tutors and Counsell, that whatsoever King Henry had enacted for the abrogating of the Popes authority, should stand in full force and authority whereby the English Church became purged of Popery: And what is very memorable, the same day that Images and Superstition were thrown out of the Church, news was brought of the great victory atchieved upon the Scots at Musselburgh. The Popishly affected Stephen Gardiner and bloudy Bonner are committed to the Tower. About this time fell out an unlucky difference betwixt the Protector and his Brother, which proved the ruine of them both, for they both lost their heads. This Year Bishop Ridley preached before the King, and in his Sermon took occasion to discourse of the necessity of Alms-deeds, which the King earnestly attending and laying to heart, sent for the Bishop after Sermon, and en∣tered into private communication with him (causing him to set down in a chair, and whe∣ther he would or not to put on his hat) about relief: The King to shew his wonderfull charity appointed severall Hospitalls, to which he gave Lands to the value of 600 pounds per annum, which had belonged to the Savoy, and 4000 Marks a year in mony beside. About the beginning of the next year, the King fell into lingring sicknesse, then into a He∣ctick Feaver, whereof, together with a consumption of the Lungs he died at length, not without suspicion of poyson.
And now Northumberland began to devise how he might gain the Crown of England to his posterity; he therefore imparts the businesse to the Duke of Suffolk, requesting his eldest Daughter Iane to be given in marriage to his son Gilford Dudley; then he takes upon him to perswade the King, not only to disinherit his two sisters, but also by Will to constitute his Cousin the Lady Iane Queen after him, which accordingly, the good King yeilded, pre∣ferring the true worship of God before all naturall respects. A few dayes before things were thus ordered, King Edward not yet 16. years of age, sent forth his blessed soul at Greenwich (to wit) the sixt day of Iuly, when he had held the Kingdome under Governours six years, five months, and nineteen dayes; shewing forth even in that tender age, blossoms of ver∣tue, together with singular piety towards God, constancy of mind, love of right, and an incredible study of Learning: Not above three hours before he expired, thinking no body had been by, he uttered this Prayer: Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wreched life, take me among thy chosen; howbeit, not my will, but thy will be done. Lord, I commit my spirit to thee: O Lord, thou knowest how happy it were for me to be with thee: yet for thy Chosens sake, if it be thy will, send me life and health, that I may tru∣ly serve thee. O my Lord, blesse thy people, and save thine inheritance: O Lord God, save thy chosen peo∣ple of England: O my Lord God, defend this Realme from Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my people may praise thy holy Name. Soon after he cried out, I faint, I faint; Lord, have mercy upon me, and take my spirit, and so yielded up the Ghost. The high and Mighty Monarch Edward the VI. by the grace of GOD King of Great Brittaine France and Ireland Defendor of the Earth etc To thee, Great King, it was a gain to dye, Whose death was crown'd with immortality; Nor does he erre, whoever takes thee for Edward the Saint, the Second Confessor. Thou that in pious Paths so Even hast trod, Art Enoch like translated by thy God. Who (as thy death does evidently show) Lov'd thee too well to leave thee long below: Whose every act the Vniverse convinces, And is a pattern to succeeding Princes. When thou of Popery didst the Temple purge, Thy Scepter turn'd into thy Saviours scourge.
MARY, Queene of England. MARY so soon as she heard of her Brothers death, posted to Framingham Castle in Suffolk, to whom resorted divers Lords, who had formerly compacted to preserve the Romish Religion: Then she sent to the Senate of London, that they should proclaim her Queen; but the Lords in the name of all the people made answer, That by the Testament of King Edward Iane was to succeed, and they asserted that Maryes mother was divorced: whereupon they fly to Arms. The Earl of Northumberland with a small Ar∣my marches against Mary; but as he proceeds but slowly, Maryes Forces increase mightily; also Edward Hastings, who was set with six Ships to prevent Maryes escape into France, re∣volted to her, by which losse the Lords and Londoners were not a little dismayed, and grew at odds one with the other; and the Londoners proclaimed Mary Queen; and Nor∣thumberland, when he was certain of his friends falling from him, that he might not run the hazard alone, calls a Counsell at Cambridge, and himself for want of an Herauld proclaims Mary Queen of England, &c. casting his Cap up in token of joy: But that did not at all help his Cause, for the Earl of Arundell, who a little before did not decline to venture his life for Iane, now coming to Cambridge in Maryes name, takes the Duke and Casts him into Prison, he in vain intreating for his life. Iane at the Command of the Duke of Suffolk her father, when the Case was thus altered, layes down the Ensigns of the Kingdome, with much more cheerfullnesse then ever she took them up. The Queen coming to London met her Sister Elizabeth with 1000 Horse, and Thomas of Norfolk, Edward Contener, Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, and Somersets Wife, which she received into Grace, giving them her hand to kisse. Then entering upon the Church affairs, she abollished those Bishops and Ceremonies that Edward had confirmed, setting up others in their roome, (the people not a little offen∣ded at it) and then she punished severely all those that were enemies to the Church of Rome. In the interim the Duke of Northumberland, the Earls of Northampton and Warwick are indi∣cted of high Treason: she spared Northampton, but Northumberland was beheaded abjuring that Religion he professed before in hope of pardon; his body was buried by the Duke of Somerset his Capitall Enemy, between Anne of Boloyne and Katharine, who all had suffered the same death. The rest persisted, and did not renounce the Faith they had professed. Iane afterwards with her husband and his two brethren, Ambrose and Henry, were all condemned to dye, but Iane was reprieved for a while. Then the Marriage was contracted between Mary and Philip of Spain, whereat Wyat and others offended conspire, lead an Army to London, and are overthrown and executed. The Queen enraged with the boldnesse of the subjects, began seriously to consider how to punish the guilty. Gilford husband to Iane was first beheaded; then Iane her self within the Walls of the Tower, with a wonderfull cou∣rage, piety, and Constancy, had her head chopt off: She was a Princesse for her learning and wisdome worthy of immortall praise. It is reported that Morgan, who passed Sentence upon her, fell mad shortly after, and cried, Take away Lady Iane from me. Then Suffolk was beheaded, and the same day Wyat the cause of all these mischiefs; for Iane had been par∣doned, had not he raised that furious tumult and enraged the Queen: those that followed him, some were punished and some pardoned. Also Elizabeth was cast into prison by the means of Gardiner Bishop of Winchester; without doubt her Life was at Stake, had she not wisely answered to questions concerning her Faith. They did severely at that time punish all those that were averse to the Romish Religion, among whom was Cranmer Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer Bishop of Worcester, these refusing to abjure their Faith were burnt to ashes. The Queens Marriage with Philip was now so∣lemnized; and Cardinall Poole being sent from the Pope, all the Errors of the English are purged, and they received under the Popes tuition. The Fame was at this time that the Queen was with Child, and for joy Te Deum was sung at Pauls, and she released out of the Tower many Prisoners, among whom were the Sons of the Duke of Northumberland, who were condemned to lose their heads: But all this hope vanisht, when the Queens Concep∣tion proved to be but a Timpany. The Queen restored to the Church all the Goods she possessed belonging to the Church; and when she was told that by so great a bounty the Crown Lands would be much wasted, she replied piously and prudently, She preferred her souls health, before all the worlds goods. Philip in the interim went to Brussels to his Father Charls, and obtained of him the Kingdome of Spaine, and his other Dominions before his death; then he returned to England; then again he went to Callice to wage war with the French, and staid upon that businesse above 18. months, the English murmuring, and the Queen la∣mentng his absence.
Thomas Stafford at that time was instigated by the French to make warre against the Queen, and landing with an Army he wan York Castle; but he soon was conquered, and taken and beheaded at London, and his followers were hanged. Then the Queen sent Pembroke to assist her husband, and won a great victory over the French, but drawing too many Forces out of Callis, the Duke of Guise assaulted and won it, after it had been in the hands of the English two hundred years; Guina followed it, and so the English were cleane thrust out of all France. The Queen was wonderfull grieved for the losse of Callis, which together with her Dropsie put an end to her life, in the year of our Lord 1558. the fifth year of her Reigne, and the fourty third of her Life. ELISABET D. G. ANG. FRAN. ET. HIB. REGINA. FIDEI CHRISTIANAE PROPVGNA TRIX ACERRIMA What means this Popish Fogg the Church to smother? Where is the Queen should be a nursing Mother? Edward preceeded thee in the same form, That a bright Sun foreruns a blustering storme: For Age and Sex, all at the stake we see; O burning zeal, and frozen Charity. If to deny the Tyranny you please, Behold a Cloud of faithfull Witnesses: No, it were better to bethink with speed, What Sackcloth such a world of ashes need. But Madam, were not these your own intents? How have you suffer'd in your Instruments?
ELIZABETH, Queene of England. ELIZABETH Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by Anne Boloyne, succeeded her Sister Mary, being raised from the Prison to the Throne: By her Corona∣tion the Papal authority fell again the second time; all the Ceremonies Mary had brought in she abollished, and reformed all according to rule of her Brother Edward. Being she was of a flourishing age, and Queen of a flourishing Kingdome, it could not be but she must be sought to of many lovers: Maximilian the Emperour, the Kings of Spaine and Sweeden, the Arch-Duke of Austria, and the Duke of Angiers, sent to woe her, but all in vaine. First, because the Queen would not marry; for at her inaugu∣ration the Condition was, That she should marry no Stranger; whereby there was hopes left to the Natives, for so great a match. The French and Scotch they hoped to prevaile much by reason she was a woman, and of tender years, whereupon they invade and spoile the English Frontiers. The French King pretending Title to the Crown of England, in right of his Wife Mary Stewart, allyed to Henry the seventh; but at last peace is confirmed betwixt Elizabeth the Scotch and French, and all the Romane Catholicks are routed out of Scotland. Mary (when Francis was dead) return'd for Scotland, and made a firme agreement with Elizabeth, but envy and ambition soon violated it and their sister-like concord, to the ruine of Mary at last. Mary takes to her husband Henry Darley, and after Bothwell, but discontents and warres arising, she flees to Elizabeth in England, who received her in her Arms: She was at first liberally entertained; but after moving dissention in England, being a most bitter enemy to those of the Reformed Religion, she was kept more narrowly: For eighteen years she was kept in prison; at last she began to riot in hope of the Kingdome, and to lay snares for the Queens Life; for which cause at the request of the severall Orders of England, she was be∣headed. Also the Duke of Suffolk who privily sought to marry her, suffered the same pu∣nishment. Elizabeth in the mean time assisted those of the Reformed Religion in France. Now fell out a warre between Philip the Second and the low Countreys, in which Eliza∣beth assisted the united Provinces. The Queen for this assistance was hated by the Spaniards, who had before privately laid snares for her life, but now he breaks forth into open warre; for he raised a mighty Fleet from Spaine and other places; it was the greatest Navy for Provision and Men that ever the Ocean bare, and carried the presumptuous Title of Invin∣cible: It consisted of one hundred and thirty tall ships of Warre, in which were nineteen thousand two hundred and ninety souldiers, eight thousand three and fifty Marriners, two thousand and eighty Gally-slaves, two thousand six hundred and thirty great Ordnance; and the 19. of Iuly 1588. they came in sight of England, and were in hopes to devour it. But by the valour of the English and the Dutch, the Fleet was partly worsted, partly hindered, but especially by a Tempest that rose against it, the Spaniard was disappointed of his hopes. They often after fought by Sea in Portugall and the West-Indies, doing and receiving much harm. This great Tempest being blown over the Queen causeth a day of Thanksgiving to be proclaimed, and rid Triumphantly to London. Notwithstanding all this she had ma∣ny troubles, but strangled all in the birth, and England was made the Receptacle of persecu∣ted and afflicted men, both from France and Holland, by reason of the Wars there. In the mean while Sir Francis Drake was sent into the West-Indies, and the Earl of Essex to the Coasts of Spaine, when after many Victories atchieved by each, the Spaniards by the mediation of the French seek peace, but the Dutch hinder it. In the year 1598. Philip King of Spain died in the seventieth year of his age. He aimed at great matters, but was unfor∣tunate in most of them; whereupon it came to passe that the three Keyes of the Spanish Empire (which his Father so called, and willed him to keep diligently) to wit, Gulet in Africa, Flushing in Holland, and Cades in Spain, were neglected; The first taken in by the Turks, the second by the Confederates of the United Provinces, the third much impaired in its strength and impoverished by the English: which his father foreseeing in his Life time ad∣monished to make peace with the English and Dutch. Anno 1599. died that Reverend and famous Divine Mr. Richard Hooker, a man moderate, temperate, meek and vertuous, even to the best imitation, and left behind him a living monument of his reall worth, his Book entituled Ecclesiastical Pollicy. Then peace was confirmed between the Spaniard and the French, but the English and the Dutch refused to be comprehended in it, because they held it disadvantageous to their buiness; but making a Covenant with joynt Forces they invade Spain. The Spaniard stirs up the Earl of Tyrone, who made a great Rebellion in Ireland. Essex was sent thither to subdue the Rebells, and to make them conformable, but he scur∣vily
neglected an opportunity of conquering the enemy, and beyond his commission treats with the Rebells concerning peace: He was therefore called home and commanded to an∣swer for his fault; by his submission he found the Queens savour: afterward prompted on either by shame, or his ambition to the Kingdome, he raised an Army and entered Lon∣don, and he purposed to have forced the Queen: His Forces ran away from him, and he was taken prisoner, accused of high Treason, and lost his head for it. Charls Blunt was sent in his Place, who in divers fights wonderfully subdued the enemy, though the Spaniard had sent many supplies to relieve them; in a set battel he overthrew Tyrone and the Auxiliary Spaniards, and then made conditions driving them out of Ireland. Tyrone afterwards when he had tried all wayes, submitted and humbly entreated the Queens pardon. In the mean time Richard Levison and William Monson with eight great Ships and some small ones, went and wasted the Spanish Coasts, and meeting the Spanish Fleet coming from America with abundance of wealth, set upon them, but was too weak, being disappointed. After that he master'd a great rich Ship riding at Anchor in Portugall, and burning some lesser Ships, re∣turned with her to England. At that time the Jesuits and Seminaries were banished. At last the Queen died Anno 1602, having reigned 44. years & 4. months, & was buried at Westminst. ELISABET D. G. ANG. FRAN. ET. HIB. REGINA. FIDEI CHRISTIANAE PROPVGNA TRIX ACERRIMA Thus dy'd Elizabeth; Did I say she dy'd? Away my babling Muso, away, ye ly'd. She is alive, and ever so shall be; Could England dote, and lose all memory. The Neatherlands, yea France & Spain would give All satisfaction that she still does live, And shall, untill unknown diseases vex The Vniverse into an Apoplex. Of whom this Nation may with comfort say, An Evening red, foretold a morning gray. Thus from the Briny Ocean of our tears, The joyfull Venus of our Peace appears.
JAMES, King of Great Britain, France, & Ireland. THE losse that England sustained by the death o Queen Elizabeth, was abundantly recompenced by her most worthy Successor King ames, in the happy union of the two warlike Kingdomes, England and Scotland. He was inferiour to he neither for Religion, nor any thing else; and by new rejoycings he extinguished that grief the Subjects had conceived for the losse of so dear a Mother to her Countrey. He was a King the more happy, because he obtained a Kingdom by lawfull succession, that was no wayes embroyled with wars and tumults▪ but setled in exceeding great peace. But as the calmest weather is not secure from clouds; so the affairs of Brittany, though in a codition most peaceable, were endangered by the malice and conspiracy of some male-contents; he Ring-lea∣ders were Henry Cobham, and George his Brother, Thomas Grey of Wilt-shire, Walter Raleigh, and others; their purpose was to kill the King but newly Crowned, to change Religion to raise Tu∣mults, to let in Forreigners; a terrible design: but this flame vanished into smoak the principall being either executed, or condemned to perpetual imprisonment, or had their parons granted to them; but least peace should be disturbed by new wars, he made peace with the King of Spain, who was a sworn enemy to England; it was solemnly confirmed by both. In Northampton and Warwickshire, new tumults arose; first, by Fines, then by Iohn Reignold that led them, but this faction was soon allayed, and the Authors thereof severely punished. In the mean time Frederick Count Elector Palatine, came to London to marry Elizabeth King Iames his Daughter; the marriage was solemnized with wonderfull pomp, but all these joyes were oversha∣dowed with Clouds of sorrow, for on the sixt day of November, 1612. Prince Henry departed this life; various reports were spread abroad by the Vulgar, as if indirect means had been used, but his Physitians gave it under their hands, that he dyed of a violent malignant Feaver. Charls the Kings second Son succeeds him in the Principallity of Wales. About this time that learned, gallant, and noble spirit Sir Walter Raleigh after 14 years imprisonment, made addresses to the King, to give him leave to visit the New found World in America, to which he gave him liberty, and a Commission under the great Seal to set forth Ships and Men for that service; his reputation and merit caused many Gentlemen of Quality, to adventure their persons and estates on the design, many considerable adventures were performed, though with great difficulty, but especially that of the taking and burning of St. Thomes; information being sent to Gondimer, who was Embassador here in England, he never rested assaulting the King with importunity for Reparation; Raleigh no sooner came a shoare at Plymouth, but he had secret information, and did endeavour to get from thence in a Bark for Rochel; but being apprehended by Sir Lewis Stackly, he is brought to London, and committed to the Tower. Gondimer that looked upon him as a man that had not only high abilities, but animosity to do his master mischief, being one of those scourges that Queen Elizabeth had made use of to afflict the Spaniards, and having gotten him in the Trap, he laid his baits about the King: in October he was brought to the Kings Bench Barre at Westminster before the Lord chief Justice, where the records of his arraignment at Winchester were opened, and he demanded why the judgement should not be put in execution; Raleigh, that judgement was void by the Kings Commission for his late expedition; the Lord chief Justice replyed, The opinion of the Court was to the contrary, he then required time to pre∣pare for death, but it was answered, The appointed time was the next morning; accordingly on that morrow he was beheaded. Buckingham the great favourite is slain by Felton, for which he was executed. Queen Anne about this time fell sick and dyed; she was a Queen to be had in everlast∣ing Memory for her Noble Vertues. The King also fell sick, but by Gods assistance he recovered. The Pasgrave in the interim, who had marryed the Lady Elizabeth, by the prompting on of some of the German Princes, was chosen King of Bohemia. The Emperour was wonder∣fully enraged at this Election, and proclaimed war against him, driving him first out of Bohemia, and afterwards out of all Germany, who in Holland, the common refuge of all wretchd people, found a bountifull and safe entertainment. But Iames that he might help his son in law, made a motion for a marriage betwixt his son Charls, and the Infanta of Spain. Charls is sent into Spaine through France by Land, where he saw upon his journey Mary daugh∣ter to Henry the fourth; he was received in Spain magnificently to outward appearance; but a difference falling out betwixt the Duke of Buckingham, and Count Olivares, the principall Don of the Spanish Court; the Treaty was drawn out at length; but Charls impatient of delay returns home▪ and arrives safe in England, and was afterward married to Mary whom he had affectio∣nately beheld in France.
What remains to be spoken of King Iames, is either scarce worth recording, or dubious in the truth thereof: He dyed at last of a disease of the Spleen, though there was false reports spread abroad, That he was poysoned, when he had reigned twenty and two years, in the year, 1625. He was a true Platonick Prince, a Husband worthy of his Wife, an honest Father to his Children, a good King to his Subjects; because he was a Prince, he was the most learned, and he was the best Prince by reason of his learning. In this Kings reigne English Plantations were etled in the Indies, Virginia, Bermudaes, and New-England; in which are Common-wealths. The right high and most mightie Monarch IAMES by the Grace of God King of great Britaine Fraunce and Ireland &c. efendor of the Faith D Sculp: They look for peace, and behold war; But we Did look for war, and have met peace in thee. The North wind brings no good, it is untrue; Never brought wind England more good than you Whose Mothers death may all the world convince, Revenge could never conquer such a Prince. What could Great Britain wish but such an heir, Vnites two Realms scarce ever out of war. Your wisdome, plenty, peace who descants on, Conclude you even a second Solomon. Herein (Great Sir) you Solomon surpass'd; That to your God were constant to the last.
CHARLS Ist. King of Great Britain, France, & Ireland. CHARLS the first succeeded his Father, being 25 years of Age. The first design he had was to marry Henrietta Maria Daughter to Henry the fourth of France, as he had purposed before, who landed in England the 22. of Aprill, and was recei∣ved magnificently. Then a Navy was prepared against the Spaniard (for all friendship was grown stale between these two Kings, by reason of the breach of the marriage, and the business of the Palatinate) he joyned with the ships of Holland, and sent away toward Spain; and first assaulting Cades, and not prevailing, they set up sail, and spoyling all the Spanish Vessels they met, they return for England. Now a Covenant was made between the English, and the united Provin∣ces, and they resolved with joynt forces to tire out the Spaniard. But Charls whose Exchequer was emptied by reason of his Spanish voyage, and setting forth his Navy, was forced to call a Parliament, but they would do nothing till Buckingham had answered to his charge; they are dissolved, and the King raises money otherwise, provides a mighty Fleet, and surprizes all the Spanish Ships he lights on. But the French not being spared, a stop and Confiscation is made of English Vessels in France. The Ministers of the Church of Rome, and those that came over with the Queen privately, disturb the English affairs; they are commanded to depart the Land, not without gifts; the French King takes it ill, and some are recalled. The French not satisfied, forbid all commerce, Charls the like; envy encreases, Lewis oppresseth the Rochellers, Charls sends relief to the besieged, but prevails little; heavy complaints are made against Buckingham; Charls to stop all farther proceedings against Buck∣ingham, again dissolves the Parliament. He raiseth new forces to assist the Rochellers under the com∣mand of Buckingham, but being ready to embark himself, he was stabbed by Felton an English man, who was taken and hanged for his pains. A new Parliament is summoned, they deny Tunnage and Poundage. The King reprints the Common-prayer-book, at which the Scots rebell; he goes against them with an Army, but returns without any good condition made. Now the Scots made a neerer agreement among themselves against the King, which they called their [Covenant.] The King therefore distressed for want, calls a Parliament, and asks Subsidies of them, all in vain. The Queen indeavours what she can with the Pope, but nothing is to be done un∣lesse the King would abjure the reformed Religion; but the King hates the motion, and had rather lose his Crowns, than accept such hard conditions. Nor was it long ere these Demagogues brought down a tumultuous rabble of Apprentices, and other base people, to the Parliament door, crying out Away with the Lieutenant of the Tower, down with Popish Bishops, out of the house with them. And to weaken his Majesty the more, or rather to satisfie the insolent tumult, they cast 12 Bishops into prison: the Earl of Bristoll and his son were sore threatned; and the year before, that never enough honoured Thomas Earle of Strafford lost his head to satisfie this unreasonable rout; a man he was of an approved judgement and understanding in State affairs, and of a singular fidelity to his King and Countrey. William Laud also, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England follow∣ed him, a man admirably learned. But now they touched the Kings bowells, for they accuse the Queens Majesty as one that had caused the troubles in Ireland, and caused that people (of them∣selves inconstant enough) to rebell: the King hereupon accused five of the lower house, and one of the upper House, their names the Lord Viscount Mandevile, Pim, Hamden, Hasilrig, Hollis and Stroud, cleerly detecting these men of these tumults and dissensions; but the Parliament would ne∣ver suffer them to come to tryal, but hid them in the City. The Parliament having brought the business to this, resolve not to give it over; but Ianuary 16. 1642. raised a vast multitude of Citizens and others, to the number of 20000. and more, under colour to defend the Laws and Liberties. The King hasts to Hampton Court, commanding his Councellors to follow him, especi∣ally Essex and Holland, who both refuse; wherefore the King with a small company, took his journey like one that sled, so that for hast, being he had no Purveyers to provide room for him sufficiently, he, his wife and children the first night were constrained to tumble all in one Bed. The King with some of his friends takes journey to York, and is honourably received by the Gentry, who proffer their best assistance; the Parliament takes advantage of his absence, and load him and his Queen with black and scandalous calumnies to render him odious to the City, and having his Militia out of his hands, together with the disposing of all places of trust, they raise a great masse of money upon publick faith, and I know not what State cheats, they fortifie all places of strength; they next send to the King humble Petitions, containing most unreasonable demands, calling them Priviledges of Parliament, giving the King plainly to understand, if he will not grant what they desire, they will have it by force, and forthwith raise a formidable Army, under the command of the Earl of Essex: the King is denyed entrance into his Town of Hull by the two Hothams, father and son, both which afterward their fellow Rebels beheaded on one and the same day, spightfully executing the son first,
least he should have the honour to dye a Knight. The King seeing his lenity hath been but their op∣portunity, and that they were now in the field ready to surprize him, sets up his Standard at Notting∣ham, levies what forces he could, and betakes himself to the field, having fortified Oxford his chief Garrison, many Battels are fought with various success, till that fatal Battel at Naseby, in which the Kings forces were totally routed, and his very cabinet of private Letters, between himself and his wife, taken and most barbarously printed and divulged to his Majesties honour, and the infamy of the divulgers. For that the King in a disguize yields up his Person to the Scots, who trayerously sold him to the English for 200000l. And the Rump having now what they desired, murder him at his own Gate, Ian. 30. 1648. He lyes buried by Henry the Eight at Windfor. The high and Mighty Monarch CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of Great Brittaine France and Ireland Defender of the Fayth. etc. Are to be sould by Thomas Ionne atye Royall Exchaunge. Thus, Ah thus our dread Soveraign Charls the first, The best of men was murder'd by the worst; At his own Gate, by his own Subjects too, What more could barbarous Moors and Scythians do? False Scots betray'd & sold him, Scots that would Betray again our Saviour Christ for gold. Thus fell our Laws and Liberties Assertor, The Churches Champion, and the Peoples Martyr: To prove him wise, just, learned, only look Into his most incomparable Book, Which shall his name from age to age present, When Brasse and Marble need a Monument.
CHARLS IId. King of Great Britain, France, & Ireland. CHARLS the second, By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, & Ireland King, was born the 29. of May, 1630. Never knew May a more hopefull flower than this that happily sprung from the Roses of York and Lancaster, joyned to the Lillyes of France; a flower to whose composure nature it seems summoned her divided glories, as Zeuxis did his divided beauties to make up one Venus. Well was this May thought then most happy, untill now we have lived to see another May; as much more happy as it is to be brought to a Kingdome, than to be brought to the world; or to be Crown∣ed, than to be Cradled. His Royall Nativity was attended by a Starre, discovered over St. Iames's at mid-day, displaying its modest beams in spight of Sun-shine, in the middle of the aire (an Emblem of his future glory) it seems when Vulgar births are passed by every day unobserved, the whole frame of nature takes notice of Soveraign births, and Complements them with Stars, Mete∣ors, Thunders, Earth-quakes; such honour have Gods anointed: when he made his own Son King over his holy Hill of Zion, a starre came and waited upon him from the East. For his Education▪ His Father (of blessed memory) pitcht upon the Reverend Doctor Duppa, Dean of Christ-Church in Ozon, Lord Bishop of Chichester, and afterward of Salisbury, who went to him as his other Genius; O ow the reverend Father insinuated himself with his sacred The∣orems into his Princely soul, in short, he arrived at that proficiency was his own honour, and the worlds admiration, as forraign Tongues, as Italian, French, Spanish, Dutch, &c. Adversity hath been his School-master, witnesse all Embassadors whom he Elegantly answers in their own Lan∣guages. This every way accomplisht Prince (whom this degenerous Land was unworthy of) was expul∣sed his Kingdomes by Traytors, whose names are blacker than my Ink, accursed Assassines, that murdered the Father (than whom a better King England was never happy under) and would have sent the thrice Noble Son the same way, but that God preserved him miraculously to be the joy and honour of these long bleeding Kingdomes once again. At last after many forreign troubles, the Scots invite the King upon tearms, almost as hard as Exile; which yet the King receives, and is Crowned in Scotland, but tyred out with their Facti∣ons, he makes for England with his friends and Lashly, who at Worcester betrayes him, where his Majesty in his own person performing wonders, yet lost the day, and escaped, leaving all things behind him a prey to the enemies, who fell upon the Royal plunder so hastily, as if they thought to find Saul the King among the stuff; but blessed be that losse that saved our Soveraigne. But the King escapes their villany and violence, and purposely loosing his company, goes to White-Ladyes, near Boscobil, where cutting off his hair, & disguising his face with Wallnuts, and his body with rustick Robes, under the conduct of the Penderells, he passed the dayes in obscure Coppices and Woods, where sleeping on the Loyal lap of Colonel Carelesse, he took up his Imperial Palace in an Oak, since worthily called, The Royal Oak, his Providores and Scout-Master general, were the Penderels, many a weary, dark, and dirty step took his Majesty, and many a course meal he made. But at last my Lord Wilmet that was designed for Bristow under protection of Mrs. Lanes Passe for her self and her man, preferred his Majesties safety before his own, and ordered it so, that his Majesty rode before her: Here Colonel Carelesse humbly took leave of his Majesty, fearing he might betray him, this being the Countrey where he was born, and generally known, who was so satisfied with this, and other his faithful services, that he was pleased by Letters Pattents under the great Seal of England, to give him by the name of Carlos, which in Spanish signifies Charls, an honourable Coat of Arms, bearing an Oak proper, in a Field, Or a Fesse Gules charged with 3 Regal Crowns of the Second, by the name of Carlos, and for his Crest, a Civit Crown, with a Sword and Scepter crossed through it Saitier wise, with this Motto, Subditus fidelis Regis, & Regni salus. His Majesty rode forward on a dull Mill Horse, and said, It was the dullest Iade that ere he rode on; and a man may believe him. His Majesty came to Mr. Whitgraves Place appointed in the Wood, forgetting to take his leave of the brothers now discharged, called to them and said, My troubles make me forget my self, I thank you all, and gave them his hand to kiss; forthwith his Ma∣jesty is conveyed to Mrs. Lanes, and taking the opportunity of her Passe, rode before her to Bristow, but Bristow not serving their turn, he returned and so journed a while among Loyal Subjects in Sommerset-shire, Wilt-shire, Hamp-shire, untill he came at last to Breghemstone in Sussex, where he took shipping, about the end of October, 51. and was safely wasted over in spight of Cromwell, Parliament, Lilly, and Hell, to a Creek in Normandy, whence he went to Dip, and there proided himself necesaries, untill he came to his Mother in the French Court, where he was honourably received.
After this his Majesty abroad, and friends at home, consult his interest, but to no purpose. At length the Arch-Rebel dyes, and his sons wanting his Matchivilian pate are thrut out of all; and Lambert following his Leaders steps, turns out the Rump, which General Monk (not out of love to the Rumpers, but Loyall policy to serve his Majesty) declares for. Sir George Booth in the mean time, is defeated by Lambert, which so elevated the Phanatick, that he leads a great Army against General Monk, who too weak for him in force, is too hard for him in a Treaty; and his Souldiers, for want of pay, spoyling the Countrey: Sir Thomas Fairfax with the Northern Gentry, rise on the backs of them, and Monk in the front; his Army forsakes him: Monk marches to Londo and de∣clares for a free Parliament, which calls in the King, whom the Lord General Monk with his Army, and all the Nobility meet with allmost inexpressible triumph at Dover, bring with Volleys of Acclamations home, and Crown him at Westminster. CHARLES II king of Great Brittaine France and Ireland Defendor of the Faith A Panegyrick upon King Charls the second. England awake, see how the Royal beams, Like Easters sun dance on the wanton streams. Great Caesar comes, and Phosphor with the morn, After an Ages night of woe and scorn. Hail sacred Phaenix, thou that dost return From the spic'd ashes of thy Fathers urn. Ride on and reckon every day of thine Auspicious as thy May's twice twenty nine. He that ha's never been unfortunate, Savours not half the sweets of happier fate. That comfort only is secure and high, Whose Base is deepest laid in misery. Per augusta, ad augusta.
The Conclusion. I Might have told ye that this Realme some call Britain, from Brutus its originall; Or, that the Romans overthrew it quite By providence, to make it happier by 't; Or that the Danes were (was the like e're known?) By Counsell-keeping Women overthrown; Or that at other times Kings did agree, To carve this Realm into an Heptarchie: All these I Pretermit, and many more, Beginning with the Norman Conquerour; Who setled here such Laws all men confesse Are the worlds wonder and our happinesse: 'Tis true, he did the Church some injury, And suffered for't in his posterity. I have, and briefly as I could, set down Who justly claim'd, and who usurpt the Crown▪ As likewise that long bloudy Civill war, Betwixt the House of York and Lancaster. In short, all Princes have their various fate, This prosperous, and the next unfortunate; As too too well this Age knows, not long since We had a good, but an unhappy Prince; Who like our Saviour Christ did never cease To tell us of the things concern'd our Peace. But Heaven resolv'd to turn another Leaf, Least his charms should convert us made us deaf: And now being punisht for our many sins, Appeased Heaven our Halcyon dayes begins; Having in mercy given us a King To all our sorrows will a period bring; Whose Grandeur and inestimable worth, None but an Angel's able to set forth: Great Charls the second, whose Illustrious Name Shall ride Triumphant on the wings of fame. Let England say now, since her joyes increase, Long live King Charls the second, Prince of peace.
