S973 10409988 44985
THE DECLARATION OF THE COMMISSIONERS for the Kingdom of SCOTLAND Concerning the removall of His MAjESTIE from Holdenby. Together with a Speech made by the Earl of Lauderdale touching the same; At a Conference with both Houses of PARLIAMENT on Saterday the 5th. of June 1647. LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock. 1647.
WHen in January last, the Honourable Houses did desire, that the King (then at New-Castle with the Scots Army) might come to Holdenby; They did declare to the Kingdom of Scotland, that they wou'd take care of the preservation of his Person, in the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Li∣berties of the Kingdoms according to the Covenant; And that when the King should be at Holdenby, and the Scotish Forces gone out of this Kingdom, they would be ready, according to their former Declarations, to joyn with the Kingdom of Scotland, in employing their best endeavours to proure his Majesties assent to the Propositions of Pece: And when the Parliament of Scotland did give their concurrance for His Majesties going to Holdenby, they did declare against all harme, prejudice, injury, or violence to be done to his Royall Person. We have attended these six weekes past in a rea∣dinesse to joyn with the Honourable Houses, according to their Declaration, for procuring His Majesties assent to the Propositions; and whilest we were expecting that an application should have been made to his Majestie by both Kingdomes for his assent, Wee understand, that in a violent manner, his Majestie is carried away against his will, by a party of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Amy, which we are confident is without any warrant from either House of Parliament. The Parliament of Scot∣land to manifest their confidence in the Houses of the Parliament of England, did consent to his Majesties
comming to Holdenby; And now by an open breach a∣gainst both Kingdomes, he is carried from thence we know not, whether I Which action will certainly be highly resented by the Kingdome of Scotland; and doth engage us according to the dutie we owe to them who have entrusted us, to represent our sense of this vio∣lent act, which must needs be dangerous to both the Kingdomes; And to desire, that the Houses in their wisdome, would take such course, as the King may be brought from those who have taken him away, unto some of his houses neere the Parliament, that so a joynt application may be made to him by both King∣domes, for the setling of a just and solid peace. And we doe assure the honourable Houses in the Name of the Kingdome of Scotland, that if there shall be need, they will be ready to the utmost of there power, to joyn with this Kingdome; As for the other ends of the Covenant, So for rescuing and defending his Ma∣jesties person, in the preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdomes, and for maintaining the Priviledges of the Parliaments, according to the Covenant, wherein we shall have regard to the honor of this Kingdome, as well as our owne. We cannot thinke that all who are of that Army, are accessory to such wicked designes, Or will knowingly disappoint the trust reposed in them by the Parliament. Some we believe have gone along in the simplicity of their hearts; Such we doubt not but the clemency and wis∣dome of the honorable Houses, may, and will reclaime unto their duty; And upon the other part wee trust the prudence and care of both Houses, will in such a way as they shall thinke fit, provide against the present visible dangers, which doe more then threaten the Par∣liament and City.
These things the Conscience of our duty hath mo∣ved us freely to declare. And as we would have accoun∣ted it guiltinesse for us to be silent at such a time; So if a speedy remedy be not taken against this deluge of the worst of evills, wee trust that wee have hereby ex∣onered our Consciences before God and the world. 5th June 1647. By command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland. Jo: Cheislie.
The Earl of Lawdersdales Speech in the Painted Chamber. 5. June 647. My Lords and Gentlemen: THe interest of these two Kingdoms of Scot∣land and England, are so neerly conjoyned in this Cause, that what is hurtfull or dan∣gerou to either, must needs be so to both; for they are so united, that they must stand or fall together. This consideration hath moved us (who serve the Parliament of Scotland here) to desire to waite upon both Houses of Parliament; having understood, that his Majestie is against his will carried away from Holdenby, we know not whither. My Lords, The Parliament of England hath often up∣on several occasions, since the beginning of these unhap∣py troubles, declared their firm resolution to maintain and reform Religion; To preserve the established Go∣vernment of the Kingdom; and, to defend his Majesties Person and Authority, in the defence of the true Reli∣gion & liberties of the Kingdoms. These I need not re∣peat, your Lorships and thee wrthy Gentlemen doe better remeber them, & I am confident will make good what you have so frequently declared. But we are all more solemnly tyed: For when the Kingdom of Scotland was ingaged in this Cause, the Parliaments of both Kindoms entred into a solemn League and Covenant, for reforma∣tion and defence of Religion, the Honour and happinesse of the King, and the peace and safety of both Kingdomes.
In the pursuance of the ends of that Covenant, the Kingdom of Scotland hath imployed both their Forces and Counsels, with so much fidelity and constancy, that the mouth of malice it self is stopt, even our Enemies be∣ing Judges. And to take away all jealousies, and to shew our earnest desires of the ease of the Countrey, and set∣ling of Peace; Our Army marcht away (as they came in∣to this Kingdom) in the dead of Winter, punctually per∣forming their Treaty. And yet further to witnesse their confidence in this Parliament, the Parliament of Scotland agreed His Majestie should go to Holdenby, or some other of His houses in or about London, untill joynt Applica∣tions were made to Him by both Kingdoms, for setling joyntly a happie Peace. But it was with the two Houses of Parliament He was left; They are of one Religion with us, and engaged in the same Covenant. Yet now we understand, that His Majestie is violently torn away from that place by some Souldiers of Sir Thomas Fairfax Army. We know not, nor cannot understand by what Authority; but we are confident not by the Authority of this Parliament. And I confesse I wonder how any Sub∣jects of great Brittain, will take upon them to dispose of the Person of the King against His own will, and the de∣clared intentions of both Parliaments. Your Lordships and the Honourable House of Com∣mons, know best what to do for Your own Honour and safetie; I shall not presume to offer any Advice, But be∣cause this action will certainly be much resented by the Kingdom of Scotland, and have a very great influence there; We are engaged to come hither, and according to the duty we owe to them that trusted us, represent our sense of this violent Act which must needs be of great
danger to both the Kingdoms. And we do desire, that the two Houses would in their wisdom take such a course, that the Kings Majestie may be rescued from those that have so violently carried him away, and be brought to some of His own houses neer the Parliament, that a joynt application may be made to Him by both King∣dom, for agreeing all differences, and setling of a just and solid Peace. I can assure You, that the Kingdom of Scotland, if there be need, will joyn as one man with this Parliament, to maintain wih their lives and fortunes the Covenant, the Kings Majestie, an the just liberties of both Parliaments, according to the Covenant against whatsoever violence; To vindicate the Honour of this Parliament, and to pre∣serve and strengthen the Union of the Kingdoms, untill it please God to crown all our endeavours with Truth and Peace. FINIS.
