T2043 11848874 49863
A COMMENTARY, OR, EXPOSITION Upon The XII. Minor Prophets. Wherein the Text is explained, some Controversies are discussed, sundry Cases of Conscience are cleared, and many remarkable matters hinted, that had by former Interpreters been pretermitted. Hereunto is added, a Treatise called, The Righteous Mans Recompence, Or, A true Christian characterized and encouraged, out of Malachi Chap. 3. Vers. 16, 17, 18. In all which diverse other Texts of Scripture, which occasionally occurre, are fully opened: and the whole so intermixed with pertinent Histories, as will yeeld both pleasure and profit, to the judicious Reader. By Iohn Trapp M. A. once of Christ-Church in Oxford, now Pastor of Weston upon Avon in Gloucester-shire. Acts 7.42. As it is written in the Book of the Prophets. The XII. Minor Prophets were conjoyned in one Volume, or Book, lest by their littlenesse they should be scattered or perish. Rivet. March 1th. 1652. Imprimatur Edm: Calamy. LONDON, Printed by R N for Philemon Stephens, at the Gilded Lion in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1654.
Viro Eruditione juxtâ ac Pietate praestantissimo, IOANNI OWENO, SS.Th.D. Aedis Christi Decano dignissimo, & Academiae Oxoniensis jam secundùm Procancellario vigilantissimo. Lucubrationes hasce suas quales quales, in animi devotissimi testimonium ac monumen∣tum, L.M.Q.D.D.D. IOANNES TRAPPVS Ejusdem Aedis Christi, annis abhinc triginta, Alumnus.
The Preface to the Reader. TRuly Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sunne, O but much more plea∣sant for the eye of faith to see the Sun of righte∣ousnesse: that light of life. Blessed, may we say, are our eyes which see this Sun shine so gloriously from the Gospell; and though through glasses, yet such as are, and will be kept from breaking by that presence of Christ pro∣mised his Ministers of the Gospel to the end of the World, whom he calls, the light of the world. Happy art thou, O England, where it hath been day-light these hundred years, and God-forbid that wee should expose our selves to that the condemnation, in loving darknesse rather then light. If we shorten this our day, certainly it will be our death. An evil generation therefore is that, whose hellish princi∣ples prompt them utterly to extinguish all our burning and shining Lamps, by draining out all their oil; and so are those children of the night, whose hellish practises at∣tempt the blowing out of these lights that do discover their deeds of darknesse, and because they cannot (no more then becken the Sunne from the skie) their breath is spent in cursing them as freely, and fiercely, as the Ethiopians do the Sun for scorching them. If this continue, sad are our fears, lest our Sun be not far from setting: and we take up that lamentation with Jeremy, Wo unto us for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out. Neither are the Symptomes of this onely in the professed disavowing of the Ministery, by men of corrupt minds, repro∣bate concerning the faith, and who have put away a good con∣science; but also in the dark lives of many of those who seem to affect Gospel-light, and yet walk not honestly as in the day: rejoyce in the light, yet walk not as children of the light. Nay amongst the best are not notions prosecuted more then practise? and our light like the Moon's without heat? yea, and whereas the Father of lights hath set up his Candle∣stick amongst us, that we might do his work; we rather do our own, making our selves, and not him our end. The good Lord in mercy make all his to face about towards himself; & o face one another, as the Cherubims over the Mercy-seat. Reader, our advice to thee is, to do thy duty, though many others neglect theirs: Blesse God there are so many windows to let in light unto thee, & pray that they may be yet clearer, to give in dayly new light (thou knowest we speake not in a
fanatick Dialect) we mean, fresh, and fuller discoveries of Go∣spel-mysteries; whereunto thou wilt finde this Authour hath made no small contribution, by these his Annotations upon the small Prophets, from before which few have drawn the curtain so far as he; open therefore the Casement in reading, and much light may be let into thy mind to understand things that have been hid from thine eyes, or seen but dimly. We need not commend the Authour, all his works speak him to be a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, an Interpreter one among a thousand: we may say of him, as Cyprian. to Cald. Adeo exercitatus & in Scripturis peritus, ut cautè omnia, & consultò ge∣rat. Origen speaking of the Prophets, calls them Bees, and their Prophesies honey-combes, this Expositor God hath made skil∣full both in hiving and expressing. This friend of the Spouse, presents her here with more new borders of gold, enameld and set out with spangles of silver, wrought upon a precious part of holy Writ, which he hath beauti∣fied with variety of humane Learning. And lest thy heart should rise against this expression; give us leave to tell thee, that though many in these last, and worst, and wofull dayes; scoffe at the learned Languages, and Arts and Sciences, as the Fox in the Greek Epigram, disparag'd the fair and ripe grapes, be∣cause they were out of his reach; yet there is a necessity of them, for the right dividing the word of truth which is evinced by a man approved;Dr. Featly tree of sav. kn. who between derogating from the al-sufficiency of Scripture (which is sacriledge, and blas∣phemy) on the one side, and detracting from the worth of University Learning (which is an Anabaptistical frenzy) on the other side; layes down the truth in the middle, in this Apho∣risme: Scripture is of it self abundantly sufficient for us, but we are not sufficient for it, without the help of Arts and Liberall Sci∣ences: we cannot sufficiently conceive or declare the works of God without naturall Philosophy, nor Law of God without morall, nor his Attributes without Metaphysicks, nor the di∣mensions of the Ark, and Temple without the Mathematicks, nor the songs of Sion without Musick and Poetry: wee cannot Interpret the text without Grammer, analize it without Logick, presse and apply it without Rhetorick. These it hath see∣med good to the holy Ghost to use in the Penning of Scrip∣tures, to shew their usefulnesse in their opening; and who can understand, or expound Prophesies already fulfilled, and to be accomplish't, without insight into prophane History. As for
knowledge in the Tongues, he deserves to have his tongue cut out that dares but mutter a word against it: dulcius ex ipso fonte. There are indeed divers Cautions, and Directions, given by the ancient holy Fathers, in the use of humane Learning, which this learned, godly Writer hath exactly observed: For he hath purg'd and cleans'd it, cut off the bond-womans hair, pa∣red her nayles, and washed her with Sope; his chief care being not , but ; as it is not only , but also . In him (to use the words of that divine Poet) doctrine and life, colours and light combine and mingle. He doth moreover subject and make humane Learning subservient to Divine. And finally useth it moderately, without affectation; and mo∣destly without ostentation. If we should now work an Embleme of this giver in his gift, brought unto the Spouse of Christ, as that reverend, learned, pious Doctor did upon his four Preachers, and apply all his images and motto's to this Author, they that know him, and have heard him, and seen his constant conversation, would (we presume) justifie our judgement: but we forbear; onely taking leave (before we take leave of thee) to super-adde thus much to our thoughts of this Book: That though in his former Commentaries he hath done excellently, yet this excel∣leth them all; as in other things, so in this especially, that the Text is expounded more largely, and large satisfaction given to the Reader in the sence of the word; which well becommeth a work of this nature. So that here is not onely work for the studies of young Divines, but the gravest may ask counsell of this Elihu, who is so full of matter, the Spirit of God within him constraining him thus to lay out himself for the good of the Church. Private men also if they please to take the pains, here may find what will very much both profit and delight. Let us request a concurrence of thine, with ours, and the pray∣ers of many, for this Reverend and worthy Author, that hee may live long, and long a burning and shining light, and bee enabled (by the influence of Divine beams) before his eyes be closed, to open the rest of holy Scripture; which we hope is his purpose, and are sure is the earnest desire, and expectation of his fellow-brethren: And that his path may bee as the shining light that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. His and thine in the service of Christ, John Bryan. Obadiah Grew. Coventry, August 29th. 1654.
Christian Reader, THough an Attestation from me to this work, is but to light a candle to the Sun, the Authour being so well known, and approved of in the Church of Christ by his former labours: yet out of my respect to the Authour, and desire of thy pro∣fit, I thought fit to tell thee, that besides the golden Eloquence, sweet Similitudes, and fitly applied Histories, which thou shalt find interwoven thorow all this Work, thou shalt meet with more for Exposition and opening of the difficult Texts in this, then in most of his former Commentaries: And there is no Verse thorow all these twelve Prophets, upon which he hath not said something. And that which may make this Work more desireable is, that there is very little in English, written upon this portion of Scripture: Besides the Authour is now grown Aged, and so better experienced in this kind of writing then formerly. In the latter part of this Book, thou shalt meet with a Treatise, called The Righteous mans Recompence, upon Mal. 3.16, &c. which therefore is fitly annexed to the former. The subject is most Divine, Comfortable, and Necessary, full of practicall Divinity, and matter of daily use for every Christian. The manner of handling it, exceeding delightfull, con∣cerning which I may say with the Poet, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. I presume that I shall need to adde no more, but to request thee, to joyne thy pray∣ers with mine to the God of heaven, that he would prolong the Authors life, that he may go over the rest of the Bible, as he hath already begun, and to subscribe my self From my study in Threedneedle street: July 27th 1654. Thine in the Lord, Sa: Clarke. IOHN TRAP Anagr. HARP ON IT. So sweet is Scripture Harmony, that we Bring it to argue it's Divinity. But yet we understand the Musick better When you HARP ON IT, both by note & letter. We think you finger't well, and if you will, We shall entreat you to HARP ON IT still. S. Clarke. A. M. To the Reverend. Mr. J. Trap, upon his Commentary, &c. To the Reverend. Mr. J. Trap, upon his Commentary, &c. John Trap Anagr. Oh! in part. John Trappe Anagr. Part in hope. And was I so mistrustfull us to fear There would no more of Trap in Print appear? Oh! now I see 'twas but IN PART, in pledge; What we received before, was but to edge Our appetites, So't hath. We like and wish We might feast every day on such a dish. May you live to complete this work: for we Love that good fruit should ripen on the tree. I'le fear no more, but that while heavens favor Lends you to us, you'le freely give your labor. 'Tis our new treasure, though't be your old store. Farewell but yet I PART IN HOPE of more. J. Clark: A. M.
In Eruditum Autorem. Livelaeus ille magnus, qui lustris abhinc Quaordecim Lingua Professor Sanctae erat Academiarum in alra nostratium, Et partumen capitis inter masculos Scitosque foetus, luce Lucem quam attulit Aliqot Prophetarum minorum, quos vocant, Donavit, O si (gns tegra saepius Ardextiusque voa sundi iia) Non coelum ante copias kine emigrans Auxisset, istm quam Prophetis omnibus, Saltem minoribus, suam caliginem Sic porsus exemisset Interpres sacer. Quibus ille tantoperè suo merito placet, Adeste, TRAPPI has paginas evolvite; Ae futas erudit omnibus Pqu gratas atque Livelaei fuit veri aureum quo pauculos Ex is Prothes clars reddidit. Livelaeus aler TRAPPƲS; Autor Vividus: Ʋt Liber si  Libris felix suis: Ʋtrique pl, piis, elegantibus, Erlesiámqe plurimùm ditantibus. Morinecesse est ateris, sue ut Patri: At alteris, divina sic pandentibus Oràcla, sic docentibus, sic entheis, Actas futura est quanta Vivacissinis. Thomas Dugard. A.M.R.B. . . . . , , , . , , ; . Tho. Dugard. A.M.R.B.
A Table of such Texts of Scripture as in the An∣notations on the twelve Minor Prophets, and in the Treatise annexed, are occasionally explained. Chap. Vers. GEnesis 37.35. I will go down to the grave to my son mourning Page. 581 Levit. 19.14. Thou shalt not curse the deaf, &c. I am the Lord Page. 808 Numb. 11.15. Moses said, I pray thee kill me out of hand Page. 240 — 23.21. God seeth no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel Page. 927 Deut. 32.6. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise people Page. 109 — 11. As the Eagle carrieth her young ones on her wings Page. 578 1 Sam. 7.6. met together at Mizpeth, drew water and poured it out before the Lord Page. 803 2 Kings 18.4. Hezekiah brake the brazen serpent, and called it Nehushtan Page. 434 1 Chron. 17.23, 24, 25. See how David improves Gods promise, and works upon it Page. 390 1 — 21.12. And there came a writing to him from Elijah the Prophet Page. 392 2 — 34, 28. Thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace Page. 228 Ezra 2.62. therefore they were as polluted put from the priesthood Page. 622 Nehem.3.16. And to the house of the mighty Page. 579 Esth. 8.7. Because he laid his hands on the Jews Page. 373 Job 13.10. He will surely reprove you, if you secretly accept persons Page. 645 — 14.17. Mr transgression is sealed up in a bagge Page. 101 — 38.31. Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion Page. 253 Psal. 5.3. In the morning will I direct my prayer to thee, and look up Page. 176 — 7. Title. Davids words concerning Cush the Benjamite Page. 287 — 32.4.5. for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me Page. 607 — 36.1, 2, 3, 4. the transgression of the wicked saith within my heart Page. 805, 806 — 65.1, 2. Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Sion, unto thee shall the vow be perfor. Page. 891 — 68.21. He shall wound the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on in trespasses Page. 870 — 76.3. there he broke the arrows, the shield, the sword and the Battle Page. 211 — 12. He cuts off the spirit of Princes Page. 513 — 80.2, 3, 7. Stir up thy strength, and come and save us Page. 676 — V. 3. Turn us again O God, and cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved — V. 7. Turn us again O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved — 102.13, 14. Thou shalt arise and have mercy on Sion for the set time is come Page. 505 — V. 14. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof Page. 505 — 116.1. I love the Lord because he hath heard my voyce Page. 608 — 119.56. This had I because I kept thy precepts Page. 684 Prov. 5.18, 19. Rejoyce with the wife of thy youth, let her be as the loving bind Page. 652 — 10.25. As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more Page. 393 — 11.7. When the wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish Page. 256 — 24.25. But to them that rebuke him shall be delight Page. 701 Eccles. 7.16, 17. Be not righteous over-much, neither make thy self over-wise Page. 705 Ver 17. Be not over-much wicked, neither be thou foolish Page. 705 — 12.11. The words of the wise are as goads and nayls Page. 816 Cant. 2.14. That art in the clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of the stairs Page. 582 — 4.9. Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister and my spouse Page. 826 Esaiah 25.11. He shall spread forth his hands as he that swimmeth Page. 243 — 26.16. They poured forth a prayer when thy chastening was upon them Page. 110 — 305. They are but vaine words, I have counsell, and strength for warre Page. 527 — 54.1. I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and thy foundation with Saphyrs Page. 49 — 66.1.20. And I will set a signe and send to Tharshish Pull and Lud Page. 623 Ezek.16.3, 4, 5, 6. Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan, &c. Page. 920 — 16.1. Thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to the fire Page. 214 — 29.1. Every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled Page. 216
— 37.16. Take thou one stick, and write upon it for Judah Page. 603 — 38.17. Art thou he of whom I have spoken in ancient times by my Prophets Page. 514 Dan. 2.4. Tell thy servants the Dream, and we will shew the interpretation Page. 533 — 3.14. It is true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my God Page. 99 Hosea 13.1, 2. When Ephraim spake trembling he exalted himself Page. 928 Matth. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it Page. 879 — 21.20. How soon is the sig-tree withered away Page. 626 — 23.35. that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth Page. 496 — 24.7. for nation shall rise against nation Page. 477 Luk. 1.74, 75. that he would deliver us from our enemies, that we may serve him Page. 945 — 75. in holinesse and righteousnesse all our lives Page. 945 — 18.2, 3. there was in the city a Judge that feared not God nor man Page. 218 Acts 3.19. That your sins may be blotted outwhen the times of refreshing come Page. 844 Rom. 8.19. Expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons, &c. Page. 889 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours, and ye are Christs, and Christ is Gods Page. 926 1 — 12.4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. Page. 209 1 — 12.31. Covet earnestly the best gifts, yet I shew to you a more excellent way Page. 428 2 — 5.14. For the love of Christ constrainethus Page. 893 Phil. 4.6. Be carefull in nothing, but let your requests be made known to God. Page. 836 Col. 4.6. Knowing how to answer every man Page. 822 1 Tim. 1.14. The grace of God was exceeding abundant Page. 145 1 — 4.2. Having their consciences seared with a hot iron Page. 668 Heb. 11 6. For he that commeth to God must beleeve that he is Page. 698 — 11.21. Jacob worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff Page. 69 Jam. 1.9, 10. Let the brother of low degree rejoyce that he is exalted Page. 909 — 4.8, 9, 10. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you Page. 832 1 Pet 1.11. searching what, or what manner of time the spirit of Christ Page. 504 1 Joh. 5.13. These things have I written unto you that you might beleeve on God Page. 700 Rev. 10.1. And a rain-bowe was on his head Page. 390 — 13.7. fear God and give glory to him, for his hour of judgement is come Page. 879 — 18. Court the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man Page. 261 — 16.14, 15, 16. for they are the spirit of Devils working miracles Page. 411 — 17.1. I will shew to you the judgement of the great whore Page. 15 — 18.2. Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen Page. 84 — 18.9. The Kings of the earth shall lament for her Page. 264 — 21.16. He measured it 12000 furlongs Page. 600 Books formerly published by this Authour. 1 GOds love tokens, and the Afflicted mans Lessons: in a Treatise upon Revel. 3.19. 2 The true Treasure, &c. A Discourse concerning the Divinity and Excellency of the holy Scriptures: Out of Heb. 1.1. 3 A Commentary upon the four Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles. The second Edition much enlarged by the Authour, and printed in Fol. 4 A Commentary upon all the Epistles of the Apostles, and upon the Revelation: together with a Decad of Common-places. 5 A Commentary upon the Pentateuch, or Five Books of Moses. 6 A Commentary upon the holy Writings of King Solomen: viz. Proverbs Ec∣clesiastes, and the Song of Songs.
These Books following are to be sold by PHILEMON STEPHENS at the Gilded Lion in Pauls Church yard. 1 Concil, Decreta, Leges, Constitutiones de Re Ecclesia∣ obis Britanici ab initio Christianae ibidem reli∣gionis cm annotationibus non minus pijs. quam doctis, opus Antiquitatis studiosis apprime gratum & utile à Hen. Spelmani Equitis. Fol. 2 Glossarium crudiristimum: in quo prisci Ritus quam plurimi nnarantur à Hen. Spelman. Fol. 3 De non temerandis Eccles, Or of the Right and respect due unto Churches, not to be violated, written by S. Hen. Spelman. 4 4 Tythes too hot to be touched, cortain learned Treatises, pro∣ving Tythes to be due, by the lawes of Nature, Scripture, and Reason, therefore neither Jewish, Popish, nor inconvenient, written by Sir Hen. Spelman. 40 5 Psalterium Davidis Latino-Saxonicum, à J. Spelmanno Hen. F. è patris Bibliotheca in lucem editum, ubi ad finem uniuscu∣us{que} Psalmi preces opinae in animum psalmi reperiuntur. 40 6 The Best Religion, or certain learned Treatises and Sermons, wherein is largely explained the sum and principal heads of the Gospel, by Dr. Gr. Williams. 7 A Commentary, or exposition on the Proverbs of K Solomon, where the litterall sence is chiefly considered, the Originall Hebrew Texts, our English Translations, and Classicall Au∣thours are examined and considered by Michael Jermin Dr. in Divinity. Fol. 8 A practicall exposition on 4 select Psalmes, viz. 27.84.85. & 87. by that godly and learned Divine, Tho Piersen B.D. 40 9 An examination and confutation of the chief points of An∣tinomianisme, with an answer to a pamphlet entituled, The cōpassionare Samaritan, handling the power of the Magistrate in compulsion of conscience, written by Tho Bedford B D. 40 10 The Civil Magistrates power in matters of Religion, stated and debated according to Scripture grounds, with an answer to all objections against the same, by Tho. Cobbet, of Lyn in New England. 4 11 Clavis Apocalyptica, inna & insitis vesionum, characte∣ribus eua  demonstrate  comment. in apoalypsin, quus acceit in hac tertia editione conjectura de Gogo & Magogo, by Jes. Medi. 40 13 A discourse touching the true notion of the Lords Supper, also the union of Christ and the Church in a shadow, by R. Cudworth, D. D. 4 14 A Commentary on the Lamentations of Jeremie, by Joh. Ʋdall 40 15 The New-birth, or a Treatise of Regeneration, in Sermons, by W Wheatly 4 late of Banbury 16 The Christian conflict, shewing the difficulties and duties of a Christian souldier in his warfare, with the armour and gra∣ces necessary thereto, as also a discussion of the case of Usury, and depopulation, with the errors of the Antinomianits, by Tho. Bentham. 4 17 — Also the society of Saints. A Treatise of Christian good-fellows, and good-fellowship, by the same Author, in 4 18 A relation of the procedings of the Assembly at Perth in Scotland, touching Divine worship, &c. in the yeer 1618. 19 An exposition of the ten Commandements, by Mr. J. Dod. 40 20 The Doctrine of the Sabbath vindicated, by R. Bifield, a∣gainst the Tenent of Mr. Ed Brerewood. 40 21 Camans calamity, being a Poeticall relation of the destroy∣ing of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian. 40 22 Article of Religion agreed on at a Convocation holden at Dublin in Ireland, in the yeer 1615. in 40 23 Touching supremacy in causes Ecclessiasticall, shewing how the powers Civilnd Ecclesiasticall may act without incroach∣ment on each other, written in the yeer 1647. tending to Peace and setling by John Geree. 40 24 The works of Dr. John Owen Dean of Christ-Church, and Vice-Chancellor of the University of Oxford. 40 25 Severall Sermons of sundry eminent Divines, on dayes of Publike Humiliation, and other speciall occasions, viz. Dr. Burges, Mr Scudder, Mr Gower, Mr. Burroughs, Mr. Johnson, Mr. ickering, Mr. Ʋdall, Mr. Tesdale, Dr. Hill, Mr. Green, Dr. Owen, Hardwick, &c. 40 26 The works of Mr. Robert Abbot now Pastor of the Church at St. Augustines gate in Waling street London, viz. A Care∣chisticall Treatise, wherein the chiefe Principles of Religion are 1 Propounded. 2 Expounded. 3 Applied, with three Sermons on Psal. 19.12. Mark 3.45.46. Psal. 31.5. The building of a Christian Family on Psal. 127.1. Directing to the duties of the severall persons of a Family. 80 A triall of Church forsakers, justifying against the Brownists, that the Church of England is 1 a True Church, 2 hath a True Ministery, 3 hath a True Worship. 80 The yong mans warning-piece, a suneral Sermon Pro. 4 10. 120 Four other Sermons, on Judg. 11.27. Mat. 7.12. 1 Tim. 1.19 120 27 A Reosrance of the holy life, and happy dath of John Bruen, of Bruen Staplsord in Cheshire Esquire, exhibiting variety of memorable and exemplary passages, usefull for all for of people, as a path to piety and charity. 8 Written by Mr. W Hinde of Banbury. 28 The life and death of the learned and godly Divine Mr. Sam Crook of Wrington in Somersetshire. 80 29 A Treatise opening the Promises and Threatnings in Scrip∣ture, by F. Bridges. 80 The stare of the Now Roman Church discussed in vindication of Dr. Hall, Bishop of Exeter, against the cavils of Hen. Burton. by H. Chomley. 80 30 A Treatise directing the weak Christian how he may rightly celebrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, with Meditati∣ons thereon, by Joh. Downam, B.D. 80 31 The summe and substance of Christian Religion, by S. Brown. late of Shrewsbury. 80 32 The Temple, sacred Poems and private ejaculations, by G. Herbert. 120 33 The Synagogue, sacred Poems in imitation of Mr. G. Her∣bert. 120 34 The substance of 3. Sermons on Ephes. 1.22, 23. shewing the Church to be the proper subject of the new Covenant, with other considerable practical propositions, in reference to the debates on foot amongst us, by W. Sambrook. 120 35 Soveraign comforts for a troubled conscience, wherein Sa∣tans subtilties are discovered, to the consolation of the di∣stressed, by R. Yarrow. 120 36 the light of faith, and way of holinesse shewing what to beleeve, and for what to strive and suffer for, in this conten∣ding age, and how to live in all estates and conditions accord∣ing to this faith, by Rich. Byfield. 120 37 Directions for the private reading of the Scriptures, where∣in the scope of the whole Scripture is methodically set down, and rules to read with profit given, with pithy directions to reconcile places of Scripture that seem to differ, by N. Byfield. and Jo. Geree. 120 38 The summe of the Principles of Christian Religion, by N. Byfield. 120 39 Tho. Categeri or Tetragrammato nomine Jehovah. disserta∣tatio qua vocis Jehovah apud nostros recep usus defenditor, & à quorundam cavillationibus iniquis partier atque inanibus vindicatur. 120 40 Sabbato Dominica, 4 propositions, tending to reconcile the seeming disterences between the letter of the Law, and Christian liberty in the doctrine of the Sabbath, or Lords day, by Chr. Harvey. 120.
41 An explanation of the principles of Religion exprest in the Catechisme of the Church of England, set down in the Com∣mon-Prayer book, by W. Crompton. 12 42 The hunting of the Fox, or A display of flattery, by Hen. Harfleet Gent. 12 43 Mount Tabor, six divine Meditations, for the exercise of faith, as propounded by Mr. S. Ward, in his Treatise of the life of Faith. Chap. 6, pag. 69. with other occasionall Medita∣tions, by R. Willis. 44 The History of the life and reigne of King Henry the 7th by the learned Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam. 45 A Treatise of the nature and quality of such simples, which are frequently used in Medicines, together with many com∣pound medicines for most diseases incident to mankind; as also an explanation of hard words and termes of Art, for the understanding of the Vulgar. Also a Tract concerning the di∣seases of children, by Rob. Pemel Physitian. 4 46 A Treatise of the chief internall diseases of the Head, with their signes, prognosticks, and cures, by R. Pemel Physitian. 8 47 Help for the poor, being a collection of sundry medicines easilie to be had, for many diseases, with an appendix concer∣ning letting blood in the small pox, by the same Author. 8 48 Claudij Galeni, Opuscula ari, cum variae lectiones & annotationes criticae à Theodoro Goulstono 4 49 Two Lessons, 1. Of self deniall, on Matt. 16.24. 2.  Self∣triall, on 2 Cor. 13.5. As also the priviledge of Adoption, on John 1.12, 13.40 by Mr. Tho. Hooker. of New England. 50 Tho. Campanella, his Treatise, shewing by what means the K. of Spain may attain to an universall Monarchy, together with a politicall description of each particular Empire King∣dom, and Common-wealth of the World, with the causes of their Rise and fall: published in regard of what is advised concerning England and Holland, much whereof is accom∣plished. 51 Paralipomena Orthographiae Etymologiae prosodiae, una cum scholis ad canones de genere substantivorum de Anomalis Ptaecrito & Supinis verborum Syntai carmiuum ratione, & figuris, collecta ex optimis authoribus in quatuor libris, per Joh. Dansi. 40 52 Articles of Peace between England and Portugall. 40 53 The Anatomy of the English Nunery at Lisbone, wherein the lud practises of those Nuns and Friars are discovered to the world, by one who was seduced to their wayes, R. Sobin∣son. 40 54 Schicards Hebrew Grammer in 80 55 A Grammaticall explanation of the 13th• book of Ovids Me∣tamorphosis, containing that Rhethoricall contest betwixt Ajax and Ʋlysses for Achilles Armour, exhibiting the power of Valour, and prevalencie of Eloquence, by Tho. Hall. 80 56 Arithmatick made easie in 2 Books. 1 Naturall. 2 Arti∣ficiall by Edm. Wingate Esq 80 57 Two Tables of Logarithmes of all Numbers from 1 to 100000 cont acted into a portable Volume, by N. Roll. The other, the Logarithmes of the right signes and tangents of all degrees and minutes of the Quadrant, each divided in∣to 100 minutes. and the Logarithme of the Semidiamiter, or Radius being 10 00000 00000. with their admirable use for the resolution of Problems in Geometry. Astronomy, Geography, and Navigation, by Edm. Wingate Esq 80 58 The use of the rule of Proportion, by the same Authour. 59 The Art of Numbring by Rods, whereby the redious opera∣tion by Multiplication, Division, and Extraction of Roots, both Square and Cubick are avoyded, being for the most part performed by Addition, and Subsiraction, first invented by the Lord Napier, Baron of Mareston, and since publisht by Seth Partridge. 12 60 An Abridgement of all Sea Lawes to bee found among any people, or nation upon the coasts of the great Ocean and me∣diterranean Sea: more especially fitted for the Sea-farers of Great Britain. 80 61 Index Rhethoricus, & Oratorius scholis, & Institutioni tene∣rioris aetatis accommodatus cui adijciuntur formulae Oratoriae, & Index Poeticus opera, Tho. Farnabij 12 62 P.Virgilii opera & tialis M. Val. Marti  Epigrammata No∣tis ad marginalibus illustrata à Tho. Farnabio. 63 Magnetis Reductorium Theologicum Tropologicum in quo ejus, novus verus & supremus usus Indicatur, per S. Ward. 12 64 The Deaf mau cured. A Treatise on Mark 7.32. Printed for the comfort of the Deaf, by Tho. Higgens, Minister of the Word at Wickwar neer Bristoll. 8 65 Mr. Tho. Gatakers Sermon on Psal 48.7, 8. in memoriall of Englands Deliverance from the Spanish Invasion 1588. 4 66 The Mystery of Godlinesse, or the Character of a Saint, in seeming contradictions by Joh. Crofts Minister of the Gospel. 67 The spiritual Touchstone, or the signes of a godly man, drawn in so plain and profitable manner as all sorts of Christi∣ans may try themselves thereby; likewise shewing how the weak Christian may establish his assurance by Nic. Byfield. 12 68 A Commentary on the Revelation of St. John, by Thomas Brightman. 4 69 Rob. Bodij Scoti. SS. Theol. Acad. Salmuriana, Glascuana & Edinburgena. In Epistolam Pauli Apostoli ad Ephesios Pre∣lectiones, supra C.C. Lectione varia, multisaria euditione & pietate singulari referiae. In quibus Analysin, & explicationem, copiosam, & praetor doctrinarum observationem appositum, & ad usum applicatum Fol. 70 Trigonometria Britanica five de dimensione Triangulorum libri duo, à Hen. Briggio. Fol. 71 The large Book of Martyrs in 3 Volumes. Fol. 72 A Compleat Table to the whole Common Law, by Tho. Ash Gent. in 2 Volumes Fol. 73 The works of Dr. Joseph Hall late Bishop of Exeter. Fol. 74 A Guide to Godlinesse, or a Treatise of Christian life, shew∣ing the Duties, with Helps and Reasons thereto, and means to remove the impediments thereof by Mr. J Downam B. D. Fol. 75 The large Bible used in Churches. Fol. 76 The large Annotations upon the whole Bible, in two Volumes. Fol. 77 A Cordiall for the afflicted touching the necessity and utili∣ty of afflictions, with the happiness of those that thankfully receive them, and the miscry of those that want them, by A Harsnet. 12 78 The Shield of the Righteous, or the 91. Psalm expounded, with the addition of Doctrines and Uses, by Rob. Horn. 40 —79 Also 3 Sermons, preached by the learned Dr. Eedes Dean of worcesier, upon Ephes. 2 19, 20, 21, 22. Ephes. 5.15, 16. Psalm 37.35, 36, 37. published by Rob. Horn. 40. 80 A short discourse between Mr. Robert Bolton and one M. S concerning Usury. 4 81 A Collection of sundry most elegant phrases of the Latin Tongue, by Mr. Packer of New England 82 A Sermon of comemoration of the Lady Danvers, by John Donne Dean of St. Pauls, together with other commemorati∣ons of her, by her Son Mr. George Herbert 12 83 A learned Treatise of Globes both Coelestiall and Terrestri∣all, by Robert Hues in English. 8 84 A brief Treatise of Last-Wills and Testaments, with the Laws and Customes of the Realme in such cases, composed by Henry Swinburne. 4 85 The Declarations and Speeches in Parliament of Sir Edw. Deering Kt. 40 86 Sir H Martyn and Mr. Glanvils speeches in Parliament touch∣ing the Petition of Right 1629 4 87 Severall Catechismes in Welch. 8 88 An Analysis on the  Timothy 1.15. with an Appendix c∣led Chronologia vapulans, py Laurence Sarson fellow of Em∣manuel Colledge Camb. 4 89 The Strong Helper, offering to bear every mans bthen, shewing how in all troubles to cast our burthen on God, with infallible grounds of comfort for the quieting of troubled con∣sciences, by Jo. Haiward. 8 90 A Commentary upon the XII Minor Prophets, wherein the Text is explained some Controversies discused, sundry Cases of Conscience cleered, and many remarkable matters handled that had by former Interpreters been pretmitted. Hereunto is added the Righteous Mans Recompence, or a true Christian Characterized and encouraged, out of Masdhi Chap. 3. vers. 16, 17, 18. by John Trapp of Weston upon Avon in Gloucester-shire.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the Prophesie of HOSEA. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE Word of the Lord] Not cunningly devised fables,2 Pet. 1.16. or humane testimonies, that can make but a hu∣mane faith; but the word of the everliving God, the Scripture that cannot be broken, John 10.35.1 Thes. 2.13. the very heart and soul of God, as Gregory cals it. That came unto Hosea] The Lord is said to come to Laban, Abimelech, Balaam, &c.Cor & anima Dei. But he never concredited his word to any such profane wretches, as he did to the holy Prophets which have been since the world began; of whom it is said, as here, The word of the Lord came to Hosea,Luke . His name signifieth a Saviour: a fit name for a Minister, whose work it is to save himself and them that hear him. To save them if he can, Obad. 21.1 Tim. 4.16. to deliver their souls from going into the pit, Joh 33.24. to pull them, if possible, out of the fire, Jude 23. to give them the knowledge of salvation by the remission of sin: to give it I say, not by infusion (for that he cannot do) but by instruction; and that he must indeavour to do,Luke 1.77. as this Prophet did: then whom few Ministers ever ran so long a race without cessati∣on, or cespitation, so constantly, so couragiously, so unweariable. For he conti∣nued prophecying sixty five years at least, saith Pareus; seventy, saith Oecolampa∣dius; it is very probable fourscore years, saith Mr Burroughes. The Hebrews say ninty years, quibus multa dixit quae non scripsit, wherein he uttered much more then he wrote. This we may easily believe: for we have but the short Notes or heads of his Sermons, and larger Discourses, which he seems also to have set down for the use of the Church in his extream old age, whereof they carry a smatch in the shortnesse of his speech, applied, as much as might be, to the measure of his breath. Hence Hierom fitly calleth him, commticum, & quasi
per sententias loquentem, concise and sententious. Amputatas loquitur sententias & verba ante expectatum cadentia,Victor Giselin. de Salust. stylo. Lud. Vives. as one saith of Salust; Multo est verbis quam sensu restrictior atque concisior, as another saith of Livy; He speaketh much in few; and seems to have more sentences then sayings. The ofner you read him, the more you may get by him: & nunquam tamen dimittat te sine siti;Lips. de Thucyd. and yet the more you get, the more you covet. Obscure he is (as delivering things briefly) and such as will not be easily acquainted with you, but upon further suit: Hence that Epipho∣nema in the perclose of his prophesie, Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know them? But this must waken and not weaken our more diligent search, not being content with the first oar that offereth it self to our view, but digging deeper and deeper, till we become owner of the whole trea∣sure, which will sufficiently pay for the pains. Wherefore search the Scripture, follow on to know the Lord; get all the dimensions of knowledge, which (now in the great abundance of the means we have) doth even bow down to us, as trees do that are laden with fruit, so that a child may gather from them. the son of Beeri] That is, of a well that hath pure and clear water in it, and that never faileth; living water, as the Scripture calleth it, and not mixt with mud. Mi∣nisters should be the children of Beeri, of a well digged by the direction of the law∣giver, Numb. 21.17. whence people should draw waters with joy, the pure waters of life, the unadulterated milk of Gods word; not troubled, brackish, and sowrish doctrines, such as the Popish Clergy (called therefore the Sea, Rev. 12.12.) do set abroach, which rather brings barrennesse to their hearers, and gnaws their entrals, then quench their thirst, or cause fruit. These and all false teachers, make Gods flock drink that which they have fouled with their feet, Ezek. 34.19. yea, impoy∣soned with their hands: as the malicious Jews once cast bags of poison into many wells here, to do mischief, and were therefore banished the Countrey. False do∣ctrine is like a filthy pond, wherein fish die soon, and frogs live long: it is like the dead Sea,Rev. 8.10, 11. or the great falling-star, called Wormwood, which made the third part of the waters become wormwood, so that many men died of the waters because they were made bitter by that son of perdition, who was himself the gall of bitternesse, and bond of perdition. Who this Beeri was, it appears not in Scripture. It seems he was a man famous in those dayes among the Israelites (and is here named honoris gratia, for honour sake to the Prophet) as Alexander and Rufus the sons of Simon the Cy∣renian, were men famously known in the Church of the New Testament; and are therefore but named only by S. Mark ch. 15.21. The Jews have a tradition, that whensoever a Prophets father is named, that father was likewise a Prophet as well as the son. And Beeri might be binominis, and have some other name of more note: like as Pethuel the father of the Prophet Joel,Joel 1.1. Alsted. is thought by some to have been Sa∣muel, and to have been called Pethuel, that is a perswader of God, because what he asked of God, he obtained. in the dayes of Ʋzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, &c.] A young Prophet he must needs be (especially if he prophesied fourscore years: See the the note above.) Haply he began as early as did Samuel, Jeremy, Timothy, Origen, or Cornelius Mus: of whom Sixtus Senensis testifieth,Lib. 4. that he was an admirable preacher at twelve years old. Ʋzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah] The Throne of Judah had some enterchanges of good Princes: Israel none at all. The same justice therefore that made Israel a scourge to Judah, made Assyria a scorpion to Israel; as is here set forth under the type of Hosea's two last children Lo-ruhamah, and Lo-ammi; whereof in their place. Mean-while, this Prophet went through variety of conditions under so many several Kings reigns (as did likewise Athanasius and Latimer) Jeroboams, (especially) the second of that name, and here only named, when six other Kings of Israel (in whose time Hosea prophesied) are not once mentioned, but lie wrapt up in the sheet of shame, because wicked idolaters, such as God took no delight in, and hath therefore written them in the earth. And in the dayes of Jeroboam the son of Joash] Not the son of Nebat, that ringleader of the ten Tribes revolt from the house of Dauid; but another little better, and yet very prosperous and victorious, 2 King. 14.25, 28. He reigned also fourty one years, and did great exploits: yet is Hosea sent to contest with him, to declaim against his sin and wickednesse, and to proclaim heavy judgements against him and his people. This the Prophet did
for a long while together with all fidelity and fortitude; when the King was tri∣umphing over his enemies, and the people were not only drunk, but even mad again, by reason of their extraordinary prosperity, as Calvin expresseth it.Non tantum te∣mulenti erant sed etiam pror∣sus insani. Calvin. Now that so young a Prophet should so sharply contend with so fierce a people, in the ruffe of their pride and jollity: that he should so rouse and repple up these drunkards of Ephraim with their crown of pride, Esay 28.1. this shews him to have been of an heroical spirit. Jonah his contemporary flinched when sent against Nineveh. Mi∣cah the Morasthite (another of Hosea's contemporaries) prophesied in the dayes of Hezekiah King of Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Zion shall be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem shall be∣come heaps, and the mountain of the house, the high places of a forest. Yet did not He∣zekiah King of Judah, and all Judah put him at all to death, &c. Jer. 26.18, 19. He and Hosea, though they prevailed little with the people they preached to, yet they were better dealt with then the Prophet Esay (their contemporary too) of whom Hierom tels us, out of the Rabbines, that he was sawn asunder, because he said he had seen the Lord: and secondly, because he called the great ones of Judah,Hieron. in Isa. 1. Prin∣ces of Sodom, and rulers of Gomorrah, Isaiah 1.10. Verse 2. The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea] Heb. In Hosea: to note, that the Lord was both in his mind and mouth, in his spirit and speech. God spake in him, before he spake out to the people. His prophesie must therefore needs be divine and deep. That's the best discourse that's digged out of a mans own breast, that comes a corde ad cor, from the heart to the heart: And blessed are the pleople (saith one) that have such Ministers, that shall speak nothing to them but what hath been first spoken by God in them: saying with David and Paul, We believe, therefore have we spoken: we also believe,2 Cor. 4.13. and therefore speak: we have experimented what we deliver: we believe and are sure, that God is in us of a truth, and that we preach cum gratia & privilegio. The beginning] Hence some gather, that Hosea was the first Prophet: Hoseas videtur tempore & majestate aliis prior, saith O Ecolampadius. Certain it is he began before Esay (because he pro∣phesied in the dayes of Jeroboam, who was before Ʋzziah) whether before Amos or no, is not so certain.Di praep. E∣vang. l. 20. ∣ulut. Eusebius tels us there was no Greek History extant before Hosea's time. Well therefore might that ancient priest of Egypt say to Solon, You Grecians are all boyes and babies in matters of Antiquity: neither is there one old man amongst you. Samuel is counted the first Prophet, Acts 3.24.Plato in Timo but Hosea was the first of those that lived in these Kings dayes, and likely held out longest (see the Note on Verse 1.) as did father Latimer, preaching twice every sabbath day,Act. & Mon. though of a very great age: and rising to his study winter and summer at two of the clock in the morning. Others read the words thus, At the beginning when the Lord spake by Hosea, he said to Hosea himself, Go take unto thee, &c. An uncouth precept, and a rough beginning for a young preacher, whose youth might be despised, and whose sharpnesse might be disgusted. But truth must be spoken, however it be taken: and a preacher should take the same liberty to cry down sin, that men take to com∣mit sin, Esay 58.1. Hierom was called fulmen Ecclesiasticum, the Church thunder∣bolt: And our Mr Perkins applied the word so close to the consciences of his hea∣rers, that he was able to make their hearts fall down,Mr Fullers Holy State. and their hairs almost to stand upright. But in old age he was more milde, and delighted much to preach mercy; as did also our Prophet Hosea, whose prophesie is comminatory in the fore-part, consolatory in the latter part. And the Lord said to Hosea] This is now the third time inculcated for more authority sake, which the people so rubb'd and menaced would be apt enough to question. He therefore shews them his commission, and that he hath good ground for what he saith; that they may have no cause to cavil,Melch. Ad. but reply as that good Dutch Divine did (if God would give them a heart so to do) Veniat, veniat, verbum Domini, & submittemus ei, sexcenta si nobis essent colla: Let the word of the Lord come, yea, let it come, and we will submit there unto, though we had six hundred lives to lose for so doing. Go take unto thee a wife of whoredoms] An arrant whore, a stinking strumpet,Calvin. scortum obsoletum, a known and trite harlot; such as were Thais, Lais, Phryne, &c. yea, and such a one as, after marriage with a former husband at least, went astray after other sweet-hearts; for so the application of the figure to the subject, Chap. 2.
requireth it to be understood: Whereby it appears (saith Diodate) that all this was done in a vision. Others infer as much from that phrase in this verse, The be∣ginning of the word of the Lord in Hosea, that is, (saith Polanus) appearing and speaking to him by an inward vision, as it were in an extasie. Besides, in the third chapter, and three first verses, the Prophet is bidden to marry another harlot. to buy her for his own use, and to keep her at his house for a time. Now scimus hoc non fuisse completum, saith Calvin; we know that this was never really done. It follows therefore that this figure was only proposed to the people, that they might perpceive in the looking-glasse of this allegory; first, their duty toward God, second, their disloyalty, thirdly, their penalty for the same. It is not an historical narration, but a Prophetical vision. Children of fornication, a bastardly brood: such as this evil and adulterous generation is; sons of the rebellious whorish woman, children of transgrssion, a seed of falshood, Esay 57.4. The Hebrews call such chil∣dren brambles, such as Abimelech was, who grew in the hedge-row of an harlot: they call them also Mamzer, as ye would say, a strange blot: And Shatuki, or silent, because when others are praising their parents, such must hold their peace, and hold down their heads with shame enough, because by-blows. for the land hath committed great whoredoms] Fornicando fornicata est, i. e. frequentissimè & faedissimè, most frequently and most filthily: See Eezek 23. thoroughout. Aholah, (that is, Israel) plaied the harlot when she was mine, verse 5. In her youth they lay with her, verse 8. so that she might say with that im∣pudent strumpet Quartilla in Petronius,etron. Satyr. that she could never remember her selfa virgin: Yea, she grew old in her adulteries, verse 43. opened her feet to every passenger, and multiplied her whoredoms, Ezek. 16.25. Meretrices scilicet hoc est meretricissimae. Such a common prostibulum is the whore of Rome. whom her fol∣lowers call piam matrem, quae gremium claudat nemini. Joan of Naples was a saint to her. Idolatry is spiritual whoredome in many respects. It defiles the soul, Gods bridal-bed. It breaks the marriage-knot, and discovenants. It enrageth God, who in this case will take no ransome. It subjecteth men to Gods deepest displeasure: It besots them and unmans them: they that make idols are like unto them, so are all they that trust in them.Psal. 115. Lastly, dolatry is seldome without adultery, in a proper sense; as appears in the old Heathens, at their feasts of Priapus, Lupercalia, &c. the Canaanites had fil∣led the Land from one end to another with their uncleannesse, Ezra 9.11. and in the Papists at this day, who reckon fornication a venial sin, have their Stews allow∣ed them; yea, among the very Indians, who abhor their most loathsome living: And for Rome it self — tota est jam Roma lupanar, it is become a great brothel∣house, and her stench is come up to heaven, as Matthew Paris (one of her sons) long since said. Departing from the Lord] In whom all amiables and admirables are concentred. This did exceedingly aggravate the unkindnesse. Verse 3. So he went] He said not,john 6.60. This is a hard saying, who can hear it? Dura mihi praecipit, & poene terret. He doth not reason but run, dispute but dispatch. God must be obeyed, though we see no sense for it. And took Gomer] which sig∣nifieth both consummation and consumption, to shew that she was consummata mere∣trix, a compleat whore, had all the tricks of a whore; and brings her paramours to finall consumption, utter extermination. the daughter of Diblaim] Not quasi de Belaim, a place so called, as Hugo dream∣eth: though there was a wildernesse of this name, whereto some think the Prophet here alludeth, to shew the Churches wretched beginning in its own nature: as Cant. 3:6. Ezek. 16.7. But Diblaim is by some taken for Gomers father: by more, for her mother, which is also held to be an harlot, according to that Ezek. 16.44. As is the mother, so is the daughter. Diblaim signifieth bunches of dried figs, that were the delicacies of those times. Gluttony is the gallery that lechery walketh thorough. Sine Cerere & Libero friget Venus. Concupiscence (as Plato saith) hath the lowest places, and is alligata ventri, as one would tie an horse or an asse to the manger.Jer. 5.8. Jeremy not unfitly compareth sensualists to fed horses, neigh∣ing after their neighbours wives: Saturity breeds security, which is the sure fore∣runner of destruction. Est ergo hic gnome, saith à Lapide. i. e. Here we have then an elegant sentence, Gomer is the daughter of Diblaim, that is, rottennesse of
sensuality: for as the worm that grows in the fruit, devoureth it; so doth grief, the pleasure of sin. This Observation we have from the Cabbalists. Verse 4. Call his name Jezreel] For the honourable name of Israel is too good for this people; call them therefore Jezreel, a people devoted to dispersion, spargere. and such as I will scatter into the four windes of heaven, as the seedsman scattereth his seed. Thus Jeconiah is called Coniah, (for a judgement upon him) Bethel, Beth-aven, Har, Hammischa, the mount Olivet, or of Unction, Har hammaschith, the mount of corruption, 2 King. 23.13. And this is not unusuall amongst men; so when they would disgrace a man, to clip or play upon his name: as when they spitefully called Athanasius Sathanasius, Cyprian Coprian, (as if all his excellent works were but dung) Calvine, Cain, &c. This people, saith God hére, are more like Ahab then Jacob. Call them therefore Jezreel (Ahabs Court) that is, a den of theeves and murtherers, where innocent Naboth cannot be master of the vine∣yard that he was born to. Micah (who prophesied also much about these times) hath a saying much to the same purpose, Chap. 2. ver. 7. O thou that art named, the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straitned? are these his doings? q. d. Ye that boast of Jacob to be your father, do you tread in his steps? are ye of his spirit, of his practise? was there such vile prophanenesse found in him, as is openly found in you? David describeth the generation of such as seek God,Psal. 24.6. as seek his face, and then subjoyneth, This is Jacob, these are Israelites indeed, these are Jews inwardly: and all others are degenerate plants, and are the worse for their outward priviledges: sith tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul of man that doth evil, but of the Jew first, and then also of the Gentile, Rom. 2.9. for yet a little while] And yet this little was a long while, through Gods gra∣cious forbearance. As bad as this people were, they should not perish without warning; yea, though the Lord foreknew they would make no good use of it. , saith the Heathen Historian: God loves to foresignifie,Herodot. and premonish. But there is nothing more dangerous and disinall, then these still revenges; as when God suddenly brake out in wrath upon Nadab and Abihu, upon Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, Pharaoh at the Red-Sea, when he would not beware. It is a just both desert and presage of ruine, not to be warned. See this in Nine∣veh, spared at first, but after a little while revolting, soundly paid for the new and old faults, Nahum. 3.19. Non consurget iterùm afflictio, saith the same Prophet,Nahum. 3.19. chap. 1.9. Affliction shall not rise up the second time: God will not make two doings of it: but when he begins, he will also make an end, 1 Sam. 3.12. that is, as sure as he begins, so sure will he make an end: and though it may be some time ere he begin, yet a little while (for he is slow to wrath, and of great kindnesse) yet assuredly he will avenge the blood of Jezreel,] i. e. the executions done by Iehu upon the house of Ahab, as so many murders: see 1 King. 16.7.2 King. 9.24, 31. & 10.11.17. This God did not presently, but that's nothing. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, nedum D. He is slow, but sure, Et tarditatem supplicij gravitate compensat,Val. Max. as the Heathen could say, the longer he holds, the harder he strikes: and visits Iehu's house for by-past sins, that they made little reckoning of. Sin may sleep a long time, like a sleeping debt, not called for of many yeers: As Sauls sin in slaying the Gibeonites, not punished till fourty yeers after: as Ioabs killing of Abner, slept all Davids dayes: as Amalec perished, for their ill usage of Israel, many hundred yeers after. It is ill angring the Ancient of dayes. He that saith, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, takes his own time for the doing of it: and who shall prescribe to him? It is dan∣gerous offending him whose displeasure is everlasting. Vapours, that ascend invi∣sibly, come down again in stormes and showers. A sinner of an hundred yeers shall be accursed, and made to possesse the sins of his youth. It is not the last sand that exhausts the hour-glasse, nor the last stroak that fells the Oak. Iehu's house is visited, and his progeny extinguished in the fourth generation, for Iehu's offen∣ces. Gods work must be done truly, that there be no halting, and totally, that there be no halving. But Iehu, as he had not that true heart spoken of by the Apostle, Hebr. 10.22. but was double minded, Iames 1.8. & 4.8. (like that mad Neapo∣litan that said, he had two hearts, one for God, and another for him that would:) So he fulfilled not after God, or he followed not God fully, as Caleb did, Numb.Implevit post mi. . 14.24. he did not all Gods wills as David, Acts 13. he served him not with a per∣fect
heart, as Asa, 2 Chron. 15.17. He reformed the State, but not the Church; or if he did something toward it, yet he was not thorow in it. He had a dispensatory conscience: for though he rooted out Baals-worship, yet the golden Calves must continue; piety must give place to policy. It was a just complaint of Chemnitius, Principes regionem potiùs quam religionem quaerunt: pauperes panem potiùs quam Christum. All men seek their own, but not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.21. And yet piety hath ever proved to be the best policie: and the very Philosopher in his Politicks gives this golden Rule.Arist. pol. l. 7. c. 8. . First take care of Divine things. Iehu seemed at first to be as zealous a Reformer, as Iehosaphat: but though his fleece was fair, his liver was rotten. In parabola ovis capras suas quaerebat; he was like the Eagle which soareth aloft, not for any love of heaven: her eye is, all the while, upon the prey; which by this means she spies sooner, and seizeth upon better. He seems to have been of Machiavels minde, viz. that vertue it self should not be sought after, but onely the appearance: because the credit is a help, the ue a cumber.Am. Marcel. Confuso quo∣dam tempera∣mento mita.Camd. Finally, of Iehu it may he said, as Marcellinus saith of Iulian, that by his hypocrisie and double-dealing, Obnubilabat gloriae multiplices cursus, he stained his many praise-worthy practises. Or as Camden saith of King Henry the eight; Fuerunt quidem in eo rege, &c. There were in that King great vertues, and no lesse vices mingled, or rather jumbled together. Or lastly, as Folieta Galeazo re∣porteth of Sfortia Duke of Millain, that he was a very monster, made up, and com∣pact of vertue and vice. See more verse 5. And I will cause to cease the Kingdom.] This fell out after 76 yeers; which God counts and calls here, but a little while: A thousand yeers with him are but as one day. What is our life but a spot of time be∣twixt two eternities?Jam. 4.14. It is even a vapour, saith S. Iames, that appeareth for a little time,Heb. 4.1. and then vanisheth away. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us, (and a door now opened) of entring into Gods rest, any of us should seem to come short, or to come lag, andlate, as did Esau, the foolish virgins, those that come a day after the fair, an hour after the feast; Agree with your adversary quickly, prepare to meet thy God,Chrysol. O Israel, Currat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententiae: Repent a day before death, (and that may be this day, before the next) make Gods judge∣ments present in conceit, ere they come in the event, prevision is the likeliest way of prevention, the surest means of mitigation: whereas coming on the sudden, they finde weak mindes secure, make them miserable, leave them desperate. Verse 5. I will break the bowe of Israel] though it may seem to have a back of steel, and though it be drawn by Ieh himself, with his full strength, as once against Iehoram, to the piercing of his heart, 2 King. 9.24. He means, God will blast all the power of their Ammunition, defeat their likeliest projects, and practi∣ses, and make the strongest sinew in the arm of flesh to crack. He breaketh the bowe, and cutteth the spear in sunder, &c. Psal. 46.9. He rendreth the weapons vain, or successefull, Isai. 54.17. Ierem. 50.9. as he did when the Rats and Mice were sent into Sennacheribs Army in great abundance, to gnaw and devour their quivers,Herod. l. 2. bowe-strings, belts, bridles, shields, (as Herodotus relates) to shew that the shields of the earth belong to the Lord, that the Militia of the World is his, that he orders the Ammunition, Ier. 50.25. And the like was done by this Lord of Hosts, or Armies, when the winde and weather fought for Theodosius, in that famous battle against the tyrant Maximus,Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 5. celebrated by Claudian: As also when the Spanish Armado was defeated and discomfited by the English in 88. That was very remarkable and for our purpose apposite, which fell out in the battle between Edward the third of England, and Philip of France. Philip enraged with a defeat, resolves presently to revenge it; and hardly had patience to stay in Ab∣beville one day, while the Bridge to passe over his Army was repayring. And with this precipitation and fury, into the field he marcheth, elevated with an assured hope of triumphant Victory.Daniels Works. 237. But it fell out otherwise; for there fell at the instant of the Battle a piercing shower of rain, which dissolved their strings, and made their bowes unusefull. In the valley of Iezreel] A city neer to Maximinianopolis, saith Hierom. Of the valley wherein this City was scituate, see Iosh. 17.16. Iudg. 6.33. It was in the tribe of Manasseh, and bordered upon Issachar, Josh. 19.18. It was ten miles long, and two miles over; being called also, the plain of Galilee, and was fit for a fight, for a pitcht battle. Here i was, saith Adrichomius, that
Gideon fought the Midianites Iudg. 6.7. Saul the Philistines. 1 Sam. 31. Ahab the Syrians 1 King 20. And here Zachary (the last of Jehu's line) was slain, and with him the kingdom of Israel received such a wound, that it could never rise again. Monachies have their times and their turns, their rise and their ruine. Junius renders it Propter Vallem Jericho, I will break the bow of Israel, because of the wall of Jezreel: that is, saith he, because of the slaughter of Ahabs house there made by Jehu 2 King. 10 Jehu's Tent in that execution was rewarded as an Act of Justice quoad substantiam operis, and yet punished as an Act of policy quoad modum for the perverse end. Finibus non officijs a vitijs discernuntur virtutes saith Augustine. By the ends and not by the works done, are vertues distinguished from vices. Two things make a good Christian, and declare him so, good Actions and good Aimes. And although a good aime doth not make a bad Action good (as in Ʋzza) yet a bad aime makes a good action bad, as here in Jebu. There may be then, we see, malum opus in bona materia, a work materially good, which yet may never prove so formally and eventually: sc. when there is a fail either quoad fontem, or quoad finem. A thing which I see in the night may shine: and that shining proceed from nothing but rottenness. Blazing comets (though but comets) as long as they keep aloft, shine bright. But when they begin to decline from their pitch, they fall to the earth, and infect the Air. So when Illuminates forsake the Lord, and minde onely earthly things, being all for self, they lose their light, and go out in a snuffe. Jehu's golden calves made an end of him and his, though he made an end of Ahabs house and Baals worship. His rooting out of Ahabs race was but to settle the crown better upon his own head. Like unto him was our Richard the third, who well knowing (saith the Historian) it was no pollicy to play the villaine by half∣deal is resolved to leave never a rub to lie in the way,Daniels hist. 218. that might hinder the true running of his bowle. Like unto him also (saith Master Calvin upon this text) was our king Henry the eighth, who cast off some degree of Popery, so farre as would serve his own turn: but there were the six Articles in force (that whip with six cords, as that Martyr called it) for which many suffered at that time.Acts & Mor. And whereas (like Sylla) he commanded others, under great penalties, to be no Papists, himself was either Papist or Athiest, jearing at some for their old Mumpsimus, and at others for their new Sumpsimus, as he profanely called the Reformation: hanging Papists on the one side of the hedge, for denying his Supremacy, and burning Protestants on the other side thereof, for denying Transubstantiation, &c. And hence it may be thought, is that dreadfull and dismall ruine that is now (in these our dayes, and in the fourth generation or succession) befaln the royall family. The house of Jehu fareth the worse for Jehu. Offa king of East-Saxons lived in the time of Charles the great, and was a potent Prince. But the many injuries he did, and the murther he committed in his house upon Ethelbert king of East-Angles, coming to him under a publike faith, and a suitor to his daughter, were justly revenged upon his posterity, which, after him, de∣clining, in the end lost all. But to return to Jehu: we shall find 2 Kin. 10.30.Daniels hist. p. 111. that God said, that because Jehu had shed the blood of Ahab in Jezreel, that he would reward him for it: and that his children to the fourth generation should sit upon the throne of Israel, and govern that Kingdom. And yet, for miscarriage in the manner, justly plagueth his posterity. As Xerxes crowned his Steeresman in the morning and yet hanged him in the afternoon of the same day. And as Marescal de Thermas the French Generall, first Knighted a French souldier in Scotland who first mounted a besieged Fort (by that means taken) and then hanged him within an hour after, for doing it without order. See more of this in the Note upon the former verse. Verse 6. And she conceived againe] To shew, in a continued allegory, the weak and wofull estate of the ten tribes, when the Assyrian took from them all the land of Gilead and Galilee, together with all the land of Nepthali, and carried them captive, subduing in a manner five tribes of Israel: to wit those without Iordan (who as they had first their inheritance given them, so they were now first carried captives) and the tribes of Zabulon and Nepthali who were seated in the land of Galilee, And this was the first captivity of Israel: see 2 Kings 15.29, Esay. 9.1. And bare a daughter. This age is compared to a daughter, because from that time forward, after the bow of Israel was so broken, as Verse 5. they should be no more able to defend themselves, than if they were a common-wealth of wo∣men:
Their spirits should be so cowed out and emasculated, their backs so bowed down with unsupportable burdens and bondages,Vt de Ctan∣mer Melc. Ad. that there was scarcely place left of a worse condition, nor hope of a better. Like them were those we read of Esay 51.23. that yeelded to such as would but say to them, Bow down that we may go over you.Hom: Jl. sic. Virg: Phrygi∣ae, neque enim Phryges. Or as those in Nahum, 3.13. Their men shall be as women , timerous and cowardly, like Issachar's Asse Gen: 49.15. [whose lot fell in Galilee, Iosh: 19.18.] or those fugitives of Ephraim Iudg. 12.4. that there∣fore bare a brand of dishonour, because they would not rather die bravely, then live basely: Of such it may be said as of Harts and Stags, they have great horns and strength, but do nothing with them, quia deest animus, because their spirits are imbased: as the Israelites in Egypt were of old by Pharoah, and as the Grecians are at this day by the Turk. call her name Loruhamah,] When God once calls a people or a person by this name, we may well write upon their dores (if any place be yet left for prayer, any good to be done by it) Lord have mercy upon them: their condition is deplorable, if not desperate. Vade frater in Cellam et dic, Miserere mei, Deus, Brother go into thy Cell and say, Lord have mercy upon me, said Crantzius to Luther, when he began to declaime against the Pope, for he looked upon him as an undone man,Scultet: Annal. and yet he was not. But those are doubly undone, to whom God shall say as here to Israel, I will no more have mercy] Heb: I will add no more to shew mercy: but my so oft abused mercy shall turn into fury. That it is not so yet with this sinfull nation, that we are not yet a Loruhamah, an Acheldama, that we are not already as Sodom,Esa. 1.9. Zeph. 2.9. and like unto Gomorrah, even a place of net∣tles and saltpits, a perpetuall desolation, as another prophet hath it, we may well cry out, O the depth, the fathomlesse depth of Gods dear love to Eng∣land. Certain it is that we have hitherto subsisted by a miracle of his mercy, and by a prop of his extraordinary patience. Certain it is that God hath not dealt with England according to his ordinary rule, but according to his prerogative royall. England (if one may so speak with reverence) is a paradox to the Bible. God grant that being lifted up to heaven with Capernaum in the abundance of blessings she be not brought down to hell by the abuse of them; that God set not that sad impression of Loruhamah (worse then any black Theta) upon her, and make her know the worth of his undervalued favours by the want of them: why should it be said of us as once, Anglica gens est optima flens, et pessima ridens? why should we provoke the Lord so long till he shall resolve upon an evill, an onely evill, i. e. without mixture of mercy;Ezek. 7.5. till the decree bring forth, Zeph. 2.2. and God pronounceth that fatall sentence against us that he did once against the old world, Fiat justitia, ruat mundus, Let justice be done though the world be thereby undone. Of all Gods Attributes he can least abide an abuse in his mercy, Gods, mercy is precious (saith one) and he will not let it run out to wast; he will not be prodigall of it: There is a time wherein God will say, now I have done, I have even done with this people, mercy hath had her turn &c. I will not al∣wayes serve them for a sinning-stock, but will take another course with them: I will take my own and be gone: and woe be unto them when I depart from them. When the sun is eclipsed, all creatures fade and flag here below. Thou hiddest thy face, Lord, and I was troubled, Psal. 30.7. David could not live but in the light of Gods countenance: he begs for mercy every where, as for life, never did poor prisoner at the bar beg harder for a psalm of mercy then he doth, Psal. 51.1. and other where. Neither would common mercies content him, he must have such as are proper and peculiar to Gods own people, even the sure mercies of David. Oh make sure of mercy, what ever you go without. And the rather because there are a race of Loruhamahs, a sort of such amongst men as are excluded from mercy. God is not mercifull to any wicked transgressours Psal. 59.5. that go on in their trespasses Psal. 68.21. that allow them and wallow in them. That last letter in Gods name had need to be well remembred Exod. 32.7. He will by no meanes clear the guilty. And that terrible text should never be forgotten by those that are obstinate in an evill course, and bless themselves when God curseth them, Deut. 29.19.20. See the note there. Gods mercy goes oft-times in Scripture bounded by his truth: and as the same fire hath burning heat and cheerfull light, so hath
God plagues for the obstinate, and mercy for the penitent. Surely as he is pater mise∣vationum the father of mercies: so he is Deus ultionum the God of vengeances: as he hath vbera, so he hath verbera, treasures of punishments for those especially that kick at his bowels, that despise his long-sufferance, that argue from love to liberty, which is the Divels logick. Cavete a Melampygo. But I will utterly take them away] Tollendo tollam, So Calvin renders it: and further tels us that some render it Comburam, I will burn them: and indeed war is fitly compared to fire that cruel element, and to extream famine Isaia. 9.19.20. The vulgar latine translateth it Obliviscendo obliviscar, I will utterly forget them: and that's punishment enough: as when one carried himself insolently toward the State of Rome, a grave Senator gave this counsel, Let us forget him and he will soon remember himself. Woe be to those to whom Christ shall say, Verily I know you not, I have utterly forgot you. Mercer rendreth it, Levabo, id est, projiciam, I will lift them up, that I may throw them down againe with the greater poise. The Seventy hath I will set my self against them in battell array. Now the Lord is a man of war Exod. 15.4. yea he is the Lord and Victor of wars, as the Chaldee there paraphraseth. But what meant the Chaldee here to render this text by Parcendo parcam eis, Sparing I will spare them: is not this point-blank against Loruhamah? How much better Tremellius, ut ullo-pacto condonem-ist is, that I should any way forgive them. Have I not pardoned them enough already? may I not well by this time be weary of repenting? I will even break off my patience, and forbear to punish no longer, I have long time holden my peace, I have been still and refrai∣ned my self: now will I cry like a travelling woman (who bites in her paine as long as she is able I will destroy and devour at once: I will, I will.Isa. 42.1 The ten tribes never returned out of captivity, unless it were some few of them that came up with the other two tribes out of Babylon, Ezr. 2. by the appointment of Cyrus: and some others that fled home when Nineveh (where they were held captive) was destroy∣ed: But for the generality of them, whether they abide in China or Tartary, or West-Indies, I cannot tell you. Parcus rendreth it, Nam tolerando toleravi eos, for I have a long while born with their evill manners. And surely Subito tollitur,Aug. qui diu toleratur, as an Ancient saith, Gods patience will not alwayes hold &c. Vers. 7. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah.] The Ark and the mercy seate were never separated. Judah had not utterly cast off God, as Israel had: but worshipped God in the Temple, (how corruptly soever) therefore they shall have mercy because they kept the right way of worship. See the Churches plea for mercy to this purpose Jer. 14.9. Againe, Judah was now in a very great straight having been lately beaten and plundered by Israel 2. King. 4.12. there∣fore they shall have mercy. God heard Hagars affliction and relieved her. I have seen, I have seen, the sufferings of my people in Egypt, saith God,Exod. 2 and am come to ease them. Because they have called thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion whom no man looketh after, therefore I will restore health unto thee, and I will heale thee of thy wounds, saith the Lord Jer. 30.17. He will repent for his people when he seeth their power is gone, Deut. 32.36. when there is dignus vindice nodus, an extre∣mity fit for divine power to interpose. He knowes that mercy is never so seasona∣ble and sweet, as when misery weighs down, and nothing but mercy turns the scale: therefore Judah shall have mercy, when Israel shall have none. True it is, that Judah was not at this time much better then Israel, Aholibah then Aholah: they were scarce free from Sodomy and many such like foul abominations. But what of that? if God come with a non obstante as Psal 106.8. Neverthelesse he saved them for his names sake &c. who shall gainstand him: If he will shew mercy for his names sake, what people is there so wicked whom he may not save? See Esay 57.47. Ezek. 20.8.14.22.44. Add hereunto that Israel and Syria were confe∣derate against Judah, & thought to have made but a breakfast of them, Isay. 7.5. &c. but God here promiseth Judah mercy: and lets them know to their comfort, that there is more mercy for them in heaven, then there can be misery in earth, or ma∣lice in hell against them. True it is, that even after this gratious promise made to Judah, it went very hard with them, See 2. Chron. 28.6. there 120000. of them were slin in one battle and 200000. of them carried captive: yea, and all this by these Israelites here rejected from that mercy that Judah is promised; besides
abundance more misery that befell them by Edomites. Ver. 17. Philistines. 18. Assyrians. 20. &c. Ecclesia hares Crucis saith Luther, The Church as she is heire of the promises, so is she of the Cross: and the promises are alwayes to be under∣stood with condition of the cross. The palsy-man in the Gospel healed by our Saviour heard, Son be of good cheere, thy sins are forgiven thee, and yet he was not presently free'd of his disease, till after a dispute held with the Pharises (which must needs take up some time) and the case cleared, Jesus said, Arise take up thy bed and walk, and so shew thy self a sound man. But to go on: Judah shall be saved, and not Israel, that envied Judah, and maliciously sought their ruine. David loo∣keth upon it as a sweet mercy, that God had spred him a table in the presence, and maugre the malice of his enemies.Psal 23.4. Mat. 8.11. And the children of the kingdome (so the Jewes are called) shall gnash their teeth, and be even ready to eat their nailes at the reception of the Gentiles. This was it that put the men of Nazareth into an anger, and our Saviour into a danger, Luk. 4.25.26. By the Lord their God] that i, by the Lord Christ by Messiah their Prince, by the word of the Lord their God, saith the Chaldee here, that word essentiall John. 1.1. that true Zaphnath Paaneach (that is Saviour of the world, as Hierome interprets it) whereof Joseph was but a type. This horn of salvation, or mighty Saviour (able to save them to the uost that come unto God by him,. Heb. 7.25) God raised up for there unworthy Jews, and even thrust him upon them, whether they would or no, Isay. 7.13.14. that all might appear to be of free grace. Well might God say,  have mercy upon the house of Judah, matchlesse mercy indeed: mercy that rejoyced against judgement. Mans perversness breaketh not off the course of Gods goodness; Judah shall be sa∣ved by the Lord their God who is Alius from his Father, but not Al, a distinct person, not a distinct thing. This Angel of Gods presence saved them, in h love, and in his pitty he redeemed them &c. Isay. 63.9. even the Angel that had re∣deemed their father Jacoh from all evill Gen. 48.16. and that soon after this pro∣phesie, destroyed so many thousands in Senacheribs army, Not by bow ner by battle &c. but by his own bare hand immediatly and miracul usly 2. King. 19. where we may see that when Senacherib (after the example of his father Salmaneser, who had captivated the ten tribes) came up against Judah, having already devoured Je∣rusalem in his hopes, and thinking to cut them off at a blow, as if they had all had but one neck, they were saved by Jehovah their God: the Virgin daughter of Zion knew well the worth and valour of Christ her champion, and that made her so confident Esay. 37.22. She knew whom she had trusted, not with her out∣ward condition onely, but with her inward and everlasting, with her precious soul, saying with David I am thine, save me: for I haue sought thy precepts. Psal. 119.94. I will not trust in my bow, neither shall mine arme save me: but thy right hand and thine arme,Psal. 44.3.5. and the light of thy countenance: for thou hast a favour unto me. See the Note on Zach. 4.6. and on 14.3.5. That's an excellent passage Psal. 21.13. Be thou exalted O Lord in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. Vers. 9. Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah] That is, after that the patience of God had waited and long looked for their conversion; but all in vane, he resolved upon their utter rejection. And first he sent for his love tokens back againe:Esa. 66.11. he weanes them and takes them off from those breasts of consolation, the holy Ordinances, deprived them of those dugs (better then wine, Cant. 1 4.) that they had despised, carried them far away from that good land that abounded with milk and hony: the men of the East should be sent in upon them to eat their fruit and drink their milk, Ezek. 25.4. This nation (saith a Divine) is sick of a spirituall plurisie: we begin to surfet on the bread of life, the unadulterated milk of Gods word, and to spill it. Now when God seeth his mercies lying un∣der table, 'tis just with him to call to the enemy to take away. Say not here with those in the Gospell threatned with this judgment,Luk. 20.16. God forbid. Think it not a thing impossible, that England should be thus visited. The Sea is not so calme in summer, but it may be troubled with a storme: the mountain so fme, but may be moved with an earthquake. We have seen as fair Suns as ours fall from the midst of heaven, for our instance, Lege historiam, ne fias historia. Surely except we repent and reforme a little better then we have done yet; a removall of our
Candlestick, a totall eclipse of our Sun, may be as certainly foreseen and foretold, as if visions and letters were sent us from heaven, as once to the seven Churches of Asia, who sinned away their light, &c. And bare a sonne,] Not a daughter as before, but a sonne, because under Hosea, the last King of Israel, that Kingdom began a little to lift up the head, and to stand it out against the Assyrian. But this was but extremus nisus regni, the last sprunting of that dying State. For soon after, Samaria the chief City was close besiege: and although it held out three whole yeers, with a Masculine resolution, yet at length it was sacked, and all the people of the land carried captive, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, &c. as it is said of their confederates the Egyptians, Esay 20.4. and as it shall be done at length to that purple whore of Rome, who shall be stript naked, broil'd and eaten, Revel. 17.16. A cold sweat stands al∣ready upon her limbs: and, for a presage of her future ruine, it is observed, that Rome, since it became Papall, was never besieged by any, but it was taken; As for their late Masculine attempts and atchievements (if any) it is but as here in the Kingdom of Israel, a lightning before death, as the blaze of a candle a little afore it goes out, the bulging of a wall that's ready to come down, or as it was said of Carthage, a little afore it was taken, Morientium bestiarum violentiores esse morsus, dying beasts bite cruelly. Verse 9. Call his name Loammi] Nomen extremum & deploratum, saith Pare∣us, the last and most lamentable name of all, containing a most heavy, but spiri∣tual, and therefore lesse sensible punishment, viz. an utter abjection and abdicati∣on from the covenant, from grace, from God, from life eternall. For ye are not my people] But, being totally cashiered, and discovenanted; Are ye not as the children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel, saith the Lord? Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistims from Caphtor,Amos 9.7. and the Syri∣ans from Kir? q. d. True it is, I have brought you up out of Egypt (and there∣in you greatly glory) but have I not done as much as all this, for those profane Nations here mentioned? with and amongst whom, henceforward I shall reckon you, for you are no people of mine, but discarded, and dispeopled? Till the Co∣venant made with Abraham, all Nations were suffered to walk in their own wayes, as fishes passe at liberty thorow the paths of the Seas, Psal. 8.8. One person was no more respected then another. But as soon as it was said, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, the Church became as fish cast into a Pond for peculi∣ar use: and was divided from other Nations,Act. 14.16. no otherwise then light was from dark∣nesse in the first creation, or then Goshen was from Egypt, in that wonderfull sepa∣ration. But here God seems to rescind his own act, to cast off the people of his purchase, and utterly to disown them; as once before he also did, when he fathered them upon Moses, saying, Thy people, which thou hast brought out of Egypt, &c. Exod. 32.7. But this (we must know) is no other then mutatio rei non Dei, effe∣ctus non affectus, facti non consilij, not a change of Gods will, but onely of his works. For hath God indeed cast away his people? God forbid.Rom. 11.1, 2. God hath not cast away his people, whom he foreknew. Thus saith the Lord God, If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, saith the Lord.Jer. 31.37. And albeit (by an angry Aposiopesis) he say here, I will not be your God. (The word God, is not in the Original, ab irato omittitur, saith Mercer) yet to shew that he is Bagnal Chemah, One that can rule his wrath, as Neb. 1.2. he subjoyneth here, verse 10. Verse 10. Yet the number of the children of Israel]. i. e. of the Israel of God, those Jews inwardly the Circumcision indeed, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoyce in Christ Jesus, putting no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3.Bern. but saying each for himself as that good Father did, Horreo quicquid de meo est, ut sim meus; All my care is to be found in Christ (sc. when sought for by the justice of God) not ha∣ving mine own righteousnesse which is of the law,Beza. but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousnesse which is of God by faith.Phil. 3.9. Lo, to such Israelites in∣deed, and of such it is here promised (the Lord in Judgement remembring Mercy) that they shall be the sand of the sea which cannot be measured nor numbered; This was first promised to Abraham; and afterwards confirmed with an oath, Gen. 22.16. It began to be fulfilled; when, by the preaching of the Apostles, so
many of both Jews and Gentiles came in and were converted to the faith of the true Messiah, as S. Paul expoundeth this text, Rom. 9.24, 25. and he had the mind of Christ. It shall have its full accomplishment, when the fulnesse of the Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel shall be saved, Rom. 11.26. Then the Church shall be as the stone that smote the Image, it shall become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth. Though the beginning of it be small, yet the later end of it shall greatly in∣crease, Job 8.7. for all the earth shall be filled with the glory of Christ: he shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth, Psal. 72.8, 11, 17 Great is the paucity of Gods people for present: but let us, by the help of this promise, get above that stumbling block. Cosmographers tell us, that if we divide all the known world into thirty parts, the Heathens part is as nineteen of this thirty: the Mahometans as six, the Christians as five only: And of those five, more then the one half is held by idolatrous Papists. But let not this discourage us; it will be otherwise one day, for the Scripture cannot be broken. And although God may seem utterly to have abandoned his ancient people the Jews (the ten Tribes especially) yet they, as well as the rest, shall be vouchsafed this honour to be called to the participation of Christ, Ezek. 37.16, 19. Jer. 3, 12, 13, &c. Esay 11.12, 13. Obad. 20. Zach. 10.6. Rom. 11.26. If God after so dreadful a threatning come in with his non-obstante (as he doth likewise Psal. 106.8. and elsewhere) and say, yet the number of the children of Israel shall be, &c. who shall gain say him? Their interpretation is too narrow, that understand this text of the increase of this people in all their dispersions, until the time of their conversion. And that of Rabbi Ezra is pretty though not proper; that as the sand keeps the waves of the sea from breaking in and drowning the world: so doth Israel preserve man-kind from perishing by the waves of Gods wrath. It should have been consi∣dered by him and the rest of those refractary Rabbines, that at that general conver∣sion of the Jews (here plainly foretold) there shall be some stubborn spirits that will not even then stoop to Christ; but will be filled with envy, as those cankered Pharisees their fore-fathers were (Acts 13.44, 45.) to see almost the whole City come together to hear Christ; Yea, they will be ready to say, as John 12.19. perceive ye how ye prevaile nothing? behold, the whole world follows him. Now against these spiritual spirits, the wrath of God shall be revealed from heaven, Rev. 21.8. Dan. 12.2. Esay. 65.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and it shall come to passe, that in the place where it was said unto them] As if God did now even repent, and would make them a full amends: make them glad accord∣ing to the time,Psal. 90.15. and in that very place when and where they had seen evil. Jeru∣salem shall be inhabited again in Jerusalem, Zech. 12.6. The Jews (it is thought) shall dwell in their own Countrey, Jer. 3.18. & 23.8. Ezek. 37.11, 12. Amos 9.14, 15. and God have a very glorious Church in the Land of Canaan. But that's not all; The Gentiles, who shall be made a spiritual Israel, though in time past they were not a people, yet now are they the people of God; and which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2.10. yea, such a signal mercy as S. John cannot look on without an Ecce admirantis; Behold,Qualem & quantum As 2 Pet. 3.11. saith he, what manner of Love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: 1 John 3.1. Yes, the sons of the living God] who as he lives, so he gives us all things richly to enjoy; and is therefore to be trusted, 1 Tim. 6.17. And that we should not only be Gods people, but his sons (reconciled, but adopted) and not only be so, but be called so, have the name and the note, the credit and the comfort. Well might the Apostle say, that the grace of God herein had abounded, even to an overflow, 1 Tim. 1.14. Well may Oecolampadius say as he doth upon this very Text, Vide ut major gratia quam peccatum, Behold, how as sin abounded, grace superabounded.Serm. 6. de Nativit. Well might Leo say, Omnia dona excedit hoc donum, &c. This is a gift of God, that exceedeth all gifts, that man should call God Father, and God call a man his sonne; this is a greater dignity then to be called an Angel, Archangel, Cherubim, Seraphim, &c. See more of this in my Righteous mans Recom∣pense. part. 2. doct. 5. Calvin upon this verse noteth, that there is an emphasis in these words, It was said, and It shall be said, The latter sheweth, that till the Lord speak peace to his people, and say to their souls that he is their salvation, they can∣not have the comfortable assurance of their Adoption, and acceptation into his fa∣vour
Eph. 1.13. After that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation; ye believed and were sealed with that holy spirit of promise. Again, if God by his Prophets have said to any, ye are not my people, &c. he will effect it. God heweth men by his Prophets, and slayeth them by the words of his mouth, Hosea 6.5. Elisha hath his sword, as well as Jehu and Hazael, 1 Kings 19.17. Ezekiel besieg∣eth Jerusalem, and overthroweth it. Jeremy is set over nations and kingdoms to root out and pull down, &c. Chap. 1.10. S. Paul hath vengeance ready for the disobedi∣ent.2 Cor. 10.6. And what Gods Ministers do on earth, he ratifies in heaven, Mat. 16.19. and 18.18. Verse 11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be gathered together] i. e. they shall unite into one body, and one religion, and shall all make one entire Kingdome,John 12. Ezek. 37.22, 24. Christ once lifted up, shall draw all things to himself: and wherever this carcase is,Mat. 24. there will the spiritual Eagles be also. Caiaphas, like another Balaam, prophesied that Jesus should die for that Nation: And not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad.John 11.51.52 Zeph. 3.9. This is the gathering together here mentioned: Christ shall be one amongst his people, and his name one, Zeh. 14.9. (See the Note there) they shall serve the Lord with one shoulder: It seems to be a Metaphor taken from Oxen that are yoked together, and that set their shoulders joyntly to the work. Surely, the more the Gospel prevaileth, the more peace there will be. They shall be gathered together in that day: So when Christ shall be preached, and obedience yielded to his government, Esay 9.7. then shall there be a blessed har∣mony of hearts: then shall they flie in flocks to the ordinances, as the doves to their windows: then shall they come to the Lords house upon horses, and in char∣rets, and in litters, Esay 66.20. and appoint themselves one head] The Lord Christ, called David their King, chap. 3.5. A multitude gathered under this one Head, and united to him is a Church. This head is indeed appointed, and set up over the Church by God, Psal. 2.6. Eph. 1.22. But the Saints are said to appoint Christ their head, and indeed, to set the Crown upon his head, as Cant. 3.11. when they chuse him and embrace him for their Soveraign, when with highest estimations, most vigorous affections, and utmost endeavours of unfained obedience, they set him up in their hearts, and serve him in their lives; giving him the preheminence, and holding all in Capite in Christ: yea, holding of the head, as the Apostles expression is, Col. 2.19. not of Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas. That Popish Buzzard was utterly out, who said that he had found in the Dictionaries, that Cephas signifieth an Head, and that therefore Peter was head of the Church. For neither doth Cephas signifie an Head, but a Stone or Rock: nor, if it did, would that prove, what he alledgeth it for. Judah and Israel shall appoint to themselves one head, not more then one. The Church is not bellua multorum capitum: neither is there any need of a ministerial head of the Church: Indeed there is a contradiction in the very mention of it (as one well observeth) a Ministerial Head; it is absurd to speak it. and they shall come up out of the land] i. e. They shall be gathered into the hea∣venly Jerusalem, saith Occolampadius; They shall come up from their miserable life, saith Luther: from their earthly affections, saith Hierom. Rather, from Chaldea, or where ever they lie captivated and dispersed, to Jerusalem; there to joyn in the same way of worship (as once the twelve Tribes did before the schism under Jeroboam) with the Christian Church, and so go on the way to the kingdom of heaven. for great is the day of Jezreel] i. e. of Christ (saith Hierom) who is Gods seed, and shall see his seed, and so prolong his dayes by a succession of Saints, Esay 53.10. for whom God also will do great things in that day of his power, Psal. 100.3. when there shall be a marvellous increase of his Church, which he shall sow with the seed of men and of beasts,Jer. 31.37. Ezech. 36.38. revealing his arm (another etymologie of the word Jezreel) for the ingathering of his Elect. Sic, Octogesimus octavus mirabilis annus.
CHAP. II Verse 1. Say unto your brethren Ammi] Besides the publike preaching of this gra∣cious promise, chap. 1.10. There it shall be said unto them &c. charge is here given that this be the subject of their more private discourse also: and that they that fear the Lord speak often one to another, we that were not a people, are now a people: we that had not obtained mercy, have now obtained mercy. Jubet per Prophetam ne haec vox in ecclesia taceatur.Mercer. God commands by the pro∣phet that these sweet words Ammi Ruhamah, be tossed and talked of at every friendly meeting; I will not leave you fatherlesse: In me the fatherlesse findeth mercy:. Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, I will not, not, not forsake thee: so many Nots there are in the Originall for more assurance, God would have such precious passa∣ges as these, to be rehearsed (even in the places of drawing water Judg. 5.11. where the maids met to fetch water, or do other ordinary chares) for mutuall in∣couragement, and for the praise of his name. O the matchless mercy of our God! O the never-enough adored depth of his free grace! who would not fear thee o King of Nations!Psal. 92.1. who would not be telling of thy goodnesse in the morning, and of thy faithfulnesse every night? Read that triumphant Psal. 145. per totum; and be you ever chaunting out, (as they of old at their daily employments) aliquid Davidicum; so building up one another with Psalms and hymns and spirituall songs. Think but on these two words in the text, and you cannot want matter. Is it nothing to be in covenant with God, and to be under mercy? O blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God,Psal. 144.15. saith David. But I obtained mer∣cy saith Paul. 1 Tim. 1.16. and that was his  his confident boasting, where ever he came, being a constant preacher of Gods free grace: (as was likewise Austin, which makes him hardly censured by the Semipelagian pa∣pists and Arminians as an enemy to nature, because so high a friend to grace.] Neither is he forgetfull to tell his Ephesians and others to whom he writeth, that they were once dead in sins and trespasses, but now, quickened together with Christ &c. They were forreiners, but now fellow-citizens with the Saints: they were darknesse,Eph. 5.8. but now light in the Lord, and should therefore walk as children of light, and talk of his praises, who had drawn them out of dreadfull darknesse, into mar∣velous light. Come, saith David, and I will tell you what God hath done for my soul. The Lord hath done great things for us, saith the Church, whereat we are glad.Psal. 66.19. Psal. 126.3. Luke. 1.49. He which is mighty hath done to me great things: and holy is his name, saith the blessed Virgin. Say ye unto your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters Ruhamah. Say it, say it, to brethren and to sisters, upon every opportunity, and with the utmost importunity, that it may take impression upon their spirits, and not be as a scale set upon the water, nor as raine falling upon a rock that leaves no signe behind it. The Grecians being delivered out of servitude by Flaminius the Ro∣man General,Plutark. rang out Soter, Soter, that is Saviour, Saviour, with such a courage, that the very birds of the ayre, astonished thereat, fell to the earth. The people of Israel gave such a loud shout at the return of the Ark, that the earth rang againe. A drowning man being pulled out of the water by Alphonsus King of Arragon, and rescued from so great a death, cryed out (as soon as he came again to himself) by way of thankfulnesse Arragon, Arragon.Valer. Max. Christian. p. 41 1. Sam. 7.12. Psal. 116.8. let us cry as loud Ammi, Ruhamah, hi∣therto God hath helped us, who were lately (with those Israelites in the wildernesse) talking of our graves. Say therefore with the Psalmist, Because thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling, I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living &c. Verse 2. Plead with your mother, plead] Here of right begins the second chapter (the former verse being not so fitly separated from the former chapter) and it is nothing else but a commentary upon the first, as Parcus well noteth. For the Prophet here proceedeth in accusing the people of disloyality and ingratitude: whereupon he denounceth a divorce and punishment: and then foretelleth their re∣pentance and return into favour with God under the kingdom of the Messiah. Now the end wherefore both the accusation and the promise is here reiterated, is not so much to confirm what had been before affirmed as to set forth the means whereby
this off-cast people was to be at length reduced unto the Church: viz. Partly by ex∣ternall meanes (as sharp Sermons and sore afflictions) and partly by the internall grace of the Spirit of God, and good affiance of his love sealed up to them, by sundry spirituall and temporall favours conferred upon them; as so many love-tokens. Come we now to the words of this verse; where Oecolampadius begins the chap∣ter: Plead with your mother, plead] It is verbum forense, saith Mercer. An ex∣pression borrowed from pleaders at the bar. q.d. Be in good earnest with her, rebuke her roundly and openly, according to the nature of her offence: that she may be sound in the faith, and ashamed of her perfidiousness. What though she be your mother, and in that respect to be honoured by you, yet she is a perverse rebelli∣ous woman, as Saul once said of his son Jonathans mother (how truly I enquire not: malice little regards truth,1 Sam. 21.30 so it may gall or kill) and therefore to be barely and boldly told her own. Besides, we cannot better shew our respect to Parents, then by seeking their souls health: and by dealing fairly but freely with them therein. Not as Walter Mupes (sometimes Arch-deacon of Oxford) did by his mother Church of Rome: For relating the grosse simony of the Pope in confirming the election of Reginald bastard son of Jocelin Bishop of Sarum into the sea of Bath, he thus concludes his narration, Sit tamen Domina mater{que} nostra Roma baculus in aqua fractus: & absit credere quae vidimus: yet let our Lady, and mother Rome be as a stick put into the water, which seems to be broken, but is not so: and far be it from us, to beleeve our own eyes against her. Was this charity? or stupidity rather? Charity may be ingenuous, but not servile and blockish.Levit. 19.17. It is not love but hatred (if Moses may judge) to suffer sin in a dearest friend to passe uncontroulled. Good Asa deposed his own mother for her idolatry: and our Edward the sixt would not be drawn by any perswasion of friends or fear of enemies, to indulge his sister, the Lady Mary,Act. & Mon. to have Masse said in her house. The truth is, those Ammi's and Ruhamah's that have found mercy from God, they have their hearts so fired up thereby with a holy zeal for him, that they cannot endure to see him dishonoured, but must appear and plead for him against any in the world. Again, as any one is more assured of his own salvation by Christ, the more he thirsteth after the salvation of others; as we see evidently in Saint Paul that vessell of mercy. I am perswaded, saith He, or I am sure, that neither life nor death, &c. shall ever separate me from Gods love in Christ. And what followes in the very next words, but this, I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bear∣ing me witness in the holy Ghost;Rom. 8.38, 39. Rom. 9.1, 2, 3, 4. That I have great heaviness and continuall sorrow in my heart. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites, &c. And how effectually and con∣vincingly he pleadeth with them to draw them to Christ and hold them close to him, that golden Epistle to the Hebrewes will well witness to the worlds end. For she is not my wife] For I have put her away by a bill of divorcement, Isai. 50.1. with a Habe tibi quae tua sunt (which was the form of divorce among the Romanes) Take thine own things and be gone. Now the Jewish Synagogue had nothing she could properly call her own, but sin and misery: when God first took her, she had not a rag to her back, Ezek. 16.10. nor any kind of comeliness. But what he was pleased to put upon her, verse 14. But she (foolish woman and unwise, Deut. 32.5.) trusting in her borrowed beauty plaid the harlot, & poured out her fornication on eve∣ry one that passed by: his it was verse 15. The Synagogue of Rome is such another meretrix meretricissima quae gremium claudit nemini, as her own sons say of her, by way of commendation. Saint John calleth her the whore, the great whore, Rev. 17.1.15. and further telleth us, that she sitteth upon her paramours in a base manner, in an unseemly sort, she sitteth upon their very consciences, and keepes them under by force: whereas Stephen King of Polony (one of her sons but not altogether so obse∣quious) was wont to say, that God had required three things to himself, sc: ex ni∣hilo aliquid facere, scire futura, & dominari velle conscientijs, that is, to make some∣thing of nothing, to know things to come, and to bear rule over mens consciences. How she forceth men to commit folly with her by the cruell Inquisition; and how she hireth others for preferments (Luther was offered a Cardinalship: Bessarion of Nice was won over to her by such an offer;Val. Max. Christian. pag. 289. Thomas Saranzius was of a poor Shoo∣makers son made Bishop, Cardinall and Pope; all in one year, and called Nicolas the
fifth,Alsted. Chr. Pag. 378. the like might be said of Aeneas Sylvins Canon of Trent; afterwards Pope Pius the second) and for a price too, is notoriously known to the Christian world. Stratagem nunc est Pontificium ditare multos ut pijesse desinant,John Baptist. Gelli. Dialog. 5. saith a good Author. It is one of the Popes Stratagems to enrich men that he may oblige them to himself: and bring them into his own vassallage. In divers towns of Germany (as at Aus∣burgh, &c.) there was a known allowance by the year for such Lutherans as would become Papists. Thus this whore of Rome imitateth Her in the text: of whom it is elsewhere complained, Ezek. 16.33. They give gifts to all whores (and so buy re∣pentance at too dear a rate) but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom: Yea thou hast plaid the harlot with them,Nolo tanti poenitentiam emere. Dem. and yet couldst not be satisfied, vers. 28. It was but time therefore that God should cast her off, as now no wife of his but an adulteresse of the Devil, as she shewed her self notably in the Trent-Conventicle:Jer. 3.3. where with a whores fore∣head that refused to be ashamed she not onely established by a Law their abominable Idolatry, but also set forth that Heathenish decree, whereby she equalleth (at least) the Apocrypha to the holy Canon, the Vulgar puddle to the Hebrew and Greek fountains, unwritten verities and traditions to the sacred Scriptures: and further addeth, that the holy Ghost himself is not to be hearkened unto, speak he never so plainly and expressely,D. Prid. Lect. nisi accedat meretricis purpuratae effons interpretatio, unlesse she may have the interpreting of his meaning, according to her way. O monstruous impudency, deserving a divorce! True it is that God hateth putting away, Mal. 2.16. and Isa. 50.1. he tells these Jewes, that he had not given their mother a bill of di∣vorcement, ut solent morosi et crudeles mariti as cruell and fo and husbands use to do, for every light offence. But what he had done this way, he was meerely com∣pell'd to it; as not able to wink any longer at thei flagiious practises: Hear his own words. Thus saith the Lord, where is the bill of your mothers divorcement whom I have put away? or which of my creditours is to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities you sold your selves; and for your transgressions is your mother put away. And yet not so far put away neither, but that if she repent, she may be received again: and that's no small mercy. See Jer. 3.1. They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him and become another mans, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast plaid the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord. Lo, God is above Law; and his mercy is matchless: he will do that for his people that none else in like case would ever be drawn to do, Mic. 7.10. Who is a God like unto thee? saith the Prophet, by way of admiration. David never came near his concubines more after that Absalom had gone in to them, and Achitophel judged that act would be such an injury, as David would never put up and therefore gave that pernicious counsell. But Gods thoughts are not as mans thoughts, neither are our wayes his wayes, &c. Of mercy, and multiplied-pardons.Isai. 55.8.9. But as the heavens are higher then the earth so are his wayes higher then our ways, and his thoughts then our thoughts. We are not to mature things according to our own modell; and to have as low thoughts of God and his good∣ness as those Miscreants once had of his power, when they demanded, Can God prepare a table for us in the wildernesse? Can he give us water out of the Rock? Sure∣ly a Finite creature cannot beleeve the infinite attributes of God throughly, without supernaturall grace: which therefore must be implored, and every of us excited not to cast away our confidence which hath so great recompense, so great encourage∣ment:Ezek. 18. but to say to our mother, and each to other, put away your whoredoms. &c. Cast away all your transgressions, &c. Ye have done all this wickednesse (saith Samuel to the revolted People of his time) but what of that? yet turn not aside from fol∣lowing the Lord: for that were to adde rebellion to sin, as Herod to all his other hateful practices added that of beheading the Baptist. Do not therefore turn aside from following the Lord,1 Sam. 12.20, 21, 22. but go home again to him, and he will speak peace. For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great Names sake: sith it hath pleased the Lord once to make you his people. He chose you for his love: and now loves you for his choice; yea he cryes after you, as once, Return you backsliding children, and I will heal your backsliding. O that you would reciprocate and say, Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God. Jer. 3.22. Let her therefore put away her wheredoms out of her sight] Not out of my sight,
(as a Lapide readeth it, neither according to the Original, nor yet his own vulgar Translation) but out of her sight, or from her face,So the Sepiua. . and her adulteries from be∣tween her breasts. Sed quid hoc sibi vult? saith Calvin here. But what may be the meaning of this. It surely seemeth harsh to say, that women play the whores; either with their faces, or with their breasts: And yet it is not unknown to the Learned what Archsilans the Philosopher said to a young wanton, that cast lust∣full looks, and laseivious glances upon others; Nihil interest quibus membris cinaedi sitas, posterioribus an prioribus: You may be naughty-packs more wayes then one And Plutarch tells of a certain Oratour,Li.  am & pu∣pillam oculi significat. that said of an impudent fellow; Quod in oculis haberet non  sed , that he had in his eyes not Pupils, but Punks. And S. Peter saith of the Sectaries of his time, that they had eyes full of the adul∣teresse, (so runs the Originall) and that could not cease to sinne, 2 Pet. 2.14. It is evident enough (saith Calvin) that the Prophet in this Text alludeth to the man∣ner of harlots, painting their faces, decking,. or laying out their breasts to allure lovers. Filthy dressing and naked breasts, (saith another Divine) this is whoredom between the breasts. A third calleth naked breasts and wrists,Bifield on 1 Pet 2. Mr. Bolion. abhorred filth. Hierom saith, if a man or woman adorn, or carry themselves so, as to provoke others to lust af∣ter them, though no evil follow upon it, yet the parties shall suffer eternal damnation; because they offered poyson to others, though none would drink it. In Scripture, women taxed for this, were notorious wicked persons, and usually whores: as Ta∣mar, Jezabel, those Damosels, Esay 3. Dives, Luke 16. Lupa Romana, Rev. 1.73. Our Henry the sixth, when a Mask of women were presented unto him, whereof some of them shewed their naked breasts, he left the presence, crying,Daniels hist 18. Fie, fie La∣dies, in sooth ye are to blame, to bare those parts to the eyes of man, that nature ap∣pointed modesty to conceal. Frederick the Emperour, seeing some countrey wenches, neer Florence, in dancing to shew their naked legs, Eamus, said he, meretricum hic ludus est non virginum, Let us go hence, for this is not maids play,Vol Moz. Cst. 377. but whores ra∣ther. That Yonker in the Proverbs, was met by a woman with the attire of an harlot, and subtill of heart, or trussed up about the breasts, pro  quasi nudato pude d. And vese 18. Nevh dod  uberibas. with her upper parts na∣ked, like a bedlam. So Levi Ben Gersom, she met him with her naked breasts, yea with something else naked, which modesty forbids to name, as some construe that Text, Prov. 7.10. So she caught him and kissed him, verse. 13, with strange im∣pudency: and no question but having caught him, her lust grew more flagrant: as by unclean touches of the face and breasts, men are more enkindled. Hence that of our Saviour in expounding the seventh Commandement, Matth. 5.30. If thy right hand offend thee, sc. by dalliance, and wanton touches, cut it off, &c. Hippocrats observeth, that there are venae & viae ab utero ad mamillas, veins and passages that go from the beily to the breasts; and that's the reason that he gives of the temptation to lust, that is in the breasts. Keep thy self pure, saith Saint Paul to his sonne Timothy. And again, The younger women exhort with purity, or chastity. It is not safe to pry into the beauty of young women. Ʋt vidi ut perij, &c. The eyes are those windows of wickednesse, and loop-holes of lust. Let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight.Prov. 6.25. And let not the strange woman take thee with her eye-lids, saith Solomon. For prevention hereof, in Chrysostoms time, the women were disjoyned from the men in the Church, by a woodden wall. And Tertullian saith to the Christian women, Judicabunt vos Arabiae foeminae Ethnicae, &c. The Heathen women of Arabia shall judge you:De veland. virg. c. 17. for they do not onely cover their faces but their heads too; and rather then they will have any part appear naked, they will let the light but into one eye. In Barbary, they say, it is death for any man to see one of the Xeriffes concubines;Heyl. Geog. pag. 156. and for them too, if when they see a man (though but thorow a casement) that do not suddenly screek out. Millions of people have died of the wound in the eye. Aholah and Aholibah, that is, Israel and Judah, no sooner saw the Assyrians, (those desirable young men) though but pourtyed upon the wall, but they doted upon those Paramours, and received them into the bed of love, Ezek. 23.16, 17. Et divarica it tibias suas, Ezek. 16.25. and multiplied their whoredoms. The very sight of the Altar at Da∣masus, set Abaz agog to have one of the same fashion, 2 King. 16. And Jeroboam coming out of Egypt, where the Ox was worshipped, brought home two Calves with him; and set them up at Dan and Bethl. The Nicodemites and Familists hold
it no sin, to be present at Idoll-service, and alledge a Text for it out of Apocryphall Baruc.Mr. Borroughs. But a good Interpreter well observeth, that, that which is intended specially here, in these words, Let her put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries, &c. is, that they should not be content meerly with change of their hearts, to say, Well, we will acknowledge the Lord to be the true God, and our hearts shall wholly trust in him; but for these externall things, what great matter is in them? Oh no, they must abstain from all appearance of evil, from the badges of Idolatry, &c. Thus he. Those badges, or ensignes of Idolatry they usually carried between their breasts, (saith another Authour) to testifie that the Idoll had their hearts; whereas Christ should have been there, Cant. 1.13. Who to shew his dear love to his Church, appeared to John girt about the paps with a golden girdle, Rev. 1.13. See the Note there, Cor sedes amoris. The heart is the seat of the affections. Hence God calleth for it; My sonne give me thine heart: and the devil strives for it, Luk. 22.3. Act. 5.3. Once he strove about a dead mans body, Jude ver. 9. but his designe therein, was to have set up an idoll for himself in the hearts of the living. His eldest son and successour the Pope, useth the same policie. It was a watch∣word in Gregory the thirteenths time, in Queen Elizabeths dayes, My son, give me thy heart: Dissemble, go to Church, be a Papist in heart, and then do what ye will: Take the Oath of Allegiance, Supremacy, any thing that shall be put to you, I will absolve you. Do but carry a Crucifix between your breasts (that's the place where they wear such mawmets) and kisse it when you have sworn (as Lewes the eleventh of France used to do) and it shall suffice.Cominaeus. An oath upon the conscience of a Popish Idolater is like a colier upon a Monkeys neck; that he will slip on for his Masters pleasure, and slip off again for his own. Pascenius scoffes King James for the invention of the Oath of Allegiance. Equivocation the Jesuites have invented, or revived rather, ad consolationem afflictorum Catholicorum, for the comfort of afflicted Catholikes, as Garnet and Blackwell professe. So impudent is Idolatry, such frontlesse whoredoms appear in their very faces, they openly prostitute themselves; Imo volunt extare signa foeditatis suae, saith Calvin, here they hang out their filthy superstitions in the sight of the Sun, as Sodom: they set them upon the cliffe of the rock, as Jerusalem, Ezek. 24.7, 8. ut similes sint publicis scortis, like common whores that solicite lovers, and send to them, as she, Ezek. 22. It was a sad complaint God made Chap. 7.1. of this Prophecie. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, then it broke forth as the leprosie in their foreheads: Their fornications were not onely covert, but overt. Their whoredomes in the face, were their worshipping the two golden Calves and Baalim (saith Parcus) their adulteries between their breasts, were their trust in Idols, in the arm of flesh, in confederacies, &c. when they would seem ne∣verthelesse to trust in God alone: As now the Papists professe to do, and have there∣to coyned diverse nice distinctions of worship, per se, & per accidens, proprie, & improprie, and a hundred the like evasions. But there is no hiding of their Asses cars by these subtilties. Doctor Reynolds in his Books de Idolatria Romana hath (among others) proved them rank Idolaters. Weston writes, that his head aked in reading that Book; but they all yeeld it unanswerable: and yet they repent not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brasse, and stones, and of wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk, Revel. 9.20. But, as those that make them, are like unto them, so are all those that trust in them, stockish, and supid; given up to the efficacy of errour, to beleeve a lie, yea and that against common sence, Isaiah 44.17. which is no small stumbling-block, to both Jews and Mahometans. Verse 3. Lest I strip her naked] Deus ideo minatur ut non puniat. God there∣fore threatneth, that he may not proceed to punish. Here he doth not so much di∣rect as threaten, as conditionally terrifie, from the pernitious effect, or sad issue of their adulteries, a full and finall desolation, after an utter deprivation of Gods gifts and graces, shadowed under a fourfold Metaphor. 1. Of stripping her of all her borrowed beauty, those jewels, and that comelinesse that he had put upon her. 2.Ezek. 16.6. Of reducing her to her first forlorn condition wherein he found her, Ezek. 16. viz. in her blood, in her blood, in her blood, as it is there said and set out for greater emphasis. 3. Of laying her wast as a wildernesse, (by the incursions and hostilities
of cruel enemies) or, as in the wildernesse (so some read it, by understanding the particle In) that is, as in the wildernesse of Arabia, where they were put to great straits when they came out of Egypt. The very first handsel God gave them there, was bitternesse and thirst. It was by Marah that they came to Elim, &c. 4. Of af∣flicting and punishing her with the most miserable and unsufferable kinde of death; I will slay her with thirst, which is worse then to be slain with hunger. All which is soretold, with some hope neverthelesse of grace and forgivenesse, if she return and seek the Lord; as by the word lest is secretly given to understand: Lest I strip her naked,] As a jealous husband snatcheth away with indignation the clothes and ornaments that he had bestowed upon his adulterous wife. The Lord threat∣neth the wanton women of Zion, to make naked their secret parts, Esay 3.17. so that their shame should be seen, Esay 47.3. even all their nakednesse, Ezek. 16.37. to discover their skirts upon their face, as Nahum. 3.5. Thus the great whore of Babylon is threatned with nakednesse, Revel. 17.16. And this we see already per∣formed upon her in part, as Mr. Philpot barely told Chadsey in that vehement ex∣pression of his, Afore God, you are bare-breecht in all your religion:Act. & Mon. 1657. he uttereth it somewhat more grossely. There was a base custome in Rome, that when any woman was taken in adultery, they compelled her (for a punishment) openly and beastly to play the harlot: ringing a bell whiles the deed was doing, that all the neighbours might be made aware. This the good Emperour Theodosius took away,M. Clark in the life of Theod. senior. 47. and made better Lawes for the punishment of adultery. God, when he threatneth to strip the Jewish Synagogue naked, meaneth (saith Mercer) that he will take away ornamenta regni & sacerdotit those ornaments of the Kingdome, and of the Priesthood, leave them as, 2 Chron. 15.3. without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law, sine lege, sine rege, sine fide, as the Brasilians are said to be. The children of Israel (saith our Prophet, Chap. 3.4. where he in∣terprets this Text) shall abide many dayes without a King, and without Prin∣ces, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim: that is, without any forme of civil Government, and without any exercise of true (yea or of false) religion. What a comfort was it to good David, in his banishment, and after the slaughter of the Priests by Saul (even fourscore and five persons, that did wear a linnen Ephod, 1 Sam. 22.18.) that Abiathar the son of Abimelech, came down to him to Keilah, with an Ephod in his hand, and that thereby he could enquire of God what to do, as he did,1 Sam. 23.6. 1 Sam. 30.7? And what a grief and misery to Saul, that God had forsaken him in those visible pledges of his favour, and would not be found of him? Hence he lay all open and naked to his enemies; who now might do what they would to him, and none to hinder them. This also was the case and condition of the people, when Aaron (by making the golden Calf at their command) had made the people na∣ked unto their shame amongst their enemies, Exod. 32.25. that is, destitute of Gods powerfull protection, and deprived of their former priviledges. A people, or a person may sin away their happinesse; and forfeit the favours they formerly enjoyed. An hypocrite may lose his gifts, and common graces; as that idle and evil servant did his talent; his light may be put out in obscure darknesse. See Ezech. 43.11, 17. with the Note. and set her as in the day that she was born,] Not onely nudam tanquam ex ma∣tre, Naked as ever she was born, (The Albigenses in France, those old Protestants, were turned out stark-naked, both men and women, at the taking of Carcasson, by the command of the Popish Bishop: and so were thousands of good Christians by the bloody Rebels in Ireland now alate) but as she was born of the Amorite, and Hittite; her navel was not cut, her birth-blot was not washed in water, nay shee was cast out into the open field, and no eye pitied her. (as the Princesse did Moses, and as the shepherdesse did Romulus and Remus) See all this and more, most ele∣gantly set out, Ezek. 16. together with what high honour, and sumptuous ornaments God did put upon her, verse 11, 12. What this people were in the day of their na∣tivity, Ioshuah telleth them in part, Chap. 24.2. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor, and served other gods: And I took your father Abraham out of Ʋr of the Chaldees, as a brand out of that fire, &c. and gave him Isaac And I gave unto
Isaac Iacob, who, together with his children, went down into Egypt, where they fell to the worshipping of Idols, Ezek. 16.26. And although they were there, held under miserable servitude, yet they continued exceeding wicked and abominable. The fire of their afflictions seemed to harden their hearts, as much as the fire of the furnace did the bricks they made. Hence, as they hardened their hearts. God hardened his hand, and had hastened their destruction, had it not been that he had seared the wrath of the enemy: lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely,Deut. 32 27. and lest they should say, our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done all this.Psal. 107.8. The Psalmist was sensible of all this & therefore saith, Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembred not the multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red sea. Neverthelesse he saved them for his Names sake &c. And what was it else, but the respect to his own great Name, and the remembrance of his holy covenant that moved the Lord to premonish this perverse people of their present danger: and not to suffer his whole wrath to arise against them, and to rush in upon them without a Ne forte,Am. 4.12. lest I set her as in the day &c. The esoe thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God with intreaties of peace. lest your house be left unto you desolate. Luc. 21. least wrah seise upon you, and that without remedy. And make her as a wil∣derness] after that  have brought her out of a wildernesse, and set her in a land that floweth with milk and hony. God can quickly curse our blessings, and destroy us after that he hath done us good. See this excellency set forth Isay 5.5. and Jer. 17.5.6. Psal. 107.34. Zech. 7.14. with the Note there and take heed lest living in gods good land, but not by Gods good lawes, we forfeit all into his hand, and he take the forfeiture. For he had rather that wild beasts should devour the good of a land, yea, that Satyres and devils should dance there: then that wicked and stubborn sinners should enjoy it. If Philip of Spain could say he had rather have no subjects, then Lutheran subjects: And if the Councell of Tholouse (out of a like blind zeale for propagating Popery) did decree that the very house should be pll∣ed down in qua fuerit inventus baereticus wherein an heretick (as they then called Gods true servants) wa found: How much more shall the King of heaven, the righte∣ous judg, root out and pluck up a rabble of rebels that refuse to be ruled by him. Idolatry is a Land-desolating sin, and brings in the devouring sword Judg 5.8.1. Joh. 5.21. Psal. 78.58.59.62. Jer. 22.7.8.9. Cavete ab Idolis. And slay them with thirst] Surgit hic oratio, surgit afflictio; To be slame with thirst is a grievous judg∣ment. Lysimachus parted with his kingdome, for a draught of water in a dry land: and made himself of a great King a miserable Captive to the King of Getes; Darius slying from his enemies,Plut. was glad to drink of a dirty puddle, that had car∣rion lying in it: professing that it was the sweetest draught that ever he drank in his life. Dives would have given all that ever he was worth for a drop of cold water. The members, infeebled for want of due moisture, seek to the veynes for relief, the veines to the liver, the Liver to the Entrals, the Entials to the ventri∣cle, he ventricle to the orifice. But these being not abe to impart what they can∣not receive, One he cryes, Father Abraham. But hospitable Abraham hath it not to him:Rab. Samuel. fire and brimstone, storme and tempest, is now the portion of his cup, extream thirst is a piece of Hels pains,Act. & Mon. fol. 1547. and one of the greatest of earths miseries. A dear servant of God in Queen Maries dayes, (kept and pined in prison) would faine have drunk his own water: but for want of nour shmnt could make none. Inward refreshings he had, even those divine consolations of the matys: he drank of the river of Gods pleasures, Psal. 26.8. which cast him into a sweet sl: at which time one clad all in white seemed to stand before hm and to say, Samuel, Samuel, be of good cheer, for after this day tho sht never be hungry or thirsty more: for soon after this he was buried: and from that time till he should suffer, he felt neither hunger nor thirst (as himself declared) though he were kept by the cruel B of Norwich with 2. or 3. morsels of bread every da, and thee spoonfuls onely of water. Mercer expounds this text of spirituall thist, the same that was foretold by Amos.Am. 8 Ideo{que} subdit vers. 4. saith Oecolampadius, and therefore God addeth in the next verse, that he will not have mercy upon her childrer, but will kill them with death; hu them to hell as he threateneth to do Jesbel's children, Ren. 2.23. Oh when the poor soul shall be in a wildernesse in a dry and thirsty land, scorch∣ed
and parched with the sense of sin and feare of wrath; when the terrours of God fall thick upon it, even the invenomed arrowes of the Almighty: Besides the bufferings of Satan, that haile shot, hell-shot of fiery darts, Eph. 6. so called for the dolour and distemper they work, (in allusion to the poisoned darts used in war by the Scythyans and other nations, the venemous heat whereof is like a fire in the flesh) when conscience I say shall by this means lie burning and boyling, what would it not gieve for a cup of consolation,Phil. 2.1. Gen. 16.14. Judg. 15.19 yea for any consolation in Christ as the Apostle hath it, for any Beer-lahai-roi, to fill the bottle at, yea for any En-haccore, any cleft in a jaw-bone to revive a thirsty Sampson, that must else be slaine with thirst. David never so desired after the water of the well of Bethlehem, as he did after God in a dry and thirsty land, where no water was, Psal. 63.1. As the hun∣ted Hart (the Hind saith the Septuagint) panteth after the water-brookes, so pan∣teth or brayeth my soul after thee. My soul thirsteth for God &c. Oh, Psal. 42, 1.2.3 when shall I come and appear before God. The tears have been my meat &c. Hunters say the Hart sheds tears (or somthing like) when hotly pursued, and cannot escape. He is a beast thirsty by nature, and whose thirst is much increased when he is hunted, The female especially, in whom the passions are stronger then in males. Christ (that Aicleth Shachar, that is, the morning-Hart or stagg, as he seemeth to be stiled Psal. 22.1. in the title, felt his soul heavie to the death in his bitter agony; and tasted so deep of that dreadfull cup, that in a cold winter night he swat great clods of blood, which, through cloths and all, fell down to the ground. And when this lamb of God was even a roasting in the fire of his fathers wrath, he cryed out, I thirst. At which time men gave him cold comfort, even vineger to drink: but God his Father most sweetly supported him: so that he might better say then Da∣vid, In the multitude of my perplexed thoughts within me, thy comforts have refreshed my soul. But what shall those poore creatures do that are strangers to the promises, and have no water of the well of life to relieve them, when Gods wrath is as a fire in their bones, and falleth upon their flesh like molten-lead or running-bell-mettle. Then they that have suckt in sin as an Ox sucks in water, shall suck the gall of asp and venom of vipers, and have none to pitty them. Francis Spira fele this spirituall thirst &c. Verse 4. And I will not have mercy upon her children] Lo here another, And to those foure afore; and more dreadfull then the rest: Like as that in the 16. of Jeremy vers. 13. where I will not shew you favour, was worse to them then their captivity in a strange countrey. Say that God do cast off his people, yet if he say,Ezek. 7.5. they shall be as if I had not cast them off, and will hear them Zech. 10.6. the afflicti∣on is nothing so great, as when he sends an evill, an onely evill without mixture of mercy, as here. Oh, this pure wrath, this judgment without mercy must needs be very heavy: when it is once grown to hatred, there is little hope. Hos. 9.15. All their wickednesse is in Gilgal, for there I hated them. God is not of himself  a hater of mankind, but the contrary, Titus 3.4. But such is the ve∣nemous nature of sin, and so contrary it is to Gods both holy nature and just law,. that he cannot but hate it in whomsoever he finds it: yet with this difference, that he pitties it rather in his Saints, & hates it in his enemies: as we hate poyson in a toad, but we pitty it in a man: because in the one it is their nature, in the other, their disease. And as revenge is the next effect of hatred, wicked men may expect no better dealing from God, then a man would afford to his stubborn enemy. Pharoah had plague upon plague: neither did the Lord leave him, till he had dasht the breath out of his body: so true is that of the Psalmist,Psal. 18. With the froward thou wilt wrestle, and that of Solomon, The back slider in heart shall be filled with his own wayes. He hath made a match with mischief, he shall have his belly-full of it.Prov. 14, He would needs have his own way, and had it, (for I would have purged him, but he would not be purged) Now I will have my way another while: for thou shalt not be purged from thy filthinesse any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee, Ezek. 24.13. So our Saviour to those refractory Jewes in the Gospell. I would have gathered thee as the hen gathereth her chickens, I would but thou wouldst not: therefore they shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee. And I will not have mercy upon her children] Lo, God is so incensed by a generall de∣fection, that he will make havock and destroy even the mother with the children,
(which was Jacobs great fear, Gen. 32.11.) yea he will dash the mother in pieces upon the children as Shalman did at Betharbel Hos. 10.14 he will put young and old into the same bag together, as fowlers deal by birds, which yet was forbidden by a law,. Qualis mater talis filia. Partus sequi∣tur ventrem. Deut. 22.6. his eyes shall not spare children, as Isai. 13.19. And why? For they are the children of whoredoms] They are maliex malis, as Hierom interprets it: they love and live in the adulteries of their mother: they take after her, as the birth usually followeth the belly, and as in a Syllogisme, the conclusion followes the weaker proposition. Those Jewes in the Gospel boldly boasted to our Saviour that they were not the children of fornication, for they had Abraham to their father Joh. 6.33. nay, God to their father vers. 41, But he as boldly telleth them, that they a ea bastardly brood, yea a serpentine seed; and that they were of their father the devil, vers. 44. And in another place, as Serpents, saith He, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell. If mercy interpose not, as the cold grave must one day hold your bodies, so hot hell your souls. But I will have no mercy upon her children: for they are the children of fornications] i.e. they are not onely mis∣begotten and illegitimate, (which though no fault of theirs, yet is their reproach, as hath been said in the Notes on the former chapter) but they are children of for∣nications in an active sense too; they have learned of their mother to fornicate: they are as good at resisting the holy Ghost, as ever their Fathers were, Acts 7.51. they fill up the measure of their fathers fias, that wrath may come upon them to the ut∣most. Children as they derive from their parents a cursed birth blot which comes by propagation; so they are very apt to fall into their vices by imitation: and then they ue both their own and their parents iniquities. Verse 5. For their mother hath plaid the harlot] Being a wife of whoredoms chap. 1.2. (see the Note there,) therefore I will not have mercy upon her children, but will root out all her increase, job. 31.12. Either she shall commit whoredom, and not increase, Hos. 4.10. Or if she do, it is for mischief: she shall bring forth children to the murtherer: or at least, she shall bequeath them a fearfull legacy of sin and punish∣ment, worse then that leprosie that Gehezi left to his posterity, or that Joab lest to his, 2 Sam. 3.29. lameness and gonorrhaea, &c. It is a dangerous thing to keep up the succession of a sin in the world, and to propagate guilt from one generation to another: it is a great provocation. When the wickednesse of such is ripe in the field (and they have filled up the measure of their fathers sins) God will not let it shed to grow again: but cuts it up by a just and seasonable vengeance. Let parents therefore break off their sins and get into Gods favour: if for nothing else, yet for their poor childrens sake: labouring to mend that by Education which they have marred by propagation and evil example. And let children of wicked parents (as they tender their own eternall good) take Gods counsell, Ezek 20. vers. 18.30. Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after their abominations? Oh, walk ye not after the statutes of your fathers: neither observe their judgements, nor defile your selves with their idols. True it is, men are won∣derous apt to dote upon their fathers doings, and are hardly drawn off from their vain conversation by received tradition from their ancestors 1 Pet. 1.18. A boe majori discit arare minor.Ovid. Prescription is held Authoritie sufficient. Me ex ea opinione quam à majoribus accepi de cultu deorum nullius unquam movebit oratio,ic. saith Tully, No man shall ever disswade me from that way of divine worship that my forefathers lived and died in. It is reported of a certain Monarch of Morocco, that having read Saint Pauls Epistles he liked them so well, that he professed that were he then to chuse his Religion, he would, before any other, embrace Christianity. But every one ought,Heyl. Geog. pag. 714. said he, to die in his own Religion: and the leaving of the faith wherein he was born was the onely thing that he disliked in that Apostle. Thus He. Sed teto erravit caelo, Antiquity must have no more Authority then what it can maintain, , Mine Antiquity (said Ignatius) is Christ Jesus, who said not to the young man, Do as thy forefathers, but Follow thou me. She that con∣ceived them hath done shamefully] She hath utterly shamed her self and all her friends; husband, children, all. The woman is or should be the glory of the man. Solomons good huswife was she, Prov. 31.28, 29. Her children rise up and call her blessed: her husband also, and he praiseth her, saying, Many daughters have done vertuously: but thou excellest them all. Alphonsus King of Arragon was once re∣solved
never to commend his wife, lest he should be accounted immodest, or uxo∣rious: but afterwards he changed his mind,Val: Max. Chri. 73. and was so taken with his wives ver∣tues and constancy, that he resolved to praise her quocunq in trivio, cui{que} obvio, sine modo, et modestia in all places and companies, &c. So did Budaeus, Pareus, and others.Plin. Tacit. utinam aut coe∣lebs vixissem, aut orbusperirs∣sem. Prov. 14.34. Deut. 28. Jer. 25.9. Ezek. 5.15. but a wicked wife, (an harlot especially) puts her husband to the blush and is a great heart-break, as Livia was to Augustus (Eudemus was both her Physician and her stal∣lion) his children also proved start naught: which made him wish that either he had lived a Batchelour, or died childlesse. Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a shame to any people. It is the snuff that dimmeth their candlestick, the leaven that sowreth their Passeover, the reproach that rendreth them a proverb, and a by-word, an astonishment and an hissing, a taunt and a talk to other countries. Such was Israels Apostasie & Idolatry, their subjecting Religion to carnal policy in setting up the two calves, and Baalim: when Ephraim spake there was trembling, and then he exalted him∣self in Israel: but when he offended in Baal, he died Hos. 13.1. Whilst he kept close to God, who but Ephraim. None durst quack, but all quaked at the name of Ephra∣im: he was on high, and much honoured. But when he declined to Idolatry, he became contemptible: and every paltry adversary cast dirt in his face, and crowed over him. So true is that of Solomon, The wise shall inherit glory:Prov. 3.35. but shame shall be the promotion of fools: What a victorious Prince was Henry the fourth of France, till he (for politike respects) turned Papist? Till then he was Bonus Orbi: but after that, Orbus Boni, as the wits of the time played upon his name Borbonius,Life of Phil. de Mornay. by way of Anagram. Once he was (before his revolt) perswaded by Du-Plessy to do publike pennance for having abused the daughter of a certain Gentleman in Rochel, by whom he had a son. Hereunto he was drawn with some difficulty, being read, to fight a battle: and this was no disgrace to him: But when, by compliance at least, he became an Idolater for lucre of a crown, and love of life, he became a vile person, as Antiochus is called, Dan. 11.21. and was worthily lashed with rods by the Pope, in the person of his Embassadours; and butchered by the instigation of those Jesuites whom he basely recalled into France, whence they had been banished, and admitted them into his bosom; making Father Cotton his Confessour et sic pro∣brose se gessit, et rem confusione dignam admisit, as here. He both shamed and undid himself. For she hath said, I will go after my lovers] Amasios meos, My sweet-hearts,Marbeck. Act. & Mon. those that have drawn away my heart from my husband. But if that persecutour could say to the Martyr. What (a devil) made thee to meddle with the Scriptures? how much better might it be said to the Synagogue, (and so to all Apostates) What (a devill) meant you to go a whoring from such an husband (who is totus,Cant. 5.16. totus desiderabilis, altogether lovely, even the chief of ten thousand,) after dumb idols and false Prophets who are their brokers (proxenetae et proci) and spokesmen? Athenaeus brings in Plato bewailing himself and his own condition, that he was taken so much with a filthy whore. Adultery is filthinesse in the abstract:Gelulim. Ezek. 22.3. 1 Pet. 4.3. so is also idola∣try: and therefore idols are called by a word that signifieth the very excrements that come out of a man; a tearm too good for those dunghill-deities, those abomi∣nable idolatries, as Saint Peter expresseth it. Mention is made in histories of a cer∣tain heathen people that punish adultery with death: and with such a death as is suitable to the sin. For they thrust the adulterers or adulteresses head into the paunch of a beast, where lieth all the filth and garbage of it, there to be stifled to death. Jude 7. Sodom and Gomorrha had fire from heaven for their burning lust: and stinking brim∣stone for their stinking brutishnesse. They are also thrown out (as St. Jude phraseth it) for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternall fire. And in the like pickle are the Beast, and the false Prophet (those Arch-idolaters) for these both are cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone Rev. 19.20. And worthily,Esay 3.9. sith they de∣clared their sins as Sodom, they hid it not: And as this huswife in the text: who said I will go after my lovers] she did, of wickedness forethought, upon deliberation, de industria, ex consilio, wilfully and of purpose, impudently and without all shame of sin, say, I will go after. This was shameles indeed: They should rather have gone after her,Deut. 23.18. then she after them. Moses fitly compareth a whore to a salt-bitch that is followed af∣ter by all the dogs in a town. And am I dogs-head, said Abner to Ishbosheth, 2 Sam. 3.8. that is. Am I so given to lust & lasciviousnes as dogs are that run after every salt-bitch? But this harlot verified that saying in Ezekiel. The contrary is in thee from other wo∣men
in thy whoredoms: whereas none followed thee to commit whoredoms, thou followest them; and gloriest in thy so doing, as Lots daughters did in their detestable incest, naming their children Moab, that is, a birth by my father; and Benammi, that is, begotten by one of my near kindred. These all might have held their tongues with shame enough. But such kinde of sinners are singularly impudent, Jer. 3.3. infatu∣ated, Hos. 4.11. and past feeling, Ephes. 4.19. And so are Idolaters wickedly wilfull, and irreclaimable for most part. See Jer. 44.16, 17. & 2.10. Esay 44.19, 20. A seduced heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul; nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? How stiffe are Papists to this day in de∣fence of their Image-worship? how severe against such as deface, or but disgrace them? Murther is not so hainous a sin, &c. That give me my bread and my water, &c.] What can be more like to the do∣ings of the Papists then this? saith Danaeus. Who knows not what suit they make, and what thanks they return to their He-Saints, and She-Saints, and how they sa∣crilegiously transfer the glory due to God alone, to the creature. The Lord right∣ly resolveth the genealogy of corn, wine, and oil into himself, verse 22. of this chapter. And the Aposte tells us, that it is He that filleth mens hearts with food and gladnesse, Act. 14.17. — Et cum charissima semper, Munera sint Author quae preciosa facit. This should make us lift up many an humble, joyfull, and thankfull heart to God: well content if we may have offam et aquam, bread and water, and the gospel: and vowing with Jacob,Gen. 28.20. that if God will give us bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then shall he be our God, and we will honour him with the best of our substance. As for other gods, whether Pagan, or Papagan, say we as that Heathen did, Contemno minutulos istos deos modò Jovem mihi propitium habeam, I care not for these petty-deities: I trust in the living God, who giveth us all things richly to en∣joy: All things, I say, both ad esum, et ad usum, for back and belly, (besides bet∣ter things) which is all that carnall people care for. There be many (too many) that say (and can skill of no other language) Who will shew us any good? who will give us bread,Psal. 4. water, wooll, oil, &c? they look no higher, know no heaven but plenty, hell but penury, God but their belly, whereunto they offer sacrifice with Poliphemus, and care for no more, quam ut ventri bene sit ut lateri, then that their bellies may be filled,Epicur. ap. Hor. their backs fitted. Let them have but plenty of victuals, and the Queen of heaven shall be their good Lady, Jer. 44.17. Base spirits look onely after low things: gain and credit carry them any way. They work for their peny a day; and are like little children, which will not say their prayers unlesse they may be promised their breakfast: Whereas a true worshipper of God soareth aloft, hath his feet at least, where other mens heads are, trades for higher commodities, cannot be put off with mean matters. When great gifts were sent to Luther, he refused them with this brave speech, Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari:Melch. Adam. I deeply protested, that I would not be put off by God with these low things. The Papists offered to make him a Cardinall, if he would be quiet. He replied, No, not if I might be Pope. They sent Vergerius, the Popes Nuncio, to tempt him with preferment, and to tell him of Eneas Sylvius, who following his own opinions,Hist. of Counc. of Trent. p. 73. with much slavery and labour, could get no further preferment then to be Canon of Trent, but being changed to the better, became Bishop, Cardinall, and finally, Pope Pius 2. The same Vergerius also minded him of Bessarion of Nice, who of a poor Collier of Trapezond, became a great renowned Cardinall, and wanted not much of being Pope. But what said Luther to all this? Contem∣ptus est a me Romanus et favor, et furor, I care neither for the favour nor fury of Rome. The Bramble thought it a brave businesse to raigne over the trees: not so the vine and fig-tree. We read of Pope Silvester, that he gave his soul to the devil for seven yeers enjoyment of the Popedome; which Luther spurn'd at. One good cast of Gods loving countenance, was more to David then a confluence of all outward comforts and contentments. Thou hast put gladnesse in mine heart, saith he, more then in the time that their corn, and their wine increased, Psal. 4.7. Their corn, and their wine he calleth it; because it is their portion, (poor souls) and they are too too well apaid of it. Wealth upon any tearms is welcome to them,
and those are their lovers that will keep them to it, yea though it be the devil himself: whose language also here they seem to have learned when they say, my corne and my water &c. All's their own if you will beleeve them: like as the devill sayd to our Saviour, Luk. 4.6. All this wealth is mine and to whomsoever I will, I give it. But God is the true proprietary, the owner of all: and it is his alone to say Cui volo, do illa. Dan. 4.22. The devill is God of this world:2 Cor. 4.4 but tis but ti∣tular onely, as a king at chesse: or at best, by usurpation onely as Absalom was a king: and as the Pope is Lord of all the kingdomes of the world, both for tempo∣rals and spirituals; to dispose of them at his pleasure. When he makes Cardinals, he useth these big-swoln words, estote confratres nostri, et principes mundi, Be you brethren to us, and princes of the world. And by such high honours, bishopricks, and benefices, he prevaileth with very many to be wholy at his devotion. One of his poore beneficiaries ingenuously confessed, that he and those of his rank preached the gospel for nothing else, nisi ut nos pascat & vestiat then to get a poore living by it. Let Saints say, Non est mortale quod opto, we breath after better things:Rev. 12.1. we have the moon under our feet and are above corn, wooll, flax &c. The devill shall not stop our mouthes with these palterments. Balaam may run and ride after the wages of wickednesse, and get a sword in his guts. Ahab may make a match with mischief, and sell himself to do wickedly: Judas hunt after lying vanities, and hastened to his own place. But Moses was of another spirit,Heb. 11.37. and refused to be called the son of Pharoah's daughter Heb. 11.24. And those Worthies in the same chapter that were tempted with offers of profit and preferment, could not be won over, but resisted the devill, and he fled from them. The world was crucifi∣ed to Saint Paul, and he to the world. He was of too generous a spirit: he was no malleable matter: all was but dung and dogs-meat in his account Philip. 3.8. D. Taylor martyr was promised not onely his pardon, but great promotion; yea a Bishoprick: but he would none of it: Another D. Taylour Bishop of Lincoln,Act. & mon. fol. 1386. Ib. 1918. Ib. 815. Ib. 1444. Ib. 1578. was violently thrust out of the Parlament-house in his robes, in Q. Maries raigne, and deprived. So was Hirmanius Archbishop of Colen for certain reformations, done by the ayd and advice of Martin Bucer. I dare say, (said B. Bonner to Mr. Hawkes martyr) that Cranmer would recant if he might have his living: so judg∣ing others by himself. But Latimer and Shaxton parted with their Bishopricks in King Henry the eights time, rather then to submit to the six Articles. And John Knox refused a Bishoprick offered him by King Edward the sixth, as having aliquid commune cum Antichristo: so did Miles Coverdale in Q. Elisabeths raigne;Knox his life by Mr. Clark. chu∣sing rather to continue a poore Schoolmaster. Pliny saith of Cato, that he took as much glory in those dignities and honours that he denyed, as he did in those that he enjoyed. He was wont also to say that he had rather men should question why he had no statue or monuments erected to him, then why he had:Plin. Nat. hist. praef. Certainely it is so with the Saints: and upon better grounds. Verse 6. Therefore behold, I will hedg up thy way with thorns] i. e. with difficulties and distresses; So God had fenced up Jobs way that he could not pass, Chap. 19.8. he had thrown the cross in his way, to stop him in his career. And so he had hedg∣ed the church about, that she could not get out. Lam. 3.7. he had enclosed her wayes with hewen stone, and made her paths crooked. Vers. 9. A great mercy if well considered, though grievous to the flesh, that loveth not to be cooped or kept within compasse. Man is fitly compared to a wild-asse colt used to the wildernesse,Jer. 2.24. Job. 11.12. snuffing up the wind at her pleasure, rude and unruly, untamed, and untractable, To be kept by hedges and fences within a pasture, seemes to such no small punish∣ment: neither count they any thing liberty but licentiousnesse: or a merry life, unlesse they may have the devil their play-fellow: But the devil plaies at no small games: capite blanditur, ventre oblectat, caudâ ligat: he playes at swoop-stake, he lyes in wait for the precious life, as that harlot. Prov. 6.26. nothing less will content him. In great wisdome therefore, and no less mercy to mens souls, doth God restrain, and bound them by afflictions, that they may not run wild as they would: nor feed upon the devils commons which would fat them indeed, but for the slaughter. This made Job prize affliction as a speciall favour, Job. 7 18. Jerom prayeth, Correct me O Lord, Chap 10. and Luther to like purpose, Feri Domi∣ne, feri clementer — Strike Lord, strike, it shall be a mercy. And King Alfred
prai'd God alwayes to send him some sicknesse, whereby his body might be tamed, and he the better affectioned to God-ward. It is observed by one of our Chroni∣clers,Dan hist fol. 14. that Affliction so held in the Saxon Kings in the Danick wars, as having little out-lets or leisure for ease and luxury, they were made the more pious, just, and carefull in their government: otherwise it had been impossible so to have held out &c. Sure it is, that if God did not hedge us in (as by his hedge of protection Is. 5.5. so) by his hedge of affliction as here, no reason would rule us, no cords of kindnesse would containe us within the bounds of obedience. David himself be∣fore he was afflicted, I went astray saith He: But God brought him home againe by weeping crosse. He once so leapt over the pale, that he broke his bones, and felt the paine of it to his dying day: he brake Gods hedge, and a Serpent bit him, Eccles. 10.8. his conscience flew in his face, the guilt whereof is compared by Solomon to the biting of a Serpent and sting of an Adder. Prov. 23.32. he roared for the disquietnesse of his heart: But better so, then roare in hell, where is punish∣ment without pitty, misery without mercy, sorrow without succour, crying without comfort, mischief without measure, torment without end and past imagination The Prophet Amos likeneth incorrigible persons to horses running upon a rock, where first they break their hoofs, and then their necks, Amo. 6.12. Another fitly compareth them to that Jesuit in Lancashire who followed by one that found his glove with a desire to restore it him, but pursued inwardly by a guilty conscience, leapes over an hedge, plunges into a marlepit behind it unseen, and unthought of, where in he was drowned. To prevent their deserved destruction (if it may be) God telleth them here that he will not only hedg them in, but wall up their way, And make a wall] macerabo maceriam, I will wall a wall, and immure her: as jealous husbands do their wives whom they mistrust: And this God speaks by an Apostrophe to others, as loathing the thought that ever he should be put to it, I will make a wall that she shall not find her paths] q. d. Ile hamper her and handle her as she was never handled. By a like passionate Apostrophe Gen. 49.4. old Jacob, speaking of Rubens incest, Thou wentest up to thy fathers bed: then defiledst thou it: moved with the odiousnesse of the fact, he breaks off his speech to Reuben, and tur∣ning him to the rest, he addeth, He went up to my couch. q. d. Out upon it, I am the worse to think of it. Maginus tels us, that in Lituania the men are such wit∣tals, that they suffer their wives to have their stallions whom they call Cennubij adjutores, and prize them far above all their accquaintance. And Balthasar Exne∣rus telleth us of a certaine Duke of Oppania, who marrying a Lituanian Lady, and going forth to meet her,Val. Max. Christian. when she came first to him: he found in her company one of that rank, a lusty young fellow; whom when he understood what he was, and wherefore he came, voluit laniandum canibus objicere, he was once in minde to make dogs-meat of him. But understanding that it was the custome of that coun∣trey, he sent him home againe without further hurt. The Lord our God is a jea∣lous God: and be the Gods of the Heathen good fellowes, saith One, yet he will not endure corrivals: nor share his glory with another. Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? And why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way, thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt as thou wast ashamed of Assyria. Yea thou shalt go sorth from him, i. e. from the Egyptian thy present patron and protector. And thy hands upon thy head, which was the gesture of women in great sorrow. 2 Sam. 13.19. for the Lord hath rejected thy confidence, and thou shalt not prosper in them, Jer. 2.33.36.37. This people to have a stake in store, howsoever the dice chanced to turn, sought to joyn friendship assoon with the Assyrian. as with the Egiptian, and so to secure themselves: but it would not do. They followed after these lovers, but could never overtake them. Egypt proved but a broken reed. Assyria the rod of Gods wrath, the staff in his hand, Es. 10.5. yea the hedge of his making, hemmed them in by straight sieges, both at Samaria and Jerusalem: till at length the Romans came, and walling them about, till they were forced to yield, took away both their place and their nation, according to that they feared, Job. 11.48. and caused to cease the dayly sacrifice which they would needs till then hold out in opposition to the Gospell.. That she shall not finde her paths] those high-waies to hell wherein she hath hitherto tired her self, by trotting after her lovers. Drusius noteth here, that an harlot hath her name in the Chaldean tongue from her tracing up and down;
delighting to be abroad altogether, to see, and to be seen, that she may draw in the silly-simple. See Prov. 7.11, 12. with the Note. God is able to strike such people with such blindnesse as he did the wicked Sodomites at Lots door, subito scotomate, saith Junius, such as tormented their eyes, as if they had been prickt with thorns, as the Hebrew word there signifieth, Gen. 19.11. See Psal. 75.6. Isai. 29.19. & 19.11, 12, 13. The fool knoweth not how to go to the city, Eccles. 10.15. they are so blinded and baffled many times in their own wayes. God loves to make fools of them. Verse 7. And she shall follow after her lovers,] Follow them hot-foot, pursue them eagerly and earnestly, as the hunter doth his game, or the pursivant, the party to be arrested: So little was she bettered by her former sufferings: Thus the blinde Sodomites continue groping still for the door, as if they were ambitious of destruction, which was now even at next door by. And thus Pharaoh, that sturdy rebell. rageth against God, and menaceth Moses with death, then, when that palpable grosse darknesse was upon him. This was one of those wild bulls in a net that was full of the fury of the Lord, Isa. 51.20. He was full of it, and yet lay raging against it, adding impatience to his impenitence, and passive dissobedience to his active. Another Bull of the same breed was Ahaziah, who sent a third Captain after the two former had been consumed with fire from heaven: as if he would despitefully spit in the face of heaven, and wrestle a fall with the Almighty. And a third was that stubborn stigmatick Ahaz, who the more he was distressed,Perdidistis fructum affli∣ctionis. Aug. the more he trespassed, This is that King Ahaz, 2 Chron. 28.22. These men lost the fruit of their afflictions; which indeed was a great losse, but that they were not sensible of it. Those that belong to God shall have stroke upon stroke, one crosse in the neck of another, till they be kindly humbled, and brought home to their first husband. God will strike a parting-blow, betwixt them and their sweet∣hearts; and make them pollute the Idols which they had once perfumed, Esay 30.22. She shall follow them, but she shall not overtake them,] Persequetur, sed non assequetur. She shall meet with disappointment, but it shall be in mercy: shee shall be crost with a blessing, chastened by the Lord, that she may not be condem∣ned with the world. She shall seek for favour and succour at her sweet-hearts hands, but all in vain, they shall all forsake her, and shall change their ancient love into mortall hatred, Jer. 2.36. Ezek. 36.17. It is the usuall practise of the devil, and his instruments, to bring men into the briers, and there to leave them to shift as they can: thus the Pharisees dealt by Judas; What is that to us? say they;Matt. 27.4. see thou to that: they left him when they had led him to his bane; like as familiars leave their witches, when they have once brought them into fetters. God dealeth not so with any of his, when he is most angry. But as in very faithfulnesse he afflicts them, that he may be true to their souls. So when they follow hard after him, as David did, they are sure to overtake him, though perhaps not presently; when they seek him, they are sure to finde him, so they search for him with all their heart, Jer. 29.13. True it is, that God often by the hand of the enemy, as by a pursivant at Arms, fetcheth in bankrupt tenants, that is, his own untoward and backsliding people, and leaveth them in the pursivants hand, till they take some course to sa∣tisfie for their arrears. But that once done, he will soon set them at liberty, and make them glad, according to the dayes wherein he had afflicted them.Psal. 90. Let a poor soul but say, as here, I will go and return to my first husband,] that is to God. I have run away from him, by my sins, I will now return again to him by repent∣ance. Let there be but such language in the hearts of Gods prodigals, and he will soon relent toward them, meet them on the way, Isa. 65.24. fall upon their necks and kisse them, Luke 15.20. hee will receive them with all sweetnesse. Jam ex hoc loco licet colligere quae sit vera resipiscentia, saith Calvin here. By this Text we may gather what true repentance is: Namely, when a sinner not onely con∣fesseth himself guilty, and worthy of punishment, but truly displeaseth himself, and seriously returnes to God. Here we have those two essential parts of true Repentance, sc. Contrition, and conversion; or Humiliation, and Reformation. The former is called in Scripture, Repentance for sin, the latter, Repentance from sin: and the one without the other is to no purpose or profit. for then was it bet∣ter with me then now,] It was so: but how came you to conceive or consider of it
in this sort? but by disappointments and afflictions? These are to us as Benhadads best counsellours, that sent him with a cord about his neck to the mercifull King of Israel. The Septuagint render the Text thus; For he was good to me then, o're he is now. And what wonder? Is there any thing to be gotten by departing from Christ, by leaving thy first love, by quenching the spirit, and making Apostacie from former degrees of grace, and holinesse? Can any son of Jesse do for us as Christ can? or do we think to mend our selves by running out of Gods blessing in∣to the worlds warm Sun, as Demas did? O call me not Naomi, said she once, but call me Marah: for I went out full, and am come home empty. So doth a revolted Christian say,Ruth 4. when he comes from the act of sinning, when he hath been seeking after his sweet-hearts: he went with his heart full of peace, and his hand full of plenty; and meeting with a bargain of sinning, thought to eeke out his happiness, and make it fuller (as Solomon did) but came home empty: empty of comfort, but laden with crosses. He hath lost his evidences, is excommunicated from the power of the Ordinances, is under the terrour of a wounded spirit, is buffetted by Satan, is out of hope of ever recovering the radiancy of his graces, hath his back∣burden of afflictions: so that he is forced to confesse it to be the greatest madnesse in the world, to buy the sweetest sin at so deer a rate. David found it so, the Shu∣lamite found it so, Cant. 5.1, 2, &c. No rest she had at home, nor comfort abroad, till she had recovered her first husbands company; for then it was better with her then now; and yet now too, upon her hearty repentance, all becomes as well with her as ever it had been before, Chap. 6.4, &c. Was it not so likewise with Ephra∣im, Ier. 31.19, 20, 21. with the Prodigall, Luke 15. with Peter after his shame∣full recidivation. Let this then be to all Gods relapsed people as a valley of Achor, a door of hope, that they may be readmitted. Shall Sarah receive Hagar into favour? Ioseph his brethren? David his Absolom, Philemon his Onesimus? Shall that Non-such Ahab, shew mercy to his profest enemies the Syrians, that had the second time set upon him? And shall not God receive his repenting children? fetch home his banished, yea though they may seem to be as water spilt upon the ground? bring them back into his own bosome, though they have never so far wandred out of the way? He will, he will. Onely he expects that they should say, and do, as the Church of Israel here, and as the Church of Ephesus is advised, Revel. 2.4. First, Remember whence ye are fallen: sc. not onely from your former feelings and comforts, but also from your former fitnesse for Gods kingdome; that jus aptitudinale (as the Schools call it) that David himself had parted with for a season, and therefore is called plain David so oft together, and not my ser∣vant David, as formerly, 2 Sam. 24.12, &c. Secondly, Repent: Sigh out that of Iob,Job 29 2, 3, 4 O that I were as in moneths past, as in the dayes when God preserved me! When his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked thorow darknesse: As I was in the dayes of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle: When the Almighty was yet with me, &c. O it was far better then with me, then now. Thus relent, repent, revenge upon your back-slidings; spare for no pains, but be extraordinarily humbled: detest your selves, give God no rest till he return unto his rest, &c. Thirdly, Do your first works, with a redoubted diligence for your former negligence; and tie your selves thereto by solemne Covenant. Begin (though at first but faintly) to pray, read, confer, meditate, cease from sin, shun the occasions, recover by degrees as a weak body doth by good diet, moderate ex∣ercise, &c. Verse 8. For she did not know] i. e. She would not be aknown or affected, of this she was willingly ignorant, as S. Peter hath it, 2 Epist. 3. Ʋt liberius peccet libenter ignorat, as Bernard. Her ignorance was not a meer nescience, or an invin∣cible ignorance, such as she could not help; but it was wilfull, affected, acquired: they not onely desired not the knowledge of Gods wayes, but haced it, spurn'd and scorn'd at it,Tu aedepol, si sapis quod scis, nescies. Terent. shutting the windows lest the light should come in: and being blinded by the God of this world, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. lest they should see and say that which Na∣ture and Scripture do both teach them, viz. that all their accommodations and comforts come from me alone. Had this their ignorance been meerly negative, yet had they not been wholly excused. The Apostle noteth, that our Saviour laid
down his precious life even for the not-knowings of the people which were such as they could not help, Heb. 9.7. but there ignorance being affected, it was an high degree of ingratitude and impudence, and a very great aggravation of their sin: it made it to be sin with an accent, wickedness with a witness. Israel was herein worse then the Ox and the Asse (that knowes his owner and his masters crib, Isai, 1.3.) they fell below the stirrop of reason, nay of sense. Hence God so stomacketh the mat∣ter both there and here. Non semel hoc peccatum carpit, saith Mercer: he cannot satisfie himself in saying how much it troubled him to be thus unkindly, ungrate∣fully, and unreasonably dealt withall: it runneth in his thoughts, his heart is grieved at it, and he must vent himself. And when he hath told his grief, and aggravated his wrong, yet he hath not done with it: but is upon it again and again; still con∣vincing, upbraiding; charging Israel for their foul and inexcusable unfaithfulness and unthankfulness. Eandem sententiam quia sancta et necessaria est, repetit, saith Oecolampadius here; he repeates over the same he had said before, out of the trouble of his spirit: and that they might once lay it to heart and be humbled. that I gave her corn and wine and oil, &c.] A great deal more then she reckons upon v. 5 and yet payes her rent there to a wrong Landlord too. God is well content that we have the benefit, and comfort of his creatures, so he may have the praise: this is all the rent he lookes for; and this he indents with us for Psal. 50.15. the Saints also knowing his mind, promise it him, and bind themselves to it as did Ja∣cob, Gen. 28.20, 21. David Psal. 51.14. For they know that ingratitude forfeits all (as in this text. She would not know,Hieron. in locum. but ile make her know: ut qui ex copia da∣torem non senserunt, sentiant ex penuria, for she shall fast another while, and go naked, &c.) like as the Merchants non-payment of customs, may prove the utter losse of all his commodities. Hence their first care to see God in all, as Moses often urgeth this people in Deuteronomie to tast the superabundant sweetness of God in the sweetness of the creatures; to look upon all, as swimming towards them in the blood of Christ, as being a piece of his purchase: and this exceedingly sweetneth all their comforts. God give thee the dew of heaven saith Isaac to his son Jacob Gen. 27.28. Profane Esau likewise, had the like, but not with a God give thee: neither cared he how he had it, so he had it any way: but it is otherwise with the Saints. See but the difference in these two brethren, long after this Gen. 33.9.11. Esau as a mere naturall man contenting himself, (like a bruit beast made and taken to be destroyed) with a naturall use of the creature, cryes out I have enough, my brother: keep that thou hast to thy self. But mark how Jacob delivers himself in another manner. Take I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee: because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough, See a like difference between the rich fools Habes multa. Thou hast much goods laid up for many years, Luke 12.19. and Davids doxology, 1 Chron. 29.13.16. O Lord our God, all this store cometh of thine hand, and is all thine own. And to the same purpose speaks Eliezer, Gen. 24.35. The Lord hath given my master, flocks, herds, silver, gold, &c. and Job, chap. 1.21. The neglect of this observing of God and ascribing all to him is the source of much sin in the world, and the mother of much mischief. Jer. 2.5. God chargeth his people that they were gone far from him and had made his heritage an abomination vers. 7. and why? but because they did not say, Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, &c. vers. 6. Were men but sensible of what God doth for them every day and hour, they could not in equity and common ingenuity serve him as they do; He preserveth, and provideth for us all: layes us down and takes us up, gives us all things richly to enjoy, commanding the best of his creatures to cater for us, Hos. 2.21. and to bring us in the best of the best for our subsistence, Psal. 8. Every good gift temporall, and perfect giving spirituall and eternall cometh from the Father of lights, as naturally and as constantly as light doth from the Sun, or water from the Seal.Jam. 1.17. Let us therefore imitate those Lights of heaven and rivers of the earth, do all the good we can with those good things God hath given us, corn, wine, silver, gold, &c. and then reflect back toward, and return all the glory and praise unto the Sun of our righteousness, and Sea of our salvation. The beams of the Moon and Stars return as far back to glorifie the face of the Sun, which gave them their beauty, as they can possibly. Let us (semblably) ever send back to Gods own glorious self, the ho∣nour of all his gifts, by a fruitfull improvement of them, and fresh songs of praise.
Let the streams of Gods daily bounty lead us (as the water-course doth, either up∣ward to the spring, or downward to the main Ocean) to the source and Fountain whence they flow. Let the returns we make, be from God, of God, to God; from him, as the Efficient, of him as the Material, and to him as the finall cause: David joyneth these three together, Psal. 86.4, 5. And Paul Rom. 11. ult. In fine, let us labour to be like the full ears of corn that hang down the head toward the earth, their originall. Or if any be so graciously exalted, so freely favoured above his fel∣lowes, that his stalk is so stiffe that it beareth him up above the rest of his ridge, let him look up to heaven; not in thoughts of pride, but humble vowes of thank∣fulness. Be not as horse and mule that drink of the brook, but never think of the spring: or as swine, that haunch up the mast but never look up to the tree: or as the barren earth, that swallowes the seed, but returnes nothing to the sower, &c. which they have prepared for Baal] Or, wherewith they have made Baal lavish∣ing gold out of the bag, and weighing silver in the ballance, they hired a gold smith and he made it a God: they fall down, yea they worship. Esay 46 6. This Baal was a special Idol of the Zidonians: but first of the Chaldees, who called him Bel; the Car∣ginians Bal, whence those compositions Hannibal, Hasdrubal; as amongst the Babylonians Belteshazzar Mehetabel, &c. Varro (though a Heathen) inveighes much against idols and images: and saith,Errorem auxe∣runt, metum dempserunt. that they that first brought them increased errour, and took away fear. Plutarch saith, it is sacriledge to worship by images, &c. It is thought, they came first from Babylon. For Ninus having made an image of his father Belus (this Baal in the text) all that came to see it, were pardoned for all their offences: whence, in time, that image came to be woshippd. A great promoter of this kind of Idolatry in Israel was Ahab, in favour of his wife Jezebel, and to ingratiate with her kindred, 1 King. 16.31. and this was the ruine of his house. This Baal was by the Zidonians called Jupiter Thalassius, or their sea-Jupiter, and is thought to be their chief God. They had their Dij minorum gentium petty gods (called in scripture the host of heaven, the queen of heaven, and a little fur∣ther in this chapter Baalim) the Greeks called them : which saith Plato, are certain middle-powers or messengers betwixt God and man, to carry up prayers, and bring down blessings, &c. Quam autem haec damonum theologia conveniat cum sanctorum et Angelorum cultu apud pseudochristianos, res ipsa loquitur,Mede in Apoc. pag. 115. saith learned Master Mede. How this doctrine of devils or heathen-deities agreeth with Saint∣worship,Melch. Ad. de Germ. Theol. pag. 815. and Angel-worship among he Papists, is easie to be discerned. A great stum∣bling it is to both Jewes and Turkes, who know it to be contrary to the first com∣mandment: and image-worship, to the second. Whence the Turkes will not en∣dure any images,Lib. 4. no not upon their coynes. And Paulus Jovius tells us, when Sultan Solyman had taken Buda in Hungary, he would not enter into the chief Temple of that city, to give praise to Almighty God for the victory, till all the images were first down, and thrust out of the place. We read also of a certain Turkish Embas∣sadour, who being demanded why the Turkes did not turn Christians? he answered, because the Christian Religion is against sense and reason: for they worship those things that are of lesse power then themselves, and the works of their own hands: as these in the text, that made them Baal, yea (as if God had hired them to be wicked) they made it of the very gold and silver which he had given them, though for a better purpose. And this was horrible wickedness, hatefull ingratitude. This was to sue God with his own mony, to fight against him with his own weapons, as David did against Goliath, as Jehu did against Jehoram, and as Benhadad did against Ahab with that life that he had lately given him.Znaras in Annal. I read of a monster, who that very night that his Prince pardoned and preferred him, slew him, and raigned in his stead. This was Michael Balbus, and he is and shall be infamous for it to all posterity. Ingratitude is a monster in nature. Lycurgus made no law against it, quod prodigiosa res esset benesi∣cium non rependere. To render good for evil is Divine: good for good is humane: evil for evil is brutish: but evil for good is devilish. And yet alase how ordinary an evil is this amongst us, to abuse, to Gods great dishonour, our health, wealth, wit, prosperity, plenty, peace, friends, means, day, night, corn, wine, silver, gold, all comforts and creatures, our times, our talents, yea the holy Scriptures, the Gospel of grace, and our golden opportunities, the offers of mercy, and motions of the spirit, turning our backs upon those blessed and bleeding embracements, and pur∣suing
our lusts (those idols of our hearts) those Baals, that is,Deut. 32.5. Lords and husbands that have us at their beck, and check? But is this faire dealing? Do we thus re∣quite the Lord, foolish and unwise as we are? Holy Ezra, thinks there is so much unthankfulnesse and dis-ingenuity in such an entertainment of mercy, that heaven and earth would be ashamed of it, Ezra. 9.13. Should we do so? saith He, oh God forbid us any such wickednesse. Others render it, which they have sacrificed, or dedicated to Baal, for Idolaters spare for no cost, Dum Deum alienum dotant, as some render that text Psal. 16.4. whiles they give their goods not to the Saints (as David) that are on the earth, but to another God. They lavish gold out of the bag: as we read of a certain King of this land, who laid out as much as the whole crown revenues came to in a yeare, upon one costly crucifix: and of another, that left by will a very great sum of mony for the transporting of his heart, to be buried in the holy land, as they called it. How profuse papists are in decking their maw∣mets and monuments of idolatry, is better known then that it needeth here to be spoken of Their Lady of Loretto, that Queen of heaven, as they call her stilo vete∣ri, hath her Churches so stuffed with vowed presents and memories,Sands his Relat. as they are faine to hang their Cloisters and Churchyards with them. Verse 9. Therefore will I returne] i. e. I will alter my course, change my stand, change the way of mine administrations, deale otherwise with them then yet I have done: they shall bear their iniquities, and know my breach of promise, as Num. 14.34. they shall know the worth of mine abused mercyes, by the want of them another while. I will go and returne to my place, till they acknowledge their offence and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early.Hos. 5.15. Finally, I will cut them short of alimony and hold them to straight allowance;Hos. 7.14. and then I shall be sure to heare them howling upon their beds for corne and wine: as dogs do that are tied up, and cannot come at their meat. And take away my corn, and my wine] those precious fruits of the earth, as S. James calleth them, James. 5.7. the pro∣duct of Gods great care, from years end to years end, Deut. 11.12. without which the earth could not yield her increase: neither would there be a veine for the silver, a mine for the gold, iron taken out of the earth, or brass molten out of the stone. Job. 28.3. All that we have is his, in true account, and he is the great Proprietary,Mat. 20.15. who onely can say (as he in the gospel) May not I do what I will with mine own? And what should he sooner and rather do, then take away meate from his childe that marrs it? If fulnesse breed forgetfulnesse, (as the fed hawk forgets his master, and as the full Moon gets furthest off from the Sun) so men, when they have all things at the full, forget God, and wickedly depart from him, what can he do lesse then forget them (that so they may remember themselves) and make fat Ieshurun look with leane cheeks, that they may leave kicking,Deut. 32.15. Isay. 26.9. and learne righteousnesse? Neither doth God do this, till greatly provoked, till there is a cause for it, Therefore I will returne. He may well say, as that Roman Emperour did, when he was to pronounce sentence of death, Non nisi coactus, I am even com∣pel'd to it, there is no other remedy, 2. Chron. 36.16. As a woman brings not forth but with paine; and as a bee stings not, but provoked: so here, Ille dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox, he afflicteth not willingly, nor grieves the children of men, Lam. 3.33. It's sin that maketh him returne as here: that puts him out of his road of mercy into wayes of judgment, that putteth thunderbolts into his hand, and maketh him do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act. Isay. 28.21. What can a Prince do less then disarme a rebel? what can God do less, then take away his own and be gone from such an impudent adul∣teresse, as is here described?Jer. 7.18. should he suffer her with his corn to make cakes to the Quen of heaven, and to poure out his wine for drink-offerings to other gods, that they might provoke him to anger? No: rather then so, he will take away corn in the time thereof, and his wine in the season thereof] He will cut off the meate from their very mouths, Ioel. 1.16. and pull their morsel from between their teeth. Just at harvest, when their corne is to be inned, God will blast it, or o∣therwise blow upon it, when all their old store is spent, and they reckoned upon a good recruit, they shall be defeated and frustrated. Therefore hath God watched upon the evill, and brought it upon us, saith Daniel, chap. 9.14. Lo, God watch∣eth his time when to be even with his enemies: and taketh his fittest opportunity
for their greater mischief. They that are wicked overmuch shall dye before their time, Eccle. 7.17. Not before Gods time (for staa cuique dies, every mans time is set, Job. 7.1. our bounds are prescribed us, and a pillar pitcht up by him, who beares up the heavens, which we are not to trespasse) but before their own time that they had propounded and promised to themselves as that rich foole, Luk. 12.19. who talked to himself (as fooles use to do) Vers. 17. saying Soul, thou hast much good laid up for many years. But we know what became of him that very night; his many years were quickly up, his glass was run, when he thought it had bin but new turned.Psal. 64.7. God shot at him with an arrow suddenly, he fetcht off this bird with a bolt whilest he was gazing at the bow, or pruning himself upon a bough. He chopt into the earth before he was aware: as one that walketh in the snow chops into a pit. He died tempore non suo (as some render that forecited text in Ecclesias∣tes) not in his own time, but in Gods time; then when it had been better for that foole to have done any thing, then to have died, because (like Elies sons) he died in his sins: and like Jezebels children, he was killed with death. This made Austin say,Rev. 2.23. that he would not for the gaine of a world, be an Atheist for one half hour: because he knew not but that God might,Job. 27.8. in that time, call him: And then, what is the hope of the hypocrite though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul? He is troubled, when God taketh away his corn in the time thereof, and his wine in the season thereof: he is hungry and hardly bestead, and therefore ready to curse God, and look upward, howling against heaven, as the hungry wolf. But first he should consider,Esay 8.21. that the corn and wine and wooll and flax that he hath in keeping is not his, but Gods; and that he reserves the propriety of all in his own hand: neither hath any man ought, in reference to him the Monarch of the world, that he can call his own. The rich fool indeed talked much on this manner, Luk. 12.18. I will pull down [my] barns and build greater, and there will I bestow all [my] fruites, and [my] goods. All was his own belike: God was not in all this mans thoughts; For if he had, he would soon have known what to have done: sc. he would have acknowledged God the Author and owner of all (as Moses mindeth men) he would also have fed the hungry with his corn,Deut. 8.17.18. and clothed the naked with his wooll and flax, as Tyrus converted did with her merchandise Isay. 23.18. he would have said to God as David did,1 Chron. 29.14. all things come of thee, and of thine own we give thee. Bernard reports of Pope Eugenius, that meeting with a poore but honest Bishop, he secretly gave him certain Jewels wherewith he might present him. If God did not first furnish us out of his treasury; we should have nothing wherewith either to honour him or to help our selves or others; Gods poore, I meane, whom Solomon calleth owners of our goods and maketh us but their stewards, Pro. 3.27. with-hold not thy goods from the owners thereof. Next, the hunger∣bit hypocrite should consider, that there is a worse hunger yet behind: and an heavy account to be given of the corn, wine, wooll, and flax, the creatures that he hath deteyned in unrighteousness, and spent upon his lusts, Jam. 4.3. If the hus∣band men must be ashamed and howl because the harvest of the field is perished: If the drunkards must wake, weep and waile because the new wine is cut off from their mouths,Serm. 4. in Quadragess. Jo. de comb. Comp. Theol. l. 6. c. 21. Joel. 1.5, 11. How shall they much more howl in hell, ubi nullus un∣quam cibus est, nulla consolatio, saith Bernard, where there is no manner of meate, no drop of water to be had for love or mony: where they must fast, and find no mercy for ever, where they must hunger and thirst in aeterno Dei as the Schooles speak, as long as God is God. The sufferings of this world to the wicked, is but as the falling of the leaves in comparison of the trees, that will fall upon him hereafter, in that eternity of extremities. If here, In the fulnesse of his sufficiency he shall be in straits, and every hand of the troublesome shall come upon him. When he is about to fill his bel∣ly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall raine it upon him while he is eating, as it is threatned Job. 20.22.23. what think we, will their portion be in hell? Meane while God will recover his wooll and his flax] He will snatch it away (as the word signifieth) in great displeasure, as a man doth his stolen goods out of the hands of a thief: He will rescue them, as Abraham did Lot and the captives from Chedor-laomer,Gen. 14. 1 Sam. 30. as David did his wives, goods, and friends from the Amale∣kitish rovers. The poore creatures, corn, wine, wooll, &c. groan heavily under the abuse of gracelesse persons, Rom. 8.22. and God heareth them, as he did
the oppressed Israelites in Egypt, for he is gratious, He hears them I say, and reco∣vers them: He spoiles their possessours of them, as Jacob did Laban of his sheep, Gen. 31.10.16. as the Israelites did the Egyptians of their Jewels: the same word is used there, as here, and it is a wonderfull significant word saith Mercer, S. Paul, imitateth it, when he saith the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption. This God doth when he snatcheth away kingdomes from tyrants, wealth fron world∣lings, strength from roysters, spirituall common gifts from the proud and secure. Zech. 11.17. See the note there, when men abuse mercies, they forfeit their right in them: wicked men have not onely a civill title, but a right before God to the things that they possesse; It is their portion, Psal. 17.14. And what Anani∣as had was his own whiles he had it, Act. 5. And God gave Egypt to Nebuchad∣nezzar as pay for his pains in taking Tyre. True it is, all was forfeited in Adam: but wicked men have yet a right to all they do enjoy in a lawfull way, by divine donation, till the day of execution: As when a traitour hath his life given him, for a time at least, he hath meate and drink also given him to maintain his life for that time. God dealeth not as that cruel Duke D'alva did, who starved some prisoners after that he had given them quarter, saying, Though I promised you your lives,Hist of Ne∣therl. I promised not to finde you meate. That which wicked men are charged with, and shall be accountable for, is, not their right to use the creatures, but their not right using them: This makes the creature cry in its kinde and long for liberty: even as birds do that thrust a long neck out of a cage (so much the Apostles word im∣porteth Rom. 8.19.) And God who heareth the cry of the widdow and father∣lesse, and looseth his prisoners Psal. 146.7.. heares and frees the poor creatures groaning under mans abuse &c. Given to cover her nakednesse.] This is the end of garments so called quasi gardmentes: they arme and fence our bodies against the injury of winde and weather, against heate of summer, cold of winter; They also cover our nakednesse and deformity, those parts especially that are by an Antiphra∣sis called verenda & pudenda (here principally perhaps intended) because they ought never to be laid naked but kept covered pudoris gratia for common honesty sake: that the shame of thy nakednesse do not appeare, Rev. 3.18.Vatab. Nature teach∣eth to cover our nakednesse; Therefore also when a man hath commttted a sin, he blusheth: the blood, as it were would cover the sin. But nothing will do that, save onely the righteousnesse of Christ, the fleece of that immaculate lamb of God, whom therefore we must put on, Rom. 13.14. in all his offices and efficacies. Our first parents indeed were born with the royall robe of originall righteousnesse on their back; but the devill soon stript them of it; and therehence they became sore ashamed of their bodily nakednesse (but chiefly of their spirituall) which there∣fore they sought to hide as they could, their privities especially. Whence some are of opinion that to look upon the nakednesse of another is a sin against nature. The Prophet Habakkuk taxeth it in the Chaldees Chap. 2.15. and the Hebrewes there say, It was a filthy custome amongst them, common at their feasts. Cloathes are the ensignes of mans sin, and the cover of our shame. To be proud of them, is as for a thief to be proud of his halter: to brag of them, is as for the Lazar to brag of a plaster laid to his filthy sore: the finenesse of such is their filthinesse: their neatnesse, nastinesse, as one speaketh. Verse 10. And now will I discover her lewdnesse,] Or her filthinesse, basenesse, foolishnesse, saplessnesse; perhaps the same with her nakednesse, verse 9. See the Note there. How shamelesse the Heathen Idolaters were, the worshippers of Pria∣pus especially (which Ierome and Isidore say, was the same with Baal-peor, and made Maacha the mother of Asa guilty of that villany) with their infamous Nos pudore pulsa, stamus sub Jove coleis apertis, &c. is notoriously known; how they ran about naked in their Lupercalia, Bacchanalia and other beastly solemni∣ties. God threatneth to make her naked here in another manner,Chaldeus red∣dit ignomini∣am, ut quam velatam desi∣derabant, aper∣tam contem∣nant Hieron. to her utter dis∣grace and ignominy. He had threatned her before with poverty, now with scorn and contempt: these go seldome asunder; but when self-procured, they are very grievous. See Deut. 28. Fornicatours are fools, Ier. 29.23. Gen. 34.7. Shechem committed folly in Israel, and is therefore called a lad, or a childe, (ver. 19. Neque distulit puer) for his witlessenesse, as being carried not by right reason, but blind affection. So Amnon was for this as one of the fools in Israel, 2 Sam. 13.12. a
Nabal, a Nebulo, one that falls below the dignity of a man, below the stirrup of reason, flagitious and profligate. Spirituall fornicatours are all this and more. They hunt after lying vanities, and so forsake their own mercies;Jonas 2.8. being singularly foolish (as the word here used import∣eth) and miserable by their own election. The indignity and iniquity of their pra∣ctise, see Ier. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Satan deals by them as he did by Adam, when he gave him an apple for Paradise; and set him to the tree of Knowledge, that he might not taste the tree of life. And like unto them (saith a Lapide here) is every wicked person, who by Satans perswasion preferreth the creature before the Creatour, earth before heaven, the devil before God, hell before heaven, sin before sanctity, evil before good. These are lewd persons of sordid and servile dispositions, homines ad servitutem parati (as Tiberius said of the Romans) men of an under-spirit, as those, 1 Chron. 4.23. Hedge rogues Mr. Dyke calleth them. In the sight of her lovers] That her, whom they have so desired whiles she was veiled, they may deride when laid open. There can nothing befall a woman more grievous, then to be stript naked, but especially before her sweet-hearts, Lam. 3.8. All that honoured her, despise her, because they have seen her nakednesse: yea she sigheth and turneth backward. It is the paint or the dresse many times, that makes the lewd woman lovely; Think the same of Idolatry: how pompous is it, and the∣atricall? but God will detect it and make it ridiculous every day more and more. Erasmus was very instrumentall this way, and did prejudice Popery by his witty jearing, as much as Luther did by his stomacking and inveying, saith One. Though it cannot be denied,Capito. but that Pruriginosa istorum hominum scabies asperiori strigali fricanda fuerat,Amama. Anibarb. Praefat. the scabby hides of those Popelings called for a sharper curry-comb, as another Learned man phraseth it. and none shall deliver her out of my hand] Not her idols, not her confederates. An idol is nothing in the world: and all Nations, set by God, are as a drop of a bucker, or dust of a ballance: they can no more stand before him, then a glasse-bottle can before a cannon-shot.1 Cor. 8.4. Isai. 40.15. It was bootlesse therefore for this adulteresse to hope for help from her lovers, when God once took her in hand. He would give her, her due, Ipsis spectantibus & stantibus instar stipitum, whiles they look on and stood like so many stocks, not daring to stir for her rescue and relief. See for this, Rev. 18.10. with the Note. Verse 11. I will also cause her mirth to cease,] Idolaters are frollick and jovial, the greatest mirth-mongers, the merry Greeks of the world, set altogether upon the merry pin,Job 21.13. they spend their dayes in pleasure, and suddenly turn into hell. Thus it was with these old idolaters. See Amos 6.4. And thus it is with the Papists at this day. They have a Proverb amongst them; Spiritus Calvinianus est spiritus melancholicus, A Calvinisticall spirit is a melancholy spirit. Turn Protestant once, and you must for ever bid adieu to mirth and jollity, and lead a Monkish melan∣choly life. In their supplication to King Iames for a Toleration, they used this as an argument for their Religion above ours, because more suitable and pleasing to mans nature.Revel. 13. It is indeed an alluring, tempting, bewitching religion. Sir Wal∣ter Rawleigh knew what he said, That were he to chuse a Religion for licentious liberty, lasciviousnesse, and merry-living, he would be a Papist. Hence the whole world is said to wonder after the Beast,. Qud omnium animalium a∣micus sit. Isidor. which is said to be like unto a Leopard, or Panther: Now the Panther is admired, and followed by most other beasts of the field (and thence hath his name) either for the beauty of his hide, or for the sweetnesse of his smell. So is the Pope for those sensual delights, and swinish plea∣sures he alloweth his followers. Lupanar utriusque Veneris Roma condidi, saith Agrippa, concerning Pope Sixtus Quintus. But what should I rake in that dung∣hill? Such sinfull mirth, as it is base born, so it is of short continuance: God will make it to cease, and to go soon out in a vexing snuffe. For why? There is a snare (or cord) in the sinne of the wicked, sc. to strangle their joy with, but the righteous sing and are merry, Prov. 29.6. yea they are merry, (or right set in their mindes,. And the Sept. here . as the Apostles word signifies, Iames 5.13.) and therefore they sing, yea and shall sing for joy of heart, when wicked men shall crie for sorrow of heart, yea howle again for vexation of spirit, Esay 65.14. Mean-while their mirth is but the hypocrisie of mirth. It may wet the mouth, but not warm the heart; smooth the brow,
but not fill the breast. It is like a little counterfeit complexion; As they repent only in the face, Mat. 6.16. so they rejoyce only in the face, 2 Cor. 1.5.12. Indeed they revel rather then rejoyce, & the end of that mirth is heaviness, Pro. 14.13. as lightening is at∣tended with thunder, & as comets end in a pestilent vapour. Let the Lord but turn his hand & take away his corn, &c. destroy vine and fig-trees, &c. and this carnal mirth is at an end: their light is put out in obscure darknesse, they lye down in sorrow, and are all Amort. they are filled with unmedicinable perplexities, and are ready to run mad Deut. 28.34. Whereas a godly man, as he hath a constant spring of comfort within him, and can be merry without musick, so he can stand under the greatest weight of affliction without buckling, as Paul: he can be medjis tranquillus in un∣dis as Noah: he can confidently say wth Habakkuk Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines &c. Yet will I rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Chap. 3.17. Her feast-dayes, her new-moones] Not the matter of their joy onely shall be a∣bolished, but the times too; She shall neither have holy-dayes nor good dayes (as they are called, Esth. 8.17.) to keep and celebrate. Here then the Lord shewes how he will uncover this harlots nakednesse, Viz First he will strip her of her spiritu∣als, and next of her temporals, Verse 12. Her feast-dayes, new-moons, sabbaths, and solemn-feasts were but apish imitations of those commanded by God, whose ape Satan will needs be. Habent & vespae favos: simiae imitantur homines, Waspes also have honey-combs as well as Bees; and apes will be doing at mens actions. Satans synagogue may seem a true Church. The ten revolted Tribes kept also diverse solemne dayes, partly commanded by the Law, (as new-moons and sabbaths) and partly instituted by Ieroboam, in honour of their idols, as now among the Papists, in pretended honour of the Saints, with feasting, dancing, ringing, roaring of organs, &c. These solemnities therefore, the Lord here first utterly disowneth, cal∣ling them, her feast-dayes, her sabbaths, &c. and none of his, because they did lacte gypsum miscere, mingle lime with milk, as Irenaeus saith of Plato; Non mea, tua funt, as Martial saith of his Epigrams, ill read by another. And secondly, that he will take them away, (sc. by carrying themselves away captive. See Chap. 9.4, 5.) and so pull off their vizour, wash off their varnish of rites and ceremonies, and lay them open to all in their own colours. Verse 12. And I will destroy her vines, and her fig-trees,] Not her wine, and her figs onely, (i. e.) her delicious drinks and sweet-meats, (even all her plenty) sed vineta ipsa & ficeta, as Rivet observeth: which shews a great deal of anger, (for fruit-trees were not to be destroyed in an enemies countrey) like as he disco∣vered a great deal of fear of the Spanish Inquisitours,Heyl. Geog. 52, &c. that brought one of them his pears (which he had sent for) tree and all by the roots It is wisdome to meet God by repentance, lest he stub up root and branch together, lest he overturn, overturn, overturn, so as it shall be no more, Ezek. 21.27. lest he crie, Cut it down,Luke 13.7. why cumbreth it the ground? sith it is not for fruit, let it be for the fire. whereof she hath said, These are my rewards,] The wages of my wickednesse, the hire of my Harlotry, Deut. 23.18. Ezek. 16.34. pretium mritorium Adultery is costly. Whores must have their rewards, they lie in wait for a prey, Prov. 23.20. and will soon bring a rich man to beggery, Prov. 6.26. Solomon himself was so ex∣hausted by such shee sinners (so they call them, Cruces et crumenio ulgas, suck purses the Poet calleth them) that he was forced to oppresse his Subjects, to suply his coffers: which occasioned the losse of ten Tribes Harlots know no other language but that of the horse-leech, Give, give; and may fitly be compared to the ravens of Arabia, that full-gorged have a tunable sweet voice; but empty, they screech horribly. Corpus, opes animum famam, vim, lumina, Scortum, Debilitat, perdit, necat, aufert, tripit, orbat. Idolatry also is no lesse costly: witnesse this harlots habit, verse 13. and the purple whore of Rome, with all her trinckets, and those masses of money that she drains out of many parts of Christendome for the support of her state.Muscipulata res. Otto (one of her Mice-catchers, as the story calleth him) sent hither into England by Gregory
the ninth, after three years raking together of money for pardons, and other pal∣terments, at last departing, he left not so much money in the whole Kingdome, as he either carried with him, or sent to Rome before him. What will not men part with to purchase heaven?Bellarm. Now they perswaded the poor people (and still they do) that good works (and what so good, as to gratifie the Pope with great summes?) were mercatura regni coelestas, the price to be given for heaven. Idolaters are all Merit-mongers: they will have heaven as a purchase; they lay claim to it, as wages for their work. They say with that wretched Monk; Redde mihi aeternam vitam quam debes,Luke 15. Give me eternal life which thou owest me, Give me the portion that be∣longeth to me. God forbid, saith another Papist, that we should enjoy heaven, as of meer alms to us. On the other side, the godly disclaim their own merits, beg hard for mercy, expect a recompence of reward from him, but all of free-grace; accounting all that they can do for God, but a little of that much, that is due to him, and that they could well beteem him: they do all righteousnesse but rest in none: they know that Gods kingdom is partum & non paratum; that their reward is the reward of inheritance, and not of acquisition: and that if they could do any thing this way, yet would it be mercy in God to reward every one according to his work, Psalm. 61.12. and I will make them a forrest,] See this more fully set forth, Isai. 5.5, 6. Such is the hatred God beareth to sinne, that he makes bloody wailes, as it were, upon the backs of the insensible creatures for mans sake. A fruitfull land turn∣eth he into barrennesse for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein, Psal. 107.34. Thus he dealt by Sodom, which was once as Egypt, yea as Eden, but is now a place of nettles and salt-pits: By Iudea, that once Lumen totius orbis, now laid desolate: as Babylon, where Strabo saith their Barley yeelded three hundred-fold increase, and their Palm-tree three hundred and sixty severall sorts of commodities, as bread, honey, wine, vineger, &c. but what devastation befell it by the Modes, see Esay 13.19, &c. It were easie to instance in the seven Churches of Asia, the Palatinate, and other parts of Germany, in Ireland, and now Scotland, and what may England look for? Shall we altogether passe unpunished? Shall we still sit safe under our vines and fig-trees, and not be forrested, and by those wilde beasts of the field devoured? Sure it is, that no beast of the field doth shew it self more raging, or ravenous, then do the wicked, when God suffers, or rather sends them to break into his vineyard: Witnesse those breathing devils the Irish Rebels, more cruel then any Cannibals. Cursed be their wrath; for it was cruel, transcendenty so, extending it self both to the living and the dead. Ʋrsi non saeviunt in cadavera: but these bears, Psal. 58.4. boars, Psal. 80.13. lions, leopards, &c. did rage against dead carcasses, and tore them with their teeth. Histories tell us, that the first founders of Rome were nourished by a Wolf: Certain it is that the off-spring of that people have the hearts of Wolves: being savage and cruel above measure. Their citie was first foun∣ded in blood, and so was the Papacy: for the foundation of that See was laid when Phocas slew his liege Lord and Emperour Mauricius, whom he stewed in his own blood. Whence the Poet wittily; Suffocas, Phoca, imperium; stabilisque Papatum. The habit of that harlot is, according to her heart, purple and scarlet; and her diet is the diet of the Cannibals.Rev. 17.6. I saw her drunken with the blood of the Saints. They are wholly bloody, both in their positions, and dispositions, their plots, and pra∣ctises. The Pope is said to be a Leopard, or Panther, with his feet like a Bear, and his head like a Lion, Revel. 13.2. See the Note there And of their S. Do∣minick (the father of the Dominicans) it is reported, that when his mother was with childe of him, she dreamed, that she brought forth a Wolf, with a fire-brand in his mouth: and he prooved accordingly;Ezek. 21.31. Habac. 1.2, 3. a bruitish man, skilfull to destroy, to devour the man more righteous then himself, by his bloody inquisitors. I pray that God would deliver his turtle from these savage creatures; that he would cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land, Ezek. 34.25. that the beasts of the land may no more devour them, vers. 28. Verse 13. And I will visit upon her the dayes of Baalim,] That is, I will punish
the sins committed in those dayes wherein they went after those multitudes of Heathenish gods: 30000.In Theog. In Georg. lib. 1. of them Hesiod reckons up in his days And Servius up∣on Virgil telles us, that for fear of offending any of them they used to close up their petitions with Dij{que} Deae{que} omnes, All ye gods & goddesses, &c. Some of the Hebrews by Baalim understand Dominos domuum the Lords of the houses: for the planets are said to have thir houses. Oecolampadius understands it of those Idols which they wor∣shipped under the name of the Stars, called elswhere the Queen of heaven, or the heavenly constellations. Others by Baal conceive to be meant their chief God: called also by them Baal-samen, or the Lord of Heaven: by Baalim their under∣gods, mediozuma numina inter mortales caelicolas{que} vectores. This was Plato's De∣monogy (See the Note above upon verse 8. of this chapter) Saint Paul is thought to have been well read in Plato's writings (his  2 Tim. 1.6. is verbùm Platoineum) and to have alluded to him in that passage, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. Though there be that are called (Baalim signifieth Lords) whether in heaven or in earth, as there be gods many and lords many: but to us there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ, that is but one Mediatour betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who indeed in regard of his humane nature is inferiour to the Father, but yet such a Lord by whom are all things, and we by him. The Papists acknowledge but one God, but they have many Baalims, many Lords and Mediatours both of intercession and of Redemption too. But this is an heathenish opinion, as indeed many of theirs are: whence they are called Gentiles, in opposition to the holy City the Church, Rev. 11.2. wherein she burnt incense to them] which typified prayer, both in the sweet savour, and ascending property; elationibus fumi with pillars of smoke, Chap. 3.6. This should have been done to God alone. He is the proper object of prayer, as being omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent: and besides in covenant with his people: He never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. No: he scorns that, and leaves that to the Heathen idols to do, Esa. 45.18.19.Deut. 2, 2. Our Rock is not as their rock our enemies themselves being judges. He is not like Baal, that pursuing his enemies could, not hear his friends. Nor like Jupiter of Creet that was carved without ears,Luc. dial. and could not be at leisure to attend small matters, no nor greater neither, unless it were at certain times when he was pleased to look down through certain chinkers in hea∣ven, as Lucian faineth. He is not as Diana, who being present at Alexanders birth,Sic. de nat deor. lib. 2. could not at the same time preserve her Ephesian temple from the fire. O thou that hearest prayers (saith David: that's one of his titles of honour. Psal. 65.2.) unto thee shall all slesh come. Whither else should I go? Basil makes prayer a chain tied to Gods ear, and mans mouth. Jamblichus saith, it is copula quâ homines cum Deo conjunguntur, a tie wherewith men are knit unto God.. De orth. fid. Damascen saith it is an as∣cent of the heart to heaven. The Church is said to ascend out of the world by these pillars of incense, Cant. 3.6. And as the Angel that appeared to Manoah by ascend∣ing up in the flame of the Altar, is said to do wondrously, Judg. 13.19, 20. So do the Saints by their daily devotions coming up (as Cornelius his prayers and alms did) for a memoriall before God, Act. 10.4. and being a precious incense, Psal. 141.2. far beyond that of Baal Priests, or Chimney-Chaplaines, who were called Chemarims,1 King. 23.5. Zeph. 1.4. or Black-ones, ab incensione thuris from their much offering up of incense, with the smoke whereof they were blacked and sooted; as some hold. and she decked her self with her ear-rings and her jewels] Harlot-like: matrons adorn not themselves so pompously. Whence Tully compares the Latine tongue to a grave Matrone; the Greek to a sumptuous harlot in all her bravery. This drawes the senses, and is therefore much in use amongst adulterers and Idolaters: as Papists for instance with their excessive gayetie in Gods service; their palles, copes and other massing-vestments of as great price, some of them,Athenas. as Demetrius king of Macedon his robewas: which none of his successours would were propter invidiosam impendij magnificentiam for the richness thereof. Gods likes no such doings now adayes in his service. The High-Priest indeed of old was sumptuously attired from head to foot. Os humeros{que} Deo similis as representing the person of God,Virg. that he might dazle the eyes of the beholders, and breed reverence in them by such an appearance. But now it is far otherwise. Cor aureum requirit Deus, non vestem. God lookes not for gorgeous array but gracious hearts: faith and love within, modesty and humility
without: these are things of great price in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. these beauti∣fie the soul better then Isaacs jewels did Rebeccah's body. It was therefore excellent counsell that Tertullian gave the young women of his time,Lib. de cult. foemin. and may be usefull to to us all: Vestite vesserico pietatis, byssino sanctitatis, &c. Cloath your selves, saith he with the silk of piety, with the sattin of sanctitie, with the purple of modestie. So shall you have God himself to be your suitour: Christ will make love to you, and greatly desire your beauty. Psal. 45.11. The kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold vers. 13. She is like that Spartan woman mentioned by Plutarch, who when her neighbours were shewing their apparrell and jewels, she brought out her children vertuous and well taught, and said, These are my ornaments and jewels. and she went after her lovers] This is oft objected to her, as a foul business in∣deed: this was the sin that disjoynted Gods soul from her, to the making of her de∣solate, a land not inhabited Jer. 6.8. We must take speciall care, that no creature creep into the Bridall-bed betwixt Christ and the soul: or if any do, complain to him be∣time and he will play Phineas his part,Act. and Mon. as Master Bradford phraseth it. And forgat me, saith the Lord] This is reserved to the last, as the foot and root of all the fore∣mentioned evils both of sin and punishment. See the lack of Gods holy fear Rom. 3.18. There is no fear of God before their eyes. And thence it is, that their throat is a gaping grave, their mouth full of gall and guile, that destruction and miscry are in their wayes, &c. 13, 14, 15, 16. &c. Fearlesness and forgetfulness of God go alwayes together. Jer. 5.22, 23. those that remember him and his presence, cannot but bear an awfull respect to him. It is a problem in Aristotle, why are men credited more then other creatures. His answer is , because they be∣leeve a Deity. Man alone remembreth, and therefore reverenceth God. Those there∣fore that so forget him, after long experience especially of his gracious care to pro∣tect them and provide for them, as a husband doth for the wife of his bosom, these are strange creatures, and must look to be visited and reminded of him from whom they have so deeply revolted: for of all things God cannot abide to be forgotten. See Isai. 17.10. Deut. 8.21. Verse 14. Therefore behold I will allure her] A strange [Therefore] It may very well have a Behold at the heeles of it: For the sense is this; Because she hath quite forgotten me, and will never be converted of her self, I will prevent her by my mercy, recalling her mildly but mightily by my Gospel. Seducam eam et deducam in desertum. Such another sweet text as this we have in Esay 57.17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousnesse was I wroth and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his wayes, and will heal him. Wayes? what wayes? his covetousness, frowardness, &c. And it is as if God should say, I see these froward children will lay nothing to heart: frownes will not humble them, blowes will not better them. If I do not save them till they seek me they will never saved: therefore I will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners: I will create the fruit of the lips peace to him. O the never-enough adored depth of Gods free grace and fuperabundant love to his people! This David well understood,Psal. 25.11. and therefore prayed, pardon my iniquity: for it is great. He knew that God both could and would remit more then he could commit: and that mercy rejoyceth against judgement; whilest God for his own sake (though not for ours) blotteth out the thick cloud as well as the cloud, enormities as infirmities Esay 44.22. See his Non-obstante Psa. 106.8. his Resolve Gen. 8.21. and his Man∣damus Psal. 14.4. and then it must needs be done, though no god would do it but himself Mic. 7.18. though no man could imagine how it should be done. Esay 55.7, 8. I will allure her] that is, I will effectually perswade her by the preaching of the Gospel. Men may speak perswasively, but God onely can perswade Gen. 9.27. they may speak to the ear, but He to the heart: and this He doth to his Elect, not onely by a morall perswasion, but by an irresistible inward attraction, Act. 11.17. by a mercifull violence, by making them willing to follow the Lamb wheresoever he go∣eth. They kisse the Son with a kisse of love and homage, having first been kissed with the kisses of his mouth: whereupon immediately followes, Draw me, we will run after thee, Cant. 1.1, 4. Elisha could more with a kisse, then his man could with a staffe, in raising the dead child. Christs works upon his people fortiter, but yet
suaviter powerfully,Recte Calvin. textum hunc reddit Incli∣nabo eam. but yet sweetly he inclineth their hearts to his testimonies and not to covetousness, Psal. 119.36. and brings them to the obedience of faith monendo potius quam minando, docondo quam ducendo. If he do seduce them (as some render the word here) it is for no hurt, it is but to speak in a word private with them, as one friend may with another: it is but to give them his loves, as he speakes in the Canti∣cles: to shew them his glory; as he did Moses: to spread before them his beauty, and so to catch them by guile, as Saint Paul did Corinthians 2 Ep. 12.19. to steal away their hearts before they are awar, according to that Cant. 6.12. that they thence∣forth may be an Amminadib, a willing people, a free-hearted people, Psal. 110.3. waiting for the law Esay 42.8. and walking by the rule, Gal 6.16. &c. Oh it is a blessed thing to be thus allured, thus inveigled, thus seduced out of the wayes of sin and death, into the wayes of holiness and happiness; by the doctrine of the Gospel,Mercer. Rivet. which is the true Pitho, the Suadae medulla, qua capiuntur homines, sed bono suo, the divine Rhetorike, wherewith mens minds are taken, but for their greatest good. and I will bring her into the wilderness] Look how I at first allured my people out of Egypt where they sat by the flesh-pots, and enjoyed the pleasures of sin for a season (out of Egypt have I called my son, that I might set him higher then the Kings of the earth) and brought them into the wilderness, and there extraordinarily pro∣vided for them (never was Prince so served in his greatest pomp) and spake to their hearts, giving them right judgements and true lawes good statutes and command∣ments Neh. 7.13. to their great comfort, Ps. 19.8. So will I again do for them, and much more then so, by Christ, in the dayes of the Gospel. Indeed as the people at their first setting foot upon the promised land, met with trouble in the valley of Achor by the sin of Achan; so shall the Saints be sure of troubles; but Christ will not leave them comfortless: a door of hope he will open unto them in their deepest distresses. Death shall be unto them not a trap-door to hell (as it is to the wicked) but an inlet into life eternall, where they shall sing the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb. Rev. 15.13. Let the Saints therefore rejoyce in hope, be patient in tribulation. Vine∣yards God will give them here, some grapes at least of the heavenly Canaan afore∣hand, spirituall benedictions, Divine comforts to sustain them, such generous wine as shall make the lips of those that are asleep to speak, Cant. 7.6. Yea to sing, Eph. 5.18.19. Lo, such wine, of the bests and such songs of joy shall the Saints have for those vines which before he threatened to destroy vers. 12. and that mirth which he would cause to cease, vers. 11. Repentance can turn crosses into comforts, and (like the Philo∣sophers stone) make golden afflictions 1 Pet. 1.7. As it is the fair and happy daugh∣ter of an ugly and odious mother, viz. sin;. so it is the mother of all mercies and benefits: for it is repentance unto life, Act. 11.18. yea to salvation, and therefore never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. It is that rainbow, which if God see shining in our hearts and lives, he will not onely not drown us; but do us all good. and speak comfortably to her] Heb. speak to her heart, such things as shall chear her up, and make her heart leap and even dance Levalto's.Confer Gen. 34.3. Ruth 2.13. Judg. 9.3. Pastquam perauxero eam. Tremell. Benigne allo∣quar. Castalio. See Isai. 40.1. and comparing 1 Sam. 15.35. Observe that the same word  Nacham signifieth to repent first, and then to comfort. And to this purpose it is that some translate the text thus, After I have brought her into the wilderness, and so humbled her thoroughly, as I once did her forefathers there, I will speak to her heart: yea I will take her alone for the purpose, even into a solitary wilderness, where I may more freely impart my minde to her (so some fense it) that having her whole desire she may come up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved, Cant. 8.5. and so be brought into the bride house, with all solemnity. Verse 15. I will give her her vineyards from thence] or. from thenceforth: either from that time, or from that place. God, as out of his melting heartedness toward her he thinks she hath suffered double for all her sins, Esay 40.1. (though she think she hath suffered less then her sins Ezra 9.13.) So he is ready, upon her repentance, to make her (strait) a plentifull amends, He destroyed her vineyards and damped her mirth, vers. 11.12. Now she shall have all again, with advantage: not her corn onely for necessity, but her vineyards also for delight: yea an honest affluence of both. She shall have reall manifestations of his love: and although he take her into the wilderness, yet will he not be unto her a wilderness, or a Land of darkness: wherefore then should his people say, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee?
Jer. 2.31. why should they not rather reason thus with the prodigall. I will go to my father: for in his house is bread enough. I will return to my first husband, for then was it better with me then now, I will repent, for the kingdome of heaven is at hand &c. Lo this is the right way of reasoning, sc. from mercy to duty, from deliverance to obedience,2 Cor. 5.14. Tit. 2.14. Ro. 2.4. Ro. 12.1. Ezra. 9.14. The love of Christ constraineth us, saith Paul: the grace of the Gospell teacheth us to deny ungodlinesse, and to live godly, &c. the kindnesse of God leadeth to repentance: & if besought by the mercies of God to present our bodies for a sacrifice to God, how can we do otherwise? If God bring vineyards out of wildernesses, comforts out of crosses, meate out of eaters, honey out of the rock,Deut. 32.13. and oyle out of the flinty rock, that is, mercies out of diffi∣culties, they must needs be very hard-hearted, that are not melted and mollified thereby. And the vally of Achor sor a doore of hope] The vally was neer unto Jericho, that city of Palmtrees, and was fertile, fat, and full of vines, Isai. 65.10. thought to be the same with Engeddi which is often mentioned in the Canticles. This vally was a kinde of dore or inlet into the promised land: and here they began first to eate of the fruits of the land, which they had so much longed for, Josh. 5.10. and now hoped for the enjoyment of the whole; whereof that vally was a pledg, and earnest. Hereby then is covertly promised to Gods people, deliverance by Christ, together with the first-fruits and earnest of the spirit, whereby they shall be brought to an assured hope of the harvest of happinesse, of the whole bargain of Christs benefits, Spes in humanis incerti nomen boni: spes in divinis nomenest cer∣tissemi Heb. 11.1. this is hope unfaileable, as proceeding from faith unfained, which can believe God upon his bare word, and that against sense in things invisible, and against reason in things incredible. It can take a man out of the vally of Achor, that is of trouble (see Josh. 7.6.) and set him on the everlasting mountains, where as from Pisgah, he may have a full prospect of heaven; the hope where of maketh absent joyes present, wants plentitudes; and beguiles calamity, (as good company doth the way) yea lookes upon it as an in let to mercy, a promise whereof to aposta∣tizing Israel some make this fat vally of Achor to be dotis nomine, as a dowry: in allusion to the manner of the Jewes in their marriages to give some piece of ground to the spouse as a pledge. and she shall sing there] As rejoycing in hope, Rom. 12.12. Et res plena gaudio & spes,Psal. 65.13. as Bernard hath it. They shall shout for joy, they shall also sing. Some think the Prophet here alludeth to that custome of the Jewes to sing in the time of their vintage, See Judg. 9.27. Esay. 16.10. Others will have it to be an allusion to their marriage-songs: that being the time of the rejoycing of a mans heart Cant. 3.11. Viz. at the recovery of his lostrib. The Septuagint render  shall be humbled: and indeed the word signifieth both to be humbled and . Some are humbled but not humble, low but not lowly: these must look for more load. But they that mourn in a godly manner, are sure to be comforted. God will turn all their sighing into singing; they shall sing aloud upon their beds which they have soaked in teares,Gosr. in rit. Epist. l. 1. Conf. l. 6. c. 12. and made to swim againe, as David Psa. 6. A reconciled condition is a singing condition, Bernard was so over-joyed at his conversion, that he was almost beside himself. Cyprian telleth his friend Donatus, that his comforts then were inexpressible. Austin saith the like of himself. The Saints cannot but sing at this dore of hope, though they be not yet got in at it. See Psal. 138.5. they shall sing in the wayes of the Lord,Psal. 119.54. though they be yet but viatores. Gods statutes are their songs even in the house of their pilgrimage; as hoping to sing shortly in the height of Zion, to flow to the bountifulnesse of the Lord, Jer. 31.22. As in the dayes f her youth, and in the day when she came up &c. Out of a low countrey, but a lower conditi∣on; being shiftlesse and succorlesse. Then did God put Timbrels into their hands, and ditties into their mouths. See Exod. 15. And so it is here said, he will do againe in the time of the gospell. Let our Nonsingers here take notice, that singing (and that joyntly with others) is a Gospell-ordinance: and for further proof let them read Mr. Cottons excellent treatise upon this subject. Verse. 16. And it shall be in that day] A sweet promise of a thorow reformati∣on, much like that Zach. 13.2. God will turne to his people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord to serve him with one shoulder,
Zeph. 3.9. For which end he formes their speech for them, & tutours them here how to terme him. Ishi they must call him, but not Baali, my husband,So Tyrannus; fur, sophista. but not my Lord: Not that there was any hurt in the word my Baal or Lord: but because it had been abused and given to Idols, God would have none of it: or because it was grown among the better sort a name of contempt: like as for the same reason the word Burden is rejected, Jer. 23.36. Or lastly, lest the people whilest they spoke of one thing should think of another: and naming Baal should be put in minde of an Idol. This is Hieromes reason. Some distinguish thus betwixt the 2 words,Lyra. Oecelamp. that Ish is a name of love, Baal of feare, Others observe that Ish signifieth an excellent man, and is therefore made choyce of as every way better then Baal, or Lord. Au∣gustus forbad men to call him Lord: and desired rather that more amiable name of Father of his countrey. It is wisdome when we call upon God to make choyce of fit titles, not onely such as he in his word hath warranted, but also such as may be suitable to our requests, and helpfull to our faith in prayer; such as wherein we may see the thing prayed for comming towards us, as it were. This will notably excite devotion. Instances of it see Psal. 80.1. Act. 1.24. and 4.24.25. &c. Note there and in the next verse, that there is no small danger in words and names. What a deale of mischief hath the word Huguenot done in France, and Puritan here. Anno 1572. Cardinall Allen at Rhemes instructed his emissary-seducers, sent over hither, to divide the people under the names of Protestant and puritan: pro∣voking them thereby to reall and mutuall both hate and contempt. His Rhemists in their anotations on 1 Tim. 20. warn their readers of using the words of Here∣ticks (so they call us) though they have no great hurt in them: and hold to their old termes of masse, pennance, Priest &c. they call us Novatores, but we may call them so better. The truth is, we may not teach nova, nor yet novè? Castalion cannot be excused in his Jana Genius Respublica for Ecclesia and other affected no∣velties. Melanchthons wish was, that men would not onely teach the same things, but in iisdem verbis, in iisdem syllabis in the same words, yea in the same syllables: for he that faineth new words brings in new doctrines (it may be thought) as did Arminius. And yet it is not many yeares since here amongst us, that he that would not be an Arminian was held no better then a practicall Puritan. But let us keep our old words (said those Veteratores) and we shall easily keep our old faith: The devill doth sometimes speake the trueth for his own ends. But was Winchester well advised when he made The Lord, and not to say our Lord,Act. & Mon. 1116. Ib. 1803. to be symbolum baereticorum, a note of an heretick. Or Dr. Stery, whose rule to know an heretick was this, they will say The Lord, and we Praise God; and The living God. This was not Novum nomen, but Novum crimen, C. Caesar. Much like that of Pope Paul 2.Cade of the church. Alsted. who pronounced them hereticks that did but name the name Academy ei∣ther in earnest or in jest: And another Pope made it heresie to hold that there were any Antipodes. Verse 17. For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth] So precise she shall be, so circumspect, according to Exod. 23.13. that she should spit out of her mouth those dunghill duties with utmost contempt; as David had done be∣fore her, Psal. 16.4. If bodily filthinesse may not be once named among Christi∣ans Ephe. 5.3. why should spirituall? The Primitive Christians would not call their dayes of the week by the Heathenish names of Dies Martis, Dies Mercurii &c. (as Mercurius Trismegist had. superstitiously named them) but the first, se∣cond, third &c. day of the week: as not willing to have the names of those Idols mentioned among Gods people. Mentioned they may be (no doubt) recitative without sin, as Baal is Rom. 11.4. and Castor and Pollux. Act. 18.11. but not honoris gratia for honour sake, or without some expression of detestation of them; such as was that of Cyril, who speaking of Paganish idolatries breaks out thus,  we rake a dunghill in a discourse of dunghill gods. What a patheticall speech or rather shriek is that of Almighty God, Jer. 44.4. Oh! do not this abominable thing: do not honour Idols in the least.Act. & Mou. shall I bow my knee to yonder Iackanapes? said that martyr pointing to the Rood in Pauls. Should I kiss Baal? as they did 1 King. 19.18. Or so much as kiss my hand in honour to him, as Job. 31.27. were not this to deny the God that is above? Verse 28. And how can those be excused that have so often in their mouths Jupiter omnipotens, mehercu∣le,
Mecastor,Hieron. Damaso. & caetera magis portenta quam numina, saith Hierom: and those that think their verses nothing so neate, unlesse there be often naming, and some∣times invocating too of Apollo,Jam. 3.11. Minerva, Venus, &c. Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Those that say they think no hurt in all this, are no more excused thereby then he that said, Lasciva est nobis pagina,Ovid. vita proba. Those that thus borrow garnish of the Egyptians, may therewith get their botches and boyles. Howsoever, they may feare to have Bellarmine himself (who was no precisian) to rise up in judgment against them and condemn them; who would not have Paul called Divus Paulus, but Beatus: because Divus, and Diva, were the words of the heathens for their gods and goddesses. and they shall no more be remembred] sc. without indignation and detestation, without a What have I to do any more with Idols?Hos. 14.1. Esay. 30.22. or a Get you hence, Abite hinc, abite longe as Charles 5 said of all his worldly pomp and atchievements at the last, as Amnon thrust Tamar out of dores when he had had his will of her, when he had moyled himself in that filthy guzzle, and sullied his conscience. She multiplied her whoredomes (saith the Prophet) in calling to remembrance the dayes of her youth where∣in she had plai'd the harlot in the land of Egypt, Ezek. 23.21. and verse 8. Not the new sent of meat, but the remembrance of their old flesh-pots moved Israel: they found sweetnesse in a lust twice sod, they had still the broth of these abominable things in their vessels, as the Prophet Esay hath phrased it, Chap. 65.4. To remember with delight sins past is, to recommit them: and herein the deceitfull heart is with all care to be looked unto, that when we call to mind former evill practises, though with an intent to be humbled for them, we be not insnared, and drawn to commit them afresh by being tickled in the thought of them. Verse 18. And in that day will I make my covenant for them with the beasts &c.] At the first creation all things were subject to man on this condition, that he should be subject to his maker as his master.Augustin. Rebellis autem facta est quia homo numini, creatura homini. But no sooner did man rebell against God, but the creature be∣gan to rebel against him. Look how a Noble-mans servants will draw in defence of their Lord, and souldiers fight for their Generall: so here, God is Lord of hosts.Psal 119.91. They continue this day according to thine ordinance (and fight in their cour∣ses Judg. 5.20.) for they are all thy servants, ready prest they are to seise a sinner, and to doe execution upon him, as a traytour, and rebel to the highest Majesty: as the sword that Hector gave Ajax turned into his own bowels, when once he began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtlesse creatures. Now here God promiseth to abolish that enmity, to make peace, even pacem omnimodam, peace, peace, as the Prophet Esay hath it, Chap. 26. a muliplied peace, a perfect, sheere, pure peace with God, with themselves, with all creatures: and to restore them in Christ that dominion they once had over the works of his hands,Rom. 8.28. Psal. 8.6. with Heb. 2.7. yea power o∣ver all nations Rev. 2.26. with a promise that all shall work together for their good, and they shall be fully freed if not from the smart, yet from the hurt of eve∣ry creature. Compare Ezek. 34.25. Job. 5.23. Esay. 11.6.7. where the Prophet seemeth to allude to the carriage of the beasts in Noahs Ark; all bloodi∣ness and rapine laid aside. The Jewes foolishly argue from these texts, that Christ is not yet come, because the Lion yet rageth, the Wolf devoureth, Serpents yet sting and spare not the best. And some interpreters of ours are of opinion, that these promises shall be literally fulfilled at the restitution of all things, which they make to be at the time of the call of the Jewes. But when I find Nebuchadnezzar and other enemies of the Church to be called Lions, Leopards, Wolves &c. as Jerem. 5.6. and elswhere, I cannot but think that these might be here meant, in part at least,Virg. ponent{que} ferocia Poeni Corda volente Deo: according to Peters vision Act. 10. and that God will so meeken the spirits of his converts, that they shall not hurt nor destroy in all his holy mountain Esay. 11.9. The literall sense is very good I grant: but yet it is still to be taken (as all such promises are) 1. with excep∣tion of the cross here. 2. with expectation of the full accomplishment hereafter, in the state of perfection.
And I will break the bowe, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth.] These words seem to be opposed to that threat Chap. 1.5. I will break the bowe of Israel, &c. And it is as if he should say, After that I have broken their power, and tamed their pride by the enemies forces, then I will punish those enemies, and so take or∣der with them, that they shall not hurt my people by any of their hostilities. Lo, peace is a piece of Gods Covenant; and covenant-mercies are very sweet, when all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, Psal. 25.10. Not mercy onely, but truth too, that comes by vertue of a covenant: Mark, what God saith to Abraham, Gen. 17.20, 21. I have blessed Ishmael; twelve Princes shall he beget: but my Cove∣nant will I establish with Isaac. And in the same Chapter Divines observe, that in ten verses thereof, God repeateth his Covenant which he made with Abraham, thirteen times: to note thus much, that that was the mercy indeed that must satis∣fie Abraham in all his troubles, sorrows, and afflictions: For the Covenant of Gods peace shall not be removed, no not when the mountains shall depart, and the hils be removed, Esay 54.10. The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will blesse his people with peace, Psal. 29.11. and will make them to lie down safely.] Being gathered under my wings, they shall repose themselves upon my power and providence, committing themselves to me in well-doing. All true and solid security, whether inward or outward; all true peace, whether of countrey, or of conscience floweth from Gods favour, Psal. 3. & 4. Hence the Apostle wisheth grace and peace, and the Angels sang,Ephes. 1.2. Luke 2 14. Deut. 33.16. Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth, even the peace of good-will toward men, the good-will of him that dwelt in the bush. The Lord is with me, saith David, I will not fear what man can do unto me. I will sleep and wake, and wake and sleep again;Psal. 3. for the Lord sustaineth me. No wonder I slept so soundly and safely (said King Philip) when Antipater watched me. Abner watched not so well, when David fetcht away Sauls spear and pitcher, and was barely told of it.Phil. 4.7. 1 Pet. 1.5. Lev. 26.5. Psal. 116.7. Ishbosheth was slain whiles he slept. The Saints go ever under a double guard, the peace of God within them, and the power of God without them, and may therefore in utramque aurem dormire, lie down safely, (See Ier. 23.6.) call their souls to rest. Verse 19. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever,] This, because it could not be easily beleeved, is thrice repeated. We beleeve not (what ever men may dream to the contrary) without much ado, and many conflicts. When faith goes about to lay hold on Christ, the devils raps her on the fingers, and would beat her off. Hence she is fain to take great pains for it, to work hard for her living. The A∣postle speaks more then once of the work of faith,. 1 Thess. 1.3. and 2 Epist. 1.11. And it is no lesse difficult (say Divines) to beleeve the Gospel then to fulfill the Law. No man can come unto the Son, except the Father draw him: the soul naturally hangs back, and had as lief put off its immortality, as put on Christ:Joh. 6. The devil al∣so doth his utmost to hinder. The contest was not so great betwixt Michael and him concerning Moses his dead Body, as it is here betwixt the beleever and him con∣cerning Christs living body. And should not God mightily assist, the businesse would never be done. Hence faith is called, the faith of Gods power,Tarnan. Col. 2.12. the faith of his operation, and what an Almighty power God doth therein put forth, is elegantly described by the Apostle in that sixfold gradation, Ephes. 1.19. which shews it to be more then a morall swasion. Betroth thee, I will, I will, I will, saith God here: and some think the Sacred Trinity is here (though darkly, accor∣ding to the manner of those times) brought in betrothing the Church in this trina repetitio. And mark, that he doth not say, I will be reconciled unto thee, and re∣ceive thee again after thy foul-playes with me, (for Reconciliationes ferè sunt vul∣pinae amicitiae inter homines, Men are seldom reconciled heartily) but I will espouse thee, marry thee unto me, and that for ever. I will null the Bill of divorce, love you no lesse then if you had continued true to me, or were now a pure Virgin. Quis hanc Dei bonitatem dignè collaudet? saith Drusius. Who can sufficiently set forth this goodnesse of God? When God once pardoneth sin, he will remember it no more; he will not come with back-reckonings. Discharges in justification are ne∣ver repealed or called in again. Peccata non redeunt is a true axiom: and it is no lesse true, that peccata non minuunt justificationem. God can pardon sins of all si∣zes; and assoon disperse the thick cloud, as the cloud, Esay 44.22. See the match∣lessnesse
of his mercy to a repenting adulteresse, Jer. 3.5. What greater love can he shew to her, then to marry her again, and rejoyce over her as a bridegroom rejoyceth over his bride, Esay 62.5. Yea to rest in his love, and to joy over her with singing, Zeph. 3.17. and to do this for ever, (as it is here promised) so that there shall be no more breach of conjugall love and communion for ever betwixt them. Ama amorem illius. Oh love this love of his, saith Bernard, and reci∣procate. And as the wife will keep her bed onely for her husband (saith Mr. Brad∣ford Martyr) although in other things she is content to have fellowship with others;Acts & Mon. fol. 1503. as to speak, sit, eat, drink, go, &c. so our consciences (which are Christs wives) must needs keep the bed, that is, Gods sweet promises, alonely for our selves and our hus∣band; there to meet together, to embrace, and laugh together, and to be joyfull together: If sin, the law, the devil, or any thing would creep into the bed, and lie there, then complain to thine husband Christ, and forthwith thou shalt see him play Phineas part. And again, if Satan should summon us, saith he, to answer for our sinnes, or debts, in that the wife is no sutable person, but the husband, we may well bid him enter his action against our husband Christ, and he will make him a sufficient answer. Thus Mr. Bradford in a certain letter of his unto a friend. In righteousnesse and in judgement, in loving kindnesse, &c.] These are the gems of that ring that Christ bestoweth upon his Spouse, saith Mercer. These are those , or love-tokens, that Christ the Bridegroom giveth to his Bride the Church, saith Tarnonius. Here he promiseth to performe to her, and to work in her all those offices and requisites due from married couples in that estate the one to the other. God will both justifie her, by the imputation or Chris righteous∣nesse; and sanctifie her by the spirit of judgement, that is or sanctification. (See John 16.10, 11. Matth. 12.20. and the Note there.) And because the best have their frailties, and although they be vessels of honour, yet are they but earthen vessels, and have their flawes, their cracks, therefore it is added, I have betrothed thee unto me in loving-kindnesse, and in mercies. q. d. My heart and wayes towards you shall be full of gentlenesse and sweetnesse, without moosity or harshnesse. My loving-kindnesse shall be great, Neh. 9.17. marvellous great, Psal. 31.21. Excellent, Psal. 36.7. Everlasting, Esay 54.8. Mercifull, Psal. 117.2. Multitudes of loving-kindnesse,Psal.36.5. Esay 63.7. as for my mercies, or bowels of compassion towards you, they are incomprehensible, as having all the dimensions, Ephes. 3.18. Thy mercy O God, reacheth unto the heavens, there's the height of it: Great is thy mercy towards me, and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowermost hell, there is the depth of his mercy.Psal. 86.13. The earth is full of thy goodnesse, there is the breadth of it. All the ends of the earth have seen thy salvation, there is the length of it. O pray to see that blessed sight, Ephes. 1.18. and 3.18. that beholding as in a glasse, this glory of the Lord, shining bright in his Attributes, you may be transformed into the same image,2 Cor. 3.18. from glory to glory: and as in water, face answereth to face, as lead answereth the mould, as tally answereth tally, Indenture indenture, so may we resemble and expresse the Lord our Husband, in righteousnesse, holinesse, loving-kindnesse, tender mercies, and faithfulnesse: that as the woman is the image and glory of the man, so may we be of Christ. For our encouragement it must be re∣membred, that the Covenant that Christ maketh with us, is a double Covenant, to performe his part as well as ours, to make us such as he requiret us to be in all holy conversation and godlinesse: for which end also we have a uplica of his Law written in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. a law in our mind, answerable to the law of his mouth, Rom. 7.23. In a word, he graciously undertaketh  parts: therefore is the Covenant everlasting, and the fruits of it are sure mer, com∣passions that fail not. In foedere novo nihil potest incidere quo miniss sit raum, quum non sit ei adjecta conditio, saith Mercer upon this Text: that is, In the new Covenant there can nothing fall out whereby it should not be everlasting, sith there is no condition required on our part. That faith, or faithfulnosse, mentioned in the next verse, God requireth not as a mutual restipulation of our part. (as works were in the old covenant) But here it is rather a declaration of his pleasure what he would have us to do, and whereto he will enable us. It is not a condition to en∣danger the Covenant; but an assurance, that he will give us strength to keep it.
Verse 20. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulnesse] Tremellius, Drusius, and Tarnonius render it in fide in faith, and interpret it of de fide vera et salvifica of that true justifying faith whereby we are united to Christ: And for this they urge the next words, as an Exposition of these. And they shall shall know the Lord: alledging some other texts of Scripture wherein saving knowledge is put for justifying faith, as Esay 53.11. Jer. 31.33. Job. 17.3. The Septuagint also render it .Tarnou. in exer. cit. Biblic. See Master Dugards trea∣tise called The change. Now  is the New Testament is oft used for saving and growing faith Tit. 1.1. Col. 2.1. and 3 10. which indeed is the bond of the spirituall marriage: and is it self nothing else but a fiduciall assent presupposing knowledge. For man is a rationall creature, faith a prudent thing, comprehending in it self these three acts: 1 know∣ledge in the understanding. 2. Assent or rather Consent in the Will. 3. Trust or confidence in the heart; certainty of Adherence: if not of Evidence. The Papists fasten faith in the will, as in the adaequate subject, that they may the mean while do what they will with the understanding and the heart. To which purpose they ex∣clude all knowledge, & detest Trust in Christs promises, expunging the very name of it every where by their Indices Expurgatorij. A blind belief as the Church beleeves is as much as they require of their misled and muzzled Proselytes. Bellarmine saith that faith may far better be defined by ignorance then by knowledge. But how shall men beleeve on him of whom they have not heard? Let us leave to the Papists, their implicit faith and their blind obedience: and cry after Christ as that poor man did. Lord that mine eyes might be opened, and that I may know the Lord] yea grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. These things have I written unto you (saith Saint John to those that were no Babyes or Zanyes in faith or know∣ledge) that beleeve on the name of the Son of God that ye may know that ye have eter∣nall life, and that ye may (yet more) beleeve in the Son of God.1 John. 5.13. David though he had proceeded further in the discovery of Divine truthes then those before him, Psal. 119.99. yet he was still to seek of that which might be known ver. 96. Even as those great discoverers of the new-found lands in America were wont to confesse at their return, that there was still a Plus-ultra more yet to be discovered. Vers. 21. And it shall come to passe in that day] In that time of grace and recon∣ciliation, fitly set forth by the name of a day in regard of 1 Revelation. 2 Adorna∣tion. 3 Consolation. 4 Distinction. 5 Speedy Preterition; I will hear saith the Lord of Hosts;] that is, I that have the command of both the upper and nether springs and forces, Sun, Moon, Stars, &c. Deut. 4.9. those storehouses of Gods good treasure which he openeth to our profit Deut. 28.12. and therehence makes a scatter of riches upon the earth by their influence. I that stop and unstop those bottles of the skie the clouds which there hang and move, though waightie with their own burden: I that make the earth to bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and meat to the eater, Esay 55.10. &c. I will hear the heavens] Heb. I will answer: that is I will so hear as that I will answer: so will not great ones sometimes: or if they do, yet the poor man speakes supplications, but the rich answereth him roughly. Solyman 2 The grand Signior, when many thousands of his poor Christian subjects,Prov. 18.23. to be eased of their heavie taxations fell down before him, and offered to turn Mahumetans, rejected their con∣version, and doubled their taxations. God hath here a great sort of suppliants.Blunts voy∣age. 111. Hom. (The Poets fam, that Litae or Supplications are alwayes about Jupiter) the heaven, the earth, the corn, &c. and he heareth and speedeth them all. Never any humble petitioner went sad out of his presence: Never said he to the house of Israel, Seek ye me in vain. The Heathen-idols may do so, but He scorns it. Are their any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? Surely they cannot, till God have heard and answered them.Jer. 14.22. The genealogie of rain of corn and wine is here resolved into Jehovah: and he promiseth to endow his beloved Spouse with them as part (though the least part) of her joynture. All are yours for you are Christs 1 Cor. 3.23. In marrying with the heir you have right to All. Here is om∣nium rerum ubertas ob Deisemen Christum, saith Hier. plenty of all things for Christs sake, who where ever he comes, cometh with a Cornucopia a horn of salvation, be∣sides a largesse of outward comforts. This was very necessary doctrine at all times to be taught in the Church, lest pressed with miseries, men should faint in their minds. Christ knowes we have need of these things also: and therefore not only bids us
pray, but promiseth to give us our daily bread by a concatenation of causes, by a lad∣der of providences which the Heathens called Destiny, but the Saints call it the har∣mony of the world; agallant description whereof we have Ez. 1. far different from the Stoikes Fate or the doctrine of Plato and Aristotle and other of the worlds wiz∣zards concerning the divine providence, which they either denied or imbased. and they shall hear the earth] which being chapt and scorcht seemeth to sollicite showers and fattening influences by an elegant Prosopopoeia, as if these insensible crea∣tures understood what they did: when men are once in covenant with God, all the creatures will be serviceable to them, yea greedy to do them good: they wil even cry for it.Vinum pendu∣lum, i.e. vuas. Verse 22. And the earth shall hear] That is, shall bear great store of corn, wine, and oil; new and fresh oil the word signifies, newly exprest, clear and shining, such as is called golden oil,Deut. 28.14. Zech. 4. Gods dear children shall have the best of the best, Esay 55. Even the kidneyes of wheat, or whatsoever dainties the earth can af∣ford them. They shall suck honey out of the Rock; or, if it be but water, yet it shall be to them as sweet as hony, because therein they taste and see the Lords goodnesse, and they have meat to eat that the world wots not of. and they shall hear Jezreel] that is they shall answer the pains and prayers of Gods people, who are here called Jezreel still (though the Septuagint ead it Israel) not to upbraid them with their former wickedness and calamities thereby procured (which yet was the first reason of that name given them Ch. 1.) but rather to set forth the riches of his grace imparted to such a graceless people. And withall to shew that nothing could hinder them from partaking of those covenant-mercies, and that happy communion with God whereto they were now restored. This very name of theirs (once their shame should now turn to their glory. O Jezreel scat∣tered by God (which is one signification of the name) they should become Jezreel a seed of God (which is another) that they might comfort themselves with the hope of Christ the promised seed, and know that their posteritie should not to de∣generate into Gentility, but that many of them should embrace Christ and inherite the promises, as did Araunah the Jebusite who became a samous Proselyte Zack. 9.7. (see the Note there) and as Jether the Ismaelite, 1 Chron. 7.17.  saith and religion called an Israelite 2 Sam. 17.25. and as Christ eth himself  of Na∣zareth as a title of honour, which was once cast upon him as a reproach. Verse 23. And I will sow her unto me in the earth] Not in the ir, as once, when they were scattered into the four winds of heaven, but in the earth, which the heavens should hear verse 21. the inhabitants whereof should  multiped: and be∣come as the sand of the sea which cannot be measured, nor numbred, Chap. 1.10. See the Note there, and Jer. 31.27. Ezek. 36.37. The Preaching of the Gospel i a kind of sowing of seed,Psal. 129.7. 1 Pet. 1.23. and this seeding is in the earth that they may be gathered into heaven, where the mower shall fill his hand and he that bindeth sheaves his bosom. And although Gods eect lie here for a time under the clos, yet at length they shal fructifie, and many spring from them by whom the name of Christ shall be so propagated. He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his dayes, and the plea∣sure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand Esay 53.10. and I will have mercy upon her] Her unhappy name Lorubamah shall be done away, and the contrary come in place. Lo this is as it were the collogue of the Sermon, and it is very comfortable. The Sun of righteousness loves not to set in a cloud. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous, yea our God is mercifull. Be it that he is once righteous, yet he is both gracious and mercifull for it. Psal. 116.5. The Jewes, for their seventie years captivity in Babylon, had seven seventies of yeers (set forth by Daniels weeks) granted for the enjoying of their own country. Gods mercie bear the same proportion to his punishments (when he hath to deal with his elect people) which seven a complete number, hath to an unity. This promise here made, the Apostle testifieth Rom. 9.25. to be begun to be fulfilled in his time by the conversion of some Jewes, and calling of some Gentiles. The full accomplishment thereof we daily expect and pray for. and I will say to them] that is, I will make them so: as when he said to Lazarus come forth of the grave, he brought him forth: together with his word there went forth a power. and they shall say] Dicere nstrum est fides et obedientia nostra, saith Pareus
here; we say thus when we beleeve and obey. There shall be restored therefore between God and his people, a most sweet harmony, and an intimate conjunction: such as he had before described to be betwixt himself and all the second causes, for his Churches sake; And truly it is never will with us indeed, till the heavens answer the earth, till Christ the Sun of righteousness so shine into our hearts, that we melt and comply as here, and as Zach. 13, 9. See the Note. CHAP. III. Verse 1. THen said the Lord unto me, Go yet, &c.] This Yet is emphaticall: and it is as if he had said Go over the same subject again in a shorter dis∣course: and lay before them the same truthes, but in more lively colours, that the ob∣stinate may be left without excuse, and the penitent may not be left without comfort. Iterum abi, Go to them once more, and be instant with them or stand over them as Saint Paul saith. 2 Tim. 4.2. and as Saint Paul doth, in crying down the Jewes con∣ceit of being justified by the works of the law, and in disgracing the sin of forni∣cation so common at Corinth. Chrysostom at Antioch having preached sundry Sermons against swearing, was at length asked when he would preach upon another subject? He answered when you leave swearing, Ile leave preaching against swearing. Austin would have a preacher so long to pursue and presse the same point,De Doct. Christian. Deut. 6.7. Shanan et Shanah re∣petere sicut in acuende. untill by the gesture and countenance of the hearers he perceive tha hey understand it, and will practise it. This is to whet the word of God upon pele (as Moses his phrase is) by going oft over the same thing, as the knife doth th whet-stone. A like type to the former is here first propounded, secondly expounded, that at length it might fasten. A preacher must not desist, though at first he prevail not (as some from this second injunction collect, that this Prophet would have done) but he must turn himself into all shapes and fashions both of speech and of spirit to win people to God, with all long suffering and doctrine, 2 Tim. 4.2. And this the Lord here teacheth Hosea to do by his own example of patience and tolerance, notably set forth in this ensuing type. Love a woman beloved of her friend yet an adulteresse] This was an harder task then to take her chap. 1.2. in hope she would prove honest. But now that she hath plaid the adulteresse and so deserved to be discarded, yet to love her, yea and that when she is habituated and hardened in her lewd practises (as the Hebrew word sig∣nifieth) Durus est hic serm, who can bear it? If none else can,Nontam actum quam habitum significat. Rivet. yet God both can and will, as appeareth by this whole Parable wherein the Prophet is commanded to represent God, as in the former type Chap. 1. and by loving that wife which he had taken before, though she had plaid false with him, to shew what was the love of God toward Israel. She forsaketh me, saith He, who give her all the good she ei∣ther hath or hopeth for, and followeth after those that put bottles of wine to her mouth, she loves those flagons, &c. Ah sinfull nation, a people laden with iniquity, &c. howbeit I will not relinquish her, but will love her freely as if she had never of∣fended me. O matchless mercy. O concio plena consolationis!Mercer. O most comfortable Sermon. God so loved the world, the Mundus immundus, that he gave his onely be∣gotten Son, &c. This was a Sic withouta Sicut, there being nothing in nature that can possibly parallel it. See Rom. 5.8. God loveth Apostates, idolaters, adulterers, yet not as such, but as he intendeth and respecteth their conversion to himself: which nothing will sooner effect then the sense of such an undeserved love. I am not igno∣rant that another sense is set upon these words, as thus; Go yet love a woman not married, as yet but espoused unto thee, who may hereafter be thy wife; but is for her adultery rejected for a long season: so God loved the Israelites as an adulterous spouse: and therefore for a long while neglected, but yet at length to be taken by him to wife, according to Chap. 2.15.19. Beloved of her friend] sc. of some paramour, as Jer. 3.1. thou hast played the harlot, with many lovers. These the Greeks called  fellow-friends, the whore was called : so they flattered their own vices putting gilded names on them, as our blades name drunkenness good-fellowship, harlots she-sinners, &c. The Septuagint render it a woman that loveth naughty things or naughty packs. But I like the former interpretation better; and it is agreeable to the Chaldee Paraphrast.
Who look to other gods] Look and lust, ut vidi! ut perij! the mind lodgeth in the eye, and looketh out at that window of wickednesse. If I beheld the Sunne when it shined,Job 31.26, 27. or the Moon walking in brightnesse: And my heart hath been se∣cretly enticed: or my mouth hath kissed my hand, &c. Job alludeth to the pra∣ctise of those old Idolaters, which was to kisse their Idols, if they could reach them, as 1 King. 19.18. (Cicero tels of the image of Hercules, cujus mentum osculis adorantium attritum fuit: and the Papists so kisse their pictures, that hard Marble is worn with it,Spec. Europ. saith Sir Edwin Sands, an eye-witnesse:) But when they could not come at the Idol to kisse it, they looked up and kissed their hand, in to∣ken of homage: and this was called adoration.Quast applica∣tio manus ados This looking to other gods, im∣ports a turning toward them. Se Deut. 31.18, 20. a loving them, a longing af∣ter them, and an expectation of some good from them. No wonder therefore that such whorish hankerings and honings were offensive to the jealous and just God: but the unjust knoweth no shame, Zeph. 3.5. men are forbidden so much as to lift up their eyes to their Idols,Psal. 121.1. Ezek. 23.27. And shall I lift up mine eyes unto the hills (saith David, as some read that Text) as if from thence came my help? Absit. Christs Spouse hath a Doves chast eye: and he would have her like that Persian Lady,Cant. 4. who being at Cyrus his Wedding, and asked, how she liked the Bride-groom? How? saith she, I know not. I saw no body there but my husband. and love flagons of wine.]See Judg. 9.27. & Amos 2.8. Bechive of Rome. Luxury is the ordinary companion of Idolatry, as Exod. 32.6.1 Cor. 10.7. Rovel. 18.13, 14. O monachi vestri stomachi, &c. At Paris and Lovain, the beshin vine is called Vinum Theologicum, the Divinity-wine: it is also called, Vinum Cos, we. caloris, odoris, saporis, optims. Those Clergy-Locusts lick up all: those Abby-lubbers are good for nothing but to devour grain, like ver∣mine: those wine-bibbers and flesh-mongers (as Salmon calleth them) are no better then the execrements of humane society, gelulim, belly-gods, and fit servants of those dungy-gods, as idols are called, Hab. 2.18. with Ezek. 4.17, 18. And a scavenger whose living is to empty privies, is far to be preferred before such an one, as looking to other gods, and making his gut his god lives but to fill privies. For a flagon of wine, or a meals-meat, any god may soon have the hearts and servi∣ces of such as have (Poliphemus-like) no supream deity but their belly. Verse 2. So I bought her to me] God is to be obeyed, though it go never so much against the heart,Epictet. and the hair with us. . Follow God was a Heathen, but an honest precept. This he that would do, must first deny himself, and say with that Dutch Divine, Veniat, veniat, verbum Dei, &c. Let a word of command come forth from God, and we will submit thereto, though we had six hundred lives to lose, yea though we can see no reason for it. Indeed, in humane governments, where reason is shut out, there tyranny is thrust in. But where God commandeth, there to ask a reason is presumption, to oppose reason, is  re∣bellion. I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver,] That is, fifteen shekels, or shil∣lings, or thereabouts: no great price it was that he gave for her, whether for hire or dowry: probably it was in order to marrying her, and in reference to that law, Deut. 21.11. Israel was once a precious people, Gods peculiar treasure, such as comprehended all his gettings. The Jews have a saying, that those seventy souls, that went down with Jacob into Egypt, were more worth then all the seventy Na∣tions of the earth beside. But now behold, how cheap they are grown; they are valued all of them at fifteen pieces of silver, a goodly price. (Zach. 11.12. Matt. 27.9.) If the tongue of the righteous be as choice silver, yet the heart of the wicked is little worth, Prov. 10.20. There, (as in the Sea) is that Leviathan (the king of all the children of pride) and there are creeping things innumerable, craw∣ling lusts, and lawlesse passions; but for any thing of worth, it is not there to be had. Hence as at the last destruction of Jerusalem, thirty Jews were sold for one penny, so here the whole body of the Nation are bought and sold for a small sum. How weak is thine heart, (how light-cheap) saith the Lord God to this light-huswife, seeing thou dost all these things,Ezek. 16.30. the work of an imperious whorish woman? God and his people reckon of men by their righteousnesse: He looked down from hea∣ven to see who sought after God, &c. Psal. 14.3. As for others, he regards them no more then men do drosse, draffe, chaffe, or such like refuse stuffe, Psal. 119.119.
Psal. 1.3. &c. what ever great thoughts they take up of themselves, and how ever the world rate them. Antiochus Epiphanes, that great king of Syria, is called a vile person, Dan. 11.21. And, the adversary is this wicked Haman, saith Esther: that was his true title, which he perhaps never heard till now. And an homer of barley, and an half homer of barley.] God buyes not this people (though for never so little) to starve them, but alloweth them alimony, though not so fine a food: barley and not wheat. See Revel. 6.5. prisoners pit∣tance, course fare, such as slaves and beasts are fed with; as she had been like horse and mule, Psal. 32. and lest she should wax fat and kick, she is held to strait allow∣ance. Whereby is signified the mean and low condition that the ten Tribes (and afterwards all the Jews) should be in, till Christ came to marry them to himselfe. First, they should be valued but at half the price of a slave. Secondly, they should be coursly fed, as beasts, with barley, or perhaps, not so well as the Jews beasts: for among them, the mouth of the Ox treading out their corn, might not be muzled. But the Heathens were wont to put an Engin about their servants necks,This engin was called.  and it reached down to their hands, that they might not so much as lick of the wheat∣meal, when they were siting it. Now they were scattered among the Heathen, and sold to the Nations for nought, Psal. 44.11, 12. They that were wont to feed delicately, were desolate in the streets: they that were brought up in scarlet, em∣braced dunghils, Lam. 4.5. their flagons of wine were turned into tankards of water, and their bellaria, or junkets (so the Septuagint render it, and not flagons) into brown-bread, horse-bread: that so those whom pride,Ezek. 16.49. fulnesse of bread, and abundance of idlenesse had undone, hardship and penury might reduce to duty. God would seem for a time to have forgotten them, that they might at length re∣member themselves: he loves to chastise mens insolency with indigency, as he did Hagars, Gen. 21.15. and the Prodigals, Luke 15. who for his swinish life, was brought to swines-meat, and thereby brought home to his father. It is the way of God to humble those he intendeth good unto, to prepare them for mercy by cut∣ting them short of these outward comforts. Though this be here a threatning, yet there is a promise in it, verse 3. that God will take off the smarting plaister, so soon as it hath eaten out the proud flesh. It is in very faithfulnesse that he afflicteth his people, because he will be true to their souls, and save them. And hence it is that he so diets them, and keeps them short, that he may do them good in the latter end, that he may change their bricks (made in their bondage) into Saphires, and Agates. See Exod. 24.10. with Isai. 54 11. Verse 3. Thou shalt abide for me many dayes,] Even till the last dayes, verse 5. or last year, as Ezekiel hath it, chap. 38.8. Thus they have abode, or sat (as a desolate widow, so the Hebrew hath it) 700. years before Christ, and above 1600. years since in a most forlorn condition; crying out in their daily prayers to God, Veniat regnum trum, bimherah, bejamenu, Let thy kingdom come speedily, even in our dayes. And again, Aedificu templum tuum, aedifica, aedifica, citò, citò, citò; Lord build, build, build thy Temple quickly, quickly, quickly. But Gods time is not yet come; for they are not yet throughly humbled. Were they but ripe, he is ready: when help is seasonable, his fingers itch (saith One) to be doing, as the mothers breast akes, when it is time the childe had suck, Exod. 12.40, 41. At mid∣night were the first-born slain, and Israel sent away, because then exactly the 400. or 430. years of their captivity in Egypt were expired. So Dan. 5.30. In that night was Belshazzar slain: because then exactly the seventy years were ended. God promiseth to take this Church again to wife, but having found her formerly so fickle and faithlesse, he would for a long time trie her, and keep her unmarried as a proba∣tioner: he would lay her (as we do filthy garments) a soaking, and a frosting, for many hundred years, to try them, and to purge, and to make white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time appointed, Dan: 11.35. And to pre∣sume to prescribe to him in this case, is to set the Sun by our Dial. As he never fails his in his own time, so he seldome comes at ours. Here then our strength is, to sit still, Esay 30.7. and not to start up, and say as that impatient Prince did,2 Kings 6.30. What should I wait for the Lord any longer? Shall Christ lose his right in his wife, because he takes her not by the day set down in our Calender? Possibly the Calen∣der of heaven hath a post-date to ours. Sure it is, that we are apt to antedate the
promises in regard of the accomplishment: as those Jer. 8.20. that looked for help that summer at furthest, but were deceived. See the disease and the remedy put together Hab. 2.2.3. and learn to wait. God will surely bring us to it if we belong to him: and thereby inure us both to patience and continence as here. thou shalt not play the harlot &c.] thou shalt not hasten after another God, and so multiply sorrowes upon thy self Psal. 16.4. as he that hath broke prison gets but more irons to be laid upon him and a stricter watch, Psal. 44.19. the Church though sore broken in the place of dragons, and covered with the shadow of death, yet she stretched not out her hands to a strange God. She knew that was not the way to get off with comfort. Is it because there is no God in Israel, that thou gaddest to the God of Ekron.Isay. 20.19. 2 King. 1. Should not a people seek unto their God? from the living to the dead? Should they seek to slip out at a back-dore and to help them∣selves by sorry shifts, or sinister practises. Is that ever like to do well? or will not such be miserable even by their own election, Ion. 2.8. Wherefore if God defer to help (as he doth usually) hold out faith and patience. Wait upon him who even waits to be gracious,Esay. 30.18. for he is a God of judgement and well knoweth how and when to deale forth his favours: Cito data cito vilescunt, Manna being lightly come by, was as lightly set by. He therefore suspends us, that he may commend his mercies to us: and when he comes with them, be the better welcome. The longer he holds us in request, the more will he do for us at length: and if we abide for him many dayes, we shall be no losers thereby. for I also will be for thee] He will love those that love him,Prov. 8.17. 1 Sam. 2.30. and honour those that honour him. Yea, if any man love me, saith Christ, my Father will love him, and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Joh. 14.21.23. I will gather them (sc. into my bosome out of all nations) that are sorrowfull for the solemn assembly who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burthen. Behold at that time I will undo all that afflict thee &c. Zeph. 5.18.19.20. God esteems highly of those that abide for him in their banishment, that stay for him till he minde marriage with them, that stick to him in affliction, that resolve to reserve themselves for him, so as if they cannot have comfort in God they will have none elsewhere. The Cherethites and the Pelethites that were with David at Gath, and afterwards stuck to him when Absalom was up, they were ever neare about him, as his guard, and dear to him as his favourites. God is All in all to those that with the Spouse will be his alto∣gether:Jer. 29.13. he will do good to them with his whole heart, that seek him with their whole heart &c. Verse 4. For the children of Israel shall abide many dayes without a king &c.] They shall be as it is said of the Brasileans, Sine rege, sine lege, sine fide, in a wo∣full confused estate, both for State and Church. This they had brought upon them∣selves by their Idols set up at Dan and Bethel: that is, in the place of Judgment, and in the house of God (so Dan and Bethel signify.) Bethel was become Bethaven, and the place of judicature (called by Solomon the place of the Holy God Eccle. 8.10.) so corrupted, that people were ready to say as Themistocles once did, that if there were two wayes shew'd him, the one leading to hell and the other to the Tri∣bunal, he would chuse that which went to hell and forsake the other. That corrupti∣on caused this confusion. The children of Israel shall be without and without, here are six withouts that they might be sensible of their abuse of mercies, and see bona a tergo formosissima good things fairest behind, their worth best appearing by their want. The Persian law commanded, that at the death, of their kings, there should be  a suspension of lawes,Stob. orat. 42. a lawlesse liberty, for the space of five dayes: that subjects might know the necessity of government, by being bereft of the benefit of it for a time: and the better prize it when they had it. The like custome they have now in Turky at the death of the Grand Signor,Turk. hist. which is no soo∣ner known, but every man doth what is good in his own eyes, till his successor be sent for, and set upon his throne. Israel hath neither King nor Prince, Ruler nor Civil Magistrate of their own, (the ten tribes I meane: for Judah had both Prince and Priests after the captivity, till the last desolation, since which they have) no forme nor face of Church or common-wealth, no not of a corrupt or depraved Church, meant here by Image and Teraphim, See 2 King. 17.10. Judg. 17.5.
much less of such an one as God had prescribed, meant by sacrifices and Ephod. Prospers conceit was that this people were called Judaei because they received jus Dei their law from Gods mouth. And Josephus calleth their common wealth a Theo∣cratie, or God-government. They received their order both for Church and common-wealth from heaven: which no other people ever did in the same man∣ner; and might truly take up that of the Prophet Esay; The Lord is our Judge,Esay. 33.22. the Lord is our law-giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. But man being in honour is without understanding &c. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked: then he forsook God which made him, and sacrificed unto devils, not to God, to Gods whom they knew not, to new Gods, that came newly up &c.Deut. 32.15.17. When Ephraim spake and spake right there was trembling and none durst budge against him: but when he offended in Baal, he died:Hos. 13.1. then every paltry adversary trampled upon him as a dead man,Sanet. in Zech. 8.13. Heyl. Georg. 370. then every scurrilous Poet could insult over him and cry, Credat Judaeus Appela Non ego: then every common Turk could by way of execration say, Judaeus sim si fallo, and in detestation of a thing: I would I might die a Jew then, a disper∣sed and despised people they are (none more) under the cope of heaven; partly for their former Idolatry, but principally for their rejecting of Christ crucified: whom they cannot but in their consciences know to be the Shiloh that should come, sith the scepter is so longe since departed from Judah, and a Law-giver from between his feet Gen. 49.10. That for their sins which are many (say the Talmudists) he yet hides himself in the caverns and secret places of the earth, is  a sim∣ple pretence, or rather a subtlety of Satan, to hold them still in blindnesse, till God unseale their eyes: till when things that are never so clere will not be beleeved. Verse 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return] They shall come out of the furnace more refined then ever. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged: and this is all the fruit to take away her sin: when he maketh all the stones of the Altar as chalk-stones that are beaten in sunder: the groves and images shall not stand up.Esay. 27.9. then indeed hath Jacob the right fruit of his sufferings, when he makes all the stones of the Alter, as chalk-stones, crumbling them to crattle: when he puls down the groves and images, those Balaams-blocks that lay in his way to God, and now re∣solves to return, and seek the Lord] from whom they had deeply revolted to seek his face and fa∣vour, to seek his ordinances & true worship, & lastly, to seek to know & do what is well-pleasing in his sight. Their hearts shall rejoyce that thus seek the Lord: & these are true converts indeed, these are those sekers Psal. 24.6. yea this is Jacob (as there) Jsraelites indeed, such as cannot be (whereever they are cast) without God in the world, without Christ,Jer. 30.9. Ezek. 34.24. 1 King. 12.6. who is here called David by a Patronymick (as also elso where) no without allusion to the Apostasy of the ten tribes from the house of David, & so from the true God; which now also they shall bewail as the root of their sin & ruine. and David their King] Call'd by Daniel Messiah the Prince,Dan. 9. Act. 3. and by Peter, Christ the Lord. See Luk. 1.32. Some think he is here called the goodnesse of God. They shall fear the Lord and his goodnesse] which also is his glory,Pavehunt ad Dominum. Exod. 33.19 The Hebrew is, they shall feare to the Lord, trepidabunt that is, trembling they shall make hast to him (as frighted doves do to their columbaries, See Hos. 11.11.) they shall kiss the Son, with a kiss of homage: and with reverentiall feare submit to he kingdome. CHAP. IV. Verse 1. Heare the word of the Lord] This is the beginning of a new Sermon, or judiciall act of God against the ten tribes, which are here convented, convinced, sentenced. It begins with an Oyes, like that of St. Paul. Act. 13.16. Men of Israel and ye that feare God (if any such be in so generall a defection) give audience. Ye have heard Gods mind before parabolically delivered and in types: now heare it in plaine tearmes,Heb. 12.25. that you may see and understand and be converted and I may heale you. Heare and your souls shall live. Heare him that speaketh from heaven, even that excellent speaker, as he is calld Dan. 10. that Arch-prophet whom ye are bound to heare Deut. 18.18. Mat. 17.5. upon paine of death Heb. 12.25.
the Lord Christ I mean who speaketh with Authority and is mighty in word and deed.Act. 10. He it was whom Isaiah saw upon his throne, and heard speaking Job. 12.41. And it is a Rule in Divinity, that where the old Testament bringeth in God appear∣ing and speaking to the Patriarches,Jer. 13.18. Prophets and people, it is to be understood of the second person. Hear therefore and give ear, be not proud for the Lord hath spoken it.Am. 3.7. The Lion hath roared, who will not fear? The Lord God hath spoken, who can but hear and fear, humble and tremble? ye children of Israel] But oh how altogether unlike your father? Even as un∣like,Ezek. 34.27. as Jehoachim (that degenerate plant) was to his father Josiah, that plant of re∣nown? His heart melted when he heard the law, 2 Chron. 34. but Jehoiachim cut it with a penknife and cast into the fire Jer. 35.23. These were Israels children, and named the house of Jacob, as those in Micah chap. 2.7. but an empty title yeelds but an empty comfort at last. Is the spirit of the Lord straitened? (saith the Prophet there:) were these Jacobs doings? Do not my words do good to him that walketh upright∣ly? were you Israelites indeed, I should not thus lose my sweet words upon you: but you would incline your ears and come unto me,Esay 55.3. 1 King 14.6. hear as for life it self: especially since I am sent unto you (as once Ahjah was to Jeroboams wife) with heavy tidings, with such a Citation or processe from heaven as may well be unto you as Samuls message was to Eli; that made both his ears to tingle; or as the hand writing was to Balthasar, that made his knees knock together. For the Lord hath a controversie with the inhabitants of the Land] The former title (children of Israel was too good) for them: they had disgraced their fathers family, and were therefore (Reuben-like) fallen from their dignity. They shall henceforth be called the inhabitants of the Land, as the wicked are called Revelation 12.12. in opposition to the heavens and those that dwell therein, the Burgesses of the new Jerusalem: Abraham had seed of two sorts some were as the dust of the earth Gen. 13.16. others as the Stars of heaven Gen. 155. And all are not Israel that are of Israel, Rom. 9.6. Multi sacerdotes et pauci sacerdotes, saith Chrysostome. There are many Ministers, and yet but few: many in name, but few indeed: workmen that need not be ashamed; Nomen inane, crimen immane. It was cold comfort to Dives in flames, that Abraham called him Son; or to Judas, that Christ called him Friend; or to these rebellious Jewes, that God sometimes called them his people, and had rooted out the cursed Canaanites to make room for them, when as they lived in Gods good Land, but not by Gods good Law. for which cause the Lord hath here a controversie with them, a suit at law, and being himself both plaintiffe and Judge,Mals fidei possessores. he is sure to cast them; yea to cast them out of that good Land as evils tenants, that should hold no longer: for vers. 3. he threate∣neth to plead against them non verbis sed verberibus with  and with blood as Ezek. 38.22. to make them say as Isai. 45.9. Wo to him that striveth with his Maker, that hath him for his adversary at Law; such a one is sure to be undone un∣lesse he agree with him quickly,Mat. 5.25. whiles he is yet in the way with him, and before he be brought to the tribunall, For even our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. his tribunall also is of fire, Ezek. 1.27. his pleading with sinners in flames of fire, 2 Thes. 1.7. the triall of mens works shall be by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. the place of punishment a lake of fire ed with a river of brimstone, Isai. 30.33. O pray therfore and prevent, that God enter not into judgement with us: for if so, no man living shall be justified in his sight.. Gods people may have and shall be sure to have the devil an adversary at Law against them, as Saint Peters word signifies 1 Pet. 5.8. The accuser of the brethren he is called, which accuseth them before God day and night Rev. 12.12. But him they may resist stedfast in the faith, and recover cost and charges of him, as I may so say: for they have Christ to appear for them in heaven, Heb. 9.24. as a law∣yer for his client. 1 Joh. 2.2. to nonsuit all the devils accusations. The Spirit also (as a Paracletus or Advocate) maketh request for them to God in their hearts, and help∣eth them, to make Apologies for themselves 2 Cor. 7.11. Again, if a man sin against another, the judge shall judge him, saith old Eli to his wicked sons: that is the Um∣pire may come and take up the controversie and put an end to the quarrell. But if a man have sinned against the Lord,1 Sam. 2.29. who shall intreat for him? who dare be his yes∣man? no mediation of man can make his peace: no reconciliation can be here hoped for, but by running from God as a Judge, to God as a Father in Christ. Let men
therefore be wrought upon by the reprehensions of Gods faithfull Ministers, by whom he appealeth and impeacheth them. If they stand out as the old world did against that Preacher of righteousness, by whom he went and preached to those spi∣rits now in prison, (because they would not take up the matter in time, but futured and fooled away their own salvation) he will break off his patience and say as Gen. 6.3. My spirit shall not alwayes strive with these men, for that they also are flesh, &c. and are therefore the worse, because they ought to be better:Ideo deterio∣res quia me liores esse debebant. therefore they shall fare the worse, because they would be no better. I have hewed them by my Prophets, Hos. 6.5. but can make no good work of them. Like ill timber, they fall to splinters: and like ill stones, they crumble all tto crattle: They are therefore fitter for the high∣way & chimney corner, then for my building. My spirit shall therefore strive no more with these perverse persons, either by preaching, disputing, convincing, &c. in the mouth of my ministers; or in their own minds and consciences by inward checks and motions which they reject, refusing to be reformed, hating to be healed. I will take away my spirit, and silence my Prophets (as he doth verse 4. of this chapter) and resolve upon their utter ruine: sith there is no good to be done upon them, See Vers. 17. of this chapter, with the Note there. Currat ergo poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia, &c. Because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land] Lo here the charge: and knowing the judgement of God you must needs say that those that commit such things are worthy of death. Rom. 1.32. For if the word spoken by Angels (the law given by Angels in the hand of Moses a Mediatour) were stedfast: and every transgression and disobedience (that is every commission and omission) received a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2.  should these miscreants escape, that had left off to do good: and for evil, they did  both hands earnestly; For the second table of the Law, it is articled against them, (for matter of omission or de∣fect) that there was neither truth nor mercy in the land: And for the first table, that there was no sound knowledge of God there; and consequently, no care of God, ei∣ther inward or outward worship: for there can be neither faith, nor repentance, nor due obedience yeelded to an unknown God.Joh. 4.22. A Samaritane service there may be (ye worship ye know not what) but not a rationall service, Rom. 12.1. such as whereof a man can render a reason. Now God will not have a blind sacrifice, Mal. 1.8. 1 Chr. 28.9. It is nothing worth that men are vertuous, unlesse they joyn to their vertue know∣ledge. 2 Pet. 1.5. nor that they offer sacrifice, if they bring the sacrifice of fools, Ecces. 5.1. Those must needs be abominable and disobedient that are to every good work reprobate, injudicious as the word signifies Tit. 1.11. and what marvell though men be alienated from the life of God (or a godly life) through the ignorance that is in them? Eph. 4.18. But let us take the words in order. There is no truth. Here God declareth against them, (a Lawyers do against offendors in courts) and not for trifles, but first for want of truth or trustinesse in word and deed: without which humane society is but funiculus ex arena a rope of sand, or arena sine calce sand with∣out lime, it cannot hold together. It was an old complaint of the Prophets, that Truth was fallen in the streets,Esay 99.14 Psal. 12.1. and faithfulnesse failed from among the children of men. When Varus was slain, Augustus grieved excessively; and that because non esset à quo verum audiret, he had none about him that would tell him the truth of things, and deal plainly with him. Multis annis jam transactis, nulla fides est in pactis, &c. Jeremy bewailes it in his treacherous country men, that they bent their tongues like their bowes for lies; but they were not valiant for the truth on the earth, Jer. 9.3. they were mendaciorum loquacissimi (as Tertullian phraseth it) loud an leud lairs, and (as Egesippus saith of Pilat) they were viri nequam et parvi facientes mendacium, naughty men, and such as made nothing of a lie. But Gods people are said to be children that will not lie Esay 63. they are  lovers of truth, which was the title of honour given to Arrianus the Greek historian: when as of all o∣ther historians Vopiscus testifieth, that there is none qui non aliquid est mentitus that taketh not the libertie to lie more or lesse. And for slipperinesse in contracts and covenants, nothing is more common amongst men; its counted a peccadello. But the God of truth, the faithfull and true witness, as Christ is called, counteth it not so. See Ezekiel 17.15. &c. 1 Tim. 4.2. and 2 Timothy 3.3. There are that take truth here for justice; according to Zech. 8.16. and so it suites well with that which followeth. Nor mercy] These two are set together Mic. 6.8.
(to do justly, nad to love mercy) as the summe of the second Table. Mouth∣mercy there was enough,Jam. 2.15.16. such as was that in St. Iames his dayes. But there is not any one that taketh Zion by the hand, Esay 51.18. that draweth out his soul to the hungry, and dealeth his bread to such, Esay 58.7, 10. Sodom had fulnesse of bread, but would part with none to strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, Ezek. 16.49. Therefore she had judgement without mercy, that had shewed no mercy, Iames 2.13.Esay 23.18. Whereas Tyrus when once she left heaping, and hoarding, and brought forth her merchandise for them that dwell before the Lord to eat suffici∣ently, and for durable clothing, is renowned and reckoned among those that came to Christ with their desirable things, as some read that Text, Hag. 2.7. Colligent omnes suos thesauros (so Calvin readeth it) they shall come with strong affections, with large contributions, as those primitive Saints did, Acts 4.34. The same He∣brew word Chasid, signifieth both Saint and Mercifull; and it comes of Chesed, the word here rendred mercy, or bounty. The tender mercies of the Almighty shed forth abundantly upon such, leave a compassionate frame upon their hearts, as in the Gaoler, Acts 16. Their thoughts steeped in the mercies they have received, are dyed of the same colour as cloth is in the dye-fat. Col. 3.12. This Text, after no mercy, fitly addes, nor knowledge of God in the land.] Heb. And no knowledge of God: or, because there is no knowledge of God in the land. Did men but know God savingly, had they but tasted and seen how good the Lord is, they would not be so hide-bound, and strait-handed to their poor brethren: but ready to distribute, willing to communi∣cate. They are the dark places of the earth, that are full of the habitations of cruelty, Psal. 74 20.1 Tim. 6.18. But in the kingdome of Christ they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord:  why? For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Esay 11.9. St. Paul thanks his ignorance for his persecutions, and blasphemy, 1 Tim. 1.13. and resolves the sinne of those Kill-Christs into their not knowing of him, 1 Cor. 2.8. Surely as toads and serpents grow in dark and dirty sellars: So doth all sin and wickednesse in an ignorant and blinde soul. Hence, in this Text, after no knowledge of God in the land, followeth that black bed-roll of abominations in the next verse. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, &c. As blinde Ale-houses are sinks and sources of all villany: so are blind hearts. In the land.] Though it were a land of light, a very Goshen in comparison of the rest of the world: Though in Judah was God known, and his name great in Israel, Psal. 6.1. Men may remain grossely ignorant amidst a multitude of means: and in a land of righteousnesse deal unjustly, and why? they will not behold the Majesty of the Lord, Esay 26.10. & verse 1. They will not see. They are willingly ignorant,2 Pet. 2. Joh. 3. Job 24.17. saith St. Peter: Ʋt liberiùs peccent libenter ignorant, saith Bernard. They hate the light, saith our Saviour; It is unto them as the shadow of death, saith Job. Hence they shut the windowes, lest it should shine upon them: or if it do, they rebel against it, rush against it, as Bats do against torches in the night. That light they have by nature, or otherwise (as a Prophet from God) they detain and imprison in unrigh∣teousnesse, Rom. 1.18. Their knowledge of God, if any, is onely apprehensivè, and not affectivè, cognoscitiva, non vitae directiva, illightning, not transforming into the same image, so as to make them children of light: It is notionall know∣ledge, not experimentall and practicall. Hence, such outrages in their lives, such errours and enormities: For, Verse 2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing,] Heb. To swear, and lie, and kill, and steal, and commit adultery: To do all this is held, licitum & solenne, lawfull, or at least pardonable. It is grown to a common practise: and custome of sinning hath taken away sense of sin. By swearing,] Heb. by cursing, or swearing with an execration and cursing, which was commonly added to an Oath, to confirm it the more, Deut. 29.12, 21. Nehem. 10.29. And indeed, in every lawfull oath, God is called to witnesse, to blesse us, if we swear right, and to curse us, if otherwise. Such an oath is a speciall part of Gods worship, and is oft put for the whole: as here, false and frivolous oaths are put for the violation of the whole first Table, and set in opposition to the knowledge of God in the Land: like as lying is opposed to truth; and killing,
stealing, whoring, to mercy, or kindnesse: Before, God had complained of their defects, or omissions: here of their commissions and flagitious practises. Swearers (but especially false-swearers) are traytours to the State, as appeareth here, and Jer. 23.10. they bring a curse, nay a large roul of curses (ten yards long, and five yards broad) upon their hearts, and Zach. 5.2. and shall one day howl in hell. The same word that is here rendred swearing, signifeth also to howl, Joel 1.8. Go to now therefore ye swearers, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you, Iames 5.1,—12. Weep here, where there be wiping handkerchiefs in the hand of Christ: better do so, then yell with devils who have borrowed your mouthes, to utter horrid blasphemies. Swearing is of the devil, saith our Saviour, Matth. 5.37. and it brings men to the devil, saith St. Iames, Chap. 5.12. They object, that they swear nothing but the truth. But that's not alwayes so. Swearing and lying are here set together, as seldom sundred. The marvel, if he that sweareth commonly, do not forswear frequently: for he sweareth away all his faith and truth. But, say they swear truth: yet that excuseth not. Truth is but one circumstance of an oath, Ier. 4.2. Men, as they must swear in truth, so in righteousnesse, (not rashly, furi∣ously) and in judgement, not in jest. Swear not in jest, lest ye go to hell in earnest. It is the property and duty of a godly man to fear an oath, Eccles. 9.2. and not to forbear it onely. As on the other side, no surer signe of a profane person, then common and customary swearing. It were well if such were served as Lewis the ninth of France served a citizen of Paris; he seared his lips for swearing, with an hot iron. And when some said, it was too cruel an act; I would to God said he, that with searing mine own lips with an hot iron, I could banish out of the Realm all abuse of oathes. Those that plead, they have gotten a custome to swear, and therefore they must be born with, shall have the like answer from God that the thief had from the Judge. He desired the Judge to spare him, for stealing had been his custome from his youth, and now he could not leave it. The Judge replied, it was also his cu∣stome, to give judgement against such malefactours; and therefore he must be con∣demned. And lying,] Fitly linked with swearing. Some gravell or mud ever passeth away with much water; so do some lies with much swearing. How oft do men for∣get their oathes, and swear again that they have not sworn at all? Should mens excrements come from them as oft, and they not feel it, they would be full sorry, and ashamed thereof. Now swearing and lying  file men much worse then any jakes can do, Mark 7.22. and render them odious to God and good men. Lying is a blushfull evil: Therefore doth the liar deny his lie, as ashamed to be taken with it; and our ruffians revenge it with a stab. God rankes and reckons it with the most monstrous sins; and shuts it out of heaven, Revel. 21.8. Aristotle saith,Arist. Ethic; lib. 4. c. 7. It is in it self evil and wicked, contrary to the order of nature, (which hath given words to expresse mens mindes and meanings) destructive to humane society. Pythagoras was wont to say, that in two things we become like unto God.Aelian. Var. hist. 1. In telling truth. 2. In bestowing benefits. Now, Mentiri, is contra mentem ire; To lie, is to utter a known untruth with an intention to deceive, or hurt. The Cretians of old were infamous for this: The Friars of late: 'Twas grown to a proverb among our forefa∣thers: A frier, a lier: 'Tis now amongst us, Every lier is, or would be a thief. Hence, lying and stealing go coupled here: but betwixt them both stands killing,Tit. 1.1. , &c. as ushered in by the former, and oft occasioned by the later, Pro. 1.19. and killing,] This follows fitly upon the former: for truth hath alwayes a scratcht face. The devil was first a liar, and then a murtherer.Joh. 8.44 He cannot so well murther, without he slander first. The credit of the Church must first be taken away, and then she is wounded, Cant. 5.6. The people here in England, once complained, that Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, that noble Patriot,Speed. was twice murthered: first, by detraction, and then by deadly practise. The French have a Proverb; Those that have a minde to kill their neighbours Dog, make the world beleeve he was mad first. This is their Proverb, and accordingly was their pra∣ctise in the Massacre of Paris. A little before which, they gave out, that the Pro∣testants met by night, to plot against the State, and to commit all manner of un∣cleannesse amongst themselves. This is an old trick of the Devil and his Instruments, first to belie the Church, and to represent her to the world in the ugliest hue; and
then to persecute her, like as of old they used to put the poor Christians in Bears or Lions skins, and then bait them with dogs. Paulus Fagius reports a story of an Egyptian, who said, that the Christians were a colluvies of moist filthy lecherous people. And for their keeping of the sabbath, he saith, they had a disease upon them, and were therefore faine to rest every seventh day. The Papists accused the Waldenses (those ancient Protestants) for Manichees; and that they affirmed there were two beginnings of things, God and the devill &c: and all because they con∣stantly affirmed that the Emperour had no dependance upon the Pope. They gave them out also for Arrians (and published their Croisado's against them as enemies to Christ) and all because they denyed that a crust was transubstantiated into Christ. To make way for the ruine of England by the gun-powder-plot, they gave out be∣yond sea that the people here looked as black as devils, were grown barbarous, and did eat young children. That we held opinion to worship no God, to serve the times, to prefer profit before right, to pretend the publike cause to our private lusts, to cover hatred with flattery,Eudaem Johannes. to confirme tyranny by shedding innocent blood, to keep faith no longer then will serve our own turnes &c. And if the plot had taken effect, they had fathered it upon the Puritans (having proclamations ready framed for the purpose) that under that name, they might have suckt the blood and re∣veld in the ruines of all such here, as had but the love, or any shew of sound re∣ligion. The word here used for killing signifies to kill with a murthering weapon, such as David felt in his bones, Psal. 42.10. such as Colignius and other the poore Protestants felt in the French Massacre: where the Queen of Navarre was poisoned, the most part of the peerelesse Nobility in France murthered, together with their wives and children; and of the common people an hundred thousand in one yeare, in diverse parts of the realme. What should I speake of the innocent blood of Ireland, for which God hath already and yet still will make diligent inqui∣sition. If the blood of Abel had so many tongues as drops Gen. 4.10. what then of so many righteous Abels? Surely I have seen yesterday (saith God) the blood of Naboth 1. King. 9.26. Murther ever bleeds fresh in his eye: to him many yeares, yea that eternity that is past is but yesterday. Neither is he wanting to punish it even in this present world. He avengeth the innocent blood that Manasseh shed, a long while after his death: he would not pardon it, no, though Manasseh repented of it, 2 King. 24.4. The mountains of Gilboah were accursed, for the blood of Saul and Jonathan spilt upon them. 2 Sam. 1. and what a deale of doe we find in the law made, when a man was murthered Deut. 21.1, 2. &c. the valley where the expiatory sacrifice was slaine in that case was from thenceforth to be neither eared nor sowen Verse 4. &c. in all to shew, what a precious esteem God hath of mans life: and what controversie with a land for shedding of blood. and stealing] Those publici latrones especially, publike theeves that sit in purple robes: and by wrong judgement oppress and rob the poor innocents are here inten∣ded, as Calvin thinks; See Isa. (23. and 33.) So are all others that either by force or fraud get into their hands their neighbours goods; whether, I say, it be by violence or cunning contrivance, the Lord is the avenger of all such. 1 Thes. 4.6. So that though haply they lie out of the walk of humane justice and come not un∣der mans cognizance, yet God will find them out, and send his flying roule of cur∣ses after them, Zech. 5.2.3. he shall vomit up his sweet morsels, here Job 20.15. or else disgest in hell what he hath devoured on earth: as his belly hath prepared deceit, Job. 15.35.Serm. before K. Edw. 6. so God will take it out of his guts againe: either he shall make resti∣tution of his ill-gotten goods, or for not doing it, he shall one day cough in hell, as Father Latimer phraseth it. and committing adultery] This is also an hainous crime (saith holy Job) yea it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges Chap. 31.11. Heathens have punished it very severely. Of one people we read that they used to put the adulterers or adul∣teresses head into the panch of a beast where the filth of it lay, and so stiffled him. God punished those stinking Edomites with stinking brimstone for their lothsome bruitishnesse; and adjudged adultery to death: because society and purity of posterity could not otherwise continue amongst men. We read not in any general commandement of the law, that any should be burnt with fire, but the high-priests daughter for adultery. Lev. 21.9. yet it seemes it was in use before the law, or else
Judah was much to blame for sentencing his daughter in law Tamar to the fire. Gen. 38.24. Let us beware of that sin, for which so peculiar a plague was appom∣ted, and by very Heathens executed. See Jer. 29.22.23. If men be slack to take vengance on such, yet God will hold on his controversie against them and a∣venge the quarrel of his covenant (for so wedlock is called Prov. 2.17.) either by his own bare hand, or else by the hands of the adulterers themselves. See an in∣stance of both these even in our times: In the yeare 1583. in London, two citi∣sens committing adultery together on the Lords day,Divine Trage∣die were struck dead with fire from heaven in the very act of uncleannesse: their bodies being left dead in the place half burnt up, sending out a most lothsome savour, for a spectacle of Gods contro∣versy against adultery and sabbath breaking. This judgment was so famous and remarkable that Laurentius Bayenlink a forrain historian hath thought good to re∣gister it to posterity.Opus Chronolo∣giae. Or his Vni∣versi. Antwerp. 1611. p. 110. Mr. Cleaver reports of one that he knew that had commit∣ted the act of uncleanesse: and in the horrour of conscience he hang'd him∣self: But before, when he was about to make away himself, he wrot in a paper, and left it in a place to this effect: Indeed, saith he, I acknowledge it to be utter∣ly unlawfull for a man to kill himself: but I am bound to act the Magistrates part, because the punishment of this sin is death: This act of his was not to be justified, Viz. to be his own deathsman: but it shewes what a controversy God hath with adulterers, and what a deep gash that sin makes in the conscience. they break out] like wild horses over hedges: or proud waters over the banks. The Septuagint renders in  They are poured out. And St. Jude hath a like expression, speaking of the Libertines of his time Verse 11. they run greedily, Gr: they were powered out, or powred away as water out of a vessel: they ran headlong, or gave themselves over to work all uncleanness with greedinesse, to satisfie their lusts, and to oppose with crest and brest whatsoever stands in their way; bearing down all before them.Beza. So Sodom and Gomorrah are (in the seventh verse of the same epistle) said by unbridled licentiousnesse to give themselves over to fornication, In scor∣tationem effusae. And when Lot sought to advise them better they set up the bristles at him, with Base busie stranger,Dubartas. comest thou hither thus Controwler-like to prate and preach to us? &c Thus these Effractores (as the Psalmist somewhere calleth them) these breach-ma∣kers,Judg. 16.9. Psal. 2.3. breake Christs bands in sunder, (as Sampson did the seven green withes) and cast away his cords from them. These unruly Belialists get the bit betwixt their teeth, like headstrong horses; and casting their rider, rise up against him. They like men (or rather like wilde beasts) transgresse the covenant Hos. 5.7. resolving to live as they list, to take their swinge in sin:Psal. 12.4. for who, (say they) is Lord over us? Tremellius reades that text, tanquam hominis, they transgresse it as if it were the covenant of a man: they make no more of breaking the law, then as if they had to do with dust and ashes like them selves, and not with the great God that can tame them with the turn of his hand, and with the blast of his mouth blow them in∣to hell. Hath he not threatened to walk contrary to those that walk contrary to him, to be as cross as they for the hearts of them, and to bring upon them seven times more plagues then before, and seven times and seven to that, till he have got the better of them? for is it fit that he should cast down the bucklers first? I trow not. He will be obeyed by these exorbitant, yokelesse, lawlesse persons; either actively, or passively. The law was added because of transgression: and is given, saith, the Apostle, not to the righteous, for they are  a law to themselves,1 Tim. 1.9. (as the Thracians boasted) but to the lawlesse and disobedient, who count licentious∣nesse the onely liberty, and the service of God the greatest slavery; who think no venison sweet but that that is stolen,Eccles. 2.2. nor any mirth but that which a Salomon would say to, Thou mad foole what do'st thou? Loc, for such rebels and refractaries, for such masterlesse monsters as send messages after the Lord Christ saying, We will not have this man to raigne over us, for these, I say, was the law made, to hamper them and shackle them, as fierce and furious creatures: to tame them and taw them with its foure iron teeth, 1 of Irritation, Rom. 7.7. 2.ly of Induration, Isa. 6.10. 3.ly
Of obligation to condigne punishment, Gen. 4.4. 4. Of execration, or ma∣lediction, Deut. 28.16, 17, &c, Let men take heed therefore how they break out against God: Let them meddle with their matches, and not contend with him that is mightier then they: 'Tis the Wise-mans counsell, Eccles. 6.10. and blood toucheth blood.] i. e. there is a continuation, and as it were a concate∣nation of murders, and other horrible villenies, as was at Jerusalem in the murther of Zacharias, the son of Barachias, the blood of the sacrificer was mingled with the blood of the sacrifice: And as Luke 13.1. the like fell out. So at Athens, when Scylla took the Town, there was , as mercilesse slaughter; the gutters running with blood, &c. And so at Samaria (which the Prophet may here probably intend) when there was such killing of Kings; (and they fall not alone) Hosea killed his Predecessour Pekah, as he had done Pekahiah; Menahem killed Shallum, as Shallum had done Zacharias: so true is that of the Poet, Ad generum Cereris sine caede & sanguine pauci, Descendunt Reges,Juvenal. & siccâ morte tyranni. What got most of the first Caesars by their adoption, or designation to the Empire, Nisi ut citius interficerentur, but to be killed so much the sooner? All or most of them, till Constantine, died unnaturall deaths: As afterwards, Phocas the traytour killed the good Emperour Mauritius, stewing him in his own broth. Heraclius slew Phocas, putting him to a shamefull and tormentfull death, &c. Con∣radinus King of Germany, and Duke of Sweveland was beheaded by Charles King of Naples and Sicily;Balthas. exner. Val. Max. Christian. pag. 274. and the heads-man presently beheaded by another, ne ex∣taret qui jactaret tam generosum sanguinem à se effusum, (saith mine Authour) that there might not be any left to boast, that he had spilt so noble blood. Our Richard the third,Daniels hist. 249. that bloody and deceitfull man, is said to have used the instru∣ments of his cruell plots, (his cut-throats I mean) as men do their candles; burn the first out to a snuffe, and then, having lighted another, tread that under-foot. Faux (that fatall actor of the intended Powder-tragedy) should have been thus rewarded by his brethren in evil, had the plot taken effect. It is that famous and never to be forgotten fifth of November 1651. wherein I writ these lines: And therefore in way of thankfulnesse to our ever-gracious Deliverer, I here think good to set down the relation as Mr. John Vicars (in his Quintessence of cruelty, or Poem of the popish Powder-plot) hath declared it to the world, as he had it from Mr. Clement Cotton, the Composer of the English Concordance, who also received it from Mr. Pickering of Titsmarsh-grove in North-hampton-shire, and it is thus. This Mr. Pickering being in great esteem with King Iames, had an horse of speciall note, on which he used to hunt with the King: This horse was borrowed of him (a little before the blow was to be given) by his brother in law Keyes (one of the Conspiratours) and conveyed to London, for a bloody purpose, which thus was plotted: Faux on the day of the fatall blow, was appointed to retire himself to St. Georges-fields, where this said horse was to attend him to make his escape so soon as the Parlament-house was blowen up. It was likewise contrived, that the said Mr. Pickering (noted for a Puritan) should be that very morning murthered in his bed, and secretly conveyed away: As also that Faux himself should have been murthered in St. Georges-fields, and there so mangled and cut in pieces as that it might not be discovered who he was. Whereupon it was to be bruited abroad, that the Puritans had blown up the Parliament-house: And the better to make the world beleeve so, there was Mr. Pickering with his horse ready to make an escape, but that God stirred up some, who seeing the hainousnesse of the fact, and he ready to escape by flight, in detestation of so horrible a deed fell upon him, and killed him, and so had hackt him in pieces. And yet to make it to be more ap∣parant to be so indeed, there was his horse found also, which was of speciall speed and swiftnesse, to carry him away: and upon this rumour, as massacre should have gone thorow the whole Kingdome upon the Puritans. But when this plot, thus contrived, was confest by some of the Conspiratours, and Faux in the Tower was made acquainted with it, (who had been born in hand, to be bountifully rewarded for that his service in the Catholike cause) when he saw how his ruine was contri∣ved,
he also thereupon confessed freely all that he knew touching that horrid and hideous conspiracie, which (before) all the torture of the rack could not force him to. The truth of all this, is attested by Mr. William Perkins, an eminent Christian and Citizen of London, who had it from the mouth of Mr. Clement Cotton: which I could not but here insert, as coming to my minde and Pen, on the very day where∣on (46. years since) it should have been acted, when my self was but four yeers of age, and it being the utmost that I can remember: but if ever I forget, let my right hand forger her cunning. Remember, O Lord, these children of Edom,Psal. 134.5, 7, 8. &c. these Romish Edomites,, Esauites, Jesuites, who said, Rase it, Rase it, even to the foundation, O daughter of Babylon, &c. The Rabbines call the Romists, Edomites, (they interpret the mount of Esau, Obad. ver. 21. to be meant of Rome) and well they may, for their blood-guiltinesse, for which they are hated of God, Psal. 5.6. Who cannot but remember,. that their sins (as a cart-rope) have reached up to hea∣ven, Rev, 18.5. there having been a concatenation, or a continued series of them, as the Greek there imports, and (as some here interpret) blood touching blood, ac∣cording to Esay 1.15. Your hands are full of blood. And Chap. 4.4. The filth of the daughter of Zion, and the blood of Jerusalem. This sence, the Chaldee Paraphrase maketh. The Septuagint (with their , mingle blood with blood) seem to un∣derstand it of incestuous matches and mixtures forbidden, Levit. 18.6. and yet avowed by David George and his disciples, and practised in the Court of Spain, by Papall dispensation. Verse 3. Therefore shall the land mourn,] Here the Lord proceeds to give sentence; and it is dreadfull indeed. Lugebit terra, languebit incola, &c. You will not mourn, therefore your land shall: the ugly face of your sin shall appear in the miserable desolation of your Countrey: There is no truth, mercy, or knowledge of God in your land: which even groans under your burden, the axeltree thereof being ready to break; therefore it shall be eased of you, by my sore, and great, and strong sword, which shall soon make work amongst you, and lay all wast. And as Gods red horse of warre is followed by the black horse of famine, and that blace one, by the pale horse of pestilence, Rev. 6.4, 5, 8. so shall it be here. As by swearing, and lying,, &c. you have broke out, so shall my whole wrath break out upon you as mighty torrent. As blood hath touched blood, so punishment shall follow hard upon sin: for these two are knit together with chains of Adamant, saith the Poet. if thou do evil, sin lies at the door, saith God, Gen. 4.7. that is, supplicium imminet, idque proximum & praesentissimum, saith Junius there: Evil shall hunt the wicked man to destroy him: his sin shall find him out as a blood∣hound, and haunt him as an hell-hag. Where iniquity breaks-fast, calamity will be sure to dine; to sup where it dines, and to lodge where it sups. No sooner had man sinned, but the earth was cursed for his sake, Gen. 3.17, 18. It was never beautifull nor cheerfull since. At this day it lies bed-ridden, and looks to be burnt up shortly with her works, 2 Pet. 3.10. Here it is brought in as a mother in mour∣ning, bewayling the losse of all her children, and refusing to be comforted. And surely though the land be eased of a very heavy burden, as I have said, when pur∣ged by Gods just judgements of her ungratefull and wicked inhabitants: yet be∣cause she lies under the dint of Divine displeasure at such a time, therefore is shee rightly said to mourn in this case, and to be in a sad disconsolate condition, (See Jer. 12.4.) she becomes a very Ahil, (that's the word here used, see Iudg. 11.33.) a Bochim, an Hadadrimmon, an Iri-sland; and being desolate she mourneth unto thee: for she seeth that her convulsions are like to end in a deadly consumption. And every one that dwelleth therein shall languish,] Heb. shall wither as a flower, Nahum 1.4. Or, shall be weakened. Those that now stand upon their tiptoes, and face the very heavens, stouting it out with God, shall then be weak as water, withe∣red as a flower, strengthlesse as a moth-eaten-cloth, Psal. 39.11. low-spirited, and crest-faln, as the king of Sodom, (erst man good enough to look four kings in the face, but anon suppliant to Abraham, a forlorn forreiner, Gen. 14.21.) Manasseh that sturdy rebell, in trouble basely hides his head among the bushes, 2 Chron. 33.11. Caligula in time of thunder ran under beds and benches. Affliction will tame, and take down the proudest spirits: they break in adversity that bore their heads on high in prosperity: they speak out of the ground, and whisper out of the dust,Esay 21.4.
that look to be brought into the dust of death Psal. 22.15. It is the pestilence that here seemeth to be threatened (as before sword and famine) and an universall pestilence too; reaching not onely to men but to other creatures made for mans uses, which shewes the greatnesse of the wrath: like as when a King not onely ex∣ecuteth the traytour, but also pulleth down his house, confiscateth his goods, and and disinheriteth his children &c. But what have those sheep done? the beasts, birds,Pareus. and fishes that they must suffer also? It is but reason they should, sith first they are part of mens enjoyments: secondly they are many times (though harme∣lesse in themselves) yet instruments of mens sin: and therefore well doth the Chal∣dee here paraphrase Diminutionem patientur propter hominum peccata they shall suffer for mans sin: who may therefore well say to them, as Judah did to Tamar, Thou art more rigteous then I. with the beasts of the field] which shall dye by the murrian. and the foules of the ayre] which shall catch the contagion,Joseph. and fall down dead: as those birds do that attempt to fly over the dead sea. and the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away] Colligentur, conficientur they shall be gathered together as seeking help one of another in a common danger: and yet they shall be destroyed,Engl. Chron. the very waters being pestilentiall, as they were here in King Edward the thirds dayes; so that the very foules and fishes had botches up∣on them. This was a heavier judgement then that which befell the old world: for then the fishes perished not: though the Jew-doctours would perswade us that these also died in the flood: for that the waters thereof were boyling hot. Verse 4. Yet let no man strive nor reprove another] let him not lose so much good labour, and spill so many sweet words upon this people: for they are grown uncoun∣sellable, incurable, incorrigible. They have rejected the counsel of God within, or, against themselves Luk. 7.30. corripiuntur sed non corriguntur: it is because the Lord intendeth to destroy them 1 Sam. 2.25. yea he hath determined it 2 Chron. 25.16 Hence as dying men lose their hearing and other senses by degrees: so those that are destined to destruction grow stupid and stubborn, and will neither heare good counsel, nor see the things that concern their peace: but spurn at ad∣monition and scorn at reproof. Tunc etiam docta plus valet arte malum. And therefore God forbids to reprove such, as deplored and desperate; to cast pearles of good counsel before such dogs, who preferr lothsome carrion before sweet odours; yea rage at them as Tigers do, and fly in the faces of such as pre∣sent them: or at best grunt and goe their wayes, as swine; leave good counsell where they find it, not putting it in practise. Now as dogs and swine were coun∣ted unclean creatures, and unfit for sacrifice: so are such for admonition. Let a man be never so able and apt to teach, let him be vir praestans, eximius, insignis, a gallant man (as the word here used sometimes signifieth) and one that can do his work never so well, yet the wisdome of his words shall be despised Prov. 23.9. Let him strive till his heart akes, Jude. 22. . & disputatos arguere, as St. Jude speaketh, he shall but strive against the stream, and by reprooving a scorner get him a blot, Pro. 9.7. The Pharisees denied our Saviour, and blew their noses at him Luk. 16.14. Let them alone therefore saith our Saviour to his disciples, they be blinde leaders of the blind; ther's no good to be done of them:Mat. 15. therefore let him that is filthy be filthy still Rev. 22.11. and he that is ignorant let him beignorant, sith he will needs be so, 1 Cor. 14.38.Levit. 26.39. Let him pine away in his iniquity. Let him pine and perish, go on, despair, dye, and be damned. My spirit shall no longer strive with him, unless it be by furious rebukes Ezek. 5.15. and by fire Am. 7.4. Oecolampadius upon this text doubts not to say that the sin of such as reject admonition, is the sin against the holy Ghost: certainly it is worse then all the forementioned swearing, lying, &c. Blind nature could see and say as much. Hesiod saith that there are three sorts of men: the first and best are those that live so well as not to need reproof. The second (and those not bad) are such as doe not so well, but can be content to heare of it.. Hesiod. Oper. et dier. Ver. 29. The third and worst are they that will neither do as they ought, nor be ad∣vised to do better. Plutarch saith those that are troubled with tooth-ach will go
to the Physitian: those that have a fever will send for him: but he that is frantick or stark mad will do neither, but reject the remedy and strike at the Physitian. So doth the scorner &c. See my common place of Admonition. for this people are as they that strive with the priest] though Gods officer, and in his stead 2 Cor. 5.20. though the peoples Oracle to preserve and present knowledg to them Mal. 2.7 and though to strive with such, be to invert Gods order, who hath appointed the people to heare and obey their Teacher; and not to prescribe to them: to follow their Guides, and not to run before them Heb. 13.7.17. and 1 Tim. 1, 20. 2 Tim. 1.15. Num. 16. From which texts and 1 Cor. 11.2.3. a grave divine argueth thus, It is a vile sin to vex our ministers by our obstinacy, yea though they were not able to make so full demonstration: yet when they re∣proove such and such things out of a spiritual jealousy and feare they corrupt their hearts, they are to be heard: how much more when they come in the demonstrati∣on of the Spirit and of power?1 Cor. 2.4. And yet how full is the church & ever hath been of such Vitilitigatores as contend with the best ministers, quarrel at Gods word and take up armes against it? snuffing at it Mal. 1.13 chatting at it Rom. 9.19.20 cast∣ing reproaches upon it Jer. 20.8.9. enviously swelling at it Act. 13.45. The more you touch these toads, the more they swell: the more you meddle with these serpents the more they gather poison to spet at you: Go about to coole them with faire words, you shall but adde to their heate: as the smiths forge fries when cold water is cast upon it: and as hot water, if stirred, casteth up the more fume.Plin. Elia. Vul∣tures unguento irritantur & scaraboni rosa Vultures cannot endure sweet odours. Tygers, if they heare the sound of a drum will rage and teare themselve- Ahab cannot abide Micaiah, nor Herod John Baptist. The people contested with Jeremy and cursed him Chap. 15.10. though he were Concionator admirabilis,Rhet. Eclesi∣ast. cap. vlt. as Kecker∣man hath it, an admirable Preacher; yet they sought his life, saying, Prophesie not in the name of the Lord that thou dye not by our hands Chap. 11.25.Jer. 44.16. Bradford. yea they told him flat and plaine, The word which thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the Lord we will not heare. O leud losels, (as that martyr in like case exclaimed) O faithless hard hearts, O Jesabels guests, rockt and laid asleep in her bed. O sorrow∣lesse sinners and shamelesse harlots &c. Ministers are lights, offensive to sore eyes; the salt of the earth which is bitter to wounds &c. Among the Athenians, if the Comedians (which were their teachers, such as they had) pleased not the people, they were overwhelmed with stones. Once was I stoned saith Paul.2 Cor. 11. and Jeremy is said to have met with the like death from his flagitious countreymen in Egypt, a∣mongst whom he was ever a man of strife, and his service was (in that behalf) like that of Manlius Torqutus among the Romans, who gave it over saying, Neither can I beare their manners, nor they my government. See Chap. 20.9. Verse 5. Therefore shalt thou fall] how could they do otherwise that were a na∣tion so incorrigibly flagitious, so unthankfull for mercies, so impatient of remedies, so uncapable of repentance, so obliged, so warned, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked? therefore shalt thou fall in the day] vivens videns{que} peribis thou shalt stumble at noon day, because there is no knowledge of God in the land: but thou hast loved darknesse rather then light, therefore shalt thou have enough of it: thy feet shall stumble upon the dark mountaines Jer. 13.16. yea thou shalt stumble and fall and never rise againe, which is threatned expressly to these swearers Am. 8.14 & implied in the Hebrew word here used. Such was Elies fall off his stoole, & Hamans fall before Mordecai the Jew Esth. 6.13. Impenitent persons are brats of fathomlesse perdi∣tion, they are ripe for ruine, shall fall into remediless misery, and (though never so insolent and angry against those that deale plainely and faithfully with them as in the former verse, yet) they shall never want an Hosea to tell them so to their teeth: that those that will not bend may break, that if they will needs fall they may fall with open eyes, and not have cause to say that they were not fore-warned. And this shall be done to day  that is, very shortly, in this present age (so some interpret it (aut certe clarissima luce, saith Mercer, or else in the open light, and in the view of all men, not in huggermugger. Tremellius thinks it is as much as re∣bus adhuc integris subitò opprimentur, Thou shalt be suddenly surprised when thou art in thy flourish, and fearest no changes. What can be more faire and flourish∣ing
then the field a day before harvest? then the vineyard a day before the vin∣tage? certissimè citissimé{que} corrues. Every wicked man may apply it: wherefore also it is delivered in the second person singular, Thou even thou: to thee be it spoken. and the Prophet also shall fall with thee in the night] The Chaldee hath it, as in the night, if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him, John 11.10. The false Prophet cannot lay his hand upon his brest and say as dying Oecolampadius did.Melch. Adam. Hic sat lucis Here's store of light. Such are wofully benigh∣ted shall be utterly darkened Zech. 11.17. yet more may look to be, for their right eye (being blind leaders of the blind) yea the night shall be upon them and it shall be dark unto them: the sun shall go down over their heads &c. Mic. 3.6. and when they fall together with those seduced soules into the ditch of destruction, themselves shall fall undermost Mat. 15.17. and receive the deeper damnation Mat. 23.14. If others shall be damned, they must look to be double damned, as Dives feared to be, if ever his brethren (by his example) came to that place of torment. Mercers note here is very good Nocte casuros dicit &c. He saith they shall fall in the night as signifying by an allegory, that when calamity shall lay hold upon these false Prophets, they shall also be pricked in their consciences, which shall tell them that ventris causa for their bellyes sake, and other base respects, they have brought upon the seduced people so great mischiefs. This shall be as a dagger at their hearts: and shall fill their consciences with horrour and distress. and I will destroy thy mother] i. e. the whole synagogue, yea the whole Church and state, the Vniversity of the Israelites: so that their nation and name should perish together. Is it not so with the ten tribes? who can tell at this day where to find them or whence to expect them? whether from China, as some think and al∣ledge Isay. 49.12. Or from Tartary, as others who say that Tartar, (alias Ta∣tari or Totari) comes from  Tothar a Residue or remnant.Breerw. En∣quir. pag. 94. This is no other then a vaine and capricious fancy saith learned Brierwood &c. Is it not altogether unlikely that the Lord in this threat might allude to that law Deut. 22.6. Thou shalt not take the damme (Heb. the mother) with the young: But I that am above law, saith God, will cut off dam and young together in the nest, I will utterly cut off the whole nation This was fulfilled 2 King. 17. and our Prophet lived to see it, to his great heart-break. Oh that we could be warned &c. Let holy mother church of Rome (as they call her) look to it, with her doctrine of Infallibility. These Israelites gloried as much of their Mother, Rev. 17. and thought (as Dionysius did of his kingdome) that the Church had been tied to their nation with chaines of Ada∣mant: but their mother is here threatned to be cut off: and of the sea of Rome it is long since foretold, Babylon is fallen, is fallen &c. It is a queston among Di∣vines whether the Church can faile? It is answered, that the Catholike invisible Church cannot: but any particular and visible Church may, as this of Israel; and that of Rome, which hath long since cast off Christ, and the publike exercise of true religion: and is become ex aurea, argentea, ex argentea ferrea, ex ferrea ter∣rea: superest jam ut in stercus abeat said one of her own sons an dugusline friar Anno.Ren. de vit. Pontif. 1414. and many others of their own writers say the same necessariò potius quàm libenter, as wrested from them by the truth, rather then of any itching hu∣mour to disgrace their mother by uncovering her nakednesse. Verse 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge] my people (ther's the wonder of it) of whom it was wont to be said by the heathen, surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people: and well it might: for what nation ever had God so nigh unto them &c. and statutes and judgments so righteous &c. Deut. 4.6.7.8. what nation ever had Prophets, and Priests as they had, to teach Jacob his statutes and Israel his law Deut. 33.10. all meanes of knowledg they had that might be; so that God might say to them as once Abijam did to Jeroboam and all Israel,2 Chron. 13.5. Hab. 2.14. Ought you not to have known this? should ye not all know the Lord from the least to the greatest? should not your land be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea? Doth not wisdome cry in your streets? and knowledge (in the abundance of meanes) bow down to you as trees do that are laden with fruit, so that a child may gather them? How is it then that you (my people) are yet so hard and blockish, as rude and ignorant of me and my will, of your selves and your duties, as the blinde Ethnickes? For some of you have not the knowledg of God: I
speak this to your shame. Yea who is blind but my servant: or deaf as my messenger that I sent? who is blinde as he that is perfect, and blinde as the Lords servant?Esay 42.19. I speak it with grief and stomack, and therefore I so oft speak it. Surely to whom∣soever much is given, much is required; and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more, Luke 12.48.2 Cor. 6.1. It is a grievous thing to receive the grace of God in vain: and when for the time men might have been Teachers, to have need to be taught the very first principles of the Oracles of God.Heb. 5. For if God will pour out his wrath upon the heathen that know him not, Ier. 10.25.Acts 14. who yet were left in the dark to grope after him, as they could: And if the poor Philoso∣phers (who had but the rush-candle of Natures dim light to work by) were yet delivered up to a reprobate sense, because they glorified God no better, Rom. 1. Oh the bloody wails that he will make upon the backs of his non-proficients, sots and dullards in his school! Ingentia beneficia flagitia supplicia. Are destroyed,] Or, silenced, as Matth. 22.12. The Chaldee rendreth it ob∣brutuerunt, they are besotted, and so fitted for destruction: for Deus quem destruit dementat. Ignorance is the mother not of devotion, (as Papists say) but of destru∣ction: and ignorant persons shall be silent in darknesse, as holy Hanna hath it: they shall lie down in sorrow, as the Prophet Esay: And although they alwayes wander and erre in heart, as not knowing Gods wayes, Psal. 95.10.11. yet they cannot go so far wide, as to misse of hell; where they are sure to suffer both pain of losse, and pain of sense: for they shall be punished with everlasting destruction, in a flame of fire (there's pain of sense) from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power (there's pain of losse) 2 Thess. 2.8, 9. Lo here the portion of all igno∣rant persons: and withall take notice of an usuall and equall proceeding of Gods impartiall justice in punishing such. He delights to punish sin in kind, to pay wicked persons in their own coyn, to overshoot them in their own bowe, to answer them in their own language, as he once did those bold Babel-builders, Gen. 11. Go to, say they: Go to, saith He: Let us build up to heaven, say they: Lets go down, and see that building, saith He: Let us make us a name, say they: Let us confound their language, that they may not so much as know their own names, saith He: Lest we be scattered, say they: Let us scatter them abroad the world, saith He. Thus God worded it with them, and confuted their folly from point to point. And the like he will do with ignorant people at that great day. Depart from us, say they now to God, Iob 21.14. Depart from me ye cursed, will He then say to them. We desire not the knowledge of thy wayes, say they, ibid. therefore I have sworn in my wrath, that you shall never enter into my rest, saith He. Ye have loved darknesse better then light, ye shall therefore have your belly-full of it in the bottom of hell: God loves to retaliate, as we may see here, and go no further: Because thou hast re∣jected knowledge, I will also reject thee: seeing thou hast forgot the Law of thy God, I will also (to cry quittance with thee) forget thy children. Thus by giving igno∣rant persons their own, he will so silence them, and even button up their mouthes, that they shall stand speechlesse; as being self-condemned. For lack of knowledge,] Propter non scientiam, for meer nescience, for such an ignorance as is privative onely, and of pure negation, which doth somewhat excuse a tanto, though not à toto: as in that servant that knew not his masters will, yet did commit things worthy of stripes, and had a few, Luke 12.48. But Israels ignorance was more then all this, and a great deal worse. For did not Israel know? Rom. 10.19. and have they not heard? yes verily: (verse 18.) No people under heaven like them for that, Psal. 147.19. But they rejected knowledge, and affected ignorance: they hated the light, and loved darknesse better. This was the condemnation, the mis∣chief of it, saith our Saviour;. who (besides this wilfull ignorance, that mother of mischief, and main support of Satans kingdome) laid down his life for the nescien∣cies, the not-knowings of his people, Heb. 9.7. and prayed for his persecutors at his death, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Because thou hast rejected knowledge,] And that out of an utter hatred of it, (as the Greek word made of the Hebrew signifieth) out of deep disdain,. as of a thing below thee, and vile in thine eyes, not worthy of thy pains, or pursuit. Wis∣dome is the principall thing, (saith Solomon, and he meaneth that wisdom that hath the fear of God for its foundation) therefore get wisdom. It is here called hadagnath,Prov. 4.5.
that knowledge, by an excellency, and with an accent, in opposition to that science, falsely so called, 1 Tim. 6.20. that knowledge that puffeth up, 1 Cor. 8.2. as it did Ioseph Scaliger, (that gulf of learning) for whom it had been happy, that he had been ignorant but of this one thing, that he knew so much. It is the acknow∣ledging of the truth which is after godlinesse (as the Apostle describeth it, Tit. 1.1.) that perfects the best part of a man, that confirmeth, setleth, guideth, discerneth, differenceth him from others, who are no better then bruits (though wise in their own generation, as are the Fox, Serpent, &c.) and maketh his face to shine, Eccles. 8.1. as St. Stevens did, who was taught of God, and mighty in the Scriptures. This holy knowledge was highly prized by Agur, Prov. 30.2. but slighted by those two slubbering Priests the sons of Eli, sonnes of Belial, they knew not the Lord, 1 Sam. 2.12. they knew him apprehensively, but not affectively: they professed that they knew God, but in their works they denied him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. He that saith, I know him, (saith S. John, 1 Epist. 2.4.) and keepeth not his Commandements, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him. Many of these Jeroboams Priests were ignorant Asses; like that Bi∣shop of Dunkelden in Scotland, who boasted, yea thanked God, that he never knew what the old and new Testament was; and that he would care to know nothing but his Portuise,Act. and Mon. fol. 1153. and his Pontifical: Or that Idol-Pastour in Germany, who being asked by the Visitours, whether he taught his people the Decalogue? answered, that hee had not the Book so called.Joh. Manl. loc. com. Others of them, that knew more of Gods minde, yet neither cared to practise it, nor to teach transgressours, Gods wayes, that sinners might be converted unto him.Psal. 51.13. I will also reject thee,] And that with a witnesse; with an unwonted and ex∣traordinary rejection, as the Hebrew word, Vecimaseka, (not found elsewhere in the same forme) seemeth to import: God will kick such Ignoramusses out of the Priesthood,Tremel. in locum. cast them out of the hearts of his people, throw them to the dunghill, as unsavoury salt; yea so reject them, as never to be received again, Ezek. 44.13. God will shake them out from his house, and from his labour, Neh. 5.13. (as the Tirshata did those Apostate Priests, Ezra 2.63.) and lay them by, as broken vessels, of which there is no further use: taking from them even that hich they seemed to have, Luke 8.18. and blasting their gifts. See Zech. 11. ult. with the Note. Seeing thou hast forgotten the Law of thy God,] i. e. All that holy learning, which thou, being a Priest, oughtest to have and to hold in firme and fresh remembrance, for the good of the poor people, which, by thy default, is cut off for lack of know∣ledge, even the knowledge of salvation by the remission of their sins, which thou shouldest have given them, Luke 1.77. not by infusion, but by instruction, which is the Priests proper office. But thou (alas) hast forgotten that little of my Law, that thou once hadst attained unto; and art grown as very a dolt and otard, as Theodorus Gaza (once a great scholler, but) in his dotage so ignorant, that he knew not his letters, he could not read. Nay thou art not onely a silly Asse, but a slow∣belly: all thy care is for fat sacrifices and benefices, thy wits are in thy belly, and thy guts in thy brain: hence thy forgetfulnesse of my Law, and of my peoples welfare. The Arabick Translation hath it thus, Inasmuch as thou hast loved this, and the consolation, therefore I will reject and forget the, &c. Demas forsook Paul, and embraced this present world; yea he became afterwards a Priest in an Idol Temple at Thessalonica, as Dorotheus testifieth. The Vulgar Latin Translation ren∣dreth this Text in the Feminine gender, quia oblia est against all Grammar and good reason: for the Lord here, speaketh to the Priest, and chiefly to the chief Priest, qui certè foemina non erat, saith Polanus, who sure was no woman: Un∣lesse the old interpreter, (like another Balaams-asse) would have this to have been spoken against the Sea of Rome, wherein Pope Joan sometime sate, Anno Dom. 854. Sure it is, that the Arch-priests of Rome are so delighted in the feminine gender, that they had rather attribute the breaking of the serpents head to a woman, the Virgin Mary, then to the Man Christ Iesus: for in their last Edition of the Latine Bible, they print, Gen. 3.15. Ipsa conteret tibi caput, She shall bruise thine head, &c. Thus Polanus. I also will forget thy children,] Thy spiritual children, say some, even that
whole people who saluted their Priests (as the Papists do their Padres) by the name of Father and observed their institutes. But they do better that understand the text of their naturall children, whom God here threateneth to forget, that is, to put them by the Priests office, as he threatned Eli. 1 Sam. 2.30. and thrust out Abiathar 1 King. 2.27. four-score years after. It is a dreadfull thing to be forgotten of God. We take it ill to be forgotten of a friend and to be as a dead man out of mind, Psal. 31.12. O take heed that God forget not us and our children: that he cast not off the care and keeping of us. He is so liberall a Lord and doth so little forget our labour of love and patience of hope as that he provideth for the posterity of his people, Psal. 69.36. The seed also of the servants shall inherit it: and they that love his Name shall dwell therein. Who then would not hire himself to such a master: who would not remember Gods Law and teach it others, if but for his poor chil∣drens sake who else will rue for it? Vers. 7. As they were increased] sc. in number, wealth and honour. Their pro∣sperity undid them, they flourished at this time in Court and Country, they waxed fat and kicked. The Priests are here accused of detestable ingratitude, and of unsuf∣ferable pride and insolency. As they were multiplyed or magnified, they have sinned against me] that is, they have abused my gifts to my great dishonour. Like fed hawkes, they have forgot their master. Nay, like yong mules, which when they have sucked, turn up their heels and kick their dam: so did these haughty and haunty Priests.Psal. 17.10. Psal. 119.70. Their hearts were fat as grease, they were inclosed in their own fat, but they delighted not in Gods Law. Cum ipsis opibus lascivire coepit Ecclesia. saith Platina. The Church began to be rich and wanton at once, rich and riotous. They had golden chalices but wooden Priests, Repugnante contra teipsum felicitate tuâ, as Salvian saith to the Church in his time: thy prosperity is thy bane. What would he have said if he had seen the Pope in his Princely State, thundering from his Capitoll, and heard their big-swoln titles of Padre benedicto, Padre Angelo, Archangelo, Cherubino Seraphino &c.Spec. Europ. Ammianus Marcellinus a heathen historian inveiged against the Bishops of Rome, even in those purer times, for their pride and luxury. Odi fastum illius ecclesiae saith Basil, I hate the haughtinesse of that Western Church. It caused the lamentable separation of the Greek Church from the Latine: the other four Patriarches (not without the like pride and stomack) dividing themselves from the Bishop of Rome, and at their parting using these or the like words. Thy greatnesse we know, thy co∣vetousnesse we cannot satisfie, thy encroaching we can no longer abide: live to thy self. And yet if they could have held them there, and shunned those evils which they blamed in others (walking humbly with God, and committing themselves to him in well-doing) they might have flourished to this day. But wrangling away the truth, and contracting rust with long ease and prosperity, God was forced to scour off that their rust with bloody War by the Turks. Of whom these Churches being in fear and danger, fled to carnall combinations: sent and subjected themselves to the Bishop of Rome that they might have his help. But all in vain: for shortly af∣ter, they were destroyed, and lost all. God covered them with confusion, and turned their glory into shame. So he hath done the Roman glory in part, and will do more every day.Parei Medull Roma diu titubans varijs erroribus acta. Corruet: et mundi desinet iste caput. God will cast dirt in the faces of proud prelates,Isa. 23.9. be will stain the pride of all glo∣ry cast upon them with ignominy, reproach Prov. 18.3. crush their crown with a woe, Esay 28.1. change their glory (their dignitie and greatnesse wherein they gloried) into shame, not without much bitternesse in the change, as the Hebrew word here used seemeth to import. Miserum enim est, fuisse felicem. Vers. 8. They eat up the sin of my people] that is, the sin-offerings, as Exod. 29, 14. This they might lawfully do, Levit. 6. and 10.17. But they were greedy dogs; and looked every one to his gain from his quarter, Esay 5.6.11. They winked at the peoples sins, and cared not what evils they fell into, so that they would bring in store of fat and good expiatory sacrifices, which made for the Priests advantage. They ate that
on earth which they were to disgest in hell: they fed upon such diet as bred the the worm of conscience, that never dyes. Just so the Papists do at this day: they teach the people, though they sin, yet by giving mony for so many Masses to be mumbled over, by a greasie Priest, or by so many indulgences and Dirges purchased of the Popes pardon-mongers, they shall be delivered, etiamsi, per impossibile, ma∣trem Dei vitiassent. I tremble to English it. Tecelius told them so in Germany; and got huge masses of mony for the Popes coffers. The common sort of Papists (for want of better teaching) will say, When we have sinned we must confesse: and when we have confessed,Specul. Europ. Psal. 14. we must sin again, that we may confesse again; and make work for new indulgences and Jubilees. But have these workers of iniquity no know∣ledge, that eat up Gods people as they eat bread? that drink up the blood of souls, much more worth hen the lives, that Davids men had jeoparded to procure him the water of the well of Bethlehem, which therefore he durst not drink of? This surely is that filthy lucre Ministers should be free from 1 Pet.. 5.2. Let all non-residents look to it, that carry onely forcipes et mulctrum those instruments of a foolish shepherd Zech. 11.15. (See the Note there) feeding themselves but starving the flock: an heavy account will they one day make to the Arch-shepheard, of this their sacri∣legious rapacity. and they set their hearts on their iniquity.] Heb. they lift up their souls: that is, they not onely prick up their ears, as Danaeus expounds it to listen after sins and sin-offerings, but they greedily desire and earnestly look after such emoluments, such belly timber: being gulae mancipia slaves to their guts, and wholly given up to gormandise. See the same expression: and in this sense Jer. 12.27. Deut. 24.15. Ezek. 24.25. and compare the practise of Popish Priests, who make infinite gain of every thing almost, as their ringing of Saints-bels, places of buriall, selling of licenses for marriage and meates, selling of corpses and Sepulchres. All things are saleable and soluble at Rome: and the savour of gaine sweet, though it come out of a stinking stewes, or Jewes counting-house. The Priests had a trick by wires to make their Images here wag their chaps a pace, if some good gift were presented: as if otherwise,Act. and Mon. to hang the lip in token of discontent. Verse 9. And there shall be like people like priest] i. e. they shall share alike in pu∣nishment, as they have done in sin: neither shall their priesthood protect them, any more then it did Elies two sons, whose white Ephod covered foule sins. A wick∣ed Priest is the worst creature upon earth. Who are devils but they that were once angels of light? and who shall have their portion with the devill and his angels, but those dehonestamenta cleri male monetae minstri, bad-liv'd ministers: It was grown to a proverb in times of Popery, that the pavement of hell was pitcht with souldiers helmets and shavelings-crowns. Letters also were framed and published as sent from hell: wherein the devill gave the Popish clergy no small thanks, for so many millions of soules as by them were daily sent down to him.Matth. Paris. ad Ann. 1072. The Priests might haply hope to be priviledged and provided for in a common calamity, for their office-sake; As Chrysostom saith that Aaron (though in the same fault with Miriam Numb. 12.1: yet) was not smitten with leprosy as she, for the honour of the Priesthood,. Chrys. lest such a foule disease on his person should redound to the disgrace of his office. But I rather think he escaped by his true and timely repentance; where∣by he disarmed Gods indignation, and redeemed his own sorrow and shame. For God is an impartiall judge: neither is there with him respect of persons: Priest and people shall all be carried captive one with another (the priests for the people, ac∣cording to that of Esay, I am a man of poullted lips: for why? I live among a peo∣ple of polluted lips and have learned their language:Esay 6. and especially the people for the priests Jer. 23.10.14.15. from the prophets there goes profanenesse quite through the land) so they shall fare the worse one for another: they shall all be in∣volved in the same punishment. Onely it shall be more grievous to the priest, by how much higher thoughts he had of himself: looking on the people as his under∣lings, as they did Joh. 7.49. and I will punish them for their wayes] Heb. visit them So Exod. 32.34. In the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them. God hath his visitation-dayes wherein to visit those visitours the priests; and his articles will be as strict and as criticall (saith one) as ever was the inquisition of Spain, or Lambeth. It was
therefore good counsel that a Martyr gave his wife in a letter, Among all other pri∣soners visit your own soul, and set all to rights there: for else, what will you do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what will you answer him?Job. 31.14 And that which Tertullian gave Scapula a Pagan persecutor; Si nobis non parcis, tibi parce: si non tibi, Carthagini. God will surely make inquisition for our blood: therefore if thou wilt not spare us, yet spare thy self: if not thy self, yet spare thy countrey, which must be responsible when God comes to visit. and reward them for their deed] Heb. I will make to return your doings: Hence this is well observed by a good interpreter; Sin passeth away in the act of it with much sweetnesse: but God will make it return back againe in the guilt of it, with much bitternesse. Verse 10. For they shall eat and not have enough] Onely they shall be filled with their own wayes Prov. 14.14. but that is but to feed upon the wind with Ephraim Hos. 12.1. which breedeth nothing but troublesome belching, or a doglike appe∣tite (as they call it) that cannot be satisfied. appetitus cani∣nus. These greedy dogs the Priests that did eat up the sins of Gods people and thought to have full gorged themselves there∣with, they met with that sore plague of unsatisfiablenesse for the present (a man may assoon fill a chest with wind as a soul with wealth; See Eccles. 5.10.Non plus satia∣tur cor auro, quam corpus cura. Ang. with the note) and for the future they coveted an evill covetousnesse to themselves, for they gat Gods curse along with their evill gotten goods which will bring them to a morsel of bread: they have not onely suckt in the ayre, but pestilentiall ayre, that not onely not fills them, but kills them too. See the note on Hagg. 1.6. they shall commit whordome and shall not increase] The Chaldee renders it, They shall take wives, but shall not beget sons.Aristot. Sol & homo generant hominem saith the Philosopher: but unlesse God the first agent concurr, that cannot be neither: Loe, Children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward,Psal. 17.3, saith David to his son Solomon, who found it true by experience: for by all his wives and concubines (no lesse then a thousand) he had but one son that wee read of and he was none of the wisest: nothing like Edward the sixt whom alone Henry the eight left (with his two sisters) to succeed him: though he had so many wives and concubines. Wantonnesse is a sin commonly punished with want of posterity: especially when it is accompanied with obstinacy in evill courses, as in Ahab; who, to crosse Gods threat of rooting out him and his posterity, took many wives;2 King. 10.1. and so bestir'd him, that he begat of them seventy sons, but with evill successe: for they were all cut off in one day. Wicked men must not think to carry it against God: and to have their wils al disputo di Dio, as that prophane Pope said; and as that gracelesse Ahaziah who sent a third captaine, after that the former two had been consumed with fire; as if he would despitfully spit in the face of heaven, and wrestle a fall with the almighty. Let no man expect to prosper in unlawfull practises, to encrease by whoredome, as these profane priests sought to do, that they might be full of children (any how) and leave the rest of their substance to their babes Psal. 17.14. But fertility is not from the meanes (right or wrong) but from the Authour (many a poore man hath a house-full of children by one wife: whilest Solomon hath but one son by many house-fuls of wives) and Job could tell that whoredome is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would root out all his in∣crease Chap. 31.12. because they have left off to take heed to the Lord] God is not bound to render a reason of his proceedings, yet doth it oft as here, that he may be justified, and eve∣ry mouth stopped. Their Apostasy is here shew'd to be the cause of their calami∣ty. Time was when they took some heed to God and his wayes: they kept close to him, and observed his commandements to do them, (as the word here impor∣teth) but now they had left off to be wise, and to do good, (Psal. 36.3.) untill their iniquity was found to be hatefull, and themselves altogether filthy Psal. 53.3. wicked doers against the covenant Dan, 11.30.32. Apostates cannot chuse un∣to themselves a worse condition 2 Pet. 2.20.22. Mat. 12.43.45.Job. 9.4. let them look to it. Hath ever any waxed fierce against God and prospered? even of late my people is risen up against me as an enemy Mic. 2.8. but what will they do in the end thereof? Verse 11. Whoredome and wine and new wine have taken away the heart] i. e.
have robbed my people of themselves, and laid a beast in their roome. Any lust allowed and wallowed in will eate out the heart of grace; and at length, all grace out of the heart. Hence temporizers grow in time so saplesse, heatelesse and heart∣lesse to any good: some unmortified lust or other there is, that as a worme, lieth grubbing at the root, and makes all to wither: that, like a drone in a hive, proves a great waster: that, as a moth in fine cloth, consumes all: or, as the light of the Sun, puts out the light of the fire: so here. But above all others, sensuall sins and fleshly lusts (such as are here instanced whoredome and drunkennesse) do war against the soule 1 Pet. 2.11. do take away the heart: they besot and infatu∣ate a man, they rob him of his reason, and carry away his affections &c. Grace is seated in the power of nature. Now these carnall sins disable nature: and so set it in a greater distance from grace. They make men, that formerly seemed to give light as a candle, to become as a snuff in a socket, drowned in the tallow: or as a quagmire which swallowes up the seed sown upon it, and yields no increase. Who are voyd of the spirit but such as are sensual? Jude. 18.19. And who are they that say unto God, depart from us, but those that dance to the timbrel and harp &c. Job. 21.11. They saw God and did eat and drink Exod. 24.11. that is, say some, though they had seen God, yet they curned againe to sensuall pleasures: as if it had reference to that eating, and drinking, and rising up to play, upon the dedica∣tion of their calf,Lib. de mira∣bil. auscult. which was presently after. Aristotle writeth of a parcel of ground in Sicily that sendeth forth such a strong smell of fragrant flowers to all the fields and grounds there abouts, that no hound can hunt there; the sent is so confounded with the sweet smell of the flowers. Let us see to it that the pleasures of sin take not away all sent (and sense too) of heavenly delights: that the flesh, as a Syren, befoole not wisdomes guests, and get them away from her Prov. 9.16. as Elian tels of a whore that boasted, that she could easily get all Sorates his Schollers from him, but he could not recover one againe from her. Indeed none that go unto her return againe, saith Solomon Prov. 2.19. for she gets their hearts from them: as David found, and Solomon complained. David was never his own worthy againe, after he had moyled himself with that beastly sin. And Solomon when he gave himself to wine and women (though his mother had sufficiently warned him Prov. 31.3.4.) he quickly took hold of folly Eccles. 2.3. his sensualities drew out his spirits and dissolved him, & brought him to so low an ebb in grace, that many question his salvation. Bellarmine reckons him among reprobates: but I like not his judgement. Let ministers of all men (this is spoken of the Priests chiefly, as some think) see to it that they fly fleshly lusts: that they exhort the younger women with chsty as St. Paul bids Timothy: and drink, (if any, yet but) a little wine for their beaths sake: re∣membring that the sins of Teachers are teachers of sins; and that their evill practi∣ses fly far upon those two dangerous wings of Example and Scandall. Ministers should be no wine-bibbers or Alestakes 1 Tim. 3.3. nè magis solliciti de mero qum de vero, magis ament mundi delicias quam Christi divitias, lest being lovers of plea∣sure more then lovers of God, that should befall them that Solomon foretelleth Prov. 23.33. thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter per∣verse things.Venter aestuans mero spumat in libidinem. Hie∣ron. Aristot. Ovid. 2. dere∣med. Amor. A belly filled with wine foameth out filthinesse saith Hierom. Wine is the milk of Venus saith Another. Vina parant animos Veneri saith a third. Whore∣dome is usually ushered in by drunkennesse: Hence they stand so close together in this text. Verse 12. My people ask counsel at their stocks] that is, at their Images which are here called stocks in contempt, as Hezekiah called the brazen serpent (when it was idolized by the people) Nehushtan, or a piece of brass: and as Julius Palmer martyr called the Rood in Pauls a Jackanapes,Act. & mon. and as the poet, in contempt of his own God Priapus, brings him in saying Olim truncus eram ficulnus,Horat inutile lignum. So the Prophet cryes shame upon the house of Israel,See that gra∣phicall descrip∣tion of their madnesse Esay. 44.11. &c. Rivet in loc. for saying to a stock, thou art my father: and to a stone thou hast brought me forth, Jer. 2.27. But to such senselesse practises men fall many times, when they grow sensuall See 2 Thes. 2.10. Rev. 17.5. Spiritull whoredome, and bodily go usually together. Rivet tels us
here of a Noble-man that went out of the Church from hearing mass into the very next house where he kept a whore; and said to the by-standers a lupanari ad mis∣sam unum tantum esse passum, that there is but one step from the masse to a whore-house. and their staff] that is, saith Kimchi, their false-prophets upon whom they leane, and by whom they are led, as a blind man by his staff. But I rather think it is meant of Rabdomancy a kind of odd way of divining by rods and staves, as Nebu∣chadnezzar is brought in doing Ezek. 21.22. and was common in those Eastern parts: Or else hereby are meant the Southsayers and Magicians rods as Exod. 7.12. Heb. 11.21. it is said that Jacob worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff, and thereby lifting up his body to do reverence to God, where the Vulgar text, omitting the prepsition, hath committed a manifest errour, in saying that Jacob worshipped the top of his rod or staff; as if there had been some picture there ingraven: the Hebrew is towards the beds-head. And it is certaine that Jacob worshipped none but God: and bowed himself either towards the beds-head, or leaning upon his staff, to testifie his humility, faith and hope, which adoration how far it was from the worshipping of Images (which the papists vrge from this place) who seeth not? for the spirit of whoredomes hath caused them to erre] That unclean spirit Zech. 13.2. the devill (who is  as Synesius saith, a delighter in idols) drives them sataico impetu, to commit whoredome both spirituall and corporall with strength of affection. Now if that spirit of errour 1 Jon. 4.6. and of giddinesse Esa. 19.14. cause men to erre, and carry them with a vehement Impetus to idol-worship (which indeed is devil-worship) what wonder? men that are that way bent know not of what spirit they are: little think that they are acted and agitated by the devill. O pray with David Psal. 143.10. that that good spirit of God may lead us into all truth and holinesse. and they are gone a whoring from under their God] i. e. from under the yoke of his obedience: they are gone out of his precincts, and therefore also out of his protection: as a whore that forsaketh her husband, and is therefore worthily cast off. Verse 13. They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hils &c.] as nearer to heaven; and in an apish imitation of the Patriarches, who, before the Tabernacle was set up, sacrificed in high places (as Abraham on mount Moriah &c.) that their bodyes being mounted aloft, they might the better lift up their hearts and eyes to heaven, saying as it were to all worldly cares and cogitati∣ons as Abraham did to his servants whom he left at the foot of the hill,Gen. 22.5. Abide you here with the Asse. Hierom upon this place hath this Note: Israel saith he, loveth high places, for they have forsaken the high God: and they love the shadow, having left the substance. But what could be more absurd then to think as they did, that God who is omnipresent, was neerer to them on hills and high places, and further off them in vallyes. See Esay 57.7. Ezek. 6.13. This they had partly also learned of the heathens; from whom neverthelesse God had shut them up as it were in an Island (so their land is called) that having little commerce with them,Esay, 20.6. they might not learn their manners. But our nature is very catching this way: and doth as easily draw and suck Idolatry to it, as the loadstone doth iron, or Turpentine fire. under oaks, and Poplars, and Elmes, because the shadow thereof is good] So they proceed from one evill to another; for sin is infinite and when a man is fal'n down one round of Hels ladder, he knowes not where he shall stop, or how he shall step back. These Idolaters as they had their high places in imitation of the Patri∣arks; so their groves of shady trees consecrated to their Idols; to strike reverence into their hearts, as they conceited, and for the greater solemnity. Sin comes commonly clothed with a shew of reason Exod. 1.10. Come let us deale wisely say they: yet every oppressour is a fool Prov. 28.16. It will so bleare the under∣standing, that a man shall think he hath reason to be mad, and that there is some sence in sinning. But especially will-worship hath a shew of wisdome Colos. 2. ult. or the reason of wisdome, as the word there signifieth, the very quintessence of it. Hence the Papists write Rationals, whole volumes of reason for their rites and
ceremonies in Divine service, (the shadow is good, say these therefore, we get under trees) And Iohn Hunt,See Dr. Shel∣dons mark of the beast. serm. a blasphemous Papist, in his humble Appendix to King Iames, Chap. 6. was not afraid to say, That the God of the Protestants, is the most uncivil and evil-mannered God of all those, who have borne the name of Gods up∣on the earth: yea worse then Pan, God of the Clowns, which can endure no ce∣remonies nor good manners at all. O tongue, worthy to be pulled out, cut in gob∣bets, and driven down the throat of this hideous blasphemer: for he could not but know the God of the Protestants (as he scornfully termeth him) to be the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Did not Rabshakeh rail after this rate upon good Hezekiah, for taking down the high-places, and Altars of God (as he called them) which yet God well approved of? 2 King. 18.22. Mr. Boroughs maketh mention of a Lady in Paris, who when she saw the bravery of a Procession to a Saint, shee cried out, Oh how fine is our religion beyond that of the Huguenots? They have a mean and beggerly religion, but ours is full of solemnity and bravery, &c. The Catholikes in their Supplication to King Iames for a Toleration plead, that their religion is (inter caetera) so pleasing to nature, and so sutable to sense and reason, that it must therefore needs be the right. A proper Argument surely: and not all out so convincing as that of Cenalis Bishop of Auranches, who writing against the Christian Congregation at Paris, and basely slandering their meetings, as if they were to maintain whoredome,Act. & Mon. will in conclusion needfully prove (if he could) the Catholikes to be the true Church, because they had bells to call them together; but the Huguenots had claps of Harquebuzes, or Pistolets, for that purpose, & Therefore your daughters shall commit whoredome,] Impunè, they shall do it, and for a punishment of your Idolatry: and in asmuch as you have prostituted your souls (that is, my spouse) to the devil, your houses shall be whorehouses, to your utter disgrace and heart-break. Certain it is, that where there is most Idolatry, there is most adultery; as at Rome, which is nothing else but a great brothel-house, and hath fully made good that of the Poet; Roma quod inverso delectaretur amore, Nomen ab inverso nomine fecit Amor. Thus God punished the idolatrous Ethnikes, by delivering them up, to passions of dishonour, or vile affections; to Sodomitical practises, which did abase them be∣low those four-footed beasts which they adored, Rom. 1.23, 24, &c. Some put off all manhood,. became dogs, worse then dogs, scalded in their own grease, verse 27. and this is there called, a meet recompense, such as God here threatneth. Mr. Levely (a very learned Interpreter) thinketh that when God saith here, your daughters shall commit whoredome, and your daughters in law (for so he renders it) shall com∣mit adultery, he meaneth it not of voluntary whoredome, but of that which is forced: according to that of Amos to Amaziah Chap. 7.17. Therefore thus saith the Lord, the wife shall be an harlot in the City: and they sonnes and daughters shall fll by the sword, &c. that is, thy wife shall be ravished by the enemy. Theodoret also is of the same judgement. Verse 14. I will not punish your daughters, when they commit whoredome,] q. d. I will not once foul my fingers with them, or be at pains to correct them: but they shall take their swinge in sin, for me, &c. Origen in a certain Homily quoting this Scripture,Hom. 8. in Exod. 20. saith, Vis indignantis Dei terribilem vocem audire, &c. Will you hear the terrible voice of a provoked God? hear it here, I will not punish, &c. You shall be without chastisement, for an argument that you are bastards and not sons. Ne∣ver was Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God said unto her, My fury, shall depart from thee, I will be quiet and no more angry, Ezek. 16.42. Feri Domine, seri, cried Luther, Strike Lord, strike, and spare not. Ferre minora volo, nè graeviora feram. There is not a greater plague can befall a man, then to prosper in sinfull practi∣ses. Bernard calleth it, misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem, a killing courtesie, Ezek. 3.20. I will lay a stumbling-block before him: that is, saith Va∣tablus,
I will prosper him in all things, and not by affliction restrain him from sin. Job surely counts it for a great favour to sorry man,Job 7.17, 18. that God accompts him worth melting, though it be every morning; and trying, though it be every mo∣ment. And Ieremy calleth for correction, as a thing that he could not well be with∣out, Correct me O Lord, &c. For themselves are separated with whores,]Rivet. God seemeth to speak this to others by change of person: Ac si puderet ipsum cum putidis hircis verba facere, as if he were ashamed to speak any longer to such stinking goats. Separates they were, but of the worst sort: they separated themselves with harlots, they gat into by-corners, far from company (specially of those that know them) that they might more freely act filthinesse.Auson. But what could the Heathen say, Turpe quid acturus, Te sine teste time. Conscience is a thousand witnesses: and men must not think long to lie hid: for God will be a swift witnesse against the adulterers, Mal. 3.5. and, it may be, bring them into all evil, in the middest of the Congregation and assembly, Prov. 5.14. See the Notes on both places. Some render it, They beget bastards, such as the Mule is, (which also hath his name pered,ijpparedu. from this root) Or they shall be unfruit∣full as the Mule. Wantonnesse is commonly punished with want of children. (See the note above on verse 10) Those children that they had took after them, it appear∣eth here: they were naught by kind, as being an adulterous geration, a seed of evil-doers, a race of rebels; and therefore it was no matter, how little they multi∣plied. Let those that have children, and others under their charge, keep home as much as may be, and not be separate from their families (with whores especially) lest their daughters mean-while commit whoredome, (counted but a trick of youth, a sin that that slippery age may easily slip into, and not easily be descried, Pro. 30.19.) and their spouses commit adultery, by occasion of their leud absence, and to cry quittance with them at home. Let them also make Nebuchadnezzars law, that none under their roof, say, or do ought against the God of heaven;Dan. 3.29. and them∣selves be first in the practise of it, as so many living lawes, walking statutes; so may they hope to keep their houses chast, and honest, and provide for the credit and comfort both of themselves and of theirs. And they sacrifice with harlots,] Heb. Holy-harlots, sacrificing-harlots, such as Solomon speaketh of, Prov. 7.14 and as those wicked women that lay with Elies sonnes at the door of the Tabernacle, 1 Sam. 2.22. Or as King Edward the fourth, his holy whore, as he used to call her, that came to him out of a Nunnery,Speed. when he list to send for her. His kinsman Lewis the eleventh of France, (knowing his dis∣position) invited him to the French Court, promising him his choice of Beauties there, and adding Adhibebimus tibi Cardinalem Burbonium,Comin. then shall Cardinall Burbon shrieve you, and absolve you of all your misdoings, &c. 'Tis well enough known what foul work the Heathens made at their sacra Eleusinia, Bacchanalia, Lu∣pe clia priapeia (the same with the sacrificing to Baal-Peor, as Hierom holds.) And to these this Text may seem to refer; and this people too have separated them∣selves to that shame. Therefore the people that doth not understand, shall fall.] Heb. shall be beaten, as some render it, shall be perplexed, and troubled, so as they know not what to do, or how to help themselves, as Aben-ezra from the Arabick. The Chaldee interprets it, collidetur, shall be dashed in pieces. Ignorance is much instanced and threatned in this Chap. three or four severall times at least.Omnis peccant est ignorans. Not because men sin onely by igno∣rance, as the Platonists think: but 1. to aggravate the hatefulnesse of this sinne, which men use so to excuse and extenuate. 2. to taunt and abase the rebellious na∣ture of man, who now is set in grosse ignorance, and ready to pitch headlong into hell, as the just guerdon of his aspiring and reaching after forbidden knowledge. 3. because ignorance (affected especially) is the source of many sins, and a main support of Satans kingdome. See the Notes above on verses 1, 6, &c. Verse 15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Iudah offend.] Lest if God lose his glory among them too, he lose it altogether Iudah was grown almost as good as Israel, (in the dayes of that stigmatick Ahaz especially, 2 Chron. 28.) Aholiba∣mah, as Aholibah, Ezek. 16. But let it not be so, saith the Prophet, sith not to be warned by the harmes of another, is a just both presage and desert of ruine. Alte∣rius igitur perditio tua sit cautio. Seest thou another shipwrackt? look well to
thine own tackling. God will take that from Israel, that he will not from Judah; because these had many means and priviledges, that the other had not; as the Tem∣ple, Priests, Ordinances, &c. Now, good-turnes aggravate unkindnesses; and mens offences are increased by their obligations. Iudah was and would be therefore the worse, because they ought to have been better. And God can better bear with aliants, then with his own people, when they offend. The Philistims may cart the Ark, but if David do it, wo be to Ʋzzah. You onely haue I known of all the fa∣milies of the earth, therefore, (whosoever scape) I will punish you for all iniquities, Amos 3.2. The unkindnesse of your sins is more then all the rest: it grieves Gods Spirit, and goes neer his heart, &c. Come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven,] Alias Bethel, the house of God, so called by Iacob, who there had visions of God, and said, How fear∣full is this place? It is even the house of God and gate of heaven. But now it was become the hate of heaven, and gate to destruction, as being abused to idolatry. Corruptio optimi fit pessima. Bethel is become Beth-aven, the house of iniquity and misery, of sin and of sorrow: for their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God, Psal. 16.4. The word there rendred sorrows, signifieth also idols, Psal. 115.4. and 106.36.Gnatsahim. because they that worship them, are sure of sor∣rows. Come not therefore to Gilgal &c.] Gilgal was the key of Canaan, scituate be∣tween Jordan and Jericho, famous for sundry services there performed to God, as were easie to instance; but now basely abused to Idol-worship. Hence this charge (and the like in Amos chap. 5.5.) not to come neer it; and the rather because it was a border Town,Exod. 23.7. Prov.5.8. 1 Tim. 6.5. and so more dangerous Keep thee far from an evil matter, saith Moses, Come not nigh the doors of the harlots house, saith Solomon. From such stand off, or keep aloof, saith Paul. Shun them as the Sea-man doth sands and shelves, as the same Apostles word imports, 1 Thes. 3.6. A man cannot touch such pitch,. but hee shall be defiled: nor live any while in Mauritania, but hee shall be discoloured. Cum fueris Romae, &c. Let them look to it that so much affect to see Italy, Rome, the Pope, the Masse, &c. But what dost thou here Elias? may God well say, as 1 King. 19.9. What protection hast thou here, either from infection of sin, or infliction of punishment? Saith not the heavenly Oracle, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18.4. Mr. Ascham (school-master to Queen Eizabeth) was wont to thank God, that he was but nine dayes in Italy: wherein he saw in that one City of Venice more liberty to sin, then in London he ever heard of in nine yeers. And is it safe pressing into such pest-houses? tampering with such temptations? Tertullian tells of a Christian woman, who being at a play, was possessed of a devil. And when he was asked by those that came to cast him out, how he durst possesse one that was a Christian, he answered, I found her in mine own place. Take heed therefore, ye come not where the devil hath to do. He that doth so, and yet prayes, Leade us not into temptation, may as well thrust his finger into the fire, and then pray that it may not be burnt. Nor swear, The Lord liveth:] i.e. Sweat not by God and Malcham, Zeph. 1.5. make not a mixture of religions:Matth. 6.23. 2 Cor. 6.15. halt not between two opinions, think not to serve two masters. What agreement hath Christ with Belial, or the Temple of God with Idols? Cast away (saith one to a neuter passive, Nicodemus) either thy wings, or thy teeth:D. Hall Epist. to W. L. and loathing this Bat-like nature, be what thou art, either a bird, or a beast. There were (belike) in Judah, that thought they could both frequent places of Idol-worship, and serve Jehovah, swearing by his Name. God will have none of that: if he be serve by men at all, he must be served truely; that there be no halting, and totally, that there be no halving. To swear vere, rite, juste, as Ier. 4.1. is a piece of Gods service, and we may well reckon it amongst our good-works. But to swear by Idols, or before Idols, made to represent the true God (as those bugges at Dan and Bethel, &c.) or by the creature, Matth. 5.24. is utterly unlawfull. It is a great dishonour to God; and a great dishonour to our selves also: for we al∣wayes swear by the greater, Heb. 6.16. Verse 16. For Israel slideth back, as a back-sliding heifer,] Juvenca petulca, as an unruly heifer, which both kicketh against the milk-pail, and wriggleth against
the yoke.. As a mad Cow, so the Septuagint. Mr. Dearing told Queen Eliza∣beth in a Sermon, that whereas once she wrot in Woodstock windowes, Tanquam ovis, as a sheep to the slaughter. Now she was tanquam indomita juvenca, as an untamed heifer: and might well fear lest God would feed her as a lamb in a large place as here, and feed her with his rod, as Mich. 7.14. The Chaldee rendreth, sicut bos qui saginatur & recalcitrat, as an Ox that waxeth fat and kicketh. But the Hebrew word is feminine: and in all creatures, the female is observed to be more headlong and headstrong. Scilicet ante omnes furor est insignis equarum. Heifers also are more wilde, wanton, and untractable:Virg. Georg. 3. noting the children of disobedience, those refractary rebels: that, as false jades will not stand and pull, (as countrey-men call it) set their shoulders to the yoke, and their sides to the work, but give in and kick against the prick. Now the Lord will feed them as a lamb in a large place.] i. e. He will keep them short, as an heifer kept in a sheep-pasture, where there is nothing for her to bite on, it is so bare. A lamb can live where an heifer cannot: a lamb can pick up the grasse of the wildernesse, and pick a living out of it. God threatneth these hei∣fers, they shall have henceforth short commons. Thus Gualther carries it. Mercer will have it thus: I will feed them as a lamb, i. e. daintily and plentifully, that be∣ing the sooner fatted, they may be fitted for the shambles. Other thus, and I think better, he shall feed them, that is, punish them, (as Mich. 5.4, 6. & 7.14) as a lamb, one single succourlesse lamb, that goes bleating up and down in the wide wast wildernesse, having none to tend it, or take care of it: it shall be all alone in a large place. How much better and safer were it to be in Gods fold: where (though pinde, or pent up in a narrower room, yet) Gods lambs are sure to be fed daily and daintily. Whereas those that affect freedom from Gods service, and hold them∣selves at best case when they have elbow-room enough to satisfie their lusts without restraint or controul, they shall be fed with Gos rod, Mich. 7. yea they shall finde that he hath two rods. beauty and bonds, Zech. 11.7 the latter for those that slight the former. Or if he feed them as a lamb in a large place, alone, and at random, they will quickly become a prey to the Wolf, and soon have enough of that wilde liberty that they so much affected. Verse 17. Ephraim is joyned to idols, let him alone.] Ephraim, that is, the ten revolted Tribes, who are called Ephraim in opposition to Judah. 1. Because that Tribe was the greatest of the ten. 2. Jeroboam the ring-leader of that revolt, was of the Tribe. 3. They fell off at Shechem, which was in that Tribe, and from thenceforth was joyned, or agglutinated to idols.] as the fornicatour is to his har∣lot, with whom he becometh one flesh: and from whom there is no disswading him. Some fetch the Metaphor from Enchanters; who by their conjuring Art have so∣ciety and fellowship with the devils; so had Ephraim with idols: and like an en∣chanted person he could not stir from them, but stood fastened to them as to a stock or stake. The Tyrians, when besieged by Alexander, fearing the departure of their god Apollo from them, laid chains upon his statue, and fastened him to his Temple. Ephraim was so fastened to his fray-buys (terriculis, so Junius renders this Text) that there is no likelihood, of his being sundred from them: he had taken fast hold of deceit, Ier. 8.5. and would not loose his hold. Let him alone, therefore, saith either God to the Prophet (lay out no more words, lose no more labour upon him) or the Prophet to Judah; let them even go, have nothing to do with them, though they be your brethren, meddle not with them, let Christ alone to deal with them at his coming: Maranatha, the Lord cometh. Mean-while, they lie under a dreadfull spirituall judgement, worse then all the plagues of Egypt: even a dead and dedolent disposition, wherunto they are delivered. This is worse then to be delivered to Satan: for so a man may be, and recover out of his snare by re∣pentance, as the incestuous Corinthian did: but when God shall say, Let such a man alone, let him take his course, I have done with him, and let my Ministers trouble themselves no more about him, there is thenceforth but an inch betwixt him and hell, which even gapes for him, where he shall rue it among reprobates. Well he may flourish a while, and feel no hurt; as Saul did not of many years after his rejection: and as the Pharisees, after Christ had said of them, Let them alone, they are blind lea∣ders
of the blind.Mat. 15. But they shall pine & swelter away in their iniquities Lev. 26.39. which is the last of those dismall plagues there threatened: they shall not be purged till Gods wrath hath rested upon them, Ezek. 24.13. so that now they may go and serve every one his idols, sith they have such a mind to it, Ezek. 20.39. and sith they have made a match with mischief, they may take their belly-full of it. Oh let us feare, lest this should be any of our cases: that God should say let him alone, he is resolved of his way, and I of mine: he will have his swinge in sin, and I am bent to have my full blow at him. I am fully perswaded (saith a Reverend man now with God) that in these dayes of grace, the Lord is much more quick and peremptory in rejecting men, then heretofore: the time is shorter, neither will he wait so long as he used to do. See for ground of this Heb. 2.3. God is oft quick in the offer of his mercy: Go and preach the Gospel, saith Christ (Go and be quick: tell men what to trust to, that as fooles, they may not be semper victuri ever about to be better, but never begin to set seriously to work) He that beleeveth shall be saved: he that beleeveth not shall be damned: I shall not longer dally with him. Destruction cometh and they shall seek peace, and there shall be none. Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour upon ru∣mour: then shall they seek a vision of the Prophet: but the law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from the ancient &c. Ezek. 7.25.26. when men are even dropping into hell, and have an hell afore-hand in their consciences, then they'le send hastily for the minister, as they did in the sweating-sicknesse here, so long as the ferventnesse of the plague lasted: Then the Ministers were sought for in every corner, you must come to my Lord, you must come to my Lady, &c. But what if God have said of such a one, Let him alone, as he reproved Samuel for mourning for Saul, and as he forbad Jeremy to pray for the Jewes, and his Apostles to take care for the Pharisees? Oh how dreadfull is that mans condition! and what can a Minister say more then what the king of Israel said to the woman that complained to him of the scarcity of Samaria If the Lord help thee not,2 King. 6.27. whence shall I help thee? out of the barne-floore, or out of the winepresse: If any dram of comfort be applied to a wicked man, the truth of God is falsified, and that Minister will be reckoned amongst the devils dirt-dawbers & upholsters,Ezek. 13.18. that dawb with untemper'd morter & sow pillowes under mens elbowes: Let such alone therefore, and let God alone to deale with them. Verse 18. Their drink is sowre] That is, they are past grace, and it is now past time a day to do them good: for thou seest how the matter mends with them, even as sowre alemends in summer: and how they even stink above ground, as Psal 14.2. Vina probantur odore, colore, sapore &c. but their wine hath neither good colour, smell, nor favour or tast; it's dead and gone, and they are as trees twice dead and rotten,Jude. and therefore pulled up by the roots, such as the Latines call vappae, that is past the best, and now good for nothing, See Esay 1.22. what life or sweetnesse can be in Apostates: yea how sowre and unsavoury to such are all fleshly com∣forts? They use to drink away their terrours, and drive away their melancholy dumps with merry company. But will that hold? what are such plasters better then the devils Anodynes, then his whistle, to call men off from better practises? there is a cup in the hands of the Lord, it is full of mixture but extreme sowre: and the very dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them up, Psal. 75.8. though it be eternity to the bottom. they have committed whoredome continually] Here they are taxed for whoredome, as before for drunkennesse (so some carry it) and afterwards for covetousnesse. This is that flagitiorum triga, whereby the Prophet perswadeth Judah to shake off Israel, as not fit to be conversed with. He had charged them before with fornication of both sorts: here he sheweth how unwearied they were in their wickednesse, and withall how intense, for fornicando fornicati sunt, they have done wickedly as they could, they have eeked out their idolatries, and adulteries, and though wearied and even wasted with the multitude of their wickednesses, yet they have not given over but are unsatisfiable, and would sin in perpetuum: as that filthy fornicatour who said he would desire no other heaven but to live for ever on earth, and to be carried from one brothel-house to another. She hath wearied her self with lies: and yet her great scum went not forth out of her: Therefore shall it be in the fire. Ezek 24.12. Therefore shall gracelesse wretches be tormented for ever, because
they would sin for ever: and therefore suffer all extreamity,Mic. 7. because they do wick∣edly with both hands earnestly: wofully wasting the marrow of their time, the flow∣er of their age, the strength of their bodies, the vigour of their spirits, in the per∣suit of their lusts, in the froth and filth whereof is bred that worme that never di∣eth: which is nothing else but the furious reflection of the soul upon its own once wilfull folly, and now wofull misery. her rulers with shame do love, Give ye] Her shields (o shamefull!) do love Give ye: where there is in the originall an elegant Agnomination that cannot be english∣ed, Ahabhu hibhu Dilexerunt Afferte, not Afferre, as the Vulgar corruptly readeth it. The Dorick dialect, the horsleaches language Give, Give, they are perfectly skilled in:  gift-greedinesse is all their delight: like the ravens of Arabia, that full gorged have a tuneable sweet record, but empty, screech horribly: Ple∣ri{que} offictarij, saith One: Very many rulers do as Plutarch reporteth of Stratocles and Dromoclites, a couple of corrupt officers,Plutarch. in politic. qui sese mutuo ad messem auream in∣vitare solebant, who were wont to invite one another to the golden harvest, there∣by meaning the Court, and the judgment-seate. These follow the administration of justice as a trade onely, with an unquenchable and unconscionable desire of gaine: which iustifieth the common resemblance of the Courts of iustice to the Bush, whereunto while the sheep flieth for defence in weather, he is sure to lose part of his fleece. Now are these Sheilds? are they not rather Sharkes? Are they protectours, and not rather pillagers? Latrones publici, publike robbers as Cato called them? These shields of the earth belong to God, saith David, Psal, 47.9. should they not then be like him?2 Chron. 19.7. Now there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor accepting of persons, nor receiving of gifts: neither by himself nor by his man Elisha, nor by his mans man Gehezi, without distaste. By one period of speech, by one breath of the Lord are they both forbidden, Deut. 16.18, 19, 20. Thou shalt not respect persons, nor receive a gift: For why: A gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, yea it transformes them into walking Idols, that have eyes and see not, eares and heare not: onely it leaveth them hands to handle that, the very touch∣ing whereof will infect and venom a man, as Pliny writes of the fish Torpedo. Let such therefore shake their hands from bribes Isay. 33.15. as Paul shoke off the viper: and be so far from saying Give ye, that he should rather say to those that offer it, Thy mony perish with thee: he that hateth gifts shall live, Prov. 15.27. Jethro's Iustice of peace should be a man of courage, fearing God, hating covetousness,Exod. 18. not bound to the peace (as one phraseth it) by a gift in a basket: nor struck dumb with the appearance of Angels &c. Verse 19. The wind hath bound her up in her wings] The evill spirit, (saith) Hi∣erom) hurries them towards hell, which is the just hire of the least sin: how much more of these fore-mentioned abominations? Take it rather to be spoken of the suddennesse, swiftnesse, and unresistablenesse of Gods judgments set forth by migh∣ty winds rending the rocks, and tearing up the mountaines by the roots, Job. 38.9. How then shall wicked men (compared to chaffe or dust of the mountaines) stand before the tempest of Gods wrath, the thunder of his power? Well they may ap∣plaud and stroke themselves for a time: but the wind shall bind them up in her wings: God shall blow them to destruction, Job. 4.9. his executioners have the wings of a stork, large and long, and wind in those wings, to note their ready obe∣dience, Zech. 5.9. And although Ezek. 1. God be represented as sitting upon a throne to shew his slowness to punish, yet that throne hath wings & hands under those wings, to shew his swiftness & readinesse to do seasonable execution upon his enemies. and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices] wherein they trusted, but now see themselves disappointed, their idols not able to help them. Then shall they cast their idols of silver and of gold, which they have made each for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats, to go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, Isay. 2.20, 21. See also Isay. 30.22. If they be not thus ashamed of their former fopperies, they are the more to be pittied. Illum ego peri∣isse dico cui periit pudor. He is an undone man that shames not, shents not himself for his evill practises, that blusheth not bleedeth not before God for them, lying down in his shame. Jer. 3.25. as fully ashamed of his former hopes, Psal. 119.116. which now he seeth how far they have abused him.
CHAP. V. Verse 1. HEare ye this ye Priests] For you are not so wise,Prov. 1.5. but that ye may heare and increase learning. Chap. 4.6. and besides, from you is profanenesse gone forth into all the land. Jer. 23.15. For you therefore in the first place I have a citation to appeare before Gods tribunall, to heare your sin & your sentence,Jac. Ren. de. vit. Pont. your crime, & your doom God cited Adam immediately & by himself. Gen. 7.9. Adam, where art thou? so he did Cain, Laban, Nabal, & others, when he sends for them by death, saying as once to that Pope, Veni miser in judicium, Come away, and heare thy sentence.Centum revo∣lutis annis Deo. respon debitis & mi∣hi. Mediately he citeth men by the mouth of his ministers; as he did the Councill of Constance by his faithfull martyr John Husse, and his word stood: and as he doth here the three Estates of the kingdome, Priests, People, and Princes, by the Prophet Hosea. That was very strange and extraordinary, that Mr. Knox reporteth in his history of Scotland,Hist. of Scot. of one Sr. John Hamilton murthered by the kings meanes: that he appeared to him in a vision with a naked sword drawn, and strikes off both his armes with these words, Take this before thou receive a fi∣nall payment for all thine impieties: and within 24 houres, two of the Kings sons died. It is indeed but part of their punishment that wicked men here receive, seem it never so grievous when, God entreth into judgment with them, as here it is said. for judgment is toward you] that is am about to pronounce sentence against you, and to do execution: and therefore hear, harken, and give-eare, the first second and third time I admonish you, that ye may know that my citation is serious and pe∣remptory: and that your damnation sleepeth not. Priest and people are set be∣fore the house of the king;Salvian. because theirs was sedes prima, & vita ima, an high place but a low life. And besides, Courtiers and great men, though they be in o∣ther cases forward enough to take place of others, yet in point of punishment they slink back, and are well content that others should go before them. God regards none for his greatnesse (Potentes potenter torquebuntur) neither spareth he any for his meannesse, or because they were born down either by the lawes, or lives of their Superiours. The people are here placed betwixt the Priests and Princes, and with them appealed and impeached, to shew how frigid and insufficient their ex∣cuse is, who plead that they did but as they were taught by their Ministers, and as they were commanded by their Governours. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgement, because h willingly walked after the commandement, as it is in the ele∣venth verse of this chapter. See the note. for judgement is toward you] Vengeance is in readinesse for the disobedient, be he what he will, kesar or caytiffe, Lord or losell, Priest or people: every whit as rea∣dy in the Lords hand as in the ministers mouth. 2. Cor. 10.6. neither shall mul∣titudes priviledge or secure them. Though they be quiet or combined, and likewise many, yet thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. Nah. 1.12. yea though they be briers and thorns that set against him in battle (and those never so much confortuplicated and sharpened) yet God will go through them, and burn them together. Esay. 27.4. he will cut off the spirit of Princes, and destroy a whole rabble of rebels that rise up against him. because ye have been a snare on Mizpah] That God may be justified and every mouth stopped, a reason is here rendred of his most righteous proceedings, and the same recited (after the manner of men) in the preamble to their condemnatory sentences. because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, & a net spred upon Tabor] These were two very high hils, much haunted by hunters, and frequented by fowlers, to whom these Idolaters (striving to catch people ritibus suis velut retibus et laqueis, with their nets and snares of errours and superstitions) are fitly compared. For they lie in in wait for mens souls and catch many of them either by perswasions or punish∣ments, by allurements or affrightments, as Julian the Apostate did of old, and as the Papists do at this day. That Jeroboam and his counsellours set watchers in these two mountains, to observe who would go from him to Judah to worship, that he might intercept them and punish them, is a plausible opinion, but wants proof. I know what is alledged, Viz 1 King. 12.28. and Hos. 6.8. according to the
vulgar translation. I confesse also that it is not unlikely that such things should be done then (as lately wait was laid by the Papists for such as had a minde to betake themselves as Geneva, Tygure, Basil, &c. for conscience sake. It is more probable that upon those high hils Idolatry was committed (see chap. 4.13. with the Note) and thereby people ensnared, as birds and wilde beasts are in the mountains: and so made slaves to the devill, and even fatted for his tooth. Hence in the next words. Verse 2. And the revolters are profound to make slaughter] They lay their nets and snares deep, and lie down upon the ground that they may take the silly birds that dread no danger. He croucheth and humbleth himself that the poor may fall into his strong pawes, Psal. 10.10. He studies the devils depths Rev. 2.24. poisonfull and pestilent pollicies, Machiavellian mysteries of mischief. His head is a forge and fountain of wicked wiles: he hath store & strength of strange traps and trains, frauds and fetches, to draw in and deceive the silly simple. That these seducers were deeply revolted Esay 31.6. they had deeply corrupted themselves Hos. 9.9. they sinned not common sins; as Kore and his complices died not a common death. They made great flaughter of mens souls, and of their bodies too, that refused to yeeld to them. Craft and cruelty seldom sundred in seducers: as some write of the Asp that he never wanders alone, without his companion with him; and as those birds of prey and desolation Esay 34.16. it is said that none of them want their mate. The devil lendeth them his seven heads to plot, and his ten horns to push and gore, &c. though I have been a rebuker to them all] Heb. a correction. Understand it either of the Prophet, that he had dealt plainly with them, and done his utmost to reclaim them, yet they refused to be reformed, hated to be healed. We would have cured Babylon but she would not be cured: Or else of God, that he had both by words and scribes rebuked their superstitions but nothing had wrought upon them. They were tormented with the wrath of God, but repented not to give him the glory, Rev. 16.9. Corrigimur, might they say, sed non corrigimur, plectimur, sed non flectimur. See how God complains of this stubbornnesse, Jer. 6.28, 29, 30. and learn to tremble at his rebukes, to profit by his chastisements, lest a worse thing befall us.Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the middest thereof: he will not do iniquity; every morning doth he bring his judgements to light, he faileth not: but the unjust knoweth no shame. There are that take the words possively and render them thus Ego vero illis omnibus castigationi sum I have been rebuked or corrected by them all.Levely. See the like Lam. 3.13. and in the Psalms often I am a reproach to mine enemies: thou makest us a reproach to all that are round about us, &c. So the Prophet here may seem to complain, as Jeremy did after him, that he was born a man of contentions, that all the people cursed him, that he was a common by-word, and but-mark: that they sharpened their tongues against him and flew in his face. To Preach, saith Luther,Totius erbis furorem in  are.   11.19. Judicatur vel sententia pronunciaur. Cmerar. Sltet. Repetitione etiam auget populi rebellia∣uem. Rivet. is nothing else but to derive  rage of the whole world upon a mans self. Wisdom (that should be justified of her children) is eftsoones judged of her childrens, as some read those words of our Saviour Mat. 11.19. But I like the actiue sence better. Vers. 3. I know Ephraim and Israel is not hid from me] Those that by Ephraim understand the Princes, and by Israel the common people etiam hoc operae addant, et illud ex scriptura probent, saith Tarnovius, let them prove what they say by Scrip∣ture, and we will say with them: Till then we take them for Synonima's. An hypocritical nation they were Isai. 9.17. and Athiestically they thought, by hiding God from themselves, to hide themselves from God. Hear them else Chap. 12.8. And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance; In all my labour they shall finde none iniquity in me: that were sin, that were an hainous business, that iniquity should be found in them, though they were a people laden with iniqui∣ty. But I know them through and through, intus et in cute saith God,Isai. 1. I am privy to all their plots and policies. And although they are profound to make slaughter (Tindall reades it, They kill sacrifices on heapes to deceive) yet let not them be de∣ceived, I am not mocked. They must not think to put me off with shewes and shadowes: to colour and cover their base spirits and vile ends with specious pre∣tences. For I search the hearts, and try the reines: neither is there any creature (no not the creature of the heart, the thoughts and intentions) that is not manifest in his
sight: but all things are naked and open (naked for the outside, Tectus clathra∣tum. Luc. and open for the in∣side; the Greek word signifieth dissected, quartered, and as it were cleft through the back-bone) before the eyes of him with whom we have to deal. Heb. 4.13. Indeed he is all eye; and every man before God is all window: so that no man needeth a window in his breast (as the Heathen Momus wisht) for God to look in at. For his eyes are upon the wayes of man: and he seeth all his goings. There is no darknesse nor shadow of death where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves Job. 24.21.22. His eyes behold, his eye-lids try the children of men Psal. 11.4. the former points out his knowledge, the later his critical descant. David Psal. 139. findeth God not onely at his finger ends, but at his tongues end too vers. 4. His knowledge stayes not here in the porch or lobbyes, but passeth into the presence, yea privy-chamber ver. 2. yea my thoughts in posse before I think them. Deus intimo nostro nobis intimior. The word is to God a sea of glasse Rev. 4 6. a clear transparent body: and his eyes are as a flaming fire Reu. 1.14. which needs no outward light, because it seeth extra∣mittendo by sending out a ray;Psal. 139.12. so that the night shineth as the day, the darknesse and the light are both alike to him. What wonder therefore though he know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from him? And how should this both humble them (for which cause it is here urged) and caution them for the future, as it did that holy man, who had written upon the walls and windowes of his study these verses, Ne pecces, Deus ipse videt, bonns Angelus astat, Accusat satanas, et lex, mens conscia culpae, &c. For now O Ephraim thou committest whoredom and Israel is defiled] in body and soul,Eph. 4.19. rushing into all impiety without restraint: working all uncleanness with greedi∣ness: being filled withall unrighteousness, fornication wickedness, covetousness, malici∣ousness: full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, &c. Rom. 1.29.30. All these evil things come from within and defile a man Mar. 7.23. worse then any leprosie, worse then the vomit of a dog, or the mire of a swine. It is the pollution of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. it is the putrefaction of a dead carcase, the sanies of a plague-sore, the devils excrement, and that which defileth far worse then that which is cast into the draught. Mar. 7.21. It sets defilement upon our selves, others, the whole land, Jer. 3.1. yea upon the visible heavens, which must therefore be purged by that last fire. And this was typified by those many Leviticall washings and purification of garments, vessels, persons, &c. Wash you therefore, make you clean put away the evil of your doings &c. Esay 1.16. Wash thy heart from wickedness O Jerusalem,  hands onely as Pilate, though those too, Jam. 4.8. Jer. 4.14. Cleanse your selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 17.1. Of the flesh that is, fleshly lusts and gross evils, as uncleanness, earthly mindedness, or Of spirit, that is, those more spirituall lusts that lie more up in the heart of the countrey, such as are pride, creature-con∣fidence, self-deceit, presumption, &c. Out with all these: there's both a stain and a sting in them. Run to the Bath of Christs blood, that blessed fountain, Zech. 13.1. and there wash and be clean. Look not upon Gods Jordan with Syrian eyes, as Naa∣man did. Abanah and Pharphar may wash and scoure: but Jordan is for cure. And if God see fit to Iay us a frosting, to fetch out our filth, yea or cast into the fire to take away our defilements, let us be contented. Verse 4. They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God] Or, their doings will not suffer them. That is, they are so habituated and hardened in sinfull practices that they are not onely disinabled to conversion but evil-affected there∣unto: they stand a-crosse to all good: to their sinewes of iron, they have added browes of brasse,Isai. 48.4. to their sin they adde rebellion, which is as bad as witch-craft, 1. Sam. 15.23. till at length they lose all passive power also of being converted: and so are transformed, as it were, into so many devils: having by custome con∣tracted a necessitie of sinning, they are become incurable: they neither will nor can return to their God: they will not frame their doings to it. The Vulgar hath it, their studies, the Septuagint their counsels: Castalio, their endeavours, Pagnine their pains &c. The Originall is very elegant, and metricall Lo ijttenu magnallchem Lashub el Elohehem. I scarce know a like text in all the Scripture, unlesse it be that Lam. 5.16. Oi na lanu, chi chattanu. Woe to us that we have sinned: which is so elegant also in the Originall, that Master Wheatly of Banbury (who used to be very plain in his
Preaching, and not to name a Greek, Latine, or Hebrew word:Master Leigh nis Saints en∣couragement, &c. ep. dedic. quoted it once in the Hebrew, as witnesse learned Master Leigh who lived some while under his Ministry. But to return to the text: whereas some might possibly conceive or reply, Ephraim is far gone indeed, but he may return. No, never, saith God: for he will not give his minde to it, or shew his good will: he is even set; and there is no removing of him; he hath made his conclusion, and is as good as ever he meaneth to be. They are so far from yielding themselves unto the Lord, as 2 Chro. 30.8. that they stand in full opposition to him, yea send messages after him. We will not have this man to rule over us. The Jewes were an untoward generation, saith Peter Act. 2.40. they, by their obstinate refusall of the Gospel, judged themselves unworthy of ever∣lasting life, saith Paul Act. 13.46. there were unmalleable, unframeable, so knotty that they were fit for nothing but the fire, so nastie, that they were fit for no place but the dunghill. And why? the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them] The devill is at Inne with them as that Martyr said: he even sits abrood upon them,Master Brad∣ford. Eph. 2.2. hatching all manner of evil counsels and courses, he worketh effectually in these children of disobedience, as a smith doth in his forge, an artificer in his shop: he acts them and agitates them, making their souls and all the powers thereof nothing else but a shop of sin, their bodies and all the parts thereof tooles of sin, their lives and all their actions of both soul and body a trade of sin, a web of wickedness spun out and made up by the hands of the devil and the flesh, an evil spinner, and a worse weaver. Hence they he rotting all their lives long in the graves of sin, wrapt up in the winding sheet of hardness, of heart (they will not frame their doing to turn to God) and blindness of mind (they have not known the Lord:) and as a carcase crawleth with womes, so do these men swarm with those noisome lusts, that are able to poisor an honest heart. How can it be otherwise? the spirit of fornication is in the mdest of them, as a King in his Kingdom: yea hath filled their hearts from corner to corner, as he had done the hearts of Ananias and Sapphira?Act. . That unclean spirit besiegeth the puest hearts, and compasseth them about, seeking to devour them, 1 Pet. 5.8. but they keep him out, stedfast in the faith, or if he any way get in, they quickly cast him out again: so that he cannot long rest or roost, much lesse raign there: for the Spirit of God keepeth them,1 Joh. 5.18 Caietan. and that evil one toucheth them not tactu quali∣tativo with a deadly touch; they regard not iniquity in their heart, there is no way of wickednesse found in them. Of the spirit of whoredomes see the Note on Chap. 4.11. And they have not known the Lord] He knowes them well enough verse 3. and they shall know it, Jer. 16.21. to their cost: but they know not the Lord, sc. saving∣ly and effectually: for if they did, they could not be so vile and vitious, so loose and licentious. A man is properly said to know no more of Gods minde then he practiteth: like as of our Saviour it is said, that he knew no sin, that is,2 Cor. 5.21. he did none: with an intellectuall knowledge he knew it (how else could he reprove it) but not with a practical: and as it is said of Elies two sons, that they knew not God because they obey'd him not. Lo such was the ignorance of this people, assected and acquired; and this is peccatorum omnium fons et fomes, the mother of all mischief and misery; as hath been oft set forth in the Notes upon the former chapter. Verse 5. And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face] Pride is the great master∣pock of the soul: it will bud, and cannot be hid Ezek. 7.10. It is the grandiabolo, that filthy spirit that is gotten into the midst of men, into the very heart of the country as it were. It is the leprosie of the soul that breakes forth in the very fore∣head, and so testifieth to his face. It proceeds from ignorance of God and his will, of a mans self and his duty: hence that connexion of this verse and the former. They know not the Lord; And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face. The Laodiceans were therefore proud, because ignorant: thou knowest not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, &c. So those question-sick phantasticks in Saint Paul were proud knowing nothing, 1 Tim. 6.4. And I would not have you ignorant of this mystery, saith he to his Romans Chap. 11.25. lest ye should be puffed up in your own conceits. Humble Agur though full of heavenly light, yet vilifies and nullifies him∣self to the utmost Prov. 30.2. and so exemplifies that Proverb of Solomen, with the
lowly is wisdom, Prov. 11.2. And as wisdom maketh the face to shine, and humi∣lity rendreth a man lovely: so pride on the contrary, sitteth in the face, and defor∣meth it. The proud man flattereth himself in his own lies, till his iniquity be found to be hatefull, Psal. 36.2. till his swelling break forth in loathsome ulcers. Thus Miriams pride testified to her face, and Ʋzziah's, and Sodoms, Esay. 3.9. The shew of their countenance witnessing against them. Pride is a foolish sinne, it cannot keep in, it will be above-board, and discover it self by lofty looks, big-swoln-words, proud gate, ridiculous gestures, garish attire, that nest of pride; but especially by stoutnesse and stubbornnesse against God and his wayes (as here in this Text it is to be taken.) When men commit sin with an high hand, and as it were, in despite of God, and on purpose to crosse him. Hence it is that God so hateth this sinne above other: for whereas all other sins flee from God, pride lets flye at him, nay flees in his face, saying, Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? Hence he will be a swift witnesse against such, and a severe Judge. Learned Mr. Leveley, reads this Text thus; The excellency of Israel (that is God, as Amos 8.7. 2 Sam. 1.19.) will testifie to Ephraims face, give in evidence against them. He will indeed be Index, Judex, Vindex, to such: for he resisteth the proud, and delighteth to stain their glory, to cast dirt in those faces of theirs, that are so hatcht with impudence, as to face the very heavens, and to contest with Omnipotency. Hence their fall with a violence, with a vengeance. Therefore shall Ephraim and Israel fall in their iniquity:] Corruet, they shall fall with a push, with a powther, as we say: and in their iniquity, that's worse then all the rest. Ye shall die in your sinnes, saith Christ to those rebellious Jews, Ioh. 8.21. that was a great deal worse then to die in prison, to die in a ditch, or in the worlds disfavour. Or, in their iniquity, that is, for their iniquity which is indeed the cause of calamities. At the losse of Calice, when a proud French-man deman∣ded of an English Captain, When will you fetch Calice again? he gravely replied, Quando peccata vestra erunt nostris graviora. When you sinnes shall weigh down ours.Tarnov. in loc. If any man ask, (saith Tarnovius upon this ) Ʋnde hodi anta passim in Germania vastitas? efficit hanc peccatorum atrita. Whence so great desolations in Germany? It is for the grievousnesse of our iquity.  his was better yet, then the result of that consultation held once at Hambo ,  sme of his La∣theran fellow-Ministers,Vol. 1. p. 465. concerning the cause and cure  manies calamities. They concluded (saith Mr. Boroug on Hosea, from the mouth of a Minister there, who told it him with grief) that it was, because their  in  not adorned enough, which therefore they . A sad husinesse, Solo∣mon would have told them, that it is a mans pride that brings him low, Prov. 29.23. And that before destruction the heart of a man is haughty, ov. 18.12 And that pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit  fall, Prov. 16.18. If the pride of Israel doth testifie to his face, the next news we all hear of him is, that Israel and Ephraim are fallen in their iniquity. A bulging wall cannot stand: a swelling sore will shortly break. This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of Hoasts. The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the gods of the earth, &c. Zeph. 2.10, 11. all those deunculi, those pretty pictures that men so much dote upon: which should not be suffered, if for nothing else, yet for the distraction they may cause in Divine worship. In the Councel-chamber of the Lacedemonians, no picture or image was suffered; lest in consultation of weighty matters, their mindes thereby might be distracted. Irenaeus reproveth the Gnosticks for their pi∣ctures of Christ, though made in Pilates time, after his own proportion. Austin denieth that images can be set up in Churches, sine praesentissimo idololatriae periculo, without exceeding great danger of idolatry.In Psal. 114. Epiphanius saith, it is an abominati∣on of desolation, to set up pictures in the Churches of Christians. Plutarch an Heathen saith,Paul. Jovius. lib. 4. it is sacriledge: And Solyman the great Turk, when he had taken Buda in Hungary, would not enter into the great Church there, to give God thanks for the victory, till all the images were cast out. But this by the way onely. Let us take heed by those mistaken Lutherans,Esay 44.20. whom a deceived heart hath turned aside, that we likewise fall not from our own stedfastnesse. lest Judah also fall with them.] Lest we be wrapt up in the same condem∣nation,
lest we follow Germany in her plagues, as we began apace to do in her sins: for the which we have also already severely smarted. If Judah comply with Israel in false worship, they shall fall with Israel. God is not tied to any people, but can well be without them. The Lord is with you, whilst ye are with him. If ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if you forsake him, he will forsake you, 2 Chron: 15.2. But will the Lord be certainly found of them that seek him? yes, if they seek him seriously and seasonably, in a time when he may be found,Psal. 32.6. Esay 55.6. and before he be utterly departed. But here was the mistake, and the mischief of it. These Apo∣stata's went to seek the Lord, and they went with their cost, but they came too late: they had sinned away their God, and wiped off all their comfortables, as Saul had done before them. The Philistims are upon me, saith he, and God hath forsaken me: he answereth me no more, neither by Prophets nor by dreams, &c. It is said,1 Sam. 28.15. 1 Chron. 10.14. that Saul did not enquire of the Lord, therefore he slew him. He did, and yet he did not, because he sought him not with all his heart: his devotion was fained and forced. Now it is a rule in the Civil Law, Ficta pro factis non ha∣bentur: nec videtur fieri quod non legitimc sit. Fained service is lost labour: nei∣ther is that done to any purpose, that is not orderly done. And this was the case of these sacrificers in the next verse. Sodomites God calleth them, Esay 1.10. Verse 6. They shall go with their flocks, and with their heards] Cursitabunt, they shall out up and down, from altar to altar, with all their stock, as if they would buy off their sins, redeem their sorrows, with hecatombs, and store of holocausts; and then be ready to say, as that Heathen Emperour did, when he was to meet his enemie in the field, Non sic Deos coluimus, aut sic viximus ut ille nos vinceret.Antonin. Phi∣losoph. ap. Vulcat. Gallic. in Avio Cas∣sio. Mic. 6.7. we have not so served the gods, or lived so, that the enemy should have the bet∣ter of us. They thought they had merited better at Gods hands, by their thou∣sands of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, then to fall, as in the former verse, then to be relinquished by him, as here. Lo this is the guise of gracelesse hypocrites: by their outward performances they think to oblige God unto them; and by their good deeds to set off for their bad. Thus Brunheldis (that French Athaliah) after many murders, and much mischief wrought by her, Anno 600. built many Col∣ledges for Priests, and Monks, in Burgundy and Austria, Eo scilicet beneficio ma∣leficia sua expiavit, saith the French Chronicler;Epit. hist. Gal. pag. 25. Dan. hist. fol. 76. thereby thinking to satisfie for all her cruelty. So here in King Stevens time, there were more Abbeys built then in an hundred yeers before. So the Papists at this day, spend and are spent in their blinde devotions: they lavish money out of the bag, and run up and down from Saint to Saint with their cost: They pray publikely in publike calamities,Quarantoras Italico nomine istas preces vo∣cant. Polan. in loc. quem con∣sule. for fourty hours together, by the Popes command, that they may pacifie God, and divert his displeasure. For the same cause, they make the same man (in their greater Cities appointed) to preach every day in Lent without intermission; so as six dayes in the week he preacheth on the Gospel of the dayes; and on the Saturday, in honour and praise of our Lady, as they call her. Lo, thus they go, as they think,Spec. Europ. to seek God with their will-worship, and work done, &c. but they finde him as little as they did here, with their flocks, and with their herds: And why? First, they go to seek him: they run, but in a wrong way; and so fulfill that sacred proverb, He that hasteth with his feet sinneth: for the faster he runs, the farther he is out. Next,Prov. 19.2. they pretend to seek him, but indeed they seek themselves: they seek him, but it is to be rid of his rod: they do not so much serve him, as serve themselves and their own turns upon him; as those hypocrites in Zachary fasted to themselves;Zech. 7. not to get off their sins, but their chains. Thirdly, they go with their flocks, &c. not mine, but theirs, saith God; he will not so much as own them, though they were tendered to him in sacrifice; because brought with a wicked minde, Prov. 21.27. as Balac and Balaam did, Num. 23.1, 2. and as Cain did, Gen. 4.5. to whom therefore God had no respect, because he brought non personam sed opus personae, not himself, but his sacrifice, as Luther hath it: who also calleth all those Cainists, that offer to God the work done, but present not their bodies for a lively sacrifice, Rom. 12.1. Hence he rejects their services with infinite disdain, as Esay 1.11, 12. and 66.2, 3. though never so numerous and precious, Mic. 6.7. Hos. 8.13. And to set forth this, as he calleth them here, their flocks, and not his, so Fourthly, he calleth them flocks and herds, not sacrifices: that was too good a name for them.
Thus, Ier. 7.21. in scorn he calleth their sacrifice flesh; such as was ordinary, sold in the shambles. And thus also, Hos. 9.4. speaking of the meat-offering appointed, Lev. 2.5. he calleth it, their bread for their souls, or, for their life and livelihood, the bread for their naturall sustenance; and saith, it shall not come into his house, he will none of it. See Mal. 1.7. with the Note. but they shall not finde him] Non erit ipsis domi, non favebit eis, saith an interpreter here, he will not be at home, not within, to open to them when they knock at his doore: he will be as strange to them as ever they were to him, because they bring him not that best sacrifice of a broken heart: and because they come too late when the gate of grace is shut, when the gale of grace is over, when he hath fully resolved upon their ruine, and will not repent when he hath withdrawn himself from them] Heb. hath snatcht away himself, hath thrown himself out of their company, as Peter threw himself out from the rude souldiers into a by-corner, to weep bitterly, Mark. 14.72. Cum se proripuisset, so Beza rendreth it.. When God is well pleased with his people, they can no sooner cry, but he will say, Here I am, Isay. 58.9. And though they offer but small things unto him, as Samuel did a sucking lamb, 1 Sam 7.9. they are highly accep∣ted, and graciously answered. But woe unto them when I depart from them, saith God Hos. 9 12. yea woe upon woe when Gods soul is once disioynted from them. Jer. 6.8. anevill, an onely evill, behold, is come. An end is come, the end is come, it watcheth for thee, behold it is come. Ezek. 7.5.6. and why? because God was withdrawing from them: Hence all evils came rushing in, as by a sluce. In the ninth, tenth, and eleventh chapters of that Prophesy, God maketh diverse re∣moves. And still, as he goes out, some judgement comes in. First he removeth from the Cherubins in the Oracle, to the threshold Chap, 9.3. and upon that Remove, see what followeth Verse 5, 6, 7. &c. Secondly he removeth to the Cherubins on the right side of the house Chap. 10.1. and see what followes Vers. 2. Thirdly to the East-gate of the house, and the first entrance into the Temple, Chap. 10.19. and then see what succeeds Chap. 11.8.9.10. Fourthly he removeth to mount Olivet, quite out of the city, Chap. 11.23. and when God was quite gone, then follwed the fatall calamity in the ruine thereof. As there is no light in the world but from the Sun, no water but from the Sea; so no sound comfort or happi∣nesse to be had but with and in God. Better have him angry with us, then not have him at all with us. The loss of God is a peece of hell; in the suburbs whereof the Saints feel themselves, when but a while deserted. Verse 7. They have dealt treacherously against the Lord] They have dealt deceit∣fully in the Covenant, they are a perfidious cursed crew of them: this I see well enough, saith God, though they may think to darken mine eye-sight with the smoke of their many sacrifices, or to stop my mouth with their great presents. See how he complaineth as in this Prophesie often, so, Jer. 3.20. Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have you dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel. Now in such a case a man will not regard any ransom: neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts:Prov. 6.35. he will not be a pandar to his own bed, unleass he be very base indeed. Most certain it is, that God will not endure any such doings: but though he love his Spouse never so well, yet if she play false with him, and admit any other into the bridall-bed,Jer. 12.7. he will forsake his house that hath been so dishonest, he will leave his heritage that hath been so embased; he will give the dearely belo∣ved of his soul into the hand of her enemies, who shall hate her more then ever they loved her, as Amnon did Tamar, and deale cruelly with her, as Ezek. 16. is at large discoursed. The wickednesse of this people was the greater, for that they pre∣tended religion (as in the former verse) to their base beastly practises. Dessem∣bled sanctity is double iniquity. See how hainously God takes it, Jer. 7.9, 10. And when others deale treacherously and unworthily with you, see whether you have not done as bad and worse against the Lord. Alphonsus king of Arragon in a speech to the Popes Embassadour professed, that he did not so much wonder at his Courtiers ingratitude to him, (who had raised sundry of them from meane to great estates) as at his own to God. for they have begotten strange children] bastards such as the Jewes call Mamzer, as ye would say aliena labes, a strange blot. They call them also brambles, such
as was Abimelech who grew in the hedge-row of an harlot, and scratcht and drew blood to purpose, Judg. 9.14. That which is here charged upon the Isralites is, that they had not onely taken to wife the daughters of a strange God, or begotten bastards of harlots, but that they had nuzzled up their children in idolatry, and so made them sevenfold worse the children of the devill then before. This was a very great aggravation of their treachery, that they should impoison their posterity, and propagate their wickednesse from one generation to another; that there should be a line and a succession of it from their loins. None are so ready to drink in false principles, and corrupt practises as young ones. Such parents as have a hand in un∣doing their children, either by ill counsell, or example, are peremptores potius quàm parentes, saith Bernard, rather parricides then parents.Ber. Ep. 111. They shall give an heavy account to God for their childrens miscarriages. Let it therefore be the care of pa∣rents, as to keep themselves pure, so to see to their little ones, that they be not corrupted. Satan bears an implacable spite and hatred to them, as the seed-plot of heaven; and hath his emissaries abroad to marre them. Such was Protagoras, of whom Plato reporteth, that he gloried of this, that whereas he had lived sixty years in all, fourty of them he had spent in corrupting of young people.Plato in Me∣none. Of Julian the Apostate it is reported, that being of excellent parts and proof, both in learning and religion, whilest he was young: he was afterwards corrupted by his two Hea∣thenish Tutours Libanius, and Jamblichus, through the carelessenesse of Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia, who should have seen better to it: and that this was a main cause of his Apostacy. now shall a moneth devour them with their portions.] Some read it thus. Now shall the enemy devour them moneth after moneth: Others put menses for menstrua, and give this sence. Like as this people make no bones to break their faith with God by spirituall fornication, mingling as it were their seed with strange gods and forraine people: so shall it come to them, which happeneth to women worn with adulteries,See Tremel. & Jun. Annat. (as Ezekiel speaketh) that their monethly diseases procured by inordi∣nate lust, shall eat up and consume their bodies. For confirmation, they alledge (but not so properly) Jer. 2.24. I willingly concur with those that by a moneth understand a little short time. How soon is a moneth run out? And yet what ha∣vock will an enemy make in a moneths space? as we have had wofull experience in these late stripping and killing times. Them and their portions shall one moneth make an end of. Death heweth its way thorow a wood of men, in a minute of time, from the mouth of a murdering-piece. The sword contemneth the rod, Ezek. 21.13. as if it should say; What doth this silly rod do here? Let me come; Ile quickly make work among them. Ile dung the land with their carcases, &c. with their portions, the lots of their inheritance. Wicked men also have their portions in this life, Psal. 17.14. they live in pleasure on the earth, and are wanton, Jam. 5.5. but their portion is no other, but a moneth may devour it: their pleasure no other but one drop of an evil conscience may damp and dissweeten it. But if God be thy portion, &c. Verse 8. Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramab,] Clangite, clamate, not with the inverse trumpets of Furius Fulvius, which sounded a re∣treat when they should have sounded an alarme. But blow ye the cornet; give no∣tice to all the countrey, that Hannibal est ad portas, the enemy is at the very gates, sending a summons, and sounding for a surrender. The desolation of warre had been denounced in the former verse; here it is proclaimed, as it were by sound of Trumpet: the Prophet acting the part of an herauld; and, by a rhetoricall hypoty∣posis, representing the enemies approach, as if it were already under view: and not foretold, but acted before their eyes. Rhetorick, we see here, is an art sanctified by Gods Spirit; and may lawfully be used in handling of Gods word. The Scrip∣ture is full of it in every part: and happy is that Minister, that thereby can make himself master of his hearers affections: as potent in his Divine Rhetorick as Peri∣cles, or Cicero, were in their humane. Let him (by our Prophets example) strive to make the things whereof he preacheth to the people, as reall before their eyes, as possibly he can. The power of a ministery consisteth much in this; to set forth sin, Christ, heaven, hell, in such lively colours, that the hearer (though unlearned) may be convinced of all, judged of all, and having the secrets of his heart made
manifest,1 Cor. 14.84, 25. he may fall down on his face, worship God and report, that God is in the Minister of a truth:Chrysostom. Eze k. 4.1. Lo this is Preaching indeed. For as every sound is not Musick, so neither is every Pulpit-discourse Preaching. Nihil frigidius est doctore verbis solummodo philosophante, &c. Ezekiel must lay siege to Jerusalem, pourtraying it upon a tile, &c. So did Jeremy and other Prophets use signes, and similitudes, Saint Pauls speech and Preaching was not indeed with enticing words of mans wisdom, (he did not so paint the window as to keep out the light) but yet in demonstration of the Spirit,1 Cor. 2.4. and of power, close to the conscience. Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah] that is in the bounds of the Kingdom of Judah, Gibeah of Benjamin, Gibeah of Saul. And the trumpet in Ramah] Samuels country, afterward called Arimathaea, Josephs country: this is said to be in the borders of Israel. Strong garrisons they were both; and places of great resort: they are now alarmed, and bidden to prepare for the approach of the Assyrian. Cry aloud at Bethaven] Or Bethel, as Chap. 4.11. a city (as it is said of Athens, Acts 17.16.) wholly given to idolatry: and therefore more stupid and stubborn then the rest. Here therefore the Prophet cries louder then ordinary, classicum canit, sic clamat ut stentora vincere possit, he sets up his note that he may the sooner awaken them, and cause them to apprehend their danger, as present and reall. Bethaven was the great place of superstition, and now Rome is the nest of Antichrist, the habitations of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, a cage of every unclean and hatefull bird: therefore the Angel crieth mightily with a strong voice, saying, Baby∣lon is fallen, is fallen, certò, citò, penitus, surely, suddenly, utterly. Rev. 18.2. After thee ô Benjamin] who art at the back of Bethaven, and farest the worse for her neighbourhood: like as Hamath did for Damascus Zech. 9.2. See the Note there. Some understand Hostis adest, the enemy is at they heeles; make away, or stand upon thy guard: for thou art like to be put to't. And this concise kind of warning here given implies a minde moved and disturb'd, either with fear or anger. Verse 9. Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke] Correptionis, vel Correcti∣onis, ut Pagninus: when thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, &c. Psal. 39.11. God hath a day for such sharp rebukes, or childings by way of con∣viction, or Argument (as the word signifieth) wherein he will be sure to carry it, with a great deal of sound reason and evident demonstration: so that Ephraim shall have nothing to say,. Vastri ita ut videntes obstu∣pescant. &c. why he should not be desolated; yea so desolated as to make the beholders amazed thereat, as the Hebrew word importeth God, will not now dally with Ephraim, or deal favourably with him as heretofore: he will not shake his rod at him only, but wast it to the very stumps: he shall be utterly destroyed from being a people: the day that now comes is a black day indeed, a day not of instruction, but of destruction, not of correction but of execution; a very doomesday, wherein God will bring them into the furnace, and there leave them Ezek. 22.20. And that none may think this sentence over severe: or not so sure but that it might be avoyded or vacated, see what followeth in the text; among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall surely be] i.e. Ei∣ther I have forewarned them sufficiently, but they would take no warning, which is both a just presage and desert of their ruine: Or else thus: I am now fully resolved upon their ruine, neither is there cause that any man should deceive himself with a vain hope, as if these evils that I foretell should not befall you. Experience the mistresse of fools, shall teach you, that the sentence I now pronounce is precise and peremptory, not conditionall as heretofore, but absolute, and unchangeable: and this I here assure you of by this solemn contestation. Vers. 10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound] A wickedness condemned by the law and light both of Nature,Deut. 19.14. Prov. 22.28. and Scripture Deut. 27.17. The Princes are mentioned, because corruption in a people (as putrefaction in a fish) begins at the head. Now the land-mark or limit is removed many wayes. As first Religione, in Religion: when the true is changed into that which is false, as was here in Queen Maries dayes against her promise, to the Suffolk men. Secondly, in Regione,Tarnon. in the civil State: when one man violently invadeth the right of ano∣ther (as Ahab did Naboths vineyard) and no man must question them because it is facinus majoris Abollae the fact of a great one.Junenal. Thirdly, In officio, in a mans office
or particular station, when he keeps not within his circle, but take liberty to trans∣gresse, prescribing new worships as 2 King. 16.10, 11. 2 Coro. 28.23. taking upon them to teach Ministers what to teach them, as Mic. 2.6. or themselves invading the Ministeriall office uncalled thereunto as did Jeroboam 1 King. 13.4. and Ʋzziah 2 Chron. 26.16. to their cost. This (saith an Interpreter) is grandis culpa, et atrox crimen, a foul fault, a crimson crime. Let our Lay-preachers and Levellers look to it, unlesse they covet a curse. Deut. 27.17. He that breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him. Fourthly, In negotio, in businesses and transactions, in contracts and cove∣nants he removeth bounds, who cozeneth and circumventeth another in any mat∣ter 1 Thes. 4.6. These must remember that God is the avenger of all such:Heb. 10. and that it is a fearfull thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living God. The Papists fall foul upon us as Innovatours, and removers of the ancient bounds: because we reject their Ecclesiastical traditions and unwritten verities (as they call them) com∣mended unto us by the Ancients, and embraced by whole nations for many ages. To whom we answer, that Multitude and Antiquity are but ciphers in Divinity: they must (at least) have no more authoritie, then what they can maintain. Let them boast, with the Gibeonites, of their old shooes, mouldy bread, &c. we hold us to the Scriptures, for our limits and land-markes unmoveable and immutable. And when they shall ask us as they oft do, where was your Religion before Luther? we answer as one once did, In the Bible, where yours never was. Erasmus met with an adversary so silly as to charge him for a remover of the ancient bounds,Erasm. in Apolog. because he had anew Translated the New Testament: a work of singular use to the Church of Christ, in those dark times. therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like water] which shall overflow the bankes to overwhelm those that remove the bounds. Yea God will pour it up∣on them by whole pailefuls, or spouts (as they call them) at sea. Or if but by vials (as Rev. 16.1. which are vessels of narrow mouthes and pour out slowly, howbeit) they drench deeply, and distill effectually the wrath of God, which wretched sinners, shall never be able to avoid or abide. Oh when God shall set himself to set open the cataracts of his wrath as once at Noahs flood, and to come against a sinner with a deluge of destruction to pour out his indignation upon him, as water hastily, heavily, irresistibly, what will he do, and where will he finde refuge? This made David pray so hard. Let not the waterfloods overflow me: nor the deep swallow me up, Psal. 69.15. It is the privledge of every godly person, that in the floods of great waters, they shall not come nigh to him, Psal. 32.6. Or if they come up to his neck, yet they shall not take away his breath: for his head is ever above water. Washt he may be (as Paul was in the shipwrack) drowned he cannot be. Sink he may seem to do once and again to the bottom: but he shall up again with Jonas, if out of the deep, he call upon the Lord, who will set him on a rock that is, higher then he. Verse 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgement] Calumniam passus est Ephraim so the vulgar hath it: Ephraim was false accused and slandered: he suffered much by Sycophants, who depraved his good actions, drew him before the judge∣ment-seats and there oppressed him; as Jam. 2.6. But the word here used signifieth all manner of injuries and oppressions, whether by vexatious suits, by fraud or by force, virulent tongues or violent hands, wrangling or otherwise wronging a man, to his crushing and utter undoing many times: For a poor man in his house is like a snaile in his shell: crush that, and you kill him. Ephraim was crushed in judgement by his countrymen, who would do him no right: but much more by the cruell Assyri∣ans, who soon after this carried him captive, and left him without all remedy of law, without hope of a better condition or place for a worse. And what wonder though men so set against him, when God was pouring out his wrath upon him as water? sith all creatures are up in arms against Gods rebels. If the cause go against a man though he have never so much right on his side (for oft-times cedit viribus aequum, might overcomes right) and he be broken in judgement, Let him see whether things be right between God and himself: and if broken in judgement, let him be of a broken spirit, and he shall be relieved. because he willingly followed after the commandment] He was too sequacious and obsequious to Jeroboam and his Princes, commanding him to worship the golden
calves. Queniam voluit, juit, like a tame fool; or, at least, as a foolish childe (so this Prophet calleth him) he was soon won over, he came off with little ado. Jeroboam did but hold up his finger, and he had him straight: A mere fatuellus carried away to those dumb idols even as he was led. 1 Cor. 12.2. a Melchite, such a generation of Heretickes there were in the Primitive Church;Niceph. so called because they followed the examples and decrees of the Emperours: resolving to be of the Kings Religion, whatsoever it were, right or wrong. The Russians are such at this day. God and their Emperour they say know best what's truth or falshood: and it is their part to obey, not to enquire. But all Christs sheep are rationall; and will try before they trust, look before they leap: the spirituall man judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged by no man, 1 Cor. 2, 15. Shew him a clear text of Scripture for what you would perswade him to, and convince him thereby that it is the minde of God, and you may have what you will of him.Jam. 2.1. But for these masters of opinions such as are magistri nostri Parisienses, that obtrude their own placits upon people, and re∣quire to be beleeved upon their bare word without further proof, he abhors them. And for the decrees of Princes and Rulers, if they crosse the Scriptures, he will take leave to disobey them, as the Apostles did, Acts 4.19. as the three children in Daniel did, and Daniel himself Chap. 6. and as all the holy confessours and Martyrs both ancient and modern did.Act. and Mon. The Bishop of Norwich asked Roger Coo Martyr whether he would not obey the Kings Lawes? he answered yes, as far as they agree with the Law of God, I will obey them. Then said the Bishop, whether they agree with the word or not, we are bound to obey them, if the King were an infidell.Act. and Mon. fol. 1550. Coo answered, If Shadrach Meshach and Abednego had done so, Nabu∣chadnezzar had never confest the living God. True it is that Magistrates must be obeyed: Basil. those that are good must be obeyed as God, those that are bad, for God: but then it must be in licitis in things lawfull, and warrantable by the word: and herein we must not frame excuse. The blessed Virgin, though unweildy, went four dayes journey (so far it was from Nazareth to Bethlehem) to obey Augustus his decree, the charge was not so peremptory, but the obedience was as exemplary. Who∣so keepeth the commandment, sc. of the King shall know no evil thing, Eccles. 8.4.5. And whereas some might reply, why then, let's do all the King bids us without sciscitation, without further delay or enquiry: Solomon answers in the next words. And a wise mans heart discerneth both time and judgement, that is, he knowes both when and how, and how far forth fitly and lawfully the commands of a King may be dispatched; and no further will he go, then he can with a good conscience. The Pope writing to Bernard, requiring him to do that which was unlawfull, Bernard writes back again this answer and it was taken; I as a childe, do not obey, and I obey in disobeying. Antigona in Sophocles saith well, Magis obtemperandum est Dijs, &c. We should rather obey God with whom we must live ever, then men with whom we have but a while to sojourn. Lo blind nature saw so much. See the Note on Act. 4.19. It may not be forgotten or slipt over, that the word here rendred the Com∣mandment signifies Command thou: Because he willingly walked after Command thou: he danced after Jeroboams pipe, saying to him as he did once to Julius Caesar, Jussa sequi tam velle mihi quàm posse, necesse est.Lucan. Or as Tiberius answered Justin.Ʋtere me pro rota figulari Plaut. (though upon a better ground & end) Si tu volueris, ego sum: Situ non vis, Ego non sum, I am onely thy clay, and thy wax, &c. Or lastly, as Luther at first submitted to the Pope in these words (though afterwards, God gave him more courage in his cause) I prostrate my self at your Holinesle feet, with all that I am and have. Vivifica, occide, voca, revoca, approba, reproba; vocem tuam vocem Christi in te praesidentis et loquentis agnoscam:Anne 1518. Epist. ad Leon. Pontific. Kimchi. that is, Quicken me, kill me, call me, recall me, receive me, reject me: I shall acknowledge your voice as the voice of Christ himself ruling and speaking in you. Jeroboam is not once named here: nor the word (Commandment) set down at large out of detestation (likely) both of it, and Him, because it was a wicked commandment: and He no better then an Usurper. For although he had it cleared to him, that Gods will was that he should be King over the ten tribes, yet because it was a will of Gods decree, and not of his Command, as of a duty done by him, he goes among Divines for an intruder and
usurper in and for that fact of his. 'Tis obedience when we follow a Divine precept: but not ever, when we follow a divine instinct. Verse 12. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth,] Their sin was the greater, because they were so willing to it, and so easily drawn to idolatry, as most agreeable to their nature, and making much for their ease: which was Jero∣boams main argument. It may very well be, that he threatned punishment to those that disobeyed his commandement: but here they should have stood out, and have bide the worst; chusing affliction rather then sin; which because they did not, therefore they should perish by their own hand, and counsels: they shall be moth∣eaten, as a garment that breedeth the moth, and as a tree that breedeth the worm that wasteth it. Not but that God had a speciall hand in their punishment: and this not permissive onely, but active too, I will be unto Ephraim, &c. For is there evil in a city, and he hath not done it? The changes and periods of King∣doms are of him, Psal. 75.6, 7. that men may know that the Heavens do rule, Dan. 4.26. so are the alterations in mens bodies and estates, as Job setteth it forth, Chap. 4.19. and 13.28. and 27.18. Every one (say some Chymicks) hath his own balsam within him: his own bane 'tis sure that he hath: his clay-cottage is every day ready to drop on his head. And for his Estate,2 Cor. 5.1. there are oft-times secret issues and drains of expence, at the which it runs out, as at an hole in the bottom of the bag, Hag. 1.6. See the Note there. Howbeit Gods holy hand is in all this; I will be unto Ephraim as a moth, &c. that is, I will wast them sensim, sine sensu. Secretly, insensively, slowly; but surely, and inevitably: This David after Job, acknowledgeth, Psal 39.11. When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth, thou castest him into a corruptio totius substantiae, as the Physicians call the Hectick: surely every man is vanity. Selah: Yea he is altogether vanity, yea and that in his best estate, when he is best underlaid, when setled on his best bottom, verse 5. when he is gotten upon his mount with David, and thinks to die in his nest with Iob:Psal. 130.7. Job 29.18. Luk. 12. Mar. in cap. 28. & 11. c. 25. when he counts upon much good laid up in store for many years, as that rich fool, that reckoned with∣out his host, as we say. Tinea damnum facit, & sonitum non facit, saith Gregory. The moth maketh no noise, but doth a great deal of hurt among clothes. The worm here, rendred rottennesse, is minutissimus vermisulus, saith Luther here, a very small creature, but doth no small mischief:Teredo. for it eats out the heart of the strong∣est wood, yea of the strongest oaken planks at Sea. See here what a poor crea∣ture is man, yea a whole kingdom, when as a moth and a little worm may consume them: when they may be crushed before the moth, as Iob speaks, Chap. 4.19. he saith not, before the Lion, but before the moth. Learn also to take heed of sin, yea of secret sins, 2 King. 17, 9. lest we be secretly wasted, our graces cast into a consumption, our comfortables wiped away, our consciences wearied with secret buffets, as being smitten with the rod of Gods mouth, Esay 11.4. our estates mel∣ted as the fat of lambs before the fire, and our land insensibly wasted, and by de∣grees desolated; as Ephraim and Iudah were, as the Greek Empire was, and as it began to be here with us, in Queen Maries raigne, which was never prosperous af∣ter that she had abolished the Gospel: for beside forraigne losses, of Calice,Speed. &c. extreme dearths raged, much hurt was done by thunder from heaven, and by fire in the royall Navie, and all things went to worse, till Queen Elisabeth came in,Q. Eliz. life by M. Clark. Mart. 2. part, pag. 319. a repairer of the breach, a restorer of paths to dwell in, Esay 53.12. according to that glorious Epitaph, caused by King Iames to be inscribed upon her Princely Mo∣nument by him erected. Verse 13. When Ephraim saw his sicknesse,] i. e. Felt himself moth-eaten, hard-driven, and at a very great under, as those must needs bee whom God set∣teth against. and Iudah his wound,] Heb. his ulcer, that needeth crushing to get out the filth, Ier. 30.13. Obad. 7. Ephraim was sick, (God had made him sick in smiting of him, Mich. 6.13.) and Iudah was sore, yea ulcerated, impostumated, and they were both sensible of it: but no otherwise then bruit beasts, which when they are smitten or sick, feel it, and howl out, but have not the reason to think whence the pain comes, what may be the cause, and cure of it. Ephraim and Iudah make out indeed for help, but they run to wrong remedies, and refuges: they turn not to him
that smote them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts: therefore is not his anger turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, Esay 9.12, 13. If God be angry, no other helps can relieve us; no creature comfort us; no combination with King Iareb secure us. In a Mine, if a damp come, it is in vain to trust to your lights; they will burn blew and dim, and at last vanish; you must make hast to be drawn upward, if you will be safe. So must men make to God; fleeing from his anger to his grace. Blood-letting is a cure of bleeding, and a burn a cure against a burn; and the running to God is the way to escape him; as to close and get in with him that would strike you, doth avoid the blow. In a tempest at Sea, it is very dangerous to strike to the shoar: the safest way is to have Sea-room, and to keep in the Main still, &c. Iareb cannot be a Defender (according to the import of his name) if God come against a people or person. Brasse and Iron can fence a man against a bul∣let or a sword;Esay 30.33. D Rainolds, serm. before Parl. Iuly 27. 1642. but if he were to be cast into a furnace of fire, it would help to torment him; if into a pit of water to sink him. Now our God is a consuming fire, and his breath a stream of brimstone, &c. as a Reverend man maketh the com∣parison. Then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and Iudah sent to king Iareb,] Or, to the king of Iareb, or to the king that should plead, and revenge his cause and quarrell. Ad Regem propugnaturum, saith Iunius. Help O king, said she in the holy histo∣rie. Kings should be Helpers, Propugnatours, Protectours. Sanctuaries of safety to the oppressed, whether Subjects or Neighbours: such as the late king of Sweden was to the oppressed Princes of Germany: And before him, Queen Elisabeth to the Low-countrey-men; whose protection when she undertook, the king of Sweden that then was said,Camd. that she had taken the crown off her own head, and set it upon the head of Fortune. But what a madnesse was it in Ephraim and Judab to call in the Assyrian to their help, as they did, 2 King. 16.7. 2 Chron. 28.16, 21. but especially 2 King. 15.19, 20. & 17.3. This was to invite the enemy into their kingdome, and to shew gold-thirsty Babel, where she might have her full draught. Thus Judea was (after the return from Babylon) lost again to the Romans, by their calling Pompey to decide the controversie betwixt the disagreeing brethren. And such an ungain course was attempted by Iohn King of England, when, being over∣laid in his Barons warres,Heyl. Geog. he sent to the Monarch of Morocco for aid, offering to hold his kingdome of him. and to receive the law of Mahomet; but he was re∣jected with scorne. Afterwards, he passed away his kingdome to the Pope, in hope of help; but had so little joy of it, that he was heard to complain, Postquam me ac mea regna (proh dolor.) Rom. subjeci Ecclesia, nulla mihi prospera, sed omnia con∣traria advenerunt, I never prospered since I subjected my self and my Kingdomes to the Sea of Rome. No more did the Greek Churches, as above hath been men∣tioned. By iniquity, saith Solomon, shall no man be established, Prov. 12.3. Shall they escape by iniquity?Psal. 56.7. saith David: What? no better means and wayes to help themselves by? In thine anger cast down such a people, O God. It is not more a prayer then a prophecy: and it was fulfilled upon this people. Yet could he not heal you, medela. nor cure you of your wound.] Kings have their names in Greek from healing: they should be Physicians, and binders up of wounds, as Esay 3.7. (see Corn. à Lapide on that Text) But King Jareb proved a Physician of no value: instead of healing the wound, he made it wider; instead of helping King Ahaz,2 Chro. 28.20. he distressed him, saith the Text. The creature was never true to those that trusted to it. Such are sure to be frustrated, Jer. 14.3. subjected to Gods wrath, Psal. 78.22. cursed with a curse, Jer. 17.5, 6. pointed at as for∣lorn fools, Psal. 52.7. Verse 14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion,] I, that is, my Assyrian, the rod of my wrath: will be as a lion, or leopard, a creature swift and fierce above measure.Aelian. de var. hist. lib. 12. cap. 39. The Vulgar rendreth it, a lionesse, which, saith Aelian, is robustissimum & bellicosissimum animal, a most strong and stout creature: Hence Semiram's glori∣ed much, when in hunting she had taken not a lion, but a lionesse. What is stron∣ger then a lion, said those Philistims to Sampson, Judg. 14.14. See 2 Som 1.23. Prov. 30.29. The Lion (but especially the young Lion, that is in his hot blood) fears no other creature, falls upon his prey with great fury, and teareth it; carrieth it away when he hath done in his mouth, or devours it in the place, and fears no
rescue. If pursued, he altereth not his gate though he die for it. Some say that he is frighted at the crowing of a cock, or the creaking of wheeles. But the Lion of the tribe of Judah cannot be terrified by any thing or turned out of his track. And Ne∣buchadnezzar his servant is oft compared to a Lion, Esa. 5.29. Jer. 41.7. Dan. 7.4. as being set awork by God to revenge the quarrell of his Covenant, upon a perverse and perfidious Nation. Hence that oft-repetition here of the pronoune I. I, even I will tear and go away] Tear the very kell of their heart in sunder, tear them by the teeth of my terrible sword, which shall devour flesh and drink blood; yea be drenched and drunk in the gall of these ungodly wretches. They have no way to help themselves better then to fall down flat before this Lion,Satis est prostrasse leoni. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 15. to rend their hearts and not their garments, to break off their sins by repentance, and to be abrupt in the work, lest he tear them to pieces, and there be none to deliver them. If this be not timely and truely done, God will go on in his wrath: and of a moth and little worm become a ramping and a roaring Lion. The little cloud though at first but as an handbredth, will soon overspread the whole heaven: yea as one cloud followeth thick upon another, so will one judgement upon another, if the Sun of Repentance do not interpose and disperse them. Light afflictions not improved to this purpose, will be but as a drop of wrath forerunning the great storm: as a crack forerunning the ruine of the whole building. That is a known text, If you will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more, and seven times more and seven to that, Levit. 26.18, 28. Three severall times God raiseth his note, and he raiseth it by sevens; and those are discords in Musick. Such saying will be heavy songs, and their execution heavy pangs to the wicked. Verse 15. I will go and return to my place] To my palace of Heaven: so the Chaldee rendereth it, I will withdraw my Majestie, and return into the habitation of my holinesse, which is in heaven. I will go from them that they may come to them∣selves, with the Prodigal: I will forget them that they may remember themselves: I will trouble my self no further with them (when God comes against sinners he is said to come out of his place, and so to disease himself Esay 26.21. with Lam. 3.33.) that they may be afflicted and weep and mourn after me Jam. 4.9. I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place, as Esay 18.4. I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, &c. Deut. 32.20. and they shall see that I will be as froward as they, for the hearts of them, Ps. 18.26. I will gather them in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave them there, Ezek. 22.20. that they may know the worth of my gracious presence, (which they have not prized) by the want of it: and be pricked on thereby to pray, Return O Lord: how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants. O satisfie us early with thy mercy, &c. Psal. 90.13, 14. Thus mothers use to leave their children (or at least turn their backs upon them) till they mourn and make moane after them. Thus the Lion seems to leave her yong ones, till they have almost killed themselves with roaring and howling: but at last gasp she relieves them, whereby they become the more couragious. God also will return to his people, when they once turn short again upon themselves, and see their sin-guiltinesse, and seek his favour. This is Gods end 1 Cor. 11.32. and the happy effect of affliction sanctified, 1 King. 8.47. Till they acknowledge their offence] Heb. Till they become guiltie: till they plead guiltie, and carry themselves accordingly, blushing and bleeding in my presence. Thus Saint James, Be afflicted, or be miserable, Chap. 4.9. ye are so; but see your selves to be so: tremble and humble at Gods feet for mercy: give glory to God my Son, and confesse thy sin, Josh. 7.19. The viper beaten casts up her poison. The traytour on the rack confesseth all. He that in affliction acknowledgeth not his of∣fence, and seeketh Gods face, is more hard-hearted then a Jew, as is to be seen here and Psal. 78.34. and 1 Sam. 7.6. In the year of Grace 1556. at Weissenston in Germany, a Jew for theft was in this cruell manner to be executed. He was hang'd by the feet with his head downward, betwixt two dogs, which constantly snatcht & bit at him. The strangenes of the torment moved Jacob Andreas, a grave Divine, to go to behold it. Coming thither he found the poor wretch as he hung, repeating verses out of the Hebrewes Psalms, wherein he cried out to God for mercy. Andreas hereupon took occasion to counsell him to trust in Jesus Christ, the true Saviour of mankind.Melch. Adam. in vit. Jac. Andreae. the Jew embracing the Christian faith, requested but this one thing, that he might
be taken down and baptized, though presently after he were hanged again (but by the neck as Christian malefactours suffered) which was accordingly granted him.Lat. Serm. La∣timer reports a like story of one in his time, who being executed at Oxford, was cut down but not quite dead. And means being used to recover him, he came again to himself, and then confessed all his villany, which before he would not be drawn to do. In the life of Master Perkins also mention is made of a lusty fellow at Cam∣bridge, who being upon the ladder and affrighted with the forethought of hell-tor∣ments, was called down a gain by Master Perkins, who prayed with him and for him so effectually, as that the beholders could not but see a blessed change thereby wrought in the prisoner;Master Fuller and Mr. Clark in Mr. Perk. his life. who took his death with such patience and alacritie, as if he actually saw himself delivered from the hell which he feared before, and heaven opened for the receiving of his soul to the great rejoycing of the beholders. How well might these men say with Themistocles Periissem nisi periissem. I had been un∣done, if I had not been undone. David was brought home by the weeping-crosse, Psal.. Herod. lib. 1. Alsted. Cbroni. pag. 325. 119.67. Affliction was a better Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth then Master Ascham; Nocumenta documenta, said Craesus, when he was in the hands of his ene∣mies. The Burgundians well beaten by the Hunnes, fled to Christ the God of the Christians, and embraced his Religion. and seek my face] Out of a deep sense of their sin-guiltinesse. This is the work of Faith, as the former of Repentance. God was not so gone from his people, nor so far out of their call: but that if they could find a praying heart, he would find a pittying heart: if they would acknowledge their offence; he would forgive the ini∣quity of their sin, Psal. 32.5. If they would set their Faith a work (as she in the Gospel did, of whom it is said, that when Christ would have hid himself, it could not be: for a certain woman whose daughter was diseased, came and fell at his feet, fetcht him out of his retiring-room Mark 7.24.25.) he would break the heavens and come down from his place Isai. 64.1, 2. he would come leaping over all lets and impediments, those mountains of Bether or of di∣vision, to the relief of his people (See this set forth Cant. 5. with the Notes there.) Provided that they seek not so much their own ease and ends as his face and favour, the sense of his presence and light of his countenance, the fear of his name, and comforts of his spirit. Thus David Psal. 63.1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee in a dry and barren Land. Carnall prayers in time of misery are but such as the dry earth, or the hungry raven make. They are the prayers of nature for ease, not of the spirit for grace: such as was that of Pharaoh, when the rack made him roar, the rod slatter. See Zach. 7.5, 6. with the Notes. In their affliction they will seek me early] Manicabunt.. Sept. They will morning me, so the Orginall hath it. They will do it, saith God, for I will give them to do it; both to will it, and to work it: for otherwise afflictions (Gods hammers) do but beat cold iron: wicked men grow worse for corrections, as water is more cold after a beat, as naughty boyes are more stubborn or more stupid after a whipping. These also may cry to God, as prisoners at the bar, or malefactours upon the rack: yea seek him early, after a sort, and yet not finde him Prov. 1.27. no though they seek him with their herds and flocks. Hos. 5.6. because they seek him not early, and earnestly, or diligently as Prov. 7.15. inflamedly as Baruch Nehe. 3.20. and Jabez 1 Chro. 4.10. accurately and anxiously, as the Church sought her beloved Cant. 5.1. as the Virgin Mary sought her lost Son. Luke 2. they seek him, not for himself, but for his corn wine and oil Hos. 7.14. they seek not him but his; they seek him not till they have nothing else to seek to. Most justly therefore may God reject their suits and regest upon them,Judg. 10. Depart from me ye wicked, Get ye to the gods whom ye have cho∣sen, &c. Justly may he say to them as once Jephta did to his country men. Do ye now come to me in your distresse, who in your prosperity said unto me, Depart from us, we will none of the knowledge of thy wayes? Those that will finde God must seek him early. O satisfie us early with thy mercies, Psal. 90.14. They must seek him early and late too Esay 26.9. alwayes and by all means, as the Apostle speaketh in another case; but especially in affliction, as here; for he lookes for it. Our Saviour being in an agony prayed more intensively; so did David out of the deep, Jonah out of the whales belly, the Church when she was in danger, as she thought of
losing God, then she set up her note and cryed, Thou art put in the midst of us,Jer. 14.9. leave us not Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam. Thus afliction exciteth devotion in the Saints: and although they seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore, yet especially, In their distresse they cryed unto the Lord, and he heareth them, Psal. 120.1. in the night of affliction they take the light of a lively faith, and seek him early. And that they may not fail to finde him, they call in help of others, as here in the next chapter. Come and let us return, &c. CHAP. VI. Verse 1. COme and let us return unto the Lord, &c. So sweetly was Gods ex∣pectation answered: as likewise it was in David Psal. 27.8. No sooner could God say, Seek ye my face, but his holy heart answered (as it were by an eccho) Thy face Lord will I seek. Look what God aimeth at in his administration to his elect he will have it: He will have out the price of his Sons blood, who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, &c.Tit. 2.14. and that he might give repentance to Israel, and forgivenesse of sins, Act. 5.31. See the proof and practice hereof in these Jewish converts. Come and let us return to the Lord, &c. See how in those dayes and at that time the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping they shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying,Jer. 54, 5. Come and let us joyn our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgot∣ten. Judah and Israel could not agree at other times: but when they are in a weep∣ing condition, then they could, when they passed through the valley of Bara,Psal. 84. and made it a Bochim with their penitent tears, even they could go from strength to strength, or from company to company (one company coming this way, and another that) and not rest untill every one of them in Zion appeareth before God.Psal. 84.6.. This was fulfilled, partly when the Lord turned again, the captivity of Zion out of Babylon, and those that had sown in tears reaped in joy: those that went forth weeping and bearing precious seed came again with rejoycing and brought their sheaves with them, Psal. 126.5.6. confer Jer. 29.13. partly, under their captivity and oppression by the Romanes, which was when Christ came and by his Apostles converted thousands to the faith, so that multitudes of them were aily added to the Church, Acts 2. and 3. And lastly at that long looked for calling of the Jewes; when they shall flie to Christ crucified as the doves unto their windows;Isai. 60.20. when they shall bring their brethren as an offering to the Lord upon horses, in chaerets, and in litters: that is, though sick, weakly and unfit for travell, yet rather in litters, then not at all; every one exciting other, and saying, Come and let us return unto the Lord. &c. Return unto him, from whom we children of Israel have deeply revolted.Isai. 31.6. Let us not pine away in our transgressions, aa those Ezek. 33.10. for yet there is hope in Israel concern∣ing this thing, Ezra 10.2. we have done all this wickednesse; yet let us not turn aside from following the Lord: for this were to adde rebellion to sin, 1 Sam. 12.20. this were worse then all the rest. Come let us return unto the Lord] By our sins we have run from him: by repen∣tance let us return unto him. See for this the Note on Zach. 1.2. If the wicked have their Come, Prov. 1.11. Esay 56. ult. should not the Saints have theirs? as Esay 2.3. Zech. 13.21. See the Note. Should not Andrew call Philip, and Philip Nathaneel, as one linke in a chain doth another, &c. True grace is communicative, charity is no churle; the Saints like not to go to heaven alone. For he hath torn] Rapuit not cepit, as the vulgar, by a foul mistake of capio for rapio in the Hebrew Lexicons. Here these converts confesse that their affliction neither came forth of the dust, Job 5.6. nor without their desert: they acknowledge God to be the Lion that tore them, Chap. 5.14. and not without cause: for that they had wickedly departed from him. This is is one property of true repentance, still to justifie God, and to say as Mauritius the Emperour did (after David) when he saw his wife and children slain by the traytour Phocas, &c. Righteous art thou, O Lord in all thy wayes, and just in all thy proceedings. Another property of it is,Psa. 119.137. to bring a man to God with some assurance of healing.
He will heal us,] For he is Iehovah the Physician, Exod. 15.26. Now Omni∣potenti medico nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus, saith Isidore, To an Almighty Physician, no disease can be uncurable. Ephraim went to the Assyrian upon sight of his disease; but he could not heal him, Chap. 5.13. But God both can and will. Here he is compared both to a Physician, he will heal; and to a Surgeon, he will binde up. That which the Poets fable concerning Telephus his Spear, is here onely verified: Ʋna eademque manus vulnus opemque ferat.Initium poeni∣tentiae est sensus clemen∣tiae Dei. The same holy hand that tare us, must cure us: and the sound perswasion of his readinesse to do it for us, will soonest of any thing bring us into his presence. Iudas confesseth his wound, and despaireth of the cure. But Peter is constrained by the love of Christ to weep bit∣terly, and beleeve. A stroak from guilt broak Iudas his heart into despair: but a look from Christ brake Peters heart into tears. There is no mention of Israels lamenting after the Lord, while he was gone: but when he was returned, and set∣led in Kiriath-jearim, then they poured forth water, &c. 1 Sam. 7. then they ga∣ther about him, and will do any thing that he commandeth them. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, Heb. 11.22. Deijcit ut relevet: premit ut solatia praestet, Enecat, ut possit vivificare, Deus. Verse 2.Jer. 18.12. After two dayes will he revive us,] Whereas some of those that were called upon to Come and return unto the Lord, might say with those in Ieremy, Nay, for there is no hope,Psal. 88.5. God hath mortally wounded us, so that we are already in the jawes of death, free among the dead, as the Psalmist hath it, free of that company: The better sort of them, fullest of faith, answer: Dead though we be, yet God will revive us: and long though it seem, yet after two dayes, or such a matter, in a very short space, so soon as ever it shall be convenient, and for our greatest good, He that shall come to our comfort,Heb. 10.37. will come, and will not tarry. And for the cer∣tainty of it, as sure as the third day followeth the second, so sure shall deliverance come in due season: fear ye not. In the third day he will raise us up,] He will, he will, never doubt of it. O the Rhetorick of God! O the certainty of the promises! See the like expressions, Esay 26.20. & 10.25. Hagg. 2.7. Habak. 2.3. Heb. 10.37. and have patience. Gods help seems long, becauser we are short: Nec quia dura, sed quia molles patimur. We should draw forth hope as a line:Senecal Joh. 13.7. and think we hear Christ saying as he did to Peter, What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter. Verse 3.Sciemus secta∣bimur que. Vatabl. Then shall we know,] Heb. And we shall know, we shall follow on to know, i. e. We shall experimentally know the Lord, if we turn unto him: wee shall tast and see that the Lord is good. We shall not onely be raised out of the dust of deaeth, that is, of deep afflictions, (wherein we lay as among the pots) and live in his sight,Psal. 22.15. Psal. 68.13. that is, comfortably; but we shall know him, which is life eternall; yea we shall prosecute knowledge, follow on to know, as unsatisfiable, and not con∣tent with any measures already required: yea we shall proceed therein and make progresse, as the morning light doth to the perfect day. Those that turn from their iniquities shall understand Gods truth, Dan. 9.13. shall be of his Councel, Psal. 25.14. shall have the minde of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. the wisdom of God in a my∣stery, verse 7. such as the great Rabbies of the world can no more understand, then the Philistins could Sampsons riddle, verse. 8. yea these pure in heart shall see God, Matth. 5.8. see him and live, see him, and eat and drink, being much acheared and refreshed, as those Nobles of Israel, Exod. 24.10, 11. Provided that being on enlightned, and having tasted of the heavenly gift, they be not slothfull, but shew the same diligence, Heb. 6.4, 11, 12. in the use of means to get more knowledge, till they all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ, Ephes. 4.13. or, (as the words may be read) of that age wherein Christ filleth all in all, Ephes. 3.19. so as to be able to comprehend with all Saints the severall dimensions, and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, Lo, this is indeed to follow on to know the Lord: when we are still adding to our vertue knowledge, till (with those famous Romans) we be full of goodnesse,Rom. 15.14. filled brim-full with all knowledge,
able also to admonish one another, saying, Come, and let us returne to the Lord, &c. Come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord, Esay 2.5. walk in that light we have, and we shall have more: for to him that hath, sc. for use and practise, shall be given, Mar. 4.25. He that first begs, and then digs for knowledge, searching for her as for hid treasure, Prov. 2.3, 4. He shall be sure of some daily comings in from Christ: he shall understand the fear of the Lord, and finde the knowledge of God, verse 5. Christ will say unto him, as once he did to Nathaneel, Thou shalt see greater things then these, Iohn 1.50. even great and mighty things, which thou knowest not, Ier. 33.3. His going forth is prepared as the morning,] That is, as sure as the morning fol∣loweth the night, and shineth more and more unto the perfect day; so sure shall God appear for our comfort, and shall dispell the night of our calamity.Psal. 30. Mourning lasteth but till morning; and as before the morning-light is the thickest darknesse, so before deliverance our afflictions are usually increased upon us. God appeareth on the sudden and beyond expectation, (as out of a cloud, or as out of an engine) and shews himself then usually, when things are at worst. Hence that of Iob, Post tenebras spero lucem: and that of the Church in Micah, Though I fall,Mich. 7.8. I shall arise: when I sit in darknesse, the Lord shall be a light unto me. Vatablus applieth this Text to the comming of Christ, that day-star from on high,Orietur Chri∣stus ut aurora qua adentu suo depellit te∣nebras. that Sun of righ∣teousnesse, to whom all the Prophets point Gods people, when they would comfort them indeed; for he is the Consolation of Israel, the Desire of all Nations, for whom their souls waited more then they that watch for the morning, wait for the morning, Psal. 130.6. But because Gods going forth is opposed to his departure, when he retired to his place, Chap. 5.10. therefore his setled going forth here, is by most interpreted of his manifestations of his mercy to his poor prisoners of hope, those disconsolate captives, whom he not onely brought back from Babylon, but also shined into some of their hearts,2 Cor. 4.6. by the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Iesus Christ. and he shall come unto us as the rain,] As the showres of blessing, Ezek. 34.26. rain of liberalities, Psal. 68.9. rain of righteousnesse, Hos. 10.12. Citò exaudi me Domine: complue me, saith Austin upon those words of David, My soul thirsteth after thee, as a thirsty land. Hear me quickly, O Lord, rain righteousnesse upon my dry soul, fill me with the fruits of thy Spirit; whose work it is to illuminate and sanctifie, as it is the Fathers to heal, verse 1. and the Sons to revive, and raise us together with himself, the first-fruits of them that sleep, verse 2. as the latter and former rain unto the earth.] sc. in perfection of gifts and graces, by degrees wrought in our hearts: Or, in seasonable and sutable comforts, as rain in seed-time, softening the ground: and a little before harvest, to plump and fill up the corn in the ear. Verse 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee, &c?] See how soon the Pro∣phet changeth his note. Hitherto he had set forth their repentance, in sense of mercy: now all on the sudden, he upbraideth and threatneth them for their incor∣rigiblenesse, and inconstancy. Ministers must turn themselves, as it were, into all shapes and fashions, both of speech and spirit, to win people to God. Aarons bels must be wisely rung, saith One. Sometimes the Treble of Mercy sounds well.M. Neh. Rog. At other times the Tenour of Judgement, or Counter-tenour of reproof sounds bet∣ter: and it oft falls out that the Mean of Exhortation soundeth best of all. It is his wisdom to observe circumstances, and know how to curse as well as blesse, chide as well as comfort, and speak warre to a rebell, as well as peace to a friend. And herein indeed lieth the wisdom and faithfulnesse of a Teacher. Then, and onely then shall he prove himself sincere, and unpartiall, when he holds this course. What shall I do unto unto thee? It is, as if God should say, I have done mine ut∣most, as Esay 5.5. Mich. 5.3. and now am at a stand, and can scarce tell what to do more. See the like expostulatory complaints, Ier. 2.30, 31. & Chap. 5.3. Amos 4.6. Esay 26.10. Matth. 11.16, 17, 18. & 23.37. I would, but thou wouldest not. As the loving hen is alwayes caring for her chickens, and calling them about her, that she may gather and guard them from the mischief of all ver∣min: but they will needs be stragling, and so perish. So if Gods people will not hearken to his voice, if Israel will none of him: what can he do lesse then give them
up to their own hearts lusts, Psal. 81.12. yea give them up to the devil, to be fur∣ther hardened to their just destruction, saying, That which will die, let is die? All that God can do is, as here, to mourn for their obstinacy, and fool-hardinesse in rejecting his grace, as he wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. We should also do the like,Esay 24.16. Jer. 4.19. Rom 9.2. Acts 2.40. crying out with Esay, My leannesse, my leannesse! and with Jeremy, My bowels, my bowels! and with Paul, I have great heavinesse and continuall sor∣row in my heart, for my perverse Countrey-men. Peter calleth them, an untoward generation: such crooked pieces that there was no working upon them. A cunning Carver can cut the similitude of any creature, yet not on a crooked or rotten stick. Where lieth the fault? surely in the crookednesse of the stick, and not in the Car∣vers cunning: so is it here. When men wrestle with God, as Deut. 32.5. shift him off,. as the Apostles word signifieth, Heb. 12.25. take up the bucklers against the sword of his Spirit, lest it should prick them at heart, as Acts 2.37. and let out the life-blood of their lusts, that they might live; what can the Lord do in this case, more then pity their unhappinesse, and punish them for their stubbornnesse, as the Judge pitieth a malefactour, as he is a man, but yet condemneth him as a thief or murtherer? Tell me not here, that God could have done more for Ephraim and Iudah then the did;Matt. 8.2. and they might have said in answer to Gods question here, as that Leper in the Gospel did. Why? Lord if thou wilt thou canst make me clean. Hence it is, God by his absolute power can make iron swim, rocks stream forth water, stones to yeeld children to Abraham: he can do whatsoever he pleaseth; save without means, &c. But it is his actuall power that man must look to. And so he (having tied the end and the means together) cannot (say Divines) because hee will not, bring men to the end, without their using those means which tend unto the end: for that is the ordinary course which he hath decreed to use, and which he will not alter, but upon speciall occasion, as our Saviour noteth in the cure of Naa∣man, and in the feeding of the widow of Sarepta, Luke 4.26.27. for your goodnesse is as the morning cloud, &c.] This people hearing God say, What shall I do unto you? might possibly reply; why? what should you do, but rain down righteousnesse upon us, and load us with loving-kindnesses? for we are good all over, we have returned and done right in thy sight, as it is said of those hypocrites, Ier. 34.15, 16. and as Peter saith of some Apostates in his time, that they were clean escaped from them who live in errour: and (for matter of practise) they had also escaped the pollutions of the world; knew the way of ighteousnesse, and seemed very forward in it; were as the fore-horses in a Teem, ing-leaders of good exercises, &c. who yet afterwards fell off to the world, tur  from the holy com∣mandements, and returned with the dog, to their vomit, and with the washed sow to her wallowing again in the mire. And this is that which the Lord here up∣braideth this people with, (and so stops their mouthes) viz. that their goodnesse, or mercifulnesse, their piety toward God, and charity toward men, as nothing else but a morning-cloud,Jude ver. 12. a waterlesse cloud, as Jude hath it, a meer flaunt, or flash, an out-side onely, an empty sound, a vain pretence; It was also as the morning∣dew, which is soon dried up by the Sun-beams: In a word, they were both false and fickle, unsteady and unstable, constant onely in their inconstancy. Hence this pa∣theticall complaint of them; God knew not where to have them, and therefore not what to do with them. These were never right with God, because not sted∣fast in his covenant, Psal. 78.36, 37. they are unstable as water, therefore they shall not excell, Gen. 49.4. they never were a willing people in the day of Christs power, Psal. 110 3. his power was never put forth upon them, to subdue their wils to Gods will. They never yet attained to that spirit of power, of love, and of a sound minde, 2 Tim. 1.7. Inconstancy comes from weaknesse. The strength of Israel repenteth not, 1 Sam. 15.29. Verse 5. Therefore have I hewed them by my Prophets,] Therefore? where∣fore? because there is so little stability, and solidity in them: because they are so off and on, so light and false hearted; therefore I have spared for no pains, (though all to small purpose) but have sharply rebuked them, that they might be sound in the faith: yea I have sought against them with the sword of my mouth,Rev. 2.16. and slain them by powerfull convictions of conscience: so that they are self-condemned, and the judgements are written, as it were with a beam of the Sun, they are so clear to
themselves and others. This is the coherence, and the reason of the illative particle Therefore. It is the sad complaint of a late Reverend writer, when we have spent all our wind on our people, their hearts will be still apt to be carried away with every wind of doctrine. They are wonne, saith another, with an apple, and lost with a nut: no man knows where to find them in one mind for a moneths space: such a generation of Moon-calves never appeared in the world before. Our giddy-hearers (saith a third) after all our pains taken with them, have no mould, but what the next teacher casteth them into; being blown like glasses, into this or that shape at the pleasure of his breath. But to return to the Text. I have hewed them by the Prophets] who are here compared to Masons or stone∣hewers, 2 King. 12.12. 1 Chron. 22.2. Job 19.24. Esay 51.1. to Carpenters 1 King. 5.15. Prov. 9.1. Esay 5.2. to day-labourers who dig pits and cisternes Deut. 6.11. and 8.9. 2 Chron. 26.10. Neh. 9.25. Jer. 2.13. A ministers life is no idle∣mans occupation; they meet with many rough stones, knotry pieces, hard quarres, tough work. Some are stones crumbling, all to crattle, as soon as we begin to ham∣mer them; and as timber falling to splinters when we fall to hewing of them: and other such sons of Belial there are that a man cannot speak to them: 1 Sam. 25.17. they are thorns that cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron, and with the staffe of a speare. These shall be thrust away as thorns, and utterly burnt with fire, 2 Sam. 23.6, 7. And for the better sort, those lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5, and smoother pieces that are to be set into Gods building, being made by his grace more malleable and tractable, there must be a great deal of pains taken with them, that they may be as the polished corners of the Temple: they must be humbled and hammered, Ier. 23.29. pared and planed here in the mount; for there may neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron be heard in the heavenly house, for which they are fitting, 1 Kin. 6.7. And herein we are labourers together with God; ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9. In which labourous kind of life, I endure all things for the Elects sake, that they may be saved, saith Paul, 2 Tim. 2.10. And I dare be bold to say, saith Luther, that faithful Ministers do labour and sweat more in a day, then husbandmen do in a moneth. And for mine own part, saith he, Si mihi esset integrum vocationem deserere, If it were lawful for me to leave my cal∣ling, I could with lesse pains and more pleasure, dig and do day-work, then labour as I now do, in the work of the ministry. Pareus thinks that the next words, I have killed them with the words of my mouth] is spoken by God of the Pro∣phets. q. d. I have set them so heavy a task and put them so hard to it, that it hath been the death of them; such crabbed and rugged spirits they have met with, such stubborn and tough timber that had long lain soaking in the waters of wickednesse: these tooles of mine are even worn out with working. But though this be a pious interpretation, and not altogether improbable, because of the change of person here, viz. them for you: yet because such a change is ordinary in Scripture and Em∣phatical also; namely when God seemeth deeply displeased with any one, and there∣fore leaveth taking to him, and turns himself suddenly to another (see chap. 4.14. and 5.3.4.) I conceive it may very well be so in this place.Sic enim con∣temptim loqui mur. Occidi istos I have slain these refractaries and rebels with the words of my mouth. I have beaten so hard upon their consciences, that they have had no joy of their lives. I have marked them out for destruction, by threatening it, as Jer. 18.7.8. and ch. 1.10. Elisha hath his sword as well as Jehu and Hazael, 1 King. 19.17. and when Elisha unsheatheth and bran∣disheth his sword, it is a fair warning that the sword of Jehu and Hazael are at hand. See Ezek. 11.13. And it came to passe that when I prophesied, Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. So did Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5. So do many despisers now adayes, though it appear not by them. A man may have his bane about him, though he fall not down dead in the place. If any man hurt Christs two witnesses, fire (though not felt) proceedeth out of their mouthes and devoureth their enemies. Rev. 11.5. And thy judgements are as the light that goeth forth] i. e. I have clearly denounced them and will as openly execute them in the sight of this Sun. The righteous shall see it and shall say, Lo this is the man, &c. Psa. 2.6.7. and 119.137. Thou, by thine hypocrisie, and externall services, as verse 6. hath cast a mist before mens eyes, that they cannot think thee to be so near a judgement: but I will dispell that mist, and
make my works a comment upon my word: and having sent unto thee a powerfull ministery, but to no purpose, I will make thee, who wouldst not hear the word, to hear the rod, and who hath appointed it. Mic. 7.9. Verse 6. For I desired mercy and not sacrifice] that is, rather then sacrifice: I prefer the marrow and pith of the second table, before the ceremony and surface of the first. I desired mercy] Heb. I desired it with singular delight and complacency, Aurea certe sententia, saith Rivet. This is a golden sentence, twice quothed by Christ him∣self, Mat. 9.13. and Mat. 12.7. which noteth the eminency of it. And with it agreeth that answer of the Scribe so much approved of by our Saviour Mar. 12.33. To love thy neighbour as thy self is more then all burnt-offerings and sacrifices. And that of the Authour to the Hebrewes. But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased Chap. 13.16. a great deal better pleased then with all the outward services and sacrifices of the Law, which yet were commanded by God, but not to be rested in. These be famous sentences indeed;M. Sam. Clark, Life of Luth. such as a man would fetch upon his knees from Rome or Jeru∣salem, as a Reverend man saith of certain brave sayings of Luther, which he had re∣cited. Mercy is here put for all the duties of charity; as the knowledge of God is for those other of Piety, whereof it is the rise and foundation. Mercy is set first non ut potior sed ut notior, not as better but as better known, and more noriced. They are set together, because they must not be sundred in our practise. Obedience must be universal, extending to the Compasse of the whole Law. A man must not be funambulus virtutum, as Tertullian speakes, going in a narrow track of obedience, picking and chusing what he will do and what not; following God in such duties as will suit with him and no further. He must follow after God as Caleb Num. 14.14. have respect to all Gods commandments,Act. 13. and do all his wills, as David walkt in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, as Zachrry and Elizabeth Luke 16. These partiall and perverse Jewes walked in all the ordinances, but they cared not for the commandments: they were altogether for the ceremoniall Law, but neglected the moral. Or if they did any thing that way, it was but the outward act of a commandment, which men may naturally perform. Thus Ahab humbled himself: and some think that Ʋria (which Esay calleth the faithful witnesse) the same with him that brought in the Altar of Damascus,Esay. 8.2. 2 Kin. 16.10. yet reputed a faithful man of his word. An hypocrite may shew mercy, but not love mercy, Mic. 6.8. and know God, but not affectively, practically, according to that of Saint Iohn, Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 Joh. 2.23. This is that obedience which is better then sacrifice, 1 Sam. 15.22. Ier. 7.21. and no wonder, Quia per victimas, a∣liena caro, per obedientiam voluntas propria mactatur,. Isoc. saith one; in sacrifices the flesh of another, but in obedience our own wils are offered up: and this the very Heathen, by the dim rush-light of nature, saw to be better. Hold thou it the fairest sacrifice and best service, to keep thy self pure and upright, saith Isocrates. O Nico∣cles. And, Non bove Mactato coelestia numina gaudent. Sed, quae praestanda est & sine teste, fides.Ovid. Epist. Vers. 7. But they like, men] Heb. like Adam, that Arch-Rebl, that old , after the similitude of whose transgression these men had sinned, Rom. 5.14. and so deserved, in like sort to be punished, by being cast out of their countrey, as he was out of paradise. Thus some sense it: as if the prophet would here reduce these co∣venant-breakers, to that first transgressour Adam in whom they all were; as the whole countrey is in a Parliament-man, and as Levi was in Abrahams loynes, and paid tithes in him,Mercer. Tremell. Vatabl. Clavius. Tigurin. Perinde ac foedus alicujus hominis infimi & infirmi. Polan. Heb. 7.9. Others take Adam for an Appellative, and give a reason for it out of the text, because it is Keadam, and not Kahadam, with  emphatical. And of these some again read it thus, Illi tanquam hominis transgssi sunt foedus, they transgressed the covenant, as if it had been a mans covenant: they made no more of breaking it, then as if they had had to do with dust and ashes like them∣selves, with their fellow-creatures, and not with the great God: and might there∣fore deal by their covenants, as monkeyes do by their collars, which they fit on for their masters pleasure, and slip off again for their own. Others read it, as we do;
They like men have transgressed, &c. sorry men fickle and falshearted men, such as Da∣vid pointed at, when he said, All men are liars, and Paul, 2 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not carnal,Psal. 116.11. and walk as men, that is, as profane men, alients from the common-wealth of Israel? Singular things are expected from Gods peculiar, Mat. 5.47. as to be eminent in good works, Tit 3.14. to get above others, as Saul was above the people by head and shoulders; to get to the very top of godlinesse, as the Apostles phrase importeth,. Ishon. Esai. 5.15. to keep Gods covenant as the apple of the eye, as Solomon saith, Prov. 7.2. that little man in the eye, that cannot be touched but he will be distempered. This the world counts precisenesse, and makes nothing of transgressing, of leaping over the hedge of any commandment, so they may shun a piece of foule way. Lo, this is the manner of most men, yea, of all men by nature; they make no bones of trans∣gressing the laws, of changing the ordinance, of breaking the everlasting covenant, Esay. 24.5. And this when they do, they work de suo & secundum hominem; for Homo est inversus Decalogus, the natural man stands acrosse to the law of God, to the whole Decalogue: the two tables whereof are called the tables of the covenant, Deut. 9.9, 11. Neither is this any excusing or extenuation of their sin, that they do but their kind, they do it as men. It is an aggravation rather, q. d. They not onely transgresse my covenant, but they do it naturally, and out of the vilenesse of their proper inclinations: like as the devil, when he speaketh a lie, he speaketh, de suo of his own, Joh. 8.44. he can do no otherwise. It is as impossible for those that are carnal and walk as men to keep covenant with God, as for a toad to spit cordials. If at any time they make an overture of doing it, if they make an essay, it is but as the morning cloud, and as the early dew that goeth away, as vers. 5. with which this verse cohereth; the 6. verse comming in. as it were by a parenthesis. There have they dealt treacherously against me,] There? where? in the very point of the covenant, which by their sacrifices and burnt-offerings they so solemnly pro∣fessed and engaged to observe: lo, therein have they prevaricated, and then at the same time have they falsified, as the same word is used, Psal. 14.5. I have been neare in their mouth, but far from their reines, Jer. 9.2. In words they professe to know me, but in works they deny me, being abominable and disobedient, and to e∣very good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. Or there, that is, (as the Chaldee Paraphrast senseth it,) In that good land which I have given them, even in Gilead, as in the next words. They live in my good land, but not by my good laws: yea, they have filled it (as the cursed Canaanites did before them, Ezra. 9.11.) from one end to a∣nother with their uncleannesse, which therefore longs for a vomit to cast them out: There have they dealt treacherously, as the adulteresse doth, who forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God. The sins of such as break cove∣nant with God are sins of a double die; they are wickednesse with a witnesse, be∣cause they do wickedly against the covenant, Dan. 11.32.Prov. 2.17. these treacherous dealers deal treacherously, yea, these treacherous dealers deal very treacherously, Isay. 24.16. And this they have done against Me, who have stooped so low, as to strike a co∣venant with them; and such a covenant, 2 Sam. 23.5. and have never failed or falsified. See Deut. 29.24, 25. Vers. 8. Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity,] Another Poeniropolis; such a city there was in Greece, and so called by king Philip, for the naughtinesse of the Inhabitants. This Gilead was one of those ten cities of refuge beyond Jordaen, given to the Priests for a possession, Josh. 21.36, &c. and probably the chief city, which therefore bare the name of the whole countrey, as Athens was called the Greece of Greece. The inhabitants thereof (though Levites) were the worst of men,. workers of iniquity, such as did wickedly with both hands, earnestly wearying themselves in the Devils drudgery; and then sitting down to rest them in the chair of pestilence. There is not a worse creature upon earth, or so fit for hell, as a profane Priest, a de∣bauched Minister, Mat. 5.13. Corruptio optimi pessima, as the sweetest wine makes the sowrest vinegar, as the finest flesh is resolved into the vilest earth; and as the whitest ivory burnt, becomes the blackest coal: Who would have looked for so much wickednesse at Gilead, at Shiloh, at Anathoth, at Jerusalem where the Priests and Scribes bare sway, and did dominari in suggestis? And yet that once faithful city was become an harlot: it was full of judgement, righteousnesse lodged in it,Isay. 1.21. but now murderers, In our Savours time it was Prophetarum macellum, the slaughter∣house
house of the Saints; as now Rome is, and once London was in bloody Bonners dayes:Act. & Mon. whom a certain good woman once told in a letter, that he was deservedly called the common cut-throat, and general flaughter-slave to all the Bishops of England. At his death he boasted (as Stokesley had done before him) how many heretikes he had burned: seven hundred saints in four or five yeers space those bloody and deceitful men sent to heaven, in fiery charets. There are none so cruel to the lives of men as wicked Clergy. Gilead was polluted with blood,]Ezek. 33.7. & 3.18. not onely with the blood of souls, (by their de∣fault drowned in perdition and destruction) but of bodies too, destroyed by their hands or means. The Priests of these times may seem, by what is said of them in the next verse, to have been men of their hands, the sworn sword-men of the de∣vil, such as was Timotheus Herulus Bishop of Alexandria, Anno 467. Pope Inno∣cent who threw Peters keyes into the river Tiber, and took up Pauls sword, as he called it, and that Philip Bishop of Beau-vieu in France, taken in a skirmish by our Richard the first, who sent his armour to the Pope with these words engraved on it, Vide num filii tui tunica sit, vel non, See whether this be the coat of thy son, or of a son of Mars. These, and their like in their several generations, were non Pastores sed Impostores, non Doctores sed Seductores, non Episcopi sed Aposcopi, as an Ancient hath it: And indeed, the Church hath ever been so pestered with leud and lazy Mi∣nisters (those dehonestamenta Cleri) that Chrysostome thought there were scarce any of that order in his time, that could be saved: Hierome saith, that the paucity of such as were good, had made them very precious. And Campian cries out, not alto∣gether without cause (Malice may be a good informer though an ill Judge) Mini∣stris eorum nihil vilius; Now this is here instanced as an odious transgression of the covenant, when such as made such a shew of sacrifice to God, should exercise so lit∣tle mercy to men: when such as should be Teachers, were turned Tyrants and blood∣suckers. Verse 9. And as troops of robbers wait for a man,] This verse hath much of the former in it, saith an Interpreter. The sum of it is, saith Wigandus, to shew, that all the forementioned wickednesses were committed, instinctu doctorum, by the instinct of their Priests, who were now turned Tories or Mosse-troopers. Hierome asked his Jew-doctour the meaning of this text, and received this answer: that at the time of the Passeover and the Pentecost, the people used to come to Jerusalem; and as they were going in their journey, these Priests would stand in the way and slay them. Others think, that these corrupt priests took into their city of refuge divers thieves and murtherers; who not having whereupon otherwise to subsist, turned hi∣waymen, (as they call them) and returning again into the city, divided the spoyle with the Priests, who had their share: and are therefore called companions of rob∣bers, and are said to murder in the way by consent, or with one shoulder, or as Simeon and Levi did at Shechem q. d. Sichemicc crastily and cruelly (for so many wayes these words are rendred) & all this they did of malice forethought,Ex destinatae malitia & ini∣to consilio. of prepensed mis∣chief, called here committing leudnesse. Even as they thought in their hearts, so they acted, saith King David. They executed the counsel of the wicked, saith the Chaldee Paraphrast.Non tam ovum ovo simile. Faciunt quic∣quid cognitant. They machinated mischief, and then practised what they had plotted with a deliberate will, and as it were with an high hand. Look now upon the Po∣pish Monkes, saith Tarnonius, and compare them with these Priests whom Hosea reproveth. And Luther saith, that they had a proverb in Germany, that there was nothing so bad, which the Monkes could think of, but they would dare to do it. Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet Effrenis Monachus,— Vers. 10. I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel,] Now a very den of theeves, as vers. 9. a Panthion of all sorts of idols, a chamber of imagery, an E∣gyptian Temple, gay and goodly without, but within an oxe or calfe, with women weeping for Tammuz, Ezek. 8.12.14. that is, for Osyris King of Egypt, whose image (under the shape of an oxe) his wife Isis had advanced to be idolatrously there adored.Cap. 6. This kind of abomination Ieroboam had learned in Egypt (whither he fled from Solomon his master) and brought into the house of Israel. And whereas
those Idolaters said, The Lord seeth us not, the Lord hath forsaken the earth, Ezek. 8.12. I have seen it, saith God, and been sore troubled at it, and even affrighted; so as a man is quando horripilatur, when his hairs stand an end; as when the de∣vil appeareth to him like an hairy Satyr. See Lev. 17.7. with the Note. Certain it is, that God hateth sin (but especially Idolatry, that abominable thing, as he calleth it, Jer. 44 4.) worse then he hateth the devil himself: for he hateth the devil for sins sake, and not sin for the devils sake. Idolatry must needs be so much the more odious to him, because therein the devil sets up himself in the place of God; and requires men (as once he did Christ himself) to fall down and worship him. See Deut. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.20. Rev. 9.20. So he dealeth by the poor Indians at this day, compelling them to worship him with bodily worship, and tormenting them, if they do not, worse (if worse may be) then the cruel Spaniards;Sir Francis Drake World encomp. 53. who suppose they shew the wretches favour, when they do not, for their pleasure, whip them with cords, and day by day drop their naked bodies with burning bacon The He∣brew word here used, hath some letters more then ordinary in it, to encrease the sig∣nification, and to shew what a very horrible thing Idolatry is. It is spurca pollutio,Tremel. in loc. as Jer. 23.14. and worse. See Jer. 2.11, 12. and 18.13. and know that God doth not use to aggravate things beyond truth, as men do, witnesse Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.14. Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego? Or, is it of set pur∣pose? so Buxtorf rendreth it. Is it for the nonce, to provoke me?Num de indu∣stria? Or Nunquid desolatio? so Arias Moutanus: As if he should say, What? you, to oppose the command of a king? If this be suffered, what desolation must needs follow? But this is not Gods way: he layes no more words upon a thing, then the matter amount∣eth to if he call Idolatry, filth, fornication, abomination, an horrible thing, such as a man would start, or stand agast at, we may be sure it is so. The Septuagint here, render it , things to be trembled at, or shreeked at. In Barbary 'tis death for the Xeriffs wife, when she seeth a man, though but thorow a casement, not suddenly to shriek out. God is a jealous God, and allows not his to look toward an Idol. If they do, he will soon see it, and visit for it. I have seen, &c. There is the whoredome of Ephraim,] Thus God looketh upon it as filthinesse, and nastinesse, which the people beheld as finenesse and neatnesse. And the same do all (that have the minde of God, and senses exercised to discern betwixt good and evil) judge of all the Popish pomp and palterment, wherewith they bewitch the de∣luded vulgar, as the serpent Scytale doth the fleeing passenger, whom when she cannot overtake, yet with her beautifull colours she doth so astonish and amaze him,Plin. that he hath no power to passe away, till stung to death. Verse 11. Also O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thee,] This is a very diffi∣cult Text: and much vexed by Interpreters. Et hic nisi Lyra lyrasset, nos omnes delirassemus. Lyra sets this sence upon the Text, and I accord him: Though thou Judah, art also to be carried captive: yet God hath set, or provided for thee, an harvest in thine own land, when I shall have returned the captivity of my people, viz. under the conduct of Zorobabel, by the Decree of Cyrus. Here then is a pro∣mise of a joyfull harvest to Judah, who is not to be punished with like severity as Israel, Chap. 1.7. and for the change of person, when I returned, for he shall have returned. See Esay 29.19. Ier. 31.23. Zeph. 3. ult. Psal. 14. ult. Simul Judae captivitas & reditus praedicitur significanter admodum, saith Hierom here; Both the captivity and return of Judah is here very significantly foretold. It is a ve∣ry good Note that One giveth here, sc. that God in his chastisements ever shew∣eth himself mindfull of his Covenant: after a long barrennesse,Rive. he setteth for his people a plentifull harvest, and turneth again their captivity, after that for a time he hath tried them. His mercy also and faithfulnesse herein appeareth, that he min∣gleth promises with threatnings: and whiles he utterly destroyeth the kingdome of the ten Tribes, he preserveth the Common-wealth of Judah, wherein the Messias was to come, and whereof there was not (by the ancient prophesies) to be a disso∣lution, till Shiloh came. Hence it is, that promises of the restauration of Judah are ever intermingled, lest any should doubt of the manifestation of the Messiah, in the fulnesse of time.
CHAP. VII. Verse 1. WHen I would have healed Israel, &c.] Whereas Israel, hearing of an happy harvest promised to Judah, Chap. 6.11. and them∣selves excluded,unus. might complain of hard dealing: God shews them here, that Cru∣delem medicum intemperans aeger facit, the fault was meerly in themselves. God came with his healing medicines to have cured them, but they hated to be healed, and like mad-men, railed and raged against the Physician, spilt the potions, would none of those slibber-sauses, as they accounted them: yea (as if on purpose to crosse God.) then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickednesses (malitia mul∣tiplex) of Samaria,] Of so perverse a spirit were they: and therefore (in Solo∣mons judgement, Prov. 12.8.) worthy to have been despised and let alone to perish in their corruptions. In Hippocrates his time, the Physicians were bound by oath, to leave such under their wounds to perish by them, as were unruly, and would not be ordered. We would have healed Babylon, (saith the Church) but she would not be healed: forsake her therefore, saith God, Jer. 51.9. Let them alone, saith Christ, Matth. 15.14. That, that will die, let it die: A fearfull sentence. Let them swel∣ter and pine away in their iniquities, Levit. 26.39. In their silthinesse is leudnesse, their disease is complicate, it is the leprosie in the head, it breaketh forth in their fore∣head, and my people love to have it so:Jer. 5.31. but what will they do in the end thereof? Ephraim here discovereth a headstrong wilfulnesse that was uncounsellable, uncure∣able. He runs away after conviction, with the bit between his teeth, as it were: he runs, I say, upon the rock. Am. 6.12. where he first breaketh his hoofes, and then his neck. Some grow desperately sinfull, like those Italian Senatours, that des∣pairing of their lives, (when upon submission they had been promised their lives, yet) being conscious of their villany, made a curious banquet; and at the end there∣of every man drank up his glasse of poyson, and killed himself. So men feeling such horrible hard hearts, and privie to such notorious sins, they cast away souls and all for lust; and perish wofully, because they lived desperately, and so securely. It is a fearfull signe of reprobation, when Gods means and medicines do men no good, but hurt rather: when Physick which should remove the disease, doth cooperate with it, then death comes with the more pain and speed. The stronger the conviction of sin is, the deeper will be the wrath against it, if it be not by re∣pentance avoided. for they commit falsehood,] They do not the truth, 1 Joh. 1.6. but deal falsely, Ier. 6.13. every one of them,Assuunt men∣dacium men∣dacio. from the Prophet, even to the Priest: they work a deceitfull work, Prov. 11.18. their bellies prepare deceit, Iob 15.35. they have an art in lying, in stitching one lie to another, as the word signifieth, Psal. 119.69. Idolatry is a reall lie, as she in the book of Martyrs answered the Doctour, that asked her, Dost thou beleeve that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament of the Altar really and substantially? I beleeve said she, that so to hold, is a reall lie, and a substantiall lie. These Idolaters having plaied false with God, and treacherously dealt with him, what wonder though they lie, deceive, rob, spoil, both within doors and without, in private negotiations, and publike transactions? but especially forge lies against those that withstood their superstitious vanities, and prey upon their goods; as Heb. 10.34. Sublata pietate tollitur fides, is a truth irrefragable. Take away piety, and fidelity is gone: as we see in that unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.2. and as Abraham concluded of the men of Gerar, Gen. 20.11. and lastly, as Constantinus Chlorus, the father of Constantine the Great, experimented in his own Councellours, and Courtiers: whence that famous Maxime of his, recorded by Eusebius: He cannot be faithfull to me, who is unfaithfull to God; religion being the ground of all true fidelity and loyalty. Verse 2. And they consider not in their hearts,] Heb. They say not in their hearts: that is, they set not down themselves with this consideration, they commune not with their consciences upon this most needfull, but much neglected matter. A good mans work lieth much within doors: he loves to be dealing with himself, and working good and wholsome considerations upon his own affections. He is never
lesse alone, then when hee is alone: for still hee hath God and himself to talk to. that I remember all their wickednesse,] i. e. Record and register them, as in a book, with a pen of iron, and point of a Diamond, Ier. 17.1. that I seal them up in a bag, Job 14.17. as the Clark of Assizes seals up Inditements, and at the Assi∣zes brings his bag, and produceth them. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed-up among my treasures? Deut. 32.34. So little reason is there, that wicked men should please themselves in hope of impunity. And yet they do, Psal. 94.7. they strive to perswade themselves, that the Lord doth not see, neither doth the God of Jacob remember: They hide God from themselves, and then think they have hid themselves from Him. Herein they are alike foolish as the Struthiocamelus,Plin. lib. 10. cap. 1. a bird as big as a Camell, and taller then a man: When this Bustard would hide her selfe, she thrusts her head into a thicket, as conceiving that no body seeth her, because she seeth no body; and so becomes a prey to the hunter. Caveatur carna∣lis securitas. Let us walk evermore in the sense of Gods presence, unlesse we had rather be carnally secured, then soundly comforted. now their own doings have beset them about.] Their studied wickednesse, their contrived iniquities, so Luther expounds the word doings:Studia corum Tigurin. for wicked men are great students, and break many a nights sleep in pernicious ploddings, Prov. 4.16. But as the Blackbird is taken by birdlime made of his own excrements, so is the wicked beset by his own devices; as by so many serjeants set on by God. Some think (and not without probable reason) that the Prophet in this phrase of besetting them about, alludeth to the future siege of Samaria: wherein these sinners against their own souls were so straitly beset by the enemy, that they could not flee, or stir, with∣out danger. And this he saith shall befall them. Now, that is, shortly, and sooner then they think for: Indeed how should it be otherwise, when as their doings are bore my face?] Eregione & velut adversa ac detestata, Over-anent and in full view, as a continuall eye-sore to me, Psal. 57.5. & 90.8. so that though I could or would forget them, yet they will not suffer me to do so: such is their im∣pudency, and importunacy for vengeance. Lyra makes it a metaphor, from a thief taken in the act, with his back burden of stollen goods; and as it were beset with them, and so brought before the Judge. His own iniquities shall take the wicked, saith Solomon, Prov. 5.22. For how can he escape the multitude of his sins within him, and the variety of Gods heavie judgements without him, &c? Verse 3. They make the king glad with their wickednesse,] A sad syncratismus surely of king and people, exhilarating themselves and each other in wickednesse. Their kings were well apaid of the peoples compliances with their unlawfull Edicts: and the people no lesse well-pleased to gratifie and flatter their kings, as the Ro∣mans did Tiberius and other Tyrants, who therefore said of them, that they were servum pecus, servile soules, & homines ad servitutem parati, men made for slaves. Tyrants care not how wicked their subjects are: for then they know they will swallow down any command though never so impious, without scrupling, or conscience-making. They like to have such about them, as will down with any thing, disgest iron for a need, with the Estrich; and say as that wretched man said (when one complained he could not do such a thing for his conscience) I am master of my conscience, I can do any thing for all that. Thus Balaam resolved to curse what ever came of it: he went not aside as at other times, neither built he any more altars; but set his face toward the wildernesse, as fully bent to do it, and nothing should hinder him now, Numb. 24.1, 2. (confer Luke 9.51.) He also gave wicked counsell to king Balak (and so made him glad at parting, though be∣fore he had angred him) to lay a stumbling-block before the children of Israel, viz. to set fair women to tempt them to corporall and spirituall fornication, that God might see sin flagrant in Iacob, some transgression in Israel, and so fall foul upon them with his plagues, Numb. 23.21. Parasites propound to kings suavia potiùs quam sana consilia, pleasing, but pestilent counsell: they also act for them, and un∣der them, as Doeg did for Saul, and so gratifie them, Letiie them, as here,Rev. 2 make them glad, but it proves to be no better then risus Sardonius, such a mirth as brings bitterness in the end: Wo to such mirth-mongers and mirth-makers; for if they shall still do thus wickedly, they shall be consumed, both they and their king, I Sam. 12.25.
And the princes with their lies] with calumnies and false accusations, wherewith they load Gods innocent servants, and that against their own consciences. Thus Doeg dealt by David; the Priests and Prophets by Ieremy; the Persian courtiers by Daniel and his companions; Amaziah by Amoz, Haman by the whole nation of the Iewes, Tertullus by Paul, the Heathen Idolaters by the primitive Christians; which caused those many Apologies made for them by Tertullian, Athenagoras, and others. If a Ruler hearken to lies (and that's a common fault among them,Prov. 29.12. as David tells Saul, 1 Sam. 24.9. all his servants will be wicked: he shall have his Aiones and Ni∣gones that will say as he sayes, and fit his humour to an hair; he shall have plenty of such as will slander the Saints, and cast an odium upon the consciencious. I once saw (saith Melancthon) an old coyn, on the one side whereof was Zopyrus, on the other Zoilus; he adds, fuit imago aulae, comitantur calumniae bene merentes, It was a picture of Princes courts, where are store of such, as, by flattery, dawb white upon black, and, by calumny, sprinkle black upon white. Vers. 4. They are all adulterers,] Adulterio calescunt, so Pagnine, scalded in their base lusts as those, Rom. 1.27. all (for the most part) were such: but especially the Courtiers, and clawback-Informers, as vers. 3. God, in his just judgement, giving them up to those vile affections or passions of dishonour, and punishing their im∣pieties with impurities: as He did also in those Heathens, Rom. 1.24. as an oven heated by the baker] An apt similitude setting forth the intense heat of filthy lust, (better marry then burn, 1 Cor. 7.9.) and of long continuance as the heat of an oven; yea, of Nebuchadnezzars oven, yea, of hell it self, whence it was en∣kindled, and where it shall be perpetually punished. The holy Angels at the last day will be most active against such, to bring them to condign punishment, 2 Pet. 2.10. (But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleannesse. Note the word chiefly, and consider the example of the Sodomites) and God most severe against them, Heb. 13.4. How much they have lived deliciously, and drenched themselves in fleshly delights, so much torments and sorrow shall they have proportionably, Rev. 18.7. As their hearts have ben as an hot oven or furnace, so they shall be bound up in bundles, and cast into a furnace of fire (where shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 13.42. Vers. 5. In the day of our King,] Our good king, on whom they so doted, that they forgat God and his sincerer service. Quaecunque á regibus dicuntur aut fiunt, Gallis minificè solet placere,Epit. Hist. Gallor. 134. It is reported of the French by their own Chronicle, that they are wonderful well pleased with whatsoever is said or done by their king: so that they affect to speak like him, to be arraied like him, & to imitate him in every thing. Their song is Mihi placet quicquid Regi placet. But is not this to idolize the creature? and have not many (otherwise well-minded men) amongst us been by this means miscarried to their cost in our late combustions? This day of their king was either his Birth-day (so Pagnine rendreth it here) or his Coronation-day (so the Chaldee Paraphrast carrieth it) which also is the Birth-day of a king as he is king,Die natalis ejus. Sam. 13.1. unlesse haply he have the happinesse to be crowned (not in his cradle onely, as Europus king of Macedony and the late king James were, but) in his mothers womb, as Misdatus king of Persia was, the crown being set upon his mothers great belly before he was born. Now in this solemn day of the king, (when they should have been better busied) The princes have made him sick, or, the princes were sick, they drank themselves sick, drowning their bodies and souls (as Richard the third did his brother Clarence) in a Butt of Malmesey. How many importunate and im∣pudent drinkers are there, that by drinking other mens health, destroy their own? See Master Prinnes Healths-sicknesse, and accord him that said, Ʋna salus sanis, nullam potare salutem, Non est in pota vera salute salus. But what beastly bedlams or rather incarnate devils were those three drunkards men∣tioned by Jo. Manlius in his common places,pag. 244. who drank so long till one of them fell down stark dead: and yet the other two nothing terrified with such a dreadful example of divine vengeance, went on to drink, and powred the dead mans part in∣to him as he lay by them? Oh horrible! Drunkennesse is a detestable vice in any,
but especially in men of place and power, Prov. 31.4. Wo be to those drunken vice∣gods (as I may in the worst sense best call them) woe to the very crown of their Pride, in drinking down many, Esay. 28.1. as Marcus Antonius wrote, or rather spued out a book concerning his own abilities to bear strong drink; Darius also boasted of the same faculty in his very Epitaph: a poor praise. Drunkennesse in a king is a capital sin, and makes the land reel;Hence those feast-dayes were called  they were like the Rom. Sa∣turnalia. Hic pendet Amphorae. witnesse Belshazzar carowsing in the bowles of the Sanctuary to the honour of Shar his drunken god; Alexander the great drinking himself to death, and killing fourty one more with excessive drinking, to get that crown of one hundred eighty pound weight, which he had provided for him that drank most: Bonosus the Emperour that beastly drunkard, called there∣fore a Tankard: and Tiberius sirnamed Biberius for his tipling; like as Erasmus called Eccius, Jeccius for the same cause: And well he might; for as he lived a shameful drunkard, so being nonplust at Ratisbon by Melanchthon in a publique dispu∣tation, and drinking more then was fit that night at the Bishop of Mundina's lodgings (who had of the best Italians wines) he fell into a fever, whereof he died.Jah. Manl. loc. com. p. 89. Drunkennesse is a flattering evil, a sweet poison, a cunning Circe that besots the soul, destroyes the body, dolores gignit in capite, in stomacho, in toto corpore acerrimos,Mercer in Prov. 23.32. grievous diseases and dolours in the head, stomack, whole man. At the last, it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prov. 23.32. The drunkard saith as the vine in Jothams parable, Non possum relinquere vinum meum, Take away my liquour, you take away my life. But it proves to him, in the issue, like that wine mentioned by Moses, Deut. 32.33. Their wine is the poison of Dragons, and cruel venom of Aspes, which makes the spirits warm, and the body sick to death. with bottles of wine] Or, with heat through wine, as Esay. 5.11. and so Jarchi expoundeth it. The same word signifieth the poyson of a Serpent, Psal. 58.4. which inflameth and killeth: confer Prov. 23.32. and think of that cup of fire and brim∣stone, Psal. 11.6. to be one day turned down the wide gullets of intemperate drin∣kers; which will be much worse to them then was that ladle-full of boyling lead, which the Turkish Bashaw caused to be poured down the throat of a drunken wretch, without giving him any respite for the recovery of his lost wits.The Grand. Sign. Serag. pag. 186. he stretcht out his hand with scorners] He that is the king, forgetting his kingly dignity, authority and gravity, (for there is a decorum to be observed in every cal∣ling, but by great ones especially) stretcht out his hand, as a companion and copes∣mate, as an hail-fellow-well-met, (as they say) prostituting his regal authority to e∣very scoundrel that would pledge him; or at least, giving them his hand to kisse, which Job saith God will not do, Chap. 8.20. with scorners] Those worst of men, Psal. 1.1. those Pests,. as the Septuagint here render it, those incorrigible persons as they translate the word, Prov. 20.1. where also it is fitly said, that wine is a mocker, because it maketh men mockers. Hence that of David, with hypocriticall mockers at feasts they gnashed upon me with their teeth, Psal. 35.16. And that holy jealousie of Job for his children, lest (while they were feasting and merry-making) they should curse God, or mock at men.Tarnou. Tales enim evadunt qui strenuè helluantur. It is ordinary with such as are full gorged with good chear, and throughly heated with wine, to set their mouths against heaven, and to license their tongues to walk through the earth, Psal. 73.9. they have a flout to fling, and a fooles bolt to shoot at their betters by many degrees: yea, though they be kings that do it, (as here) if they stretch out their hands with scorners, and jear at the power and profession of Godlinesse, they are no better then base fellowes, as great Antiochus is called, Dan. 11.21. and as Kimchi upon this text noteth from his Fa∣ther, that those that at the beginning of the feast or compotation were here called Princes, are afterwards when they fell to quaffing and flowting called (in contempt) scoffers & scorners. Polanus & others by stretching out the hand understand, ad aequales haustus potare, &c. a drinking share and share like with every base companion, till drunk; they became despicable. Nempe vbi, neque mens, neque pes suumfacit officium. The Greeks when they meet at feasts or banquets, drink small draughts at first, which by degrees they increase, till they come to the height of intemperancy. Hence Graecari, and as merry as a Greek. How much better those Spartans, of whom the Poet,
Quinetiam Spartae mos est laudabilis ille, Ʋt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo?How much better the Persians in Esthers time, Chap. 1.8. the drinking was accord∣ing to the law, none did compel, &c. And what a drunken beast was Domitius the father of Nero,Sueton. who slew Liberius an honest Roman, because he refused to take up his cups, as he commanded him? The Carthag inians made a law, that none of their Magistrates during their office should drink any wine. Romulus being invited to a feast would not drink much,Gell. lib. 11. cap. 14. quia postridie negotium haberet, because he had publike businesse to dispatch on the morrow. Ahashuerosh drinking more freely on the first day of the feast,Esth. 1.5, 10. became so frollick, that in his mirth he forgat what was conveni∣ent; and guided by his passions, sent for Vasthi. Vers. 6. For they have made ready their hearts like an oven.] As an oven red hot is ready to bake whatsoever is cast into it, so are wicked mens hearts, heated from hell,Ad male cogi∣tandum. Pag∣nin. ad pessima facinora Tigur. prepared for any evil purpose or practise that the devil shall suggest: but espe∣cially to lie in wait for blood, and to hunt every man his brother with a net, Mic. 7.2. David complains of some that lay in wait for his soul, Psal. 59.3. that satanically hated him, Psal. 38.20. and 7.13. and 109.4, 6, 20, 29. that sought his soul to de∣stroy it, not his life onely but his soul too; as that monster of Millain did, that made his adversary first forswear Christ, (in hope of life) and then stabbing him to the heart said,Bodin. de Rep. Now go thy wayes soul and body to the devil: and as the Papists dealt by John Husse, and Hierome of Prague, to whom they denied a confessour, which he required after the manner of those times, to fit him for heaven; and for John Husse,Act. & Mon. after they had burnt him, how despitefully did they beat his heart (which was left untoucht by the fire) with their staves: Besides, that the Bishops when they put the tripple crown of paper (painted with ugly devils on it) on his head, they said, Now we commit thy soul to the devil. Did not these mens hearts burn like an oven with hellish rage and cruelty? their baker sleepeth all the night,] Concoquens illa, scilicet corda, so Vatablus; He that concocteth or worketh their hearts, that is the devil (as some interpret it) or evil-concupiscence, as others, Tota nocte protrahitur furor eorum, so the Chaldee; their rage is deferred or drawn out to the length all night long, till in the morning, i. e. at a convenient season it break out and bestirs it self. A metaphor from a baker, who casting fire into the oven with good store of lasting fuel, lets it burn all night and sleeps securely; as knowing that he shall find it through hot in the morning. Those scorners in the former verse, by being over-familiar with their drunken king, come not onely to slight him for his base behaviours, but also to conspire against him, and to plot his death; wherein their heart is the oven, ambition the fire, trea∣son the flame of that fire, Satan that old manslayer the baker; who, though he make as if he slept all night, yet by morning he hath set his agents the traitours a∣work (either by secret treacheries or open seditions) to do as in the next verse, and as is to be seen, 2 Kin. 15. Vers. 7.Dedit hac con∣tagio labem, Et dabit in plures, — Juven. Sat. 2. They are all hot as an oven,] That none might post it off to others, all are accused of this mad desire to do mischief; as all the Sodomites full and whole, young and old, came cluttering about Lots house, Gen. 19.4. and have devoured their Judges; all their Kings are fallen, &c.] Scil. being slain with the sword of those that succeeded them in the throne, as may be read, 2 Kin. 15.8, 9, &c. and as it was in the Roman State, where all or most of the Cesars, till Constantine, died unnatural deaths. Neither was it much better here in England, during the difference between the two houses of York and Lancaster; wherein were slain fourscore Princes of the blood-royal,Dan. hist. 249. This is the fruit of sin, Prov. 28.2. For the transgression of a land many are the Princes thereof: either many at once (as once here in the heptarchy) or many ejecting and succeeding one another, to the great calamity and utter undoing of the people by their new Lords, new Lawes. there is none among them that calleth unto me,] though in so great a confusion, and under so heavy calamities: a strange stupor, that there should be none to set to his shoulder to shore up the falling State. None there were (to speak of) in a
considerable number of praying people to stand in the gap, and to divert the divine displeasure. Their sins cried loud for vengeance, their blood-guiltinesse especially. But had there been but a few voyces more of praying Saints, their prayers had haply out-cried them. A few birds of song are shriller then many crocitating birds of prey: stirre up your selves therefore, ye that are Gods remembrancers, to take hold of him, and give him no rest. Lie night and day at the gate of his grace, knocking thereat by the hand of faith, and praying for the peace of our Jerusalem. If En∣glands fears were greater, thy prayers might preserve it, Jer. 5.1. as if our hopes were greater, thy sin and security might undo it, Eccles. 9.18. Vers. 9. Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people,] viz. In confederacies, marriages, manners, superstitions. They were conformed to those nations from whom God had separated them with a wonderful separation, Exod. 33.16. and put them up by themselves from all the world in the promised land, as it were in an Island, Isay. 20.6. And this they had done not once but often, as the conjugation importeth; and that wilfully without any necessity: yea, and that constantly, and of custome, or desperate obstinacy, (Heb. he will mingle himself) so that there was little difference to be discerned betwixt Ephraim the professed people of God, and profane heathens. Hence that, Amos. 9.7. Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel, saith the Lord? Hence Saul is called Cush, or an E∣thiopian for his black and ill conditions, Psal. 7. title, as the Chaldee interpreteth it. Cast we may be upon bad company, but we must not mingle with them. The rivers of Peru, after they have run into the mam sea, yea, some write twenty or thirty miles, they keep themselves unmixt with the salt water: so that a very great way within the sea, men may take up as fresh water as if they were neer the land. At Belgradi in Hungary, where the Danuby and Sava (two great rivers) meet,Abbats Geog. 331. their waters mingle no more then water and oyl; not that either flote above other, but joyn unmixed: so that neer the middle of the river I have gone in a boat,Sir Henry Blounts voyage into Levant. p. 10. (saith mine Authour) and tasted of the Danow as clear and pure as a well. Then putting mine hand not an inch further, I have taken of the Sava as troubled as a street∣channel, tasting the gravel in my teeth. Thus they run sixty miles together, and for a dayes journey I have been an eye-witnesse of it. To come nearer home, the river Dee in Merionith-shire running thorough Pimbli-meeri remaines intire,Camden. and mingleth not her streams with the water of the lake. Let not Ephraim mix himself among the people, but cry with David, Gather not my soul with sinners, Psal. 26.9. and vers. 5. I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and will not sit with the wicked. Ephraim is a cake not turned,] And so but half-baked, or dow-baked; neque cru∣dus, neque coctus, neither hot nor cold, as Laodicea, Rev. 3.15. halting between two, as 1 Kin. 18.21. Mongrels, as those 2 King. 17.33. Zeph. 1.5. Barnacles that are neither fish nor flesh: Amphibians that will conform to the world, and yet seem to be for the Lord. But he likes no such retainers, no such holy-day-servants; he requi∣reth to be served truly that there be no halting: and totally, that there be no halving: he cannot away with dow-baked duties. Men must be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, they must be zealous of good works, if they look to be accepted.Rom. 12.11. Tit. 2. The effectual fervent prayer, or the thorough-wrought prayer of a righteous man availeth much. A cake that is half-baked, half burnt pleaseth not the palate: no more do customary, formal bedulling performances please the Lord. It is Gualthers note upon this text;Jam. 5.16.  as a cake, saith he, that is raw on the one side and scorcht on the other is cast away; so Hypocrites that are hot in their superstitions, but cold in their devotions are reject∣ed of God; Introrsum turpes, speciosi pelle decorâ. I know the words are otherwise interpreted by Luther, Mercer, Polanus, and others, with reference to the following words, thus: that Ephraims adversaries, even those strangers with whom he hath mixed himself, shall be so greedy to devour him, that they shall not stay till he be baked on both sides, but shall eat him raw. But I like the former better. Vers. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not,] Strange stu∣pidity, such as was that of Sampson, who had lost his haire, and therewith his strength, and wist not of it. These strangers were the Kings of Syria, but especially
of Assyria. See 2 King. 13.7. & Chap. 14. with 15.19, 30. & 17.6. Salmanasar, as a deep gulf swallowed them up whole. Now that they should not know how these strangers had devoured their strength, that is their wealth, and warlike power, this was very strange. The Chaldee Paraphrast helps us to the meaning of it: Non novit formidare à facie mea. He knew it not, that is, He knew not how to fear be∣fore me, to tremble at my judgements, and to flee to my mercies: this he knew not, that is, he cared not to do, as the old world knew not till the flood came, though fairly forewarned, Matt. 24.39. and as the Greeks would not know that the Turks had invaded their Empire, till they were got into the very bowels of it. So was it with Ephraim. A spirit of pride and of slumber had so surprized and seized him, that he took no knowledge of the enemies and evils that were upon him. Thus the spirituall sleeper stirs not with Saul, though the water-pot and spear be taken from his bolster. Like the foolish hen, which loseth her chickens one by one, by the devouring kite; when one, or two, or three, are snatcht away she still continues to pick up what lies before her. It is our wisest way to observe, and improve Gods dealings with us, to be sensible of his stroaks, and to return to him that smote us, and can as soon heal us, if we come to him for cure, Lev. 26.40. yea, gray-hairs are here and there upon him,] Heb. sprinkled, sparsi, non spissi. He began but to decline and de∣cay, as a man doth when he grows toward fifty. And as gray hairs come the sooner through cares and griefs, (Histories tell us of a young man, who being for some capitall offence condemned to die, grew gray in one nights-space, and was therefore pitied and spared) and are fore-runners and fore-warners of death. So the many and grievous miseries inflicted upon this people, foreshewed their utter de∣struction to be even at next door by. And this the rather, because they knew it not, (as before) but (as it is said of the Flemings) that the elder they grow, the foolisher they are.Quòmagis se∣nescunt eo ma∣gis stultescunt. Erasin. Apopht. Cleanthes was wont sometimes to chide himself: Ariston wondering thereat, asked him, whom chidest thou? Cleanthes laughed and answered. I chide an old fellow, qui canos quidem habet, sed mentem non habet, who hath gray hairs indeed, but wants understanding, and prudence worthy of them. It was Chrysippus (I trow) that offered to the world that sowre distribution and choice, Aut mentem, aut restim comparandam; Either get wit worthy of your years, or go out of the world by an halter.Bibl. Pat. That of Eleazer is very remarkable, who would not do any thing which migh seem to be evil, because he would not spot his white head. Gray hairs should be a strong argument to move men to live blamelessely (because old age is a crown,Prov. 16.31. Gen. 25.8. when found in the way of righteousnesse, as it is said of Abraham, that he went to his grave with a good gray head) and gray hairs in a State, that is, lesser and lighter judgements, should make men prepare to meet and prevent God: because, as in an house, stillicidia praecedunt ruinam, and as in a man, gray hairs fore-signifie death, so do these, desolation; if course be not timely taken. Verse 10. And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face,] Sept. the ignominy, or impudency of Israel: q. d. They think to brave it out in a stout and stomachfull way. Low they are, but not lowly; humbled, but not humble. God thrust him downward, as it were with a thump on the back: but he stood stouting it out with him; and so discovered a great deal of arrogancy and folly. Plectimur, may such say,Salvian. nec tamen flectimur: Corripimur sed non corrigimur; We have been stricken, but not sick; beaten, but not sensible, &c. the drunkards ditty, Prov. 23.35. When for all this, for all that God can do to tame them, and turn them again, they will on in their wicked wayes, and not accept of the punishment of their iniquities: not confesse and forsake their sins, that they may have mercy: not seek him, that is, come unto him by faith, Heb. 11.6. and subject themselves unto him by true obe∣dience, 2 Chron. 7.14. this is such a piece of pride as testifieth to mens faces, that they deserve to be destroyed: this is wickednesse with a witnesse: this is fastus adco enormis atque notorius, saith Pareus, such horrible and notorious insolency, as is not to be endured. God complains of Israel for this with a sigh, Ah sinfull nation, &c. and resolves upon revenge, verse 24. See more of this in the Note on Chap. 5.5. Of turning to God. See Zech. 1.3. and of seeking God, see Hos. 5.15. Verse 11. Ephraim also is like a silly dove,] that may be drawn any way for want of wit (so the word signifieth) easily perswaded, enticed, deceived. The
Septuagint render it , insensata, witlesse, or wanting an heart, as the next words explain it; the heart being put for the understanding, as Jer. 5, 21.Prov. 6.32. & 11.12. & 10.13. and oft in the Proverbs. Lo such a thing is Ephraim; and yet he holds himself wondrous wise, in calling to Egypt, and going to Assyria for help. Which was as wisely done, as if sheep should commit themselves to the Wolf for safeguard. The Egyptians were their ancient oppressours: the Assyrians should be shortly their executioners. Betwixt these two, as betwixt two milstones, they had been, and were to be ground to powder, as it were: and yet to these, they were ready to run for refuge. This was indeed to be like a silly dove, which flies from the clawes of the Hawk into the net of the fowler, who will soon make a breakfast of them: or that waits till the fowler be gone, that she may fall upon the bait, never fearing the snare that is laid for her. See 2 King. 17.4. A serpents eye in a doves head is a singular orna∣ment. Be ye wise as serpents, innocent as doves. The serpent, when charmed,Mat. 10 16 stop∣peth his ears, by applying one to the earth, and covering the other with his tail. The dove is too credulous and perswasible, dulce canente fistulâ. She is also dull, and defends not her young ones, as other creatures do. She will sit quiet in her co∣lumbary, and see her nest destroyed, her young ones taken away, and killed before her eyes, and never offer to rescue or revenge; which the hen and other fowls seem in some sort to do. Lo such was Ephraims stupidity. The Philistins were upon him, the enemies spoiled and made a prey of him, yet he knew it not, as it is verse 9. he was not affected with it, nor driven to God by it: but either sat still, as the spoi∣led dove doth in her nest, or upon her dove-coat, delighted in the beauty of her feathers, priding her self in the clapping of her wings: or else ran a wrong way for refuge: flew to king Jareb, to humane helps, to carnall confederates, which never were true to those that trusted them. See chap. 5.13. with the Note. Where you shall see that from the Assyrian they had pro praesidio ludibrium: as likewise those Christians had that called in the Turk, or the like to help them. True it is that reli∣gion without policie is too simple to be safe: but it is no lesse true, that policie with∣out religion is too subtile to be good. As the dove without the serpent is easily caught: so the serpent without the dove stings deadly. Let that bee held and re∣membred, that there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsell against the Lord, Prov. 21.30. and that he takes it very ill, when we decline him, and knock at the creatures door for help, Ier. 2.13. shifting and sharking in every by-corner for comfort. This is the devils policie to draw men from God the Rock of ages,Josh. 8.5. (as Ioshuah did the men of Ai out of their city, and as Bristow counselleth his fel∣lows,Brist. Mot. the Popes Janizares, to draw the Lutherans out of their strong-hold of the Scriptures, into the open field of Councels and Fathers) that he may do what he will with them, and destroy them. For he knows, that be our hopes never so high, our helps from the creature never so likely, yet if God deny his concurrence, and in∣fluence, the arm of flesh (as Ieroboams) shrinks up presently; and the strongest sinew of it cracks, and becomes unusefull. Verse 12. When they go,] Yea, flee (as the dove doth very swiftly, pleasing her self in the clapping of her wings, and cutting of the air) they cannot flee so high, but I shall easily reach them, Obad. 3.4. for in the thing wherein they deal proudly, I am above them, Exod. 18.11. I can over-top them, melt their waxen wings, and bring them down with a vengeance.Psal. 94.11. He taketh the wise in their own craf∣tinesse. And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise that they are vain, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. So saith the Apostle out of the Psalmist; but with this difference. The Psalmist saith, the thoughts of men, the Apostle, the thoughts of the wise, meaning the worlds wizards, the choisest and most picked men, the greatest po∣liticians, the most nimble and Mercuriall wits, quorum praecordia ex meliore luto finxit Titan. These God will take, saith Paul: he will lay hold upon them, Fugientes in cursu depre∣hendit manu{que} injectâ captat, Eras. Annot. as they are running away, (so the word signifieth) as bruit beasts made to be taken and de∣stroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. or as fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare: so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. I will spread my net upon them,] as a skilfull fowler. By net, understand cap∣tivity, and other miseries, compared to a net, Ezek. 12.13. & 17.20. & 19.8. Lam. 1.13. Psal. 9.16. wherein being once caught, the more they struggle, the
faster they stick: the more they seek to extricate themselves, the more they are in∣tangled: snares are round about them, and sudden fear surprizeth them, Iob 22.10. the steps of their strength shall be straitned: and their own counsels shall bring them down, Iob 18.7. I will bring them down as the fowles of the heaven,] Though they may think themselves extra jactum, out of gun-shot, I will cause them to descend, as the He∣brew word signifieth: and though lifted up to heaven, as Capernaum, and nested in the clouds; yea among the stars, as Edom, Obad. 4. yet shall they be brought down to the nethermost hell. God will meet with them in their out-strayes, cast∣ing his net over them: or bring them down with his bowe, whilest (with the foolish bird) they are gazing at the bolt: hee hath wayes enough to hamper such as go out of his way: to be for a gin, and for a snare unto them, Esay 8.14. to shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded, Psal. 64.7. How are they brought into desolation in a moment? they are utterly consumed with terrour, Psal. 73.19. I will chastise them as their congregation hath heard.] Or,. Sept. Ligabo eos Kimchi. Judg. 8.16. I will binde them (as a bird is bound in a net that she cannot stir forth) and, by binding, nurture them: as Gideon taught the men of Succoth, by tawing and tearing them with thorns and briars of the wildernesse. The hypocrites in heart, heap up wrath: thy cry not when God bindeth them, Iob 36.13. God expects men should cry peccavi, when they are bound as Paul was, to be beaten with rods; and not be silent in darknesse, 1. Sam. 2.9. or, not make moan when he hath them under hand. Hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it. Ye must now do so, that would not hear the word sounding in thei Congregations. I will chastise them as their Congregation hath heard.] Crebrò & clarè, I have plainly and plentifully told them my minde: and foretold them by my Prophets, what would be the issue of their evil practises. Sed surdo fabulam, They would not hear Moses and the Prophets. See 2 King. 17.13. 2 Chron. 24.18.19. They thought that my words were but wind,Jer. 5.13. and that all my threats were but in terro∣rem, to fright them a little, and not in good-earnest. Therefore they shall finde that the just Lord is in the middest of them, he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judgement to light,Zeph. 3.5. he faileth not: but the unjust knoweth no shame, feareth no colours, trembleth not at Gods word though it come never so close to his conscience, though it even dash him in the mouth as it were, and make him spit blood. See Ier. 7.13. Verse 13.Naedu, Wo unto them, for they have fled from me:] As Cain (the devils Patriarch) did when he went out from the presence of the Lord, in his fathers fa∣mily, into the land of Nod, Gen. 4.16. being himself a Nad, that is, a runnagate, verse 12. of the same root, that is here made use of in the Text. Now as that land took name of Cain, and his wofull state therein, so is every land and place a Nod to Apostates: and St. Iude throws a Wo after them, Wo unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, Iude 11. that is, they have wickedly departed from God, and his blessing, and gotten into the worlds warme sunne: yea, they not onely go from God, but flee from him in hurry-hast, as from an enemy; a metaphor from birds flying amain, Prov. 27.8. As a bird that wandreth from her nest, (where God took order for her security, Deut. 22.6, 7.) so is a man that wandereth from his place (how much more from his God, that Infinite good?) exposed to misery and mischief, to ruth and ruine. Wo to such, yea double wo: Wo and alas: de∣struction to such,. and devastation, as the word signifieth. Perdition and destruction, as the Apostle phraseth it, 1 Tim. 6.9. whereby is meant, remedilesse misery, mis∣chief without measure, torments without end, and past imagination. This truth must be told, how ever it be taken; that wicked men may not perish without war∣ning. Toothlesse truths, and silken words, would better please people who are most of them sick of a Noli me tangere, and cry out against these fierce Preachers, that come with their Wo unto them, Destruction unto them, &c. This is the way, say they, to drive men into utter despair. We answer; First, if it should be so, yet that is not the proper effect of the Word so dispensed; but to a bate the pleasure that reprobates take in sin, and to restrain them from outrage: that they despair, it proceeds meerly from their own corruption and guiltinesse. They reply, that it
comes rather from the severity of the Teachers, who set themselves to preach dam∣nation, and utter terrible things. Secondly, therefore we answer; that the mad world (ever beside it self in point of salvation) is herein very much mistaken. Let them give us an instance of any one that was ever driven to despair by the sincere preaching of the word: and yet for one bitter word given by us, the Prophets gave ten. This whole Prophecy of Hosea is much more Comminatory then Consolatory. God himself comes here with Wo unto them, Destruction to them. Indeed by this patheticall exclamation, he declareth his affection toward them whom he threat∣neth: and how little delight he takes, either in their destruction, or in such denun∣ciations thereof: And so must Gods Ministers, &c. Because they have transgressed against me:] This is a new degree of their A∣postasie from God. Wicked men and deceivers grow worse and worse, and adde rebellion to sin. As a stone will fall down to come to its center, though it break it self in twenty pieces: so will Apostates, till they come to their own place with Ju∣das: they cease not till they become altogether filthy, Psal. 53.3. as the dog at his vomit, or the sow in her slow, 2 Pet. 2.22. It fareth with such as in that case, Lev. 13.18, 19, 20. If a man had a bile healed, and it afterwards brak out, it proved the plague of leprosie. Though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me.] All was done against God, whence the word me, is so often inculcated in this and the next verse. God is, as it were, a sufferer in all the sins of the sonnes of men: and this is no small aggravation of the evil of sin, that it strikes at Gods face, lifts at his throne, makes to his dishonour Thou hast made me to serve with thy sinnes, and wearied me with thine iniquities, Esay 43.23. And to shew this to be so, it was, that the offendour was confined to the city of refuge, during the High-priests life;Godw. Antiq. Heb. p. 98. as being the chief God on earth. Good David was very sensible of this, and much humbled, when he said, Against thee, thee onely have I sinned, Psal. 51.14. The trespasse was against Ʋriah, but the transgression against God, so gracious a God; and there lay the pinch of his grief: viz. the unkindnesse that was in his sinne. Therefore also Moses, in his swan-like-song, sets on this humbling consideration, Deut. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not hee thy Father? and wilt thou kick against his naked bowels? hast no where else to hit him but there? Again, Is not he thy Redeemer, that hath bought thee, and brought thee out of the iron furnace, where thou labouredst in the very fire, and wast wearied out with unsufferable servitude? More, hath he not made thee, and dost thou rebell against thy Maker, thy Master? Or, hath he not made thee, that is, ex∣alted thee: in which sence, he is said to have made Moses and Aaron, 1 Sam. 12.6. that is, to have advanced them to that honour in his Church: and so we say, Such an one is made for ever. Lastly, hath he not established thee, that thou mightest abide in his grace, and remain unmoveable? And dost thou yet evil requite him, &c. To render good for evil, is Divine; good for good, is humane; evil for evil, is brutish; but evil for good, is devillish. See how grievously God taketh it here. Though I have redeemed them, viz. out of the hands of their enemies in generall, (See an ample proof hereof, Nehem. 9. and the whole book of Judges thorowout) and in speciall, as a late particular mercy to Ephraim, I have delivered and prospe∣red them in their warres, under Ieroboam the sonne of Ioash, 2 King. 14.27. and therefore they should have given me their good word at least, and spoken good of my Name: yet They have spoken lies against me.] Ascribing the glory of their deliverances to their Idols, or arrogating it to themselves, or fathering their false worship upon me as the Authour, or at least, Abbettour thereof, by my present pro∣spering of them. See Ier. 7.10. Verse 14. And they have not cried unto me with their heart,] Hitherto hath been said what they had done: now what they had not done. Omissions are sins as well as commissions. Not serving of God, not sacrificing is condemned, Mal. 3.18. Eccles. 9.2. Not robbing onely, but the not relieving of the poor, was the rich mans ruine. Omission of diet breeds diseases, and makes work for hell,Luke. 16. or for the Physician of our souls. It is the character of a gracelesse man, that he calleth not upon God: And wee have too many of that profane Earl of Westmorelands mind, who said, that he needed not to pray at all,Camd. Elisa. for he had Tenants enow to
pray for him. Some wicked pray (so as it is: indeed they Cant, or Charme, ra∣ther then pray,. Esay 26.16 they powred forth a charme when they chastening was upon them) but they pray not with their heart. Their hearts are exercised with covetousnesse, 2 Pet. 2.14. and inhabited by the devil, Acts 5.3. Simon Magus his heart was not right with the Lord, Acts 8.21. How could it be, when it was in the gall of bitternesse, and bond of perdition, 23. as every unregenerate heart is? Hence though God be neer in their mouthes, yet he is far from their reins, Jer. 12.2. and though they honour him a little with their lips, yet their heart is farre from him, Matth. 15.8. A little artificiall breath they can give God; and that's all. The breath that comes from life is warm, (as that from the body) whereas artificiall breath is cold, as that from bellows. The deeper and hallower the belly of the Lute or Violl is, the pleasanter is the sound: the fleeter, the more grating and harsh in our ears. The voice which is made in the mouth, is nothing so sweet as that which comes from the depth of the breast, Ephes. 6.6. Do the will of God from the heart: serve God in the spirit, Rom. 1.9. Lift up hands and hearts to God in the heavens, Lam. 3.41. Lip-labour is but lost-labour, yea it is sin, Prov. 15.8. Displeasing service is double dishonour; as dissembled sanctity is double iniquity. These men cried, vociferabantur, voce stentorea sonum edebant. They did set up their note, yea they howled upon their beds,] whereupon they had cast themselves, being sick, not of wantonnesse, as once Ahab was, but of want: which made them howl as dogs do, when tied up from their meat and hunger-bit: but were no more regarded then a dog that howleth, or then the Cuckow in June. For why?Jejelilu. They howled indeed to some tune, (as they say) the Hebrew word hath a letter more then ordinary, to note as much. It was the Heathen fashion to cry hideously to their gods: as also the Indians do at this day. So did these, because kept short, and held to strait allowance. It is said of the Ravens of Arabia, that when they are hungry, they screech horribly. And a Parrot when he is beaten, utters an hoarse and harsh voice.Esay 66.3. The songs of the Temple shall be howlings in that day, Amos 8.3. Their sacrifices as the cutting off a dogs neck, which is not done without much howling and yelling. They assemble themselves,] sc. To make publike supplication in their Idol∣temples; called beds before, (as some conceive) because as corporall fornication is committed in beds, so is spirituall in those places of superstition. Here therefore they met; not ad ruminandum, (as the vulgar Latine) to feed as beasts, nor to cut and lance themselves as Baals priests did, (as the Septuagint) and the Heathens in great afflictions,. Deut. 14.1. But to howl for wheat, for provender, for pro∣vant:Inops Senatus auxilij humani ad Deos popu∣lum & vota convertit: om∣nia delubra implent, &c. Liv. lib. 3. as now the Papists do in their sacra Ambarvalia: and as of old the Pagans did in time of extream famine, or other publike calamity. But as the grashopper hops not much above the earth: and as vapours exhaled and drawn up by the Sun, do soon fall down again: so do drossie and earthy hearts in prayers, they seldom rise above corn and wine in their desires. Si ventri bene, si lateri, as Epicurus in Ho∣race. If the belly may be filled, the back fitted, their own turns served, it's enough to them, whose belly is their God, and who mind earthly things onely. Which when they have once got, then they rebell against me,] they consume it upon their lust, James 4.2. and so fight against God with his own weapons, as Jehu did a∣gainst Jehoram with his own men; they abuse their store to his dishonour, like corn∣fed cattell they kick against their master; or as the young Mulet, that when shee hath suckt her fill kicks her damme: or as the wild-asse, that snuffes up the wind, and cannot be taken. Or secondly, they rebell after they have assembled themselves, and made a shew of no small devotion:Jer. 2. when once the duty is over, they go to their old courses again, and undo all their prayers, as Jerem. 5.3. as if now they had prayed, they had purchased a license to live as they list. Whereas duties should mightily ingage us against sin; and deliverances command obedience. Verse 15. Though I have bound, and strengthened their arms,] Quum ego erudivi, So Pagnine, Polanus, and others: when I taught them, or chastened them, as verse 12. and strengthened their arms: there is no and in the Originall; it is an Asynde∣ton; to shew that God had done both for them, together and at once: he had acted the part both of an Instructour, and of a Chirurgion; (like as Rev. 3.18. he takes upon him the person both of a rich merchant, and a skilfull Physician)
he had done all that could be done to do them good; teaching their hands to war, and their fingers to fight, Psal. 144.1. binding up their broken armes (See Ezek. 30.24.) and strengthning their feeble sinewes, their hands that hung down, Heb. 12.12. After I have scourged them, I have re-established them; but what thanks for my labour? what Minerval or pay for my pains? The worlds wages;Hoc ictu ceu didactro ac∣cepto Linus mortuus est. Buchol. such as Hercules paid the Schoolmaster Linus, whom he knockt on the head: or as Agri∣cola's scholars in Germany killed their master with their pen-knives; or as Physitians and Surgeons are many times paid by their penurious patients, of whom the Poet wittily, Tres medicus facies habet, unam, quando rogatur; Angelicam, mox est, cum juvat, ipse Deus.Owen: Epigr. Ast ubi, curato, poscit sua munera; morbo, Horridus apparet terribilis{que} Satan. yet do they imagine mischief against me,] All goes against God (See the note on vers. 13.) Here they imagine mischief against him, as before they spake lies against him, vers. 13. and acted rebellion against him, vers. 14. Thus they spake and did evil things as they could, Jer. 3.5. and the reason of all was, they imagined mischief, cogitabant quasi coagitabant, they were men of wicked devices, Prov. 12.2. wholly made up of sinful projects and purposes: they plotted and plowed mischief, and that against God himself (which is horrible,) David thought much that his enemies should machinate mischief against him, though but dust and ashes; and threatneth them sore for so doing, Psal. 62.3. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? Ye shall be slain all of you; as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence: he meaneth, ye shall be surely and suddenly ruined. What then will become of those Zamzummims that imagine mischiefe against the Lord? and such a Lord as hath bound and strengthened their armes, that had been broken by the enemies, and sought their good every way, puniendo, muniendo, malis & bonis afficiendo, &c. If they had slipt into some small offence against him, of infirmity and at unawares, it had been nothing so grievous: but to busie their braines, and bend their wits and studies scientes, volentes, & deliberato consilio to plot and practise mischief, or (as the Septuagint render it) mischiefes against God, (for every transgression and disobedience is contrary to his most pure Nature, and sacred Law, and shall therefore receive a just recompence of reward, Heb. 2.2.) so gracious a God, this is detestable ingratitude. This is, as if those in the Gospel should have railed against Christ, for raising them from the dead: it is like the matchlesse mischievousnesse of that mon∣ster Michael Balbus, who that night that his Prince pardoned and released him;Zonaras in Annal. gat out and slew him. Omne peccatum est deicidium, for although wicked men cannot reach God, yet they reach at him; shooting up their darts against heaven, (as the Thracians did once in a storm) and saying in effect as Caligula did to his Jupiter,Herodot. Homer.! either kill me, or I will kill thee. Vers. 16. They return but not to the most High,] Gnal for Gnelion by contraction: as Jah for Jehovah, so afterwards, Chap. 11.7. and 2 Sam. 23.1. Return they do, or seem to do at least (for it is their hypocrisie that is here described) but not to the most High: to whom then? to idols, or humane helps, or any thing rather, and sooner, then to God. Jehu went farre in the work of Reformation, and made a great flaunt at first, as if he would have done as much that way, as ever Josiah did: But he and his people came not up to the height, turned not to the most High God, honoured him not as a just and jealous God, that can endure no corrivals. They gave the half-turn, but returned not with all their hearts, Joel. 2.12. they turned from west to north, but not from west to east, to the full counterpoint, setting their faces toward God, and having their backs towards their sins. They had haply a kind of velleity, some short-winded wishes and wamblings, as I may so say, but it boyled not up to the full height of a resolution for God; they made beleeve they would cast away their transgressions, but it was but as the mother makes her childe beleeve, that she will cast him to the puttock or into the water; when as she holds him fast enough, and means him no hurt at all. These faint essayes of returning are not wor∣thy of the most High; he delighteth not to be dallied with, but requireth the best of the best; and that we serve him like himself, that is, after a godly sot, or worthy
of God, as Saint Iohn phraseth it, 3 Ioh. 6. Thus if we do, we shall be drawn up to him, and have cause to rejoyce in our sublimity, or, in that we are exalted, Iam. 1.9. For indeed the most High stoopeth to the true convert (who considering his distance repents and abhors himself in dust and ashes) he dwelleth in the highest heavens and lowest hearts,Job. 42.5. Esa. 57.17. They are like a deceitful bow] a rotten bow (though otherwise fair) when an arrow is drawn to the head, breaks and deceives the archer. Or thus, when a man shoots with a deceitful bow, though he level his eye and his arrow directly to the mark, and thinks with himself to hit it; yet indeed the arrow, by reason of his deceit∣full bow goes a clean contrary way; yea, and sometimes reflects upon the archer himself; semblably these false Israelites dealt with God. Their hearts were as the bow, their purposes and promises to return as arrows; the mark they aimed at con∣version; to the which, they, in their afflictions looked with so accurate and intent an eye, as though they would repent indeed; but their hearts deceived them as being un∣sound: hence they started aside like a deceitful bow, Psal. 78.57. and the arrowes of their fair promises and pretences vanished in the aire, as smoak. Some take the words in another sense, as if punishment and disappointment were here threatned: but I best like the former. Let us look to the secret warpings of our hearts, and, seeing we are Gods bow, Zach. 9.13. let us not be deceitful, &c. Their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their tongue,] and the people with them; for princes fall not alone, as we have seen in our late wars, wherein Lords and Losels fel together not a few at Newbury-fight especially , the sword devoureth one as well as the other, 2 Sam. 11.25. God hangs up the heads of the people as it were in gibbets, Num. 25.4. their greatnesse cannot bear them out,Thrasonicae au∣licorum Dej e∣rationes ronchi & blasphemiae in Deum, & Prophetas. Rivet. Philip of Spain. Farnesius. Minerius. nor their life-guards defend them, for the detestation of their tongue (so some read this text) for the hatred that God beareth to them for their blasphemies and great swelling words of vanity, uttered against him, his people, and his ordi∣nances. With our tongue, say they, we will prevaile, our lips are our own: who is Lord over us? Lo this and worse is the rage of their tongue: as his, that said he would not leave one Lutheran in his dominions: another, that he would ride his horse up to the saddle in the blood of the Lutherans: a third, that he would send them all to dine with the devil, &c. God will cut off the spirit of such outragious Princes. They shall fall by the sword, they shall be a portion for foxes, Psal. 63.10. and a derision to the Egyptians. this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt,] their confederates in whom they trusted; and upon whose help bearing themselves over-bold, they had spoken lofti∣ly, setting their mouthes against heaven, and their tongues walked thorow the earth, Ps. 73.9. Lo, these should not onely faile them but jear them; not onely not succour them, but scorn them; as the Monarch of Morocco did our King John, that sent to him for help in the Barons wars. He grew into such dislike of our king (saith the story) that ever after he abhorred the mention of him. Neither met he with bet∣ter entertainment from the Pope, to whom he basely submitted and surrendred his kingdome. It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in Princes. For, Deo confisi nunquam confusi, they that trust in the Lord shall never be ashamed. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 1. SEt the trumpet to thy mouth,] Heb. The trumpet to thy palate. A hasty ex∣pression, an abrupt and imperfect speech, common with such as are mo∣ved with passions, of anger, grief or fear, as Chap. 5.8. after thee O Benjamin. God, though not subject to such perturbations, Iam. 1.17. yet here and elsewhere utters himself in this sort; to set forth the nearnesse of the peoples danger by the enemies approach: and the necessity of their return to him by true repentance, for the di∣version of his displeasure. Break off thy sinnes by righteousnesse, saith the Prophet to Nebuchadnezzar; be abrupt in the work, cut the cartropes of vamty, if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity, Dan. 4.27. Take the bark from the tree, and the sap can never find the way to the boughes: get sin remitted, and punishment shall be removed. In this sermon of the Prophet (which is much sharper then the
former, and may seem to be one of the last, because God is so absolute in threatning, as if he meant to be resolute in punishing) there is (as one saith) peccatorum & poenarum  an heaping together of sins and punishments of many sorts: and the prophet is commanded to give suddain warning of the enemy at hand, which is elegantly set forth by a military hypotyposis or lively representation; as if it were now a doing. The trumpet to thy mouth, that is, set up thy note, and pro∣claim with a loud and clear voyce, as Esay. 58.1. crie in the throat (so the Chaldee hath it here) spare not, that none may say he was not warned: lift up thy voyce like a trumpet, that all may hear and fear, Am. 3.6. as people use to do when an ala m is sounded, or the bels are rung backward. See chap. 5.8. There they had been before alarmed, here reminded in brief: for the prophet is as it were, monosyllabus, as one in haste; he uttereth amputatas sententias & verba ante expectatum cadentia, as Se∣neca somewhere hath it, broken sentences, concise, but pithy periods. he shall come as an Egle against the house of the Lord,] He, that is, the Assyrian; not Nebuchadnezzar, though the like is said of him, Ezech. 17.3.7. Much lesse the Romans (as Lyra interpreteth this text of the last destruction of Jerusalem, because the Eagle was their Ensign) but Pul, Tiglath-Pileser, and Salmanaser, who came against the ten Tribes as an Eagle, to waste, spoil, and carry captive speedily,2 King. 15.19. & 29. & 17.3. &c. & 18.19. Lam. 4.19. Plin. lib. 10.3. im∣petuously, irresistibly: as Ierem. 4.19. The Eagle is the strongest and swiftest of birds, and feareth no obstacle, either from other fowl, or winde, or thunderbolt, as Plinie affirmeth. Nebuchadnezzar is not onely compared to an Eagle (as before is noted) but to a Lion with Eagles-wings, Dan. 7.4. that is, with invincible armies, that march with incredible swiftnesse. And all this was long since forethreatned, Deut. 28.49. The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee from farre, from the end of the earth, as swift as the Eagle flieth: to which Text the Prophet here seemeth to allude; as indeed all the Prophets do but comment upon Moses, and draw out that Arras, which was folded together by him before. against the house of the Lord,] that is, the house of Israel, called Gods house, Numb. 12.7. Heb. 3.5. and Gods land, Hos. 9.3.15. and their Common-wealth is by Iosephus called a Theocratic. And although they were now become Apostates, yet they gloried no lesse then before, to be of the stock of Abraham, and of the family of faith: like as the Turks call themselves at this day, Musulmans, that is, the true and right beleevers; especially after they are circumcised, which is not done till they be past ten yeers of age; following the example of Ismael,Grand Signior Serag. p. 191. whom they imitate, and honour as their Progenitour: alledging that Abraham loved him, and not Isaac, and that it was Ismael whom Abraham would have sacrificed. because they have transgressed my Covenant, and trespassed] Sin is the mother of misery: and the great Makebate betwixt God and his creature. It moves him when we ask bread and fish to feed us (as verse 2.) to answer us with a stone to bruise us, or a serpent to bite us. The sin of this people was the more hainous, because they were covenanters, and confederate with God. It was his covenant that was in their flesh, Gen. 17.13. and he had betrothed them to himself, and betrusted them with his Oracles. but they like men, transgressed the covenant, and dealt treacherously against him, Chap. 6.7. (See the Note there.) they performed not the stipulation of a good conscience toward God.1 Pet. 3.21. they trespassed against his law.] As if it had not been holy, and just, and good,Rom. 7. pre∣cious, perfect, and profitable; grounded upon so much good reason, that if God had not commanded it, yet it had been best for us to have practised it, Esay 48.17. I am the Lord that teacheth thee to profit, &c O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandements! &c. q. d. It is for thy profit and not for mine own, that I have given thee a law to live by. But they have trespassed, or praevaricated: and this, out of pride and malice, as the word signifieth; and as before he had oft convinced them of many particulars, and more will do: therefore are they justly punished. Verse 2. Israel shall crie unto me,] It is their course and custome to do so: they will needs do it though I take no delight in it. Hypocrisie is impudent, as chap. 5.6. and Ier. 3.4, 5. No nay, but it will despite God with seeming honour; and pre∣sent him with a ludibrious devotion. Israel, though revolted and degenerated into Iezreel, chap. 1. shall crie, yea cry aloud, vociferabuntur, cry till they are hoarse, as criers do: and unto me, but not with their heart, chap. 7.14. It is but clamor sine
side fatuus, an empty ring, that God regards not. For, not every one that saith un∣to him, Lord, Lord, &c Mat. 7.21. Many leane upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil can come unto us, Mic. 3.11. who yet shall hear, Discedite, Avaunt ye workers of iniquity: I know you not. Wo then to all profligate professors, carnall Gospellers: their prayers shall not profit them, neither shall they be a but∣ton the better for their loud cries to the most High, (Pro. 1.28. and odious fawnings, My God, we know thee.] When their hearts are far from him. Of such preten∣ders to him and his truth, it is that the Apostle speaketh, Tit. 1.16. They professe that they know God, (which yet God denies, Hos. 4.1. & 5.4.) but in works they deny him: being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. To come and call God Father, the guide of our youth, and then to fall to sinne, this is to do as evil as we can: We cannot easily do worse, Jer. 3.4, 5. To cry, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord: and then to steal, murther, and com∣mit adultery, &c. this is painted hypocrisie, Ier. 7.4, 9. when men shall take san∣ctuary, and think to save themselves from danger by a form of godlinesse (as the Jews fable that Og king of Bashan escaped in the flood by riding astride upon the Ark) when they are perfect strangers to the power of it, this is to hasten and heap up wrath, Iob 36.13. Religion, as it is the best armour, so the worst cloak: and will serve hypocrites as the disguise Ahab put on, and perished. Castalio maketh this last clause to be the speech of the blessed Trinity, We know thee O Israel: q. d. Though thou collogue and cry, My God: yet we know thine hypocrisie and the naughtinesse of thy heart. But the former sence is better, though the placing of the word Israel in the end of the verse, seem to favour this: for thus it runs in the Hebrew, To me thy shall cry, My God, we know thee, Israel. Verse 3. Israel hath cast off the thing that is good,] Heb. The Good: as first, the good God, who is good originall, universall, All-sufficient, and satisfactory, proportionable and fitting to our soul. He both is good, and doth good. Psal 119.68. and that both naturally, abundantly, freely, and constantly. Good thou art, O Lord, and ready to forgive, saith David, Psal. 86.5. And the Good Lord be mir∣cifull,2 Chron. 30. &c. saith Hezekiah in his prayer for the people. To speak properly, there is none good but God,Ase elonganit' ipulis. saith our Saviour, Matt. 19.17. but Israel cast him, or rather kickt him off (procul à se rejecit) as the word signifieth: So do all grosse hypo∣crites: they are rank Atheists, practicall Atheists though professionall Christians. Secondly, they reject Christ as a Soveraigne, though they could be content to have him, as a Saviour: they send messages after him, saying, We will not have this man to rule over us: they will not submit to the lawes of his kingdom, nor receive him in all his offices, and efficacies: they are Christlesse creatures, as without God, so without Christ in the world. Thirdly, hypocrites reject the good Spirit of God, (as David calleth him, Psal. 143.10.) the fruit whereof is in all goodnesse, and righteousnesse, and truth, Ephes. 5.9. When God striveth with them by his good Spirit (as Neh. 9.20.) they, by yeelding to Satans suggestions, grieve that holy Spirit, and by grieving resist him, and by resisting quench him, and by quenching maliciously oppose him, and offer despite unto him; and so cast themselves into the punishing hands of the living God, Heb. 10.29, 31. Lastly, they cast off the good Word, and true Worship of God: those right judgements, true lawes, good statutes, and Commandements, Neh. 9.13. they put the promises from them, and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life, Acts 13.46. they hate instruction, and cast Gods words behind them, Psal. 50.17. In a word, bee hath left off to bee wise, and to do good: hee setteth himself in a way that is not good: hec abhorreth not evil, Psal. 36.3, 4. The words may be read thus, The good (God) hath rejected Israel; the enemy shall pursue him: according to that in the Psalme, God hath for∣saken him, persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him, Psal. 71.11. Sure it is, that the Lord is with us, while we are with him: and if we seek him, he will be found of us. But if we forsake him, he will forsake us. And if he forsake us, wo be to us, chap. 9.12. we are in danger to be caught up by every paltry enemy, as young Lapwings are to be snatcht up by every buzzard. If Israel cast away the thing that is good, Chron. 15.2. what marvell if evil hunt him to overthrow him, Psal. 140.11. and if he find himself in all evil in the midst of the Congregation, and the assembly, Prov. 5.14. Hence Cains fear, when cast out by God; and Sauls complaint, that
the Philistines were upon him, and God had forsaken him. Verse 4. They have set up kings, but not by me, &c.] The Septuagint and vul∣gar Latine render it, They have reigned to themselves: like as St. Paul telleth the haughty Corinthians, who, carried aloft by their waxen wings, domineered and despised others, ye have reigned as kings without us, &c. 1 Cor. 4.8. But our rea∣ding is according to the Originall: and so they are charged with a double defecti∣on: the one Civil, from the house of David, they have set up kings, &c. the other Ecclesiasticall, from the sincere service of God, they had made them idols. For the first, it was not their fault to set up kings; but to do it without God, without his licence, and approbation. They took counsel, but not of God: they covered with a covering, but not of his spirit, that they might adde sin to sin, Esay 30.1. They went headlong to work, in setting up Jeroboam the son of Nebat. For although the thing were done by the determinate counsell and foreknowledge of God, as was likewise Christs crucifixion, Acts 2.23. (See 1 King. 11.31, 17. and Chap. 12.15, 24.) yet because the people were led by their own pride and ambition to chuse a new king, without either asking Gods consent, or eyeing his decree, they did it rashly, and seditiously; neithey aimed they at any thing else, but at the easing of their bur∣dens, and drawing to themselves the wealth of the kingdome. As for Jeroboam, it is before noted, that although he had it cleared to him, that Gods will was he should be king over the ten Tribes, yet because it was a will of Gods decree, not of his command, as of a duty to be done by him; and because he did not as David, who when he had the promise of the kingdome, (yea was anointed king) yet invaded not the kingdom, but waited till he was lawfully exalted thereunto by God: there∣fore passeth he for an usurper. And the people are here worthily reprehended, sith whatsoever is not of faith is sin: and it is obedience when men obey a Divine pre∣cept; but not ever, when they follow a Divine instinct. they have made princes, &c.] Some render it, They have removed Princes,R. Sal. Jark. (as if in the word Hasiru Sin were put for Samech) they have taken liberty to make and unmake Princes at their pleasure: as the Roman Army did Emperours: and as that potent Earl of Warwick, in Henry the sixths time, who is said to have carried a king in his pocket. But because the former reading is confirmed by the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the sence is agreeable to what went before: neither read we of any kings of Israel deposed by the people, we retain it as the better. Of their silver and their gold have they made them idols,] Of the guts and gar∣bage of the earth had they made them terricula, fray-bugs, or molestations:Gnatsabim. ter∣rorem enim & tristitiam duntaxat afferunt suis cultoribus, for they cause terrour and heavinesse onely to those that worship them.Polan. Their sorrow shall be multiplied that hasten after another God, Psal. 16.4. The Greek Churches, for instance, so set up∣on Image-worship; and therefore now subjected to the Turkish tyranny: a type whereof were these ten Tribes carried captive by the Assyrian, without any return. Idols are called griefs, or sorrows, saith Peter Martyr, because they torment the minde; and trouble the conscience; neither can they quiet or pacifie it:Com. in 1 Sam. 31.9. so that Idolaters must needs be alwayes in doubt and despair, as Papists are, whose whole religion is a doctrine of desperation. Their penances and pilgrimages to such or such an Idoll, might still their consciences for a while: but this was a truce rather then a peace: a palliate cure, which would not hold long; a corrupting of the sergeant, but not compounding with the Creditour. that they may be cut off.] Not their silver and gold, the matter of their idols, as some sence it; but the whole nation, Princes and people together. Idolatry is a God-provoking, and a land-desolating sinne, as in this Prophecy. Often it is not so much the enemies sword as the sin of idolatry that destroyeth cities and king∣doms, through the justice and jealousie of Almighty God. Verse. 5. Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off,] That is, it can do thee no stead, nor deliver thee from the destroyer. Be not afraid of such mawmets (saith Jeremy) for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good, chap. 10.5. they can neither hurt, nor help: for an idoll is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.4. nothing but a meer fiction: it hath no god-head, or power divine in it self, as the following words shew, that there is none other God but one. How then can help be reasonably expected from it? Israel had cast off the thing that is good, for calf-worship, ver. 3.
therefore is he worthily cast off by his calf, called here Samaria's calf, or calves, because that was the chief City, the Palace of the King, and is therefore put for the whole Province: and their idols called a calf, by way of contempt, as the brazen-serpent is called Nehushtan, or a piece of brasse when once it was Idolized. See how Rabshakeh insults over those Heathen-deities, 2 King. 18.33, 34, 35. and blasphemously applieth it to the God of Israel, who never casteth off his faithfull servants: but is with them in trouble, to deliver them, and honour them, Psal. 91.15. Surely the Lord will not cast off his faithfull people, neither will he forsake his inheritance, Psal. 94.14. Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, Job 8.20. But though he cause grief, yet he will have compassion according to the multi∣tude of his mercies, Lam. 3.31, 32. some reads it thus, Thy calf, O Samaria, hath been carried away into a far countrey, namely into Assyria: as the idols of the na∣tions which were overcome, were carried away captive in triumph by the Conque∣rours. See Hos. 10.6. Mine anger is kindled against them,] God is said to be angry against idolaters, because he doth that which an angry man useth to do, viz. 1. chide, 2. fight; see the second commandement in the sanction of it, and tremble at Gods displeasure, which when once kindled, and comes into his face, or, nostrils (as here) it burneth to the lowest hell, consumeth the earth with her increase and sets on fire the foun∣dations of the mountains, Deut. 32.22. It is ill angring him that is the Ancient of dayes, and a consuming fire. The Jewes use to say to this day, that there is no pu∣nishment befalleth them, in which there is not an ounce of Aarons golden calf. How long will it be ere they attain to innocencie?] Quousque non poterunt inno∣centiam? a forcible ellipsis: as if God were so vexed, that he could not fully utter himself, nor at all speak to Samaria as he had begun, but turn his discourse to o∣thers, saying, How long will they not be cleansed? or, not abide innocency? By which powerfull expression three things are intimated. First, that these Israelites were refractarie and desperate: not onely unclean, but enemies to innocency, such as could not abide it: they were inveterate, and incurable, their diseases ingrained, and not easily stirred by any potion. Secondly, that God is most patient, who though he thinks over-long of the time that men continue in their evil courses, and therefore cries, Quousque, How long, &c. and when will it once be? yet bears with their evil manners, and inviteth them to better. Thirdly, that he will at length break off his patience, and proceed to punishment, sith there is no other remedy, 2 Chron. 34.16. Prov. 29.1. Compenset longas ut gravitate moras. Verse 6. For from Israel was it also,] There is an Emphasis in Also, and it is as if the Prophet should say, This calfe of Samaria is no lesse from Israel, and came out of his shop or device, then that of old set up by them in the wildernesse. Israel then brought a calf out of Egypt, Jeroboam brought two; and Israel hath received them, and are much taken with them: so that they cannot attain to innocencie, (as it is in the former verse) so far they are engaged, and so fast joyned to idols, that they cannot get off: there is so much of Self in it: it was the barn of their own brain; and hence so over-admired, so clasped and hugged, with the Ape, &c. or rather, as Cleopatra hugged her Vipers that sucked her blood, and took away her life; so did they their own inventions, though fairly warned of the danger, verse 3, 4, 5. Lo this was Israel, that acted thus madly. Israel that was wont to laugh at, or pity other Nations for their Idolomany, for worshipping the works of their own hands, for going a whoring after their own inventions, for changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things: As in Lap-land, the people worship that all day for a god, whatsoever they see first in the morning. Now that a calf-worship should be found in Israel,Rom. 1.23. Abbats Geogr. and not onely so, but found out by Israel; who was herein worse then Egypt: for that the Egyptians worshipped a living Ox of Gods making; but Israel, a dead calf of their own making: such sots they were grown, and so thwart to the very principles of reason. the workman made it,] who confessedly is no God, therefore it is not God,] for no man can give that divinity to another, which himself hath not. Nay it is certain
that God himself by his infinite power cannot make any thing to be a God to us. He cannot do this I say: like as he cannot lie, he cannot die, he cannot deny him∣self, &c. so he cannot raise a created excellency to that height, as to be a God to us. How vile then is the Voluptuary, that maketh his belly his god? the Mammonist, that maketh his gold his god? the Ambitionist, that maketh his honour his god? How abominable the Masse-monger, that maketh his god, and eateth him when he hath done? This made Averroes the Mahometan crie out; Quoniam Christiani Deum suum manducant, sit anima mea cum Philosophis, that is, Forasmuch as Christi∣ans do eat their God, let my soul be rather with the souls of the Philosophers. Those Pseudo-christians the Papists, stick not to call the consecrated Host, their God and Lord: and Harding (that sottish Apostate, for he was once a zealous Preacher against Popery, and wished that he had a voice as loud as the bels of Oseney,Artic. 2 to cry it down) in his disputation against Juel, is not ashamed to defend it. And yet we all know that that Host or Sacrament, as they call it, of the Altar, is the work of the Baker, therefore it is no God, neither Lord nor God. (whatsoever our Lord God the Pope say to the contrary) Which yet further appeareth, in that (as the calf of Samaria here) it may bee broken in pieces, or to shivers, (which word of ours seemeth to come from the Hebrew shebharim here used) yea ground to powder, as was the molten calf in the wildernesse, whereto the Prophet may well here allude. Is not their breaden-god broaken by the Priest into three bits? Is it not chawed with his teeth? May it not be gnawed by mice, become meat for worms,In cauelis Missae. &c? Murescit, putrescit, & corrumpitur: all which things the Papists themselves confesse may befall their god, which is therefore no god, or nomine tantum & non numine deus, a nominall god onely. And the like we may say of images, and re∣liques (such as is at Genua, the tail of that Asse, whereon Christ rode into Jerusa∣lem) these and other monuments of idolatry may, nay they ought to be broken, burnt, and utterly abolished, Exod. 34.13. Deut. 7.5. Ezek. 20.7. as (blessed be God) they are lately amongst us, by our Worthies in Parliament: to whom perhaps, for that and the like good services, we attributed but too much, we even idolized them: and the king of Sweden (that bright Northern-starre) a little before his decease, being in discourse with Dr. Fabricius his Chaplain, he told him,Mr. Clark in his life. that he thought God would ere long take him away, because the people did so overvalue and deifie him. Verse 7. For they have sown the winde, and shall neap the whirl-winde:] To sowe the winde is to labour in vain, as Eccles. 5.16. to labour for the winde, and Prov. 11.29. to possesse the winde, to feed on the winde, Hos. 12.1. and to be eaten up of the winde, Jer. 22.22. The Greeks expresse the same by hunting after,. and hus∣banding the winde. The winde we know maketh a mighty bustle, as if it were some great businesse, solid and stable: but presently it blowes over, and comes to nothing. Or if it get, as seed, into the bosome of the earth, either it breeds an earth-quake, or at least ariseth in a whirl-winde, which blowes dust into the eyes, and once at least buried a considerable Army in the Lybian sands. Solomon saith,Cambyses his souldiers. He that sow∣eth iniquity, shall reap vanity, Pro. 22.8. But our Prophet here, saith more: He that soweth the wiude of iniquity, shall reap the terrible tempest of unconceiveable mi∣sery. By the blast of God he shall perish, and by the breath of his nostrils he shall be consumed, Job 4.8, 9. As the beginnings of Idolatry, hypocrisie, vain-glory,. carnall policy, &c. are empty and unhappy, (it is but the sowing of blasted corne, as the Septuagint here hath it, seed corrupted by the winde) so the end thereof is very sad and dismall. The word here rendred, the whirl-winde, hath a syllable in it more then ordinary, to note (saith Tremellius) the fearfulnesse of the divine vengeance,Suphatha. that will befall the forementioned: and especially at death, when they are entring upon eternity. Oh what a dreadfull shriek gives the guilty soul at death, to see it self launching into an infinite Ocean of scalding lead, and must swim naked in it for ever: not having the least cold blast of that winde it sowed all its life long to cool it; but rather to adde to its torment! Then will God speak to such, as once he did to Job out of a whirl-winde, but after another manner; Go to now ye forma∣lists, false-worshippers, triflers, troublers of Israel: ye that have been meer mutes, and ciphers, nullities in the world, superfluities in the earth, or worse then all this:Jam. 5.5. Go to now, I say, weep and howl for the miseries that are come upon you. Ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.Jam. 5.5. But now, an end is come, is come; an evil, an onely evil, with∣out mixture of mercy, sorrow without succour, mischief without measure, tor∣ments, without hope of ever either mending or ending, are the portion of your cup: the dregs of that cup of mine must you now drink off, that hath eternity to the bot∣tome. O lamentable! Oh did but men forethink what would be the end of sin, they durst not but be innocent. Oh let that terrible tempest at death bee timely thought on and prevented, Job 27.20, 21, &c. Terrours take hold of him as waers: a tempest stealeth him away in the night. The East-winde carrieth him away, and hee departeth, and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. For God shall cast upon him and not spare: he would fain flee out of his hand, &c. It hath no stalk: the bud shall yeeld no meal:] Nihil habet fertilitatis firmitatis∣que, as Ruffinus expoundeth it; It hath no firmnesse or fruitfulnesse: the winde of wickednesse that thou hast sown, the blasted corn that thou hast committed to the earth, will yeeld thee nothing but losse, and disappointment. A blade there may be, but not a stalk: or if a stalk, yet not a bud: or if a bud, yet it shall bee nipt in the bud: it shall yeeld no meal, but onely dust and chaff: or if it come to the meal, yet strangers shall swallow it up, so that you shall bee never the better for it: but after that ye have sown the winde of iniquity, ye shall reap the whirl-winde of misery, maledictionem omnimodam, curses of all kindes, which God hath hang'd at the heels of your idolatry, a pernicious evil, (whatever those superstitious shec∣sinners bragg'd to the contrary, Ier. 44.17.) Or if they flourish for a season, and have hopes of a large crop: yet God will curse their blessings, and frustrate their fair hopes, Psal. 37.2. as he dealt by that rich wretch mentioned by Mr. Boroughes, in his Comment on the second Chapter of this Prophesie, pag. 379. I had certain information, saith he, from a Reverend Minister, that in his own Town there was a worldling, who had a great crop of corn. A good honest neighbour of his walking by his corn said, Neighbour, you have a very fine crop of corn, if God blesse it: yea, saith he, I will have a good crop: speaking contemptuously. And before he could come to get it into the barn, it was blasted, that the corn of the whole crop was not worth six pence. Verse 8. Israel is swallowed up,] Not their meal onely, as verse 7. but themselves also are devoured by those workers of iniquity, that eat up Gods people as they eat bread, Psal. 14.4. Persecutours are men-eaters, more cruel then those American Canibals, that devour men peece-meal: they make but a breakfast of Gods people, as Senacherib meant to do of Ierusalem; and the Powder-papists of England. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. But blessed bee God, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth, Psal. 124.2, 3, 6. Let us keep us out of the clawes and clutches of that old man-slayer, who night and day walketh about (in a circular motion) that he may take us at advantage, seeking whom hee may swallow down his wide gullet, which he hath even made red with the blood of souls,. 1 Pet. 5.8. and is therefore happly, called the great red-Dragon, Rev. 12.3. that hath seven heads to plot, and ten horns to push men into the sin of idolatry, and thereby into hell. So long as Israel was holinesse to the Lord, and the first-fruits of his increase, all that devoured him found that they offended: for evil came upon them, Ier. 2.3. they could no more disgest him,Judg. 5.1 then the Whale did Ionah: a cup of trembling, or of poyson he was to all the people round about, Zech. 12.2. See the Note there. But, when he offended in Baal, he died: when he chose new gods, then was warre in the gates: when they made leagues with idolaters, then were they even swallowed up by them: as were likewise the Greek and Latine Churches, by the Eastern and Western Anti∣christ, those crooked Leviathans, those dragons in the sea, as the Egyptian, and As∣syrian are called, Esay 27.1. now shall they be among the Gentiles,] whose favour and friendship they have basely sought, and dearly bought. It was threatned in the former Chapter, verse 16. that they should be a derision in the land of Egypt. See the Note. To have Egyptians deride us, and that for sin, is an heavy judgement. So here, to be dis∣dained and vilified by such, as an old broken vessell, fit for none but unclean uses. as a vessell wherein is no pleasure.] No delight or complacency; vas despectum,
reijculum, abjectum, a vessell that is for the carrying up and down of excrements; so shall Israel be employed by Gentiles, in base and contemptible offices: as they were by the Babylonians, Jer. 51.34. yea Iehojakim himself (though a King) was no better used, Ier. 22.18. and Moab, that haughty nation, Ier. 48.38. In which sence, Mob shall be my washpot, saith David, Psal. 60.10. that is, brought into most abject slavery; as your scullions or scavengers: they shall lie among the pots, Psal. 68.13. not onely to make pots, for the king of Babylons use, (as those ser∣vile souls, the base brood of their degenerated forefathers, 1 Chron. 4.23.)Matulam praebere. but al∣so to hold pots, or empty pots and vessels of dishonour; that they might know a difference betwixt Gods service (which is all clean and fair work,2 Tim. 2.21. fit for a vessell of honour, an elect vessell, elect and precious, sanctified and fit for the masters use) and the service of their enemies, base and beastly; such as is beneath the excellency of an ingenuous man: such as the Turks at this day put the Jews to; and the Spani∣ards the poor Indians. Verse 9. For they are gone up to Assyria, a wilde asse alone by himself,] This was that that most moved the Lord to denounce and determine hard and heavy things against Israel, they had suspicious thoughts of God, as if he either could not, or would not do for them, and help them out, as the Assyrian (though an enemy) would. This prank of theirs, God uttereth here with as great indignation, and dislike, as old Iacob did his sonne Reubns incest, when he said, He went up to my couch. The Lord is as jealous of his glory as any man can be of his wife: neither will he give it to another, Esay 42.8. he admits not of any corrivall in heaven or earth, as Potiphars wife was his own peculiar. Now God is no way more glorified by us, then when we put our trust in his love and faithfulnesse, and expect from him safety here, and salvation hereafter. For in so doing, we set him up for our king, Iudg. 9.15. and put the crown royall upon his head, Cant. 3.11. As in doing otherwise, we turn his glory into shame, loving vanity, seeking after leasing.Psal. 4.2. Hence that angry expostulation, Ier. 2.36. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? How dost think to mend thy self, by running to the creature; as if there were no God in Israel? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of As∣syria: Yea thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head (after the manner of mourners, 2 Sam. 13.19.) for the Lord hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them. a wilde asse alone by himself:] Foolish and fierce above measure, untameable and untractable: loving to be alone, and so becomes a prey to the lion,Lib. 8. cap. 40. as saith Siraci∣des, chap. 13. verse 21. Pliny speaketh much of the wilde asse, and his properties: and Interpreters on this Text, bring many reasons why Israel is compared to him. Israel is as stupid, and as mad as the wilde asse, saith Lyra. He is all for himself, saith Iunius: he casteth off Gods yoak, saith Tremellius: he is a contemptible crea∣ture, saith Kimchi: he walks where he lists, as masterlesse, saith the Chaldee: hee seeketh water in the wildernesse, but hardly findeth it, so doth Israel help of the cruell enemies, and hath it not, saith Oecolampadius: he taketh a great deal of pains for his belly, saith Mercer: he cannot be tamed and made serviceable, saith Gesner. He is left alone by God to be carried captive by the Assyrian, saith Ribera. The Scripture describeth the nature of this creature in many places, Gen. 16.12. Iob 6.5. & 11.12. & 24.5. & 39.8. Psal. 104.11. Esay 32.14. Ier. 2.23. & 14.6. Dan. 5.21. Ephraim hath hired lovers.] This is the second similitude, taken from a most libi∣dinous harlot. See the like basenesse in Judah, Ezek. 16.33. They were so mad upon their idols, and creature-confidences, that they were at no small charge for them: they lavished money out of the bag: and laid on,Jer. 5.38. as if they should never see an end of their wealth. They sent great gifts and summes of money to the Assyri∣ans and Egyptians; and leaned upon them as their champions: they hired loves, as the Hebrew here hath it. But love as it cannot well be counterfeited, (a man may paint fire, but he cannot paint heat) so it cannot at all be hired or purchased. Those that go about it shall finde loathing for love, and be scorned of those mercenaries, which are seldome either satisfied, or sure. Verse 10. Yea, though they have hired among the nations,] The uncircumcised; strangers to the promises, and aliens from the common-wealth of Israel: that they
should so far distrust God, and debase themselves, as to seek help of such; this went neer to the heart of God, and was very grievous. They brought up an evil report upon Gods house-keeping, charged him with unfaithfulnesse to his people, whom he now seemed to leave in the lurch, to shift for themselves in their straits; and hardened his enemies in their wicked, but yet more prosperous condition. Foelix scelus virtus vocatur.Cic. de divin. lib. 2. How would these Heathens hugge themselves in the conceit that Israel should do thus, who was Gods portion, Deut. 32.9. the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12.7. of whom it was anciently sund, and commonly said among the Heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them, Psal. 126.2. Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people! saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help; and who is the sword of thine excellency: and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high-places, Deut. 33.29. Whoso∣ever was free of the city of Rome, might not accept of any freedome in another city: for that they counted a dishonour to Rome. And will not God take it in ill part from his covenanters, to seek or make after correspondency with his enemies, and safety by them? The help of the wicked, Ecclesiae sunt tandem perniciosa & semper perfidiosa, are the best perfidious, and at length pernicious to the Church. now will I gather them,] This the Chaldee, and the Vulgar make to be a pro∣mise of bringing back their captivity; when indeed it is a commination of carrying them into captivity. I will gather them,] that is, either the enemies against Israel; or else Israel, for the enemies; ut eos acervatim perdam, that I may lay them heaps upon heaps, and gather them, as dead corps slain in battle are gathered together for buriall. Or, I will gather them, to the end that I may disperse them. And they shall sorrow a little,] And but a little now, for the burden of the king of princes.] for the taxes and tributes exacted from them by the king of Assyria, (whose Nobles were Princes, 2 King. 18.24. Esay 10.) See 2 King. 15.19, 29. But all this is but a little: it is but the beginning of sorrows; it is but small drops fore-running the great storm; or as a crack fore-running the fall of the house. They shall sor∣row much more hereafter, when carried captive, and made a scorn to the scum of the people. See Deut. 32.42. Some read the whole verse, Yea, because they have hired among the nations, now will I gather them together: (for they have begun a little) because of the burden of the king of Princes. And they thus paraphrase it: Well may they bribe and hire, but this will be the end: The Israelites themselves shall fall by heaps; the nations whom they hire shall come so tumbling in upon them (as Esay told Ahaz, Esay 8.) Do you not see it pretily well begun already? Look upon the late example that is yet now fresh and bleeding before your eyes: so you will the better beleeve my threatning in that which is to come: I mean, the sacking and carrying away of the Tribes beyond Jordan, by Pul and Tiglath-Pileser. If you ask me the reason,The calling of the Jews. pag. 212. why God should be so angry with you? It is because you are so foolish, or so wicked rather, to send presents and tributes to the king of Ashur (who in the pride and vanity of his heart nameth himself the King of Princes, the mighty and most potent King) with the pilling, polling, and burdening of your Subjects. Verse 11. Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sinne,] Because he hath multiplied altars against Gods expresse command, Lev. 17.3, &c. Deut. 12.5, &c. Josh. 22.22. Jer. 11.13. and that, to sinne: as if it were on purpose to crosse and provoke the Lord to anger, by their superstitions and will-worship, and to despite him with seeming honours (for displeasing service is double dishonour) therefore he shall have enough of it, ere I have done with it. He shall be given up to a re∣probate sense: that going on from one sin to another, he may fill up his measure, till wrath come upon him to the utmost. Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur & ise. Idolatry is sinne with an accent, wickednesse with a witnesse, 1 King. 15.30, 34. & 16.2. 1 King. 12.30. & 13.35. and shall be punished accordingly: for so the Chaldee paraphraseth here; Because they have multiplied their altars for sin, the altars of their idols shall be their ruine: there is one Hebrew word for sin and pu∣nishment: sinne hales hell at the very heels of it, as One saith wittily. Polanus up∣on
this Text, hath these three profitable Observations. First, that as in the old Te∣stament, one onely altar was set up by Gods command in the Tabernacle and Tem∣ple: so also in the new Testament, we have no other altar but Christ, Heb. 13.10. Iren. lib. 4. contra haeres. cap. 34. Secondly, as the Israelites sinned in multiplying altars: so do the Papists most grievously, in that not content with Christ and his satisfactory sacrifice alone, they set up other altars, and bring in other expiatory sacrifices. Thirdly, as the Israelites made many altars to sinne, though they preten∣ded good intention and devotion: So the Papists at this day multiply altars (even hundreds in some one Church in Rome) to sinne, though they falsly pretend their good intention therein, and the preservation and augmentation of Gods service. Verse 12. I have written to him the great things of my Law,] Magnalia legis; there are also minutula legis, Mat. 5.22. both must be looked to: for though the Civilian say of his Law, De minutis non curat lex, the law takes no notice of small faults: yet it holds not true of the Law of God, which is spiritual, and must bee kept as the apple of the eye, Prov. 7.2. and observed in every point and part, nay in every punctilio and particle thereof. But to come to the words; Ephraim could not plead ignorance of Gods minde, for their many altars, and superstitions: Deus enim jure quaerat & queratur, for God might very well say and complain, as Prov. 22.20. Have not I written for thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge? and in the verse next afore, I have made known (my minde) this day to thee, even to thee. So here, I have written, sc. by my Pen-men and Secretaries, to him chiefly, and for his better direction in my service, that, he might walk therein by rule, and not at randome, (See Deut. 4.8. Psal. 147.29.) the great things, or excellent do∣cuments (the multiplicity or multiformity, saith the Chaldee) of my Law, or of my doctrine sapientiall, Prov. 13.14. which taketh in the Gospel too, that Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. But they were counted as a strange thing.] As not pertaining to them, as that wherein they were little or nothing concerned, as the narration of forraign affairs. Whereas men should read and regard the holy Scriptures, as they do the Statutes of the Land: holding themselves as much concerned and intended as any other: threatning themselves in every threat, binding themselves in every precept, blessing themselves in every promise, mingling the whole Word with faith in their hearts, and resolving upon the obedience of faith; as knowing that these are verba vivenda non legenda, words to be lived, not read onely: and that they should indwell in us familiarly, and yet richly, Col. 3.16. and we should be as inwardly acquainted with them, as any man is with his sister, or nearest allies, Prov. 7.4. All this the ra∣ther; First because God is the Authour of the holy Scriptures, both matter and words are his, 2 Pet. 2.21. he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since the world began: and he guided their hands in writing the Bible. How dare Papists then say, that they wrote it injussi without command from God. Secondly,Luke 1. because God hath written his Law for us, for our behoof and benefit, Rom. 4.23. and 15.4. The Scripture is Gods Epistle to us, saith Gregory. It is a lamp to my feet,Psal. 119.1 and a light to my pathes, saith David. Not a light that I see at a distance, a great way off; but a light held to my feet, that I may see my way in this land of Chabul, this dirty and dark world: and not lift up one foot, till I descry and finde sure foot∣ting for another, as those Psal. 34.6. Thirdly, because he hath written for us, the honorabilia legis, honourable and precious things, such as a man would fetch from China or the uttermost part of the habitable world upon his bare feet, rather then be without. David prefers it before gold and silver, Psal. 19.11. Solomon before pearls and rubies, Prov. 3.15. Moses before all the learning of other Nations, Deut. 4.6. The Scripture is the souls food, saith Athansius: the souls physick, saith Chrysostome: the invariable rule of truth, saith Irenaeus. It is saith Another, the Aphorismes of Christ, the Library of the Holy Ghost, the divine Pandects, the Wisdom of the Crosse, the Cubit of the Sanctuary, the Firmament of Faith, the Touchstone of Errour, &c. What reason then had Darbishire (Bishops Boners kins∣man and Chaplain) to say to Mr. Hawkes the Martyr, that he was too curious: for he would have nothing but his little pretty-Gods-book?Acts and Mon. And is it not sufficient for my salvation? said Hawkes: yes, said he, but not for your instruction. God send me the salvation (said Hawkes) and you the instruction. That the Scripture is full
and sufficient for both instruction and salvation, see 2 Time. 3.16, 17. and my Trea∣tise called the True Treasure. Has igiur nocturnâ versate manu, versate diurnâ, Psal. 1.2. Let there not, by infrequency or disuse, grow an alienation or strange∣nesse betwixt us and the holy Scriptures: but be ready in them, and have them, as Saul had his pitcher and spear at his bolster: as David had his chosen stones at hand in his scrip, &c. Luther wisheth all his own books burnt; because I fear, saith he, they hinder men from reading the Bible, that book of books; in comparison whereof all the books in the world are but wast-paper. After which, I tremble, saith he, to think of the former age, wherein many Divines spent so much time in reading Ari∣stotle and Averroes, and so little in reading the Book of God. Melancthon saith that he heard some preach upon Texts taken out of Aristotles Ethicks. Carolostadius was eight yeers Doctour when he began to read the Scriptures: and yet at the ta∣king of his degree,Joh. Manlius. being asked whether he had read the Decalogue, negitabat se hujusmodi librum in Bibliotheca sua habuisse unquam: he denied that he had ever had, or heard of any Book so called:Amam. in Antibar. praf. such a perfect stranger was he to the great things of Gods Law. And if the learned Doctours be thus bard and ignorant, what may we think of the poor misled and muzled multitude, that lie fast lockt up in the Popes dark dungeon, and are flatly forbidden to meddle with the Scriptures, lest they should be infected with heresie, or possessed with a devil, as some (say they) have been by that means? Verse. 13. They sacrifice flesh in the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat it;] q. d. They would seem not to have rejected the great things of my Law, nor to be such strangers thereunto; sith they were much in sacrificing according to the Law. But their hypocrisie is most hatefull:In decal. In that First, they offer (with Cain) Non personam, sed opus personae, as Luther saith; not themselves, but their bare sacrifices, Esay 66.3. which is but as a brainlesse head, and soul-lesse body: it is but flesh, as it is here called in contempt, and scorne. See the like, Jer. 7.21. Hos. 9.4. And think the same of all externall services; si careant animâ suâ, id est rect â in Deum fide, & erectâ in illum mente, if not performed in faith and obedience. Secondly, They pretended to serve God, when indeed they onely served their own bellies, as those, Rom, 16.18. sought their own ends, Phil. 2.21. catered for the flesh, Rom. 13.14. insigne donum quo afficior (as Luther Paraphraseth the text) carnem offertis quam vos ipsi voratis, i. e. A goodly gift it is that you give mee, viz. the flesh of your peace-offerings which your selves may feast with: and you therefore multiply sacrifices that you may gorge your selves with good chear. Now one egge is not more like to another, then these old flesh-mongers were to the Popish flesh-flies at this day. It was an honest complaint of one of them; We, saith he, handle the Scripture, tantùm ut nos pascat & vestiat, onely that it may feed us, and cloath us. And it is evident to all the world, that their Masses, pilgrimages, festivals vowed presents and memorials, &c. are onely to pamper their paunches: which made them so angry with Erasmus, and Luther, for medling. but the Lord accepteth them not,] How should he (say) when there was nothing but flesh, nothing but self in them. See the like, Jer. 4.10. Am. 5.22. Esay 1.10. where God telleth them, that their sacrifices were grievous and offensive to all his several senses, nay to his very soul too. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomina∣tion to the Lord, Prov. 15.8. yea though he bring it with never so good an intent, Pro. 21.27. how much more if he bring ex rapina holocaustum, a sacrifice of what he hath got by rapine and robbery? and so the Chaldee carrieth the sence of the former words: the sacrifices of mine offerings, quae collecta sunt ex injria, saith He, which were gathered and gotten by wrong-dealing: how then should the Lord accept them? now will he remember their iniquity,] Even while they are sacrificing: let them not think to blinde his eyes with the smoak of their offerings, to stop his mouth with their rich gifts, and donaries: to bribe him into a connivency: to expiate and set off their sinnes with their sacrifices: for God will remember them, and punish them. Yea, now will he do it, in the time of their holy duties: he will come upon them then in his wrath,Luke 13. as Pilate came upon the Galileans, and mingled their blood with their sacrifices. Sure it is that sin (brought into Gods holy presence) petiti∣ons
against the sinner, as Esther did against Haman, at the banquet of wine: picks out the time of prayer and other duties to accuse and call for vengeance.Esth. 7.6. Take we heed, lest while we are confessing our sinnes, (which yet we close with, and will not forsake) and judging our selves worthy to be destroyed, God say not, Out of thine owne mouth will I condemn thee, thou gracelesse person, that hast so much im∣pudence as to bring thy Cozbi into my presence, then; when all the people (as on a fast-day) are weeping before the door of the Tabernacle.Lev. 10.3. God will be sanctified of all that draw nigh unto him: one way or other he will be sanctified, either in them, or on them. Of such he saith, as Solomon once did of Adoniah,1 King. 1.5. If he shew himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of his head fall to the earth: but if wickednesse shall be found in him, he shall die. If any defile the Temple of God,1 Cor. 3. him shall God destory. they shall return to Egypt.] They had a minde to run thither for refuge: they sent also to So king of Egypt for that purpose, 2 King. 17.4. Instead of making their peace with God, they betook themselves to base shifts; and sought help of the creature. This is the guise of gracelesse men, when distressed.Rahab. But they shall soon have enough of Egypt, chap. 9.3, 6. Their strength (or their Egypt) had been to have sitten still, in expectation of help from heaven, Esay: 30.7.Deut. 28.6. and to have considered that the last and greatest curse denounced against their disobedi∣ence, was, And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt, &c. Verse 14. For Israel hath forgotten his maker,] Not more his Factour, then his Be∣nefactour, as 1 Sam. 12.6. the Lord made Moses, and Aaron, i. e. he advanced them to that honour in his Church. So our Saviour is said to have made twelve, when he ordained them to the Apostleship, Mar. 3.14. And the Apostle saith of Israel, that God exalted the people, when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, Acts 13.17. sc. to the priviledge of his peculiar people, the possession of the pro∣mised land, the custody of his Oracles, and services, &c. besides the many benefits and deliverances wrought for them. All which they are said to have forgotten. 1. Because they laid them not to heart, see Esay 57.11. they saw not God in them: 2. Because their lives were not answerable: they walked not worthy of such a God: but said (in effect) We are delivered to do all these abominations, Jer. 7.10. God challengeth remembrance, and well he may, Eccles. 12.1. for he hath created us for his glory, Esay 43.7. he hath formed us, yea he hath made us, (as it followeth there, and all that we might remember him) the word (made) is used for a degree of grace after creation. Those that are his workmanship, his attificiall facture crea∣ted in Christ Jesus (who is the beginning of this creation of God, Rev. 3.14.) unto good works, Ephes. 2.10. if ever they should forget God,. (which is the character of a wicked man, Psal. 50.22.) if they should forsake God that made them, and lightly esteem the Rock of their salvation; as Solomon did the Lord that had appea∣red unto him twice; if they should not prefer him above their chief joy,Deut. 32.15. or make him ascent above the head of their joy (as the Hebrew hath it, Psal. 137.6.) and set him over all, as Pharaoh did Joseph (causing Sun moon, and starres to do obeysance to him) I mean all their naturall, morall, temporall, and spirituall abilities to bee subject and serviceable to him, he would have an unanswerable action against them, and both heaven and earth would have cause to blush at their disingenuity, and un∣thankfulnesse. Let it ever be remembred, that of all things God cannot abide to be forgotten. and buildeth temples;] To God, no doubt; and yet because they worshipped him not in his own way, they are said to have forgotten him: So do Papists in all their structures, vowed presents, and memories (as they call them.) In king Ste∣vens time here, notwithstanding all the miseries of warre, there were more Ab∣beys built, then in an hundred years before. But who required those things at their hands? Christus opera nostra non tam actibus quam finibus pensat.Zanch. Now the end why those Temples and Monasteries were built, appears in stories to be pro remissione & redemptione peccatorum, pro remedio & liberatione animae: pro amore coelestis pa∣triae: in honorem gloriosae Virginis, in eleemosynam animae, &c. for remission of sins,Acts & Mon. pag. 1077. redemption of souls, honour of the Virgin Mary, and other superstitious ends and uses. and Iudah hath multiplied fenced cities:] As thinking thereby to fence them∣selves
against Gods wrath, to mott themselves up against his fire, that had burnt up the ten tribes, and threatened them. Strong cities and munitions may be lawfully built; but then their foundations must not be laid upon fire-works. If sin be at the bottom (as the voice from heaven is said to have told Phocas) though they build as high as heaven,Niceph. it will not do. Babylons thick wals and large provisions could not secure her from the enemy: Samaria held out for two or three yeers, but was sur∣prized at last by the Assyrian: so was Jerusalem by the Babylonians, and then by the Romanes, Esay. 22.8, 9, 10, &c. great fault is found with this people for their war-like preparations with neglects of God, vers. 11. and of deep and down-right humiliation, vers. 12, 13, 14. The name of the Lord is the strongest tower, Prov. 18.10. But cursed is he that maketh flesh his arm, that trusteth in men though ne∣ver so great, or means though never so likely, Jer. 17.5. those were never true to those that trusted them. The Jebusites were beaten out of their fort, though they presumed it impregnable. The men of Shechem were fired out, Judg. 9.49. so shall Judah be: for, I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof,] The enemy did this, but not without the Lord; who cannot book it that men should thrust in palaces and strong-holds: and as Luthyer well observeth, in this whole chapter is fully set forth whence it is, that strong Palaces and flourishing kingdoms come to nought; it is because men believe not in God, but trust to their own strength, Deut. 28.52. they fortifie themselves against an enemy, but do not parifie God; displea∣sure; who is himself a devouring fire, and can quickly quash all our forces, and con∣fute our confidences. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. REjoyce not, O Israel, for joy as other people,] Not as good people, for they have reason to rejoyce, and are called to it in both Testaments: joy is the just mans portion, but thou art naught all over, thou hast gone a whoring from thy God; who will shortly meet thee as a bear robbed of her whelpes, or as the jea∣lous hu band doth his adulteresse, Again, not as other bad people, for they may revel (rejoyce indeed they cannot) and be merry, after a sort: rejoyce they may in the face, as the Apostle phraseth it, and from the teeth outward: some kind of frothy and flashy mirth they may have (and let them make them merry with it, 'tis all they are like to have) but so mayest not thou; because thou hast had warning sufficient, and hast known thy masters will, but not done it: yea, thou hast done that abominable thing that other nations never yet did, Jer. 2.11.12. thou hast changed thy God for those that are no gods; thou hast forsaken the fountain, and run to the cistern, &c. which is such a prodigious wickednesse, as the very heavens are astonished at, and are horribly afraid, in Grac. , to dance a gal∣liard. yea, desolate; mourning, and as it were melting at this horrid act. Shall the heavens mourn, and wilt thou rejoyce? yea, fetch a frisk, or dance a galliard for joy, as the word signifies: what if other nations do so, when they have got the better of their enemies, or gathered in their harvest, Es. 9.4. or otherwise have all things go well with them? yet revolted Israel had no such cause, unlesse they were upon better tearms with God. Say that this were the time when Joash beat Benhadad thrice over, and recovered the cities of Israel, 2 Kin. 13.15. Or say it was, when he took Amaziah, and brought all the spoyle of Jerusalem to Sa∣maria, Chap. 14.13.2 Chron. 28. or else when Pekah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day, and carried captive two hundred thousand, with much spoyle: these were times of great mirth and Jollity, 'tis confessed. But, are there not with you even with you sins against the Lord your God (as the prophet Oded there bespeaks them) and should not those sins be bewailed? Besides, are they not your brethren whom you have slaughtered and captivated? and can you have any joy of such a conquest, of civil wars that are — nullos habitura triumphos, that are such a misery as all words (how wide soever) want compasse to expresse? Hear what the pro∣phet mos (who was Hosea's contemporary) saith to this, Ye which rejoyce in a thing of nought, (so he calleth their victories present prosperity, pomp and pride) which say, have we not taken to us horns by our own strength? Behold, I will raise up against
you a nation, O house of Israel, that shall tame you, and take you a link lower (as they say) so that your laughter shall be turned into mourning, and your joy into heavinesse. There is ever a snare (or a cord) in the sin of the wicked,Jam. 4.9. viz. to strangle their joy with; but the righteous sing and rejoyce, Prov. 29.6. For thou hast gone a whoring from thy God.] That's a foul businesse, and may well damp thy joy. Sins are the snuffes that dimme our candlestick, the leaven that sow∣reth our passe overs, the Sanies of a plague-sore that threatneth our very life. And, whereas the sinnes of others are but rebellions against God, the sins of his professed people are treacheries: they go a whoring from their God, desuper Deo suo, velomis∣so Deo suo, from under their God, or laying aside their God; casting him, as it were, into a by-corner. Hence those pathetical compaints in Jeremy, Chap. 18.13. Ask ye now among the heathen, who hath heard such things? the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing; filthiness in a stewes is nothing so odious as filthiness in a Virgin. And again, Chap. 32.30. The children of Israel, and the children of Judah have onely done evil from their youth. God takes evil so hainously from them, as if they had never done him any good service all their dayes; or as if they were the onely sinners upon earth: they were so much worse, because they ought to have been bet∣ter then other nations. Now God expects our sorrows should be proportionable to our sins; Rejoyce not therefore, but (by a Liptote) weep and houl for the miseries that shall come upon you. Thou hast loved a reward (or a harlots hire) upon every corn-floor,] i. e. Thou hast prostituted thy self to a loose Idolatry;Mercedem meretriciam. like to a common whore that goeth a whoring up and down the threshing floors. Hence Boaz his fear lest it should be noised that Ruth had lain at his feet, and that a woman came into the floor, Ruth. 3.14. Or else he meaneth (saith Diodate) some particular kind of idolatry used in the time of harvest and threshing; as if they would have acknowledged their increase to come by their idols goodnesse. Such was that of the Metapontines, of whom Strabo storieth, that when they had had a good harvest, and were grown rich there∣by, they dedicated to Apollo at Delphos  an harvest of gold. See more of this Chap. 2. with the Notes. Verse. 2. The floor and the winepresse shall not feed them,] Culpam poena premit comes, Punishment attendeth sin at the heeles. They had abused their plenty, and a∣scribed it to their idols: therefore shall they be cut short either in their store, as Hag. 3.6.10. and 2.16. or in their strength, as Hos. 4.10. and 8.7. (See Chap. 2.8.9. with the Notes.) One way or other their hopes shall be frustrated, the creature shall lie to them, and not answer their expectation. The new wine shall fail in her,] Mustum mentietur ei, see the like phrase, Hab. 3.17. Es. 58.11. Job. 41.6. they shall come to the corn-floors and wine-presses, as men come to a lottery with heads full of hopes; but depart disappointed, with their hearts full of blanks. As they have lied to God (idolatry is nothing else but a large lie,) and dealt deceitfully with him in the covenant: so shall all things lie to them, and not answer their hopes. Look how a certain Prince paid a false traitour (who for a summe of money had betrayed his countrey to him) in false coyn; so shall it fare with such as falsifie with God: he will blast their hopes, and curse their blessings, cut them short in the height of their expectancies, strike them in the things that their hearts are most set upon, the new wine shall lie to them, and so set them a howling, Joel. 1.5. Vers. 3. They shall not dwell in the Lords land,] Because they would not live by the Lords lawes; they shall therefore be turned out of his house (so this land was called Chap. 9.3.) as rebellious children, that are a disturbance and a disgrace to their fathers family: they shall hold no longer, as tenants of him the chief Land∣lord, because so backward to send a lamb (as rent or an homage penny) to the ruler of the land, Esay. 16.1. they were tenants at will, and held upon condition of obe∣dience, Levit. 18.26. it was divided amongst them by lot: Ioshua divided it a∣mongst them, and left none to himself. The people gave him a portion, and he was content with it; though it were but a mean one in the barren mountains, as Hierome noteth. He had the promise that God would never leave him no forsake him: and he well knew, that if he trusted in the Lord, and did good, he should dwell in the land and be verily fed, Psal. 37.3. He and Caleb were of another spirit, and fulfilled
after God; therefore they onely of all that generation entred the promised land, the Lords land: which because Moses might not do, it was a great grief to him. These Idolaters here are threatened to be cashiered and cast out of this good land, and to have their pleasant land laid desolate, to be spewed out, as the Canaanites had been before them, Levit. 18.28. and so consequently to be deprived of Gods fa∣vour, help, and protection; and altogether dispriviledged, yea, disinherited. This was an heavy judgement to them, and must be a warning to us, that yet live in the bosome of the Church, and under the joyful sound; that we forfeit not our present enjoyments, that we sinne not away our precious priviledges, as the seven Churches and others have done. Alterius perditio tua sit cautio. We stand upon our good be∣haviour, as they did; See Deut. 30.19.20. But Ephraim shall return to Egypt,] which they ought to have been sensible of as a punishment long since threatned, Deut. 28. ult. (see Hos. 8.13. with the Note) though now, of their own accord, they returned to it, for fear of the Assyrian (whom by their false-dealing they had justly incensed) yet that should not shelter them, but Gods hand would find them out, and fetch them thence into captivity. Oft they had been warned not to go down to Egypt for help; and they must needs be hard bestead that fled thither. True it is, that the Egyptians are renowned in hi∣stories for a thankful people, and the Israelites are charged not to abhor an Egyptian, because they were once strangers in his land,Diod. Sic. l. 2. Dent. 23.7. and had tasted of his courtesies. But withall, they could not but know how hardly the Egyptians had dealt with their fore-fathers, and how treacherously also with them; and that they ought not de jure, to have returned thither upon any tearms. Sed Deus quem destruit dementat, and although here they were resolved for Egypt, yet Chap. 11.5. God resolveth o∣therwise; and voluntas Dei necessitas rei, his will shall stand, when all's done. And they shall eat unclean things in Assyria,] Things forbidden by the law, as swines-flesh, &c they shall be forced to eat or starve: they must not look for liberty of conscience in Assyria, nor have that favour to make a difference of meat as Daniel had, Chap. 1. but as Ezekiel baked his barley-cakes with mans-dung: Even so said the Lord, shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the heathen, whither I will drive them. So haughty they were grown, that their fathers house could not hold them; therefore they shall be giad of huskes with hogs, (as that prodigal) they shall eat as the heathens, sith they would needs act as the heathens. They thought it was hard with them in their own land, when the floores and the wine∣presse would not feed them, vers. 2. But now it is farre worse, when forced by hard hunger, they are glad of any meat, be it clean or unclean: neither have they any more mind to be so merry with other nations, as vers. 1. or cause so to be: their stomacks craving and themselves (with Drusus in Tacitus) ready to eat the stuffings of their bed; or (with the Jewes in the last siege of Jerusalem) not onely to feed upon dogs, rats, cats, &c. but the leather of their shooes, girdles, targets, bridles, yea,Pontanus Hegesippus. oxe-dung was a precious dish unto them, and the shreddings of pot-hearbs cast out and trodden under foot, &c. Vers. 4. They shall not offer wine-offerings unto the Lord,] Non libabunt, multò minus litabunt, they shall not have wherewith to offer sacrifice, when they are in their banishment, Chap. 3.4. much lesse to serve God with cheerfulnesse, to exhi∣larate his heart with their wine-offerings, Judg. 9.13. to chear up themselves with the wine and oyle-offerings, Num. 15.5. which were symbols, and signes of the Merit and Spirit of Christ (for the Ceremonial Law was their Gospel, it was Christ in figure) and the deprivation of them threatened the deprivation of grace and glory. Now therefore, sith such a sad condition, and such sinking of spirits abi∣ded this people, what reason had they to rejoyce with joy as others. Neither shall they be pleasing to him,] Heb. they shal not be sweet or mingled; for as sweet and sowre maketh the best sawce, so the mixture of things of divers qua∣lities maketh the sweetest confections, and most pleasing to the palat: but so shall not be these mens wine-offerings to God, if any they should present; but sowre and savourlesse. He is now resolved to take another course with them, to glorifie him∣self in their calamity, and to give unto them another while the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath, Rev. 16.19. that is, to delight as much in their mise∣ry, as a man would do in drinking off a bowle of generous wine.
Their sacrifices shal be unto them as the bread of mourners,] i. e. as funeral-feasts (whereof read Jer. 16.7, 8. Ezech. 24.17.) made ad levandum luctum, eaten in heavinesse by those that were polluted by the dead, and therefore altogether un∣fit for sacrifice; sith God loveth a cheerful service, and will not have any of his come off heavily. See Levit. 10.19. Deut. 13.7. and 26.14. Mal. 2.13. where those unkind husbands are blamed, for causing their wives, when they should have been cheerful in Gods service, to cover the Lords altar with tears, with weeping and with crying out, so that he regarded not the offering any more. So Ezr. 9.5. that holy man, though till then he sat astonied at the sins of the people, yet he arose from his heavinesse at the evening sacrifice; for he knew, that even sorrow for sin might be a sinful sorrow, if unseasonable and sullen: for it sowres a mans spirit, and makes his services unacceptable to God. For their bread, for their soul shal not come into the house of the Lord,] Their bread, That is, their meat-offering or other sacrifices, (see Mal. 1.7. with the note) for their soul, that is, for themselves (soul is oft put for the whole person) shal not come, rightly and in due manner unto divine acceptation, into the house of the Lord, it should not have come into the Temple while it stood, and the Levitical service was orderly performed: how much lesse shall it be accepted now in a strange land, being the bread of mourners. Others by the bread for their soules understand their natural and necessary sustenance. He speaks, say they, of that meat-offering, Levit. 2.5. appointed for a spiritual use, yet called here the bread for their life or liveli∣hood, because God esteemed it no other then common meat. Tarnouius by the house of the Lord here understandeth the Church, as Chap. 8.1. and 9.5. and 2 Tim. 2.20. The door of this house, saith he, is Christ, Joh. 10.9. and door-keeper the holy spirit, ibid. vers. 3. the foundation and corner-stone Christ, Eph. 2.20. the wall is God, Zach. 2.9. the stewards the ministers,1 Cor. 4.1. Eph. 2.19. those of the houshold the Saints, &c. What will ye do in the solemn day, &c.] q. d. How will ye do to laugh and leap then, as ye do now? vers. 1. How will you be able to support your selves, to keep your hearts from dying within you? when you call to mind and consider your for∣mer solemnities and festivities, which now (alas!) in your captivity you are utterly deprived of? Time was when you went with the multitude to the house of God, with the voyce of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holy-day, Psal. 42.4. with dancing, eating, drinking and joy, Deut. 16.14, 15. Judg. 21.19.10. But now the scene is altered; your singing is turned into sighing, your mirth into mourning, your joy into heavinesse; and you must needs hold your selves so much the more miserable, that you have been happy. The Epicures indeed held that a man might be chearful against the most exquisite torments. 1. In consideration of his honesty and integrity,Ex praeteritc rum voluptatum recordatione. Cic. de finib. l. 2. Senec. de benef. l. 4. c. 22. 2. In consideration of those pleasures and delights that formerly he had enjoyed; and now cheared up himself with the remembrance of. This last is a very slight and sorry comfort indeed. The former hath much in it; for a good man keeps every day, holy day, said Diogenes: and can be merry without musick, saith another Philosopher. He hath a merry heart, or good conscience, which is a continual feast; and is bound to rejoyce evermore, 1 Thes. 5.16. and to keep the feast in all countries,. 1 Cor. 5.8. the Calender of his whole life is crowned with continual festivals; and he is the happiest man, and may be the merriest if he but understand his own happi∣nesse. But this (alas) was not the case of these woful caytives and captives. They had sinned away all their comforts; and what with the sad remembrance of their for∣mer enjoyments, and with the sense of their present servitude, they had little mind to keep holy-day. Hence this passionate exclamation, what will ye do, &c? God had threatned before, Chap. 2.11. to take away their feast-dayes, new-moons, sab∣baths and solemnities; but they heeded him not, tanquam monstra marina Dei verba surda aure praeterierunt: therefore now God fulfilleth what he ad forethreatned,Lam. 2.. and calleth, as in a solemn day, his terrours round about them, what they were wont to do in their solemn dayes and festivals, may be seen, Num. 10.10. what we do or should do at least, upon our Lords day-sabbaths, (the delight of every good soul) we need not be told. Let us take heed, lest by profane violating or carelesse observing that holy rest, with all its solemnities, we deprive not our selves (as these Israclites did) of such a precious priviledge: God gave us a good warning, in that
the first blow given the German Churches was upon the sabbath-day; which is there so ill sanctified,Alsted. in Encyclop. Dike of Consc. pag. 276. that if it should be named according to their deserving of it, Doemoniacus potius quam Dominicus, saith Alsted, it should be called not the Lords∣day, but the Priests-day rather. It is very remarkable, that upon that day was Prague lost, and with it all opportunity of hearing, singing, publique praying, communica∣ting on that high and honourable day, Esay. 58.13. Vers.Abierunt, i.e. obierunt. 8.For lo they are gone, because of destruction,] They are gone either into E∣gypt for refuge, or into the state of the dead, they are gone out of the world. They shall perish by destructiou, so some render it. When God had said in the former verse what will ye do, they should have faln down before him and said, What wilt thou have us to do, Lord? we know not what at all to do, but our eyes are toward thee. This had been right, and thus they might have disarmed Gods indignation: but they had other carnal shifts, and thought they could tell well enough what to do, and whi∣ther to go: whereupon they were so fully bent, that the prophet here reports them gone already. For lo they are gone, and got to Egypt; as divers of them did doubt∣lesse during the siege, and after the sack of Samaria, when they were forced to shift for themselves as they could: but did they so escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O God, saith David, and it is not more a prayer then a prophesie, Psal. 56.7. and this people had the proof of it. Egypt shall gather them,] either for punishment, or for burial, as Ezech. 29.5. Jer. 8.2. so that they fled but out of the smoak into the fire; and in running from death they ran to it: as the Historian saith of those poor Scots at Muscleborough∣field, who running for their lives,S. J. Heyw, in Edw. 6. p. 35. so strained themselves in their race, that they fell down breathlesse and dead. Memphis shall bury them,] Lest they should please themselves with vain hopes of return to their countrey, he shews that that shall never be; but they shall lay their bones in a strange land. Memphis (anciently called Noph, Isay. 19.13. or, (as some will) No, Nahum. 3.8. at this day Grand Caire, famous for the Pyramides and the kings sepulchres) Memphis, I say, a principal city of Egypt shall be a Kibroth∣hattaavah to you, a place of sepulchres; especially then, when Nebuchadnezzar, sent by God (who giveth him Egypt as his pay for his paines at Tyre) shall come and smite that land, and deliver such as are for death to death, and such as are for the sword to the sword, &c. Jer. 43.11. The pleasant places for their selves, nettles shall possesse them,] Heb. shall possesse them as their inheritance; so that the Israelites nor their heirs shall ever repossesse these pleasant places for their silver, i. e. where they either laid up their silver (their repositories or counting houses) or where they laid out their silver, either in costly buildings and sumptuous furniture, or else in idols and statues placed therein to their no smal charge & delight. These shal be ruined and over-run with nettles, thorns and thistles, a token of horrible desolation, Esa. 32.13. and 34.13. Note hence, that as God spareth a place for a few good men found therein, (as he would have done Sodom, which is now a place of nettles and saltpits, Zeph. 2.9.) so a fruitful land bringeth he into barrennesse, (or saltnesse) for the wickednesse of them that dwel therein, Psal. 107.34. witnesse Judaea that land of desire, Ezek. 1. ult. that gar∣den of Eden, Joel. 2.3. that glorious land, Dan. 11.16. yea, glory of all lands, Ezek. 20.15. now wofully waste and desolate: so is Grecia, formerly so farmous for armes and arts: so are some parts of Germany, and so may England soon be (with∣out the greater mercy of God, by a miracle of whose mercy, and by a prop of whose extraordinary patience we have hitherto subsisted) I say, England, whose vallies now are like Eden, whose hils are as Lebanon, whose springs are as Pisgah, whose rivers are as Jordan, whose walls is the Ocean, and whose defence is the Lord Jehovah. Vers. 7. The dayes of visitation are come,] A visitation that is like to prove a vex∣ation; for every transgression and disobedience, that is, Omission and commission, shall receive a just recompence of reward from the God of Recompences (so he is called Jer. 51.56.) whose eyes behold, his eye-lids trie the children of men, Psal 11.4. the former points out his knowledge, the latter his judgement, or his critical descant in his visitation or inquisition, the dayes whereof are set, Stat suae cuique dies, and Is∣raels dayes are come, are come, it is repeated for more assurance, as Babylon is fallen,
is fallen, certò, citò, penitus: and as Ezek. 7.5, 6, 7. the Prophet tells them, The end is come, is come, is come; and so some ten or twelve times, that he might beat it into them, and awaken them them out of the snare of the devil. The wickeds hap∣pinesse will take its end surely and swiftly: but its hard perswading them so: And the Jews, as they were ever noted for obstinate, and overweening, so to this day they are light, aeriall, and Satanicall, apt to work themselves into the fools para∣dise of a sublime dotage. But they shall know it to be so as I have said, by wll experience, that Mistresse of fools. Israel shall know it,] sc. to his sorrow, he shall pay for his learning, buy his wit,Oculos incipit aperire mori∣endo. Plin: open his eyes (as the mole doth) when death is upon him, roar and look upward, Esay 8.21. as the hog doth when the knife is at his throat. O Lord (saith the same Prophet, Chap. 26.11.) when thy hand is lifted up (and thy hand is a mighty hand, Jam. 4.10. it falls heavy) they will not see, they wink wilfully, or seek strawes to put out their eyes withall, as Bernard hath it: but they shall see, will they nill they,Festucam qua∣runt unde ocu∣los sibi eruant. and be ashamed of their former oscitancy, or rather obstinacy, when that hand of God which was lifted up in threatning, shall fall down in punishing, and the fire of thine enemies shall devur them: How much more at that last and great visitation, that terrible day of Retribution, when they shall answer for all, with flames about their ears. Tunc sentient magno suo malo, then shall they feel to their eternall wo, the truth of all the threatnings, which till then they heard, and read, as a man doth an Almanack-prognostications of winde or foul-weather, which he thinks may come to passe, and it may be not: And give nothing so much credit to them, as the Prior of S. Bartholomewes in London did to an idle and addle-headed Astrologer,Holinshead in 1524. when he went and built him an house at Harrow on the hill to secure himself from a sup∣posed flood, that that Astrologer foretold. The Prophet is a fool, &c.] , a naughty man; the Hebrew word here is evil, and signifieth a rash and unadvised fellow, that is headstrong and headlong: such were their false prophets that promised peace when warre was at their gates, and made all fair weather before them, when the tempest of Gods wrath was even bursting out upon them; such a tempest as should neve be blown over. These should now appear to be fools, or rather Impostours, that had brought the credu∣lous people into a fools paradise. the spiritual man is mad,] Heb. the man of the spirit, or ventosus, the windy man, that uttereth vain and empty conceits, humani cerebelli Minervas, the brats of his own brain, light, aery Nothings, the disease of this age, full of flashes and figments, idle speculations of men of corrupt mindes, and destitute of the truth. These pretend altogether to the spirit, and would be thought the onely spirituall men; as the Swenkfeldians (whom for their ill savour, Luther called Stenck∣feldians) who bewitched many with those glorious words (which were ever in their mouthes) of Illumination, Revelation, the inward and spiritual man, &c. and enti∣tuled themselves, the Confessours of the glory of Christ. So the Entusiasts and Ana∣baptists, what boast make they of the spirit: professing that they will deliver no∣thing but what they have immediately revealed to them from heaven. Muncer (their ringleader) wrote a base book against Luther (which he dedicateth to king Jesus) wherein Lutherum flagellat quod Enthusiasmorum spiritu careat & nil nist carnalin sapiat, he falls foul upon Luther, as wanting the spirit of revelation,Scultet Annal. pag. 239. and one that savoureth nothing but carnall things? All his followers look upon Luther as more pestiferous then the Pope: and for Calvin they say, (and I have heard it) that it had been happy for the Church if he had never been born. It was their pra∣ctise of old (as Leo Judae observed in his epistle before Bullingers book against the Catabaptists) and is still, to discourage and disparage Christs faithfull Ministers all they can, as carnall, and not relishing the things of the spirit: the right off-spring they are of those ancient Hereticks called Messalanii (the same with the Eu∣chites, and Enthusiasts) who in the year of Christ 371. professed to be wholly made up of the spirit: gave themselves much to sleep: and called their dreams and wild phantasies, prophesies and revelations. for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.] Heb. the great Satanical hatred, that thou hast born against God and thy neighbour; but especially Gods faithfull prophets, whom thou heartily hatedst for their plain dealing; as Ahab did
Michaiah, because he never spake good to him. It is very probable that Michaiah was that disguised Prophet who brought Ahab the fearfull message of displeasure and death, for dismissing Benhadad; for the which he was ever since fast in prison, deep in disgrace. Lo this is the worlds wages. Truth breeds hatred, great hatred, as the text hath it, devillish hatred, and this is through the multitude of mens iniqui∣ties, the overflow of sinnes, which wretched men hold so dear to themselves, that they cannot but rage against those that declaime against them, and proclaim hell∣fire against their hatefull practises: they cannot stand still to have their eyes pickt out; how should they? say. Now for such, what wonder is it if God in justice give them up to the efficacie of errour that they may beleeve a lie, sith they would not receive the love of the truth,Augustin. in loc 2 Thess. 2.11? ut infatuati seducantur, & seductiju∣dicentur, that being infatuated they may be seduced, and being seduced, perish? what wonder also if he deliver them up, as to strong delusions, so to vile affections, and abominable actions, that they may receive in themselves that recompense of their errour that is meet, Kom. 1.27? What marvell, if men that will not endure sound doctrine be left to seducers? if those that have itching ears meet with clawing Preachers?2 Tim. 4.3, 4. if such as turn away their ears from the truth, be turned to fables and fopperies? It is for the multitude of mens iniquities, and especially for their great ha∣tred to the truth, that the Church is so pestered with Impostours (2 Pet. 2.1, 2.) who bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. Do not our modern seducers so amongst us, when (among other portentous opinions held by them) they stick not to affirm, that Christ is a carnall or fleshly thing: That those that are grown Christians may go to God immediately without a Christ: that Christ did not rise again, &c. Others contemn him by the notion of the man dying at Jerusalem — O horrible!Dr. Homes his character of the present times. 200. Time was when the Popes were so notoriously naught, as to speak thus basely of Christ; to deny, or at least doubt of the immor∣tality of the soul, the resurrection of the body, &c. and then a poor Popeling cried out, that the sinnes of that Synagogue were so great, as that it deserved not to be ruled by any other then Reprobates. Certain it is, that God plagues contempt of the truth (that great Gospel-sin) with an inundation of errours and enormities. Verse 8. The watch-man of Ephraim was with my God,] i. e. The false prophets above mentioned, pretend themselves to be with God, and for him; speak, look, and act as if they came out of Gods bosome, or were so many Angels newly dropt from heaven: take upon them glorious titles to that purpose, as Watch-men, Prophets, spiritual-men, &c. These titles proved snares to many that enquired not narrowly into them: and especially because they preached placentia, soothed men up in their sinnes, sowed pillows under their elbowes, dawb'd with untempered morter, &c. Hence silly people lent both their ears to them (as birds do to the lure, or whistle of the fowler) and were soon ensnared. the prophet is as a snare of a fowler, &c.] Seducers have their pithonologie, their art to perswade before they teach, as the Valentinians had: they are cunning and insinuate as Zanchy testifieth of Laelius Socinus, that, by propounding questions, he sought to ensnare him,Zanch. de trib. Eloh. praefat. semper interrogans quasi cuperet doceri, labouring to drop into him certain dangerous principles of the Samosatenian heresie. This slie trick they have learned of that old manslayer the devil, who by these Emissaries of his catcheth simple people, as the fowler doth the bird, by casting baits: or as the fisher, by one fish catcheth another, that he may feed upon both. And hatred in the house of his God.] Satanicall hatred (as in the former verse) which these wicked watch-men do stir up against the true Prophets, and faithfull ser∣vants of God. Diodate carrieth it thus, These wicked watch-men are the chief oc∣casion of Gods hatred, and of the rejection of his people, who are as it were his family. Luther, Wigandus, and others set this sence upon the whole verse. (taking the former part to be spoken of the good watch-men) Those ancient watch-men of Ephraim were joyned with my God, and wholly for him: but those at this day are a snare; &c. and if there be any yet left of the former stock, they have left off to do good, and are become hatefull, as Psal. 36.2, 3. their iniquity is found to be hatefull. There are that render the words by way of exclamation thus, Orem odio∣sam & abominandam in domo Dei! Oh hideous and hatefull! oh how hath the devil bestirred him, to stir up such Seducers, to do so much mischief among Gods people!
There are that interpret these two Verses, not of false Prophets, but of the true, who were looked upon as fools and mad men, by the mad world; ever beside it self in point of salvation, &c. It is not for nought that Rivet saith, Hi due versus satis sunt intricati. these two verses are very intricate. And of this eight verse Luther saith, that the brevity thereof hath caused obscurity. Drusius also saith, Locus iste difficilior est quam vulgus existimat; This text is harder, then most men imagine. Verse 9. They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the dayes of Gibeah:] The people are as bad as possible, shamelesly, lawlesly wicked: nothing better then those sonnes of Belial the men of Gibeah, that were sunk to sins bottom:Judg. 19. totally transformed into sinnes image, extreamly flagitious, so that a worse people could hardly be found upon the face of the earth. As it was given in answer to a godly man who desired to know of God, why Phocas was set up for Emperour?Cedren. because there could not be a worse man found, and that the sinnes of Christians required it. Lipsius maketh mention of one Tubulus (about Tullies time) who was so despe∣rately wicked, ut ejus nomen non hominis sed vitij esse videretur, that his name seemed to be the name not of a man, but of wickednesse it self.Lips antiq. lection. Lo such were these men of Gibeah, Judg. 19. nothing behind Sodomites in sinne: as Samaria now was nothing behinde them, and is therefore fitly coupled with her sister Sodom, Ezek. 16.46. The reason of all which is here given, their wicked watch-men: ac∣cording to that, Esay 3.12. qui te ducunt, seducunt. They which lead thee, cause thee to erre: and again, Esay 9.16. The leaders of this people cause them to erre; and they that are led of them are destroyed. It is thought that the Gibeah here mentioned, and to which this verse relateth, was the same which Josh. 21.17. is called Gebah; which was a city given to the Priests, who being lords and owners of the Town, were (probably) the ring-leaders of the rest in that matchlesse villany;Rom. 1.32. and so were of the number of those worst of sinners, who knowing the judgement of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not onely do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. Now will he remember their iniquities, and visit their sinnes.] Now that they had filled up the measure of their fathers sinnes, Matth. 23.32. nay sought to out∣sinne them, Et puduit non esse impudentes (as Austin saith somewhere) God would forbear them no longer. Let this bhoted, by such as being told of their vile and vicious practises, plead that they do but as their forefathers did. Certainly if the times be as ill as they were heretofore, they are even for that cause much the worse; and God will the sooner remember and visit, pay wicked men for the new and the old. See chap. 8.13. Verse 10. I found Israel like grapes in the wildernesse,] Where any thing is good and sweet, because in a barren and solitary place. Hence they are said to have sucked honey out of the rock, Deut. 32.13. that is, water as sweet as honey, because in such necessity. The Vine and Fig-tree are of so great account, as that Jotham in his parable brings in the trees, offering the soveraigne power to them, Judg. 9.10, 12. To these two noble and usefull trees, and to their most seasonable and com∣fortable fruit doth the Lord here compare Israel: to grapes in the wildernesse,Mic. 7.1 and to the first-ripe figs, quae delicatis in summo sunt precio, which are counted great dainties. Our Saviour came with great desire to the fig-tree. Matth. 21.19. his soul desired the first ripe fruits: and though they had not been full ripe, he could have been glad of them, even of the first-fruits of the fig tree, at her first-time, as it is here, in primordio ejus, of those untimely fruits which the fig-tree casteth when shaken of a mighty winde, Rev. 6.12. By this expression then is set forth Gods dear and free love to Israel, when he found him in a desert land, in the wast howling wildernesse: he compassed him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye, Deut. 32.10. All this and more he did for them, ex mro motu, out of pure and unexcited love, according to his own heart, according to the good pleasure of his will, he loved them because he loved them, Deut. 7.7, 8. and 10.14. in the wildernesse especially, where they grieved him fourty years together, and tempted him ten times, Num. 14.22. But God had said of Israel, He is my sonne, even my first-born, Exod. 4.22. and so, higher then the kings of the earth, Psal. 89.27. He had chosen him for his love, and now loved him for his choice. This
sonne of his he called out of Egypt, to keep a feast to the Lord in the wildernesse, Exod. 5.1. that is to serve him, Exod. 4.23. to serve him acceptably, Heb. 12.28. to set up his pure worship according to his own prescript in the Mount, Exod. 25.40. This was altogether as delightfull to God, as grapes in the wildernesse are to a wea∣ried parched traveller. And this the rather, because it was the kindnesse of their youth,Ʋno anno se∣pties fructus sufficit. the love of their espousals, which was as the first ripe of the figs, in the first time, at the first bearing: for the fig-tree bears twice a year: and the Egyptian fig-tree seven times a year, saith Solinus. Now the first-ripe-fruits are Ladies-meat, we say, or longing-meat. Gods soul doth even long after the first-ripe-fruits, Mich. 7.1. as we prize even Nettle-buds, when they bud out first. If the Vine do but flourish, the Pomgranates bud, the tender grapes appear, Cant. 6.11. & 7.12. he will pour his spirit upon the seed, and his blessing upon the buds, Esay 44.3. Hee liketh not those arbores autumnales, Jude 12. that bud at latter end of harvest: he made choice of the Almond-tree, Ier. 1.11. because it blossometh first. So he cal∣led for first-fruits of the trees, and of the earth, in the sheaf, in the threshing-floor, in the dough, in the loaves: yea for ears of corn dried by the fire, and wheat beaten out of the green ears, Lev. 2.14. to signifie how pleasant unto him is the primrose of our age. but they went to Baal-peor,] See Num. 25.3. with the Note. Heb. they went in to him, which obscoenum quid & turpe denotat, as Gen. 16.2. so Psal. 106.28. They joyned themselves also to Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead, that is, sacrifices offered to the infernall Gods, or to Pluto the Devil (whom the Phoenici∣ans called Moth, or Death) in the behalf of the dead. and separated themselves,] Heb. Nazarited themselves, ad religiosè colendum: they became Votaries, to that shame,] i.e. to that shamefull and abominable Idoll, that blushfull Priapus,Tarn. qui referebat viri pudendi speciem: and whose worshippers are brought in saying, Nos, pudore pulso, stamus sub Iove, coleis apertis, &c. , we rake a dunghill (as Cyril speaks in like case) in discour∣sing of such dunghill-deities. Isidor interpreteth Baal-peor, simulachrum ignomi∣niae, an image of ignominy: and most sure it is, that idolaters, left off their Idols in deepest dangers, shall be ashamed of their expectation of help from them, Jer. 3.19. and 11.13. and their abominations were according as th loved.] Or, according as they listed, so some interpret it: or, according as they loved the Moabitish women more or lesse, so they worshipped their Idols: Solomon did the same. Or, they became as detestable as their very Idols, which they loved and worshipped. Or, I abominate them as much now as ever I loved them before: and how much that was he had shewed in the beginning of the Verse. Now there is nothing that goeth more to Gods heart, then the losse of his love upon an unthankfull people. He had healed their back-slidings in Egypt (where they had worshipped Idols, Ezek. 16.) hee had loved them freely, and immensely. Now therefore that they should so slight such a love, to go after such a shame, and so to undo themselves for ever; this was monstrous ingratitude, this was an unsufferable injury. Verse 11. As for Ephraim, their glory shall flee away as a bird,] Heb. Ephraim by a Nominative absolute. Or, O Ephraim, as with a sigh, or a shriek, for grief and horrour of their ensuing calamity, exilium, excidium, & exitium. The Lord af∣flicts not willingly, nor grieves the children of men, Lam. 3.33. It goes as much against the heart with him, as against the hair with us; witnesse this patheticall ex∣pression. See also chap. 11.8. Their glory, that is, their God, as in the next verse. Or,Hier. Epist. 7. their children, as in the next words. They worshipped Baal-peor for fruitful∣nesse; but it shall not do: For either they shall be punished with barrennesse, or else with a luctuosa foecunditas (as Hierom saith of Loeta, who buried many children) a dolefull fruitfulnesse. their glory shall flee away as a bird,] Suddenly, swiftly, irrecoverably, shall their numerous posterity (which they looked upon as themselves multiplied and eterni∣zed) be cut off, be snatcht away by the hand of death: so that (Rachel like) they shall refuse to be comforted, because her children were not: or as Cratisiclea in Plutarch,Plut. in vi. Cleom. who seeing her dear children slain before her, and her self ready to be served in like sort, uttered onely this word, Quò pueri, estis profecti? Poor chil∣dren, what's become of you?
From the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.] In all these states shall the curse follow them close: Either they shall not conceive, or die in the womb, or be stifled in the birth: they shall all prove Icabods. It is God that gives strength to conceive, as he did to Sarah, Hannah, Elizabeth, &c. It is he that formeth us in the womb, and that by the book, Psal. 139.15, 16. and pre∣serveth us there, Job 10.8. when neither we can shift for our selves, nor our parents provide for us. It is he that taketh us thence, Psal. 22.9, 10. as a nurse or midwife doth the new-born babe. It is he that keepeth us in the cradle, and in childhood, when we are subject to a thousand deaths and dangers: for puerilitas est periculo∣rum pelagus: it is a just wonder that any childe attains to maturity. But if wicked mens children do so, as oft they do, (for they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes, Psal. 17.14.) yet it follows, Verse 12, Though they bring up children, yet will I bereave them,] If his chil∣dren be multiplied, it is for the sword, and his off-spring shall not be satisfied with bread, Iob 27.14. This was fulfilled in Ahabs seventy sonnes, beheaded together, 2 King. 10.6. in whom he had vainly promised himself the establishment of his house, which God had threatned to root out: In Iehu and his posterity after the fourth generation: Those Romans that went out against the enemy at the Porta scelerata (as it was thereupon called) and never returned again: and that Eckins Raschachius a German Captain, at the siege of Buda, Anno 1541. whose sonne a valiant young Gentleman, being got out of the army without his fathers know∣ledge, bare himself so gallantly in fight against the enemy, in the sight of his father and the Army, that he was highly commended of all men, and especially of his father, that knew him not at all. Yet before he could clear himself, he was compas∣sed in by the enemy, and valiantly fighting, slain. Raschachius exceedingly moved with the death of so brave a man, ignorant how near he touched himself, turning about to the other Captains said, This worthy Gentleman, whatsoever he be, is worthy of eternall commendation, and to be most honourably buried by the whole Army. As the rest of the Captains were with like compassion approving his speech, the dead body of the unfortunate sonne rescued, was presented to the most miserable father; which caused all them that were there present to shed tears.Turk. hist. But such a sud∣den and inward grief surprized the aged father, and struck so to his heart, that af∣ter he had stood a while speechlesse, with his eyes set in his head, he suddenly fell down dead. Yea, wo also to them when I depart from them,] This is indeed worse then all the rest: this is that onely evil spoken of by Ezekiel: hell it self is nothing else but a separation from Gods presence, with the ill consequents thereof: and the tears of hell are not sufficient to bewail the losse of that beatificall vision. How miserable was Cain, when cast off by God? Saul, when forsaken of him? David, when de∣serted though but for a few moneths? Iob for a few years, Suidas saith seven? While God was graciously with him, and prospered him, he was Iobab, (that same men∣tioned Gen. 36, 34, as some think) but when under sense of Gods absence, contra∣cted into Iob. See the like, Gen. 17.5. Ruth. 1.20. His desertion was far more comfortable then Davids: it was probationall. onely, but Davids penall, for chastisement of some way of wickednesse. O lay we hold upon God (as the spouse doth upon her beloved) and cry as the Prophet did, Lord leave us not.Jer. 14.9. If he seem to be about, and his back be turned, cry aloud afrer him, as the blinde man in the Gospel did, till Iesus stood: set up thy note, as Micha did after his lost idols, Iudg. 18.24. Ye have taken away my Gods, saith he, and what have I more? as if he should have said, I esteem all that you have left me as nothing, now that my gods are gone. Jerusalem the joy of the whole earth pleased not Absalom, unlesse hee might see Davids face. God was no sooner gone from Miriam, but the leprosie ap∣peared in her face. But of this before. Verse 13. Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place:] And therefore pleaseth himself as not forsaken of God. But He maybe angry enough with those that yet outwardly prosper: As he was with the old world buried in security:Herod. l. 1. Plin. l. 6. cap. 26. with sodom, who had fulnesse of bread, and abundance of idlenessE: with the land of Shinar (where Babel was built, Gen. 11.) fruitfull beyond credulity, as Herodotus and Pliny testifie, with Tyrus a maritine and magnificent city, planted in a pleasant
place, in the very heart of the Sea; as Venice is at this day, mediâ insuperabilis undâ, environed with her embracing Neptune, to whom (as the ceremony of her throwing a ring into the Sea implies) she marrieth her self with yearly Nuptials, and hath for her Motto, Nec fluctu, nec flatu movetur, Nor windes, nor waves can stir her. Of the pomp, pride, and populousnesse of Tyrus read Ezech. 26, 27, & 28. chapters. Lo such a one was Ephraim, when ripe for ruine, near to an utter downfall. What can be more fair and flourishing then a corn-field, or vineyard, a little afore the harvest, the vintage? Physicians say, that the uttermost degree of bodily health is next unto sicknesse. Glasse, or other metals cast into the fire, shine most, when ready to melt and run. This was Tyrus case, this was Ephraims, plea∣santly planted, but marked out for destruction: as a Carpenter cometh to a Wood, and with his Ax marketh out the fairest trees for felling. Ephraim is the worse be∣cause he seeth Tyrus yet prosper. But God will take that from heathen Tyrus, that he will not take from Ephraim: and the sun-shine of prosperity doth but ripen the sins of them both for divine vengeance. They shall bring forth children to the murtherers.] As to Gods executioners: and so shew themselves not parents, but parricides: because they betray their children (as Babel did, by her idolatry, Psal. 137.8. and Esay 13.8.) into the hands of the enemy. Wherein they are more cruell then that false School-master in Italy (mentioned by Livy and Florus) that brought forth his scholars (the flower of the Nobility and Gentry there) to Hannibal: who if he had not been more mercifull then other∣wise, they had all been murthered. But what shall we say of such wretched parents, as bring forth children to that old man-slayer the devil? and how shall such undone children curse their carelesse parents in hell, throughout all eternity? If the Lord also could say of those poor children that were sacrificed to Moloch (the Chaldee paraphrase understands this Text of those children) Thou hast slain my children, and delivered them, to cause them to passe thorow the fire for them (namely for the images of the foresaid idols) Ezek. 16.27. what will he say, or rather what will he not say, to those bloody parents, that carry their children with them, to Sa∣tans slaughter-house? Verse 14. Give them O Lord: what wilt thou give?] This question implieth abundance of affection in the Prophet, praying for this forlorn people devoted to destruction. It is the property of gracious spirits, to be more sensible of, and more deeply affected with the calamities that are coming upon the wicked, then those wic∣ked ones themselves are: as Daniel was for Nebuchadnezzar, whose dream hee had interpreted,Dan. 4. and as Habakkuk was for the Chaldeans, whose destruction hee had fore-prophecied, Hab. 3.16. Hoseah likewise (out of great commiseration of Ephra∣ims direfull and dreadfull condition) sets himself to pray for them; though him∣self seems set at a stand, and in a manner non-plust, that he cannot well tell what to ask for them. God once made a fair offer to a foul sinner, even to Ahaz, that sturdy stigmatick, Esay 7.11. Ask thee a signe of the Lord the God: ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. But Ahaz said, (churiishly enough) I will not ask, neither will I try the Lord, ver. 12. he would none of Gods kindnesse, which yet the Lord there heapeth upon him verse 14. that where sin abounded, grace might superabound. Had our Prophet had but half such an offer, or any the least such encouragement, oh how gladly would he have embraced it, how hastily would he have catch at it, as those Syrians did at Ahabs kind words, 1 King. 20.33? But he, considering the severity and certainty of Gods judgments denounced against them, vers. 12, 13. and being much amazed thereat, sets himself to intercede and make request for his deplored countreymen; as Samuel did for Saul rejected by God, 1 Sam. 16.1. as Paul did for the obdurate Jews, Rom. 9.3. And because he saw that he could not obtain of the impartiall Judge of the world, to let go such an im∣penitent people altogether unpunished, he begs for them, that of two evils they may suffer the least: and rather bring forth no children at all, or children that may die as soon as born (this had been threatned vers. 11, 12.) then bring forth children to the murtherer: It being the greatest misery that can befall a tender hearted parent, to see his dear children butchered before his eyes, as Zedekiah and Mauricius the Emperour did: and before them both the king of Edom, whose eldest sonne, was by the king of Moab sacrificed upon the wall, in his fathers sight, 2 King. 3.27. Amos 2.1.
Thus Rabbi Kimchi giveth the sense of this text: Give Lord, what thou wilt give? viz. that they may suffer in the womb, or at least in their infancy, that which they should otherwise suffer by the enemies sword: Confer, Jer. 20.18. Luk. 23.23. Eccles. 4.2. Job. 3. The prophet knew well that God is never so bitterly bent a∣gainst a people or person, but that something he will yeeld to faithful and fervent prayer, Mat. 24.20. Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus. Vers. 15. All their wickednesse is in Gilgal,] We have had the prophets prayer: Followes now the Lords answer in this and the following verse, where we have the former threats repeated, to shew that God was unchangeably resolved upon their ruine; and that first for their Idolatry, secondly, for their other vile practises, thirdly, for the apostasie of their Princes: All this here. Their Idolatry was the worse, be∣cause committed at Gilgal, where God had done much for their forefathers: See the Note above on Chap. 4.15. The quality of the place addes much to the great∣nesse of the sinne, Esay. 26. In the land of uprightnesse they will deal unjustly, Esay. 25.10. the faithfull city is become an harlot, Esay. 1.21. Esay. 5.7. he looked for judgement, but behold a scab, The devil desireth to set up himself in such places, as have been formerly eminent for Gods sincere service, as Gilgal once was, 1 Sam. 10.8. and 11.15. for the ark of the covenant was there, which these Idolaters had not. So in the holy land, (as they still call it) which is possessed by Mahometans, and Papists: So Wittenberg, where Luther first began to reform, is now deformed by divers errours and heresies, as Polanus observeth. Wilkinson against the Familists re∣ports the like of Colchester in Essex. For there I hated them,] Angry I was with them before, and grieved for their o∣ther misdoings: but their idolatry hath enraged me with an holy hatred of them, and that there, where I shewed greatest love to their sorefathers. God thinks the worse of such places wherein Idolaters rest and roost: like as he thinks the better of the towns and houses, where his faithful servants inhabit, as Esay. 49.16. their wals are ever before him. For the wickednesse of their doings I will drive them out,] Revenge and expulsion is the next effect of hatred. There is a great deal of other wicked doings, where idolatry (that wickednesse with a witnesse as it is here stiled) is set up. Surely of this abominable thing we may well say as Saint James doth of discord; where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work, Jam. 3.16. But God will not endure such doings in his house: David would not in his, Psal. 101. Solomon enter∣tained Jeroboam into his house & service, because he saw the young man was meet for the work, 1 King. 11.28. but he proved a mischief to and against his house. Many now adayes scruple not to entertain and harbour such as are serviceable, though other∣wise their religion be either a popish puppet and calf worship, or a flat irreligion. These have little of God in them. I will drive them out of mine house, saith he, I will love them no more,] A fearful sentence, like that Jer. 16.13. I will shew them no favour: this was worse to them, then their captivity there threatened. Ephraim had a great deal of outward peace and prosperity, but love they had none; because none of those graces that flow from election, and accompany salvation. These are Gods love-tokens, that all must court: But oh I take heed (saith one) if thou add'st any more to thy wickednesses, lest that this dreadful sentence be pronounced in heaven against thee, I will love thee no more, Heb. I will adde no more to love thee. All their Princes are revolters,] Col sarehem sorerim, an elegancy past englishing.. Dan. Hist. of Eng. fol. 207. the Princes were all rebellious and refractary, uncounsellable, unperswadable (as the Seventy render it) like that king of Scotland that would seldom ask counsel, but never follow any: so wedded he was to his own will. Elati superbiâ volebani su∣periores esse verbo, saith Luther upon this text. Jeroboam-like they would stretch out their hand against a prophet, that should crie against their altars,1 Kin. 13.4. and deal plainly with them, as Hosea here doth: testifying to their faces that they were all Apo∣states, and made Israel sin. Princes should be the Lord-keepers of both tables of the Law; as it was written upon the sword of Charles the Great:Decem pracep∣torum custos Carolur. But when they are
naught, as here, the people take after them. Principis vita censura est & cynosura. Vers. 16. Ephraim is smitten,] As a tree that hath received a deadly wound, or that hath the bark pulled off it, so that the sap cannot find the way to the branches: or that is blasted, as the fig-tree in the Gospel was by Christs curse; and as a vine smitten by great hailstones, and beaten down to the ground. The Lord shall smite Israel, saith another Prophet, as a reed is shaken in the water, and he shal root up Israel, &c. 1 King. 14.15. root and branch in one day. The root is dried up, they shal bear no fruit,] The root of the righteous shall not be moved, Prov. 12, 3. The root of the matter is found in me, saith Job. Chap. 19.28. the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. Esay. 6.13. as a teyl-tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, ib. The Duke of Florence gave for his ensigne a great tree with many spreading boughes, one of them being cut off with this posie, Vno avulso non deficit alter Aureus.Virg. But it is otherwise with the ungodly; as it was with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.14. nay, worse; for not so much as a stump of their roots is left in the earth, Vers. 15. but they are written in the earth, Jer. 17.13. written childlesse, Jer. 22.30. their root is dried up, the parents shall perish; they shall bear no fruit, beget no children, which are the fruit of the womb, Deut. 28.11, 18. Luk. 1.42. Doegs doom shall befall them, Psal. 52.5. God shall destroy thee for ever; he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah. Yea, though they bring forth,] as Ahab did seventy sonnes, after that God had threatened his utter extirpation, following the work of generation so much the rather; see the note on verse 13. Yet I will slay,] for it is God that lets in, and sets on the enemy; it is he that kil∣leth and maketh alive, 1 Sam. 2.6. Even the beloved fruit of their womb.] Heb. their desires, or their desireable ones,Valete mea de∣sideria, valete. Cic. ep. fam. l. 14. ep. 2. their dearest children, called by Tully also his desideria. The Latines seem to have their filius a son, from  beloved; there is an Ocean of love in a fathers heart:Tres vomicas tria carcinoma∣ta. Sueton. though the more he loveth, the lesse he is loved sometimes, (as David by Absalom) and is sure if he belong to God. to be crossed in his earthly Idol. Children are certain cares but uncertain comforts: they may prove, as Augustus his three chil∣dren did, whom he called his three ulcers or cankers, &c. Vers. 17. My God wil cast them away,] My God, not their God, for they are cast-awayes and Apostates: see the like, 1 Iohn. 5.17. and learn to stick to God the closer, when others start from him; & to secure our own interest in a general defecti∣on, by siding with God, and subscribing as here the prophet doth, to his perfect righteousnesse in the rejection and destruction of reprobates. Wil cast them away] with disdain and detestation, as vile and execrable. He will do it, saith the prophet here, not without a great deal of grief, as finding that God was fully resolved, and would not alter. The eternity of Israel will not he, nor re∣pent;1 Sam. 15. for he is not a man, that he should repent, saith Samuel to Saul, that cast∣away and it is very dreadful: as indeed it is for any wicked men to have such as have interest in God, to declare against them; sith the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psal. 25.14. and their sentence is not to be slighted. Gods messengers e∣specially, out of their acquaintance with their masters proceedings, can foresee and foretel a punishment. Because they did not hearken unto him,] Haec not abilis est sententia, This is a no∣table sentence, saith Luther upon the text; and worthy to be written upon all our walls and windows. Death came into the world by the ear, so must life: for it is, Hear and your soules shal live; and they that will not hear the instruction of life, are doomed to destruction, as were Eli's sonnes, 1 Sam. 2.25. and Amaziah, 2 Chro. 25.16. A heavy ear is a singular judgement, Esay. 6.10. an uncircumciled ear a forerunner of ruine, Jer. 6.10, 11. O pray God to pull off that filthy foreskin and to give us an hearing ear, (that way to wisedom) an understanding heart, such as Solomon begged, 1 King 3.9. Pray, that he would bore our ears, as Psal. 40.6. and make the bore big enough, that we may not onely hear, but hearken; listen as for life, hear and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord hath spoken it, Jer. 13.15. when God hath spoken once, let us bear it twice, as David did, Psal. 62.11. he preacht over the Sermon again to himself at home. We must do with the words
directions, as we do with oyl to a stiffe joynt; rub and chafe them on our hearts by deep and frequent meditation and prayer: lest else we hear with these in the text. Because they did not hearken unto him, they shal be wanderers among the nations,]Gen. 4.12. Heb. Nodedim: Cains curse shall befall them. A fugitive and a vagabond shal I be upon the earth, but could not wander so wide as to misse of hell; nor flie so far as from his own evil conscience. Lo, this is the case of these wandering Jewes, a dis∣jected and despised nation exiled out of the world by a common consent of all peo∣ple, till God turn again their captivity as the streams in the south, till he gather the out-casts of Israel. CHAP. X. Vers. 1. I Sracl is an empty vine,] Heb. an emptying vine; losing her fruit, and so deceiving the owner. How can Israel but be empty of all good, of all fruits of the spirit, when he will not hearken unto God, nor dwell under the drop∣pings of a powerful ministry? when he is cast off by God,Chap. 9.17. who fils his people with the fruits of righteousnesse: and is not a wildernesse a land of darknesse unto them? Jer. 2.31. when his root is dried up, Chap. 9.1Phil. 1.11. and all his juyce and strength runs out into leaves, so that is (frondosa vitis (as the vulgar renders it) a leavy vine; such as are our profligate professours, and carnal gospellers, and such as was Saint James his solifidian, that empty fellow, as he calleth him, Chap. 2.20. when,. last∣ly, the holy Spirit (those two golden pipes, Zach. 4.) empties not into his candle∣stick the golden oyles of all precious graces, as from two blessed olive branches? The Vine and the olive (two of the best fruit-trees) grow best together, saith Me∣lanchthon. If Israels heart be divided from God, as vers. 2. and hath not his fruit found in him, as Chap. 14.8. what marvel if he prove (as Nahum. 3.10.) empty and void, and waste; and though (as verse 2.) the Lord turn away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and mar∣ried their vine branches? He beareth fruit to himself,] As he beareth fruit in and from himself (like the ivy, which though it clasp about the oak, and sometimes kils it, yet brings forth all its berries, by virtue of its own root) so he beareth fruit for himself, or to himself. Profit, pleasure, and preferment is his Trinity: and corrupt self is all these in unity. He fasteth to himself, as those hypocrites, Zach. 7.5. he prayes, hears, confers, gi∣veth alms, &c. cut of sinful self-love. In all that he doth sibi soli velificatur, he seeks his own ends onely; as the Eagle, when he flieth highest, hath his eye on his prey. In parabola ovis capras suas quaerit: like the fish in the Gospel, either he is dumb, or hath nothing but silver in his mouth, he is a notorious self-seeker, he bears fruit to himself: he sacrificeth to himself as Sejanus did. As Prometheus is fabled to have stollen fire from Jupiter; so the false Israelite would cozen God of heaven, if he could tell how. Spira confessed that he used prayer onely, as a bridge to bring him to heaven; and therefore he despaired of acceptance, as well he might: for how should God relish such sorry hedge-fruits? how should he say of such clusters of Gomorrah, Destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it? The good soul, as she bears all her fruit in Christ, Ieh. 15.2. so she keeps all her fruit for him, Cant. 7.13.Es. 65.8. and cries out, Propter te Domine, propter te. As all his springs are in her, so all she has and is, is for him; and if she had more and better, she could beteem it him. Hence it is, that when he comes into his garden (upon her invitation) Cant. 4.16. to eat his plea∣sant fruits, he gathereth his myrrhe with his spice, he eateth his honey with his hony∣comb, as it were crust and crumb together, Chap. 5.1. He takes in good part the bet∣ter and worse-performed services; he passeth by failings in the manner, where the heart is upright, for the main: wicked men present also some kind of fruit, (as the oak bears some kind of apples and acorns, but they are not mans meat: swine indeed will haunch them up; so the devil likes well enough of these self-fruits) but they make not to Gods palat. Delicata res est Spiritus Dei, our oaken apples will not down with him. Self must be strained out, and God set up,Tertull. that ye may be called Trees of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord, that he alone may be glorified,
Esay 61.3. being filled with the fruits of righteonsnesse, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.11. according to the multitude of his fruit, he hath increased the altars,] Juxta uber∣tatem, exuberant simulachris, saith the Vulgar elegantly; but yet short of the Ori∣ginal, where there is a dainty Agnomination, and a double Polyptôton. For the sence: the Prophet as he had accused Israel of emptinesse, and selfishnesse, so hee doth here of unthankfulnesse, in abusing Gods plenty to the promoting of idola∣try; as if God had hired them to be wicked. See the like before, chap. 2.8. with the Note: and consider how far against the ingenuity of a Christian it is, to bee least for God, when he hath most from him: when his own turn is served, then to turn his back from the Authour of all his good: to do as the Moon, that gettest fur∣thest off the Sun, when she is fullest of his light. according to the goodnesse of his land,] Idolaters desire to be where there are good lands, fruitfull fields: that they may lavish upon their Mawmets; that they may so beautifie, or (as the Hebrew word here is) bonifie their images, as Jezebel did her head with tires and brave dresses, 2 King. 9.30. Their sorrows shall be multi∣plied that hasten after another God, or, that endow another God, and give gifts to him, as that Text may be rendred, Psal. 16.4. What excessive cost the superstitious pa∣pists bestow upon their idols, or images, (which are one and the same, as we see here) and especially upon their ady of Loretto, the Jesuite Tursellinus hath set forth to the world. And why they so much desire and endeavour to recover En∣gland (praying for it, as is to be seen written on the gates of their Colledges, Jesu, Jesu converte Angliam: fiat, fiat) the reason is evident: it is a good land, and would easily yeeld them goodly images, stately altars, &c. England was wont to be called, the Popes asse, and his puteus inexhaustus, his pit of treasure, that could ne∣ver be drawn dry: he was wont to say, that he could never want money, so long as hee could hold a pen in his fingers, to write to England. He received here-hence yearly,Job. Manl. loc. com. p. 492. above nine tunne of gold. Now, according to what they received, they expended upon their images. What a shame is it then for true worshippers, that there is no proportion between their increases for God, and their encreases from God: that those that are rich in this world,1 Tim 6.17, 18. are not rich in good works: that they lay not by for pious and charitable uses, according as God hath blessed them, 1 Cor. 16.2. but that they should be the richer the harder: as children that have their mouthes full, and both hands full, yet will part with none, but spill it rather. It is observed, of men that grow very far, that they have so much the lesse blood. And so the fatter many men are in their estates, the lesse blood, life, and spirits they have for God. Verse 2. Their heart is divided,] sc. From God; whose soul therefore is justly disjoynted from them, Ier. 6.8. They professed to worship the true God, and yet they transferred the honour due to him alone upon dumb-idols: they halted between two, and would needs serve two Lords: but God would none of that. Be the gods of the Heathen good-fellows, saith One, the true God is a jealous God, and will not part stakes with another: The double-minded man is not for his ser∣vice: for he will be served truely, that there be no halting; and totally, that there be no halving. Good therefore and worthy of all acceptation is the counsell of St. Iames to such,. chap. 4.8. Cleanse your hands ye sinners: and purifie your hearts ye double-minded, or ye cloven-hearted. Out with the corruption that cleaveth to your hearts: and then there will be a constancy and evennesse in your mindes, mouthes, and manners: which is absolutely necessary to such as draw nigh to God in holy duties, and the contrary abominable, Esay 29.13. Now shall they be found faulty,] Sinners against their own souls, procurers of their own ruth, and ruine. And this they shall so clearly be convinced of (as afflicti dat intellectum, smart makes wit) that they shall cry out with Josephs brethren, We are verily guilty, Gen. 42.21. and conscience awakened shall answer as Reuben in the next verse, Spake I not unto you saying, Do not sin: (O do not this abomina∣ble thing) and yee would not hear? Did not the Prophets foretell you what would be the fruit of your idolatries? did they not even slit up your hearts with the sa∣crificing knife of Gods word, (sharper then any two-edd sword) and lay all your evil thoughts naked and open,. or dissected, quartered, and cleft in the back-bone
(as the Apostles word signifieth, Heb. 4.13.) but ye would not then be convinced of all, and falling down upon your face worship God, as 1 Cor. 14.24, 25? Now you are found faulty, or guilty, and cry peccavi: or now you are, that is, shortly ye shall be wasted and desolated, as some render it: or now shall they die,Interibunt. (so the Vulgar) shall they perish: how should they do otherwise whose heart (that seat of life) is cut in twain, and whom the jealous and just God will cut in twain;. tear∣ing their souls from their bodies by death, Satans slaughter-man, and appointing them their portion with hypocrites, Matth. 24.51. He shall break down their altars.] He, that is God, my God, chap. 9.17 for this Chapter is a continuation of that (though Gualter make it the beginning of Hosea's seventh Sermon) He, that excellent He, that Aph-Hu, 2 King. 2.14. Even He, proved by five reasons to be one of Gods Attributes, by Mr. Weemss in his Exposition of the Morall Law, Part. 1. pag. 162. Vide sis. Others render it thus: It shall break down their altars, Ipsum cor. It, that is, their Heart, (which indeed is the next Antecedent) and happy had it been for them, if their heart divided from their wickednesse, had been active in breaking down their Altars in the Prophet Esay's sence, chap. 27.9. as a fruit of their true repentance: By this therefore, that is, by their affliction sanctified, shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit (and good fruit too) to take ay his sinne: When (in te∣stimony of his sound repentance, and self-abhorrency for former idolatry) he makes all the stones of the altar as chalk-stones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up. But it appears not any where that Israel was so well-af∣fected though grievously afflicted: that his divided heart prompted him to any such holy practise. Rather it brought ruine upon him, to the decolling of his altars, and spoyling of his images (which he so doted on, and delighted in) and so might well say to him, as Apollodorus the tyrants heart did,. who dreamed one night that he was flea'd by the Scythians, and boyled in a caldron: and that his heart spake to him out of the kettle; It is I that have drawn thee to all this: thou mayest thank me for all. Verse 3. For now they shall say, We have no king,] sc. to do us good: he is no better to us now, then a king of clouts: he cannot protect us, or deliver us out of the hands of our enemies. If we crie unto him, as she did, Help O king; he must needs answer as there, If the Lord do not help thee, whence I help thee?2 King. 6.16, 27. Vain is the help of man now that God sets against us. Feared him we have not, and now help us he will not. Est ergo interrogatio negantium & desperantiuns, saith River. This is the question, not of penitentiaries (as Lyra thinketh) but of such as despair, and deny that help can be had, either from God, whom they have slighted, or from their king, who is over-matched; as Asa was by the Ethiopians, when he came forth against them, with an Army of five hundred thousand, but was encountred by an Army of a thousand thousand, the biggest, I think, that we read of in the book of God, 2 Chron. 14. and was therefore fain to crie, Help us O Lord our God, for we rest in thee: and in they Name, not in our own strength, we go against this mul∣titude, ver. 11. because we feared not the Lord,] We trembled not at his word, as chap. 9.17. and now it hath taken hold of us, Zech. 1.6. See the Note. By our prophanenesse we have enraged God against us: by our creature-confidence, wee have made him our enemy: and now, all too late, we acknowledge our implety, we bewail our fol∣ly: for what should a king do to us? what can he do for us? more then weep over us, as Xerxes did over his Army? cry Alas, Alas, that great city Babylon, &c. as those kings her paramours, Rev. 18.9, 10. wish they had never raigned as Adrian,Felix si nan imperitassent. &c. Once the cry of this people was, Nay, but we will have a king, and they had him: but no such great joy of him. After that again, they would have a king of their own choosing, Ieroboam I mean; and he proved a singular mischief to them, as did likewise all his Successours. They doted upon a king, and put their trust in Princes; but they soon found that in them there was no help, Psal. 146.3. that they could not rescue them out of the punishing hands of the king of kings, the living God. Verse 4. They have spoken words,] Bubbles of words, great swelling words (as 2 Pet. 2.18.) thereby thinking to bear down, and outface the Prophets, and the
godly-party. They speake violent words, (as the Chaldee hath it) robustious words, as if they would yet carry it (though their king could not help them) by confederacies, and covenants, confirmed with oathes: holding that rule of the Pri∣scilianists for Gospel (as they say.) Iura, perjura: secretum prodere noli: And that maxime of Machiavel, that Religion it self (in contracts and covenants) should not be cared for; but onely the appearance, because the credit is an help, the use a cumber: but all these are but words, saith the Prophet, and those but winde: they shall do them no good, because without God. Quid nisus? risus: conamina? inania, vana: Conventus? ventus: foedera? verba mera. Swearing falsly in making a covenant,] A foul businesse, whether it be under∣stood of covenanting with God (whereof before) or with the Assyrian, with whom they broke, to ingratiate with So king of Egypt, 2 King. 17. How God plagueth perjurers, &c. covenant-breakers, see Zach. 5.3. and Mal. 3.5. with the Notes. He will appoint the sword to avenge the quarrell of his Covenant, Lev. 26.25. as he did upon Jerusalem, not leaving there one stone upon another: upon those seven golden candlesticks, long since broken in pieces for their breach of co∣venant: upon Bohemiah, that seat of the first open and authorized Reformation, whatever will yet become of England, &c. thus judgement springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.] Heb. Of my field, where I have plowed and made long furrowes, fitted for good seed, wherein I looked for judgement, but behold oppression; for righteousnesse, but behold a crie, Esay 5.7. This root of bitternesse, these stalks of hemlock (that venemous weed, full of deadly poyson) is bad any where, but worst of all, when found in Gods field, noted for an habitation of justice, and mountain of holinesse, Jer. 31.23. Where should a man look for justice, but where holinesse is profes∣sed?Luther. sith primo pracepto reliquorum omnium observantia praecipitur, the second Table of the Law is included in the first: yea the keeping of all the ten is enjoy∣ned in the first commandement?Velejus. Of Rome it was anciently said, that all the neigh∣bouring cities were the better for her example of singular care to do justice. It should be so said of the city of God: where when judgement is turned into worm∣wood, and the fruit of righteousnesse into hemlock, as Amos 6.12. Well it may grow till it be ripe in the field, but God will not suffer it to shed, to grow again, but cuts it up by a just and seasonable vengeance. Verse 5. The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear,] sc. When God shall break the necks of their altars, and spoil their images, as verse 2. They feared not God, by their own confession verse 3. therefore they are full of base fears, whereof the true fear of God would have freed them, Matth. 10.28. Hee that feareth God needeth not fear any other thing, or person, Psal. 112.7. but can say with David, My feet,Horat. that is, mine affections, stand in an even place, that is, in an equable te∣nour: Impavidum ferient ruinae, I shall rest in the day of trouble, when he cometh up against the people, (saith holy Habakkuk. chap. 3.16.) I shall rejoyce in the God of my salvation: when those that fear not God shall be at their wits end: yea they shall be mad for the sight of their eyes that they shall see, Deut. 28.34. Because of the calves of Beth-aven,] Calves in the feminine gender, Shee-calves, by way of contempt and derision,S. H. Blounts voyage. 122. Grand Sign. Serag. 199. Virg. Aeneid. 9 Hom. Il. 8. In loc. as Hierom noteth: as Esay 3.12. Women rule over them. The Jewes at this day look upon women as a lower creation, and suf∣fer them not to enter into the Synagogue. As among the Turks they never go to Church, neither is there any reckoning made of their religion. The Heathens had the like conceits and expressions: O Phrygiae, neque enim Phryges—, &c. We cannot speak over-basely of idols: the Scriptures calleth them, excrements, Nothings, &c. Luther wonders that Jeroboam knowing how ill the people had sped with their golden. Calf in the wildernesse, should yet dare to set up two at Dan and Bethel (both here called Bethaven, or houses of iniquity:) and a
man might as well wonder, that having as great a miracle wrought before him in the drying up of his hand, as St. Paul at his conversion, yet was he no whit wrought upon. But if God strike not the stroke, if the Spirit set not in with the means, all's to no purpose. Who would think that men should ever be so void of reason, as to trust in that which cannot save it self from the enemies hands? as these calves of Beth-aven, and as the Papists breaden-god, brought into the field by the rebels of North-folk, in King Edward the sixths dayes: neither was there lacking masses, crosses, banners, candlesticks, with holy-bread, and holy-water plenty, to defend them from devils and all adversary power: which in the end, neither could help their friends, nor save themselves from the hands of their ene∣miees: but eft-soons both the consecrated god, and all the trumpery about him,Act. and Mon. 1190. was taken in a cart, and there lay all in the dust; Leaving to them a notable lesson of better experience, saith Mr. Fox, who relateth it. For the people thereof] i. e. of the calf, to whom they had dedicated themselves; as the Moabites are called the people of Chemosh, Num. 21.29. and Turks, Maho∣metans. For all people will walk every one in the name of his God; and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever, Mic. 4.5. Do mourn over it,] As those women wept for Tammuz, Ezech. 8.14. that is, for Osiris king of Egypt, whose image they had adored, as those Rev. 18. wailed o∣ver that old whore, when they saw her a broyling; as Idolatrous Micah cried after his gods, Judg. 18. and as the people of the East-Indies in the Isle Zeylon, having an apes tooth which they had consecrated, gotten from them, mourned, and offered an incredible masse of treasure to recover it. Should not men then mourn after the sincere service of God, and hold it dear to their soules? And the Priests thereof that rejoyced in it] Heb. the Chemarims, or Chimney-chaplaines, that were all black and sooty with the smoak of the sacrifices, and were therefore called Chemarim or Camilli, as affecting a black habite sanctimoniae ergo; or having black brand-marks upon their bodies, in honour of their Idols, whereof these haply were the Hierophantae, or masters of the Ceremonies, and made a great gain thereof the ground of their joy: for it is , gain so called, because it delights the heart. For the glory thereof.] i. e. of the calf, the beauty and bravery of its worship, all is now utterly gone. Vers. 6 It shall be also carried unto Assyria, &c.] As no small part of the spoyl, shal this Deafter be carried captive: being so far unable to save others, that he cannot save himself. For a present to king Jareb,] (See Chap. 3.13. in signum omnimodae victoriae. so Aeneas, Ilium in Italiam portat, victosque penates.Aeneid. 1. though in another sense; yet they must needs be poor despicable deities,See Isay. 46.2. that fall into the enemies hands. The Ark indeed fell into the Philistines hands: but the Ark was not Gods, but onely a signe of his presence, which God suffered so to be ta∣ken, for a punishment to his people, and for a plague to his enemies, whom he smote in the hinder parts, and so put them to a perpetual reproach, Psal. 78.66. Ephraim shall receive shame] because they hoped and harped upon better things, Job. 6.20. O pray, with David, that our hopes be not disappointed: that they make us not ashamed, as Paul speaketh; that they prove not as the spiders web,Rom. 5.5. curiously framed but to catch flies onely; or as the childes hope, who catcheth at the shadow on the wall which he thinks he holds fast, or at the butterflie, which if he catch, he hath no such great catch of. And Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsels] of their impolitick plots and practises, in dividing themselves from Davids house, and setting up unwarranted worships, calling in forrain helps, &c. Their own counsels have cast them down, Job. 18.7. because they were acted by false principles, and aymed at their own corrupt ends. They took counsel, but not of God; and covered with a covering, but not of his spirit, that they might adde sin to sin, Esay. 30.1. They made not the Word the man of their counsel, as David did, Psal. 119.24. neither prayed they
as he, Psal. 73.24. Guide me Lord with thy counsel, and so bring me to glory. In a word, they perished by their own counsels, Hos. 11.6. whereby they provoked God, and so were brought low, by their iniquity, Psal. 106.43. and then they were ashamed of their own counsel, they saw themselves befooled by their carnal reason, and by that which they call Reason of State, which indeed is treason, unlesse it be seaso∣ned with Justice and Religion. Vers. 7. As for Samaria, her king is cut off, as the feam upon the waters,] An apt simile (whereof this prophet is full) Her king, (not her idols, as some sense it) though gotten into Samaria, a strong city, so well victualled and fortified, as to hold out a siege of three years continuance, yet shall be cut off, or silenced as Chap. 4.7. as the foam upon the waters, bulla evanida, more weak then water, whereof it ariseth, and whereby it is wherried away, and cannot resist: or, as a bubble blown up by every small wind, and as easily blown out again; it no sooner appears but it disappeares. Lo such are the greatest kings and kingdoms, when God taketh them in their wickedness. He cuts off the spirits of Princes, Psal. 76.12. he slips them off, (so the Hebrew is) as one would slip off a flower between ones fingers; or as one would slip off a bunch of grapes. The kingdoms of the earth are like foam upon the waters. 1. For their seeming brightnesse. 2. For their great eminence. 3. For their instability and inability to resist. 4. For their sudden fall, and disap∣pearance. The Turkish Empire (which hath swallowed up so many glorious Empires and renowned kingdoms) laboureth with nothing more then the weighti∣nesse of it self: and shall shortly be cut off as foam, and live no otherwise then by fame, as others now do: though for the present, it be no whit inferiour, in great∣nesse, and strength to the greatest Monarchies that ever yet were upon the face of the earth; the Roman Empire onely excepted. Verse 8. unde . The high places also of Aven, &c.] Sept. the Altars, ab Alto dicta. Of Aven, for Beth-aven, (whereof before) a place so hatefull now, that God loathes at large to mention it: he even cuts off the head of it, as he had threatned to do by the Altars verse 2. So Jeconiah degenerating, is Coniah, &c. the sinne of Israel,] that damning sinne of idolatry here committed, that wic∣kednesse with a witnesse, which makes God abhorre places as well as persons, and turns them into sin as it were. What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem? Mich. 1.5. shall be destroyed.,] Thus, mans sinne brings destruction upon the creatures. It is as poyson in a glasse, that causeth the glasse to be broken, and cast upon the dung∣hill. The vessels that held the sin-offering, if made of earth, they were to be bro∣ken; if of brasse, or other metalls, to be purged with fire: as one day the earth and visible heavens also shall be for the defilement that mans sinne hath set upon them. The thorn and the thistle shall come upon their altars,] There shall be nil nisi so∣litudo in terris,Tarnou. aegritudo in animis, &c. See the Note on chap. 9. vers 6. they shall say to the mountains, Cover us,] This they shall say out of the sense and terrour of Gods just judgements driving them to desperation. —tellus prius ima dehiscat, &c. Aristides commendeth Themistocles for this, that he never was so perplexed by any evil occurrence, as to wish that the earth would swallow him up quick, or to pronounce the dead happy. Rivet well observeth here, that Iudaea, as it was full of hills and rocks, so they were wont to dig themselves therein caves and dennes, wherein to hide in time of danger. To these David oft repaired, and so secured himself from Saul. And to these he alludeth when he calleth God his Rock, Psal. 18.2. and the Rock of his refuge, Psal. 94.22. And of these places of security Iosephus writeth,Antiq. l. 14. cap. 26. De bel. Jud. ib. 1. cap. 12. describing the forme of them. Now when they were in those holes of the hills, and were distressed by the enemy there, what wonder though they said to the mountains, fall upon us, cover us bury us alive, erush us to pieces, grinde us to powder, rather then that we fall into the bloody fingers of these mer∣cilesse monsters; who will put us haply to a lingring death, kill us peecemeal, as Tiberius did those he was angry with:Sueton. and as the Canibals of America, when they take a prisoner, feed upon him alive, and by degrees, to the unutterable aggravati∣on of his horrour and torment. Our Saviour foretold his disciples, that at the last destruction of Jerusalem, men should crie out to the mountains on this manner:
And so shall the Antichristian rout also do one day, Rev. 6.16. They that would not worship the Lamb, shall finde him a Lion: those that would not cast away their transgressions, but faced the heavens, shall run into the rocks to hide them; those that would not aspire to eternity, shall despair of mercy; those that would not lift up their eyes to the everlasting mountains, from whence comes help, shall now in vain tire the deaf mountains, with hide us, help us. Now what can the mountains do more then give an eccho to such help us; for they need help also: the wrath of God is upon the creature, &c. Verse 9. O Israel thou hast sinned from the dayes of Gibeah,] Or, Prae diebus worse then in the dayes of Gibeah. What those dayes were, see chap. 9.9. and Judg. 19. when they were, is not so certain: but probably, before the time of the Judges, and soon after Joshuahs death: for Jebus, or Jerusalem, was not yet taken, Judg. 19. with chap. 1. and Phineas was yet alive and ministred before the Lord, chap. 20.28. and was one of those Elders that out-lived Joshuah, who had seen all the great works of the Lord, which he did for Israel, Judg. 2.7. so that these dayes of Gibeah, were very ancient: and Israels sinne the worse, because from those dayes: and yet more, because above, or beyond those dayes. God made use of your forefathers to punish that great sin: and yet you continue to be more vile and vitious then they were, that were so punished by your forefathers: Neither are ye at all warned by their harmes: which is a just both presage and desert of your downfall. Alterius perditie tua sit eautio. Exemplo alterius qui sapit, ille sapit. there they stood.] Who stood? either the men of Gibeah stood stoutly to it: and slew in two severall battles fourty thousand. Or, there stood the men of Israel, and their battle did not overtake the children of iniquity: not so overtake them at first, but that they were twice beaten by them: All which notwithstanding, they stood it out, and prevailed at last: but so shall not you, sith it is in my desire, and decree, verse 10. to order it otherwise, and utterly to destroy you at once. Non surget bîc asslictio. Verse 10. It is in my defire that I should chastise them,] That is,Nahum 1.9. I am un∣changeably resolved, and fully bent upon't, to carry them captive and enslave them to their enemies: wherein they shall finde that they have to do with God, and not with man; and that it is I that binde them, though I make use of the Assyrians to that purpose. Luther renders it, Valde cupidè eos castigabo, exceeding desirously will I chastise them. O the venemous nature of sin, that maketh the mercifull God to desire and to delight in mens miseries: to take comfort in their punish∣ments, Ezck. 5.13, 15. to laugh at their destruction,. Act. 13. Prov. 1. And although he bear long with mens evil manners, yet he beareth them as a burden, whereof he de∣sireth to be eased, Esay. 1.24. as a servitude whereof he desireth to be freed, Esay 43.24. as a pain, not inferiour to that of a travelling woman: and albeit he bite in his pains, as it were, for a time, yet hear him what he saith, Esay 42.14. I have long time holden my peace, I have been still and refrained my self; now will I cry like a travailing woman: I will destroy and devour at once. and the people shall be gathered against them,] God can bring in his armies at his pleasure: for all creatures are at his beck and check. If he do but look out at the windows of heaven, and cry, Who is on my side? who? all creatures in heaven and earth will presently present their service: he never need want a weapon to chastise his rebels.C. Pempei. If he but stamp with his foot (as that proud Roman said) he can have men enough. How ready are the Assyrians here, to be the rod in his hand? When they shall bind themselves in their two furrowes,] i. e. I will bring their enemies upon them, and they shall yoke them like oxen that are yoked to plow: yea, they shall bring them into such servitude, that they shall make them do dou∣ble work, plow in their two furrows, be they never so weary of doing one. The enemies shall not be moved to pity the poor Israelites, when tired with hard labour: but shall make them plow like beasts, giving them no rest till they have even wearied and worn them out. This is Polanus his interpretation: who further admonisheth us, as oft as we behold, or think upon the yoking of oxen for the plow,Polan. in loc. that wee likewise bethink us of the miserable condition of such poor Christians, as are slaves to Turks, and Tartats, and other enemies, who binde them indeed in their two furrows. It is not so long since here amongst us, diverse of Gods dear servants were driven
from Ciceter and other places (taken by the enemy) naked and barefoot, (as the Egyptians were by the Assyrians, Esay 20.4.) thorow thick and thin to Oxford-Gaole, &c. where by the cruelty of their keepers, many of them lost their precious lives, to the incredible grief of their dear relations. Neither can I here passe by Tillies cruelty at Magdeburgh in Germany: where after twenty thousand persons at least put to the sword, and the Town burned down, his souldiers committed all manner of ravages,Mr. Clark in the life of the K. of Swed. all the countrey over: Ladies, Gentlewomen and others, like beasts, they yoaked and coupled together, leading them into the woods to ravish them; and such as resisted, they stripped naked, whipt them, cropt their ears, and so sent them home again. The Irish cruelties unnameable, might here be instanced. O quam duram, O quam tristem serviunt illi servitutem! See Mr. Clarks relation. The words may be read, They shall binde them together. Verse 11. And Ephraim is an heifer that is taught,] sc. With the Ox-goad, which hath its name from teaching, Judg. 3.31. because therewith Oxen are taught to plow,Malmad. saith R. David. Ephraim was a bullock unaccustomed to the yoak, Jer. 31.18. but God brought her to it and taught her, though at first a backsliding heifer, chap. 4.16. (see the the Note there) taught her, as Gedeon taught the men of Succoth, with briers and thorns of the wildernesse, so that they paid dear for their learning, Judg. 8.16. But Ephraim, though taught it, loveth not plowing work, because hard and hungry. She loveth rather to tread out the corn,] where she may dance and frisk in the loft straw without either yoak or muzzle, Deut. 25.4. As we thresh, so it was their manner to tread out their hard corn with the feet of beasts, or by them to draw Wains over it, and so get it out of the husk. Now this was fair and free work, and Ephraim delighted in it; the rather, because she might feed all the while at pleasure: whereas those heifers that plowed, wrought hard all day, and in all weathers, without any refreshment. It is an ill signe, when men must pick and choose their work: this they will do for God, but not that. A dispensatory conscience is a naughty conscience: neither doth he Gods will but his own, that doth no more, or no other, then himself will. Such holy-day-servants, such retainers God careth not for. Every one can swim in a warm Bath; and every bird will sing in a summers day. Iudas will bear the crosse, so he may bear the bag. And those carnall Capernaites follow Christ, whiles he feeds them: as children will say their prayers, so they may have their breakfast. But Abraham will forsake all to follow God, though he knew not whither: yea though God seemed to go crosse-wayes: as when he promised him a land slowing wich milk and honey, and yet as soon as he came there, he found famine, Gen. 12.1, 10. So when he promised him seed as the stars, yet kept him without child for twenty years after: and after that hee must kill him too, Gen. 22. So Iob will trust in a killing God: Ionah calls upon him out of the deep: David keeps his statutes, when God had in some degree forsaken him, Psal. 119.8. and behaved himself wisely in a perfect way, though God was not yet come unto him, Psal. 101.2. This is the triall of a Christian, to do difficult duties upon little or no incouragement; to wrestle as Jacob did, in the night, and alone, and when God was leaving him, and upon one leg, &c. This is work-man-like. The staff-rings were to continue upon the Ark: the Kohathites shoulders felt where∣fore: and so long God helped them to carry it. But when they once fell to carting it for their own ease,1 Chro. 15.26 as the Philistines had done, 1 Sam. 6.) God made a dismall breach upon them, 2 Sam. 6. and David was very sensible of it, when he came up the second time to fetch the Ark, 1 Chron. 15.12, 13. but I passed over upon her fair neck,] God will make her both bear and draw; though she were grown delicate and tender, with long prosperity; her good, and fair, and fat neck, not galled, or brawned with the yoak, which now she made dainty of; yet He would bring her to it: though he were by her untractablenesse forced to sit upon her neck, and make her more towardly to the yoak, as the manner of plowmen was in that case. I will make Ephraim to ride,] Or, as the Vulgar hath it, I will ride him and rule him, though he kick and lay about him never so much: though he champ upon the bridle, and stamp with his feet, &c. Ile master him, and make him more serviceable, or at least, lesse insolent. See this fulfilled, Jer. 31.18, 19. where Ephraim is brought in seeing his need of mercy in the sense of misery.
Iudah shall plow, and Iacob shall break his clods.] Judah doth the worst of the work, and suffers more hardship in the wayes of my worship, and is held under by Israel, as appeareth in the second book of Kings, chap. 10.16. &c. Jacob, that is, the ten Tribes, did onely break the clods, or harrow, which is the lighter work; and should therefore have been done with more delight. But they love to take their ease, and onely follow after their pleasure, and profit: and though taught to plow, yet like it not, because laborious: no though they have Judah for an example of better. Verse 12. Sowe to your selves in righteousnesse, reap in mercy:] Righteousnesse is a sure seed, a precious grain, which those that sowe (and every action of our life is a sowing) shall doubtlesse come again with rejoycing, and bring their sheaves with them, Psal. 126.6. Onely they must not look to sowe and reap all in one day; as one saith of the Hyperborean people far North, that they sowe shortly after the Sun-rising with them, and reap before the Sun-set: that is, because the whole half year is one continuall day with them. The Church is Gods husbandry,Heresbach. de. re rust. 1 Cor. 3.9. the seed is the Word of God, Luke 8.11. Ministers are Gods husband-men, harvest∣men, Matth. 9.37, 38. the plough, Luke 9.62. plough-staff, Luke 13.8. axe, Mat. 3.10. are the Lawes threatnings: the fruit-causing rain, are the promises of the Gospel, Esay 55.10, 11. faith that works by love, are the fruits: the last day, the harvest, Mat. 13.39, 40, 41. Then, at utmost,. those that sowe bountifully (or, in blessings, as the Greek hath it) shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that soweth seemeth to cast away his seed: but if he sowe in locis irriguis, (as Eccles. 11. 1. Ezek. 34.26.) upon fat and fertile places, he knowes he shall receive his own, with usury. In some parts of Egypt, where the river Nilus overfloweth, they do but throw in their seed, and they have four rich harvests in lesse then four moneths.S. H. Blounts voyag. 77. Oh sowe bountifully the seeds of piety and charity into Gods blessed bo∣some: and then be sure to reap plentifull mercy, in thy greatest necessity: reap in the month of mercy (as the Originall here hath it) that is, according to the mea∣sure of divine mercy (see Levit. 27.16. Exod. 16.16.) proportionably to the infinitenesse of Gods mercy. Now the Scripture hath three notable words to ex∣presse the fulnesse of Gods mercy in Christ, to those that sowe in righteousnesse, Ephes. 2.7. the abundant riches of his grace, that are cast in over and above, Rom. 5.20. The grace of God hath been more then exceeding: there's a second , 1 Tim. 1.14. The grace of God was exceeding abundant. It had a pleonasme before: yea, but here's a superpleonasme; here's good measure, pressed down,Luk. 6.38. shaken to∣gether and running over shall God give into mens bosomes: Like as when a poor man asked Mr. Fox for an alms, he (finding him religious) gave him his horse: Or as Alexander gave one (that craved some small courtesie of him) a whole citie. And when the poor man said, It was too much for him to receive: yea,Non quaero quid te accipe∣re deceat, sed quid me dare. Sen. de benef. l. 2. c. 16. . but not for me to give, said he. So God giveth liberally and like himself, Jam. 1.5. He doth not shift off his suiters, as once a great Prince did a bold begging Philosopher. He asked a groat of him, and the king told him, it was too little for a king to give. He requested the king then to give him a talent: the king replied, It was too much for a begger to crave. Certain it is, that God in his spirituall blessings and mercies to us is wont to regard not so much what is fit for his to ask or expect, as what stan∣deth with his goodnesse, and greatnesse to bestow. If Israel had a hundred-fold increase of his seed, those that sowe to themselves in righteousnesse,Gen. 26.1. by doing and suffering Gods will shall have much more: Even an hundred-fold here, and eternall life hereafter, Matth. 19.29. so great a gain is godlinesse: so sure a grain is righte∣ousnesse: who would not then turn spirituall seeds-man? break up your fallow ground,] sc. of your hearts, that ye sowe not among the thornes, Jee. 4.3. The breaking up of sinfull hearts, is a singular meanes to pre∣vent the breaking down of a sinfull nation. Hence the Prophet, though almost out of hope of any good to be done, upon his desperate countreymen, resolves to try one more exhortation to them: and as in the morning he had sowed his seed,Eccles. 11.6. so in the evening he with-holdeth not his hand: for who can tell whether it may not prosper? and whether in the midst of threats, they might not suffer a word of exhortation,Heb. 13.22. and whether it might not leave some impression, being delivered in few words? Sowe (therefore saith he) to your selves in righteousnesse, &c. but first break up
your fallow ground,] Innovate vobis novale. Repent, and be renued in the spirit of your mindes; in spirit and speech, in mindes and manners, in constitution and conversation, in the purpose of your hearts, and practise of your lives. Old things are past,2 Cor. 5.17. let all things become new: turn up the turf, stock up, and stub up the roots and weeds; get into Christ, and become a new creature. Till this be done, men are in an undone condition, though they should spend their whole time in gathering up pearls and jewels. for it is time to seek the Lord,] High time, sith your souls lie upon it. Plowmen, we know are carefull to take their time: so are all others, wise enough in their gene∣ration. The wayfaring-man travelleth while it is light. The Seafaring-man takes his opportunity of winde and tide. The Smith smites whiles the iron is hot. The Lawyer takes his terme-time to entertaine Clients, dispatch suits. The men of Issa∣char were in great account with David, because they had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chron. 12.32. so are they with God, that regard and use the seasons of grace; that seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near:Esay 55.6. that put in the plough, set upon the practise of repen∣tance, after a showre, when the heart is best affected; after God by his Word and Spirit hath taught (so some render the Text) or rained righteousnesse upon them. Rain comes from heaven: so doth every good and perfect giving. Rain poures down plentifully, Psal. 68.9. thou didst send a plentifull rain on thine inheritance: so do the showres of righeousnesse on good hearts. Not a drop of rain falls in vain, or in a wrong place, but by a divine decree, Job 28.26. so here. Seek it in time, and we shall not fail of it. Onely we must not set God a time when to come, but wait upon him, who waiteth to be gracious. Elijah sent seven times ere the rain came. Seek till God comes: Limit not the holy One of Israel. As he seldom comes at our time, so he never failes in his own. Hold out therefore faith and pati∣ence: for behold he cometh on the clouds, on the wings of the winde, and his re∣ward is with him. To him that soweth righteousnesse, shall be a sure reward, Prov. 11.18. Verse 13. Ye have plowed wickednesse,] The former exhortation was even spilt upon them: for they went on to plot and plough wickednesse: they had their necks in the devils yoak, and promoted his kingdom with sides and shoulders: they let out the strength of their spirits for the furtherance of sin, and were at no small pains to go to hell. as being the devils hinds and horses to draw his plough, Prov. 21.4. Job 4.8. Even as I have seen, saith Eliphaz, they that plow iniquity, and sowe wickednesse, reap the same. Ye have reaped iniquity, saith our Prophet, that is, dignum factis praemium, the reward of your wickednesse. And her iniquity is op∣posed to mercy in the former verse, as wickednesse also is to righteousnesse: or wic∣kednesse may be taken for their Apostacy, Idolatry, and creature-confidence; and iniquity for the rest of their enormities, proceeding from those former: for these wicked ones are never out of action.Plaut. Capt. Act. 3. sc. 5. Arant, serunt, occant, scelera, they plow, sowe, and harrow mischi so that would they but take the like pains for heaven that they do for hell, they could not (lightly) misse of it. Ye have eaten the fruit of lies,] That is, ye have been cozened, by your false Prophets, and State-politicians; whose fetch it is to formalize and enervate the power of truth, till at length they have left you an heartlesse and saplesse religion. Ye have fed hungerly upon the murthering morsels of sin; and that's the reason that there is so much ill blood amongst you. Your bread is that panis meadacij So∣lomon speaks of, Prov. 20.17. full of grit and gravell, made up with saw-dust (as they served the Martyrs) and mixed with lime,Turk. hist. as the treacherous Greeks dealt by the Western Christians, marching towards the Holy-land. because thou didst trust in thy way,] In thy Calf-worship. Way is oft put for re∣ligion: and every action men do, is a step either to heaven or to hell: he that walketh uprightly, walketh safely. These Idolaters were very confident of their way: so are our Papists, and other heretikes; as David George, that pestilent Li∣bertine, was fully perswaded, that the whole world would submit to him. And Campian, Coster, and other zealous Papists tell us to our heads, that our religion is errour, our selves heretikes, our end destruction: that one heaven cannot hold us hereafte, one Church now, &c. Thus the way of a fool is right in his own eyes:
but hee that hearkeneth to counsell (as no confident fool will) is wise, Prov. 12.15. and in the multitude of their mighty men.] This made them ready to boast, as that young king of Hungary did, that though the skie should fall down upon them,Sigismund. Turk. hist. yet they were men enow, and strong enough, with their pikes to bear it up. These Ephraimites liked their way of false worship the better, because backt by a strong Army. That way the mighty men go, that shall be troden: this is a secret byasse, a strong poyse upon the spirits of most men, Rev. 13. when power and authority was put into Antichrists hands, the whole world wondered after him. But cursed be that man, that maketh flesh his arm, &c. I will not trust in my bowe,Jer. 17. my sword shall not save me, saith David. There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength, Psal. 33.16. See Psal. 146.3, 4, 5. Verse 14. Therefore shall a tumult arise among the people, &c.] Even among those mighty men, wherein ye trusted, shall there be seditious tumults, that shall soon bring all into a miserable confusion. Intestine commotions may undo a people, as a man may die of an inward bleeding. Ac veluti in magno populo cum saepe coorta est, Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus, &c.Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1. When the multitude is in a rage, they are like to a tiled house that is on fire (saith One) there's no coming near the house, the tiles do so flie about your face: so it is in tumults, there's no coming neer to talk to them, to convince them: but they are ready to flie presently upon you. In Kets sedition, Dr. Parker in his Sermon be∣fore the Rebels neer Norwich, touched them for their missiving so near, that they went near to touch him for his life. The rude rage of the rebels was such, that some being disabled almost to hold up their weapons, would strive what they could to strike their enemies: others being thrust thorow the body with a spear, would run themselves further, to reach those that wounded them deadly. Yea boyes were ob∣served to be so desperately resolved, as to pull arrows out of their own flesh,Lise of King Edward the 6. p 75. and de∣liver them to be shot again by the archers on their side. There are none so inso∣lent and cruell as the vilest of the people, when they are got together in a head. What havock made the seditious in Jerusalem a little before the last destruction of it? the Guelfs and Gibellines in Italy? Wat Tyler and his complices here? That Rebell,Joseph lib. 2. cap. 11. & l. 6. cap. 11. Speed. 734. . held up by the many-headed multitude, dared to say, that all the Lawes of England should come out of his mouth. The Hebrew word here used signifieth an inunda∣tion, or multitude of waters, which over-run their banks with violence and roaring. The people are a most dangerous and heady water, when once it is out: it is like a sweeping rain which leaveth no food, Prov. 28.3. The Septuagint render it, De∣struction. Sal. Jarchi saith, it signifieth the voice of those that cry, Fugite, Fugite, Away, Away, the enemy is at hand, &c. Some say, to the same purpose, that it signifieth clamorem meticulosorum, the crying of those that are scar'd,Virg. Aen. as when there is Luctu, ubique pavor, & plurima morti imago. See Am. 2.2. Zeph. 1.15, &c. and all thy fortresses shall be spoyled.,] Yea though they be munitions of rocks. Thy terriblenesse hath deceived thee, and the pride of thine heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest the height of the hill: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the Lord, Jer. 49.16. And again, all thy strong-holds shall be like fig-trees, with the first ripe figs: if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater, who shall devour them at a bit, Nah. 3.12. as Shalman spoyled Betharbel] Shalman signifieth peaceabley (saith an Interpre∣ter) a man of a calme spirit: but he answered not his name: for he exercised grea∣test cruelty. There is not a more troublesome sea, then that which is called Mare pacificum. There is oft Aliud in Titulo, aliud in Pyxidc. Absalom signifieth the Fathers peace: but he proved otherwise then was hoped. Fallitur augurio spes bena saepe suo. But this Salman is by the best Interpreters thought to be Salmanasar king of Assy∣ria
in this Prophets time. Salman is vox truncata, a name cut off to the halves: a thing very ordinary in all the learned languages, as were easie to instance. See Esay 15.2. Bamoth for Bamoth-Baal, Josh. 19.35. Chamath for Chamath-Dor. Hesiod puts  for ,Vide Lips. ep. 19. lib. 1. Ennius hath Fabric for Fabricius. This Salmanasar (or as Luther will have it, some other great warriour called Salman, not elsewhere mentioned in Scripture, but not unknown to the ten tribes) did cruell execution, it seems, upon Betharbel, a city beyond Jordan, 1 Maccab. 9.2. like as Tamerlan (for a terrour to the Greek Empire, much whereof he afterwards subdued) did at Seba∣stia;Turk. hist. fol. 211. where he made a mercilesse slaughter of all sexes and sizes; whereby he held the whole East in such awe, as that he was commonly called, The wrath of God, and Terrour of the world. There are that think this Arbel to be the same with that Arbela where Alexander defeated Darius, and won the Persian Monarchy. They make it a city or countrey of Assyria, beneath Arpad, and hinted at by Rabshakeh, 2 King. 18.34.See 2 King. 15.29. & 16.34. & 19.13. Where are the gods of Hamath, and Arpad? sc. Salmanasar hath utterly de∣stroyed them. Arbel is by some interpreted, the city of Bel, where Belus or Baal was worshipped. By others, Beth-arbel is interpreted, The house of the insnaring god, the god of policie, or subtilty: It seemeth to them, that the people of this place had a god that they thought would ensnare and ensnarle all their enemies: but it proved much otherwise. For, the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.] Dashed against the ground (so the word signifieth) against the walls,. Sept. or pavement. See Gen. 32.11. Psal. 137.9. Esay 13.16. Such is the savage cruelty of warre, when God lets it out. Such was the barbarous dealing of the French in the Parisian Massacre, such the Sicilian Vespers, and at Merindoll; where the paps of many women were cut off, which gave suck to their children;Act. & Mon. fol. 868.  which looking for suck at their mothers brests being dead before, died also for hunger. Was not this to kill the mother with the children? which God forbade by a symboll of taking the dam with the young, Deut. 22.6. and again of killing the ewe and the lamb both in one day, Lev. 22.28. The Spaniards murdered fifty millions of Indians in 42. years, as Acosta the Jesuite testifieth. Arsenoe was killed upon her children by her bloody brother Ptolomce king of Egypt. And another of that name killed thirty thousand Jewes, and compel'd the living to feed upon the flesh of the dead. When the Switzers vanquished the Thericcuses in battle,Languet. Chron. they banqueted in the place where they won the victory: using the dead bodies of their Adversaries instead of stools and tables. The sight of such like cru∣elties, common in warre, might well make Zuing lius say, when he had been abroad with the Army,Melch. Ad. in vit. 36. that he had found more wickednesse, and bad counsels and courses therein, then ever he had known before, either by experience, or out of books. This passage in Gods book (and the like, chap. 13.16. their infants shall be dashed-in pieces, and their women with child shall be ript up.) he could not be ignorant of. The Pro∣phet refers his hearers to a sad example of fresh-bleeding cruelty, well known to them: that they might relent, repent, and prevent the like misery upon themselves. This is the use we should all put such examples to, Luke 13.2, 3, 5. & 17.26.28. 1 Cor. 10.6, 7, 8, 11. Verse 15. So shall Bethel do unto you,] i. e. the idolatry that you have commit∣ted at Bethel, by a Synechdoche of the place, this shall undo you. Or, So shall he do unto you, O inhabitants of Bethel. Bethel shall be made a Betharbel. They that take not example by others, shall be made an example to others. Lege historiam, ne sias historia Because of your great wickednesse:] Heb. the wickednesse of your wickednesse, the iniquity of your sin, the foolishnesse of your madnesse, Eccles. 7.25. your idolatry especially, that wickednesse with a witnesse. Let us (by Gods example) learn to lay load upon our sins, and not to extenuate, but to aggravate them against our selves. In a morning shall the king of Israel be utterly cut off.] This was fulfilled in Hose the last king of Israel, 2 King. 17. cut off in a morning, that is, in a moment, as foam, or a bubble upon the waters. The morning-light lasteth not long, but shineth on to the perefect day. Or, in a morning, when some hope appears, and some comfort is ex∣pected, as Psal. 30.6. it is but a lightning afore death. Accidit in puncto, quod non speratur in an. Contrarily, the Saints at evening-time have light, Zech. 14.7. See the Note there.
CHAP. XI. Verse 1. WHen Israel was a childe, then I loved him,] Or Because Israel was a childe, I loved him. Young things are lovely; young children especially, for their innocency, and ignescency. Some sence it thus, Israel was a child, and had nothing of worth, or lovely in him; yet I loved him freely, Deut. 7.7. Hos. 10.9. called him out of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, led him thorow the deep, as an horse in the wildernesse, Esay 63.13. possessed him of the promised land. Out of which though I shall shortly cast him for him ingratitudes: yet there is hope of his restauration, by the Messiah my Sonne, whom when I have called out of Egypt, he shall gather together again the dispersed of Israel, and bring life and immortality to light by the Gospel. The foundation of which restauration, he here maketh to be his own free-grace.. Luke 1.53. He hath holpen his servant (or his childe) Israel, in remembrance of his mercy. God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Son, &c. Joh. 3.16. Here then beginneth our Prophets first Evangelicall sermon, as Tarnovis observeth: who also readeth the Text thus: Albeit Israel was a childe, such a forlorn out-cast childe, as is described, Ezek. 16. and 23. Yet I lo∣ved him, and adopted him for my sonne: not for any defect on my part, (for I had an onely begotten Son, in whom I am well pleased:) or, for any desert on his part, for I found him in his blood, in his blood, in his blood,Ezek. 16.6. when I cast my skirt of love over him, and said unto him, Live. Yea and for his salvations sake, I have called, that is, I have decreed to call out of Egypt (whither he fled from Herod, and where he abode two or three years at least) my childe Jesus, whose office it is to save his people from their sinnes.Epiphan. Mat. 1.21. And although I might justly have deprived them of such a Saviour for ever, because when he came to his own, his own received him not, (yea, rejected him to whom their own signes given to Herod, did so aptly and evidently agree) yet out of Egypt, to shew the constancy of my love to Israel,Mat. 2. have I called (by mine angel, as Jacob by a messenger called his wives to him into the field, Gen. 31.4.) My Son Christ, who is Gods Son, first by eternall genera∣tion, Prov. 8.22, 23. Secondly, by personall union, Psal. 2.7. And thus God called out of Egypt, first Israel his people, and then Christ the Head of his people; in whom at length this prophecy was fulfilled. Verse 2. As they called them,] i. e. As the Prophets and Ministers (whose names are here concealed, that the Word onely may be glorified, as Acts 13.48.) called to them, to come out of spirituall Egypt, out of darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive forgivenesse of sinnes, and in∣heritance among the Saints, by faith that is in Christ, Act. 26.18. so they went from them:] They went a contrary way, as the child Samuel, when God called him, ran to Eli: or rather as the wilfull Jews, when God would have gathered them, as the hen doth her chickens, they would not. When God called his naturall Son out of Egypt, he came presently, Heb. 10.7. Psal. 40.7, 8. not so his adopted sonnes: for they turned upon him the back, and not the face, as Jer. 2.27. they refused to be reformed, they hated to be healed. See chap. 7.1. with the Note. Nay to make up the full measure of their sins, and to heighten their contempt, they sacrificed unto Baalim, and burnt incense to graven images,] Quasi agrè fa∣cturi Deo, as if they would despite God on purpose, and spit in his very face: com∣mit the like villany in his presence, as the Irish Rebels lately did, when they bound the husband to the bed-post, whiles they abused his wife before him. See the Notes on chap. 2. and almost on every chapter where their idolatry is cried out upon, and their extreme ingratitude. Verse 3. I tauaght Ephraim also to go,] A child he was verse 1. and like a childe I dealt with him, teaching him how to set his feet, pedare to foot it, as nurses do their little ones: he keepeth the feet of his Saints,1 Sam. 2.9. he guideth their feet in the way of peace, Luke 1.79. See for this, Deut. 1.31. & 32.11. Num. 11.12. So great is the goodnesse of God to his people, that he dealeth with us as with his little chil∣dren, nos sublevando, submonendo, docendo, ducendo, regendo, tegendo, convocando,Tarnou. condonando, portando, confortando, &c. saith a learned Interpreter truely, and trim∣ly. He speaketh unto us as unto children, Heb. 12.5. paternè diligit, micè dirigit,
he loveth us as a father, he directs us as a friend, guiding us with his eye, leading us in his hand, setting us betwixt his knees, as some interpret that text, Deut. 33.3. setting us upon his knees, as a father doth his darling, and rejoycing over us with joy, yea joying over us, with singing, Zeph. 3.17. His affections are more then fatherly:Mr. Baine. and his expressions are according. We are like infants (saith One) new-born, in a manner. They are kept by the loving parents from fire and water: they are fed, laid to sleep, made ready, and unready, and shifted in their scapes, but they know not who doth all this for them. So doth our heavenly Father by us in Christ. But (he knows) little understanding have we of him. After this, he teacheth us to go, taking us by the arms,] to help our feeble knees. And taking us up in his own arms, when we come to a foul or rough place: helping us over the quagmires of crosses, and the difficulties of duties. And whereas we fall seven times a day, and in many things fail all: he taketh us up after that we have caught a knock, and cherisheth us in his bosome, &c. Montanus and Junius carry the sence another way, as if the words were not a description of Gods love to the peo∣ple, but of their unthankfulnesse to God; rendring the words thus: When as in∣form Ephraim, he taketh them in his arms, that it, he setteth up idols, and, after the manner of impudent and shamelesse strumpets, he taketh the puppets in his arms, and embraceth them before my face. But I like the former sence better. But they knew not that I healed them.] Not onely held them, that they might not fall, but healed them when they had fallen. Daring they would be sometimes to stand upon their own legs, to prevail by their own strength, 1 Sam. 2.9. to say with her in the Poet,Arachne apud. Ovid. Metam. Consilij satis est in me mihi, &c. I am wise enough, and able enough, to go on as if they were petty-gods within themselves, and had no need of nor dependance upon me. Hence they hurt themselves, but I healed them. I for∣gave all their iniquities,Psal. 103.3. I healed all their diseases, their bruises, and putrifying sores, that else had not been closed, bound up,, nor mollified with ointment, Esay 1.6. God left not his people in their low estate, as some Physicians do their Pati∣ents: but provided a soveraigne salve, an horn of salvation, such as would cure any disease, or maim, even the sinne against the holy Ghost too: but that it is the na∣ture of it to rage and rave both against the physick, and the Physician. Christ is both the one and the other: as beeing made unto us of God, Wisdom, righteous∣nesse, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Quod sanitas in corpore, id san∣ctitas in corde. He is Jehovah that healeth, for he is Jehovah that sanctifieth. This Ephraim knew not, that is, out of pride and stoutnesse they acknowledged it not, but sacrifice to their own nets, wits, endeavours, &c. Of all things God can least endure to be neglected, or to have the glory of his benefits transferred upon others (See chap. 2.8. with the Note.) When men shall either say in the language of Ashdod,1 Sam. 6.9. It is a chance, or else, I have made my self thus and thus happy. This, though the Saints should at any time do, yet God will pardon their frowardnesse, and say, as Esay 57.17, 18. I have seen his wayes, (his waywardnesse) and will heal him (neverthelesse) and restore comforts to him. Verse 4. I drew them with cords of a man,] Not of a beast: though they have deserved to be hampered as unruly heifers, and to be yoked and ruled over with rigour; to be tamed and taken down a link lower, yet I, out of my Philanthropie, yea out of singular grace, have dealt civilly, nay courteously with them, in an ami∣cable and amiable way, and not as I might have done out of my Soveraignty, and according to my justice. I drew them by the cords of a man, that is, 1. Gently, and favourably; suiting my self to their dispositions, (which are oft as different as their faces) hiring them to obedience, afflicting them in measure, with the rods of men, 2 Sam. 7.15. fitted to the weaknesse of men: If God should plead against us with his great power, as Job speaks chap. 23.6. it would soon grinde us to pow∣der; but he hath no such designe: he correcteth his children vel ad demonstrationem debitae miseriae,Aug. Tract: in Joan. 124. vel ad emendationem labilis vitae, vel ad exercitationem necessariae patientiae, saith Austin, ad exercitium non ad exitium, saith another Ancient, to re∣fine, and not to ruine them. 2. Rationally, by cogent arguments and motives, be∣fitting the nature of a man: able to convince them and set them down with right reason, would they but consider, Deut. 32.29. would they but be wise, and weigh things aright. This God wisheth they would do: calleth them to reason the case
with him, Esay 1.18. pleads with them in a friendly way, Jer. 2.31. and then ap∣peals to their own consciences, whether they have dealt well with him, yea, or no, Esay 5.3. making them read the sentence against themselves, as did Judas the tray∣tour, Matth. 27.4. and those Pharisees, Matth. 21.40. He bespeaks them, after most clear conviction, as Esay 46.8. Remember this, and shew your selves men: bring it again to minde, O ye transgressours. Most people are led on in a continu∣ed hurry of lusts, and passions, and never bethink themselves, as 1 King. 8.47. never say so much as What have I done?Orat. pre Quintio. Si haec duo tecum verba reputasses quid ago? saith Cicero to Nevius. Hadst thou but bethought thy self of those few words, What have I done? thou wouldst never have been so covetous a cormo∣rant. Oh could men have but so much power over their passions and lusts, as to get alone and weigh Gods wayes, much good might be done upon them: But for want of this, Fertur equis auriga, &c. they rush into all excesse of riot, as an horse into the battle: yea they are so farre unmand, as to think that they have reason to be mad, and that there is no small sense in sinning. I do well to be angry, even un∣to death, Jon. 4.9. with bands of love,] Heb. thick cords, cart-ropes (as it is rendred, Esay 5.18.) ropes of many wreathes, twisted together, and inter-twined with love, that sweetest Attractive. So Jer. 31.3. With loving-kindnesse have I drawn thee: and Esay 63.9. In his love and his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the dayes of old. He gave them a law, the summe of which was nothing but love; and multiplied mercies upon them without measure, as is amply set forth by those holy Levites, Neh. 9. Now, mercy commands duty: and every new de∣liverance is a new tie to obedience. Love should have love, Publicans and sinners yeeld that, Matth. 5.46. Yea, love should shew it self strong as death, Cant. 8.6. Jonathan would have died for his David; David for his Absalom;Cos amoris amor. Priscilla and Aquila, for Paul, Rom. 16.4. Christ out of his love did die for his people. Have I but one life to lose for Christ? said that holy Martyr. Let men take heed how they sinne against love, for this is the greatest aggravation of sinne: this is bestiall, this is like unruly horses in a teame, to break the gears, to snap in sunder the traces, that should hold them. Such yokelesse sons of Belial shall one day be held by the cords of their own sinne, and whipt with those cords of conviction, that they would not be drawn by. Shall the harlots hands be bands, her words cords to draw men to destruction, and shall God stretch out his hand all day long to them to no pur∣pose? Shall he lose his sweet words upon them, &c? Peters heart burst, and hee brake out in weeping, when he saw Love sparkling in Christs looks;Mar. 14.72. and con∣sidered how he had burst asunder the bands of love, sinned against such manifesta∣tions of mercy, wiped off all his comfortables for the present, drew from Christ those piercing quick questions, Lovest thou me? yea but dost love me indee? O let the cords of Gods kindnesse draw us nearer to him, hold us closer: to sinne against mercy, is to sin against humanity: and as no surfet is more dangerous then that of bread: so no judgement is more terrible, then that which grows out of love felt and slighted. and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on the jaws, &c.] i. e. on their neck: albeit it seemeth by that law, made for not muzling the oxe that treadeth, &c. that those creatures when they wrought, were muzled or haltred up: and that hal∣ter fastened to the yoke that was upon their necks. The sence is this, I unyoked them often, to give them meat, as the good husbandman doth that is mercifull to his beast, he lifts up the yoke that lies hard upon its neck, leads it to the manger, layes food before it, &c. So dealt God by this people all along from the wildernesse, and forward: not suffering them to abide jugiter sub jug is Gentium, long under their enemies yoke: but delivering them out of the hand of those that served themselves of them, Ezek. 34.27. Christ also hath delivered His out of the hands of those that hated them, and lay hard upon them; as the devil is an hard taskmaster, that nei∣ther takes off the yoke, nor layes meat: gives no rest or refreshment to his drudges, and dromedaries: but acts them and agitates them day and night, &c. Now those that are His, Christ brings them from darknesse to light, and from the power of Sa∣tan to God, that they may do works meet for repentance, that weigh just as much as Repentance doth, Acts 26.18, 20. and so finde rest to their souls: Provided,
that they take and keep Christs yoke upon them (not thinking to live as they list more saying as those Libertines in Jeremy we are delivered to do all these abominati∣ons) and learn of him to be meek and Iowly &c.Jer. 7. Mat. 11.29. so shall they soon find Christs yoke easie,Luth. in loc. and his burden light Vers. 40. And of this easie yoke of Christ Luther understands this text in Hosea; and thereupon discourseth of the Lawes rigour, and Gospels relaxation, according to that of Austin, Lex jubet, gra∣tia juvat: the Law commandeth but the Gospel helpeth: God by his spirit a∣ssisting, and further accepting pence for pounds, the will for the work, the desire for the deed done &c. and laying meate before us, meate that the world knowes not of, hidden Manna, the convivium juge of a good conscience &c. Vers. 5. He shall not return unto the land of Egypt] That is, he needs not run to Egypt for help, (as King Hosea did) nor to the Assyrian, to whom they were tri∣butaries from the time of Menahem: for they wanted nothing, and less should have wanted, if they would have been ruled by me. but they refused to return.] He was not to have returned to the land of Egypt or of the Assyrian who is his king; so some read the text. Others sense it thus: When I threaten them with the Assyrian, they think to shift and shelter themselves in Egypt: but I shall keep them thence, or find and ferret them out there. God knowes how to cross wicked men of their will, to spoyle their plots. Egypt shall prove no better then a broken reed running into the hand of him that leaneth on it 2 King. 18.21. The Egyptian was ever an enemy to Israel: and though for his own ends he gave goodly words, and seem reconciled: yet such Reconciliations are but vulpinae amicitiae. But were he never so fast a friend, yet sin-guilty Israel shall not have their an Asylum, nec stabile stabulum (see Chap 9.3. with the Note) because the desire of the wicked shall perish Psal. 112.10. They take counsell together, but it shall come to nought, they speak the word, but it shall not stand Esay. 8.10. Confer Esay. 30.1.2. and 31.1.2.3. Prov. 21.38. but the Assyrian shall be his king] Will they, nill they, they shall be carried cap∣tive to Assyria: and sith they will needs be crossing of God, he will cross them much more: he will walk contrary to those that walk contrary to him Lev. 26.21. and be as froward as they for the hearts of them Psal. 18.26. They will not re∣turn to me, saith the Lord, they shall not therefore return to Egypt: they will not submit to my scepter, they shall therefore have the Assyrian for their King, that proud cruel stout-hearted Prince Isay. 10.5.7.12. who will tyrannise over their bodies, and over their cattle at their pleasure, so that they shall be in great distress Neh. 9.37. because they refused to return] Heb. they disdained to do it, scorned the motion, slighted the messenger.Sen: in Aga∣mem. Plus est a vis se re∣vocaesse quàm vitia ipsa ne∣civisse Amb. in Psal.  By their sins they had run from God: by repentance they should have returned unto him, and then the amends had been well-nigh made: for Quem poenitet peccasse paenè est innocens the penitent is in almost as good a case as the innocent; Ambrose saith he is in a better. But for these men, to all other their sins to add obstinacie and impenitencie, as Herod to all his former evils did the death of the Baptist, this was to heap up wrath against the day of wrath Rom. 2.5. The word here rendred (refused) is by the Seventy turned They would not. That there∣fore thy returned not to God, it was the fault of their will. True it is, they had no power to turn themselves: but the cause of that inability too, was in them∣selves. They therefore neither could nor would return: and both by their own fault and folly. Vers. 6. And the sword shall abide on his cities] Heb. shall keep residence or rush upon his cities. It can do no less; it cannot return into the scabbard, rest or be still till the Lord, who put it into commission, call back againe his commission, Jer. 47.6.7. It is a dreadfull thing when the sword abideth on a people; as in Germany that stage of warr, Ireland still a land of divine ire &c. England hath some Halcy∣ons at present,incredibili ce∣leritate & temporis bre∣vitate à Pom∣peio confectum. Aug: de Civ. Dei. Mr. Burr. praise be given to God: and let every good man pray with David, scatter thou the people that delight in warr Psal. 68.30. The Piras warr was dis∣patcht by Pompey with incredible swiftness, to his eternall commendation. And we have cause to bless God (saith a countryman of ours) that God hath raised up instruments for us, who have hazarded the shortening of their own lives for the shortning of the warr: who have done their worke of late, as if they had took it
by the great &c. And the same Author observeth, that it is a sad thing for the sword to be in the field; but for the sword to be in the cities it is much more sad: and he in∣stanceth in Jerusalē out of Josephus,Jos. de bell Jud: l. 7. c. 7. where the number of the slaine was eleven hun∣dred thousand: We may further instance in that unhappy city of Magdeburg in Ger∣many, where so much cruelty was exercised first by Charles the fift, (much regrated by him at last in his retired life, taking account of his actions) & since that in our me∣mory by Mounsier Tilly, who like a bloody villain put to the sword there twenty thousand persons at least of all ranks, ages, and sexes:Mr. Clark life of K. of swed. 23. that great city also he burned down, utterly turning it into cinders excepting an hundred nine & thirty houses &c. The like immanity was exercised by the Popes champions upon the poor Protestants at Angrogue in France: where they killed and burned without mercy: but could never set fire upon the two temples there, nor upon the Ministers house,Act: and Mone 880. which remained whole, the houses round about being all consumed with fire. and shall consume his branches and devour thèm] His branches or his villages, which are as branches of the greater cities. The trees of America (but especially of Bra∣sile) are so huge, that it is reported of them,Abbbots Geog. p. 271. that severall families have lived in several armes or branches of one tree, to such a number as are in some petty village or parish here. The greater cities are as the body or-root of a tree, the villages as the branches. The scripture oft calleth them mother and daughters, as Heshborn and all her daughters, That is villages Num. 21.25. as the Chalde there explaineth it. See Ezech. 10.44.45.46.48.53. hence we read of a citieand mother in Isracl 2 Sam. 20.19. Branches also are called daughters of the trees they grow from Gen. 44.23. The word here rendred branches is by some rendred Barres, by others, Diviners or Liers, as the word here used is interpreted Jer. 50.36. A sword is upon the liars or diviners, and they shall dote: potest Augur Augurem videre & nou ridere? saith Tully of such diviners: that is, Can they one looke upon another and not laugh, considering how they gull people with their lies and fopperies? The sword shall be upon such, as it was upon Balaam Satans spelman, they shall be a portion for foxes Psal. 63.10. as those that Astutam vapido servant sub pectore vulpem. because of their own counsels] He that goeth to school to his own carnall reason, is sure to have a fool to his master; an ignis fatuus that will bring him into the bogges and briers. The wisdome of the fiesh is enmitie to God. Nemo laeditur nisi à seipso. See the Note on chap. 10. vers. 6. Vers: 7. My people are bent to backsliding from me] they have a principle of Apostacie in them, as those Galathians had, of whom the Apostle, I marvaile that you are so soon removed unto another Gospell Gal. 1.6. and as those old Apostates in the wildernesse, who so soon as Moses his back was turned almost, cryed out to Aaron, Make us golden Gods. This people was before accused to be acted by a spirit of fornication, a certain violent impetus, a strong inclination to whoredome, and to be apt to backslide with a perpetuall backsliding: all their recidivations and revolts were but a fruit of the bent of their spirits, which were false and unsettled: not resolved whether yet to turne to God, though they were beset with so many mischiefs: they hangd in suspence and rather inclined to the negative then else. Suspensi sunt, so Calvin, Pareus, and others, read this text. My people are in sus∣pence, or in a mamering whether to turne to me or not, they hang in doubt, as the same word is rendred Deut: 28.66. God liketh not that his people should stand doubtfull as Spticks; and adhere to nothing certainly: to be in religion as idle beggars are in their way, ready to goe which way soever the staffe falleth: but that they should strive to a full assurance in what they beleeve Luk. 1.4. to be fully perswaded as ver. 1. and to a firm purpose of heart in what they should practise Act. 11.23. Irresolution against sin or for God can hardly consist with the power of Godlinesse: be not off and on with him, halt not, hang not in doubt what to do; but follow God fully as Caleb did; come off freely as David, who had chosen Gods precepts when he was solicited to have done otherwise Psal. 119.173. And again, I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgements have I laid before me ver. 30. I have waighed them, and am resolved to keep them, I am come to a full determina∣tion.
Mr. Deodate senseth the words thus. They desire and expect that I should turn in favour to them and relieve them: whereas they should turn to me by re∣pentance, which they will not do: and herein he followeth Arias Montanus. Thus those stiffnecked Jewes in Jeremy expected that God should still deale with them (however they dealt with him) according to all his wondrous works chap. 21.2. presuming and promising themselves impunity; and thus Judas also had the face to ask,Mat. 26.25. as the rest did, Is it I? as resting upon Christs accustomed gentlenesse, and that he would conceale him still, as he had done certain daies before. though they called them to the most High] They, that is the Prophets as vers. 2. called them with great importunity, upon every opportunity, to the most High, to God (in opposition to those Dii minutuli petty deities whom they doted on. See chap. 7.16.) to come up to him, to have high and honourable conceptions of Him, not casting him in a base mould, as those miscreants did, Psal. 50.21. but saying as David, and with a David-like spirit, Thous Lord art high above all the earth, thou art exalted far above all Gods, and there-hence inferring, Ye that love the Lord, hate evil Psal. 97.9.10. I am God Almighty, walk before me and be upright Gen. 17.1. The God of glory appeared to Abraham Act. 7.2. he so con∣ceived of God; and hence his unchangeable resolutions for God. none at all would exalt him] Heb. together he exalted not, scarce a Hee, a single man that would do it, that would lift up his head to listen to such good counsel, (so some sence it) or that would exalt and extol the most High; who though he be high above all praise as Neh. 9.5. and cannot be praised according to his excellent greatnesse: Yet is he pleased to account himself exalted and magnified by us, when, considering the infinite distance and disproportion that is betwixt him and us, we lay our selves low at his feet for mercy, we set him up in our hearts for our sole Soveraign,2 Sam. 18.3. we esteem him as the people did David more worth then ten thousand, we give him room in our soules, and with highest apprehensions, most vigorous affections, and utmost endeavours wee bestow our selves upon him, as the only Worthy. Now this is done but of a very Few, and well done but of fewer yet; so drossy and drowsy are mens spirits, and so little is the Lord, lited up by the sons of men. See the Prophet Esay his complaint chap. 64.7. Vers: 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim?] Here beginneth the second part of this chapter, full of many sweet Evangelicall promises, and here, if ever, Mercy rejoyceth against Judgment, Cervix or treadeth on the very neck of it, as St. James his word importeth chap. 2.13. The Lord seemeth here to be at a stand, or at strife with himself about the destruction of this people fore-threatened; which well might have been a gulf to swallow them up, and a grave to bury them in for ever, being most worthy to perish, as were the Cities which God destroyed in his wrath. Gen. 19. Howbeit God in the bowels of his mercy earning and taking pitty of his Elect amongst them (for he had reserved 7000. hidden ones that had not bowed their knees to Baal) spareth to lay upon them the extremity of his wrath, and is ready to save them for his mercies sake. Heare how father-like he melts over them; how should I expose thee O Ephraim? how should I deliver thee up O Israel? How should I dispose the as Admah? how should I set thee as Zeboim] q. d. Justice requires that I should lay thee utterly wast, and even rain down hell from heaven upon thee as once upon Sodom and her sisters. But Mercy interposeth her four several How's (in the Originall two onely, expressed, but the other 2. necessarily understood, and by Interpreters fitly supplied) foure such patheticall Interrogations as the like are not to be found in the whole book of God, and not to be answered by any but God himself: as indeed he doth to each particular in the following words, My heart is turned within me, that is the first answer, The second, My repentings are kindied together: The third I will not execute the fiercenesse of my wrath: The fourth I wil not return to destroy Ephraim. And why? First I am God and not Man: Secondly the Holy One in the middest of thee. My heart is turned, or turneth it self, within me] that is my mind is changed, or at least is, in doubt what to do, in this businesse. This is spoken  after the manner of men, and must be understood  agreeably to Gods greatnesse. Here is mutatio rei non Dei, effectus non affectus, facti non consilij: Repentance
with man is the changing of his will. Repentance with God is no more then the willing of a change: ill is not a change of his will, but of his work. Confer Lam. 1.20. & 2.11. Am. 1.12. There are that render it, My hart is turned against me, that is, against my former severe sentence of cutting them all utterly off at one blow; Fiat Justitia, pereat mundus. Oh! I cannot finde in my heart to do it. For my repentings are kindled together,] Simul aestuant viscera mea poenitentiâ. So Tre∣mellius: My bowels are altogether on a light fire with repentings, as Gen. 43.30. and 1 King. 3.27. Now repentings are as improperly attributed to God, as bowels. There were a sort of ignorant Monks in Egypt, who started this foolish and ridicu∣lous question (which yet bred no small stirres there Anno Dom. 403.) An Deus corporeus sit? Whether the Divine Essence be a body, having hands, heart, bowels, &c? The ruder sort of them held it affirmatively. What blasphemies Vorstius hath vented, in that base book of his de Deo, I need not relate. How God is said to re∣pent, hath been said already: Sure it is,Calvin. that herein he graciously accommodateth himself to our rudenesse, and speaketh as we are able to bear. It appeareth that fury is not in God, Esay 27.4. Our sins put thunder-bolts into his hands, and it is, Non nisi coactus with him, when he proceeds to punishment. His bowels are ve∣ry ready to work in the wayes of grace, and mercy toward sinners: and the least act of faith in that mercy, would certainly set bowels on work amain. This the Church in Esay well knew, and therefore prayed when deserted, Look down from heaven, &c. Where is thy zeal, and thy strength?Esay 63.15, 16. the sounding of thy bowels and of they mercies toward me? are they restrained? Doubtlesse thou art our Father, notwith∣standing thine austerities. God seemeth sometimes to lose his bowels, and then we must find them for him: to sleep, and we must awake him: to hide himself, and then we must fetch him out (as the woman of Canaan did by the force of her faith, Mark. 7.24, 25.) God will come, but he will have the faithfull prayers of his people to lead him. I came for thy word, Dan. 10.9. &c. Verse 9. I will not execute the fiercenesse of mine anger,] Heb. the heat of it Gods bowels kindled, and whatsoever might cause repentance came together, and lay glowing as it were at his heart: and this cooled and even quenched the heat of his wrath, (as the Sun-beams when they shine full upon the fire) so that now hee resolves not to execute the height of his heat, the extremity of his fury, for then the spirit should fail before him. Ephraim is Gods dear sonne, his pleasant child: whom when he hears bemoaning himself, as Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. he soon repents him of the evil, ans cries, —Satis hoc, pro crimine magno Paulum supplicij lenem sunsisse parente. I will not return to destroy Ephraim,] I will not undo him twice over, or utterly ruine him: as those that have laid their enemy for dead, returne to see whether he be dead out-right: or as souldiers that have once pillaged a city, return after a while to take all that little that was left before, and to set the rest on fire. God will not deal so hardly with Ephraim, though he might do it. Reprobates indeed shall have an evil, an onely evil, Ezek. 7.5. without mixture of mercy; they must ex∣pect one plague upon another, as it fared with Pharaoh, till God had dashed the very breath out of his body, &c. But for his elect people, Hath he smitten them, as he smot those that smot them? No, but in measure, in the branches onely: hee stayeth his rough wind, &c. Esay 27.7, 8.. Hero. And as Craesus his dumb sonne burst out into Kill not King Craesus. So when enemies are ready to devour the Church, or Satan to swallow Gods child up in despair, his bowels work; he can hold no longer, but cries, Save my child, save my Church, &c. Why should the spirit fail before me, and the souls which I have made? I have seen his wayes, and (though bad enough) I will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners.Esay 57.16. 17, 18. For I am God, and not man,] yea such a God, as the like is not, for pardoning iniquity, and passing by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, Mic. 7.18. 'Tis naturall to him, Exod. 34.6. 'tis usuall, Neh. 9.17. there he is called a God of pardons, as Esay 55.7. he is said to multiply pardons. He hath commanded men to forgive an offending but repenting brother, seventy times seven times in a day, Mat. 18.22. What then will himself do? For he is God Almighty, and not man. Man is an angry vindictive, cruell creature: one man is a Wolf, yea a Devil to another: unsociable, implacable, unmercifull, as those were Rom. 1.31. Beware
of men, saith our Saviour to his disciples, Matt. 10.17. absurd and wicked men, 1 Thess. 3.2. barbarous, and bruitish, skilfull to destroy, Ezek. 21.31. Yea beware of good men, when enraged. What strange deaths did David (soon after his foul fall, and not fully recovered) put the poor Ammonites to, 2 Sam. 12.31. Further, men as they are unmercifull, so they are unmindfull of their promises. But God is not a man that he should lie, Num. 23.18. What he hath spoke with his mouth, he will make good with his hand. The eternity of Israel will not lie, (as men will, Rom. 3.4.) nor repent, (as men do, whatever he may seem to do; see the note on the former verse) for he is not a man that he should repent, 1 Sam. 15.29. Men are mutable: the truest friend is , and easily changeable creature, as the Heathen complained; all in changeable colours, as Tertullian saith of the Peacock; as often changed as moved. Not so Almighty God. I am Jehovah, I change not, Mal. 3.6. See the Note there, and remember still to retain high thoughts of God: not measuring him by our modell; as to think him to be as mercifull as we are, as powerfull as our understanding can reach, &c. See Esay 55.8, 9. and beg superna∣turall grace: without which it is impossible for a finite creature to beleeve the infi∣nite Attributes of Almighty God. the holy One in the middest of thee,] Though Israel had deeply revolted, set up golden gods, and done wickedly as they could, so that there was no visible Church amongst them, yet God was the holy One in the middest of them: Seven thousand he had reserved that Eliah knew not of, 1 King. 19.18. and a Church there was in Israel, when at worst. Like as there was in medio Papatu, in the darkest midnight of damned popery: and at this very day, there are said to be thousands of profest Protestants,Spec. Eur. even in Italy it self: and in Sivil, a chief city of Spain, there are thought to be no fewer then twenty thousand. and I will not enter into the city.] I will not invade the city as an enemy, to wast all with fire and sword, as once at Sodom. For why, there are holy ones in the mid∣dest of thee (so Rivet expoundeth it by an enallage of the number) a considerable company of righteous people, for whose sake I will spare thee, Jer. 5.1. Verse 10. They shall walk after the Lord,] powerfully calling them by his Word and Spirit, going before them, and bringing up the Rere, Esay 52.12. their King shall passe before them, and the Lord on the head of them, Mic. 2.13 Time was, when they fled from God, Hos. 7.13. and said, I will go after my lovers, &c. chap. 2. Now they are of another minde, and other manners: they shall walk after the Lord, non pedibus sed affectibus: they shall be carried after him with strength of of desire,Rev. 14.4. and delight, which he shall work in them: they shall follow the Lamb whither soever he goeth: Gods people are said in Scritpture to walk before him in godly sincerity, to walk with him in an humble familiarity, to walk after him in an holy conformity, yeelding unto him the obedience of faith. As Israel in the wildernesse, so must we, follow God and the line of his Law, though it seem to lead us in and out, backward and forward (as them) as if he were treading a maze. he shall roar like a lion,] By the preaching of the Gospel, he shall shake heaven and earth. The voice of the Gospel is, Repent. Aut poenitendum, aeut pereundum, except ye repent ye shall all perish. He that beleeveth and is baptized, shall be saved: He that beleeveth not,Mar. 16.16. shall be damned, was a terrible voice. Of the Lion it is re∣ported, that he roareth so fiercely, that the rest of the creatures stand amazed: and that, whereas his own whelps come dead into the world, he roareth over them, and reviveth them.Plutar. in lib. de just. animal. Afterwards, when he meeteth with prey, he roareth for them to come about him. Let this be applied to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Confer Jol 3.16. then the children shall tremble from the West.] The children of grace, Deut. 14.1. shall joyn themselves in spirit to the communion of the Church from all the ends of the world, where they have been scattered: they shall serve the Lord with fear, rejoyce with trembling. The Ancient Hebrews applied this promise to the coming of the Messiah: onely they dreamt of an earthly kingdom of his, as did also the disciples, being sowred with the leaven of the Pharisees. Others think it to be a Prophecie of the conversion, and calling of the Jewes, to be accomplished in the last dayes: as also of the generall spreading of the Gospel, and gathering of the Elect,
far and wide from one end of the heavens unto another. And this they call, the time of the Restitution of all things. Vorse. 11. They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt.] Trepidè accurent, so Tremellius: they shall run tremblingly. Fear causeth hast. Men delay and trifle till God strikes their hearts with fear: then 'tis ecce ego, mitte me, Here I am, send me, Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth, What wilt thou have me to do Lord? &c. ti∣mor addidit ulas; as the doves when pursued by the hawk, scour into their colum∣baries. As birds frighted, flie to their nests, and other creatures to their holes, and harbours: so do those that are prickt at heart with the terrours of the law, flee to the precious promises of the Gospel: hiding themselves in the wounds of Christ crucified, and are relieved. All St. Pauls care was, that when he was sought for by the justice of God, he might be found in Christ, not having his own righeousnesse,Phil. 3.9. but that which is through the faith of Christ. and as a dove out of the land of Assyria,] i. e. out of what countrey soever, where they shall be scattered, I will recollect them by my Gospel, which is there∣fore called Gods arm, because thereby he gathereth his Elect into his bosome. Doves flie swiftly, Psal. 55.6. and by flocks, Esay 60.8. so shall the Elect to Christ, both of Jewes and Gentiles. By the children of the West, may be meant these Western Churches, and withall the Northern parts. By Egypt, the whole South. By Ashur, all the Eastern Tract, those large and mighty kingdoms that lie Eastward from Judea, even to the Sun-rising. Thus many shall come from East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and acob in the kingdome of hea∣ven, Mat. 8.11. The molten-Sea stood upon twelve Oxen, which looked to all the four quarters of the world: so did the twelve gates of the new Jerusalem, &c. and I will place them in their houses,] Not in strong garisons, but in their own∣houses; where they shall dwell securely under their own vines and fig-trees: for they shall have the Gospel of peace, and the peace of the Gospel, See 2 Sam 7.10 Or thus, I will place them in their own houses, that is, in my Church (saith Polanus) which hath its houses and places of receipt among all people the whole world tho∣rowout, where they may serve God, without fear, in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all their dayes. Thus the Apostles in their travels, where ever they came, found brethren, &c. and having nothing, yet they possessed all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. True tranquillity and sound security is to be found no where but in Christ, Mic. 4.4. and 5.5. nor by any but by those that hear him roaring, and calling them to the participation of his grace and peace. Those that hearken to Christs Oracles shall dwell in his tabernacle. Verse 12. Ephraim composseth me about with lies,] They get about me as if they would do me doubty service (Psal. 76.11. the saints are called a people that are round about God: and Psal 148.14. a people near unto him, and that compasseth his altar. See Rev. 4.4.) but all's but counterfeit: a meer imposture, a loud lie, Psal. 78.36 whereby they would cozen me of heaven, if they could: putting upon me false coyn silver'd over a little; and circumventing me, if it lay in their power. But what saith Bernard, Sapins nummularius Deus est; Nummum fictum non reci∣piet. God is a wise Mint-man: there's no beguiling him with counterfeit coyn. Hypocrisie (that reall lie) is an odious, a complexive evil: for it hath in it, 1. Guile, opposite to simplicity, as intending to beguile God, which he cannot, and man, which he fain would, and oft doth, to further his worldly and wicked de∣signes, as Judas, Herod, Matth. 2.8. Pharisees, Mat. 23.14. 2. Falshoud, op∣posite to truth; as onely acting religion, playing devotion, compassiong God with deceit, as the house of Israel here, deceiving him not by impotency onely, and in the event; but by imposture, and so in purpose; contenting themselves with a shew, with a semblance, Luke 8.18. with a form of knowledge, Rom. 2.20. and of god∣linesse, 2 Tim. 3.5. rather eeming to be good, then seeking to be so. These are hells free-holders: and other sinners are said but to have their part with them. There are that thus interpret this Text; Ephraim compasseth me, the Prophet preach∣ing mercy, and promising good things, they beset me, and gather close about me, as desirous of my doctrine: but it is in mendacio, in hatfull hypocrysic (see Ezek. 33.31, 32.) and when I crosse them never so little, they craftily conspire to pre∣judice my Ministery, to asperse my person, &c. To preach saith One, is nothing else
but to derive the rage of the whole world upon a mans self, to become the But-mark, yea the Center ad quod omnes lineae dolorum tendunt,Meisner. in loc. to which all the lines of lies and falsehoods do tend. but Judah yet ruleth with God,] To serve God is to rule with him (as Livia said, she ruled her husband Augustus, by obeying him) It is the greatest liberty, Rom. 6.18, 22. 1 Pet. 2.16. Abraham was a prince of God, Jacob prevailed with God, and had power as a Prince, Gen. 32.28. Moses (as if he had been Chan∣cellour of heaven) over-ruled the businesse, and God is fain to bespeak his own freedom, Exod. 32.10. Judah also is here said to rule with God, to be potent with him; because God was sincerely served amongst them, and they held fast their first integrity: the true religion was openly professed, and the true worship of God in∣corruptly maintained in the Temple at Jerusalem. This made Abijah (though none of the best) so boldly to boast, and he prevailed: so that there fell down of Israel slain four hundred thousand, 2 Chron. 14.10, 17. and yet the men of Judah that slew them, were but four hundred thousand ina ll, verse 3. Israels Apostacy is here aggravated by Judah's integrity: they were not under the temptation of evil ex∣ample. Judah was the worse for them, and not they for Judah. and is faithfull with the Saints.] Or, with the most Holy: he keepeth the faith to God, those Holy Ones, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit (so some sence it) as Josh. 24.19. Prov. 9.10. he is far from those false and fraudulent dealings where∣with the ten Tribes seek to circumvent and beguile god. Or thus, Jxlah is faith∣full with the saints of former ages: he holds to his old principles, to the good old way, wherein Abraham and the other Ancients went before him. He is also faith∣full; with such as are sanctified, the true priests of God, consecrated to himself, and set apart for holy use: In opposition to the ten Tribes, who went after those leaden priests made by Ieroboam of the lower sort of the people, and well fitted to golden deities. Lastly, he is faithfull with the people of God, those good souls that left the ten Tribes and went to Judah, to the true worship of God. With these Judah was faithfull, courteous, and communicative: embracing and encouraging them all that might be. This was a singular commendaton. CHAP. XII. Verse 1. EPhraim feedeth on wind,] Slender feeding; unlesse Ephraim were of the Chamaeleon-kind: quippe nec cor auro satiatur nec corpus aura. Wind fills,Esay 55.10, 2 Cor. 9.10. but feeds not. Ephraim had sowed the wind, chap. 8.7. but to what profit? Hee that ministreth seed to the sower, and bread to the eater, would here, surely, neither give bread for food, nor multiply their seed sown, but send them to the gods that they had chosen, and to their confederates whom they so relied upon, from whom they should reap the whirlwind. (See the Note on chap. 8.7.) Wind, we know, bloweth up storms and tempests: so doth idolatry and creature-confi∣dence, the tempest of Gods wrath that will never be blown over. and followeth after the East-wind,] Which if he catch, a great catch he is like to have of it. Eurus est ventus urens & exsiccans. The East-wind is noted in Scri∣pture for pernicious and hurtfull to fruits and herbs, Gen. 41.6. Ezek. 7.10. and 29.17. Hos. 13.15 violent it is also, and spareth not men, Ion. 4.8. The Seven∣ty render it, , a burning blast, as they do the former words, Ephraim is an evil spirit, by a mistake of the points. Iob speaketh of some that fill their bellies with the East-wind; they think to do so, but it proves otherwise: they snuff up the wind with the wild-asse, but it tumours them onely, and proves pestilentiall. It is very dangerous for men to follow after their own conceits and counsels. It may be worse to them upon their death-beds, when they are lanching into the main of Immortality,Euroaquilo. then any rough East-wind, or then any Euroclydon, that wind menti∣oned, Acts 27.14.Ʋna erusque uotus{que} ruunt. Virg. that hath its name from stirring up stormes, and is by Pliny called Navigantium pestis, the Mariners misery. An empty body meeting with tempests, will have much ado to bear up. If Ephraim first seed upon wind, and then fall under the East-wind, it must needs go hard with him. The godly man, who is filled with all the fulnesse of God, Ephes. 3.19. shall have him for a refuge from
the storme, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storme against the wall, Esay 25.4. His prayer is that of Ieremy, chap. 17. vers. 17. Be not thou a terrour unto me, O Lord: thou art my hope in the day of evil. If the wind be not got into the earth, and stir not there, storms and tempests abroad can∣not make an earthquake: no more can afflictions, or death, an heart-quake, where there is peace with God: Such a mans mind immota manet, is as mount Zion which cannot be removed. He daily increaseth lies and desolation,] This being the fruit and consequent of those; for flagitium & flagellum sicut acus & filum, sinne and punishment are in∣separable companions, Wo unto them for they have fled from me: destruction unto them, because they have transgressed against me, Hos. 7.13. See the Note there. To heap up lies, is to hasten desolation. A false witnesse shall not be unpunished: and he that speaketh lies shall perish, Prov. 19.9. They tell us of a threefold lie, i. e. A merry lie, an officious lie, and a pernicious lie. But the truth is, every lie is pernicious: and a man should rather die then lie. He that lieth in jest, may go to hell for it in earnest. Iacob told his father an officious three-foldlie, and scarce ever had a merry day after it, Gen. 27.19. God followed him with one sorrow upon an∣other, to teach him and us, what an evil and a bitter thing it is to cumulate lies, as here, and how it ensnares and ensnarles us. And they do make a covenant with the Assyrian, and oil is carried into Egypt.] that is, all precious and pleasant substance was carried for a present, to make roomth for them. Oil is instanted, as the chief staple commodity of the land, (see Ezek. 27.17.) and in Egypt very scarce: this sin of theirs in seeking to other nations, and relying on the arme of flesh, is oft reproved and threatned thorowout this Prophesie. See chap. 5.13. & 7.11. & 9.8. & 10.4 & 11.5. To neach Gods Ministers to continue crying out against the prevailing sinnes of the people, and never give over, till they see a reformation wrought amongst them.Tle. 1.15. The Cretians are alwayes lyars, &c. Rebuke them sharpely, saith the Apostle; yea, be instant and constant, in season, and out of season, using the same liberty in beating down sin, that men do to commit it. Chrysstom told his heaters at Antioch, that till they left their swearing, he would never leave preaching against it. Verse 2. The Lord hath also a controversie with Judah,] Lest the Prophet should be thought partiall in the law, Mal. 2.9. (See the Note there) and lest Ephraim should say of Judah, as once Oded did of Israel; Are there not with them, even with them also, sinnes against the Lord? The Prophet answers by way of concession,2 Chro. 28.10 that there were so indeed; and that therefore God had a controversie with them, a litigation, or disceptation: he was expostulating with them by words, and some lighter stroaks, notwithstanding he had commended them before, as ruling with God, and retaining his pure worship. God would take his time to deal with them too, for their many impieties, and especially for running to Egypt for help, as they did in the dayes of Ahaz, and Zedekiah, see Esay 30.2. and 31.1. but because they were not yet so bad as the ten Tribes, nor so desperately wicked,See chap. 4.15. & 5.5, 8, 12, 13, 14. & 6.11. therefore the Lord was yet but pleading with them, he had not passed sentence, he was not resolved upon their ruine and utter extirpation: as he was for the ten Tribes, those foul Apostates and shamelesse covenant-breakers: concerning whom he saith, and is set upon't, I will punish Jacob according to his wayes.] See the like words, chap. 4. verse 9. with the Note. He calls them Jacob, because they gloried much in him their Progenitour, as did likewise the Samaritans that succeeded them, Iob. 4.12. So did the Jews in Micah chap. 2.7. But the Prophet Hosea answereth them in effect (as there) by proving a disparity. O th that art named the house of Iacob, (that wilt needs be named so, and therein pridest thy self) is the Spirit of the Lord raitned? (ye are not surely straitned in him, but in your own bowels,Odlosum & impium dog Anaptista∣rum. qui idea pueris batis. mum negant, quia sensu & mente careant. Luther. in loc. . that yee expresse Iacob no better, that ye resemble him no more) Are these his doings? was Iacob a man of your practises? No: for he left no means unattempted, that hee might attain the blessing: he strove for it with his brother in the womb, afterwards with the Angel, against whom with much wrestling and raising of dust, he prevai∣led, as it followeth in the two next verses. Verse 3. He took his brother by the heel in the womb, to have hindred him if he could, of the first-birth-right; so desirous he shewed himself, so soon, of that de∣sireable
sireable priviledge, and the proises annexed. Whence we may learn (saith One) that God taketh care even of unborn babes, that belong to him, and worketh strangely in them sometimes, as he did in the Baptist, Luke 1.44. the child leaped in the womb, by a supernaturall motion; he leaped more like a suckling at the brest, as the word signifieth, then an unborn Embryo. Mention had been made in the former verse, of the name of Jacob: here we have the etymon, or reason of that name; He took his brother by the heel, or foot-sole, as if he would have turned up his heels and got to the goal before him. Hence his name was called Iacob, Gen. 25.26. that is, Calcanearius, or Heel-catcher, as if he would have pulled his bro∣ther back; or presage of what he should afterwards do, viz. supplant Esau, and get the preheminence both of birth-right; and blessing; Gen. 27.36. and withall a fruit, an instance of Gods free grace, in preferring Jacob when he could not yet do any thing that was good) before Esan, though he were the elder, stronger, stouter, a manly child, a man already, as his name importeth, one that had every thing more like a man then a babe. See Mal. 1.2. with the Note. And observe, that God here upbraideth Iacobs degenerate brood, with his benefits toward him their forefather, whereof they now walked so utterly unworthy. And by his strength,]. By his hard labour, say the Seventy but better, by, or in his strength, that is, by the supply of the Spirit of Iesus Christ, Phil. 1.19. and by the power of the Almighty, casting him down with the one hand, and bearing him up with the other. He had  with God.] Heb. he played the Prince with God, fortiter & fide∣liter se gessit, he bore himself bravely, and had strength with God. He doth not lie down sullen and discouraged, but wrestleth with excellent wrestlings; he held with his hands, when his joynts were out of joynt. He wrestled in the night, and alone, and when God was leaving him, and upon one leg, and prevailed, as it is in the next verse. This he did partly by his bodily strength elevated, for he was a very strong man, as appeareth Gen. 29.10. by his rouling the great stone from the Wels mouth; but principally by the force of his faith put forth in prayer, which can work wonders.Ephes. 3.16. Oh, its a sweet thing indeed to be strengthened with might, by the spirit, in the inner man. Orqu hic home, non est omnium! This is the generation of them that seek him:Psal. 24.6. that seek thy face, this is Iacob: yea, this is Israel, for so God knighted him, as it were, in the field for his good service: and new named him, G 3.28. Neither were the faithfull ever since called Abrahamites, or Isaakites, but Israelites; for honours sake. Verse 4. Yea, he had power over the Angel.] that Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. the Angel of the great Council, as the Seventy render, Esay 9.6. the Lord Christ, who redeemed Jacob from all evil, Gen. 48.16. and is called Elohim in the former verse Iacob is reproved for asking his name, an argument of his Majestie. God as he surmounteth all creatures, and hath no parallel, so he surpasseth all no∣tion, and is above all name.Plutarch. lib. de Isd. & Ofid The Africanes call him Amon, that is Heus, tu, quis et? Our best eloquence of him,  an humble filence: Or if we say any thing, to say as in the next verse following, Iehovah, God of heasts, Jehovah is his momoriall. and prevailed] Sept. . He had power, or got the better, Christ yeelding himself overdome by the prayers of the Patriarch: for the effectuall servent pray∣er of a righteous man availeth much, saith St. James: there is a kinde of omnipo∣tency in it, saith Luther, of whom also that saying passed amongst his friends, Iste vir pot uit, apud Des qnod volit, That man could do what he would with God. The reason whereof is given by St. Hierom, in these words, Deus ipse qui nulliscon∣tra se viribusuperari potest, precibus viucitur, that is God himself, who is other∣wise insuperable, may be overcome by prayers: provided that men persevere in prayer as Jacob did,Invictum vin∣cunt vota pre∣es{que} Deum. holding out till the morning-light, and growing more resolute toward the later end then he had been before. He wept and made supplication.] Jacob did. (not the Angel, as Mercer and Dru∣srus would carry it) His wrestling was by weeping, and his prevayling by praying. Verbum, preces, & lachryma, Misera arma sunt Ecclesia.
We read not till this Text, of his weeping for the blessing, (no more we do of the earthquake in Hezekiah's dayes, till Amos 1. and Zach. 14.) But this we know, that ardent prayer is a pouring out of the soul to God, not without a shower of tears, or at least a storm of sighes. And as musick upon the water sounds farther, and more harmoniously then upon the land: so prayers with tears are more plea∣sing to God, and prevalent with him. Christ could not but look back to those weeping women that followed him to the crosse, and comfort them. Tears of com∣passion, and of compunction, when men love and weep, as Mary Magdalen did, are very acceptable to God, who puts them into his bottle as precious. There are tears of another sort, lachrimae nequitiae, tears of wickednesse, expressed either by hypocrisie or a desire of revenge: such were Esau's tears for the blessing too, Gen. 27.38. but he went without it, because a profane hypocrite: he cried out of discontent, and threatened his brother Iacob: he complained of his fathers store, (Hast thou but one blessing) of his brothers subtilty, (was he not rightly called Iacob?) but not a word of his own wickednesse. He roared for the disquietnesse of his heart, but he did not, as Iacob, weep and make supplication to his Judge,Hithchame. deploring his own wants, and imploring the supplies of his grace, quam unicè ex∣petijt, as the main thing he desired. he found him in Bethel,] that is the Lord found Iacob there, Gen. 28.18. but especially, Gen. 35.14. confirming his promises to him and all his posterity. there he spake with us,] who were then in Iacobs loyns, and promised that God should be our God: but we have falsified with him, and turned Bethel into Beth∣aven: abusing that place to idolatry and calf-worship, where we, in our forefathers, had so many manifestations of divine mercy. Oh better he had never spoken with us there. then that we should have so slighted his promises, cast his words behinde our backs, and wickedly departed from our God. Is this Iacob-like, &c. There hee spake with us. What he spake with Iacob, he spake with us: and wee are to hold our selves no lesse concerned therein then he was. See a like expression. Psal. 66.6. See likewise, Rm. 15.4. and Heb. 13.5. what God spake to Ioshua, chap. 1.5. he spake to all Beleevers And that which he spake to his afflicted; Psal. 102. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer, that he spake to us: for verse 18. This shall be written for the generations to ome. The Hebrews have a proverb; Quae patribus a ciderunt signum sunt filijs, What things befell the fathers, those were a signe to their children: and thence it is, that the deeds of the fathers are oft attributed to the children. Let us labour to see our own names written up∣on every promise: and secure our interest by searching for the conditions whereun∣to the promises are annexed; and then put them in suit by faithfull prayer, saying with David, Remember thy word unto thy servant, whereupon thou hast caused me to trust. Verse 5. Even the Lord God of hosts,] Lo, He it is who promised, who spake with us at Bethel: even that Jehovah who is himself unchangeable and Almighty; whose promises are eternall, and infallible: who will perform with his hand, what he hath spoken with his mouth, to the thousandth generation of those that return unto him. Concerning Gods name Jehovah, see the Note on Mal. 3.6. Concer∣ning his Title, God of Hosts, see the Notes on Mal. 3.17. Doct. 1. The Lord is his memoriall.] Jehovah is that nomen majestativum (as Tertullian hath it) that holy and reverend name of God, whereby he will be known, and re∣membred,Psal. 111. Exod. 3.19. which place doth notably illustrate this. True it is, that the Jews to countenance their conceit of the ineffability of this name Jehovah, do corrupt that Text: and, for this is my name Legnalam for ever, they read, this is my name Legnalam, to be concealed. Where it is well observed by One, how crosse the superstition of men is to the will of God. They in a pretended reverence to God, will not so much as mention this name; because they say, 'tis a name that God so much glorieth in: and yet the Text saith, this name is Gods memoriall: it is the name by which he would be remembred to all generations, as that which set∣teth forth his glory more then any other Name whatsoever. So that when we would have a holy memoriall of God (and to remember Him,Tam Dei me∣minisse opus est quam respirare. Nazianzen. is every whit as needfull as to draw breath, saith an Ancient) we need no Images or other unwarrantable helps: the meditation of the Name Jehovah, and the import of it, will be of singular use
that way. Papists have their pictures, and their memories, as they call them; Ido∣laters fain to themselves diverse representations, and remembrances. Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrances, Esay 57.8. where Gods Law should have been written, according to Deut. 6.9. & 11.12. and when as Gods Name should have been remembred, Psal. 135.13. and Psal. 102.12. Verse 6. Therefore turn thou to thy God,] The premises considered, Repent: and so return to God from whom thou hast deeply revolted. It is to thy God, to whom thou art exhorted to turn; not to a tyrant, but to a God in covenant: yea it is with thy God (as the Hebrew hath it) with his good help, that thou shalt turn.. Onely cry unto him, Turn us Lord, and we shall be turned, draw us, and we will run after thee, &c. Of turning to the Lord, see the Note on Zach. 1.3. Keep mercy and judgement,] Those magnalia legis, those weightier matters of the Law (as our Saviour calleth them, Matth. 23.23.) which Ephraim had made light of, chap. 4.1. He is therefore called upon to evidence the truth of his turning to God, by bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, Matth. 3.8. such as are tantamount, and weigh just as much as repentance comes to. Optima & aptissima poenitentia est nova vita, saith Luther; The best and rightest repentance is a new life, universall obedience to both Tables of the Law: Mercy and judgement are here put (by a figure) for the duties of the second Table: as constant waiting up∣on God for the duties of the first: for the Prophet here observeth not the order of nature,Donande. Condonands. but of our knowledge, when he instanceth first in the second Table, as doth also the Prophet Micah, chap. 6.8. Mercy must be kept and exercised, by 1 Gi∣ving, 2 Forgiving: This God prefers before sacrifice, Hos. 6.7. This Chrysostom saith, is a more glorious work then to raise from the dead. And here let those that would keep mercy (and not shew it onely sometimes, when they are in a good mood) steep their thoughts in the mercies of God: and so strive to be mercifull, as their heavenly Father is, Matth. 6. Judgement also must be kept, and justice done, Esay 56.1. after the example of God, who is said to exercise loving-kindnesse, but with∣all judgement, and righteousnesse in the earth, Ier. 9.24. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous, yea our God is mercifull, Psal. 116.5. the mixture of mercy and judgement is very comely: as in publike persons, Psal. 101.1. (where we see, that Davids ditty was composed of discords, which made an excellent harmony) so in others of all sorts, Prov. 21.21. who are required to be mercifully just, and justly mercifull in all their enterdealings: according to that golden rule, given by our Saviour, Luke 6.31. Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye to them likewise. This is the standard. and wait on thy God continually.] First, beleeve Him to be thy God, by a parti∣cular individuating faith: and then thou wilt be easily drawn to wait upon him, who waiteth to be gracious: or to draw near unto him, (as the Seventy here ren∣der it) and come boldly to the throne of grace, Heb 4.16. for as the Ark of the Covenant,. and the Mercy-seat, were never separated: to neither is the mercy of God from those that are in covenant with him, and can truely call him Theirs. Hope is compared to a line (the same Hebrew word that signifieth the one signifi∣eth the other) and waiting on God is nothing else but Hope and Trust lengthened, or drawn out. Sure it is that Trust in God at length will triumph: and all his dis∣pensations will appear beautifull in their season. Hold out therefore faith and pati∣ence. Wait upon the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart: Wait I say upon the Lord.Psal. 27.14. Ponder that sweet promise, Habak. 2.3. not delivered only, but doubled, and trebled for more surety. And then consider first thy distance from God in worth, and degree: next thy dependance upon him, thine undone con∣dition, if he desert thee: and then thou wilt be content to wait upon him conti∣nually, to stay his leisure as David did for the kingdom, and as those in Esther did for deliverance: to say with those good souls in the Acts, The will of the Lord be done. Verse 7. He is a merchant,] Heb. He is Canaan, that is, a meer naturall man, Ezek. 16.3. a money-merchant, who so he may have it, careth not how he comes by it: he is more like a Canaanite then a Jacobite. Jacob said, I have enough my bro∣ther; but Ephraim is sick of the plague of unsatisfiablenesse: and instead of keep mercy and judgement, as in the former verse, he keepeth false ballances in his hand,
and false weights in his bag, Deut. 15.13, 14, 15. Lev. 19.36. Prov. 11.1. and 16.11. and 20.10. See the Notes there, He that hath his hands full of the ballan∣ces of deceit, and will not loose them to take hold of God, will not part with his fat and sweet (as the Vine and Olive in Iothams Purable) though it be to raigne in heaven, how can it be expected that he should turne to God, or that he should love to be his servant, Esay 56.6? when hee loveth to oppresse.] To get gain, if not by fraud and cunning contri∣vance, then by force, and by forged cavillation, as Luke 19.9. Sic quaecunque po∣test arte nocere, nocet: And all this he loveth to do: he delights in it; he not one∣ly is pleased with it, but pleadeth for it, and opposeth with crest and brest what∣soever standeth in the way of his own heart; exercised with covetousnesse, (as S. Peters phrase is, 2 Pet. 2.14,) which he constantly followeth, as the Artificer doth his trade. Let such Canaanites read that flaming text, 1 Thess. 4.6. and take heed, lest while they get all they can, by wrench and wile, lest while they count all good fish that comes to net, they catch at length the Devil and all: lest they receive no lesse summes of curses, then of coyn; lest screech-owls of woe cry aloud, from the beams of their chambers, &c. See the Note on chap. 7.1. Verse 8. And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich,] Sed mihi plande domi. I have it howsoever, though I hear ill for it; though the Prophet inveigh against my covetousnesse, yet I am rich, while he and his companions are poor, and indigent: yea I have found me out substance,] An idol, so the Vulgar renders it:Ephes. 5.5. and in∣deed, every covetous man is an idolater, and performs both outward and inward ser∣vice to his Mammon of unrighteousnesse, to his golden-calf.. Substance hee here craekes of, and rest to his soul (as the Seventy render it) in opposition happly to the aery notions (as he accounted them) of the Prophets invectives against his cove∣tous practises, and the terrours of his own conscience, which he endeavoured to corrupt and bribe: See to like purpose, Esay 57.10. Thou hast found the life of thy hand, that is, a livelihood by thy labour; therefore thou wast not grieved: thy heart is hardened, and thou art insensible of thy sin-guiltinesse; thou settest the gain against the guilt, and then all is hall with thee. Felix scelus virtus vocatur;Tul. de divin. lib. 2. Prosperous wickednesse is accounted vertue. Leah, because fruitfull, and successefull, rejoyced in that whereof she had greater reason to repent. So did those Idolaters, Ier. 44.11. Dionysius, after the spoil of an idol-Temple, finding the winds favou∣rable in his Navigation; Lo, said he, how the gods approve of sacriledge. It is no better that Ephraim here deals with the Almighty: Surely saith he, if God disliked my courses so much as the Prophet would make beleeve,, I should not gather wealth as I do: but the world comes tumbling in upon me, therefore my wayes are good before God. This is an ordinary paralogisme, whereby wicked worldlings deceive their own souls; hardning and heartning themselves in their sinfull practi∣ses, because they outwardly prosper. But a painted face is no signe of a good com∣plexion. Seneea could say, That it is the greatest unhappinesse to prosper in evil. In all my labours,] so he calleth his fraudulent and violent practises, as making the best of an ill matter. They shall find no iniquity in me.] Though they search as narrowly as Laban did into Jacobs stuff: What can they find, or prove by me? Am I not able, either to hide mine ill-dealings, or to defend them? Can they take the advantage of the Law against me? Why then should I be thus condemned and cried out of, as I am? Thus the rich man is wise in his own conceit, Prov. 28.11. and covetousnesse is ne∣ver without its cloak, 1 Thess. 2.5. which yet is too short to cover it from God, who is not mocked with masks, or fed with fained words, whereof the covetous caitiff is sull, 2 Pet. 2.3. witnesse Ephraim here, with his pretences, of innocency, In all my labours, that is, mine ill-gotten goods, (the fruit of mine hard and ho∣nest labour, saith he) they shall find none iniquity, no crimen stellionatus, no craft or cruelty. That were sinne.] Piaculum esset, that were a foul businesse: farre be it from me to stain my trading, or burden my conscience with any such misdeed. I would you should know, I am as shie of sinne as another: neither would I be taken trip∣ping for any good. Thus men notoriously guilty, may yet give good words, yea largely professe what they are guilty of, to be an abominable thing. And this is a
sure signe of a profane and cauterized conscience, of an heart that being first tur∣ned into earth and mud, doth afterwards freez and congeal into steel and ada∣mant. Verse 9. And I that am thy Lord God from the land of Egypt,] This seemeth to be interlaced for the comfort of the better sort, that trembled at the former threat∣nings: for as in a family, if the dogs be beaten, the children will be apt to cry; so is it in Gods house. Hence he is carefull to take out the precious from the vile, and telleth them, that he hath not cast off his people whom he foreknew: but would surely observe his ancient covenant, made even in the land of Egypt toward his spirituall Israel I will yet make them to dwell in tabernacles, &c.] i. e. I will deliver my Church from the spiritual Egypt: and make her to passe thorow the wildernesse of the world,Diode. in particular Churches, aspiring toward the heavenly Canaan: even as my people dwelt in Tents in the wildernesse, the remembrance whereof is celebrated in the feast of Tabernacles, Lev. 23.43. See Zach. 14.16. with the Note. Verse 10. I have also spoken by the Prophets,] And not suffered you to walk in your own wayes,Esay 30.20. as did all other Nations, Acts 14.16. The Ministery is a singular mercy, however now vilipended. and I have multiplied visions,] whereby I have discovered thy present sins, and imminent dangers, though thou hast said, They shall finde none iniquity in me, &c. The wit of Mammonists will better serve them to palliate and plead for their dile∣ctum delictum, their beloved sinne, then their pride will suffer them once to con∣fesse and forsake it, though never so plainly and plentifully set forth unto them. and used similitudes by the ministery of the Prophets,] Heb. by the hand, which is the instrument of instruments,. saith the Philosopher: so is the ministery of the word, for the good of souls. It is called a hand, because it sets upon mens souls with the strength of God, and a certain vehemency. Did not my word lay hold upon your fathers? Zach. 1.6. See the Note there. It is said, Luke 5.17. that as Christ was teaching, the power of the Lord was present, &c. The Gospel of Christ is the power of God, Rom. 1.16. It is his mighty arm, Esay 53.1. Now it was ordinary with the Prophets to use similitudes, as Esay 5.2. Ezek. 16.3. which is an excel∣lent way of preaching and prevailing: as that which doth noth notably illustrate the truth, and insinuate into mens affections. Galeatius Caracolus, an Italian Mar∣quesse, and Nephew to Pope Paul the fit, was converted by Peter Martyr reading on 1 Corinth. and using an apt similitude. Ministers must turn themselves into all formes and shapes, both of spirit and of speech for the reaching of their hearers hearts; they must come unto them in the most woing, winning, and convincing way that may be. Onely in using of Similies, they must, 1. Bring them from things known and familiar, things that their hearers are most acquainted with, and accustomed to. Thus the Prophets draw comparisons from fishes to the Egyptians, vineyards to the Jews, droves of cattle to the Arabians, trade and traffique to the Egyptians. And thus that great Apostle, 1 Cor. 9 24. fetcheth Similies from run∣ners, and wrestlers, exercises that they were well acquainted with in the Isthmian Games, instituted by Thesus, not far from their city. 2. Similies must be very na∣turall, plain, and proper. 3. They must not be too far urged: we must not wit∣wanton it in using them: and let it be remembred, that though they much illustrate a truth, yet Theologia parabolica nihil probat. There are nterpreters of good note, that read this whole verse in the future tense; and make a continuation of that promise in the verse afore. I will speak by the Prophets, sc. in the dayes of the Gospel, when great was the company of those that published it, Psal. 68.11. I will multiply visions: See this fulfilled, Acts 2.17. with Joel 2.28. I will use similitudes, teach in parables, and illustrate therewith grave sentences and doctrines, as Christ and his Apostles did, and as the best Preachers still do, that they may thereby set forth things to the life, and make them as plain, as if written with the Sun∣beams. Verse 11. Is there iniquity in Gilead?] What in Gilead, a city of Priests? (See chap. 6. ver. 8. with the Note) yea Gilead is a city of those that work iniquity, a very Poneropolis, a place of naughty-packs, chap. 4.15. Now there is not a worse creature on earth, then a wicked Priest, nor a worse place then a wicked Gilead
The Hebrew hath it thus, Is Gilead iniquity? Or as Luther, Drusius, and others, certè verè, profectè. Surely it is so. Confer Mich. 1.5. Gregory Nazianzen reports of Athens, that it was the plaguiest place in the world for superstition. Our Universities were so in times of Popery, and began to be so again, a few years since. Revera Gilead est iniquitas, profectò vanitas sunt, they were grown so incorrigibly flagitious, that they seemed to be as it were, transformed into sinnes image. Some render the Text thus; Is there iniquity in Gilead? Are they onely vanity in Gilgal? They sacrifice, bullocks, &c. and set this sence upon it. What? think you the men of Gilead, those beyond the river of Jordan, whom Tiglath Pilesen poyled and ld captives, that they onely were guilty of idolatry, and you not, because you remain at home, un∣touched of the Assyrian? Nay, saith He, the very entrance into the Countrey,Jun. & Trem. Gil∣gal it self, so aboundeth with idolatry, that it is not to be doubted, but in the rest of the parts of the kingdome, their altars are as thick as furrows in the field, that is to say, innumerable. Some think this last clause, their altars are as heaps in the fur∣rows of the field (or of my fields, whereof I am chief Lord,Sadai. and wherein he should have served me, and not idols) hath reference to some superstitious way of theirs, of seeking God, by erecting altars in the furrows, for the fructifying of their fields the Heathen did so to their Dij Terminales: and the Papists still do so in their so∣lemn Processions, erecting crosses and crucifixes in the bounds of their fields, and thereby thinking to get a blessing on their corn and pastures. Turnovius, noteth here, that God in the old Testament would therefore have but one Altar, whereon to offer sacrifice, and that to be at Jerusalem onely, to teach them that Christ, the Anti-type of all their sacrifices, should once be offered up upon the altar of his Crosse, a propitiation for their sinnes, Heb. chap. 9. & 10. This Altar he also ap∣pointed to be in the Temple, that the sacrificers might beleeve the gracious presence of God with them, and might worship him in spirit and in truth. Verse 12. And Jacob fled into the countrey of Syria,] Iacob, in whom ye glory, was a poor forlorne fugitive, glad to runne for his life, and to take hard on for his livelyhood, Gen. 28. & 29. This they were bound by the Law to make confession of ever when they offered their basket of first fruits, and to say, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, &c. Deut. 26.5. that, considering the meannesse of their original, they might not boast of their ancestry; but magnifie, Gods, free-grace in their present enjoyments; and say as that noble Athenian General Aphicrates did, in the middest of all his triumphs,  from how great basenesse and mi∣sery, to what great blessednesse and glory are we exalted? King Agathocles, would be served in earthen vessels, to mind him of his father, who was a poor potter. Willigis Arch bishop of Ments, Anno 1011. being a Wheel-wrights sonne, hang'd wheels, and wheel-wrights-tools round about his bed-chamber, and under-wrot in Capitall Letters, Willigis, Willigis recole unde veneris, Remember thine Originall.Buchler: How low and mean were we of this Nanion at first? Brith signifieth blew-coloured, sc. with woad; Hence our name Britains: This was their fine clothing: their food was barks of trees and roots. Holishd saith, chat some old men he knew, who told of times in England, that if the good-man of the house had a matris, or a flock-bed, and a sack of chaffe to rest his head on, he thonght himself as well lodg'd, as the Lord of the Town: for ordinarily, they lay upon straw-pallets cove∣red with canvase, and a round log under them heads instead of a bolster they said, pillows were fit onely for women in child-bed and in a good farmers house, it was rare to find four pieces of Pewter: and it was accounted a great matter that a far∣mer should shew five shillings, or a noble together in silver, &c. There are that render the Text thus: Thither fled Jacob nut of the countrey of Syri, after Israel had served for a wife, and for a wife had kept sheep. Verse 13. Hither also by a Prophee did Jehovah, bring up Israilent of Egypt, &c.] that is, Gilead served as a sanctuary unto Jacob, when be fled from Laban, In Gilgal also God by Joshuah renewed his Covenant with your fathers after he had brought them out of Egypt, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. A horrible thing therefore it is, if well considered, that these two places should now he so im∣pured with idolatry; and become the nuts of evil, which heretofore were the means of so great comfort to Gods people. Thus Junius, Planus, and others. A witty interpretation, but somewhat forced.
And Israel served for a wife,] He had nothing to endow her with, he would therefore earn her with his hard labour: wherein he shewed singular humility, pa∣tience, meeknesse, waiting upon Gods providence: none of all which graces were found in his degenerate posterity, who yet prided themselves in their father Iacob. And for a wife he kept sheep.] q. d. Jacob, that he might obey his father, was content to serve his Uncle; and to suffer a great deal of wrong from him: but ye refuse to serve me though a liberall Lord, a bountifull Benefactour. He held close to me in that hard service: but you abusing your liberty, enslave your selves to false gods. He in his misery kept his confidence of the blessing: but you in your pro∣sperity, cast it clean away, &c. Luther upon this Text speaketh much about the blessing of a good wife,um qua per∣petu rixan. dum. (a commodity that cannot be too dear bought) and the plague of a scold that is alwayes rayling and wrangling. The Heathen well saith, that every man when he marrieth, bringeth either a good, or an evil spirit into his house; and so maketh it either an heaven or an hell. Parcus well observeth here, the great use of Histories and holy examples, according to Rom. 15.4. Plato thinks that Historia comes ,In Cratyle. of stopping the flux of errours and enor∣mities. Verse 13. And by a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt,] By Moses that Prophet, by an excellencie: as Aristotle is called the Philosopher, Tully the Oratour, Paul the Apostle, Calvin, the most learned Interpreter, &c. Moses was a famous Prophet indeed, and a Type of Christ. Confer Deut. 18.15, 18. and 34.10, 11, 12. Acts 3.22. and 7.35, 36, 37, 38. Theodoret calleth him the great Ocean of Divinity.. Bellarmin, Gods speciall favorite, then whom Antiquity had nihil sapientius, sanctius, mitius, none more wise, meek, and holy: Indeed, titles of honour are not worthy of him. Howbeit he was but a mean man at first, Exod. 4.30. he took his wife and his sonne and set them upon an asse; that was the best, and the onely beast that he had, for ought we read. It was not very likely that so poor a Prophet should do so great a deed. But God loves to help his people with a little help, Dan. 11.34. that through weaker means, his greater strength may ap∣pear. His end here may seem to be the same as before, in setting forth Jacobs mean∣nesse, to take down the haughtinesse of the people, proud of their Founders and forefathers. A Prophet he is purposely called, and his name concealed, 1. To shew, that the work was done not by might nor by power, but by Gods Spirit; Zech. 4.6. 2. To shew what God will do for his people by the prayers and for the sake of his Prophets, when they are most shiftlesse and hopelesse. 3. To let this unworthy people see how much God and done for them once by a Prophet, how little soever now they set by such. This is Cyrus observation. Verse 14.Excusserunt ex suvissim pectore meo suevitatem. Ephraim hath provoked him to anger, most bitterly,] Heb. with bitter∣nesses, or unto bitter displeasure, or with bitter things, that is, sinnes that imbitter Gods Spirit and put thunder-bolts into his hands. As a Bee stings not till provo∣ked, so neither doth God punish, till there be no remedy, 2 Chron. 36.16. If Ephraim will provoke him to anger,. (which he will not dare to do to his land-lord) if he will put it to the triall, whether God can be angry, as those did, Heb. 3.9. he shall know the power of his wrath, Psal. 90.11. he shall feel, to his sorrow, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that he hath forsaken the Lord, and that his fear is not in them, Jer. 2.19. there will be bitternesse in the end, Principium dulce est, sed finis amoris amarus, Amr amaror. Lust is a lie, as Amnon proved. Her end is bitter as wormwood, though her lips drop as an honey-combe, saith Solomon of sinfull plea∣sure, Prov. 5.3. It is like Jonathans honey, or Esau's pottage, or Iudas his thirty pence, which he would gladly have been rid of, but could not. Those that pro∣voke God shall one day hear, Do ye provoke me to anger? Are ye stronger then I? they shall be taught to meddle with their match, and not to contend with him that is mightier then they, Eccles. 6.10. they shall cry out in the bitternesse of their souls, as Lam. 3.15. He hath filled me with bitternesses, he hath made me drunk with wormwood. And God shall reply, as Jer. 4.18. Thy way and thy doings have pro∣cured these things unto thee: and this is thy wickednesse, because it is bitter. therefore shall he leave his blood upon him,] God shall bring upon him deserved destruction; he shall bring him into the fire, and leave him there, Ezek. 22.20.
the guilt of his sinne shall remain upon his soul, and then punishment cannot bee far off. See Ezek 24.7, 8. with chap. 18.13. Josh. 2.19. Or, the enemy shall leave him all bloody. and his reproach shall his Lord return unto him.] His Lord, not the Assyrian, as some sence it, but his Liege Lord (whom he hath reproached, by changing his glory into the similitude of a calf, and other corruptible things) shall cry quittance with him, as verse 2. cast utter contempt upon him, according to 1 Sam. 2.30.Rom. 1.23. and make him know that he is his Lord. CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. WHen Ephraim spake trembling,] Or, there was trembling, as there is among the beasts of the field, when the Lion roareth. Ephraim whiles innocent of the great offence, spake with authority, and none durst budge against him: for he had great power in his hand. Now, as the Philosopher told Adrian the Emperour, who challenged him to dispute; Difficile est ei contradicere qui potest aqua & igni interdicere: vel adversus  scribere, qui potest proscribere. It is dangerous medling with the Lions beard. Nuchadnezzars Majesty was such, that all people, nations, and languages trembled and feared before him, Dan. 5.19. wheresoever his commands or armies came, there were very great heart-quakes and concussions of spirit. Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What dost thou Eccles. 8.4. Job was no king: and yet whiles hee was Jobab, that is, in a prosperous condition, The young men saw him,Gen. 36.34. and hid themselves: the nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth, Job 29.8, 10 The people feared Joshuah  chap. 4.14.) as they feared Moses, all the dayes of his life: for why? the Lord had magnified him in the sight of all Israel. Naturall conscience cannot but stoop to the image of God in whom∣soever. When Ephraim was first in the Throne, he became formidable: but when hfell openly from God, he grew feeble: first he was a terrour, and then a scorn. But when he offended in Baal, he died.] When by Jezabel (who did all under her husband, she was King, and he Queen) Baal-worship was brought in, then Ephraim fell from his dignity: then every paltry adversary trampled upon him, as the Hare will do upon a dead Lion. See how Benhadad insulted over Ahab, 1 King. 20. Thy silver and thy gold is mine, thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest are mine. And the king of Israel answered and said, My Lord, O king, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have. Look how the worried Curre falls upon his back, and holds up all four, as craving quarter: so did this sordid Idolater, glad to crouch to his enemy: when God was departed from him; he was even as a dead carcasse. Morti vicinus jam magis atque magis. He that departeth from God (who is his life) by an evil heart of unbelief,Heb. 3. subiect∣eth himself to all sorts of deaths, Naturall, Civil, Spirituall, and Eternall. Verse 2. And now they sinne more and more,] Heb. They adde to sinne: God in his just judgement hath given them up unto hardnesse of minde, and to their hearts lust: that for all this sudden change, they repent not, but run more and more into Idolatry. Not content to worship Baal, and such Heathen-Deities, They make them molten images of their silver,] they laid their monies together, to make the golden-calves, or silver-shrines, as Acts 19.24. and other idolatrous trinkets: they lavished silver out of the bag, and were at no small charge. They multiplied their altars, chap. 10. and abused Gods gold and silver to mysticall adultery, chap. 2. All this they did Now, saith the Text: most unseasonably, and as it were in flat opposition to God; after he had sought to reclaim them both by counsels, and cor∣rections, and had hang'd Ahab and his house up in gibbets, as it were, before them, for their admonition. Surely it is a just both presage and desert of ruine, not to bee warned. See chap. 7.1. with the Note,
And idols according to their own understanding,] i. e. according to their own inventions, motu suo proprio; forsaking the Rule of the Word, they will needs be schollers to their own Rea2on, though they are sure to have a fool to their Master. That's a good saying of Solomon,Prov. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not unto thine own understanding, in matters of Gods worship especially: for there Deus damnat quicquid arridet judicio hominum vel rationi,Calv. in loc. that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. all of it the work of the craftsmen,] And should men worship the work of their own hands? what can be imagined more irrationall and sottish? But it is a most righteous recompence of their errour. See Esay 29.13, 14. God doth blinde and blast such,Rom. 1.27. causing their madnesse to appear to all, and that they are men compact of meer incongruities, solaecising in opinion, speeches, actions, all: nothing is more irrationall then irreligion. they say of it, Let the men that sacrifice kisse the calves.] They, that is, the king and his counsellours, or the idolatrous priests by their appointment. These were active to invite, and incite men to partake of those idolatrons services. Should we be lesse diligent in calling upon others to kisse the Son, with a kisse of love and ho∣mage? should we not be as serious and sedulous in building stair-cases for heaven, as the wicked are in digging dnts to hell? kisse the calves.] That the custome of kissing in divine worship was used in all Nations, is evident. They kissed either the idols mouth, or their own hand (where the idoll stood on high, so that they could not come at it) in token of homage. See 1 King. 19.8. Job 31.27.Aderare est quasi applicare manum ad os. So (after the example of Dioclesian) the Pope holds forth his foot to be kissed by the greatest Potentates: whiles he sitteth as God, in the Temple of God, &c. Verse 3. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud,] They shall vanish and come to nothing: the morning cloud irradiated by the Sun, seems very gay at first, but is soon dispelled by it, the dew lies very lovely upon the grasse, and seems to im∣pearl it: but is soon dried up. See chap. 6.4. The chaff lies hollow and high, but is soon disperst before a whirl-wind. See Psal. 35.5. Dan. 2.35. Psal. 1.5. The smoke rowls out of the chimney, as if it were some solid substance, and would mue the whole heavens, but is presently scattered; Evaporat & evanescit, the higher it ascendeth, the sooner it vanisheth. See here how that is verified chap. 12.10. I have used similitudes by the ministery of my Prophets, (four in a breath wee have here) and be hereby advertised. 1. Of mans weaknesse. 2. Of Gods power. 3. Of the swiftnesse of Ephraims ensuing misery. 4. The severity of Gods dea∣ing with Idolaters, he will leave no signe nor remaine of them: he will utterly re∣move them as a man takes away dung,. till it be gone, 1 King. 14.19. Sic transit gloria mundi. Life it self is but a shadow, a dream, yea a dream of a shadow, Psal. 144.4. profit, an uncertainty, 1 Tim. 6.17. pleasure, a spirt, honour a blast, pomp a phancy, Act. 25.23. the whole world a scheme, or notion that hath no∣thing in it of any firmnesse, or solid consistency. Why then should wicked world∣lings brag,1 Cor 7.31. and look so big?? Why should the Saints be affected either with it's al∣lurements, or affrightments, and not cry out with that heroicall Luther, Contemptus est a me Romanus & favor & furor, I care neither for Romes favour, nor fury; I am neither fond of the one, nor afraid of the other, for all is but fumus aut funus vanity and vexation? Verse 4. Yet I am the Lord thy God, &c.] Yet for all the sorrow: and though, I thus threaten thee: for since I spake against thee, I do earnestly remember thee still, &c. Jer. 31.20. It is easie to observe, all along this Chapter, an interchange of menaces and mercies, as in the preceding verse and this; so verse 8. and 9. verse 13. and 14. verse 16. and chap. 14.1. to shew how soon the Lord repents him of the evil, and how ready to shew mercy to the worst that return. If men could but finde a penitent heart, he would easily finde a pitying heart: like as David would have been friends with Absalom after all the unkindnesse, would he have been but better at last. To reduce Ephraim it was, that this Chapter, like checquer-work, is made up of promises and threatnings; that the tartnesse of the one might make him the better to taste the sweetnesse of the other. Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt,] See the Note on Chap. 12.9.
He was their God before, Gen. 17.7. but then he mainly manifested himself so to be, when he brought them thence with a strong hand, and so declared himself to be Jehovah, Exod. 6.2. yea I am ready to shew thee the like mercy still: for I remember (saith he) the kindnesse of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wildernesse, in a land that was not sowen, Ier. 2.2. and thou shalt know no God but me,] i. e. Effectually acknowledge, worship, serve, love, none save me, Deut. 13.2. Gal. 4.9. Thou shalt experience none other: it is a blessed thing to be ignorant of false-worship; and not to be insighted into, or versed in the depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24. Thou shalt not enquire how these Nati∣ons worshipped their gods, Deut. 12.30. Ahaz got hurt by seeing the Altar at Da∣mascus: Many that will needs see the Popish-service, are ensnared thereby. for there is no Saviour beside me. [This is a Title that God much glorieth in. See Esay 60.16. and 63.1. Act. 5.31. and we should go oft to him in this Name, as Ier. 14.8. sith he is able to save them to the utmost that come unto him, Heb. 7.25.. to save them perpetually, and perfectly. He is a sole Saviour, a thorow Saviour, a Saviour in solidum: and doth not his work to the halves, as Papists make it. How blasphemous is that direction of theirs to dying men, to say, Joyn, Lord, mine obedience with those things which Christ suffered for me, &c. Verse 5. I knew thee in the wildernesse, in a place of great drought,] In terra torridissima, where I gave thee pluviam escatilem & petram aquatilem as Tertul∣lian phraseth it, where I gave thee bread from heaven, set the flint abroach,Tert. de pati∣entiae. Psal. 78.20, 24 kept thy clothes whole and fit, kept back thine enemies, led thee by a pillar of cloud, sent thee in flesh at Even, and bread in the Morning, served thee as never Prince was served in his greatest pomp. And wilt thou yet kisse the calf, qui te nec ser∣vat, nec satiat, ut ego? who neither saveth thee, nor satisfieth thee, as I have done? not suffering thee to lack any thing, Deut. 2.7? but crowning thee with loving kindnesse, and tender mercies: insomuch as Moses stands amazed at it, and cries out, Happy art thou O Israel! who is like unto thee, O people saved of the Lord, &c. Deut. 33.29. Verse 6. According to their pasture so were they filled:] Saturity bred security; fulnesse, forgetfulnesse. This was a foul fault, and is much complained of, Deut. 32.13, 14, &c. Psal. 78.10, 11, &c.Acts 14.17. God had brought them out of a place of great drought into large and fat pastures, a land flowing with milk and honey, where he filled their hearts with food and gladnesse, where he fed them among the iies, daily and daintily. But they, as if God had hired them to be wicked, basely abu∣sed his bounty to luxury, and having fulnesse of bread, and abundance of idlenesse, grew proud as Sodom, and out of measure sinfull; forgetting God and his will,Ezech. 16.49. themselves and their duties, and running out into all excesse of riot, though they had been fairly warned, and commanded to the contrary, Deut. 8.10, &c. Their heart grew fat as grease, and became as a foul stomach, which the more you fill it, the more you spill it: or like fed horses, they grew fierce and filthy, Jer. 5.7, 8.. Hippoc. there was no hoe with them. See Ezek. 34 16, 18, 20. Whiles they were in the wil∣dernesse God knew them, yea he knew their souls in adversity: They both knew God, and were known of him. But now, God neither knew them so much, nor they him: they lived not upon him now, as once in the wildernesse;Gal. 3. but being filled, yea filled (you have the word here twice together) to note how they fell up∣on those allowed delights, and even glutted themselves, gorg'd themselves, they flew upon them, as those in Sauls time did upon the spoil of the Philistines: they fed without fear, as those Pseudo-Christians in Jude vers. 12. they gormandized as those flesh-mongers afore the floud, more like beasts then men,. as the Greek word signifieth, Luke 17.27. And hereupon their hearts were exalted,] Posperity and plenty will easily blow up such a blab as pride, in the best hearts, if care be not taken to the contrary, as Agur knew, and therefore prayed, Give me a mediocrity, lest I be full and deny, and proudly ask, W is the Lord? and as Solomon felt, whose wealth did him more hurt then his wisdome did him good, Eccles. 2.Prov. 30.9. and as Hezekih experimented to his cost, Esay 3. ndeed of Iehosaphat it is noted, 2 Chron. 17.3. that he walked in the sst wayes of David his father. (for the truth is, Davids first wayes were his best wayes: neither was he ever so good and tender.
as when he was hunted as a Partridge in the mountains) and of Vespasian it is sto∣ried,Verspasianus unus accepto imperio melior factus. that he was made the better man by being made Emperour: but he was a rare bird, and had scarce his fellow again. It is the property of prosperity to tumour the heart: and ubi uber, ibi tuber. See Psal. 73.3, 6. & 1 Tim. 6.17. they eat and are swelled as being poysoned with pride: they are are fatted, but it is for the slaughter. therefore have they forgotten me,] Non tam theoreticè quàm practicè, they re∣member there is a God, but they honour him not as God: they forget their in∣gagements to him, and through the pride of their countenance, they seek not after him, Psal. 10.4. they consider not their distance, their dependance, &c. Now of all things God cannot abide to be forgotten, Esay 1.2, 3. it is a sin that he can hard∣ly pardon, Ier. 5.7, &c. See the Note on chap. 8.14. Verse 7. Therefore will I be unto them as a lion, as a leopard, &c.] Thus still God proceedeth to use similitudes by the ministery of his Prophets, as he did before verse 3.Exod. 19.4. Dent. 32.10, 11. Mat. 23.37. He here compareth himself (who otherwhere is compared to an Eagle, bearing her young upon her wings; to a Hen hovering over chickens, to a father cherishing his children, &c) to a lion, yea to an old lion, which taketh the prey but seldom, and therefore is more ravenous of it, when taken; (See chap. 5.14.) to a leopard, or panther, that diligently observeth by the way, and lieth in wait for his prey, and useth subtilty, as not being so swift of foot: confer Ier. 5.6. To a Bear robbed of her whelps,Plin. lib. 10. cap. 57. Scal. exere. 208. which are very dear to her. To any other cruell creature, verse 8. as the Tiger that flieth upon the very picture of a man, and tea∣reth it, or if he cannot come at it, teareth himself for anger. Neither is it for nothing (saith Rivet) that God compareth himself here to all these together: but to shew that there was no hope of escape, neither could he that had avoided one danger, be safe from another. So dreadfull a thing is it to fall into the punishing hands of the living God. Oh consider this ye that forget God: least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Verse 8. I will meet them as a Bear bereaved of her whelps,] Surgit hic oratio. The Bear is more cruell then the Lion: for the Lion is said to spare the prostrate: but the Bear falleth foul upon all, yea upon dead carcasses. See Amos 5.9. and confer 2 Sam. 17.8. Prov. 17.12. See also what work the two Bears made upon the two and fourty children, 2 King. 2. and will rent the caul of their heart,] The pericardium, that fat heart of theirs, verse 6. that hoof upon their hearts which the word could not pierce thorow, that filthy fore-skin that grew to their uncircumcised hearts. there will I devour them like a lion,] Once more like a lion, ut immanis Ieo, for the word is not the same as before,. as a lion, that is, in heart, and that loves to suck the blood, and the fat that is about the heart. There will I devour them, that is, in their cities, and houses, where they hold themselves safest: as the lions dealt by those mongrell-Colonies that made a mixture of religions, 2 King. 17.25. the wild beast shall tear them.] when they but stirre any where abroad; so that there shall be no safety, no peace to him that goes out, or to him that commeth in, 2 Chron. 15.5. but —crudelis ubique Luctus, ubique pavor, & plurima mortis imago. Let us therefore have grace, whereby we may serve God with reverence and godly fear: for even our God (and not the God of the Jews onely) is a consuming fire, is a devouring Lion, is a furious Leopard, a raging Bear: yea put all the dread∣fulnesse of all the creatures in the world together,Heb. 12.28, 29 it is all to be found in the wrath of God, even the quintessence of all. hence that of the Psalmist, Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath, Psal. 90.11. as who should say, Let a man fear thy displeasure never so much, he is sure to feel thee much more, if once he fall into thy fingers. Now a fearfull man can fancy vast and terrible fears, as ramping lions, ravenous leopards, fire, sword, racks, scalding lead, burning pitch, running bell-mettle, all this in extremity, and that to all eternity: and yet all these are but as a painted fire, in comparison of the uncon∣ceiveable and unsupportable wrath of God.
Verse 9. O Israel thou hast destroyed thy self,] Heb. He, or, It hath marred thee, O Israel: that is, either thy sin of self-exaltation, and forgetfulnesse of me, as verse 6. Or ty King, in whom thou trustedst, as verse 10. Or thy Calf, whom thou worshippedst, hath been the cause of thy confusion. Or thy fained comforts,Consolatie fictlitia. as Aben-Ezra will have it; thy soothing up thy self in sinfull practises. Or, One ath destroyd thee: Or, Somewhat hath undone thee, but not without thee. Whatever it is that hath done it, it is not I, what hard thoughts soever thou mayest have of me, because I appear thus dreadfull to thee, as in the former verse. Fury is not in me, but thou mayest thank thy self, and fault thy sinne as the mother of thy misery, as the cause of thy calamity; thou hast destroyed thy self,. Hom. Odyss. . and thine own heart may say to thee, as the heart of Apollodorus seemed in a dream, to say to him, when he was tortured by the Scythians; It is I that have drawn thee to all this. It is the observation of a great Politian; England is a mighty Animal, which can never die except it kill it self. Answerable whereunto was the speech of the Lord Rich, to the Justices in the reigne of Edward 6. Never forraigne power could yet hurt, or in any part prevail in this Realm, but by disobedience, and misorder among our selves: that is the way wherewith God will plague us,Interest of Princes. p. 55. if he minde to punish us, &c. We use to say, No man is hurt but by himself: Ye have not injured me at all, saith S. Paul to the Galathians: you cannot do it, unlesse I will.Act & Mon. fol. 1186. Gal. 4.12. The devil can do nothing at us, if we give not way to him. And though there were no devil, yet our corrupt Nature would act Satans part against it self; it would have a supply of wickednesse (as a serpent hath of poyson) from it self; it hath a spring of its own to feed it. Nemo igitur sibi palpet de suo: quisque sibi Satan est, saith an An∣cient. And it was no ill wish of him, that begged of God,Domine, libera me a malo homine, meipso . to deliver him from that naughty man, Himself: for he knew, that as in that first Chaos, Gen. 1.2. were the seeds of all creatures: so in mans heart, of all sinnes, and miseries that follow thereupon. God made man upright: but they have sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. many shifts and sharking tricks. Sinne and shifting came into the world to∣gether, Gen. 3.12. The woman whom thou gavest me, &c. God must bear the blame of Adams sin: so must his Decree of Reprobation, still be alledged as the cause of mans perdition. But this covering is too short: for no man is destroyed because he is reprobated, but because he is a sinner: neither are any damned because they cannot do better, but because they will do no better. If there were no will, there would be no hell: and this indeed will be the very hell of hell,Cesset voluntas propria, & non erit infernus. that they have been self-destroyers. The worme of conscience (say Divines) that never-dying worme, is nothing else but a continuall remorse, and furious reflection of the soul upon it's own willfull folly, and now wofull misery. but in me is thy help.] Heb. In me, in thy help, that is, (saith Drusius) I am in thy help, and thy help is in me: whatsoever help thou hast, I am in it. We can easily undo our selves; as a childe can easily break a glasse, that all the men in the countrey cannot piece up again. But God both can and will help his, though never so shattered: and repair that image of his, lost in Adam, that One that destroyed Israel. Lord, saith Augustine, Ego admisi unde tu damnare potes me: sed tu non amisisti unde salvare potes me: that is, I have done enough to undo my self for ever, but with thee there is enough for my safety here, and salvation hereafter. God as he both can and will help his, that cry, Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man: so he will then chiefely do it, when they seem to themselves and others,Psal. 60.11. to be in an undone condition. Thou hast destroyed thy self, in me is thy help: His holy hand is reserved for a dead lift. Verse 10. I will be thy king,] Thine eternall king, so Pagnine. As I have been thy Prophet, verse 4.5. so I will be thy king; I will also be thy Priest, and thy Re∣deemer, verse 14, that so thou mayest hear my voice, submit to my scepter, and ap∣ply my death for thy deliverance from deaths dominion. Or, I will be thy king, and not be born down by thy boysterousnesse, who callest for another king, and repi∣nest against my righteous regiment. Thou wouldst cast off mine authority, but I will maintain it. The Lord is king, be the people never so unquiet, Psal. 99.1. he will raigne over rebels in spite of their hearts: and those that will not be his subjects, his willing people, shall be his slaves, his footstool. The Geneva Bible reads it thus,Psal. 110.1, 3. I am: Where is the King that should help thee in all thy cities? R. Aben-Ezra,
Calvin, Oecolampadius, and others go the same way: onely they render it, Ero, I will be one and the same (according to that name of mine, I am that I am, Exod. 3.14. and before Abraham was, I am, Ioh. 8.58.) though you be off and on with me, though you change often, yet I am Jehovah, I change not. I will be: What will he be? The same that I said, I would be, thy Saviour, thine Helper: Or, I will be a stander-by, to see what will become of thee, and how thy king (in whom thou trustest) will help thee: this last is R. Solomon Jarchi's interpretation. Pa∣reus will have it run thus, I will be, what? a lion, a leopard, a bear, &c. and no∣thing shall alter my resolution. Where is any other that may save thee in all thy cities?] Thou sayest (but they are but vain words) I have counsell, and strength for warre; I have a King, and Princes, and strong cities. But alasse, where are they? Let them encrease their Army, and come forth as he once said, Judg. 9.29. Ʋbi est Rex tuus? ubinam? nunc servit te, &c. Where is the king? where is he? let him now save thee in all thy cities, so Polanus rendreth it. Can they save thee, who cannot save themselves? It is a Sarcasticall concession. See the like Deut. 32.37, 38. Judg. 10.4. Am. 4.4. And observe that Gods to deride and insult over men in their carnall confidence; and his people are licenced to do so too, so it be out of pure zeal, Psal. 52.6, 7. and not out of private revenge. and thy judges,] Or chief Officers, Princes, that are necessary to a King, and are called his Comites, cousins, and counsellours. whereof thou saidst,] and wast set upon it: thou wouldst needs have them, contra gentes, as they say, and hadst soon enough of them. Strong affections bring strong afflictions. Give me a king and princes.] It was partly their ambition, and partly discontent with the present government (as the present is alwayes grievous) that prompted them to this request;. Thucyd. and they had it, but for a mischief. It is not alwayes in mer∣cy that prayers are answered: for Deus saepe dat iratus, quod negat propitius, God oft throwes that to his enemies, when they are over-importunate, which he denies to his friends, in great mercy to their souls. They do best, that acknowledging him the onely wise God, pray, Not our, but thy will be done, &c. Verse 11. I gave thee a king in mine anger,] As once before he gave them Quails to choak them. A king, that is, all those kings they had since they fell off from the house of David. These were Gods gifts, but giftlesse-gifts, which hee cast upon them in his anger,. for a punishment both of the sinnes of Davids ho use, and likewise of the peoples rebellion. It was ab irato potius quam ab exorato Deo. Take him, (saith He, sith you will needs have him) with all that shall follow af∣ter. The hypocrite shall raigne, that the people may ensnared, Job 34.30. Set thou a wicked man over him, (saith the Psalmist) and let Satan stand at his right hand, Psal. 109.6. See Dan. 8.23 Saul was an hypocrite, Jeroboam a wicked man, so were all his successours in that Throne. Levit. 26.17. it is written as an heavy curse of God; If you still trespasse against me, I will set Princes over you that shall hate you, mischievous, odious princes: odious to God, malignant to the people. and took him away in my wrath.] Heb. In mine immoderate wrath, that passed the bounds. This is spoken of God after the manner of men; for he cannot ex∣ceed or over-do: fury is not in him, Esay 27.4. but here he threateneth to take away king and kingdome together: as he did Hosea, by the Assyrian that carried them all captive. Observe here, that better a bad Magistrate then none, for this latter is the fruit of Gods utter indignation. Those Anabaptists that from this Text inferred, that no Christian can with a good conscience take upon him kingly digni∣ty, should have observed, that as an evil king is reckoned as a plague to a people, so a good king is to be held a speciall blessing to them. Verse 12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up,] sc. in a bundle, or fardle, or fagot, as the French hath it. And like as all fardles are opened on a Fair-day, so shall Ephraims iniquities be brought to light, and punished at the last day: As the housholder bindeth up the tares in bundles at harvest and burneth them: so shall it be in the end of the world. The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all scandals, and them which do iniquity: and
shall cast them into a furnace of fire, &c. Matth. 13.30, 41, 42. As the Clark of Assizes bindes up the inditements of malefactours in bundles, or seals them up in a bag for more surety: and at the Assizes, brings his bag, takes them out, and reads them: so will it be at that last and great day. My transgression is sealed up in a bag, saith Iob: and thou sowest up mine iniquity, viz. as the writings, or informati∣ons of a processe, which is ready to be sentenced. See Deut. 32.34. Ier. 17.1. Hos. 9.9. Sinners shall one day know, that Gods for bearance is no quittance;Job 14. that however he is silent for a season, and thereupon they are apt fondly to conceit him to be such another as themselves, yet He will confute them, and set their sins in order before their eyes, Psal. 50.21. Their actions are already in print in heaven: and God will one day read them aloud in the ears of all the world. And then though their sinne be hid for present, all shall out to their utter shame and everlast∣ing contempt, Dan. 12.2. that last light of the day of wrath shall reveal all, Rom. 2.5. punish all, Hos. 9.9. Whatever God hath threatned, shall then be inflicted: whatever arrowes are in the bow-string, shall then flee, and hit, and stick deep. And the longer the Lord is in drawing, the heavier they will light: Morae dispen∣dium foenoris duplo pensabitur, the longer He forbeareth, the heavier He punish∣eth: So that there shall be no cause, why sinners should say, Where is the God of judgement? Mal. 2.17. See the Note. God will enquire after their iniquity, and search after their sin, Iob 10.6. Verse 13. The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him,] This Com∣mon-wealth was before compared to a mother, chap. 1. & 3. And as a woman that hath conceived, is not for a while discerned to be with child, till she biggen, and burnish, and grow near her time: so is it with sinners: see it elegantly set forth by S. Iames, chap. 1.14, 15. The sorrows of a travailing woman are known to be un∣expected, exquisite, and inevitable: so shall Gods judgements be upon the workers of iniquity, such as they shall never be able to avert, to avoid, or to abide. This is set forth by an apt similitude, ordinary in holy Scripture, Mic. 4.9, 10. Psal. 48.7. Ier. 49.29. and 50.43, &c. And whereas some might say, A travailing woman is soon delivered; her pain is sharp, but short: she hath hope, not onely of an end but of a birth; the joy whereof maketh her remember her anguish no more, Ioh. 16.21. The Prophet replieth, that it is otherwise with Ephraim. he is an unwise sonne,] that will be the death both of his mother and of himself. He hath no list to help himself, and to get free of the straights and petils of the birth, by passing thorow the narrow womb of Repentance, and being born anew, God stands over him, stretching out his hands all the day long, to do a midwives of∣fice, to take him out of the womb, as Psal. 22.9. to cut his navell, and wash off his blood, to salt him, and swaddle him, as Ezek. 16.4. but he hath no minde to come out of the filth of his sins, or to be washed from his wickednesse. Rather then be regenerated (without which there is no heaven to be had, Ioh. 3.5. or freedom from deadly dangers upon earth) he will venture to stay a while at least (as the Text here hath it) in the mouth of the matrix.] though it cost him a choaking. Such Ephraims we have not a few, that proceed no further then to conviction; de∣barring themselves of the benefit of a thorow conversion. These go as far as Kadesh-barnea, they are nigh to Gods kingdom, they are almost perswaded to be true Christians, they are come as far as the place of the breaking forth of children, but there they stick and are stifled: they are never brought forth from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sinnes, and inheritance among the saints and sonnes of God, Acts 26.18. Oh make much of the least beginnings of grace (saith a Reverend man) even those called repressing: since they prepare the heart for conversion. There is a faith in the true convert, of no better perfection then that in the Temporary, though he stay not there, as the other (being an unwise sot) doth &c. And although we bring forth good things (saith Another) as Sarah's dead womb brought forth a child; it was not a child of natures, but of the meer promise, yet it cannot be denied, that a na∣turall man (though he be Theologically dead, yet he) is Ethically alive, being to be wrought upon by arguments; and that grace doth for the most part prepare naturals before it bring in supernaturals: and if we hide our talent, we are not allowed to ex∣pect the spirit of Regeneration; As if we die in the wildernesse of preparatory
antecedaneous works, we never get to Canaan. Verse 14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave, &c.] Some read it thus,Calvin. Tigurin. Isid. Clar. Danaeus. Drusius. I would have ransomed them, &c. I would have redeemed them, &c. had they been wise, or oughts, (as we say) had not their incurable hardnesse and obstinacy hindered; had they put forth into my hands, as unto a midwife, &c. But (alas) it is no such matter: therefore that that will die, let it die. repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.] I am unchangeably resolved to ruine them: Or, repentance should have been hid from mine eyes, my goodnesse toward them should never have altered, &c. But let us rather look upon the words as a most sweet and comfortable promise of a mighty redemption, and glorious resurre∣ction to the Remnant, according to the election of grace, whom God would not have to want comfort, I will ransom them. Here therefore he telleth his Heirs of the promises, that he will bring them back out of captivity wherein they ay for dead, as it were: and that this their deliverance should be an evident argument and sure pledge of their resurrection to life eternall. To which purpose the Apo∣stle doth aptly and properly alledge it, 1 Cor. 15. and thereupon rings in Deaths ears (out of this Text, and Esay 25.8.) the shrillest, and sharpest Note, the boldest and bravest challenge, that ever was heard from the mouth of a mortall; Death, where is thy sting? Hell where's thy victory, &c? Oh thanks be to God, who hath given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, and thereby hath made us more then con∣querours, that is, Triumphers, 2 Cor. 2.14. But to return to the Text. Be it, saith the Prophet, that the Common-wealth of Israel, both mother and child must pe∣rish for want of wisdom, as was threatned in the foregoing verse: yet let not the penitent among them despair: for I the Lord Christ, will ransom them, by laying down a valuable price (so the word signifieth) from the power,]Ephdem. Heb. hand: of the grave, or of hell, that though hell had laid hands on them, yea closed her mouth upon them, as once the Whale had upon Jonas, yet I would open the doors of that Leviathan, and fetch them thence with a strong hand. I will redeem them from death,] by becoming their near kinsman according to the flesh, whereby I shall have the next right of redemption. But how shall all this be done? After a wonderfull manner. O death I will be thy plagues,] Not one, but many plagues, even so many, as shall certainly do thee to death. The Vulgar rendreth it, Ero mors tua, O mors, morsus tuus, O inferne. The Apostle for plagues hath sting: for the plague hath a deadly sting, and so hath sinne much more; the guilt thereof is by Solomon said to bite like a serpent, and sting like a cockatrice, Prov. 23.32. Now Christ by dy∣ing put sinne to death, Rom. 1.25. Ephes. 1.7. Heb. 2.14. We read of a certain Cappadocean,Sphinx. Phil. pag. 750. whom when a Viper had bitten, and suckt his blood, the Viper her self died, by the venemous blood that she had suckt. But Christ (being life essential) prevailed over death: and swallowed it up in victory, as Moses his serpent swal∣lowed up the sorcerers serpents, or as Fire swalloweth up the fuell that is cast upon it: yea by death, he destroyed him that had the power of death, the devil; whose practise it was to kill men with death, Rev. 2.23. this is the second death. O grave (or, O hell) I will be thy destruction,] thy deadly stinging disease, joy∣ned with the pestilence, Psal. 91.6. Death to a beleever is neither totall, nor per∣petuall, Rom. 8.10, 11. Christ hath made it to him, of a curse a blessing, of an enemy a friend, of a punishment an emolument, of the gate of hell the portall of heaven, a postern to let out temporall, but a street-door to let in eternall life. And to assure all this; Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes,] i. e. there shall be no such thing as repentance in me, for all things that are at all are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. The meaning is, I will never change my minde for this matter, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.Psal. 89.34. Confer Psal. 110.4. Rom. 11.29. Some render it (but not so well) Consolation is hid from mine eyes, and so make them to be the words of the Church, q. d. I see not this promise with mine eyes, but I receive it, and accept of it by my faith. Verse 15. Though he be fruitfull among his brethren,] In allusion to his name Ephraim, which signifieth fruitfull and flourishing, Gen. 41.52. Confer Gen. 48.16, 19, 20, &c. & 49.22. See the like allusions, Am. 5.5. Mic. 1.10.
An East-winde shall come,] which is violent and hurtfull to the fruits of the earth. the winde of the Lord,] a mighty strong winde: meaning that most merci∣lesse and impetuous enemy the Assyrian, sent by the Lord to avenge the quarrell of his Covenant. shall come up from the wildernesse,] where the winds blow most fiercely, because they meet with no resistance. and his spring shall become dry, &c. This is a description of extreme desolation, and it is explained and amplified in the next words. he shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.] He, that is, the Assyrian, not Christ (as Hierom, Mercer, and Ribera will have it) who shall take away from Death and Hell all matter of glorying. Not the fire of the last day, as Lyra. No, nor Ephraim, as Pareus, and Tarnouius carry it: as if it were a promise of their con∣quest in Christ over all their enemies, corporall, and spirituall, dividing the spoil of the converted Gentiles, who shall come in to them with all their desireable things, as some read that Text, Hag. 2.7. Confer Am. 9.11, 12. Obad. 18. Zech. 14.14, 16, 20, 21. That this whole verse containeth a promise of Ephraim's reduction to the Church of God, I could easily yeeld; reading it especially, as many good Interpreters do. For he shall fructifie among his brethren, after that an East-wind coming, a wind of Jehovah coming up from the desert, his spring shall be∣come dry, and his fountain shall dry up: the same shall spoil the treasure of all plea∣sant vessels. This is a similitude (say they) from a piece of ground all dried up and parched, that nothing is able to grow: notably expressing the miserable and distressed estate of this people; that as an easterly wind, and a tempestuous storm, hath dried them quite, and spoiled all their delightfull treasures, made them the vilest, and most contemptible of the earth. (Marcellinus tells of an Emperour,Am. Marcel. lib. 2. that meeting with some of this Nation, and annoyed with the sight and stench of them, cryed out, ô Marcommani, ô Quadi, ô Sarmatae, &c. O Marcoman's, Quades, and Sarmatians, I have found at length a more loathsome and sordid people then you.) All which notwithstanding, Ephraim shall flourish again, and hold up their head among their brethren, sc. by the merit and spirit of Him who ransometh them from the power of the grave, from the dint of death. This sence of the words, is confirmed by that which followes in the next Chapter vers. 5, 6, 7. Verse 16. Samaria shall become desolate,] Here many begin the fourteenth Chapter, but not so well: for this verse evidently cohereth with the former, and sheweth that Ephraim shall not onely be plundered,rea peragetur. but butchered by the Assyrian by their own default. Samaria shall become desolate, or be found guilty (as the Chaldee hath it, and the words may bear.) How can she be otherwise, when as she hath rebelled against her God,] she hath imbittered him, or bitterly provo∣ked him to wrath, (as chap. 12.15. See the Note there) who therefore sent in the Assyrian to desolate her: that bitter and hasty Nation to march thorow the breadth of the land, to possesse the dwelling places that were not theirs.Hab. 1.6. This was a bitter affliction, but behold a worse: they shall fall by the sword,] they shall lose not their land onely, and the trea∣sures of all their pleasant vessels, as verse 15. but their dearest lives, which to save a man will gladly part with all that he hath, Job 2.4. or submit to any servile em∣ployment, as the Gibeonites in Ioshuah's dayes did; who were willing to take hard on as slaves and underlings, rather then to be cut off with the rest of the Ca∣naanites. their infants shall be dashed in pieces,] Sept. , their sucklings, that are ordinarily spared for their innocencie, ignoscency, &c. See chap. 10.14. with the Note: and consider that infants are not so innocent (though they have yet done neither good nor evil) but that God may justly inflict upon them all torments here, and tortures in hell, for the guilt of originall sinne that cleaveth to their natures. Howbeit this excuseth not the barbarous cruelty of his executioners, who shall be surely and suitably punished, Psal. 137.8. and their women with childe shall be ript up.] Of this kinde of savage inhuma∣nity, see Am. 1.13. 2 King. 8.11. & 15.16. where you shall finde that the ty∣rant Menahem ript the infants of Tiphsah out of their mothers bellies, because their fathers opened not the gates unto him. The like cruelty was exercised in the
Sicilian Vespers, and Parisian Massacre, by those Romish Edomites: maugre whose malice Ephraim is yet fruitfull, the Church flourisheth. Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine crescit. CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. OIsrael, return unto the Lord,] Ʋsque ad Dominum, as far as to the Lord: give not the half but the whole turn; and take it for a mercy that you are yet called upon to return, and may be received: that yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. All the former part of the Prophesie had been (most-what) Comminatory: this last Chapter is wholly Consolatory: the Sun of righteousnesse loves not to set in a cloud.Ezr. 10.2. return unto the Lord thy God;] He is yet thy God: no such argument for our turning to God as his turning to us, Zach. 1.3. See the Note there Tantùm ve∣lis & Deus tibi praeoccurret. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat, &c. The Fathers plenty brought home the Prodigall: he had but a purpose to return, and his father met him, Esay 65.24. See Joel 2.12, 13. Esay 55.6, 7. Jer. 31.18. Hos. 3.5. Acts 2.38. This is the use we should make of mercy. Say not, He is my God, therefore I may presume upon him: but, He is mine, therefore I must return unto him: Argue from mercy to duty, and not to liberty, for that's the Devils Logick, which the Apostle holds unreasonable, yea to a good heart impossible, Rom. 6.1, 2. His mercy is bounded with his truth, with which it therefore goes commonly coupled in Scripture. It is a sanctuary for the penitent; but not for the presumptuous. for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.] i. e. Consumption is decreed, yet a rem∣nant reserved, Esay 10.22, 23. Thou hast fallen into great calamity, and that by thine iniquity, which puts a sting into thy misery. This it is fit thou shouldst be sensible of: for conviction is the first step to conversion. But if thou art fallen, wilt thou there lie and not rise again by repentance, and return to him that smiteth thee? wilt thou not submit to his justice, and implore his mercy? Here then is an∣other motive to conversion; as indeed this verse abounds with arguments to that purpose, as Pareus well observeth. First, thou art Israel, a Prince of God, who hath greatly graced thee above all people: Return to him therefore. 2 Thou hast run away from him by thine iniquity: ad turned upon him the back, and not the face: Return therefore. 3. He is Iehovah, the Authour of thy being, and well-being. 4 He is God, to whom thou must either turn, or burn for ever: aut poenitendum, aut pereundum: he can fetch in his rebels. 5 He is thy God in covenant with thee, and will accept of pence for pounds, desires for deeds, sincerity for perfection. 6 Thou hast fallen by thine iniquity: and yet wilt fall further, and never rise a∣gain, as Am. 8.14. if thou stop not, step not back by repentance, and stir up thy self to take hold of God. Verse 2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord,] Confesse your sins, beg pardon, and promise amendment. Sue to God to give you those words that he bids you Take: go to him in his own words, put his promises in suit: crave the help of his holy Spirit, without which what can we do, Rom. 8.26. Say to God as Job 37.19. Teach us what we shall say unto thee: for we cannot order our words, by reason of darknesse. David promiseth not onely to pray, but to marshall up his prayers, to put them in good array, so the word signifieth, Psal. 5.3. In the morning will I direct my prayer, order it in the best manner: his words should be, nec lecta, nec neglecta, neither curious, nor carelesse, but such as are humble, earnest, and direct to the point, avoiding vain babblings. Here's a form prescribed in the Text (forms of prayer therefore are not so unlawfull, as some conceive them) words put into their mouthes (as the phrase is 2 Sam. 14.3.) that they might not misse. Men must as well look to their words, as to their feet, when they come before God: and see that their affections in prayer be not without answerable expressions. Take with you such words, as may testifie that ye turn heartily to the Lord, and not from the teeth
outward, as they in the Psalmist, Psal. 78.36, 37. Turn before ye begin to pray: for God heareth not sinners; sith their incense smels of the hand that offereth it, Esay 1. Say unto him,] Mentally and vocally: with spirit and speech. True it is, that prayer is not the labour of the lips, but the travell of the heart: and God hath promised to answer his people before they call, Esay 65.24. By calling upon his Name, we neither inform him of what he knoweth not; nor move him to shew us more mercy then he intendeth. But yet prayers are necessary, as means which God will have used, that we may receive what he of free mercy giveth. Besides, it pre∣pareth us holily to enjoy the things received; and makes us ready, either to wait for them, or to want them: and to be content that he may be glorified, though we be not gratified. And although God knoweth our thoughts, and understands the mind of the spirit, as being the searcher of hearts, Rom. 8.27. yet he calls for the calves of our lips, the service of our tongues, Jam. 3.9. guiding them now and then in a wonderfull manner, farre beyond all naturall apprehension: and strangely enabling his praying servants, who do also finde no small benefit by this practise of pouring out their hearts before him, both for the preventing of distractions, and kindling affections, and discerning their profiting in holy disires: for the more wor∣thy effect followeth, where more fervent affection went before. Take away all iniquity,] Few words, but full of matter: O quam multa, quam paucis! What a short, but pithy prayer is this! Such was that of the Publican,Gic. de Bruti epistola. Luke 18.13. that of our Saviour in his agony, when yet he is said to pray more fervently: that also which he taught us to pray, Mat. 6.7, 8, &c. set in flat oppo∣sition to Paganish battologies. This in the Text is not much unlike that perfect pat∣tern: for here they are taught to beg, Ʋt auferantur sua maleficia, conferantur Dei beneficia: Take away all evil, and give good: and then to restipulate thanks. So will we render, &c. Take away from us, as an unsupportable burden, such as we cannot stand under, All iniquity, stain and sting, crime and curse, power and punishment, that there be no after reckonings: crosse out the black lines of our sinnes, with the red lines of thy Sons blood, that Lamb of God, that taketh away the sinnes of the world by this Merit and Spirit, by his Value and Vertue; that true scape-goat,Joh. 1.29. Heb. 9.28. that carrieth the sins of his people into the wildernesse. and receive us graciously,] Heb. Receive good, that is, (as some interpret it) Ac∣cept, out of thy fatherly favour, the true witnesses and effects of our thorow con∣version: But better they that thus sence it, Take good, to wit, to bestow upon us, as Psal. 68.19. with Ephes. 4.8. And it is not improbable (saith a Reverend Writer) that the Prophet here secretly leadeth us to Christ the Mediatour, who first receiveth gifts from his Father, and then poureth them forth upon his Church, Act. 2.23.D. Reyn. in loc. So will we render the calves of our lips,] Thy benefits shall not be cast away upon unthankfull persons: but we will present unto thee a sacrifice that will please thee better then an oxe or bullock, that hath horns and hoofs, Psal. 69.31. This cannot be done but by a sound Convert: for the Lepers lips must be covered according to the Law: and the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord. To the wic∣ked God saith, What hast thou to do to take my Name into thy mouth, &c. hee liketh not a good motion from an ill mouth, as that State in the Story: The lip of excellency becommeth not a fool, (Prov. 17.7.) no more then lying doth a worthy man, that is renowned for his wisdom. It well becommeth the Saints to be thank∣full, to cover Gods Altar with the calves of their lips. This expression implieth (saith One) That Gods people should not offer their thankfulnesse to God of that which cost them nothing; but bring, 1. A calf, do something to further Gods worship, or relieve the necessities of others. 2. It must be a dead calf, that is, it must proceed from humble and mortified mindes. 3. A sacrificed calf: where is required, 1 An Altar, our praises must be tendred in the mediation of Christ. 2 Fire, for the bare throwing out of words, though in the name of Christ, will not serve without feeling, ardency, and zeal. 3 We must lay our hands on the head of the calf; that is, in all humility, confesse our unworthinesse of the blessings we give thanks for, as being lesse then the least, Gen. 32.10. Verse 3. Ashur shall not save us, &c.] q. d. He cannot if he would: he shall not, if he could. The two great sinnes of this people were Creature-confidence,
and Idolatry: both these they do here abrenounce and abandon. The best re∣pentance, saith Luther, is a reformed life. It is true say they, we have gone to the Assyrian, (wherein we have dealt as the silly bird flying to the snare, or as fishes, which to avoyd the powle wherewith the water is troubled, swim into the net.) We have taken our horses instead of our prayers, and gone about to finde out good. We have been so foolish, as to think that dumb Idols, that cannot help themselves, should help us. But now we are otherwise resolved, experientiâ edocti & poeniten∣tiâ ducti: we finde at length (that which we should have beleeved sooner, without trying conclusions) that men of high degree are but a lie, that horses are but a va∣nity, that an Idol is nothing, and can give nothing. That power belongeth unto thee, none else can do it: that mercy belongeth unto thee, none else will do it: therefore since in thee onely, the fatherlesse, that is, the friendlesse and shiftlesse finde mercy, O be thou pleased to do us good. For in thee the fatherlesse findeth mercy.] The poor pupil, the forlorne orphan, that's left to the wide world, and lost in himself, cries out, Lord, I am hell, but thou art heaven,Miseria res digna miseri∣cordiâ. Ruper∣ti Imp. symb. &c. I am an abject, oh make me an object of thy pity, Jer. 39.17. Because they call thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after, therefore I will restore health unto thee, &c. The proud Assyrian, and other enemies, would be apt to insult over Israel: as afterwards Cicero did: The Jewish Nation, saith he, shew how God regards them, that have been so oft overcome by Pompey, Crassus, &c. But let Gods people be but fatherlesse enough, let them withdraw their confidence from men and means, and cast it wholly upon God, making him their Tutour and Protectour, and they shall be both preserved, and provided for. Deo confisi nunquam confusi. I will not leave you orphans, saith Christ, Job. 16. Hence the Church resteth on God, in the fail of other comforts, Psal. 10.14, 17, 18. Psal. 27.10. Hab. 3.17. Psal. 102.13. The prayer of the destitute he regards. The Hebrew word signifies a poor worthlesse shrub in the wildernesse, trod upon by beasts, unregarded. Verse 4. I will heal their back-slidings,] Relapses, we know, are dangerous: and Apostasie little lesse then incurable, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. Heb. 6.6. Bishop Latimer, in a sermon afore King Edw. 6. tells of one notorious back-slider that repented: but beware of this sinne, saith he, for I have known no more but one that did so. To fall forward is nothing so dangerous, as to fall backward with old Eli. Hence Paul so thundreth against the Galathians, and Peter against apostatizing Libertines, 2 Epist. 2.22.Omnipotenti medico nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus Isidor. But if Jehovah the Physitian, (as he is called, Exod. 15.26.) under∣take the cure, and say, I will heal their back-slidings, what can hinder? Christ in the Gospel, cured the most desperate diseases: such as all the Physicians in the coun∣trey might have cast their caps at, Matt. 4.23, 24. and 8.16. He refused none that came to him, Matt. 12.15. no not his enemies, as Malchus. Will he then reject his Ephraim, a child, bemoaning himself, though not a pleasant childe, a towardly sonne, Jer. 31.18, 20. a back-slider indeed, but such an one, as crieth now, that God bindeth him, Job 36.13. No sooner doth God cry, Return ye back-sliding children, and I will heal your back-slidings, I will love you freely: but Ephraim, melted with such a love, replieth, Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, Ier. 3.22. O most happy compliance! See the like, Zach. 13.9. with the Note there. They shall return even to the Lord (from whom they had deeply revolted) and he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them, Esay 19.22. They had beg'd of him to take away all iniquity, verse 2. And He here (in answer) promiseth to heal their back-slidings, that compound of all iniquities, that falling∣sicknesse, that oft hales hell at the heels of it, Heb. 10.38. I will love them freely:] Ephraim might remember, and Satan would be sure to suggest, that the Prophet had said before, Ephraim is smitten, or wounded, My God will cast them away, or hate them. Mine anger is kindled against them, Chap. 8.5. and 9.16, 17. Here therefore, upon their repentance, all this is graciously taken off in one breath, and Satan silenced. Be it that they are back-sliden, and sore woun∣ded by their fall; I will heal their back-slidings, and make their broken bones to rejoyce. Be it that there is nothing at all in them that is laudable, or love-worthy, yet I will love them freely, ex mero motu, of mine own free, absolute, and inde∣pendent grace, and favour, out of pure and unexcited love, without any the least
respect to their merit, which is nothing better then hell. Be it that they have bitterly provoked me to anger, and (as angry people use to do) I have both threa∣tened them, and punished them: yet now mine anger is turned away from them.] I am fully reconciled unto them in Christ, will clear up my countenance toward them, and remove mine heavy judgements from them. Gods favour is no empty favour. It is not like the Winter-Sun, that casts a goodly countenance when it shineth, but gives little heat or comfort. If he love a man freely, and out of the good-pleasure of his will, cum spontaneitate (as he doth all His,. Ephes. 2.8. ma∣king them accepted in the Beloved, Ephes. 1.6.) such a man may promise himself all the blessings of this and a better life. Excellent is that of Bernard;Qui misit vni∣genitum, immi∣sit spiritum, pro∣misit vultum, &c. Bern. de Temp. Aug. Confes. lib. 5. c. 8. Psal. 20.4. He that sent his Son for thee, poured his Spirit into thee, promised to clear up his counte∣nance upon thee, quid tandem tibi negaturus est? What can he deny thee? He that inviteth thee to feed upon the fatted-calf, will not onely take away all iniquity, but give good. That was the second Petition they preferred, and they have it an∣swered in the next verse, ad cardinem desiderij God not onely grants their prayer, but fulfills their counsell. Verse 5. I will be as the dew unto Israel,] I will give good in abundance: and and this is sweetly set forth in a seven-fold Metaphor, all answering to the name of Ephraim, (which signifieth fruitfull) and to the ancient promises made unto him: and all again opposite to the many contrary curses, threatned in the former parts of the Prophesie, under Metaphors of a contrary importance, as Pareus and (out of him) Tarnouius have well observed. As First, of solid and fruit-causing dew, in opposition to that vanishing and barren dew, chap. 6.4. and 13.3. Secondly, of the flourishing lilly, contrary to those nettles, thorns, and thistles, chap. 9.16. and 10.8. Thirdly, of the well-rooted and durable trees of Libanus, contrary to dry-roots, chap. 9.16. Fourthly, of spreading and growing branches, instead of branches consumed, chap. 11.6. and 9.16. and 10.8. Fiftly, of trees yeelding pleasant shade and repose, contrary to chap. 9.3, 6. Sixtly, of corn to fatisfie hun∣ger, contrary to chap. 8.7. Lastly, of a Vine bringing forth excellent wine,Adricom. Brocard. Hierom. con∣trary to chap. 9.16. and 10.1. And all these fruits, the fruits of Lebanon, a most sertile mountain, the valleys whereof were most rich grounds for pasture, corn, and vineyards. as the dew unto Israel, he shall blossom as the lilly,] Quot verba tot lumina imo flumina orationis. This Prophet aboundeth with similitudes, as is before noted, (See chap. 12.10. with the Note there.) He beginneth here with a Simile drawn from the dew of heaven; a mercy very much set by, in those hotter countreys es∣pecially, where from May to October they had no rain. The Chaldee Paraphrase, and Hebrew Doctours, understand this Text concerning Christ, and his benefits.Psal. 73.1. Gal. 6.16. Ephes. 1.3. Truely, He is good to Israel, to the pure in heart. Peace and mercy, sanctity and safety, all spirituall benedictions in heavenly things in Christ, shall be upon the Israel of God. What the dew is to the herbs, fields, fruits, that is Christ to his Israel. 1. The dew comes when the air is clear: so doth Christ by his blessing,Aristot. lib. 1. meteor. cap. 10. Plin lib. 2. cap. 60. & lib. 18. cap. 29. when the light of his countenance is lift up upon us. 2. As the dew refresheth, and cherish∣eth the dry and fady fields, (hence it is called the dew of herbs, Esay 26.19. which thereby recover life and beauty) so doth Christ our hearts, scorcht with the sense of sinne, and fear of wrath. 3. As the dew allayeth great heats, and moisteneth, and mollifieth the earth, that it may fructifie: so Christ cooleth the Devils fiery darts, and filleth his people with the fruits of righteousnesse. He is unto them as a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest, Esay 18.4 and maketh their souls as so many watered gardens, Jer. 31.12. 4. As the dew falls in a narrow compasse, without noise, and is felt onely by those (in the force of it) on whom it descends: so the grace of Christ watereth his faithfull onely; secretly and sweetly insinuating into their hearts: the stranger medleth not with their comforts. See Joh. 14.17. The cock on the dunghill knows them not. he shall grow as the lilly.] which hath its name in the Hebrew, from its six leaves, and serves here, and elsewhere to set forth the great comelinesse,Cant. 2.1. . sweet odour and true humility of the Church: for the lilly groweth in vallies (as Theophylact upon this Text noteth) sweet it is but not great, and the more it blossometh, the more it shooteth upwards: to teach us heavenly-mindednesse. It is also of a perfect white∣nesse,
to mind us of innocency. Her Nazarites were purer then snow, whiter then milk,Lib. 21. cap. 5. Lam. 4.7. Lastly, Lilio nihil est foecundius, saith Pliny, nothing is more fruitfull then the lillie, Et lachrymâ suâ seritur, saith the same Authour, it is sown in its own tears. Weeping Christians grow amain, &c. and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.] i. e. As the Cedars of Lebanon, as the Chaldee Paraphrast interpreteth it: or as the frankincense-tree, which taketh very deep rooting, so Cyril senceth it. The lilly (with its six white leaves, and seven golden-coloured grains within it) soon fadeth, and loseth both beauty and sweet∣nesse:Rom. 6.10. but so doth not Christ and his People. He can as well die at the right hand of his Father, as in the hearts of his Elect, where he dwels by faith: whereby they are rooted and grounded in love, strengthened with might, by his Spirit in the inner man,Ephes. 3.16, 17. so that the gates of hell cannot prevail against them. Immoa manet, is the Churches Motto; Nec fluctu, nec flatu movetur, which is the Venetian Motto. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever, Psal. 125. Winds and storms move neither Libanus, nor the well-rooted Cedars thereof: which the more they are assaulted, the better they are rooted So fareth it with the Saints. Plato compareth man to a tree inverted. The Scripture oft compareth a good man to a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that taketh root downward, and beareth fruit upward, 2 King. 19.30. —quae quantum vertice ad auras,Virg. Aeneid. lib. 4. Aethereas, tantum radice ad tartara tendit. Let us cast forth our roots as Lebanon: stand fast rooted in the truth, being sted∣fast and unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord, and with full purpose of heart cleaving close unto him, 1 Cor. 15. ult. being established by his grace, Col. 1.11. Heb. 12.28. and 13.9. In the Civil Law, till a tree hath taken root, it doth not belong to the soil whereon it is planted. It is not enough to be in the Church: except like the Cedars of Lebanon, we cast forth our roots, and are so planted, that we flourish in the Courts of our God, and bring forth fruit in our old age, Psal 92.12, 13, 14. Verse 6. His branches shall spread,] Heb. shall walk, or expatiate; shall reach out, and stretch themselves all abroad: so shall the Church be propagated all the earth over: She shall flourish as the Palm-tree, which though it have many weights hung on the top, and many snakes hissing at the root, yet it still saith, Nec premor, nec perimor, I am insuperable: I am like a green Olive-tree in the house of God: I trust in the mercy of God for ever, and ever, Psal. 52.8. and his beauty shall be as the Olive-tree,] that goodly tree, Lev. 23 40. that re∣taineth her greennesse in the depth of Winter: yea in that Universall deluge, Noahs Dove met with an olive-leaf. The Lord hath called thy name (saith the Prophet to the Church, Jer. 11.16.) A green olive-tree, fair and of goodly fruit. The Cypresse is fair, but not fruitfull; the fig-tree fruitfull, but not fair and flourishing. But the olive-tree is both fair and fruitfull: her fruit also is of singular use to mankind both for food, and physick, and light for the lamp, Exod. 29.20. Lev. 6.15, 16. In one respect it is an emblem of peace, it maketh the face shine, Psal. 104.15. and in the other, it is an emblem of grace and spiritual gifts, 1 Iob. 2.20. of increasing with the increase of God, by the Spirit, and of reigning with him in eternall glory. and his smell as Lebanon.] Whereby is meant, the sweet savour of the Gospel, which spreadeth it self abroad in the ministery of the Word, and in the lives of belcevers, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. who besides their continuall offering up to God spiri∣tuall incense and services in prayers, thanksgivings, alms, and good-works, they per∣fume the very air they breath upon by their gracious and savoury communication, Ephes. 4.29. yea the very company they come into: as a man cannot come where sweet spices and odours are beaten to the smell, but he shall carry away the scent thereof in his cloathes.Nihil nisi foe∣tidain  foe∣dum exhala∣vit. River. When the spirit of Christ blowes upon them, and grace is poured into their hearts, then their lips drop sweet smelling myrrhe, Cant. 5.13. and 4.16. then also their good name is better then a precious ointment, Eccles. 7.1. (See the Note there) when the wicked stink alive and dead.
Verse 7. They that dwell under his shadow shall return, Or, shall sit still, shall be at rest. The Chaldee hath it, They shall dwell in the shadow of his Christ. See a like promise of refocillation and protection, Esay 4.6. Es. 25.4. Psal. 35.8. The refuge and refreshment of the Church is whole from Christ: under the shadow of whose divine grace shhe resteth in her members, shaded and sheltred under the hollow of his hand, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall, Esay 25.4. when indignation is kindled (Esay 26.20.) and when the Lord com∣eth out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the land for their iniquity: then shall true converts have a chamber of rest, a Pella provided them: or, at least be able to sing Davids Requiem, Return to thy rest, O my soul, hover and cover under Gods wing, run to his Name as a tower, and be safe. Why art thou cast down,Prov. 18.10. trust in God, trust in an angry God, in a killing God, as Job, beleeve him upon his bare word, and that against sense, in things invisible; and against reason, in things incredible. This is Faiths triumph, and this is the Saints safety. They shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine,] The Seventy and Latine render it, They shall live with corn; that is, they shall have great plenty of all things necessary, as Psal. 87. and 142.14. But the other reading is better; They shall revive as the corn, which suffering much from frost, hail, snow, tempest, lieth for dead, as it were, in Winter; but at the return of the Sun in Springtide reviveth,Joh. 12.24. 1 Cor. 15. and yeeldeth a great increase. In like sort, the Vine when pruned and lopped spreads again, and is the more fruitfull: So those that are viti vitae inserti, set into the true Vine, though lopped and harrowed with sore and sharp afflictions, yet can truly and triumphantly say, As dying, and behold we live, as chastened, and not killed, &c. Their bodies also by death are not so much rotted as refined,2 Cor. 4. and shall be conformed to Christs most glorious body the standard, Phil. 3. ult. and the sent thereof as the wine of Lebanon.] which was noted for the best, as Kimchi proves, and Athenaeus confirmeth. Among the Jews at this day, the wo∣men when they speak of their dead husbands, say, His scent, or his memoriall is as the wine of Lebanon. Verse 8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do, &c. Heb. Ephraim, what have I to do, &c. This some make to be the speech of God to Ephraim: as if Ephraim here were the Vocative case, and God were brought in abhorring the motion of par∣ting stakes with idols, of sharing his glory with another. But because this, God never did, (for what communion hath light with darknesse, Christ with Belial?) and because the Chaldee Paraphrast, and from him the best Interpreters supply [shall say] I take this latter to be the better translation. Here then God promi∣seth, first, what Ephraim shall do, or rather, what he by his grace will cause him to do: he shall utterly abominate and abandon his idols, whereunto his heart had been joyned, or glewed, chap. 4.17. Secondly, what he will thereupon do for Ephraim: what speciall favour he will shew him, and what a gracious compensation he will make him, I have heard him, and observed him, &c. Ephraim now grown penitent, shall say, (See the like ellipsis supplied, Esay 5.9.) with utmost indigna∣tion and aversation, with greatest heat of anger, and height of hatred, shall he utter it. See the like, 2 Sam. 16.10. 2 King. 3.13. Matth. 8.29. What have I to do any more with idols?] Or sorrows, or buggs, those Balaams-blocks, those mawmets, and monuments of idolatry, those images of jealousie, that provoke to jealousie, Ezek. 8.3. those dunghill-deities that can produce no good, hear no prayers, work no deliverance, bring nothing but evil and anguish to us. What then should we rather do, then pollute those images that we had perfu∣med, cast them away with detestation, as a menstruous clout, and say unto them, Get ye hence, Esay 30.22? Then will God soon say, I have heard him thus be∣moaning and befooling himself. God hath a quick ear in such a case; He hath al∣so an eye open to the supplications of his servants, in all that they call upon him for,Jer. 31.18. as Solomon telleth us, 1 King. 8.52. I have observed him.] Or fixed mine eyes upon him, with a most vigilant care, and criticall inspection. It would be wide with Gods Ephraims, and they would want many things, if he should not see as well as hear, if he should not seriously,Ephes. 3.20. and sollicitously consider and care for them, above all that they ask or think, and
without any monitour, aid and accommodate them. He is oft-times better to them then their prayers: for why? The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, as well as his ears are open to their cry, Psal. 34.15. The Vulgar Latine rendreth it, Dirigam eum, I will direct him, as a Tutour, and Gardian doth his Pupil, his Or∣phan. See verse 3. He will also protect him, that nothing may be wanting to his happinesse. I am like a green firre tree,] green all the yeer about, and of so large branches, and broad leaves thick set, that neither Sun nor rain can easily come at the wea∣ried passenger, reposing himself under them. And whereas Ephraim might say, Here's repose, but where shall I have repast? It is added; In me is thy fruit found,] q. d. The sir-tree is indeed green, and shady, but withall barren: it bears no fruit, either ad esum, or ad usum. It boweth it self down to the earth, so that a man may easily lay hold upon the branches, saith Rabbi David, and other Hebrews. But what shall he get by that more then a green bowre, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, &c? As an Ancient speaking of Ahab, describeth him sitting in his ivory Palace in Samaria, in the time of the three yeers famine: He had every thing else, but wanted bread: So Ephraim here, hath shade, but can he live by that? what shall he do for food? He shall not want for that, saith God-Alsufficient: for From me is thy fruit found.] Praestò est, (so some render it) Here it is ready, and mouth-meet:Polan. Tremel. Tarnou. Tine Deo om∣nis copia est egestas. Bern. yea satis est (so others render it) it is enough of it, satisfactory, and proportionable to thy necessity. Yea I would thou shouldst know, that what fruit soever thou hast, or shalt bear as an Olive or Vine, verse 6. and 7. it is found in me, proceeds from me, the root of the matter is in me, as Job speaketh in another case. Verse 9. Who is wise and he shall understand these things,] A patheticall per∣close,Conclusio gnomica. Exclamatio emphatica. whereby the Prophet (Oratour-like) would leave a sting in the hearts of his hearers, and so seal up, and fet on all that he had said before. Who is wise,] q. d. I could wish there were more: but I see there are not many. Store there are of fools, Stultorum plena sunt omnia, such dust-heaps there are in every corner to be found, not a few, that either know not the will of God, or stumble at it. But who hath known the mind of the Lord? Who amongst you will give ear to this? Who hath believed our report?1 Cor. 2.16. Esay 42.23. Esay 53.1. Jer. 9.12. Juven. sat. 13. Jer. 8.9. Psal. 119.98, 99. or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Who is the wise man that may understand this? Lucernâ accensa hominem quaerebat Aesopus. Jeremy was bidden run to and fro to finde a man that sought the truth, chap. 5.1. Rari quippe boni. Not many wise, wise I mean to salvation, 2 Tim. 3.15. that make sure work for their souls, and draw their wisdom from Gods holy word, from the Mine of the Mystery of Christ. All others are foolish people, sottish children: they have no understanding, be they never so shrewd and of deep reach for the world,Jer. 4.22. be they never so wise in their generation; the fox is so in his, and the de∣vil in his,1 Cor. 9.24. for when he was but young, he out-witted our first Parents, who yet were no babies, simple and weak in understanding, as the Socinians affirm them to have been, or else they would not (say they) have so sinned. A fond conceit, and with∣out footing in Gods holy word; where we finde, that they were created in Gods image,Ephes. 4. which consisteth in knowledge, righteousnesse and holinesse, as saith the Apostle. And he shall understand these things,] which none of the Princes of this world know,2 Cor. 2.8. because their learning hangs in their light; and like Moles, they dig dex∣terously under ground, but are blinde above ground. Sapiens est cui res sapiunt prout sunt, saith Bernard. He is the wise man that savoureth things as they are. And herein lieth the whole wisdom of a man, saith Lactantius, ut Deum cognoscat, & colat,Lib. 3. cap. 30. that he know and worship God aright, that with a practicall judgement, he ponder the word and wayes of God,Arist. Rbst. cap. 11. Metap. lib. 1. cap. 10. Ethic. l. 6. c. 7. & lib. 6. c. 5. Xenoph. de dict. & fact. Socat. in order to salvation. This is that wis∣dom that dwelleth with prudence, Prov. 8.12. Aristotle in many places of his works, distinguisheth between Wisdom and Prudence. Wisdom he maketh to be a right apprehending of truths in generall: Prudence, an applying them to parti∣cular cases, and uses. But Socrates said, that there was no such difference: sith He that knoweth good things to do them, and evil things to avoid them, is to be held a wise man, and none else. They may seem here, to be put for one and the same:
sith the wise man is said, not to know, but to understand, judge, and pouder, and the prudent to know: teaching us, that God calls for a prudent wildom, and a wise prudence, directing the soul to an orderly carriage, and an holy care, that godlinesse, (which is the onely wisdom) may run thorow our whole lives, as the woof doth thorow the web. For the wayes of the Lord are right,] Understand it not so much of the wayes of Predestination, providence, &c. wherein God walks toward us (which yet are all right and equall) as of those wayes of his Will, Word, and Worship, where∣in he requireth us to walk towards Him. These are called the way of God, Matth. 22.16. and the way of salvation, Acts 16.17. and the way of truth, 2 Pet. 2.2. and the right way, verse 15. and the way of righteousnesse, verse 21. Right these wayes are called, or strait. First, because they are conform to the Will of a righteous God, which is the mensura mensurans,Non solum recta, sed & regula. the first rule of right, the standard. Secondly, because the matter of it is holy, and just, and good, a doctrine of righteousnesse, that teacheth us to give God his due, and men theirs. It is also pat for every purpose, Psal. 19 7, 8. Prov. 30.5. Of the Book of Psalms, Athanasius hath observed, that they are so penned, that every man may well think they speak de se, in re sua, of himself, and to his own particular necessities. Thirdly, because it rectifieth us, and transformeth us into the same image: it maketh such as deliver up themselves thereunto, to walk as patterns of the rule, as a transcript of the word, that dwelleth richly in them, and worketh effectually, as a seed of immortallity. Fourthly,Psal. 125.5. Jer. because it carrieth us on in a strait line unto a right end, without crooking, or compassing about, Psal. 19.8. and 25.4. Has vias qui teru, non terit. Pray therefore as Da∣vid did, Psal. 13.29. lest breaking out into by-wayes (all which are high-wayes to hell) or but stepping over the hedge, to avoid a piece of foul way, we brush and bruise our selves to get in again, break our bones with David, &c. And the just shall walk in them:] Such as are just with a double righteous∣nesse, Imputed, and mparted; that of Justification, and this of Sanctification: these will choose the way of truth, Psal. 119.30. and 25.12. and be willing to walk honestly, Heb. 13.18. orderly and by rule, Gal. 5.25. accurately, and to the utmost, Ephes. 5.15. directly, and distinctly, eyeing the mark, and pro∣pounding to themselves the highest pitch, and the best patterns: often comparing themselves with the rule, laying their lives by the line, and reforming their out∣straies, Psal. 119.59, 60. making it the main of their endeavour, that all their deeds may be wrought in God, Joh 3.21. Lo this is the just mans practise: and it is er opounded for a president. But the transgressours shall fall therein.] They perish from the way, Psal. 2.12. they stumble at the word and fall into perdition, as the Chaldee here hath it: and so shew themselves to be transgressours, traytours, rebels, yea reprobates. See 1 Pet. 2.8. they stumble at the word, being aisobedient, whereunto also they were appoiinted. O fearfull! A bridge is made (saith a Reverend Divine) to give us a safe passage over a river, but he who stumbleth on the bridge is in danger to fall into the river. The Word is given us as a means to carry us over hell to heaven: but he who stumbleth and quarrelleth at this means, shall fall in thither, from whence otherwise he had been delivered by it. Neither may we think the worse of the Word for this accidentall effect of it upon trans∣gressours; sith the fault is meerly in themselves: As when a lame man stumb∣leth in a plain path, the fault is not in the way, but in the foot. Blear eyes can∣not abide the light; nor children endure honey, when they have sore mouthes. The same Sun makes flowers smell sweet, but carrions stink loathsomely. Mo∣ses saved the Israelite, killed the Egyptian: and Abigail's voice, pacified David, but made Nabal's heart die within him as a stone. Oecumenius telleth us,Columbam vegetat, scara∣baeum necat. De mirab. auscul. that the fragrancy of precious ointments is wholesome for Doves, but kills the Beetle. And Aristotle affirmeth, that oyl of roses is deadly to Vultures, who hunt after onely dead mens carcasses. Christ himself, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, was set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a signe to be spoken against, Luke 2.34. for a But-mark, against whom his enemies should
shoot the shafts of their gainsayings. To the Jews he became a stumbling-block, and unto the Gentiles foolishnesse, 1 Cor. 1.23. Let them alone (saith He,Mat. 15.14. concerning the Pharisees, who were offended at his sayings) Let them stum∣ble, and fall, and be broken, and snared, and taken, Esay 8.15. Christ in his Ordinances, is to reprobates a rock of offence, 2 Pet. 2.8. but such a rock as that, Judg. 6.21. out of which goeth fire and consumeth them. For if any love not the Lord Jesus Christ, he is Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Behold they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9. Linea ducta mihi est, gratia, Christe, tibi.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the Prophesie of JOEL. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE Word of the Lord that came, &c.] See the Note on Hosea 1.1. with whom, Hierom and some other Interpreters, make this Prophet a Con∣temporary, for the likenesse of Argument: and that common Canon of the Jew-Doctours, that the Prophet who sets not down his time, is to be held of the same time, with him that is placed before him. The Seventy set him not onely after Hosea, but also after Amos and Micah:Sedar Olam Zuta. Sic Funccius Genebrard. and the ancient Hebrew Chronicle, called Sedar-Olam affirmeth, that Joel prophesied together with Nahum and Habakkuk, in the dayes of king Manasseh: which Dru∣sius would prove out of Joel 3.5. Others, with more shew of reason, out of 2 King. 21.10. and 23.26. Joel might very well be one of those Prophets that denounced Gods heavy judgements against Iudah, for the sinnes and abominations of Ma∣nasseh, whom some make to be his convert. For although at first the Lord spake to Manasseh, and to his people, but they would not hearken (2 Chron. 23.10) yet the rod might set the word awork afterwards: for Manasseh when he was in afflicti∣on besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly (verse 12.) and Ioel might very well be to him a sonne of Pethuel, or of Gods perswasion: God, by his ministery might speak to his heart, Hos. 2.14. set before him an open door,Ostium Dei. (another Etymon of the name Pethuel) Rev. 3.8. minister unto him an entrance further and further into Christs everlasting kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. If any think it more likely that Ioel prophesied under Iosiah king of Judah, when that great famine fell out which is described in like termes by Ieremy, chap. 14.1, 2. compared with 2 King. 23.26. I shall not strive with him. But that this Joel was the sonne of Samuel (here cal∣led Pethuel) a perswader of God, because what he asked of God he obtained) as R. Salomon would carry it, I cannot imagine: for that Joel was not a Prophet,1 Sam. 8.1, 3, 5. but a corrupt Judge.
Verse 2. Hear this ye old men,] Who, as ye are fittest to hear serious dis∣courses (Aristotle excludeth young men from his Ethick-Lectures, because raw, and rash:Arist. Ethic. green wood is ever shrinking, and warping) so ye are more expe∣rienced; and yet not so wise, but that, by hearing, ye may become wiser, Prov. 1.5. Solon said, he could never be too old to learn. Julianus the Lawyer said, that when he had one foot in the grave, yet he would have the other in the school.. Solon. David Chytraus, when he lay a dying, lifted up himself to hear the di∣vine discourses of his friends, that sat by him; and said, that he should die with better cheer, if he might die, learning something. and give ear all, &c.] Hear and give ear: draw up the ears of your mindes to the ears of your bodies,Si moribundus oiam aliquid didicisset. Melch Ad. Jer. 13.15. that one sound may pierce both. When these two words are joyned together, as they are often, the matter propounded, is either very dark, or very remarkable, and commands attention, as Deut. 1.45. Esay 1.2, 10. Jer. 13.15. Hos. 5.1. all ye inhabitants of the land,] sc. of Judea, or all ye inhabitants of the whole earth, q. d. I shall speak of so great a matter, as that I could wish to be heard all the world over. And because all men love to hear news, I shall tell you that, that was never known to fall out in any age. Rem novam pollicetur emphaticoters quam more Rhetorico, saith Oecolampadius. Prick up your ears therefore and listen. Hath this been in your dayes, or even in the dayes of your fathers?] Was there ever such havock made by severall sorts of vermine successively, for four yeers to∣gether? This was the very finger of God, Exod. 8.19. all whose works (by how small instruments soever) are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure there∣in, Psal. 111.2. His extraordinary works especially, are to be noted and noticed; the memory of them is to be transmitted to all posterity. This shall be written for the generation to come, Psal. 102.18. They shall come and shall declare his righte∣ousnesse, unto a people that shall be born, that he hath done this, Psal. 22.31. Sed vae stupori nostro. There is a wo to such as regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands, Esay 5 12. that make of them but a nine dayes wonderment at best, and so passe them over. Whereas every judgement of God should be a warning-peal to repentance. We be like the Smiths dog, (saith One) who the harder the Anvil is beaten on, lyes by, and sleeps the sounder. Like the hen (saith Another) which loseth her chickens one af∣ter another by the devouring kite; and yet still continues to pick up what lies before her: such a deep drowsinesse and drossinesse of spirit, there is upon most of us. Verse 3. Tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their children,] Heb. Cipher them up diligently, after the manner of Aithmeticians: reckon up the severall years,Deut. 19.20. with the severall calamities thereof to your children and nephews; that they may hear, and fear, and do no more so. Let your woes be their warnings, your sufferings their standing-sermons; your corrections their instructions. See 1 Cor. 10.5, to 12.Greg. Mor. Ruina majorum sit cautela minorum. Hast thou marked the old-way (saith Eliphas to Job, Chap. 22.15, 16.) which wicked men have trodden, which were cut down out of time: whose foundation was overflowen with a flood, (Heb. a flood was poured upon their foundation) which said unto God, Depart from us, &c? He speaketh of those Antediluvian Atheists, buried in one universall grave of waters. See Iosh. 22.20. Neh. 13.26. Iude 5, 6, 7. and learn to keep a Catalogue of Gods great works, whether of mercy or judgement; yea to polish and garnish them for the use of posterity, not with vain affectation of wit, not with pedantick pomp of words, but with sobriety, and holy gravity, as here: such as may stick by our children, and leave impression. Verse 4.. Zachala.  Eruca ab erodendo. Isidor. lib. 12. Orig c 5. Lecusta quaft locae ustulans. . That which the palmer-worm hath left, hath the locust eaten,] The palmer-worm hath its name in Hebrew from shaving. (because it shaveth off the fruits of the earth.) In Chaldee from creeping: In Greek from crookning: In La∣tine from gnawing. The Locust hath its name in Hebrew from multitudo, where∣with the very Sun is darkened: In Latine from burning places, where it spoileth: In Greek from cropping the tops of corne, and plants, which as they fled, they fed upon. The Canker-worm hath its name in Hebrew from licking: In Chaldee from fleeing: In Greek and Latine from feeding upon the flowers of apples and other fruits. Comester some render it. Flemings call it, The preacher, a bombo quem
polando edit from the noise it maketh as it flies. The Caterpiller hath its name Chasil, from wasting, because it utterly consumeth all, not onely fruits and leaves, but tender boughes and branches: Ʋt ita crescat oratio sicut ipsum malum, to shew that as their sinne increased, so did their punishment. The Lord of Hosts can∣not possibly want a weapon wherewith to beat a rebel: neither may wicked men expect that He should lay down the bucklers first. To that bold question of Pharaoh,Exod. 5.2. Who is the Lord that I should obey him? God made a large reply, by his armies of locusts, lice, slies, &c. till Pharaoh was forced to answer himself, The Lord is righ∣teous. What spoil hath been made by these despicable creatures here mentioned in other countreys, Pliny recordeth. Pierius testifieth that the Egyptians made the Locust an Hieroglyphick of Famine.Plin. l. 11. c. 29 And although we finde not expressely set down in the holy History, when this particular plague was executed, yet we need not doubt but it was done according to Deut. 28.38, 39. See 1 King. 8.37. Verse 5. Awake ye drunkards,] ye Ale-stakes, and Suckers (Heb. Shiccorim) that pour in heady and intoxicating drinks, such as soon lay you to sleep, and (besides) take away your heart, Hos. 4.11. rob you of your selves, and lay a beast in your room. Portentosum sane potionis genus, saith Pliny concerning ale,Lib. 14. cap. ult. that excessively drunk, maketh men more sleepy then dormise: besides that worse sleep of carnall security, Eph. 5.14. Rom. 13.11. These therefore are here called upon to be sober and watch, (See 1 Thess. 5.6. 1 Pet. 5.8. 1 Pet. 4.7.) ye to weep and howl, to turn their laughter into mourning, and their joy into heavinesse. And why? For their sinne they should have done (as that drunkard in the Ecclesiasticall History, that, toucht with a sense of his sin, wept himself blind) but here they are sar∣castically called upon to weep for their great losse, as they esteem it.Vinum merum nondum dilu∣tum. Because of the new-wine for it is cut off from your mouth,] As many things fall out betwixt the chin and the challice, the cup and the lip: You made account to have mouthed it, to have swilled your souls, as they say, and to have swallowed it down your wide gullets. But behold, it falls out somewhat otherwise: the cater∣piller hath been before you, and left you nothing better then Adams-ale to tipple. This is cold comfort to the drunkard, whose Word is that of the Vine in Jothams parable, Non possum relinquere vinum meum, Take away my liquor,Aug. de temp. ser. 131. you take away my life. Austin brings him in saying, Malle se vitam quàm vinum eripi, He had rather lose his life then his wine. And Ambrose tells of one Theotimus, that being told by his Physicians, that much quaffing would make him blinde, Vale lumen ami∣cum, said he, Farewell sweet eyes; if ye will not bear wine, ye are no eyes for me. This drunkard would rather lose his sight then his sin; his soul then his lust. Such kinde of persons are like the Panther, which is said to love the dung of man so much, as if it be hang'd on high from it, it will skip and leap up, and never leave till it have burst it self in pieces to get it: and this is the way they take that creature. God will take these naturall brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.14. after another manner. He will not onely cut them short enough here,Grand sign. Serag. 186. but turn a cup of fire and brimstone down their throats, Psal. 11.6. which will be worse to them then that ladle full of boyling lead, poured down the throat of a drunken Turk, by the command of a Bashaw. Verse 6. For a nation is come up upon my land,] A nation, sc. of vermine,Sic columella de apibus. Virgil. de piscib Hom. de muscis. by swarmes, as vers. 9. called afterwards, an army chap. 2.11. and a people, chap. 2.2. See the like Prov. 30.25, 26. Is come,] that is, shortly shall come. Ʋpon my land,] this glorious and goodly land, as it is called Dan. 11.16. Tarnouius makes this by a mimésis to be the drunkards lamentation A nation is come up, &c. Strong and without number.] yea therefore strong, because without number: insuperable, because innumerable. Feeble they are, and yet formidable; because set on by God Almighty, whose warriers they are, as the Roman spoylers are called, Matt. 22.7. And perhaps the Assyrians may here be hinted at. I doubt not but the lite∣rall sence is chiefly intended: Neither can I concur with Oecolampadius, who hold∣eth it to be Propheta indignum, unbeseeming the Prophet, to preach thus concern∣ing worms and locusts: For concerning such poor creatures deal the Prophets by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, in sundry other places, Prov. 6.6. Am. 4.9. and 7.1. Nahum. 3.15. Whose teeth are the teeth of a lion.] that is, they devour all that is in their way; as there is no standing before a lion, no not before a moth, that hath commission to crush a man, Job 4.19.
Verse 7. He hath laid my vine wast] The Prophet proceeds in aggravating the the calamity, that he might make the people the more sensible. There is nothing in the world more stupid and more stubborn then a drunkard. Of such it is that that saying of an Ancient is often verified, Ablatus est à peccantibus timor, ne possit esse cautela, Feare is taken away from offendours, that there should be no caution against it. Here therefore let the words of the wise be as goads and as nailes fastened by the Masters of the assemblies. Let them so preach with Peter, that their hearers may be prickt at heart Act. 2, 37. may be galled and sawed as it were Act. 7.54. may startle and tremble, as Act. 24.25. may awaken out of that dead lathergy,2 Tim. 2.26. whereinto Satan hath cast them, and recover out of his snare, who are taken captive by him at his pleasure. True it is, we can hardly get men to be∣lieve that hell is so hot, or sin so heavie, or the devill so black, or God so unmerci∣ful as the Preachers make him. The Lion, say they, is not so terrible as he is paint∣ed; nor is our case so dangerous as is born us in hand. Sed nos pergamus exaggera∣re, saith Pareus here. Let Gods Ministers lay load upon mens sins, and set forth to the full the miseries that will fall upon them. The Prophets did so for temporal (as here most graphically and to the life) shall not we much more for eternal punish∣ments? Oh (saith One) that I could get words to gore your very hearts with smarting pain: that this doctrine might be written in your flesh! and barked my fig-tree] Take away the bark from the tree, and the sap can never find the way to the boughes. These Vermine had barked the trees with their teeth, cast the bark out of their mouths upon the ground, and made the branches naked and all white as froth; so that the drunkards, deprived of their sweet draughts, were brought ad efflationem animae (as the Calde here expoundeth Chetsephah) to an yielding up of the ghost, yea, ad laqueum & restim, as the Latines, to the very halter. Verse 8. Lament like a Virgin] Our Prophet hath done with his drunkards: and now applyeth himself to the soberer sort, whom also he calleth to deep and down∣right mourning, in this case of common calamity; there being not any so innocent and holy, but had some hand, if not upon the greater cart-ropes yet surely upon the smaller cords that drew down dearth and judgment upon the land. lament therefore like a Virgin] betrothed, but bereft of her espoused husband, before she was married to him; So Piscator. Others understand it of her that (lately a virgin, but now new-married) passionately loved her husband and bitterly bewaileth his death; which some young women have taken so grievously, that they have refused to live any longer; but have chosen to put an end to their life and grief together, as historians testify. girded with Sackcloth] Sacco non serico, with mourning weeds as a testimony of, help to your humiliation. The dead we see, may be lawfully lamented: indeed it is one of the dues of the dead.. Justa de∣functorum. It is fit that the body, when sown in corruption, should be watered by the tears of those that plant it in the earth. Only we must not mourn in this case as heathens Without hope. 1 Thes. 4.13. Our grief must not be excessive, either for measure or continuance; Neither must we mourn so much for our friends departed, as for our sins against God. In the former case baldness is forbidden: in the later it is required Isa. 22.12. And Zach. 12.10.11.13. One poor woman weeping over Christ shall be as deeply affected as all the people were in that unspeakable losse of their good king Josiah, at Hadadrim∣mon in the vally of Megiddo, where Jeremiah lamented, and all the singing men and singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentation, and made them an ordinance &c. 2 Chron. 35.24.25. Verse 9. The meat-offering and the drink-offering is cut off] Periit libatio & ob∣latio. This was the godly mans greatest grief, that there wanted matter of testify∣ing their thankfulness to God in his commanded worships: and that God was so deeply displeased, as that he had deprived Himself and his Ministers of the due allowance; so that they also mourned, and could not chreefully execute their office, for lack of maintenance; for they were not of the Camelion-kind. Verse 10. The field is wasted the land mourneth] The sacrifices are not only cut off for present, but little hopes left for the future: for the field, that common store∣house, that horreum unde hauriatur, is wasted: Shuddad Sadeh, there is an ele∣gant
allusion in the Original: as in the following words a Prosopopoeia not inferi∣our to those of the Poets, as Luther and Vatablus here note. The land mourneth] By an ordinary Metaphor among the Hebrewes, those things are said to mourn that are wasted, defolated, corrupted and changed for the worse. Lam. 2.8. the rampart and the wall are said to lament,Plutarch. and to lan∣guish together. When Ephestion died, Alexander not only clypped his horses and mules hair, but plucked down also the battlements of the walles of the city: because it should appear that the walls and ramparts did mourn for his death: So Esay 24.7. The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth: all the merry-hearted do sigh. It is fit that if the land mourn, and faile of her increase, men should much more mourn and be moved with a sense of their sins, the cause of such calamities. The earth lies under a curse of barrennesse, at its best Gen. 3.17. and was never so beautiful and cheerfull since the Fall of Adam. At this day it lyeth bed-rid, as it were, waiting for the comming of the Son of God, that it may be delivered from the bondage of corruption Rom. 8.20. But in times of dearth, it seemeth to mourn more then ordinary, yea to blush and bleed. the new wine is dried up] Or is abashed: as loth to look men in the face, because not answerable to their expectation, See Esay. 33.9. the oyl languisheth] Or, is sick. Corn, wine, and oyle, are the maine supports of mans life: all's gone. Verse 11. Be ye ashamed O ye husbandmen] This Repetition of his former exhor∣tation is not needlesse: for man is a stout and stubborn creature: neither goeth any thing more against the hair and the heart with him, then to come downward, and to be so soundly sensible of Gods judgements, as seriously to repent. Hence St. James his extraordinary importunity in pressing this most needfull but much neglected duty, chap. 4.9, 10. He knew, & so did our Prophet, that this work must be done, or else men are undone. Hence that heap of words.Seca. Nunquam satis dioitur quod nunquam satis discitur. That can never be too much taught, that is never enough learned. Verse 12. The Vine is dried up, and the Figtree languisheth] God cutteth you short of all things both for necessity and delight: and this is so much inculcated, and iterated, that you may not slight it as a common occurrence: but be deeply affected with it, as a sore affliction. Verba toties repetita viva sunt, vera sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt. Let no man think that this is a superfluous tautologie,Aug. or an idle repetition of the same thing. For, in sacred scripture there is not a tittle in vain: there is not an apex whereon there hangs not a mountain of fense, as the Rabbines use to say. By one and the same thing repeated, memory is helped, af∣fection is excited, and matters of moment are better minded, Phil. 3.1. Besides, Repetitio confirmatio est, saith Ambrose,De bone Mart. c. 12. The repeating of a matter implyeth 1 The infallible truth of it. 2 The inexpressible excellency of it. 3 The profitable use of it. 4 The absolute necessity of it. Aut faciendum, aut patiendum. Verse 13. Gird your selves and lament ye Priests] Be you Prest, and first in the practise of humiliation: Be you an example of the believers in word in conver∣sation &c. 1 Tim. 4.12. a patern of piety. Si vis ne flere &c.. Horat. Judg. 9.18. If others shall la∣ment, you must begin to them: and say as Abimelech did to his souldiers, What ye have seen me do, make hast and do likewise: and as St. Paul doth to his Philippians, Those things which ye have both learned and received, and heard and seen in me, do;Philip. 4.9. and the God of peace shall be with you. for the meat-offering and the drink-offering, &c.] your maintenance is substracted, and (that which should more affect you) the sacred service of God is intermitted, and so the glory is departed, the dayly sacrifice is neglected, which the Jewes coun∣ted and called The abomination of desolation. Phineas his wife was not without natural affection 1 Sam. 4.21. but her spiritual affections prevailed. Therefore in the declaration of her sorrow, that of her father in law and husband is but once named: but twice it came in, The glory is departed, The glory is departed. All comforts are but Ichabods to a good heart without the ordinances: without the sincere milk of the word Gods new-born babes cannot be quitted.Tom. 4. Oper. Lat. p. 424. I could not live in Paradise without the Word (said Luther) as with the Word, I could easily live in hell it self. Verse 14. Sanctify ye a fast] Having humbled your selves, preach repentance to
others. That's the best sermon that's digged out of a mans own brest. Sanctify your selves first, and then prepare your brothren, saith losiah to the Priests of his time 2 Cron. 35.6. A religious fast (for that the Prophet intends here by Sancti∣fy) rightly observed and referred to religious ends, is both a testimony of true re∣pentance, and a furtherance thereunto: for it cames the rebell flesh 1 Cor. 9. ult. which else will wantonize, and overtop the Spirit Deut. 32.15. And it giveth wings to our prayers, which before groveld on the ground, as it were. Fasting in∣flameth prayer; and prayer sanctifieth fasting. sanctify therefore a fast, call a solemn assembly] Heb. a day of restraint separa∣ting your selves as Zech. 8.19. from all fleshly delights; amercing and punish∣ing your selues in that sort by an holy revenge, as Psal. 35.13. and afflicting your soules with voluntary sorrowes for your sins and miseries. gather the Elders] both those qui canis & annis sunt tales, who are full of dayes and so of sins; and also those, that are in place of authority: whose offences have sored higher on the wings of Example, and Scandal. and all the inhabitants of the land] For as all are sin-guilty, so your unanimity and charity will further the service. All should get together in this case, and bring their buckets to quench a common fire: the more publike and general the humilia∣tion is, the more pleasing and prevalent, Judg. 20.26. 2 Chron. 30.3, 13. Ion. 3.5, 7, 8. into the house of the Lord your God] which house was a type of Christ, (in whom God heareth His) and had made many promises to prayers there put up in faith, 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. 2 Chron. 6.28, 29. of the Lord your God] Yours still by vertue of the covenant: be sure to keep faith in heart, when we are at the greatest undr. And cry unto the Lord] with the heart at least as Moses did at the red sea,Moses egit vo∣cis silentio ut magis audi∣vetur. when yet none heard him but the ear of heaven only; and as Hannah did when she uttered no audible voyce, and yet poured forth her soul to the Lord with such a strange and unwonted writing of her lips, that Eli thought she had been drunk. Verse 15 Alas for the day &c.]1 Sam. 1.15. Gr. Alas, Alas, Alas; the Vulgar Latine A, A, A, which à Lupide makes much adoe about, to little purpose. for the day of the Lord] that is, The day of the greatest evils and miseries then ever hitherto they had suffered, if repentance prevent not. That they had suffe∣red much already appeareth chap. 2.25. but those were but the bginnings of their sorrowes, if they yet went on in their sins. for as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come] An Elegant Agnomination there is in the Original: together with an allusion to that tremend title of God Shaddai. The Jewes (probably) boasted much and bare themselves over-bold upon their interest in God almighty. The Prophet therefore tel's them that Gods greatest power should be little to their profit whiles impenitent: for that it should be put forth and exercised for their utter destruction. Aben-Ezra interpreteth Shaddai a Conqueror, Others a Destroyer, which a Conqueror must needs be. And hereto this text and that Esa. 13.6. do allude, when they say Shod shall come from Shaddai, Destruction from the Almighty. Here also we may learn when we are under affliction, to ascend to the first cause thereof Am. 3.6. as David did in that three years famine 2 Sam. 21.1. See am. 3.38. Verse 16 Is not the meat cut off before your eyes?] Heb. before your eyes: and so it appeareth to be the Prophets speech, and not a form prescribed by him to the people, by adding the word (saying) to the end of the fourteenth verse Cry to the Lord, saying, Alas for the day &c. And it is as if the Prophet should say; Doe ye not yet see what case you are in? Are ye so stupid and so stout or sturdy, as not to stoop though starved almost? should not Vexation give understanding; Are not the fiercest creatures tamed with hard hunger? Will not men in such case buy or beg food of their deadly enemies? O brawny breasts! O horny heart-strings! yea joy and gladnesse from the house of our God?] All Gods services were to be performed with joy: but now, for want of corn and wine (which cheareth God and man Iudg. 9.13.) the dayly sacrifice ceased, and all good hearts were thereby sadded. See vers. 9 with the Note. Verse 17 The seed is rotten under their clods] It lieth buried or drowned with
excessive rain and moisture, corrupting the seed soon after it was sown: and that which was not so marred, was afterwards, when it came to be corn, dried up with excessive heat. The corn is withered.] So that the garners were desolated, the barnes broken down for want of stuffing, and for that there was no use of them, sith they sowed, but reaped not, Mic. 6.15. The husbandman was called to mourning, Amos 5.16, for a three-fold calamity that lay upon his tillage. First, Immoderate rain, in or about seeding. Secondly, Locusts and other vermine at spring. Thirdly, extreme drought after all, verse 19, 20. Thus God followeth sinners with one plague in the neck of another, (as he did Pharaoh, that sturdy rebell) till he have made his foes his footstools To multiply sin, is to multiply sorrow, Psal. 16.4. to heap up wickednesse, is to heap up wrath, Rom 2.5. I will heap mischiefs upon them,Si quoties pec∣cent homines sua fulmina mittat Jupiter, exiguo tempora inermis er. Ovid. saith God, I will spend mine arrows upon them, Deut. 32.23. which yet cannot be all spent up, as the Poet feared of his Jupiter, that if he should punish men for every offence, his store of thunder-bolts would be soon spent and exhausted. Verse 18. How do the beasts groun]? The wilde beasts groan in their kinde. The herds of cattell] home and tame beasts, as oxen, &c. are perplexed,] as not knowing what to do: 'tis the same word with that, Esth. 3.15. God had hid his face, (withdrawn his hand) and they were troubled, he taketh away their breath, (for lack of pasture) they die and return to their dust, as David telleth us in his Physicks, Psal. 104.29. Epiphaxius his Physiologer reporteth of the bird called Charadius, that being brought where a sick man lieth, if he look upon the sick with a fixed and unremoved eye, there is hopes of recovery: but if he look another way, the disease is deadly. Sure it is, that if God look in mercy upon man and beast, they are cared and catered for, Psal. 36.7. and 104.27. and 145.15, 16, &c. and the contrary. yea the flocks of sheep, &c. which yet can bite upon the bare, live with a little, and get pasture, where the bigger creatures cannot come. Verse. 19. O Lord to thee will I cry.] I will, though others will not. I have called upon others to cry mightily unto thee, and to meet thee by repentance: but they ranquam monstra marina, as so many Sea-monsters, passe by my words with a deaff ear, they refuse to return: thy hand is lifted up in threatning, and will fall down in punishing, but they will not see, Esay. 26.11. they will not search, they will not have their eyes (like the windowes in Solomons Temple) broad inward: the eyes of their mindes are as ill set (for this matter) as the eyes of their bodies, they see not what's within. But whatever they do,1 King. 6.4. my soul shall weep in secret for their pride, and mine eyes shall weep sore, &c. (Jer. 13.17.) for their insensiblenesse of their misery. For the fire hath devoured the pastures,] that is, the immoderate scorching heat of the season. See Psal. 83.14. Jer. 17.6. Or the blasting winde, as Lyra expounds it; or the locusts, as Drusius, or God, (who is a consuming fire) by any, or all these instruments of his wrath, as Tarnouius. And the flame hath burnt all the arees of the field.] This was dreadfull; but yet nothing to that conflagratio mundi, spoken of by St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3.12. when the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements melt with fervent heat on the heads of the wicked: who shall give a terrible account, with the world all on alight fire about their ears. Verse 20. The beasts of the field cry also unto thee,] Glocitant, a term taken from Deer: they cry as they can, they cry by implication, imploring thine help, each for himself. See Psal. 149.9. Job 39.3. Psal. 104.27. And should men be silent? For the rivers of the waters are dried up,] This maketh the Hart bray after the wa∣ter-brooks, yea shed tears as hunters say the Hart will, when hot and hard-be∣stead for water. Hereto David seems to allude, Psal. 42.5. My tears have been my meat, &c. And the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wildernesse.] This had been said be∣fore verse 19. The reason of such repetitions, see above in the Notes on verses 11, 12. Neither let this last exaggeration of the common calamity, by that which befell the bruit beasts, seem superfluous. For whereas the security and obstinacy of most men is such, that they take little notice of present pressures, but promise themselves peace
and safety, whatsoever God by his servants shall say to the contrary: it is but need∣full surely, that their danger should be inculcated, and their calamity set out, and set on with utmost importunity, and vehemency. CHAP. II. Verse 1. BLow ye the trumpet in Zion,] Idem aliis verbis repetit, saith Mercer here. The Prophet repeateth the same as in the former Chapter; one∣ly in other words, more at large, and after another manner: pressing the people further to the practise of repentance by many sweet promises of the blessings of this, and a better life. Our Prophet may seem to bee of the same mind with Tertul∣lian, who said that he was nulli rei natus nisi poenitentiae, born for no other end, but to repent, and to call upon others so to do. Tot autem verbis & figuris ntitur, saith Luther, he useth so many words, & figures, because he had to do with a people that were harder then rocks, Jer. 5.3. as also, because there is an absolute necessi∣ty of repentance. Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum, as our Saviour tells his Disci∣ples twice in a breath, Luke 13.2, 5. The Prophet had urged them hereunto from the evils they felt, or feared, chap. 1. Pain and penitency are words of one deri∣vation: God plagueth men that he may make them cry Peccavi: not Perij onely, I am undone, as Cain; but peccavi, I have done very foolishly, as David. The seventeen first verses of this Chapter, are Hortatory; the rest Consolatory. The day of the Lord cometh; therefore Repent. This is the summe of the exhortation. It cometh,. Herod. and that instantly; Give warning therefore: God loveth to foresignifie, (saith the Heathen Historian) and to premonish, before he punish. He dealt so with Cain, to whom he read the first lecture of Repentance, Gen. 4. as he had done of Faith, to his father Adam, in the Chapter before. He dealt so with the old world, with the Sodomites, Ninevites, &c. Sound an alarm in my holy Mountain,] Ring the bels backwards, (as amongst us they do) the house is on fire; the enemy is at hand. Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble,] and take course to prevent, or miti∣gate the ensuing mischief; to cut the cart-ropes of sin, that pull down wrath upon the land. for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand.] An end is come, is come, is come, as Ezekiel hath it, chap. 7.6, 7. I will overturn, overturn, overturn, as the same Prophet hath it elsewhere.Ezek. 21.27. and 10. Should we then make mirth? as it is in the same Chapter: should we sleep upon a mast-pole, dance upon a weather-cock? go hal∣lowing and hooping to the place of execution? Verse 2. A day of darknesse, and of gloominesse,] Lest they should imagine it to be some light matter, that hath been, and is still threatned, he sets forth to the life, the bitternesse of that day, so lowring and lightlesse, that it can hardly be called a day: a dark and dolefull doomesday it will be to the impenitent, infaustus & infe∣lix, dismall and dreadfull. What better can be expected by those Tenebriones, that delight in the deeds of darknesse, and are acted by those Rulers of the darknesse of this world,Ephes. 6.12. the Devils, whom they follow as they are led, 1 Cor. 12.2. till they fall into outer darknesse, even that darknesse beyond a darknesse, (as the dungeon is be∣yond,. or below the prison) where they shall never see the light againe, till they see all the world on a light fire. Let those Lucifugae look to it, that love darknesse better then light: for, besides what they meet with here, they shall one day have their bellies full of it in that dungeon of darknesse.Exod. 19.15. A day of clouds and of thick darknesse,] Caused by that huge army of Locusts, &c. coming in great swarms,Postera vix summos spar∣gebar lumina montes Orta dies. Virg. Lux subit, & primo feriente cacumina sole. Ovid. and darkning the air. as the morning spread upon the mountains,] i. e. longe, lateque, far and neer, all the countrey over, and that in an instant: even as the Morning spreadeth abroad up∣on a sudden over the tops of hills, though they be a great way off. Hereby is im∣ported, that the calamitie here threatned, is such as they can neither avert, nor avoid: Irretensibilis est, saith Luther. A great people and a strong,] So the Locusts are called. See Chap. 1.4, 5, 6.
not without some respect to the Chaldeans, that should afterwards carry them cap∣tive, as Hierom here glosseth. there hath not been ever the like,] sc. in the land of Judea, nor of the like conti∣nuance. See chap. 1.2, 3. even to the yeers of many generations.] Heb. of an age, and an age; so Deut. 32.7. Joel 3.20. This assureth us of the greatnesse of this peoples sin, sith they were so signally punished: for God doth not use to kill flies with beetles, as they say. Verse 3. A fire devoureth before them, and behinde them a flame burneth,] Such waste these vermine shall make: like as it is said of the great Turk, that where-ever he sets his foot, there never growes grasse again; he doth so eat up the countreys where he comes with his huge armies. And the late Lord Brook,Pag. 47. in his discourse of Episcopacy noteth, that that unhappy proverbe amongst us was not for nought, The Bishops foot hath troden here. In Biscay, a Province of Spain, they admit no Bishops to come amongst them: and when Ferdinand the Catholike K. came in pro∣gresse hither, accompanied amongst others by the Bishop of Pampelune,Heyl. Geog. pag. 55. the people arose in armes, drove back the Bishop, and gathering all the dust, on the which they thought he had troden, flung it into the Sea. What fires they kindled here in Queen Maries dayes, devouring six or seven hundred at least of Gods faithfull wit∣nesses in five yeers space: And what work they made in our remembrance thorow∣out the three Kingdoms, to the imbroyling of all, and their own utter ruine, I need not relate. That renowned Authour afore-cited, had told them time enought,L. Brooks discourse of Episcop. 39.(but that they were destined to destruction) that if they forbare to touch the su∣preme Authority of the Land, which they affected, it was but as once Mercury spa∣red Jupiters thunderbolts, which he durst not steal, lest they should roar too loud, or, at least, burn his fingers. The land is as the garden of Eden,] i. e. of all kinde of pleasures and delights.Eden inde, . See Gen. 2.8. and 13.10. Strabo speaks spitefully of the land of Canaan, as if it were a dry, stony, and barren countrey, not worth the seeking after. Rabshaketh shews more ingenuity then this, Strabus & pravus Strabo (as one therefore calleth him) 2 King. 18.32. Tacitus commends it for a fertile soil: so doth Pliny: but above all, the holy Scripture setteth it forth to be Sumen totius orbis,Heidfeld. a land flowing with milk and honey, &c. Exod. 3.15. Deut. 32.13. and behind them a desolate wildernesse.] Not such a wildernesse as yeelded pa∣stures, and habitations for shepherds, chap. 1.19, 20. but utterly desolate, and therefore unhabitable, as under the Torrid Zone. No place can be so pleasant, but sinne can lay it waste. A fruitfull land turneth the Lord into barrennesse, for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein.Psal. 107.34. There is no foot-step left at this day of that gallant Garden, planted by God himself: or if any, cecidit rosa, sit spina; the place remains in the upper part of Chaldea, but not the pleasantnesse of the place. The like we may say of Sodom, of Jerusalem, of Greece, of Asia the lesse, of Germany, Ireland, &c. England hath hitherto subsisted meerly by a miracle of Gods mercy, and by a prop of his extraordinary patience: The Lord continue it to the glory of his Name, and the good of his poor people. Fiat, fiat. Verse 4. The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses: and as horsemen,] i. e. the Locusts, and other Insects come on amain: they march with much nimble∣nesse and swiftnesse. An horse is a warlike creature, full of terrour:. Pausan. so swift in service, that the Persians dedicated him to their god, the Sun, as the swiftest crea∣ture to the swiftest god. See Job 41.20. Prov. 21.31. In Persia they do all, almost on horseback: they buy, sell, confer, but especially fight on horseback to this day. So they did of old; and so did the Chaldeans, from whom they took the Monarchy. These were horsemen, and not as horsemen: this place therefore is pro∣perly and principally to be understood of the locusts. Confer Rev. 9.7. Verse 5. Like the noise of charets on the the tops of mountains,] Not onely on the tops of standing-corn, (as other Locusts, which therehence also have their name ) but as the hurry of charrets in stony places, Rev. 9.9. For in that book of the Revelation, the Pen-man borrows all the elegancies and flowers of the old Testament, thereby to set out the story of the New in succeeding ages: as herehence the Popish Priests are fitly called Locusts for their numerosity and voracity, Rev. 9.3.
They are also likened unto horses (verse 7.) fed and fierce to run, and rush into the battle, not without noise: Like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, Eccles. 7.6. Or the ratling of the jumping charet-wheels, Nahum 3.2. as a strong people set in battle aray,] In a bloody fight between Amurath the third, King of Turkey, and Lazarus Despot of Servia, many thousands fell on both sides. The brightnesse of the armour, and weapons, was as it had been the lightning: the multitude of launces, and other horsemens-staves shadowed the light of the Sun: arrows and darts fell so fast, that a man would have thought they had poured down from heaven. The noise of the instruments of warre, with the neighing of horses, and out-cries of men, was so terrible and great, that the wild-beasts in the mountains stood astonied therewith:Turk. hist. fol. 200. and the Turkish Histories, to ex∣presse the terrour of the day, vainly say, that the Angels in heaven, amazed with that hideous noise, for that time forgot the heavenly hymns, wherewith they always glorifie God. Verse 6. Before their face, the people shall be much pained,] This is a confirma∣tion of the former assertion: the people when they shall see those swarms of Lo∣custs, &c. mustering and marching in the air, they shall be much pained (as a tra∣velling woman is) pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them, their faces shall be as flames, Esay 13.8. for fear least they should light on their countrey, and lay all wast. all faces shall gather blacknesse.] Pallorem, palenesse, so Castalio rendreth it: a blackish lead-like-palenesse, such as is on sooty-pots. (the Originall here is, hath gathered a pot,Nigricantem colorem signi∣ficat. Mercer. that is by a metonymy, a pot-like-blacknesse) See Nah. 3.10. Jer. 30.6. Psal. 68.13. where, by blacknesse (such as slaves and scullions contract by lying among the pots, and smoky, and sooty chimney-corners) is set forth the ex∣ceeding great fear, and affliction that Gods people are oft in: and from whence he graciously promiseth to deliver them that trust in him. Such shall not be afraid— whose heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. It was fear that now caused (the naturall heat and the blood retiring to the heart, to receive it, as in a sudden surprize, the souldiers run to the Castle) palenesse and blacknesse of face. It was hunger after∣wards, that burnt them, Deut. 32.24. and made their visages blacker then a cole, (as Lam. 4.8.) or darker then blacknesse, as the Originall hath it. Verse 7. They shall run like mighty men,] Horribiles, fortissimi ut Gigantes. They shall strike terrour into others,Oecolamp. as in the former verse: but themselves, as Giants and Conquerours, shall over-run all, with incredible swiftnesse and prowess. Strong souldiers have strong sinews: and thence their speedy marches, and quick dispatch.2 Sam. 2.18 Asahel was light of foot as a wild-Roe. Aehilles is every where by Ho∣mer called Swift-footed. Alexander the Great, being asked how he so quickly conquered so many countreys?. answered, , By my nimblenesse. Caesar, in omnia praeceps, saith Lucan, he passed the Alpes, and was at Rome with a trice, as they say. His Word was, Veni, vidi, vici, I no sooner came, but I over∣came. He is said to have taken a thousand Towns, conquered three hundred Nati∣ons, took prisoner one million of men, and to have slain as many. What a deal was done by Joshua in a short space at the conquest of Canaan? Charles the fifth, Emperour of Germany, is reported to have won in the Indies, by his Captains and Commanders there,Tukr. Hist. 28. Kingdoms, in 28. Battles. Bajazet the Great Turk, for his swiftnesse and fiercenesse, was sirnamed Gilderun, or lightning. To such worthy Warriours, ready and speedy, prompt and present, are these Locusts, Gods armed souldiers, here compared, They shall run like mighty men, they shall climbe the wall like men of war, that cannot be kept out, that will not be worsted. They shall march every one (Heb. man) on his way,] though many, yet they shall not one hinder, or hurt another, but hold a comely equipage, keep rank and file, observe the lawes and rules of discipline, and so Conjuncti pollent etiam vehementer inertes. They go forth all of them by bands, or gathered together, saith Solomon, Prov. 30.27. So do those Locusts in the Revelation: the Popish Clergie under their King, the Destroyer, Rev. 9.11. Locusts they are fitly called, for their numerosity and
voracity. The Jesuites alone have sometimes 200000. schollars. And how they feed on the fat and drink the sweet where they swarme, who knowes not? they shall not break their ranks] Or, writh and pervert their paths,Sic & R. Abrab. in Comment. as Aben-Ezra out of the Arabick idiom rendreth it. Hierom testifieth that He and others saw in Judea troopes of Locusts flying in so even an order, ut nè puncto quidem aut ungue teausverso declinent ad alteram, that you could not say they brake rank at all; tanto ordine & dispositione jubentis Dei volitant, saith He,Psal. 47. so strict and beautifull discipline there is in Gods whole army, to whom belong the sheilds of the earth, the Militia of the whole world. Verse 8 Neither shall one thrust another] Or straiten another. The Greek word  to presse and persecute, seemes to come from this Hebrew word Dakag. The Prophet still alludeth to the manner of marshalling armies in such sort, as that neither may the souldiers hinder one another, nor the enemy have any advantage to break in upon them. Exercitus pulchre dispositus, & amicis pulcherrimus vide∣tur, & hostibus inexpugnabilis, saith Zenophon; that is,In Oeconom. A well-ordered army seemeth both beautifull to their friends, and invincible to their enemies. They shall walk every one] Heb. Man, Mighty man q. d. vir validus Mesillah Via trita. Each locust shall walk and stalk, as a strong lusty man in his trodden track, in the path that God hath put him into, and shall hold to it. and when they fall upon the sword] Heb. the long sword, or javelin, they shall not be wounded: as if they were unwoundable, or shot-free, as the Poet fabled of Achilles, and as the Persians, vanquished by the Athenians at the field of Mara∣thon, cried out Stobaeus. We fell them, yet they fall not: we then wound, And think them dead, but they are safe and sound. Verse 9 They shall un to and fro] As souldiers do when they have taken a town by assault, and have leave to plunder. En victoriam & hostilem insultationem, saith Mercer here. See the lively portraicture of Victory and Triumph. they shall ru upon the ] After they have scaled it (as afore) they shall walk or run upon it as Conquerors, without feare of an enemy: Alexander the great would do so. they shall climb up upon the houses] No longer now the owners castles: for they shall be ferrited out of their retiring roomes, or forced to do as Sardanapalus the Assyrian Monarch did; who, straighted by the enemy, sacrificed himself with his wealth and wenches to Vulcan in a wood-pile, (as One phraseth it) in his royall pallace. they shall enter in at the windowes, as a theef] whose property is 1. to climb up some other way, and not to enter in by the dore Ioh. 10.1. death also getteth in by the windowes and that way entreth into palaces Ier. 9.21. so doth Satan (that theef of the truth, as Basil calleth him) wind himself into the soul by the eyes, those windowes of wickednesse and loop-holes of lust. 2. to rifle and ransack, and leave little enough behind him. What clean-work these insets made, see before chap. 1.4. and take notice what great matters God Almighty can do by the most contempti∣ble creatures. Quid ciniphe vilius, saith Philo the Jew, what can be baser then a louse? and yet all the strength of Egypt was brought down by that despicable vermine? Pliny in his eight book and twenty fourth chapter tel's us out of Mr. Varro, that a great town in Spain was undermined and overturned by conyes;Clara exitii documenta sunt ex con∣temnendis ani∣malibus. Plin. Munster. Cosmogr. An. Dom. 969. another in Thessaly by Moles: a third in France undone by Froggs: a fourth in Africa by Locusts: a fift in Italy by Serpents &c. Who hath not heard of Hatto, that mercilesse Archbishop of Ments devoured by Mice, though he had motted up himself against their invasion in an Iland? God cannot possibly want a weapon wherewith to beat his Rebels. Verse 10 The earth shall quake before them &c.] Tragicis figuris calamitatem amplificat, saith Luther here. By such tragical tearmes the Prophets use to set forth an horrible desolation, such as first the Assyrians and afterwards the Romanes brought upon the Jewes: the Turks and Saracens upon the Christian churches
whether there were any such earthquake or stupendious concussions of the heavenly bodies as is here described, is uncertain. Strange forerunners there were both in heaven and earth of the last destruction of Ierusalem, as Christ also had foretold. In the dayes of Iustinian the Emperour,Mr. Clark in the life of Just∣inian pag. 67. the Sun for the greatest part of an yeare gave so little light, that it was but equall to the light of the Moon, the sky being clear without clouds or any thing to shadow it: after which, there followed a great famine, and much war and bloodshed. the Sun and the moon shall be dark] Wondrous expressions to meet with their wondrous stupidity. The Hebrew Doctors (and Oecolampadius much disliketh it not) allegorize the text; and by the earth understand the common people, by the heavens the Grandees, by the Sun and Moon the king and kingdome, as by the Starres those of indifferent rank, all which are woe begone (as they say) by reason of the present calamities: as when upon the death of Prince Henry, Great Brit∣tain was said to be all in black; and as Demades was wont to say of the Achenians, nunquam eos sapere nisi pullis vestibus indutos that they were never so wise,Pluarch. as when they were in mourning weeds. Verse 11 And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army] In the head of his army, as Generals use to do for incouraging the souldiers. A General should be like Quintilians Orator, Vir bonus, dicendi peritus, both valiant and eloquent, as was Cato Censorius,Si actu ejus penitus igno∣rasses, per lin∣guam tamen militem esse diceres, ut qui∣dam de Caesare. Optimus Orator, Optimus etiam Imperator saith Pliny: and Julius Caesar, and Hunniades, who were Masters of speech as well as men of their hands: So was Joab Davids General, of whose speech to the army 2 Sam 10.12. Pellican saith, Non potuit vox Duce dignior cogitari, A braver speech could not have been uttered by the mouth of a mortal. But here God himself uttereth his voyce before his army: for the Lord is a man of war Exod. 15.3. a Victor of warres (as the Chalde there hath it) and what wonder sith the voice of the Lord is power∣full, the voyce of the Lord is full of Majesty. Psal. 29.4. he sets on and gives the signal of the battel to these Locusts, he puts spirit into them and cryes Cou∣rage, my hearts: and thence it is, that they are so valorous and victorious. for his camp is very great] His camp these Locusts are called, though they knew it not. He hisseth for the Flie of Egypt and for the Bee, that is in the land of Assyria. And they shall come and rest all of them in the desolate vallyes, &c. Esa. 7.18, 19. The Assyrian, is the rod of Gods anger, and the staf in his hand. I will send him saith the Lord, against an hypocriticall nation, to avenge the quar∣rel of my covenant. Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so &c. Esay. 10.5, 6, 7. But it is here, as when in applying of horse-leeches, the Physician seeketh the health of his patient, the leech only the filling of his gorge. Almighty God as he disposeth and ordereth membra culicis & pulicis, as Austin hath it, the members of the meanest creatures: so by the same power and providence, he over-ruleth all their motions, to his own glory. for he is strong that executeth his word] Or, that thing is strong, that weak Lo∣cust, set a work by God, shall do his will vigorously (and not faintly as Jer. 48.10.) shall go through stitch with it, and none shall hinder it. for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible] Tremble therefore and humble under this mighty hand of God: let this earthquake worke in you an heart-quake, these horrible commotions and calamities draw from you a shower of teares, or at least a storm of sighs for your sins: unlesse ye hold it better to be carnally secured then soundly comforted. who can abide it?] Or else avoid it, otherwise then by repentance? Am. 8.12. Fly,Dr. Reinolds saith a Reverend man, from Gods anger to Gods grace. Blood-letting is a cure of bleeding: and a burn a cure against a burn. Running to God is the way to escape him: as to close, and get in with him that would strike you, doth avoid the blow. Verse 12 Therefore also now saith the Lord] Now though it be late first, and, as you may think,Nunquam sero si serio. too late. Now, though the dreadfull day of the Lord be very neer at hand: yea though the Locusts be already come, as Kimchi senseth it. Oh that ye would know at the last in this your day of grace, the things that belong to your peace, before the gate be shut, the draw-bridg taken up, the taper burnt out &c. Behold now is the accepted time: behold now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.
The Apostle (after the Prophet Esay) purposely beateth upon the , as if he should say, Now, or never; sith thou mayest, the very next minute be cut off by the stroke of death from all further time of repentance and acceptation. Up there∣fore and be doing: It is the Lord himself that thus saith, Turn ye even to me,] Ʋsque ad me, altogether as far as to me:Stultitia sem∣pr in pt vi∣vere. Sen. give not the half turn onely: begin not to repent, and then give over the work. Some are ever about to repent, but they can never finde time, and hearts to set seriously about it, to do it in good earnest. Some wamblings they have, as I may say, and some short-winded wishes, some kinde of willingnesse and velleity, but it doth not boyl up to the full height of resolution to return. The Prodigall changed many places, ere he came home. Many came out of Egypt, that yet never came into Canaan. with all your heart,] with the heart, Jer. 4.14. Prov. 23.26. and with the whole heart, in opposition to a divided heart, Hos. 10.2. a double heart, Jam. 4.8. a heart, and a heart, Psal. 12.2. This whole heart, is elsewhere called, a true heart, Heb. 10.22. a perfect heart, 2 Chron. 16.10. truth in the inwards, Psal. 51.6. where there is an unfained faith, 1 Tim. 1.5. laborious love, 1 Thess. 1.3. sound and cordiall repentance, as here, undissembled wisdome, Jam. 3.17. such holinesse as rendreth a man like to a chrystall glasse with a light in the middest of it, doing the truth, Job. 3.21 and having his works full, Rev. 3.1, 2. being a true worshipper, Joh. 4.24. an Israelite indeed, Ioh. 1.47. God, he knows to be just, and jealous: he will not endure corrivals, or compartners in the kingdome. His jurisdiction is without peculiar: he will not divide with the Devil. Be the gods of the Heathen good-fellows? saith One; the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his glory with another. He must be served truely, that there be no halting; and totally, that there be no halving and with fasting, weeping, and with mourning.] with deep, and down-right humiliation, sutable to your sins as Ezr. 9.6. ye have inveterate stains; such as will not be gotten out, till the cloth be almost rubb'd to pieces. Satan hath intrench∣ed himself in your hearts, and will not be gotten out, but by fasting and prayer. Fasting, is of it self but a bodily exercise, and meriteth nothing; for religion con∣sisteth not in meat and drink  the belly full or empty, Rom. 14.17. Col. 2.23. But fasting is a sinular furtherance to the practise of repentance, and the enforcing of our prayers. ee Ezr. 8.21. As full feeding increaseth corruption, Ier. 5.7, 8. so religious Astinence macerateth, tameth, and subdueth the Rebell Flesh, 1 Cor. 9.27. giving it the blew-eye, as there, and 2 Co. 7.11. so that not the body so much,. as the soul is made more active by emptinesse. Fasting dayes are soul-fatting dayes, they fit men for conversion as here, and make much to the humbling of the spirit; hence they are called dayes of humiliation, and of self affliction, Levit. 16.31. and 23.37. and with weeping, [Drown your sins in a deluge of tears; cleanse your wounds by washing in this precious water: quench hell fire with it, kill the wom, fetch out sins venome: there's a healing property in these troubled waters. Tears of vine-branches are said to cure the leprosie, and the Olive is reported to be most fruitfull, when it most distil eth. These April showers bring on May-flowers, and make the heart as a watered garden; or as some faces appear most oriently beautifull, when most bedewed with tears. Peter never lookt so sweetly as when he wept bitterly. David never sung more pathetically then when his heart was broken most peniten∣tially, Psal. 6. and 51. when tears in stead of gemmes were the ornament of his bed, as Chrysostom speaketh. Mary Magdalen (that great weeper) as she made her eyes a fountain to wash Christs feet in, so she had his wounds as a fountain to bath her soul in; yea she had afterwards the first sight of the revived Phoenix, whom shee held fast by those feet, that had lately trod upon the lion, and the adder, &c. and with mourning.] This is added, as a degree beyond the former. Men may fast, and yet find their pleasures, Esay 58.13. weep out of stomack as Esau, or complement, as Phryne the harlot, who was sirnamed , weep-laugh, be∣cause she could easily do either: and as among the Brasileans,Magirus in Ggr. Ʋt flerent oculos erudi resuos, Ovid. tears are for a pre∣sent salutation, and as soon gone, as if they had said, How do ye? What is an hum∣bling day, without an humbled heart? not onely a religious incongruity, but an high provocation; like Zimri's act, when all the Congregation were weeping, before
the door of the Tabernacle. Here therefore the Lord calleth to mourning, funerall∣mourning,Nudaque mar∣moreis percussit pectora palmis. Ovid. In gloss. margin. as the word signifieth: with tabring upon the breast, Nah. 2.7. smiting on the thigh, Jer. 31.19. beating on the head, face, and other parts, sicut mulier∣culae in puerperio facere solent, saith Luther there. See Esay 32.11. and 22.12. Sorrow for sin must not be slight and sudden, but sad and soaking: the heart must be turned into an Hadadrimmon, Zech. 12.10, 11. where the Prophet seems in a sort, to be at a stand, for comparisons fit enough, and full enough, to set forth their sorrow, who looking upon Christ whom they had pierced, felt the very nails stick∣ing in their own hearts, as so many sharp daggers, or stings of scorpions. The good soul (say the School-men) seeth more cause of grief for sinning, then for the death of Christ: because therein was aliquid placens, something that pleaseth: but sinne is simpliciter displicens, simply displeasing. So that Gods mourners need not send for mourning women to teach them to mourn, as Jer. 19.17. but rather have need to be comforted, lest they should be swallowed up with over∣much grief, 2 Cor. 2.7. and lest Satan get an advantage against them, verse 11. by mixing the detestable darnell of desperation,Act. & Mon. with the godly sorrow of a pure pe∣nitent heart, as Mr. Philpot Martyr speaketh. Verse 13. And rent your heart and not your garments,] i. e. not your garments onely,Schindler. which was gestus perturbationis, among the Jews, a gesture usuall with them, to set forth the greatnesse of their grief and displeasure; as 1. At funerals, and losse of friends,Tumpius Aene∣as humer ab∣scinaere vestem Auxilioque vocare Deos, & tendere palmas. Virg. Aeneid. as Gen. 37.2. In case of blasphemy, as 2 King. 18.3. In time of common calamity, Esth. 4.1. Godly sorrow for sinne should exceed all other sorrows whatsoever, both in intention, and extension: the whole soul sending con∣tinuall streams into it out of every faculty. And hence it is that the Prophet here calleth upon them to Ront, and as it were to discontinuate their hearts, Cor inte∣grum, cor scissum, the broken heart is the onely sound heart: and to rent the gar∣ment, and not the heart, is as very a juggle as that of Players, who seem to wound themselves, but do not; and make a shew of thrusting themselves thorow their bo∣dies, but the sword passeth onely thorow their clothes. Stage-players can act to the life those whom they personate; yea out-strip them in outward actions: so do hy∣pocrites the true Christian.2 Cron. 34.27 Doth good Josiah melt at the menaces of the law, and weep, and rend his clothes, and humble himself? wicked Ahab will, also in like case,1 King. 21.27. rend his clothes, put sackcloth upon his flesh, fast, lie in sack cloth, and go softly and heavily, as sorrowfull men and mourners use to do. Doth the Publi∣can fix his eyes on the ground? those hypocrites in Esay will hang down their heads as bulrushes. Doth holy Timothy weaken his constitution with religious ab∣stinence? the false Pharisee will not onely weaken his constitution, but wither and disfigure his complexion,, that he may appear to men to fast, Matth. 6.16. Such pains men will be at for applause, for a little stinking breath; which yet cannot blow one cold blast upon them, when they shall be frying in hell for their seeming∣nesse. Rent therefore your hearts, saith the Prophet: break up your fallow-ground, circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the filthy fore-skin of your hearts, Jer. 4.3, 4. wash them from wickednesse that ye may be saved, verse 14. Be ye active, and voluntaries in your sorrows for sinne. Virtus nolentium nulla est; Fained and forced grief is nothing worth. Judas grieved, confessed, restored, and yet miscarried. He went not forth, as Peter, to weep bitterly: he did not cast himself: into heavinesse, as Iam. 4.9, 10. It was fired out of him, as sweet-water out of roses. It was squeezed out of him, as Verjuice out of crabs. Gods people are com∣manded to afflict themselves with voluntary sorrows, Lev. 16. to loath themselves for all their abominations,Rom. 8.13. Ezek. 16. to mortifie the deeds of the body by the spirit, to do it with their own hands: and not to give over the practise of it, till they feel their hearts to ake, and quake within them, yea to fall asunder in their bosomes, like drops of water. See all this done by David, after he had numbred the people, 2 Sam. 24.10. Some shadow of it we have in the example of Epaminondas the Theban Generall, who the next day after the Victory and Triumph, went droop∣ing and hanging down his head: and being asked,Plutar. why he did so? he answered, Yesterday I felt my self too much tickled with vain-glory: therefore I correct my self for it to day.2 Sam. 24.10. Expounded. But we have a better example in holy David, whose heart smote him, saith the Text, and made him smart inwardly. He was not yet smitten, either
by Gods hand, or the Prophets reproof (as afterwards) but his sanctified consci∣ence did its office of a faithfull Monitour, and houshold Chaplain: his heart mis∣gave him. Bee-masters tell us, that those are the best hives, that make the greatest noise. Sure it is that that's the best conscience, that suffers not a man to sleep in sin. Davids heart smote him. But for what? for numbring the people. It was for his own sin, for a small, for a secret sin, for a failing in the manner only. David knew that a man may dye as well of an inward bleeeding, as of an outward hurt. The good soul is oft afflicted for faylings in that holy duty which others applaud and extol. And David said unto the Lord: he could not rest till he had opened his mind unto him by confession and supplication, and so got a vent to his troubled spirit: as when a sore is opened, there is ease immediately. To God therefore he addresseth himself, not to men (as Judas did and Papists do, and many amongst us being in pain of conscience will rather shark for ease, then sue for pardon,) and acknowledgeth with aggravation the iniquity of his sin, the sinfulnesse of it as Pauls expression is Rom. 7.13.Psal. 32.3. (for sin is so vile that he could call it no worse then by its own name) I have sinned greatly in that I have done: his sin swelled like a toad in his eyes, and he spat it out of his mouth with utmost indignation. He con∣fesseth sorrowfully, but not desperately, as Iudas: for he both cryes for pardon. Take away the iniquity (for as for the punishment how he stood affected see verse. 17. Let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and my fathers house) and conclu∣deth himself Gods servant, yea proveth himself so, (as some godly learned think,) by those following words, For I have done foolishly; q. d. If I deserve not to be called Gods servant in regard of my late sin (and indeed God calls him but plain David verse. 12. Goe and say to David, not to my servant David, as at other times,) yet at least in regard of my later service of confession joyned with Refor∣mation; for now I see I have done very foolishly, who once thought I had done wondrous wisely and politickly. and turn unto the Lord your God] Of turning to God see at large, the Note on Zach. 1.3. Here it is prescribed as a remedy against Gods wrath, and pressed again and again, to shew the necessity of doing it, or we are utterly undone. So elsewhere, Turn you, turn you, why will you dye? except ye repent, ye must needsly perish. Aut poenitendum aut pereundum, Either you must turn on earth,Ioh. 3.3. or burn in hell: be born again, or ye cannot see the kingdome of God. Heaven was too hot to hold the Apostate-Angel. And although the devill could get into para∣dise: yet no unclean thing ever gat into heaven. No dirty dog may trample on that golden pavement. The pure in heart only can see God, as whole eyes can look upon the Sun-beames, and as transparent bodies receive the light. Turn you there∣fore unto the Lord, If a man see a Lion or a burning fire before him, he will make some shift to turn another way. So here: biasse, for there is no safety in going forward: sith our God is a consuming fire: and as a roaring lion will tear, and rent the cawle of our hearts in sunder Hos. 13.8. if we rent not our hearts, and turn unto him. By turning may well be here meant Reformation, that Repentance from sin (as Humiliation before required, is in scripture called Repentance for sin) for it is not enough to mourn unlesse we mend also, to bewail our wickednesse, but we must embrace better courses, Jer. 26 13. Esa. 1.16. Mat. 3.8. Rom. 12.9, & 13, 11. Eph. 4.22. God for this cause gives us the light of Nature and Scrip∣ture, besides other meanes, and time enough. Had he given us but one Prophet onely, and but forty dayes, as he dealt by Nineveh, we should have done it as they did. How much more now that we abound with leisure (read Jezebels sin and sentence Rev. 2.21.) and have so many Prophets rising up early and speaking to us,Iob. 13.4. Turn ye again now every one from his evill way Jer. 25.4, 5. what will become of us if we refuse to be reclaimed, hate to be healed. This one Prophet here fills his mouth with arguments. First, it is not to a tyrant or a stranger that you are exhor∣ted to turn, but to the Lord your God, to him that is your head, husband, father, who hates putting away, having once betrothed you to himself in righteousnesse and in judgement, and in loving kindnesse, and in tender mercies Hos. 2.19. Next, This Lord our God is, for his sweet and patient nature here set forth to be Gratious, and will therefore love you freely Hos. 14.4. Merciful, and will therefore pitty your misery: Slow to anger, or not apt to snuff, but a master of his wrath Nah. 1.2.
and one that can bear more then any other whatsoever Mic. 7.17. And,Bagnal Che∣mah. of great kindnesse] or Much in goodnesse, doing good to the evill and un∣thankful, as our Saviour yokes them. and repenteth him of the evil] A little punishment being enough to a father for a great fault,Pro peccato magno paululum supplici satis esto patri Terent. Where note, that Gods repentance is not a change of his will, but of his work only: and so he repents for his people, when he seeth their power is gone, Deut. 32.36. when there is dignus vindice nodus, an extremity fit for di∣vine power to interpose: when the enemies are ready to devour the church or Sa∣tan to swallow down Gods child in despair, his bowels work, he can hold no lon∣ger, but cries Save my child, save my church &c Jer. 31.20. then he sends out his Mandamus for deliverance, Psal. 44.4. then he comes with his Non obstante as Psal. 106.8. Isay. 57.15 Now who would not return to such a God? and what heart can resist such powerfull Rhetorick? An heape of words we have here (taken for most part out of Exod. 34.6.) and all to draw out faith, and encou∣rage those that have any mind to look toward God. It is no such easie thing to beleeve, as fond folk conceit; and to comfort a conscience cast down in the sense of sin and fear of wrath is no lesse difficult, saith Luther, then to raise the dead from the grave. If men fear they shall fail of mercy upon their return to God. Either they will fall into dedolency or despair. But perswade them once of the goodnesse of God, and it will lead them to repentance; Rom. 2.4. Let them see that in their fathers house is bread enough, and they will home immediatly: that God will abundantly pardon, and he shall have suitors great store. Esa. 55.7. The sweet and gratious nature of God should be as a perpetuall picture in our hearts; and an effectual motive to make men turn unto him. Verse 14 Who knoweth if he will return and repent &c.] Hitherto the Prophet had argued from Gods gratious disposition: now here from his curteous and bounteous dealing with his converts. who knoweth if &c.] This is not the speech of one that doubteth and is uncer∣tain (as was that of Dvid 1 Sam. 12.22. who can tell whether God will have mercy on me, that the child may live?) but of one earnestly affirming and avouch∣ing, as was that of Mordecai Esth. 4.14. And who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdome for such a time as this? q. d. 'Tis sure thou art. And it is no lesse sure that if men Turn to God, he will turn to them Zach. 1.3. and that whithersoever he comes, e leaves a blessing behind him. His favour is no empty favour: it is not like the winter-Sun, that casts a goodly countenance on the earth, but gives little heat and comfort God ever comes with his Cornu-copia in his hand: and his steps drop fatnesse. Then shall the earth yield her increase, and God even our own God shall bless us, saith the church Psal. 67.6. He will do it the rather, saith our Prophet, that his people may the more cherefully serve him, when they shall have a meat-offering and a drink offering,alvin. et sic maneat int ger cul∣tus ipsius, and so he may have his dayly service duely performed: for of this the saints are most solicitous: it is their desire that God should be glorified, rather then that themselves should be gratified, and their own turns served. Verse 15. Blw the trumpet in Zion] that all may hear, and convene: those of Jerusalem in the Temple, and the rest in their severall Synagogues Lev. 23.31. for that yearly fast was standard to the rest, kept upon extraordinary and emer∣gent occasions, as here, for the preventing of the fore threatened judgment. Pa∣pists appoint set fasting-dayes as Lent, and Friday, in every week, Eves of holly∣dayes &c. whether the times be clear or cloudy.A Lapide in loc. A Lapide, also the Jesuite keepes a coyle against Luther and the Centurists, for decrying their Popish processions and publike Letanies, which he thinks to be here and elsewhere authorised. A discourse he giveth us here too, about the use and original of bells among christi∣ans, answerable to trumpets amongst the Jewes. A Symmist of his, Cenalis Bishop of Auranches, to prove their Pope-holy Church the true Church, maketh no mention at all either of Preaching or Sacraments: but produceth bells for a sufficient mark of the Catholke true church: we have bells, saith he, whereby our Assemblies are ordi∣narily called together: but the Lutherans have claps of harquebuzes and pistolets for signes whereby they congregate:Act. & Mon. fol. 828. betwixt which and bells he maketh a long Anti∣thesis: and therehence inferreth, that the church of Rome is the true church. A
proper argument: and yet the man pleaseth himself as much in it, as the second-Councell of Nice did in their profound proofs for idolatry,Prideaux. which (as One well saith of them) were such as that the Images themselves (if they were sensible) would blush to hear repeated. Sanctify a fast] See the Note on chap. 1.14. Proclaime a religious abstinence from all kind of sustenance (2 Sam. 12.17. Iohn. 3.) for a season, either from morning till evening, as Judg. 20.26. 2 Sam. 3.35. or from evening till eve∣ning Lev. 23.32. or longer as Esth. 4.16. Act. 9.9. as the hand and wrath of God is more or lesse felt or feared. But the least time that may be, is a whole day: there is an old Canon,Turk: hist. fol. 777. that our fasts should continue usque dum stellae in coelo appareant till the starrs appear in the sky. The very Turks in their solemn fasts eate nothing all the day till night: yea so precise they are, that upon their fasting dayes they will not so much as wash their mouths with water, till the starrs appear: whith maketh their fasts (especially in the Summer, when the dayes be long and hot,) to be unto them very tedious. Christians hold and teach that nature is by fasting to be chastised, and not disabled for service: and that such as cannot fast so long but they shall either indanger health, or be unfitted for the spiritual duties of the day, may eat: provided, that they abuse not this liberty to the satisfying of the flesh. Coloss: 2.23. 1 Tim. 5.23. call a solemn assembly] See chap. 1.14. with the Note. Verse 16. Gather the people, Sanctifie the Congregation &c.] Let the Priests Gods ministers see to it, that the people come together: and for the better too, as much as in them lies. For they are to the people in place of watchmen, of Cen∣tinels, of Embassadors, and in Christs own stead, who seemes to say unto them as Psal. 50.5. Gather my saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice, that they may meet me with intreaties of peace, disarme mine indignation conceived against them, and quench the flame thereof with their tears; not quench the spirit in their teachers by their crossenesse, and backwardnesse to businesse of this nature. assemble the Elders] Whether for age as Iob. 15.10. or for place of authority as Iosh. 7.6. 1 Sam. 15.30. Ruth. 4.4. These must be chief doers and most forward at fasts, as was Joshuah, Jehosapat, the King of Niniveh, Ezra &c. For 1 they are most guilty in regard of their years and their office which either addeth two wings to their, sins viz. Example, and Scandal, whereby facilè volant, non facilè violant they sore much higher, and fly much further. 2 Their presence, counsel, and countenance may be a great furtherance to the work. See Ezek. 46.10. The Prince in the middest of the people, when they go in, shall go in: and when they goe forth, shall go forth. A Lapide saith,A Lapide in locum. that the Elder sort are to meet, because they are least lustfull, and more prayerfull. It should be so I con∣fesse: but how many old goats are there abroad, that even hang over hell, which gapeth for them? and as the canker soonest entreth into the white rose, so doth corruption easily creep into the white head. He was a rare old man of whom we read, that being tempted to sin said, Nay: least he should stain his white head. Gather the children and those that suck the brests] For they are church-members, and to them also pertain the publike dangers and calamities: out of which times and cases, children and Novices are not to be tied to these austerities of religion, (as our Saviour sheweth Mat. 9.17.) as little, as new wine is to be put into old ves∣els. Add hereunto, that the parents might by the sight of their poor children (subject to Gods wrath by their default,)Eph. 2.3. Rom. 5.12. be brought to a further sense of their own sinfulnesse; and moved by their cryes and laments ut ferventius orent, & pl∣rent, to cry and pray more earnestly. Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber] The new-married-man was by the law allowed to cheare up his wife Deut. 24.5. and therefore exempted from war∣fare, and other publike imployments abroad Deut. 20.7 and the wedding-day is called the day of the rejoycing of a mans heart Cant. 3.11. They were wont to have a week of feasting at such times Gen. 29.27. Fulfill her week sc. of banquet and bride-ale, as they call it. And it is noted as an absurd thing in Sampsons wife,Judg. 14.17. that she wept all the seven dayes of such a feast, when mirth was so much in season. But is it a time for men to hang their hearts upon the merry pin, when God calles
them to hang up their Harps upon the Willow-trees? when the sword is sharpe∣ned to make a sore slaughter, when it is fourbished and glittereth, and contemneth the rod, (i. e. lesser and lighter judgements, that usually fore-run it) should wee then make mirth? Ezek. 21.10. Should men eat, and drink, and marry, and be merry, when to morrow they may look to die, and are already stumbling in the valley of the shadow of death? Such a thing the old world may do, buried in se∣curity, and to be shortly therefore buried in one universall grave of waters. But holy Noah was vexed at it: and Ambrose thinks (not without reason) that during the time of the deluge, all the while that he was in the Ark, hee came as little at his wife, as Ʋriah did, while the Ark, and Judah, and Israel abode in Tents, and Joab, and the Hoste encamped in the fields, 2 Sam. 11.11. Nehemiah, though a great Courtier,Neh. 2.2, 3. and the Kings Cup-bearer, could not but be sad, when it went ill with the Church: all comforts then were but Ichabods to him, hee had no joy of them. Sorrow at such a time is better then laughter: for by the sadnesse of the countenance the heart is made better, Eccles. 7.3. The mad world is a perfect stranger to the truth of this sacred Position, as having so far banished sadnesse, that they are profest enemies to seriousnesse; and stick not to light a candle at the devil (as they say) for sinfull lightsomnesse. But wo be to such mad Mirth-mongers, saith our Saviour, Luke 6.25. and after him, St. James chap. 5.1, 5. and before them both, the Prophet Esay chap. 22.12, 13, 14. and the Prophet Amos chap. 6.4, 5, 6. What so lawfull as the use of the marriage-bed, Heb. 13.4? and for whom more lawfull, then for the bride-groom, and bride? Yet in a common cala∣mity, and in a day of restraint (as a fast-day is called, Joel 2.15.) married couples must abstain, 1 Cor. 7.5. where the Apostle speaketh of a publike fast, as Peter Martyr observeth.Pet. Mar. in loc Hence Zech. 8.19. they separated themselves, at such a time. And it is spoken of as a foul sinne, Esay 58.3. behold in the day of your fast, ye finde pleasure. All sensuall delights, though never so lawfull at other times, must bee then suspended and laid aside: As musick, mirth, perfumes, Dan. 6.18. brave apparrell, Exod. 33.4, &c. all ornaments of the body, soft-lying, 2 Sam 12.16. all cheerfulnesse and outward joy, Iudg. 20.26. 1 Sam. 7.8. The Roman Censor punished one that shewed himself out of a window,Liv. with a garland upon his head, in the time of the second Punick war. Verse 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord,] Let not them be either dull,Psal. 103. Rev. 22. or dumb, (as Popish Masse-priests with their dumb-shews at divine Service) but as (for their dignity) they are the Lords Ministers, (as likewise the good An∣gels are, and their (fellow-servants) so (according to their duty) they must be first in holy exercises: going in and out before Gods people in the perfornce of their trust, and that worthy work of theirs, 1 Tim. 3.1. for the which , are to be very highly esteemed in love, 1 Thess. 5.13. Let Ministers therefore pray hard for their people, as did Aaron, Samuel, Paul, &c. Let their prayers (at asts espe∣cially) be well watered with teares (those effectuall Oratours, that cry to God for mercy, Psal. 39.12. as blood doth for vengeance, Gen. 4.16.) as theirs were Judg. 20.23. and Judges 2.5. and 1 Sam. 7.6. and as Ezra, chap. 10.1. and remy, chap. 9.1. and 13.17. and why? but for corruption in Magistrates, Ministers, All sorts; a generall defection drawing on a generall desolation. Oh let Gods two faithfull witnesses be clothed in sack-cloth, Rev. 11.3. teaching Gods people with many tears and temptations,Act. 20.19, 20, 31. both publikely and from house to house: yea, not ceasing to warn them night and day with tears, to redeem their own sorrows by sound re∣pentance. It is said of Athanasius, that by his tears, as by the bleeding of a chast Vine, he cured the leprosie of that tainted Age. And of Luther, that by his pray∣ers and tears he had prevailed with God, that Popery should not over-run his coun∣trey,Act. & Mon. In vita Luth. during his dayes. When I am dead, said He, let those pray that can pray. Me∣lancton, his Colleague, writeth, that he constantly prayed with abundance of tears: for he knew, that as Musick upon the waters, sounds farther, and more harmoni∣ously then upon the land: so prayers joyn'd with tears, finde much respect with Christ; who could not but look back upon the weeping women, and comfort them, though he was then going to his death. between the porch and the altar,] This was that void place; where the Priests prayed after the sacrifices were offered, Ezek. 8.16. As in man, there is Body,
Soul, and Spirit, 1 Thess. 5.23. so in the Temple at Jerusalem, 1. between Solomons Porch, Act. 3.11. and the Altar of burnt-offering, was the outer great Court, 2. Chron. 4.9. where the people met for preaching and prayer. Next, there was the second Court, for the Priests onely: and here was the Altar of incense, Luke 1.9, 10. Thirdly, the most Holy place, for the High-priest to enter once a year, Num. 17.10. The first is here spoken of, the outer Court, where the priests might bee best heard to pray, and seen to weep; and the people might comport, and say Amen; the want whereof St. Paul counts no small losse, 1 Cor. 14.16. and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, &c.] Other exercises there were usually performed at publike fasts; as Reading the Scriptures, Jer. 36.5, 27. ex∣pounding and preaching, Neh. 8.4, 8. examining, censuring, and punishing such sinnes as then most raigned, Neh. 9.2. Ezr. 9.2. Josh. 7. and 22. Binding them∣selves to God by a Covenant of better obedience, Nehem. 10.18, 29, 30. Contri∣buting to good uses, Esay 58.7. and 2 Chron. 31.3, 4. But the chief businesse and duty of the day was, as here, Prayer to God for pardon of sinne, and removall of shame, and other punishment: whence also it was called, A day of Atonement, or Expiation. Spare thy people, O Lord, &c. Brevis oratio, sed tota affectibus ardens, saith Mercer, A short prayer, but very affectionate: So are all Scripture-forms: they have fulnesse of matter, in fewnesse of words. Quam multa, quam paucis! How much in a little! as Tully said of Brutus his Laconicall Epistle. See Numb. 6.24, 25, 26. Hos. 14.2. Luke 18.13. Matt. 6.9, 10, &c. which is both a prayer, and a pattern: as the standard is the exactest measure. Why then should any man fall out with forms, and call them idols, odious as swines-flesh, &c? Why should they say, that the use of the Lords Prayer is the Note of a formalist? Is not this to speak evil of good, &c. and give not thine heritage to reproach:] Suffer us not, for our sinnes, to be for∣ced by famine, to beg bread of our enemies the Ammonites, and Moabites: for that will reflect upon thee Lord, and turn to thy dishonour, as if thou hadst no care of thine heritage, couldst not maintain thy servants. See a like prayer to this, Num. 14.11.12, 16, 17, &c. and Deut. 9.26, 27, 28. and learn to deprecate shame and reproach as a fruit of sinne, and a piece of the curse, Deut. 28. Lev. 26. 1 Sam. 2.30. Beg of God; 1. To keep thee from reproachfull courses, such as may expose thee to the scandall of the weak, and scorn of the wicked. David is much in this petition. 2. To hide thee in a pavilion from the strife of tongues, Psal. 31.20. either to preserve thee from aspersions, or so to oil thy name, that they may not stick. 3 To give thee good repute and report among the best. 'Twas God gave Solomon honour; and he promiseth it to all his, as a reward of religion, Prov. 22.4. that the heathen should rule over them:] It is an heavy hand of God upon his people, when Pagans or Papagans have dominion over them, Neh. 9.9, 10, 27, &c. Psal. 79.1, &c. and 80.1, 2, &c. and 137.1, 2, &c. Lam. 1.2, 4, 5. They are bloody in their positions, and dispositions. See Rom. 1.31. their government is tyrannicall, such as the Spaniards is over the poor Indians, the Turks over Greece, the Rebels over the English in Ireland, &c. The Saints also are, 1. Conscienci∣ous, and cannot yeeld to their unlawfull commands, as the three children. 2. Zea∣lous, and cannot but contest, as Steven, Paul at Athens, the Martyrs. 3. Friend∣lesse, and destitute, Matt. 10.16. as Paul afore Nero, Christ afore Pilate, forsa∣ken of all. Pray therefore as here, and prevent such a mischief, by shunning Ieru∣salems sinnes of ignorance, ingratitude, incorrigiblenesse, formallity, &c. and by putting our necks under the yoke of Christs obedience, observing from the heart that form of doctrine which he hath delivered unto us, Rom. 6.17. wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?] q. d. Why should they cast our religion in our dish? why should they twit us with thy neglect of us? why should thy name be blasphemed, and thy power traduced, as it were on a publike theatre? This was that which most galled these good souls, (as it had oft done David before them) that God, with whom they quartered armes, should be reproached for their sakes, and thorow their sides; and his glory defaced. This was as a murthering-knife in Davids bones, Psal. 42.10. and worse to him then all
the evill that he had suffered from his youth up. Our nature is most impatient of reproach: for there is none so mean but thinks himself worthy of some regard: and a reproachfull scorne shewes an utter disrespect which flowes from the very superfluity of malice. You shall find some (saith Erasmus) that if death be threate∣ned can despise it: but to be belied or reproached, they cannot brook, nor from revenge contain. Gods people can bear wrongs best of any: compell them to go a mile, thei'le be content, if it may do good, to go two, yea as farr as the shooes of the preparation of the Gospell of peace will carry them. But if wrong be offe∣red to God, if he be any way dishonored, or his Name bored through by blasphe∣mies, O what a stomack they have presently, and how blessedly blown up are they, with a zeale of Gods glory, which even eateth them up. Verse 18. Then will the Lord be jealous (or, Zealous) for his land] Then dicto citiùs straight upon't; no sooner shall you repent (as is prescribed,) but the Lord will be jealous &c. Of Gods jealousie for his people, see the Note on Zech. 1.14. and 8, 2. And of the happy effect of fasting turned to feasting, see the Note on Zach. 8.19. See also Judg. 20.23. Ezra. 9.6. Dan. 9.20. 2 Chron. 20. Bacah turned into Berachah: besides the constant experience of these and former times, of the happy successe and unmiscarrying returns of holy fasting and prayer: no instance to the contrary. God usually answers his humbling people, as here, ac∣cording to the desire of their hearts: neither so only, but according to the request of their lips also.Aug. Confess. l. 5. c. 8. Psal. 21.2. he fits his mercy ad cardinem desiderii: and lets it be to his, even as they will. They say Spare thy people, and accordingly he will pitty or spare his people, saith the Prophet. They would not have God to give his heritage to reproach by inflicting famine upon them, as if they served an hard master that would affamish them. To this God gives a full answer in the next verse, Behold I will send you corn &c. Again, they desire God to take care of his own great name, and to vindicate it. I will, saith God, by doing greatest things for you Verse. 20. and by causing the blasphemers to return and discern that their Rock is not as your Rock, themselves being judges: and that to ask, where is now their God?Deut. 32. is as great folly, as if one should say, betwixt the space of the new and old moon, Where is now the Moon? when as it is never neerer the Sun, then at that time. There are some Interpreters of good note, that read this verse not in the Future, but in the Preter tense, thus, Then was the Lord zealous for his land, and pittied his people,Mercer. Leveleus. sc. when once he saw them seriously to repent, he did all this that followeth for them. Neither maketh it any thing against this interpretation, that the repentance of this people, their assembling and fasting &c. is not recorded. For no more is it that Moses went to Pharaoh according to Gods command, to threa∣ten those swarmes of flies Exod. 8.20. or that Esay took his son Shear-iashub, and went to Ahaz to confirme and comfort him, as God had commanded Esay. 7. which yet we doubt not but the Prophet did. This is an ordinary Aposiopesis. and pitty his people] Or, spare them, pardon them. The word signifies to shew mercy to him whom by all right thou mayest justly destroy Ezek. 5.11. 1 Sam. 15.3. Oh the divine Rhetorick, and omnipotent efficacy of Repentance! This is the rainbow, which if God seeth shining in our hearts, he will never drown our soules.Fulgent. Dat poenitentiam & poste à indulgentiam, He gives his people to repent, and then spareth them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. But it is other∣wise with those that partake not of the divine nature:Mal. 3.17. they are fierce, and implaca∣ble, as is the devill, who workes effectually in them, as a smith doth in his forge. Henry the fourth Emperour of Germany came in the middest of a sore winter upon his bare feet, to the gates of the castle of Canusium, and stood there fasting from morning to night for three dayes together, waiting for the judiciall sentence of the Pope, and craving pardon of him; which yet he could not obtaine by his own or others tears, or by the intercession of any Saint, save only of a certain harlot, with whom the Pope was then taking his filthy pleasure. The Emperour mistooke, who thought that the Pope could be pacified by fasting and prayer. This God re∣quired another kind of sacrifice, then these. Verse 19. Yea the Lord will answer and say unto his people] He will say it in an∣swer to their prayers (see the Note on verse 18.) Fear not my people, that ye shall be a reproach among the Heathen:
for Behold I will send you] as a token of my love, and a pledge of better bles∣sings. Corn and wine and oyle] all that heart can wish or need require, a sufficiency of outward comforts, and (if not a superfluity, yet) an honest affluence as Psal. 23.5, 6. and boldnesse to conclude from temporals to spirituals, as there David doth; because bestowed in mercy and as an answer to prayer: for God never said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain (he scorns that) whether it be for Bona throni, or Bona scabelli, as Austin distinguisheth, Good things of this life or a better, upper springs or nether springs, though we ask but the one (as here) yet we shall have both. Nay take two, saith He, as once Naaman did to Gehezi; take thy back∣burthen, take even as much as thou canst bring faith to bear away. God deales with his servants as the Prophet did with the Shunamite, when He bad her ask what she needed, and she found not what to ask, he sent for her againe, and makes her a free promise of that she most wanted, and desired, a son 2 King. 4.16. So, oft God is pleased to do for his servants exceeding abundantly above all that they ask or think. David asked but life of God, and He gave him length of dayes for ever, and ever, Psal. 21.4. This people prayed that God would not (for that turn) give his heritage a reproach among the heathen; and He gratiously pro∣miseth that he will never any more make them a reproach &c. (so they continue penitent (for  here signifies perpetuity, as Mercer noteth: and not for a time only, as Lyra would have it. Verse 20. But I will remove farr off from you the Northen army] sc. of vermine, of those destroying creatures that came from to the North. Ab Aquilone nihil boni, was a Proverb amongst this people. God promiseth here to free them of that mis∣chief: and to disimpester the country of those noysome Insects. Gratiae privativae plures sunt quam positivae, saith Gerson, Gods privative favours to us are more then his positive: hence mans happinesse is usually called salvation, which properly betokeneth the privative part thereof. Little do we consider or understand from how many deaths and dangers we are dayly and hourly delivered. It is good to keep a catalogue of Gods providences, and to transmit them to posteritie, such as was that of the Gun-powder-plot; and before that, of the Reformation begun by Henry the eight, and carried on by his son, to the ridding of the land of those po∣pish Locusts; Which Reformation how imperfect soever, to be done by so weak and simple meanes, yea by casual and cross meanes, against the force of so puissant and politick and adversary, is that miracle, which we are in these times to look for. An out-lander speaketh thus of it, Ecclesiae Anglicanae reformationem desperasset aetas praeterita, admiratur praesens, obstupescet futura. This was the Lords own work;Sculiet. det. 2. d Ep. dedi. and it is marvelous in our eyes. Oh that the same Lord would be both Author and Fmisher! and as he hath in good part cut off the names of the idols out of the land, so that they shall be no more remembred; so he would cause the Prophets and the un∣clean spirit to passe out of the land, that he would send all false doctrine and here∣sy packing to hell from whence they came. Fiat, Fiat. and will drive him into a land barren and desolate] Or, dry and forlorn, where he shall perish for want of food. The body of this Army shall be driven into the wildernesse, the vantagard into the lake of Sodom toward the East: and the rere∣ward into the Mediterranean Sea, toward the West; for the Western Ocean was hardly known to the Hebrewes: as neither was it to the Romanes, till the dayes of Julius Cesar. and his stink shall come up, and his ill savour &c.] sc. by reason of their dead carcasses covering the earth, and infecting the ayre. The old Hebrewes under∣stood this text concerning the destruction of the devill in the dayes of the Messias. Oh that God would once destroy that first-born of the devill, that King of Locusts, Abaddon, the Pope, and dung his vineyard with the dead carcasses of his incurable complices, that their stink might ascend, and their ill savour come up into all mens nostrills. Matthew Paris (an ingenuous Papift) speaking of the court of Rome long since, said, Hujus faetor usque an nubes fumum teterrimum exhalabat, Her fil∣thinesse hath sent up a most noysome stench to the very clouds of heaven, as So∣doms did. And Theodorcus Vrias (another of her good sons in Germany) com∣plained Anno 1414. that the Church of Rome was become ex aurea argenteū, ex ar∣gentea
ferream, ex ferrea terream, superesse ut in stercus abiret, of gold silver, of silver iron, of iron earth, and that she would next become of earth dung, &c. She is so already, and stinks alive worse then any carrion, rotting in its slime. Oh that God would once put into the hearts of the kings of the earth to loath her, and burn her, for an old stinking baud, as is prophecyed they shall, Rev. 17.16. because he hath done great things.] Heb. he hath magnified to do, he hath made great spoil and havock, he hath revelled in the ruines of Gods poor people, and so hath hastened his own destruction, and their deliverance. The Saints are many times more beholden to their enemies outrages then to their own deserts, or duties for deliverance. Some Interpreters, as Castalio, Leveley, &c. understand the Text, of God: and render it, Quia magnisicè aget, for the Lord shall do great things, as it is also in the following verse: there being here the same anomaly, or change of person, as is Esay 22.19. And I will drive thee from thy station, from thy state shall he pull thee down. Verse 21. tellus culta. Fear not O land,] O red earth, or O tilled land, that hast layen bedrid∣den, as it were, under the heavy curse of God, ever since the fall of Adam: and wast never beautifull, or cheerfull since that time, Gen. 3.17. Thou that hast lately been under that great and very terrible day of the Lord, Ioel 2.11. who hath made bloody wails upon thy back, and laid thee as a desolate wildernesse, verse 3. to thy great grief and terrour: Cheer up now, and fear not. Thine inhabitants are Poenitents, and Repentance hath turned their crosses into comforts; as scarlet pulls out the teeth of a serpent; as wine draweth a nourishing vertue from the flesh of vipers, as the Philosophers-stone, they say, turns all into gold. See 1 Pet. 1.7. God will turn all thy sadnesse into gladnesse: neither shalt thou any more lye to those that manure thee, (as the Scripture phrase is, Habak. 3.17.) that is, disappoint, and frustrate their expectation: but thine enemies shall be found liaers unto thee, Deut. 33.29. for the Lord will do great things,]Spem mentita seges. Virg. Victum seges aegra negabat. Horat. Magnificentiùs aget Deus: far greater things God will do for thee, then the Locust hath done against thee: so that thou shalt gain by thy losses, and say, Periissem nisi periissem, I had been undone, if I had not been undone. Wherefore be glad and rejoyce with inward and outward joy. And because Fear is a passion opposite to Joy, (for fear hath torment, 1 Joh. 4.18. and that was a rare mixture in those good women that returned from our Saviours sepulchre with fear and great joy, Mat. 28.8. See Psal. 2.11.) therefore, Fear not, O land, quit thine heart of that cowardly passion, and be as merry as mirth can make thee; for the Lord hath done great things for thee, whereof thou hast good cause to be glad. Faith in Gods Power quelleth and killeth distrustfull fears: filling the heart with unspeakable joyes,1 Pct. 1.8. and full of glory. Verse 22. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field,] q. d. Ye shall have no cause to fear for the future: though hitherto ye have suffered hardship, Chap. 1.18. Beasts and birds do in diem vivere (as Quintilian saith of them) and take no further thought then for present sustenance. But by a prosopopoeia, (as before the land, so here) the beasts that till it are forbidden to fear want; for God, the great House-keeper of the world, will provide them their meat in due season, Psal. 104.27.28. and seve∣rall meats according to their severall appetites. He will hear the heaven, the hea∣ven shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear all kinde of fruits, both naturall, as herbs of the field, and grasse of the wildernesse, and such as are sowen and plan∣ted, as wine, oyl, figs; so that neither man nor beast shall want any thing ad esum, vel ad usum, but have plenty without penury, &c. It shall be said of Judea, as So∣linus saith of Spain, In Hispania nihil infructuosm, nibil sterile, that there is no unfruitfulnesse in any part of it: or, as it is said of Campania in Italy, that it is the most fruitfull Plat of earth that is in the Universe. the fig-tree and the vine,] that before had been barked, and wasted, chap. 1.7, 12. do yeeld their strength.] i. e. their utmost fruits; which they could not do without God, into whom therefore the Prophet Hosea rightly resolveth the genealogie of corn, wine, oil, &c. Hos. 2.22. It is no otherwise with us in spirituall regards. For though we have grace, yet we cannot bring forth that grace to act, without new grace: like as trees, though they be fitted to bear fruits, yet, without the influence of the heavens,Aug. Enchir. chap. 32. they cannot put forth that fitnesse in fruit. Nolentem praevenit Deus ut velit: volentem subsequitur, ne frustra velit.
Verse 23. Be glad then ye children of Zion,] ye righteous Ones, Psal. 32.11. and none else: for joy is the Just mans portion, and none have any reason to re∣joyce but such: nay they are flatly forbidden it, Hos. 9.1. See the Note there. Let Israel rejoyce in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyfull in their king. Let the Saints be joyfull in glory. Gaudeant in re, gaudeant in spe,Psal. 139.2.5. gaude∣ant de possessione, gaudeant de promissione, saith Bernard. If Plato could tell the Musicians, Philosophers knew how to dine and sup without them, they could bee merry without a fidler: how much more may Zions children? Be it that there is a cord in the sinne of the wicked. (to strangle their joy with) yet the righteous sing and are merry, Prov. 29.6. In the greatest fail of all outward comforts, they can rejoyce in the Lord their God, as here, and as David at the sack of Ziklag, 1 Sam. 30.6. and Habakkuk, amidst all the miseries of the world, and malice of Satan, Habak. 3.17. It is in the Lord their God that they rejoyce; it is an holy and spiri∣tuall joy, not profane and carnall, as is the worldlings, who feedeth upon ashes, &c. Esay 44.20. rejoyceth in a thing of nought, Am. 6.13. his joy is no better then a little counterfeit complexion, crackling of thorns, &c. For he hath given you the former rain moderately,] as a pledge of his love, and as a fruit of the Covenant. Moderate showers ye shall have, neither too much, nor too hastie: rain of righteousnesse, in such measure and moderation, as shall be needfull. and he will cause to come downe for you,] The vanities of the Heathen cannot give rain, Jer. 14.22. nor can the heavens yeeld showers. God therefore must be waited upon, Jam. 5.7. and prayed unto,. verse 18. and the thundring Legion so famous in Church-history. He must not have cause given him to complain of mens brutishnesse and inadvertency, as Jer. 10.13, 14. the former rain,] that fell in October, when they had sown;. Saint James calleth it the morning-rain, chap. 5.7. and the latter rain.] Heb. the gathering rain, be∣cause it fills and fits the corn for ingathering: as falling about May, and a little afore their harvest. In the first] not moneth, but primo quoquo tempore, as soon as is fit. See Zech. 10.1. with the Note. Verse 24. And the floors shall be full of wheat] Such fatness shall Gods foot∣steps drop, that your houses shall be full of all precious and pleasant riches:Prov. 24.4. so that you shall, (as rich men love to do) de pleno tollere acervo. Onely take heed you have not, as that rich fool aenimam triticeam, a wheaten soul, that your abundance get not within you, as the Pharisees did, Lvke 11.41. (so that they did not more pos∣sesse, then were possessed by what they had) that ye set not your hearts upon your riches, Psal. 62.11.. —difficile est opibus non radere mentens.Mortial. and the fats shall overflow.] There shall be plenty of all things, (as Prov. 3.10.) the fruits and effect of that rain promised before. And doth not God daily turn water into wine, when of water falling upon the vine, and concocted by the heat of the Sun, he produceth the grape whence wine is pressed? Verse 25. And I will restore to you the yeers, &c.] I will so make up your former losses, that there shall remain no signe, nor sense thereof. See a like promise, Zech. 10.6. they shall be as though I had not cast them off, with the Note there. See also Esay 60.10. my great army,] sc. the locusts: see above verse 2, 5, 11.Magaleh chesoth Mat∣teh cheloth. Kimchi. God is Lord of Hosts, and (as the Rabbines well observe) he hath the upper and lower troops; as his horse and foot ready prest. Verse 26. And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied,] which, what a great bles∣sing it is, see Hagg. 1.6. with the Note, and Eccles. 6.1, 2. with the Note. and praise the Name of the Lord your God,] Not haunch up Gods creatures, as swine do swill: but, tasting the sweetnesse of the Creatour in them, lift up many an humble, joyfull, and thankfull heart to Him. This was better then the former bles∣sing: for naturally fulnesse breeds forgetfulnesse of God, Deut. 32.15. That hath dealt wonderously with you,] Heb. ad mirificandum, sc. in so sud∣den and strange a change of his hand, whereby he hath made himself marvailous
as he delights to do by working wonders, such as mans power connot perform, nor reason reach unto. and my people shall never be ashamed] As they have been among the heathen ver. 19. and as those are that pray to no purpose. Deo confisi nunquam confusi. Their faith is unfained, and therefore their hopes unfaileable Rom. 5.5. Verse 27. And ye shall know that I am in the mid'st of Israel] These temporall blessings shall seal up my love to you and presence of grace with you. True it is that no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them Eccles. 9.1. because all things come alike to all verse. 2. But yet from this text we may com∣fortably conclude, that if the good things of this life make us more cheerfull, thank∣full, hopefull: if Mercy excite us to duty, and the sense of Gods love makes us love God, his wayes, and people, with a desire to love them more, then we are loved of God, who is in us of a truth 1 Ioh. 4.10, 19. and we may know it too. For if instinct of nature teach dammes to know their young ones, and the young their dammes: shall not Gods spirit teach us to know him, that he is in the middest of us; not by his omnipresence only, but by his gratious presence? yea that he is the Lord our God, and none else; and that, while we hold us to this anhcor-hold of the faithfull soul, we shall never be ashamed Psal. 31.1. That was a brave speech of Luther, and one of those that a man would fetch upon his knees from Rome or Jeru∣salem to be author of them,Joh. Manl. loc. com. pag. 145. Ipse videret ubi anima mea mansura sit, qui pro ea sic so∣licitus fuit, ut vitam pro ea posuerit, Let Him see to it where my soul shall rest, who took so much care for it, as that he laid down his life for it. Verse 28. And it shall come to passe afterwards] sc. In the dayes of the Messiah (which is called the world to come Heb. 2.5.) but especially after his Ascension: see Ioh. 7.37. Act. 2, where this prophesie was fulfilled, and this place taken for the first text preached on by the Apostles, verse. 17. to the conversion of three thousand soules at one sermon. For together with the word there went forth a power,Luk. 7. 2 Tim. 1.7. even that Spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind, here promised to be powred out, not distilled only (see the Note on Zech. 12.10.) and that upon all flesh. Spirit upon flesh, the best thing upon the basest: yea upon all flesh, without respect of persons, or difference made of sex, age, or condition: provided that they know and acknowledg themselves to be but flesh Gen, 6.3. corrupt and carnal (animas etiam incarnavimus,Bern. as an Ancient complaineth) and that whatsoever is of the flesh is flesh. Ioh. 3.6. (for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?) that whole Man is in evill, and whole evill in Man; neither can it be gotten out in any measure, till the heart be mollified and made tender as flesh Ezeh. 11.19. and 36.26, 27. which cannot be done till men be taught of God, and drawn out of darknesse into his marvelous light: till they be spiritualized,2 Cor. 3.18. and transformed into the same image from glory to glory as by the spirit of the Lord. and your sons and your daughters shall prophesie] This was fulfilled Act. 2. as St. Peter sheweth. For the new Testament is but the old unfolded and fulfilled: as was also typified in the two Cherubims of the sanctuary, looking intently into the Propitiatory (Christ Rom. 3.25.) but with their faces turn'd one towards another Exod. 25.20. See Act. 26.22. It was fulfilled, I say, in that visible descension of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles and the rest Act. 2. Act. 8.15, 17. and 10.44. So that this makes nothing at all for the Enthusiasts raptures and dotages: the true offpring they are,Funcc. Chronol. of those ancient Euchites or Messalanii, who, leaving their trades, gave themselves to much sleep, and called their dreams and phantasies pro∣phesies, Anno Dom. 371. your old men shall dream &c. your yong men shall see visions] i. e. God will no less open his will unto them then he did of old to the Prophets by dreams and vi∣sions: for, by the conduct of the Spirit, they shall be led into all truth and holi∣nesse: they shall be all a royall Priesthood 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 1.6. full of all good∣nesse, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another Rom. 15.14. Verse 29. And also upon the servants] they shall be the free-men and women of Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 7.22. by as full a measure of Gods free and noble Spirit be∣stowed upon them as upon their Masters and Mistresses. The Trent Translation hath it, upon my servants and my handmaids. But there is no such pronoun in the Original, though it is true, that all that have the spirit are his; and the con∣trary
Rom. 8, 9. Eph, 1.13. The scope of the text is (as Mercer well noteth,) to shew that ut gratuitum & commune Christi beneficium, sic & spiritus, as the benefits of Christ are free and common to all his people, so is the Spirit. And sure∣ly, next to the love of Christ in dwelling in our nature, we may well wonder at the love of the holy Ghost, that will dwell in our defiled soules, and act in them, as he doth. For there are diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit 1 Cor. 11.4. as the divers smels of flowers come from the same influence: and the diverse sounds in the organ, froin the same breath. Verse 30. And I will shew wonders in the heavens] Prodigia beneficia credentibus,a Lapid. malefica & horrifica incredulis, saith Cornelius a Lapide, who interpreteth the text, of those signes and wonders that shall precede the day of judgment: and for con∣firmation here of alleageth chap. 3.2. together with Mat. 24.29. Luk. 21.25. And had he looked a little higher into those chapters, and taken in all the troubles that befell the Church from our Saviours ascension to his second comming, together with those horrible calamities and confusions that shall befall the wicked, for con∣tempt of the Gospell, and persecution of the professors thereof, he had done right, in mine opinion. It is ordinary with the Prophets to set forth horrible commotions by such figurative expressions, See Ier. 4.23. &c. Isay. 13.10. Rev. 6.12. Those that have received the Spirit of Adoption, must not dream of a delicacy, but expect persecution. Christ came to send fire on the earth Luk. 12.49. Neither may Persecutors hope to escape unpunished, but look to be pursued by divine ju∣stice. See the Note on Rev, 6.15. How heavie was the hand of God upon Jeru∣salem that slaughter-house of the Saints; and afterwards upon the Ten Persecutors of Rome? 1 Nero (whom Tertullian rightly calleth Dedicatorem damnationis Christianorum, quippe qui orientem fidem primus Rema cruentavit, the first bloody Persecutor of the Christian religion) lost thirty thousand of his subjects by the pestilence, had his army utterly routed and cut off in Britanny: both the Arme∣nia's revolted from him: the Senators rose up against him, and compelled him to be his own deaths-man. 2 Demitian was butchered by his souldiers. 3 Trajan dy∣ed of a dropsie. 4 Severus dyed miserably here at York. 5. Maximinus, with his sonn, was cut in peeces. 6. Decius dyed in a farr country. 7. Valerian was flea'd, by Sapores king of Persia, who took him prisoner. 8. Aurelian was slain by his own men. 9. Dioclesian poisoned himself. 10 Maximian hang'd himself. What should I speak of Julian, Anastasius, Heraclius &c. The French persecutors, Fran∣cis the second, Charles the ninth, Henry the third, the Guises &c. Philip the se∣cond of Spain, who returning out of the Low countries, fell into a storm, and suffered shipwrack to the great danger of his life?Hist. of Gennc. of Trent. 417. He said he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root out Lutheranisme, which he presently began to do, with all his might. He afterwards died miserably of the lousie disease. Q. Mary died of a tympany, or else of grief of heart for K. Philip's unkind departure,Speed. forraine losses, Callice surrendred, hurt done by thunders from heaven, and by fire in the royal navie, extream dearths raging, her conceptions fayling &c. What heavy judgments befell divers particular persecutors of those times, Poole, Gardiner, Bonner, Morgan, Story, Burton, see Acts and Mon. 1902. 1904. &c. 1915. George Eagles (alias Trudge-over the world) having hid himself in a cornfeild, was,Mr. Leigh his Saints Encou∣ragement Ep. to Read. for mony descried by one Ralph Lurdain, and burnt at Chelmsford: where after∣wards the same Lurdain was hang'd for stealing an horse. blood and fire &c.] Signes terrifying, and testifying the wrath and displeasure of God for the sinns of men, and such a face of the whole Fabrick of the Vniverse: as that all the parts thereof may seem to have conspired for the destruction of man∣kind. Before the wart betwixt Pompey and Caesar, the sea seemed to be bloody, —Superique minaces Prodiglis terras implerant, ethera,Lucan: lib. 1. monstra enu∣merans quae bellum civila praecesserunt. pontum Ignota obscurae viderunt sydera noctes, Ardentem{que} polum flammis, coelo{que} volantes Obliquas per inane faces— Fulgura fallaci micuerunt crebra sereno, Et varias ignis denso dedit aere formas.
Before Caesars death not only drops of blood fell from heaven, but also pits and pooles flowed with blood. —puteique cruore Mutati In the year of grace 874.Claudian. lib. 1. in Eutrop. Funcc. chron. at Brixia, in the enterance of Italy, rained blood for three dayes and three nights together. In the yeare 1505. there appeared in Germany upon peoples garments, and womens rocks as they were spinning, diverse prints and tokens of the nailes, of the spunge, of the spear, of the Lords coate, and of bloody crosses &c. Maximilian the Emperour had and shewed the same to Fran∣cis Mirandula; who wrot thereupon his book called Staurostichon, wherein are these verses, Nonignota cano,Act. & Mon. fol. 769. Caesar monstravit: & ipsi Videmus: innumeros prompsit Germania testes. It is not many yeares since a showre of blood fell about Glocester, if our intelli∣gence deceived us not. Such prodigies are usually sad presages, nec inania terricula∣menta haec esse,In lsc. res ipsa testatur, saith Gualther here: and event proveth that these are no vaine fray-bugs. By fire here, understand those terrible flaming appariti∣ons in the ayre, lightenings, comets &c. portending lamentable calamities. Such there were to be seen (as I have heard from eye-witnesses) on that very night wherein the Powder-plot was detected and defeated, in a very terrible manner. And such were those Meteors in the likenesse of fiery serpents, that fell here Anno 788. before the Invasion of the Danes: whereunto we may adde the new-starre that appeared in Cassiopeja in November 1572.Camd. Elisah. and continued sixteen moneths: soon after which Charles the 9 of France (Author of the Parisian Massacre) died of exceeding bleeding at severall parts of his body, inter horribilium blasphemiarum diras. saith the Historian, cursing and swearing. And lastly that prodigious Co∣met Anno. 1618. forerunner of the German warres, and our late troubles; what∣ever is yet behind to be suffered by us. Certainly if the sorcerors of Egypt were amongst us, they would wonder at mens stupendious stupidity, and tell them that these extraordinary occurrents in heaven and earth were the very finger of God, for their warning. and pillars of smoke] Heb. palmes of smoke (so Cant. 3.6.) by similitude, be∣cause tall, and straight as palme-trees; which also lift up themselves under their burthen, and will not be held down. Smoaky vapours mounting upright are fitly compared thereunto, Elationes fumi, so Tremellius, Verse 31. The Sun shall be turned into darknesse, and the Moon into blood] by strange and stupendious Eclipses: such as was that of the Moon for 12. nights to∣gether, a little before the last destruction of Jerusalem: and that of the Sun this present 29 day of March 1652. wherein I writ these things, but could scarce see to write, or forbeare to behold: for though busy enough to bring this work to an end, if God please, yet I cannot say as the Duke of Alva did to the king of France, who asked him whether he had observed the late great Eclipse? No, said he I have so much to do upon earth, that I have no leisure to look toward heaven. Of this dayes Eclipse I may well say as Lucan doth of another, Ipse caput medio Titan cum ferret Olympo, Condidit ardentes atra caligine currus; Involvit{que}Lucan. lib. 1. orbem tenebris, gentes{que} coegit Desperare diem.— I heartily pray it do not presage a dreafull eclipse of the Sun of Christs glorious gos∣pell amongst us; that this bright Sun should go down at noon over our heades, and our earth be darkened in the clear day Amos 8.9. And let every good soul pray that that dismall day may never arise unto us, wherein it shall be said, that this glo∣ry is departed from our English Israel.
—nobiscum, Christe, maneto: Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam. and the moon into blood,] that is, into rednesse, as it was likewise on the 15. day of this instant March, in the morning: Two such Eclipses so neer together, having seldome been seen. I fear we may have cause, ere the yeer come about, to sing sadly with the Poet; Signa dabant luctus superi haud incerta futuri:Ovid. Metam. lib. 15. Saepe faces visae, solis quoque tristis imago: Caerulus & vultum ferrugine Lucifer atrâ Sparsus erat, sparsi lunares sanguine currus. Before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.] i.e. the great day of generall judgement; called here, the great day, because the great God will on that day do great things, and determine of great matters: and the terrible day, because it is a day of anger, and of wrath, Rom. 2.5. Rev. 6.17. yea the day of the de∣claration of the just judgement of God, according to the Gospel, Rom. 2.5, 16. It is elsewhere called, That day by an appellative proper, Mar. 13.32. Luk. 21.34. Mat. 7.22. That day of note, wherein God will break filence, execute judgement upon all, and convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 15. Enoch foretold this great day, before Noah did the deluge: this day is longer before it comes; but shall be more terrible when it is come. Whether it shall come in the yeer of our Lord, 1657.Alsted. Chronol. p 494. (as some have gathered out of the numerall letters of these two words, Mundi Conflagratio, and because the yeer of the World 1657. was the yeer of the Flood,) let time de∣termine: I have nothing to say to it. Verse 32. And it shall come to passe, that whosoeveer &c.] Lest any good soul hearing the former heavy menaces, should say with the disciples, Mark 10.26. Who then can be saved? Or, with these Despondents in Jeremy, chap. 2.25. There is no hope, the Prophet concludeth with this comfortable Coroliary, Whoso∣ever shall call upon the name of the Lord,] yea, that but nameth the name of Christ in faithfull prayer, desiring and endeavouring to depart from iniquity, 2 Tim 2.19. the same shall be delivered,] He shall have safety here, and salvation hereafter. Rom 10.13. Watch ye therefore, and pray alwayes (saith our Saviour) that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to passe, and to stand before the Son of man, Luke 21.36. with 25 Something God will yeeld to the prayers of his people, when he seemeth most bitterly bent, and unchangeably resolved against them, Matth. 24.20. and when the tribulation is so great, that it is not likely that any flesh shall be saved, vers. 21, 22. Prayer, saith One, is the best lever at a dead lift; provided that it be the prayer of faith; for Mercy is the Mo∣ther, Faith the Midwife of deliverances. Hence it followeth. for in mounth Zion and in Jerusalem,] where the pure word of God was preached, Esay 2.3. and mens hearts purified by faith, Acts 15.9. shall be deliverance,] from all evils and enemies, Psalm 76.3. There brake he the arrows of the bowe, the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah. There? where? In Salem, in Zion, verse 2. where Gods people were praying. This Moab knew, and therefore more feared a praying people, then a numerous army, Numb. 22.3. This the Queen Mother of Scotland knew, and therefore said, that she feared-more the fasting and prayers of Iohn Knox, and his disciples, then an army of twenty thousand men.Spec. bell. sacri. Let Gods suppliants but call upon him in the day of their trouble, and he will deli∣ver them, that they may glorifie him, Psal. 50 15. He will deliver them, yea and honour them: with long life will he satisfie them, and shew them his salvation, Psalm 91.16. Holy Merlin, Chaplain to the Admirall of France, at the Parisian Massacre, had the performance of this promise among many others: For under∣standing the danger they were all in, he prayed in the Admirals chamber (and by his command) a little before the Murtherers brake in: and, by a singular providence,
escaped into an Hay-mow,Epitom. hist. Gullick. where he lay hid for a fortnight, and was miraculously fed by a hen that cam daily, and laid an egge hard by him. as the Lord hath said,] and Gods suppliants have stedfastly beleeved, and do therefore put his promises in suit. In the want of other Rhetorike, let Christians in their prayers burden God with what he hath said, sue him upon his own bond, urge this with repetition; Lord thou hast promised, thou hast promised, and they shall finde that he cannot deny himself: and he can as soon deny himself, as his promises. His covenant he will not break: nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips, Psal. 89.34. and in the remnant whom God shall call.] Those holy brethren that shall partake of the heavenly calling to glory and vertue,Heb. 3.1. whether they be Jewes, or Gentiles. Faithfull is he that calleth them, who also will do it, 1 Thess. 5.24. And although they are but a remnant, which is but a small to the whole piece, an hand-full to an house-full, a fold to a field, a little, little flock, Luke 12.32. yet being the caled of Jesus Christ, Rom. 1.6. and such as call upon him in truth, they are not onely his called,. but chosen and faithfull, Revel. 17.24. They are also heirs of that pro∣mise, Mic. 5.7. which shall be fully made good to them, that (as for their propa∣gation) this remnant of Iacob, shall be in the middest of many people, as a dew from lehovah, (the dew is ingendred, and distilled from the Lord immediatly:) so (for their growth and increase) they shall be as the showers upon the grasse, as the sprout∣ing up of grasse and herbs in the wildernesse, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sonnes of men, to come with watering-pots to nourish them (as herbs in gardens do) but these have showers from heaven, that give the increase. CHAP. III. Verse 1. FOr behold in those dayes, and in that time,] In is dibus illis ipsis, & in hoc tempore ipso, In those very self-same dayes, and in that self-same time. sc. In the time of the Messias, in the dayes of the Gospel; when God shall deliver Jerusalem, and call the remnant of Gentiles, and so bring again the capti∣vity of Judah and Jerusalem, of the whole Jsrael of God, preaching liberty to the captives, Esay 61.1. and proclayming the everlasting Jubilee, Joh. 8.36. In those happy dayes, I say, Jer. 23.5, 6. Wo to the wicked enemies of the Church, it shall go ill with them. They are sure to be broken with a rod of iron, to be dashed in pieces like a potters vessell, Psal. 2.9. dashed against Christ the King, who as He is Pierum rupes, a Rock of refuge to his people (such as was that to Moses, Exod. 33.22.)Sic Val. Max de tribunali L. Cassij. so He is, Reorum scopulus, a Rock of revenge to Persecutours, to split them to pieces, such a rock as that out of which fire arose, Judg. 6.21. the fire of Gods jealousie, Zach. 1.14. which burneth unto the lowest hell, Deut. 32.22. Let them, therefore, have grace, (as the Apostle from this ground adviseth, Heb. 12.28, 29.) Let them, at least have so much wit for themselves, as Pilats wife had in a dream, to take heed of having any thing to do with just men. Let them do as Tertullian counselled Scpula,Si non nobis, tibi: si non tibi, Carthagi∣niparcas. God will reduce the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, which shall be as a cup of poyson to all the people round about, as a burdensome stone, as an harth of fire, Zech. 12.2, 3, 6. (See the Notes there) Their destruction must needs go along with the Saints salvation, Philip. 1.28, 29. Esay 8.9. Prov. 11.8. The Jew-Doctours collect from this and other like places in the Prophets, that when the Messias commeth, he shall recollect the Jewes into the land of Canaan: where they shall get the better of their enemies, and have a most flourishing Common∣wealth, and glorious Church. For this, they daily expect the visible appearance of the Messias;Buxtorf: Sy∣nag. Jud. cap. 13. Sanbed. c. 11. oft throwing open their windowes to behold, and crying altogether to God, Let thy kingdom come, let it come quickly, even in our dayes, quickly, quickly, quickly. That he stayes so long, is for our sins, say they, which are many. See the Notes on Zach. 14.2, 3.
Verse 1. I will also gather all nations] that are adverse to my Church, that I may have my peniworths of them, and do execution upon them with ease (trou∣bling those troublers of his Israel, 2 Thess. 1.6. licet videantur plures & potiores) as he dealt by Jehosaphats enemies, 2 Chron. 20. and leaving them no more place to escape, then those have who are environed in a valley by a potent enemy, who hath gotten them into a pound, as the proverb is. And this God will do in the valley of Jehosaphat, (a valey, saith Lyra, Adrichomius, and Montanus, betwixt Jerusalem and Mount Olivet) in the very view of the Church, that the righteous may rejoyce, when he seeth the vengeance, and wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, (see verse 4.)Chaldeus R. Salmon Mercer. verily, he is a God that judgeth in the earth, as in the valley of divine judgement, (so some render Jehosaphat here, as if it were an appellative) called verse 14. the valley of decision, and the words that next follow seem to favour, and I will plead with them (judicio agam) judicially plead with them there, for my people: which word also God useth when he foretelleth the destruction of Gog, and Magog in Ezekiel. So that the valley of Jehosaphat (saith Mercer) is the place whereso∣ever God shall please to punish the enemies of his people. As for that conceit of Lyra and others: who gather out of this Text, that this valley neer Jerusalem, shall be the very place where Christ shall sit to judge the world at the last day: and for confirmation, alledge Acts 1.11. Mercer judgeth it to be a clidish conceit: and Luther asketh where all mankind shall have room to stand in so small a valley? Though others judge it not unlikely that it shall be thereabouts, because Jerusa∣lem is in the middle andabout the center of the earth: and besides, it will be the more for the glory of Christ, to sit there as Judge where himself was judged. But it is probable he will sit in the air, (neer the earth) whither the Elect shall be rapt up to meet the Lord, 1 Thes. 4.17. that the devils may be subdued and sentenced in the air, where they have ruled and played Rex, Ephes. 2.2. and that the wicked may be doomed on the earth, where they have offended. for my people, and for my heritage Israel,] All was His: and the wrongs done to them, were done to Gods self: as the injury done to the Subject, is said to be done to the Soveraigne, his crown and dignity. See Acts 9.4. Matth. 25.45. So that ye cannot tread upon the least toe, in Christs mysticall body, but the head cries out from heaven, Why hurtest thou me? The Saints sufferings are his, Col. 1.24. their reproach his, Heb. 13.13. Manet compassio, etiam cum impassibilitate,Bern. Christ retaineth still compassion, though free from personall passion: and though without feeling, yet not without fellow-feeling. He doth condolere proportionatè ad mise∣riam, as Pareus rendreth the Apostle, Heb. 5.2. condole,. and that proportiona∣bly to his peoples misery. and for mine heritage Israel,] Israel, , saith Mercer, the people of Gods purchase, that comprehend all his gettings, and are much more dear to him then Naboths inheritance was to him: He sets them before his face for ever, Psal. 41.12. as loving to look upon them; yea, upon the very walls of the houses where they dwell, Esay 49.16. They are his portion, Deut. 32.9. his inheritance, Esay 19.25. the dearly beloved of his soul, Ier. 12.7. his glory, Esay 46.13. dear to God, though despised of, and dispersed in the world. He may suffer them to be Anathe∣ma secundum dici (as Bucholcer said) but not secundum esse. whom they have scattered among the nations,] The Jew-Doctours referre this to Titus and Adrian the Roman Emperours. The first carried 97000 of them captives, saith Iosephus. The second drove them utterly out of Jewry; and by Proclamation commanded them, not so much as look toward that land, from any tower or high mountain. But all this was for their sedition and other wickednesses. And ever since they have continued a disjected and despised people,See Deut. 28.64. exiled out of the world, as it were by a common consent of Nations, specially for their inexpi∣able guilt in murthering Christ, and persecuting his people: Concerning whom therefore, this Text is to be understood. See how Christians were soon scattered abroad thorowout the regrons, Act. 8.1. Iam. 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.1. where they are called Strangers of the dispersion. Afterwards, the Heathen Persecutours relegated and con∣fined them to Isles, and mines: and scattered them into corners. So did the Pope and his Agents: forcing them to flee for their lives, &c.
And parted my land] As Salmaneser did to his new colonies: as Senacherib also designed to do, had not God prevented him: as the Pope taketh upon him to do, those countries whom he counteth hereticall. He gave this land (in Hen. 8. his time) Primo occupaturo to him that could first seise it. He declared Iohn King of Navarre, a schismatick, an heretick, an enemy to the sea Apostolick, and gave his kingdom to the Spaniard,Guicciard. lib. 11. because he took part with the French, and would not suffer the Spaniard to march through his kingdom against the French. And what work he hath lately made in the Palatinate and other parts of Germany, who knowes not? Verse 3. And they have cast lots for my people] Impiously and imperiously domi∣neering over them: as those rude souldiers that cast the dice upon our Saviours Coat, at his passion. It was ordinary to divide by lot the enemies they had taken in fight Nah. 3.10. Obad 11. Lam. 3.53. Judg. 5.30. but at base rates thus to sell Gods people ignominiously, and that to satisfie their lewd lusts, this was unsufferable. and have given a boy for an harlot,] Heb. that boy, as afterwards, that girl, with an emphasis; a son and daughter of Israel, those earthly angels, Angli quasi Angeli, as Gregory the Great once said of the English-boyes presented to him. Thou hast slain my children and delivered them, to cause them to passe thorow the fire, said God, not without very great indignation, to their idolatrous parents, Ezech. 16.21. His they were more then theirs: by vertue of the covenant he had made with that people. Hence Deut. 14.1. Ye are the children of the Lord your God: and can he bear with your misusages? Should he deal with our sister as an harlot? said they with a courage (as the great Zaijn in Zonah importeth) Gen. 34.31. So here, should they give a boy, (such a boy) for an harlot? that is, for the hire of an harlot, and to gratifie such abhorred filths? In the reigne of Henry 2. of France, Anno 1554 many precious sonnes of Zion were burned there for religion, not without the indignation of honest men,Hist. of Counc. of Trent. fol. 387. who knew that the diligence used against those poor people was not for any piety or religion, butto satiate the covetousness of Diana Valentina the Kings Mistresse, to whom he had given all the confiscations of goods, made in the kingdom, for cause of Heresie. and sold a girl for wine,Prov. 4.17. that they might drink.] the wine of violence: drink, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, Ier. 25.27. Worthy therefore to be served as that drunken Turk was by that severe Bashaw, who caused a ladle∣full of boyling lead to be poured down his throat. God will turn a worse cup down their wide gullets one day,Psal. 11: Quorum vivere est bibere, and whose profane proverb it is, Bibere & sudare, est vita Cardiaci: But what an heathenish basenesse is that of the Papists (besides an horrible abuse of Gods holy ordinance) that at Rome, a Jewish maid may not be admitted into the stews of whoredome, unlesse she will first be baptized.De contin. lib. 3. cap. 4. Espensaeus (a modest Papist) writeth it, not without detestation. Verse 4. Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tyre, &c.] Or, what are yee to me? I value you not, but look upon you as vile persons, how great soever in the world? See Dan. 11.21. Or, what have I to do with you? what wrong have I done you, that ye invade my land, and molest my subjects? It is an idle misprision to sever the sence of an injury done to any of his members, from the head? and it was a malapert demand of the devil, What have I to do with thee, O Jesus the Son of the living God? whilest he vexed a servant of his. But there is an old enmity betwixt them and their seed, Gen. 3.15. and it will never be extinct, while the world stands. Israel had given Tyre and Zidon as little cause to quarrell them, as once they had done Moab, whom they had assured, that they would not meddle nor mo∣lest them. Howbeit, Moab was distressed, or irked, fretted, vexed at them, Numb. 22.3. carried with Satanicall malice against Gods people, because of a different re∣ligion; and sought their ruine. Lo this was the case of Tyre, Zidon, and Palestine, near neighbours, but bitter enemies to the Church. Bats flie against the light: ma∣lice breaks all bonds: and vents it self by utmost inhumanity. Mercer understan∣deth by those nations, verse 2, 3. the open and professed enemies of the Church: and by these neighbouring peoples here mentioned, those more subtle adversaries, that pretend love, and can draw a fair glove upon a foul hand: but will take the first opporunity to do the Saints a mischief, and to spet their poyson at them. This
is an old stratagem of the Devil, still practised by the Renegado Jesuites a∣mongst us. Will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me, &c.] Num meritum mihi refertis, an etiam infertis? so some render it. Whilest ye afflict my people, is it to be avenged on me, for an old injury I have done you? or is it rather to pick a quarrell with me, who have done you no wrong? Surely, whether it be this, or the other, I shall handle you according to your deserts. swiftly and speedily will I return your recompense.] Repentè è vestigio,ieere. while you'le say, what's this? I will execute my fierce wrath upon you, and you shall soon feel what it is despitefully to spit in the face of heaven, and to wrestle a fall with the Almighty. See Obad. 15. God cannot bear long with sins of this high nature. He resisteth the proud persecutours. Verse 5. Because yee have taken my silver, &c.] Sacriledge is a second sinne they here stand charged with. Yee have taken, that is, taken away, (by which ob∣fervation, ye shall easily reconcile the Psalmist, Psal. 68.19. with the Apostle, Eph. 4.8. saith Tarnouius here) my silver and my gold,Aurum The∣losanum. vessels consecrated to mine use and service: or mine, that is, my peoples, whom ye have robbed: but it shall not thrive with you; it shall prove as the gold of Tholouse, fatall to them that had any part of it: or as Achans wedge, that cleft his body and soul asunder these ye have carried into your Temples,] or Palaces, even my goodly pleasant things. my desireable goods, either to adorne your houses, or your idols, to your own bane, as Belshazzar. It is surely a snare to a man,Prov. 20.25. who devoureth dedicated things: that bowseth in the bowles of the Sanctuary. And it was a sad complaint of Luther, that even in the reformed Churches, Parishes and Schools were robbed of their due maintenance: as if they meant to starve us all.Luth. in Gen. 47. The like saith Gualther in his Homily upon this Text: Non desunt pseudo-evangelici, saith He, There want not such false-Gospellers amongst us, who restore not the Church her wealth, pul∣led out of the Papists fingers: but make good that saying of One, Possidebant Pa∣pistae, possident Rapistae; Papists had Church-livings, and now Rapists have gotten them: like as a good Authour observeth upon the battle of Montlecherye,Comin. l. 1. c. 4. that some lost their livings for running away, and they were given to those that ran ten miles further. Verse 6. The children also of Judah, and the children of Ierusalem,] The precious sonnes of Zion, comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2. with whom you were anciently confederate in the dayes of Solomon, 1 King. 5. and seemed to be then their prospe∣rity-proselytes. have ye sold unto the Grecians.] that is, to the Gentiles in generall, for so Saint Paul oft useth the word Grecians, as contradistinct ot Jews; who were barbarously sold, as if they had been bruit beasts, and that into the farthest countries, that they might never ransome themselves, nor return to their native soil again. This was singular, yea savage cruelty, which the mercifull God cannot abide, but will se∣verely punish, Iam. 2.13, 14. Esay 47.6. thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid the yoke. See the Babylonian cruelty graphi∣cally described, and accordingly recompensed, Ier. 51.34, 35, &c. The Spanish cruelty to the poor Indians is unspeakable. They have made away 50 Millions of them in 42 years, as Acosta the Jesuite testifieth; and that under pretence of con∣verting them to the faith. They suppose they shew the wretches great favour,World encom∣post by Sir Fr: Drake. when they do not (for their pleasure) whip them with cords, and day by day drop their naked bodies with burning bacon. Such a devil is one man to another, when set awork by the devil, and spurr'd on by him. But shall they thus escape by iniquity? In thine anger cast down the people, O God. He will do it:Psal. 56.7. for those words are not more a prayer, then a prophecy. Verse 7. Behold I will raise them out of the place, &c.] Seem it never so impro∣bable, or impossible, Ile do it, saith God, and you shall see it. Behold, Ile fetch home my banished, though they may seem to be as water spilt on the ground. Ile make those dead bones live: and raise my self a name and a praise, by out-bidding their hopes, and marring your designe of utter extermination. Ribera understands the words concerning the resurrection of the dead at the last day: because the He∣brew word properly signifieth, to raise one out of sleep. Some think it is meant of
the Apostles and Martyrs, fetcht out of banishment; as was John out of Pathmos, Athanasius,Erasm. in vita Chrysost. Chrysostom, (who yet in his last banishment, by reason of the barba∣rous usage of the fouldiers that led him along, hired for that purpose, sweetly and blessedly breathed out his last) the English Exiles in Queen Maries time, whereof many returned and did excellent service here.Calv. in loc. But I doubt not, saith judicious Calvin, but God intends here a spiritual gathering together of his people into one body, by the bond of faith: and this was principally fulfilled after the death of Christ, who died for that Nation: And not for that Nation onely, bus that also hee should gather together into one the children of God, that were scattered abroad, Joh. 11.51, 52. so that those whom God hath gathered together and caused to return (non pedibus vel navigio, for that needs not, to Hierusalem which is above, which is the mother of us all) from the lands of the East, of the West, of the North, and of the South,Psal. 107.2, 3. shall praise the Lord together, as the Psalmist hath it. and will return your recompense upon your own head,] God delights to retaliate, to bloody and decitufull men especially; as were easie to instance in the Egyptians, Adonibezek,Polybius. Agag, Attilius Regulus, the Roman Generall, who dealt most cru∣elly with the Carthaginians, and was shortly after as cruelly dealt with by them, when fallen into their hands. Here at home in K. Edw. the sixths time, the remem∣brance of Somerset much moved the people to fall from Northumberland (who had wrought his death) in his greatest attempts, and to leave him to his fatall fall: whereat also they openly rejoyced, and presented to him handkerchiefs dipt in the blood of Somerset,Life of Edw. 6. by Sir I. H. for whom they thought he suffered rather late, then undeserved punishment. So certain it is (saith the Histarian) that the debts both of cruelty and mercy go never unpaid. Verse 8. And I will sell your sonnes and your daughters,] And so the scene shall be soon altered, and a strange vicissitude easily observed. But when was this done? or was it ever done? Ego putarim factum, etsi scriptura non dicat quando, saith Tarnovius: I suppose it was done, though the Scripture say not when. Others flie to Allegories, and understand the Text of the conversion of the Gen∣tiles. I like their way best, that say. That which God did for the Churces sake, the Church it self is said to do it. For their cruelties to the Jewes, God delivered these Nations up into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar first, (who had a hard tug of it, and had therefore Egypt given him for his wages) and afterwards by Alexander the Great, who took Tyre, and rased it. And this was that great service spoken of, Ezek. 29.18. wherein every head wasmade bald, and every shoulder bare, in filling up that strait of the Sea, which separated it from the Continent, before it could be taken. But taken it was, together with Sidon, and Philistia; and their children sold as far as Sabaea, which was then counted the utmost part of the known earth, Mat. 12.42. Luke 11.31. being part of Arabia the Happy, or, (as some will) the Desert. All this was done for the Jews sake, though the world little considereth it. It was enough for them, that they knew it to be so, according to this Prophecy: and that God did hereby shew his high esteem of them, by avenging them of their enemies, and by thus giving men for them, and people for their life, Esay 43.4. for the Lord hath spoken it.] And will therefore surely do it: neither could their Apollo deliver them out of Gods hands; though, to prevent his forsaking of them, when besieged by Alexander, the Tyrians chained and nailed that Idoll of theirs to a post, that they might be sure of it. But all would not do. Verse 9. Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles,] Oratio tota est figurata, saith Pa∣reus: All this following discourse is figurative; Hortatio sarcasmon habens, saith Mercer. It is an Ironicall challenge to all Gods enemies, to do their worst to Christ and his Church: Somewhat like that Iudg. 9.29. Increase thine Army and come out (which seems to be the challenge that Gaal sent to Abimelech, by some messen∣ger) Or that of Rabshakeh, Esay 36.8. I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders on them: Or that, Esay 8.9.10. prepare warre,] Heb. sanctifie warre: that is, laying aside all other businesse, give your selves wholly to it: (like as at holy services they were called upon, Hoc agere, to minde the businesse in hand, and nothing else) as Scanderbeg did; out of whose lips, whiles he was fighting, the very blood would ftart; so earnest he was at it.
wake up the mighty men] the Giants, the champions, such as were Goliath the Gittite, Davids band of worthies, Achilles, Albertus Marquesse of Brandeburg, who for his valour was called Achilles Teutonicus. Put what metall you can into these your Mighties, that they may do their utmost. But withall know that they shall soon meet with their matches, viz Gods Mighty Ones mentioned verse 11. let all the men of war draw neare] that they may joyn battel, and not stand da∣ring and facing one another: as the two armies of Christians and Turks did in the dayes of Baldwin the second, king of Ierusalem for three moneths together,Turk. hist. fol. 27. and then rose and returned without any notable thing done.Speed 963. It is the ancient and man∣full fashion (saith our Chronicler) of the English (who are naturally most impati∣ent of lingering mischiefs) to put their publike quarrels quickly to the triah of the sword. Praestat semel quam semper was Cesars motto: and his property was Credere nil actum, dum quid superesset agendum.Lucan. Verse 10. Beat your plowshares into swords] Come with the best preparation you can make, that ye may seeme (as they say of a travelling Turk) to be so many walking armouries.Voyage into Levant. let the weak say I am strong] Come forth full and whole, yong and old, weak and strong, all that are able to bear armes, without excuse. It is an ancient custome in Scotland, in cases of importance, to command the fire-crosse to be carried, that is, two fire-brands set in fashion of a crosse, and pitched upon the point of a speare,Life of Ed. 6. p. 20. and proclamation is thereupon made that all men above 16 yeares of age, and un∣der 60 shall come into the field to oppose the enemy. Those were desperate boyes in Kets conspiracie, that at the battel nere Norwich pulled the arrowes out of their own flesh,Ibid. 75. and delivered them to be shot againe by the archers on their side: and those other wounded and weakned, no less desperately resolved, who being disabled almost to hold up their weapons,Ibid. 72. would strive what they could to strike their ene∣mies: others being thrust thorough the body with a speare, would run themselves further on, to reach those that wounded them deadly. The enemies of the truth will make hard shift but they will bear armes against Christ: and, though feeble,Scito quia ab ascensore sun dmone per∣urgetur Sern. yet will say I am strong, a Satana impulsi & armati, saith Mercer here, as being pricked on, armed and agitated by the devill, that old manslayer: according to that of Bernard, Seest thou thy persccutor outragious, marvel not: but know, that the devil rides him, makes him run. Verse 11. Assemble your selves, and come all ye heathen] Come and fetch your bane, whereof, by your forwardnesse to come uncalled, ye may seem to be ambi∣tious: Judgments need not go to find you out: for you associate your selves that ye may be broken in peeces Isa. 8.9. as at Armageddon Rev. 16.16. Come on therefore, sith you will needes be so mad, and take what befalles you. Who would set the briars and thorncs against me in battel? I would go thorough them, I would burn them together, Esay 27.4. See Zech. 14.2, 3. (with the Notes) Ezech. 38.4,Gnushu pro chushu. 16, 17. &c. Rev. 19.17, 18. The word here Englished Assemble, is by Iarchi rendred Festinate Hasten: by others conglobamini cluster together, that ye may be the sooner cut off, that the mouth of Gods sword may have its full bit, that he may make an utter end, and your affliction may not rise up the second time. Nah. 19. thither cause thy mighty ones to come down] i. e. Vel Angelos vel alios saith Mer∣cer, either thine Angels (called Gods mighties Psal. 103.20. Esay. 10.34. Psal. 68.17. where these Mighty Ones are said to make Sion as dreadfull to all her enemies, as those Angels made Sinai at the delivery of the law) or other thine officers and executioners, that by thy command they may fall on, and destroy these Heathen-armies, see verse. 13. the answer to this prayer of the Prophet and the pow∣er of prayers which Luther fitly calleth bombardas & instrumenta bellica Christiano∣rum the great ordnance and warlike weapons of Christians. Vers. 12. Let the heathen be wakened] Here begins Gods answer to the Prophets prayer. The heathen, though at ease Zach. 1.11. and fast asleep, must be arrowsed and assembled to the valley of Jehosaphat, where God the righteous Judge (at the Prophets request reminding him of his promise, I am come for thy words saith He to
Daniel, chap. 11.12.) gets up to the Tribunall, and there sits to judge all the heathen round about. Let not us doubt of the like successe of our suites: but, when wronged, run to the Judg of heaven and earth who will do us right, so we pray over the promises, as here, and not faint, though he heare long with us. This, our Saviour hath taught us, by that famous parable of the unjust Judge and the im∣portunate widdow Luk. 18.2, 3. &c. wherein we may take notice of many ex∣cellent encouragements to pray down our enemies. 1. He was a Judge onely; but God is our Father also. 2. He was an unrighteous Judge: But, is there unrighte∣ousnesse with God. Rom. 9.14, 3. He, as he feared not God, so he cared not for man: but God is  properly and peculiarly loving to man above other creatures, Tit. 3.4.4. He avenged the widdow, as wearied out with her: and meerly to be rid of her: And shall not God do as much for us, out of his love to righteousnesse and hatred of wickednesse?Psal. 45.7. 5. It was troublesome to him to be sued unto: but God is displeased with us for nothing more, then for our back∣wardnesse and bashfulnesse, Ioh. 16.24. Quid est cur nihil petis? what meanest thou to ask me nothing? said Se verus to his favourite. 6. the unjust Judge had no care of his credit: but God is most tender of his glory; and delights much in that title of his, O thou that hearest prayers. Verse 13. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe] It even hangs for mowing, as we say: the enemies are ready ripe for ruine: down with them therefore that they may not shed in the field, and seed again: let this vally of decision be unto them a vally of excision: let it be as a wine-presse to those bunches and branches of the grapes lopt off the vine. Lacus iste locus coedis See Rev. 14.18, 19. Mat. 13.39. There is a stint set to mens sins Gen. 15.16. Zech. 5.8, 11. Mat. 23.32. with the Note there. What more beautifull to behold then a field afore harvest, then a vineyeard afore the vintage? and yet how sudden an alteration, when work∣men once take it in hand. for the wickednesse is great] Here is that plainely, that before was expressed para∣bolically. The scripture oft expounds it self in the same text: and is every where its own best Interpreter. Verse 14. Multitudes, Multitudes in the vally of decision] Or Concision, (as Hierom and Tremellius) or of threshing, as Piscator, in reference to Iehosaphat, who once threshed the Moabites and Ammonites there. These multitudes are thi∣ther summoned (Turbae, Turbae adeste) or are there lay'd dead, even heapes upon heapes, with those Philistines Judg. 15.16. So Aben-Ezra senseth it, and thence the name of the valley of Concision or decision: to shew that there God, having passed a definitive sentence upon the Churches enemies, and a very severe one too, such as was that kind of punishment, to put men under harrowes of iron &c. 2 Sam. 12.31. Am. 1.3. would now finish the work and cut it short in righteous∣nesse. Rom. 9.28. idque citò & certò, as sure and as soon, as if that day of slaughter were at next doore by. for the day of the Lord is neere] Lyra understands it of the last day, which cannot be far off. And Diodate was of the same mind. For upon the next words Verse 15. The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened] he sets this note, Signes which shall goe before the last judgement, Mat. 24.29. Luk. 21.25. See the Note above on chap. 2.13. The Prophets, by such formes of speech, use to decipher greatest calamities when all things look dark: as it fareth also with them that are under spiritual desertion Esay. 50.10. who yet are exhorted there to trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon their God: to cast the anchour of hope, as Paul and his company did in the shipwrack Act. 27.20. when they saw neither Sun nor moon for many dayes together, and no small tempest lay upon them: all hope that they should be saved, being taken away. Verse 16. The Lord also shall roare out of Zion] Out of his church he shall terrify his enemies as the Lion doth the rest of the creatures by his dreadfull roare: so that they are amazed thereat, and have no power to stirr from the place. Lyra inter∣preteth it of that terrible Discedite Goe ye cursed that shall be uttered by Christ at the last day. A sentence that breatheth out nothing better then fire and brimstone, stings and sorrowes, woe, and alass, torments without end, and past imagination.
and the heavens and the earth shall shake] The heavens with thunder, the earth with earth-quake, to the terror of the wicked, but comfort of the godly. Hag. 2.6. for the Lord will be the hope (or, harbour) of his people] they shall have a good bush on their backs in the greatest tempest: they shall not be afraid though the earth be removed, and though the mountaines be cast into the middest of the sea, Psal. 46.2. —fractus si illabatur orbis,Hora. Impavidos ferient ruinae O the force of a lively faith! and the privy armour of proof that beleevers have about their hearts! O the dignity and safety of Gods people in the worst of times, Hab. 3.18, 19. Happy art thou o Israel: who is like unto thee, O people! saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, the sword of thine excellency: and thine ene∣mies shall be found lyars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places Deut. 33.29. Verse 17. So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God] you shall experiement that, which, during your deep afflictions, ye made some doubt of: and were rea∣dy to say as Gideon did to the Angell, If the Lord be for us, why is it thus with us? or, as your unbeleeving forefathers in the wildernesse, Is God amongst us? as if that could not be, and they athirst. dwelling in Zion] Defending my people, and dispensing my best blessings to them. The Lord that made heaven and earth blesse thee out of Zion.Psal. 134.. The blessings that come out of Zion, are farr beyond those that otherwise come out of heaven and earth. then shall Ierusalem be holy] with a double holinesse, Imputed and Imparted: the profane being purged out here in part, but heareafter in all perfection. This our Saviour sweetly sets forth in those 2. parables of the tares, and of the draw-net. Mat. 13. Or, It shall be holy, that is deare to God, and under his care, favour and protection from the dominion, direption, and possession of profane Heathens. and there shall no strangers passe through her any more] either to subdue her and prejudice her (as the proverb runs of the great Turk, that wherever he sets his foot, no grasse growes any more, such havock he makes) or to fasten any filth or contagion upon her See Rev. 21.27. where St. Iohn alludeth to this text: as all along that book he borroweth the elegancies and flowers of the old Testament to set out the state of the New, in succeeding ages. If this promise be not so fully performed to us as we could wish, we must lay the blame upon our sins, whereby the Reformation is ensnarled, and our prosperity hindred. Behold, the Lords hand is not shortned that it cannot save: neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear. But your iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God: and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear Esay. 59.1, 2. Nothing intricates our actions more then sin: this is that devill in the ayre, that hinders our happinesse: this is that Make-bate Hell-hag, Trouble-town: charme this devill, and make him fall from his heaven (which is to do hurt) and we shall inherit the promises. The godly man only prospers. Psal. 1.3. Verse 18. The mountains shall drop down new wine] By these hyperbolicall ex∣pressions is promised plenty of all things pertayning to life and godlinesse; such a golden age, as the Poet describeth. Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris ibant, Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella.Ou Metam. Where it must be observed, that spirituall good things are promised under the no∣tion of temporall, as of Must, Milk, &c. Ob populi infantiam, by reason of the in∣fancy of that people of that time. The mountaines, i. e. the most barren places: shall drop down , without our labour, shall yeild plentifully, New wine strong consolations and Scripture-comforts for strong Christians. And the hills shall flow with milk, that unadulterated sincere milk of Gods word for his babes 1 Cor. 2.2. 1 Pet. 2.2.
And all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters,] Sanctuary-waters, wholesome doctrines, such as have a healing, cooling, quenching, quickning property in them, Esay 44, 3. and a fountain shall come forth,] viz. Baptisme, that laver of regene∣ration, Tit. 3.5. that fountain opened, Zach. 13.1. that pure river of water of life, clear as chrystal, that washeth away sin, Rev. 22.1. Acts 22.16. and shall water the the valley of Shittim.] That dry valley in the borders of Moab, neer to Jordan,Num. 25. Josh. 2. and not far from the dead Sea. Here it was that the Israelites defiled themselves with the daughters of Moab (as Jarchi noteth) but shall bee purified and sanctified with the washing of water, by the word, Ephes. 5.26. Tarnovius renders the Text, Qui irrigabit vallem cedrorum, which shall water the valley of cedars, those choisest trees planted in the paradise of God, Psal. 92.13. For (saith He) as the Tabernacle was built and garnished of old with Shittim-wood, for the most part, Exod. 25.5. & 26.15. & 27.1. & 30.1. so is the spirituall temple, with these spirituall cedars. Verse 19. Egypt shall be a desolation,] By Egypt and Edom, are meant all Christs adversaries, whether they be professed open enemies as were the Egyptians, or false brethren as the Edomites. Romists have been both, and shall therefore be desola∣ted, Rev. 17.16. with 11.8. For the violence against the children of Judah,] From the very cradle of the Church, Exod. 1. yea sooner: for Esau in the very womb justled his brother Jacob, and offered violence against him, that he might lose no time. because they have shed innocent blood in the land.] The Saints blood is called, innocent blood; 1. Because their sinnes are remitted. 2. Because they are cause∣lesly killed. And this is a land-desolating sinne. The innocent blood spilt by Ma∣nasseh, brought the captivity: the Marian times, our late troubles. The blood of the Martyrs, shed by Turk and Pope (whom the Jew-Doctors understand by Egypt and Edom here) shall be the ruine of them both. Verse 20. But Judah shall dwell for ever,] Perpetuitas Ecclesiae declaratur, saith Mercer: The perpetuity of the Church is declared, and assured. The blood of Mar∣tyrs is the seed of the Church. Christ is with his to the end of the world: and those Roman persecutours who sought to root out Christian Religion, and erected pillars in memory of what they had done, or rather attempted that way, what got they thereby but perpetuall ignominy, besides the irrepairable losse of their souls, bodies, and fortunes? Tu vero,Beza. Herodes sanguinolente, time. The Church as the Palm-tree, spreadeth and springeth up the more it is oppressed: as the bottle or bladder,Duris ut ilex tonsa bipenni∣bus. Horat. Cur. 4.4. Plin. l. 18. c. 16. that may be dipt, not drowned: as the oak that taketh heart to grace from the maims and wounds given it, and sprouts out thicker: as Fe∣nugreek, which the worse it is handled, the better it growes, as Pliny saith. No fowl is more preyed upon then the pigeon; no creature more killed up then sheep: yet are there more pigeons then birds of prey, more sheep then slaughter-men, &c. Verse 21.Optatus. For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed,] i. e. I will clear their consciences from dead works, from the stain and sting of all sinne, that they may not question their right to these precious promises; but boldly take the com∣fort of them: I will say unto them, Such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are justified, but ye are sanctified. Be of good cheer therefore, sith your sinnes, your bloody sinnes are forgiven you. Or thus, I will cleanse their blood, that is, I will declare that the blood of the godly which the world thought to have been justly spilt, was indeed innocent blood, and that they were slain without cause. This I will do, partly by rooting out and damning their enemies, and partly by clearing their innocencie, and crowning their constancy. Thus Mercer, Levely, &c. for the Lord dwelleth in Zion.] This is the last promise, but not the least. It re∣ferreth, saith Danaeus, to Christ taking our flesh; by the which he dwelt among us, being God manifest in the flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16. and Joh. 1.14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw the glory thereof, &c. This is reserved to the last place, as the causa & cumulus felicitatis: especially since he dwelleth with his Church for ever, as it is in the precedent verse, and maketh her a true Jehovah Shammah, as she is called, Ezech. 48.35.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the Prophesie of AMOS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE words of Amos,] Not of that Amos who was father to Isaiah, (as some Ancients, for want of He∣brew, mistook it) but a man of meaner rank:2 Cor. 11.6. rude in speech, but not in knowledge, tam sensuum nomine quam simplicitate verborum clarus, as Hierom saith of Didymus. The Jews firname him, , The Stammerer: as if he had been a man, not onely of a low, but of a letsome language; one that had an impediment in his speech,, Ʋt Michael Balbus. as Mark 7.32. and this they gather from his name Amos, which signifieth a burthen, as if this herds-man had had bovem in lingua, a clog upon his tongue: and could not utter himself freely. But let this passe for a Jewish tradition. True it is, that Amos is by interpretation a burden: and no lesse true, that the words of Amos are onerosa prophetia, the burthen of the word of the Lord to Israel by Him, (See the Note on Mal. 1.1.) who is a vehement Prophet laden with reproofs and threatnings,Comminationi∣bus ac repre∣hensionibus. Onustus. (as Luther saith of him) such as the land was not able to bear, said that Malecontent Amaziah, who had sel in aure, his gall in his ears, as they write of some crea∣tures. But truth must be spoken, however it be taken: neither may Gods Ministers meddle with toothlesse truths onely, (as Balac bid,Am. 7.10. Neither curse nor blesse at all) but bind heavy burdens, if need be, upon the shoulders of obstinate sinners, that may cripple their iron sinewes, and make them buckle under the sense of Gods un∣supportable displeasure. who was among the herdmen of Tekoah,] He was no Prophet, neither was hee a Prophets sonne; but an herdman and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit, chap. 7.14.1 Cor. 1.27. and extraordinarily called to this high office, by Him who chooseth the foelish things of the world to confound the wise: and the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty, who enabled the dumb Asse to forbid his Masters madnesse, 2 Pet. 2.16.
and sent this down-right Net-herd to deal with a bruitish people, worse then the Ox an Asse that have no understanding, Psal. 32. Esay 1.3. Job 10.4. and who had changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into a four-footed calf, and creep∣ing things, Rom. 1.23. Tekoah is said to be six miles from Bethlehem, twelve from Jerusalem,Kimchi in loc. & in cap. 3.10. seituate in the tribe of Judah, 2 Chron. 11.6. Quinquius that learned Hebrew, therefore is utterly out, in saying that Tekoah was a great townin the tribe of Asher. which he saw concerning Israel,] He not onely heard these words, but saw them in a vision: he had them by revelation from God. See the Note on, Hos. 1.1. concerning Israel,] Herodot. Or, against Israel, that is, the ten revolted tribes, who had many Prophets sent them, to foretell their captivity. God loves to foresignifie. In the dayes of Ʋzziah, &c. At the same time with Hosea, and Isaiah, and Micah, when Procas Sylvius was king of the Latines, and Sardanapalus of the Assyrians, as Hierom saith. and in the dayes of Ieroboam,] the second; not that funestum Iudaeis caput, that Jeroboam the sonne of Nebat,2 Kin. 14.20, 25. & 2 Chro. 26.6, 7, 8, &c. who caused Israel to sinne. Under the raign of these two kings Judah and Israel were in great prosperity: and, bewitcht there∣with, applauded themselves in their impiety, as Psal. 73.5.6. This Prophet therefore is sent to rouse them and rub them up, to tell them their own, and what they should trust to. Two years before the earthquake.] That notable earth-quake, famous and fresh in most mens memories. Whether it sell out just then when Ʋzzia attempted to offer incense, and was therefore smitten with leprosie, 2 King. 15.5. as some An∣cients affirme: or whether at that instant, when Esay in a vision saw the Lord in his glory, and the posts of the door mooved, Esay 6.4. as some Rabbins tell us, I have not to say. It seems to be foretold, chap. 3.5. and so terrible it was, that people fled from it, Zach. 14.5. See the Note there. Josephus maketh mention of it, in the ninth Book of his Antiquities, chap. 11. and telleth us, that half a great hill was removed by it out of its place, and carried four furlongs another way: so that the high-way was obstructed, and the kings gardens utterly marred. God, by such extraordinary works of his, shweth his justice and displeasure against sinne, Psal. 18.8. Esay 13.23. as also his special mercy to his praying people, as at An∣tioch, in the yeer 529, and at Bern Anno 1584; near unto which city a certain hill, carried violently beyond and over other hills, is reported by Polanus (who lived in those parts) to have covered a whole village that had 90 families in it; one half house onely excepted,Polan. syntag. 841. wherein the master of the family with his wife and children were earnestly calling upon God. Oh the terrour of the Lord! and oh the power of prayer! Verse 2. And he said, The Lord will roar,] This is spoken for the terrour of the wicked, as the like was Ioel 3.16. for the comfort of the godly. See the Note there. The word, as Moses, saves the Israelite, slayes the Egyptian; and is, as the fra∣grancy of precious ointment: of which Oecumenius tells us,Columbam ve∣getat, scarabae∣um necat. Oecum. that it refresheth the Dove, but killeth the Beetle. See 2 Cor. 2.16. with the Note. The Prophet here tells Idolatrous Israel to their teeth, that God will no longer deal fairly with them as a shepherd, but fiercely as a lion: he will not onely roar upon them, but rent the caul of their hearts: as the lion, together with his roar, layes his pawes upon the prey. And that ye may know that these are not bug-bear termes, devised on pur∣pose to affright silly people, and that I shoot not Fot-guns at you. the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, &c.] That is, all your bravery shall down: all your wealth and wordly greatnesse shall wither: the top of your Carmel, the Zenith of your prosperity shall be blasted, and the scene soon altered. All this the Prophet used to shepherdy,Navita de ventis, de tau∣ris narrat orator. Bucholcer. expresseth accordingly, Artis suae usus sermonibus (as it is naturall for all Artists to do) but with a great deal of life and boldnesse. Verbis vivis, animatis sententiis, & spiritus fervore flagrantissimus, as One saith of Savanarolas Meditations upon Psal. 51. Verse 3. For three transgressions of Damascus and for four,] For their seven, that is, severall sinnes, not a few: for their many and bony provocations, for their progresse in sinne, without mean, or measure. The Jews here note, that for three faults God will pardon a man, but let him beware of the fourth: God will not al∣wayes
serve man for a sinning-stock, but break off his abused patience, and proceed to punishment. Lo all these things worketh God twice and thrice with man, Iob 33.29. but let him not thereupon grow over-bold: lest he pay for his presumption. Sin iterated is greatly aggravated; as cyphers added increase the summe: and though it may sleep a long time, yet it is but as a sleeping-debt not called for of many yeers, required at length: as Sauls sinne in slaying the Gibeonites, was not punished till fourty yeers after: as Ioabs killing of Abner, slept all Davids dayes, &c. Now, lest Israel looking upon Syria yet flourishing, should promise themselves like impunity, they are here thus threatned. I will not turn away the punishment thereof,] but pay them home for the new and the old; yea, for the old by occasion of the new; for their obstinate and incu∣rable wickednesse, I will punish them seven times more, and seven times more, and seven to that, Lev. 26.24. &c. and so hang them up, as it were, in gibbers, for a warning to Israel, that they may wash their feet in the blood of these Heathens, and redeem their own sorrows. because they have threshed Gileaed,] i. e. the Gileadites whom they had taken captive, and thus cruelly intreated. See 2 King. 13.7. and 10.32. where it ap∣peareth, that all this was done, not without the Lord: which yet is no excuse to Hazaels cruelty. That Conquerours were wont to use this kinde of torment and punishment, see 2 Sam. 12.31. But that David should do so, is some wonder: hee was hardly recovered of his late foul fall: and thence haply, so much harshnesse. Certain it is, that the mercifull God abhorreth cruelty toward his creature; and se∣verely punisheth it: such as was this of Hazael toward Israel, foretold by Elisha, 2 King. 8.12. and afterwards of Ptolomie Lathurus King of Egypt, who slew 30000. Jews at once: and forced the rest to eat up their dead carcasses.Joseph. So that barbarous Duke of Alva, rosted some of his prisoners to death, starved others, and that even after quarter: saying, though he promised to give them their lives,Hist. of Ne∣therl. Grimst. he did not pro∣mise to finde them meat. Dio telleth us of the Jews that dwelt about Cyrene, in the dayes of Trajan; that they slaughtered a great sort of Romans and Greeks af∣ter a miserable manner; sawing them down the middle from the crown of the head, tearing their flesh with their teeth, smearing themselves with their blood,Eio in vit Trajan. and wearing their skins for coverings, &c. so that 200000 people perished there: and besides in Egypt, and Cyprus, 240000, by the like abhorrid cruelty, and about the same time, by the same hands. Beware of men, Mat. 10. Verse 4. But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael,] Sin doth as naturally draw judgements, to it, as the load-stone doth iron, or turpentine fire: and hainous sinnes, heaviest judgements, devouring plagues: Such as are the fire of warre, Psal. 78.63. pestilence, Lev. 10.3. forreigne enemies, Num. 21.28. Jer. 48.45. homebred conspiracies, Judg. 9.15, 20. besides the fire of hell, whereof all miseries here are but typical. Let men kisse the Son therefore, lest Gods anger be kindled: and get the spirit of judgement, and of burning, that they may dwell with everlast∣ing burnings. For even our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. Verse 5. I will break also the barre of Damascus,] i. e. their power and might, all strength defensive, or offensive, and so make way for the enemie into the city, give him a fair entrance without resistance. It is God that orders the battle, and renders mens attempts vain, or prosperous, Esay 54. ult. Jer. 50.9. whencesoever the sword comes, it is bathed in heaven, Esa. 34.5. and cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven.] Campus idoli, the plain, or valley of idols (so Mercer rendreth it) that is, of Syria given to idolatry; or Da∣mascus, a very Poneropolis, and therefore ripe for ruine. and him that holdeth the scepter,] A plain periphrasis of a king, (called oft by Homer, , Scepter-bearer) or of him that was to succeed in the kingdom. The French call him Dolphin, the Spaniards, Jnfant, &c. Our Henry the second,Daniel. crowned his eldest sonne Henry, while he was yet alive, and put the Scepter into his hand: which made his ambition quite turn off his obedience. from the house of Eden,] Or, of pleasure, the kings palace, a very paradise. God denieth not great men their lawfull pleasures, for refreshment, amidst their weighty businesses, &c. but yet they must remember St. Iames his charge against the Grandees of his time, Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth,Jam. 5.5. and been wanton: ye have nouri∣shed
your hearts. as in a day of slaughter, or of good cheer. And that of Abraham to Dives,Jam. 5.5. Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things &c. Luk. 16.25. which text Gregory the great could never read, but his heart aked with feare,. lest it should be his own case. It is well observed, that Philedoni Lovers of pleasures are set as last and worst of those wicked ones, 2 Tim. 3.4. Solomon is bla∣med for spending thirteen yeares in building his house, and planting those paradises about it, Eccle. 2.5. and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir] A place of Media,Strabo. l. 17. called by other Authors Cyrrha, or (as others think Cyrene in Egypt, or Afrrica. This was fulfilled 50. yeares after by Tiglath Pileser. saith the Lord] who spake the word and it was done Psal. 33.9. and 148.5. And what wonder, when his Fiat onely made the world, and he can as easily unmake it, if he please. Verse 6. For three transgressions] See the Note on ver. 3. of Gaza] One of the five chief cities or Satrapies of the Philistines; an ancient name,Lib. 1. de. situ erb. cap. 11. Gen. 10.19. Deut. 2.23. 1 Sam. 6.17. and not so first called by Cambyses, making it his Magazine, when he marched against Egypt, as Mela would per∣swade us. I will not turn away] Or I will not convert them, as some render it (so verse 2.9. &c.) i. e. non reducam ad misericordiam suam, I will shew them no mercy: but they shall have an evill, an only evill Ezek. 7.5. without mixture of mercy. This is punishment enough. because they carried away captive the whole captivity] This cruely God singleth out (as before) as a singular sin that shall be surely punished. Now that is called a whole or perfect deportation, when none escapeth; but all of all sorts, sexes, and sizes, are carried away, as by a sweeping raine, or universall deluge. Jer 13.19 Ju∣dab shall be carried away captive all of it: it shall be wholy carried away captive. Whether this were Judah or Israel that was so inhumanely dealt with by the Phi∣listines, we find not. Something like it we read 2 Chron. 21.16, 17. Ioel. 3.6. See the Note there. to deliver them up to Edom] Or to shut them up in Edom, their most inveterate dead∣ly enemy; to whom the Philistines delivered or sold them on this condition or bar∣gaine, that they should hold them there in perpetuall and irrevocable slavery. Verse 7. But I will send a fire] i. e. an enemy, saith Drusius, which, as a fire, shall consume all. This was fulfilled by Ʋzziah 2 Chron. 26.6. whence it was af∣terward called Gaza which is desart, Act. 8.26. which shall devour the palaces thereof] built likely in the blood of the poor afflict∣ed, and having sinne at the bottome, which blew up all at length, as the voyce from heaven said to Phocas,Cedren: hist. pag. 543. who likewise laid his foundation in blood. See the Note on verse 4. Verse 8. And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashed] These other foure Satra∣pies of the Philistines (Gath is not mentioned, because haply Time had now tri∣umphed over it, so that it lived by fame only) were the worse likely, and fared the worse for Gaza's ill neighbourhood: like as Hamath did for Damascus Zech. 9.2. and I will turn mine hand] Not in mercy as Zech. 13.7. but for further mis∣cief; I will have a double blow at Ekron, where Beelzebub the Grandiabolo is worshipped, Iterabo plagam: and when I have done with the rest, I will begin againe with Ekron; Acheronta movebo. and the remnant of the Philistines] This is dreadfull, but due to them, and just upon them for their savage dealing with Israel verse 6. This was fulfilled by Heze∣kiah conquering all that countrey 2 King. 18.8. See Iosephus lib. 9. cap. 13. Verse 9. For three transgressions of Tyrus] That crown of the sea Esay. 23.8. mediâ insuperabilis undâ, till Alexanders time, who joyned it to Continent, and afterwards ruined it. Charged it is here, as those before, 1. with incurable ob∣stinacy. 2. with extreame cruelty. because they delivered up the whole captivity] which either themselves had taken, or that had fled to them for refuge in some common calamity: but were betrayed by them into the hands of their bitterest enemies. See verse 6. and acknowledge
the truth of that divine proverb. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel: they help their clients no otherwise, then the wolfe in the fable helped the sheep of his cough, by sucking his blood. and have not remembred the brotherly covenant] that passed of old betwixt Da∣vid Solomon, and Hiram their king. Or rather, that between Jacob and Esau and their respective posterity, which the Tyrians should have promoted by labou∣ring a reconciliation betwixt these dissenting brethren: but they contrariwise blew up the coales, and rather stirred up more strife then stinted it. They called not to mind what unity and amity ought to be between people so neer allyed: and what good offices they should therefore have done for them. Protinus indigni fraternum rumpere foedus.Horat. Thou shalt not abhorr an Edomite, for he is thy brother. This is Gods argument to Israel Deut. 23.8. Should not the Tyrians have said the like to the Edomites, and so sought to have pacified them, rather then gratified them in their heredita∣ry hatred, and deadly feud &c. they put themselves amongst those worst of men, which, given over of God, though they know the law, how that they which com∣mit such things are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also take pleasure in those that do them Rom. 1. vlt. Verse 10. Therefore I will send a fire upon the walles of Tyrus] This was fulfilled shortly after in the warr that Salmanasar waged against the Tyrians, whereof see Joseph: lib. 9. chap. 14. Or in Nebuchadnezzars warr with them, whereof read Ezech. 29.18. Jer. 27.3. and 47.4. Joseph: cont. Appion. lib. 2. Or Alex∣anders, Curt: lib. 4. Justin. lib. 11. It is good for men to tremble at Gods judgments whiles they hang in the threatenings, as Josiah did: and not to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, as Ananias and Sapphira did Act. 5.9. by putting it to the proof, whether he will be dicti sui Dominus as good as his word. Verse 11. For three transgressions of Edom &c.] i. e. of the Edomites, the Rabbines understand the Romists those false-brethren the Popes blood-hounds. See the parallel made by D. Taylor in his sermon called the Romish Edomite. because he did pursue his brother with the sword] First when he drove him from house and home for fear of his life, which he threatened to take from him Gen. 27. and afterwards came against him (returning home-wards) with foure hundred cut∣throates at his heels Gen. 32.6, 8. to smite the mother with the children, ver. 11. Next in his posterity, those sworn swordmen of the devill: that denied Gods Isra∣el passage in the wildernesse, comming out against him with much people, and with a strong hand Num. 20.20. to his great discouragement Num. 21.4. And ever after, bote him an aking tooth, and waited him a shrewd turn; joyning with the enemy, and taking all advantages of mischief. See 2 Chron. 28.17. Psal. 137.7. Obad. 10.11. Malice is commonly hereditary, and runs in the blood. And (as we use to say of Runnet) the older it is, the stronger. and did cast off all pitty] Heb. corrupted his compassions, forgot his brotherhood, banished naturall affection out of his bosome, and put off all humanity. The Rab∣bines tell us, that out of the profanenesse of his Spirit Esau put away his circumcisi∣on, by drawing up againe the foreskin with a Chirurgeons instrument. Whether this were so or not, I have not to say: but that he corrupted his compassions (if any ever he had) violated the law of nature, and abolished the bowels of a bro∣ther, the brotherly covenant, this text assureth us; even all the affections, duties, and respects of blood and nature by which he was bound. His grandfather Abra∣ham could say to his nephew Lot, Let there be no difference between thee and me; for we are brethren, Gen. 13.8. This one consideration was retentive enough, cooler sufficient to his choler: it was even as the Angel that stayd his hand when the blow was comming, Gen. 22. It should have been so with Edom: good blood would not have belyed it self: But he had lost his brotherly bowels, and even put off manhood: he had wiped out all stirrings of good nature, as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down, as the scripture speaketh in another case:2 King. 21.13. or as when a man emptieth wine out of a cup, the sides are yet moist: but when it is rinsed and wiped, there remaines not the least tast or tincture.
and his anger did teare perpetually] i. e. He in his anger did teare, as a beast of prey,Psal. 14. and rage without intermission. The enemies of the Church do so still: such is their implacable hatred against God and his truth: they eat up Gods people as they eat bread, yea they tread down and teare in peeces, as if there were none to deli∣ver. At the Town of Barre in France, when it was taken by the Papists, all kind of cruelty was used, saith Mr. Fox: children were cut up, and the guts of some of them and hearts pulled out, which in rage they tare and gnawed with their teeth. The Italians likewise which served the king there did for hatred of religion break forth into such fury,Act. and Mon. fol. 1951. that they did rip up a living child, and took his liver being as yet red hot,Erasm. epist. lib. 16. ad ob∣trectator. and eat it as meat. Erasmus tells of an Augustine friar, who openly in the pulpit at Antwerp wished, that Luther were there, that he might bite out his throat with his teeh. And Friar Brusierd in a conference with Bilney brake out into these angry words: But that I beleeve and know that God and all his saints will take revengement everlasting on thee,Act. and Mon. 914. I would surely with these nailes of mine be thy death.Psal. 74.19. Gen. 49.7. Pray therefore with David, Deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove to these destroyers &c. Cursed be their anger, for it is fierce: and their wrath for it is cruel. and kept his wrath for ever] Though himself was mortal, yet his wrath, might seem to be immortal: as was Hanibals against the Romanes, and our Edward the first against the Scots: against whom being about to march, he adjured his son and Nobles,Dan. hist. fol. 201. that, that if he died in his journy into Scotland, they should carry his corpes with them about Scotland, and not suffer it to be enterred, till they had ab∣solutely subdued the countrey. Anger may rush into a wise mans bosome, but should not rest there.Aug. ep. 87. Eccle. 7.9. for it corrupteth the heart, as vineger doth the vessel wherein it long continueth; Of the Athenians it was said, that their anger was  everlasting; but that was but small to their condemnation. Thou shalt neither revenge nor remember ill turns Lev. 19.18. where servare is put for servare iram to keep,Ar. Rhetor. l. 9. c. 1. for to keep ones anger: to shew that there is nothing that a man is more ready to keep; as beeing a vindictive creature; Arestotle saith (but absurdly) that it is more manly to be revenged, then to be reconciled: and this the world calleth manhood: but indeed it is doghood rather. The manlier any man is, the milder and more mercifull, as David 2 Sam. 1.12. And Julius Caesar, when he had Pompey's head presented to him,. 1 Cor. 6.7. wept, and said, Non mihi placet vin∣dicta sed victoria, I seek not revenge but victory. And the Apostle purposely dis∣graceth revenge of injury by a word that signifieth disgrace, losse of victory, or im∣potency of mind. Thunder, haile, tempest, neither trouble nor hurt celestiall bodies: no more doth anger, great minds. Edom was short-spirited, soon kind∣led, and not easily appeased; his wrath kept no bounds, as the word here used importeth: his coales were coales of Juniper, fierce and long lasting: his fire not elementary, but culinary; nourished by low and unworthy considerations: a fruit of the flesh, and such as excludes out of heaven Gal. 5.20, 21. It was not the passi∣on, but the habit of hatred which St. James calleth the devill Jam. 4.7. and St. Paul counselleth men not to give place to that devill: and for that end, not to let the Sun go down upon their wrath Ephe. 6.26. See Ezech: 35.5. where Edom is charged with a perpetuall hatre, and therefore threatened with blood, and de∣solation, as here. Verse 12. But I will send a fire] A fierce enemy, ut supra. The inhabitants of Teman and Bozra, together with other the posterity of Esau, were famous for pow∣er and policy Obad. 8.9. Ier. 49.7. Esa. 34.6. But there is no wisdome, might nor counsell against the Lord Prov. 21.30, 31. He can make fooles and babies of the Churches enemies: he can fire out their malice &c. Verse 13. I will not turn away the punishment thereof] Or I will not turn and reduce him to my self by repentance, that I may shew him mercy, as Lam. 5.22. Ier. 31.18. but harden his heart, and hasten his destruction. because they have ript up the women with child] Immane facinus, & vicinis indig∣num, saith Mercer, A cruel fact, and the worse, because done by so neere neigh∣bours, and allyes; thus to kill two at one blow, and those also innocent and impo∣tent, and such as they ought to have spared by the law of nature, and of nations: and all this, meerely out of covetousnesse and ambition.
That they might enlarge their border] but first root out the little ones, that else might hereafter claime and recover their fathers possessions. So at the Sicilian vespers they ript up their own women that were with child by the French: that no French blood might remaine amongst them. See the Note on Hos. 13.16. and learn to detest covetousnesse, that root of all evill, 1 Tim. 6.10. Better converse with a Canibal, then with a truly covetous caytiffe: and more curtesie you may expect. Verse 14. But I will kindle a fire &c.] with mine own hands (not only send a fire, as before verse. 10.12.) as Charles 5. Emperour of Germany,Parei medul. 1. hist. prof. pag. 907. (when it was told him how that Farnesius the Popes Generall had ravished certain Ladies) brake out into these hot words: If I had the villaine here, I would kill him with mine own hands: neither was he ever heard to speak any thing with so great anger, in all his dayes. with shooting in the day of battle] Cum clangore, velululatu with noise of trum∣pets and souldiers, so terrible, haply, as that in the bloody fight betwixt the great Turk Amurath 3. and Lazarus Despot of Servia: where the noise was so great,Turk: hist. 300. that the wild beasts in the mountains stood astonied, and the birds fell to the earth amazed thereat. with a tempest] i. e. with incredible swiftnesse, and all on the sudden: and so the more terrible, because impetuous. Verse 15. And their king shall go into captivity] Where he may find as little fa∣vour as Zedekiab did with Nebuchadnezzar, Valerian with Sapores the Persian, Ba∣iazet with Tamerlan the Scythian: and not so much as Gilimer king of Vandals with Bellizarius, of whom he requested (and obtained) these three things, a loafe, a spunge, and an harp: a loafe to relieve him, a spunge to wipe his weeping eyes, and an harpe to cheer him up in his captivity. He and his Princes together] Lords and losels shall fare alike: the sword spares neither: And in hell Potentes potenter torquebuntur Mighty men shall be mightily tormented. CHAP. II. Verse 1. FOr three transgressions &c.] Or Malicious wickednesses with an high hand committed, and heaped up to that height. See chap. 1.3. because he burnt the bones of the king if Edom] A wicked man, but yet a man:. and God (who is a lover of mankind) shewes himself sensible of the injuries and indignities done but to his dead body: such an enemy he is to cruelty to his crea∣tures. That Mesa king of Moab bore a speciall edge against the king of Edom, sought to break thorough the army to him but could not, and afterwards sacrificed his son and heir whom he had taken in that sally made upon the king of Edoms quarters, we read 2 King. 3.26, 27. There are some that think that at another time, overcomming the Edomites, he dig'd up the bones of that king out of his se∣pulcher, he burnt them to lime, that is prorsus, perfectissimè & absolutissimè as some sense it, to ashes and cinders as Esay. 33.12. or (for greater revenge, and con∣tempt,)Targnm. be whitelimed the walles of his pallace therewith, as Gen. 11.3. Psal. 69.23. Esay. 22.21. Thus, in that horrid massacre of Paris, they cut of the Admi∣rall's head (whom before they had murthered) and presented it to the Q. mo∣ther;Speed. 1161. who, balming it, sent it for a present to the Pope, who thereupon caused the Massacre to be pictured in the Vatican hall: under one side is Colignij & soci∣orum caedes, On the other, Rex Colignij caedem probat.Il Mercuri Italico 92. The king himself (viz Charles 9.) beholding the bloody bodyes of those then massacred: and feeding his eye on so wofull a spectacle, breathed out this bloody speech Quam bonus est odor hostis mortui. How sweet is the smell of a slain enemy:Spec: belli sacri. another hel-hag said upon a like occasion, that she never beheld so goodly a peece of tapesstry, as the faces of those butchered Saints. This insulting over the dead is, that peece of cruelty which the church complaineth of Psal. 79.2. Cornelius a Lapide upon this text cryes out of it as an inhumane and shamefull thing both because the honour of
sepulture is the last dues of the dead; and also because this is to fight with dead carcasses., Justa de functorum. Yet this hath been practised by one Pope against another, and by ma∣ny of the Popes Champions here in England, who unburied and burnt the bodies of Paulus Phagius, Peter Martyrs wife, and many others: Cardinal Wolsey had a purpose (had he not been prevented by death) to have taken up King Henries body at Windsor,Act. & Mon. 1905. and to have burnt it. How much better Charles the fifth (yet no friend to the Reformation, but a prudent Prince) who entring Wittenberg as a Conquerour, and being importuned to dig up the dead bodies of Luther, and other Reformers, refused to violate their graves, and sent away Melancthon, Po∣meran, and some other eminent Preachers unhurt, not so much as once forbidding them to publish openly the doctrine that they professed?Act. & Mon. 1784. Cambyses heareth ill among all men for his digging up the dead body of Amasis King of Egypt, and causing it to be whipt and brickt; and Sylla for the like cruelty to C. Marius. Of all fowl we most hate and detest the Crowes;Herodot. lib. 3. Plin. l. 7. c. 50. and of all beasts, the Jackal's (a kinde of oxes in Barbarie) because the one digs up the graves, and devours the flesh, and the other picks out the eyes of the dead. Hinc moraliter disce, saith a Lapide, Learn hence also what a basenesse it is to tear and deface the good names of those that are dead: to fly-blow their names is worse then to burn their bones to lime. And yet among many other men of mark that might bee instanced, Melancthon mortuus tantùm non ut blasphemus in Deum cruci aigi∣tur, saith Zanchius: not Papists, but Lutherans laid blasphemy to his charge after his death, whom all Christendome worthily honoured for his learning and piety.Zanch. Miscell. Verse 2. But I will send a fire,] See Chap. 1.4. and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth,] A city so fair and large that it hath a plural name, which signifieth cities, by way of excellencie: as Athens was called the Greece of Greece;. Rome, the Epitome of the world, &c. and Moab shall die with tumult,] with all these together, on an huddle, as it were: they are here set down by an elegant Asyndeton, to set forth the sudden∣nesse and terrour of the judgement threatned. They shall be stormed, and have no quarter given them. Here Osiander noteth, that it is one of the many punish∣ments of sin, for a man not to die in his bed, but in battel. It was promised to Iosiah,2 Chro. 34.28 he should die in peace. True it is, he died in battel: but he died before that generall desolation that followed shortly after. (for indeed, with him died all the prosperity of that people) And besides, his weeping and humiliation had altered the very nature of the trouble, and made warre to be peace to him. Verse 3. And I will cut off the Iudge,] i. e. the king, who sometimes sits him∣self in Judgement,Acts & Mon. as K. Hen. 8. did here, at the condemnation of Lambert Mar∣tyr: as the King of Persia doth oft at this day.The Preachers Travels. 63. I have seen him (saith a travel∣ler) many times to alight from his horse, onely to do justice to a poor body. The Grand Signior himself sits one day in the week to receive the poors petitions, and punish the faulty Grandees about him. For as he stiles himself, Awlem Peawh, that is, the worlds refuge: so he would have the world to take notice, that such as lament unto him,The Grand Sign. Serag. pag. 148. shall be sure to have redresse and succour from him, although his Ministers fail them, or abuse them, through their injustice: Hence, few Visiers die in their beds. from the middest thereof.] i. e. of Kerioth, the chief city where the Court was kept, as Kimch saith, with a great deal of pomp and pride. We have heard of the pride of Moab. See Ier. 48.7, 11, 14, 18. Zeph. 2.8, 10. It was their nationall sin, and fore-runner of their fall. Verse 4.Ideò deteriores quia meliores esse debebant. Zach. 1.19. For three transgressions of Judah,] who were therefore worse then the above-mentioned Nations, because they ought to have been better. Beset they were with enemies round about, who dealt cruelly with them: and this should have made them to cleave more close to God: these hornes pushing and scattering them, should have pushed them home to him: but it proved otherwise. For Judah also is found to to be incorrigibly flagitious, guilty, as the former, of three transgressions and of four, &c. worse in them then in others, because in Judah was God known, and to them were committed the Oracles of God, whom they might hear eftsoons screeking out unto them, when they were putting forth their hands to wickednesse,
Oh do not this abominable thing. But they tanquam monstra marina, as One saith,Jer. 44.4. like so many Sea-Monsters passed by Gods words with a deaf ear. They despised the law of the Lord,] They would none of his counsell: they liked well to live in Gods good land, but not to live by Gods good lawes: like those in the Gospel, they rejected the counsel of God within themselves,Luk. 7.30. and that with scorne and disdain, as the word here used signifieth. See the Note on Hos. 6.6. and have not kept his commandements,] though holie, just, and good, though such, as if a man keep them, (be it but Evangelically, si faciat, etiasi non perficiat) he shall live in them, by a life of grace, as the flame lives in the oyle, or the creature by his food: Though in keeping thereof (how much more for keeping thereof?)Liv. 18.5. there is great reward, Psal. 19.11. and their lies caused them,] that is, their idols (as the Vulgar well rendreth it) and their will-worships: their new inventions, and good intentions, thereby to serve and please God. These are properly called lies: because contrary to the law of truth (whereto they are here opposed) and to Davids practise, who did the truth, 1 Ioh. 1.6. and could safely say, I hate and abhorre lying: but thy law do I love, Psal. 119.163. and ver. 104. Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way. after the which their fathers have walked.] So that they are a race of Rebels, a seed of evil-doers, and do fill up the measure of their fathers sins, till wrath come upon them to the utmost. This is no small aggravation, Ezek. 20.30. Are ye pol∣luted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after their abomi∣nations. See Acts 7.51. Must I bee provoked by you from one generation to another. Vers. 5. But I will send a fire upon Judah.] They shall also bear the punishment of their iniquities, yet is it not said as ver. 2. that Judah shall die with tumult, &c. God will make a difference in his dealings with his own and others, his sonnes and his slaves, these shall totally and finally be consumed at once, Nah. 1.9. not so the Saints. The remnant of the Philistins shall perish, Am. 1.8. But of Judah a rem∣nant shall be still reserved, for royall use, Isai. 11.11, 16. Ver. 6. For three transgressions of Israel, &c,] The ten Tribes come in last: lest they (with whom his main businesse lay, and to whom he will hence-forth apply himself) should conceit themselves priviledged, because for present prospered: lest they should read, or hear the menaces of Gods mouth, as men do the old stories of forrein wars, that nothing concern them. because they sold the righteous for silver,] Even Gods own pasture-sheep, that had golden-fleeces, precious souls: these they made sale of for a little money, which ever was, and still is a common medler; and drives the bargain, and businesse to an upshot. Money, saith One, is the worlds great Monarch, and bears most Ma∣stery: whence it is, that the Hebrew word Adarcon, used for money, 1 Chron. 29.7. Esay 8.27. comes of Adar, strong, or mighty, and Con, to prepare: to shew that a moneyed man is a mighty man, as this world goes. Unlesse we may say of money, as one doth wittily of Sardanapalus, the last of the Assyrian. Monarchs: Sardanapalus, saith He, had a terrible name. Sar noteth a Prince, Dan a Judge, Niphal an overthrower, or Conquerour: no otherwise appliable to him, but that his Luxury was the overthrow of both Soveraignty and Judgement. So is money mighty and well prepared, but it is to blind the eyes of the wise, and to pervert the matters of the righteous, Deut. 16.10. who because not so well underlaid as his ad∣versary, lies long languishing many times at Hopes hospital; as that lame man did at the pool of Bethesda, but might not be sped, because (for want, belike, of stir∣ring Angels) he could get none to put him into the Pool immediatly after the An∣gel had stirred it. That was a sad complaint made by the Prophet Habakkuk, chap. 1.4. Behold the law is slacked, and judgement doth never go forth: for the wicked doth circumvent the righteous, viz. by his bribery and basenesse, therefore wrong judgement proceedeth. A Judge is to retain the decency and gravity of the Law; yea of the Law-maker, with whom their is none iniquity, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts, 2 Chron. 19.7. Nec prece, nec precio, should be the Magistrates Motto: he should be above all price or sale. and the poor for a pair of shooes,] For a cup of wine, Joel 3.3. for handfulls of
barley, or peeces of bread, Ezek. 13.19. for a thing of nothing, so base they were grown at length: a very small deal of gain would win them over. See chap. 8.6. At first, a little matter would not hire them: it must bee silver, and a considerable summe too; as an harlot, that requires at first no small reward: but afterwards prostituteth her self light-cheap to all commers. Sinne seemeth modest and maiden∣ly at first: but meddle not, for it sooneth woadeth an impudency in mens foreheads, and debaucheth them. Vers. 7. That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor:] Covetous∣nesse is craving, and cruel: it rides without reins, as Balaam did after the wages of wickednesse; and cares not whose head it rides over, to compasse commodity. Yea it panteth after the dust of the earth, on the head of the poor, as desirous not onely to lay them in the dust,Anhelant. but to lay them a-bleeding, and a-dying there. They gape over the head (or life) of the poor, in the dust of the earth (so some read the words) as devising to destroy them. A poor mans lively hood is his life, Mar. 12. ult. Luke 8.43. for a poor man in his house is like a snail in a shell; crush that and you kill him. These cormorants earnestly desired, and indeavoured to bring dust upon poor mens heads (the garb of those that were in heavinesse, Iob 2.12. Ezech. 27.30. Lam. 2.20.) by their oppressions and injustice; yea to bring them down to the dust of death, to set them as farre under ground, as now they were above. Lo this they do as greedily, and as greatly desire, as serpents and other hot creatures covet the fresh air, to cool their scorched entrails. See Ier. 14.6. Job 5.5. and 7.2. It is said of Saul the persecutour, that he breathed out threatnings against the Church, Acts 9.1. as a tired Wolf, that wearied with worrying the flock, lieth panting for breath. So Bonner whipt the poor Martyrs, till he was breathlesse. Some Inter∣preters note out of Joseph Ben Gorion,Gorionides hist. c. 44. that there was an old custom, that those that were accused before the Judges, should be arrayed in black, and have their heads covered with dust. And hence they conceive the sence to be this. That pant, i. e. that earnestly desire that such poor men may be accused by the rich,Drusius. Mercer. of whom they may receive gifts to pervert judgement. And this they think to be confirmed by the following words. they turn aside (or pervent) the way of the meeke,] that is, the cause, businesse, judgement of the modest, and self-denying poor, the subject of rich mens injuries, (for most part) and unreasonable oppressions, Jam. 2.6. A crow will stand upon a sheeps back, pulling off wool from her side: she durst not do so to a wolf, or a mastiffe. Even reasonlesse creatures know whom they may bee bold with: so do wicked oppressours.Veterem feren∣do injuriam invitas novam. The meek by pocketting up one wrong, invite another. Ye have condemned and killed the just: and he doth not resist you, Jam. 5.6. Ye not one∣ly rob, but ravish the poor, that are faln into your nets, Psal. 10.9. ye do even whatsoever you please to them, as One Martyr said of John Baptist, that he was put to death,Acts and Mon. as if God had been nothing aware of him. and a man and his father will go in, &c.] by an horrible (if not incestuous) fil∣thinesse; such as Heathens by the light of nature condemned and execrated, 1 Cor. 5.1. The Indians abhor it; shewing themselves in respect of the incestuous Spani∣ards amongst them, as the Scythians in respect of the Grecians, whom they so far excelled in life, as they were short of them in learning. Am I a dog, said Abner to Isbbosheth, 2 Sam. 3. that is, so impudently and excessively lustfull as a dog is, so scalded in his own grease, Rom. 1.27. Some libidinous sensualists put off all manhood, become dogs, worse then dogs: following their harlots, stiled in Scripture, salt∣bitches, Deut. 23.18. such as having abandoned both the fear of God, and shame of the world, care not whom they admit, father, son, any one, every one. to profane my holy name.] As if I were Authour, or Fautour of such cruelties and villanies. This is to take Gods name in vain, Prov. 30.9. yea this is to blaspheme, 1 Tim. 1.20. by breaking down the banks of blasphemy, and causing the enemies of the truth to speak evil with open mouth, as they did in Davids dayes 2 Sam. 12.14. And in Pauls dayes, Rom. 2.24. And in Origens dayes, Nunc male audiunt castigan∣turque vulgo Christiani;De opisicio. Dei prooem. quòd vitia sub obtentu nominis Dei celent, &c. saith He, Christians and their religion heareth ill among Heathens, by reason of their im∣pious and impure lives, and their conversation not becoming the Gospel of Christ, Philip. 1.27. Of such carnall Gospellers it may be truly said, as Diogenes said to
Antipater (who being vitious wore a white cloke, the ensigne of innocency) that they do virtut is stragulam pudefacere put honesty to an open shame, bring contempt upon God and his wayes &c. Verse 8. And they lay themselves down upon clothes] i. e. table-carpets, or bed∣coverlets layd under those that sit at meat: whether on the ground, with their legs gathered under them (as the Turkish Bashawes do to this day, and the Trojans of old-stratoque super discumbitur ostro) or at beds or tables,Turk. hist. fol. 231. Virg. Enead. lib. 1. Horat. 1. Car. od. 27. Vide Lambin. ad loc & Lips. lib. 3. Antiq. lection. leaning on the left elbow Esth. 1.6. and 7, 8. Ioh. 13.28. Et cubito remanete presso. laid to pledge] These should have been restored and not detayned beyond the time prescribed Deut. 24.12, 13. Exod. 22.26, 27. by every altar] It was their fashion to feast in their Idol-temples 1. Cor. 8.10. and 10.21. See Horat. Oda. 37. lib. 1. And this in imitation, belike of Gods people, who were commanded to feast before the Lord, in the place that he should chuse to place his name in. See Deut. 14.23.26. 1 Sam. 1.3, 4. &c. And here Paucis verbis multiplex scelus arguit, saith Gualther, in few words he accuseth them of much wickednesse. and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God] A God they have of their own devising, a wodden God, and such as if he had but a paire of hornes clapt on his head, might make an excellent devill, (as the Major of Dan∣caster told the wise men of Cockram in Q. Maries dayes, that came to complaine of the Carver for making them an ugly Crucifix) Next they drink wine in the house of their God,Act. and Mon. besides their drink-offerings (which Davids soule hated Psal. 16.4.) they had their drunken compotations in their Idoll-temples,Heyl. Geog. 449. as now they say in the Isle of Sardinia after masse done, they fall to drinking and dancing in the middest of the Church: singing in the mean time songs too immodest for an Ale∣house. Lastly, they drink the wine of the condemned] or of such as they have fined or mulcted, for not comming along with them to the Idol-temples. Diodate rendreth it, the wine of the amercements, that is bought with such mony as they have unjustly amer∣ced and condemned the innocent in. There are that here understood that wine that was wont to be given to malefactors led to execution Prov. 31.6. to cheer them up: but these wretches drank it off from them. The former sense is the better. Verse 9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them] It is not usuall with God to hit men in the teeth with what he hath done for them Jam. 1.5. unlesse in case of unthankfulnesse, as here. Then indeed people shall hear of what they have had; and be taught the worth of good turns by the want of them. Good turns aggra∣vate unkindnesses: and our offences are not a little increased by our obligations. Hence this approbation; and it is as if God should say: This people hath not only done the evills afore-mentioned, but also after the receipt of mercies without mea∣sure and many miraculous deliverances; as if I had even hired them to be wicked: and as if that were to pass for truth which the snake in the fable said to the country man, that had shewed it kindness, Summum praemium pro summo beneficio est In∣gratitudo.Speed 622. ex Parisien. In the yeere 1245. the Pope was denied entrance into England: it being said that the Pope was but like a mouse in a fachell, or a snake in ones bo∣some, who did but ill repay their hostess for their lodging. God had done excee∣ding much for this perverse people: and this they now heare of with stomack enough, as well they deserved. At Athens, if a servant proved ungratefull, for his manumission, his master had an action  against him:Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 1, and might re∣cover him again into bondage. Lycurgus the Lacedemonian law-giver would not make a law against Ingratitude: as holding it monstrous not to requite a kindness, not to acknowledge a good turn. The old Romanes decreed that such as were found guilty of this fault, should be cast: alive to the Cormorant, to be pulled in peeces and devoured. Our Saviour fly yokes together the evill, and the unthankfull Luk. 6.35. and God here summs up all this peoples sins in this One, as the Epitome of all the rest. yet I destroyed the Amorite] when once his iniquity was full Gen. 15. when he had filled the land from corner to corner with his uncleannesse Ezrh. 9.11. then sent I my hornets before them, which drove them out before them. But not with
their sword nor with their bow. Iosh. 24.12. See this thankfully acknow∣ledged by this Church, after she had payed for her learning, Psal. 44.2, 3. with 9.10. whose height was like the height of the Cedars &c.] For stature and strength they seemed insuperable, Num. 13.28. &c. But God soon topt them and tamed them, he took them a link lower, and made them know themselves to bee but men. Psal. 9.20. or if trees, cedars, oakes (as Plato saith of man, that he is but arbor in∣versa) yet, I destroyed his fruit from above, and his root from beneath] I left him little enough to be proud of: lesse then Nebuchadnezzar, who had a stump left, and was reser∣ved for royall State againe Dan. 4.15. God cut off these Amorites, that is, all the seven nations, head and tayle, root and branch, old and young together Deut. 7.2. Iosh. 6.21. (Behold the severity of God,) as if he had forgotten that forepart of his back-parts Jehovah, Jehovah, gracious, mercifull &c. and had taken up that Emperours Motto, Fiat justitia, pereat mundus, Let Justice be done, though never so many be undone. Verse 10. Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt] which lies lower then Judaea: as doth also mysticall Egypt then Ierusalem, which is above, which is the mother of us all. To what great preferments and priviledges Gods people are now brought up by Christ, See Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. and cry out with that noble Athenian  from how great miseries to what great mercies are we ad∣vanced?Act. 26.18. Even from darknesse to light, from the power of Satan to God: that we may receive forgivenesse of sins and inheritance among the Saints &c. And shall we then againe break Gods commandements? Ezra, 9.14. Or say, We are delive∣red to do all these abominations Ier. 7.10. Would not the heaven sweat over us, and the earth cleave under us, yea hell gape for us upon such an entertainement of di∣vine bounty. and led you forty yeares through the wildernesse] led you all along in my hand as an horse in the wildernesse, that ye should not stumble Isay. 63.13. Led you, and fed you, dayly and daintily, sending you in Angels food, and then setting the flint abroach that you might not pine and perish in that vast howling wildernesse Deut. 32.10.. Besides that, I there bore with your evill manners, Act. 13.18. as a mo∣ther beares with her childs frowardness, or as an husband beares with his wives crossenesse, which he knowes he must either tollere, or tolerare, cure or cover. to possesse the land of the Amorite] to fit you for such a mercy, to humble you, to prove you, and to do you good at the latter end, Deut. 8.16. God knowes the height of our spirits, and the naughtinesse of our natures &c. how ill able mens braines are to beare a cup of prosperity: and how soon their hearts are lifted up with their estates, as a boat that riseth with the rising of the water. God there∣fore usually brings his people into the wildernesse, and there speaketh to their hearts: he holds them first to hard meate,Hos. 2.14. and then puts them into full possession. Verse 11. And I raised up your sons for Prophets] The Ministery is worthily instanced,. as a singular mercy Psal. 147.19, 20. Other nations had their Pro∣phets such as they were Tit. 1.12. Tragedians and Comedians were said  to labour in teaching the people, and were highly esteemed of the Athe∣nians: insomuch as that after their discomfit in Sicily, they were relieved out of the publike stock,Rous his Ar∣chaen. 90. . 2 Pet. 1.21. who could repeate somewhat of Euripides. But what were these to Israels Prophets, those holy men of God who spake as they were moved, acted, and as it were carried out of themselves by the holy Ghost, to say and to do what God would have them? yea those holy children, such as Samuel and Je∣remy (for of them especially the Rabbines understand this text) who devoted them∣selves to the work betimes, being more forwardly then either Athanasius the boy∣bishop, or Cornelius Mus, who (if we may beleeve Sixtus Senensis) was a Preach∣er at twelve yeare old: and such one an as with whome all Italy was in admiration. and of your young men for Nazarites] The Chalde hath it Doctours or Teachers; it being the office of these holy Votaries, to teach the people. Heathens also had a kind of Nazarites, as Lucian setteth forth in his Dea Syria (Habent & vespae fa∣vos, simiae imitatur homines) and the Turks at this day have their Dermislars,Turk. hist. fol. 473. and their Imailers, whom they call the religious brothers of love: Epicurus his hoggs
they might better tearme them, saith the Historian.Bellarm. lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 5. The Papists would prove their Monkes to be Christian Nazarites: but the abolishing of that order is decla∣red Act. 21.25. and Monks are so farr from the abstinence of the Nazarites, that they eat of the best, and drink of the sweetest that Sea and Land can afford. So farr also from the singular sanctimony of the Nazarites, whereof see Lam. 4.7. that the Poet sung truly of them, Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet Effraenis Monachus.— They may better professe themselves successors to the Scribes & Pharisees; who may seem (saith One) to have fled and hid themselves in the Monks and friers.Vitae sanctimo∣nia & voo singulari ab aliis Separati. Now the Pharisees pretended to succeed the ancient Nazarites, as their very name imports, but they were (as likewise the Popish Monks) a generation never instituted by God nor brought in by the Prophets, but only a humane invention, and through their own boldnesse: whence Chemnitius upon the tenth of Iohn takes theeves there to be the Pharisees. An Interpreter here sheweth, how God hath now made all his people Nazarites i. e. separated and sanctified unto himself by making them paterns of pie∣ty, as the Rechabites holy, harmelesse, undesiled of dead works, and evill works,Eph. 5.18 1 Thess. 5.22. Jude 23. from whom they are bid to stand off, 1 Tim. 6.5. as also not to be drunk with wine where∣in is excesse, but to be filled with the Spirit: abstaining from all appearance of evill, hating the garment spotted with the flesh &c. See the Notes on Numb. 6. Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel?] If it be not testified against me, as Mic 6.3. and if ye cannot, then read the sentence against your selves,Mat. 27.4. as Judas did, that ye may appear to be subverted and self-condemned Tit. 3.11. God lo∣veth to fetch witnesse from mens own consciences for the justifying his procee∣dings: and to convince them cleerly, that he is no way wanting to them, but they to themselves. A cunning carver can cut the similitude of any creature, but not on a rotten stick. What could god do more to his Vineyard then he had done (Es. 5. How oft would I have gathered thy children, as an hen her chick∣ens &c. Mat. 23.27. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Ier. 4.14. God is so farr from being guilty of Israels misery as that (besides other unde∣niable arguments of his love, as bringing them out of Egypt, destroying the Amo∣rite &c.) he had raised them up Prophets and Nazarites, given them his word, Sacraments, all good helps to mollify their hearts; and then appealeth to their consciences by this Rhetoricall interrogation, Is it not even thus? so to wring from them a confession of the truth, in spite of their teeth. Verse 12. But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink] Opponit jam Propheta pessi∣mam gratiam &c. saith Gualther. Here was the ill requitall they made the Lord for all his benefits; they corrupted his young Nazarites (as Buzzards snatch up yong lapwings) and silenced his Prophets, or enjoyned them at least to meddle with toothlesse truths only, to preach placentia: threatening them if they did otherwise (for so the Original importeth) that so they might sin without controule, and go to hell without hinderance. This God heavily here complaines of, as an horri∣ble Ingratitude. To render good for evill is divine, good for good is humane: evill for evill is brutish, but evill for good is divelish. Verse 13. Behold I am pressed under you &c.] A countrey comparison (such as this Prophet is full of) plaine but pithy; to shew how God is pressed and oppress∣ed with peoples sins, wearied as it were Esay. 43.24. and his patience even worn out; so that he can forbeare them no longer, Isay. 42.14. but like a travelling woman, that bites in her paine, as long as she is able, at length cryes out; so here, God hath much adoe to forbeare killing men in their sins: as he was ready to have a blow at Moses, when he met him in the Inne, and could hardly hold his hands; he even grones under the pressure as a cart seemes to do under an extraordinary loade laid on it, till it creake and crack againe: He seemes to screeke out to sin∣ners as Jer. 44.4. Oh doe not this abominable thing? And (when he cannot be heard) to sigh out, Ah sinfull nation, a people laden with iniquity &c. Esay. 1.4. as Fasciculus temporum Anno. 884. bitterly bewailing the iniquities of those times cries out, Heu, heu, Domine Deus &c. That ninth age is much complained of by
many Waters. God hath as much, nay more cause to complaine of ours, conside∣ring his paines with us and patience towards us, to so little purpose and profit. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. many Interpreters make these words not a complaint, but a communication; rendring it thus, I will presse or straighten your place as a cart full of sheaves presseth, sc. either the ground whereon it goeth, or the corn which it thresheth out of the husk Esa. 28.27, 28. or as the creature that lieth under the wheeles of it is crusht in pieces. It was a memorable saying of Mr. Bradford Mar∣tyr, He that will not tremble in threatening, shall be crusht in peeces in feeling. These perverse Israelites would not be warned by any threatening, therefore they were pressed to some purpose in that sore famine, and straight siege of Samaria. Obsidione vos premam saith the Chalde here,Samariana. I will so beleaguer your city, that there shall be no escaping. Look how a laden cart onustum sibi, so laden that ano∣ther sheaf can hardly be laid on, so sticks in straight places, that it can neither go forward nor backward: so will I bring you into those distresses, that you shall not know how to avoid or abide them.. (Confer Psal. 4.2. Prov. 4.12. 2 Cor. 4.8.) I will distresse my distressers: and presse with such piercing afflictions, as shall make you sigh and screech out another while, Oh it is an evil thing and a bitter to forsake the Lord &c. Jer. 2.19. Oh he is worse then mad, that would buy the sweetest sin, at so deare a rate. Verse 14. Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift] men are apt to blesse themselves when God curseth Deut. 29.19. and to bind upon impurity in a com∣mon calamity; to make faire weather when such a tempest is up, as shall never be blown over. Or, if worse come, then, as all creatures run to their refuges Prov. 30.25. Psal. 104.18. Prov. 18.11. Dan. 4.14.11. Judg. 9.50, 51. (the hun∣ted hare runns to the forme, to the bushes that she formerly haunted, but now those cannot save her) so men in misery bethink themselves of and betake them∣selves to creature-comforts, and refuges, either naturall or artificiall as here, but these all serve them as Absoloms mule did her master, hanging betwixt heaven and earth, but rejected of both. Let a man be as swift as Asahel, God can easily overtake him;Life of Edw. 6. by St. Ioh. Heyw. his sin will find him out, and he shall but in running from his de run to it: as the Historian speaketh of those Scots defeated by the English at Muscleburough fled, that they so strained themselves in running for their lives, that, they fell down breathlesse and dead. Surely as the coney that flies to the holes in the rocks doth easily avoyd the dogs that persue her: when the hare that trusts in the swiftnesse of her legs is at length overtaken and torne in peeces: So those that trust in God shall be secured: whereas those that confide in themselves or the creature, shall be surprized, and come to an ill end. David ran to God in distresse and was releeved. Saul goes to the witch, and from thence to the swords-point, Judas to the Pharisees, and thence to the halter. the strong shall not strengthen his force] but be made weake as water. None of the men of might have found their hands Psal. 76.5. their hands are palsied, their sinews crackt and cripled. It is God that both strengtheneth and weakneth the armes in the day of battle Ezek. 30.24. Verse 15. Neither shall he stand that handleth the bow] Arcitenens, though he can do it never so dexterously: yet if he trust in his bow Psal. 44 6. God will break it Ier. 49 35.Herodot. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 5. c. 26. or otherwise render it unusefull: as it befell the army of Se∣nacherib in Egypt, of Maximus against Theodosius, and the French in the battle between our Edward the third, and their king Philip: who being enraged with a defeat,Daniels hist. 237. resolved presently to revenge it: being elevated with an assured hope of triumphant victory. But it fell out otherwise: for there fell at the instant of the battle a piercing showre of raine which dissolved their strings, and made their bowes unusefull &c. neither shall he that rideth the horse] though it be as good an one, as Cain is fai∣ned by Dubertas to have mannaged, or as Alexanders Bucephalus, or Julius Cae∣sars great horse, serviceable, and full of terrour. A horse is so swift, that Iob saith he eateth up the ground: Pansan. and the Persians dedicated him to their God the Sun, as the swiftest creature to the swiftest power-divine. But as the sun in heaven can neither be out-run, nor stopt in his race: so neither by men nor meanes can God be frustrated, or his anger avoyded. the Canaanites had both horses and
charrets, the Israelites had neither: and yet they found an horse a vaine thing for victory &c. Psal. 33.17. and 147.10. Verse 16. And he that is couragious] Heb. strong of his heart, a Cucurdelion, as one of our kings was called, Egregie cordatus homo, one of a Roman resolution to vanquish, or die: they were wont to say of cowards in Rome, that there was no∣thing Romane in them. But let a man be as bold as Brutus, whom One pronounced, Romanorum ultimum, the last of the Romanes, as if after, Rome had brought forth no couragious man and worthy of her self. Let him be couragious among the mighty, such as were those Lion-like chieftaines among Davids worthies, Scan∣derbeg, Zisca, Huniades, who was in that unhappy battle at Varna (by a just hand of God upon him for joyning with that perjured Popish king Ladisaus) beaten out of the field. and forced to flee away naked in that day] escaped narrowly with his life: as he did also another time, when after a slaughter of 34000. Turks, he was compelled to save himself by flight: and all alone by uncouth wayes to travell three dayes and nights, without meat or drink: and afterwards being on foot and disarmed (which is here meant by naked: confer Esay. 20.3. Mich. 1.8. 1 Sam. 19.14.Turk. hist. 310. Mr. Clarks Life of Hunniad. pag. 98. he fell into the hands of two notable theeves, who despoiled him of his apparrel &c. and on the next day he light upon a shephard of whom he for Gods sake craved something to eat, and obtained bread and water and a few onions, as the Turkish history hath it. CHAP. III. Verse 1. HEare this word that the Lord hath spoken &c.] Here beginneth the se∣cond sermon tending to confirme what had been affirmed in the for∣mer, and evincing the equity of the judgements there threatened for their hate∣full ingratitude, and other horrible offences, condemned and cryed out upon by the very Heathens. heare this word] Verbum hoc decretorium this notable word; So Mat. 22.21. . there are three articles in the Originall: and there is not the least tittle in the text upon which there han∣geth not a mountaine of sense, say the Rabbies; this neck-verse. that the Lord hath spoken] And shall he not do it? who ever waxed fierce against God, and pros∣pered? Ioh. 9.4. against you O children of Israel] By his word, Christ many times secretly smites the earth Es. 11.4. that is, the consciences of carnall men glued to the earth: He sets a continuall edge upon the word, and consumes them by his rebukes, till he have wearied them with his secret buffets and terrours: and then in the end casts them into a reprobate sense, as he did the Pharisees, who were toties puncti & re∣puncti, minime tamen ad resipiscentiam compuncti. against the whole family] The Dodecaphylon, all the twelve tribes,Malcoln. in Act. Apost. the whole house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah Isay. 48.1. God stands not upon multitudes Psal. 9.17. nor matters, whether it be against a nation that he speaketh and acteth, or against a man only, Iob 34.29. which I brought up from the land of Egypt] This they oft heare of by way of ex∣probation, as chap. 2.10. God seeming to repent him for their detestable un∣thankfulnesse, as David did of the kindnesse he had shewed unworthy Nabal, in safegarding his substance 1 Sam. 25. and to complaine as Frederick the third Em∣perour of Germany did, that of those courtiers whom he had advanced,Valer. Max. Christian. Camd. Elis. he found scarce any that proved faithfull to him, but the worse for his courtesy: or as Q. Elisabeth, that in trust she had found treason. Verse 2. You only have I known] That is, owned and honoured, culled and called, chosen and accepted to be my people, when I had all the world afore me to chuse in Deut. 10.14, 15. and nothing to move me thereto but mine own meer grace, even the good pleasure of my will.. therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities] Not passing by the least without a sensible check: the least, I say, that is allowed and wallowed in: and that because
of the disloyalty and treachery that is therein. Other mens sinnes are rebellions against God: but the saints sins are treacheries, because against the covenant. Let such therefore look to themselves, and walk accurately, or they shall be sure to rue it.. Ephes. 5.15. God will be sure to plow his own ground, whatsoever becomes of the wast: and to weed his own garden, though the rest of the world should bee let alone to grow wild. His own he will not fail to punish. 1. In case of scandall, as David. 2. For sins unrepented of, though not scandalous. Oh the bloody wails that God hath left upon the backs of his own dear children for such sins! Bastards may scape scot-free: but sonnes shall pay for it. Ingentia benesicio, slagitia, supplicia. The punishing Angel is bidden begin at Gods Sanctuary,Magdeb. Praefat. ad Cent. 5. Ezek. 9. He will be san∣ctified in all that draw neer unto him, Levit. 10.3. Sanctified I say, either actively, or passively: either in the sincerity of mens conversation, or in the severity of their visitation: at which time, his Articles of enquiry will be very strict and criticall against his own professed people, who are therefore worse then others, (and shall therefore speed worse) because they ought to be better. Verse 3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed?] God permits his peo∣ple to walk together with him in an humble familiarity: but then they must take care that familiarity breed not contempt: and that they conceit not that hee will connive at their iniquities, or that their holy services will bear them out i any known sinne. He is just and jealous of his glory, wherein he should be no small loser, if he did wink at any besides involuntary sailings, and unavoydable infirmi∣ties; for which there is a pardon of course, if sued out. If I shall walk with you, saith God, as a father, friend, husband, you must agree with me, consent, and con∣form to me, idem velle, & idem nolle, will and nill the same that I do: or else I shall walk with you no otherwise then as a severe judge, or cruel enemy, Levit. 26.24. as a lion, with the prey that he hath taken, as the fowler with the bird hee hath caught, or the hunter with the wild beast he hath gotten into his snare. Verse 4. Will a lion roar in the forrest, when, &c.] It is said of the Lion, that he sets up a double roar:Put. lib. de indust. anima. first, when he descrieth his prey, next when he seizeth it, Then, saith Plutarch, he roareth, or rather belloweth like a bull, that other beasts may come to him, and take part with him. It is not for nothing that the lion ut∣tereth his voice: much lesse that Almighty God thundereth, and threatneth by his Prophets, your sins without repentance will be your ruine, according to those threat∣nings: though you are so sturdy, or at least so stupid, as to fear them no more, then Be∣hemoth doth the iron weapons,Jeb 40. which are esteemed by him as strawes, or bull-rushes. Shall the wrath of a King be as the roaring of a lion, Prov. 19.12. and as the messen∣gers of death, Prov. 16.14. and shall Gods menaces be slighted? will vile men imagine him a God of clouts? One that howsoever he speaketh heavie words, will not do as he saith? intends them no otherwise, then in terrorem, for fray-bugs? Surely they will finde it far otherwise: and it must be concluded, that being alrea∣dy sentenced, either their beds are very soft, or their hearts very hard, that can sleep securely in so deplorable a condition: Surely Gods predictions shall have their ac∣complishment, 1 Sam. 3.19. & 15.29. Beleeve them therefore: Stand in awe and sin not, sith he that despiseth the word, shall be destroyed: but hee that feareth the com∣mandement, shall be rewarded, Prov. 13.13. See the Note there. Will a youg lion cry out of his den?] q. d. Is it for nothing that God so terribly threatneth? Is there not a cause? as David said in another case, 1 Sam. 17.29. Surely, as in the Revelation we never read that heaven opened, but some great mat∣ter followed: so here; Hath the Lord spoken it, and shall he not do it? Never think it. Oh think of God as of one not to be thought of: as One, whose wisdom is his justice, whose justice is his power, whose power is his Truth, and all himself. He is the God of Amen, Psal. 31.6. faithfull, and true: he can as soon die as lie: neither can he be hindered or resisted, as Angels, men, and devils may. In the creature there is an essence, and a faculty, whereby they work: as in fire is the substance and the quality of heat. Now between these, God can separate, and so hinder their working; as in the Babylonish fire. In the Angels there is an essence, and an execu∣tive power: God comes between these oft, and hinders them from doing what they would. Not so in God; who is most simple, and entire, armed with power irre∣sistible to tame his rebels: Every morning doth he bring his judgement to light, he
faileth not: but the unjust knoweth no shame, Zeph. 3.5. the fool passeth on and is punished, Prov. 22.3. Verse 5. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, &c? Think you, that all things are carried here by blind fortune, and not by a particular providence, as if —mundo nullus inesset, Rector, & incert fluerent mortalia casu? Will you say of the evils you have suffered, in the language of Ashdod;1 Sam. 6.9. 1 Cor. 10. It is a chance? Is that Heathen-Idol Fortune any thing in the world, more then a blasphe∣mie, spued out by the devil against the divine providence? Can a sparrow fall to the ground, or any the least bird into a snare upon the earth, without your heaven∣ly Father, Matth. 10.29. Birds flying seeme to be at liberty; yet are guided by an over-ruling hand. They fall sometimes into a gin: and do not you thereupon conclude, that some fowlers hand is in it? Lo you are insnared, and insnarled by your enemies: and can you not discern that it is the Lord who hath done it? Lam. 3.37, 38. Act. 17.25, 28. Eccles. 9.12. For man knoweth not his time (nor his chance, ver. 11.) as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth sud∣denly (but providentially) upon them. Or shall one take up a snare from the earth, &c.] No wise fowler will take up his nets, till he have gotten his prey: No more will God withdraw his hand, or call off the enemy and the avenger, till he have his designe: till he hath either refor∣med or ruined you. Verse 6. Shall a trumpet be blowen,] sc. out of a watch-tower in time of war, to sound an alarme, and to say, Hannibal ad portas, the enemy is at hand, the Phi∣listines are upon you. and the people not be afraid,] or run together to make resistance?Jer. 5.22. Psal 114.7. Will ye not then tremble at my threats, saith the Lord? Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. Fear is an affection of the soul, shrink∣ing in it self from some imminent evil. God is the proper object of it, whence hee is called Fear in the abstract, Psal. 76.11. and those that come on his errand should bee received with reverence, yea with fear and trembling, as was Ti∣tus, 2 Cor. 7.15. and before him Samuel, by those Elders of Bethlehem, 1 Sam. 16.4. as suspecting it was the purpose of some judgement that brought him thi∣ther. Commest thou peaceably? said they. It is a good thing to stand in awe of Gods Messengers, and to tremble at his judgements, whilest they yet hang in the threatnings. It appeareth by this Prophet, that carnall security was grown epid emi∣call, and had over-spread the land, chap. 6.2, 3. Some there were that said, God had not sent the Prophets to denounce those evils, but that they had done it of their own heads, as we say. Others doubted of the certainty of those evils de∣nounced, chap. 6.3. against whom He here disputeth by these fore-going similitudes; and in the next words plainly asserteth the Divine providence, and the authority of the Prophets, Gods privy-Counsellours. Shall there be evil in a city,] Understand it of the evil of punishment. See Lam. 3.37. Esay 45.7 Mic. 1.12. Eccles. 7.14. 1 King. 9.9. and 21.29. See my Treatise called, Gods love-tokens, pag. 3, 4. &c. and the Lord hath not done it?] Although God doth it not but onely as it is bonum Justitiae, good in order to his glory. That which we are here advertised is, that it is not Luck and Fortune that doth tosse and tumble things here below: but that God sits at the stern, and steers the affairs of the world. The Gentiles in∣deed, held Fortune as a goddesse: representing her by a Woman sitting upon a Ball, as if the whole world were at her command; having with her a razor, as if she could at her pleasure cut off and end mans happinesse; bearing in her right hand the stern of a ship, as if she could turn about all things at her pleasure, and in her left hand the horn of abundance, as though all plenty came from her. This was abominable idolatry, to be shunned by Christians: yea the very name of Luck or Fortune, is to be spet out of their mouthes with utmost detestation. It repented Austin that ever he had used that wicked word, Fortuna.Aug. Retract.
Verse 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing,] i. e. Hardly any thing. He lo-veth to foresignifie, to warn before he wound: and this meerly out of his Philan∣thropie. Howbeit sometimes, and in some cases, he is more sudden and still in his revenges: that he may thereby, First maintain his honour and glory, the eyes whereof are by some sinnes extraordinarily provoked, as Acts 12.23. And second∣ly, to teach men not to continue in sinne, no not for a moment: sith they may bee presently cut off from all further time of repentance, acceptation, and grace for ever: This made Austin say, that he would not be an Atheist, no not one half hour, to gain all the world. See Luke 17.32. and 12.20. Pharaoh had warning of the first and second plagues, not so of the third: and again, of the fourth and fifth, but not of the sixth: and yet again, of the seventh and eight, but not of the ninth. And when neither warning, nor no-warning would do good, then came that sweeping plague; Tandem prototocos ultima plaga necat. But he revealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.] Gods Prophets then are his meniall servants: not his underlings, or inferiour hinds, but of noblest em∣ployment about him. Every faithfull Minister is servant to the king of heaven (Act. 27.23. whose I am, and whom I serve: this the Devil denied not, Act. 16.16, 17.) yea his Steward Embassadour, Herald (as here) by whom he proclaims warre, but first proffers pardon, and proposes conditions of peace. A practise usuall, not one∣ly among the people of God, by his appointment, Deut. 20.10. but also among the Heathens, as Histories informe us. The Romans had their Lex Facialis: by their Heralds they sent to such as had wronged them, Caduceum & Hastam, as Ensignes of peace and warre, that within thirty dayes they might take their choice: within which time, if they did them not right, the Herald presently denounced warre a∣gainst them, casting forth a dart in token thereof. Alexanders course was; when he sat down before a city, to set up a torch: to shew that if they would come in, and submit before that torch were burnt out, they should have hearing. Tamerlan hang'd out first a white flag, then a red, and lastly a black. And the Turks at this day,Turk. hist. 344. first make to their enemies some offer of peace; how unreasonable so∣ever it matters not. Gods offers in this kinde are all of grace, and for our good. If it were otherwise, what need he give warning? and why doth he not as Absa∣lom did; when, intending to murther Amnon, hee spake neither good nor evil to him? Well might the Lord say, Fury is not in me, O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy self. As I live, I desire not the death of a sinner, &c. If he did, why might he not rush suddenly upon such and confound them at once, as he did the reprobate An∣gels, even in the very act and first moment of their sinne? Why comes he first in a soft still voyce, when he might justly thunder-strike us? and why sendeth hee his Heralds to proclaime warre, but yet with articles of peace and reconciliation open in their hands?Chrysost. Why was He but six dayes in making the world, and yet se∣ven dayes in unmaking and destroying one city, Jericho? Was it not to shew that the Lord is mercifull and gracious, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse? And this he hath commanded his Prophets to make known,Psal. 103.8. that the goodnesse of God may lead men to repentance. As, if they turn his grace into wantonnesse, and per∣vert his patience to presumption,Rom. 2.4. their commission is to declaim against such pra∣ctises with all authority, Tit. 2.15. and to proclaim hell-fire, in case men amend not. Necessity is laid upon them so to do, and wo be to them if they preach not law as well as Gospel; that when they return up their commission, they may report the matter, saying, Behold we have done as thou hast commanded us, Ezek. 9.11. True it is, that perverse people question the Prophets, and quarrell them for this plain∣dealing: as Ahab did Eliah for a troubler of Israel, and Amaziah our Prophet A∣mos, for a trumpetter of rebellion. But this is as great folly, as if some fond peo∣ple should accuse the herald, or the trumpet as the cause of their warre: or as, if some ignorant pesant, when he seeth his fowls bathing in his pond, should cry out of them, as the causes of foul weather. Verse 8. The lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesie?] Who that knoweth the terrour of the Lord, can dare to do
otherwise, when he commandeth it? Shall men fear fire, water, bears, lions, &c. and not the great and terrible God? If he roar upon his servants, and say as to Jeremy he once did. Thou therefore, gird up the loynes of thy minde, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee; be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them: We must roar against mens sinnes, and bee instant,Jer. 1.17. though they roar against us for so doing, and threaten never so much. Micaiah will not budge for a Kings authority, when once he had seen the Lord in his Majestie; nor Paul for an Angels, Gal. 1. the rest of the Apostles for the Sanhedrims, Acts 4.19. & 5.25, &c. When the Emperour threatned Basil with imprisonment, banish∣ment, death, he answered; Let him threaten boyes with such fray-bugs: I am re∣solved: neither menaces nor flatteries shall silence me, or draw me to betray a good cause or conscience. If I deal not plainly and faithfully with your souls, said Ber∣nard,Bern. de tem∣pore. 99. Vobis erit damnosum, mihi periculosum. Timeo itaque damnum vestrum, timeo damnationem ineam si tacuero. i. e. it will be ill for you, and worse for mee. The truth is, you would be betrayed, and I should be damned, if I should hold my peace. Let me be accounted proud, pragmaticall, any thing,Luth. ep. ad Staple. rather then found guilty of sinfull silence, when the Lord calleth me to speak, saith Luther. These were men whose hearts were fraught with the reverentiall fear of God; and therefore found themselves necessitated to bee faithfull: besides the love of Christ constraineth them, 2 Cor. 5.14. so that they could do no lesse, they could not but speak, &c. Act. 4.19. Verse 9. Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, &c.] that is, in the courts of the Phi∣listin-princes, and of the Egyptian kings, who are here attested and invited, to judge betwixt God and his vineyard, to passe an impartiall sentence, and to say whether Israels sinnes deserved not all the judgements that God by his Prophets had denounced, yea and greater too. Holy Ezra acknowledgeth as much, chap. 9.13. But because that many were ready to say, as those in Jeremy,Jer. 2.35. Because I am in∣nocent, surely his anger shall turn from me: behold I will plead with thee, (saith the Lord) because thou sayest, I have not sinned. Yea thy sworn-enemies shall give true evidence against thee, and judge of the justice of my proceedings with thee, that I may be justified, and every mouth stopped. Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria,] that there-hence ye may be eye-witnesses, and have a full prospect of their leudnesse; which will be to you a pleasant spectacle; that out of their tragedies you may frame comedies. Samaria was a city set upon an hill: and as it self, so its wickednesse could not be hid. Carnall people are very inquisitive into the miscarriages of professours: and ready to search more narrowly thereinto then Laban did into Jacobs stuff. What a jear made Ammianus Marcellinus of the pride and luxury of some of the primitive Bishops? Averroes, of the Papists Breaden-god? the Turks, of the Papists Asinus palmaris? the Jews, of their clipping the crucifix, and weeping over it in the Pulpit? as also the swearing that is so common amongst Protestants; together with that mad con∣ceit of some, that he that cannot swear with a grace,Profectò aut hoc non est Evangelium: aut nos non sumus Evan∣gelici. wanteth his tropes and fi∣gures befitting a Gentleman? This and such like unchristian practises, made learn∣ed Lineker when he read Christs Sermon in the Mount, cry out; Certainly, either this is not Gospel, or we are but bad Gospellers: It is a lamentable thing, that it should be commonly reported that there be such abominations found in the Church as are hardly heard of among the Heathen, 1 Cor. 5.1. —pudet haec opprobria nobis, Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli. Why should it be told in Gath, or published in the palaces of Ashdod?2 Sam. 1.20. why should Egyptians condemn Israelites, as the Scythians once did the Greeks, and the heathen Indians now do the beastly Spaniards that tyrannize over them? Why should there be any successours to those Hereticks mentioned by Bellarmine, and called, Christianocategori, Accusers of Christians; because by their unchristian conversa∣tion they delivered up Christ and his people to bee buffetted,De Eccles. triumph. l. 2. c. 11. and spitted on by their enemies? See the Note on Hos. 7.16. This shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.
and behold the great tumults] Or the humming-noises, the garboiles, the violent irruptions upon the poor oppressed, causing them to cry out as those that are crushed or broken in peeces. and the oppressed in the middest thereof] whether by force or fraud oppressed: whether it were  or  The Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 Thes. 4.6. This the Heathen shall take speciall notice of, and say with Calocerius the Conful Verè magnus est Deus Christianorum, The Christians God is a righteous God indeed. Verse 10. For they know not to do right] They have done wrong so long together, against knowledge and conscience, that now they are given up to a reprobate sense, to an injudicious minde,. Rom. 1. having sinned away that light they had, and lost that little knowledge they had learned out of the law of Moses concerning good works: this they have wickedly blotted out of their own minds; as also those common noti∣ons of good and evill, that glimmering of divine light left in the naturall man; this in a defiled conscience is wholy extinct. Have the workers of iniquity no know∣ledge? No, not they, as appeares by what followes, they eat up my people as they eat bread Psal. 14.4. These Cannibals, like pickrels in a pond, or sherkes in the sea, devoure the poorer as they the lesser fishes. And though they cannot but know this to be evill, condemned by the light of nature, and much more of scripture, yet they do it, and will do it: their eyes being put out with the dust of covetousnesse, and their hearts so exercised therewith 2 Pet. 2.14. that they can say as that wretched fellow did, We are masters of our consciences, we can do what we will, for all them: and as Balaam resolved at length, to curse, whatever came of it. who store up violence and robbery in their palaces] Till the screech-owles of woe cry aloud from the wals, and the beames out of the timber make answer Hab. 2.11.12. till their cursed boards of evill-gotten goods witnesse against them, and eat their flesh as it were fire Jam. 5.3. till very Philistines and Egyptians cry shame on them, and say as the Indians did of the cruel Spaniards, that they carried them∣selves neither like Christians nor men, but like devils; that it had been better the Indies had been given to the devils of hell, then to them; and that if the Spani∣ards went to heaven when they were dead, they would never come there. Let no man think to thrive violentiâ & vastitate, by rapine and robery: to treasure up sin is to treasure up wrath Rom. 2.5. which, as a fire, will devoure their palaces, and it shall not be quenched, Ier. 17.27. Verse 11. Therefore thus saith the Lord] And he saith it in great hast and heat; as appeareth by that concise kind of expression that he here useth after the manner of those that are through-angry,Aposiopesis, ut Ques ego &c. and therefore say not much, but meane to do the more. an adversary round about the land] A distresser at every corner: that as all the borderers have beheld thy wickednesse, so shall they thy wretchednesse, by rea∣son of the enemy and the avenger, who shall meet thee at every turne: and leave thee neither hope of better, nor place of worse. and he shall bring down thy strength from thee] Thee in the feminine gender:At for Atta ex agna pertur∣batione. Chiskuni. haply because they should be so infeebled, and impoverished: Or else, to expresse the heat of Gods anger against them, as Num. 11.15. where meek Moses being in a great passion of anger and grief together, saith to God, If Thou (in the feminine) deale thus with me, kill me I pray thee, out of hand &c. he was so out of measure moved, that he could not fill up his speech, nor utter the last syllable. thy strength] Thy strong-holds, or thy riches, those treasures of wickednesse wherein thou trustest Prov. 10.2. and verse 15. The rich mans wealth is his strong city. It is called his strength because he confideth in it, 1 Tim. 6.17. and because he is enabled by it, to bring about his designes. and thy palaces shall be spoyled] They shall be blown up, because their foundati∣on was laid upon fire-works, their morter mixt with blood, their materials raked together by rapine and robbery, their furniture, and those ill-gotten goods therein hid and hoarded, shall be given hosti non haeredi, not to thine heire but to thine enemy for a booty. An inheritance may be hastily gotten at the beginning: but the end thereof shall not be blessed Prov. 20.21. As the partridge sitteth on egges
and hateth them not: so he that getteth riches and not by right, shall leave them in the middest of his daies and at his end be a foole Jer. 17.11. A poor foole God will make of him, ere he hath done with him, as he did of Balaam, Achan, Ahab, Gehezi, the rich man Luk. 12. and 16. Verse 12. As the Shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the Lion] by a countrey-comparison (as before oft) the Prophet sets forth the fewnesse of such as shall escape the enemies hands.1 Sam. 17.35. Is it but a little that a shepherd dare pull out of the jawes of a Lion. Few Davids or Lysimachusses, that dare look such fierce crea∣tures in the face. Something a shepheard in this case may adventure to do, that he may not be made to stand to the loss Exod. 22.13. Gen 31.39. But it is not much:quibus non est lectus integer, Tarnou. Kimchi. neither are they many, that shall make escape, and those few shall be of the poo∣rer sort too, that have scarce a corner of a bed to lye on: or such as are sick-abed and not cared for by the enemy, not counted worth the killing. Or such as are in good health, but glad to hide themselves for feare of the enemy under any bed or bench-hole, as is usuall in the sack of a city. and in Damascus in a couch] Or in the corner of a couch. Now Samaria and Damascus are joyned together; because they were both desolated about the same time, by the same enemy, and for the same cause, viz. their invading Judaea in an hostile manner 2 King. 16.7.9. Esay. 7.4. See the like Esay. 8.4. and 17.3. Verse 13. Heare ye and testisie &c.] ye my Prophets and all true beleevers. The Septuagint add ô ye Priests, whose lips were to preserve knowledge, and to pre∣sent it to the People. All that were thereunto commissionated by the Lord God the God of Hosts, are here straightly charged to heare and to charge, testify, or contest (See 2 Tim. 4.1.) and what they have received of the Lord to deliver the same to the whole house of Jacob: not stealing away the word from them Jer. 23.30. or shunning to declare unto them his whole counsell Act. 20.27. but faithfully handling the law Ier. 2.8. Verse 14. That in the day that I shall visit &c.] Tell them so from me, saith God: say to these wicked, Wo be unto them, it shall be ill with them Esay. 3.11. The jelous Lord of Hosts will surely visit the iniquity of Idolatrous fathers upon their children, to the third and fourth generation Exod. 20.5. See Ier. 3. Ezek. 16. Hos. 2. As they have their day of defection, so hath He of Visitation; his season, his harvest for judgment, Mat. 13.30. What then will they do when God riseth up: and when he visiteth, what will they answer him? Iob. 31.14. I will also visit the altars of Bethel] At first there was but one altar 1 King. 12.32, 33. and 13.2. but afterwards they multiplied, as in Peters at Rome, there are said to be now above an hundred altars Hos. 8.11. and 10.1. there is no end of will-worship: but, like the Ierusalem-Artichoke, plant it where you will, it over∣runs the ground and choakes the Heart. Now as God loved the gates of Zion where he was solemnly worshipped, more then all the dwellings of Jacob Psal. 87.2. and as the walls of good people (whose houses are little churches) are continuall be∣fore him, Esay. 49.16. So he heartily hateth places and monuments of Idolatry: and layeth them wast as he hath done our Abbeys and Monasteries Zisca over∣threw three hundred of them in Bohemia: and among the rest the famous Monaste∣ry called the Kings-Court, a mile from Prague:Zisca's life by Mr. Clark. in the walles whereof the whole Bible was most exquisitely written in letters of gold; but little read or regarded by those filthy Abbey-lubbers, of whom Luther testifieth that they were tam despe∣ratae malitiae &c. so desperately debauched that they durst adventure upon any vil∣lany whatsoever. and the hornes of the altar &c.] which were held the holier parts thereof. This was fulfilled by good Iosiah many yeares after 2 King. 23.15. 2 Chron. 34.4.6. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. Time can be no prejudice to Gods proceedings: nei∣ther is his forberance any quittance. Verse 15. And I will smite the winter-house with the summer-house] Heb. upon the summer-house, I will lay them both upon one heape: they shall one dash against the other. To have change of houses or of roomes in one house fit for the severall seasons is not unlawful, so we set them not up by wrong-dealing, nor set our
hearts upon them:Haec sunt quae nos invitos faciunt mori. for so we are apt to do (as Charles 5. Emp. told the Duke of Ve∣nice who had shewed him his stately palace) and this brings a curse. and the houses of Jvory] i. e. decked and enameled, checkered and entrayled with Jvory,Eboratas. Lively. as some sense it. Ahab had made him an Jvory house. Heb. an house of tooth, i. e. of Elephants-tooth: so did other kings (likely) after him. The Porphyro∣genity in Constantinople were borne in a room made of Porphyry, a precious stone &c. All must down together. CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. HEare this word ye kine of Bashan] Obesae & benè pastae, ye fat bawsons (as we use to call them) ye that are Baeotum in patria, crassoque sub a ëre natae. Ye that have hearts as fat as grease, and delight not in Gods law Psal. 119.70. Ye that cover your faces with fatnesse, Job. 15.27. till both your eyes stand out with it Psal. 73.7.8. (as fulnesse breeds forgetfullnesse Deut. 32.15. the fed hawk forsakes his master) as untamed heyfers full-fed, ye have been unruly and refracta∣ry, meanes of much mischief to my poor afflicted, as was Iezabel to Eliah, Hero∣dias to the Baptist, Eudoxia the Empresse to Chrysostom, Theodora to Bellisarius that brave and noble Captaine, and others; Poor Tegedine suffered many yeeres captivity in misery and irons, by the Turk, for one word in a sermon, which dista∣sted a proud and petulant woman without the least cause. What cruel persecutions raised the Q. Mother of Scotland about the beginning of the Reformation there? the Q. Mother of France Katherine de Medices, for thirty yeares together? Q. Mary here, being wholy possessed by the Bishops, as Alexandra was by the Phari∣sees, of whom Iosephus testifieth that she had the name, but they had all the power of the kingdome? Oh these kine of Bashan, these wanton and wicked women (for so I understand the text after the Jew-Doctours Vatablus, Lyra, Lively &c.) when once they get the reines in their hands, there is no hoe with them: when once the devill gets passage per costam ad cor (as Gregory speaketh) by the rib to the heart, what may he not effect? when the hen is suffered to crow, what hope is there of good? David complaines of strong buls of Bashan Psal. 22, 12. but those he might better deale with, then with these curst cowes of Bashan that thrust with side and shoulder, and pusht the diseased with their hornes, till they had scattered them abroad, Ezek. 34.21. that are in the mountaines of Samaria] Ladyes of the Court, accustomed to high titles, such as I (that am non aulâ sed caulâ natus & educatus, no courtier but carter rather, and used to call a spade a spade) care not to complement. which oppresse the poor, which crush the needy] As did, much about the same time, Iezabel in Israel, and Athaliah in Judah: and (besides the above-mentio∣ned) Dame Alice Piercy K. Edward the thirds concubine, an impudent woman; who so farr wrought upon the kings impotencies, and presumed on his favour, that she imprisoned Sr. Peter Lamare Speaker in Parliament,Daniel. 257. and intermedled in courts of Justice, and other offices; where shee her selfe would sit to effect her de∣sires: which though in all who are so exalted are ever excessive, yet in a woman, most immoderate: as having lesse of discretion and more of greedinesse. I have spoken before of Diana Valentina King Henry the second of France his mistresse,Hist. of Coun∣cell of Trent. 387. to whom he had given all the confiscations of goods made in the kingdome for cause of heresy, whereby many poor Protestants were oppressed, and needy crushed and quashed to peeces: for a poor man in his house is like a snaile in his shell: crush that, and you kill his heart. which say to their masters] Or, Lords, that is to their husbands: as Sarah called her husband Lord Gen. 18.12. She in obedience, but these in craft and counterfaisance: that they may the sooner subdue them, and have what they will of them.
Bring and let us drink.] q. d. Fac nobis potestatem in hos aut illos, saith Mercer: that is, Give us authority over such and such, that we may pick their bones, drink their tears, enrich and feast our selves of their spoils, make no more scruple to un∣do them by force or forgery, then to eat a meals-meat when hungry, or then the luxurious Italians (who have twenty distinct species of liquor,Il Mercuri Italico. to please the Gusto) do, to take off a cup of the most delicious, which they profanely call Lachrymae Christi. Verse 2. The Lord God hath sworn by his holinesse,] He hath sworn for more assurance, Heb. 6.16, 17, 18. it being hard to perswade secure sinners of the cer∣tainty and infallibility of the threatnings: which yet will as surely befall them without repentance, as the coat is on their back, or the heart in their bodies. And, by his holinesse, he hath sworn; that is, by himself, (as having none greater to swear by) confer Gen. 22.16. Jer. 51.14. Esay 45.23. and 62.8. where God swears by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Exod. 17.16. He is brought in laying his hand upon his throne; and swearing to root out Amalek. And so some in this place think, that by Gods Holinesse, is meant heaven,Mercer. the habitation of his holinesse, and of his glory. But Drusius dislikes that,Esay 63.15. because swearing by heaven is condemned by Christ, Mat. 5. If God be holinesse it self, let him be sanctified in righteousnesse, Esay 5.16. and let men swear (when called to it, and not till then; the Hebrew word here used is passive, and signifieth to be sworn,Neshbang. rather then to swear) in truth, in judgement, and in righteousnesse, Jer. 4.2. Behold the dayes come,] certò & citò, surely and suddenly: even those dismall dayes of blacknesse and darknesse, of greatest calamities. See chap. 5.18, 20. And let this prediction be to you as the knuckles of a mans hand, to write you your de∣stiny; or as a prophet to read it unto you. That he will take you away] i. e. Ye shall be taken away, and hurried into ano∣ther countrey: like as Esay 8.4. He shall take away the spoyl of Samaria, i. e. It shall be surely taken away, so Luke 12.20. They do reqire thy soul,. that is, it shall be required of thee. with hooks,] Heb. with thornes, which were wont to be used in fishing, till iron∣hooks were more frequent. See Job 40.21. Ezek. 29.4. and 19.4. They brought him with hooks, that is, with chains, nto the land of Egypt. Those that were over∣come, were wont to be linked and langold together; and so led captive by their Conquerours. and your posterity with fish-hooks.] Heb. that which is last of you; your children, and nephews, as Dan. 11.4. it is foretold of Alexander the Great, that none of his race shall succeed him, but strangers. See enemies compared to fishers, Jer. 16.16. Habak. 1.16. and note, that hereby is intimated, that these insolent Dames shall be no more like fat kine, that abide in their pastures: but as fishes hanging on the hook, that are easily pulled up, and quickly carried away with little labour, but much delight to the fisher. See a like comparison from swimming, (Esay 25.11.) the motion wherein is easie and not strong: to shew, that God can subdue his stoutest adversaries, with greatest facility. Verse 3: And ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow,] Quâ data porta ruitis, ye shall be glad to get out at any breach to save your lives, which now hang in suspence, Deut. 28.66. yea to ride one upon the back of another for hast, as kine do in a narrow strait. Or, ye shall be led into captivity, after the taking and disman'ling of your cities. See Ezek. 12.5, 12. And ye shall cast them into the palace.] Or, ye shall cast away the things of the palace. Ye shall cast them, that is, your children and nephews, (vers. 2.) into the palace: either that ye may not see their destruction, as Gen. 21.16. or that they might with greater celerity, provide for their own safety. That was a singular ex∣ample of the Vindelici (now called Suevians) subdued by Drusus the Roman Ge∣nerall under Augustus, but not without great resistance:Heyl. Geog. 289. the women throwing their young children at the Romans instead of darts. These were monstrous mothers, mad-cows indeed. Verse 4. Come to Bethel and transgresse,] Do so, if you think  good: and sith you are so set upon it, go on, despair, die and be damned: That that will perish, let it perish, quoniam vobis stat sententia, sith you are resolved, and there's no removing
of you, take your own course, at your own perill. Here then we have a most bit∣ter sarcasme, wherein God in seeming to command sin, sheweth his utmost dislike of it: for he is not a God that loveth wickednesse, neither shall evil dwell with him, Psal. 5.4. See the like Ironicall expressions, Jer. 7.21. Ezech. 20.39. Eccles. 11.9. Numb. 22.20. Esay 29.1. and 8.9. and 47.12. Judg. 10.14. 1 King. 18.27. At Gilgal multiply transgressions,] that your madnesse may appear to all men. See Hos. 4.15. with the Note.1 Tim. 4.15. and bring your sacrifices every morning,] Like Apes imitate the daily sacrifice: and do those self-same things to your idols, which I have commanded to be done to my self alone; and in other places, that should be done at Jerusalem onely. Do all this, and try what will come of it: will you try a fall with God? will you de∣spitefully spet in the face of heaven? Do ye provoke me to anger, saith the Lord? do ye not provoke your selves to the confusion of your own faces? Jer. 7.19. and your tithes after three years.] that so ye may seem to keep my Law exactly, Deut. 14.28. and to be wanting in no duty, either of piety, or charity. Waspes al∣so have their honey-combs: idolaters a form of devotion, Verse 5. And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven,] which I have flatly forbidden to be done, Lev. 2.11. Neither leaven nor honey (which hath a leave∣ning property in it) might be burnt in any offering made by fire: to shew how God hateth hypocrisie; which, as leaven, sowreth, swelleth, impureth, both us and our services. Out with it therefore, 1 Cor. 5.7. God indeed permitted his people to offer leavened bread with the peace-offerings, Lev. 7.13. ut offenderetur, Deum ferre nostram infirmitatem, saith Alsted, to shew that God beareth with our infir∣mities. But those leavened loaves were not to be burnt upon the altar: they were onely for food to be eaten. and proclaim and publish the free-offerings,] that you may not seem in any thing to come short of my most forward worshippers: nor to be without your holy convo∣cations solemnly proclaimed. Atque ita omnino in caepta idololatria strenuè pergite, and so shew your selves thorow-idolaters:Tarnou. as the Historian saith of our Rich. 3. that knowing it was no good policie to play the villain by half-deal, he resolved to suffer never a rub to lie in his way, that might hinder the true running of his bowles.Dan. Hist. 218. for this liketh you.] Heb. so ye love. Idolatry is marvellous pleasing to corrupt nature: as is to be seen in little ones delighting in babies. The whole world wonde∣red after the beast. The Papacie with its pomp and pleasure is an alluring, tempting, bewitching religion.Rev. 13.3. The great whore with her cup of fornications may easily boast,Aelian. hist. as that harlot in Aelian did, that she could soon get scholers from Socrates; not he from her. But what an odde or rather sad thing is it, that men should so like that which will be their bane? and that God should be put to complain, as here, and Jer. 5.31. My people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof? Polybius saith, that whereas man is counted the wisest of all creatures here below, to him he seemeth to be the foolishest: for other things love and seek their own preservation, Solus homo ab aevo ad aevum peccat ferè in ijsdem & punitur. Man onely persisteth in sin, and is punished, as if he were ambitious of destru∣ction. Verse 6. And I have also given you cleannesse of teeth,] so that you need not spend time in picking them, as those that are full-fed: for I have cut you short enough, and held you to hard allowance: as those that would tame wild creatures, keep them empty and waking: but you have been, and so continue, untamed and untractable, incorrigibly flagitious, uncapable of repentance. Your diseases are complicate, yea they are so ingrained, that they are not easily stirred, much lesse destroyed by any potion I have yet given you. In vain have I smitten your chil∣dren: they received no correction, Jer. 2.30 In all your cities,] One as well as other, lest you should say as those Philistines, It was a chance  and as the Rabbines tell us, that the idolatrous priests told Jerobo∣am,1 Sam. 6.9. that the drying up of his hand fell out meerely by accident. and want of bread in all your places,] Thus the Scripture oft interpreteth it self, and is ever its own best glosse. Some think that by want of bread here, is meant
dearth of corn; as by cleannesse of teeth, scarcity of flesh: and that by all your places, we are to understand, all your houses. This fell out in the times of Elias and Elisha, 1 King. 17. and 2 King. 6.21. and 8.1. and God would not have it to bee forgotten, but is justly angry that they remained so irreformable. That dearth in Elias his dayes, lasted above three yeers: and might (likely) be as ex∣treme, as that here in England, (about the yeer 700.) of three yeers continuance: and so violent it was, that not onely many died daily for hunger, but great num∣bers joyning hand in hand, fourty or fifty in a company,Godw. Catal. p. 465. threw themselves head∣long into the Sea. A like three-yeers famine also wee read to have been in Bohe∣mia and Polonia, Anno 1312. so great, that children devoured their parents, and parents their children: some fed upon the dead carcasses that hang'd in gibbets,Balth. Exner. Val. Max. 135 &c. Wolves also were so famished, that they fell upon all they met, and fed upon them. yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord.] Ye have lost the fruit of your afflictions, and all mine hammers hitherto have but beat cold iron.Perdidistis sructum afflicti∣onis. Aug. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed, the Founder melteth in vain, for the wicked are not plucke away, sc. from their wickednesse: his drosse is yet with him, his great scum still in him. Ezek. 24.6, 12, 13. it is woven into the very texture of his heart, and can∣not be separated. Reprobate silver shall men call him, because he returneth not to God that smiteth him, Jer. 6.29, 30. Esay 9.12, 13. Verse 7. And also I have with-holden the rain from you, &c.] And so have punish∣ed you with thirst and drought, as well as with dearth and famine: and because I have found you wells without the water of piety, 2 Pet. 2.17. therefore I have refused to rain upon you, as I threatned, Deut. 28.23, 24. En quia jam vobis sunt ferrea pectora,Bill. Anthol. lib. 2. reddit Coelum etiam vobis durius aere, Deus. When there were yet three moneths, &c.] When you could worst of all want it (see Joel 2.23. with the Note) for the watering of the seed, and opening of the earth. And I caused it to rain upon one city,] It rains not then by hap-hazard: neither are the seasons of the yeer (whether barren or fruitfull) ruled by the course of na∣ture, or influence of the stars, but by God, Act. 14.17. It is he that giveth rain from heaven, and fruitfull seasons. He covereth the heaven with clouds, he pre∣pareth rain for the earth, he maketh grasse to grow upon the mountains, and stan∣ding corn in the fields, Psal. 147.8. He weighes these waters by measure: so that not a drop falls in vain, or in a wrong place; but by Divine decree, Job 28.26. for the fatning of the earth, allaying the heat, nourishing the herb and tree, Deut. 32.2. Esay 44, 14. producing unto us the appointed weeks of harvest, Jer. 5.24. that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater, Esay 55.10. This the poor Pagans ascribed to their god Jupiter, whom they therefore stiled . Him they confessed the greatest of all, calling him : the Overseer of their trading, hence : the keeper of their houses, hence Jupiter Herceus, &c.Of , a wall, or hedge. this they did to the great shame of many Atheists amongst us, who hold that all things come either by benigne nature, or blinde adventure. One peece,] sc. of the same field, was rained upon, and fructified (this was neer to a miracle; as when Gideons fleece was wet and no place else: and again, every place else, and not Gideons fleece, Judg. 6.37.) and the peece whereupon it rained not] It, that is, the cloud, but by Gods appointment: for He it is that filleth those bottles of the skie, and emptieth them again, where and when he pleaseth, either in mercy, as Joel 2.23. Zach. 10.1. Lev. 26.4. or for a judgement, as Joel 1.17. Gen. 17.11, 12. 1 Sam. 12.18, 19. In the yeer of grace 1551. a great multi∣tude of men and cattle in Germany were drowned and destroyed; decidentibus su∣bitò nubibus, ac effusis certatim aquis, saith Bartholinus; by excessive showres and immoderate waters, pouring down upon people as by spoutes. This was the very finger of God, who will one day rain upon the wicked, snares, fire, and brimstone,Barthol. lib. 2. de Meteor. c. 2. Psal. 11.6. and an horrible tempest. Heb. a burning tempest: like as now out of those very clouds where-hence he raineth, he doth oftsoons scatter sudden fires unto all parts
of the earth, astonishing the world with the fearfull noyse of that eruption. withered] It must needs do so: and so must Gods own Vineyard the Church, when he shall command the clouds that they raine no raine upon it, Esay. 5.6. that is, his ministers, that they drop no doctrine upon it, Deut. 32.2. Ezek. 21.2. Am. 7.16. fitly resembled to raine in regard 1. of cooling heat, 2. quenching thirst, 3. clensing the ayre, 4. allaying the windes, 5. mollifying and mellowing the parched and heat-hardened earth, 6. causing all things to grow and fructify. This raine of righteousnesse goes sometimes by coasts, as here: God tying up the tongues of his faithfullest labourers, and witholding their showres, though they be clouds thick, and full, and likely enough to drop down in abundance. See Ezek. 3.26, 27. Hos. 9.7. Prov. 16.1. Pray therefore, oh pray earnestly, both ministers, for ability and liberty to drop their word toward the holy places, and prophesie. Ezek. 21.2. and People, that he would fill their ministers as full of good matter as ever Elihu was Iob. 32.18. and then be with their mouths Exod. 4.12. yea stretch out his holy hand, and touch them Ier. 1.9. performing that peece of midwifery Prov. 16.1. that they may freely utter their conceptions, and come to their hearts in the fulnesse of the blessing of the Gospel of peace Rom 15.29. In the Island of St. Thomas on the back-side of Africa in the middest of it, is an hill: and over that,Abbots Geog: 251. a continuall cloud wherewith the whole Island is watered. This is our happy∣nesse for present. Oh that we knew but this gift of God, and were answerably thankfull and fruitfull:Joh. 4. Oh how cursed a generation are those that repine at it saying, Never was merry world, since so much preaching &c. How shall such miscreants one day wish to have but one drop fall from these full clouds to coole the heat and horrours of their consciences, but shall not obtaine it. Verse 8. So two or three cities wandred] Necessity is an hard weapon: and want of water will make men wander far, and part with any thing for it: as Lysimachus did with his kingdome, sacrificing his estate to the service of his life. Oh that we were as solicitous for our soules &c. Those good soules Psal. 84.7. went from strength to strength, travelled many a mile, to see Gods face though but in that dark glasse of the ceremonies. The good Sunamite went every sabbath and new-moon to the Prophet. Our forefathers were unweariable in making out after the meanes, which we vilipend, and make no reckoning of &c. to drink water] raine-water: for in those countries (as Hierome testifieth who lived there many yeares, and therefore knew the scituation and nature thereof) they have but few springs,Mercer in verse 7. and no considerable rivers, but only lordan: and are therefore glad to keep raine-water in cisterns for all uses: being much afflicted with thirst and drought, if it raine not. but they were not satisfied] either because there was not enough to be had: or by a singular curse of unsatisfiablenesse, See Hag. 1.6. with the Note. yet have ye not returned unto me] usque ad me, so far as me. You have made some faint overtures and essayes of returning, but they have not reacht out unto me: they have not amounted to the full measure of a sound conversion. Plectimur, may you well say,Salvian. nec tamen flectimur: corripimur, sed non corrigimur &c. God rained not upon us that we might return unto him, and learn righteousnesse Esay. 26.10. that we might powre out a prayer when his chastening was upon us verse. 16.18. But we, alasse, have done nothing lesse: we have turned every one to his own way: and done what in us lies to defeat God and undo our selves by our incorrigiblenesse and uncureablenesse. Verse 9. I have smitten you with blasting and mildews &c.] This, by immoderate raine: that, by drought caused by an East-wind, that ventus vrens & exsiccans. God cannot possibly want a weapon to tame a rebell. when your gardens and your vineyards increased] Or were trimmed and tricked up. Taxat nimium eorum studium saith Mercer. The Prophet here taxeth their over∣much paines taken, and cost cast away in multiplying and dressing their hort-yards, and Vineyards: when in the meane while, they neglected the sincere service of God: and suffered their own hearts to lie like the sluggards field, that was all grown over with thornes and briars, Prov. 24.31. that is, with lusts and sins, under which lurketh that old serpent. the palmer-worme] which is worse then the locust, as Hierom noteth: for the
locust feeds only on the tops of the eares of corne as he flies (and thence hath his name in Greek) but palmer-wormes stick close to the fruits or flowers they light on:. and will not off, till all be consumed. It is the last and worst of evils, saith He: and leaves nothing behind it: omnia corradit & converrit, makes cleane work. See Ioel. 1.3, 10, 11, 12. &c. with the Notes. yet have ye not returned unto me] No not yet: but have rejected the remedy of your recovery: see verse 8. Verse 10. I have sent among you the pestilence] that evill angell Psal. 78.49. that  eminent hand of God, as Hippocrates calleth it: that destruction that walketh in darknesse, and wasteth at noon day, as the Psalmist stileth it.In prognost. Psal. 91.6. This God sent: for it is a messenger of his sending, an arrow of his shooting 2 Sam. 24.15. and may better be called morbus sacer, then the falling sicknesse; as being an ex∣traordinary hand of God, such as was that Sudor Anglicus in the dayes of Edward the sixth,Sennert. de febrib. l. 4. c. 15. the sweating sicknesse that raged very violently for forty yeares together here in England (as Sennertus testifieth) and slew so many, that strangers won∣dred how this Island could be so populous as to beare and bury such incredible mul∣titudes. No stranger in England was touched with this disease: and yet the English were chased therewith, not only here but in other countries abroad:Life of Ed. & by Sr. Io. Heyw. pag. 126. which made them like tyrants both feared and avoyded, where ever they came. So long as the ferventnesse of this plague lasted, there was crying Peccavi Peccavi: and some pretences of turning to the Lord. The Ministers were sought for in every corner (saith Mr. Bradford) oh you must come to my Lord, you must come to my Lady &c. Thus, when he slew them, then they sought him:Psal. 78.34.36. and they returned and enquired earely after God: Neverthelesse they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues. As the fox, when taken in a snare, lookes pitti∣fully; but 'tis only that he may get out: as Ice melts in the day and hardeneth againe in the night; or as Iron is very soft and malleable whiles in the fire, but soon after returneth to its former hardnesse. after the manner of Egypt] In the way to Egypt (so some reade it) as you were trudging down to Egypt for help against enemies, or for corn in time of famine (for Egypt was the worlds granary) I have stretcht my net over you: Egypt hath gathered you up, Memphis hath buried you, Hos. 9.6. But taking the words as we translate them, After the manner of Egypt, i. e. so as I plagued the Egyptians, when you were amongst them (See Exod. 12.29.)Exod. 9.15. with mortality of men and murraine of cattel. The plague of Athens is graphically described by Thucydides:Lib. 2. bell. Pelopon. Metam. l. 7. Georg. l. 3. whence Ovid and Virgil are thought to have borrowed their descriptions of the pestilence. The plague of Italy is set forth in lively colours by Dionys: Halycarnass: lib. 11. Antiq. That of Constantinople, by Nicephorus and Sigebertus. your young men have I slaine with the sword] Juvenes à juvando saith Varro: because they are able and apt by armes to defend the commonwealth, and to help it at a dead lift. In Hebrew they have their name à delectu: because they are cho∣sen to fight and do businesse, as fittest for the purpose Exod. 17.9. 2 Sam. 6.1. These God had slaine with the sword which cutteth its way thorough a wood of men, and heweth down the youngest and strongest; spareth neither Lord nor loscll, as they say: is dispatched with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood Esay. 9.5. and I have made the stink of your campes] by meanes of the slaine, both men and horses that lye unburied, and poyson the ayre; See Ioel. 2.20. Esay 34.3. and yet have ye not returned] Nec sic tamen: Vide contumaciam, saith Mercer here. Obstinate men will sooner break, then bend. Monoceros interimi potest, non capi. Verse 11. I have overthrown some of you] Some and not all: thus, in the midst of judgement he remembred mercy, he did not stir up all his wrath Psal. 78.38. he let fall some drops, but would not shed the whole showre of it: for he remem∣bred that they were but flesh &c. Some he hang'd up in gibbets, as it were, for ex∣ample to the rest: as St. Jude saith he dealt by Sodome and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, thrown forth for an instance of divine vengeance to all succeeding ages Jude. 7. and as Herodotus telleth us,, that the sparkles and ashes of burnt Troy
served for a lasting monument of Gods great displeasure against great sinners. See the like threatened to Babylon Esay 13.19.20. as God overthrew Sodom] As Jehovah from Jehovah rained hell out of heaven upon them Gen. 14.24.De praepar. Evang. l. 5. c 23. Vide Socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 30. that is, God the Son from God the Father: and so Eusbius observeth that the Father here saith of the Son, that he overthrew Sodome and Gomorrah: he condemned them with an overthrow 2 Pet. 2.6. he overthrew them and repented not Jer. 20.16 he overthrew them in a moment, and no hand stayed on them Lam. 4.6. And yet worse shall be the condition of those that despise the grace of the Gospell, which is the great sin of these last times Mat. 11.24. yea the devils will keep holy-day as it were, in hell, in respect of such sinners against their own soules. and ye were as a sire brand] Ambustus & fumigans titio smutchy and smoaky, and scarcely escaping with the skin of your teeth Iob. 19.20. as Lot out of Sodom, as the man of Benjamine out of the army 1 Sam. 2.12. as the young man that fled naked away at Christs attachment Mar. 14.52. or as Hunniades narrowly esca∣ping with his life from the battel of Varna; where he had like to have fallen with that perjured Popish king, as good Jehosaphat had for joyning with Ahab. It is as if God should say: There are not many of you that are left, and have your lives for a prey: howbeit they are ill bestowed upon you, for any good use you have made of my forbearance. Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learne righteousnesse, Esay. 26.10. and if thou deliver him once, yet thou must do it againe: and when all's done that can be done. A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment Prov. 19.19. and so (to be sure of it) shall a man of great sto∣mach and stubbornnesse, that refuseth to return as these of whom the fifth time it is here complained. and yet ye have not returned &c.] O prorsus obstinati! saith Tarnovius here:Act. 7.51. Prorsus indurati et contumaces, saith Mercer. Ye stifnecked and uncircumcised in heart and eares, do ye thus alwayes resist the holy Ghost: will ye needs be like horse and mule uncounsellable, untractable? will ye, after conviction, needes run away with the bit in your mouths and take your swinge in sin &c. If so resolved, yet stay saith the Psalmist,Psal. 32.9.10. and take this along with you, Many sorrowes shall be to the wicked: your preservation from one evill shall be but a reservation to seven worse Lev. 26. as it fared with Pharaoh, Senacherib and others: God will surely subdue, or subvert you. Verse 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee o Israel] Thus? how? Non nomi∣nat mala ut omnia timeant saith Ribera. He tells them not how, that they may feare the worst: even all that is written and unwritten. It was the very policy of Julius Caesar never to extenuate or deny to his souldiers the danger of an enemy, but rather to raise up thoughts of valour by aggravating the contrary forces: and this way he did (not seldome) hyperbolically rhetoricate, saith the story. Now the Lord need not do so: sith his judgements are a great deep, neither can any man know the power of his anger:Psal. 90.11. let a man feare it never so much, he is sure to feel it a great deale more, if he once fall into his fingers. Is it nothing to drink the dregs of Gods displeasure, when it is eternity unto the bottome? Is it nothing to launch into an infinite Ocean of scalding leade, and to swim naked in it for ever? Oh do any thing rather then be damned, and as Lewis King of France cast the Popes bulls into the fire saying,Speed 496. he had rather they should burn then himself fry in hell for obeying them: Or as Mary Q. of England restored againe all the Eccle∣siasticall livings assumed to the crown,Idem. saying that she set more by the salvation of her own soule, then she did by ten kingdomes: So let the wicked forsake his wayes, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return to the Lord that he may have mercy upon him, and to our God, that he may multiply pardon. Esay 55.7. and because I will do this unto thee] which (had I not wished thee well) I would never have told thee.Ideo minatur ut non puniat. But God loves to fore-signifie: and therefore threateneth evill that he may not inflict it: he would gladly be prevented by our humble addres∣ses unto him, and by our entreaties of peace. Heare him else. prepare to meet thy God O Israel] Turn and try; thou canst not likely lose thy labour: or if thou should'st, yet thou hast lost many a worse. Let Ephraim but
bemoane himself, and God will soon melt over him Ier. 31.20. Let Gods prodigals return to their mercifull father, and he will meet them halfe-way, and receive them with all sweetnesse. Tantum velis, & Deus tibi praeoccurret. Do as those Jer. 3.17. Alexanders Macedenonians being sensible of his displeasure laid by their armes put on their mourning attire,Plut. in Alexandro. came trooping to his tent, where for al∣most three dayes they remained with loud cryes and abunance of teares testifying their remorse for offending him, beseeching his pardon which at last they gained. And Guicciardin tells us, that Lewis 12. of France (when he entred Genoa in his triumphant charret with his sword naked) resolved to make a prey of their riches,Guice. lib. 7. and an example of many of the chief amongst them, and to leave the rest to his souldiers mercies. But beeing met first by the chief, afterward by the multitude,Parel Med. hist. prof. 754. making great lamentation for their folly, with abundance of teares and cryes, his wrath was appeased toward them. The like we read of Henry 7. Emperour to∣ward the citizens of Cremona; of our Edward the third,Daniel. hist. 240. toward the Inhabitants of Callice. And in Cades conspiracy here, after that 26. of the chief rebels were executed, the multitude naked in their shirts met the king on Black-heath,Speed 851. humbly praying mercy: which they obtained. Verse 13. For o, He that formeth the mountaines &c.] q. d. If my mercy move thee not to an humble submission, let my Majesty: and for that end consider and tremble at my Nomen Majestativum my transcendent excellencies, as they are here displayed, descried, and described (for thy learning) with a great deale of solem∣nity and state; to the end that thou mai'st not expect evils, but prevent them (as Demosthenes counselled his countrymen.) He that formeth the mountaines] At first (doubtlesse) with the rest of the Uni∣verse: (though some held they were cast up by Noahs flood) see Psal. 90.1, 2. by his mere Fiat without toole or toyle Esay. 40.28. This the blind Heathens saw,Plutarch de Iside & Oyr. and thus hieroglyphically set forth: In Thebe a town of Egypt they worshipped a God, whom they acknowledged to be immortall: And how painted they him? In the likenesse of a man blowing an egge out of his mouth: to signify that he made the round world by his word. and createth the wind] The worlds beesome (as Rupertus calleth it) wherewith God sweepeth his great house, and whereby he setteth forth his inexpressible pow∣er. See for this Psal. 18.11. and 148.8. Iob. 28.25. Ier. 10.12. Senec: lib. 5. Nat: quaest. cap. 18. And although we cannot tell whence it commeth, or whither it go∣eth Iob. 3.8. yet can we (with Cruciger) contemplate the footsteps of God in this and other creatures: saying with Paul, that God is so neer unto us, that he may be almost felt with our hands. and declareth unto man what is his thought] what language he hath in his heart,quid sermoci∣netur, quidve cogitet. Drus. what he talketh within himself, as the rich fool did Luk. 12.17. Jesus knew the Pharisees thoughts: yea thou understandest my thoughts afarr off saith David Psal. 139.2, even before I conceive them. Hierom and Theodotion referre the affix to God,Eloquium suum. . The Seventy reade thus, Who declareth unto man his Christ sensu pio et egregio saith Mercer, sed alieno: for Ma-sicho they reade Meshichio; perperam. that maketh the morning darknesse] As he did at Sodome whereon the Sun shon bright in the morning; but ere night there was a dismall change. So in Egypt Exod. 10.22. so in Jury at Christs death Mat. 27.45. Let this learne us to blesse God for the light both naturall Gen. 1.4. and supernaturall 2 Cor. 4.4.5. and to pray; that our Gospell-sun may not set at noon-tide, nor our light be put out in obscure darknesse: but rather that he would make our darknesse, morning (for so the words may be read here) by clearing up those truthes to us, that yet lye in part undiscovered: Oh cry after Christ, as the poor man in the Gospell, Lord, that mine eyes might be opened! Oh that thou wouldest give me sight and light! Sun of righteousness shine upon my dark soule. and treadeth upon the high places of the earth] As being Higher then the highest, Excelsus super Excelsos Eccles. 5.8. terrible to all the kings of the  those dread soveraignes) Psal. 76.12. the most high God Gen. 14.18. and 22. that hath heaven for his throne, and earth for his foot-stoole: yea those highest places of
the earth, the tops of mountains, and rocks inaccessible. But who is this King of glory? The Lord, the God of Hosts is his name.] Give therefore unto the Lord (O yee mighty) give unto the Lord,Psal. 29.1. glory and strength: Give unto the Lord the glory due to his name, worship the Lord in the beauty of holinesse, &c. Exalt yee the Lord our God,Psal. 99.5. and worship at his footstool: for he is holy. CHAP. V. Verse 1. HEar ye this word] A new sermon, as appeareth by this new Oyer: not unlike that of S. Paul, Act. 13.16. Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience: or rather, that of Diogenes, who cried out at Athens, , Hear O ye men. And when as (thereupon) a great sort of peo∣ple resorted to him, expecting some great matter, he looked about him, and said, , I called men, and not varlets. They were no better surely that our Prophet had to deal with;Isai. 1.4. Ah sinfull nation, a people laden with ini∣quity, a seed of evil-doers, children that were corrupters: they had forsaken the Lord, provoked the Holy One of Israel, they had increased revolt. Hence this onerosa prophetia, this word, this weighty word, this burdensome prophecy. which I take up against you,], hinc  onus Heb. lift up, being scarce able to stand under the burden of it. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. And it is against you, not for you: but that's your own fault: for do not my words do good to him that walketh upright∣ly? Mic. 2.7. Excellently Austin, Adversarius est nobis, quandiu sumus & ipsi nobis, &c. The word of God is adversary to none, but such as are adversaries to themselves: neither doth it condemne any, but those that shall be assuredly con∣demned by the Lord, except they repent. But we have in a readinesse to revenge all disobedience, saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.6. and if any man will hurt Gods faith∣full witnesses, for discharging their duties, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed, Rev 11.5. for Elisha hath his sword as well as Jehu and Hazael, 1 King. 19.17. And when Elisha unsheatheth and brandisheth his sword, it is a fair war∣ning that the sword of Jehu and Hazael are at hand. See Hos. 6.5. Jer. 1.18. even a lamentation.] Heb. a very bitter lamentation, Ezek. 19.14. like those of Jeremy for Judah, or of the mourners in Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.4. or of Christ weeping over that city, Luke 19.41, 42. Or of Paul bewailing his wretched coun∣treymen, Rom. 9.3. and 10.1. or of the two witnesses clothed in sackloth, Rev. 11.3. the habit of mourners: or of Athanasius, who by his tears (as by the bleeding of a chast vine) sought to cure the leprosie, and prevent the misery of that tainted age. Heu, heu, Domine Deus, was the cry of the ancient Christians. Flete nefas magnum, nam toto flebitis orbe. Their books are like that in Ezekiel written on both sides,Cardan. and there was written therein, lamentations, and mourning, and wo, Ezek. 2.10. This of Amos was a sad song, a dolefull ditty, a lamentable prophesie of Isra∣els utter destruction, as it followeth in the second verse, where (Prophet-like) hee speaketh of it as already done, notwithstanding their present prosperity and tranquil∣lity. And have not Englands Turtles groaned out for a great while, the sad and la∣mentable tunes of wo and misery to this sinfull nation: and plainly foretold what we have felt already, and have yet cause enough to fear. Ah! great be the plagues that hang over England,Act. & Mon. 1667. (said Mr. Philpot Martyr long since) Happy shall that person be, whom the Lord shall take out of this world, not to see them, &c. And the like said Rogers our prto-martyr Bradford, Ridley, Lever, &c. besides the concurrent predictions of Gods faithfull servants a-late, whose hearts and tongues he hath so guided, as that they all as one man, have denounced heavie judgements, and taken up loud lamentations against us. Now, as before great stormes, cocks crow loud and thick: so is it here; and so it should be, Exod. 32.31, 32. Jer. 18.20. Ioel 2.17. else God will be displeased, Ezech. 13.5. & 22.30, 31. Verse 2. The virgin of Israel is fallen,] i. e. Though of the spouse of God, she be become the devils adulteresse, Jer. 3.1. Hos. 1.2. yet shee will needs be counted
and called a virgin still: as Sardis, she hath a name to live, but is dead: as the Ro∣mish crew cry themselves up the onely Church Catholike, and therein (like Oyster∣wives) do much out-crie us.Rev. 3.1. But what saith the Lord by his Prophet Ieremy, chap. 18.13? Ask ye now among the Heathen; who hath heard such things? The Vir∣gin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing. And the Virgin of Rome may well say as Quartilla the strumpet in Petronius doth, Iunonem meam iratam habeam, si unquam me meminerim virginem fuisse.Petron. Satyr. I can hardly remember my self a maid. Israel may also be called a virgin, because she yet subsisted and flourished in her first liberty and splendour, till taken and defloured, as it were, by the Assyrian. And in this sence we read of the virgin of Babylon, Esay 47.1. of Egypt, Jer. 46.12. of Zidon, Esay 23.12. and now of Venice, whose Motto is, Intacta maneo, I am still a maid: as having never yet fallen into the enemies power. Tournay, a town in France, was ever counted so invincible, that this sentence was engraven over one of the gates, Iannes ton me perdu ton pucellage, Thou hast never lost thy maiden∣head. Yet was it yeelded up to our King Henry 8. with 10000. pound sterling,Speed sol. 1001. for the citizens redemption. The Virgin of Israel sped not so well. Shee is fallen,] That is, shee shall fall, surely, suddenly, utterly. she shall no more rise,] i. e. return out of captivity, and be restored to her pristine splendour: yet some think otherwise. she is forsaken upon her land,] Projecta est, prostrata jacet, she is thrown hard upon her ground, and as it were dashed against it, like an earthen pot against a rock: and all this, because she had left off righteousnesse in the earth, Verse 7. Those that forsake God, shall be forsaken of him, 2 Chron. 15.2. there is none to raise her up.] God will not; and then, man cannot. Behold, saith Bildad, God will not cast away a perfect man; neither will he take the ungodly by the hand, Job 8.20. he will bring them into trouble, and there leave them, Ezek. 22.20. & 29.5. His own he will not leave: or if he do, yet forsake them he will not, Heb. 13.5. and if men do, he will relieve them the rather. Because they called thee an out-cast saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after; therefore I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the Lord, Jer. 30.17. Verse 3. The city that went out by a thousand,] i. e. that had a thousand in∣habitants passing to and fro thorow the gates (See Gen. 34.24. and 23.10. for men love not to bee cooped up, or confined to a place, as the Duke of Venice is, but to be travelling and trading) Or, that can send out a thousand, fit to bear arms. Shall leave an hundred,] Here's a wofull decimation, purporting a very great paucity of people: such as was threatned, Deut. 28.62. a tenth man onely shall be left, if that. Behold the severity of God, and betray not the lives of others, by an impenitent continuance in sinne. Turn to God, if but for your poor brethrens sake, that are in danger, or in durance. Hezekiab's reason to repent is very remark∣able, 2 Chron. 30.9. For if ye turn again to the Lord, your brethren and your children shall finde compassion before them that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: for the Lord your God is gracious and mercifull, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto him. Shall leave ten.] Not take ten in an hundred and leave the rest, as the Roman Generals used to do in the Army, in case of a mutiny. This was fulfilled in that three yeers siege of Samaria, 2 King. 18.10. as afterwards the like fell out at Ie∣rusalem, which could hardly be repeopled in Nehemiah's time, and at this day is but thinly inhabited: there being not an hundred housholds of Jews to be found there. In our Countries, of the abundance of people commeth dearth, which maketh ma∣ny male-contents to mutter: but in many parts of Turkey, for want of men to ma∣nure the ground: most of the poor being enforced with victuals and other necessa∣ries to follow their great Armies, in their long expeditions: of whom scarce one of ten (saith mine Authour) ever return home again, there by the way perishing,Turk. hist. 1153. if not by the enemies sword; yet by the wants, intemperatenesse of the air, or immo∣derate pains-taking. Verse 4. For thus saith the Lord,] Or, Truly thus saith the Lord: Notwith∣standing the former terrible sentence, which the Prophet could not denounce with
dry eyes: but takes up a lamentation, though lesse concerned in it, and might well say, as One did in another case: Tu quibus ista legis, inertum est, lector ocellis,M. Fox of the L. Jane Gray. Ipse quidem siccis dicere non potui. All Gods threatnings (for most part) are conditionall, Ier, 18.7. and 26.2 sc. if men repent not. As if they do, they may live in his sight, and be accounted worthy (such is Gods great goodnesse) to escape all those things, that shall befall the im∣penitent, Luke 21.36. The Gospel is post naufragium tabula, and hath its reward too,Heb. 11.6. Heb. 11.6. sc. of grace and mercy. Do this and live, saith the Law. Seek the Lord, and live,. saith the Gospel. He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, (and that is the force of the Hebrew word here used, which signifieth to eu∣quire, to make serious search, and scrutiny, to seek him out, (as the Seventy have it) when he is with-drawn; to seek him as a Student doth sciences, a worldling gold, a hungry man meat, &c. as a man studiously turns over a Commentary, to finde out the sence of a Text,1 Thess. 3.8. 1 Sam. 25.6. Esay 34.16. Do this, saith God, and ye shall live: not onely have your lives for a prey, but live merrily, happily. Now we live, saith the Apostle: that is, we rejoyce; and Thus shall ye say to him that liveth: that is, hath a com∣fortable life, and a confluence of blessings. But besides all this, yee shall live for ever: and aterna vita, vera vita, eternall life is the onely life properly so called. Life (in what sence soever taken) is a sweet mercy:Aug. A living dog is better then a dead Lion, saith Solomon: and Ioseph is yet alive, saith Iacob, (he doth not say, Ioseph is Lord of Egypt) I will get down,Eccles. 9.4. Gen. 46.28. Rom. 6. lt. and see him before I die. But eternall life is (by a specialty and with an accent) the gift of God through Iesus Christ our Lord: and this gift he will freely bestow on all that so seek him as not to be satisfied without him: as Moses, who would not be put off with an Angel, but said, If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence, Exod. 33.15. and as Luther, who when great gifts were sent him, refused them, and said, Valde protestatus sum, me nolle sic satiari à Do. I deeply protested, that I would not be satisfied with these low things;Melch. Ad. but that I would have God, or nothing. This was one of those brave Apophthegmes of his, concerning which One well saith; A man would fetch them upon his knees from Rome, or Jerusalem, rather then be without them. Verse 5. But seek not Bethel, &c.] Make not lies your refuge, idols your Ora∣cles: they that observe lying vanities, do (by their own election) forsake their own mercies (Jon. 2.8.)Verse 9. But I (saith the Prophet, who had now paid for his learning, and was yet under the lash) will sacrifice to thee alone, will seek thy face and fa∣vour, not at Bethel, or Gilgal, but in the place where thine honour dwelleth: not at Hull, Sichem, or Loretto, but in the true Reformed Churches, in the beauties of holinesse, in the midst of those seven golden candlesticks, in the hearts and houses of his faithfull people; concerning whom He hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, &c, 2 Cor. 6.16. and when they walk within their houses with a perfect heart, I will come unto them, Psal. 101.2. I will there command my bles∣sing, even life for evermore, Psal. 133.3. See chap. 4.4. and Hos. 4.15. with the Notes. For Gilgal shall surely go into captivity,] An elegant agnomination in the O∣riginal,Hagilgal. galloh ijgleh. such as the Prophets are full of, and this plain Prophet, among the rest. See chap. 8.2. Ministers may sometimes rhetoricate: and it had need to be an elaborate speech, that shall work upon the conscience. and Bethel shall come to nought.] Heb. shall be Aven, as elsewhere it is called Beth-aven, Hos. 4.11. and 10.5. Against Beersheba he saith nothing: because that name afforded him not the like elegancy, as Mercer thinketh: or because that city belonged to Judah,1 King 19.3. and so was not destroyed with the ten tribes, as Hierm holdeth. Seek not these places saith the Prophet, for help and succour in distresse: but say as Jer. 3.23. Truely in vain is salvation hoped for from these hills: truely in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. Verse 6 Seek ye the Lord, and ye shall live,]Mercer. See verse 4. Sic eadem saepe sur∣dis & obstinatis inculcantur. The oft pressing of a duty imports; 1. The excellency. 2.Ʋlpian. P. The necessity. 3. The difficulty of doing it: else what need so many words?
Perquam durum est, sed ita lex scripta est, saith the Civilian. Hard or not hard, it must be done, or men are undone. lest he breake out like fire] Lest he go through you and burn you together Esay. 27.4. lest ye be utterly burnt with fire in the same place 2 Sam. 23.7. that is in hell (as some expound it) which the Prophet calleth torment∣ing Tophet, Esay. 30,33. and Plato calleth  a fierylake: so terrible, saith Bellarmine, that one glimpse of it were enough to make a man not onely turn Christi∣an and sober, but Anchorite and Monk: to live after the strictest rule that may be. Verse 7. Ye who turn judgement to wormwood] Ye Grandees and governours of the people, that turne the sweetest thing into the sowrest, (as corruptie optimi pessima) right into wrong-dealing; that follow the administration of Justice as a trade only, with an unquenchable, and unconscionable desire of gaine; not ca∣ring what becomes of righteousnesse, but leaving it off in the earth, or rather not leaving it at all upon earth (Terras Astraea reliquit) but chasing it out of the world as much as in you lyeth: whiles you cast it down to the ground, and tread it under foot Dan. 8.12. whilest you oppresse the just, crush the needy &c. chap. 4.1. See the Note there. Some read the text by way of exclamation thus; O ye that turn judgement &c. q. d. What strange creatures are you? what monsters of men? what publike scourges? what scabs? Esay. 5.7. God looked for judgement,Judices instar scabrei mlesti sunt oppressis Piscater in loc. but behold oppression (In the Originall it is, behold a scab) for righteousnesse, but be∣hold a cry: such a cry, as entreth into the eares of the Lord of sabbath. Verse 8. Seek him that maketh the seven starres] Once againe, seek him: that is, Returne to him by true repentance: and by faith take hold of his strength, that ye may make peace, and ye shall make peace with him Esay. 27.5. To stand out it bootes not: sith it is He that made Bootes and Orion &c. that is, of infinite pow∣er: and doth whatsoever he will in heaven and earth; who only doth wondrous things Psal. 72.18. See chap. 4.12.13. Chimah and Chesil, that is Pleiades and Orion are twice mentioned together in Iob. Noted starrs they are, and known to shepheards and such like; Ams, likely, was but such an Astronomer, as heardsmen use to be. Those that writ of these starrs tell us, that Chimah comes of Chamah, to love ardently; because of the fellowship and working together that appeares in them. They be seven starres that have all one name: because they all help one another in their work, which is to bring the spring; and like seven sisters or lovers, so are they joyned together in one constellation, and in one company. We see (saith One) that God will have the sweetest works in nature to be perfor∣med by mutuall help. The best time of the yeare commeth with these seven starrs (hence we read of their sweet influence Iob. 38.11.) and the best time of our life commeth, when we enter into true love and fellowship. As for Orion, it is the starr (saith the same Author) that brings winter: and his bonds cannot be loosed. It binds the earth with frost and cold, that the fruits thereof might be seasoned and made kindly against the Spring: neither can the Spring come till Orion have pre∣pared the way. God will have us suffer before we raigne. The word Chesil here used signifies in the Chaldee, to perfect: because by suffering and offering violence to our selves we enter into perfection. Luk. 13.32. If we would have a pleasant Spring of graces in our hearts, we must first have a nipping winter: the spirit of mortification must be like the cold starr Orion to nip our quick motions in the head, and to bind all our uncleane desires, and burning lusts that they stirr not in us: and unlesse we do thus, the seven starrs of Comfort shall never appeare to us. and turneth the shadow of death:tenebras fera∣les & letales. Psal. 23.4. that is, the thickest, darknesse, into the morning] into the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day Prov. 14.18. This severing of night from day, and day from night, this mutuall and orderly suc∣cession and course of the night after the day, and the day after the night, the lengthening and shortening of the dayes in summer and winter, the wonderfull eclipses, and other occurrents of that nature, are works of Gods power, and provi∣dence, not to be slighted but improved to true repentance. We are to mark the countenance of the skie, and to discerne the face of heaven: that every day and night winketh at us, and beckneth to us, to remember the wisdome, power, justice, and mercy of God lined out unto us in the browes of the firmament. The heavens de∣clare the glory of God: and the firmament sheweth his handy-work.Psal. 19.1. The creatures are Regij professores, saith One, Catholike preachers saith Another, real Postills of the Divinity, saith a third. Clemens Alexandrinus saith, that the World is Dei
scriptura, the first Bible that God made for the instruction of man. Antonius Ere∣mita told a Philosopher (who objected to him his want of bookes) that the Uni∣verse was to him instead of a well-furnisht library,Aug. de doct. christ. l. 1. Niceph. l. 8. cap. 40. Lib. 2. de Arca cap. 3. every where ready at hand. Hugo affirmeth, that every thing uttereth these three words, Accipe, Redde, Fuge, Receive mercy, Return duty, Shun sin, together with that hell that it hales at the heeles of it. Much a man may learn out of the book of Nature, with its three leaves Heaven, Earth, and Sea: but there he must not rest. For, as where the Naturalist ends, the Physician begins: so where Nature failes and can go no fur∣ther, there Scripture succeeds and gives more grace Iam. 4.6. Psal. 19.1, 2, 7, 8. The Caldee Paraphrast takes this text allegorically: as if the sense were; God changeth his hand towards the sons of men at his pleasure, prospering them one while, crossing them another: so that they walk in darknesse and have no light Esay. 50.10. yea they walk through the vale of the shadow of death Psal. 23.4. Not through a dark entry or church-yard in the night time, but a vally, a large, long vast place: not of darknesse onely but of death; and not bare death, but the shadow of death, that is the darkest and most dismall side of death, in its most hi∣deous and horrid representations. And yet if God be with his Davids in this sad condition, no hurt shall befall them, butmuch good. Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. That calleth for the waters of the sea] that is, for great armyes, saith the Chal∣dee. But better take it litterally, of the generation of raine, the chief author whereof is God: the materiall cause is the sea sending up vapours: The Instru∣mentall cause is the Sun, by the beames whereof God drawes the vapours upwards, sends for them, as it were, into the middle region of the ayre, there thickeneth them into clouds, and then resolveth them into raine This Kimchi illustrateth by the simile of a boyling pot whereout vapours and fumes ascending to the colder pot∣lid are turned into drops of water. See Gen. 2.6. The waters of the sea] 1 King. 18.44. A little cloud arose out of the sea like a mans hand. And presently the Prophet said to Ahab, Prepare thy charet and get thee down, that the raine stop thee not. And it came to passe in the meane while that the heaven was black with cloudes &c. Humorem magn tollunt & aequore ponti Nubes, qui in toto terrarum spargitur orbe,Lucret. lib. 6. Cum pluit in terris— The Naturalists observe that it snowes not in the sea, because it sends up hot va∣pours, which presently dissolve the snow. the Lord is his name] His memoriall Hos. 12.5. See the Note there: He is not an idol to be dallied with and deluded. Verse 9. That strengtheneth the spoyled against the strong] Victorem à victo supera∣ri saepe videmus. God can quickly change the scene, turn the scales Ier. 37.10. though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire. In a bloody fight between Amurath the third King of Turks, and Lazarus Despot of Servia many thousands fell on both sides. In con∣clusion the Turks had the victory, and Lazarus was slaine. Amurath, after that great victory with some few of his chief captaines, taking view of the dead bo∣dyes, which without number lay on heapes in the field like mountaines, a Christian souldier sore wounded and all blood seeing him, in staggering manner arose (as if it had been from death) out of an heape of slaine men, and making toward him, for want of strength fell down diverse times by the way as he came, as if he had been a drunken man. At length drawing nigh unto him, when they which guar∣ded the kings person would have stayed him, he was by Amurath himself comman∣ded to come neerer, supposing that he would have craved his life of him. Thus this half-dead Christian pressing neerer unto him, as if he would, for honour sake, have kissed his feet, suddenly stabbed him in the bottome of his belly with a short
dagger which he had under his coat; of which wound that great king and con∣queror presently died. The name of this man was Miles Cobelite, who,Turk. hist. fol. 200. before sore wounded, was shortly after in the presence of Bajazet (Amuraths son) cut into small peeces: So in that memorable fight between the Swissers and the Dol∣phn neare to Basile, when Burcardus monk a noble-man and a great souldier,Lavat. in Prov. 27.14 grew proud of the victory, and put up his helmet that he might behold what a laughter they had made: one of the half-dead Swissers rising up upon his knees, threw a stone at him, which hitting right gave him his deaths-wound. At the battle of Agincourt, where our Henry 5. won the day,Speed 795. ex hypod. Nerstr. the French were so con∣fident of a victory, that they sent to king. Henry, to know what ransome he would give, and &c. Henry comforting his army with a speech, resolved to open his way over the enemies bosome, or else to die. After which, such was the courage of the English, notwithstanding their great wants, as he that ere while could scarcely bend his bow, is able now to draw his yard-long arrow to the very head. so that the spoyled (or spoyle) shall come against the fortresse] And take it by assault. Deus loca, quantumvis valida, vasta facit.Prov. 21.30. There is no strength against the Lord. Verse 10. They hate him that rebuketh in the gate] In domo judicij, saith the Chalde: for the gate was the place of judgement, verse 12.15. Deut. 17.5, 12, 15. Those then that did not approve and applaud the oppressions and wrong-dealings of the Judges, and rich bribers, but cryed out against such, and took the same liberty to rebuke them that they did to commit them, these were hated cane pejus & angue, worse then any toad. Thus Ahab hated Micaiah, the Sodomites Lot, the Jewes Jeremy, their successors Christ, the Baptist Steven, Paul, &c.Melch. Adam. thus those of Geneva hated Farellus their faithfull minister, tryed him for his life, banished him out of their territories: Thus afterwards some of them hated Calvin, calling him Cain: yea calling their dogs Calvin, in derision and detestation of him. And thus Bishop Ridly lamenting the state of England, even of thy greatest Magistrates saith He, some (the Kings highnesse excepted) evermore unkindly and ungently against those that went about most busily and wholesomely to cure their sore backs, spurned privily, and would not spare to speak evill of them, even to the Prince himself: and yet would they toward the same preachers outwardly beare a jolly countenance, and faire face. As for Latimer, Lever, Bradford, Knox, their tongues were so sharp, they ripped in so deep in their galled backs to have purged them, no doubt, of their filthy matter,Act & Man. fol. 1616. that was festered in their hearts, of insatiable covetousnesse, of filthy carnallity and voluptuousnesse, of in∣tollerable ambition and pride, of ungodly lothsomenesse to heare poore mens cases, and to heare Gods word. And these men, of all others, these Magistrates then could never abide &c. Thus He, and much more to the same purpose. They were then sick of a Noli me tangere, and so (alasse) they are still. How few Vespasians to be found, of whom Quintilian testifieth that he was patientissimus veri, One that would patiently heare the naked truth of things: not toothlesse truths onely, but such as touched to the quick? How few Davids that loved Nathan the better ever after (for dealing so plainly and faithfull with him) and made him of his cabbi∣net-councell? How few Q. Elisabeths, who called oft for her Deering by whom she was barely told of her faults: though the Bishops (those Court-parasites) would never suffer him to preach more before her? The Q. of Navarre would not harken to such ministers as disliked that fatall French match (that gave oppor∣tunity afterwards to the Parisian Massacre) in regard of the diversity of religions:Epitom. hist. Gallic. but inclined rather to those that smoothed her up, and told her that it would lay the foundation of a lasting and most happy peace. And generally of those French Reformed churches it was observed, that for some yeares before that bloody massa∣cre, they affected a frothy flashy kind of Preaching: and cared not for that that came home to the conscience. See my common place of Admonition. and they abhorr him that speaketh uprightly] Auget orationem, saith Drusius: The Prophet groweth in his expression of their wickednesse: for to abhorr is more then to hate; See Prov. 6.16.Serpens si ser∣pentem come∣derit fit draco. Hatred (as they say of the Crocodile) groweth as long as it liveth: Sin is of an encroaching nature. If a Serpent devoure a Serpent (saith the Proverbe) he becommeth a Dragon. Hatred of the truth, as runner the
elder it is the stronger: the Pharisees for instance; who did not onely inwardly swell and boil with hellish hatred of Christ, his works, and doctrine: but also out∣wardly belched out against him the basest blasphemies: and in their pertinacious working, constantly persecuted him, even to the most reproachfull death of the crosse. This is merces mundi, the worlds wages to Gods faithfull witnesses. They make a man an offender for a word, (yea for speaking uprightly) and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought, Esay 29.21. An expectas ut Quintilianus ametur? said He: Dost thou think that plain-dealing Quintilian should be loved? It is not likely. To preach, saith Luther, the truth, which is according to godlinesse, is nothing else but to derive the rage of the whole world upon a mans self. Verse 11. Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor,] Panting after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, Chap. 2.7. See there, and Psal. 109.16. Some render,, Ye fire the poor; others, ye plunder them: so the Chaldee, and Hierom.. The Seventy have it, Ye smite them with fists. But better, Ye foot it up∣on them, and make them sell their commodities under-foot (as we phrase it) to pay your heavy taxes, and satisfie your greedy covetousnesse. and ye take from him burdens of wheat,] Heb. the finest wheat, and best win∣nowed: these ye force him to make money of,. for your use; glad to feed upon the offall-wheat himself. Ye have built houses of hwen stone,] squared and polished,Domos rasiles & politas. Sept thinking to flourish, and frollick: but the screech-owls of wo crying aloud from the stones, out of those walls, shall marre your mirth, Hab. 2.11. but ye shall not dwell in them,] For either ye shall be prevented by death, and sent to dwell with devils: or be carried away captive, and a stranger possesse your new-buildings, Deut. 28.30. Ye have planted pleasant vineyards,] As He in the History, that having a cup of new-wine in his hand, expressed out of the grapes of his new-planted vineyard, was set upon and slaine by a wild-boar, before he could drink it, and gave occasion to that proverb,Erasm. Adag. Multa cadunt inter caelicem supremaque labra; Many things fall betwixt the cup and the lip, betwixt the chin and the chalice. Hereunto agreeth that story in Mr. Burroughs upon Hosea.Burr. on Hos. 1. pag. 379. I had, saith he, certain information, from a reverend Minister, that in his own town there was a wretched worldling, who had a great crop of corn. A good honest neighbour of his walking by his field, saith, Neighbour you have a very fine crop of corn if God blesse it: yea, saith he, I will have a good crop, speaking contemptuously: and before he could come to get it into the barn, it was so blasted, that the corn of the whole crop was not worth sixe pence. God hath many wayes to defeat the wicked mans expectation, and the hope of un∣just men perisheth, Prov. 11.7. Etiam spes valentissima perit, so some render that text, he shall die or miscarry, in the very height of his hopes and expectations. Verse 12. For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sinnes,] I know them, and can easily set them in an order before your eyes, Psal. 50.21. bring them out (as they did the vessells of the Sanctuary) by number and by weight:Ezra 8.34. make you answer for all with flames about your ears, lay open your many transgressions, and mighty sinnes;Fortia peccata. The Hebrew hath it, your bony, or big-boned sinnes: huge, hainous, and monstrous, capable of all manner of aggravations. All these I know, saith God, they are all in Print in heaven, and I will one day read them aloud in the ears of all the world. Fac ergo confitendo propitium, quem taeciendo non facis nescium, saith Austin. Make therefore God thy friend, by confessing thy sins to him, which thou caust not by any means conceal from him. they afflict the just,] they pinch and distresse him by their oppressions, which are often here laid in their dish, as an abomination to the Lord; for he is mercifull. See Chap. 2.6. they take a bribe,]Cophe. A ransome to blinde their eyes, as 1 Sam. 12.3. or a pacifica∣tion of their pretended displeasure against heinous crimes brought before them. Olim didici quid sint munera, said a worthy man, Once I have learned long since, how dangerous a thing it is for men in place to meddle with gifts. A publike person as he should have nothing to lose, so nothing to get: he should be above all price, or sale, &c.
they turn aside the poor in the gate.] that is, in the place of Judicature: This makes many that go to law, to be at length of Themistocles his minde; who pro∣fessed that if two wayes were shewed him, one to hell, and the other to the barre, he would chuse that which went to hell, and forsake the other. Another said, that hee wondered much at two sorts of men: viz. those that go to sea, and those that go to law: not so much that they did so at first, but that, after triall, they would ever go a second time. Verse 13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence,]. According to that old and good rule, Either keep silence, or speak that which is better then silence. There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak, Eccles. 3.7. and it is a singular skill to time a word, Esay 50.4. to set it upon its circumferences, Prov. 25.11. so to speak, and so to do, as those that shall be judged by the law of liberty, Iam. 2.12. He that would be able to speak right and forcible words, must first learn how and when to keep silence. It is not good casting pearls before swine: nor pulling a Bear, or mad dog by the ear. 'Tis the true ambition of a Christian, to study to be quiet,1 Thess. 4.11. . to meddle with his own businesse, to affect rather quietnesse from the wicked world, then ac∣quaintance with it, and to passe thorow it with as little noise and notice as he can. Not but that Gods faithfull servants must cry aloud, and not spare; lifting up their voyces like a trumpet, &c. Esay 58.1. and casting away the inverse trumpets of Furius Fulvus, which sounded a retrait, when they should have sounded an alarme. But this must be done with godly discretion. Zeal should eat us up, but not eat up our widome, (saith One) nor should policie eat up our zeal. The Apostles professed that they could not but speak the things that they had heard and seen: they must either vent or burst. And yet holy Paul, (who was full of the spirit of judgement and of burning, Esay 4.4. (though he preached at Ephesus (where hee lived two yeers and more together) that they be no gods that are made with hands: yet he made no particular invective against their great goddesse Diana, whereon they so impotently doated, Act. 19.26, 37. He that hath a good mixture of zeal and prudence, is like a ship well ballasted, that sails with a prosperous gale: but zeal without discretion, is like fire on the chimney-top; or like mettle in a blinde horse; or the devil in the demoniack, that cast him sometimes into the fire, and sometimes into the water. What a storm of persecution raised Bishop Abdias in Persepolis, by his intemperate zeal, not bridled with discretion; as the Poets fa∣ble that Minerva put a golden bridle upon Pegasus, lest he should flie too fast? And it was some disadvantage to Paul, when in the Councel (though provoked and unjustly smitten) he called the high-priest whited wall: he was glad to ex∣cuse it by his ignorance. We may not be too bold, or too forward to speak in a good matter, to such as hate him that rebuketh in the gate: and abhor him that speaketh uprightly, verse 10. for it is an evil time.] by reason of an evil and adulterous generation, that make it so. It is a day of evil, as Psal. 41.1. that is, of difficulty and danger, to those that dare speak out: Such as were Tiberius his times. That Tyger laid hold with his teeth on all the brave spirits that could speak their minds fitly, and durst do it freely. He put to death a certain Poet, which in a Tragedie had inveighed against Agamemnon; suspecting himself to be intended.Senec. Freedom of speech used by the Waldenses in blaming and reproving the vices, dissolute manners, life, and actions of great ones, made them looked upon and persecuted as hereticks,Girardus. and enemies to the Sea Apostolike, as Manichees, Catharists, what not? Verse 14. Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live,] See verse 4. and 6. Oh Seek, seek, seek, saith our Prphet: as some of the Martyrs cryed out, Pray, pray, pray; Mr. Sanders, and Mrs. Askew, repeated those words two severall times toge∣ther, Mr. Marsh once, adding, Never more need. To seek God, is to seek good, and to finde life: for with him is the fountain of life, Psal. 36.9. To seek evil, is to seek the devil, who is that evil one: it is as Solomon saith in a like case,. a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death, Prov. 21.6. and so the Lord the God of Hosts shall be with you,] to assist and accept you in seeking good: to protect and provide for you in shunning evil. Deal couragiously therefore, and God shall be with the good, 2 Chron. 19. ult. as your seven-fold shield,. and exceeding great reward, Gen. 15.1. See the note there.
as ye have spoken,] Ʋt praedicatis & jactitatis, as ye boast and bear your selves bold upon: saying as Mic. 2.11. Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil can come upon us. But that's as you make it: for ye are upon your behaviour. The fault is not in God, but wholly in your selves, if ye live not happily, reigne not everlastingly. —at Paris ut vivat regnetque beatus Cogi posse negat.—Horat. ep. 2. God is far from mens hearts; and therefore far from their help: for can two walk together, except they be agreed? Chap. 3.3. Verse 15. Hate the evil, and love the good,] God doth so: you must also, or else never look for his gracious presence with you: for idem velle, atque idem nolle, ea demum vera est Amicitia;Cicer. True friends do both will and nill the same things. Minu∣tius Foelix saith, that he and his friend Octavius did so. The like did Basil and Nazianzen, Jonathan and David: Corporibus geminis spiritus unus erat. All Gods people, as they partake of the Divine nature, so they live the life of God, Ephes 4. and have the same both sympathies and antipathies (as I may so speak) abhorring that which is evil, cleaving to that which is good, Rom. 12.9. God, they know, hateth evil worse then he hateth the devil: for he hateth the devil for sinnes sake, and not sinne for the devils sake: so do they, looking upon sinne as the most loathsome thing in the world, the very vomit of the devil, which (so farre as they are regenerate) they do infinitely loath to lick up. And for that which is good, whether things or persons, these they heartily love: not onely with a love of Desire, as Psal. 42.1, 2. but also of Complacencie, as Psal. 73.25, 26. herein resembling Almighty God; not as an image doth a man, in outward lineaments onely, but as a sonne doth his father, in nature and disposition; being daily more and more con∣formed to the heavenly pattern, and transformed into the same image from glory, to glory, by his Spirit. and establish judgement in the gate.] which hitherto ye have not done, vers. 10, 12. Perform the duties of your own particular places: be good Justicers as well as good men. It is said of Galba and of our Rich. 3. that they were bad men, but good Princes: but I hardly think it. Some good parts they might have, and some good acts they might do; but good Princes they could not be, unlesse they did hate the evil and love the good: but so doth not any bad man, for want of better princi∣ples. Make the tree good and the fruits will be good: and the contrary; Evil men may be some way usefull to the Publike, and do good offices for the Church, and yet perish, because not in a good manner, upon a good motive, and for a good end, Rev. 12.16. the earth helped the Woman: and yet, chap. 16.1. the vials of Gods wrath were poured out upon the earth. A good Magistrate, as he sits in Gods place, (the judgement-seat is called the Holy place, Eccles. 8.10.) so hee loving what God loveth, and hating where God hateth, can boldly write over it, that Distich, that is said to bee written over the Tribunall in Zant, in letters of gold; Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat, Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, bonos. It may be that the Lord.] Or, out of doubt, the Lord God of Hosts will be graci∣ous, &c. He is surely ready, were men but ripe, and right for mercy: it sticks onely on their part, and not on his: he waiteth to be gracious, Esay 30.18. Oh unworthy we, that cause him so to do. Currat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia. They are but a remnant that shall have mercy:Chrysolog. a few that shall finde favour: Oh labour to be of those few that shall enter into life, Luke 13.24. Verse 16. Therefore the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord, saith thus,] Therefore? wherefore? because neither promises of mercy, nor menaces of misery, will work upon you, stand forth, and hear your doom, your sentence of condemnation, and it beginneth,Acts & Mon. as is usuall, In nomine Dei: neither can you say, as that Martyr did,
when wrongfully sentenced, ye begin in a wrong name. To assure the matter, the Prophet here heapeth up three Majesticall names of God: that they might trem∣ble and turn, considering the greatnesse of Him with whom they here have to do, being glorious in holinesse, fearefull in prayses, doing wonders Exod. 15.11. wailing shall be in all streets &c.] A generall outcry, as once in Egypt, when in every house there was a dead corps: or, as at the taking and sacking of Troy there was Luctus ubique, pavor, & plurima mortis imago.Virg. And they shall say in all the high-wayes, Alas, Alas,] Man is a creature apt to over∣grieve for crosses: and to fill the ayre with moanes and complaints of his misery. The latine word Aeger for a sick person, is judged to come from  the dolefull expression of his grief. The Greek word  is as much as , Not ever. We are soon weary of suffering, and would faine see an end of it: and therefore cry out for help. The Hebrew word here used Ho, Ho, is the same with our Oh, Oh; it is dolentis particula, it is ejulantis, the broken speech of one in great dolour and du∣rance. Nature need not to be taught to tell her own tale, when in distresse, then men are apt to be eloquent, even beyond truth: they add, they multiply,. Ari∣stoph. 1 Cor. 10.13. they rise in their discourse, like him in the Poet, I am thrice miserable, nay ten times, nay an hundred, ten hundred times: whereas they should correct their excessive complaint; with that other , Alas, Alas: but why Alas? Nothing hath befaln us but what is humane, common to men, and our betters. and they shall call the husbandman to mourning] For the marring of his corn by the enemy, or by the vermine. Others read it thus,Jarchi Livelejus. The husbandmen shall send for those that are skilfull in lamentation, to mourning, and wayling. and such as are skilfull of lamentation] An ordinary practise in those Easterne parts (as now also in Jreland) to hire artificiall mourners at funerals to sing dole∣full ditties. Ʋt qui conducti plorant in funere. See Jer. 9.17. Mat. 9.23.Horat. de arte Poet. Sic Ho∣mer. de Hecto∣re sepulte Gellius lib. 2. cap. 20. with the Note. Of the lawfulnesse of this custome the Prophet speaketh not. Many things are mentioned in scripture and made use of, but not approved, as Usury Mat. 25.27. dancing Mat. 11.17. Theft, 1 Thess. 5.2. injustice Luk. 16.1. the Isthmian games, 1 Cor. 9.24. &c. Verse 17. And in all vineyards shall be wayling] where used to be great jol∣lity and revell-riot in time of vintage Psal. 4.8. The calamity shall be com∣mon, the scourge over-flowing: and all sorts shall have their share See Ioel. 1.5, 11, 13. for I will pass through thee saith the Lord] as a fire in a thick wood Iam. 3.5. or dry stubble Ioel. 2.5. Nah. 1.10. I will go thorough them, I will burn them toge∣ther Esay. 27.4. make a short work with them Rom. 9.28. So fearefull a thing it is to fall into the punishing hands of the living God Heb. 10.31. to stand in his way, when his sword is in commission, and He saith to it, Sword go thorough the land, cut off man and beast from it Ezek. 14.17. Let this be thought on by those secure ones that live, as if they were out of the reach of Gods rod:Ezech. 21.13. for what if the sword contemne even the rod? and be drenched in the gall of these sturdy rebels? what then? Verse 18. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord] The day of his visitation when he will go thorough us, as you Prophets would make beleeve. Where is the promise of his comming? Let him make speed and hasten his work,Esay. 5.19. Jer. 17.15. that we may see it. Let him increase his army and come down Judg. 9.29. Such jearing and daring spirits there are still abroad. But do they provoke the Lord to anger? are they stronger then he? The great and terrible day of the Lord will come time enough to their cost; they need not accelerate it. Can they stand to his triall?Job. 26.14 or abide the thunder of his power? to what end is it for you] when God shall answer you, as he did a far better man, out of the whirlewind and say,Job. 38.2, 3. 1 Pet. 4.18. Who is this that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up now thy loynes like a man &c. Where then shall the ungodly and the wicked appeare? what hils will they call upon to fall on them, when the elements shall fall upon them like scalding lead, or burning bell-mettall; and yet
all this be but the beginning of their sorrowes? Now therefore be not ye mockers, lest your bands be made strong, Esay. 28.22. God can easily hamper you, if he once take you in hand. the day of the Lord is darknesse and not light] No interchange of light: an evill, an onely evill, without mixture of mercy Ezech. 7.5. a black and dismal day of one mischief upon another, in a continued series. Affliction shall not rise up the second time Nah. 1.9. but ye shall totally and finally be destroyed: wrath shall come upon you to the utmost, 2 Thes. 2. This is illustrated in the next verse by an apt Similitude. Verse 19. As if a man did sly from a lion &c.] And so by running from his death, should run to it: by seeking to shun the shelves should split against a rock, Inci∣dit in Scyllam &c.Alsted. Chro∣nol. pag. 480. as Nicodemus Frischline (that famous Poet, Orator, and Phi∣losopher) endevouring to escape out of close prison, by casting himself out at a window, the rope broke, and he perished by falling headlong upon a rock: So fareth it with those that feare not God. Aliud ex alio malum, One mischief trea∣deth on the heeles of another, as Iobs messengers. The clouds returne after the raine Eccle. 12.2. as in April-weather, one showre is unburthened, another is brewed: and deep calleth upon deep at the noise of the water-spouts Psal. 42.7. Evill shall hunt the violent man to destroy him Psal. 140.11. your sins shall find out, out as a blood-hound, Num. 32.23. as it did that Popish Priest in London, who having escaped the fall of Black-friers Anno. 1623. (where Drury had his braines knockt out of his head, together with his sermon) and taking water, with a purpose to saile into Flanders, was cast away (together with some others) un∣der London-bridge;Jac. Revius de vit. Pontif. 312. the boat being overturned. And as Philip the second King of Spaine, who going from the Low-countries into Spaine by sea, fell into a storme in which almost all the Fleet was wracked, his housholdstuff of very great valve lost, and himself hardly escaped:Hist. of Counc. of Trent. 417. He said he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root out Lutheranisme, which he presently began to do. But the hand of God was upon him in an extraordinary manner:Caros. Scribon∣de inflit. Princ. cap. 20. for beside the invincible Arma∣do here defeated, to his great heart-break (for his pretended patience was but as the fever called Epialis wherein men are cold without, but hot as fire within) he fell into that most lothsome lowsy disease, called Phthiriasis, whereof at length he dyed. and a Beare met him] A Beare robbed of her whelpes (which she licketh into forme, and loveth above measure) is a very fierce and fell creature. To meet her in such a rage is to meet death in the very face: and yet that danger may be sooner shifted and shunned, then the heavy wrath of God avoyded or averted, without true and timely repentance: there is no way to run from him but by running pe∣nitently to him: as in a tempest at Sea, it is very dangerous to strike to the shore: the safest way is to have sea-room, and to keep in the Maine still. or went into the house] To shelter himself from the Beare: as every creature in danger runneth to its harbour Prov. 30.26. Psal. 104.18. and leaned his hand on the walles] As being breathlesse in running, and glad to stay himself on what he can next lay hold on. Man, like the vine, must have some∣what to leane on: if it be but a broken reed, or bulging wall Psal. 62.3. he shifts and sharks in every by-corner for comfort, as the Papists (stung by the Friers ser∣mons) do by pardons and pennances,Prov. 23.32. which are but palliate cures. for a serpent bites them] the guilt of sin abiding, biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder. Verse 20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darknesse &c.] q. d. How say ye now: when thus beset with mischief on all hands, such as ye can neither avoyd nor abide, must ye not needes subscribe to the truth of what I said verse 18. and do here againe repeate (that you may the better observe it) with greater emphasis, and earnestnesse? you shall not have the least glimmering of comfort, ease, direction or good counsel. To what end then should you desire this dreadfull day of the Lord? Are you in hast to be undone. Verse 21. I hate, I despise your feast-dayes] wherewith ye think to stop my mouth, and to make me your debter: saying as that Romane Emperour when his enemy came against him, Non sic Deos coluimus ut ille nos vinceret, we have not
so served the Gods, that they should serve us no better, then to give the enemy the better of us. The feast-dayes,Antonin. Phi∣losoph refer. Vulcat. Gallic. in Avidio Cassio. Jer. 32.35. and solemne assemblies you so much bind upon are yours and not mine: I never commanded them (viz as you now use them) neither came they ever into my mind. So farr am I therefore from accepting your sacrifices, as that I hate, I despise, I will not smell: an elegant Asyndeton, importing Gods utter distaste of what they did (The sacrifice of the wicked is abo∣mination: how much more when he bringeth it with a wicked mind? Prov. 21.27.) and assuring a sudden vengeance, as in that quick and smart passage, Go, preach, baptise, He that beleeveth not shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. Will∣worship and out-sidenesse in religion is very odious to the Almighty: and stinks worse in his nostrils, then any ill vapour from the vilest dunghill doth in ours: or as those poisonous smels that ascended up once from the five cities of the plaine, and brought down from him a counterpoyson of fire and brimstone. Rome also (that spirituall Sodom) shall be destroyed in like sort, with a terrible fire Rev. 17.16. and 18, 8, 9. for her detestable will-worships, superstitions and Idolatries, which no other nitre can possibly purge. Rev. 13.18. the whole number of the Beast, whatsoever is numbred to belong unto him, is but the number of a man, hu∣mane inventions and will-wisdome; men will have it so: and this is the summ of all Popish religion. When the wit of man will be over-pleasing God with better devises then his own, will needes despite him with seeming honours, it turnes to madnesse, and ends in mischief. Verse 22. Though ye offer me burnt offerings &c.] So long as ye stick in the bark, please your selves in the externall performance, rest in the work done, think to ex∣piate your sins by your duties, and to sett off with God for your bad deedes by your good, and to get a license thereby to live as you list: though ye offer me burnt-offerings (which were wholy burnt in sacrifice to God, and so were ordinarily most acceptable.) I will not accept them] Nor shall you be a button the better for them, but the worse. Esay. 66.3. yea though ye added wine, oyle, and incense, that there might be a savour of rest in it. The very Heathens could say, that Gods favour is not to be gained by multitude of sacrifices, but by the integrity of those that offer them. neither will I regard (or look at) the peace-offerings of your fat beasts] whether sheep or oxen, or another distinct creature, bigger then an oxe called in the Ara∣bick dialect gamus, as Aben-Ezra affirmeth, the French call it Buffle, and we the Buffe or wild-Oxe: All would not do; God would neither see nor heare, as it followeth. Verse 23. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs] No more pleasing to me then the grunting of an hog, or the braying of an asse, because hatelesse, heartlesse: for as every sound is not musick, so neither is ever musicall sound melodious to God. The voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet to our eares, as that which comes from the depth of the brest. Sing with grace in your hearts, is the best tune to all the Psalmes: which are therefore called spirituall songs Col. 3.16. both because they are indited by the Spirit, that are to be sung with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15. and because they being so sung, do mak us more spirituall in the use of them: whilest we sing Davids Psalmes with Davids heart. for I will not heare the melody of thy viol] Or of thine organe, harp, citterne, Inte, bag-pipe, for so some render it, with respect to the Etymologie of the word Nebel. The Greek rendereth it Of the Psalteries: what need we trouble our selves much about those things whereof we can neither have proof nor profit: at least not profit enough to pay for the paines? God will not heare either their voyce or in∣strument-musick, because the heart was wanting. Non vox sed votum, non Musica chordula, sed Cor. The deeper and hollower the belly of the lute or violl is, the pleasanter is the sound: the fleeter, the more grating and harsh in our eares: think the same of God: and see how exceeding offensive to all his senses, yea to his very soule hypocrisy is Esay. 1.11, 12, 13. &c. Verse 24. But let judgement run down] Heb. roule down freely, plentifully, and plainely, ut devolutus monte praecipiti torrens, as the great billowes of the sea,Livius. Columella. or as waves rowling over rocks, so let judgement and equity be constantly and vigo∣rously administred and executed.
and righteousnesse as a mighty streame] that comes with a force, and beares down all before it. Fiat justitia, ruat orbis, Let justice be done what ever come of it. The Sun might as soon be turned out of his course, as Fabricius out of the track of Truth and Justice, saith the Historian. How much better might this have been said of Job, Moses, Phineas, Nehemias, &c. famous in their generations for bran∣dishing the sword of justice against the friends of Baal, Balaam, and Batchus, for turning the wheel over all such roaring monsters, such lewd and lawlesse Belialists, as, hardened with impunity, dare oppose with crest and brest whosoever or what∣soever standeth in the way of their wicked lusts and practises. Oh this was better then burnt-offerings without this: this was that Actuall, Magisteriall, and Ma∣jesticall kind of devotion, that pleased God farr better then an oxe that hath hornes and hoofes. Verse 25. Have ye offered unto me sacrifices &c.] i. e. To me only, and not to other Gods also? did ye not begin betime to play the idolaters? and do ye not fill up the measure of your fathers? Mat. 23.32. They sojourned in Egypt, and brought thence a golden calfe: Jeroboam sojourned there, and brought home two; which were no sooner up but you were down upon your knees, where still you continue at your mawmet-worship. Is it not even so, o house of Israel? And was it not even so in the wildernesse,. where and when I bore with your evill man∣ners about the time of forty yeares Act. 13.18. (for full forty it was not, but 38. onely and some few moneths) and was provoked by you ten times Num. 14.22. when I had but newly brought you out of Egypt chap. 3.1, 2. So that your Idola∣try is hereditary; and therefore the more ingrained and to be abhorred. God alone is to be worshipped Exod. 20.2, 3. 1 King. 18.21. truely that there be no halting, and totally that there be no halving. Be the Gods of the heathen good-fellowes, saith One: the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his glory with another. For indeed he is the One Deut. 6.4. and Onely God, Psal. 86.10. besides whom Psal. 18.32. without whom 1 Sam. 2.2. and beyond whom 1 King 8.6. there is none other Deut. 4.39. nor any like him 2 Sam. 7.22. nor any with him Esay. 44.24. he is the onely Lord, and besides Him there is none other Joel. 2.27. Verse 26. But ye have born the tabernacle of your Moloch] That Idols were wont to be carried upon mens shoulders we may see Esay. 46.7. Baruc. 6.3. and 2.5. That Moloch or Malcom was the abomination of the Ammonites, (who called him their king, as the Israelites called the true God Es. 44.6. and 33, 22.) See 1 King. 11.5. that the Israelites should do thus in the wildernesse (where they had Gods tabernacle erected) carrying about them privily some portable chap∣pels or pictures of these Idols (as some hold they did,Rom. 1.23. 2 Thess. 2.10, 11. and Josephus seemes to say as much) was monstrous wickednesse, and the guise of men given up to a reprobate sense. and Chiun your images] that is, your notable image, the plurall for the singular, as oft; especially in names of dignity. Hierom here for Chiun hath Rephan; confer Act. 7.43. and the Commentatours thereon. Aben-Ezra thinks that by Chiun is meant the planet Saturn, called chivan in the Arabick. And other Hebrews by the starr of your God (that is, the starr which is your God. See Esay. 21.9.) under∣stand Mereury. Verse 17. Therefore will cause you] Idolatry is a land-desolating sin. beyond Damascus] and not only so, but also beyond Babylon Act. 7 by the way of Damascus, by Tiglath Pileser sent for by Ahaz, for that purpose Es. 8.4. King. 15.29. CHAP. VI. Verse 1.In utramv is aurem dorin. WOe to them that are at ease in Zion] that lye sleeping on both sides, and slighting the former menaces, as Leviathan doth the iron∣weapons Iob. 41.27. that live as if ye were out of the reach of Gods rod: and as for all your enemies, ye puff at them, saying: We shall not be moved, we shall
never be in adversity, Psal. 10.5, 6. To these sleepers in Zion, God here sends forth his summons (the word Hoi signifieth as well Heus as Vae, Ho, as Wo, Esay 55.1. Zach. 2.6. Ho, ho, come forth) that were quiet and still, Zach. 1.11. lulled asleep by Satan, or rather cast into a dead lethargy: Sampson-like their enemies are upon them, and they fast asleep the while: Ishbosheth-like they stretch themselves upon their beds of ivory, till they lose, not their precious lives onely, but their im∣mortall souls. Security ushereth in destruction: those that are at ease in Zion, shall be raised by a dreadfull Woe rung in their ears, that shall make their hearts fall down, and their hairs stand upright. In the froth of carnall security and sensuall delights is bred that worm of conscience that never dieth, Mar. 9. and here begins to grub and gnaw: like as while the Crocodile sleepeth with open mouth, the Ichneumon, or Indian Rat shoots himself into his bowels: after which he never is at ease, as having his entrails daily devoured: so that one while he will be in the wa∣ter, and anon after on the land, till life fails him. and trust in the mountain of Samaria,] Are carnally confident and secure, as good David also was, when gotten upon his strong mountain, Psal. 30.6, 7.. Septuag. but was soon confuted: Thou didst hide thy face and I was troubled. The best are apt by rest, to contract rust: and being full-fed to wax wanton, Deut. 32.15. To affect more mundi delicias quam Christi divitias, as One saith, the worlds dainties then Christs comforts: to trust in uncertain riches, then to rely upon the living God, who giveth them all things richly to enjoy. This must be lookt to:1 Tim. 6.17. for it hath a woe hanging at the heels of it, Jer. 17.5, 6. Psal. 52.7, 9. which are named chief of the Nations,] Heb. expressely named, declared, notified, celebrated, chief,] the head, or first fruits; the head and height, Principium, id est, praecipuum gentium: So Amalec is called the first of the Nations, Numb. 24.20. haply they held themselves so:Justin. lib. 2. as the Egyptians afterwards boasted much of their Antiquity, and the Chinois at this day do of their excellency, and perspicuity above other Nations. Many wicked ones are of great renown in this world, Psal. 73.4, 6. and stand much upon their titles and termes of honour: who yet in the next generation shall be utterly forgotten, Psal. 109.13. for that their names are not written in heaven, Rev. 17.8. and look how much they have glorified themselves, and lived deliciously, so much torment and ignominy shall be given them, Rev. 18.7. To whom the house of Israel came.] The whole house of Israel, viz. the two tribes to Zion, the ten to Samaria, Vel sacrorum causà, vel judiciorum, saith Dru∣sius, as to places of worship, and besies, courts of Justice. Others sence it thus, The house of Israel came unto them, that is, the Israelites invaded those nations, that once held Zion and Samaria, and succeeded them therein: not by any strength of their own, but by Gods mighty hand and out-stretched arm, which they (ungrate∣full wretches) acknowledge not: but came in for themselves, so Ribera rendreth it, Quasi sibi tantum nati, se solos esse aliquid, as if they were the onely proprietaries, the sole owners of all; and owed no service to any chief-Lord. Such insolency grows from security. See Job 21.23. Verse 2. Passe ye unto Calneh and see,] Take a voyage to, and a view of those most famous bordering cities, Calneh, or Selencia in Mesopotamia on the East, (whereof see Gen. 10.10. the beginning of Nimrods Kingdom) Hamath the great, or Antiochia, (now Aleppo, a famous Mart-town) on the North. Then go down Southward to Gath of the Philistines, which was of all the five satrapies potissima & potentissima, and is therefore called Metheg-Ammah, 2 Sam. 8.1. with 1 Chron. 18.1. because, being a town of great strength, it was, as it were, the bridle, where∣by the whole countrey about was kept in awe: It was afterwards known by the name of Diocaesarea. Away to these neighbouring cities, and see in them, as in so many Optick-glasses, how much more God hath done for you then for them in every respect; the greater is your guilt, and the deeper will be your judgement in the end, for abuse of these rich mercies (of a fertile soil, a large Empire, &c.) to secu∣rity, oppression, and other detestable vices and villanies. be they better then these kingdoms?] sc. of Judah, and Israel? which were cer∣tainly multis nominibus laudatissima, very fruitfull and pleasant countries,. Deut. 8.7, 8, 9. Numb. 14.7, 8. whatsoever Strabo spitefully reporteth to the contrary,Lib. 7. being therein worse then Rabshakeh, Esay 36.17.
Or their border greater then your border,?] sc. till the Babylonians, Syrians, and Assyrians took part of your countrey from you, and cooped you up, cut you short. And now that you are so straitned for room, doth not the Lord recompense you in multitudes of people? Judea was not above 200. miles long, and 50. miles broad, say Geographers: and yet what huge armies brought they into the field? Observe then saith the Prophet, the great things that God hath done for you above other Nations, and walk accordingly: or else take lessons out of their losses, and damages, and know that the case will be your own, Aliorum perditio vestra sit cautio: Learn by other mens harms, to beware. Verse 3. Ye that put farre away the evil day,] Wo to you that would do so, if you could; that fondly perswade your selves there is no such danger in evil-doing, as the Prophets pretend: but that all shall be hail and well with you, though yee walk in the imagination of your hearts, to adde drunkennesse to thirst, Deut. 29.19. and to heap up sin as high as heaven,Quae longinqua sunt, non metu∣untur. Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 5. Rev. 18.5. This cursed security and hope of impunity, is the source of much wickednesse in the world. See Prov. 7.19, 20. Matth. 24.48. with the Notes. It is a sad thing when men shall say, as Ezek. 12.27. The vision that he seeth is for many dayes to come: and he prophesieth of the times that are farre off. This Atheisticall conceit accelerates the judgement, vers. 28. Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, there shall none of my words be prolonged any more: but the word which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord God.Val. Ma. Tarditatemque supplicij, gravitate compensabo. and cause the seat of violence to come near.] Amotâ Justitiae sellâ: setting a∣side the care of justice, together with the fear of God, for whom yee ought to have reserved the chief room in all your publike meetings, as the Ethiopian Judges are said to do. Atque vi an geritur res, might overcomes right: and robberies are daily done by authority. See Psal. 94.20. The throne of iniquity shall not have fellowship with God: neither will he take the wicked by the hand, whatever those corrupt Vice-gods do,2 Pet. 2.3. (as we may in the worst sence, best terme them) whose judge∣ment now of a long-time lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not. The evil day that they put farre away, will suddenly surprize them, and then what will they do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what will they answer him? Job 31.14. Sed quam caecus inest vitijs amor? omne faturum,Claudian. l. 2. in Eutrop. Despicitur, suadentque brevem praesentia fructum, &c. Verse 4. That lie upon beds of ivory,] which was a commodity far fet (even out of India) and dear bought;Ezek. 27.15. precious, and sumptuous. The wealthier sort used to deck their houses with such kind of beds deckt with ivory (lectis eburatis, as Plautus phraseth it) as Esth. 1.6. with gold and silver: hence their houses are called houses of ivory, chap. 3.15. and 1 King. 22.39. See Plin. lib. 33. cap. 11. Herat. l. 2. Sat. 6. Here then is condemned their luxury, and abuse of Gods good gifts, with neglect of the weal-publike, and contempt of judgements threatned. and stretch themselves upon their couches,] Pandiculantur in suis cubilibus, so Rabbi Solomon.. Others render it, redundantibus ac diffluentibus. Wo to them that delight in over-long and large coverlets, curtains, &c, superfluously hanging down on all sides upon the very ground; so Kimchi. The Seventy and Vulgar render it, Wo to those that wantonnize upon their couches, melting in sensuall pleasures. Com∣pare 1 Tim. 5.6. Jam. 5.5. God grudgeth not his people an honest affluence, Psal. 23.4.Lascivientes, Deliciantes. but granteth them all things richly to enjoy, 1 Tim. 6.17. Howbeit he re∣quireth them to be sober and watch: not making provision for the flesh, to live af∣ter the lusts thereof, but walking decently as in the day; not in rioting and drun∣kennesse, not in chambering and wantonnesse, &c. Rom. 13.13, 14. and eat the lambs out of the flock,] E grege, id est, egregios ac optimos, the very best and fattest morsels, pampering their paunches; swinish belly-gods. and the calves out of the middest of the stall.] The French call them high-grasse∣veals.Veaux de haute graisse. Nothing would down with them but tid bits, , dainty and goodly, Rev. 18.9. Those Abbey-lubbers of the Romish Synagogue are compared to fed horses, pampered in their cloysters (as war-horses in their stalls or stables)
and prepared unto battell, Rev. 9.7. Lawfull it is, I grant, at some times to eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet, and to please the appetite,Neh. 8.10. Deut. 4.26. to gratifie it with what it liketh and lusteth after. But yet it must still be remembred, that it is a finne to feed without fear; and a shame for a servant of God, to be a slave to his palate. Eat such things as are set before you, saith Christ to his disciples,. be it never so homely, if wholesome, Luke 10.8. And Gen. 9.3. after, Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you, it is added, even as the green herb have I gi∣ven you all things, that is, soberly and without curiosity, to take and make use of such meats as are at hand, as Dr. Willet interprets it. And this, Nature seems to teach man, in giving him so narrow a mouth, throat, and belly:Hexap. in loc. whereas to swine she hath given a wide mouth, a very thick neck, a large belly, and but a very little brains: that they might the sooner grow fat,Chrysost. Theatr. natu. 354. and take no other thought but for the belly saith Bodine. Verse 5. That chant (or quaver) to the sound of the viol,] That sing division with much variation of their voyces, and many distinctions of diverse tones,Particulari∣zant, they sing their parts in consort. modu∣lations fractions. The Hebrew root-word signifieth the single grains of grapes, that remain after the vintage: or the particular berries, Lev. 19.10. Our word parting, answereth to the Hebrew peret. It is their wanton and unseasonable musick (emasculating, dissolving, and drawing out their spirits) that they are here threat∣ned for. This abuse of Musick (given to men for better purposes) is elsewhere condemned, chap. 5.23. Esay 5.12. Exod. 32.18. Eccles. 2.8. God made not man more avium minurire to sport on earth, as Leviathan doth in the sea: to spend his whole time (as the people of Tombutum in Africk are said to do) in singing and dancing: and, when he is cast out of one paradise, to make himself another. It is charged as a foul fault upon those sensualists in St. James, that they had lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton, Jam, 5.5. and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David.] Whose example, likely they pleaded, to patronize their fidlings, and chaunting of ribald songs. But his musick and theirs agreed like harp and harrow, as the proverb is. Two may do the same thing, and yet it not be the same; because not from the same principles, and for the same purposes: as we see in Cain and Abel, the Pharisee and the Pub∣lican, David and these singsters, who did nothing lesse then help forward their de∣votion by Musick, as did David: and as did our late holy Esty, who when he sat and heard a sweet consort of Musick,D. Halls Art of div. Medit. seemed upon this occasion carried up for the time before-hand, to the place of his rest, saying very passionately; What musick may we think there is in heaven? Verse 6. That drink wine in bowles,] Non in scyphis, cyathis, aut calicibus, not in cups, pots, or chalices, but in vessels of price, and of largest receipt, that they may bee counted and called (as young Cicero was) Tricongii, such as can drink whole-ones, and no small-ones neither. (The Seventy and the Chaldee render it, In phials, others in goblets) Diotimus of Athens, for his excellive drinking, was termed , Tun-dish.Ailian. lib. 2. cop. 41. Alexander the Great gloried that he could drink down any man: and one time inviting many to supper, he provided a crown of 180 pound to be given to those that drank most: and fourty one of the company killed them∣selves with drinking to get that crown. Darius king of Persia, caused this to bee ingraven upon his tomb; I was able to drink much wine, and to bear it bravely. Was not this to glory in his shame? had he no way else to shew his valour?Athen. Did he never take notice of that Persian law; that it should not bee lawfull for their King to be drunk but onely once a yeer, when they sacrificed to the Sunne,Idem. whom they took to be the greatest of the gods? How much better Bathsheba, in her Le∣muels-lesson. It is not for Kings, Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes, strong-drink: lest they drink and forget the law, &c. Prov. 31.4. And if not for kings, much lesse is it for others to be drunk with wine wherein is excesse, Eph. 5.18. lest with Nabal, and the rich glutton, they drink deep of the wine of Gods wrath: and have the full vials of his vengeance poured upon them for ever. and anoint themselves with the chief ointments,] After the manner of the Jewish Nation, whereof see 2 Sam. 12.20. Eccles. 9.8. Luk. 7.38, 46. Psal. 23.5. and 104.15. Mat. 6.17. They spare for no cost, or pains to please all their senses. And such a prodigall pleasure-monger was that rich citizens sonne, mentioned in the
second part of the Theatre of Gods judgments: who to please all his five senses at once, allowed to the delight of every severall sense a severall hundred pound. For which end 1.Theat. of Gods judgments part. 2. pag. 110.111. He bespake a curious faire room richly hangd, and furnished with the most exquisite pictures, to please the eye. 2. He had all the choysest Musick that could be heard of, to give content to the eare. 3. He had all the Aromatickes and odoriferous perfumes, to delight his cent in smelling. 4. All the Candies, Preserves, Junkets, even to the stretching of the Apothecaries or Confectionaries art, to please his taft. 5. And lastly, a beautifull and faire strumpet lodg'd with him in a soft bed, and the daintiest linnen that could be compassed to accommodate his touch: and all these this Epicure (more then ever Sardanapalus did) enjoy'd at one instant. He spent thirty thousand pounds in three yeares, and swore after all, that if he had ten times more then ever he had, he would spend it all to live one week like a God, though he were sure to be damn'd in hell the next day after. they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph] i. e. of the Israelites Psal. 80.2. and 77.16. Amos. 5.6. Joseph is mentioned and put for all the rest, because he was famous amongst his brethren,Aug. de doct. Christian. lib. 4. cap. 6. vel ob mala quae pendit, vel ob bona quae rependit, both for the evils that he suffered, and for the good turns that he returned. Time was when poor Joseph was ill handled by his mercilesse brethren; and could not be heard, though he used many intreaties, Gen. 37.23, any 42, 21. They when they had cast him into the pit, there to pine and perish with hunger, sat down to eat, and so to ease themselves of any remorse of conscience, that might be wrought in them.See 1 Sam. 22.8.  They should have been sick at heart (as the word here signifieth) for the affliction (the confraction, the breaking to shivers) (of Joseph: poor Reuben was so, as farr as he durst shew it: and Joseph forgat not his kindnesse, when he came to his greatnesse. God (who is all bowels) will never forget those that forget not his afflicted; but commiserate and relieve them, as they have opportunity and ability. Verse 7. Therefore now shall they go captive with the first] Heb. in the head of those that go captive: as they have been first in the degrees of honour, and of sin, so shall they be now of punishment, according to that saying of the Centurist, Ingentia beneficia,Magdeburg. Esa. 50.11. ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia. This they shall have of Gods hand, they shall lie down in sorrow: yea many sorrowes shall be to these wicked ones, Psal. 32.10. these mercilesse men shall not have the least mercy shew∣ed them, Iam. 2.13. God will surely set off all hearts from such (as he did from Haman, for whom in his misery not one man openeth his mouth once to intercede) and he will punish magnum luxum magno luctu, as One saith, great luxury with great necessity. and the banquet of them that stretched themselves] They shall neither have mind nor mony to make feasts, that were wont to lay on in all sorts of superfluities. That prodigall above-mentioned was by a just hand of God reduced to extreame penury, and cast off by all his former acquaintance.Sen. That luxurious Roman Apicius (the expences of whose kitchin amounted to more then two millions of gold,) having eaten up his estate, and fearing poverty poysoued himself: leaving behind him ten bookes, of direction how to furnish and set forth a feast with all manner of va∣rieties, which now he could sooner talk of then take of. The word here rendred banquet is taken for a funerall feast Jer. 16.5. and so some think the sense here is;Lively. they shall be carried captive into a farr country, and there be deprived of the ho∣nour of burialls; which is a judgement elsewhere threatened Jer. 22.18, 19. Aben-Ezra rendreth it, facesset canticum the song of the wanton shall be set packing: and for this he alledgeth, that in the Arabick dialect, the root word here used, signifieth to lift up the voyce, either for joy or grief; The Seventy render it, the neighing of horses: as noting their immoderate lust according to Jer. 5.8. And this sense Ribera commendeth. Verse 8. The Lord God hath sworn by himself] Heb. by his soul, which is him∣self: sith whatsoever is in God, is God. So chap. 4.2. Gen 22.16. Heb. 6.16.17. Or, He hath sworn by his soule, that is Seriè & ex animo Seriously and heartily. Among the Heathens ex animi sui sententia was instead of an oath. saith the Lord God of hosts] who hath power enough in his hand to performe what he hath so solemnly assured.
I abhorr the excellency (or, the pomp and pride) of Jacob] So Basil speaking of the Western Church, Odi fastum istius Ecclesiae saith He, I hate their pride. This he elsewhere calleth  the Western brow (from the fore-head, that seat of pride and arrogancy) which at length occasioned that lamentable separation of the Easterne or Greek church from communion with the Latine:Field. Gerson. Carlton. the other foure Patriarks dividing themselves from the bishop of Rome. Pride is an odious evill; fitly compared by One to a great swelling in the body, which unfits it for any good service: and is apt to putrify, and break, and run with loathsome and foule mat∣ter: so doth Pride disable the soule from doing duty, and at last breaks forth into odious deeds, abominable to God and Man. There are that by Excellency or Glory here understand their glorious Temple, and other priviledges, wherein they so much gloried. See Psal. 47.5. But Mercer thinks it rather meant of the ten tribes then of the two, whose crown of pride is elsewhere taxed Esay. 28.1. Hos. 7.10. The pride of Israel testifieth to his face, it breaketh out in his forehead, as a great master-pock. therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein] Heb. with the fulnesse thereof: both persons and things are all forfeited, and shall be seized by the enemy; be the city of Samaria never so rich a Cargazon, so full a Magazine of Men and meanes, I will shut them up (so the word signifieth) after a strait siege, into the ene∣mies hand, who shall make a spoyle of them. Verse 9. And it shall come to passe, if there remaine, ten men &c.] that is many, as Zech. 8.23. Levit. 26.26. because ten is the utmost of single number q. d. Though a considerable company escape the enemy, yet pestilence or some other destruction shall put an end to them. they shall dye] See this fulfilled 2 King. 17.5. In which common calamity what an happynesse had they, that belonging to the election of grace could confidently say as Hab. 1 12. Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy One?Occidere potest, non laedere. We shall not dye (or if we do, death may kill us but cannot hurt us) O Lord thou hast ordained them for judgement, and O mighty God thou hast established them for correction. The wicked are killed with death Rev. 2.23. undone by it:Hos. 2.15. to them it is no other but a trap-dore to hell; as to the Saints it is as the valley of Achor, a door of hope, the very day-break of eternall brightnesse. Verse 10. And a mans uncle shall take him up] Him, that is every one of the ten a fore-mentioned, being now dead of the plague, shall his uncle or dearest friend take up on his own shoulders, for want of the ordinary mercenary officers (called by the Latines Vespillones, Libitinarii, Pollinctores) their best friends shall be forced to bury or burn their dead corpses. So Seneca in Oedipo. —portat hunc aeger parens Supremum ad ignem, mater hunc amens gerit, Properatque ut alium regerat in eundem regum. To bring out the bones out of the house] for buriall as 1 Sam. 31.15 the flesh being first burnt. Bones are a part of a mans body; and therefore to be commit∣ted to the earth, or laid up in a safe place as Iosephs were Exod. 13.19. Iosh. 24.32. and with his, the rest of the Patriarks doubtlesse Act. 7.16 This is one of the dues of the dead 1.. In honour of God who made mans body with admirable art Psal. 139.5. and as it were by the book verse 14.15, 16.2. Next because the dead body was sometime a Temple of the Holy Ghost, and an instrument of many holy actions 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. and 2 Cor. 6.16. 3. because it shall be raised one day and conformed to Christs glorious body the Standard Philip. 2.21. We know, saith the same Apostle, that when Christ, our life, shall appeare, we shall appeare with him in glory: like as in the transfiguration, that body of Moses which was hid in the valley of Moab, appeared with Christ in the hill of Tabor. and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the house] To him that burneth the dead, as afore, that assisteth a mans uncle to interr him. The Jewes did not usu∣ally burn but bury: yet sometimes they did Jer. 34. and 1 Kings. 31. and at this time they were forced by the raging pestilence to do it (as Hierome here noteth) for the preventing of stench and further infection.
Is there yet any with thee?] sc. left alive: or hath death made a clean rid∣dance? Or thus: Are there yet any more dead corpses, which I may carry foorth for the buriall? and he shall say No:] Or, And he shall say An end, a totall consumption: they are all dead, and gone. A sad verdict. then shall he say, Hold thy tongue] sc. beare it patiently,Has, St. fret not, murmure not, 'tis Gods doing Psal. 39.9. Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God Zeph. 1.7. for we may not make mention of the Name of the Lord] This is vox desperantis the voice of despaire and despondensy: and it is as if he had said: it is bootlesse to pray; for God is set to plague us, and will not be pacified; Surely there is no hope: but we are all Free among the dead, like the slaine that lie in the grave whom God remembreth no more, Psal. 88.5. neither helpeth it us to remember or mention him any more. Men under sharp afflictions are apt to think that there is left them neither hope of better nor place of worse, as the Church in the Lamentations. Others sense it otherwise: but to me this seemeth the likeliest. Verse 11. For behold the Lord commandeth] Calamities, and they come: the Chaldeans, and they are at hand with their battel-axes, but it is he that gives them their commission, and biddeth them Fall on. and he will smite the great house with breaches &c] i. e.aequo pulsat pede &c. he will destroy rich and poor together; pale death will knock at both their houses with an even foot, as in time of plague, earthquake or the like Epidemicall evill. The grave is the Congre∣gation house of all living Iob. 30.23. whereinto men chop oft before they think: as a man that walks in the snow may into a marle-pit. The mortall scyth is master of the royall scepter: and it mowes down the lillies of the crown, as well as the grass of the field. Death is the onely king against whom there is no rising up, as Augur phraseth the most absolute predominance Prov. 30.31. it levelleth Lords and Losels, and layes all wast: breaking down the greater houses and cleaving the lesser, with an utter extermination of all. Search you therefore, search you, O nation not desired; before the decree come forth &c. Zeph. 2.1, 2. After-wit here helps not: repentance, though true may come too late in respect of temporall judgements, as in Moses Deut. 1.37. and David 2 Sam. 12.10. Verse 12. Shallhorses runne upon the rock?] Is it possible they should do so, and not first break their hoofs, and then their necks? will the rider therefore venture there? were it not matchlesse madnesse in him? will one plow there with oxen?] Sure he will conceive it too hard a tug, and too vain a labour. Hierom rendreth it Bubalis, with wild-oxen: which, not accusto∣med to the yoke, are like to make but wilde work where-ever they are plowed with. Now as there is no good horse-racing upon a rock, nor fit plowing there: so neither must you ever hope to escape unpunished, or to keep up your Common∣wealth unshattered, so long as ye deal thus preposterously, perversly, and absurdly, Prov. 14.14. That of Virgil is not much unlike: Atque idem jungat vulpes,Eclog. 3. & mulgeat hircos. for ye have turned judgement into gall, &c.] Or, into poyson: the Chaldee ren∣dreth it, into the head of hurtfull serpents. The word seemeth to signifie the poyson of serpents, which is in the head. See Hos. 10.4. with the Note. and the fruit of righteousnesse into hemlock.] Or, Wormwood, as if ye were a kin to that Starre in the Revelation that is stiled Wormwood,Revel. 8.11. Bellarm lib. 4. de Pontif. Romam. that great Antichrist, who would make the world beleeve, that he hath power de injustitia facere justitiam, ex nihilo aliquid, ex virtute vitium, that is, of injustice to make justice, of nothing to make something, of vertue vice, to dispence with any of the ten Commande∣ments,In Extrav. to make new articles of the Creed, to dispose of all kingdoms at his pleasure, and what not? Pope John 23 saith, that he may grant a dispensation against the law of Nature and of Nations,Caranza Sum. Conc: sess: 13. against St. Paul, and St. Peter, against the four Gospels, &c. The Councel of Constance comes in with a Non-obstante against Christs own institution, with-holding the cup from the Sacrament: and the like for priests marriages, prayers in a known tongue, singing of Psalms, &c. When the Car∣dinalls
meet to chuse a Pope, they make a vow, whosoever is chosen, he shall swear to such Articles as they make. And Sleydan telleth us, that the Pope is no sooner chosen, but he breaks them all, and checks their insolencies, as if they went about to limit his power, to whom all power is given both in heaven and earth, both in spirituals and temporals. And indeed, he is called the Beast, in respect of his civil power, and the false-prophet in respect of his spiritual: and the Starre Wormwood, because being himself in the gall of bitternesse, and bond of perdition, he turneth all judgement into gall, and the fruit of righteousnesse into wormwood. See Chap. 5.7. Verse 13. Ye which rejoyce in a thing of nought] In the creature, saith à Lapide, which is a meer Nothing: in your wealth and strength (called hornes in the next clause) which are an uncertainty, an obscurity, as the Apostle deemed them 1 Tim. 6.17. and have no solid subsistence, saith Solomon, Prov. 23.5.. though the foolish world call them substance, and goods: Indeed it is onely opinion that sets the price upon them, as when gold is raised from twenty shillings to two and twenty, the gold is the same: estimation only raiseth it. It is said of the people of the East-Indies in the Isle Zeiilon that having an apes tooth got from them, which was a conse∣crated thing by them, they offered an incredible masse of treasure to recover it. Such things of nought, are highly prized and pursued by the worlds  by worthlesse persons,. Act. 25.23. such as Anthiocus was in all his state Dan. 11.21. and Agrippa in all his pomp (or as the Greek hath it, in all his phantasy or vaine shew) and as these voluptuaries in the text, who had their wine and their musick, fat calves, and choycest oyntments wherein they held themselves happy verse. 4.5, 6. but the Pro∣phet telleth them that in rejoycing in these low things, they rejoyced in a thing of nought: they fed altogether upon ashes, a deceived heart had turned them aside, so that they could not deliver themselves from these empty vanities, nor say (as wise men would have done,) Is there not a lie in my right hand. Esay 44.20. Which say, Have we not taken to us horns,] yet, no doubt: but such as God by his Carpenters can soon cut off, Zech. 1.20, 21, or without them, by his own bare hand, Psal. 75.11. But what an arrogant brag is here? Have we not taken? and to us? and horns? and by our own strength? Hic Deus nihil fecit, Here God did nothing; they were all the doers: so small a winde blowes up bubble, Sic levè sic parvum est, animum quod laudis avarum Subruit, aut reficit.— It is a notable witty expression of Luther; By mens boasting of what they have done, saith He, Hac ego feci, haec ego feci, This and that I have done,Luth. in Psal. 127. they become nothing else but faeces, that is dregs: if themselves were any thing, they would not thus rejoyce in a thing of nothing: they would not crack in this sort. Verse 14. But behold, I will raise up against you a nation, &c.] which shall be a cooler to your courage, a rebater to your swelth, a meanes to take you a link lower, and to stain the glory of your pride. I tell you not what a nation it is, that you may imagine the worst: but you will finde their quiver is an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men, and no lesse mercilesse, Jer. 5.16, 17. and they shall afflict you (or crush you) from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of the wildernesse] from one end of your land to the other; that as ye have filled it from corner to corner with your uncleannesses Ezra. 9.11. so there may passe over it an overflowing scourge to wash the foul face of it, as once the old world. Hamath was before noted to be Antiochia, which was one of the bounds of the land of Israel to the North-East. the river of the wildernesse] is else where called the river of Egypt, as some will have it, See Num. 34.5, 8. Deut. 3.17. Iosh. 13.3. and 15.47. 1 Chron. 13.35. where the wildernesse was Joel. 1.20. I cannot but concurr with Kimchi, who by the river of the valleys here, understandeth the dead sea, comparing this text with 2 King. 14.25. & Deut. 3.17. It being common in Scripture to call lakes and great rivers by the name of Seas, Luke 5.1. with Num. 34.11.Josephus. Galenus. The dead sea also is in Humane Authours called the lake Asphaltites the lake of Palestina, of Sodom, &c. It lieth to the South-west: and is elsewhere made the bound of the Promised land, Num. 34.3. Josh. 15.2.
CHAP. VII. Verse 1. THus hath the Lord God shewed unto me,] sc. in a Propheticall vision: this being the first of those five that follow, to the end of the Prophe∣sie: all foretelling the evils that should befall this people, to whom Amos is again sent, as Ahijah was to Jeroboams wife with heavie tidings, and as Ezekiel was afterwards to his rebellious countreymen, with a roul written full of lamentations, and mourning, and woe.Ezech. 2.10. and behold he formed grashoppers,] Or, locusts, fore-runners of famine, Joel 1.4. (See the Note there) or, (as some will) of the Assyrians, whom the divine justice made a scorpion to Israel, as Israel had been a scourge to Judah. When the Israelites were in their flourish, as the grasse or wheat is in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter groweth, they had been first mowed by Benhadad, king of Syria: but, growing up again under Jeroboam their king, they were devoured by Pul and his Army, as by so many greedy locusts. In the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth,] For in those fat and fertile countreys they used Luxuriem segetum tener â depascere in herba.Virg. Georg. 1. Now if the latter growth were eaten up too, what else could follow but extreme famine? It was the latter growth after the kings mowings.] Or, sheep-shearings, as some read it: but the former is better: and Diodate here noteth, that it is thought that the kings did take the first crop, in esum & usum jumentorum, to keep their warre horses, and for other services: leaving the latter mowings for other cattle, who were taught to say, After your Majestie, is good manners. Verse 2. When they had made an end of eating,] Not the corn onely, but the grasse, to the very roots; besides a pestilent stench left behinde them; when, I say, they had done their worst. Prayer is the best lever at a dead lift: as is to bee seen, Jam. 5.18. upon the prayer of Elias the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit, after three years and a halfs drought; when it might well have been thought that root, and fruits, and all had been dried up, and that prayer had come too late. But that's seldome seen: as all Gods people can say experimentally. But what shall we think of Jamblicus,Lib. 5. cap. 27. a Heathen Authour, who hath such a com∣mendation of prayer, which might well beseem an experienced Christian? He cal∣leth it, Rerum divinarum ducem & lucem, copulam, quâ homines cum Deo conjun∣guntur, the guide and light of divine duties: the band whereby men are united to God. Nay he proceedeth and saith, that prayer is clavis instar, qua Dei penetra∣lia aperiuntur, instead of a key, wherewith Gods cabinet is opened: and much more to the same purpose: All this the Prophet knew full well, and therefore sets to work in good earnest: and as when a cart is in a quagmire, if the horses feel it coming, they'le pull the harder, till they have it out: so He. Then I said, O Lord God forgive, I beseech thee,] Sin, he knew, was their grea∣test enemy; the mother of all their misery. Of that therefore hee prayes for par∣don, and then hee knew all should be well: as when the sore is healed, the plaister falleth off. Of Christ it is said, that He shall save his people from their sinnes, Mat. 1.21. as the greatest of evils: and the Church in Hosea chap. 14.2. cries, Take away all iniquity. Feri Domine, feri, saith Luther, nam à peccatis absalutus sum. Smite me as much as thou pleasest, now that thou hast forgiven my sins. By whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.] Here is much in few. It is Jacob, thy confederate: and he is down upon all four: and he is but small, low and little, and (as some render it) Quis stabit Jacobo? Behold, He whom thou lovest is sick, Ioh. 11.3. They that are thine by covenant, are at a very great under: trodden on by the buls of Basan, as a poor shrub of the wildernesse, so the Psalmists word imports, Psal. 102.17. Why shouldest thou be as a man astonied, (that knowes not
whether he had best help or not?) or as a mighty man that cannot save?Jer. 14.9. Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us; and we are called by thy Name: leave us not. Thus the Prophets indeed prayed for their unkind countreymen: so did Paul, Athana∣sius, Luther. I have obtained of God, said He, that never whilest I live shall the Pope prevail against my countrey: when I am gone, let those pray that can pray. And indeed, he was no sooner gone, but all Germany was on a flame:Act. & Mon. as when Austins head was laid, Hippo was soon surprized by the enemy; and when Pareus's, Heidelberg. Verse 3. The Lord repented for this: it shall not be, saith the Lord.] Here was mutatio rei, non Dei: facti, non consilij: a change not of Gods will, but of his work; therefore (by way of explication) it followeth, it shall not bee saith the Lord. To speak properly, there can be no repentance in God, 1 Sam. 15.20. but this is spoken after the manner of men: and it notably setteth forth the power of faithfull prayer, able after a sort, to alter Gods minde, and to transfuse a dead Palsie into the hands of Omnipotencie, Exod. 32.10. where God is fain to be-speak his own freedom: and Moses is represented as the great Chancellour of heaven. Verse 4. And behold the Lord God,] whose Asterisk, or starry Note this behold is, saith Tarnovius, stirring up to attention. Another compareth it to an hand in the margent of a book, pointing to some notable thing. Another to the sounding of a trumpet before some proclamation: or to the ringing of a bell before the ser∣mon of some famous Preacher. the Lord God called to contend by fire,] that is, by parching heat and drought, causing dearth, as Joel 1.19. For which purpose, God called his Angels, those mi∣nistring spirits that execute his judgements upon the wicked (as they did once upon Sodom) to contend for him (a metaphor from civil courts) to plead for him by fire, to destroy the perverse Israelites by fire and brimstone,Esay 66.16. Ezech. 38.22. as they had done So∣dom and Gomorrah (so some interpret it according to the letter) or by the woe of warre, compared to fire, 2 King. 14.26. Esay 26.11. as being a misery which all words (how wide soever) want compasse to expresse: Or, by immo∣derate heat and drought, as afore: so great, that it devoured the great deep,] as that fire of the Lord in Eliah's time licked up the water that was in the treuch, 1 King. 18.38. See Esay 51.10. and did eat up a part.] Or, it devoured also the field: Not onely the waters, in and under the earth, that serve to make it fruitfull, but a part of the earth it self: which was altogether above and against the common course of nature.Kimchi. Some render it, and did eat up that part, or that field, sc. that mentioned verse 1. the Kings field; that as the King had chiefly offended, so he should be principally punished.Drusius. Other, interpret it by chap. 4.7. One piece was rained upon, and the piece where∣on it rained not, withered. Verse 5. Then said I, O Lord God, cease I beseech thee.] See verse 2. and perse∣vering in prayer for the publike, remember to plead, not merit but misery, Psal. 79.8, 9. and with all humility to acknowledge that it is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed: because his compassions fail not, Lam. 3.22. Verse 6. The Lord repented for this,] As he is gracious, Exod. 22.27. and quickly repenteth him of the evil, Joel 2.13. Redire nos, non perire desiderat. I said,Chryselog. I would scatter them into corners, &c. Deut. 32.26, 27. Mercy could not behold such strange wrath and cruelty, and not weep her self even sick, as it were. this also shall not be, saith the Lord.] So ready is he to yeeld himself overcome by the suits of his servants. Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus. See verse 3. Verse 7. This he shewed me, and behold,] See verse 4. The Lord stood upon a wall made by a plumb-line, &c.] Here he was set, or stood firme, (as the word signifieth) as not to be removed from his purpose, by any in∣treaties: he was fully resolved upon their ruine, and it should be done exactly, ad amussim, by line and by rule, as it were, and with so much justice, and most exqui∣site diligence, that against it should lie no manner of exception. It is said of the
Areopagites in Athens, that their sentence was so upright, that none could ever say he was unjustly condemned of them. How much more true is this of the righteous judgement of God, who must needes therefore be justified and every mouth stop∣ped? Mat. 22.12. And he was speechlesse, because self-condemned Tit. 3.11. and had not what to request. with a plumb-line in his hand] To shew that he would accurately examine their actions, and punish their pravities. (See Lam. 2.8. and 2 King. 21.13.) not sparing them as heretofore. A heavy sentence surely Psal. 130.3. Verse 8. Behold I will set a plumb-line] I will call them to a strict account and shew them no favour Jer 16.13. I will now actually execute my justice which I have hitherto suspended; and pay them home for the new and the old; bring∣ing upon them an evill, an onely evill, without mixture of mercy Ezech. 7.5. I will not againe pass by them any more] A metaphor from men that passe by such things as they slight and count inconsiderable: winking at small faults as not worthy to be reckoned upon. Hence Mic. 7.18. God is said to pardon iniquity and passe by transgression: as elsewhere he is said to bind them up in a bundle, to seale them up in a bag, to cast them behind his back, to remove them as far as the East is from the West,Psal. 103. so that he beholdeth no sin in Jacob, nor perversenesse in Israel Num. 23.21. The Church, privy to her own infirmities, calleth her self black Cant. 1.5. but Christ calleth her faire all over chap. 4.7. She saith, God hath punisht us lesse then our sins, Ezra 9.13. He saith, She hath received double for her sins Isa. 40.1. Too much saith God; too little, saith She. O beautifull con∣tention? But this is a priviledge proper to the communion of Saints, with whom God will not deale according to the rigour of his law (as he doth with the wicked) but according to his prerogative. Verse 9. And the high-places of Isaac shall be desolate] The Edomites also came of Isaac: but by a Synechdoche the Israelites only are here and ver. 16. to be un∣derstood. Like as elsewhere Heber is put for the Israelites only Num. 24.24. and Ioseph, for Ephraim Rev. 7.8. Some think that the high places of Isaac are here mentioned, to shew that they were erected by the people in an apish imitation either of Beersheba where Isaac worshipped, or of mount Moriah where Isaac should have been offered: And that Isaac is here written with Sin and not tsadi to shew that God held himself not adored, but derided by those high-places of irrision, or those ridiculous ultars, which therefore he threateneth to desolate, and lay wast. and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword] as a prelude to the utter extermination of all by the Assyrians. See this fullfilled 2 King. 15.10. and chap. 17. Jeroboam was very prosperous and victorious: yet designed to destructi∣on.Aug. Mat. 6.30. It is said of wicked men, that foeneâ quadam felicitate temporaliter floreant, they flourish to day as grass, and to morrow are cast into the oven: and as the mettle whereof men make glass is nearest melting when it shineth brightest, so are gracelesse persons nearest destruction, when at greatest lustre. The Turks ob∣serving that few of their Visiers die in their beds,Grand Sig. Serag. have this proverbe amongst them, that the greatest man is but as a statue of glasse. Verse 10. Then Amaziah the Priest of Beth-el] Observing that the prophet had foretold a desolation, and not prayed as before that it might be averted: be∣cause he saw God was fully resolved, and their destruction determined. Amos hath conspired against thee in the land] Thus Eliah was the Troubler of Israel, Jeremy a feedsman of sedition, Christ an enemy to Caesar, Luther a trumpet of rebellion, all Contra-remonstrants, antimagistraticall. As Athaliah cryed Trea∣son, Treason, when her self was the greatest traytour: and as in Nero's dayes Sedi∣tion was unicum crimen corum qui crimine vacabunt,Lipsiu. laid ordinarily to the charge of those that were most free from it, so was it here. Amos bath conspired &c. whereas Amos might well have said as Latimer did,3 Serm. bef. K. Ed. 6. As for sedition, for ought that I know, methinks I should not need Christ, if I might so say. Religion is an utter enemy to rebellion: and as there are few conscionable Christians, (Pro∣phets especially) that have not passed under this calumniation: so he cannot be rightly esteemed such an one, that deserveth it. But Amazia's honour and in∣comes were now at stake: as he well perceived when he heard Amos say, Go not
up to Bethe-el &c. the high-places of Isaac shall be destroyed: and hence, his zeale against the Prophet, like as Erasmus told the Electour of Saxony, that the Pope and his shavelings were therefore so sharp set against Luther, because he lifted at the triple crown; and sought to bring down the monks fat paunches. the land is not able to beare all his words] his burdensome prophesies (See Mal. 1.1. with the Note) much lesse can I endure them, or any faithfull servant of thine, true to his trust. Such a lying accusation we read of Esth. 3.8. made by haughty Haman against the innocent Jewes, that they kept not the kings lawes, and that therefore it were good policy to weed them out, as not to be longer en∣dured. So Francis King of France, desiring to excuse to the Protestant-Princes of Germany his cruell persecution of the Lutherans in his Kingdome, wrot to them that he looked upon them all as Anabaptists, and as enemies to civil government: and therefore used such severity against them. This gave occasion to Calvin to write his admirable Institutions, to vindicate our religion from that soule aspersion:Saultet. An∣nal. 454. the like divelish policy was afterwards used to blanch over that horrid French massacre. For it was given out, that the Protestants had conspired against the King, the Queen-mother, the kings brethren, the king of Navarre, and the Prin∣ces of the blood. There was also coyne stamped in memory of the matter, in the forepart whereof with the kings picture was this inscription, Virtus in rebelles:Cambd. Eli∣sab. 163. and on the other side, Pietas excitavit justitiam: Piety hath stirred up justice. Here was a faire glove drawn upon a foule hand: and this they learned of the devill, who was first a slanderer and then a murtherer: as those that have a mind to kill another mans dog, make the world beleeve he was mad first, that they may do it with the better pretext. Verse 11. For thus Amos saith, Jereboam shall die by the sword &c.] When did Amos say so? he said indeed that the house of Jeroboam should be smitten with the sword ver. 9. and this Amaziah maliciously transferreth to the person of Jeroboam, the more to enrage him against the Prophet: whom therefore he nameth once and againe, to create him the more displeasure. That Jeroboam died by the sword, we read not, but that his son Zechary was slaine, and his house destroyed in the next generation we find 2 King. 15. according to Amos his Prophecy. But to colour this calumny, some truth shall be admingled. and Israel shell surely be led away captive] This indeed the Prophet had oft affirmed, (though not in any of those three last visions) and it proved too true: but because Amos saith so, he must passe for a traytour against the majesty both of the king and of the people. What an impudent sycophant was this? The king and people are pretended: and what good subject can endure it? but that which ir∣ked him was, that his own authority was by this plain-dealing Prophet impaired, and his gaine like to be lessened, if the superstition of Bethel were thus decried. It is said of Phlugius and Sidonius (authours of the Interim in Germany) that among other points of Popery therein defended, they spake much for Chrisme and ex∣treame unction, ut ipsi discederent unctores,Melch. Adam. that thereby they might hold fat bisho∣pricks. Such arguments prevaile much with all self-seekers, whose covetous∣nesse and ambition usually ride without reines, and over whose neck it mattereth not. Veese 12. Also Amaziah said unto Amos] After he had maliciously misinformed the king, but prevailed not; so God would have it, in whose heart is the kings hand, & who rebuketh even kings for their sakes, saying, Doe my Prophets no harme. O thou Seer] Faire words; the better to insinuate. Mel in ore, verba lactis: Fel in corde, fraus in factis. Some think he calleth the Prophet thus by way of jeare, quasi fatidicum aut fana∣ticum, as a fortune-teller or distracted. Others, that he giveth the Prophet good words, and seemeth to give him good counsel, as fearing the people, ligam fecit. with whom Amos was in some credit: and therefore the king was told of a conspiracy against him in the middest of the house of Israel, verse. 10. Flee-thee away into the land of Judah] Age. fuge: as a friend wrote to Brentius,
when he was in danger to be surprized by the Emperours Agent,Melch. Adam. in vita Brent. Fuge, fuge Brenti citò, citiùs, citissimè, Flie for thy life, hast, hast, hast. So the Pharisees (for no great love, be sure, but only to be fairely rid of him) came and said to Christ, Get thee out and depart hence: for Herod will kill thee Luk. 13.31. into the land of Judah] This he speaketh scornfully, q. d. we are not good enough for you? you are so strict &c.Mercer. and there eat bread, and prophesie there] Invidiosè omnia & contemptim dicit: If you stay heare, you may hap to starve for it. Away therefore into your own country: and there make thee a living by prophesying. He seemes to measure Amos by himself: as if he were of those that prophesied, for an handfull of harly, and a morsell of bread, Ezek. 13.19. Mic. 3.11. and as a certaine Popish Priest confessed concerning himself and his symmists, We preach the gospell said he, tan∣tum ut nos pascat & vestiat, only to pick a living out of it. Verse 13. But prophesie not any more at Bethel] Take heed of that: lest, by diffusing too much light amongst us, thou marre our markets, and hinder the sale of our false wares. This was the naked truth of the businesse: though something else was pretended, and the kings interest pleaded. for it is the kings chappell, and the kings court] Touch these mountaines and they will smoake, Truth is a good mistresse, but such of her servants as follow her too close at heeles, may hap to have their teeth struck out. Ahab hateth Michaiah: and Herod, Iohn Baptist, and the Pope Savanarola, for their plaine dealing, laying them fast enough for it.. Great ones love it  they must heare pleasing things: or, if told of their faults, it must be done with silken words, as She said. They are usually beset with their Aiones and Negones as One hath it,Bucloc. that will say as they say: & mirifica est sympathia inter magnates & parasitos, and there is a wonderfull sym∣pathy betwixt kings and court-parasites, as was betwixt Ahab and the false pro∣phets. Few Vespasian are to be found (of whom as it was said, that he was the only One who was made the better man by being made Emperour, so) Quintilian commendeth him for this, that he was patientissimus veri most patient of truth, though never so sharp. Jeroboam was none such: or at least Amaziah the Priest of Bethel would make the Prophet so beleeve, when he tells him it is the kings court, an ill ayre for truth to breath in. Nihil veritate gravius, nihil assentati∣one suavius. Verse 14. Then answered Amos and said to Amaziah] With no lesse courage,So Ioh. 1.19.21. I suppose, then Paul and Barnabas used to the stubborne Jewes Act, 13.46. or Basil to Valent the Emperour, or Johannes Sarisburiensis to the Pope Anno 154. or Bishop Ridly, when offering to preach before the Lady Mary, and receiving a repulse, he was brought by Sr. Thomas Wharton her servant to the dining place and desired to drink. Which after he had done, he paused a whille looking very sadly: and sodainely brake out into these words. Surely I have done amisse: why so? quoth the knight: for I have drunk, said He, in that place where Gods word offered hath been refused: whereas if I had remembred my duty, I had departed immediately and shaken off the dust of my shooes;Act. & Mon. fol: 1270. for a testimony against this house. These words were by the said Bishop spoken with such a vehemency, that some of the hearers afterwards confessed the haires to stand upright on their heades. I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son] Neither born, nor bred a Prophet: neither have I rashly or ambitiously put my self upon this tremend employment: my call thereto was extraordinary. The Prophets scholars were called their sons 2 King. 2.3, 5, 7, 15. Esa. 8.18. Mar. 10.24. 1 Cor. 4.14, 17. but I was an heardman, and a gatherer of Sicomore fruit] Of meane condition, and hardly bred; so that I could live with a little, and needed not to turn Pro∣phet ventris causâ, for food sake. When one said to the Philosopher, If you will but please Dionysius, you need not feed upon green herbs, he presently replied, And if you can feed upon green herbes,Melch. Adam. you need not please Dionysius. Nature is content with a little, grace with lesse. It is not for a servant of God to be a slave to his palate: Luther made many a meale of a herring. Verse 15. And the Lord took me, as I followed the flock] As he took Elisha from the plow-taile, the Apostles from casting and mending their nets &c. Asinos elegit
Christus & idiotas, sed culdvit in prudentes: simulque dona dedit, & ministeria, he called them to the office, and withall he gifted them. He called also learned Na∣thaneel, and Nicodemus, a Master in Israel: lest, if he had called none but such as were simple, (saith Ioh. de Turrecremata) it should have been thought, they had been deceived, through their simplicity. But it is Gods way to chuse the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and things that are not, to bring to nought things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. and the Lord said unto me,] He often inculcates the Name of the Lord, to shew that there was a necessity of his prophesying: for who can safely disobey such a commander. See chap. 3.8. Aut faciendum, aut patiendum. The Philosopher could tell the Emperour, who challenged him to dispute, that there was no contest∣ing with Him that had twenty Legions at his command. Go prophesie unto my people Israel.] Keep within my precincts, and thou shalt bee sure of my protection: be true to thy trust, and I will see to thy safety. If thou have not fine manchet (as Bucer said to Bradford, encouraging him to bestow his ta∣lent in preaching) yet give the poor people barley-bread, or what ever else the Lord hath committed unto thee. Having therefore such a call from heaven to this work,Act. & Mon. 1454. with what face canst thou hinder me therein? with what countenance will ye appear before the judgement-seat of Christ (said Dr. Taylour Martyr to Stephen Gardiner, Lord Chancellour, who had thus saluted him, Art thou come, thou villain? how darest thou look me in the face for shame? knowest thou not who I am, &c?) How dare ye for shame look any Christian man in the face, seeing you have forsaken the truth, denied our Saviour Christ and his word,Ibid. 1387. and done contrary to your own oath and writing. And, if I should be afraid of your Lordly looks, why fear you not God, the Lord of us all? who hath sent us on his errand, which we must deli∣ver, and truth be spoken, however it be taken, 1 Cor. 9.16. Verse 16. Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord,] Hear, thou despiser and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in thy dayes, a work which thou wilt in no wise beleeve, though a man declare it unto thee, Acts 13.41. But whether thou wilt hear, or forbear, beleeve or otherwise, thy doom is determined, and shall bee pronounced. Hear, therefore, and give ear: be not proud,Ezek. 3.27. for the Lord hath spoken it. Oh that thou wouldst give glory to the Lord, and confesse thy sinne! Oh that thou wouldst submit to Divine justice, implore his mercy,Jer. 13.15, 16. and putting thy mouth in the dust, say as once that good man did, Veniat, veniat, verbum Domini,Melc. Ad. & submittemus, ei sexcenta si nobis essent eolla. Let the Lord speak, for his servant heareth! But because there is little hopes of that, stand forth and hear thy sentence, and the evil that shall befall thee, as sure as the coat is on thy back, or the heart in thy body. For hath the Lord spoken, and shall he not do it? Thou sayest prophesie not,] By a bold countermand to that of God in the for∣mer vers. Go, prophesie, &c. But wee to him that striveth with his maker:Esay 45.9. let the pot∣sherd strive with the ptsherds of the earth, let men meddle with their matches,Eccles. 6.10, and not with him that is mightier then they. and drop not thy word,] which is as sharp as vineger, and nitre. Or, though it were as sweet as honey, yet it would cause pain to exulcerate parts, when dropped upon them. against the house of Isaac.] though commanded so to do verse 9. Toothlesse truths would be better disgested. Verse 17. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Thy wife, &c.] Thou shalt bee sure of thy share in the common calamity, which thou wilt not hear of; but thou shalt hear and be ashamed, &c. Esay 26.11. So little is gotten by thwarting with God, and seeking to frustrate his counsell. With these froward pieces, God will shew himself froward: and if they walk contrary to him, he will also walk as crosse to them: he will tame such sturdy rebels, as he did Pharaoh,Psal. 16. Lev. 26. and that way raise him a name: all they shall get by him is but more weight of punishment; as when Je∣boiakim had burnt Jeremies roul of curses, all that he gained, was that the roul was renewed, and there were added besides thereunto, many like words, Jer. 36.32. See the like, Ier. 20.2. 1 King. 13.4. and 22.25. Acts 5.38, 39.Dum devit∣tur impletur. The counsel of God (saith Gregory) whiles shunned, is executed: the wisdom of man may wriggle, but cannot escape.
Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city,] a common strumpet,Kimchi. for a punishment of thy spirituall harlotry;Rev. 2.20 together with thy seducing my servants to commit for∣nication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. Or,Per vim stu∣prabitur. thy wife shall be an harlot,] that is, she shall be ravished by the enemy be∣fore thy face; so Theodoret, Calvin, Mercer, &c. See Esay 13.16. Lam. 5.11. The Irish rebels bound the husband to the bed-post, whiles they abused his wife be∣fore his face. And thy sonnes and thy daughters shall fall by the sword,] because thou hast ta∣ken my sonnes and my daughters, and these hast thou sacrificed unto devils to be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, that thou hast slain my chil∣dren, and brought them forth to the murtherer? Ezek. 16.20, 21. that thou hast sent so many souls to hell,Peremptores potius quam parentes. Bern. and nuzled up thine own sons and daughters in ignorance and superstition, being therein, rather a parricide then a parent? Thy land shall be divided by line,] thy purchases shall be parted among the ene∣mies:Virg. Eclog. thine ill-gotten riches shall be made a spoil to the souldier. Impius haec, &c. and thou shalt die in a polluted land,] i. e. In Assyria, filled with the unclean∣nesse of the inhabitants, from corner to corner, as Canaan was, Ezra 9.11. Lev. 26.38. Here thou shalt die for thine abominable idolatries, to thy great regret. Seldom do such escape the visible vengeance of God, as by virulent tongues, or violent hands persecute his true Prophets. Whether Amos for his boldnesse was first scourged by Amaziah, and then wounded to death by his son Ʋzziah (as some will) is un∣certaine. and Israel shall surely,] though thou wouldst not beleeve it, verse 11. CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. THus hath the Lord God shewed unto me,] viz. in this fourth vision, whereby (for better assurance, and to shake them out of their despe∣rate security) Israels utter ruine is again foretold, by a lively type, which is here, 1. propounded; 2. expounded, verse 3, 5. that he may run that readeth it, and none may fall, but with open eyes.Hab. 2.2. And behold a basket] made up haply in the form of a dog, as the word Calub seemeth to import. of Summer-fruits,] Heb. of Summer; that is, of that which the summer affor∣deth: toward the end of it especially, when fruits ripen, and even fall into the hand of the gatherer. The summer it self hath its denomination from a root that signifieth to awaken:Schindler. Pagnin. because then the fruits and flowers, that seemed to be asleep all winter-long, do awake, as it were, and shew themselves. Verse 2. Amos, what seest thou?] This the Lord asketh, to stir up attention and affection in the Prophet; who might haply need as much to be arroused, as Zachary in like case did, chap. 4.1. with whom it fared as with a drowsie person, who though awaked and set to work, is ready to sleep at it. and I said, A basket of Summer-fruit,] Apples, saith Jerome, figs, say others: and why not as well grapes ripened in the Summer-sun-shine?Rev. 14.20. & 19.15. Whereby the Holy Ghost in the Revelation, describeth such as are ready ripe for the wine-presse of Gods wrath? Nahum compareth them to stubble, laid out in the Sun a-drying, that it may burn the better, Nah. 1.10. The end is come upon my people,] An elegancy in the Originall beyond English∣ing: the Latine Interpreters have (some of them) assayed the like, but they fall farre short of it. The Old Testament is full of such Agnominations: and God seemeth delighted with them. See Jer. 1.11, 12. & 48.2. & 47.43, 44. Lam. 3.47. Amos 5.5. Mic. 1.10, 14. Zeph. 2.4. Exod. 2.10. Gen. 3.20. & 4.1, 25. & 5.29. & 17.5. & 21.5, 6, &c. There is a pedantique stile, and a majestick: an effeminate elo∣quence, and a manly. This latter is lawfull, and may very well become the man of God; who yet must not wit-wanton it in weightiest matters; but shun those more gay and lighter flashes, and flourishes, wherewith the emptiest Celles affect to bee
most fraught: as they, who for want of wares in their shops, set up painted blocks to fill up vacant shelves, as One well expresseth it. The end is come upon my people,] Exitus & exitium. As the summer is the end of the yeer, and the time of ripening fruits: so, now that this people are ripe for ruine, An end is come, is come, is eome, it watcheth for them, behold it is come, Ezek. 7.6, 7. even the precise time and terme of their finall overthrow. I will not again passe by them any more.] See chap. 7.8. God can passe by, that is, pardon his people better then any other, Mic. 7.18.Ephes. 6. (like as they that are born of God, and partake of the Divine nature, can bear wrongs best of any: compell them to go a mile, they'l be content, if it may do good, to go two: yea as farre as the shoos of the preparation of the Gospel of peace will carry them.) But as the Saints of God may not be therefore injured (which was Iulians jearing cruelty) because they are meek: so must not God be presumed upon and provoked; because he is mercifull. There is mercy with him, that he may be feared, saith the Psalmist: for abused mercy turneth into fury: and opportunities of grace are oft so head∣long, that if once past, they are irrecoverable. Wo be to that people, or person, to whom God shall say, I will not again passe by you any more. Verse 3. And the songs of the temple shall be howlings,] Heb. shall howle, shall be turned into the black-santis, as they call it, (cantus in planctum laetitia in la∣chrymas) such as I hate, chap. 5.23. and feel it grating mine ears, as an harmo∣nia discors. there shall bee many dead bodies in every place.] Either through pestilence, or sword. Others read it thus. In every place it shall bee said, Proijce, si∣le, Out with them, Make no words: an earnest Aposiopesis (See chap. 6.10. with the Note.) q. d. Patiently acquiesce in the just judgement of so mighty a God. Or, throw these dead bodies into pits, and say nothing: lest we be sequestred as unclean by the law. It is no small misery to be under hard and heavy crosses, and yet to be forced to dissemble and suppresse them; to bite in pain, and to disgest grief, as horses do their choler, by biting on the bridle. I was dumb with silence, saith David, I held my peace even from good, that is, from just defence, but my sor∣row was stirred thereby; my sore was exulcerate, renewed, (as the Greek there saith) and increased, Psal. 39.2. Give sorrow a vent, and it will wear away. Verse 4. Hear this, ye that swallow up the needy,] that soop them up, as drink, (our word soop, seems to come of the Hebrew Shaaph) that would make but a breakfast, nay but a bit of them: that would swallow them at once down their wide gullets, and do, for that purpose, pant and even faint, as well-nigh windlesse, after them, to devour them. Hence they are called, Man-eaters, Cannibals, Psal. 14.4. See chap. 2.7. with the Note. even to make the poor of the land to fail.] Heb. the meek of the land. Poverty should meeken and tame mens spirits: howbeit some are humbled, but not humble: low, but not lowly. Those that are both, are oft oppressed by the Great Ones of the earth: and even devoured, as the lesser fish are by the bigger. Ye have con∣demned and killed the just, saith St. Iames to the wicked rich men of his time, and he doth not resist you, chap. 5.6. He onely committeth his cause to him that judgeth righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. and indeed he need do no more then so: for God is the poor-mans king, as James the fifth of Scotland was termed for his charity: yea, he is the worlds refuge, Awlen Penaugh, as the great Turk vaingloriously stileth him∣self, and would have the world to take notice, that such poor people as lament to him, shall be relieved by him, although his ministers fail them, or abuse them, through their injustice, to make the poor of the land fail. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord. I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him, Psal. 12.5. Neither doth God say it onely, (though that were sufficient) but swear it too in this chapter, yea in this text (the two next following verses are put in as by a parenthesis) and these Cormorants are called upon to hear it, and not to passe it by with a deaf ear, tanquam monstra ma∣rina, as such kind of creatures use to do. Verse 5. Saying, when will the New-moon be gone, &c.] O, what a wearinesse it is I and ye have snuffed at it, Mal. 1.13. See the Note there. This ye have said, or thought at least: and God knoweth the language of your hearts. He presseth upon
no man; neither will he accept of that service that is pressed, out of people, as verjuice out of a crab. All his saints are free-hearted Psal. 110.3. all his souldiers volunteeres:The sabbath they call Desi∣derium die∣rum. they welcome the sabbath, as that holy man did, who went forth to meet and salute it with Veni sponsa mea, Come my sweet spouse, I have dearely longed for thee. They also passe it over with singular delight, Esay. 58.13. wal∣king into Christs garden of spirituall duties, whereof there is so great variety for the good soule to breath it self in and not be sated:Cant. 2. and then are taken into Christs wine-cellar,1 Cor. 2. and (after an holy manner) inebriated with divine consolations: such as the cock on the dunghil knowes not, such as pass all carnall mens understanding. They find no more rellish in holy dayes and duties, then they do in the white of an egge or in a dry chip: the work they do at such times, for fashion-sake or feare of law &c. is dead work, as the Apostle calleth it: they sit in the stocks when they are at prayers, and come out of the Church when the tedious sermon runs some∣what beyond the houre, as prisoners do out of a jayle &c. they cannot tell how to weare out the sabbath, which therefore they wish over, and constantly violate either by corporall labour, or else (which is as bad, or worse) by spirituall idle∣nesse. Full ill would these men addere de profano ad sacrum, (as the Jewes say we should do,)Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. pronouncing those happy, that begin the sabbath with those of Tibe∣rias, and end it with those of Tsepphore (the former began it sooner then others, the later continued it longer. Full ill would they have liked our King Edgars law,Act. & Mon. that Sunday should be solemnized from Saturday nine of the clock till Munday morning. Full loth would these men be to beg Davids office out of his hand, of being a doore-keeper in Gods house: that is, to be first in and last out. And what would they do to keep an everlasting sabbath in heaven, that are so troubled, and even tired out with so short an attendance on the Lords-day: not without a world of wilfull distractions, such as spoyle and fly-blow their performances, so that they stink in the nostrils of the Almighty. and the sabbath] Not the sabbath of the seventh yeare (called Shemittah Re∣mission Levit. 25.) as some would have it meant: but the weekly sabbath, which the unrighteous Mammonists here cry out of, as if on that day the Sun proceeded a flower pace then on others; and they greatly grutcht lucellum suum Dei cultui cedere that God should be served, to their disadvantage. Their fingers therefore itch to be setting out corn: and they as dearely desire it as David did once to come and appeare before the Lord.O rus, quand te aspiciam? Horat. As He had his, when shall I come, by way of wish Psal. 42.3. so they had their When shall we fell corn? when shall we set forth wheat? Surely as Davids soule longed sore to go forth unto Absalom 2 Sam. 13.39. so that he could have found in his heart, but for stark shame, to have gone himself and fetched him home: so was it with these gripple corn-ma∣sters, these frumenti corrasores & veluti corrosores Prov. 11.26. They had a good mind to have been doing on the New-moones and sabbaths,Exod. 20.8. & 34, 21. Lev. 23.3. Neh. 10.32. & 13.15. &c. Num. 10.1. 2 Sam. 20.5. but that they were flatly forbidden by the law, made on purpose for these lawlesse and disobedient, 1 Tim. 1.9. these masterless monsters, these yokeless Belialists, to be to them as chaines and shackles, to confine them (as Solomons command did Shimei, that they may not leape over the pale after profit and pleasure, or if they do, they may dye for it,) Esay 66.23. it is prophecyed that, in the restitution of the church from one new-moon to another, and from one sabbath to another (as oft as they come) with∣out tire-somenesse, all flesh shall come to worship before the Lord, they shall call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable, Esay. 58.13. be rapt and ravished in spirit Rev. 1.10. be in the feare of the Lord and in the comfort of the holy Ghost all the day long,Epist. 3. ad Magnes. , as Ignatius hath it. Sabbatize spiritually, rejoycing in divine meditations. This well practi∣sed would take men off from the worlds tastelesse fooleries (as his mouth will not water after homely provisions, that hath lately tasted of delicate sustenance) It would also blessedly free them from those many foolish and hurtfull lusts 1 Tim. 6.9. those heavy sorrowes and self-created miseries, wherewith covetous caytiffes pierce them selves thorough, gall and gore-their own hearts and trouble their own houses verse. 10. taking no more rest, then if upon a rack, or bed of thornes. making the Ephah small and the shekel great] Selling by small measures, but for
great rates: which was directly against the law Deut. 25.13, 14. and that gol∣den Rule of right, the standard of equity, the royall law of liberty Mat. 7.12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets: this is the sum of what they have said, for duties of the second table. and falsifying the balances by deceit] Heb. preverting the ballances of deceit, that is (by a metonymie as Job. 22.6.) making those that were right, deceitfull. See Prov. 20.10, 23. with the Notes there. Such falsifiers are counted no bet∣ter then Canaanites Hos. 12.7. and shall have small joy of their cursed hoards of evill gotten goods. Verse 6. That we may buy the poore for silver &c.] Thus the poore alwayes pay for it: the modest and mild poore, especially as ver. 4. Hence Poore and affli∣cted are put for one and the same Zeph. 3.12. and to want, and to be abased Philip. 4.12. they that want shall be sure to be abased and abused by the wretched rich, who will ever go over the hedge where it is lowest, and catch the poore by draw∣ing him into the nets Psal. 10.9. that is into their debts, bonds, and mortgages, and at length making such their bondmen, by abuse of that permission Lev. 25.39. See chap. 2.3. yea and sell the refuse of the wheat] Quisquilias, the husks, more fit for pigs or poultrey; hardly mans meate, and yet held good enough for the poore:deciduum p gamenta, the offall. al∣though their flesh was as the flesh of their brethren, and their children, as their chil∣dren Neh. 5.5. however they used them. How farr were these rich wretches from considering the poore as Davids blessed man Psal. 41.1. and as Dr. Taylour the Martyr did; whose custome was once in a fortnight at least to go to poore mens houses, look into their cupbords, see how they fared, and what they lacked:Act. & Mon. that he might either make or procure them a supply from such as were better able? Verse 7. The Lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob] i. e. by himself the matter of Jacobs chief boasting, there being no God like unto their God (their enemies themselves being judges Deut. 32.31.) neither any nation so great as to have God so nigh unto them as Israel had, in all things that they called upon him for, Deut. 4.7. So that this oath of God grates upon their Ingratitude for such imparallel priviledges, and it is uttered in great wrath, as appeareth by the follow∣ing angry Aposiopesis (wherein the Apodosis is not set down but understood.) If I ever forget any of their workes] forget to punish them. These oaths cum reticentia are very dreadfull.Psal. 95. Take heed lest by stubbornnesse we provoke God to sweare in his wrath that we shall not enter into his nest. Take heed lest a promise of entring being left us, and a profer made us, we should seem to come short of it,Heb. 4.1.  to come lag or late, a day after the faire, an houre after the feast. God is now more quick and peremptory then ever in rejecting men that neglect so great salvation Heb. 2.3. the time is shorter, he will not wait so long as he was wont to do.Mar. 16.16. He that beleeveth and is baptized shall be saved: he that beleeveth not, shall be dam∣ned. Surely God will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousnesse:Rom. 9.28. because a short work will he make in the earth. The time is short, saith the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.29. a metaphor (say some) from a piece of cloth rolled up, only a little left at the end. Let us therefore feare (as the same Apostle inferreth upon the conside∣ration of Gods oath Heb. 3.18. with 4.1.) and let our feare not weaken but waken our diligence in well-doing, lest he sweare and repent not, lest be come to a resolution and decree (Gods oath is nothing else but his inviolable and invariable decree) to cast us off, as he did Saul, for his wilfull disobedience 1 Sam. 15. Saul lived long after his utter rejection, and men could see no alteration in his outward condition: but God had sworn, as here, never to forget any of his works. Now saith Samuel to him (and it is fearefull) the Eternity of Israel (the Excellency of Jacob) will not lie, nor repent: for he is not a man that he should repent.1 Sam. 15.29. Do not think this a case that seldome comes: it is done every day upon some or other, saith a great Divine: but woe be to that man upon whom it is done: it had been much better for him that he had not been born, Mat. 26.24. Oh consider this all ye that forget God. lest he swear by his excellency, Surely I will never forget any of your works.
Verse 8. Shall not the land tremble for this?] q. d. So great are the oppressions here exercised, that the very axletree of the earth is even ready to crack under them. Amaziah, that hedge-priest of Bethel, had said of our Prophet, that the land was not able to beare all his words, chap. 7.10. but Amoz more truely affirmeth, that the land trembled under their many and mighty sins, and could beare them no lon∣ger: the earth-quake fell out about this time Am. 1.1. and it was a just wonder, that the earth had not opened her wide mouth, and swallowed them all up quick into hell as Numb. 16.31, 32.Called there∣fore . and as it did a great part of the city of Antioch Anno. 527. for their horrible heresies and blasphemies there held and broached by her bishops. and every one mourn] i. e. smart, till they mourn. Nationall sins bring nationall plagues. The Hebrewes hold that there is not a worse sin then Oppression: St. James saith, that it it cryes to heaven, and entreth into the eares of the Lord of sabbath Jam. 5.4. who will not fale to heare, for the is gracious Exod. 22. and it shall rise up wholy as a slood] i. e. The land shall rise up, shall seem to do so, when it is sloated and over-covered with water: as the sluggards field is said to rise up or ascend with thornes, that is to be overgrown therewith. Here then is threatened an overflowing scourge, an universall destruction covering the face of the countrey, as Nilus doth a great part of the land of Egypt every yeare, lea∣ving much mud behind it: whereof see Pliny and other Authours. Mercer thinks the words would be best read by interrogation, as the former, thus, and shall it not rise up wholy as a flood? q. d. shall it not be turned into a large lake, as once Sodom and her sisters were for like cruelties to the poore? Ezech. 16. Verse 9. And it shall come to passe in that day &c.] Here the Lord threateneth (saith Mr. Diodate) to encumber the land with horrible and mournfull calami∣ties, when it shall be least thought of. Earthquakes, inundations, suddaine and dreadfull darknesses are sure effects and signes of Gods heavy displeasure against mens sins Psal. 18.8, 12.Lively. Mat. 24. Luk. 21. Jocl. 2.10. as Another noteth. See a like text, Jer. 15.8, 9. and promise contrary to this threat Job. 18.5, 6. I will cause the sun to go down at noon] A suddain change, as was at Sodom: the Sun was faire risen upon it that very day that it was destroyed in, Gen. 19.23, 24. as at Babylon, when surprized by Cyrus, they could not at first beleeve their own calamity: as it was with Jerusalem often, and shall be with Rome Rev. 18.7, 8. She saith in her heart, I shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning and famine &c. to confute their fond conceit of an eternall Empire. For when they shall say Peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, as travaile upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 Thes. 5.3. Philosophers say, that before a snow, the weather will be warmish: when the wind lies, the great raine falles: and the faire weather made before him, till the instant that he was drowned in the sea. Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, and other tyrants were smitten in the height of their pride, and ruffe of their iollity. Jerusalem had three yeares great plenty before her last destruction, of which some interpret this Text. Those seven once flourishing Churches of Asia, how glori∣ous and resplendent were they till they had sinned away their light? The same might be said of many others: and who knowes how soon it may be said also of us? who knowes whether we be not even now, upon the very Tropikes and tur∣ning-points of time? Surely Gods patience towards us quò diuturnior eò minacior, the longer it lasteth the more evill is toward us, if we abuse it. If in a land of light we love darknesse better then light, we may soon have enough of it. Solem in Britannia non occidere nec resurgere retulii Tacitus.In vit. Agricol. Tacitus telleth us that at some time of the yeare, the Sun seemeth neither to rise nor fall in this country: but so lightly to pass from us in the night, that you can scarce discern day from night. Of England for this many yeares it may be said, as Solinus doth of the Rhodes,Polyhistor. that it is semper in Sole sita ever in the Sun. How long it shall be so, He alone knowes that knowes all. Walk whiles ye have the light: and pray that God would discloud these gloomy dayes with the beames of his mercy, and not cause our Sun to go down at noon, nor our land to be darkened in the clear day. Oh stop this Sun of righteousnesse posting (as it may seem) from us (when the
blind man cried lustily, Jesus though journying stood still) stay him by your impor∣tunities, as those two did at Emaus and say, Vespera jam venit; nobiscum, Christe maneto, Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam. Verse 10. And I will turn your feasts into mourning] Whether your idolatrous feasts and temple-musick whereby you vainely conceit to be secured from danger, saying, Is not the Lord amongst us? what evill can come unto us. Or your common feasts, whereat you have songs to cheer you up, and so to put sorrow from your hearts, and evill from your flesh, nourishing your selves as in a day of slaughter, or good cheer Jam. 5.5. All shall be turned into mourning, funerall mourning, see ver. 3. and I will bring up sack-cloth upon all loynes] for a token of your great grief, as the custome then was, and is still for mourning-weedes. The Hebew word sack is the same in almost all languages: which sheweth that the Hebrew is the mother of all the rest, saith Mercer. and baldnesse upon every head] you shall pull off your haire for grief; Or, because they had learned of the Heathens their neighbours, in token of lamentation, to shave their heades Ezech. 7.18. Jer. 48.37. and beards too Isa. 15.2. which yet was forbidden them to do, Lev. 19.27. and 21, 9. unlesse it were to shew their sor∣row for sin Esa. 22.12. and I will make it as the mourning of an only son] which was very bitter Jer. 6.26. Zech. 12.10. The losse of a loving yoke fellow is more grievous then that of a son: but to father and mother together nothing more bitter then luctuosa foecundi∣tas (Laeta's case in Hierome) to bury many children, and especially to bury all in One. and the end thereof as a bitter day] Thereof, that is, either of that land, or of that lamentation, there shall be bitternesse in the end. So the Poet Nunc & amara dies, & noctis amarior umbra est;Tioul. lib: 2. Omnia jam tristi tempora felle madent. How could it be otherwise then extream bitter with this people, when heaven and earth conspired to punish them? neither had they the good word of God (called the word of his patience,Rev. 3.10. written on purpose that we through patience and com∣fort of the scriptures might have hope Rom. 15.4. that out of those breasts of consolation we might suck and be satisfied, Esa. 66.11.) to succour them and keep from swooning Psal. 119.92. And this was the greatest plague of all the rest: and is therefore reserved to the last place, deterrima tanquam colophon, as a most sad catastrophe. Verse 11. Behold the dayes come] Behold it; for it is a just wonder: the Lord createth a new thing in the earth, when Israel should want the word; Israel to whom were committed the oracles of God, Israel to whom God had spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which had been since the world began,Luc. 1.70. in a sweet succession: See my True treasure pag. 3.4. He made known his wayes to Moses, his acts and monuments to the children of Israel.Psal. 103.7. Yet even these who had the cornu-copia of Gods word shall now suffer a famine of it: they shall have cause to ry out, We see not our signes, there is no more any Prophet, neither is there amongst us any that knoweth how long, Psal. 74.9. the word of God shall be pretious,1 Sam. 3. and they shall be hard put to't to come by it; Amaziah and his complices shall not need to pack away the Prophets, as chap. 7.12. and to bid them go preach else∣where: the law shall be no more, the Prophets also shall find no vision from the Lord Lam. 2.9. that I will send a famine in the land] Heb. I will let it out (sc. out of my treasury of plagues where I have it ready, and desirous to be a broad) and turn it loose, Septuag. which before I kept up, as a wild beast, that it might not hurt nor destroy in all mine holy mountaine: now it shall out amongst you, and the devill with it, Rev. 12.12. with hell at the heeles of it.
not a famine of bread] though that's very grievous, Lam. 1.11, 19. and 2.12, 20. and 4.4, 9. and 5.16. and puts people to many hard straits and extremities (as were easie to instance) even to the eating of one another. nor a thirst for water] a torment more intolerable then the former. Lysimachus to save his life parted with his kingdom for a draught of water. But of hearing the word of the Lord,] which is pabulum animae the souls proper food, such as she cannot live without: but when God seeth his oracles vilipended and lying under the table, 'tis just with him to call to the enemy to take away. It was so with those seven churches of Asia among many others; as also with those of Africa that vast Continent (thrice as large as Europe) in all which there is not any region intirely possessed by Christians, but the kingdom of Habassia: for as for the large region of Nubia, which had from the Apostles time (as 'tis thought) professed the Christian faith, it hath again above an hundred yeers since forsaken it, and embraced instead of it, partly Mahumetanisme, and partly Idolatry; and that by the most miserable occasion that might be, viz. famine of the word of God, for lack of Ministers. For, as Alvarez hath recorded, at his being at the king of Habassia's court,Hist. Ethiop. cap. 37. there were Ambassadours out of Nubia, to intreat him for a supply of ministers to instruct their nation, and to repair Christianity, gone to ruine amongst them; but they were rejected. Verse 12. And they shall wander from sea to sea,] Trouble themselves to no pur∣pose, take pains (as Esau did for venison, but lost his labour) run to all coasts and quarters to seek the word of the Lord. and shall not find it] And why, they despised it when it was in their power; they rejected the counsel of God against themselves with those Lawyers, Luk. 7.30. He would have gathered them, but they would not be gathered; he would have pur∣ged them, but they would not be purged; Ezek. 24.13, 14. they are therefore mi∣serable by their own election: as Saul was, who slighted Samuel whiles he was a∣live, and would have been full glad of his counsel when he was dead. He that would not once worship God in Samuel, worships at length Samuel in Satan; and no marvel. Satan was now become his refuge, and preacheth his funeral: his Ʋrim now was darknesse, his Prophet a ghost: O woful condition. But what should a parent do when the child loaths and spils his victuals? snatch it from him, and lay it out of his reach. Samaria felt this worser famine, when carried captive especial∣ly: so did Jerusalem, after Malachi, whose prophecy the Jews fitly call Chathimath Chazon the sealing up of vision. Bath Chol, or the Eccho from heaven they had now and then after this time, Mat. 2.17. Joh. 12.28 they had also the writings of Moses, and the Prophets interpreted after a sort by the Scribes and Pharisees, whom (whiles they sat close in Moses chair, and kept it warm) men were bound to to hear, Mat. 23.2, 3. which because Dives did not, he suffered hunger and thirst in hell for ever, Luk. 16.24. And had he been granted the liberty of hearing a∣gain upon earth but one more sermon, how farre would not he gladly have gone for it? and how, as for life, would he have listned to it? But this could not possibly be, for out of hell there is no redemption, Psal. 49.8, 9. and when the night of death once comes, men can work no more. Night is a time not of doing work, but of re∣ceiving wages; up therefore and be doing, whiles it is yet day, Joh. 12.35, 36. seek ye the Lord while he may be found, Esay 55.6. seek him seasonably, seek him se∣riously: Then shall ye seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart, Jer. 29.13. That was a dismall doom that our Saviour passed upon those stiffe-necked Jewes and uncircumcised in heart and ears, (as Saint Steven right∣ly stiles them, Act. 7.51.) that were as good at resisting the Holy-Ghost as ever their fathers had been before them. Ye shall seek me, and yet shall die in your sinnes: whither I go ye cannot come, Joh. 8.21. Ye shall wander up and down for meat, ma∣king a noise like an hungry dog, and grudge that ye be not satisfied, Psal. 59.14, 15. Do not the miserable Jewes do so all the world over to this day, expecting their Messias? quem tantis ululatibus exposcunt, throwing open their windows to behold him, and praying for the rebuilding of their Temple thus, Templum tuum brevi, valde citò,Buxtorf. Synag. Ind. cap. 13. valde citò, in diebus nostris citissimè, nunc aedisica templum tuum brevi, &c. Merciful God, great God, bountiful God, beautiful God, sweet God, mighty God, thou God of the Jewes, now build thy Temple, do it shortly, suddenly, quickly, ve∣ry
quickly, very quickly, very quickly, even in our dayes, now, this day before the next, &c. Ah poor creatures! they would not, when time was, know in that their day the things which belonged to their peace; therefore to this day they are hid from their eyes, and wrath is come upon them to the utmost.Luk. 19.42. Alterius perditio tua sit cautio, Let their harmes be our warning, not to stand out the day of grace, not to surfeit of the word, lest we suffer a famine of it; not to retain the snuffes of our sinnes, lest they dim our candlestick: a removal whereof, except we repent, may be as certainly foreseen and foretold, as if visions and letters were sent us from hea∣ven, as once to Ephesus telling them so, Rev. 2.5. And indeed it hath been the opi∣nion, and is still the fear of some not unconsiderable Divines, that Antichrist, before his abolition, shall once again overflow the whole face of the West, and suppresse the whole protestant Churches. Now if ever this come to passe, (as justly we may fear it will) what may we thank but our detestable lukewarmnesse and loathing of the heavenly Manna, our not receiving the love of the truth, that we might be sa∣ved? for which cause if God shall send us strong delusions,2 Thess. 2.10, 1. even the efficacy of er∣rour, that we should believe a lie, that being infatuated we should be seduced, and being seduced be damned, as Austin glosseth that text, whom can we blame for it? Verse 13. In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst,] When God depriveth a people of his Ordinances, and so withdraweth his gracious pre∣sence from them, what wonder though temporal judgements come rushing in as by a sluce? Persecute and take him, (said Davids enemies) for God hath forsaken him, and there is none to deliver him, Psal. 71.11. The Philistins are upon me, saith Saul, for God hath forsaken me. Behold, I am cast out from thy presence, said Cain (that is, from my fathers house where thine ordinances are administred) and therefore every one that findeth me shall slay me, Gen. 4.14. In that day of the want of the word, in the day of spiritual famine and thirst, behold aliud ex alio malum, another thirst shall seise upon the choycest and fairest; as flies settle upon the sweet∣est perfumes, when they are cold, and corrupt them. Shall the fair virgins] whom all men favour for their comelinesse, , beauty is of it self lovely and attractive, it needeth no letters of commendati∣ons: but God is no respecter of persons, and beauty abused is like a fair house with an ill inhabitant, said Diogenes: like a jewel of gold in a swines snout, said Solomon, Prov. 11.22. Some are Helena's without, but Hecuba's within, painted sepulchres, Egyptian temples; like Aurelia Orestilla, of whom Salust saith, that she had nothing in her praise-worthy but her beauty: Fair she was and foolish, not , beau∣tiful and wise, as it is reported of Aspasia Cyrus his concubine.Athenaeus. Now these fair maids, together with the choice young men, best able to endure thirst a long season, shall faint for thirst,] Heb. shall be over-covered with grief, shall be troubled and perplexed, shall faint and swoon, shall find by experience that all flesh is grasse, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field, that even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint. Esa. 40.30, 31. Verse 14. They that swear by the sin of Samaria] i. e. by the calfe set up at Be∣thel, not farre from Samaria. This calfe is called the sin or guilt of Samaria,Esa. 40.6, 7. to shew the abomination of it; for which cause also Paul cals it sinful sin, Rom. 7.13. as not finding for it a worse Epithite: and Antichrist for like cause he calleth That man of sin, 2 Thess. 2, 3. to note him Merum scelus, saith Beza, meerly made up of sin. Now to swear by this of Samaria, was to deifie it: to swear by any thing besides the true God, is to forsake him, Jer. 5.7. which is an hateful wickednesse, Jer. 2.12, 13. as in Papists who familiarly swear by their Hee-Saints, and She-Saints; and so sacrilegiously transferre upon the creature that which pertaineth to God alone. and say, Thy god, O Dan, liveth,] God onely liveth, to speak properly, 1 Tim. 6.17. but to say that Dan's Deunculus lived, (being no better then a dumb and dead idol) and to sweat by the life of it,Spec. Eurp. (as the Spaniards do now in the pride of their Monarchy, by the life of their king) this is horrible impiety. As for that of Abigail to David, 1 Sam. 25.26. Now therefore my Lord, as the Lord liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, the former was an oath, the latter was not an oath, but an asseveration or obtestation onely, conjoyned with an oath. and the manner of Beersheba liveth] that is, the formes and rites of worshipping in Beersheba (another nest of idolatry, Chap. 5.5. and Hos. 10.13.) as the Chal∣dee paraphraseth it. Durandus hath written the Romish Ritual, the way of worship used in that Synagogue of Satan: Mercer rendreth it, Vivet peregrinatio Beerseba, the way or passage of Beerseba liveth. Beerseba had an idol, and was the way to Dan and Bethel: hence this superstitious oath drawn out to the full length, By the sin of Samaria, by the god of Dan, and by the manner of Beersheba: like as the great Turk Mahomet promising his souldiers the spoyle of Constantinople for three dayes together, if they could win it, for confirmation of his oath solemnly swore by the immortal God, and by the four hundred Prophets, by Mahomet, by his fathers soul, by his own children,Turk. hist. 345. and by the sword wherewith he was girt, faithfully to perform whatsoever he had to them in his proclamation promised. even they shall fall and never rise up again] Fall, fatally, ferally, irrecoverably, as old Eli did when his neck was broken, but first his heart. The ten tribes for their i∣dolatry and contempt of the word never returned out of captivity. From the famine foretold what could follow but irreparable ruine, though for a time they might flourish, See Prov. 29.1. with the note. Of that spiritual famine let us be most im∣patient, and say as Luther did, I would not live in Paradise without the word: but with it I could make a shift to live in hell it self. CHAP. IX. Verse 1. I saw the Lord] This Seer, Chap. 7.12. saw the Lord in a vision; for o∣therwise God is too subtile for sinew or sight to seize upon him. We can∣not look upon the body of the Sun, neither can we see at all without the beams of it: so here, standing upon the Altar] Or, firmly set sc: to do execution upon that Altar, sc: that idolatrous Altar at Bethel fore-mentioned, and formerly threatned by another Prophet, 1 Kin. 13.1.2. The Rabbines say, God was seen standing upon that Al∣tar, as ready to sacrifice and slay the men of that age, whose idolatries and other impieties he could no longer bear with. And hence it is haply, that he is brought in standing; like as Act. 7.55. Jesus at Stevens death was seen standing at the right hand of God, where he is usually said to sit. Stat ut vindex, sedet ut judex. And he said] sc: to the Angel that stood by, Zeck. 3.7. or to the enemy commis∣sionated by him, or to some other creature, for they are all his servants, Psal. 119.91. neither can he want a weapon to tame his rebels with. smite the lintel of the door, that the posts may shake] Smite with a courage, as Ezeck. 9. Angels give no light blowes. Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts shall lop the bough with terrour: and the high ones of stature shall be hewen down, and the haughty shall be humbled:Esa. 10.33, 34. And he shal cut down the thickest of the forrests with iron, and Lebanon shal fal by a Mighty one: that is, by an Angel shall he smite to the ground that mighty army which was like a thick wood, see Esai. 37.36. Psal. 78.25. and 89.6. So at our Saviours Resurrection, an Angel, in despite of the souldiers set to watch, rolled away the grave-stone, and sat upon it. And as a mighty man, when he sitteth down, shaketh the bench under him, so did He shake the earth: and for fear of him the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men, Mat. 28.2, 4. Down with this Idol-Temple, down with it, saith God here, even to the ground. and cut them in the head, al of them] cleave them down the middle, so that every post may be sure to fall, being divided from the top to the bottom: and let this act be a signe to them all of what I intend to do to their persons; as many of them as by this gate have entred into this Idol-Temple and Altar. A deep cut in the head is dangerous and deadly, Gen. 3.15. Psal. 68.22. and I wil slay the last of them] I, by mine agents and instruments, as afore: for it is but one hand and many executioners, that God slayes men with. Job could discern Gods arrowes in Satans hand, and Gods hand on the armes of the Sabaean robbers. The sword is bathed in heaven, before it is embrewed in mens blood, Isai. 34.5. The Lord killeth and maketh alive, saith holy Hannah, 1 Sam. 2.6.
He that fleeth of them shall not flee away.] See chap. 2.14. with the Note, and say, Behold the severity of God.Rom. 11.12. Verse 2. Though they dig into hell, &c.] No starting-hole shall secure them from the wrath of God, and rage of the creature, set a work by him. Hell and de∣struction are before the Lord, Prov, 15.11. yea hell is naked before him, and de∣struction hath no covering, Job 25.6. He hath a sharp eye, and a long hand, to pull men out of their lurking-holes; as he did Adam out of the thicket,2 Chro. 33.11 Manasseh from among the thornes, Jonah from the sides of the ship, the Duke of Buckingham in Rich. the thirds time, &c. Be sure, saith Moses, your sinne will finde you out,Speed. Num. 32.23. and Gods hand will hale you to punishment. Though they climb up to heaven,] That is, (by an hyperbole) to high and strong places: as the Babel-builders, the Benjamites that fled to the Rock Rimmon, and there abode four moneths, Judg. 20 47. the gibing Jebusites, that were so con∣fident of their strong-hold of Zion, that they flouted David and his forces, 2 Sam. 5.8. the proud Prince of Tyre, and others. thence will I bring them down] From their loftiest tops of Pride and creature-confidence which God loves to confute and defeat: as I might instance in Nebu∣chadnezzars, Xerxes, Haman, Sejanus, Bajaezet, that terrour of the world, and (as he thought) superior to fortune, yet in an instant, with his state, in one battle overthrown into the bottome of misery and despaire:Turk. hist. 287. and that in the middest of his great strength. The same end awaits the Pope and his hierarchy-ruet alto à culmine Roma, that Jupiter Capitolinus shall be one day unroosted by him, who cast∣eth the wicked down to the ground Psal. 147.6. Verse 3. And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel] In densis sylvis, inter spelaea ferarum, Lawfull enough it is in some cases to hides David did oft, and Elias, and Christ, and Paul, 2 Cor. 11.32. and Athanasius, and diverse other Saints. Tertullian was too rigid in condemning all kind of hiding in evill times.Lib. de suga on persecution. But to hide from God, who searcheth Jerusalem with lights, and to whom the darknesse and the light are both alike, Psal. 139.12. to whom obscura clarent, muta respondent, silentium confitetur, this is base, and bootlesse. Carmel shall not cover them, nor any other starting-hole secure them from divine justice. The poore Jewes were pulled by the Romanes out of privyes and other under-ground places, where they had hid themselvss, as Josephus writeth: and so were those Samaritans served by the Assyrians, who ferreted them out, and slaughtered them. and though they be hid from my sight,] as they think; but that cannot be: for He (like the Optick vertue in the eye) sees all, and is seen of none. in the bottome of the sea,] which, how deep and troublesome soever, is to God a Sea of glasse like unto Chrystal: corpus diaphanum, a pervious, clear,Rev. 4. transparent body, such as he sees thorow, and hath the sole command of. thence will I command the serpent. For there is that crooked serpent Leviathan, there are also creeping things innumerable,Esay 27.1. Psal. 104.26. to arrest wicked men as rebels and trai∣tors to the highest Majestie, and to drag them down to the bottom of hell. All elements, and creatures, shall draw upon them, as servants will do upon such as as∣sault their Lord. Rebellisque facta est, quia homo numini, creatura homini, as Austin truely and trimly avoucheth. Verse 4 And though they goe into captivity, &c.] And so may hope the worst is over, (Surely the bitternesse of death is past) yet it shall prove otherwise: The hypocrites hope is as the giving up the ghost, saith Iob, and that's but cold comfort:1 Sam. 15.32. Or, as the spiders web, spun out of her own bowels; and, when the beesome comes, swept to the muck-hill. before their enemies,] whose custome was to drrive their captives before them, Lam. 1.5. young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, Esay 20.4. Or, before their enemies, that is, before they are taken captive by the enemies, by a voluntary yeeldance, in hope of quarter for their lives. The Jewes indeed had a promise from the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 21.9. That if they went out and fell to the Chaldeans that besieged them, they should have their lives for a prey, but the ten tribes had no such promise made them: They were strangers from the covenants, Ephes. 2.12. and therefore could look for no mercy. Loammi, and there∣fore Lo-ruhamah, Hos. 1. the Ark and the Mercy-seat were never sundred.
thence will I command the sword] See Esay 13.15, 16. Jer. 9.10. and 43.11. Ezek. 14.17. and I will set mine eyes upon them,]Emphaticote∣on est qam si dixiset Oculos pluraliter. Mercer. Heb. eye, viz. the eye of my providence, that oculus irretortus, whereby I will look them to death, and take course that no∣thing shall go well with them: see a little below, vers. 8. Jer. 21.10. Psal. 34.16. In Tamerlanes eyes sat such a Majesty, as a man could hardly endure to behold: and many in talking with him became dumb. He held the East in such awe, as that he was commonly called,Turk. hist. 211.236. The wrath of God, and terrour of the world. Augustus Cesar frowned to death, Cornelius Gallus: and so did Queen Elizabeth, Sir Chri∣stopher Hatton, Lord Chancellour. Gods enemies are sure to perish at the rebuke of his countenance, Psal. 80.16. and, if he but set his eyes upon them for evil, and not for good, all occurrences shall certainly work together for the worst unto them. Verse 5. And the Lord God of Hosts is he, &c.] Here the Prophet proveth what he had said in the foregoing verses, by an argument drawn from the wonderfull power of God, which profane persons are apt to question, that they may harden their hearts against his fear. Consider saith He, first, that He is the Lord God of Hosts, and (as the Rabbines well observe) he hath the upper and lower troops ready prest, as his horse and foot, to march against his enemies. Next, that he toucheth the land, as it were with his little finger, and it shall melt, like the fat of lambs before the fire: it shall crumble to crattle, moulder away, and be moved, because he is wroth, Psal. 18.7. and shall men be unmoved? shall they bee more insensible then the senselesse earth? The people of Antioch, though many of them gave their hands for Chrysostoms banishment, yet terrified by an earthquake (which wrought in them an heart-quake, as it had done in the Gaoler, Acts 16.) they immediately sent for him again. But thirdly, the tremend power of God appears in this, that The land shall rise up wholly like a flood, and it shall be drowned, as by the flood of Egypt,] God can flote it, and flood it at his pleasure. See chap. 8.8. Water is naturally above the earth, as the garment above the body saith David: and would (but for the power and providence of God) prove as the shirt made for the murdering of Agamemnon, where the head had no issue out. Let God be seen herein, and mens hearts possessed with his holy fear: who can so easily pull up the sluces, let in the Sea upon them, and bury them all in one universall grave of waters. Fear ye not me,Jer. 5.22. saith the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetuall decree, that it cannot passe it: and though the waves thereof tosse themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar,Lib. de mirabil. yet can they not passe over it? This Aristotle admires, and David cele∣brates in his Physicks, (as One calleth that 104 Psalm) verse 6.9. and all men should improve, to affright their consciences from provoking to anger so great a God. Verse 6. It is he that buildeth his stories (or spheres) in the heaven,] Surgit hic oratio. The Prophet here riseth in his discourse: and as Chrysostom said of St. Paul, Tricubitalis est, & coelos transcendit; Low, though he were, and little, yet he gat up into the third heaven: so may we of Amos, though but a plain-spoken and il∣literate heardsman, yet in setting forth the power of God, hee mounts from earth to heaven, and shews himself to bee Virum bonum, dicendi peritum, an exquisite Oratour, according to Quintilians character. God this Great Architect, and publike-workman, (as the Apostle after Plato, whom he seemeth to have read, cal∣leth Him,. Heb. 11.10) hath without tool or toil, Esay 40.28. builded his stories in the heaven (which is three stories high, 2 Cor. 12.2.) wherein (as in a theatre, or molten looking-glasse, Job 37.18.) his Majesty most clearly shineth, chap. 4.13. and 5.8. See Psal. 104.3. every sphere and starre twinckling at us, and as it were, beekning to us, to remember his omnipotency (whereof that rare Fabrick is a no∣table work and witnesse) and not to think to escape his judgements, if we go on in sinne. For although he be higher then the heavens, Job. 8.11. yet his eyes behold, his eye-lids try the children of men, Psal. 11.4. and verse 6. Upon the wicked He shall rain down snares, fire and brimstone, &c. and hath founded his troop (or bundle) in the earth,] that is, the other three elements say some: the Sea, which together with the earth maketh one Globe, say others: the Ʋniverse (saith Mr. Diodate) which is like the fabrick of a building:
of which the earth being the lower part, and onely unmoveable, hath some resem∣blance of a foundation. He that calleth for the waters of the Sea, and poureth them out, &c.] See the Note on chap. 5.8. Verse 7. Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me,] The emphasis lieth in this last word, Ʋnto me, who am no respecter of persons, but in every nation,Act. 10.3.4. he that feareth God, and worketh righteousnesse, is accepted with him.) Unto your selves indeed you seem some great businesse, because Israelites; to whom pertaineth the Adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, &c. Rom, 9.4. To others also you seem a great nation, yea a wise and understanding people, as having God so nigh unto you, and so set for you, Deut. 4.6, 7. and 33.29. But tell me, Quis te discrevit? Who made you to differ? and what have ye more then others, that ye have not me to thank for? You look upon the Ethiopians with scorn, as an igno∣ble and servile people: as likewise upon the uncircumcised Philistines, and unhal∣lowed Syrians. But wherein are you beyond them, if you look back to your Ori∣ginal, and consider my dealings with them and you? It is nothing else but self-love that maketh you thus insolent; and teacheth you to turn the glasse to see your selves bigger, Others lesser then they are. You foolishly set up your Counter for a thou∣sand pound; and are in some sence like those Ethiopians, or Negroes,Heyl. Geogr. so much slighted by you; of whom it is said that they paint the devill white, as being a co∣lour contrary to their own. But much more to blame are you, that being Gods peculiar people, and partakers of so great priviledges, you do no more change your evill manners, then the Ethiopians do their black-hue Jer. 13.23. you are no where white but in your teeth, as they: good a little from the teeth outward. I am neer in your mouthes, but farr from your reines, Jer. 12.2. Such an one was that stigmaticall Cush the son of Iemini mentioned in the title of the seventh Psalme, (perhaps Saul the son of Kish the Beniamite is intended) non tam cute quàm corde Aethiopicus, of black and ill conditions: and therefore to God no better then an Ethiopian, or any other Pagan people. have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt] q. d. I grant I have; and you glory very much in it: whereas you should rather glorify me much for it, and walk worthy of such a deliverance; for every blessing is a binder, and every new deliverance a new tie to obedience. But what singular thing have I herein done for you more then for Philistines and Syrians, whom yet you look upon as dogs and out∣casts? have not I also brought up the Philistines from Caphtor,] i. e. from Cappadocia (called an Island Ier. 47. because it bordered upon the sea) or,Turk. hist. 843. as some will have it from Cyprus, a rich Island, called therefore Macariah, that is, Blessed. and the Syrians from Kir] Syros è Kiro, from Cyrene a countrey of Asia, as Beroaldus thinketh. It is mentioned Esa. 22.6.Chron. lib. 4. cap. 6. as subject to the king of Assyria: and thither the Syrians were translated by Tiglath-Pileser 2 King. 16.9. but when either these or the Philistines were brought back againe to their own coun∣treys, we read not in scripture, or elsewhere at this day.1 Chron 4.22. These are ancient things, (as it is said in another case) and are here alledged as well known to the Israelites, who are nipt on the crown as they say, and pulled from that perilous pinacle of self-exaltation, whereupon they had unhappily peirked themselves. Verse 8. Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinfull kingdome] Be it Ethiopia, Palestina, Syria, or Israel, but especially Israel Amos 3.2. not his eye only his  his jealous eye (as ver. 4. for evill, and not for good: but both his eyes, yea his seven eyes, for he is  All eye, to look through and through the sinfull kingdome, to judge and punish, to inflict tribulation and an∣guish upon every soul of man that doth evill, of the Jew first, because of his privi∣ledges, and also of the Gentile Rom. 2.9. The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, with the point of a diamond Jer. 17.1. and Israel is therefore worse then others because he ought to have been better. His whole kingdome is a kingdome of sin, a merum scelus, a very Poneropolis, as that place in Thracia was called,Theopomp. whither Philip had assembled all the infamous persons and men of evill demeanour. What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? Mic. 1.5. their capitall sins were most in their capitall cities; and thence overflowed the whole kingdome:
called therefore here a sinfull kingdome, wholly given to Idolatry (as Athens was Act. 17.16.) which is that sin with an accent, that wickednesse with a wit∣nesse, Exod.. 32.21. 1 King. 12.30. and 15, 3, 30. that land-desolating sin. Jer. 22.7, 8, 9. Psal. 78.58, 59, 62. and I will destroy it] See here the venomous nature of sin, and shun it, else we shall prove traytours to the state, and have our hands if not upon the great cart∣ropes, yet upon the lesser cords, that draw down vengance upon the land. And here some one sinner may destroy much good Eccle. 9.17. how much more a rab∣ble of rebbels, conspiring to provoke the eyes of Gods glory? saying that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob] A remnant shall be left for royall use,See Jer. 30.11. reliquas faciam reliquias, and so make a manifest difference, remembring my promise Lev. 26.40. which is a speciall text touching the rejection and con∣version of the Jewes, as is also this in some mens judgments. For here (say they) is a threatening of extream desolation with some comfort enterlaced of a remnant to be reserved: amongst whom it is further promised 1. that the kingdome of David thorough Christ shall be set up as glorious as ever it was before, in the most flourishing times of David or Solomon ver. 11.2. Next, other nations shall joyne with them and be made partakers of one common inheritance ver. 12. So doth James Act. 15.16, 17. expound it. 3. Thirdly there is promised the fruitfulnesse of their land ver. 13. the inhabiting in their own countrey, ver. 14. and the perpetuity of their abode there, ver. 15. But all this others think to be, optabile magis quàm opinabile, little better then a golden dreame. Verse 9. For lo I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel] It is not without Gods command and good leave that evill spirits and men can sift the saints, as Satan desired to have done Peter. He desired it, as a challenger desireth one of the other side to combate with: so he beg'd leave to sift Iob, and so he tempted David to number the people, but it was by Gods permission. Up therefore and pray that ye enter not into temptation Luk. 22.31, 46. or that ye may come cleer out of it,Rom. 16.20. and more then conquerours, even Triumphers: the enemy is stinted: yea Christ will tread him under your feet shortly. and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations] The ten tribes among the Assyrians (who were Emperours of the whole East) and whither since they are scattered, whether into Shina, Tartary, West-Indies, or other countries, is not known. The whole twelve-tribes (those also that once instantly served God day and night Act. 26.7.) are now wofully disjected and dissipated: being cast out of the world,Aug. in Psal. 58. as it were, by a common consent of Nations, and generally slighted and hated. The Romanes permitted other nations to call themselves Romanes, after they had conquered them: but so they would not suffer the Iewes upon any termes to do: lest there should be some blot stick to the glory of the Romanes by that odious and sordid people. The Pope useth them as spunges, the Turk as slaves, &c. like as corne is sifted in a sieve] Or, by a fann; to the same sense as that Zach. 13.9. for as here a sieve, so there fire serveth to denote Affliction with the use of it: sc. to purge Gods people, specially of those two troublesome choke-weeds, High-mindednesse and Earthly mindednesse, Cribratione Dei non perditur sed purgatur frumentum, saith Zanchy, Gods good corne is not lost, but made cleane by the sifting they suffer.Jer. 23.28. yet shall not the least grain (Heb: stone) fall upon the earth] As the chaf and dust shall:Augustin. Mat. 3.12. for what is the chaf to the wheate? saith the lord, Improbi nobiscum esse possunt in horreo, sed non in area. Christ hath his fan in his hand, and will surely discriminate: he will take out the pretious from the vile, he will drive the chaffe one way and the wheat another: and take care that not the least grain of weighty wheat, that had good tack in it, (as a stone hath, though but a little stone) shall be lost. He will turn his hand upon the little ones, and secure them Zech. 13.7. Verse 10. All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword] The flagitious, pre∣sumptuous persons,Deut. 29.19. that blesse themselues when I curse them, saying, We shall have peace though we walk every man in the imagination of his heart, and take his full swinge in sin. Such sinners in Zion Esa. 33.14. such sacrificing Sodomites Esa. 1.10. such profligate Professours shall die by the sword: either by the hand
of the enemy, or which is worse, gladio spiritali saith Mercer, by the spiritual sword, being blinded and rejected by God; so that their preservation is but a reservation to a greater mischief. Whereas, on the other side, some of Gods elect might in a common calamity perish by the sword, but then (Josiah-like) they died in peace, though they fell in battle: their death was right pretious in the sight of the Lord, and a plentifull amends made them in heaven. which say, the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us] Or, for our sakes, by our default. If affliction do find us out, yet we have not deserved it:Begnaden propter nos. common oc∣currences we cannot be against. Thus the wicked man flattereth himself in his own eyes, untill his iniquity be found to be hatefull Psa. 36.2. In all my labours they shal find none iniquity in me: that were sin Hos. 12.8. Yet thou sayst, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shal turn from me: behold I wil plead with thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned Jer. 2.35. Ver. 11. In that day wil I raise up the Tabernacle of David] A most sweet con∣clusion of the Prophesie by sundry Evangelicall promises after so many very severe and sharp menaces: the Sun of righteousnesse liketh not to set in a cloud. In that day, that happy day whensoever it shall dawn, that Christ shall come: for the Prophets knew not the certaine time when, but made diligent enquiry as far as they might with sobriety 1 Pet. 1.11. and well knew that the Law, which they preached and explained, was an introduction to a better hope Heb. 7.19. which they saw afar off and saluted Heb. 11.13. wil I raise up the Tabernacle of David] that is, the kingdome of the house of David saith the Chaldee Paraphrast: meaning, of the Messiah, whom the sounder sort of Rabbines from this text call Ben Niphlei, the repairer of the breach,Galatin. the restorer of pathes to dwell in: Now the Church is here called the Tabernacle of David, because that once stately Palace of David was by many desolations reduced to a tent, as it were, and that ready to drop too. The Branch grew out of the root of Jesse, when that goodly family was sunk so low, as from David the king to Joseph the carpenter. Besides, all was out of order both in Church and State, when Christ came. and close up the breaches thereof] Heb. wall up: by unwalling (as the Hebrew hath it Num. 24.17.) all the children of Seth: by subduing the sons of men, the godly seed to the obedience of faith: by bringing into captivity every haughty thought &c. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. (that at the name of Jesus every knee may bow Philip. 2.10.) and getting a full conquest by the preaching of the gospell, which shall quickly close up all ruptures, and raise up all ruines, by chasing away terrours and false-worships, doctrines of devils, and traditions of men, whereby the Scribes and Pharisees had made the commandement of God of none effect. and I will build it as in the dayes of old] in those purer times of David and the other holy Patriarches, who made up but one and the same Church with us, and were saved by the same faith in Christ Jesus, that Lamb of God slain from the foundation of the world, Rev, 13.8. Mine antiquity is Jesus Christ said Igna∣tius the Martyr. As we preferr the newest Philosophy, so the ancient'st Divinity, saith Another. Verse 12. That they may possesse the remnant of Edom,] That they which are called by my name, which are called Christians, viz. the Apostles and their succes∣sours to the end of the world, may possesse together with Christ (to whom the Fa∣ther hath given the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession) the remnant of Edom; those few of them that receive the faith, who are but as a remnant to the whole peece, an handful to a houseful.Psal. 2.. And not of the Edomites onely, those inveterate and hereditary enemies to the Israel of God; but of all the heathen which are called by name, who beseech and are bapti∣zed into Christs name, being content to receive his mark, and to professe his Reli∣gion, which formerly they were perfect strangers to. These and those first Preachers of the Gospel, and Planters of Churches (being Israelites by birth) are said to pos∣sesse by inheritance, because Christ was pleased to make use of their ministery; and upon these his white horses to ride abroad the world, conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6.1, 2. In a like sense it is promised, Esa. 14.2. that the house of Israel shall possesse their proselytes in the land of the Lord for servants and for handmaids, and
take them captives whose captives they were, and rule over their oppressours. Such a change shall the Gospel make. saith the Lord that doth this] For indeed none else could have done it. Effectual conversion is his work alone, God perswade Japhet, &c. Noah may speak perswasive∣ly, but God onely can perswade. Rebecca may cook the venison, but Isaac onely can give the blessing. Paul may plant, &c. Deus potest facere, nec solet fallere. Verse 13. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that the plowman, &c.] The Gospel of peace brings with it the peace of the Gospel, and with peace, plenty, with the horn of salvation the horn of plenty, a confluence of outward comforts and contentments,Bous Deus Constn tantis terren imple∣vit mubus qanta pre nullus uderet D C D. l. 5.25 Elizabetha glo∣risissima & foeliciss soemina Thuan. Hist. lib. 124. as in Solomons dayes, and Constantines, (whom God prospered and blessed beyond all that he could have wished, saith Austin) and Q. Eliza∣beths, whom, for her care to propagate the Gospel, He made to be the happiest woman that ever swayed scepter, as her very enemies were forced to acknowledge: so liberal a paymaster is the Lord, that all his retributions are more then bountiful; and this his servants have not ex largitate, sed ex promisso, out of his generall pro∣vidences, but by vertue of a promise, which is farre sweeter. The Masorites have observed, that in this verse are found all the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet (as also in 26 more verses of the Old Testament) to note, say the Calvinists, that in the king∣dome of the Messiah, there shall be great abundance of all things, & plenum copiae cornu: or, if that should fail, yet plenty of all spiritual benedictions in heavenly things,In instauratio∣ne casulae Da∣vidicae coapsae Merc. Amama. Eph. 1.3. and contented godlinesse, 1 Tim. 6.6. which hath an autarkie, a self-sufficiency; so that having nothing a man possesseth all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. This the Prophet expresseth in the following words by many excellent hyperbole's though (to say sooth) Christus & regnum ejus non patiuntur hyperbolen. All words are too weak to set forth the worth of Christ and his kingdom. the plowman shall overtake the reaper] In signis hyperbole, saith Mercer: no sooner shall harvest be ended, but seeding shall succeed, and that promise fulfilled, Levit. 26.5. all businesses belonging to the tillage of the ground, and the inning of the fruit, shall have their fit and sutable seasons; where, under the name of corporal blessings spiritual also are to be understood: and indeed those blessings out of Zion are farre beyond any other that come out of heaven and earth, Ps. 134.3. and the treader of grapes, him that soweth seed] precious seed, Ps. 126.5. sowing-seed (as one englisheth it) drawn out of the seed basket, and cast all along upon the land: the meaning is, that the vintage shall last so long, that the seeds-man shall scarce have time to do his businesse, for waiting upon the wine-presse. and the mountains shall drop sweet wine] Or juice of pomegranates, more delici∣ous liquor then that which the Italians profanely call Lachrymae Christi, or that which at Paris and Lovaine is called Vinum Theologicum, or Vinum Cos, that is, o∣loris, odoris, saporis optimi, the best in the countrey for colour, savour and taste, to please the palate. and al the hils shal melt] sc. with milk, honey, oyl, as Joel. 3.18. the same al∣most with this. And the heathen Poet hath the like, —Subitis messor gaudebit aristis:Claudian. lib. 1. in Ruffin. Rorabunt querceta favis stagnantia passim Vina fluent oleique laeus.— Ver. 14. And I will bring againe the captivity of my people] There is an elegancy in the original that cannot be englished, and God seemes delighted with such Ag∣nominations, as hath been before observed: to shew the lawfull use of Rhetorike in divine discourses,Act. 26.18. so it be not affected, abused, Idolized. This promise is ful∣filled when beleevers are by the gospel brought from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgivenesse of sins, and be set free from the tyranny of corruption, and terrour of death Heb. 2.14.15. Colos. 1.13. Luk. 1.74. Zach. 9.11. Psa. 68.19. and they shall build the wast cities] Restore the sincere service of God, as those noble Reformers did in all ages; fetching the Church, as it were, out of the wil∣dernesse, where she had long laine hid Rev. 12.6. and whence she is said at length to come leaning upon her Beloved Cant. 8.5.
and they shall plant vineyards] That is, particular churches. and drink the wine thereof] Have the fruit and comfort of their labours in the Lord, which they shall see not to be in vaine 1 Cor. 15. they shal also make gardens, and eat of the fruit] while they shall see their peo∣ple to be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.8. but far off flourishing, Psal. 92.13. actuosi & fructuosi Esa. 51.3. The Popish Commentatours (as it is the manner of many of them to marre and bemire the text with their absurd glosses) by cities here would have men to understand the state of married people, by vineyards their Prelates, and by gardens Monkes. Is not this to wrest the scriptures, and so to set them on the rack, as to make them speak more then ever they intended? Is it not to compel them to go two miles when they are willing to go but one? Is it not to taw them, and gnaw them, as Tertullian saith that Marcion the heretick (that Mus Ponticus as he therefore cals him) did, to make them serviceable to his vile purposes? Vers. 15. And I wil plant them upon their land] as trees of righteousnesse, the plan∣ting of the Lord, that he might be glorified, Esay. 61.3, 11. being well rooted and no worse fruited, Philip. 1.6. and they shal no more be pulled up] None shall pull them out of Christs hand; for he and the Father are one. None shall separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus, Rom. 8. they shall be sure of continual supplies of sap and safety,Joh. 10.29, 30. be∣ing kept by the power of God thorow faith unto salvation, 2 Pet. 1.3. The para∣dise of God was so planted, that it was watered on all sides with most noble rivers, to keep it flourishing: how much more will the Lord do this in his heavenly garden the Church? See Psal. 92.13, 14. when it comes to be transplanted especially. saith the Lord thy God] Thy God, O Prophet, who will ratifie and verifie what pro∣mises soever thou hast uttered in his name. Or thy God, O people, now reconciled unto thee in Christ, Ioh. 26.17. and therefore ready to heap upon thee all things needful for life and godlinesse.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the Prophesie of OBADIAH. Verse 1. THE vision of Obadiah,] The same, say some, that hid the Lords Prophets and fed them by fifty in a cave, when sought for to the slaughter, by wicked Jezabel, 1 King. 18.4. whereupon himself also re∣ceived a Prophets reward. That is (saith Lyra) was endued with the spirit of prophesie. Hierom ad∣deth, that he was buried at Samaria, (called after∣wards Sebaste by Herod, in honour of Augustus) and that there his Sepulchre was yet to be seen. The Rabbines say, that this Obadiah was that widows husband, whom Elisha relieved, by multiplying her oyl, 2 King. 4. Others (with more shew of reason) conjecture that this was that Obadiah mentioned 2 Chron. 34.12. a faithfull Levite, set by Josiah to oversee the Artificers, who repaired the Temple in the eighteenth yeere of his reigne:Jer. 49. Ezech. 25. Psal. 137.7. and so was contemporary to Ezechiel and Je∣remy, with whom also he consenteth in many passages: and besides, he maketh men∣tion of the Babylonish captivity, and the Edomites cruelty to the Jews at that time. But let him be who he will, (for where the Scripture hath no tongue, we need not finde ears: but may well content our selves with a learned ignorance) his doctrine he entituleth not a Burden, because he concludeth it comfortably, but a Vision which is more generall: it being his scope to comfort the people of God, that were under great affliction. Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom,] If Obadiah were himself an Edo∣mite, but a Proselyte to the Church (as some Rabbines have reported him) his vi∣sion should have taken the better with his cruell countrey-men, to bring them to repentance. But whether he were or not, they should have observed his authority: and that his doctrine came Cum privilegio, and that it was the Lord God, the Tremend Trinunus that spake by him; and that hee was according to his name, a
servant of the most high-God, which shewed unto them the way of salvation, Acts 16.17. Sed surdo fabulam: the Edomites were so fleshed in blood, and such inveterate enemies to the Church, that there was little good to be done upon them. Howsoever, to leave them without excuse, and, if possible, to rouse them out of their security, He saith, We have heard a rumour from the Lord,] We, that is, I and my fellow-Prophets (who are à secretis to the Lord, Amos 3.7.) have heard for a certainty, that the Edomites are devoted to destruction. And that this was no vain rumour, but ac∣cordingly accomplished, see Jer. 25.9, 21. Mal. 1.3. and an Embassadour is sent among the heathen.] An herald at arms sent by Ne∣buchadnezzar, say some, to stir up his Chaldeans against the Edomites: Others, make this Embassadour to be Christ, or a created Angel, or a divine instinct, or, lastly, the Prophets. Whosoever he is, he doth his work very vigorously. Arise ye, saith he, and let us rise up against her in battell.] Let us joyn our forces, and do our utmost against Idumea. After this sort also shall Gods warriours stirre up themselves one day, and one another, against the Romish Edomites, those Pseudo-christians Antichristians, when God shall once put into their hearts, to hate that old withered whore of Babylon, to make her desolate and naked, to eat her flesh, and burn her with sire, Rev. 17.16, 17. The Alarum was long since given them (not unlike this in the Text) by Francis Petrarch in these words. Babylon altera, nempe propinquior atque recentior, adhuc stat: citò itidem casura; si essetis viri.De rem. utri∣usque sort. de al. 118. There yet standeth a nearer and newer Babylon then that of old: but it should not stand long, were you but Men. Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in bat∣tell. The Jews at this day call the Hierarchie of Rome, the wicked kingdome of Edom; and for Dumah, Esay 21.11. they read Roma, by a very easie (but willing) mistake. See Dr. Taylours sermon, called The Romish Edomite. Verse 2. Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen.] That is, vile, de∣spicable, and abject, as Psal. 119.141. I am small and despised: nothing is more ordinary then to despise the day of small things, Zech. 4.10.Augustin. . Hesiod. Godw. Catal. And whereas God is said to be Magnus in magnis, nec parvus in minimis, hee had alwayes kept down these profane Edomites, shutting them up in mount Seir, a craggy barren coun∣trey (not unlike Ascre Hesiods countrey, or Landaffe in Wales, which is said to be a place, neither pleasant, fertile, nor safe) and not suffering them to attain to any fame, or almost name among other Nations. Were it not that they are mentioned in the Bible (and never there for any goodnesse neither) it would hardly have been known that there ever had been such a people. Wherefore then should Edom be so intolerably insolent, as verse 3? swell to such an height of pride, play such bloody prans, as he is here accused of? especially since God is taking a course to make him yet lesser and lower then yet he is,Esay 23.9. by those armies of his that are comming up∣on him, to stain the pride of all his glory. Verse 3. The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee,] so as to make thee think thy self some great businesse, when its no such matter; and that thou canst secure thy self in thy strong-holds from thy strongest enemies: but herein thy pride hath befooled thee, and put the same trick upon thee that the serpent did once upon the first woman, Gen. 3.13. (the same word is there used as here) who complained, when she was in the transgression. The serpent hath deceived me, &c.1 Tim. 2.14. He is still the King of all the children of pride; and thereby cheateth them,. ravisheth them of their right reason, and rendreth them the direct objects of Gods hatred and heavy displeasure, Jam. 4.6. hee setteth himself in battell aray against them. Though his excellency mount up to the heavens (saith Zophar concerning the proud person, Job 20.6.) and his head reach unto the clouds: yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung; they which have seen him, shall say, Where is he? There is a deceitful∣nesse in sinne, Heb. 3 13. a lie in all these outward vanities, Jon. 2.8. they were never true to those that trusted in them. But the proud person feedeth upon ashes, he feedeth himself with false hopes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, put him into a fools paradise, that he cannot deliver his soul,Esay 44.20. get out of his golden dreams, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? His case is not unlike that mans, who lying fast asleep upon the edge of a steep rock, dreams merrily of much happinesse and safety: but upon the sudden starting for joy, breaks his neck, and
tumbles headlong into the bottome of the sea. thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock] In a rocky mountainous countrey (as the Highlander in Scotland out of the reach of my rod, as thou fondly fanci∣est: in Arabia Petraea, where thine enemies cannot come at thee; and where thou thinkest thy self no lesse safe and out of harmes-way, then Moses was, when God had put him into the cleft of the rock, and covered him with his hand Exod. 33.22. or Elias when he stood in the mouth of the cave 1 King. 19.13. whose habitation is high] Heb: his habitation is high; by a change of the person out of an holy disdaine o Edoms pride and creature-confidence, as if he were extra jactum, out of gun-shot, above danger. that saith in his heart, Who shall bring me down?] Aequalis astris gradior, & cunctos super Altum superbo vertice attingens polum,Atreus in Thieste apud Senec. Demitto superos, summa votorum attigi &c. My roof receives me not, tis ayre I tread:Ben: Jons. At every step I feele my advanced head Knock out a starr in heaven— Such great swelling words of vanity speakes the proud man,2 Pet. 2.18. such big bubbles of of words, ssquipedalia verba, Who shall bring me down? who is the Lord? who is lord over us? &c. Such haughty expressions such lofty language is a forerunner, a presage of imminent destruction, as here. A bulging wall is not farr from a down∣fall. While the word (Is not this great Babel &c.) was yet in Nebuchadnez∣zars mouth, he was deprived of his kingdome, and driven from men &c. Dan. 4.31. Megasthenes the Persian (an ancient writer) reporteth that the Chaldeans re∣late, that Nebuchadnezzar returning home laden with victories, fell mad; and being in a fanatick veine, foretold the destruction of Babel, whether he foretold it or no tis sure he occasioned it, by confiding in it, and by robbing both God of his glory, and his ancestors (the first founders) of their honour: for he only en∣larged it,Psal. 129.1. and built the palace entirely: and now he saith? Who shall bring me down? &c. That will I, saith God, in the next words. Aesop being asked by Chilo (one of the seven wise men of Greece) what God was doing? answered, He bringeth down the proud, and lifteth up the lowly. See the like Psal. 147.6. Verse 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle] Or, as the Arabick text hath it, ad aquilam hard by the Eagle; Couldst thou fly as high a pitch as that bird, which is said to sore out of sight, and build thy nest aloft, as He doth, on the highest mountaines, and tallest trees, that the serpent may not come at his young. and though thou set thy nest among the starrs] i. e. upon such high hills as reach to the upper region of the ayre.Cicero. 1. de Oratore. Of Ithaca, (Ʋlysses his country) the Oratour saith, that it was in scopulis quasi nidus affixa, set as a nest among the rocks. And Pau∣lus Aemylius the Romane Generall pulled down the castles at Athens, saying that they were tyrannorum nidi: and our Henry 8. commanded the Abbeys here to to be demolished, saying, that those crowes-nests were to be destroyed, ne ite∣rum ad cohabitandum convolent that they might never breed againe amongst us. Lucifer and his Antitype Nebuchadnezzar spake of ascending into heaven, above the heights of the clouds, and of the setting their thrones above the starres of God Esa. 14.13, 14. See the like language, or bigger from the Prince of Tyre Ezek. 28.2. with the issue, much like this that here followeth. thence will I bring thee down] Down with a vengeance: as he did Pharaoh, Ne∣buchadnezzar, Herod, Edom, Attilas, Gensericus, Bajazet &c. The Philistines flouted Jonathan and his armour-bearer and said, Come up to us, and wee will shew you a thing: that is, we will give you your payment before we part with you: they held it impossible to get up that sharp steep craggy rock where they kept garrison. But Jonathan clambred over that rock on his hands, and feet; and put them to the rout 1 Sam.Plut. in Alexand. Curt. l. 7. 14.13 An exploit of as great or rather of greater valour, then that of Alexander the great, for which he is so crowned and Chronicled by Plu∣tarch, and Curtius: the story is this. Arimazes having garrisoned a very strong
rock, (held almost inaccessible, and to which there was but one only passage) in the Sogdian countrey, with thirty thousand men: and being sent unto by Alexan∣der to yeeld up his hold, derided him and asked whether Alexander could flie? whereunto Alexander returned this answer, I will make thee know ere thou art a night elder, that the Macedonians can flie. Hereupon he pickt out three hundred of the boldest men he had: and by great promises prevailed with them the next night, to climbe up the backside of the rock to the top of it; which accordingly they did: and killing the guardes, took the garrison, letting in Alexander, who nailed Arimazes to a crosse. saith the Lord] who will surely do it: how improbable, or impossible soever you may judge it. Verse 5. If theeves came to thee, if robbers by night] Or, what? have theeves come to thee? have robbers been here? O, sure 'tis worse then so with thee: they would never have made such clean work, as they say, but have left somewhat be∣hind them, they would never have plaid the Harpyes in this sort, and taken all before them, &c. Thus the neighbour nations stand wondring at this wofull desolation, and sarcastically insulting: Now to be mocked in misery is no small grief to the party. Thus the Prophet prickes them by a Rhetorical Addubitation, the better to affect their minds with an effectual feare of no ordinary or easy cala∣mity, but such as will be wonderfull, and incredible: so that they that heare of it will say, how art thou cut off?] Or, how silent art thou? what? did thine enemies set upon thee per amica silentia Lunae? did they take thee napping, that they shred thee thus? Have they dealt by thee, as Sr. Francis Drake (in his travels) did by the Spaniard whom he found sleeping on the bank of a river with many wedges of gold lying by him. He never waked the man, but eased him of his charge; Or rather as Epaminondas did by the watchman, whom he found fast asleep: he thrust him through with his sword; and being chid for so severe a fact, replied, Talem eum reliqui, qualem inveni, I left him but as I found him. If the grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some grapes:] Surely they would: Deut. 24.21. there would likely be a gleaning of grapes after the vintage is done Isa. 24.13. two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough; foure or five in the outmost fruitfull branches Esa. 17.6. It is hard but some make escape out of the battle to bring the ill newes. Edoms ruine therefore and desolation was most deplorable and irreparable, sith none was left alone: but all both men and meanes raked and racemated. Verse 6. How are the things of Esau searched out?] Or (as Drusius reades it) How are the posterity of Esau searched out? the men to the slaughter, the wealth to the spoile? what cunning and daring souldiers were these to pry into every cor∣ner for prey, and to pull them out of every lurking hole, where they might have been circumvented and butchered, in those dark and strait places; This shewes surely that they were both armed and animated by God himself. Confer Joel. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. but especially Jer. 49.10, 11. where you have the full of that, which is here but abridged: and therefore this verse hath not so much as an Athnach in it, for distinction. how are his hid things sought out?] i. e. his treasures and Jewels which have their name in Hebrew from hiding: because men use to secret and secure them with utmost care and diligence, See Mat. 13.44. hence they are called treasures of darknesse Esa. 45.3. See Iob 3.21. Abundance of this was found at Constan∣tinople, taken by the Turks:Turk. hîc. 345. 347. so that the souldiers divided it among themselves by hat-fuls, wondring at their wealth, and deriding their folly, that possessing so much, they would bestow so little in defence of themselves and their countrey, lost by their tenacity and nigardice: And the same is reported of Heidelberg.Joseph cont. Appron. l. 1. Antiq. l. 10. c. 10. This that is here threatened against Edom, was accordingly executed in the fift yeare after the destruction of Jerusalem, saith Josephus; Nebuchadnezzar in the 23. yeare of his raigne invading and wasting Idumea. Ill-gotten goodes prosper not. Men rake together riches, and know not who shall gather them Psa. 39.7. But, let no man goe beyond and defraud another: for God is the avenger of all such 1 Thes.2 Cor. 4.2. Prov. 10. 4.6. They do best that renounce with St. Paul, those hidden things of dishonesty:
not walking in craftinesse, nor making hast to be rich; for treasures of wicked∣nesse profit not: and when God comes by his judgements to turn the bottome of the bag upwards, as Josephs steward once did, all our secret thefts will out. See Eccle. 12.16. Verse 7. All the men of thy confederacy] which therefore should be true to thee, but prove trecherous: so vaine it is to trust to that broken reed of carnall combi∣nations, Many friends are like deep ponds, cleare at the top, and all muddy at the bottom: the causes they will be, but not the companions of calamity. Like they are saith One, to crowes which flock to a dead carcasse, not to defend it but to devour it: and no sooner have they bared the bones, but they are gone. David complaineth of such Psal. 55.13, 14, 15. and Jeremy of his unkind countreymen of Anathoth chap. 11. But for Edom, it was no great pitty, considering their perfidy both to God (because they had transgressed the lawes morall and munici∣pall, changed the ordinances, that is, the law, of nations and broken the everlasting covenant, that is, the law of Nature, which is that light that lighteneth every man that commeth into the world Ioh. 1.9.) and also to their brethren the Israelites their extreame inhumanity, as it followeth ver. 10.11. They had therefore but their own measure meted againe to them: as they had forgotten the brotherly co∣venant, Am. 1.9, 11. so they met with those that paid them home in their own coyne: neither were they any more pittyed, then Haman when the king frowned upon him, or Sejanus when he fell into the displeasure of Tiberius; his friends sh¦ewing themselves most passionate against him, saying that if Caesar had clemency, he ought to reserve it for men, and not cast it away upon monsters. al brought thee even to the border] And there left thee at the worst: pretending to help thee, but betraying thee indeed to the enemy: and helping to cast thee out of thy countrey, under a shew of courtesy. the men that were at peace with thee] Heb: the men of thy peace, the Ammonites, Moabites and other neighbour-nations from whom thou fearedst no hurt: these, to ingratiate with the king of the Chaldeans. have deceived thee] Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen.Ovid. . Socr. This made a certaine Heathen cry out, Friends, there is no friend to be found: and Another, to pray God to deliver him from his friends; for, as for his enemies he could better beware of them. they that eat thy bread] Heb. thy bread-men, thy fellow-commoners, convictores & consalanei, others amici, that are seldome either satisfied, or sure. have laid a wound under thee] The Hebrew word signifieth both a wound and a plaister: they would secretly wound them, lay a wound under them; and yet seeme willing to bind up their wounds, and heale them, by applying a plaster: such dawbing there is in the world, Fide, deffide. Cavebis autem si pavebis. there is none understanding in him] that is, in Edom. and this seemeth spoken by way of Apostrophe to the Israelites, whose comfort is intended in this whole Prophesie. It is as if it had been said, Edom holds himself wise, but will shew himself a very sot, destitute of common sense: such as taketh not notice that these are the wounds with which he was wounded in the house of his friends: the wital is either insensible of it: or else well content with it, till he hath bought his wit, and begins to open his eyes; but not till the paines of death are upon him, as it is said of the Mole. Verse 8. Shal I not in that day saith the Lord &c.] Edom was famous for wis∣dome, as appeareth by Eliphaz the Temanite, and other of Iobs friends who were Idumeans: and Rabshakeh could say, that counsel and strength are for war Esa. 36.5. what a price did Agamemnon sat upon Nestor? and Darins upon Zophirus? Scipio did nothing without his Polybius, and ascribed most of his victories to his advise.Prov. 20.18. Every purpose is established by counsel; and with good advice make warr, saith Salomon. Romani sedendo vincnnt passed for a proverbe of old. The Romanes, conquered by sitting in counsel: and Cyreas got more cities by his wisdome, then, Pyrebus by his puissance. But where no counsel is the people fall Prov, 11.14. and this was Edoms case in that day, that is, at that time when their confederates be∣trayed them to their enemie, and desolation was at next doore by. God destroyed their wise men: he either cut them off, or infatuated them. Deus, quem destruit,
dementat. When God intends to undo a man (say the Dutch) he first puts out his eyes, and befools him, Pliny saith of the Eagle, that setting upon the Hart, hee lights upon his hornes, and there flutters up and down, filling his eyes with dust, born in her feathers: that at last he may cast himself from a rock, and become a prey. God blindeth the understanding, and expectorateth the wisdome of those whom he designeth to destruction. Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools, the wise counsellours of Pharaoh are become bruitish, they have also seduced Egypt —The Lord hath mingled a spirit of perversities in the middest thereof, &c. Esay 19.11, 12, 13, 14. Verse 9. And thy mighty men, O Teman,] thy Gyants, thy Champions, that durst look death in the face upon great adventures in the field: these were now dismayed, and dispirited; their courage was quailed, and even broken with fear, as the word signifieth: so that as Saul, when the Devil had preached his funerall, made haste and fell with the fulnesse of his stature all along on the earth, as being sore afraid, 1 Sam. 28.20, so shall it be with the mighties of Teman, that is, of Edom: for Teman was nephew to Esau, and sonne to Eliphaz, Gen. 36. and of him, some city, or part of the countrey took its denomination. The Chaldee and the Vulgar Latine take the word Teman appellatively, and render it thus. Thy mighty men shall perish from the South: or, those that dwell to the Southward of thy coun∣trey, and so are more remote from the Northern Chaldees; yet they shall no sooner hear of their coming, but they shall tremble, and forget their prowesse. to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.] Heb. every man, be he never so manly, and magnanimous. Of the mount of Esau] of Idumea, which was mountaneous, and therefore fitly called Seir, that is, rough and rugged, nay be cut off by slaughter.] so that they shall live by fame onely, and hardly that. Verse 10. For thy violence against thy brother Jacob,] For thine open violence,Hence tachmas, the vulture, who liveth by rapine, Levit. 11.10. thine iniquity, rapine, injury done by force, and in publike view, set upon the top of a rock, that all might behold it, Ezek. 24.7. against thy brother,] thine own mothers sonne, Psal. 50.20. This is no small aggravation of thy sinne, that it is in germanum Iaeob, thy nearest Allies. Edom had other sinnes not a few: but this was the chief, and is therefore here and else∣where chiefly alledged, as the cause of their utter ruine, Ezech. 25. and 35. Amos 1. Mal. 1. Nothing is more hatefull to God then unnaturalnesse. A brother is born for adversity, Prov. 17.17. his birth bindes him to it: and hee must first offer vio∣lence to himself, that is unkind to his distressed brother: he must tear the dictates of nature out of his own heart. And however at other times brethren may jarre and jangle: yet at a strait, and in a stresse, good nature (if there be any remains of it) will work: and good blood will not belie it self: Israel was charged for this cause not to abhor an Edomite, because he was his brother, Deut. 23.7. and yet the Edomites used them as discourteously in their passage to Canaan, as the Moabites and Ammonites did, Num. 20.20, 21. they were also their perpetuall enemies, and of a devilish vindictive spirit toward them, to the very last: hence their ensuing doom. shame shall cover thee,] for thy violence covering thee as a garment, and for thy pride compassing thee as a chain, Psal. 73.6. The face of such as are ashamed is wont to be covered with blushing, the blood flushing to the outward parts to relieve them, and, as it were, to hide their shame. Hence the Hebrews say, that those that blush for shame, are covered with shame, Mic. 6.10. Psal. 69.8. and 35.26. and 109.17, 29. Iob 18.22. Those that shame the counsel of the poor, be∣cause the Lord is his refuge, Psal. 14.6. shall themselves be covered with confusion here, and be raised up at last day to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2. And thou shalt be cut off for ever. Aeteruùm, ex ima decisus stirpe, peribis. Esay prophcieth the same irreparable ruine to Edom, chap. 34.10. and so doth Ezechiel, chap. 35.9. That which Ieremy speaketh of seventy years continuance only of their serving the king of Babel, chap. 25.11. it is not meant of an end of their captivity, but of the Babylonish Monarchy.
Verse 11. In the day that thou stoodest on the other side,] Over-anent; curiously cying, and maliciously promoting, by thy virulent tongue, and violent hands, the downfall of Israel. Nemo curiosus quin malevolus, saith an Ancient. These Edo∣mites fed their eyes with their brethrens miseries, as with a pleasant spectacle. At first perhaps, they were onely lookers on: but afterwards they stood against them in battel (when they saw them worsted) and took part with their enemies. See Esth. 8.2. Psal. 9.6. Eph. 6.11. The Samaritanes afterward served them in like sort, as Josephus reporteth: especially when Antiochus tormented the Jewes, they wrote to him to excuse themselves as no Jews; and (offering him their service) basely stiled him, Antiochus the mighty God. In the day that the strangers carried away captive, &c.] Edoms malice is here aggravated by the circumstance of time they took to expresse it: viz. when Gods people were at worst, and when their extreme misery should have moved pity. This was a Dog-like, Devil-like practise, to fall upon those that are down before; to adde affliction to the afflicted, Psal. 69.26. to push the wounded out of the Heard, as they say Deer do. Of such barbarous and savage usage David oft complaineth, and Job, and Jeremy, and Jesus, Psal. 22. such shall one day cry out at Gods barre, as Jo∣sephs brethren did, Gen. 42.21. and finde no mercy, Jam. 2.21. no more then cruell Haman did, Esth. 7. it being just with God to set off all hearts from him, who had been so unreasonably mercilesse. This Job well knew, and therefore so studiously purgeth himself of this hainous wickednesse, chap. 31.29. Ausonius also out of Pitaccus Mytelenaeus affirmeth him to bee a beast and worse, that maketh himself merry in another mans misery. The beastliest among bruit creatures, even swine, seem to be affected with the out-cries of their kind. Men onely, more brui∣tish then they, triumph in the calamities each of other, and are not moved with their out-cries, albeit as bitter as that of Hezekiah, Esay 38.14. O Lord, I am op∣pressed, help me. This Solomon calleth oppression of an high nature, Eccles. 4.1. See Psal. 142.4. and forreiners entred into his gates,] having taken the city: then did the Edo∣mites set fire to the Temple, 2 Esdr. chap. 4. vers. 45. Citizens in a siege fortifie their gates, and defend them to the utmost; for if the gates bee gained, the city is lost: as it was at Jerusalem, and as it had like to have been at the city of Coccinum, in the Island of Lemnos, which the Turks had surprized on the sudden, but that they were happily prevented by the courage of one Marulla, a maiden of that city, who seeing her father slain in the gate, took up the weapons that lay by him: and, like a fierce Amazon, notably revenged his death, desperatly fighting in defence of her countrey,Turk. hist. 412 with those few that were in the gate at the first, and so kept the Turks out, untill the rest of the citizens, moved with the alarm, came to the gate. and cast lots upon Jerusalem,] i. e. upon the plunder of Jerusalem: according to the custome of old souldiers, Num. 26.56. See this fulfilled, 2 King. 24. and 25. See allso more of this practise, Nah. 3.10. Joel 3.3. and how grievous it is to the ingenious, hear Andromache, O foelix una ante alias Priameia virge, Hostilem ad tumulum,Virg. Aeneid. Lib. 3. Troiae sub moenibus altis Jussa mori, quae sortitus non pertulit ullos, Nec victoris heri tetigit captiva cubile. Even thou wast as one of them.] The emphasis lieth in the word Thou: as in that of Julius Caesar, vov . Di Cass. beholding Brutus among the Conspiratours that took away his life: What? Thou my sonne Brutus? Even Thou, brother Edom, whom we spared in our passage thorow the wildernesse; when we destroyed other Nations, Deut. 2. Thou, who hast from David's dayes (for most part) been our vassall and tributary. Hie∣rom applieth this to Heretikes; Mercer to that Arch-heretike Antichrist, an utter opposite to Christ, yet a pretended friend (as was Iudas) a servant of Gods servants (if you'le beleeve him) but a most bloody persecutour of the Church, in whose ruines he yet revelleth, and will do, till Christ shall punish him, with his sore, and great, and strong sword, Esay 27.1. and dung his vineyard with the flesh of that wild-bore.
Verse 12. But thou shouldest not have looked on the day,] Unlesse it were with weeping eyes. Ijsdem quibus videmus oculis flemus. Men have the same organ of seeing and of weeping: that when they behold a dolefull object, they might weep over it: not as the Crocodile doth over the dead body which she had slain before, and afterward devoureth: but with true tears of compassion,Gen. 4.6. weeping with those that weep. God takes it ill here, that any should once look upon his afflicted peo∣ple, unlesse it be to pity and relieve them. He observed Cains lowring upon his brother: and the Jewes wagging their heads, Mat. 27.39. Rabshakehs lofty looks,Gen. 31.2. Esay 37.23. Labans change of countenance, &c. Men may not look at liberty, and as they list. Vultu saepe laeditur charitas. It was not for nothing therefore, that in Queen Elizabeths dayes, at a meeting of the borderers in the Marches, betwixt England and Scotland, about goods unjustly taken,Cam Elisab. 279. security was given and confir∣med on both sides by oath, (according to custome) and proclamation made, that no man should harme other, by word, deed, or look. when he became a stranger,] and fell under a strange punishment, as Job speak∣eth, chap. 31.3. that is, a rare and unheard of misery, monstrosum exilium, Tremel∣lius rendreth it. This was threatened, 2 Chron. 7.21. and accordingly fulfilled, Lam. 1.9. Israel became the worlds wonderment, a famous instance of Gods se∣verity against a people of his wrath, and of his curse. Aben-Ezra rendreth it, In his strange day, such as he had never seen the like before. Others, when he was ba∣nished his own borders, and became a stranger at home: when God seemed to look strange upon him, and to stand aloof, or as a man astonied, that knows not whe∣ther he had best help or no, as a mighty man that cannot save, Jer. 14.8,Acts & Mon, 1423. 9. Iohn Baptist was beheaded in prison without any law, right, or reason, as though God had known nothing at all of him, said that Martyr. neither shouldest thou have rejoyced over the children, &c.] For this is to bee sick of the devils disease, , and such are assured, that they shall not go un∣punished, Prov. 17.5. God will soon see it, and be displeased, and turn the current of his wrath, upon such an offendour, Prov. 24.18. as he did here upon Edom, for looking with liking on the calamity of his brother, for rejoycing at the down∣fall of his enemy. Neither shouldst thou have spoken proudly.] Heb. Magnified thy mouth, blustering and breathing out big threats, setting up thine horne on high and saying, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof, Psal. 137.7. Diripite, ex imis evertite fundamentis.Buchanan. Such a Pyrgopolynicas was Nebuchadnezzar, Esay 10.13. and Alexander the great, and Antiochus, that little Antichrist, Dan. 7.8. and that great Antichrist of Rome, bellowing with his bulls, and menacing hell to all that adhere not to him. See Rev. 13.5, 6. and a like phrase to this, Ezek 35.13. Verse 13. Thou shouldest not have entered into the gate, &c.] But have looked upon them as my people, though under a cloud of calamity; which will soon blow over. To enter therefore into their gates for prey, and spoil, is to burden your selves with that burdensome stone, that shall break you: to drink of that poisonous cup that shall bane you: to lay your hands upon that harth of fire, that will burn you, Zech. 12.2, 3, 6 Look to it, hands off, keep you farre from so evil a matter, lest it prove as that gold of Tholouse, a mischief to all that meddle with it.Aurum Tho∣losanum. thou shouldest not have looked,] See Verse 12. The repetition shews the hainous∣nesse of the sinne. The Holy Ghost doth not open his mouth in vain (whatever Iob did, chap. 36.16.) nor multiply words without reason. In the day of their calamity.] This is thrice mentioned: to shew how sensible God was of this savage dealing of theirs with his poor people, who now lay under the strokes and stripes of a displeased mercy. The Hebrew word here rendred cala∣mitie, signifieth a fog, vapour, or mistie cloud, Gen. 2.6. Iob 36.27. and by a Me∣taphor, it is put for affliction and misery, as it is also in Latine. Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris,Ovid. Athanas. Nubecula est, citò transibit said that Father.
Verse 14. Neither shouldest thou have stood in the cross-way] To intercept those poore fugitives. Who sought to save themselves by flight, sith they could not by fight. But alasse, Ʋna salus victis,Virg. nullam sperare salutem. Seeking to shun the shelves, they ran upon a rock. Mischeivous Edomites way∣laid them: and either slew them, or drew them back to prison, as in the next words. neither shouldest thou have delivered up] Or shut up close prisoners the Residue, Heb: Serido (the same almost with the English, the letters only transposed) those poore few that were yet undevoured by the sword. This was greatest cru∣elty of all: And see the Edomites progresse in it, and what Proficients they prove. Nemo repentè fit deterrimus. Sin proceedes by degrees: neither is any man at his worst at first. First they looked at the churches calamity, and then they laughed, and then they insulted and spoke big words, and then they plundered, and lastly they butchered some, and imprisoned other some. Did not Gods enemies do all this amongst us, in our late unnaturall commotions? wherein, besides the many massa∣cres made every where, it was a like difficult thing, in those parts where they prevailed, to find a wicked man in their prisons, or a good man out of them. Verse 15. For the day of the Lord is near &c.] The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. The Lord shal laugh at him: for he seeth that his day is coming Psa. 37.12, 13. the particular day of his sore punishment, a type and pledge of the generall judgement, that great day of the Lord, as it is called Rev. 6.17. and 16.14. because the great God will on that day do great workes, and determine great matters, Jud. 19. But as some mens sins go before to judgement, (as it were, by a speciall sessions preceding and anteverting the great Assises) so should Edom, and his neighbour Nations tast all of Nebuchadnezzars cup and whip Jer. 25. and this day is said to be neere upon them, though it came not of above an hundred yeares after: so is the comming of Christ to judgement neere, though we presume not to set the time as some have done, deceiving and being deceived. as thou hast done, it shall be done to thee] God loves to retaliate, and to oppose frowardnesse to frowardnesse Psal. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety Levit. 26.18.21. severity to cruelty, as he did to Adonibezek, Agag, Zeba and Zalmunna Jud. 8.19. and Edom here, and Ezech. 35. And the heathens held this but meet, as appeareth by their fables and stories of Phineus Quid fodis immeritis natis sua lumina, Phineu? Poena reversura est in caput ipsa tuum.Ovid. So of Diomedes king of Thrace,Justum est ai Rhadaman∣thus quod quis injustè aljs intulit idem subeat & pati∣atur. Arist. Ethic. cast by Hercules to be devoured by his own dogs which he had so oft fed with mans flesh. The like might be said of Perillus and his brazen bull, whereof himself had the handsell. Herein they said no other thing, then what God had in the old law decreed Levit. 24.19. and Christ in the New hath confirmed Mat. 7.2. for a terrour to evill-doers, who shall have like for like returned unto them, and be filled with their own wayes Prov. 14.14. See Lam. 4.21. The Rabbbines conceive all this to be spoken of the Romanes (whom they call Edomites) Sure we are God will be even with that Romish Antichrist, and render him his own in kind, when he once takes him in hand, as Rev. 18.6. &c. Rev. 13: 10. Verse 16. For as ye have drunk upon mine holy mountaine] As you O Edomites, have rejoyced and revelled in the ruines of Zion, carousing and carolling in her ca∣lamity, so shall many nations, and you among, yea above the rest (for your ex∣cessive perfidy and cruelty) drink deeply of the cup of Gods fury, which hath eter∣nity to the bottom. and they shal be as though they had not been] This clause makes against that other sense that some set upon the text, viz. The Heathen shall drink, feast, and triumph over thee, O Edom, whom they have subdued: yea they shall drink so stoutly that they shall swallow thee up, and all thy substance, leaving thee nothing Praeter coelum & coenum, as that Roman prodigall boasted he had done to himself. Their
exposition seemeth more probable, who here begins the Consolatory part of the Prophesie? and make this verse an Apostrophe to the afflicted Iews thus.Aben-Ezra Tremell. Mercer. Levely Tar. Like as ye my people have drunk your part of the cup of affliction (an ordinary Metaphor, not in Scripture onely, as Ezek. 23.32. Ier. 49.12. Mat. 20.22. but also in Hea∣then Writers, in allusion perhaps to the cup of poyson given at Athens to Male∣factours, or (as some think) to the manner of their feasts whereat the Symposiarch, or ruler of the feast (Ioh. 2.) gave order what, and how much, every one should drink) so shall all the Heathen drink, and that continually: yea they shall not on∣ly sip of the top, that which is sweetest and clearest; but the dregs and sediment too, they shall both drink and swallow down; till such time as it hath wholly swal∣lowed them up, so that they shall be as though they had not been. See for confir∣mation of this sence, Ier. 25.25. and 49.12. And pray for the ruin of Rome, so long since foretold by Sibylla. Tota eris in cineres, quasi nunquam Roma fuisses. The Prophesie is fulfilled already in Edom; whose very name is lost, more then what the Scripture reporteth of them. The Chaldees cut off abundance of them, together with the Moabites, Ammonites, and other neighbour nations. After that, Iudas Macchabeus, and his nephew Hircanus slew a great sort of them: and then, lastly, the Romans and other Princes rooted them utterly out. See Ioseph. Lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 10. 1 Maccab. 5.65. 2 Mac. 10.16, 32. Verse 17. But upon Mount Zion shall be deliverance,] God will turne againe their captivity as the streames in the South. He stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to send them home: he restored unto them both Religion and Liberty: he did all that could be done for them, by sending his Son amongst them in the fulnesse of time, made of a woman, &c. made also unto all his people, wisdome, righteousnesse, san∣ctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Jesus hath delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 Thess. 1.10. Neither is there any other Name, whereby heaven is to be had, but onely by the Name of Jesus. and there shall be holinesse,] Holinesse to the Lord, as Zach. 14.20. See the Notes there. All the Lords people shall be an holy nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. Every inha∣bitant of the city of God shall be partaker of holinesse, both imputed and impar∣ted; that, for justification, being inherent in Christ, imputed to us; this, for san∣ctification, imparted by Christ, inherent in us. and the house of Jacob shall possesse' their possessions.] They returning from Ba∣bylon shall not onely recover their own possessions, out of the hands of the Edomites, Samaritans, and Syrians, by vertue of an Edict from king Darius; but they shall also possesse the Edomites themselves, and their territories: when converted to the faith of Christ, they shall bring their wealth unto the Church, and (as it is faid of Tyrus, Esay 23.18.) feed and clothe therewith the Saints of God. Verse 18. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, &c.] The house of Jacob are the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin: the house of Joseph are the ten tribes of Is∣rael, whereof Ephraim was the head. The sence is this, those two tribes, toge∣ther with such of the ten as joyned themselves to them, either before, or after the captivity, shall invade Idumea, burn it, and subdue it, as fire doth stubble fully drie. This was done by Hircanus, and Judas Macchabeus, who compelled the Edomites to bee circumcised: and so wholly possessed those parts,Joseph. 13. Ant. 17. that there were not any reliques of them remaining; no not so much as one  (as the Sep∣tuagint render it) or,  (as some read them,) any to carry corn after the camp, or fire before it, according to the custome of the Greeks and Easterlings: which torch-bearer might as little bee violated, as an Embassadour; but here, hee should bee cut off with the rest, and not so much as a messenger left to relate the overthrow. The Edomites were so utterly rooted out by Hircanus,Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 3. that they thenceforth ceased to bee Edomites, and became Jews. Those of them that were converted, by the preaching of the Gospel, ceased to be either Edomites or Jewes, and became Christians. The Apostles burning with the zeal of Gods glory, and love to mens souls, devoured and wasted the infidelity, idols, and vices of the Gen∣tiles, where-ever they came preaching. Hence Chrysostom saith, Peter was a man made all of fire, walking among stubble: Paul was insatiabilis Dei cutor, an insa∣tiable servant of Christ. And to the like purpose it was, that to one that desired to know what kind of man Basil was, it is said, there was presented in a dream a
pillar of fire, with this Motto, Talis est Basilius, Such an one is Basil. And old Latimer, when he was demanded the reason why so little powerfull preaching? an∣swered, Deest ignis, the spark of the spirit is wanting. Howbeit this Prophecy, as it began to be fulfilled at first by the Apostles, and the Apostolicall persons that came after them; so it is daily, and shall be continually to the worlds end fulfilled by the faithfull preachers of Gods holy word, who are clothed with a spirit of judge∣ment and of burning, Esay. 4 4. and out of whose mouth proceedeth fire, Rev. 11.5. to purge the gold, and to consume the stubble. Verse 19. And they of the South shall possesse the mount of Esau,] Those of the South, that is, the tribe of Judah. For Iudaea was divided into five parts, Josh. 15. whereof one was Southward, toward the coast of Edom, ver. 21. Another was in the vale or plain, near unto the Philistines, ver. 33. Here then Obadiah sheweth, that the Jews shall not onely recover their ancient inheritances, but also much en∣large the same: whereby he signifieth, that the Church of Christ shall grow so very great, that Jewry shall be too narrow for them (see Zach. 10.10) the ancient bounders shall not receive them. See Num. 24.17. Esay 11.14. The Gospel was soon spread, not onely to the neighbour nations, but to all the ends of the earth: the Edomites, Philistines, &c. are onely mentioned, as being better known and more adverse to the Jews, then other nations were. and they of the plain, the Philistines,] i.e. those five Lordships, Gath, Gaza, As∣calon, Ekron, and Azotus, all which countrey (called Sarona, Acts 9.) Augustus gave to Herod the Ascalonite; and, after his death, to his sons; dividing it into Tetrar∣chies, Luke 3.1. and they shall possesse the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria,] All which Hircanus subdued, and destroyed their Temple built in mount Garizim. and Benjamin shall possesse Gilead,] that is, shall propagate and extend his ha∣bitation beyond Iordan: and in respect of his exceeding great multitude, shall be compelled to hold and possesse Gilead, all the countrey betwixt Iordan and mount Libanus. Thus Hierom with the Hebrew Scholiasts, and many others: who do also note, that under these earthly felicities heavenly are described: and that all this is chiefly accomplished under Christ, when as the faithfull are made heirs and lords of all things by Him, who is their Head. See Ezek. 37.16, &c. Verse 20. And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel, &c.] i.e. the multitude of the Jews carried captive to Babylon, returning at length into their own countrey, shall possesse all the places of the Canaanites, all the Maritine cities, all the tract of ground as farre as Sarepta, which is betwixt Tyre and Zidon, there∣fore called Sarepta of Zidon, 1 King. 17.19. Here dwelt the Canaanites, whom Asher could not expell, Judg. 1.31, 32. See Mat. 15.22. and the captivity of Jerusalem which is in Sepharad,] that is, either in some ci∣tie of Assyria, or in the utmost bounds of the Babylonish dominion, (as some in∣terpret the word Sepharad, by taking it asunder) or as farre as Apharad, (so the Septuagint) that is, Euphrates. The Hebrew Doctors, as by Canaanites here, they understand the Dutch, and by Zarephath, France, so by Sepharad they will needs have Spain to be meant, subdued say they by Nebuchadnezzar, after other his great conquests, and by him planted with Iews, carried captive from Ierusalem. With such bold and frivolous fancies do these poor deluded creatures fondly feed them∣selves. They are generally light, aeriall, and fanaticall brains, saith One: apt to work themselves into the fools-paradise of a sublime dotage. They not onely expect a corporall restitution to their own countrey,Blounts voyage. but also a soveraignty over all other nations, and possession of their Provinces, saith Another: they beleeve that the Messias is not yet come,Buxtorf. synag. c. 5. because the Christian Empire is not yet destroyed: and therefore they pray daily for the overthrow of the Roman Empire. Out of the East it is that they expect their Messiah, whither the Spanish Iews fled, (when they were banished) and are exceedingly multiplied: for those do they hold to be this captivity of Ierusalem here mentioned,Spec. Europ. viz. of the tribe of Iudah; and the other in Germany, and Italy, to be of the tribe of Benjamin: who in honour of the more noble tribe, and to correspond with them the better, do learn the Spanish Tongue: which those still retain, in hope, belike, to be one day Lords of that large and rich countrey.
Shall Possesse the cities of the South.] i. e. shall return to their own Southerly cities and provinces. And this Prophesie of recovering the holy land, is to be ta∣ken in a spirituall sence: and it importeth, that all those that are Israelites indeed, Iews inwardly, shall flee to the Church of Christ, Rom. 9. Verse 21. And Saviours shall come up on mount Zion,] Judas Macchabeus, and Hircanus in the history: as in the mysterie, the Apostles and other of Christs Mi∣nisters, who are here and elsewhere called Saviours (a very high stile) because God maketh use of their Ministery (as he doth likewise of the Angels) for the good of them that are heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. and by their help, the faithfull are saved. Hence those expressions, 1 Tim. 4.16. thou shalt save thy self and those that hear thee, Iam. 5.20. he shall save a soul from death, Iob 33.24. Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have received a ransom. See also Mic. 5.6. Iude 23. 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9, and 4.1. and 9.22. Let Ministers hence learn their dignity, and their duty. Christ hath communicated to them many of his own most honourable titles, as Light of the world, Doctour, Pastour, Saviour Redeemer, &c. True it is, He alone is the principall Saviour (and therefore it followeth in the closure of this shortest,Brevissimus sed difficilimus Propheta. Merer. but most difficult Prophet, the kingdom shall be the Lords) He, to speak properly is the sole both Soveraign and Saviour of his body the Church. Sed servatores di∣cuntur, saith Mercer, but they are called Saviours, because they preach the word of this salvation, and are instrumentall to Christ in that great work; like as the Apothecary is to the skilfull Physician, in curing his patient of a deadly disease. to judge the mount of Esau,] Antichrist with his adherents: all other Infidels also, and Atheists, condemned here by Christ and his faithfull Ministers,Ezek. 20.4. as rebels against God, and sinners against their own souls. Wilt thou judge them, sonne of man? wilt thou judge them? cause them to know their abomination, and to judge themselves worthy to bee destroyed; that judging themselves, they may not bee judged, 1 Cor. 11.31. but of Esauites may become true Iacobites: as Iether, by nature an Ismaelite, 1 Chron. 7.17. is, for his faith and piety, called an Israelite, 2 Sam. 17.25. Lo thus to judge the mount of Esau, ought to bee the ambition of Christs Ministers, for to gain them to Christ, by convincing the world of sinne, of righteousnesse, and of judgement, that is, of the mischief of sinne, the necessity of justification by Christs merit, and of sanctification by his Spirit. This is to be both Iudges and Saviours; as those Iudges of old were, whereunto the Prophet here seemeth to allude. This is to save people with fear, pulling them out of the fire,Joh. 16.. Iude 23. This is to proclaim Christ King, and to set the Crown upon his head, as Cant. 3.11. with that glorious acclamation, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our law-giver, the Lord is our King, and He will save us, Esay 33.22. The Kingdom shall be the Lords.] Not onely the Kingdom of Power, over all creature, 1 Chron. 29.11. and Grace in the hearts of his people here (called oft the kingdom of heaven in the Gospel) but also of Righteousnesse, and of Glory hereafter, to be chiefly exercised at that Great and dreadfull day. Now to this King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the onely wise God, be honour and glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.1 Tim. 1.17.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of JONAH. CHAP. I. Verse 1. NOw the word of the Lord came] Heb. And the word] For with that particle And, the Hebrews sometimes begin a discourse, as Ezek. 1.1. Levit. 1.1. an ele∣gancy proper to that tongue. Howbeit Hugo Car∣dinalis maketh this And, not an inceptive particle, but a copulative to many other things that were in the Prophets mind. Others conceive it to be conti∣nuative of some other history not now extant: or at least connexive of this history with the course of his ordinary calling, and Prophetike employment among the ten tribes, to whom he prophesied together with Hosea,2 King. 14.25. Amos and others, but with little good successe, in the reigne of Iero∣boam the second, a Prince more prosperous then pious. Ionah prophesied of his prosperity, and victories: whereof when no good use was made by the house of Is∣rael; their calamity and captivity was likewise foretold by Hosea, Amos, and Esay: and hence some conclude, that Jonas was the first of all the Prophets, whose writings are extant: For he lived, say they, before the battell of Joash King of Israel with the Syrians, about the end of the life and prophese of Elisha, 2 King. 13.14, &c. and 14.25. unto Ionah the sonne of Amittai,] Ionah signifieth a Dove, but Ionah had too little of the dove in him: plenus enim fuit effraenatis motbus, saith One, as passio∣nate a man of an honest man,Luther. D. Harris as you have lightly heard of, saith Another. Whe∣ther he was that mad fellow (as those much more mad Captains called him, 2 King. 9.11.) that was sent to anoint Iehu, or else the widow of Sarepta's sonne, raised by Eliah, (as the Hebrewes will have him to be) I have not to say. But that he was a servant of the Lord, we finde, 2 King. 14.25. and a type of Christ, Mat. 12.40. concerning whom he prophesied,Augustine. non tam sermone quam sua quadam passione, far
more plainely, then if he had by voice foretold his death and resurrection. And whereas the Grandees and Potentates of the world get them a great name by the death and danger of many others; Jonas his omnibus superior est, saith an Interpre∣ter, Jonah surpasseth them all in this, that by his sermon at Niniveh he preserved that great city, wherein were so many thousand persons, and so much cattle chap. 4.11. That he was called and sent thither by God, it appeareth by this text,Oecol. in lc. and Oecolampadius observeth it. He was not, saith he, of them that run before they are sent; but being sent, he refused to run, because of the hardnesse of the task laid upon him as did likewise Moses and Jeremy, till better tutoured. There is lesse danger in refusing to run when sent, then in running unsent. But when God cal∣leth a man to the ministery, let him not doubt or despond, though at first he find not so much incouragement. Magna semper fecerint, qui Deo vocante docuerunt, saith Luther. They have alwayes done great things that have followed Gods call, as did Jonas at Niniveh, and doth still in the Church of God: for among others, Cyprian that famous Martyr confesseth, that he was converted from idolatry and Necromancy, by hearing the history of the Prophet Jonas read and expounded to him by Cecilius, whom he thencesorth called novae vitae parentem, the father of his christian life. Verse 2. Arise, go to Niniveh] Haec est vocatio Prophetae saith Oecolampadius: This was the Prophets call, which he should have obeyed without hucking or shucking delayes or disputes, conferring, or consulting with flesh and blood Gal. 1.16. True it is, that in humane governments, where reason is shut out, there tyranny is thrust in. As in the Papacy (where the whore sitteth upon them Rev. 17.1. that is, useth them vilely and basely; sitteth upon their consciences, as Rachel did upon her fathers images) though their superiours command the Friars a voyage to China or Peru, without dispute of delay they must presently set forward: to detract or disobey in this case is held breach of vow,Spec. Europ. equall to sacri∣ledge: This is intollerable tyranny. But where God calleth or commandeth (as here,) to ask a reason, is presumption; to oppose reason, is rebellion. Paul durst not but be obedient to the heavenly vision Act. 26.19.. Jonah declined his Apostleship (as a Father calleth it) but it had like to have cost him a choaking: whereof when in danger, he could confesse that They that obserue lying vanityes (as he had done to his cost) forsake their own mercy, are miserable by their on electi∣on.John. 2.8. As for the expression here used, Arise go, it is hortantis particula, & studium notat: it is an encouraging and exciting particle. Up and be doing. Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Rom. 12.12. Surge, age, summe Pater— Said Mantuan to the Pope, exciting him to take up armes against the Turk. There is a curse to him that doeth the work of the Lord negligently Jer. 48.10. and a Command to do it with all our might Eccles. 9.10. Nineveh that great city] Built by Ninus, and by him so named: as Adrianople, Constantinople, Charles-town &c. A great city it was indeed, never any so great: as consisting of three cities, and having more people within the walles, then are now in some one kingdome, saith an Author. It was sixty miles about, saith Di∣odorus Siculus (Bunting saith Alcaire at this day is no lesse: Paulus Venetus saith Quinsay in Tartary is an hundred miles in circuite, but we are not bound to be∣leeve him. It is enough that Cambalu the chief city there is 28. miles in compass) Nineveh was three dayes journy in Jonah's dayes, fortified with a wall of an 100.Turk. hist. fol. 75. foot high: and that also beautified, and beset with 1500. towers, each of them erected to the height of 200. foot. Thus farr Diodorus: who also tells us that this great city received one ruine by the river Tigris, which at an innundation bra out upon the wall, and threw down twenty furlongs thereof. See Nah. 1.9. Its lat destruction was undertaken and ended by Nebuchadnezzar, as the Jewes in their Chronologie testify. Herodotus saith, by Cyaxares, not by Astyages,Herod in Clie. as Hierome mistaketh him. If Sardanapalus were king of Nineveh, when Jonas cried against it (as Corn. à Lapide contendeth) it was much that such an egregious voluptuary should so soon be wrought upon, as chap. 3. But He and his people
soon relapsed to their former impiety; and were therefore destroyed, as Nahum had foretold: So that it may now be said of Nineveh as once it was of another great city in Strabo, magna civitas, magna solitudo. That great city is become a great desert. See Zeph. 2.15, It is nothing now but a sepulcher of it self, a little town of small Trade, where Nestorius his sectaries have taken their shelter, at the devotion of the Turk. It is become like that other Niniveh mentioned by Eusebius quae est parvum quoddam in angulo Arabico oppidum,Lib. de loc. Ebraic. which is a certain little town in a corner of Arabia. and cry against it] Cry aloud with open mouth, and full throat, sic clames, ut Stentora vincere possis.Isa. 51.1. The voyce said Cry: but what should he cry? Cry that their wickednesse is come up before me (so some) but that's not all: Cry, as chap.Hben-Ezra. 3.5. Yet forty dayes and Niniveh shall be destroyed, for their wicked∣nesse is come &c. their iniquity will be their ruine: tell them so from me Esa. 31.10.11. their wickednesse is come up before me] Their pride,Am. 5.12. cruelty and other many and bony sins, as Amos hath it. Of their idolatry we read not, and yet we doubt not: they declared their sins as Sodom Es. 10.9. they set them upon the cliffs of the rocks Ezek.Jer. 3.4, 5. 8. they did wickedly as they could, and filled not only the earth with their abominations, but the heaven also with the noise and stench there∣of, to the annoying of Gods senses, and the vexing of his soule; more then any filthy drunkard doth those that are sober, with his hooting and spewing. See Gen. 4.10, and 18, 20. Rev. 18.5. with the Notes. Verse 3. But Jonah rose up to flee &c.] i. e. He made hast (more hast then good speed) to disobey God. Homo est inversus decalogus. The naturall man standeth acrosse to the will of God: being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate Tit. 1.16. Jonas was a spirituall man; and should have di∣scerned all things 1 Cor. 2.15. But this spiritual man was mad Hos. 9.7. (as they that are cured of a frensy, will yet have their freakes, and frantick tricks some∣times) he cast off the yoke, and turned, for the time, runnagate from the Lord; who met him at half-turn, and brought him back againe, though by weeping-crosse. Of the black-birds dung is made the lime whereby he is taken: so here. They that would excuse Jonas, and say that he sinned not, Dei scriptis injuriam faciunt, saith Luther, they wrong the scriptures. The best have their infirmities: as the snow-like swan hath black legs: and as no pomegranate is without some rotten graines. David saw such volumes of corruptions, and so many Errata's in all that he did, that he cries out, Who can understand his errours? Cleanse thou me from secret faultes,Joseph. Antiq. lib. 9. cap. 11. Psal. 19.12. to flee unto Tarshish] Tarsus in Cilicia, St. Paules countrey Act. 21.39. and 23.3. rather then the city Tunis in Afrike, as Vatablus will have it, or the East-Indies, as others. Tarshish sometimes signifieth the maine Ocean, as Psal. 48.8. (whence some take it here for the sea) but that may be by a metonymie of the ad∣junct: because Tarsus stood upon the Ocean-shore, and was a fit haven whence to hoise up saile into sundry countries. from the presence of the Lord] Ab ante Domini from the speciall and spirituall presence of God wherein he had hitherto stood and ministred. For from Gods generall presence (whereby he filleth all places) and is not farr from any one of us Act. 17.27. (not so farr surely, as the bark is from the tree, the skin from the flesh, or the flesh from the bones) Jonas knew he could not flee. Blind Nature saw and could say. —quascunque accesseris oras, Sub Jove semper eris.— God is a circle, said Empedocles, whose center is every where, whose circumfe∣rence is no where. Why the Prophet fled, many causes are assigned by Interpre∣ters: as Amor patriae, timor humanus &c. his feare of the Ninevites, his love to his Israelites, his conceit that it would be to little purpose to preach to heathens, sith he had prevailed so little at home &c. The very cause was that which we find chap. 4.2. I fled to Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gratious God &c. and I
feared, lest I should thereupon be counted a false Prophet. So much there is of Self found in the best: who when once they are got out of Gods way, they may run they know not whither, and return they know not when. and went down to Ioppa] Heb. Iapho; a sea-town in the tribe of Dan. Iosh. 19.46. distant about 50. miles from Geth-Hepher (Jonas his town 2 King. 14.25.) which was in the tribe of Zabulon toward the lake of Tiberias. Sinners are no small paines-takers. There is the same Hebrew and Greek word for wickednesse and toilesomenesse. Would sinners be at the same paines for heaven,. that they are at for hell, they could not lightly miss of it. and he found a ship going to Tarshish] They that have a mind to commit sin, shall easily meet with an occasion: the Tempter, who feeleth their pulses and knoweth which way they beat, will soon fit them a penniworth: He hath a wedge of gold to set before Achan, a Cozbi before Zimri. Indeed it is the just mans happinesse, that no evill shall happen to him Prov. 12.21. that is (as Mercer interpreteth it) non parabitur ei; & dabitur occasio iniquitatis,Non causabi∣ur, aptabitur. God shall cut off from him the occasions of sin, remove stumbling-blocks out of his way; either not lead him into temptation, or not leave him in it. so he paid the fare thereof] Forsan ut citiùs navie solveret:Mercer. perhaps to make the marriners hasten the more. Jonas might better have obeyed God and gone to Nineveh on free-cost. But wit is best when 'tis bought, they say. How many be there, who perish at their own charge; as Phocion the Athenian payd for the poyson that dispatched him. to go with them to Tarshish from the presence &c.] i. e. out of Gods blessing, into the worlds warme Sun. All wilfull sinners are runnagates from the Lord; factique sunt à corde suo fugitivi, saith Teritullian: faine they would also run (if they knew how, or whither) from their own consciences. But if they belong to God, Conscience shall be awakened to do its office: and they shall one day say with her, I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home againe empty, why then call ye me Naomi; call me Marah: for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me Ruth 1.20, 21. Verse 4. But the Lord sent out] Heb. cast forth, sc. out of his treasuries Psal. 135.7. where-hence he sendeth at his pleasure mighty great winds which he (the only Aeolus) holdeth in his fist, hideth in his repositories, checketh them as he seeth good, weighs them in his hand Iob 28.25. sends them out as his Posts, makes them pace orderly, appoints them their motion, whether as messengers of mercy Num. 11.13. Gen. 8.1. Exod. 14.21. or as executioners of justice Exod. 10.13. Iob 1.29. hurting mens houses, cattle, corn, persons: yea hurrying and hurling the wicked into hell Iob 27.21. a great wind into the sea] whither they that go down in ships see Gods great wonders in the deep. For he commandeth and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof &c. Psa. 107.23, 24, 25. &c. Did it not so in a marve∣lous manner here in 88. and againe in that other 88. some few yeares since? Had not Jehosaphat his ships broken at, Ezion-geber 1 King. 22.48.Val. Max. Christian. p 132. and Charles the fifth at Algeire by two terrible tempests, which destroyed almost all that goodly Fleet? The very marriners acknowledged this wind to be an effect of Gods justice, and therefore thought fit to implore his mercy: for there was a mighty tempest in the sea] which is troublesome of it self and never still; though sometimes it seems so: but by blustering and big winds is made out of measure troublesome, such as was that  Luk. 8.23.Inhorrait mar Virg. and that Eu∣rclydon Act. 27.14. which Pliny calleth Navigantium, Pestem, the marriners misery. so that the ship was like to be broken] Heb. thought to be broken. Gr.. was in dan∣ger to be broken: the marriners made no other reckoning: they looked upon all as lost. God reserveth his holy hand for a dead lift usually: and loveth to help those that are forsaken of their hopes. Verse 5. Then the marriners were afraid, and cryed every man to his God] Forced by the present necessity, first these stout fellowes were surprized with feare: neither could they looke pale death in the face with blood in their cheeks. Death is the king of terrours Iob 18.14. Natures slaughter-man, Gods curse and hels purveyour
Next they cryed every man to his God. This was a lesson of Dame Natures teaching, sc. that there is a God, and that this God is to be called upon, and especially in distresse. Those fooles of the people that said there was no God, could not (when hardly bestead) but look up to heaven and cry out for help. All people will walk every one in the name of his God Mic. 4.5. These mariners or salt-men (so called, either because they dealt in that commodity, or else because they rowed in the salt sea) had their severall gods, according to their severall countries, and these they now called upon, whom till now perhaps they little enough cared for; sea-men aae not over-pious, for most part. And yet of the Turkish mariners I have read, that every morning they salute the Sun with their generall shouts; and a Priest saying a kind of Letany,Blunts voy. p. 76. every prayer ending with Macree Kichoon that is, be Angels present: the people answer in manner of a shout Homin, that is Amen. But it is remarkable, that these in the text, though they cryed every man to his God, yet,Serv. in Georg. lib. 1. lest they might all mistake the true God, they awaken Jonah to call upon his God. This uncertainty, attending idolatry, caused the Heathens to close their petitions with that generall Dijque Deaeque omnes. But (thirdly) as they cried to their gods, so (according to that rule Ora & labora.) they cast forth the wares that were in the ship] Not doubting to sacrifice their goods to the service of their lives. Skin for skin, and all that a man hath &c. so Act. 27.18 19, 38. Let us lose any thing for eternall life Luk. 16.8. and 9.25. Mat. 18.8 suffer any hardship for heaven: we cannot buy it too deare. A stone will fall down to come to its own place, though it break it self in peeces by the way: so we, that we may get to our center, which is upward &c. but Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship] Into the bottome of it, bither he had betaken himself before the storm; not considering that God had long hands to pull him out of his lurking-holes, and bring him to judgement. and he lay and was fast asleep] It's likely, that he had not slept of many nights before (through care, feare and grief, those three vultures that had been gnawing upon his inwards) and therefore now sleepes the more soundly. Or rather it was carnall security: his heart being hardened by the deceitfulnesse of sin Heb. 3.13. He had hardened his heart against Gods feare, and wilfully withdrawn from his obedience: hence this spirituall lethargy, this deep sleep in sin; not unlike that of the Smiths dog, whom neither the hammers above him, nor the sparks of fire falling round about him can awake: though the water-pot and speare be taken from the bolster, the secure person stirrs not: though the house be on fire over his eares, he starts not. Their senselesnesse God will cure in his Jonas's, by sharp affli∣ctions. Cold diseases must have hot and sharp remedies. The lethargy is best cured by a burning ague: God will let his presumptuous people see what it is to make wounds in their consciences, to trie the preciousnesse of his balme: such may go mourning to their graves. And though with much adoe they get assurance of pardon, yet their consciences will be still trembling as Davids Psa. 51. till God speake further peace, even as the water of the sea after a storm is not presently still: but moves and trembles a good while after the storme is over. Verse 6. So the ship-mas came unto him] God might have come himself with his drawn sword, (as Baanah and Rechab did upon sleeping Ishbosheth) and taken off his head: or have sent an evill Angel to arouse him in a fright: or have thrown him into the burning lake, as Agrippa did his dormouse into the boyling caldron. But such is not Gods manner of dealing with his people, though he be deeply dis∣pleased.Jer. 10.24. Correct them he will, but with judgement not in his anger, lest they be burnt to nothing. Instruct them also he will (Corrections of instruction are the way of life Pro. 6.23.) by one meanes or other; as he did here Jonas by a rude mariner: and as long before he had done Abraham and Sarah by Abimelech an Heathen Prince, to shame them what meanest thou O sleeper] Heb.Gen. 20. what's come to thee? what a senselesse stu∣pidity hath seised thee. Are we all in danger, and dost thou sleep? as the Philoso∣pher (in danger likewise of shipwrack) said to one that made light of it, Do we all stand upon our lives, and dost thou play the foole? The spirituall sleeper, in like sort, may he be but warme in his own feathers, regards not the danger of the house. He is, saith One, a mere mute and cipher, a nullity in the world, a superfluity
in the earth, Jeremies rotten girdle, good for nothing, or like the branches of a vine, Ezech. 15.3. arise, call upon thy God] For our gods will do nothing for us. The gods of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of mens hands: they have mouthes but speak not, &c. Psal. 115.4. But if Gods Israel trust in the Lord, he will be their help, and their shield, v. 9. Forasmuch as there is none like unto him, Ier. 10.6. neither is their Rock as our Rock, our enemies themselves being judges, Deut. 32.31. if so be that God will think upon us,] The Chaldee hath it, will be merciful unto us: The Hebrew word signifieth, will clear up, and behold us with a serene counte∣nance; granting us a calme, and taking care that we perish not So shall we acknow∣ledge him to be Haelohim, that God by an excellency. Q. Elizabeth (that Regina Serenissima) for her merciful returning home certain Italians that were taken pri∣soners in the 88 Invasion, was termed Saint Elizabeth by some at Venice: who also affirmed to the English Embassadour there, that though they were Papists, yet they would never pray to any other Saint, but that Saint Elizabeth. Vers. 7. And they said every one to his fellow] when Ionas had now prayed, and yet the tempest continued (for we know that God heareth not sinners, Joh. 9.31. no not a David or a Jonah, if he regard iniquity in his heart, Psal. 66.18. how should the plaister prevaile whiles the weapon remains in the wound?) they resolve to try another course for the safegard of their lives. Man is , a creature that would fain live, said Esop; and what man is he that desireth life, and loveth many dayes that he may see good, saith David, whereunto Austin answereth, Quis vitam non vult?Hom. 4. who would not be master of such an happinesse? Come and let us cast lots] And so put the matter into Gods hands, Pro. 16.33. He disposeth of lottery, so it be rightly undertaken, not superstitiously, curiously, rashly: but as trusting in God, and not tempting him. that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us] Some extraordinary cause they knew there was of this extraordinary tempest. Sinful men strike not their dogs, much lesse their children, without a cause. A Bee stings not, till provoked; neither doth God punish his creatures, till there be no other remedy, 2 Chron. 36.16. Good therefore is the counsel of the Prophet, Lam. 3.39, 40. Why is living man sorrowful, a man for the punishment of his sin? Let us search and trie our wayes (find out the sin that God strikes at) and turn again to the Lord; turn and live. so they cast lots,] They should have also prayed, as Act. 1. & 6. saying as Saul, 1 Sam. 14. Give a perfect lot: wicked men also are bound to pray, Psal. 14.4. but although they do not, God can get himself glory by their prophane lottery; as he did by Nebuchadnezzars, Ezek. 21.20, 21. and the lot fell upon Jonah] Secret sins will out at length, and be brought into judgement, Eccles. 12.14. Saeculi laetitia est impunita nequitiae.Aug. Surely the bitter∣nesse of death is past, said Agag, but he found it otherwise.1 Sam. 15. Janah thought himself out of the reach of Gods rod, &c. Wicked mens faults shall be written in their foreheads; and they forced to answer for all at last with flames about their ears. Verse 8. Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause, &c.] He confessed not till urged, and necessitated. Sinne gagges people, and prompts them to hide their faults, as Adam; or at least to mince, extenuate, shift them upon other persons and things, as Eve. Sinne and shifting came into the world together; and Satan, that old manslayer, knowing that there is no way to purge the soul but upwards, holds the lips close, that the heart may not disburden it self, God by this means is oft put to his proof, and must bring the malefactour to trial; who refusing ordinary trial, must therefore be prest, Jer. 2.35. what is thine occupation?] For that thou hast one, we take it for granted. At A∣thens every man was once a year, at least, to give account to the Judges by what art or trade he maintained himself. By Mahomets law, the Grand Signior himself must use some manual trade; Solyman the Magnificent made arrow-heads; Mahomet the great horn-rings for archers, &c. That which the mariners here enquire after is, whether Jonas his occupation be honest and lawful? whether he laboured the thing that was good, Eph. 4.28. For if any man over-reach or oppresse his brother in any matter, by the use of any ill arts, he shall be sure to find, that the Lord is the
venger of al such, 1 Thess. 4.6. though haply they lie out of the walk of humane justice, or comes not under mans cognizance. and whence commest thou?] Art thou not of an accursed countrey? and is not thy people a people of Gods wrath, as England was in the time of the sweating∣sicknesse,Lifeo Edw. 6. by S. J. H. pursuing the English where-ever they came; which made them like ty∣rants both feared and avoyded of all nations? How the Jewes are at this day hated and shunned as an execrable people, is known to all. what is thy countrey, and of what people art thou?] Notanda brevitas, saith Hie∣rome here, Note the brevity of thee questions, nothing short of those in Virgil so much admired. —juvenes quae causa subegit Ignotas tentare vias? quò tenditis? inquit, Quod genus?Vrg. Aene.  unde domo? pacemne huc fertis, an arma? Note also here, how these Pagans proceed not to execution, till they have fully in∣quired into the matter. This was farre better then that ugly custome of some peo∣ple in Europe, mentioned by Eneas Sylvius: that if any one amongst them be sus∣pected of theft, or the like crime, he is presently taken and hanged up. Then, three dayes after they examine the businesse; and  the party be found guilty, they suf∣fer his body there to hang till it rot down: or if otherwise, they bury him in the Church-yard, Sy. Eu∣rop. cap. 20. and keep a funeral-feast at the publike charge. Vers. 9. And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew] i. e. a true Beleever, as was Heber the Patriarch, Gen. 10.21. and, after him, Abram the Hebrew, as he is cal∣led, Gen. 14.13. This name of Hebrews, as it was the first title given to Abraham and his seed, so it indureth one of the last, 2 Cor. 11.22. Philip. 3 5 Epistle to the Hebrews, title. and I fear the Lord God of heaven,] That's mine occupation: I serve God with my spirit, in the Gospel of his Sonne, as Paul hath it, Rom. 1.9. every faithful Mi∣nister is servant to the King of heaven, Act. 27.23. (this the devil could not deny, Act. 16.16, 17.) neither is he of his meaner or inferiour servants, of his Under∣ling, sbut of the noblest employment: Ministers are his Stewards, Embassadours, Para∣nymphs, or Spokesmen, &c. and this is their occupation, or their work; farre be∣yond that of Solomons servants. which hath made the sea, and the drie land,] This troublesome sea that now so threat∣neth you: and that drie land which you would so fain recover. These, with all their contents, are his creatures: neither did he make them, and then seave them to Fate or Fortune; as a carpenter leaves the house he hath built to others, or a ship-wright the ship: but he ordereth and ruleth them at his pleasure, and will un∣make all again, rather then his shall want help in one season, Psal. 124.8. and 134.3. This was part of Jonah's confession, and but part of it: for he told them (no doubt) how ill he had dealt with this great and good God, running away by ealth from his masters service, and detrecting his yoak; and that therefore he was justly apprehended, and adjudged to death. To this purpose was Jonas his confessi∣on, quae ei salutis fuit exordium, saith Mercer, which was the beginning of his safe∣ty and salvation. Now his hard heart is broken, and his dumb mouth opened, not only to confesse his offence, but to aggravate it: in that being not only an Hebrew of the Hebrewes, a member of the true Church, but a Prophet, a Doctour in Israel, he should deal so perversely and perfidiously. It is a sweet happinesse when sin swels as a toad in a mans eyes, and he can freely confesse it in the particulars, and with utmost aggravation; laying open al his transgressions in all his sinnes, as Moses phraseth it, Lev. 16.21. Affliction sanctified will bring a soul to this, as here it did the Pro∣phet: like herein to that helve Elisha cast into the water, that fetcht up the iron that was in the bottom. Verse 10. Then were the men exceedingly afraid] Heb. with great fear; when once they had heard the businesse, and weighed the particulars of his message to Nini∣veh, of his miscarriage, and of his present misery, together with the danger that themselves were in for his sake: how much more for their own, as being conscious to themselves of farre more and greater sinnes then Ionas had to answer for, &c.
This put the Marriners into a great fright. And as all fear hath torment, they could not be at quiet, till they had further questioned him, saying; Why hast thou done this?] Lo, he that would not be subject to Gods command, is now liable to the censures, conviction, and condemnation of rude barbarous men: which, being humbled in the sense of his sinne, hee doth patiently endure without grudging. Danaeus his Note here is, that concerning themselves and their own sinnes against God, these good fellowes spake nothing what ever they think; but demand of the Prophet, why hast thou done this? as if he were the onely mis∣doer. because he had told them] As willing now to give glory to God, and take shame to himself: this is the property of a true penitentiary. See Psal. 52. Title (where David stands to do penance in a white sheet as it were) and Augustines Confessi∣ons. Hypocrites deal with their souls, as some do with their bodies: when their beau∣ty is decayed, they desire to hide it from themselves by false glasses, and from others by painting: so do they their sins from themselves by false glosses, and from others by excuses. But as the prisoner on the rack tells all; and as things written with the juice of limmons, when held to the fire are made legible: so when God brings men into straits, when he roasteth them in the fire of his wrath, then if ever, they will confesse against themselves, and so give glory to God, Josh. 7.19. by putting themselves into the hand of justice, in hope of mercy. Verse 11. Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee?] q. d. Thou art a Prophet of the Lord, and knowest how he may be pacified. Thou art also the party whom He pursueth: say what we shall do to thee to save our selves from thy death, that even gapeth for us? from this Sea, which else will soon swallow us up? for the Sea worketh and is tempestuous; so Kimchi readeth the Text; making these last also to be the words of the Marriners. Thou seest that there is no hope, if thine angry God be not appeased. Wo unto us, who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods? 1 Sam. 4.8. If the Sea be thus ragefull and dreadfull, as verse 15. if it thus work and swell more and more, as we see it doth, thereby testifying that it can now no longer defer to execute Gods anger, tell us what we shall do in this case and strait. What? Verse 12. And he said unto them,] More by Gods inward revelation then by discourse of reason; not as rashly offering himself to death, but as freely submit∣ing to the mind of God, signified by the Lot that fell upon him, calling for him to punishment. Take me up, and cast me forth into the Sea,] Eximia sides, saith Mercer. Be∣fore, we had his repentance, testified by his confession with aggravation. Here we have his faith, whereby he triumpheth over death in his most dreadfull representa∣tions, (Take me up, saith he, with a present minde and good courage) as also his charity, whereby he chose rather to die, as a piacular person, then to cause the death of so many men for his fault. Like unto this was that of Nazianzen, who desired, Jonah-like, to be cast into the Sea himself, so be it all might be calme in the Publike: that of Athanasius, who by his sweat and tears, as by the bleeding of a chast vine, cured the leprosie of that tainted age: that of Ambrose, who was farre more sollicitous of the Churches welfare then of his own: that of Chrysostome,In 1 Cor. 11.  &c. who saith, That to seek the publick good of the Church, and to preferre the salvation of others, before a mans private profit, is the most perfect Canon of Christianisme, the very top-gallant of Religion, the highest point and pitch of Piety. so shall the Sea be calme unto you,] Not else: for I have forfeited my life by my disobedience: and my repentance (though true, and so, to salvation never to be re∣pented of) comes too late, in regard of temporall punishments:2 Cor. 7.10. as did likewise that of Moses, Deut. 3.26. and of David, 2 Sam. 12.10. such is the venemous nature of sinne in the saints ('tis treachery, because against covenant) and such is the dis∣pleasure of God upon it, that he chastiseth his here, more then any other sinners, Lam. 4.6. Dan. 9.12. and whoever else scape, they shall be sure of it, Amos 3.2. The word here rendred calme, signifieth silent; for the Sea, when troubled,, est maris agitatio. E stach. in Hom. Hiad. H. roareth hideously: so that the roaring of the devils at the painfull preconceit of their last doom of damnation is set forth by a word that is taken from the tossing of the Sea, and the noise thereupon, Iam. 2.19. The devils beleeve and tremble, or shiver, and shudder, with horrible yellings.
for I know that for my sake, this tempest is upon you.] If Jonah were a type of Christ, in that being cast into the Sea, a calme followed: yet herein hee differed, that Christ suffered not for his own offences,1 Pet. 2.24. and 3.18. but bore our sinnes in his own body on the tree, and died, the just for the unjust. Verse 13. Neverthelesse the men rowed,] Heb. digged: for so they that row seem to do with their oars,Virg. Aeneid. Vastum sulca∣vimus aequor. as with spades. Hence also the Latine Poets say, that Boat∣men cut, plow, furrow the waters. Infindunt pariter sulcos,— The Seventy ren∣der it , they did their utmost indeavour with violence, to bring the ship to shore, and to save Jonah: and not as those bloody Emperours, Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius, who took delight in the punishment of offenders, and used to come early in the morning into the market-place, to behold their executions. Non nis coactus,Ʋtinam literas nescirem. said that better Emperour, when he was to subscribe a sentence of death: and, Oh that I could not write mine own name, said Another upon the like oc∣casion. but they could not,] They did but strive against the stream, for the Lord had other∣wise determined it: and Voluntas Dei necessitas re: who hath resisted his will? for the Sea wrought and was tempestuous against them.] As verse 11. Praesentem{que} vires intentant omnia mortem. Verse 14. Wherefore they cried unto the Lord,] Not unto their false gods, but unto the true Jehovah: of whom they had learned something by what they had seen, and heard from Jonah. Vaetorpori nostro. We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee,] A most ardent and affectionate prayer. A naturall man may pray from the bottome of his heart, out of a deep sense of his wants: but he cannot give thanks from the bottom of his heart; because void of the love of God, and joy of faith. Danaeus noteth from these words, that Iudges ought to pray before they passe sentence of death upon any. Let us not perish for this mans life,] which we take away, but full sore against our wills. Wilfull murther was ever accounted an heinous crime among the Heathens also. Abels innocent blood had as many tongues as drops, to crie to heaven against Cain. Gen. 4.10. The voice of thy brothers bloods. And 1 King. 9.26. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth. Murder ever bleeds fresh in the eye of God: and to him, many years, yea, that eternity that is past, is but yesterday. Full well then did these men so earnestly deprecate the guilt of innocent blood, which they knew would lie and light heavie. and lay not upon us innocent blood,] Innocent as to us; for hee hath done us no hurt, but much good by his piety and patience: whence it is that we are so loth to part with him, after this sort especially. for thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleaseth thee.] Thou hast appointed him to this death, and now callest for him, as we easily collect by the circumstances; Sic quicquid superi voluere, peractum est.Ovid. Meta∣mor. l. 8. Verse 15. So they took up Jonah,] Not against his will, but in a sort offering him∣self to condigne punishment. The Marriners had tried all wayes to save him: till they saw they must either destroy him, or be destroyed with him. So deal many with their beloved sins,, Dixit Caligula. which they are loth to mortifie, they see they must either kill or be killed, Rom. 8.13. either turn from them to God, or burn for ever in hell. Jonas his charity is exemplary, who yeelded to perish alone, rather then to have o∣thers perish with him, and for him: the Devil and his imps desire to draw compa∣ny the same way with themselves; and say as that wretch of old, When I die, may the earth be all fired. and cast him forth into the Sea,] Thus dealeth God by his servant Ionah; for∣merly faithfull in his office, and able thereunto, and therefore sent to Nineveh. Be∣hold the righteous shall be recompenced in the earth, Prov. 11.31. here they are sure of their payment, neither can all their good deeds bear out one prepensed wic∣kednesse,Ovid. Metam. Nec horret iratum mare. Horat. lib. epod or a lesser fault that lies unrepented of: as were easie to instance in Moses, Miriam, David, others: And all this proceeds from love displeased. and the Sea ceased from raging.] Heb. stood from its wrath, or indignation. Nec maris ira manet. The Sea having found what it sought for, and now possest of
the prisoner it pursued, resteth quiet and content: Vide hic mare & disce sapere, saith One, See the sea here, and learn obedience to thy Creator, sith winds, waves and all are at his beck and check. See Mat. 8.23. Ver. 16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly] Heb: with a great feare, They feared before. ver. 10. with a naturall feare: but now they feared Jehovah, they began to beare an awfull respect to the divine Majesty, of whose power and goodnesse they were by this miracle clearely convinced, and as it may seem, to the true faith effectually converted. For They offered a sacrifice to the Lord] They sacrificed spirituall sacrifices presently, (that holocaust of themselves Rom. 12.1. that broken heart that lieth low and hea∣reth all that God saith, giving thanks to his name Heb. 13.15.) and resolved to co∣ver Gods altar at Jerusalem upon their safe arrivall, as the Chaldee here paraphraseth. and made vows] That the true God should be their God (as Iacob the father of vows promised Gen. 28.21.) and that they would bestow cost on the Temple, on the poor Saints, to feed and cloath them, as Isa. 23.18. &c. Verse 17. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish] A whale Mat. 12.40. which is a great fish indeed. Pliny tells of one taken that was six hundred foot in length and 360. in bredth,Plin. lib. 32. cap. 1. when they swim and shew themselves above water annare insulas putes, saith the same Authour, you would think them to be so many Islands: so many mountaines, saith Another; who also addeth,Lib. 9. cap. 2. that when they grow old, they grow to that bignesse and fatnesse, that they keep long in a place. Insomuch as ex collectis & condensatis pulveribus frutices erumpere cernantur,Sphinx Phili. the dust and filth gathered upon their backs seemes to be an Island, which whiles ship∣men mistake, and think to land at, they incurr a great deale of danger. Such a great fish God prepared Either at first, when in creating of whales, creavit vastitates & stupores, as One saith: Or He now commanded this great fish to be ready to ship Jonas to the shore: and to afford him an Oratory in themeane while. and Jonah was in the belly of the fish] where Interpreters note a concurrence of these foure miracles. 1. That he was not there consumed, but that the concoctive faculty of the fishes maw was so long time kept from doing its office. 2. That he could in such a close prison breath and live; without the common use of aire and light. 3. That he was not killed up with intolerable stench in so lothsome a jakes. 4. That he could there frame such an excellent prayer, or rather song of thanks∣giving: For Jonah was the true Arion whom the Poets faine to have been a min∣strell cast into the sea by the mariners, and saved by a dolphin. three dayes and three nights] Part of them at least: as Christ was in the grave Mat. 12.40. where, in the history of Jonas,. he descrieth the mystery of his own death, buriall and resurrection: teaching us thereby to search the scriptures, to search them to the bottome: as those that dig for gold, content not themselves with the first or second oare that offers it self, but search on till they have all. The Rabbines have a saying,Epist. 3. ad Volusian. that there is a mountaine of sense hangs upon every Apex of the word of God. And so great is the depth of the holy scriptures, saith Augustine, that I could profit daily in the knowledge thereof, though I should set my self to search them from my childhood to decrepit old age, at best leisure, with utmost study and a farr better wit &c. CHAP. II. Verse. 1. THen Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God] i. e. Praised God with this Canticum eucharisticum, this gratulatory song as Tremellius calleth it. That he prayed in the ship, in the sea, in the whales belly, we doubt not; but that he chiefly intendeth to shew his thankfulnesse for the return of prayers, and the sweet support he felt in the whales belly, we do as little doubt; See ver. 2, 6, 7. yea that this was the substance (though now better methodized) of what he praied and praised in the bowels of the fish, we have cause to beleeve from this very verse: and therefore also his deliverance is set down ver. 10. after his doxologie. The word here rendred pray'd signifieth also sometimes, to give thanks,
as 1 Sam 2.2. and who knowes not that thanksgiving is a speciall part of prayer? This therefore: Jonah having prayed, and perceiving that he was heard, and by the goodnesse of God preserved safe in body, and sound in mind, he growes strong in faith,Rom. 4. giving glory to God: and being fully perswaded that he should yet walk before him againe in the land of the living. out of the fishes belly] where though he might seem buried alive, and free among the dead, yet he enjoyed Gods gracious presence, and those strong consolations, that made him live in the very mouth of death, and say in effect as blessed Bradford did,Act & Mon. fol. 1476. I thank God more of this prison and of this dark dungeon then of any parlour, yea then of any pleasure that ever I had. For in it I find God my most sweet God alwayes. Verse 2. And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction] His lips did not move in affliction, like a creaking doore or a new cart-wheele, with murmuring and mu∣tinying against God and men:Psal 73.9. he set not his mouth against heaven (as the how∣ling wolf when hunger-bit) neither did his tongue walk through the earth, cursing the day of his birth,Lam. 3.29. and cutting deep into the sides of such as were meanes of his misery. But putting his mouth in the dust, if so bee there might be hope, he cried by reason of his affliction. The time of affliction is the time of supplication: no time like that for granting of suites Zech. 13.9. Gods afflicted may have what they will of him then, such are his fatherly compassions to his sick children: he reserveth his best comforts for the worst times, and then speaketh to the hearts of his people, when he hath brought them into the wildernesse Hos. 2.13. This Jonah experimen∣ted, and therefore said, I cried out of mine affliction unto the Lord. Ad Dominum asslicto de pectore suspirando. And he heard me] How else am I alive amidst so many deaths? here's a visible answer, a reall return: Oh blessed be God who hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me Psal. 66.20. Surely as the cloud, which riseth out of the earth many times in them and insensible vapours, falleth down in great and abun∣dant showers: so our prayers, which ascend weak and narrow, return with a full and enlarged answer. This was but a pittifull poore prayer that Ionas here made, as appeares ver. 4. and so was that of David Psal. 31.22. For I said in mine hast I am cut off from before thine eyes: Neverthelesse thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee. It would be wide with us, if God should answer the best of us according to our prayers, yea though well watered with teares: sith Ipsae lacrymae sixt lacrymabiles &c. we had need to weep over our teares, sigh over our sobs, mourne over our griefs &c. Jonah was so taken with this kindnesse from the Lord his God, that he repeates it and celebrates it a second time. out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice] The whales belly he calleth hels-belly, because horrid and hideous, deep and dismall. Thence he cri∣ed as David did De profundis, and was heard and delivered. Yea had hell it self clo∣sed her mouth upon a praying Jonah, it could not long have held him: but must have vomited him up. A Mandamus from God will do it at any time, Psa. 44.4. and what cannot faithfull Praier have of God? there is a certaine omnipotency in it, said Luther. Verse 3. For thou hadst cast me into the deep] A graphicall description of his wo∣full condition, which yet he remembreth now as waters that are past and is thank∣full to his Almighty Deliverer. See the like in David Psa. 116.3. and learn of these and other Saints, to acknowledge the uttermost extremity of a calamity, after we are delivered out of it. For hereby thy judgement will be the better in∣structed and the more convinced: thine heart also will be the more inlarged to admire, and thy mouth the wider opened to celebrate the power, wisdome, and mercy of God in thy deliverance. As if this be not done, God will be provoked either to inflict heavier judgements, or else to cease to smite thee any more with the stripes of a father, and to give thee up for a lost child. for thou had'st cast me into the deep] Not the mariners, but Thou didst it: and therefore there was no averting or avoyding it. Thou had'st cast me with a force,
as a stone out of a sling, or as that mighty Angel Rev. 18.21. that took up a stone like a great milstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence &c. In the middest of the seas] Heb: in the heart of the sea's: so Mat. 12.40. So shall the Son of man be three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth. And Deut. 4.11. we read of the heart of heaven that is, the middle of it, as the heart sitteth in the middest of the body as king of that Isle of Man. Now if it were so grievous to be cast into the main Sea, what shall it be to be hurled into hell, by such an hand, and with such a force into that bottomelesse gulf, whence nothing was ever yet boyed up againe? and the floods compassed me about] Aquarum confluges The Sea, whence all floods or rivers issue, and whereto they return (Homer calleth the Ocean  a river by the figure Miôsis) Danaeus here noteth that out of that gulf of the Sea,. Iliad. . which of Plato is called Tartarus, that is, hell, the waters do flow into the veines of the earth (as it is Eccles. 1.7.) losing their saltnesse in the passage. Here Jonah cried out as Psa. 69.1.2. Save me, O God: for the waters are come in unto my soule. I fink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into the deep waters, where the floods overflow me. It was onely his faith that held him up by the chin: and, like blown bleathers, bore him alost all waters. all thy billowes and thy waves passed over me] All: so it seemed to Jonah, that God had powred out all his displeasure upon him: but he sufereth not his whole wrath to arise against his people: neither remembreth iniquity for ever. Thy billowes or surges, not the seas but thine. God seemed to fight against Jonah with his own hand. David likewise in a desertion complaines that all Gods waves and floods were gone over him Ps. 42.7. In this case (for it may be any ones case) let us do as Paul and his company did (in that dismall tempest Act. 27. when they saw nei∣ther sun nor star for diverse dayes and nights together) cast anchor of hope, even beyond hope: and then wait and wish for day. God will appeare at length, and all shall clear up: he will deliver our soules from the nethermost hell. Vers. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight,] Thus those straits brought him to these disputes of despair, as they did likewise David, Psal. 31.22. the Church in the Lamentations Chap. 4.22. and others, apt enough in affliction to have hard conceits of God, and heavy conceits of themselves. Whiles men look at things pre∣sent, whiles they live by sense onely, it must needs be with them as with an house without pillars, tottering with every blast; or as a ship without anchor, tossed with every wave. They must therefore thrust Hagar out of doors, and set up Sa∣rah; silence their reason, and exalt Faith, as did Jonas here; Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight: Here you may take him up for a dead man; here he inclineth some∣what to that of Cain, Gen. 4.13, 14. and surely they that go down to this pit (of despair, as Hezechiah speaketh of the grave) cannot hope for Gods truth,Esa. 38. as long as there they stay. yet I wil look again toward thine holy Temple] Here he recollects and recovers him∣self: as the same soul may successively doubt and believe, not simultaneously: and faith, where it is right, will at length outwrastle diffidence, and make a man more then a conquerour, even a Triumpher. When sense saith such a thing will not be, Reason saith, It cannot be, Faith gets above and saith, Yea, but it shall be: what talk you to me of Impossibilities, I shall yet (as low as I am, and as forlorn) look again towards Gods holy Temple of heaven; yea, that here on earth, where God is sincere∣ly served, and whereto the precious are annexed. Faith is by one fitly compared to the cork upon the net: though the lead on the one sinks it down, yet the cork on the other keeps it up in the water. The faithful soon check themselves for their doubtings and despondency, as Jonah here; as David chides David, Psal. 43.5 and as Paul saith of himself and his fellowes, that they were staggering, but not wholly sticking, 2 Cor. 4.8. Vers. 5. The waters compassed me about even to the soul] that is, usque ad animae deliquium, till I laboured for life, and was as good as gone. The depth closed me round about] see the Note on vers. 3. and further observe, that Gods dear children may fall into desperate and deadly dangers, see Psal. 18.3. and 88.3. & 116.3. And this for 1. prevention, 2. purgation, 3. probation, 4. preparations to further both mercies and duties. Let us not therefore censure our
selves or others as hated of God, because greatly distressed; but incourage our selves in them, as did David at Ziklag, 1 Sach. 30.6. The right of the Lord shall change all this. Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. The weeds were wrapt about mine head] Alga as Alligando. The weeds which the fish had devoured, or whereunto the fish, wherein I was, had dived and lain down amongst them. Or this might befal Jonah in the bottom of the sea, before the fish had swallowed him: for weeds easily wrap about those that swim, or are drowned. Vers. 6. I went down to the bottomes of the montains] that is, of the promonto∣ries, or rocks of the sea, where the waters are deepest. Thus Mercer after Kimchi. The channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were discovered, Psal. 18.15. The mountains are said to be under water, Prov. 8.25. because their foundations are there placed. the earth with her barres was about me for over] As if resolved there to keep me close prisoner; that though the fish had disgorged me, yet I should never have got to land. The shores are set by God as barres to keep the sea within his bounds, Job 38.8, 10, 11. Jer. 5.22. Here then all the creatures seemed to set against poor Jo∣nas, and (which was more then all) the Creatour too: so that he might sigh and say, as in the Poet, In me omnis terrae{que} avium{que} maris{que} rapina est:Martial. Forsitan & coeli — Yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption] i. e. from the place where I was likely to have laine and rotted.. Cum duplicantur lateres, venit Moses: when things are at the worst God appeareth, as it were out of an engine. In the mount will the Lord be seen Ezek. 37.11. &c. 2 King. 19.3. he stayes so long some∣times that he hardly findes faith on earth Luk. 18. and yet comes at last to the re∣lief of his poor people: viz. when they are ripe and ready for it. He is a God of judgement, he knowes how and when to deale forth his favours: and even wai∣teth to be gracious Esay 30.22. See Esa. 28.24, 25, 27, 28. O Lord my God] sc. by the meane and merit of thy son, in whom alone it is, that thou Lord art my God, and that I can call thee Abba Father. It is well observed by an Interpreter, that in this short history of Jonah are all things contained, which may make to the sound and saving knowledge of God and his will, of our selves also and our duties. Verse 7. When my soul fainted within me, I remembred the Lord] And could say as the Church in Esay when at lowest,Esa. 63.16. Doubtlesse thou art our Father, our Redee∣mer, thy Name is from everlasting. As there is in the creatures an instinct of nature to do their kind: so there is of grace in the Saints, to run to God. Yea in the way of thy judgements, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our soule is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee: with my soule have I desired thee in the night: yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early &c. Esa. 26.8, 9. Oh Lord, saith Habacuc, art not thou from everlasting my God and mine holy One. It was a bold question, but God approves and assents to it in a gracious answer, ere they went further;Hab. 1.12. We shall not die (say they obruptly) O Lord thou hast or∣dained them (the Caldeans) for judgement: but us onely for chastisement. Here was the triumph of their faith, and this was that which held up Jonas his hope though with wonderfull difficulty, held head above water. He remembred the yeeres of the right hand of the most High Psal. 77.10. he called to mind his songs in the night season ver. 6. his former experience, a just ground of his present confi∣dence. He remembred the Lord, his Power and Goodnesse, those two pillars, the Jachin and the Boaz that support Faith; and this fetcht him againe when ready to faint. I had even fainted, unlesse I had beleeved to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living, Psal. 27.13. and my prayer came in unto thee] q. d. Though I was so faint I could scarce utter a prayer, yet thou harknedst and heardest, as Mal. 3.16. thou madest hard
shift to hear, (as I may say) thine ears were in my prayers, as S. Peter hath it, 1 Pet. 3.12. thou felst my breathing, when no voice could bee heard, Lam. 3.56. thou heldest not thy peace at my tears, Psal. 39.12. quando fletu agerem non afflatu, yea thou heardest the voice of mine affliction, Gen. 16.11. Into thine holy Temple.] Whether we take it of the Temple at Jerusalem (a type of Christ) Jonah's prayer was accepted for Christs-sake: and proved to no lesse purpose, though made in the Whales belly, then if he had been pouring it out in Gods holy Temple. Or, if we understand it of Heaven, the habitation of Gods holinesse, and of his glory, his orisons were come up thither, for a memorial before the Almighty, Act. 10.4. and like pillars of incense pierced into his presence, Can. 3.6. neither would they away without their errand, but lay at Gods feet, til he should cōmand deliverance out of Zion Verse 8. They that observe lying vanities] That listen to sense and reason in mat∣ters of God, and make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, as Ionah had done to his cost, till, having payed for his learning, he descried them all to bee but lying vanities, or most vain vanities, emptie Nothings. forsake their own mercy.] Are miserable by their own election, because sinners (in a speciall manner) against their own souls, as were Corab and his complices, Num. 16.38. as was Pope Silvester, who gave his soul to the Devil for seven years enjoyment of the Popedome: and as are all those wilfull wicked persons, that refu∣sing to be reformed, and hating to be healed, chuse to spend the span of this life after the wayes of their own hearts, though they thereby perish for ever. These are those fools of the people, that preferre an apple before Paradise, a messe of pot∣tage before the inheritance of heaven, their swine before their Saviour, turning their backs upon those blessed and bleeding embracements of his, and cruelly cut∣ting the throats of their own poor souls, by an impenitent continuance in sinne: so losing, for a few bitter-sweet pleasures, or paltry profits in this vale of tears, for an inch of time, that fulnesse of felicity at Gods right hand, thorough all eternity. It is written of them who tame the Tyger, that when they have taken away the young one, knowing that presently they shall be pursued by the old Tygresse, they set loo∣king-glasses in the way by which they flee: whereunto when she cometh and seeth some representation of her self, she lingreth about them a good space, deceived by the shadow, and detained in a vain hope to recover the young againe: Mean-while the hunter most speedily posteth away with his prey. Semblably dealeth Satan with the men of this world (saith mine Authour) He casts before them the deceitfull lusts of profit, pleasure, and preferment (the worldlings Trinity) those lying vani∣ties, being none other then shadows and semblances of good: yet are men so de∣lighted with these, that they dote about them, having no care to pursue the enemy, for recovery of that image of God, the Divine nature, that Satan hath beguiled them of. He setteth them to the tree of knowledge, that they may not taste of the tree of life. He putteth out their eyes with the dust of covetousnesse, and shutteth their ears against the instructions of life, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and God should heal them, Mat. 13.15. In all which there is not any thing more to be lamented then this, that people should love to have it so, Jer. 6.31. be active in their own utter undoing, Hos. 13.9. wittingly and willingly forsake God the fountain of living waters (their own mercies, as he is here called, and elsewhere, Psal. 144.2.) and hew themselves out cisternes, broken cisternes that can hold no water, Jer. 2.13. Verse 9. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving,] q. d. Let others do as they think good: let them make a match with mischief till they have enough of it. Let them walk till they have wearied themselves, in the wayes of their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes: but let them know (I speak it by wo∣full experience) that for all these things, God will bring them to judgement, Eccles. 11.9. The best that can come of sinne is Repentance: and that's not in mans power, but in Gods gift, 2 Tim. 2.25. If he had not melted mine hard heart, and brought me back to himself with a strong hand, I had pined away in mine ini∣quities, and perished for ever. But now having been so miraculously delivered from so great a death, I will sacrifice unto the Lord with the voice of thanksgiving. I will set up my note and sing aloud unto God my Saviour, who hath thus beyond
all desert, delivered such a miserable wretch, rebell, and runagate as my self. I will sacrifice] Heb. I will slay, sc. those birds and beasts in use for feasts and sacrifices at Jerusalem. with the voice of thanksgiving.] Heb. of confession, that is, I will confesse and acknowledge God to be what he is, to do what he doth, and to give what he giveth. Now to offer a sacrifice, at such a confession, or thanksgiving, added much to the solemnity thereof; and made it more, honourable in it self, and more acceptable to God. To these gratulatory sacrifices the word slaying is attri∣buted, as here: to shew, that even in gratulation, expiation must bee made: and that by the blood and sacrifice of Christ all our offerings are accepted in heaven. I will pay that I have vowed,] Not my generall vow onely as a Covenanter, to devote my self to his fear and service all my dayes; but those particular, personall, voluntary vowes made in my distresse: such as was that of Jacob, Gen. 28.20. Hannah, 1 Sam. 1.11. David, Psal. 132.1, 2 &c. In affliction men are wondrous apt to promise great matters, if they may but be delivered. See Psal. 78.36. Pliny in an Epistle to one of his friends, that desired rules from him how to order his life aright; I will, saith he, give you one rule, that shall be instead of a thousand. Ʋt tales esse perseveremus sani, quales nos futuros esse profitemur infirmi. That you be sure to be the same when well, that you vowed to be when you were sick. But this is few mens care. See Jer. 34.10, 11. Sonnes of Belial break these bonds (as Sampson did the green withes) and cast away those cords from them; if they could at least. being worse herein then those Mariners, chap. 1, then Saul, that made great conscience of violating his vow, 1 Sam. 14. then Turks and Papists, who are superstitiously strict this way Jonah knew it to be as bad, if not worse, then per∣jury, to vow and not to performe, Num. 30.3. and that God is the avenger of all such, Deut. 23.21. He therefore, not merely for fear of punishment, but chiefly for hatred of that sinne saith, I will pay that I have vowed,] The Hebrew word Ashallemah seemeth to imply two things. First, that his vow, till paid, was incom∣pleat, it was an imperfect thing; the better part of it was yet wanting. Next, that till that chare were done, he could not be at peace within himself, he could not be quiet: for vowes are debts: and debts, till they be payed, are a burden to an ho∣nest minde, and do much disease it. Salvation is of the Lord.] Salus omnimoda, as the Hebrew word (having one letter more then ordinary in it) importeth:Jeshugnathah. all manner of salvation full, and plen∣tifull deliverance, is of the Lord; who is therefore called, the God of salvation, un∣to whom belong the issues from death, Psal. 68.20. A quo vera salus non aliunde venit. This Ionah speaketh, as he doth all else in this holy Canticle, not by rea∣ding, or by rote, but out of his own feeling, and good experience: his whole di∣scourse was digg'd out of his own breast, as it is said of that most excellent 119. Psalme, that it is made up altogether of experiments; and it therefore hath verba non legenda sed vivenda, words not so much to be read, as lived, as One said once of it. Dives thought that if one went from the dead to warne his wicked brethren, they would never be able to resist such powerfull Rhetorick. Behold, here is Ionah raised from the dead, as it were, and warning people to arise, and stand up from dead courses and companies, that Christ may give them light: why do they not then get up and be doing at it, that the Lord may be with them? Shall not the men of Nineveh rise up in judgement with this evil generation, and condemn them, be∣cause they repented at the preaching of Jonas:Mat. 12.41. but these do not, though they have many Jonas's, that both preach and practise, non verbis solum praedicantes sed & exemplis, as Eusebius saith Origen did, that live sermons and not teach them onely? Verse 10.Dci dicere est facere. Aug. And the Lord spake unto the fish, [He spake the word and it was done: He is the great Centurion of the world, that saith to his creature, Do this, and hee doth it. Yea, he is the great, great Induperator, to whom every thing saith. Iussa sequi tam velle mihi quàm posse necesse esse.Lucan. I am wholly at thy beck, and check. Jonah spake to God, and God to the fish. It may be said of faithfull prayer, that it can do whatsoever God himself can do: sith he is pleased to yeeld himself over∣come by the prayers of his people, and to say unto them cordially, as Zedekiah did to his Courtiers colloguingly. The king is not he that can deny you any thing. Prayer is of that power, that it can open the doors of Leviathan, as wee see here,
(which yet is reckoned as a thing not feisible, Iob 41.14.) yea of the all-devou∣ring grave, Heb. 11.35. If the Lord, pricked on by the prayers of his people, set in hand to save them, and shall say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back, bring my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the ends of the earth, Esay 43.6. they shall come amain, and none shall be able to hinder them: Come therefore (with those good souls in Hosea, who had smarted for their folly, as well as Ionah) and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn,Hos. 6.1, 2. and he will heal us: he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. After two dayes will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. A time we must have to be in the fire, in the fishes belly, as in Gods Nurturing-house; but hee will take care that wee be not there overlong: what's two or three dayes to eterni∣ty? Hold out faith and patience: Yet a very little, little while,Heb. 10. and hee that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. and it vomited up Ionah upon the dry land.] And here Death was defeated and wiped: it was much more so, when it had swallowed up Christ;Quantum in devoratione mors laetata est, tantum luxit in vomitu; Hieron. and little dreamt that it self should have been thereby swallowed up in victory. But then was ful∣filled that of the Prophet, O death, I will be thy death. And as there so here in a proportion, and as a type, omnia jam inversa, saith Mercer, all things are turned t'other way. Before the fish was an instrument of death; now, of life, and serves Jonah for a ship to bring him to dry land. This fish useth not to come neer the shore, but to sport in the great waters: howbeit now he must, by speciall command, vomit up Ionah upon the dry land. Why then should it be thought a thing incredi∣ble with any, that God should raise the dead? The Sea shall surely give up the dead that were in it: and death and hell deliver up the dead that were in them:Acts 26. S. Sen. Nat. quaest. l. 3. c. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. and they shall be judged every man according to his works, Rev. 20.13. This, some of the Heathens beleeved: as Zoroastres, Theopompus, and Plato. And the Stoikes opini∣on was, that the world should one day be dissolved by fire or water: and all things brought to a better state, or to the first golden age again. But we have a more sure word of Prophesie: and this that is here recorded may serve as an image and type of our preservation in the grave, and our resurrection from the dead, by one and the same Almighty power of God. CHAP. III. Verse 1. AND the word of the Lord came unto Ionah the second time.] Ionah is a sinner, but not a cast-away. God layes him not by as a broken vessel, treads him not to the dung-hill, as unsavoury salt: but receives him upon his return by repentance, and restores him to his former employment, gives him yet a name, and a nail in his house; yea sends him a second time on his message to Nineveh; and counting him faithfull puts him again into the ministery, who was before a runagate, a rebel, &c. But he obtained mercy, &c. 1 Tim. 1.13. as did likewise the Apostles, after that they had basely deserted our Saviour at his passion; and Peter after he had denied him. See Ioh. 20.22, 23. and 21.15, 16, 17.Quem poenite; peccasse, poenè est innocens. Sen Agam. The poenitent are as good as innocent. Return ye back-sliding children (saith the Father of mercies) and I will heal your back-slidings, Ier. 3.22. The Shulamite retur∣ning, is as lovely in Christs eye as before: and all is as well as ever betwixt them, Cant. 6.4. There is a naturall Novatianisme in the timerous conscience of convin∣ced sinners, to doubt and question pardon for sinnes of Apostasie and falling af∣ter repentance: But had they known the gift of God, and who it is that saith to them. Be of good cheer, thy sinnes are forgiven thee, they would have conceived strong consolation. Verse 2. Arise go unto Nineveh,] Begin again, and take better heed: as the Nazarite was to do, that had defiled the head of his consecration, Numb. 6.9, 12. unto Niniveh that great city] See the Note on Chap. 1.2. There was no city since, by the estimation of Diodorus, had the like compasse of ground or starelinesse of wals; the height thereof being an hundred foot, the breadth able to receive three
carts a-row, adorned with fifteen hundred turrets. Some think (as Annius & Berosus) that those three cities spoken of, Gen. 10. Rehoboth, Calah and Resen were all in∣cluded in Niniveh, and they conceive it thus: that when Nimrod had built Baby∣lon, Ninus, disdaining his government, went into the fields of Ashur, and there e∣rected a city after his own name. Raphael Volaterranus saith, it was eight years in building, ten thousand men working at it. Quintilian saith, that great Millain, an∣cient Ravenna, brave Bouonia, noble Naples, and other great cities of Italy are but towers to Rome: but what was Rome to Niniveh? and yet Lipsius hath written a treatise of Romes greatnesse, and when the Emperour Constantine came to Rome, and beheld the companies that entertained him, he repeated a saying of Cineas the Epirote, that he had seen so many kings as citizens: but viewing the building of the city, he thought naturam vires omnes in urbem unam effudisse, that nature had shewed the utmost of what she could do, in that one great city. See more on vers. 3. and preach unto it the preaching] Heb. Proclaim unto it (or, against it) the pro∣clamation that I say to thee, that I have formerly put into thy mouth, and do now so again, sc: that their wickednesse is come up before me, and I am even upon the way toward them to punish it grievously. Flagitium & flagellum sunt sicut acus & filum, Who ever waxed fierce against God and prospered? Job 9.4. This wicked men must be boldly told, Esa. 3.11. however they take it; neither may Gods mi∣nisters steal away the word, Jer. 22.30. or keep back from the people any part of Gods counsel, Act. 20.27. handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifesta∣tion of the truth commend themselves to every mans conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. as becometh his Embassadours. Vers. 3. So Jonah arose, and went unto Niniveh] He went not home first, to bid them farewel, as Luk. 9.61. neither went he another way, as once: it was enough of that once, and he had learned obedience by the things that he had suffered. To Niniveh he goes, though a mere and a mean stranger, unknown, unregarded, and with an harsh message; such as he might fear would cost him his life from that fierce and furious people. But Jonah feareth nothing now but disobedience: and seems to say,Luth. Epist. as afterwards Luther did, Inveniar sanè superbus, excors & modò impij, filentij non arguar, Let me be called and counted proud, mad, any thing, every thing that naught is, so that I be not found guilty of sinful silence, and of betraying the trust committed unto me, by a dastardly deserting the cause of God. Jonah was now of another spirit,Jlevit post me. . Rom. 8. and fulfilled after God, as Caleb, Num. 14.24. for why? he had now received not a spirit of fear, and of bondage, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Tim. 1.7. his spirit of grace had sanctified to him his afflictions, which else would have been but as hammers to cold iron; as they were to Pharoah, Ahaz, the rayling thief, &c. Aben-Ezra saith that assoon as ever the whale had vo∣mited up Jonah, he got up and took the direct way to Niniveh: that if God should command him thither again he might be ready, and shew his forwardnesse. It is a very good signe, when men are the better for what they suffer: when thereby the iniquity of Jacob is purged, and this is all the fruit the taking away of their sinne, Esay 27.9. according to the word of the Lord] His call and command which Jonah had former∣ly cast behind him, Sed Piscator ictus sapit, There shall be only fear to make you un∣derstand the hearing, Esay 28.19. Esay stood off till frighted; but then he offers his service: Here I am, send me, Chap. 6.8. now Niniveh was an exceeding great city] Heb. a great city of God, or to God; which some interpreted dear to God,Deo chr & curae. and such as he would not destroy. Others a city not idolatrous, though otherwise vitious: Others, a city which God himself ac∣counted great,Animo magno ihil magnum. and looked upon as such. But if to a great mind nothing is great, as Seneca saith, what can be great to him who is great, Ps. 77.13. greater, Job. 33.12. greatest, Ps. 95.3. greatnesse it self, Ps. 145.3. and to whom all nations are but as the drop of a bucket, or dust of the ballance? behold, he taketh up the Isles as a very little thing, Esay 40.15. Oecolampadius applieth it to the Church of the Gen∣tiles, that city of the living God. They do best that take it, as we read it, for an exceeding great city: like as elsewhere tal mountains and cedars, are called moun∣tains of God,. Homer. Psal. 36.7. and cedars of God, Psal. 80. &c. and excellent wrestlings, are wrestlings of God, Gen. 30.8. See Gen. 23.6. So the Greeks and Latines call
great things divine: God being the measure of all true greatnesse: Niniveh as it was a very great city (of fifty miles compasse as Herodotus and Diodorus) so Jonah is often told so; that he might come to it well prepared and resolved: sith he was to have a great task, and an hard tug of it. See Vers. 2. and Chap. 1.2. Of their dayes journey] Not such a journey as a traveller could dispatch in no lesse time; but suh as a Preacher pedetentim obaembulando by leasurely walking,Theodocet. might in three dayes go thorow: See Vers. 4. This is added to set forth further the greatnesse of the city. Vers. 4. And Ionas began to enter into the city] Having seen God, he now fears no colours, dreads no danger; as neither did Moses, Michaiah, Esay, Chap. 6. Paul, Act. 21. Luther going to Wormes, &c. Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord, we perswade men, 2 Cor. 5.18. we forewarne them to flee from the wrath to come, Mat. 3.7. we pull them out of the fire of hell, as firebrands, Iude 2.3. a dayes journey] One of the three dayes, Vers. 3. Not all the three in one day, for haste, as Hierome would have it. and he cried and said,] Not fearfully muttering his message, but delivering it with a courage, Boanerges like, able almost to make his hearers hearts fall down,Mr. Full. and hairs stand upright, as One saith of Master Perkins. Yet fourty dayes and Niniveh shall be overthrown] The word properly noteth a sudden, inevitable, and perpetual destruction, such as was that of Sodom and her Sisters, Gen 19.25. Ier. 20.16. Es. 13.19. Am. 4.11. Now we must not think that Ionah said no more then is here set down: that he expressed no condition, such as was that, Rev. 2.5. Except ye repent, or that like a mad man he ran up and down the city (as one did once about Jerusalem, and another lately about London) repea∣ting and thundering out these words onely, inconditis & ineptis clamoribus,Am. 3.7. with harsh and hoarse outcries. God therefore threatneth that he may not punish, and all his threats are conditional, Ier. 18.8. if they repent, he will also. This, if Ionah expressed not, yet the Ninivites understood; for else they would never have re∣pented but despaired (as Iudas with his poenitentia Iscariotica) and defied Ionah as an evil messenger sent against them. They might well enough think that if God had not meant them mercy, he would never have forewarned them, never have given them fourty dayes respite: the Septuagint cannot be refused for rendring it three dayes (though some have attempted it) It is probable that Ionah omitted nothing that pertained to the preaching of repentance, though here we have it set down in some onely. The Hebrews tell us, that the Mariners also went to Niniveh; and telling what had befallen Ionah at sea, confirmed his doctrine, and sentence against the Ni∣nivites, who thereupon repented. But these, as they affirm without reason, so they may be dismissed without refutation. Vers. 5. So the people of Niniveh beleeved God] See the mighty power of Gods holy word. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. to the laying flat those wals of Ieri∣cho, making the devil fall as lightning from the heaven of mens hearts, Luk. 10.18. These Ninivites though rich, great, peaceable, prosperous, profane above measure, (as great cities use to be) &c. yet, at the preaching of Ionah they believed God, and repented of their evil wayes: whether truly and seriously I have not to say. There is an historical faith, an assent to the truth of what God speaketh, and trem∣bling thereat, Jam. 2.19. there is also a natural and moral repentance wrought by natural conscience: such as was that of Pharaohs, Saul, Ahab, Alexander the Great; when, having killed Clitus, he was troubled in conscience, and sent to all kind of Philosophers (as it were to so many Ministers) to know what he might do, to appease his conscience, and satisfie for his sinne. There are very good Authours that hold this conversion of the Ninivites to have been sound and serious (and for this they alledge that of our Saviour, Mat. 12.41.) flowing from a lively faith in God, which is the root of all the rest of the graces, the very womb wherein they are received; the fountain also and foundation of all good works, as the Apostle Peter hinteth when he saith, 2 Pet. 1.5. adde to your faith vertue, which is nothing else but faith exercised. and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth] These were the fruits of their faith, and, though but bodily exercise and external performances, yet they might serve
both to evidence,Jejunium & saccus armae poenit entiae. Hieron. and to increase their inward humiliation. True it is, that hypo∣crites and heathens may do all this and more, as Ahab, those Psa. 78.34, 36. and Isa. 58.3. The Romanes in a strait ad Deos populum & vota convertunt, commanded the whole people with their wives and little ones to pray and pacify the gods, to fill all the temples,Liv. l. 3. and the women to sweep and rub the pavements thereof with the haires of their heads &c. from the greatest &c.] See the Note on Ioel. 2.16. Verse 6. For word came unto the kng of Nineveh] I can hardly beleeve that this was Sardanapalus (as some will carry it) but some other better Prince, that (Vespasian-like) was patientissimus veri,Quintilian. one that had those about him that would tell him the truth of things, and he was content to heare it, and submit to it. Like enough it is, that this was but harsh newes to him at first hearing: but when he had well considered it, and taken advise upon it, he set upon a reformation. Our Chroniclers tell us of a poore Hermite that came to Richard the first Anno 1195. and, preaching to him the words of eternall life, bad him be mindfull of the sub∣version of Sodom, and to abstaine from things unlawfull. Otherwise, said He, the deserved vengance of God will come upon thee. The Hermite being gone, the king at first seemed to slght his words. But afterwards falling sick, he more seriously bethought himself: and waxing sound in soule as well as body, he grew more devout and charitable to the poore,Hovedon 428. Speed 542. rising early and not departing from the church till divine service were finished &c. If the king of Nineveh had ever heard of Jonah his being in the whles belly, it might well be some inducement to him to beleeve his preaching, it might do him no lesse good then Iohn Friths book called A preparation to the crosse, brought in a fish's-belly to the University of Cam∣bridge a little before the Commencement, did to some good people here, that had hearts to make use of it. One grave Divine gave this Note upon it in a sermon be∣fore the Parliament,Mr. Jeremy Dike above twenty yeares since, That such a book, should be brought in such a manner, and to such a place, and at such a time, when by reason of peoples confluence out of all parts notice might be given to all places of the land, in mine apprehension it can be construed for no lesse then a divine warning, and to have this voice with it, England prepare for the crosse. he arose from his throne] Laid aside his state, as the great Turk also doth, at this day, when he entreth into his temple to pray. Jer. 13.18 Say unto the King and to the Queen Humble your selues, sit down: for your principalities shall come down, even to the crown of your glory. This great king could not but know himself to be a great sinner: and that his sins had done much hurt. 1. by Imputation: for plectuntur Achivi,Horat. the people oft pay for their Rulers follyes, as in Davids dayes, 2 Sam. 24. 2. by Imitation: for Magnates are Magnetes, they draw many by their example: and as bad humours flow from the head to the body; so do bad Rulers corrupt the rest. This conscious, and (as some think) conscicucious King therefore riseth up from his throne,Jud. 3.20. Zarnou. (as Eglon that unweildy king of Moab had once done to heare Gods message by Ehud) & qui paulò antè sedebat superbus in folio, nunc jacet humilis in solo, he lieth low, and putteth his mouth in the dust Lam. 3.29. laying aside all cogitation and pride of his kingly majesty: together with all soft and sumptuous rayment (that nest of pride, as One calleth it.) he laid his robe from him] Paludamentum suum, saith Tremelius; but that's a cloak which the Romane Emperours used to put on when they went forth to bat∣tle, and therefore not so proper here (as Piscator thinkes) sith there was no visi∣ble enemy, which makes the Ninevites repentance the more remarkable. Mercer rendreth it Chlamydem suam, his imperial cloake; the Chaldee his precious gar∣ments. The word signifieth his sumptuous and gorgeous attire, his cloake of State, no lesse costly (perhaps) then that of Alcishenes the Sybarite, sold to the Car∣thagians by Dionysius for 120.Athenus. talents: or that of Demetrius of Macedon, which none of his successors would weare propter invidiosam impendij magnificentiam for the exceeding great costlinesse thereof. This robe or purple and other ornaments the King of Nineveh laid aside, as was fit, in this day of restraint, as a fast-day is fitly called. So the children of Israel stript themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb, where they had made a golden calf Exod. 33.6. For the Lord had said to Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, ye are a stifnecked people: I wil come
up into the middest of thee, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee. ver. 5. that I may determine how to dispose of thee: and this is spoken after the manner of men, who judge by the outward actions as Gen. 18.21. and 22, 12. for otherwise, God knoweth all his works from the beginning of the world Act. 15.18. But he speaketh this here as if he would hereby judge of their repentance, whether it were true or false. The Prophet Esay objects it to those of his time for a foule fault, Behold in the day of your fast, ye find your pleasure chap. 58.3. and covered him with sack-cloth] And so, as Chrysostome hath it, quod non pote∣rat diadema, id saccus obtinuit: sicut ferrum potest quod aurum non potest. Sack∣cloth could prevaile more then silk: as iron can do what gold cannot. and sat in ashes] In cinere Illo, so Vatablus rendreth it: in that ashes wherein he used to sit, when he most mourned. Our sorrow for sin should be the deepest of all sorrowes Zech. 12.11, 12, 13. See the Note there. Verse 7. And he caused it to be proclaimed] by sound of trumpet as Ioel 2.12. or otherwise as 2 Chron. 20.3, 4, 18, 19, 20. and 22, 6, 7. at which times he that obeyeth not, is culpable before God and man Lev. 23.29. by the decree of the King and his Nobles] who all unanimously consenting to so good a work, iis quibus praeerant, praeibant became a president to their inferiours; who looked upon them (no doubt) as their looking-glasses, by which most men dressed themselves. When Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue beleeved,Tertull. many Corinthians beleeved also Act. 18.8. The Primitive Christians were wont to pray that their emperours might have good counsellours. Of a certaine Prince in Germany it was said, that Esset alius, si esset apud alios,Bucholc. He would havs been a farr better man, had he had better servants and officers about him. let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock tast any thing] The whole action of Fasting hath it's name both in Hebrew and Greek,. from abstinence and forbearance of meates and drinks: à toto if it may be, at least à tanto & à tali, as Dan. 10.2, 3. and as it might be here, till the forty dayes were expired; besides, that one or more solemne dayes of totall fasting, wherein neither man nor beast &c. But why is the beast abridged of sustenance? both to testify and increase the peoples humiliation by their lowings and bellowings. Alexander the great, at the death of his favourite Ephestion, clipped his horses and mules haire, and cut them short,Plutarch. in token of his great grief: he pulled down also the battlements of the walles, that they might seem to mourn with him. So Virgil speaking of the generall grief for Cae∣sars death saith. Non vlli pastos illis egêre diebus Frigida Daphni boves ad flumina,Eclog. 5. nulla nec amnem Libavit quadrupes, nec graminis attigit herbam. Let them not feed, nor drink water] But what they get of themselves without mans care, who is to be wholy intent and taken up in Gods service; and so to be∣gin the heavenly life here, the sweetnesse whereof makes him forbeare both meate and thirst. Besides, they took pride in their palfryes, covering them with pur∣ple and rich trappings. See Judg. 8.26. they catered for the flesh by fatting cattle and other creatures to please their palate. This they were now forbidden to do by an edict from the king, who interesseth himself in matters of religion; as did also Artexerxes Ezra. 7.26. (for which Ezra seeth cause to blesse God) and Nebu∣chadnezzar Dan. 3.29. which the scripture commendeth, and recordeth as a work of his repentance. Verse 8. But let man and beast be covered with sack-loth] Let all best meanes be used for the humbling of the heart: without which, what is an humbling day but a religious incongruity (saith One) and a very high provocation: like Zimri's act when all the Congregation were weeping before the doore of the Tabernacle? The beasts covered with sack-cloth were as an house hangd with blacks, to move men to mourne the more. Chrysostome telles us of a custome in his time, (and it is still in use amongst us) that when great men were buried, their horses followed the hearse cloathed in black; as seeming to mourne for their masters. The cour∣sest
weeds are fittest for fasting-dayes: to shew that but for shame, we would have none, as having forfeited all: and that we look upon our better apparell, but as finer covers of the foulest shame. and cry mightily unto God] Cry with a courage; Let the beasts roare lustily and rend the clouds as it were with their clamours: want of food will make them do so. And as God can so speak, as that the bruit beasts shall understand him, Ioel. 2.11. Am. 5.8. and 9.4. Iohn. 2. ult. so can they, after a sort, so speak or moane,Gnorebh. that he can understand them Ioel. 1.20. Hos. 2.21. Ps. 147.9. he heareth the young ravens that cry unto him, though but with a hoarse and harsh note: whence also they have their name in Hebrew. Much more will He heare men that cry unto him, if they cry mightily with intention of spirit, and extention or rather contention of speech: if they set up their note, as the noise of many waters Rev. 19.6. if they thunder and threaten heaven, as Nazianzen saith his sister Gorgonia did:Preces fundi. mus, coelum tundimus, mi∣sericordiam extorquemus. Tert. . Jam. 5.16. if they bounce hard at heaven gates, and resolve to wring mercy from God by an holy violence, as Tertullian saith the good people of his time did. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much: but then it must be the working, stirring, labourfull prayer, as the word signifieth; that strives and struggles, and straines every veine in the heart (as Elias seemed to do by that posture in prayer of putting his head betwixt his leggs 1 King. 18.42.) that sets awork all the faculties of the soule, and all the graces of the spirit: that stirrs up dust as Jacob did: maketh a man sweat, as our Saviour; who being in an agonie prayed the more earnestly Luk. 22.44. not without strong crying and teares, and was heard in that he feared Heb. 5.7. For such a prayer when a man cryes to God  mightily or with all his strength,  it availeth much, it can do any thing; as Paul using the same words saith, I can do all things through Christ who streng theneth me Philip. 4.13. Yea let them turn every one from his evill way &c.] For else Prayer profits not, Humiliation is to no purpose without Reformation; Repentance for sin, without repentance from sin:. there must be fruits meet for repentance, answerable to amend∣ment of life, tantamount as repentance, and that weigh just as much as it: for, Optima & aptissima poenitentia est nova vita, saith Luther, the best and truest repen∣tance is a new life: and if gods people will humble themselves, and pray and seek his face, and withall turn from their evill wayes, then he will do much for them 2 Chron. 7.14. and from the violence that is in their hands] Heb. In the hollow of their hands, where it lay hid as it were, but not from God, who here bids them turn from their wrong-dealing and rapacity. This was their speciall sin, (ut in magnis imperijs & emporiis magnae sunt rapinae) therefore are they charged to relinquish it. It is a speech, saith Mercer, like to that of our Saviour, Go tell my Disciples and Peter &c. Tell them all, but be sure you tell Peter. So here: turn from all your evill wayes: but especially from the violence that is in your hands. See Es. 59.6. Ezech. 23.27. Psal. 7.4. The Hebrewes understand this text of restitution to be made of evill∣gotten goods, or wrongfully deteined from the right owners. This say they, must be done: or the party can be no more renewed by repentance, then a man could be legally purified by the washing of water, when he continued to hold in his hand an unclean thing. That of Austin is well known, The sin is not remitted, till that which hath bin ill-gotten from another be restored. And that of Father Latimer,Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ab∣latum. Aug. Restore, or else you will cough in hell, and the Devils will laugh at you. Gravell in the kidneys will not grate so upon you, as a little guiltinesse in this kind will do upon your consciences. The same Latimer tells us in a sermon of his afore K. Edw: 6. that the first day that he preached about Restitution, there came one and gave him twenty pounds to restore: the next time another, and brought him in thirty pounds: another time another gave him two hundred pounds ten shillings. The Law for restitution see Num. 5.6, 7. the party must not only confesse but restore, or he is not a true convert. And this will well ap∣peare when death comes to draw the curtaine, and looke in upon a man. Hence our Henry the 7. in his last will and testament, after the disposition of his soul and body,Speed 995. Turk. hist. fol. 767. he willed restitution should be made of all such monies as had unjustly been levied by his officers. And the like we read of Selymus the grand Signiour in the Turkish history.
Verse 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent] This is the speech of one that doubteth, and yet despaireth not: like that of David praying for his sick child, Who can tell whether God will be gratious to me that the child may live 2 Sam. 12.22. We are staggering, saith Saint Paul, but not wholy sticking 2 Cor. 4.8. They that go down to the pit (of despaire, as well as of the grave Es. 38.18.) cannot hope for thy truth: but are hurried headlong into hell, as the Gergesites swine were into the sea. The Prophet Jonah was peremptory, that by such a day Nini∣veh should be destroyed: These men therefore had good reason to doubt, if not of the pardon of their sins, yet of the saving of their city. All their hope is, that this that Jonah denounced was not Gods absolute decree, but onely his threatening, and that conditionall too; viz. except they repented. This if they could do, and heartily, they knew not but that mercy might be yet had. Keep hope in heart, or the work will go on heavily Psal. 43. ult. Hope is the daughter of Faith: but such as is a staff to her aged mother. See the Note on Ioel. 2.14. Of God repenting I have spoken elsewhere. Verse 10. And God saw their works] i. e. He noted and noticed them to others. Or, he saw them, that is, he approved of them. Videre Dei, est approbare. Let God but see Repentance (as a rainbow) appearing in our hearts and lives, and he will never drown us in destruction. But unlesse God sees turning, he sees no work in a fast, saith One upon this very Text. God may say to impenitent fasters, saith Another, as Isaac did to his father, Behold the fire and wood, but where is the lamb? Or as Jacob did concerning Joseph, Here's the coat, but where's the child? Get thee behind, said Jehu to the messengers, what hast thou to do with peace? Confessions and humiliations are our messengers: but if the heart be not broken, if the life be not amended, what peace? The Talmudists note here, that God is not said to have seen their sack-cloth and ashes, but their repentance and works, those fruits of their faith; truth in the inward parts, which God eyeth with singular delight Ier. 5.3. as the work of his own spirit Eph. 8.9.August. Certum est nos facere quod facimus; sed ille facit ut facimus, and he is pleased to call his grace in us, our works, for our incouragement in well-doing: and freely to crown it in us, without any merit on our part. That they turned from their evill way] To which they were by nature and ill custome so wedded and wedged, that they could never have been loosened, but by an extraordinary touch from the hand of heaven. The conversion of a sinner from the evill of his way is Gods own handy-work Jer. 31.18. 2 Tim. 2.25. Ezech. 6.9. Plato went three times into Sicily to convert Dionysius the tyrant, and could do no good on him. Polemo, of a drunkard, by hearing Xenocrates, is said to have become a Philosopher: But what saith Ambrose to him?De Elia & jciun. cap. 12. Si resipuit à vino &c. If he repented of his drunkennesse, yet he continued an Infidel; he was still temulentus sacrilegio drunk with superstition: He recovered of one disease, and died of another, as Benhadad did: he gave but the half turn,Psal. 9.17. and therefore turned at length, and neverthelesse into hell. We conceive better of these Ninivites: though fome are of opinion, that their repentance was but fained and forced, as was that of Pharaoh and Ahab, as appeares (say they) by the sequent history, by their dea∣ling against the Jewes, and by Nahum. and God repented] This was mutatio Rei non Dei, as is above noted. CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. BƲt it displeased Jonah exceedingly] Mirablilis homo profectò fuit Jonas, saith Winckleman here, as strange a man was Jonas of an honest man, as you shall lightly heare of. Well might David caution Psa. 37.8. Cease from anger and forsake wrath: fret not thy self in any wise to do evill. A fretfull man is easily drawn to evill. David was (once at least) displeased at Gods dealing: which was no whit for his credit, or comfort 2 Sam. 6.8. Discontented he was, not at Gods lenity, as Jonah, but at Gods severity, against Ʋzziah: and
that all the peoples joy should be dashed and damped with such a sad and sudden diaster. How much better minded was he when dumb, not once opening his mouth, because God did it, Psal. 39.9? The Greeks give this Rule, Either say nothing, or say that which is better then nothing. O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your wisdome,. said Job to his friends, Iob 13.5. Silence some∣times comes to be a vertue; and never more then when a man is causelesly displea∣sed. Prima semper irarum tela maledicta sunt, saith Salust. Angry people are apt to let flie, to mutter, and mutiny against God and man; as here. Reason should say to choler, that which the Nurse saith to the childe. Weep not, and you shall have it.Plut. But either it doth not: or if it do, yet the ear (which tasteth words, as the mouth doth meat) is oft so filled with gall (some creatures have fel. in aure) that nothing can relish with it. See Exod. 6.9. If Moses his anger was pure, free from guile, and gall, Exod. 32.19. yet Ionah's was not so. It is surely very diffi∣cult to kindle and keep quick this fire, without all smoke of sinne. Be angry, and sinne not, is, saith One, the easiest charge, under the hardest condition that can be. Men, for most part, know not what they do in their anger; this raiseth such a smoke. Put fire to wet straw and filthy stuffe, and it will smoke and smutch you quickly; yea scorch you and scald you, when once it breaks out. Levit. 13.5. we read of a leprosie breaking out of a burning: seldome do passions burn but there is a leprosie breaking out of that burning. It blistereth out at the lips: hence the Hebrews have but one and the same word for Anger and foaming at the mouth, Esth. 1.18. Zach. 1.7.Ketseph. Spuma. Hos. 10.7. They have also a Proverb, that a mans disposition is much discovered, Bechos, bechis, becagnab; by his cup, by his purse, and by his passion: at which time, and in which cases. A fool uttereth all his mind, Prov. 29.11. (all his wrath, a fool, and  suddenly, rash∣ly, is from the same root. De sera un∣min: vindict. say the Seventy) and that suddenly, rashly, as the Hebrew intimateth: but a wise man keepeth it in till afterwards, Prov. 29.11. Ahashuerosh when hee felt himself enraged against Haman, walked into his garden, Esth. 7.7. And Platarch tels of one Archytas, that, displeased with his servants for their sloth, he flung from them, saying, Valete quoniam vobis irascor, I will leave you; for that I am angry with you. The very first insurrections of inordinate Passions are to bee crusht, the first smoke of them to be smothered, which else will fume up into the head, and gather into so thick a cloud, as wee shall lose the sight of our selves, and what is best to be done: Cease therefore from rash anger and stint strife betime. The be∣ginning of it, saith Solomon, is as when one letteth out water: therefore leave off contention before it bee medled with, Prov. 17.14. Storms rise out of little gusts: and the highest windes are, at first, but a small vapour. Had Jonah stopt, or stept back, when he felt himself first stirred, he had not so shamefully over-shot himself, nor heapt up so many sinnes, as he did in the following entercourse with Almighty God. He was naturally hot, and hasty: and so were those two brethren the sounes of thunder; they had quick and hot spirits, Luke 9.55. Now, where there is much untowardnesse of nature, there Grace is the more easily overborn: sowre wines need much sweetning. Gods best children, though ingrafted into the true vine, yet carry they about them a relish of the old stock still. It is thought by very good Divines, that Ionah feeling his own weaknesse in giving place to anger, thought to strive against it, and so addressed himself to prayer, verse 2. but trans∣ported by his passions of grief and rash anger, while by prayer hee thought to have overcome them, they overcame him, and his prayer too: so true is that of the Apostle; The wrath of man worketh not the righteousnesse of God, Jam. 1.20. Verse 2. And he prayed unto the Lord,] i. e. He thought to have done so; but by the deceitfulnesse of his own heart, he quarrel'd with God; and instead of wrastling with him, as Jacob, he wrangled with him. The words seem to be rather a brawle then a prayer; which should ever proceed from a sedate and setled spirit, and hold conformity with the will of God. Could Jonah be in case to pray, when he had neither right conceptions of God, nor bowels of mercy to men: but that millions of people must perish rather then he be held a false Prophet? Say there were something in it of peace for Gods glory, which he thought would suffer; as if God were either mutable, or impotent. Say that there were in this outburst, some∣thing of affection to Gods people, who had then no greater enemy to fear, then these Ninevites; whom therefore Jonah would have had destroyed according to
his prediction: yet cannot he be excused for falling so foul upon God, and upbray∣ding Him with that which is his greatest glory, Exod. 33.28, 19. with Exod. 34.6, 7. The truth is, nothing makes a man eccentrick in his motions, so much as head-strong passions, and private respects. He that brings these into Gods pre∣sence, shall do him but little good service. The soul is then onely well carried, when neither so becalmed that it moves not when it should, nor yet tossed with tempests to move disorderly, as did Jonah here, and Job, in that peevish prayer of his, chap. 6.8, 9. See also Jer. 20.7, 8. I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, &c.] that is, my thought: for whe∣ther he worded it thus with God till now, it appeareth not: but God heareth the language of mens hearts: and their silence to him is a speaking evidence. when I was yet in my countrey.] And had Jonah so soon forgotten what God had done for him, since he came thence? Oh what a grave is oblivion! and what a strange passage is that (and yet how common?) Then beleeved they his words, they sang his praise. They soon forgat his works, they waited not for his counsel, Psal. 106.12, 13. Jonah did not surely wait for Gods counsel, but anteverted it. Idcirco an∣teverti, saith he in the next words, (Therefore I fled before) and thought hee had said well, spoke very good reason. It is the property of lust and passion, so to blear the understanding of a man, that he shall think he hath reason to be mad, and that there is great sence in sinning. Dogs in a chafe bark at their owne masters: so do people in their passions let flie at their best friends. They set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh thorow the earth, Psal. 73.9. Ionah in his heat here, justifieth his former flight, which he had so sorely smarted for, Et quasi qui∣dam Aristarchus, he taketh upon him to censure God for his superabundant good∣nesse, which is above all praise. For I knew that thou art a gracious God, and mercifull, &c.] This He knew to be Gods name, Exod. 34.6, 7. but withall he should have remembred, what was the last letter in that Name; viz. that he will by no means clear the guilty. See Nahum 1.2, 3. The same fire hath burning heat and chearfull light. Gracious is the Lord, but yet righteous, saith David, Psal. 116.5. his mercy goes ever bounded by his truth. This Jonah should have considered; and therefore trembled thus to have upbraided God with that mercy by which himself subsisted: and but for which he had been long since in hell, for his tergiversation and peevishnesse. But mercy re∣joyceth against judgement, and runneth as a spring, without ceasing.Jam. 2. It is not like those pools about Jerusalem that might be dried up with the tramplings of horse and horse-men. The grace of God was exceeding abundant, 1 Tim. 1.14. It hath abounded to flowing-over, as the Sea doth above the hugest rocks. See this in the present instance. Jonah addeth sinne to sinne,. and doth enough to undo himself for ever: so that a man would wonder how God could forbear killing him, as hee had like to have done Moses, when he met him in the Inne. But He is God, and not man: he contents himself to admonish Jonah of his fault, as a friend and fa∣miliar, velut cum eo colludens, jesting with him, as it were, and by an outward signe, shewing him how grievously he had offended.Mercer. Concerning these Attributes of God here recited, see the Note on Joel 2.13. and say with Austin, Laudent alij pietatem: Dei ego misericordium. Let no spider suck poison out of this sweetest flower: nor out of a blind zeal make ill use of it, as Jonah doth, for a cloke of his rebellion: lest abused mercy turn into fury. Verse 3. Threfore now, O Lord, take I beseech thee my life from me,] A pitifull peevish prayer, such as was that of Job, and that of Jeremy above noted: to which may be added Sarah's hasty wish for God to arbitrate betwixt her and her husband: Moses his quibling with God, till at length he was angry, Exod. 4.10, 14. Eliah's desire to die out of discontent, &c. What a deal of filth, and of flesh, clogs and cleaves to our best performances? Hence David so prayes for his prayers, and Nehemiah for pardon of his reformations. Anger is ever an evil counsellour; but when it creeps into our prayes, it corrupts them worse then vinegar doth the vessel wherin it standeth. Submit your selves therefore to God (as Ionah should have done) resist this devil (of pride and passion) and he will flee from you:Jam. 4.7. as by giving place to impatiency ye give place to the Devil, Eph. 4.26. who else (by his vile in∣jections, or at least by his vain impertinencies) will so flie-blow and marre our du∣ties
that we may well wonder, they are not cast back as dirt into our faces. Sure it is that if the holy Ghost had not his hand in our prayers, there would not be the least goodnesse in them: no not uprightnesse and truth, without which Christ would never present them, or the Father accept them. for it is better for me to die then to live] sc. in that disgrace that I shall now un∣dergo of being a false prophet, not henceforth to be believed. Lo, this was it that troubled the man so much, as it did likewise Moses, Exod. 4.1. They will not be∣lieve me; for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee. But God should have been trusted by them for that, and his call obeyed howsoever, without con∣sults or disputes; carelesse of their own credit, so that God might be exalted. True it is, that a man had better die with honour, then live in disgrace, truly so called. It were better for me to die,1 Cor. 9.15. saith holy Paul, then that any man should make my glo∣rying void. Provident we must be (but not over-tender) to preserve our reputation: learning of the unjust steward by lawfull (though he did by unlawfull) means to do it: for our Saviour noted this defect in the children of light, that herein they were not oft so wise as they should be, Luke 16.8. But Ionah was too heady and hasty in this wish of his death; because his credit, as he thought, was crackt, and he shoulld be lookt upon as a lyar. But was the Euge of a good conscience nothing to him? was Gods approbation of no value, nor the good esteem of his faithful people? It was enough for Demetrius, that he had a good report of the truth 3 Iohn. 12. what ever the world held or said of him. What is the honour of the world but a puffe of stinking breath? and why should any Jonah be so ambitious of it, as that without it he cannot find in his heart to live. Life is better then honour. Joseph is yet alive, saith Jacob. To have heard that Joseph lived a servant would have joyed him,D. Hall. Cont. more then to heare that he died honourably. The greater bles∣sing obscureth the less. He is not worthy of honour, that is not thankfull for life. St. Pauls desire to be dissolved that he might be with Christ, which is farr farr the better Phil. 1.3. was much different from this of Jonah Vers. 4. Doest thou do well to be angry?] Or what? art thou very angry? Nun∣quid rectè? Summon the sobriety of thy senses before thine own judgement: and see whether there be a cause. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?Mat. 20.15. Is thine eye evil because I am good? Shall I not shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy? Or enviest thou these poor Ninivites their preservation, for my sake? Cannot I provide for mine own glory, and for thine authority by other means and wayes then thou imaginest? Have patience Jonah, and rest better satisfied with my dispensation. Be swift to bear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. For, I wot well, the wrath of man worketh not the righteonsnesse of God.Jam. 1.19, 20. This thou wilt see and say as much, when come to thy self, for now thou art quite off; and being transported as thou art, Nil audire voles,Hora. nil discere, quod levet aegrum. Hierome seeks to excuse Jonah's anger: but God here condemneth it, as not well: and Ionah himself, partly by not answering again, and partly by recording the sto∣ry, seems to say of himself as Father Latimer doth in another case; I have used in mine earnest matters to say,Serm. 3. Sund. in Advent. Yea, by Saint Mary, which indeed is not well. Anger is not altogether unlawful, so it be well carried; It is, saith one, a tender vertue: and as it is not evil to marry, but good to be wary, so here. Let a man ask himself this question, Do I will to be thus angry? and is mine indignation rightly regulated for principle, object, measure, end? If it be not, the spirit of God will be grieved in the good soul, and sensibly stirre, Eph. 4.30, 31. yea, thou shalt hear the cor∣recting voice thereof within thee, saying, Dost thou well to be thus angry? Should not all bitternesse and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking be put away, with all malice? And should ye not be kind one to another, and  hearted, for∣giving one another, even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you? Eph. 4.31, 32. Vers. 5. So Jonah went out of the city,] As not yet knowing what God might do, though he found him inclinable to shew them mercy upon their repentance. Or he might think haply, that these Ninivites were onely sermon-sick, penitent indeed for the present, but it was too good to hold long: these seemingly righteous men would
soon fall from their righteousnesse, and then be destroyed, though for present some∣what favoured of God. Mercer reads the text in the preterpluperfect tense, and makes it an hysteron proteron thus, exierat autem Jonas; but Jonas had gone out of the city, sc. before he had shewed himself so hot and hasty against God, and braw∣led with him as above. Others think, that when he saw which way the squares were like to go, he flung out of the city in a great pelt: and if God had fetcht him a∣gain with a flewet on the ear (as Queen Elizabeth did the Earl of Essex her favou∣rite,Camb. Elisa. when being crossed by her of his will he uncivilly turned his back as it were in contempt) he had done him no wrong: But God is long-suffering, &c. He consi∣dereth whereof we are made, and with what strong corruptions we are beset. He knowes that sinne hath a strong heart, and will not easily be done to death: that nothing cleaves more pertinaciously, or is more inexpugnable then a strong lust; whether it be worldlinesse, wantonnesse, passionatenesse, pride, ambition, revenge, or the like: these Jebusites will not easily be driven out; these sturdy rebels will hardly be subdued; these stick closest, as a shirt doth to a leprous body; and can∣not be done off but with great adoe. Now if Jonah be of a cholerick constitution, and soon kindled; if this evil of his nature have been confirmed by custome (a second nature) if Satan stirre up the coals, and say to him as the people did to Pi∣lat, Do as thou ever hast done: God graciously considereth all this, and beareth with his evil manners. and sat on the east-side of the city] Quite out of the precincts; where he might see their ruine, and not suffer with them. Faux after he had laid his train, and ser it awork to fire the powder at such an hour, was to have retired himself into Georges fields, and there to have beheld the sport. That Jonah was so uncharitable as to wish and wait the overthrow of Niniveh, and not that they would rather return and live, admits of no excuse. But that expecting its overthrow (according to that God had threatned by him) he secured himself by separating from those sin∣ners against their own souls, was well and wisely done of him. See Esa. 48.20. and 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 16.4. Lot did so from Sodom,. the people from Core and his complices, John and his disciples from Cerinthus the heretick: he sprung out of the Bath from that blasphemer, lest he should be punished with him: so the Church of Ierusalem packt away to Pella, &c.sob. l. . c. . and there made him a booth] A sorry something, wherein to repose himself, till the indignation were over-past. Ministers as good souldiers of Jesus Christ must suffer hardship, be content to dwell in tents, or to lie in huts, till they come to the heavenly palace, where they shall have a better building, 2 Cor. 5.1. yea, a throne in that city of pearl, whose master builder is God, Heb. 11.13.Turk his. fol. 3.1. Mean while let them not seek great things for themselves: but as the Turks never build sumptuous∣ly for their own private uses, but content themselves with simple cottages how mean soever, good enough say they, for the short time of our pilgrimage here: so much more should Christians, & especially Ministers; whose reward (how little soever upon earth) is great in heaven. Let them live upon reversions: and though their dwelling be but mean, a booth or little better, yet they shall have stately mansions above:Ma. 5.12. and in the mean time, if they can but say as that Heathen did, , God dwels here with me, this house of mine is a little Church, a tabernacle for the God of Ia∣cob; oh how happy are they in that behalf, even above the great Turk with his Serag∣lio, (which is two miles in compasse) yea, with his whole Empire,Turk. hist. which (saith Lu∣ther) is but a crust cast by the great house-keeper of the world to his dogs. and sat under it in the shadow] Having food and reyment saith the Apostle, let us therewith be content.. Where the word rendred rayment signifieth any covering over head, if it be but an haircloth. Some say it signifies domicilium an house: others say that houses are not named, for that they were not any where to fix:Estius. Vt Hamax but to be ready to run from place to place, and to leave house and all behind them: or as souldiers burn their huts when the siege is ended, that they may go home to their houses; be∣ing discontentedly contented in the mean while: so should we, glad to hover and cover under the shadow of the Almighty by the grace of faith, quae te pullastrum, Christum gallinum facit, which makes Christ the hen, and thee the chicken saith Luther. till he might see what would become of the city] whether God would not ratifie
his word by raining down hell from heaven upon it, as once he did upon sinfull Sodom: or overwhelme it with the river Tigris, as once he did some part of it, saith Diodorus Siculus,Diod. lib. 2. so that twenty furlongs of the town-wall were thrown down by it. And the Prophet Nahum threateneth, that with an over-flowing flood God would make an end of the place thereof, chap. 1.8. Verse 6. And the Lord God prepared a gourd] sc. after that his booth was dried up, and the leaves withered, God by his providence, and not without a miracle (because without seed, and so suddenly) furnished Ionah with this gourd or ivy∣bush, or white vine, or the plant called Palma Christi, or Pentadactylon, because it resembleth a mans hand with five fingers: something it was, but what, is not certainely known. Kimchi thus describeth it: Est herba longis & altis frondibus umbrosa. It is an herb or plant that yeeldeth good shade with its long and large leaves. And many yeares before him, one Rabba son of Hanna said, that it growes by the waters side, is commonly set for shade-sake, before tavern doores: and that oyle is made of the seeds of it. and made it to come up over Ionah] Not only to refresh him, (who having been so lately in the whales-belly was haply more tender-skinned then before, and not so well able to endure the heate of the Sun) but also to make way to that reproof he afterwards gave him ver. 10. Hoc enim exierno signo, saith Mercer, for by this out∣ward signe, God sporting with him, as it were, clearly convinceth him of his impati∣ency, & admonisheth him of his duty: & this He thinketh was not done till the forty dayes wore over. to deliver him from his grief] from his head-ach, caused by the heat of the Sun; which yet he cursed not as the scorched Atlantes are said to doe. Or to exhilarate and refresh his spirits after his self-vexing: for the hasty man never wants woe, and the envious person, because he cannot come at another mans heart, feedeth upon his own.Esa. 5.7. Now though God chide him for his fault, yet as a father he tendereth his in∣firmity, and taketh care that the spirit faile not before him and the soule that he had made. And it is as if he should say: Ionah goeth on frowardly in the way of his heart; I have seen his wayes and will heale him: I will leade him also, and restore com∣forts unto him Esay 57.16, 17, 18 As it is a rule in Physick, still to maintaine nature. so Ionah was exceeding glad] Heb. rejoyced with great joy, that is, supra modum, he was excessive in all his passions, which speakes him a weake man. Some think he rejoyced the more in the gourd, as conceiving that God thereby voted with him, and for him. This was also Leahs errour, when rejoycing in that whereof she should have repented rather, she said Gen. 30.18. God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband, and she hath borne me a fist son. So much mis∣taken are the best sometimes: and so bladder-like, is mans soule; that filled with earthly vanityes though but wind, and gone with a wind, it growes great, and swels in pride and folly: but if prickt with the least pin of piercing grief, it shriveleth to nothing. Verse 7. But God prepared a worm] All occurrences are to be ascribed not to Na∣ture, Fate, or Fortune, but to God: who as he is Great in great things, so is he not little in the least.Maximus in magnis, nec parvus in mi∣nimis. He prepared first the gourd, and then the worm, and then the wind. He was the great doer in all. He so attempereth all, that his people shall have their times and their turns of joy and sorrow. These two are tyed together, said the Heathen, with chaines of Adamant: hence also Ageronia's altar in the tem∣ple of Volupia.Flut. See the circle God usually goes in with his, Psal. 30.5, 6, 7. &c. to teach them that all outward comforts are but as grass or flower of the field, which he can soone blast or corrode by some worme of his providing. Moneo te iterumque iterum{que} monebo, saith Lactantius, I warn thee therefore, & will do it againe & againe, that thou look not upon those earthly delights as either great or true to those that trust them:De opisicio Da. ad Dem. but as things that are not onely deceitfull, because doubtfull but also deadly, because delicious. There is a worm lies couchant in every gourd to smite it, a teredo to wast it, besides the worm of conscience bred in that froath and filth, for a perpetuall torment. and it smot the gourd that it withered] Plants have also their wounds, diseases and death,Lib. 17. cap. 14. saith Pliny. The gourd being gnawed at the root, and robbed of its moist∣ness withered. Sic transit gloria mundi. But the righteous shall flourish like a palm∣tree
tree (not like this palm-crist) Psal. 92.12. Now the palm-tree though it have ma∣ny waights at the top, and many snakes or wormes at the root, yet it still sayes,Alciat: Emb. Nec premor nec perimor, I am neither born down, nor dried up: but as Noahs olive drown'd, kept its verdure; and as Moses bush fired but not consumed; so fareth it with the righteous, persecuted but not forsaken &c. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. and at death a crown of life awaites him, Quanta perennis erit, an immarcescible crown,Sr. Thom. Bodlye's posy. an inheri∣tance undefiled and that withereth not, Pet. 1.4. that suffereth no Marasmus, but is reserved fresh and green for you in heaven; like the palm-tree which Pliny saith never loseth his leafe nor fruit: or like that Persian tree, whereof Theophrastus saith, that at the same time it doth bud, blossome and beare fruit. Verse 8. God prepared a vehement East-wind] The windes then blow not where they list, at randome I mean, and without rule: but are both raised and layed againe by God at his pleasure. He prepared, and sent out of his treasures,Jer. 10.13. this violent East-wind Heb: silent:R. Selomoh. so called either because it silenceth all other winds with its vehemency: or because when it blowes, men are made silent or deaf with its dinn, so that their tale cannot be heard. There are that by silent here understand a still, low, gentle East-wind, that cooled not the heate of the avre inflamed by the Sun, but rather added to it, and set it on:  the Greeks interpret it: and this suites well with that which followeth. and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah] Ʋssit & laesit Psal. 121. So the Poet, — seriente cacumina Sole. Chrysostome cannot but wonder, that whereas all fire naturally tendeth upwards, the Sun should shoot his beames downwards, and affect these lower bodyes with his light and heat. Whereby if he be troublesome to any Jonah, it is because God will have it so (for he is a servant, as his name in Hebrew importeth) without whom neither Sun shineth nor raine falleth Mat. 5.45.Mat. 13.6.21. Rev. 7.16. and 16.8.9. 1 Pet. 4.12. and who by afflictions (set forth in Scripture by the heate of the Sun) bringeth back his straglers Psal. 119.97. that he fainted] Though the head of man bath a manisold guard upon it, as be∣ing overlaid first with haire, skin and flesh, like the three-fold covering of the Ta∣bernacle; and then encompassed with a skull of bones like boards of Cedar; and afterwards with diverse skins like silken curtaines:Obtectue fuit maerore . Sept. and lastly enclosed with the yellow skin which Solomon calleth the golden ewer Eccle. 12.6. yet Jonah fainted and wished in himself to die] Ita ut ab animo suo peteret mori, he required of his soule to go out of his body, Egredere ô anima mea, as Hilarion said, but in a better sense he called for death, as his due: being, belike, of Seneca's mind, that Nature hath bestowed this benefit on men, that they may bereave themselves of life, whensoever they please: not considering that God is Lord of lise and death, neither may any one lay down his life but when He calleth for it: as a souldier may not leave his station, but at the command of his captaine. it is better for me to die then to live] Not so Jonah, unlessed you were in a better mind. You should rather say as Martinus on his sick-bed did,Sever. Epist. 3. Bernard. Domine si adhuc populo tuo sum necessarius, Lord if I may yet be serviceable to thee, and usefull to thy people, I refuse not life and labour. Or as Mr. Bolton on his death-bed desi∣rous to be dissolved, when he was told by some standers by,Mr. Bagshaw. in the life of Mr. Bolton. that though it was better for him to die then to live, Yet the Church of God would miss him: He thus sweetly replied with David 2 Sam. 15.25, 26. If I shall find faevour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again &c. but, if otherwise, loc here I am, let him do what seemeth good in his eyes. A good man is born for the benefit of many, as Bucers Physitians said to him: neither may he desire to die out of discontent,Mel. Ad. Non sibissed mul∣terum utilitati esse natum. as Jonah did for a trifle, wherein he was crossed; and rather then which to have been deprived of, Niniveh that great city, by his consent, should have been de∣stroyed. That he never after this would return to his own countrey, but was so sick of the fret that he died of the sullens, as some Hebrewes say, I cannot beleeve. See the Note on ver. 3.Eneid. lib. 1. Ver. 9. Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd?] What? so soon blown up for a thing of nothing? Tantaene animis coelestibusira?
— Dijne hunc ardorem mentibus indunt Euriale?Aeneid. lib. 1. an sua cuique deus fit dira libido?Ibid. lib. 9. Knew not Jonah that to be angry without a cause, was to be in danger of the judge∣ment? Mat. 5.22. that it was a mortall sin, and not veniall, as Papists falsly con∣clude from that text; which sets not forth a different punishment of rash anger, but a diverse degree of punishment? that it is the murther of the heart, as our Saviour there shewes, and the sountaine of the murther both of the tongue, and of the hand? will he be like the foolish bee, who loseth her life to get revenge? See the Note on ver. 4. and he said] Before he said nothing when reproved for his rash anger ver. 4. and that was best. Now he chats against God, laying the reines in the neck of his unruly passions, and running riot. Who can understand his erours? and who can tell how oft a servant of God may fall into a foul sin, if strongly inclined thereto by nature, or violently tempted by satan and his instruments? Of Judah indeed it is expresly noted, that he knew his daughter-in law Tamar againe no more Gen. 38.26. But what shall we say to Lots double incest? to Sampsons going down againe to Gaza Iudg. 16? to Abrahams twice denying his wife? to Iohns twice adoring the Angell Rev. 19.10. and 22.8? Let him that standeth, take heed lest he fall: and let Gods people see that there be no way of wickednesse found in them, that they allow not, wallow not in this guzzle: sith hereby they loose not their jus haeredita∣rium, but yet their jus aptitudinale, not their title but yet their fitnesse to Gods kingdome: and perhaps, their fulnesse of reward there 2 Iohn 8. and he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death] A fearefull out-burst: resist passion at the first rising up: else who knowes whither it may transport us? Passi∣ons, saith One, like heavy bodies down steep hils, once in motion move them∣selves: and know no ground but the bottome. Ionah (saith Another upon this text) slights admonition, riseth up in an animosity against it to a desperate degree of anger: such wild beasts are surious passions when we give them the reines. Thus He, Surely as the Lion beateth himself with his own taile: and as sullen birds in a cage beate themselves to death, so could Ionah in this rage find in his heart to do: and he shames not to tell God as much. It was therefore no ill wish of him that desired God to deliver him from that naughty man Himself,Domine libera me à malo he∣mine meipso. from headlong and headstrong passions, which may not only dissweeten a mans life but shorten it. The Emperor Nerva died of a sever contracted by anger. Valentinian by an irrup∣tion of blood. Wenceslaus King of Bohemia in a rage against his cup bearer fell presently into a palsey, whereof he died. What disease Ionah died of I know not: but this I know, that in his heat he did and said enough here in this text, to have made Almighty God resolve as he did once against those muttering Muti∣neeres in the wildernesse, As truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine eares, so will I do to you:Num. 14.28. Thou shalt surely dye Jonah; out of thine own mouth will I judge thee &c. But God chose rather to glorifie himself in Jonah's salvation, then in his deserved destruction. Dat igitur poenitentiam, & poste à indulgentiam (as that father prayed) He therefore first giveth him repentance, and then par∣don, as appeareth partly by his recording of these passages, and so shaming himself, as it were, before all the world: and partly also by his closing up his Prophesie with silence: not striving with God for the last word, as Peter did with Christ, and would needes carry it, till the event of things confuted him, and he was glad to seek a corner to cry in Mat. 26.35. with 75. Verse 10. Then said the Lord] He did not roare upon Jonah, nor run upon him with a drawn sword, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers: but gently said unto him, that he might the more admire his own impotency and Gods lenity;Iob 15.26. both which he studiously describeth all along this Prophesy; a good signe of his sound repentance. Thou hast had pitty on the gourd] Here is the end scope and application of the parable; whereby it apeareth that God prepared not the gourd so much for the ease and use of Jonah's body, as for a medicine to his soule, convincing him of the iniquity both of his wayes and wishes, by an argument drawn from the lesse to the greater: and confuting him by a comparison. Thou, a sinfull and wretched man,
hast had pitty Or spared, and art sorry it perished. The gourd a sorry shrub, a meane mushrome, and none of thine neither, but as lent thee: Alasse master, said they it was but borrowed. for the which thou hast not laboured] And so canst not be so fast-affected to it.. Ethic. l. 4. For all men love their own works rather then other mens, as parents and poets, saith Aristotle: proving thereby, that those which have received their riches from their parents are more liberall, then they which have gotten them by their own labour. neither madest it grow] Thou hast neither planted nor watered it, or any way added to it, by thine industry: for that also was no part of thy paines but mine. Not that God laboureth about his creatures; for he doth all his work without toole or toile Esa. 40.28 but this, as many other things in Scripture, are spoken after the manner of men, and so must be taken. which came up in a night] Heb: was the son of a night, not without a miracle? though Pliny speak of the quick and wonderfull grouth of this shrub. and perished in a night] Citò oriens, citò itidem moriens, quickly come, and as quickly gone; a fit embleme of earths happinesse. Surely man walketh in a vaine shew; faeneâ quadam foelicitate temporaliter florens:Aug. Ep. 120. they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. They are but Hemerobij: their life is but a day (and such a day too, as no man is sure to have twelve houres to it) as this gourd was but of one dayes continuance, a it came up in a night, so it perish∣ed the next; citò crevit, citò decrevit, repentè prolatus, repentè sublatus, of very small continuance.Tarnou. Verse 11. And should not I spare Niniveh] I who am all-bowels: I who am a sin-pardoning God Neh. 9.31. none like me for that Mic. 7 18. I,Ego emphati∣cum. Mercer. who am the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort 2 Cor. 1.4. whose property and practise it is to comfort those that are cast down 2 Cor. 7.6. I, who am so transcendently gra∣tious, that thou hast even hit me in the teeth with it ver. 2. should not I be affected with the destruction of Niniveh? that great city] See Notes on chap. 1.2. and chap. 3.3, 4. yea I will spare it, sith it is ten thousand times more worth then that gourd of thine so much pittied. wherein are more then sixscore thousand Persons] more then twelve myriads of innocent infants that cannot discerne &c. but live a kind of sensitive life, as not yet come to the use of reason, and are therefore matched and mentioned with beasts. And also much cattle (a part of my care) which have had their share, as they could, in the common humiliation; and shall therefore share in the common preservati∣on. And hast thou an heart to repine at this, and not to be set down with so good reason? Jonah is now sad and silenced: and although we heare no further of him, yet methinks I see him (Iob. lik) laying his hand upon his mouth in an humble yeeldance: yea putting his mouth in the dust, and saying Once have I spoken,Job 40.5. but I will not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no further. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: for thou hast caused me to understand wherein I have erred.Job. 6.24.25. How forcible are right words &c.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of MICAH. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THe word of the Lord &c.] See the Note on Hos. 1.1. to Micah the Morasthite to distinguish him from Micaiah the son of Imlah, who prophecied in A∣habs dayes, above an hundred yeares before this. Micah the Morasthite, so called from the place of his birth or abode which is made famous by him (as Abdera was by Democritus, Hippo by Austin) and not He by it; Ambrose saith hi name signifi∣eth, Quis iste? who's this? who? (saith that Father in answer) Not one of the common sort, but an elect vessell to carry Gods name to his people. Hierome from his title Morasthite interpreted, calleth him Cohaeredem Christi Coheire with Christ, of whom and his kingdome he sweetly Prophecieth: and may therefore be called the Evangelicall Prophet; as was Esay, his contemporary with whom he hath many things common: and this one thing above him, that he nameth Beth∣lehem Christs birth-place chap. 5.2. for the which (as well as for his boldnesse Ier. 26.18.) he was famous in the Church Mat. 2.6. Ioh. 7.42. in the dayes of Iotham, Ahaz. Hezekiah] Ahaz standeth between Iotham and He∣zekiah, as thistle or thorn between two lillyes or roses. Manasseh comes after, and degenerates into his grandfather Ahaz. To his time Micah attained not, much lesse to Josiahs, as Isidore hath it: for betwixt Iotham and Iosiah were an hundred and twenty yeares at least. It is probable that Micah Prophesied forty yeares, if not more: wherein he saw many changes, and met with many molestations: had cause enough to cry out with his Colleague, Who hath beleeved our report? My leanenesse, my leanenesse &c. Yet held he on his course; as being of Latimers mind, who speaking in one of his sermons of a minister that gave this answer why he left off preaching? viz. because he saw he did no good; this saith
Latimer, is a naughty, a very naughty answer. which he saw] sc. with the eyes of his mind, for the use of the Church; whereto this prophesie comes commended, first as the word of the Lord, and secondly, as ex∣traordinarily revealed to this Prophet. concerning Samaria and Ierusalem] Samaria seemeth to be first named because most guilty before God. They are yoked together, because there was scrace ever a better (Aholah and Aholibah sisters in sin) and one the much worse for the others neighbourhood. Jerusalem would take it in high scorn (likely) to be matched with Samaria (so much slighted and shunned by her Ion. 4.9.) as Papists now do to be set by Protestants, Turks by Christians (the word of a mussulman beares down all other testimony amongst them) But this Prophet is very bold (as it is said of Isay his coaetaneus Rom. 10.20) binds them both up in one bundle, and spareth not to shew Judah their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Verse 2. Heare, all ye people,] He beginneth as Esay, in a lofty and stately stile, powring himself out in a golden flood of words (as Tully speaketh of Aristo∣tles Politicks) and calling for utmost attention and affection: as knowing that he had to do with men more deaf then sea-monsters, and more dull then the very earth they trod on; which is therefore here commanded to hearken, sith men (that ha∣bitable part of Gods earth Pro. 8.31) will not heare and give eare: wherein they are worse then the insensible creatures Psal. 119.91. and let the Lord God be witnesse against you] Here he turneth his speech to the refractary Jewes: speaking to God as a righteous judge and swift witnesse, Judex, Judex, vindex, against them if they hearkened not to his message, nisi pareant, ideo∣que pereant. the Lord from his holy temple] that is, let him testifie from heaven Psal. 11.4, that he is displeased with you, and that I have carefully sought your soules-health. Or, from his temple at Ierusalem wherein ye glory, and where ye think ye have him as fast bound to you, as the Tyrians had their idol Apollo, whom they chained and nailed to a post, that he might not forsake them, when Alexander besieged their town, and took it. The Heathens had a trick when they besieged a city,Macrob. lib. 3. cap. 9. Virg. Ae. 2. to call the Tutelar gods out of it by a certain charme, as beleeving that it could not otherwise be taken. In a like sense whereunto some have interpreted the following verses here. Verse 3. For behold the Lord commeth out of his place] that is, say they out of Iudaea and his temple there, leaving it to the Chaldaeans and Assyrians. See Ezech. 3.12. and chapters 9.10, and 11. where God makes divers removes from the Cherubins to the threshold, from thence to the East-gate, from thence to mount Olivet, quite out of the city chap. 11.23 and when God was gone, then followed the fatall calamity, in the ruine of the city. But by Gods comming forth out of his place here, I conceive is meant his descending from heaven to do justice on this hy∣pocriticall nation, Esay 26.21, and because hypocritis nihil stupidius hypocrites resting on their externall performances and priviledges will hardly be perswaded of any evill toward them Mic. 3.11. Is not the Lord, say they amongst us? none evill can come upon us; therefore we have heare an emphaticall Ecce, Behold the Lord commeth: he is even upon the way already, and will be here with the first. He will come down as once at Sodom, when their sin was very grievous Gen. 18.20. when they were overcharged with the superfluity of naughtinesse; God came from heaven to give their land a vomit; And so he would do here: for Unregenerate Israel was to God as Ethiopia Am. 9.7. as the Rulers of Sodom, and people of Go∣morrah Esay 1.10. and tread upon the high-places of the earth] the High and mighty Ones, that having gotten on the top of their hillocks as so many Ants, think themselves so much the better and safer, repose confidence in their high places and strong-holds, as Nebuchadnezzar did in his Babel, Edom in his clifts of the rocks, munitions of rocks, Obad. 3. the rich fool in his heapes and hoards Luk. 12. these, with their false confidences, God will tread down in his anger, and trample them in his fury, as the mire of the streets: he will bring down their strength to the earth, and lay their honour in the dust. Isa. 63.3, 6. Verse 4. And the mountaines shall be molten under him] This is to the self-same sense:
Though men swell in their own eyes, to the hugenesse of so many mountains: and though gotten upon their hill of ice, they think they shall never be moved, Psal. 30.6, 7. yet when God with his devouring fire, and everlasting burnings comes in presence, these craggie mountains shall soon dissolve and melt as wax, they shall be as waters, poured down a descent, they shall flow as a land-flood, &c. By which similitudes, and familiar comparisons is notably set forth the irresistible wrath of God for the affrighting of hard-hearted sinners, that they may take hold of his strength, and make peace with him, Esay 27.5. The valleys also shall be cleft.] The poorer sort also shall have their share in the common calamity. God will neither spare the high for their might, nor the base for their meannesse, but Lords and losels together, shall be as wax before the fire, &c.] Wax is a poor fence against fire, sticks and stubble against a strong tor∣rent: so humane force, against divine judgements. Verse 5. For the transgression of Iacob is all this,] Lest they should think, either that these things were threatned in terrorem onely, and would never be inflicted: or else that they had not deserved such severity, but that God should pour out his wrath rather upon the Heathen that knew him not, and upon the families that cal∣led not on his name. The Prophet here sheweth that Jacob was become a just ob∣ject of Gods indignation, by his transgressions or rebellions, and the whole house of Israel by their sinnes: there was a generall defection, and therefore they must expect a generall destruction. I or why? the just Lord is in the middest thereof: he will not do iniquity, he will not acquit the guilty: morning by morning doth he bring his judgements to light, he faileth not: but the unjust knoweth no shame, will take no warning, which is a just both presage and desert of his ruine. What is the transgression of Iacob?] say they in a chatting way; like these mis∣creants in Malachy, that so worded it with God, chap. 1. and 3. Is it not Samaria?] saith the Prophet, in answer to that daring demand of theirs. So, what are the high-places of Iudah?] viz. the superstitions and carnall confiden∣ces thereof? Is it not Jerusalem? saith the Prophet. Are not their capitall cities become their capitall sinnes? Read we not of the calf of Samaria, Hos. 8.5. and did not her kings set up idols at Dan and Bethel, and Gilgal. and Beersheba? As for Jerusalem, had she not turned the very Temple into an high-place, by resting in her ceremoniall services, and sacrifices? Did not some of her best kings wink at the high-places? And Ahaz, that stigmaticall Belilist, shut up Gods Temple, and set up strange worships? How then could these frontlesse fellowes ask, What is the trans∣gression, &c? and What are the high-places &c? The Prophet goes not behind the door to tell them, that the best of them were no better then a rabble of rebels a∣gainst heaven: and their chieftains were most in fault, though they least liked to hear of it. Samaria is a very Poneropolis, and Jerusalem is little better: they both are even transformed into sinnes image: the Prophet here speakes of them, as if they were not onely sinfull, but sin it self; as Tully saith of one Tubulus a Roman Preter, that he was so desperately wicked,Haraporcorum, vel colluvies rabidorum ca∣num. Aug. ut ejus nomen non hominis sed vitij esse viderer; that he passed not for a man, but for a Vice, so flagitious were his practises: or as Austin saith of this present evil world, That it is nothing else but a stie of filthy hogs, or a kennell of mad dogs. Verse 6. Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field,] i.e. like as when stones are gathered out of a field, they are laid together on heaps: so I will take course that where Samaria now is, there shall be nothing to be seen, but heaps of stones and rubbish. God is the true : for thou hast made of a city an heap, of a defenced city a ruine, a palace of strangers to be no city, it shall never be built, Esay 25.2. Of Rome it was long since prophesied: Tota eris in cineres, quasi nunquam Roma faisses. O that God would hasten that day: Scipio foresaw it, and wept, sc. when he saw Carthage set all on a light fire by himself. In the greatnesse of the Turkish Empire are swallowed up many kingdomes and countreys: besides all those Churches and places so much spoken of in Scripture, the Romans onely excepted: yet no doubt for their many and mighty sinnes, Time shall triumph over this so great a Monar∣chy,
when it shall but then live by fame, as others now do.Turk. hist. pref. Cedren. Jam seges est ubi Troia fuit. Though thou build thy walls as high as heaven (said the Oracle to wicked Phocas) yet sinne that lieth at the foundation, will one day over-turn them. and as plantings of a vineyard,] that is, it shall be made a place fit for the planting of vines: it shall be utterly rased and harased.— Ʋni mihi pergamo restant Incola captivo quae bove vi∣ctor erat. Bacchus amat colles. A Lapide observeth the fitnesse of the expression here used, in that Samaria was scituate on an hill that bore vines: and before it was a city, it had been a vineyard: God threatneth to make it so again, and so to stain the pride of all its glory: see what a trouble-town sinne is. Surely did people but know what it will once cost them, and cause to them, they durst not but be innocent. and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley,] that is, into a by corner. Elapidation is necessary to a vine-yard, Esay 5.2. there being no possession that requireth more pains and care, as Cato hath observed. and I will discover the foundation thereof.] I will not leave a stone upon a stone, nor any foot-step of so stately a city, that hath so long time been a cage of unclean birds, an Augean stable of abominable idolatries. God, as he hath loving respects to the places of his servants birth and abode, Psal. 87.6. Esay 49.16. so he sets the marks of his wrath upon those places where foul sinnes have been perpetrated, as up∣on our Abbeys and Monasteries, whose very foundations are laid naked. Verse 7. And all the graven images thereof,] Upon these the jealous God will execute vengeance: so to shew his hatred of idolatry. The stones of the altars hee will make as chalk-stones, that are beaten in sunder: the groves and the images shall not stand up, Esay 27.9. As for those that worship them, and repent not of the works of their hands, Rev. 9.20. they shall smart surely for their idolatries, as did those of old in the wildernesse: and the more ingenuous of their posterity acknowledge at this day, that there is no punishment befalleth them,Moses Gerand. in which there is not still an ounce of that golden calf. True it is, that the Samaritan superstition which was grosser at first, (and for which they were carried captive by the Assyrian) was af∣terwards refined by Manasseh a Jew-priest, that in Alexanders time made a defe∣ction to him, and brought many Jews with him: but that saved them not from ut∣ter destruction. and all the hires thereof shall be burnt with fire,] Her rewards given her by her sweet-hearts, Hos. 2.5, 12. and 9.1. her vowed presents and memories, (as Papists now call them) her monies and donaries shall be set on a light fire. God will con∣fute their vain confidences, as he did those Popish rebels of Norfolk in Edward the sixths time, who brought into the battell the Pix under his canopie, and with all his trinkets, crosses, banners, candlesticks, memories, &c.Acts & Mon. fol. 1190. which in the end could neither help themselves, nor save their friends from the hands of their enemies. for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, &c.] Ill gotten goods thrive not. Few harlots are found to be rich. Indeed we read of Phryne, a notable strumpet, that she offered to rebuild the walls of Thebes on condition that this might be en∣graven on them; , & Alexander pulled them down, and Phryne set them up again, but it would not be accepted. Flora also the Roman harlot was very rich: and so is the whore of Babylon at this day, by her trading with the merchants of the earth: but this will not hold long, Rev. 18.10. In one hour shall her judgement come: and in one hour so great riches shall come to nothing, verse 17. England was wont to be counted and called the Popes Asse; for bearing his burdens: and his puteus inexhaustus, his pit of treasure, whence hee drew at pleasure. Polydor Virgil was sometime Collectour of his Peter-pence here, &c. But Henry 8. casheered and cast him out hence; depriving him of his harlot-hire. And well he had done, had he not given occasion to those that came after to com∣plain. Possidebant Papistae, possident jam Rapistae, &c. Verse 8. Therefore I will wail and howle,] Good men are usually more deeply affected with the wretched estate of wicked persons, then they themselves are. Thus Samuel mourned for Sauls rejection; Daniel was astonied and troubled at the import of Nebuchadnezzars dream, chap. 4.19. Habakkuks belly trembled,Hab. 3.16. and his lips quivered at the consideration of the judgements that were to come upon the Chaldeans. Do we so (saith Mr. Perkins) at other mens smartings. I will go stript,] tàm mente quàm veste, renting off my garments, and casting
them from me, as if bereft of my wits: Pro demente vel insano quidam accipiunt, saith Calvin here. See Esay 59.15. with the margent, and Esay 20.2. I will make a wailing like the dragons,] which sucking the Elephants blood, till he fall down dead upon them, and oppresse them with his huge bulk, make an horrible howling: so horrible (saith Palacius out of Pliny and Solinus) that they amaze, yea kill those that hear it. Fides sit penes autores. and mourning as the owls,] Heb. as the daughters of the owl, or of the ostrich: young ostriches cast off by their dammes, Job 39 14. Lam. 4.3. and hungerbit howl pitifully, as do also the young ravens for like cause, Psal. 147.9. Of the ra∣vens of Arabia it is recorded, that full gorged, they have a tuneable sweet record: but empty, screech horribly. By these similitudes here used, the Prophet would ex∣presse his griefe to be unexpressible. Verse 9. For her wound is incurable,] Or, she is grievously sick of her wounds; Or, her wounds are full of anguish, neither is there any to pour in balm of Gilead, to allay it:Speed. 432. Camd. in Middlesex. any to lick it whole, as the Lady Elinor did her husband Prince Edwards wound, traiterously given him in the holy land, by an Assassine, with a poisoned knife. for it is come unto Judah,] viz. Samaria's wound and Plague is come, i. e. shall shortly come, though now they live, as if out of the reach of Gods rod, or as if they had a protection. he is come unto the gate of my people.] Sennacherib (fleshed with former successes at Samaria, which had been carried captive by his father) came up to the very gate of Jerusalem, as an over-flowing scourage: and thought to have cut off all the Jews at once: as if they had had all but one neck. He came up over all his channels, and went over all his banks. He passed thorow Judah, and over-flowed, reaching even to the neck: and that stretching out of his wings filled the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel, Esay 8.8. But Immanuel soon took a course with him, Esay 37.33. so that though he came to the gates, yet he entered not into the city: nor shot an arrow there, nor cast a bank against it. Look upon Zion, saith that Prophet, the city of our solemnities, and see if Jerusalem be not still a quiet habitation, Esay 33.20. Walk about Zion, saith the Psalmist, and go round about her, tell the towers thereof. See if any be missing since Sennacherib came up against them. Mark yee well her bulwarks: are they diminished? consider her palaces: are they at all defaced? Psal. 48.12, 13. What if Jerusalem be wicked? yet Sennacherib is insolent. If therefore Jerusalem shall be smitten with the rod of Sennacheribs fear, Sennacherib shall be smitten with the sword of Gods revenges, who of all things cannot en∣dure a presumptuous and self-confident vaunter: but will deal with his people, not according to his ordinary rule, but according to his Prerogative. Surely Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of hosts, though their land was filled with sinne against the Holy One of Israel, Ier. 51.5. Verse 10. Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all,] sc. in their sight and hearing, (though at home, weep your fill, verse 8.) lest the daughters of those un∣circumcised triumph, 2 Sam. 1.20. lest out of your tragedies they compose co∣medies; and ye become their musick, whilest they revel in your ruines, and make themselves merry in your misery. In the house of Aphrah, roll thy self in the dust.] An elegant Agnomination in the original: q. d. Dust thy self in the house of dust. Aphrah had its name from its dustinesse; as Paris is called Lutetia à luto, from its dirtinesse: and as Hiram cal∣led the twenty cities of Galilee given him by Solomon, Cabul, that is dirty, or displeasing, 1 King. 9.13. Fitly was this city called Aphrah, or Dusty, saith the Prophet: for it shall be reduced to dust, and the inhabitants occasioned to roll themselves in the dust, in token of extreme sorrow. See Lam. 2.10. Some think Aphrah is put for Ephraim: others, better understand it for a particular city; either that in the tribe of Manasseh, Gideons city, Judg. 6.11. or that other in the tribe of Benjamin, Josh. 18.23. not far from Jerusalem. Verse 11. Passe ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir,] Or, thou that dwellest fairly, as it were in a city set with Saphires, see Esay 54.11. such as was Susa in Persia, and Antioch in Syria, a city so sweet and specious, that Mahomet never durst come into it, lest he should be there detained by the pleasure of the place.
Saphir here (say some) may allude to Samaria, that instead of her fairnesse shall be exposed to ignominy and nakednesse: they shall be carried away, young and old, naked and bare-foot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Samaria, Esay 20.4. So the Popes champions dealt by the Waldenses in France, those anci∣ent Protestants. One great city of theirs they took, and put to the sword sixty thousand. To another they they gave quarter for life; but so,Rivet. Jesuita vapul. 331. as that both the men and the women should depart stark naked (partibus illis quae honeste nominari non possunt, sanctorum illorum cruciatorum oculis expositis) and shew all. The inhabitants of Zaanan] Loci pecorosi, saith Junius, the countrey of flocks. Some make it to allude to Zion. Others say, it signifieth an out-let: and make it to be as a gate to the kingdome of Judah. These came not forth of their gate in the mourning of Bethezel, or of the place over-anent, to condole with them, as having their hands full at home, and matter enough of mourning for their own misery. He shall receive of you his standing] The enemy shall stand and stay amongst you, till he hath subdued you, and made a clear conquest: hee shall not give you over, till he have done the deed. Verse 12. For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good,] Or, shall grieve for the good, viz. that he hath lost in the common calamity; grieve till he be heart-sick, as Amos 6.6. or wait till he faint, for hope deferred maketh the heart sick, Prov. 13.12. The name of this city is Maroth, that is, bitternesses; and bitter things shall befall her: see Ruth 1.20. because together with the good of Piety, which she ought to have waited upon, she hath lost the good of Prospe∣rity, which in vain she hath waited for. The expectation of the wicked is wrath, Prov. 11.23. But evil came down from the Lord.] It is He that sends and sets the enemy awork: as Titus acknowledged, at the last destruction of Jerusalem, that he onely lent his hands to the divine justice. It was God that stirred up enemies to revolted Solomon. And Joh descried Gods hand on the arms of the Sabean robbers. Verse 13. O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the charet to the swift beast,] To the Camel, or Dromedary, saith Calvin, which is a very swift beast, (wee call a low body Dromedary, per Antiphrasin) or to the post-horses Angarijs, as Junius: he means, Make haft away. Salmaneser is already at Samaria, and Sennacherib will be re long at Lachish, Esay 36.2. Hannibal ad portas, begone with all possible speed: hast, hast, hast. She is the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion,] Not partner onely, but Au∣thour, and Ring-leader. Such are all haeresiarchs, and inventers of evil things, Rom.  30. These shall drink deep of Gods wrath here, and be cast alive into the burning , Rev. 19.20. Some apply the words to the confederacy of Lachish with Jeru∣salem against king Amaziah, 2 King. 14.19. slain at this city. for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.] The often-change of person in this verse is remarkable. The chief sinne that Lachish stands charged with is, that being near to Beersheba, she had learned her manner, Amos 8.14. that is, her rites, and religions, instituted by Jeroboam, and transmitted them to Jerusalem. Su∣perstition soon spreads, and is catching: like the Jerusalem-Artichoke, it quickly over-runs the ground, and chokes the Heart. Verse 14. Therefore shall thou give presents, &c.] And so seek to make thee friends among the Philistines: but such carnall confederacies never prosper. The Greek Churches, Anno 1438. afraid of the Turks, sent and subjected themselves to the Bishop of Rome, that they might have the help of the Latine Churches: but shortly after, they were destroyed, their Empire subdued, and swallowed up by the Ottoman greatnesse, &c. How much better were it to send a Lamb to the Ruler of the earth, Esay 16.1? to bring presents unto Him that ought to be feared, Psal. 76.11? even to God, who cutteth off the spirits of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the earth? verse 12. Was he not so to Sennacherib whom Lachish here feared, and fled from? to Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Xerxes, who after he had ted over two millions of men into Greece, and beaten the Hellespont (for batter∣ing his bridge of boats over it) with three hundred stripes, was defeated, routed,Hered. and forced to flee back in a poor fishers boat, to save his own life? The houses of Achzib (that is of a lie) shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.] Or
have been a lie to the kings of Israel: never true to those that trusted them: And wilt thou confederate with them, and confide in them? Verse 15. Yet will I bring an heir unto thee,] Or, a Possessour, who shall lay claim to thee, as by right of inheritance. This heir was the Assyrian, and those Colonies brought by him into the cities of Israel, 2 King. 17.34. These took upon them as heirs and owners of the countrey, till turned out afterwards by Iosiah King of Judah, 2 King. 23.4, 8. Here is another elegant allusion, (as this Chapter is full of them) for Mareshah signifieth an Inheritance, or Possession. And if it were Miah's own countrey, (as many think) we may see the Prophets integrity, in not bearing with his best friends: but taking the same liberty to tell them of their sins, and dangers, that they did to commit the one, and to incurre the other. Phy∣sician heal thy self, said they to our Saviour, Luke 4.23. that is, thine own coun∣trey, as it is there explained. He shall come unto Adullam, the glory of Israel.] Haply so called, because David was once there hid and harboured: and the place thereby renowned. Or, because it was a strong-hold, wherein Israel gloried and trusted, but in vain: sith the ene∣mie should come to it, and surprize it. Some think poor Adullam is called the glo∣ry of Israel ironically, and by way of scorn. Some read it thus, O glory of Israel, (to wit, then lost and overthrown) and they make it to be a deep sigh of the Pro∣phet, fet from the bottome of his heart; whereby he witnesseth that he is greatly sorry for the ruine of the Israelites:Danaeus. that hee might move them also to mourn in like manner. This he further presseth them to in the next words. Verse 16. Make thee bald and poll thee,] i. e. Make most bitter lamentation: he alludes to a custom among the Easterlings, of tearing off the hair of their heads and beards, in times of great heavinesse. See Iob 1.20. Esay 15.2 Jer. 7.29. Ezr. 9 3. In other cases baldnesse was forbidden Israel, (lest they should symbolize with Heathens) but in case of sorrow for sin, they were called to it, Esay 22.12. for thy delicate children,] To whom thou hast been rather a parricide then a parent:L. Flor. dealing by them, as that fale School-master in Italy, that brought forth his schollers to Hannibal. as the Eagl,] when he is old, and loseth his feathers; and with them, not one∣ly his beauty, but also his swiftnesse and courage. CHAP. II. Verse 1. VVO to them that devise iniquity,] Or, labour, affliction, vanity, a lie. The Hebrew word Aven, is of large use; applied to all kinde of sinne, which causeth pain, sorrow, and misery: and here in particular to covetous∣nesse, that root of all evil to a mans self, and others, 1 Tim. 6.9, 10. Our Prophet flings a Wo at it, as doth likewise Habakkuk, chap. 2.9. calling it an evil covetous∣nesse, as the Prophet Esay tells us, that for the uniquity of his covetousnesse, God was wroth with Israel and smot him, Esay 57.17. The world counts it a light of∣fence: and casts a cloak of good husbandry over it, 1 Thes. 2.5. But this disguise will serve such, no better, then that which Ahab once put on and perished. Let no man deceive you with vain words,. (those plaistered words, 2 Pet. 2.3. used by hels Proctours) for because of these things (sc. fornication, covetousnesse, &c. those peccadillo's as they are counted) cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobe∣dience, Ephes. 5.6. For why? They devise iniquity, cogitant quasi coagitant, they plot and plow mischief, being men of wicked devices, Prov. 14.2. talking eftsoons to themselves, as that covetous caitif did, Luk. 12.17. beating their brains about their worldly projects, and resting no more, no not upon their beds by night (a time and place appointed for rest, when men should together with their clothes put off their cares, and compose themselves to sleep; that nurse of nature, and sweet parenthesis) then one doth upon a rack, or bed of thorns. Thus they work evil upon their beds,] They work hard at it, having the devil for their task-master, who shall therefore also be their pay-master. He hath their souls here as in a sling, 1 Sam. 25.29. violently tossed about and restlesse: they are his
drudges and dromedaries, driven about by him at his pleasure 2 Tim. 2.26. wholly acted and agitated by him Eph. 2.2. having as many Lords as lusts,1 King. 21.4. where∣with their hearts are night and day exercised, 2 Pet. 2.14. without intermission. See this in Felix, who at the same instant trembled and coveted a bribe: in Ahab, who sick of Naboths vineyard, laid him down upon his bed, but rested not. His heart did more afflict and vex it self with greedy longing for that bit of earth, then the vast and spacious compasse of a kingdome could counter-comfort. when the morning is light they practise it] And so they lose no time, being up and at it by peep of day; when others are fast asleep, and so more easily surprised and circumvented by them. The morning is the most precious part of the day: and should be employed to better purpose. But wickednesse proceedeth from the wicked, as saith the proverb of the Ancients 1 Sam. 24.13. and as they like not to have God in their heads Psal. 10.4. nor hearts Psal. 14.1. so neither in their words Psal. 12.4. nor wayes Tit. 1.16. but the contrary: Surely satan is rightly called the God of this world; because as God at first did but speak the word and it was done, so if the devill do but hold up his finger, give the least hint, they are ready prest to practisey. because it is in the power of their hand] The Vulgar hath it, Because their hand is against God: and indeed the same word El signifieth God and Power. The Seven∣ty render it, Because they have not lifted up their hands to God (an exercise proper and fit for the morning Psal. 5.4.) The Tigurine, Quia viribus pollent, They have strength enough to do it.Nihil cogitant quod non idem patrare ausint De Monachit. Lutherus. Their hand is to power (so the Originall hath it) that is, saith Calvin, quantum possunt, tantum audent, they dare do their utmost, they will try what they can do: their hand is ever ready to rake and scrape toge∣ther commodity; neither can they be hindred either by the feare of God, or any respect to righteousnesse. Ver. 2. And they covet fields, and take them by violence] See here the severall de∣grees of sin; and what descents covetous men dig to hell, and beware betimes. Sure∣ly as the plot of all diseases lies in the humours of the body; so of all sin in the lust of the soule. The Heathen could say, .Laertius. Covetousnesse is called the lust of the eyes 1 Ioh. 2.16. because from looking comes lusting, from lusting, acting, (hence lusts of the soule are called deedes of the body Rom. 8.13.) yea acting with violence, they covet and take, they rob and ravish Psal. 10. there is neither equity nor honesty to be had at their hands: but as they take away fields, houses, heritages shamelesly; so they beare them away boldly, and think to scape scotfree; because it is facinus majoris abollae,Juvenal. the fact of a great one, whose hand is to power, as ver. 1. and houses, and take them away] though a mans house be his castle (as we say) yet it cannot secure him from these cormorants. Scribes and Pharises devoured widdowes houses Mat. 23.17 where was a concurrence of covetousnesse and cru∣elty (for these seldome go sundred) besides the putid hypocrisie of doing this under a pretence of long prayers. A poor man in his house, is like a snaile in his shell: crush that, and you kill him. so they oppresse (or defraud) a man and his house] Either by fraud or force, by craft or cruelty they ruine a man, (a well-set man virum validum) and his family, his whole progeny; which might not be done to the unreasonable creatures Deut. 22.6. This is to be like Ʋladus that cruel Prince of Valachia: whose manner was, together with the offendour to execute the whole family; yea sometimes the whole kindred. Ver. 3. Behold against this family do I devise an evill]Turk. hist fol. 363 They had devised iniqui∣ty ver. 1. and now he deviseth their misery. God usually retaliates, and proporti∣ons provocation to provocation Deut. 32.21. frowardnesse to frowardnesse Psal. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety Lev. 26.18, 21. and device to device, as here. He loves to pay sinners home in their own coyne; and to make them know by sad experience and see, that it is an evill thing and bitter to forsake the Lord and his feare Jer. 2.19. Woe be to that man against whom the Almighty sets himself to devise an evill: such an one shall find, that thought is not free (as that pestilent, proverb
would make it) either from the notice of Gods holy eye, the censure of his mouth, or the stroak of his hand. See Ier. 4.14. and 6.39. Rev. 2.23. Deut. 29.19. And this, Nature it self had some notion of, as appeareth by his censure who judg∣ed that Antiochus did therefore die loathsomely, because he had but an intent to burn Diana's temple.Polybius. In declam. Fecit quisque quantum voluit, saith Seneca: and ncesta est, & sine stupro, quae stuprum cupit saith the same Authour. Vaine thoughts are ve∣ry sins, and expose men to punishment: these shall either excuse or accuse at the last day Rom. 2.15. Meane-while, God is devising what to do to them: he is preparing his bow and making ready his arrowes upon the string, even a Tophet of the most tormenting temper will shortly swallow them up, without true and time∣ly Repentance. From which ye shall not remove your necks] It shall so halter and hamper you, that like fishes taken in an evill net, and as birds caught in a snare, so shall ye be sna∣red in an evill time, when it falleth suddenly upon you Eccles. 9.12. ye shall ne∣ver be able either to avoide it,Sic laqueos fe∣ra dum jactat, astringit Sen. or to abide it. But as the bird in a gin, the fish on the hook, the more it strives, the more it sticks: and as the bullock under the yoke, the more he wriggles, the more he galles: so shall it be here. Your faire necks, that would not beare the easy yoke of Gods obedience, shall be ridden on by the enemy and bound to your two furrowes Hos. 10.10, 11. yea a yoke of iron shall be put upon thee, untill thou be destroyed Deut. 28.48. neither shall ye go haughtily] Heb. Romah; and hence haply Roma had its name, from its height and haughtinesse: according to that of the Poet —atque altae moenia Romae.Virg. 1. Aeneid. The meaning here is, God would deject and darken them, so as that they shall utterly lose their former renown and splendour. He will thrust them down, as it were with a thump on the back, and there hold them. See Ezech. 21.26, 27. the scene shall be changed, and the haughty abased. for this time is evill] Both sinfully and penally evill The Apostle semeth to al∣lude to this text, when he saith, i.e. . Rdeeme the time, because the dayes are evill: and Sufficient to the day is the evill thereof, that is, the misery of it, saith Christ Mat. 6.34. And againe, Those very dayes shall be affliction (so the Greek text hath it) Mark 13.19. as if the time were turned into affliction: because of that evill, that onely evill without mixture of mercy Ezech. 7.5. here foretold,Ideo minatur Deus ut non puniat. and therefore foretold, that it might have been prevented. Verse 4. In that day shall one take up a parable &c.] In that day, that dolefull, and dismal day of their calamity. shall One] Any one that is moved at your misery, and would work you to a sense of your sin the mother of your misery: shall take up a parable] tristem & querulam sad and sorrowfull. and lament with a doleful lamentation] Heb. with a lamentation of lamentations, or with heigh-ho upon heigh-ho, as the word seemes to signify. we be uttterly spoiled] Plundered to the life, laid naked to the very foundation, chap. 1.6. put into such a condition, as that there is neither hope of better, nor place of worse. he hath changed the portion of my people] that is God, or the Assyrian by Gods appointment, hath taken away our countrey, and given it to strangers. The Pope took upon him in Henry the 8. dayes to give England Primo occupaturo to him that could first win it This brutum fulmen came to nothing: But when Gods people changed their glory for that which profited not, Ier. 2 11. he soon chang∣ed their portion; he caused that good land to spew them out, he turned their weale into woe, and brought wrath upon them to the utmost. Neither profited it them any more to have been called Gods people, then it did Dives in flames, that Abra∣ham called him Son; or Judas, that Christ called him Friend. how hath he removed it from me?]Erah. This is Lamentation-like indeed. See Lam. 1.1. and 2.1. and 4.1. all beginning with the same word, How. The speech is con∣cise and abrupt, meet for mourners. There is an elegancy in the original not to be Englished. How uncertaine are all things here! God sits upon the circle of the
earth, and shakes out the inhabitants qt pleasure, as by a canvas.Esa. 40. Persons and things are said to be in heaven, but on earth: on the outside of it only, where they have no firm footing. Dionysius was driven out of his kingdome:Aelian. lib. 2. which yet he thought was tied to him with chaines of adamant, saith the Historian. turning away (from us as a lothsome object, being so incorrigibly flagitious) he hath divided our fields] sc. to the enemy for a reward: like as he gave Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar for his paines at Tyre. Or thus, Instead of restoring (which now we are hopelesse of) he hath divided our fields, our fertile and fat countrey to those that will be sure to hold their own in it; as the Gaules and Gothes did in Italy, after they had once tasted the sweetnesse of it. Vatablus rendreth the text thus: How hath he taken from me those fields of ours which he seemed ready to re∣store? he hath even divided them, sc. to others. Verse 5. Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by lot] Fields were divided with cords of old, and inheritances also, See Psal. 16.5. and 105.11. and 78.55. 2 Sam. 8.2. This hope is henceforth cut off from revolted Israel: the ten tribes never returned, the other two did, and some few of the ten amongst them. Whether upon their conversion to Christ they shall be restored to the promised land, Time (the mother of Truth) will make manifest. In the congregation of the Lord] So you were once, but now nothing lesse. A Congregation ye are still, but of malignants: a rabble of rebels conspiring against heaven. A name ye have to live, but ye are dead: ye cry out Templum Domini, The Temple of the Lord are we: but in truth ye are no better then those Egyptian temples, beautifull without, but within nothing to be seen but a cat, rat, or some such despicable creature. Here they are called the Congregation of the Lord by an irony, as the Cardinall of Ravenna is so called by way of derision. Verse 6. Prophesie ye not, say they, to them that prophesie] Prodigious impuden∣cy, thus to silence the Prophets, or else to prescribe to them, according to the other reading of the text, Prophesie not, as they prophesie, for they are too tart: therefore Drop not ye who thus drop vineger and nitre, who vex our galled consciences, no lesse then the cruel Spaniards do the poor Indians naked bodies, which,Sr. Fr. Drake. for a sport they do day by day drop with burning bacon: But let these drop that can smooth us up, that can utter toothlesse truths, that will drop oyle into our eares,byssina verba. and give us silken words; these be Prophets for our turns &c. God cannot please some hearers, unlesse he speak tinkling and tickling words. Now, these must get their eares healed (as Demosthenes advised his countreymen of Greece) ere they can be in case to hear with profit. They must learn of Bees, to pasl by roses and violets, and sit upon Time; to heed, I meane, sound rebukes rather then smooth supparasitations. There are that note a jeare it the tearm Drop. It is well known that the word Preached is oft compared to raine Deut. 32.2. Esay. 55.10.11. The Prophets therefore are here in derision called Droppers or Distillers,Luk. 16.1. and forbidden to do their office; or at least, to drop in that sort. Thu their suc∣cessors in evill the Pharisees (who were likewise coverous) derided Christ; And thus their predecessours also in Esay's time put a scost upon him, and his preaching, cap. 28.10. where the sound of the words in the Original carries a taunt as scorn∣full people, by the tone of their voice, and riming words, gibe and jeare at those whom they vilify. they shall not prophesie to them] q. d. You shall have your wish; my droppers shall give over dropping, and be no further troublesome, nor take shame any more by prophesying to such a perverse people, so shamelesly so lawlesly wicked. that they shall not take shame] Or, shall they not take shame? q. d. though they will not heare of it, that shame shall be their promotion, and confusion their portion, yea they shall surely feel and find it so. Verse 7. O thou that art named the house of Jacob] That hast a name to live but art dead Rev. 3.1. that art called a Jew, and makest thy boast of God Rom. 2.17. that hast a form of knowledge Rom. 2.20. and a form of godlinesse 2 Tim. 3.5. a semblance of sanctimony Luke 8.18. acting religion, playing devotion, as if it were a neme onely; or as if it were enough to be named the house of Jacob, or to have his voice, though the hands are the hands of Esau, the practise nothing suitable to the profession. Thus many amongst us content themselves with the
bare name of Christians: as if many a ship hath not been called Safe-guard or Goodspeed, which yet hath fallen into the hands of Pirates. The devil will surely sweep, and hell swallow all such Nominalists: such shall find that an empty title yeelds but an empty comfort at the last. What was Dives the better for this, that Abraham called him sonne, or Iudas that Christ called him friend, or the rebellious Iewes that God stileth them his people? Doth he not elsewhere disclaim them, and call them a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity; the people of his wrath and of his curse? May not all Formalists fear Jacobs fear? Gen. 27.12. My father per∣adventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver: and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing. Our heavenly Father will surely feel us in our addresses: and if he find us but complementing, and contenting our selves to be called the house of Jacob, he will confute our vain confidences, and cut us out of the roll; as he did Dan and Ephraim, who were named the house of Jacob, and yet for their wickednesse are passed by in the reckoning up of the twelve tribes, Rev. 7. as if they were souldiers put out of pay, and cashiered. Is the spirit of the Lord straitned] or shortned? Is he a penny-father? hath he but one blessing?Mal. 2.15. Is there not with him the residue of the spirit? plenteous redem∣ption, an exceeding abundant goodnesse even to a superpleonasme?. 1 Tim. 1.14. Where then is the fault that you are no more Jacob-like, plain-hearted and perswasible; that ye refuse to be reformed, hate to be healed, saying to me, Depart, and to my Prophets, Drop not, &c. Neither curse ye nor blesse ye, as he said to Balaam? wherein if they should hearken to you, and be ruled by you, yea, should you straitly threaten them with bonds to speak henceforth to no man in my name, as Act. 4.17. yet my word is not bound,2 Thess. 3.1. 2 Tim. 2.9. but runs and is glorified: my spirit is not straitned, but is free and not fettered. I tell you, that if these (Prophets) should hold their peace,Luk. 19.40. and not drop, the stones would immediatly cry out: which against change of weather do stand with great drops of water to confute your unyeeldingnesse. Turn ye therefore now at my reproof; behold, I will turn out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you, Prov. 1.23. I will do it howsoever; yea, in despite of you I will do it, as some sense the foregoing verse, reading it thus (and the original will bear it) Drop ye not, but they shall drop. Are these his doings?) i.e. Such as God doth approve of, or rather, are these Jacobs doings? tread you in the steps of your father Jacob? did he ever silence the Prophets, and withstand those that were sent unto him? Did he not rather lie low, put his mouth in the dust and crie out, speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth. Good is the word of the Lord which ye have spoken, &c. And whereas ye will be apt e∣nough to replie that Iacob had no other cause: for the Prophets never spake but good and comfortable things to him, it is answered in the next words. Do not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly?] Heb. upright; that pon∣dereth his paths by the weights of my word, and turneth not to the right hand nor to the left, Pro. 4.26, 27. but walketh exactly, accurately, and precisely, Eph. 5.15. keeping within my precincts, &c. Do not my words do good to such, and speak they not peace to him? David felt it as sweet as honey, Ps. 119.103. But as ho∣ney causeth pain to exulcerate parts, though of it self it be sweet and medicinal: so doth the word of God to exulcerate consciences. Children, though they love to lick in honey,. Al. Aphrod. Probl. yet they will not endure to have it come neer their lips, when they have sore mouths: so is it here. Excellently saith Saint Austin, Adversarius est no∣bis, quamdiu sumus & ipsi nobis, &c. The word of God is adversary to none, but such as are their own greatest adversaries, &c. It may well be compared to Moses rod, which whiles he held it in his hand, it flourished and brought forth almonds; but being cast on the ground it turned into a serpent. Did it not take hold of those refractaries, Zech. 1.6. that would not take hold of Gods covenant, and chuse the things that pleased him, Esay. 56.4? Doth it not still sting wicked people with un∣questionable conviction and horrour; when as great peace have they which love Gods law,Psal. 119.165. and nothing shall offend them? Vers. 8. Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy] Heb. yesterday, no longer ago; to all their former flagitious practises they have now newly added this of ex∣ecrable rapine and robbery, which is still fresh, and as it were flagrant in mine eyes. Although the truth is, that God looketh upon former sins as presently committed:
for as there is no beginning of eternity, so neither is there any succession. But let men take heed how they heap up sin, lest they heap up wrath: for although God may bear with people for one or two out-strayes, yet when once it comes to three trans∣gressions and to four, he will not turn away the punishment, Am. 1.2. and one new sin may set many old awork in the conscience; making it like Ezekiels scroul,Ezek. 2.12. wherein was written lamentations, and mourning, and woe. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith the Lord, 2 Kin. 9.26. The word signifieth last night, though it were done some while before. See the word yesterday so used by the Apostle Hebraizing with his Hebrews, Chap. 15.8. Some read the text thus, He that was yesterday my people is risen up on the other side as a∣gainst an enemy, viz. raging against God, and ranging against all men, biting all they come aneer as mad dogs. See Esay. 9.21. 1 Thess. 2.15. they please not God, but rise up in rebellion against him; and are contrary to all men, being rather Is∣maelites then Israelites, Gen. 16.12. and therefore not rightly named the house of Jacob (that plain man, Gen. 25.27. without welt or gard, guile or gall) nor could the word of the Lord do good unto them, so long as their deeds were evil, and they loved darknesse rather then light.Joh. 3.19. Ye pull off the robe with the garment] Robbing and pillaging passengers with greatest inhumanity: not leaving them a rag to cover them, or a crosse to blesse them with, as the proverb is. This was common in Scotland and Africa, saith Da∣ here. It was in England also, till the dayes of king Alfred, who first divi∣ded the land into shires, and then the subjects into tenths or Tithings; every of which severally should give bond for the good a bearing of each other, &c.Heyl. Geog. 474. By this course men were not careful onely of their own actions, but had an eye to all the nine, for which they stood bound; as the nine had over each. Insomuch that a poor girle might travel safely with a bag of gold in her hand, and none durst meddle with her. from men that passe by securely, as men averse from war] There are a sort of such as delight in warre, Psal. 68.30. that make a sport of it, as Abner, 2 Sam. 2.14. that take more pleasure in it then in an Empire, as Iustin saith of Pyrrhus king of . David was none such; and yet he wanted not for courage. His motto was,Nulli major ex imperio, quam illix bello fui voluptar. m for peace, or (as the Hebrew hath it) I am peace. He had seen the woe of warre, and knew well the lawlesnesse of it. The law is no more, saith the Church in  Lmentations, Chap. 2.9. Inter arma silent leges, saith the Heathen, The noise  drowns the voice of lawes. A reverend man hath well observed, that as those three commandments, Thou shalt not kill, Thoss shalt not commit adultery, Thou  are ranked together in the law: so they are commonly violated to∣gether by unruly souldiers, Esay. 13.16. Their children also shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes, their houses shall be spoyled, and their wives ravished. These are the miseries of warre. But what meant these miscreants to shed the blood of warre in peace, 1 Kin. 2.5. to strip the innocent and therefore fearlesse passenger of his raiment as those theeves did him, that went down from Ierusalem to Jeri∣cho,Luk. 10.30. dreading no such danger? neither to rob him onely, but to ravish him too, Ps. 10. that they might sind all precious substance, and fill their houses with spoyl? And what meant the corrupt Rulers to suffer it so to be, and not to brandish the sword of justice against such stigmatical Belialists. Vers. 9. The women of my people] Or, the wives; once wives, but now widdows, and therefore calamatious, friendlesse, comfortlesse; as a vine whose root is unco∣vered, as a wandring bird, or a nest forsaken, Isai. 16.2. have ye cast out from their pleasant houses] where they had long lived with their husbands in love, peace, and much sweetnesse, as good Naboths wife had: This was barbarous cruelty. God had taken order in the law, that none should harm a bird sitting upon her own nest, how much lesse a daughter of Abraham? Widdows and Orphans are his clients, Ps. 146.9. from their children have ye taken away my glory] i. e. My maintenance and that livelihood that I had allowed them for their better education, which might have re∣dounded to my great glory. Whereas now, being by you bereft both of friends and meanes, gomunt, fremunt, vobis maledicunt, clamantque vindictam in coelum, saith Montanus, they groan, they moan, they curse you, they crie to me for ven∣geance. &c.
Vers. 10. Arise ye and depart] Veteres migrate coloni, make up your fardles and prepare for a deportation:Virg. here's no longer being for you, unlesse ye were better. Behold the land is defiled; therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land it self vomiteth out her inhabitants Lev. 18.25. This is not your rest] As you falsly fancy, and vainly vaunt: binding upon the promise, but not performing the condition. It is the guise of gracelesse men to stuffe themselves with promises, till they have made them a pillow for sinne: Et sic pra∣sumendo sperant, & sperando pereunt,Byrn they presume till they perish, as he did who di∣ed with this desperate saying in his mouth, Spes & fortuna Valete, Farewell life and hope together. Because it is polluted] sc. by your sinne, which is of so sullying a nature, that it defileth also the very visible heavens, which are therefore to be purged by the fire of the last day: like as those vessels that held the sin-offering were either to be bro∣ken if earthen, or to passe the fire if of better mettal: they must not think to rest that let sin lie unrepented of in the conscience. But as a man that hath used himself to drink poison, at the 1. & 2. time he may do wel, but the last it overcomes and de∣stroyes himself: so the next sin, though lesse, may set all the former aworking. And as two poisons met in the stomack make a man restlesse; so sin and wrath met in the conscience, raise a great garboile there. Neither must they think to dwell in Gods good land, that will not live by Gods good laws, Esa. 1.19. Ps. 107.39, 40. they walk upon fireworks every moment ready to be blown up:Euseb. de vit. Const. lib 5. brimstone also is scae∣red upon their habitations, that if the fire of Gods wrath do but lightly touch it, they are suddenly consumed. Eusebius telleth us of Dioclesian, that bloody persecu∣tour of the Church, that giving over the Empire, he decreed to lead the rest of his life quietly: but he escaped not so. For after that, his house was wholly consumed with lightning, and a flame of fire that fell from heaven, he hiding himself for fear of the lightning died within a little after. it shall destroy you even with a sore destruction] Dissipatione roboratâ, saith Calvin, Perditione praecisâ, saith Tremellius. The land longs for a vomit to spue you out, and it shall do it effectually. Poyson given in wine works more furiously then in water. Woe be to that people or person whom God will destroy with a violent destruction. This he doth not willingly, or from his heart, Lam. 3.35. but mens sinnes compel him to it. Surely as many a fowl is shot with an arrow feathered from her own bo∣yd: and as of the blackbirds slime is made the lime whereby he is taken: so out of the dung of mens sinnes doth God make his limetwigs (his judgements I mean) to take them withal. Long they might rest, would they but let him rest: but pollu∣tion is the forerunner of perdition. Verse 11. If a man walking in the spirit, &c.] Si vir ventosus, so Junius rendreth it, if a windy and false man lie, saying, &c. Let a man but feed them with vain hopes and frothy fancies, let him but make fair weather before them when the storm of Gods wrath is ready to break out upon them; let him promise them plenty of all things, and prophesie to them of wine and strong drink: as the Popish Priests in Gersons time publikely preached to the people, that if any one would hear a Masse, he should not on that day be struck blind, nor die suddenly, nor want sufficient su∣stenance, &c. These call themselves the Spirituality, or men of the Spirit, (as Hosea hath it) as if all others to them were carnal, and destitute of the spirit. They also (after the manner of those false prophets of old) take to themselves big-swoln titles, and as they increase in their pretended holinesse, so they proceed in their titles from Padre benedicto to Padre Angelo,Specul. Europ. then Archangelo, Cherubino, and lastly Cere∣phino, which is the top of perfection. But what is all this more then a light flask, or a pillar of smoak, which the higher it mounteth, the sooner it vanisheth? And what are all such vain boasters but gloriae animalia, popularis aurae mancipia vilia ac Hierome cals Crates the Philosopher? may it not fitly be said of them as Hos. 9.7. The Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad: and as Ezek. 13.3. Surely these are foolish prophets that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing. O Israel, they Prophets are like the foxes in the desert, &c. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land. The Prophets prophesie falsely, and the Priests beare rule by their means, and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof? Jer. 5.31. All will be naught no doubt. There is not a more dangerous creature then a parasitical Prophet. Ezekiel calleth them the devils dirt-dawbers,
chap. 13.10. his upholsters, for they sowe pillowes, &c. And these are Prophets for this people, fit lettice for such lips, dignum patellâ operculum: a singular plague of God upon the men of this world, who deserve to be deceived: for why? they have desired it, and it best pleaseth their vitiated palats. Most people, ha∣ving first flattered themselves, are well content to be soothed up by others: and I cannot but accord him that saith, If there were Judges ordained for flattery, they would have no doings: there being so very few that will complain, that they are flattered. Verse 12. I will surely assemble, O Iacob, all of thee,] An Evangelicall promise (saith Diodate, after Others) of gathering together the Universall Church under the kingdom of Christ, contrary to the precedent dispersion, vers. 10. Assembling I will assemble, and gathering, gather them, sc. into the bosom of the Church, cal∣led therefore Ecclesia (as culled and collected out of the world) and Church, or Kirk, of : because it belongs to the Lord Christ, who gathereth his toge∣ther, as the hen doth her chickens: and died not for that Nation of Jews onely, but that also he might gather together into one, the children of God that were scattered abroad, Joh. 11.51, 52. Here, He is called the breaker up: and his Apostles like∣wise those that have broken up, and have passed thorough the gate, &c. doing great exploits, and subduing souls to the ohedience of the faith; as here in Britain, where Cesar himself could not break thorow, but Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis, as Pompey in Lucan upbraids him. Hence Tertullian saith,Britannoruni inaccessa Ro∣manis loca Christi patu∣erunt. Christ brake into those places of Britanny that the Romans could never come at. He is that King against whom there is no rising up, Prov. 30.31. He is Jehovah on the head of his people, or in the fore-front of them, as their Captain Generall, to lead them on, and bring them off safely in all encounters. Habent ista amplissimam promissionem, saith Gualther here: this is an excellent promise, and carrieth in it a most sweet consolation.Quasi Ante sig∣nanus & Ductor. Lapid. But I rather think it to be a continuation of the former threatning: I will surely as∣semble them, sc to the slaughter. I will gather them together, sc. that they may be broken in pieces: I will put them (or pen them up) together as the sheep of Bozrah, that are fat, and fit, and appointed for the slaughter. See Esay 34.6.Esay 8.9. Bozrah was a rich pasture countrey in Edom, from whence most fat sheep, and meet for meat were sent to the shambles. As the slock in the middest of their fold,] So will God, first shut you up by strait sieges, and then number you out to the sword: and ye shall all bow down to the slaugh∣ter, Esay 65.12. There is a memorable story of the suffering of certain good peo∣ple in Calabria, Anno 1560. by the hands of the bloody Papists there. A great sort of them being thrust up in one house together, as in a sheep-fold, the executi∣oner comes in: and among them, takes one, and blindfoldeth him with a muffler about his eyes, and so leadeth him forth to a larger place, where he commandeth him to kneel down: which being done, he cutteth his throat, and so leaving him half-dead, and taking his butchers knife, and muffler all of gore-blood,Acts & Mo. fol. 859. cometh again to the rest; and so leading them one after another, he dispatched them all to the number of eighty eight. In Ireland many like barbarous butcheries have been com∣mitted, by those breathing devils the Romish Rebels, those fat-wolves worrying Christs flock in the midst of the land. But shall they thus escape by iniquity?. Acts 20.29. No verily, in thine anger cast down that people, O God, Psal. 56.7. Give them blood again to drink, for they are worthy. A Lapide saith, that Bozrah signifieth Rome: and that Micah here, after a sort foretelleth, that the Church of Rome should bee the common sheep-fold of the sheep of Christ, under one chief shepherd the Pope. But this conceit is far fetcht: and Rome (the slaughter-house of the saints) is no otherwise Bozah, then that she is of Edom (the Rabbins for Dumah, Esay 21.11.Jegnaleg dam. read Roma, and call the Court of Rome, the wicked kingdome of Edom) and that her brats, as the Vultures young ones, do glut-glut blood (so the Hebrew sound∣eth, Job 39.30.) and where the sl ae, there is she. They shall make a great noise.] Heb. a humming noise. By reason of the multi∣titude
of men, or rather wolves, Lycanthropi, wherewith they are invironed, to their no small heart-break. Verse 13. The breaker up is come up before them] The , breach-maker shall handle them hardly and cruelly, as Gally-slaves, or men condem∣ned to the mine-pits. Ʋna salus victis nullam sperare salutem. They have broken up] Made havock, and laid heaps upon heaps. And their king shall passe before them] Not onely fex populi, but Rex ipse, shall bee carried captive, as were Hoshea, and Zedekiah, the city being broken up, Jer. 52.7. And the Lord on the head of them] Jehovah, that man of warre, Exod. 15.3. going before them, as Captain of the enemies forces, to avenge the quarrell of his cove∣nant, Levit. 26.25. CHAP. III. Verse 1. AND I said,] viz. at another time, and in a new discourse: the heads whereof  we have here recorded. A stinging Sermon it is, preached to the Princes, and Prophets, those great Heteroclites in the house of Israel. For as in a fish, so in a Church and State, corruption begins at the head: and as heume falling from the head upon the lights, breeds a consumption of the whole body, so is it here. To the chieftains therefore, and Capitanei, our Prophet appli∣eth himself: And as it is said of Suetonius, that ealibertate, scripsit Imperatorum vitas quà ipsi vixrunt, that hee wrote the Emperours lives with as much liberty, as they lived them: so did Micah as boldly reprove the Princes sinnes, as they committed them. Such another Preacher amongst us was Latimer, and after him Dering; who in his Sermon afore Queen Elizabeth, speaking of the disorders of the times; These things are so, saith He, and you sit still and do nothing. And again, May we not well say with the Prophet, saith He, It's the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, seeing there is so much disobedience, both in subjects and Prince. Once it was Tanquam ovis, as a sheep before the sheerer:Act. & Mon. but now it is Tanquam uvenca petulca, as an un∣tamed heifer, &c. In our dayes, Reverend Mr. Stock had this commendation given him by a faithfull witnesse; that hee could speak his minde fitly, and that he durst speak it freely. I will go to the Bishop (Steven Gardiner, then Lord Chancellour) and tell him to his beard, that he doth naught, said Dr. Taylour Martyr; and hee did so, though his friends disswaded him. Truth must be spoken, however it bee taken. And if Gods Messengers must be mannerly in the forme, yet in the matter of their message, they must be resolute, and plain-dealing. It is probable that Jo∣seph used some kind of preface to Pharaohs Baker, in reading him that hard destiny, Gen. 40.19. such haply as was that of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, chap. 4.19. or as Phile brings him in with a Ʋtinam tale somnium non vidisses, &c. But for the mat∣ter, he gives him a sound, though a sharp interpretation. So dealeth Micah by these corrupt Princes, to whom neverthelesse he giveth their due Titles: and of whom hee fairly begs audience. Hear I pray you, yee heads of Jacob, &c. Or, hear yee now, who formerly have refused to hearken. It was in Hezekiah's dayes, that this Sermon was preached, as appeareth, Jer. 26.18. not long before Sennacherib inva∣ded the land, Mic. 5. And although the King himself were religious, and righte∣ous, yet many of his Princes and Courtiers, who in the reigne of his father Ahaz, had been habituated in rapine, and wrong-dealing, still played their pranks, and are here as barely told their own. Is it not for you to know judgement?] To know it, and do it? as it is said of our Saviour, that he knew no sinne, that is, he did none. And have the workers of ini∣quity no knowledge? they eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon God, Psal. 14.4. Of all men Magistrates should be knowing men, fearing God, hating covetousnesse, and cruelty, Exod. 18.21. They are the eyes of their Countrey,
and if they be dark, how great is that darknesse? They are the common looking-glasses, by which other men use to dresse themselves. Judges they are, to discern, and decide controversies: fit it is therefore and necessary, that they know udge∣ment: how else shall they execute it? Tully complaineth of the Roman Priests in his dayes, that there were many things in their own lawes that themselves un∣derstood not. I will get me to the great men, saith Jeremy, (when hee found things farre amisse among the vulgar) and will speak unto them; for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgement of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds, Jer. 5.5. Verse 2. Who hate the good, and love the evil,] q.d. That you know not judge∣ment, but are men ignorant of the truth, which is according to godlinesse, appear∣eth by your wicked practises. For you stand acrosse to what God requireth,Homo est in∣versus deca∣logus. hating what you should love, and loving where you should hate. Goodnesse is in it self amiable, and attractive: but you are perfect strangers to it, and therefore hate it, and those that professe it. Evil is of the Devil: and must therefore needs be loath∣some: and yet you love it, allow it, and wallow in it:. whereas you should abhorre that which is evil (hate it as hell) and cleave (or bee fast glued) to that which is good, Rom. 12.9. You are direct Antipodes to the godly, Psal. 15.4. and have no∣thing in you of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. or of the spot of Gods children: but are a perverse and crooked generation, Deut. 32.3. Who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones.] Like so many carnivorous Canibals, or truculent wild-beasts. As the Ossiage, or Break∣bone pursueth the prey, tears off the flesh, breaks the bones, and sucks out the mar∣row: such were these griping tyrants: their furious rapacity surmounted all bounds of humanity. Such an one was Verres among the Romans, as Tully describeth him: that Tigre Tiberius, those Romish Usurers in King Johns time here, called Caursini quasi capienes Ʋrsi (quoth Paris) devouring Bears: who left not so much money in the whole Kingdom, as they either carried with them, or sent to Rome be∣fore them. Money and lands are here called mens skin, flesh, and bones: and a poor mans substance is his life. See Mark 12. ult. and Luke 8.43. Hence oppressi∣on is called a bony sinne, Amos 5.12, 13. and Oppressours Men-eaters, Psal. 14.4. and murtherers, Hab. 2.12. Cyprian cries out, Frae parcunt Danieli, Aves pascunt Eliam, homines saeviunt; Lions spare Daniel, ravens feed Elias; but men rage and are worse then both. Melancthon maketh mention of a certain Prince, some few years before his time, who, to get money out of his subjects, would send for them: and by knocking out first one tooth, and then another (threatning to leave them toothlesse else) would extort from them what summes soever he pleased. Our King Johns exactours received from his subjects no lesse summes of curses, then of coin,Joh. Manl. loc. com. pag. 636. Speed. 568. Ibid. 1012. saith the Chronicler: And so did Cardinal Wolsey, under Henry 8. by his im∣portable Subsidies: which caused Suffolk to rise up in arms, making poverty their Captain. Verse 3. Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin, &c.] He stills proceeds in the Allegory, the better to argue, and aggravate their extreme cruelty. Money, saith the Heathen, is a mans flesh, blood, life, all. Of this, when the people were pilled, and polled, by their cruel princes, who are here compared to butchers and cooks, they are looked upon as not onely excoriated, but excaiied, and even exossaed, and laid for dead: for mortis habet vies quae trahitur via ge∣mitibus. It is a lifelesse life that many poor people live for want of necessaries. Such savage Shepherds Ezekiel inveighes against, that not onely sheer their sheep,Ezek. 34. Tiber. ap. Sueton. but held them, and suck their blood. Atqui pastoris est pecus tondere, non deglbere, non carnem & ossa concidere, &c. Chop them in peeces, as for the pot, &c.] Making no more bones of undoing them and their families, then to eat a meals-meat, when hungry: yea nourishing their hearts therewith, as in a day of slaughter, or good cheer. Jam. 5.3. Verse 4. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them] Then sc. when God shall have changed their cheer, pulled the fat morsell from between their teeth, and fed them with the bread of affliction, and water of affliction, with prisoners pittance as they call it, which will neither keep them alive,1 King. 22.27. nor suffer them to die; Then shall they cry, and whine as hogs when hungry, as dogs when
tied up from their meate; but God will not hear them. He will even cast out their prayers with contempt, as beeing the prayers of the flesh for ease, and not of the spirit for grace. They cry unto the Lord aloud, but it is only to be rid of his rod, they roare when upon the wrack, but 'tis only to get off, they look rufully as the fox doth when taken in a gin, but it is only to be set at liberty, they chatter out a charme when Gods chastening is upon them, yea they may be with child (as it were) of a prayer, and yet bring forth nothing but wind Esa. 26.16, 17, 18. For either God answereth them not at all, which was Sauls case & curse 1 Sam. 28.15. & Moabs Isa. 16.12. and Davids enemies Psal. 18.41. Or else he gives them bitter answers Ezek. 14.4. Judg. 10.13, 14. Or if better; it is but for a further mischief, that he may curse their blessings, and consume them after that he hath done them good Iosh. 24.20. Their preservation from one evill is but a reservation to seven worse; as we see in Pha∣oh, Senacherih, Ahab, and others. Lo, this is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressours which they shall receive of the almighty Iob 27, 13, 14, 15. &c. See the place. Remedilesse misery shall befall them, calamities that shall wring from them clamours but to no purpose, or profit See Prov. 1.28. he will even hide his face from them] that is, withdraw his savour, care, provi∣dence, help, presence, and benefits, of all which the face is the symbol: that like as they have turned upon God the back and not the face, and have been mercilesse to men,Esa. 58.7. hiding their eyes from their own flesh: so shall it be done to them in the day of their distresse, God will award them judgement without mercy who shew∣ed no mercy Iam. 2.13. He will set off all hearts from them, as he did from wicked Haman,See Prov. 21.13. with the Note. when the king frowned upon him. Lastly, he will turn their own consciences loose upon them (as once he did upon Iosephs brethren Gen. 42.21.) to ring that dolefull knell in their eares Isa. 3 1. Woe to thee that spoilist, &c. when thou shalt cease to spoile, thou shalt be spoiled, &c. Talionis lege mulctabere, as Adonibezek, Phocas, Charles 9. &c. Verse 5. Thus saith the Lord concerning the Prophets] False prophets, who pretended divine authority, when as God never sent them, but expresly decla∣reth here against them, and threateneth them. Those prophane Princes had their flesh-flies, those court-parasites, to sooth and smooth them up in their sins: to promise thm peace, albeit they walked in the imagination of their own hearts, to add drunkennesse to thirst,Deut. 28.19. Bucholcer: and to live as they listed. Mirifica est sympathia inter Magnates & parasitos, saith One. There is a strange sympathy betwixt Great men and claw-backs: nothing so troublesome to such, as truth; nothing so tooth∣some, as flattery: this is the fruit of  self-love: and the end thereof are the wayes of death Prov. 16.25. that make my people to erre] That  them and carry them out of the right way into by paths, Act. 20.30. and blind thickets  rrour, where they are lost for ever. Deut. 13.13. Seducers are said to draw  violently or to thrust them onward. Jeroboam is said to have driven Israel from following the Lord: and the false Apostles to drag disciples after them Act. 20. compelling them by their perswa∣sions to embrace those distorted doctrines, that cause convulsions of conscience. that bite with their teeth] The dogs of Congo bite through they bark not, saith Mr. Purchas:Pilgr of Reli∣gion. Christs Polititian by Tho. Scot. there are a sort of cu-dogs, saith Another, that suck a mans blood only with licking. Seducers are such: Beware of false Prophets: for they come to you in sheeps clothing; but inwardly they are ravening wolves. And in this sense Hierome and Theodoret take this text: they devoure those they make prize of,. as the Apostles word signifieth Colos. 2.8. Others think their covetousnesse and gormandise is noted. O Monachi, Vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi: Vos estis, Decis est testis, certissima pestis. As hungry dogs they snap at a crust, and make cleane work, such is their voracity and unsatisfiablenesse: Ingluvies, & tempestas, barathrum{que} macelii. And cry, Peace]  All shall be as well as heart can wish, or need
require. Let these Cerberusses but be morselled, and you shall heare no worse of them. Like they are to the ravens of Arabia that full gorged have a tuneable sweet record: but empty, screech horribly. Si ventri benè si lateri as Epicurus saith in Horace, Let their bellyes be filled and their backs fitted, and they will prophecy all good to you: as those false Prophets nourished by Iezebel did to Ahab; as the Pharisees cryed up the Centurion, who had built them a synagogue Luk. 7. as the Popish Clergy canonize their benefactours, and extoll them to the skies. Wvlsin Bishop of Sherborn displaced secular Priests and put in Monks. Hence the Monkish writers make him a very holy man; and report of him, that when he lay a dying he cryed out suddenly, I see the heavens open,Godw. Cataloc. 335. and Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God, and so died. Yea, they had a trick to make their Images speak their minds this way. As the rode of grace here in England had a man with∣in it inclosed, with an hundred wires to make the image goggle with the eyes, nod with the head, hang the lip: move and shake his lawes according as the value was of the gift that was offered. If it were a small peece of silver, he would hang a frowning lip: if a peece of gold, then should his jawes go merrily. This idolatrous forgery was at last, by Cromwels meanes, disclosed:Act. & Mon. fol. 1034. and the image with all his engines shewed openly at Pauls crosse, and there torn in peeces by the people, who had been so seduced. and he that putteth not into their mouthes, they even prepare warr against him] Heb. sanctifie a warr, id est, excomunicatis aquâ & igni interdicunt,Gualth. crucem adversus eos praedicant &c. they thunder against them, and throw them out of the Church: publish their Croysades, as they did against the Waldenses in France, the Hussites in Bohemia, and Luther in Germany: whom the pope excommunicated, the Emperour proscribed, diverse divines wrot against: the reason whereof when Erasmus was asked by the Electour of Saxony, he rightly answered, Because he meddleth with the Popes tripple crown, and with the Friars fat paunches. Verse 9. Therefore night shall be unto you] Ye shall be benighted, your gifts blasted, and your persons baffled: your lamp shall be put out in obscure darknesse: the sword shall be upon your arms, and upon your right eyes: your arms shall be clean dried up,Zech. 11.17. and your right eyes utterly darkened. Those illuminations and inspirations that ye seemed to have, shall be taken from you: and God shall passe that dreadfull sen∣tence, Take the talent from him, even here in this life: let him not have the least dram or drop of a prophetick Spirit, of ministeriall abilities; and then, in the next world, cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darknesse &c. Mat. 25.28.30. and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine] Tenebrae vobis à divinatio∣ne, vel propter divinationem, so Calvin. All the reward ye shall have for your di∣vination shall be disgrace and confusion: your folly shall be manifest unto all men, as was that of Jannes and Jambres 2 Tim. 3.9. And the Sun shall goe down over the Prophets] The same thing is set forth by sundry Metaphors, for more assurance: for Hypocritis nihil stupidius, it is hard to perswade an hypocrite, that evill is toward him: see ver. 11. Verse 7. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded] They shall be hissed and hooted at for Impostour, and falsaries: shame shall be the pro∣motion of these fooles, as it is at this day of the Heathen Philosophers, of the Iewish Rabbins, of the Popish Doctours and Schoole-men: who once caried the bell for most acute and accurate Divines, but now appear to be great triflers, a rotten gene∣ration of dunghil-divines as one stileth them: in detestation of whose vain jang∣ling and doting about questions 1 Tim. 6.4. Luther saith,Luth. tom. 1. oper. lat. ep. 47. Prope est-ut jurem &c. I could swear almost, that there was not a Schoolman that understood one chapter of the Gospel. Latimer professed that by hearing Bilneys confession, he learned more, then afore in many yeares. So from that time forward, saith He,Act. & Mon. 917 I began to smell the word of God, and forsake the School-doctours, and such fooleries. yea they shall all cover their lips] And stand aloof; as lepers. See Lev. 13.45. Ezek. 24.17, 22. Or they shall leave off their lying; for I will stop their mouthes,Ego illis os claudam. Calv. that they shall not hereafter so much as mute any more. The Septuagint render it, All men shall abhorre them, shall open their lips against them. Montanus, involuent mysta cem suam, they shall wrap up their mustachoes, which (saith à Lapide) the false
Prophets wore upon their upper-lip, & incedebant comptuli, and went neatly trim∣med, as do now the Calvinistical Ministers. But if some do so, yet this is better then the Popish priests shaving, which is a ceremony so bald, that some Priests in France are ashamed of the mark: and few of them have it, that can handsomly avoid it. for there is no answer of God] He comes not at them, as sometimes he did to Abimelech, Laban, Balaam; neither speake they according to his word, for why? there is no light in them Es. 8.20. The Philosophers professing themselves to be wise (but wanting the widome from above) became fooles Rom. 1.22. The Pharisees had they known any thing aright and as they ought, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory 1 Cor. 2.8. Oracles they had and miracles enow: but they rejected the counsel of God against themselves being not baptized Luke. 7.30. or if they were, yet remained they a viperous brood Mat. 3. and never attain∣ed to that answer of a good conscience toward God 1 Pet. 3.21. The Schoolmen often cite the Philosophers,Lombard Passim. seldome the Apostles; they count the authority of Fathers as good as that of Scriptures: neither doubt they to call the writings of the Eathers by the name of Scripture. Was not this to set mens threshold by Gods threshold: and their posts by his posts Ezek. 43.8. what marvel therefore though they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, while they taught for doctrines mens traditions? what marvell though Popish fopperies once so admired be now so much slighted, since the world seeth further into them, then formerly? Notable is that passage in K. Henry the eights prote∣station against the Pope; England is no more a babe; there is no man here, but now he knowes that they do foolishly, that part with gold for lead &c. Surely except God take away our right wits, not only the Popes authority shall be driven out for ever,Act. & Mon. 990. but his name also shortly shall be forgotten in England. We will from henceforth ask counsell of him and his, when we list to be deceived, when we covet to be in errour, when we desire to offend God, Truth, and honesty &c. Ver. 8. But truely I am full of power] But doth it become the Prophet thus to praise himself? Laus proprio sordescit in ore: and those who vaunt most, have oft the least courage; as those creatures who have the greatest hearts of flesh, are the most timerous; as the Stag, Panther, Hare &c. For answer, it must be con∣sidered, that the Prophet speaketh not here of his own good parts, out of a vain glorious humour (it was enough for him that he was all glorious within,Psal. 45.13. virtusque suo contenta theatro est) but to separate himself from those false prophets afore∣mentioned, and to assert his calling by his qualifications, as doth likewise St. Paul 2 Cor. 12. to those who sought a proof of Christ speaking in him. The word rendered But truly signifies, All which notwithstanding: q. d. Albeit there is such a generall defection from God, and such unfaithfulnesse in the Prophets of these times, yet I am full of power, lively and lusty, vigorous and vivacious. by the spirit of the Lord] That noble Spirit, as David calleth him, that spirit of power,Psal. 51. 2 Tim. 1.7. of love, and of a sound mind (as Paul, that putteth spirituall mettle into the soule, and steeleth it against all opposition. And truely if the spirit put not vigour into us, how dead and flat are our duties and all ordinances like liquor that hath lost its spirits? there is as much difference many times as betwixt cold water and Aquavitae. and of judgment] to discern of things that differ, to time a word as the Prophet Esay hath it,Esa. 50.4. and to teach things profitable and proper to my auditours (not as He in the Emblem that gave straw to the dog, and a bone to the Asse; or as those false Prophets, who spake good of evill, and evill of good) and wisely to distinguish betwixt law and Gospel in praxi;Gratias agat Deo, & sciatse esse Theolo∣gum Luth. which who so can do, let him thank God, saith Luther, and let him know, that he is a Divine indeed. and of might] Or, of manhood, virtue, prevalency against an adversary, pati∣ence under whatsoever crosse occurrences for the truths sake, and for my pain-dea∣ling. A minister had need be a man,. every inch of him; and to play the man 1 Cor. 16.13. yea, as the good souldier of Jesus Christ, to suffer hardship; being strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. He must be like the diamond in the High-priests brestplate for hardnesse and hardinesse, as of Athanasius Nazazen
testifieth, that he was Magnes & Adamas, both a loadstone for his lovelinesse and humility, and an Adamant for his resolute stoutnesse and magnanimity against those that were evil. to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sinne] to tell them of their wickednesse with the same liberty that they commit it. See here the true picture of a Preacher, both how he must be gifted, and how deeded; A thanklesse office it is with the world to be thus bold and busie; and very many ministers affect to be coun∣ted no medlers: they think it enough to preach toothlesse truths, and not to incurre the displeasure of people, by telling them of their transgressions, and Gods judgements. But this is not the garb and guise of those that are sent and gifted by God. see Ezek. 3. and 33. Vers. 9. Hear this, I pray you, ye heads, &c.] He had had a bout with them be∣fore: but because little good was thereby done, he is at them again; according to that counsel of the wiseman, In the morning sow thy seed,Eccles. 11. in the evening withhold not thy hand; for thou knowest not, &c. Preach the word saith the Apostle, be instant (or stand over the work) in season, out of season, &c. 2 Tim. 4.2.. Chrysostome told his Antiochians, that he would never give over preaching against that sinne of swearing, till they gave over their swearing: which because he could not get them to do, he breaks out into these words. It will be an hard speech unto you, but I will speak it: Though there be so many thousands of you, yet there cannot be found an hun∣dred that shall be saved: and I tell you true, I doubt of them too. Ye heads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of the house of Israel] As bad as they were he gives them their titles. The devil also is to have his due: he is called by the holy Ghost Prince of the ayr, and his Angels are stiled Principalities, powers, Ru∣lers of the darknesse of this world, Eph. 6.12. See the Note on vers. 1. that abhorre judgement] They were not onely ignorant of it, vers. 1. but abhor∣red it; and therefore abhorred it, because they knew it not. Plato could say, that if morall vertue could be beheld with mortal eyes, it would attract all hearts to it self. But these, as natural bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, spake evil of those things that they understood not, 2 Pet. 2.12. and what they knew naturally as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupted themselves, Jude 10. being carried away by their impetuous and imperious lusts, they not onely did that which was evil, but also hated the light of the law that reproved and sentenced them: licensing o∣thers by their practise at least, to do the like. Such Centaures and Cyclopes were these princes of Israel grown; such Heteroclites these heads of the house of Iacob. The whole head was sick, Isai. 1.5. the Rulers were a scab, Chap. 5.7. The Lord looked for judgement, but behold oppression: for righteousnesse, but behold a crie.. Caff. They had made the age not unlike that under Nero, wherein nothing almost was un∣lawful: but villany was acted by authority. and pervert all equity] Heb. they pervert, &c. It is spoken to others, in token of a∣bomination: See the like, Gen. 49.4. with the Note. Now equity or rectitude is perverted, when the guilty are acquitted and the innocent condemned,2 Chron. 19.7. (See Esay. 5.20, 23. when there is accepting of persons, and receiving of gifts. Vers. 10. They build up Zion with blood] Heb. bloods, that is, with goods gotten by rapine and robbery, to the utter undoing of many poor oppressed, whose live∣lihood is their life, Mar. 12. ult. Luk. 8.43. How much better Selymus the great Turk, who being upon his death-bed moved by Pyrrhus the Bassa to bestow the great wealth, taken by him from the Persian Merchants,Turk. hist.  upon some notable hospital for relief of the poor, took order that those evil-gotten goods should be forthwith restored again to the right owners, to the shame of many Christians who will not be drawn to do so. Our Henry the seventh indeed in his last will and Testament, de∣vised and willed restitution should be made of all such moneys at had unjustly been levied by his officers. But how few such princes are to be found?Speed.  It is held a good∣ly thing to build Zion, though it be with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. But God, as he will not have ex rapina holocaustum, so he infinitely abhorreth all those, who, under pretext of religion in building some poor hospital with the fragments of their accursed wealth, seek to make him a party, a partaker of their cruelty, as those did, Esa. 66.3, 4, Mar. 7.11. Mat. 23.14. Our Henry the third, when he had (after his many great exactions) sent the Friar-Minors a load of freese to clothe
them,Dan. hist. 168. had the same sent back again with this message, That he ought not to give almes of what he had rent from the poor, neither would they accept of that abomi∣nable gift. Zion is not to be builded or beautified with bloods, &c. Vers. 11. The heads thereof judge for reward,] Being so many locusts, & latro∣nes cum privilegio, as one saith, Well might Saint Paul say that covetousnesse is the root of all evil, 1 Tim. 6.10. It is here assigned as one cause (and carnal security as another) of that Regiment without righteousnesse, here justly complained of. And it was the worse, because it had over-run all sorts of such as were in place of power, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. The Princes and Judges took gifts, which they should not only not have taken, but have hated, Prov. 15.27. they should have shaken their hands from holding of bribes, Esay. 33.15. sith there is a curse to such Magistrates with an Amen to it, Deut. 27.25. and Psal. 15.5. exclusion out of heaven:Stapleton. Olim didici quid sint munera, said one once, Raine is good (said ano∣ther) and ground is good, sed exeorum conjunctione fit lutum, of the mixture of these two is made dirt: So, Giving is kind, and taking is courteous: yet the mix∣ing of them maketh the smooth paths of Justice foule and uneven. Nec prece nec precio, should be the Magistrates Motto. And Iustice Iustice (as Moses phraseth it, Deut. 16.20.) that is, cleer sheer justice without mud should run down as wa∣ters, and righteousnesse as a mighty torrent, Am. 5.24. and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money] They were meerly mercenary: and as Apollo's Oracles, corrupted by Philips gold, were said , to speak as he would have them, so was it here. Both Priests and Prophets were ignava ventris mancipia, (see vers. 5. with the Note) greedy dogs,In Mat. 10.16 slow-bellies, they all looked to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter, Esay. 56.11. Albertus Magnus complained of the covetousnesse of Pastours in his time: Bernard for this cause calleth them Impostours, and By-seers, Hugo Cardinalis said that the devil had two daughters, Avarice and Luxury: the former whereof he had married to the Iewes, the latter to the Gentiles: but now, saith he, the Priests have taken away both of them from their right husbands, and make use of them for their own. Si posui aurum in conjugium meum, So the Septua∣gint read that text, Job. 31.24. signifying the covetous mans great love to money: whence Saint Iames calleth such,2 Pet. 2. adulterers, and adulteresses, Chap. 4.4. Saint Paul saith they minde onely earthly things (sc. their purses and paunches) Phil. 3.19. and and uncessantly wooe this Mundus immundus, this vile strumpet the world: having eyes full of the adulteresse, and that cannot cease to sinne. But their money shall pe∣rish with them that teach for hire, that follow the ministery onely as a trade to pick a living out of, qui plus fisco quam Christo vacant, plus attonsioni quam attentioni gregis, & ubi non vident quaestum, rident Christum, &c. All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christs, Psal. 2.21. yet will they lean upon the Lord] Or, lay their weight upon him, as upon a staffe or crutch, velut firmissimo scipione. Thus their forefathers (Psal. 78.32, 35.) though they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works, yet they would needs be∣lieve that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer. So their successours, Jer. 3.3, 4, 5. when they had spoken and done evil as they could, yet, having a whores forehead, they could give goodly words, Wilt thou not from this time crie unto me, My father, thou art the guide of my youth? Will he reserve his anger for e∣ver? Will he keep it to the end? Here were good words (for they are good cheap, as we say) but nothing more. The Lord was much in their mouthes, but farre from their reins, Jer. 12.2. Selfe-deceivers think they lean upon the Lord, when it is no such matter: Their faith is a mock-faith, a strong phansie, a blind presumption, which will prove but a broken reed, and was never true to those that trusted it. Surely as he that maketh a bridge of his own shadow cannot but fall into the brook; so neither can he escape the burning lake, that had rather be carnally secured, then soundly comforted. Good gold is a cordial; so is not Alchymy gold: neither will it passe the seventh fire, as the other will. Security is the forerunner of calamity: nei∣ther miscarry any so sure or so soon, as the over-confident. and say, Is not the Lord amongst us] And hath he not promised so to be for ever? True, but upon condition that you be with him, and no otherwise, 2 Chron. 15.2. He is not so tied to you, but that he can go away from you. See his many removes,
Ezek. 9, 10, and 11 Chapters; and observe, that still as he goes out, some judge∣ment comes in. They call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel, the Lord of hosts is his name, Jer. 48.2. but all this was but court-holy-water, as they call it, empty words; such as our profligate professours are full of. But wilt thou know, O vain man, (or, O empty man) that words without works are bootlesse? Jam. 2.20. that externall priviledges alone profit not,. Jer. 7.4. Act. 6.14. that formal profession and performances are disaccepted, and those that please themselves therewith are but as women travelling with a false birth, Isai. 26.18. Men are wont to do with these, as those Conjurers did with the name of Jesus; they thought if they used that name, it was enough. They heare therefore,Act. 19.5. Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? So shall it fare with such as glory in this, that they were born in the bosome of the Church, live under the means of grace, &c. Gehezi took the Prophets staffe: but there was something more, else the childe had not been raised. Those tell but an ill tale for themselves, that have no more to say but this, Is not the Lord amongst us? Men are the worse for his presence with them, if they walk not worthy of the Lord in all wel-pleasing,Col. 1.10. if they have not grace to serve him with reverence and godly fear: for even our God is a consu∣ming fire, Heb. 12.28, 29. None evil can come upon us] Let Prophets say what they please, we shall have peace, Deut. 29.19. all shall be well with us, whiles God is with us, and for us.Job. 8.20. Exod. 34. Psal. 5. But God will not take the wicked by the hand, saith Job, neither will he at all acquit the guilty, saith Moses. The foolish shal not stand in his sight, saith David: for he hateth al the workers of iniquity, Psal. 5.5. Beware of him and obey his voice; pro∣voke him not: for he will not pardon your transgressions, Exod. 23.21. or if he do, yet 'tis two to one, that he will take vengeance of your inventions, Psal. 99.8. Shake off therefore carnal security: fear the Lord, and depart from evil. Vers. 12. Therefore shal Zion for your sake be plowed as a field] even for your sakes, O wicked Princes, Priests and Prophets; you are the traytours that have be∣trayed us all into the hands of divine justice: to be angry with us for saying so, and telling you what to trust to, is as if some fond people should be angry with the herald, or the trumpet, as the cause of their warres. Zion shal be lowed as a field] Shall be utterly laid waste and sevelled. Conque∣rours used to plow up those places that they would not have re-edified; and to sow them with salt, Judg. 9.45. It must needs be a dismal destruction, that is described in such exquisite tearms. Alterius perditio tua sit cautio. This threatning of the Prophet took so well, that the judgement was respited for above an hundred years, Jer. 26.19. But now mens hearts are more hardned, and therefore their destruction more hastened. and Jerusalem shal become heaps] Rupes ruderum, This they once thought as pos∣sible, as to overthrow Gods own throne: the very disciples had a conceit that the World could not outlast the Temple, as may be gathered from Mat. 24.3. But they (some of them) lived to see themselves confuted, and our Saviours words ve∣rified, There shal not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down, Vers. 2. and the mountain of the house] that famous house that was worthily reckoned one of the seven wonders of the world, and stood upon mount Moriah. As the high places of the forrest] As wooddy and desert places, fit onely for wild beasts, Lege & Luge, saith one, speaking of Jerusalems desolation. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. BƲt in the last dayes it shall come to passe] God reserveth his best com∣forts till the last, as that Ruler of the feast did his best wine, Ioh. 2.10. and as the sweetest of the honey lieth at the bottome. These last dayes are Gospel-dayes, Heb. 1.2. times of Reformation, Heb. 9.19. of Restitution, Act. 3.21. called the World to come, Heb. 2.5. that new heaven and earth wherein dwelleth Righteousnesse, 2 Pet. 3.13. that new Jerusalem that is all of gold, Rev. 2.1. E∣zekiels new Temple, bigger then all the old Jerusalem; and his new Ierusalem
bigger then all the land of Canaan, chap. 40.41.42, &c. Let Popish buzzars blas∣pheme that description of the Temple and City:Sanct. Argum. cap. 40. calling it, (as Sanctius doth, once and again) insulsam descriptionem, a senselesse description: so speaking evil of the things that they know not, Jude 10. We beleeve and are sure, Joh. 6.69. that God hath provided some better thing for us, then for those under the law, Heb. 11.40. viz. that great mystery of godlinesse, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16. who should again restore the kingdom to Israel, the spiritual kingdom to the Israel of God: as is here foretold in the self-same words with those of Esay chap. 2.1, 2. whence he is not ashamed to take it. That the mountain of the house of the Lord] The Church, 1 Tim. 3.15. called elsewhere, the mountain of the Lord, and his holy hill, Psal. 15.1. and 24.3. and 48.2. Esay 30.17. both for its sublimity, Gal. 4.26. and firmnesse, Psal. 46.3. and 125.1. winde and stormes move it not: no more can all the power and policy of hell combin'd prevail against the Church, Mat. 16.18. She is , a kingdom that cannot be shaken: and may, better then the city of Venice, take for her Posie, Immota manet. Shall be established in the top of the mountains] Constituetur firmiter, shall bee strongly set upon a sure bottom, upon munitions of Rocks: yea upon the Rock of Ages, Mat. 16.18. Jer 31.35. Esay 33.20. Some, by the house of the Lord, here understand the Church: and by the mountain of this house, Christ, whereon it is built, and whom Daniel describeth by that great mountain that filled the whole earth, Chap. 2.35. that stone cut out without hands, that smot in pieces the four Monarchies, ibid. And hence it is, that this mountain of the Lords house is exal∣ted above the hils: the Church must needs be above all earthly eminencies whatso∣ever, because founded upon Christ: who therefore cannot be exalted, but shee must be lifted up aloft together with him. God who is rich in mercy, saith, that great Apostle, hath quickened us together with Christ, and hath raised us up toge∣ther, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephes. 2.5, 6. The Church is mysticall Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. she is his wife, and wheresoever hee is Caius, she is Caia: she shineth with his beams, and partaketh of his honours; union being the ground of communion. and people shall flow unto it.] As waters roul and run toward the Sea: but that these waters should flow upward, flow to the mountain, as here, is as wonderfull; as that the Sun should send his beams downward to the earth, when as it is the pro∣perty of all fire to aspire and flie upwards. This is the Lords own work, and it is marvellous in our eyes.Chrysost. Hom 8. ad Hop. Antioch. The metaphor of flowing, importeth the coming of peo∣ple to Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel. 1. Freely, Psal. 110.3. 2. Swiftly, as the waters of the river Tigris, swift as an arrow out of a bowe. See Esay 60.8. 3. Plentifully, by whole Nations turned to the faith, and giving up their names to Christ. 4. Joyntly, as verse 2. and Zach. 8.21. 5. Zealously, bearing down all obstacles that would damme up their way. 6. Constantly, and continually, as rivers run perpetually, by reason of the perennity of their fountains; and are ne∣ver dried up, though sometimes fuller then some: quin ut fluvij repentinis imbri∣bus augentur, saith Gualther, as rivers swell oft with sudden showres, and over∣flow the banks, so beyond all expectation, many times, doth God take away tyrants, and propagates his truth, enlarging the bounds of his Church, with new confluxes of Converts. Verse 2. And many nations shall come and say] The conversion of the Gen∣tiles is here foretold, a piece of that mystery of godlinesse, 1 Tim. 3.16. The Jews usually call Christians in contempt Gozin, (the word here used) and Mamzer Goi Bastard-Gentiles. But, either they must come under this name themselves, or deny that they are the posterity of Abraham, Gen. 12.2. Where God saith, I will make of thee a great Nation. Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord] The wicked have their Come, Prov. 1.11. and would not go to hell alone. Should not the Saints have theirs? should they not get what company they can toward heaven? The Greeks call goodnesse, , from ; and , from , because it doth as it were, invite and call others to it; and every man is willingly to run after it. and to the house of the God of Jacob] to the publike ordinances, where wee may
hear, and beleeve, and be sealed with that holy spirit of promise, as those Ephesians were, chap. 1.13. We read that Marcellinus, Secundanus, and some others, were converted to Christianity by reading Sibylla's oracles of Christs birth: and that by Chaucers Book, some were brought to the knowledge of the truth. But either this was not so, or not ordinary: for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word prea∣ched, which therefore the people of God do so prize, as Luther did, who said,Acts & Mon. 767. He would not take all the world for one leaf of the Bible: and that without the prea∣ching of the word, he could not live comfortably in Paradise: as with it, hee could live and enjoy himself, though it were in hell. and he will teach us of his wayes] Cathedram in coelis habet qui corda docet, saith Austin. All true Converts are taught of God, Joh. 6. and then quàm citò disci∣tur quod docetur? saith the same Father; how soon are men discipled? how soon learn they the wayes of God, whereby to serve him here, and be saved by him here∣after. For it is false that some contend for: sc. that every man may be saved in his own faith, be it right or wrong: For none can come to the Father but by the Son, Joh. 14.6. Neither is there any other name but His under heaven whereby men must bee saved, Acts 4.12. See Joh. 17.3. and 6.40. Heb. 11.6. whatso∣ever the Huberians affirme of Universall Election; or the Puccians of a natu∣rall faith. and we will walk in his paths] which are all paved with mercy and love: so that the saints run therein and faint not; walk, and are not weary, Esay 40.31. They are all Peripateticks, ever in action, Gen. 17.1. they are Currists, not Quaerists,Ambros. saith Luther elegantly; they do not reason, but run the pathes of Gods precepts. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus Sancti gratia. For the law shall go forth of Zion] The law, or doctrine, as Prov. 13.14. Understand here the Gospel, that Law of God, Psal. 19.7. that Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. that perfect law of liberty, Jam. 1.25. a counter-pane whereof God putteth into the hearts of his people, Jer. 31. whereby they become (as it was once said of the Thracians) , a law to themselves;Herod. as being transformed into the same image with the Gospel, like as the pearl, by the often-beating of the Sun-beams upon it, becommeth radiant as the Sun. and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.] Not from Africa at first (as the brethren of the rosy-crosse would have it) though 'tis thought the Gospel was re∣ceived, and the Christian faith professed even from the Apostles time, in that large region of Nubia in Africk. But repentance and remission of sinnes was preached among all nations beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.41. The Jews were Gods Library-keepers, and the Apostles sent and went from Jerusalem to plant Churches abroad the world, and to gather into one, the children of God that were disper∣sed, Ioh. 11.52. Verse 3. And he shall judge among many people,] We had before, Christs Pro∣pheticall Office: here we have his Princely, and elsewhere his Priestly,This seems to have been the effect of that old prophecy among the Easterlings, that Judaea profecti rerum potirentur, some that came out of Jury should conquer all. Vide Sueto. in Vespas. & Tacit. lib. 21. (wherein both the former are founded) for he is the true Trismegist, and Melchisedech was a right type of him. He is the onely judge, and needs no Vicar upon earth, such as the Pope claims to bee, Esay 33.22, no such Officers to see his lawes executed, as the Ephori were among the Greeks, and the Censores among the Romans. The Lord that sent the rod of his strength out of Zion, as verse 2. doth also give him to rule in the middest of his enemies, whiles his people are willing in the day of his power, in the beauties of holinesse, Psal. 110.3. willing that Christ should send forth judgement to victory, Mat. 12.20. that is, perfect his own work of grace be∣gun in their hearts. To which end, as it here followeth, He shall rebuke (or convince) strong nations] Convince them, I say, (by his Spirit) of sinne, of righteousnesse, and of judgement, oh. 16.8. Of the lothesom∣nesse of sin, of the necessity of getting righteousnesse by Christ, and repentance from dead works; that men may serve the living God, and as much as in them is,Acts 17.30. live peaceably with all. And they shall beat their swords into plowshares] i. e. their fierce and fell natures shall be mansuefied, as Esay 11.6, 7, 8, 9. and if they wage warre, it shall be non nisi coacti, either for the just punishment of Delinquents, whom they cannot other∣wise come at: or for their own necessary defence, and that they may establish peace
with truth. But if men would live by the lawes of the Gospel, they need not wage warre, or want peace, either of countrey or of conscience: but they might take for their Motto, that of David, Ani shallom, I am peace: and have for their portion that peace, peace, Esay 26.3. even a perfect, sheer, pure-peace, a mul∣tiplied peace with God, with themselves, and with others: this is a main piece of Christs kingdom upon earth,Florus. who is the Prince of peace, and came in a time of peace: viz. in the raigne of Augustus, when as there was Totius orbis aut pax aut pactio, saith Florus, a generall peace, or truce thorowout the whole world. neither shall they learn warre any more] To make a trade or a gain of it, and so to earn a curse Deut. 27.25. to delight in it, Psal. 68.30. and make a sport of it (as Abner did, 2 Sam. 2.14. and Pyrrhus king of Epirots) to wage it without weighty reason rashly. If we Princes (said our Hen. 7.) should take every occasion that's offer∣ed, the world should never be quiet, but wearied by continuall warres. We may also here take warring (as St. Iames doth, chap. 4.1.) for jarring, and jangling, for private discords, and dissentions. Now these the people or God are so farre from learning, that they utterly lay them aside, and are kinde one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christs sake forgave them, Ephes. 4.32. Verse 4. But they shall sit every man under his vine] seeding upon the fruit that shall even fall into his mouth, saith à Lapide. Sit they shall under Christ, the true Vine, saith Hugo, and under the holy Ghost, as a fig-tree, whose fruit is farre sweeter then any honey. But these are coynt interpretations saith Gualther. I should rather expound this Text by that 91. Psalm; wherein the safe and happy condition of the godly is at large described. Vineyards and fig-yards were ordina∣ry in those countreys: and hence this proverbiall expression, to set forth doubt∣lesse, the spirituall security, and that peace of conscience chiefly, that is granted to Christs subjects: a peace, farre beyond that under Solomon, which is here pointed at: or that under our Queen Elizabeth, not to be passed over without one touch at least upon that string, which so many years together sounded so sweetly in the ears of our Fathers. Then it was, if ever, that the mountains brought forth peace, and the little hills righteousnesse, Psal. 72.5. The great ones defended their inferi∣ours,Westmer. in Psal. 72. and the inferiours blessed their superiours; the Magistrate righted the subject, and the subject reverenced the Magistrate. and none shall make them afraid] God, they know, will not hurt them, man can∣not: he may take away their heads, but not their crowns; their lives, but not their hopes: for the righteous hath hope in his death: his Posie is not onely, Dumspiro spero, but Dum expiro. Let the wicked have a trembling heart, and failing eyes while he lives, Deut. 28.65. and when he dies crie out, as a great man was heard to do, Spes & fortuna valete, Farewell life and hope together. The servant of Christ, as he sits mediis tranquillus in undis all his life long: so when he dies, he can call his soul to rest: and sing old Simeons Nunc dimittas, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace, &c. for the mouth of the Lord of hosts,] And what better assurance can we desire, sith God can neither die, lie, nor denie himself: Sith, secondly, he is the Lord of Hosts, and so armed with power to make good what he hath spoken. Peter had a will to deliver Christ from the Jews, but wanted power. Pilate had power to have done it, but wanted will. God wanteth neither of these to do for his people, and to deliver them out of danger. Courage therefore. Verse 5. For all people will walk every one in the name of his god,] They will do so, they are resolved not to alter their religion: as Tully said, Me ex ea opinione quam à majoribus accepi de cultu deorum, nullius unquam movebit oratio: I will never be disswaded by any one from that way of divine worship, which I have re∣ceived from my forefathers. How wilfull at this day are Jews, Papists, Pagans, He∣retikes? And how much easier a matter do we finde it, to deal with twenty mens reasons, then with one mans will? A wilfull man stands as a stake in the middest of a stream, lets all passe by him, but hee stands where he was. Nay but wee will have a king say they, when they had nothing else to say. Nay, but I will curse howsoever, though against my conscience, said Balaam: and do not the Popish Balaamites as much as this, many of them? As for the Vulgar sort of them,
they are headlong and headstrong, resolved to retaine contra gentes the senselesse superstitions transmitted unto them by their Progenitours. But what saith the Oracle Rev. 14.7. Feare God, and give glory to him; for the houre of his judge∣ment is come: and (what ever your ancestours did) worship you him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of waters. and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God] This was well resolved, and is as well practised by all Christs faithfull people, who dare not follow a multitude to do evill Exod. 23.2. dare not walk by their fathers practise Iosh. 24.2, 14, 15. for they consider that no commandement doth so expresly threaten Gods judgements upon posterity as the second. They therefore resolve to walk in the name, that is, by the lawes and under the view of the Lord their God, who is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, as Moses describeth him, in opposition to all other deities, whether so reputed or deputed Deut. 10.17. for ever and ever] We will not only take a turn or two in his wayes, as tempo∣raries; who are hot at hand but soon tire, and give in: but we will hold on a constant course of holinesse, and not faile to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth Psal. 1.2. Ioh. 8.12. and 10.4.14. Rev. 7.17. As for those Apo∣states that change their God, that change their glory for that which doth not pro∣fit, as they therein commit an horrible wickednesse, such as the heavens have cause to be astonished at Ier. 2.11, 12, 13. so they could not chuse out for themselves a worse condition Heb. 10.37, 38. for why? they put the son of God to an open shame chap. 6.6. like (as those that are carted amongst us are held out as a scorn) and do in effect say, that they have not found him such as they took him for. Verse 6. In that day] sc. of grace and of the Gospel: It is called a day and that day, by an excellency in regard of Revelation, Adornation, Consolation, Di∣stinction, speedy Preterition. saith the Lord] Whose word cannot be broken Ioh. 10.35. and is therefore the best security 2 Cor. 1.20. will I assemble her that halteth] Heb. that goeth sideling, that is maimed, dis∣ioynted, lamed, Esa. 35.3. torn Psal. 35.15. and tired out with long journeys into captivity, as the Jewes were by the Babylonians, Greeks and Romanes before Christs comming: that they might breath after those dayes of refreshing from the presence of the Lord Mal. 3.1. and I will gather her that is driven out] Or, rejected, thrust away with a force, that is, the Gentles, suffered to walk in their own wayes Act. 14.16. and carried away unto dumb idols, even as they were led 1 Cor. 12.2. and her that I have afflicted] Both Jewes and Gentiles, the whole community of people: for God shooke all nations then, when the desire of all nations (Christ Heb. 12.25.) was to come Hag. 2.7. See verses 22, 23. Junius, after the Sep∣tuagint, rendrth it ut veniant desiderati omnium gentium, that the Saints, those desirable ones, out of all nations may come: for unto Shiloh in a most afflicted time (when the scepter was departed from Judah &c.) was the gathering of all people to be Gen. 49.10. Esa. 26.8, 9. See Esay. 66.20. rather in litters as lame people are carried) should they come, then not at all: rather on one leg with Jacob, should they wrestle, then not prevaile. Verse 7. And I will make her that halted a remnant] Yea a renowned remnant Zeph. 3.19. Not many Jewes were converted in comparison of the Gentiles: hence they are called a remnant. They both killed the Lord Iesus, and their own Prophets: they have also persecuted us, saith the Apostle or cast us out, as by an Ostracisme, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men,1 Thess. 2.15, 16. forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles &c. Thus the generality of them then: and so to this day they conti∣nue crosse, and cursing Christ and his followers, thrice a day in their synagogues:Hieron in Esai. l. 12. c. 49. & l 14. c. 42. Buxtorf. Synag. Howbeit at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace Rom. 11.5. and that remnant became the seminary of the Christian Church. and her that was cast far off, a strong nation] Numerous and valorous. Vide fi∣dem & passionem martyrum & de gente robusta non ambiges, saith Hierome here.
Consider the faith and patience of the Martyrs, and you will easily yeeld them to be a strong nation indeed: Christians have shewed as glorious power in the faith of Martyrdome, as in the faith of miracles. They can do that which others can∣not turn their hands to: they can suffer wrongs, best of any: Compell them to go a mile, they'le be content to go two: yea as far as the shooes of the preparati∣on of the Gospel of peace will carry them. There is nothing that they date not undertake and undergo for the glory of their God. Thi courage in Christians, Heathens counted obstinacy;Tertull. in Apologet. but they knew not the power of the spirit, nor the privy armour of proof that the Saints have about their heart, which maketh them insuperable, more then Conquerours. and the Lord shall raigne over them in mount Zion] i. e. In the Christian Church, out of which went the law, that is, the Gospl ver. 2. See Esa. 40.9. and 52.7. Heb. 12, 22. There shall Christ raigne, and so he did ever: but now he shall declare himself to be Messiah the Prine Dan. 9.25 Lord and hst Act. 2.36. Saviour and Soveraigne. As king he 1. of rebels makes them sjects, willing to be ruled by him. 2. He preserves them in that priviledge by his spirit. 3. He gives them lawes far better then those of the twelve tables  Rome, which yet far exceeded (saith Cicero) all the learned libraries of the Philosphrs in worth and weight. 4. He sweetly inclineth their wil to yed universal obedience thereun∣to, and to crosse themselves so they may please  5 He rewards them with comfort and peace here, and with life eternall hereafter. 6. He destroyes all the enemies of his Church, and then at last delivers up the kingdome to his Father 1 Cor. 15.24. not his essentiall kingdome as God, but his oecomical kingdome, as Mediatour. Verse 8. And thou O tower of the flock] that is, O Church of Christ, who is oft compared to a shepherdesse in the Canticles: here to a Migdal-der or tower of the flock (that flock of Christ which hath golden fleeces, precious souse:) in reference either to that tower, Gen. 35.21. built for the safety and sevice of shepherds: or else to the sheep-gate in Ierusalem (whereof read Nh. 3.1. and 12.39.) so called from the sheep-market, which for the conveniency of the Temple was neare to it; as was also the sheep-pool called Bethesda Ioh 5.2. where the sacrifices were washed. The world is a field, the Church a fold, in that field; and a strong fold (strong as a tower) yea a strong-hold Ophel as it is stiled in the next words; and that of the daughter of Zion, that is of the Christian Church, the inviolable security whereof is here noted. unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion] such as was in David dayes and Solomons: lage, rich, peaceable, prosperous, terrible to other nations &c. This was carnally understood by the Jewes, who therefore drame to thi day of an earthly kingdome, and have in their ynagogues a crown ready to set upon the head of their Messiah whensoever he shall come: neither were Christs disciples without a tincture of this Pharisaicall leaven: whence their often-enquiries when the kingdome of God shall come? and their frivolus contests among themselves, who should be the greatest in Christs kingdome? who should sit at his right hand and at his left &c. as if there should have been in Christs kingdome (as in Solo∣mons) a distribution here of honours and offices. And this groundlesse conceit hung as bullets of lead at their eye-lids; that they could not look up to see that Christs kingdome was spirituall and not of this present world. the kingdome shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem] This the Jewes (mistaking it as before) pray earnestly that it may come citò,Baxtor. Syn: Jud. citiùs, citissimè, bimherah, bejamens, with speed, and even in our dayes; oft throwing open their windowes to behold their King, and to receive their long-looked-for preferment, in his earthly mo∣narchy. Ver. 9. Now why doest thou cry out aloud?] Hout and houle? q.d. hast thou any such cause to be so unreasonably and out ragiously impatient so long as Christ is thy king and counsellour? What if there now be no king in the? What if thy coun∣sellour be perished? A wo-case I confesse, and great confusion most needes be the issue of it; as it fell out in Ierusalem after Iosiah was slaine: Confer Hos. 3.4. with the Note there. But yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing; nei∣ther need the Saints be so excessively dejected with outward crosses, so long as
Christ is with them, and for them. If Seneca could say to his friend Polybius, Fas tibi non est salvo Caesare, de fortuna tua queri, Be thy case never so miserable,Sen. ad olyb. Consol. thou hast no cause to complaine, so long as Caesar is in safety: How much lesse ground of mourning or murmuring have Christs subjects, so long as He liveth and raigneth? Gaudeo quod Christus Dominus est,Calvin. Epist. alioqui totus desperassem writeth Miconius to Calvin, of the Churches enemies: I am glad that Christ is Lord of all: for otherwise I should have had no hope of help at all. David in deep distress comforteth himself in the Lord his God 1 Sam. 30.6. and Psal. 119.94. I am thine, save me, saith He: q. d. my professed subjection to thee calleth for thy care and protection of me: and here he stayes himself. Kings and Councellours are great stayes to a state: but Christ is not tied to them. These are but particu∣lar good things, as is health against sicknesse, wealth against poverty &c. but Christ is an Ʋniversall good, all sufficient and satisfactory; every way proporti∣onable and fitting to our soules, and severall necessities. Why then do we cry aloud as utterly undone? why sing we not rather with David when at greatest under, The Lord liveth, and blessed be the God of my salvation.Psal. 18.46. It is God that aven∣geth me, and delivereth me from the violent man &c, He is King of all the earth. He is wonderfull in counsel, and excellent in working &c. It was a learned mans Motto, Blessed be God, that he is God; and blessed be Christ that he reignes for ever; that Counsel is his, and sound wisdome: that he hath understanding, he hath strength Prov. 8.14. for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travel] They have, but they needed not, hadst thou but turned into thy counting-house, and considered thy manifold privi∣ledges in Christ, thy King and Counsellour. We oft punish our selves by our passions, as the lion that beates himself with his own taile. Sed ô benè (saith an Interpreter here) quod sint hidolores saltem similes parturientium, It is yet an hap∣pinesse, that the Churches pangs, though bitter,Tarnou. yet are no worse then as those of a woman in travell. For 1. The paines of travell seldome bring death; but life both to mother and child: so do afflictions to the Saints 2 Cor. 4.17. Heb. 12.9. 2. Travell comes not by chance, nor for long continuance: neither doth affliction Ioh. 7.30. Luk. 22.53. 3. Travell is unavoidable, and must be pati∣ently born: so must affliction; or else we lose the fruit of it: Act. 14.22. 2 Tim. 3.12. 4. Sharp though it be, yet it is short: so mourning lasteth but till morning Psal. 30.6. and 73.24. and 135.14. Ioh. 16.15. Ier. 10.23. 5. As the travelling woman hath the help of other women: so hath the afflicted, of God, Angels and men. 6. Lastly, as she remembreth the sorrow no more for joy of a manchild born into the world: so is it here Ioh. 16.20. Rom. 8.17, 18. Verse 10. Be in pain and labour to bring forth &c.] Be sensible of thine ensuing captivity, and take on: but yet with hope of a gracious deliverance in due time. See the Note on ver. 9. It is no lesse a fault to despise the chastening of the Lord, then to faint when thou art rebuked Heb. 12.5. The hypocrite in heart heapeth up wrath saith Elihu, and why? he crieth not when God bindeth him Iob. 3.11. The wicked saith Hannah, are silent in darknesse, and shall therefore lie down in sorrow. This is not patience but pertinacy,1 Sam. 2.9. Esay. 50.10. the strength of stones and flesh of brasse Iob 6.12. It is not vasour but apathie, stupidity and indolency, much com∣plained of in scripture, and threatened with a succession of sorrowes Lev. 26.18, 28. seven more, and seven more, and seven to that. Three times in that chapter God raiseth his note of threatening, and he raiseth it by sevens, and those are dis∣cords in musick. Such sayings will be heavy songs; and their execution heavy pangs: worse then those of a woman in travel. for now shalt thou go forth out of the city] This Now fell not out of an hundred yeares after. Foule weather seldome rotteth in the ayre. Time weareth not out Gods threatenings. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, nedum Deo, Time can be no prejudice to the Ancient of dayes: sooner or later his word shall be accomplished. When the sins of the Amorites are full, they shall be sure of their payment. The bottle of wickednesse, when once filled with those bitter waters, will sink to the bottom. and thou shalt dwell in the field] Sub dio, having no canopie over thee, but the azured skie: so little account is made of poore captives: If they may have the
open ayre to breath in, though they lie without dores, 'its better then a stinking dungeon, or to be shut up close under hatches among the excrements of nature, as Barbarussa Christian prisoners taken in Greece were:Turk hist. 750. so that all the way as he went home with them to Constantinople, every houre almost some of them were cast dead over-board. and thou shalt go even to Babylon] there to dwell among plants and hedges, ma∣king flower-pots for a forreine prince. There they dwelt with the King for his work: 1 Chron. 4.23. there shalt thou be delivered, there the Lord shall redeem thee] This There, is as Emphaticall as that Yet so oft repeated Zech. 1.17. See the Note there. It seemed improbable to many, and to some impossible, that ever they should return out of Babylon. But God effected it to the great astonishment of his poore people, who were like them that dream Psal. 126.1. and could scarce beleeve their own eyes. God loves to deliver those that are forsaken of their hopes. Ad nos ergo transferamus promissionemistam, saith Gualther upon the text. Let us apply this promise to our selves: and as oft as we are pincht with poverty, or tormented with diseases, or cast out into banishment, or are in any great danger by water or land, or under terrours of conscience, let us think we heare God thus speaking to us, There shalt thou be delivered: there I will redeem thee &c. Verse 11. Now also many nations are gathered &c.] that is, they shall be once gathered, when the Babylonians, who are Lords of the world, shall muster many nations against thee. Would any man take the Churches picture saith Luther? then let him paint a silly poor maid, sitting in a wood or wildernesse, compassed about with hungry lions, wolves, bores and beares, and with all manner of cruel and hurtfull beasts,Loc. com. de persee. ver. Eccles. and in the middest of a great many furious men assaulting her every moment and minute, for this is her condition in the world. that say, Let her be defiled] sc: with blood and slaughter. Or, Let her be con∣demned as an hypocrite, Let her be stoned as an adulteresse, so the Trent translation. Thus they pretend, as Rabshakeh did, that they were sent by God against an hypo∣criticall nation, that had broken their faith with God and men. The like craft and cruelty was used in the Parisian massacre, and Gunpowder-plot: God and man; said they (in that blind letter, that brought all to light) have agreed to punish the wickednesse of this age. Those that would kill a dog, give out that he was mad first, saith the French Proverb. Whom no man looketh after Jer. 30.17. and let our eyes look upon Zion] Let us feed our eyes with such a delightfull spectacle: and say as that cruel Charles the 9. of France did, when he saw the streetes strawed with the bodies of the massacred Protestants, and the rivers dyed with their blood, O pulchrum spectaculum! O brave sight, Or, as the Q. Mother of Scotland, when she beheld the dead carcasses of her Lutheran subjects, said, that she never saw a goodlier peece of Arraz in all her dayes. See the accomplish∣ment of this prophecy in the Lamentations, Psalm. 137. and in the book of Nehemiah. Verse 12. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord] Nothing like their thoughts Es. 55.8. Confer Es. 10.7, 8. Zach. 11.15, 16. &c. His thoughts are fatherly, whiles theirs are butcherly: the Physitian in setting leeches to his patient, seekes his good: he aymes not at filling the leeches gorges: neither will he set more on him, then will make for his health. God by his wisdome, and according to his eternall counsell (which the wicked understand not) ordereth and draweth the blind and bruit motions of the worst creatures to his own honour, and his church∣es good;D. Reyn. as the huntsman doth the rage of the dog to his pleasure, or the marri∣ner the blowing of the wind to his voyage, or the Artist the heate of the fire to his work, or the Physitian the blood-thirstinesse of the leech to a cure. Surely, (saith the Psalmist speaking of Senacheribs cruelty in the siege of Jerusalem) the wrath of man shall praise thee (eventually, though not intentionally) the remainder of wrath shalt thou restraine Psal. 76.10. Let the enemies think and project as they please,Ier. 29.11. 2 Thes. 1.6, 7. let them rage and resolve upon your utter ruine. I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evill, to give you an expected end: to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled rest &c. For thus saith the Lord God the Holy One of Israel,
In returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quietnesse and in confidence shall be your strength Esay. 30.15. And I will strengthen the house of Iudah, and I will save the house of Ioseph, and I will bring them again to place them, for I have mercy upon them, and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and I will heare them, Zech. 10.6. Surely as it was said of old, Neither shall Rome fall while Scipio standeth: neither shall Scipio live when Rome falleth: so may it more truely be affirmed of Christ, that he and his people shall stand and fall toge∣ther. But he shall stand at the later day upon the earth Iob 19.25. yea he shall set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the earth Rev. 10.2. as Lord of sea and land, maugre the malice of all, that sought to supplant him, who shall there-hence fall, and never rise up againe Am. 8.14. Verse 13. Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion] Go in this thy might (where∣with thou so lustily threshest out thy wheat by the wine-presse said the Angell to Gideon Judg. 6.14) and thresh the Midianites another while, thou shalt smite them as one man ver. 16. thresh them as the sheaves of the floore that lie ready for the flaile, or (as the custome of those countries was Deut. 25.4. 1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Tim. 5, 18.) for oxen to tread out, or the wheel to turn over Esa. 2.28. for I will make thine horne iron &c.] So that thou shalt do great exploites, by mine assistance, against Sennacherib, Antiochus and other enemies subdued and threshed down to straw by the valiant Macchabees. Spiritualiter etiam hoc intelli∣gendum, saith Sa. here; this is also spiritually to be understood of converting people to the faith separatâ paleâ infidelitatis. This the Apostles did vigorously and effectually, being furnished by Christ with hornes of iron, and hoofes of brass; with spirituall courage and metall, whereby they did soon beat in peeces many people, and brought them to Christ by the obedience of faith, together with all their wealth and substance, which they cheerfully consecrate unto the Lord of the whole earth. This was typified of old by the Tabernacle built with the spoils of the Egyptians: and by Davids dedicating to the Lord the gold and silver which in great abundance he had taken from the enemies 2 Sam. 8. It is prophecied of Tyrus, that being converted she should find another manner of merchandise then formerly, viz: to feed and cloth Gods poore with durable cloathing. The Centurion,Esa. 23.18. Luke 7. when once he became a Proselyte, built the Jewish Synagogues, that had been thrown down by Antiochus. Constantine the Great was bountifull to the Church above measure, insomuch as that he was by the heathens in scorn called Pupillus, as if he had wanted a guardian to over-rule and order his expences. Sed refriguit hoc studium hodiè in magistratibus plerisque, as Gualthe re complaineth, and not without cause. The Church is not only scanted, but spoed of her revenues: and that which was piously consecrated, is impiously converted to other uses &c. Thus He. CHAP. V. Ver. 1. NOw gather thy self in troopes, O daughter of troopes] Here the Virgin, the daughter of Zion despiseth her adversaries of Assyria and Babylon, and laughes them to scorn: the daughter of Ierusalem shaketh her head at them Isa. 37.22. and bearing her self bold upon the foregoing promise (chap. 4.13.) that she should beat in peeces many people, she taketh liberty to taunt the Assyrian Monarch with all his troopes beleaguering her, and basely abusing her Judges: telling him, that the Babe of Bethlehem would shortly take an order with him. And although she were but a Virgin, yet, having such a Champion as Christ, who is in love with her, that will take her part and fight her quarrell, she doubteth not to say, Now gather thy self in troopes &c. Nunc turmatim coito, ô turmaria, Increase thine army and come forth, Gather your selves and ye shall be broken in peeces, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in peeces. Take counsel together,Isai. 8.9, 10. Isai. 33.22. and it shall come to naught: speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is with us, Jehovah is our Juge, Jehovah is our Champion, Jehovah is our king, he will save us. Lo, this is the Churches confident boasting in Christ, this is the triumph of her,
trust in him.Psal. 32.7. The thought of his birth swalloweth up all her fears and discontents; and compasseth her about with songs of deliverance. He hath laid siege against us,] And already devoured us in his hopes: but if we do but turne us to Christ, and say, Behold she whom thou lovest is distressed: the Assyrian as a strong river is come up over all his channels, and reacheth even to the neck: yea the stretching out of his wings filleth the breadth of thy land, O Im∣manuel, Esay 8.7, 8. he will soon bestir himself, he will besiege our besiegers, he will smite them upon the cheek-bone,Psal. 3.7. and break the teeth of those ungodly, that smot the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek, for a reproach to the whole people. Hugo,. Bacillis ceci∣derunt. Beza. by this Iudge of Israel, understandeth Christ, who was indeed at his passion contumeliously buffetted, and smitten with rods upon the cheek, Mat. 20.6, 7. But this, though it be true, yet cannot be the sence of this text. Verse 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah] Not so called from Ephratah, Calebt wife, 1 Chron. 2.19, 50, 51. but from its fruitfulnesse: whence also it had the name Bethlehem,Joh. 6. that is, the house of bread, where Jesus, (that Bread of life, that came down from heaven) was born in the fulnesse of time, as is here first foretold by this Prophet: that great mystery of godlinesse being revealed to the world by de∣grees, in severall Ages. Here was Christ born by meer accident; in regard of his parents, who were brought hither by a tyrannicall Edict of Augustus, Luk. 2.2. but yet by a sweet providence of God, that this Scripture might be fulfilled, and our faith in Christ setled. Though thou be little among the thousands of Iudah] Or, Art thou little, &c? q.d. No such matter: and so it agreeth with Mat. 2.6. Or thus: And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, it is a small thing to be among the Princes of Judah: Out of thee shall come a Ruler, &c. q. d thou hast a dignity above this, and above them all, in that out of thee shall come a Ruler, &c. Take tsagnir in the Neuter gender, (as Scul∣tetus after Osiander,. and Forster doth) and then the eeming difference betwixt the Prophet and Evangelist is taken away. Some make St. Matthew to relate the words of the Scribes to Herod, as they had varied the Text before him. But we finde not that they are any where taxed for altering or corrupting the Text; but for misin∣terpreting it onely, Mat. 5. Besides that, they were by their office Text-men, to look to the letter of the Scripture, and to keep it pure, 1 Cor. 1 20. where they are distinguished from teachers of traditions, and teachers of Allegories. yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me] that is, to God the Father: that we may know that the coming of Christ in the flesh, was a plot of Gods own contri∣ving. He came not by cce, but by counsel: him hath God the Father sealed, an∣ointed and appointed to the work.Joh. 6.27. This is comfortable to consider of. that is to be Ruler in Israel] Matthew rendereth it, a Captain that shall feed my people Israel, Mat. 2.6. See the Note there. whose goings forth have been from of old] This is spoken of Christs eternal gene∣ration, which none can declare, Esay 53.8. What is Gods name, and what is his Sons name, if thou canst tell? Prov. 30.4. The Scripture usually speaketh of this grand Mystery by way of circumlocution. It is here spoken of in the Plurall num∣ber for the excellency of it.Adoro plni∣udinem scri∣pturarum. Aug. In this Text then we have a description of Christ, in his natures and offices. See the like, Rom. 1.3, 4. and adore the fulnesse of the Scriptures. Verse 3. Therefore will he give them up] As a little before the day springeth, it is darker then ordinary: so before the day-spring from on high visited Gods people, they were under very hard and heavy pressures and miseries: whereby their desires after him were increased and ineagered. The enemy oppressed them, by Gods per∣mission, yea by his active providence: that they might pant after a Saviour, and sigh out with old Jacob their father, Gen. 49.18. O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. untill the time that she which travelleth hath brought forth] She, that is, the Vir∣gin Mary, say some: Or, she, that is, say others, the afflicted Church, according to chap. 4.9, 10. See the Notes there. Shee must have a time of travell, of trouble, before she can bring forth, and be delivered. Luther saith well, that the Church is haeres crucis, and that every Christian is a Crucian: we must suffer before we can reigne, and bear the crosse, or ere we wear the crown.
Then the remnant of his brethren] i. e. the converted Gentiles, whom Christ is not ashamed to call his brethren, Heb. 2.11, 12. shall return unto the children of Israel] shall be proselyted, and conjoyned to the elect Jews, that there may bee one sheep-fold under one shepherd. And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: In that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one, Zech. 4.9. See the Note there. Verse 4. And he shall stand and feed (or, rule) in the strength of the Lord] He shall stand, and none shall be able to stirre him: there shall be lifting at his government, but it stands firm and fixed. Earthly Monarchies have their times, and their turnes: their ruine, as well as their rise. The Roman Empire fell under the weight of its own greatnesse. The Turkish, although it be indeed very strong, yet is it by many probably thought to be on the declining hand. But Christ shall stand, when all earthly greatnesse shall lie in the dust. And He shall feed his flock in the strength of the Lord: neither shall any ravenous Lion, or grievous Wolf, pluck them out of his hand; because He and the Father are one, Joh. 10.39. and God hath laid help on one that is mighty, Psal. 89 19. and in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God,] that is, by the power of Gods word, called his name, Acts 9 15. and elsewhere. This word hath a singu∣lar majestie in it, whereby it aweth and affecteth mens consciences, to the propaga∣ting of Christs kingdom: viz when it is accompanied with the Spirit of God, cal∣led his strength in the former clause. And that these ever go together, in all the subjects of Christs kingdom, see Esay 59 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord, My Spirit that is upon them, and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds sed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.] Now, that is, ere long: in Gods due time, which oft seems long, because we are short; apt to antedate the promises, in regard of the accomplishment, to limit the Holy One of Israel, and to set him a time, to set his Sun by our diall, Jer. 8 20. help they would have that Summer at furthest. But as God never fails in his own time, so he seldom comes at ours: We must live by faith, Hab. 2.2. and stay Gods leisure, as David did for the kingdome, and those in Esther, for deliverance. Gods promises will at length take their way over all Alpes of opposition: but we have need of patience &c. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10 36, 37. Verse 5. And this man shall be the peace] The man Christ Jesus, 1 Tim. 2.5. that man, that shall be as an hiding place from the winde, and a covert from the tempest: as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, Esay 32.2. Winds and tempests will arise, and that upon the Church; As∣syrians, and Babylonians, (Nimrods brats) will invade, and infest her: but that famous He afore-mentioned shall bee her peace, her Prince of peace, Esay 9.6. who giveth her pacem omnimodam, peace internal, external, eternal, called by the Apostle life and peace, Rom. 8.7. This peace, peace, as Esay calleth it, chap. 26 3. that is, a multiplied, renued, continued peace: this peace Regionis & Religionis, of Countrey, and of Conscience, as God hath promised, and Christ hath purchased. He merited, and made it through the blood of his Crosse, Col. 1.20. Esay 53.5. Ephes. 2.16. And hence it was, that as he was brought from heaven, with that song of peace, Luke 2.14. so he returned up again, with that farewell of peace, Joh. 14.27. left to the world the doctrine of peace, Ephes. 2.17. whose Ministers are messengers of peace Rm. 10 15. whose followers are the children of peace, Luke 10.6 whose unity is in the bond of peace, Ephes. 4.3. and whose du∣ty is the study of peace, Rom. 12.18 and to whom God hath promised, I will give peace in your land, &c. And ye shall chase your enemies, &c. If any ask,Lev. 25.6, 7. how peace, and pursuit of enemies can consist? It is easily answered. You shall have civil peace amongst your selve, and besides an ability to quell, and quiet for∣raigne enemies. Or, you shal have peace: and if it hap that war arise, you shall have the better in batte If the Assyrian come into your land, he shall be a loser by it: if he tread in your palaces, he shall retreat with shame, and defeatment, as it befell Sennacherib.
Then shall we raise against him seven shepherds] that is, a competent number of Chieftains and Champions, with their victorious forces, which shall repell the ene∣mies, and secure the Church, Christo duce & auspice Christo, under Christ the Arch shepherd. This some understand of the Apostles, those anointed, or autho∣rized Ones, (as the word here signifieth) the weapons of whose warfare were not carnall, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong-holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and bringing in, not the heads, but hearts of those whom they had subdued: as Paul did of Sergius Paulus, the Proconsul, Acts 13.9. where also he is first called Paul, in memory (belike) of those first spoils hee brought into the Church. By shepherds here, are meant (saith Gualther) the Ministers and Preachers of the word, who feed, defend, and watch over the flock. By principal men, Magistrates, endu∣ed with that free, (or, as the Chaldee hath it) kingly spirit, Psal. 51.12. to decree, and act for the good of the Church. Such shepherds, in the time of the Assyrian warre, were Esay, Micha, Joel, &c. such principall men, were Hezekias, and Elia∣kim, Isa. 22. &c. Such after the captivity were, Ezra, Haggee, Zachariah, Mala∣chi, Zorobabel, Nehemiah, Judas Macchabeus, &c. Qui nutantem remp. & Ecclesi∣am suis consilijs, & fortibus gestis fulserunt, who under-propped and kept up the tottering Church, and Common-wealth by their prayers, counsels, and valiant at∣chievements, both before and since the dayes of Christ upon earth. Verse 6. And they shall wast the land of Assyria,] Heb. They shall eat it down, as shepherds do pastures with their flocks. Pascere is put for perdere, saith Cal∣vin: they shall leave nothing there safe or sound, but either bend, or break the Churches enemies, bring them to Christ, by the sword of Gods word, or utterly ruine them by temporall slaughters. Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum. Thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian] It is Christ that delivereth his, what instruments soever he please to make use of, Luke 1.71. 1 Cor. 15.24. an he must have the praise of it. The Grecians thankfully acknowledged to Jupiter their deli∣verance from the Persians, wrought by Themistocles; and therehence called him, : as the Romans for like cause Sosptator, presenting a Palme to him, and sacrificing a white Ox:Liv. lib. 6. d. 3. o acknowledging, it was his power, whereby the conquest was atchieved. Our Edw. 3. after his victory at Poers, (where hee took the French king Anno 1356.) took speedy order, by Smon Archbishop of Canterbury, that eight dayes together should be spent in giving God the thanks and glory How much more should wee praise him for spiritual deliverances,Polyd. Virg. lib. 19. from sinne, Satan, the world, &c. and consecrate our selves wholly to his service, sith Servati simus ut ser∣viamus, Luke 1.74. deliverance commands obedience, Ezra 9.14. Verse 7. And the remnant of Jacob] The remnant according to the election of grace, Rom. 11.5. these are but a few in comparison, as a remnant to the whole peece, or an hand-full to an house-full: but they shall increase and multiply, by Gods blessing upon them, as is here set forth by two similitudes. First, for their propagation and multiplication, the Prophet compareth them to the dew, which is ingendred and distilled from heaven immediatly. Therefore also Psal. 110.3. new converts are compared to dew, and Gods begetting them, to the womb of the mor∣ning,See M. Tho. Goodw. fast∣serm. Apr. 27. 1642. when over-night the earth was dry. Secondly, for their growth and increase, he compareth it to the sprouting up of herbs and grasse in the wildernesses, where man cometh not, and so their springing tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sonnes of men, for them to come with their watering-pots to nourish them (as herbs in gardens do) but these have showers from heaven, that give the increase. I the Lord do keep my vineyard, I will water it every moment, Esay 27.3. There is an honour due to Gods Ministers, 1 Thess. 5 13. but the word onely must be ∣fied, Act. 13.48. and Christ earnestly intreated, that as of old the Manna me down with the dew, which covered the Manna (whence that expression, hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17.) so He himself who is the bread of life, would descend into us, by the word of his grace, and fill us with the fruits of righteousnesse: that he would rigare & recreare, refresh and cherish our hearts, as the dew from heaven doth the dry and fady fields. Vers. 8. And the remnant of Jacob—as a Lion among the beasts of the forrest] The saints shall prosper and do great exploits, as being indued with an invincible force of the spirit, making them as so many Cuer-de-lions: or as Chrysostom saith
of Peter, that he was like a man made all of fire walking among stubble. What Lion-like men were all the Apostles, those white horses upon which the Lord Christ rode about the world conquering and to conquer? Rev. 6.2. That lion of the tribe of Judah Rev. 5.5. had put upon them of his own spirit:Ioh. 1.16. and of his fulnesse bestowed upon them grace for grace: hence their transcendent zeale and courage for the truth. Steven was amongst his country-men the Jewes, as a Lion among the beasts of the forrest. So were in their severall generations Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, Luther, Latimer, Farel &c. that noble army of Martyrs: One of them told the Persecutours that they might pluck the heart out of his body: but never pluck the truth out of his heart. Another,Act. & Mon. 1430. 1438. that the heavens should sooner fall, then he would turn. A third, that if every haire of his head were a man, he would suffer death in the opinion and faith that he was now in. A fourth said, Can I die but once for Christ? And generally, the valour of the patient, and the savagenesse of the persecutours strove together; till both exceeding nature and beleefe, bred wonder and astonishment in beholders and readers; and in some, effectual conversion, as in Justin Martyr, in Calberius, in those 400. said to be converted at the Martyrdome of Cecilia, and lastly in Silvester the executioner at the martyrdome of Simon Laloe at Dyion in France: where seeing the great faith and constancy of that heavenly Martyr, he was so compuncted with repentance,Act. & Mon. fol. 829. and fell into such despair of himself, that, after much adoe, being comforted and converted, he removed with all his family to the church of Geneva. But what a silly conceit is that of the ewes at this day, that when Messias comes, they shall be these Lions among the Gentiles in the middest of all other people to tread them down, and to teare in peeces without rescue? and what a true character hath a late writer given of them, that they are a light, aeriall,S. H. Blount. and fanaticall-brain'd people; and easily apt to work themselves into the fooles paradise of a sublime dotage? Verse 9. Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries] q. d. Adversaries thou shalt be sure of, O my Church: but thou shalt have the better of them. Thou shalt keep footing still under the stanard of the crosse and prevaile.Sub militia crucis. Calv. The mountaine of the house of the Lord shall overtop all other mountaines of worldly power chap. 4.1 It shall be as that mountain not far from Arbela (where the Empire of the world was won and lost in one day) called Nicatorium by Alexan∣der the great, as a constant trophee of that famous victory he there gat over Da∣rius. As she is highest in the favour of God, so she shall be highest in her self:. Strabo. and her enemies shall be found liars unto her. Her hand shall be lifted up, and fall very heavily upon her adversaries: if not sooner, yet at utmost at the Resurrecti∣on: the upright shall have dominion over them in that morning Psal. 49.14. the Church shall shine as the Sun in his strength, when her enemies shall be in that place that is fittest for them, even the lowest place, the footstoole of Christ. Meane∣while she conquereth thn when she is conquered, (as Christ overcame as well by patience as by power) and is sure not to be shivered though shaken, not to be drowned though dowsed over head and eares in the waters of affliction. Niteris incassum Christi submergere navem: Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis. That ship may be tossed (saith One) not shipwrackt whereof Christ is the Pilot, the scripture the Compasse, the promise the tacklings, hope the Anchour, faith the cable, the holy Ghost the wind, and holy affections the sailes filled with hea∣venly graces. Such a soul sailes safely: and will neither fall upon the soft sands of presumption, nor hard rocks of despaire. Verse 10. And it shall come to passe in that day Viz. of Christs power and kingdome Psa. 110.3. The word day here signifies non spatium diurnum, sed diu∣turnum, ac à Deo destinatum, saith Danaeus, not the space of 24. houres, but a long time, yet certain and set by God. that I will cut off thy horses out of thee] for the which thou hast been trading with Egypt: and in which thou trustest more then in me. Some trust in horses, and some in charrets &c. I will therefore cut off both, I will take away thine earthly
idol; and that in much mercy to thee: that in quietnesse and confidence may be thy strength Esay 30.15. and ver. 7. your strength is to sit stil, or your Egypt is to sit stil, q. d. by sitting still you shall have an Egypt (the same word Rahab signifieth strength and Egypt) by being without their horses, you shall do better then when you had them, and thought your selves simply the better or safer for them. See Zach. 9.10. and I will destroy thy charets] That other prop and supposed help I will pull from thee: that thou maist not trust to such uncertainties that cannot save: but in the living God who giveth us all things richly to enioy 1 Tim. 6.17. Trust is Gods jewel: and of all things, he cannot endure to be robbed of it, or wronged in it by creature confidence: for it giveth him the soveraignty Judg. 9.15. and sets the crown on his head: and the contrary. Verse 11. And I will cut off the cities of thy land] thy fenced cities, and pla∣ces of strength, for like reason as before, that thou maist look upon my name alone as a strong tower, and thereto run and be safe Prov. 18.10. that thou maist hover and cover under my wings Psa. 91.1, 2. and there hold thee as se∣cure as in a tower of brasse, or town of warre. Blessed be the Lord (saith Da∣vid, who could not be safe in Keilah that had gates and barres) for he hath shewed me his marvellous loving kindnesse as in a strong city, Psal. 31.21. The tower of Shechem saved not those that ran to it Judg. 9. The strong-hold of Zion could not secure the Jehusites, that in the height of their pride scorned David and his host, that laid siege to it 2 Sam. 5.6, 7. Belshazzar and his Babylonians bare them∣selves so bold upon the strength of their city, and provision laid in for 20. yeares, if need were, (as Xenophon testifieth) that they reproached the Persians that be∣sieged them, and derided their attempts as to no purpose: yet were shortly after made a prey to the enemy. Arimazes having gaison'd a very strong and steep rock in the Sogdian countrey with 30000.Plut: in Alex. Curt. lib. 7. men, sent to Alexander the great (who demanded it) to know whether he could fly or not? But the next day he was taken together with his strong hold, and ned to a crosse. God delights to con∣fute men in their confidences: that those that are his, may run to the Rock of ages Isa. 26.4. to that Arx roboris of his holy Name, which alone is impregnable, inexpugnable. The Spaniards called their Navy in 88. the Invincible Armado: but it proved otherwise: and that upon Saint James his day, whom they count their Patrone, their Tutelary-Saint. It is not unlawfull to have cityes and strong-holds &c. but to confide in them, by rising up to a corky frothy hope when we have them: or to sit down in a faithlesse sullen discontent and despondency when we want them; this is to make flesh our arme, and so to incurr that heavy curse Ier. 17.5. God will cut off all occasions of so doing from those whom he loveth, as here he promiseth: and as accordingly he performed to this people, after their return from Babylon, and especially a little before the comming of Christ in the flesh, when they were reduced by Pompey into a province of the Roman Empire. Verse 12. And I will cut off witch-crafts &c.] As before God had pomised to take away such things as in themselves are not evill, but only by our abuse: so here he will also remove from his people things simply evill, and unlawfull, such as are witch-crafts, idolatry &c. that he may make way for mercy which he is ready to give, Inde  fascino. were they but fit to receive it. The word here rendred witchcrafts hath the signification of changing or turning: and is used for unlawful divelish arts and Artisans. It is also applyed to false teachers and their juglings Gal. 3.1. Rev. 18.23. See a like promise Zech. 13.2. with the Note there. See Mal. 3.5. with the Note. and thou shalt have no more sooth-sayers] Or starr-gazers,Fuller. Misc. lib. 1. cap. 16. diviners; fortune∣tellers. One derivation of the word clepeth them Nebulones or Knaves: as those that undertake to foretell future things ex nebulis by the clouds, planets, starrs, by calculating nativities, and the like unlawfull practises of Judiciary Astrologie, Necromancie, Pyromancie, Oneiromancie, Aruspicie, Sorilegie, and other dia∣bolicall Arts of that nature. The Ephesians were much addicted to such wicked practises: hence the proverb  for the black art. The Samaritans also, Act. 8. And hence that malicious slander of the Jewes, Say we not well that
thou art a Samaritan, that is, one that dealeth with the devil: for otherwise they knew, that Christ was no Samaritan, but a Galilean, as they called him in scorn,Joh. 8.48. in truth a Bethlehemite, as verse 2. The Jews themselves are taxed, Esay 2.6. that they were Soothsayers, like the Philistines; and told, that God had therefore forsa∣ken them, or sent them away into captivity. See more against this sort of sinne and sinners, Esay 44.24, 25, 26. and 47.12, 13, 14. Jer. 10.2, 2. Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, &c. But especially Deut. 18.10, 11. where we have these five Arguments (as One well observeth) against Astrologicall, and other unlawfull predictions. First, that all such are abomination to the Lord, verse 2. Secondly, that for such Arts, the Canaanites were driven out, verse 12. Thirdly, that unlesse men cast away the use of the said Arts, they cannot be perfect, that is, upright and sincere with God, verse 13. Fourthly, that godly men must differ from Canaanites and Hea∣thens, in the abandoning such arts, verse 14. Lastly, that instead of such wayes of prediction, the Lord raiseth up Christ, the great Prophet, to foretell unto them what is meet for them to foreknow, verse 15. with Act. 3.23. To seek to know more, is condemned for curiosity and rashnesse, by Christ himself, in his own disciples, Act. 1.7. it derogateth from the glory of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge: it is to go a whoring from Christ, Lev. 20.6. and is therefore in this Text fitly yoked with idolatry: It is here also reckoned among those things that must be cut off, if Christs kingdom shall be set up amongst us. So that if there were no other text of Scripture against that wickednesse but this alone, it were sufficient. Verse 13. Thy graven images also will I cut off] Sorcery and Idolatry are fitly coupled here and elsewhere: for they commonly go together, as in the Pope and his Clergy. See Rev. 9.21. and 21.8. as also in the Canaanites, Philistines, and other Heathens. True it is, that the Temples at Rome were without images for 170 years after it was built: that the Lacedemonians would not endure pictures or ima∣ges, lest by them they should be distracted: that the Turks and Jews both, at this day, do abhorre Christian Religion, for the abominable idolatry they see among Papists. For since the captivity of Babylon, the graven images and statues have been so cut off from the Jews, that they would never be drawn to worship the work of their hands. They have a saying amongst them to this day,Moses Gerand. That no punishment befalleth them, wherein there is not an ounce of that golden calf, they once made in the wildernesse. Having paid therefore for their learning, they abhorre idols, Rom. 2.22. and count it sacriledge, as Plutarch did, to worship by images. The Papists should do so likewise: and not say as their Vasquez (unable to answer our arguments doth) that the second Commandement belonged to the Jews onely: or bring such proofs for their idolatry, that the images themselves (if they were sen∣sible) would blush to hear repeated. Verse 14. And I will pluck up thy groves, &c.] wherein thou placest a part of thy happinesse, (as the Hebrew word importeth) and hast an over-high opinion of them, because anciently frequented by the Fathers, before the Law. But it should have been considered, that it was but a will-worship at best; yea, that God had flatly forbidden the planting of groves, Deut. 16.21. as things in use among Pagans, for honour, either of some God, or some great mans ghost, which was thought to dwell there. Nulli certa domus, lucis habitamus opacis.Virg. Aeneid. The worshippers of Priapus, (that shame) when they had ended their sacrifice, stept into a grove hard by the altar, and there like bruit heasts, promiscuously satisfied their lusts: thereby as they conceived, best pleasing their god. So will I destroy thy cities.] Or, thine enemies: and this will be the end, or fruit of that forementioned reformation. Mr. Fox observeth, that in K. Edw. the sixts time, the English put to flight their enemies in Muscleborough field,Acts & Mon. in the self∣same day and hour wherein the Reformation, enjoyned by Parliament, was put in execution at London, by burning of idolatrous images. Verse 15. And I will execute vengeance in anger] upon those that refuse to bee reformed, that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lords Jesus Christ,
2 Thes. 1.8. Such as were the Jews enemies, the primitive persecutours, the stub∣borne Papists, some of whom have professed, that they would rather take part with the Turks then with the Lutherans: as some rigid Lutherans again have pro∣tested openly, that they would return to the Papacy, rather then to admit ever of that Sacramentary and Predestinary pestilence (as they call it) of the Calvinists. But what a sad story is that related by Mr. Burroughs, who had it from a worthy Minister of those parts;Burr. on Hos. 1. p. 465. that at Hamborough was not long since held a consulta∣tion by some learned Lutherans concerning the cause and cure of Germanies cala∣mities: and where it was concluded, that Germany suffered so much in these late warres, because their images in Churches were not adorned enough, which there∣fore they would presently procure done. Had they consulted this Text, they might soon have seen their mistake, and bethought them of better. But Lord, when thine hand is lifted up,Esay 26.11. they will not see: howbeit they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy toward thy people: yea, their ears shall be opened, and their instruction sea∣led, Job 33.16. that they may be accounted worthy to escape that vengeance, that shall be executed in anger and fury upon the Heathen, that have not heard the joy∣full sound, but, as so many sea-monsters, have with a deaf ear passed by the do∣ctrine of salvation, the Gospel of peace. CHAP. VI. Verse 1. HEar ye now what the Lord saith,] Exordium breve est, sed planè patheticum, saith Gualther. This is a short, but pithy and patheticall preface; wherein he wooes their attention: Audite quaeso, Hear, I pray you. Mini∣sters are spokesmen for Christ, and must therefore give good words: and yet re∣membring on whose errand they come, it is required that they be found faithfull, 1 Cor. 4.2. Arise, contend thou] Surge, age, O Micah! Debate thou Gods cause against this rebellious and ingratefull people, as it were in judgement: calling all, even the insensible creatures to be judges. See the like, Deut. 32.1. Esay 1.2. Mic. 1.2. (for these two Prophets have many things common) and be sensible, that some sit as senselesse before a Preacher still, as the seats they sit on, pillars they lean to, dead bodies they tread upon: so that we have need (as One did once in my hearing) to call to the walls and windows to hear the word of the Lord. This heavy ear is noted for a singular judgement, Mat. 13.13, 14. Esay 30.8, 9. The Philosopher was angry with his Boeotians: telling them that they had not their name for nought, sith their ears were Ox-ears, and that they were dull creatures, and uncapable of counsel. Demosthenes also for like cause, called upon his countrey-men of Athens, to get their ears healed: and Diogenes used to tell his tale to the statues and images, that he might inure himself to lose his labour, as he had so often done, in speaking to the people.Pag. 18. Let us, to the wearing of our tongues to the stumps, preach and pray never so much, men will on in sinne, said blessed Bradford, in that excellent Sermon of his of Repentance. We cry till we are hoarse (saith another rare Prea∣cher) we speak till we spit forth our lungs: but all to as little purpose as Bede did, when he preached to an heap of stones. Asine quispiam narrabat fabulam: at ille mo∣vebat aures. But shall people thus carry it away, and God lose his sweet words? Never think it. Those that will not hear the word, shall hear the rod, verse 9. of this chap∣ter: and if they could but see their misery, they would do as the Prophet requires, cut their hair and cast it away, under the sense of the horror of Gods indignation, Jer. 7.27, 29. they would beg of God a hearing ear, (which is as an ear-ring of gold, Prov. 25.12.) and beseech him to make the bore bigger, that his word might enter: yea to draw up the ears of their souls to the ears of their bodies, that one saving sound might pierce both at once. Let him that hath an ear to hear, hear: or if yet any think good to forbear, let him forbear, Ezek. 3.27. but he will certainly repent it. He that now gives God occasion to call to the hills, &c. shall one day tire the deaf mountains, saying, Fall on me, hide me, dash and quash me in a thousand peeces. O that I might trot directly to hell, and not stay to hear that dreadfull Discedite, Go ye cursed!
Verse 2. Hear O ye mountains the Lords controversie] Although the people would neither hear nor obey God, the Prophet doth: and, according to command, he summoneth the mountains to hear and testifie: the Lord seeming to say unto him, as once he did to Ezekiel; But thou sonne of man, be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: but hear what I say unto thee, and do it. It might seem to him a senselesse thing to cite the mountains, &c. But hee knew that if God command a thing, to argue or debate upon it were bold presumption; to search the reason of it, proud curiosity, to detrect or disobey it, flat rebellion. To the mountains and foundations of the earth he applies himself: happly with like minde, and in like manner as the Host of Nola did to the Church-yard: and there called at the graves of the dead; Oh ye good men of Nola, come away;Anton. de Guevara. for the Roman Censor calls for your appearance: for he knew not where to call for a good man alive. and ye strong foundations of the earth] Those roots of the mountains, Jon. 2.7. yet not so strong, but God can shake them, Job 9.5, 6. Nah. 1.5, 6. and that by so weak a creature as air, gotten under ground, and seeking a vent. Hee can lift them off their foundations, Deut. 32.22. and carry them to another place to hear his controversie, as he did the hill in Herefordshire, Anno 1571.Camden. de Btan. fol. 473. Polan. synt. and that other in the territories of Bern, that removing out of his place in an earth-quake, covered a whole village, that had 90 families in it. See the Note on Amos 1.1. for the Lord hath a controversie with his people,] See the Note on Hos. 4.1. and learn to tremble before this great God, who sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grashoppers, Esay 40.22. which he can shake out of their place at pleasure, and send them packing to hell. O consider what a fearfull thing it is to be at controversie with God: and to have him both our Accuser, wit∣nesse, and Judge. O the terrour of the Lord at that great and last day of the world! Ʋtinam ubique de hoc judiio disseretur! Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us (but they shall reply,Luke 23 30. we are witnesses against you for your de∣testable unthankfulnesse) and to the hills, Cover us, but they shall eccho out Cover us; for who can dwell with this devouring fire? who can abide these everlasting bur∣nings? and he will plead with Israel.] At which time they shall find, that an empty title, hath but an empty comfort; and that tribulation and anguish shall be on eve∣ry soul of man that doth evil: but of the Jew first, because of his priviledge,Rom. 2.9. and then of the Gentile. None so deep in utter darknesse, as those that once were An∣gels of light. Let us all pray with holy David, Enter not into judgement with thy servant, O Lord, &c. And with Job, If thou shouldst contend with me,Psal. 143.2. Joh 9.2, 3. Dan. 9.7, 8. I could not answer thee one of a thousand. And with Daniel, O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee: but to us confusion of face, because we have sinned against thee. Verse 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee?] Or rather, what have I not done, to do thee good? O generation, see yee the word of the Lord,Jer. 2.31. and not hear it onely: was ever any thing more evidencing and evincing then what I now alledge? Have I been a wildernesse unto Israel, a land of darknesse? May I not well say unto you, as He did to his ungratefull countreymen; What? Are ye weary of receiving so many benefits from one man? But say; What hurt have I ever done you?Themistocles. and wherein have I wearied you, or been troublesome to you? unlesse it be by daily load∣ing you with loving-kindnesses, Psal. 68.19. and bearing with your provocations? Forgive me that injury, 2 Cor. 12.13. Testifie against me,] Put me in remembrance, let us plead together, declare thou against me, that thou mayest be justified, Esay 43.26. See here, first, with what meeknesse, and mildnesse God proceedeth against sinners, so Esay 5.3. Judicate quaeso. See, next, that God is content, for our better conviction, to submit his courses unto scanning, and to bring his proceedings with us to a triall, before hee passe sentence; that he might be justified when he speaketh, and cleared when hee judgeth, Psal. 51.4. Here hee wills them to plead the cause with him, as it were at even hand; offering to make answer to whatsoever they could object, or lay to his charge. Seipsum quasi reum sistit. He maketh himself the Defendant,Gualther. and bids them put in their Bill of complaint against him, freely and without fear. This is Stupenda sanè dignatio, a wonderfull condescention indeed. Should he use martiall law against us,M. Neh. Rog. and assoon as ever we offend (like Draco) write his lawes in blood
upon us (as One well saith) it were but just and right. But for him to reason and plead with us about the justice of his cause before he proceedes to judgment, this deserves admiration and acknowledgement in the highest degree. O the depth! Verse 4. For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt] Here God twits them with his former favours: which he never doth, but in case of brutish unthankful∣nesse. Now there was brutish, and worse. To render good for evill is divine: good for good is humane: evill for evill is brutish: but evill for good devilish. This makes God, contrary to his custome, upbraid people with what he hath done for them: and angrily call for his love-tokens back againe, as Hos. 2.9. For their deliverance out of the Egyptian servitude how great a mercy it was, see the Note on Hos. 11.1. such as they were againe and againe charged never to for∣get Deut. 6.12. and 5.15. and 26.5. to 12. How much more bound are we to God for our Redemption by Christ? for what's Pharaoh to Satan? Egypt to this present evill world? Egyptian bondage to fins slavery? Seeing then that our God hath given us such deliverance as this, should we againe break his commande∣ments &c. Well might the hills and mountaines testify against such a monstrous un∣thankfullnesse, and disingenuity. and redeemed thee out of the house of servants] Gradatim progreditur, saith Calvin. It was somthing to be brought out of the land of Egypt, a most superstitious place: where they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man (for they defiled their king Osiris) and of birds (for they wor∣shipped the hawk and Ibis) and of foure-footed beasts (for they worshipped an ox,Rom. 1.23. a dog, a cat, a swine) and of creeping things, for they worshipped the Crocodile, Ichneumon &c. yea they worshipped plants and pot-herbs. Hence the Poet Felices gentes,Iuven. quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina— To be brought out therefore from amongst such hatefull Idolaters was no small fa∣vour, lest they should smell of their superstitions, as Mica's mother did after all that ayring sin in the desert Judg. 17.3. and Jeroboam, by being there awhile, had learned calf-worship: hence that strickt charge never to make leagne with them. But to be redeemed out of the house of servants, was more: out of the iron furnace Deut. 4.20. Ier. 11.4. where they wrought night and day in latere & luto Exod. 1. in setting up those famous Pyramids, and treasure-cities for Pharaoh, where they served with rigour, Exod. 1.13. their lives were made bitter with hard bondage ver. 14. till God withdrew their shoulders from the burden, and their hands did leave the pots Psal. 81.6. till they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved-work of a Saphire-stone Exod. 24.10. to shew, that God had now changed their condition, their bricks made in their bondage to Saphirs. Confer Esay 54.11. and consider what God hath done for us, by bringing us into the glorious liberty of his own children, who were once the devils drudges and dromedaries, serving diverse lusts and pleasures Tit. 3.3. which gave lawes to our members Rom. 7. and held us under in a brutish bondage, much worse then the Heathens mil-house, the Turks gallies, Bajazets iron-cage, the Indian mines, or Egyptian furnace. For there, if they did their task they escaped stripes; but here, let men do the devill never such doughty ser∣vice, they are sure of scourges and scorpions after all, armies and changes of sor∣rowes and sufferings: terrours and torments, without any the least hope of ever either mending or ending. This should make us lift up many an humble, joyfull, and thankfull heart to our most powerfull Redeemer: saying with St. Paul, Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Tim. 1.17. and I sent before thee, Moses, Aaron and Miriam] As three principall guides, and Miriam for one: who did her part among the women Exod. 15.20. and, having a prophetick spirit, became a singular instrument in the hand of God who spake by her Num. 12.2. But her weak head was not able to bear such a cup of honour, without being intoxicated: which caused her father to spit in her face
Num. 12.2, 14. Her death is recorded in scripture Num: 20.1. but not her age, as is Sarahs Gen. 23.1. Some have observed that God thought not fit to tell us of the length of the life of any woman in Scripture but Sarah, to humble that sex. But as soules have no sexes, so of some women (such as were Miriam, Deborah, the Virgin Mary, Priscilla, Blandina, the Lady Jane Gray, Q. Eli∣zabeth &c.) it may be said, that in them, besides their sex, there was nothing wo∣man-like or weak: as if (what Philosophy saith) the soules of these noble crea∣tures had followed the temperament of their bodies, which consist of a frame of rarer roomes, of a more exact composition, then mans doth. It is possible that Mi∣riam might (till that matter of emulation betwixt her and Moses his wife fell out) be as helpfull to Moses and Aaron, as Nazianzens mother was to his father;Non solum ad∣jutricem in pi∣etate, sed etiam doctricem & gubernatricem. Nazian. Epi∣tap. pat. not a help-fellow only, but a doctresse and governesse. Verse 5. O my people remember now what Balak] There must be a Recognition of Gods mercies, or else there will neither follow Estimation, nor Retribution: Else we that should be as temples of his praises, shall be as graves of his benefits. Our soules are naturally like filthy ponds, wherein fish die soon, and frogs live long; rotten stuff is remembred, memorable mercies are forgotten; whereas the soul should be as an holy Ark, the memory like the pot of Manna preserving ho∣ly truths as the Law; and speciall blessings, as Aarons rod, fresh and flourishing. This Israel did not, and are therefore justly blamed Psal. 106.7, 13, 21. and here againe reminded of one signall mercy among many, that they might take notice of the enemies malignity, Gods benignity, and their own indignity and in∣gratitude, that parching wind, that drieth up the fountaine of divine favours.Ventus urens & exsiccans. what Balack king of Moab consulted] Joshua saith, that he arose and fought against Israel chap. 24.9. that is, he had a good mind to have fought, but he did not because he durst not. So Esth. 8.7. Haman is said to have laid his hand upon the Jewes, because he intended and attempted such a matter. They, that is the Sortilegi or Lot-sorcerers, with whom, Balack-like, he consulted, cast Pur, that is, the lot before Haman from day to day, and from month to month: viz.Esth. 3.7. to find out what month or day would be lucky for the accomplishment of his intended massacre of the Iewes: but before that black-day came, Mordecai was advanced, and Haman hanged. Now, as there, by the speciall providence of God over∣ruling the superstition of that wicked wreth, way was made for the preservation of Gods people: So was it here. Balack consulted, and Balaam answered him: that is, he was as willing to curse as the other would have had him, but might not: for God would not harken unto him, but blessed his people still, and delive∣red them out of his hand Iosh. 24.10. Yea though at length he was resolved to curse howsoever, and therefore went not forth as at other times to seek for inchant∣ments, but set his face toward the wildernesse, as if he would do the deed, what∣ever came of it Num. 24.1. Yet his indevour was fruitlesse and frustrate. So shall the malicious attempts of Rome and Hell be against the Reformed religion and the Professors thereof (whom the Romish Balaam banns and curses with bell book and candle (at the instigation of the Spanish Balak, with his factours the Jesuits) so long as they adhere to him and pray as Psal. 109.26, 27, 28, 29. Help me O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy. That they may know, that this is thy hand: that thou Lord hast done it. Let them curse, but blesse thou: When they arise, let them be ashamed, but let thy servants rejoyce &c. Salvation is of the Lord: his blessing is upon his people. from Shittim unto Gilgal] Oratio elliptica: q. d. Remember what I did for you at Shittim in the wildernesse, and so all the way untill you came into the pro∣mised land, even to Gilgal, where you first pitched tent Iosh. 5.8, 9, 10. At Shittim it was, where, by the pestilent counsel of Balaam (the devils spelman) the Midianites out-witted them, by setting faire women before them as a stum∣bling-block Num. 25.1, 18. to draw them to those two sister-sins, adultery and idoaltry. Then and there,Digni qui fu∣ditus deleren∣tur. Gualth. the heades of the people were hanged up before the Lord against the Sun, and some others; when as God might justly have cut them all off, and cast them away from being a people before him. Nonne illic reful∣sit admirabilis Dei gratia? saith Calvin: was not this a miracle of Gods mercy?
that ye may know the righteousnesse of the Lord] i. e. the faithfulnesse and good∣nesse of God in keeping promise with your fathers, notwithstanding your provo∣cations. Or my righteous dealings with those fornicatours and adulterers, whom I there judged: preserving the innocent, or penitent, till they came to Gilgal, and onwards. Or that thou maist know how just my complaint is of thee, and mine action against thee. So Vatablus expounds it. Verse 6. Wherewith shall I came before the Lord] This is vox populi the voice of the people now convinced in part; or at least of some one for them. Praestat her∣bam dare quàm turpiter pugnare. Better yeeld then disgracefully hold out the con∣test. God, say they hath the better of us: neither need he now call upon heaven and earth to arbitrate, nor on the mountaines and strong foundations to heare the quarrell, for we are self-condemned Tit. 3.11. Our own consciences reade the sentence against us, we have deserved to be destroyed: but oh what may we do to avert and avoid his wrath? what shall we do that we might work the works of God? Ioh. 6.28. Loe this is the guise of gracelesse men: faine they would pacifie God, and work themselves into his grace and favour by ceremonies and frivolous businesses: yea they offer largely for a dispensation to live in their sins, which they had as liefe be knockt o' th' head, as part with. Intere à per flexuosos circuitus fing unt se ad Deum accedere,In loc. à quo tamen semper cupiant esse remoti, saith Calvin, they fetch a compasse about God, but care not to come near him. Heaven they would either steale if they could, or buy at any hand, if they might: faine they would passe è coeno ad coelum, à deliciis ad delicias from Dalilab's lap to Abra∣hams bosome: faine they would (as One saith) dance with the devill all day, and then sup with Christ at night. They seem here very inquisitive and solicitous about their soules health: they give the half-turn sed ad Deum usque non revertuntur but they return not even to God: like a horse in a mill they move much, but re∣move not at all: like those silly women 2 Tim. 3.6, 7. or as ants that run to and fro about a mole-hill, but grow not greater. and how my self before the high God] Or, shall I bow my self &c. will that, or any like bodily exercise please him, or pacisy him? if cringing or crouching will do it, if sack-cloth and ashes, if hanging down the head and going softly, if pen∣nances and pilgrimagts &c. hypocrites do usually herein out-do the upright. Doth the Publican look with his eyes on the ground? the hypocriticall Jewes will hang down their heads like bulrushes. Doth Timothy weaken his constitution by ab∣stinence? the Pharisees will never give over till his complexion be wholy withe∣red and wanzed. Doth Paul correct his body with milder correction, as it were a blow on the cheek? the Jesuite will martyr his sides with the severe discipline of scorpions. But although God must be glorified with our bodies also 1 Cor. 6.20. and externall service is required (what ever the Swenkfeldians say to the con∣trary) yet Bodily exercise of it self profiteth little 1 Tim. 4.8. and let those that brag off or bind upon their outward worship of Christ consider, that the devill himself in the demoniack of Gadara fell down and worshipped him. What com∣fort can there be in that which is common to us with devils? who as they beleeve and tremble, so they tremble and worship. The outward bowing is the body of the action; the disposition of the soule, is the soule of it. shall I come before him with burnt-offerings &c.] shall I prevent him, and pro∣piciate him with holocausts? shall I meet him marching against me, and thus make my peace with him? The Jewes were much in sacrifices, till they wearied Gods soule therewith, and all his senses Esay 1.13, 14, 15. but they were sacrificing Sodomites ver. 10. they stuck in the bark, they pleased themselves in the work done, not attending the manner, which either makes or marres every action, and is mainely eyed by God: their devotions were placed more in the massy materia∣lity, then inward purity; and hence rejected David could tell (through these Questionists could not) that God desired not sacrifice, further then as thereby men were led to Christ; and that the sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit Psal. 51.16.17. that no burnt offering is acceptable, not calf of a yeare old, unlesse laid on the low altar of a broken heat, which sanctifieth the sacrifice. Verse 7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of ramms] It was taken for a maxime among all nations, that no man was to come before God empty-handed:
nor to serve him of free-cost. And although Lycurgus the Lacedemonian made a law, that no man should be at very great charge for a sacrifice, lest he should grow weary of Gods service: yet when the famous carver Phidias, advised the Atheni∣ans to make the statue of Minerva rather of Marble, then of Ivory. 1. because more durable (this passed with allowance.) 2. because lesse chargeable: at the mention hereof, with infinite indignation they commanded him silence. Pliny tells us, of Alexander the Great, that when, as being yet a youth, he cast great store of frankincense upon the altar, and his School-master told him, he must not bee so liberall, till he had subdued the frankincense-countreys: when once he had conque∣red Arabia, he sent his school-master a ship full of frankincense, largely exhorting him to worship the gods therewith. Supersition is, for most part, not liberall onely, but prodigall; and no wonder, when as good works are by Bellarmine said to be mercatura regni coelestis the price and purchase of heaven. Hence their Churches are so stuffed with vowed presents, and memories, as at Loretto,Spec. Europ. and else∣where, they are fain to hang their Cloysters, and Church-yards with them. What would not men give, what will they not suffer, that they may be saved? I would swim thorow a sea of brimstone, said One, that I might come to heaven at last. But those that would buy heaven, and do offer as these here, a bribe for a pardon, shall hear, Thy money perish with thee: And those that seek to bee saved by their works, Luther fitly cals, the Devils martyrs: They suffer much, and take much pains to go to hell, they buy their damnation, as One saith the Pharisees did, when they gave Iudas those thirty pieces, for which he sold his salvation. Shall I give my first-born for my transgression, &c?] The superstitious Iews used, we know, to offer up their children in sacrifice to Moloch, or Saturn, 2 King. 17. and 21. and 23. and that, in an apish imitation of Abrahams offering his sonne Isaac.Euseb. praep. Evang. lib. 4. Diod. Sic. l. 20. to the same Saturn the Phoenicians are said to have sacrificed the best of thei sonnes. So did the Carthaginians, as Diodorus Siculus testifieth. And when as they had for awhile left off so to do, and were overcome by Agathocles, they (supposing that the gods were therefore angry with them, because they had not done as formerly) slew 200. at once, at the altar, of their young Nobility, to pacifie the offended deity. Of like sort were Anammelech, and Adrammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim, unto whom that people burnt their children in the fire, 2. King. 17.13. And little better were our Ancestours, the old Brittones, who not onely sacrificed their stran∣gers, but their children too, non ad honorem sed ad injuriam religionis.Camd. Britan Here then the Prophet seemeth to speak by way of Concession, that he may shew these Questi∣onists, how little it would avail them to sacrifice their children, if such a thing were lawfull to be done. Verse 8. Hee hath shewed thee, O man, what is good] i. e. What is right, just, and acceptable to himself. Hee shewed it by the light of Nature: for Aristotle (Natures secretary) saith, It is not likely that God is so well pleased with the costlinesse of the sacrifices, as with the godlinesse of the sacrificers. He hath shewed it much more by the light of Scripture: there he hath told thee,Arist. in Rheto what is the unum necessarium, One thing necessary; in comparison whereof all other things are but by-businesses: what is the Totum hominis, the whole duty of man, sc. to fear God, and keep his commandements, Eccles. 12.13. What is the Bonum hominis, as here, yea, the Summum Bonum, or chiefest good of man, attainable in this life; viz. Com∣munion with God, and Conformity to God. And what doth the Lord require of thee] But thee? Quia in omni creatura ter∣rena nihil melius fecit te, ipse quaerit te à tu, quia in perdideras te, in te,Aug. serm. 136. de temp. as Augustine elegantly paraphraseth this Text. In as much, as God hath among all earthly crea∣tures, made nothing better then thee, therefore he requireth thee, of thee, &c. But to do justly, and to love mercy] This is the summe of the second Table: as that which followeth, is of the first, to walk humbly with thy God. Here then is a brief of the whole Bible, a little Bible, as the eleventh to the Hebrews, is by One not unfitly called, A little Book of Martyrs. Do this and live: Do this here en∣joyned, and thou shalt never fall: yea, thou shalt go gallantly into heaven, as Saint Peter hath it, 2 Epist. 1.10, 11. Certa semper sunt in paucis, saith Tertullian. Things simply necessaryk, whether to be beleeved or practised, are few in number,
but many in vertue; in sight small, but great in weight: like gold, which being so∣lid, is contracted into a narrow room: but may be drawn into so large an extent, that one angel may cover an acre of ground, as the Naturalists have observed. To do justly, is the duty; not onely of Magistrates, whom God hath entrusted with the administration of his earthly kingdom, by the due execution of vindicative and remunerative justice, but also of all other persons, in their server all places and stations, whose rule must be that golden saying of our Saviour, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the pro∣phets, Mat. 7.12. See the Note there. And to love mercy] This is more then to shew mercy: for that a man may do, and yet, for want of love, lose all, 1 Cor. 13. He must not onely draw out his sheaf, but his soul to the hungry, Esay 58.10. nor distribute spirituall alms, but do it out of deep affection, as Titus, 2 Cor. 7. he must be ready to distribute, willing to commu∣nicate, 1 Tim. 6.18. his mercy must flow from him, as water doth from the foun∣tain, or light from the Sun: it must not be wrung from him, as verjuyce from a crab, or as distilled water is forced out by the heat of the fire. Let the love of Christ constrain us to look out some of his receivers, (as David did Jonathans stock) to whom we may shew mercy for his sake. What though we be weak, yet if willing to shew mercy,2 Cor. 8. God accepteth according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. The widows mite is beyond the rich mans magnificence: because it came out of a richer minde: The Apostle bids, Put on, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindnesse, Col. 3.12. such as the Gaoler had to∣ward Paul and Silas: such as the Samaritan had toward the wounded man by the way-side: such as those primitive Christians had, who came to the Church, with strong affections, with large contributions, Acts 4.34. The like is foretold of Ty∣rus when converted, Esay 23.18. and of Ethiopia, Psal. 68.31. that shee shall hastily stretch her hands unto God, Heb. she shall make them run, noting her readi∣nesse, and speedinesse, in giving her goods unto the saints. The tender mercies of the Almighty, shed forth abundantly upon His, leave a compassionate frame upon their hearts, and do dye their thoughts, as the die-fat doth the cloth. And to walk humbly with thy God] Or, Bashfully, with an holy shamefacednesse, and sollicitosnesse of doing any thing that may offend the eyes of Gods glory. Yea, what care, faith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.11. sc. of walking worthy of the Lord, unto all-pleasing, Colos. 1.10. as proving your hearts and lives to him in every part and point of obedience. This the Lord in a mystery taught his people, Deut. 23.13, 14. when commanding them to cover their excrements with a paddle, hee giveth this reason thereof. For the Lord thy God walketh in the middest of thy camp, &c, therefore shall thy camp be holy, that he seen no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. They that stand in the presence of Princes must be every way exact: and give them all due respect. Now a good man, like a good Angel, is ever in Gods presence: and must therefore walk worthy of the vocation wherewith he is called, with all lowlinesse and meeknesse, Ephes. 4.1, 2. with all modesty, and demission of mind, and of demeanour, (as the word here signifieth) and especially, when he draweth night to God in holy duties.1 Chro. 29.14. Then it must be his care to exercise a three-fold humility. First, precedent, before he sets upon Gods service, he must in heart devote, and dedicate all that he is, and hath, as a due debt to the Almighty, saying with David,Justinian. It is of thine own, Lord, that I give thee: , as that good Emperour said. The second is concomitant: when in the performance of good duties, he hath grace, (this lovely grace of humility especially) whereby hee may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear; which is nothing else but an awfull respect to the divine Majesty,Heb. 12.28. with whom wee have to do, Heb. 4.13. The third is subsequent; when after hee hath done his best, he is dejected in the sense of his many failings in the manner; and looking on his plumes, he looketh al∣so on his black feet, and is abashed, and abased before the Lord. Lo, this is to humble himself to walk with his God. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Verse 9. The Lords voice crieth unto the city] Or, shall cry, viz. by his Prophets. ,Herodet. said the Heathen. God loves to fore-signifie, to warn before he woundeth, to foretell a judgement, before he inflicteth it. He had shewed his
people what was good, and what he required of them: but to little purpose, through their unteachablenesse, and stubbornnesse. He thereatneth therefore here to take another course with them. And the man of wisdome shall see thy name] Gualther rendreth it, And the man of Essence, &c. that is, qui revera vir est, non caudex aut truncus, hee that is a man indeed, or not a stock, or trunck (such an one as was that saplesse fellow Nabal, in whom all true reason was decayed and faded) will easily see Gods name, that is, the divine majesty of the word, working powerfully upon his heart, as the Sun-beams beat upon Jonas his head, and disquieted him. Danaeus rendreth it, And wisdom seeth thy name, that is, wisdoms children, as Luke 7.35. which will justifie her, when others are either so froward, that nothing can please them, (neither John fast∣ing, nor Christ eating, Mat. 11.16, &c.) or so dull, that nothing can affect them, as these here: the word of God was worse then spilt upon them. Sure it is, that wisdoms children are not many. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? saith Hosea chap. 14.9. the very question imports a paucity. See the Note there. Though a gunne be discharged at a whole flight of birds, there are but a few killed: though the net be spread over the whole pond, but a few fishes are taken. Rari sunt qui philosophantur, saith Ʋlpian. It is with our hearers, as it was with Jona∣thans signal arrows, two fell short, and but one beyond the mark: So where one shoots home to the mark of the high-calling in Christ Jesus, many fall short. Three sorts of four of those that heard our Saviour, were naught, Mat. 13. And of those that heard Paul at Athens, some derided, others doubted, and but a very few belee∣ved: as Dennis, and Damaris, and some others with them, Act. 17.34. Hear ye the rod] Sith ye would not hear the word, and so redeem your own sorrows. All Gods rods are vocall, they are speaking as well as smiting: they are not mute, but mingled with instructions. They are his Free-school-master; curst,. and crabbed, but such as whereby he openeth mens ears (till then, uncircumcised, and stopt with the superfluity of naughtinesse) to discipline, and commandeth them to return from iniquity, Job 36.8, 9. By chastening men, God teacheth them out of his Law, Psal. 64.12. Hence Luther calleth Affliction, Theologiam Christianorum, the Christian mans Divinity: and Another saith, that Schola crucis est schola lucis. There shall be onely fear, to make you understand the hearing, Esay 28.19. As God is said to hold his peace, when he punisheth not, Psal. 50.21. Esay 41.14. so, to preach and teach, when he doth. And look how Gideon, by threshing the men of Succoth with thorns and briars of the wildernesse, taught them, Judg. 8.7.16. so here. I have a message from God unto thee, O King, said Ehud, Judg. 3.20. Lo, his ponyard was Gods message. Whence, One well observeth, that not onely the vocall admonitions, but the reall judgements of God, are his errands and in∣structions to the world. For when thy judgements are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousnesse, Esay 26.9. Smart makes wit; and Vexation giveth understanding. and who hath appointed it] God, who hath not onely a permissive, but an active hand in all our afflictions. Others render the text, Quis sit, qui accersatistud, who it is that hath procured it, or sent for it, Who, but your selves? according to Hos. 13.9. See the Note there. Nemo laeditur nisi à seipso. Men may thank them∣selves for all their sufferings: for God afflicteth not willingly, Lam. 3.35. He co∣meth forth of his place to do it, Esay 16.21. and counteth it his work, his strange work, Esay 28.21. He doth justice, (when there is no other remedy) but hee loveth mercy, and so requireth us to do in the verse next afore-going. Vers. 10. Are there yet the treasures of wickednesse] What yet? for all that ever I can say or do to the contrary? Though I cry out unto you by my word (and have set it on with my rod, that it might stick the better) Oh do not this abomi∣nable thing! Is there yet unto every man an house of the wicked, and treasures of wickednesse? (so some read it) see chap. 2.2. with the Note. The Vulgar reads it, (and Gualther disliketh it not) Is there yet fire in the house of the wicked? sc. the fire of Gods wrath? and treasures of wickednesse, as fuell cast upon it, to con∣sume all? See Jam. 5.1, 2, 3. Treasures of wickednesse profit not, Prov. 10.2. sith to heap up sinne, is to heap up wrath, Rom. 2. and to rake together ill-gotten goods, is to carry home a fardle of plaguy-clothes, and death with them. Ephraim
said yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance Hos. 12.8. But in so do∣ing, Ephraim fed upon the wind ver. 1. yea upon pestilentiall ayre: he daily in∣creased lies and desolation, that is, such lying vanities as bring desolation, and not consolation:Desolationem potius quam consolationem. Aug. Epist. 121. ad Probam. as hale hell at the heeles of them, (as we see in the parable of that wretched rich man Luk. 16.) Animam ipsam incendio gehennae mancipant, the fire that is in them shall feed upon their soules, and flesh thoroughout all eternity. Out of dores therefore with these treasures of wickednesse, by restoring them to the right owners, as Zacheus did; and as Justinian the Emperour, who would not put the vessels of the Temple taken by Titus, and recovered from Gensericus, into the treasury, but restored them. and the scant measure that is abominable?] Heb: the Ephah of leaxenesse, (so called,Modius maci∣lentus. both because it wante of its due proportion, and makes men leane) full of wrath: q. d. you scant it to those you trade with, but God fills it up with his fierce wrath and indignation. See Am. 8.5. with the Note. Verse 11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked ballances] Shall I cleare and acquit such? I that am the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, I abhorr all injustice?Exod 34.7. Iob. 8. I that have named my self a God that will by no meanes cleare the guilty, nor take the wicked by the hand? Doe they think to draw me in as a par∣ty? or that I will beare with their false and fraudulent dealings, which I have so oftdeclared against, and doomed both in the law, and by my servants Solomon, Amos, and others. No: assure your selves, your sins shall find you out, and I will curse you, smite you, plague you, and so set it on, as no creature shall be able to take it off. Let earthly Judges warp, as they will, and wink at sin, I nei∣ther can nor will: but as men have sowed, so they shall reape; as they have sow∣ed in hardnesse of heart, so they shall reape in horrour of conscience, & quorum eculos culpa clausit, poena aperiet, as they have lived unconscionably, so they shall die uncomfortably: at which times, their treasures of wickednesse shall leave them in the lurch: as the devill leaves witches, when they come to prison. Verse 12. For the rich men thereof are full of violence] After that they have once enriched themselves by fraud and false-dealing, they take the boldnesse openly to oppresse, and to exercise regiment without righteousnesse, which is no better then robbery with authority: of which before chap. 2. and 3. Thus wicked men wax worse and worse 2 Tim. 3.13. till wrath come upon them to the utmost 2 Thess. 2. and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies] Not the rich men only are in fault: but as the Cretians, so these are alwayes liars, loud and lewd liars: their tongue is deceitfull in their mouth; so that they no sooner open their mouthes, but swarmes of lies issue out: they are mendacierum loquacissimi, they have taught their tongues to speak lies Ier. 9.5. they are now become artists at it: Yea they take fast hold of deceit Ier. 8.5. so that they cannot be got off, without striving. This is lamentable, and yet common: especially in trading and traffiquing. But oh when shall that golden age return, that the argument may againe proceed, Sacerdos est, non fallet: Christianus est, non mentietur. He is a minister, and will not deceive you: He is a Christian, and will not lie! See Esa. 63.8. Verse 13. Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee] This is one twig of that rod Vers, 9. that now they shall heare and feel too, that would not harken to Gods word. Bernard telleth us concerning a brother of his; that when he gave him many good instructions and he, being a souldier, minded them not: he put his finger to his sides and said, One day a speare shall make way to this heart of thine, for instructions and admonitions, to enter. God can (and, where he inten∣deth mercy will) make way for his his word by his rod: and seale up instructions by chastening men with paine upon their beds, and the multitude of their bones with strong paine Iob 33.16, 19. He can fasten them to their beds, as he did Abime∣lech, David, Hezekiah, and thereby tame them, and take them a link lower Iob 33.17. He can smite them with sicknesse, and make them desolate, as it is here: with such sicknesse as shall make their best friends afraid of them, and that none dare look at them, but as through a grate: and all this with a sting too in the taile of it, Because of thy sins. Fooles, because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities are afflicted. Their soule abhorreth all manner of meate (so sick they
are and stomackelesse, that nothing will down with them) and they draw neare to the gates of death Psal. 107.17, 18. This was the case of that rich and wretched Cardinall Henry Beauford Bish: of Winchester and Chancellour of England,Fox Martyr. fol. 925. in the raigne of Henry 6. who tossing upon his sick-bed, and perceiving he must die, murmured at sicknesse and death, that his riches could neither relieve him under the one, nor reprieve him from the other. This was also the case of that great Emperour Charles 5. of whom Du-plessy reporteth, that when he was old and crazy, he cursed his honours, his victories, trophies, riches, saying, Abite hinc, abite longe, Away, be gone miserable comforters are ye all. Mention is made before of a great man that wrot this a little before his death, Spes & fortuna Valete. And surely there are not a few rich Cormorants, who may well say to their wealth when they are sick, as Cornelius Agrippa did to his familiar spirit, Abi perdita bestia, quae me predididsti, Be gone thou wicked beast, that hast been mine undoing. &c. A promise contrary to this threatening in the text is that Esai 33.24. And the inhabitant shall not say I am sick: the people that dwell therein, shall be forgiven their iniquity. Verse 14. Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied] Either as not having enough to satisfy; but prisoners pittance, so much only as will keep life and soule together: Or else, troubled with a bulimy, an appetitus caninus, a weakenesie of the dis∣gestive faculty, so that thy meate feeds thee not: the staffe of it being also bro∣ken by God, the nutritive property of it being taken away. See the Note on Hag. 1.6. and thy casting down shall be in the middest of thee] Thou shalt be laid low enough by civill and intestine discords, which as a fire feedeth upon the people Es. 9.19. no man shall spare his brother. Or, like as an hungry man snatcheth on the right haud, and eateth on the left hand, and yet is not satisfied ver. 20. till thine unnaturall con∣vulsions end in a deadly consumption. and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver] Thou shalt catch up thy chil∣dren, thy jewels &c. and think to secure them from the enemy, but shalt not be able. Of this misery we had over-wofull experience in our late unnaturall gar∣boiles. and that which thou delivsrest; will I give up to the sword] Other judgements forerun the sword: which, when they will not do, the sword will then contemne the rod Ezek. 21.10 that is, it will set at naught whatever the rod hath done, and come furbished and sharpened for the slaughter. Verse 15. Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reape] This had been long since threa∣tened by Moses Deut. 28.38, 39 40. and was now above 700. yeares after to receive its accomplishment in this people. There is an infallibility in all the menaces of Gods mouth. Men are apt to think that they were uttered in terrorem only; and to put them off, as those in the Gospel did, with a God forbid, Whe knowes if the Lord will deale with us according to all his wondrons workes, that this evil may passe from us Ier. 21.2? But what saith the Prophet Zephany?Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the middest thereof: he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judge∣ment to light; be faileth not: but the unjust knoweth no shame: sin hath woaded such an impudency in his face, that he shuns no sin, dreads no danger. Verse 16. For the statutes of Omri are kept] Subest verbis hisce sarcesmus. Here the Prophet taunteth them for their Idolatry: and telleth them plainely what will be the issue of it. q. d. You think you deale wifely and take a safe course for your selves, that together with Ephraim you are joyned to idols, and have such great names as Omri and Ahab to countenance you therein. Omri's statutes can be obser∣ved, when mine lie neglected. Haec tibi pro vili, sub pedibusque jacent.Ovid The workes of the house of Ahab that Non-such can be imitated, and their counsels embraced, when my work lies undone, and my counsell is rejected Luk. 7.30. Sanè benè. Ful wel ye reject the commandement of God (being ingrati gratiae Dei as Ambrose speaketh) that ye may keep your own tradition Mar. 7.9. And do not the Papists even the very same at this day. The Popes Canons are kept exactly, and all the
rites of the Church of Rome: they walk in the track of the Trent-conventicle, and hold it worse to deface an Idoll, then to kill a man: to eate flesh or egges on a fasting day, then to commit incest: to work on a holy day, then to break the sabbath. Ther's no command of the morall law but they can dispense with it: but none of their ceremoniall lawes. Let God (say they, profanely) look to the breach of his own law; we will look to ours. that I should make thee a desolations] Luther here observeth, that oppression and other violations of the second table, God usually punisheth with war, famine, and pestilence: but breaches of the first table, and especially idolatry, with utter deso∣lation. This is a land-destroying sin Ier. 22.7, 8, 9. therefore ye shal beare the reproach of my people] that is, of such as had been my people, if you could have held you so; but you are now, loammi, dispriviledged. Or, that which I threatened in the law long since to bring upon you, if ye carried not your selves as my people; or that which you deserved for having profaned the name and title of being my people Ezek. 36.20, 23. Rom. 2.24. with Luk. 12.47. CHAP. VII. Verse I. WOe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer-fruits] Allai li Alasse for me. This last sermon of his, the Prophet be∣gins with a patheticall quiritation: bewailing his own unhappinesse in the little good successe of his ministery. Mirifice autem nostris temporibus hic sermo convenit, saith Gualther: This discourse suites well with these times; wherein we may justly cry out with the Prophet Esay, Who hath beleeved our report? And againe, O my leanenesse, my leanenesse! woe is me, for there is only as the shaking of an olive-tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done Esai. 24.13, 16.Hei mihi quàm pingui macer est mihi taurus in arvo. Though he had worne himself to a very sceleton in the Lords work; yet had he laboured in vaine, Israel was not gathered chap. 49.4, 5. and hence his wofull complaint. The like we read of Elias 1 King. 19.10. where he bitterly bewailes his alone∣nesse: So did Ahanasius in his age, and Basil in his. Fasciculus temporum Anno, 884. cryes out, for the paucity of good people, Heu, heu, Domine Deus, Alasse, Lord, how few appeare to be on thy side. Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto.Virgil. And Gualther complaines, that the Anabaptists in Germany urged this as chief ar∣gument to draw people from communion with our churches,In loc. that there was so little good done by preaching, and so few soules converted. Hence some mini∣sters despond, and are ready to kick up all. Latimer tells of one who gave this answer why he left off preaching, because he saw he did no good. This, saith Latimer, is a naughty, a very naughty answer. A grief it will be, and fit it should be: piety to God and pitty to men calls for it. Christ wept over Ierusalem: Paul had great heavinesse and continuall sorrow in his heart (not inferiour to that of a woman in travel) for his contumacious countreymen:. Rom. 9.2. neither could he speak of those lewd losels at Philippi with dry eyes Philip 3.18. But an utter discou∣ragement it should not be, sith our reward is with God howsoever Esay 49.5. and perhaps a larger, because we have wrought with so little encouragement; we have plowed when others have only trod out the corn:Hos. 10.91. they trod and fed toge∣ther, when as those that plow have no refreshing till the work be done. Certaine it is that God will reward his faithfull servants secundum laborem, non secundum proventum,. according to their paines taken in the ministery, and not according to their peoples profiting. There is no cluster to eate] None to speak of: hedge-fruit there is great store: wild-grapes not a few: grapes of Sodom, clusters of Gomorrah: But for good grapes, pleasant fruit, godly people, there is a wondrous scarcity of such. Dio∣genes lighted a candle at noon-day to look for a man: the Host of Nola went to the graves to call for the good men of the town. Tully saith, that if there be one good
Poet in an age, it is well. Christ wondred at one good Nathaniel, and tells us in the same chapter, that they are but few that receive him, and with him the adop∣tion of sons Ioh. 1.12. Clusters we must not look for: bu if there be found two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough: four or five in the outmost fruitfull branches, it's well. Sufficit mihi auditor unus, sufficit nullus.Isa. 17.6. Paul when he came first to Philippi had a poore audience; only a few women Act. 16.13. and one convert: neither had he much better successe at Athens; and no Church could be planted there Act. 17. my soule desired the first ripe fruites] praecocem fructum, the rath-ripe fruit, as a great dainty, a precious rarity. We highly prize nettle-buds, when they first bud: so doth God our young services. Ier. 1.11. he made choice of the almond tree because it blossometh first: so of Ieremy from his infancy. He called for first-fruites of trees, and of the earth, in the sheafe, in the threshing-floore, in the dough, in the loaves. He would have eares of corne, dried by the fire; and wheat beaten out of the green eares Lev. 2.14. He would have the primirose of our child-hood. There were three sorts of first-fruites: 1. Of eares of corne offered about the Passeover. 2. Of the loaves, offered about Pentecost. 3. About the end of the yeare, in Autumne. Now of the two first God had a part, not of the last. He likes not of those Arbores autumnales Jude 13.. that bud at later end of harvest. Conversion (as Divines observe) usually falleth out between eighteen yeares of age, and eight and twenty: Besides Abraham in the old Testament, and Nicodemus in the New, we have not many instances of men converted in old age. When people grow croked and rooted in evill practises, they are hardly ever set straight againe. Remember therefore thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth:Eccles. 12.1. his soule delighteth in the first ripe fruites. Remember that Jesus Christ shed his blood for thee, when he was but 8. dayes old: and took thee into his family by baptisme, when thou didst hang on thy mothers brest. Verse 2. The good man is perished out of the earth] Heb: The Saint, or graci∣ous man, that out of mercy obtained of God, can extend mercy to men. Rari quippe boni. Of such it may be said, as One doth of faithfull friends in this age, that they are all (for most part) gone on pilgrimage: and their return is un∣certaine. and there is none upright among men] None (to speak of) that maketh straight pathes for his feet Heb. 12.13. that foots it aright, according to the truth of the Gospell Gal. 2.14. that walketh evenly Gen. 17.1. and accurately,. as it were by line and by rule Eph. 5.15. and that halts not between two opinions, as those Israelites; but is right in his judgement, and undefiled in his way Psal. 119.1. rather desiing to be good, then to seem to be so: few such to be found surely: black swans you may count and call them. Sed nec Brutus erit, Bruti nec avunculus usquam.Inven. They all lie in wait for blood] A company of sanguinaries, blood-suckers, hun∣ting for the precious lives of men; but especially of such as reprove them in the gate. If you touch them in their lusts, they will seek to touch you in your life, as Ioash did Zachary, and as the Priests and people said of Jeremy This man is wor∣thy to die. All malice is bloody, and wisheth him out of the world, whom it spiteth. they bunt every man his brother with a net] They add fraud to their force, and craft to their cruelty: these seldome goe fundered; as some write of the asp, he never wanders alone without his companion with him; and as the scripture speakes of those birds of prey and desolation, none of them shall want their mate. Esa. 34.16. The matter is made the worse, because it is a brother whom they hunt; whether he be so by race, place, or grace, a brother should be better dealt with. Verse 3. That they may de evill with both hands earnestly] Heb: for good and all, or, for adoe: that they may speak and do evill as they can Ier. 3.5. and seek to out-sin one another; like unhappy boyes that strive who shall go furthest in the dirt. Nolunt solita peccare, saith Seneca: Et pudet non esse impudentes, saith Austin. Luther testifieth of the Monkes in Germany, that they were so desperately
wicked, ut nihil cogitent quod non idem patrare ausint, that they could not devise that wickednesse, which they durst not do. The Prince asketh] A beggerly practise for a Prince, but so base they were grown, and so greedy of filthy lucre. The Prince asketh, and, by asking onely, com∣pelleth: for who dare deny him? If some Naboth do, he shall die for it. There is a memorable story of a poor man in Spain, to whom when the Lords Inquisitours sent for some of his pears, which they had cast their eye upon; he for fear of offending, brought them his pears,Heyl. Geog. tree and all by the roots. and the Judge asketh for a reward] Heb.Plaut. The Judge for a reward, sc. will gra∣tifie that sordidum Poscinummium, the Prince: who when he giveth him his Com∣missions hinteth to him haply,Dio. as Nero did to his publike Officers, Scis quid nobis opus est. Thou knowest what I want, and must have: see then that thou help me to it.Speed. Such trading there was likewise betwixt our Rich. 2. and Judge Belknap with his fellows. To this purpose, the Chaldee paraphrast here: The Prince, saith He, requireth supplies of the Judge, and this bespeaketh him, Fac pro me, & retribuam tibi; Negotiate for me, and I will be thy pay-master; favour me, help mee at my need, and I will requite thy curtesie, whensoever thou wilt. Thus muli mutuo scabunt, one hand claws another: and betwixt the oppressive Prince, and unco∣scionable Judge, the law is slacked, and judgement doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compasse about the righteous: therefore wrong judgement proceedeth, Hab. 1.4. and the great man, hee uttereth his mischievous desire] Heb. he speaketh out the corruption of his soul. He doth it. Emphaticum est pronomen Ipse, saith Calvin. This same He hath a speciall Emphasis in it, q. d. This impudent man being now past all grace (for Illum ego perisse dico,Curtius. cui perit pudor) boasteth of his villany: and thinks to bear it out bravely, because it is facinus majores abollae, the fact of a great One. But who is this He, this great man in the Text, that dares thus obtrude, and justifie to the world his most malapert misdemeanour? The rich Client, saith Calvin,Ibi fas ubi maxima mer∣ces. that hath his money to plead for him: for in suits both of love and of law, money (mostly) maketh mastery: and Angels trouble the current of justice (saith One) at certain seasons. Others understand it of Counsellours, Pleaders, Advocates, Sollicitours, and other Officers of Justice: who when as they ought to reprove the iniquity of the Judges, do rather help it forward, by justifying the wicked for a reward, and taking away the righteousnesse of the righteous from him, Esay 5.20. by making the law a nose of wax, and by quirks and devices, varnishing falshood and wrong-dealing. so they wrap it up.] Contorcnplicant: they wreath their wrong-dealings together, as a rope twisted of many threeds,Speed. till their iniquity be found to be hatefull: till there wanteth but an hurdle, an horse, and a halter (as Belknap said of himself) to do them right. They make a league together, they joyn and strengthen their evil counsels, and frauds, &c, so Mr. Diodate. These men agree among themselves, and conspire with one consent to do evil: so the Genevists. Verse 4. The best of them is as a brier] which a man cannot handle without hurt. See 2 Sam. 23.6. Psal. 55.21. and 58.10. Ezek. 2.6. Mat. 7.16. and 13, 7, 22. so, you cannot deal with them without danger: guilt, or grief you shall be sure of. Lot felt it so at Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. and so did thoe that set up that bramble A∣bimelech, for their king, Judg. 9. The most upright is sharper then a thorn-hedge] Ʋt ibi inveniatur dolor, ubi spe∣rabatur auxilium, saith Hierom here: so that a man shall have grief, where he ho∣ped for help and succour: as a man that taking hold of a thorn-hedge to get over, hath his fingers prickt by it, and is glad to let go: Or, as a sheep, that flying to the bush for defence in weather, loseth part of her fleece. Now if the best, and most upright among them were no better: what can be imagined of the many? and what better can be hoped for by us (for one egge is not more like another,. then these times are those here described: it is but the same fable acted over again, onely every thing is now worse then ever) then a day of visitation, a time of perplexily, as it followeth here? For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they bee drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry, Nah. 1, 10. as sear thorns under the pot, Eccles. 7.6. I will go thorow these briers, saith God, I
will burn them together, Esay 27.4. they shall be utterly burnt with fire in the same place, 2 Sam. 23.7. that is, in hell, as some interpret it. The day of thy watch-men, and thy visitation cometh] Where sinne is in the saddle, punishment will be upon the crupper. God will have a visitation-day: and that for his Watch-men, Prophets, and Governours, as well as for the common sort. Thy visitation cometh, Thou shalt share in punishment with them, as thou hast done in sinne: neither shall it help thee to say, Our Watch-men were in fault: for God will visit you all: and his Visitation-Articles will bee very strict and cri∣ticall. Now shall be their perplexity] They shall be so intricated, and intangled; so en∣snared and ensnarled, as that they shall not know which way to turn them. They shall be in as great a distresse as Israel was at the red-sea, Exod. 14.3. or as the Jews at Shushan were, when the decree was gone out for their utter destruction, Esth. 3.15. or as Manasseh was, when taken by the Assyrians among the thorns, he was bound with fetters, and carried to Babylon, 2 Chron. 33.11. Verse. 5. Trust ye not in a friend] Friends (said Socrates) there is no friend: And a friend is a changeable creature, saith Another: all in changeable colours as the Peacock, as often changed as moved. Besides,. many friends are not more fickle then false, like deep ponds, cleer at the top, and all muddy at the bottome. Fide ergo: sed cui vide. Try before you trust: and when you have tried your ut∣most, trust not over-farre, lest you cry out at length, as Queen Elizabeth did, In trust I have found treason: or as Julius Caefar, when stabb'd by Brutus among others, What thou my sonne Brutus? He was slain in the Senate-house, with 23. wounds, given (most part) by them whose lives he had preserved. Put ye not confidence in a guide] Potenti & pollenti consilio & auxilio.Tarnou. Be he never so potent, or politick, beyond thousand others, as the word importeth: and as the people said to David, But now thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Sam. 18.3. thou art the light of Israel, thou art the breath of our nostrils: so that if thou mis∣tary, we shall all breath out our last. All which notwithstanding, Princes are not to be trusted, Psal. 62.7. and 118.8, 9. and 146.3. for either they may die, or their affections may die; all their golden thoughts may perish. Great mens words, saith One, are like dead mens shooes: hee may go bare-foot that waiteth for them. Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom] from thy wife, thine , called the wife of thy bosome, because she should be as dear unto thee as the heart in thy bosom. Be not too open-hearted to her, lest she tell all, as Sam∣psons wife: or as Fulvia in Salust, who declared all the secrets of Cncius,In bell. Cati∣linar. a noble Roman, her foolish lover. A fool telleth all, saith Solomon, Prov. 29.11. he is as little able to keep, as to give counsel. He is full of chinks, and leaks every way: the doors of his mouth are seldome kept shut: you may know him by his gaping: fools are called by Aristophanes, and Lucian, , Gapers. but a wise man keepeth it in till afterwards, Prov. 29.11. Tacitus he holds to be the best Historian: and keeps his mouth with a bridle as David did, Psal. 39. and as the Poets fain of Pegasus, that he had a golden bridle put upon him by Minerva, their goddesse of Wisdome. God and Nature have taught us by the site of the tongue in a mans mouth to take heed to it, and to keep the doors of it: and when all's done, to pray God to keep that door, Psal. 141.3. The tongue is ever in udo, in a moisture: but yet tied by the roots, that it may not stirre out of place; It is also guarded with a percullis of teeth, and a two-leaved gate of lips, which we must carefully keep, and hold that for an Oracle, Si sapis, arcano vina recende cado. Verse 6. For the sonne dishonoureth the father] Or, revileth the father,Menabbe. be-Nabals him, beknaves him (of Nabal comes Nebulo) turpitudine afficit bespatles him, vilifieth him. This is monstrous wickednesse, Mal. 1.6. and a sure signe the devil hath set his limbs in a man that is thus unnaturall, fierce, traiterous, heady, high-minded: which yet is foretold of these dregs of times, these last and worst dayes, both by our Saviour, Mat. 10.21, 35, 36. and likewise by St. Paul, 2 Tim. 3.3, 4.
Such a sonne was He, who when his father complained, that never father had so undutifull a child as he had: Yes,Full. holy State said his sonne, (with lesse grace then wit) my grandfather had. Such a sonne was Ham, and Absalom, and Amida, son of Mu∣leasses King of Tunes,Turk hist. 745. who cast his father out of his Kingdom, and put out his eyes: and Henry,Speed. eldest sonne to our Henry 2. who rebelled against his father, and died before him of a fever, and a flux, with excoriatiation of the bowels: And lastly, Adolphus Egmondanus,Cominaeus. who imprisoned his own fater six yeers, for no other cause but for living so long; and keeping him from the Dukedome of Gelder∣land. The daughter riseth up against her her mother] As Mr. Fox mentioneth, some that witnessed against their own parents here in Q. Maries dayes: and were a means of their Martyrdome. A mans enemies are the men of his own house] See Mat. 10.36. with the Note, and take our Saviours counsel there; Be ye wise as serpents, innocent as doves: but beware of men, yea of the men of your own house. Fide Deo soli: mortali fidito nulli: Fallunt mortales: fallere Jova nequit. Verse 7. Therefore will I look unto the Lord] Therefore: inasmuch as there is no faith nor fair-dealing amongst men, I will look unto the Lord; look wishly and in∣tently, as a watch-man in his watch-tower doth look as farre as ever he can see on every side. I also will lift up mine eyes unto those hills of heaven, from whence cometh my help, Psal. 121.1. I will pray and look up, Psal. 5.3. I will keep close communion with the Lord, and by faith commit the keeping of my soul to him in well-doing, as unto a faithfull Creatour, 1 Pet. 4.19. This I will do: and yet more then this. I will wait for the God of my salvation] If he tarry, I will wait for him: be∣cause he will surely come,Rev. 13.10. & 14.12. Psal. 119. he will not tarry, Hab. 2.3. This is the voice of faith: and here is the faith and patience of the Saints. God sometimes lies off and stayes long; even till our eyes even fail with looking for his salvation; and all to try what we will do: as Samuel tried Saul, who because he stayed not out his just time, lost his kingdom. David waited for for the kingdom; and had it not, till he had learned to quiet and behave himself as a child weaned of his mother, Psal. 131.2. Those in Esther waited for deliverance: and had it not, till almost forsaken of their hopes. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord, saith dying Jacob: and I will wait for the God of my salvation,Gen. 49. saith our Prophet here, for a president to all the good souls of his time. Let us but consider our distance from God in worth and degree; together with our dependance upon him, our undone condition without him, how long he waited for us, how he hath hitherto helped us, as 1 Sam. 7.12. and now seems to say unto us,Joh. 13.7. as he did once to Peter, What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter; and we shall be content to wait, as here, and to say, My God will hear me] According to my faith, and his own faithfulnesse. The whole force of faith consisteth in this, saith Luther, Ʋt quis benè applicet prono∣mina, that a man will apply pronounes:Luth. in Gal. 1. that he can fiducially say, My God: and, will hear me. Were it not for this word of possession mine, the devil might say the Creed to as good purpose as we. He beleeveth there is a God, and a Christ, and such a Christ, as is there described: but that which torments him is, he can say my, to never an Article of the Faith. Time was, when Christ heard the devil begging that he might enter into the swine: but he could not say, My God hath heard me. Let us secure our interest in God: let us individuate Christ, and appropriate him to our selves,. by a particular faith, and then all shall be well with us. Verse 8. Rejoyce not against me, O mine enemy] Here's the triumph of faith, in the fail of outward comforts, in the middest of the worlds insultations and irrisions. Ne laeteris de me. O daughter of Babylon that art to be destroyed, thou that art victrix gentium, captiva vitiorum (as Austin said of Rome in her pride) thou that for present carriest the ball upon the foot, and none can come neer thee: Rejoyce not against me, as forlorn and hopelesse: say not, This is Zion the outcast, whom no man seeketh after.Jer. 30.17. For assure thy self, The right hand of the Lord will change all this, and
Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. When I fall, I shall arise] Because fall I never so low, I cannot fall below the supporting hand of God, which will help me up againe Psa. 37.24. The wick∣ed fall and never rise Am. 8.14. they shall drink of the cup of Gods wrath, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more Jer. 25.27. their carcasses shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handfull after the harvest-man, and none shall gather them Jer. 9.22. This is fearfull. If Haman fall before Morde∣cai the Jew, he shall not easily stop, or step back. Esth. 6.13. A Jew may fall before a Persian and get up and prevaile. But if a Persian or other persecutor begin to fall before a Jew, he can neither stay, nor rise. There is an invisible hand of Omnipotency that strikes in for his own, and confounds their opposites. when I sit in darknesse, the Lord shall be a light unto me] He can lighten the grea∣test darknesse: as he did the dungeons to the Martyrs.Acts &. mon. 857. From the delectable Or∣chard of the Leonine dungeon: so Algerius an Italian Martyr dated his heavenly Epistle. I am now in the Bishop of Londons Cole-house (saith Mr. Philpot) a dark and ugly prison as any is about London: but my dark body of sin hath well deserved the same: and the Lord now hath brought me into outer darknesse, that I might be the more lightned by him: as he is most present with his children in the middest of darknesse. And in his letter to the Lady Vane, I thank the Lord,Ib. 166 saith He, I am not alone, but have six other faithfull companions, who in our darknesse do cheerfully sing hymnes and praises to God for his great goodnesse. We are so joyfull, that I wish you part of my joy &c. The posy of the city of Geneva stamped round about their mony was formerly out of Iob,Ibid. Post tenebras spero lucem, After darknesse I look for light. But, the Reformation once settled amongst them, they changed it into Post tenebras lux. Light after darknesse.Scultet. Aunal. Like as the Saxon Princes, before they became Christians, gave for their armes a black horse;Cranz. in Saxon. but being once baptized, a white. Verse 9. I will beare the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him] The Church had sinned, and God was angry with her. So Zech. 1.12. Esay 57.17. What meane then the Antinomians to tell us that God is never an∣gry with his people, for their foule and flagitious practises, no not with a fatherly anger? nor chastiseth them for the same, no not, so much as with a fatherly chastize∣ment?Virg. Aeneid. Is not this contra Solem mingere? Godlinesse is on target against affliction. Blind Nature saw this. —nec te tua plurima, Pentheu, Labentem texit pietas— Onely it helpes to patient the heart under affliction by considering 1. That it is the Lord. 2. That, a man suffers for his sin, as the penitent theef also confessed Luk. 24.41.3. That the rod of the wicked shall not lie long upon the lot of the righte∣ous. . Say we then, every one with David, I know that thy judge∣ments are right, and thou hast afflicted me justly, Psal. 119.75. yea in very faithfulnesse hast thou done it, that thou mightest be true to my soule. And with that Noble Du-plessy, who when he had lost his onely son, a gentleman of great hopes (which was the breaking of his mothers heart) quieted himself with these words of David, I was silent and said no word, because thou Lord diddest it.Psal. 39. See my Love-tokens pag. 145.146. &c. It shall be our wisdome in affliction to look to God, and to reflect upon our sins, taking his part against our selves: as a Physi∣cian observes which way nature workes, and helpes it. until he plead my cause] As a faithfull Patron, and powerfull Avenger: for though it be just in God that I suffer, yet it is unjust in mine enemies, who shall shortly be soundly paid for their insolencies, and cruelties. he will bring me forth to the light] He will discloud these gloomy dayes, and in his light I shall see light. I shall behold his righteousnesse] that is, his faithfulnesse in fulfilling his Promise of deliverance in due time. Meane-while I will live upon reversions, live by faith and think to make a good living of it too. All the wayes of God to his people are mercy and truth Psa. 25.10. this is a soul-satisfying place of scripture indeed. All
the passages of his providence to them, are not onely mercy but truth and righteous∣nesse: they come to them in a way of a promise: and by vertue of the Covenant, wherein God hath made himself a voluntary debter to them, 1 Joh. 1.9. Verse 10. Then she that is mine enemy shall see it &c.] Not onely shall I behold his righteousnesse (as before) but mine enemy shall see it, and feel it too, to her small comfort. They shall see it when 'tis too late to remedy it: as they say, the Mole never opens her eyes, till pangs of death are upon her. And shame shall cover her,] when she shall see that thou hast shewed me a token for good; that thou hast holpen me, and comforted me, Psal. 86.17. which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God.?] So laying her religion in her dish, whereby God became interested in her cause, and concerned in point of honor, to appear for her. The Church is no lesse beholden to her enemies insolencies for help, then to her own devotions: for God will right himself, and her together. See Joel. 2.17. with the Note. Mine eyes shall behold her] and feed upon her misery, not as mine enemy, but as Gods: nor out of private revenge, but out of zeal for his glory. Now shall she be trodden down, as the myre of the streets] Erit infra omnes infimos: she shall be as mean as may be. Nineveh that great city, is now a little town of small trade; Babylon is nothing else but a sepulture of her self. Those four Monar∣chies that so heavily oppressed the Church, are now laid in the dust, and live by fame onely: so shall the Romish Hierarchie, and Turkish Empire. All Christs enemies shall shortly be in that place that is fittest for them; sc. under his feet, as was before noted: he will dung his Church with the carcasses of all those wilde boars, and buls of Bashan, that have trod it down. Verse 11. In the day that thy walls are to be built] In the type, by Nehemiah, chap. 3. who did the work with all his might: and having a ready heart, made rid∣dance, and good dispatch of it.Mar. 16.15. In the truth, and spiritually, when the Gospel was to be preached to every creature, and a Church collected of Jews and Gentiles. The Church is in the Canticles said to be a garden enclosed: such as hath a wall about it, and a well within it, Cant. 4.12. See the Note there. God will be favourable in his good pleasure unto Zion,Psal 51.18. and build the walls of Jerusalem. His spirit also will set up a standard, in his Saints, against strong corruptions and temptations: and make them more then conquerours, even Triumphers, Esay 59.19. Rom. 8.37. 2 Cor. 2.14. In that day shall the decree be farre removed] That decree of the Babylonians, forbidding the building of the Temple and City, shall be reversed: and those sta∣tutes that were not good, (given them by Gods permission, because they had despised his statutes, Ezek. 20.24, 25.) shall be annulled, and removed farre away. Some read it, In that day shall the decree go farre abroad, and interpret it, by Psal. 2.7, 8. of the doctrine of the Gospel. Verse 12. In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria] To thee, Ieru∣salem, in the Type, shall recourse be had from all parts, as if thou wert the chief city of the world. (Pliny saith, that in his time she was the most famous of all the cities of the East: and Titus himself is said to have wept at the last destruction of it by his souldiers, whom he could not restrain from firing the Temple) To the new Je∣rusalem, the Church of the New Testament, in the Antitype: from whence the Gospel was sent out to every creature which is under heaven, Col. 1.23. and whereunto people of all sorts flowed, and many nations came, Mic. 4.1, 2. with highest acclamations, most vigorous affections, and utmost indeavours bestowing themselves upon the Lord Christ, Act. 2.9. &c. Jerusalem, in the Hebrew tongue, is of the duall number; in re∣gard of the two parts of the city, the upper and the nether town. Or, (as the Caba∣lists give the reason) in regard of a twofold Jerusalem, the heavenly and the earthly: and the taking away of the earthly, they say, was signified, by the taking away of the letter jod out of Jerushalaijm, 2 Sam. 5.13. But Jerusalem which is above is free, firme, and full; the desolate (once so) having many more children then she that hath an husband, Gal. 4.26, 27. whom the Lord of Hosts also doth blesse, saying, (as a Father to them all) Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance, Esay 19.23, 24, 25. and from the fortresse, even to the river] i.e. from all bounds and borders of the
land, yea of the world (Psal. 89.12. Tabor and Hermon are put for the East and West parts of the World) shall people come in to the New Jerusalem, which hath twelve gates: On the East three gates, on the North three gates, on the South three gates, and on the West three gates, Rev. 21.12, 13. See the Note there. Verse 13. Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate] Understand it, not of the land of Caldea, as A lapide doth; but of Judea, which must be desolated before the coming of Christ in the flesh. And this is here foretold. 1 Lest the impenitent, by misapplying the former proimses, should dream of impunity, (saeculi laetitia est impunita nequitia) and 2. Lest the godly, because of this desolation shortly to en∣sue,Aug. should despair of the former promises. Because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings] What their do∣ings were, and what the fruit thereof, see Ier. 9.3, 4, 5, &c & 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. This Prophet could not but tell them of both, though hee had small thank for his love and labour: even as little as Moses had of that perverse people in the wilder∣nesse. His service among the Jews was in some sense like that of Manlius Torquatus among the Romans: who gave it over, saying Neither can I bear their manners, nor they my government. Ieremy once thought to have done so, chap. 20.9. but might not. He lived to see this prophecy of Micah fulfilled: and was afterwards carried down to Egypt by his ungratefull countreymen; where also (for a reward of his 41. years uncessant pains in the Ministery as a Prophet) they stoned him to death,Bucholc. Chronol. who had been a brazen wall to his countrey, ejusque commodis adangendis natus, and a common blessing. Verse 14. Feed thy people with thy rod] Rule them with thy Seepter, or feed them with thy pedum pastorale, thy shepherds-rod, or staffe, Psal. 23.4. This, say some, is the speech of God the Father, to God the Son. Or, (as others) of God to the Ministers and Pastours, charging them to take heed to his flock, and to feed his Church. But it seemeth rather to be a prayer of the Christian Church (seeing the ruine of the Jewish Synagogue) that Christ (the chief Shepherd) would do all good officer for his poor people, feeding them with his rod, that is, with his word and Spirit, guiding them with his eye, Psal. 32.8. leading them in the way everlast∣ing, Psal. 139.24. lest, seduced by their own lusts, or other mens evil lives, they should any way miscarry. the flock of thine heritage] Those poor of the flock, Zach. 11.7. that hear his voice and follow him, John 10.3, 4.5, 27. being holy, harmlesse, tractable, sociable, patient, profitable as sheep; which have wooll for raiment, skin for parchment, flesh for meat, guts for musick, &c. Such shall go in and out, and find pasture, Joh. 10.9. pasture that will breed life, and life in more abundance, verse 10. See Psal. 23.1, 2, 3, &c. Davids Pastorall: where he assureth himself, as a sheep of Christs he∣ritage, that hee shall have all things needfull for life and godlinesse: And so may every poor Christian, grounding his faith upon the Covenant, Ezekiel 34.25, 28. which dwelleth solitarily in the wood] Sleepeth in the woods, Ezek. 34.25. where they meet with many a brush, yea many a bruise, verse 28. where they walk in dark and dangerous paths, even in the valley of the shadow of death, Psal. 23.4. of the darkest side of death, of death in its most horrid and hideous representations. Feed them therefore; fence them with thine omnipotent arm, bear them in thy bo∣som, see to their safety. Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead] Not bite upon the bare ground, but feed plea∣santly, plentifully: feed among the lillies, frequent also the foddering places, turn to the under-shepherds, the Ministers, and so return to the Arch-shepherd and Bishop of their souls, following the Lamb wheresoever he goeth; who will teach them many things, and that out of deepest compassion, Mar. 6.34. who will also shew them great and mighty things, that they knew not, Jer. 33.3. as in the dayes of old] As thou wast with the Church of the Old Testament, so be not wanting to that of the New: but feed them according to the inegrity of thine heart, and guide them by the skilfulnesse of thine hands, Psal. 78.72. Pull them out of the Lions mouth, seek them up when lost, tend them, handle them, heal them, wash them, drive them as they can go, bearing the lambs in thy bo∣some, Esay 40. Do for them, as thou hast ever done for thy people in former
ages. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever: we will shew forth thy praise to all generations Psa. 79.13. Verse 15. According to the dayes of thy comming out of the land of Egypt] Here's a present and full answer to the churches prayer: so ready is the Lord to fulfill the desires of the righteous. It is but Ask and Have: and they are worthily misera∣ble, that will not make themselves happy by asking. The summ of Christs answer is this: As I led Joseph like a flock out of Egypt thorough the wildernesse; and fed them there daily and daintily, with Angels sood (never was Prince so served in his greatest pomp) so will I shew thee marvelous things at Babylon, and bring thee thence with a mighty hand Ezek. 20.34. to make mee a glorious Name Esa. 63.14. and both these deliverances shall be a most certaine type of thy spirituall redemp∣tion by Christ. Loe thus will I do for thee as in the dayes of old ver. 14. and so fit mine answer ad cardinem desiderij, give thee not only the desire of thine heart,Aug. Consc. lib. 5. cap. 8. but the request of thy lipps Psa. 21.2. letit be to thee even as thou wilt Mat. 15.29. Verse 16. The nations shall see and be confounded] Considering how I have de∣feated and befooled them; how I have made all their might to melt, and moulder; they shall stand amazed, and be made a common table-talk: as Belshazzar and the Babylonians were, when Cyrus (Gods servant) suddainly brake in upon them and surprized their city, which they held insuperable: and as the Heathen Emperours of Rome were, when the Christians, under the conduct of Constantine, carried it against them. they shall lay their hand upon their mouth] Be struck dumb, as if they had seen Medusa's head: they shall not be able to contradict the Gospell, or to hinder the progresse of it. Valens the Arrian Emperou comming upon Basil, while he was in holy duties, with an intent to do him hurt, was not only silenced, but so terri∣fied, that he reeled and had fallen,Greg. orat. de laud. Basil. had he not been upheld by those that were with him. their cares shall be deaf] With the sudden bursting forth of Gods wonderfull and terrible works, saith Mr. Diodate. Verse 17. They shall lick the dust like a scrpent] that is, be reduced not only to extreme hunger and penury, but to utmost vility and basenesse of condition, so as to lick the very dust. And whereas it is added like a spent, he puts them in mind of that old malediction Gen. 3. and gives them to know, that as, like that old serpent, they have lifted themselves up against God, so will God cast them down again to the condition of serpents, and abase them to the very dust. See Psa. 22.30 and 72.9. Es. 49.23. they shall move out of their holes like wormes (or creeping things) of the earth] They shall tumultuate, and be all on an huddle, as ants are when their molehill is thrown up with a spade. The Hebrew word imports great commotion and bustle. they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall feare because of thee] O God, or O Church, terrible as an army with banners, Impiety triumpheth in prosperity, trembleth in adversity: and contrarily, saith holy Greenham Since the fall, we tremble before God, Angels, and good men. What have I to do with thee, thou man of God (said She) Art thou come to call to mind my sin and to kill my son? At the siege of Mountabove in France, the people of God within the wals, ever before a sally sang a Psalme: with which holy practise of theirs, the enemy comming acquainted, when they heard them singing would so quake and tremble, crying they come,Spee. belli sal. 282. they come, as though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon them. Verse 18. Who is a God like unto thee?] No God surely (whether so reputed or deputed: whether heathen deities, heavenly Angels. or earthly Rulers) can compare with our God, or come neare him, for pardoning of sin. Indeed none can do it at all but He; as the blind Pharisees saw and could say. Men may par∣don the trespasse, but God alone the transgression. But say, they could do some∣thing that way: yet nothing like our God: who maketh his power appear to be great Num. 14.17 in pardoning such offences as no God or man besides would pardon. See Jer. 3.1. Neh. 9.31. he forgiveth iniquity, transgression and sin Exod. 34.6, 7. that is, all sorts of sins, to all sorts of sinners without excer∣tion,
Mat. 12.31. This is the expresse letter of Gods covenant, which we ought not either to obliterate, or to interline; but to beleeve it in the full lati∣tude and extent. We are apt to cast Gods pardoning-grace into a mould of our own; and to measure it by our modell. But against this we are cautioned Isai. 55.8. God must be magnified in our thoughts, his quarters there enlarged, high and honourable conceptions are to be had of him: or else we wrong him no lesse then we should do a King, by respecting and receiving him no otherwise then we would do another ordinary man. He is set forth here, as a God imparal∣lell, and that not without an interrogation of admiration, O! who is a God like unto thee? Thy mercy is matchlesse, thy grace aboundeth even to an over∣flow. 1 Tim. 1.14. it is more then exceeding, it hath a superpleonasme,. saith the Apostle there. Surely as the Sea swallowes up hugest rocks, and as the Sun scattereth greatest mists: so doth He pardon enormities as well as infirmities, and blotteth out the thick cloud as well as the cloud Isa. 44.22.Jam. 2, His mercy rejoyceth against, or glorieth over judgment: and is ready to say of a great sinner indeed —Jam dignus vindice nodus: The more desperate the disease is, the greater glory redoundeth to him that cureth it. Our Saviour gat him a glorious name by curing incurable diseases: and gained greatest love by franckly forgiving Mary Magdalens and others sins,Luk. 7.42, 47. which were many and mighty, or bony as the Prophets word signifies Amos 5.12. Adams Apostacie, Noahs drunkennesse, Lots incest, Davids blood-guiltinesse, Manasseh his idolatry and witch-crast, Peters thrice denying and abjuring his master, Pauls blasphemy and persecution: All these sins and blasphemies have been forgiven to the sons of men: neither can they commit more then he both can and will remit to the penitent. Note this against Novatus that proud heretick: and strive against that naturall Novatianisme, that is in the timerous conscience of convinced sinners, to doubt and question pardon for sins of Apostasie, and falling after repentance, and to say as those Unbeleevers of old, Can the Lord prepare a table for us in the wildernesse? So, Can he forgive such and such iniquities so oft reiterated? This is a question, no question: what cannot our God do in this kind, who pardoneth sin naturally Exod. 34.6. (and therefore freely as the Sun shineth, or as the Fountaine casteth out waters) who doth it also abundantly Isai 55.7. multiply∣ing pardons as fast as we multiply sins: and lastly, Constantly, Psal. 130.4. Ioh. 1.27. Zach. 13.1. It is his perpetuall act: and it should be as a perpetual picture in our hearts. We should go on our way toward heaven, as Sampson did toward his parents, feeding on this hony-comb. that pardoneth iniquity] Heb: that taketh away, sheere away, non ne sit, sed ne obsit, not sin it self, but the guilt of it; the damning and domineering power of it: this David calleth the iniquity of his sin: and saith that this God forgave him Psal. 32.5. pronouncing himself and all such happy as are so dealt with verse 1.2. and passeth by the transgression] Heb: Passeth over it, taketh no notice of it, as a man in a deep muse, or as one that hath hast of businesse, seeth not things afore him: his mind being upon another matter, he neglects all else besides that. As David when he saw in Mephibosheth the feature of his friend Jonathan, took no no∣tice of his lamenesse, or any other defect or deformity: so God beholding in his people the image of his son, winks at all faults, that he might soon find in them. That which Cicero said flatteringly of Caesar, is truly affirmed of God, Nihil obli∣visci solet praeter injurias, He forgetteth nothing but the wrongs that are daily done him by his; and as it is said of our Henry 6. that he was of that happy memo∣ry, that he never forgat any thing but injury &c. so here.Daniel 198. of the remnant of his heritage] Not of all, but of those poor few that confesse and forsake their sins Pro. 28.13. and in whose spirit there is no guile Psa. 32.2. that are mortified persons Rom. 11.26. with Esay 59.20. It is a priviledge proper to the Communion of Saints.
he retaineth not his anger for ever] Angry he may be, and smite in his anger Esay 57.17. yea he may take vengeance of the inventions of those whom he hath pardoned, Psal. 99.8. temporall vengeance I mean: but it soon repenteth him con∣cerning his servants; and a little punishment serveth turn for a great offence, Jer. 31.19, 20, 21. David, no sooner said, I have sinned, but he heard, The Lord hath taken away thy sin, 2 Sam. 12. because he delighteth in mercy] And hence he pardoneth iniquity of free-grace, ex mero motu, out of his pure and unexcited love, out of his Philanthropy, and unde∣served favour, the sole impulsive cause of pardon. What a man delighteth to do, he will do howsoever. If the Sun delight to run his race, who shall stop him? If God so delight in mercy, that he will save for his Names sake, and come in with his Non obstante, as he doth, Psal. 106.8. who, or what shall hinder him? Verse 19. He will turne again, he will have compassion upon us] Here's the pith and power of faith, particularly applying promises to a mans self. Say that sin hath separated betwixt us and our God, Esay 59.2. and made him send us farre away in∣to captivity: yet he will turn again and yern toward us, he will turn again our capti∣vity as the streams in the South. His compassions are more then fatherly, Psal. 103.13. motherly, Esay 49.15. brotherly, Heb. 2.12. This the Church knows, and there∣fore cries after him,Cant. 8.14. Make hast my beloved; and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Hart, which when it fleeth, looketh behind it, saith the Chaldee Paraphrast there. And this that he will do, she is bold to beleeve. He will, he will, and that to us, saith the Prophet here. Lo this is that work of faith, to wrap it self in the promises, as made to us in particular, 1 Tim. 1.15. and unlesse faith be on this sort actuated, it is, as to comfort, as good as no faith. Compare Mat. 8.26. with Mark. 4.40. He will subdue our iniquities] By force and violence (as the word signifieth) subjugabit, pessundabit, conculcabit. Sin is sturdy, and will rebell, where it cannot reigne. It hath a strong heart, and will not easily yeeld. But yeeld it shall, for God will subdue it. And this is a further favour, (as every former is a pledge of a future) To pardon of sinne, God will adde power against sinne: to justification by Christs merit, sanctification by his Spirit: he will let out the life-blood of sin, and lay it adying at our feet: he will tread Satan with all his black train under our feet shortly, Rom. 16.20. He will not onely turn us againe, but turne his hand upon us, and purely purge away our drosse, and take away all our tinne, Esay 1.25. In fine, hee will so mortifie the deeds of the body by his Spirit, that sinne shall not have dominion over us, Rom. 6.14. shall not play Rex in us: the traveller shall not become the man of the house, as Nathans para∣ble speaketh. And thou wilt cast all their sinnes into the bottom of the sea] Where-hence they shall never be boyed up again. This, the Prophet by an insinuating Apostrophe, turneth himself to God, and speaketh with much confidence. Such is the nature of true faith, sc. to grow upon God, and, as I may so say, to encroach: as Moses did, Exod. 33.12, 13, &c. to chap. 34.10. and as David did, 1 Chron. 17.23. &c. See how he improves Gods promise, and works upon it, ver. 24, 25. he goes it over again, and yet still encroacheth: and the effect was good, chap. 18. We hinder our selves of much happinesse by a sinfull shamefacednesse. Let us come boldly to the throne of grace;Heb. 4. ult. so shall we see our sins, as Israel did the Egyptians dead on the shore. Verse 20. Thou wilt performe the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham] Heb. Thou wilt give: for all is of free gift. His love moved God to promise, his truth binds him to performe, 2 Sam. 7.18, 21. For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart hast thou done all these things. Having made himself a voluntary debter to his people, he will come off fairly with them: and not bee worse then his word, but better. Hence Rev. 10.1. Christ is said to have a rainbowe upon his head: to shew that he is faithfull and constant in his promises, and that tempests should blow over, the skie be cleared. For this is as the waters of Noah unto mee, saith the Lord: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth: so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart, &c. Esay 54.9, 10. God hath hitherto kept
promise with nights and dayes, Jer. 33.20, 25. that one shall succeed the other: therefore much more will he keep promise with his people. which thou hast sworn unto our fathers.] And, in them, to us, by vertue of the covenant. So he spake with us, when he spake with Jacob at Bethel, Hos. 12.4. and that the promises sworn to the Fathers of the old Testament, belong also to us of the New. See Luke 1.55, 73, 74. Now, that God swore at any time to them, or us, hee did it for our sakes doubtlesse: that by two itable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, wee might have a strong consolation: who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us, Heb. 6.17, 18. See the Note there. Gloria Deo in Excelsis.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of NAHUM. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE burden of Nineveh] i. e. The burdenous pro∣phesie. See the Note on Malac. 1.1. It is a burden to wicked men to be told of their sinnes, and fore∣told of their punishments. To whom we may not unfitly apply that of the Civilian, Perquàm durum est,Ʋlpian. sed ita lex scripta est. If it be so tedious to hear of it, what will they do to bear it? Nineveh had fair warning before by Jonah; and for present, the unclean spirit seemed to be cast out of her: but he returned soon after, with seven worse, as appears by this Prophesie; and so their last state was worse then the former, Mat. 12.45. Their bile half-healed, breaking out again, proved to be the plague of leprosie, Lev. 13.18, 19, 20. such as shut them out of heaven. God will do good to those that are good, and continue so. But as for those that turn aside un∣to their crooked wayes, (as all Apostates do) the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, (as cattle are led to the slaughter, or malefactours to execution) but peace shall be upon Israel, Psal. 125.5. The book of the Vision] Or the Epistle of the Vision. Hence some collect, that Nahum went not to Nineveh as Jonah had done; but sent this propheticall Epistle thither, to let them know what should shortly befall them. So Jeremy sent an Epistle to Babylon, chap. 29. and Eliah wrote a threatning letter to Iehoram king of Judah, 2 Chron. 21.12. before his translation to heaven; and lest it to be sent to him by Elisha, or the other Prophets, who durst not shew themselves in his presence; such was his insolent cruelty, as 'tis conceived. of Nahum the Elkoshite] Elkosh was a small town in Galiee beyond Bethabara, as say Hierom and Dorotheus. Here was our Prophet born, and named Nhum, non sine numine, saith Gualther; for Nahum (as Noah) signifieth a Comforter: and
so he proved, by this Book of his, both to the ten Tribes now newly carried captive by the Assyrian Monarch; and also to the other two Tribes,Epiphanius. who were shortly after besieged by the same Assyrian, in the reign of Hezekiah; under whom Nahum prophecied. See the Note on Exod. 3.1. Vers. 2. God is jealous] See the Note on Zech. 1.14. and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth] As he is Pater miserationum, to his people, a father of mercies, and God of consolation: so to his and their enemies he is a most sure and severe revenger, Deus ultionum, as David calleth him, Psal. 94.1. A God of recompenses, as Jeremy, chap. 51.56. And when He comes against a people, he usually takes them to do, when they are at the strongest, and most confident: as Nineveh now was, in the dayes of proud Sennacherib. and is furious] Heb. and is Master of hot wrath: he is all on a light fire, as it were, with fierce indignation against the enemies of his Church: Yet not so, but that he is Master of his anger too; and doth nothing in it, but what is just and equall. Hence the vials of his wrath are said to be golden vials, Rev. 15.7. his an∣ger is holy, his fire is pure, and without smoak. And this is further declared in the following words. The Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries] Such as seek to thrust him be∣side his throne, that oppose his worship, contemn his word, persecute his people, send proud messages after him, saying. We will not have this man to reigne over us: Bring hither those mine enemies, saith He, and slay them before me, Luk. 19.27. As for such as sin of infirmity, and return to him by repentance, they shall not find him furious, but gracious. and he reserveth wrath for his enemies] Their preservation for a time, is but a re∣servation to that wrath to come. As hee precipitateth not his anger, but defers the execution of it, giving men space to repent, as he did Jezabel, Rev. 2. so they shall find that his forbearance is no quittance; and that Poena venit gravior, quò magè tarda venit. Verse 3. The Lord is slow to anger] Slack he is not, as some men count slacknesse, saith St. Peter, but long-sufferring to us-ward, &c. 2 Epist. 3.9, The devil stirred up the Heathen Poets, to perswade people, that God either knew not, or cared not what was done here below: that he was oft from home, feasting with the Ethiopi∣ans, &c. The Epicures also taught the like doctrine:Homer. and the Sadduces among the Jews, the Manichees among the primitive Christians, the Libertines amongst us. But they shall one day find that God is slow, but sure; that the higher he lifteth his hand, the harder he will strike; the further he draweth his bowe, the deeper will bee the wound. and great in power] Heb. Great of power, able to knock down sinners in the very act of their rebellion, and to send them packing to their place in hell. So that it is not for want of power that he is so patient. For the Lord our God is God of gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, Deut. 10.17. But what need we go further then the Text, where he is called, the strong God, great in power, And that will not at all acquit the wicked.] This is the last letter in his name (that nomen majestativum, as Tertullian calleth it,) Exod. 34.7. which he will in no wise for∣get: as neither must we. He will not take the wicked by the hand, saith Job,Job 8.20. nor wink at the workers of iniquity, saith David, Psal. 50.21. but will render a just recom∣pence to every transgression and disobedience, saith Paul, Heb. 2.2. A God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he, Deut. 32.4. the Lord hath his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm] The word Suphab here tendred whirlwind, begins with a small Samech, ad minuendum timorem piis,Buxtorf. Tiberias. 167. ne pro∣pterea terreantur, to take off the Saints from their inordinate fears, and to assure the wicked, that when the Lord cometh, imminet inde Soph finis & exitium: there shall be an end of them, and an utter destruction. As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an everlasting foundation, Prov. 10.25. Or, as some read it, The righteous is the foundation of the world, as firm as the worlds foun∣dation, sc. the earth, which is unmoveable. and the clouds are the dust of his feet] He walketh upon them as men do upon the dust of the earth: he maketh the clouds his charet, and rideth upon the wings of the
wind Psal. 104.3. See Isa. 60.8. and 19.1. The wickeds happinesse shall take its end surely and swiftly, as Ezekiel tells them in his seventh chapter, An end is come, is come, is come. Ver. 4. He rebuketh the sea and maketh it dry] He had shewed what wonders God can do in the ayre. Now he telleth, what he doeth in the water, and in the earth. And it is well observed by an Interpreter, that when the Prophets speak of God,Tarnon. they do for most part imitate the expressions of Moses that most severe law-giver, and allude to his history; to shew, that by the law is the know∣ledge of sin, Rom. 3.20. without which the stony hearts of men melt not, that the promise of the gospell may relish sweetly with them Psal. 19.10, 11. The word here rendreth He rebuketh importeth, that God rateth and rattleth the Sea verborum pedumque strepitu with such a voice and other noise, as causeth fright and flight. The Sea saw it and fled, Iordan was driven back, what ailed thee, O thou Sea that thou fleddest &c. Psal. 114.3, 5. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, they were afraid; the depths also were troubled Psal. 77.16. See Exod. 14.21. Psal. 78.14. and 66.6. and 136.16. and 106.9. This is not in the power of any man to do; though Xerxes vainely attempted somthing, when he wafted two millions of men over the Hellespont, and, for battering his bridge of boates, caused it to be beaten with 300. stripes, and cast a pair of fet∣ters into it, to make it his prisoner. But to how small purpose all this, together with his digging through Isthmus, his drinking up rivers with his army and the like, it well appeared, when he was forced to fly back out of Greece in a poor fishers boat, which being overburdened had sunk all, if the Persians by the casting away themselves, had not saved the life of their king, The story of Canutus the Dane, (somtimes king of England) is well known. He was told by a Court-Pa∣rasite that all things in his dominions were at his beck and command. Canutus (to confute him) caused a chair to be set on the sea-shore; wherein being set, he said to the sea flowing fast toward him. Thou belongest to me, and the land upon which I now sit is mine own, neither is there any whosoever that obeyes me not shall escape unpunished. I command thee therefore thou sea, that thou come up no higher into my land; nor presumest once to wet thy masters legs or garments. But the Sea, keeping his ordinary course, without duty or reverence washed both his legs and gown. He then leaping back said, Let al the inhabitants of the world know,en: Hunting∣ton. that the power of kings is frivolous and vaine; neither is there any mortall man worthy the name of a king, but he to whose beck heaven, earth and sea by his lawes, eternally are obedient. Neither did Canutus after this time weare a crown; but set it upon the Crucifix according to the superstition of those times; thereby acknowledging it to be a royalty proper to Christ alone to rebuke the surges of the sea, and to say unto them Peace, and be still, Luk. 4.24. Mar. 4.39. and drieth up all the rivers] As he did Jordan Ios. 4 2 King. 2. Chereth 1 King. 17.7. the great river Euphrates Rev. 16.12. See the Note there. See also Plin. nat. hist. l. 2. cap. 85. and 103. Bashan languisheth and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth] all the beauty of those fertile and pleasant places fadeth. When the earth beareth fruit and flowers, she is said to yeeld her strength, to bring forth her increase: as when through drought or otherwise she doth not, she is said to languish and hang the head. See Ioe. 1.10.12. If the Eclipse of the Sun cause a drooping in the whole frame of nature, how much more the wrath and vengeance of God? Ver. 5. The mountaines quake at him, and the hills melt] Though vallies and low places are also liable to earthquakes: as Antioch often, Ferrara in Italy An. Dom. 1514. and 1573. yet hill-countreys much more; because there are more holes and cavernes,Alsed. Chro∣nol. See Psal. 29.6. and 144.4. Zach. 14.4, 5. In the yeere 1618. Aug. 25. Pleurs a town in Rhetia was overwhelmed by a hill, which, with a most swift motion opprest 1500. men. So that village aforementioned in the country of Bern, that was over-covered by a hill in an earthquake: to the de∣struction of 50.Polan: synt. families. All this and that which followeth is alledged here, to shew how easily God can overturn the Assyrian greatnesse. and the earth is burnt at his presence] Viz. by his fire from heaven, as Sodom,
and by other his land-desolating judgments, such as Judea (that once fertile, now barren country) Greece, Asia (once so flourishing) Germany, Ireland &c. do at this day grone under. God turneth a fruitful land into barrennesse, for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein. Psal. 107.34. yea the world and all that dwell therein] Quae quidem sunt mira, sed tamen vera divinae potentiae effecta. Wicked men, besides what they here suffer,Tarnou. shall one day give an account of what they have done in the body, with the world all on a light fire about their eares: The triall of their workes shall be by fire 1 Cor. 3.13. the tribunall of fire Ezek. 1.27. the Judge a consuming fire Heb. 12.29. His attendants Seraphins flaming creatures Isai. 6.2. his pleading with sinners in flames of fire 2 Thess. 1.7. the place of punishment, a lake of fire fed with tor∣menting temper Isai. 30.33. Sodoms fire and brimstone was but a toy to it. And shall the Ninivites think to mott up themselves against this formidable fire: which the most solid parts of the world cannot avoid or abide? Ver. 6. What can stand before his indignation?] A glasse bottle may as well stand before a cannon-shot. Theres no standing before a lion, much lesse before a de∣vouring fire, least of all before an angry God. When our Saviour did but put forth a beame of his Deity, and said I am he, the stout souldiers fell to the ground Ioh. 18.6. and there they had lame, if he had not licensed them to rise againe.Augustin. Quid autem judicaturus faciet, qui judicandus hoc fecit? The wicked shall not stand in judgment, saith David Psal. 1.7. who can abide in the fiercenesse of his anger?] Heb:Collectumque premeus volvi sub naribus ignem. in the inflammation of his nostrils. Thus the Prophet describeth Gods terrible executions of justice on the Churches enemies, pulcherrimis metaphoris, hypotypôsi evidentissima, & distributionis artisicio insignissimo by most elegant Metaphors, evident demonstrations, and artifi∣ciall distributions.Crocius in loc. his fury is powred out like fire] A metaphor either from metalls melted, or from showes of raine, such as God powred down upon Sodom (whereunto proba∣bly the Prophet here alludeth, as verse 8. to Noahs flood) flaming showers Jer. 7.20. and 44.6. and the rocks are thrown down by him] that is, by his fierce wrath, when it is at the full height: as the fire which at first burns a little within, upon a few boards and rasters; but when it prevaileth, bursteth out in a most terrible flame: as thunder which we heare at first, a little roaing noise afarr off: but stay awhile, and it is a dreadfull crack, cleaving the very rocks. See Ier. 4.23, 24. Mat. 27.51. Verse 7. The Lord is good] To Israel (though terrible to the Assyrians as hath been plainly and plentifully set forth) to the pure in heart Psal. 73.1. and he doth good Psal, 119.68. to those that are good, that are upright in their hearts Psal. 125.4. These shall tast and see that the Lord is good: these shall fee∣lingly fay,' Oh blessed is the man that trusteth in him, Psal. 34.8. Oh praise the Lord for he is good &c. a strong hold in the day of trouble] Praesidium, aut fortalitium, A strong fort or fortification, better then awer of brasse, or town of warr: the righteous run thereunto and are safe.Prov. 18.10. Hezekiah (for whose sake this is spoken) had the expe∣rience of it. He had a day of trouble and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: the children were come to the birth, and there was not strength to bring forth Esai. 37.3. To God therefore he runs in this dolefull day of his, and had present help. And what though the Gods of the nations had not delivered them: yet Hezekiah's God in whom he trusted did not deceive him as Senacherib said he would ver. 10.12. He is the champion of his church, and will be the strong hold of his people, when the heathens Tutelur Gods, and the Papists Patrone-saints will leave them in the lurch. England was sometime said to have a war-like George, but the Papists be∣ing offended with us (to do us, as they suppose, a mischief) have robbed us of out George, and left us God alone to be our Champion: for which honour and favour all true English hearts are bound to thank them, and can merrily sing as He did once, Contemno minutulos istos deos, modò Jovem propitium habeam, We care not for their He-saints, or she-saints to shelter us: so that the great God will be good to us, a streng-hold in the day of trouble. and he knoweth them that trust in him] that hover and cover under his wings, as
the chickens do under the hens: for that's the force of the Hebrew word here used. Such as these God knoweth for his 2 Tim. 2.19. he knoweth their soule in adversity Psal, 119. he knoweth how to deliver them, as he did the righte∣ous Lot 2 Pet. 2.9. then, when they knew not what to do, as Jehosaphat 2 Chron. 20.12. yet if their eyes be toward him, their affiance in him, he will extricate and deliver them. So well pleased is he with those that trust in him, (for that's meant here by his knowing of them Psal. 1.6. confer Iob 9.29. 1 Thes. 5.12.) he taketh such complacency and delight in them Psal. 147.11. and 33.18. and such continuall care of them, (as hath been proved by an universall experience, nor one instance can be given to the contrary) that they shall be sure to have whatsoe∣ver heart can wish, or need require 2 Sam. 22.2, 3. even miraculous loving kind∣nesse from God in a strong city Psal. 17.7. and 31.21. so great as cannot be uttered Psal. 31.19. This is for the comfort of Gods Israel. But lest the wicked (as they are apt) should meddle with childrens meat, which was never meant for them: lest Niniveh should please her self in a fond conceit of Gods goodnesse to her also, and so turn it into wantonnesse, the Prophet brings in a stinging But in the next words. Ver. 8. But with an over-running flood he will make an end of the place thereof] i. e. of Niniveh that great but bloody city chap. 3.1. Her state shall be utterly ruinated as the old world, by the generall deluge. But because the word here rendred flood is used of rivers that overflow the bankes 2 Chron. 32.4. and the adjunct over-running also implies as much (See Esai 8.8. Dan. 11.10, 40.) I suppose the Holy Ghost here forethreateneth that ruine of this city by the river Tigris, which at an inundation broke out upon the wall, and threw down twenty furlongs thereof. This was a sad foretoken to them of their ensuing desolation by the enemy (as that raine was that fell in Egypt) where it used not to raine (a little before Cambyses with his Persians subdued it) for it fell out in the time of the Siege, as Diodorus testifieth, according to an oracle that the Ninivites had recei∣ved by tradition from their progenitours, sc. that their city should then be taken by the enemy,Diod. Sic. when the river took part against them: and it fell out accor∣dingly. and darknesse shall pursue his enemies] i. e. terrible and inextricable calamities shall overtake them: their ruine shall be irreparable. And indeed it may now be said of Niniveh, which once was of a great city in Strabo, Magna civitas, magna solitudo See Zeph. 2.13, 14, 15. Drusius rendreth it thus, Hostes suos persequi faciet tenebras, He shall cause darknesse to pursue his enemies, Or, He shall make his enemies to pursue darknesse, according to that noted saying of the Ancients, Deus quem destruit, dementat, whom God intends to destroy, him He first infatuateth. But the former sence is the better. Ver. 9. What do ye imagine against the Lord?] because against his people. So Psal. 62.3. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slaine all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence. The blind and bloody Ninivites looked no further then the Jewes whom they invaded: they considered not that God was ingaged in the quarrel of his people. This made the Virgin daughter of Zion, confident of Gods help, shake her head in scorn and pitty at them, saying, Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy One of Israel. Isai. 37.22, 23. She knew well (though her enemies knew not) that as an unskilfull archer in shooting at a beast hitteth a man sometimes: so the Churches adversaries, in troubling of her, trouble Almighty God, who will not faile to be even with them: for he that toucheth Gods people, toucheth the apple of his eye Zach. 2.8. Saul, Saul. why persecutest thou me  Act. 9.4. It was a simple question of Satan to our Saviour,. what have I to do with thee? whilest he vexed a servant of his. Hath he his name from knowledge, and yet could he so mistake himwhom he confessed to be the son of the living God? It is an idle misprision to-sever the sense of an injury done to any of the members, from the head. Drusius reades the text thus, Quid cogitatis de Domino? what think ye of the Lord? what conceit or opinion have ye of him? Doe ye imagine that he cannot performe what he threateneth by his Prophets? or that he cannot,
when he pleaseth, deliver his people out of your hand? he will make an utter end] Not a consumption only, but a consummation: This he is even doing, as the Hebrew hath it: he is busy about it, and will not faile to sinish it: for he useth not to do his work to the halves. Surely a short work will the Lord make in your land, now that he taketh you to do, certo, cito, penitus. assliction shall not rise up the second time] God will dispatch you at one blow. See a like expression 1 Sam. 26.8. Niniveh had many brushes before, by Phraortes king of Medes and his son Ciaxares, and afterwards by the Scythians, whereof See Ier. 49.34. and by Astyages &c. Now Nbuchadnezzar was ap∣pointed by God to make an utter end of it &c. The wicked shall totally and finally be consumed at once. Not so the Saints: these he corrects with a rod, those with a grounded staffe Esa. 32.32. These in mercy and in measure. in the bunches only, he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the East-wind Esa. 27.8. he stayeth such afflictions as would shake his plants too much, or quite blow them down. But to the wicked he hath no such tender respect: he smites them at the root, and, after many blowes, he resolves to have them down. For instance: compare Gods different dealing with Noah and the old world, with Lot and the Sodomites, Israel and the Canaanites, Moses and Pharaoh, David and Saul &c. Fret not there∣fore thy self because of evill-doers Psal. 37.1. when the wicked spring as the grasse, and when all the workers of iniquity do slourish: it is that they shall be destroyed for ever. Psal. 92.7. Pharaoh bad faire way made him till he came to the midst of the sea: not one wave may rise up against him to wet so much as the hoof of his horse. It was a faire Sun-shine-day when Lot went out of So∣dome: but ere night there fll out a dismall change. It was in the Spring that the flood came, then when every thing was in its prime and pride: besides that, the world never more flourished in wealth, peace, arts, and all magnificence: yet sudden destruction came upon them, they were all at once buried in one universall grave of waters. Ver. 10. For while they be folden together as thornes] And so can hardly be hand∣led without hurt: God will burn them together in the same place 2 Sam. 23.7. as a man puts thorns folden, and that cannot easily be sundred all together into the fire, where they make a sudden blaze and are extinct. So will God deale with the Ninivites, not withstanding their carnall combinations and confederacies.Junius Crocius. and while they are drunken as drunkard] who are very quarrelsome, bragging and braving: but may be easily dealt with, and pusht down with one finger. as stubble sully dry] that hath long laine a sunning, and so is very combustible. The wicked are oft compared to stubble, because good for nothing but the fire: and when fully dry, when ripe for ruine, they shall be fully devoured, as some read the words. Ecqem vero mihi dabis Rhetorem &c. as One saith of another text. But what gallant Rhetorick is here? well might God say Hos. 12.10. I have spoken also by the Prophets and used similitudes &c. (See the Note there) here we have three in a breath; and all little enough to work on the hearts of the wicked, who are loth to beleeve the truth and certainty of Gods threats: but ra∣ther blesse themselves when God curseth Deut. 29.19. Ver. 11. There is one come out of thee that imagineth evill against the Lord] Ma∣ny there are, but one among and above the resT: sc. Sennacherib, that bold Briareus, that lifteth up his hundred hands at once against heaven; and threateneth to cut off at a blow Gods people, as if they had all but one neck. See verse 9. He is come up over all his chanels, and gone over all his banks, Isa. 8.7. but God shall soon put a stop to him: and with an over-running slood (that he may be even with him) make an utter nd of his place, as it is here ver. 8. a wicked Counsellour] Heb. a counsellour of Belial, or of the devill, who len∣deth him his seven heades to plot, and his ten horns to push Gods people. What pernicious counsel he gave them see 2 King. 18. 2 Chron. 32. Esal. 36. sc. to cast off God as not able to deliver them out of his hands: and to make an agree∣ment with him by a present &c. the pestilent counsell he gave them by Rabshakeh, who was, say the Rabbines, a Renegado-Jew. Every Visier and Basha of State among the Turks useth to keep still a Jew of his private counsell: whose malice, wit, and
experience of Christendome, with their continuall intelligence, is thought to advise most of that mischief,Voyage into the Levant. p. 114. which the Turk at this day puts in execution against us (saith mine Authour) the Jews being found the most nimble and Mercuriall wits in the world, but counsellours of Belial. In all the shop of hell there is no anvile so well set, whereon to forge, no engine so apt, whereby to execute any choice piece of mis∣chief, as that man, who is ingenuose nequam, & publico mao facundus (as it is said of C. Curio the Roman) Wittily wicked, and pestilently eloquent. Such were Cardinall Pool to England, Cardinall Sadeletus to Geneva, and the Isuite gene∣raily, great Politicians and factours for Rome: They say, Satan sent Luther, and God sent them to withstand him. They destroy many souls, as the Dragon doth the Elephant; by biting his ear, and sucking his blood; because he knows that to be the onely place which the Elephant cannot reach with his trunk to desend. They take crafty counsel against the Church.Psal. 8.33. Verse 12. Thus saith the Lord] To thee, O Jerusalem, and for thy comfort. The Lord will speak peace to his people: and Ministers are charged to speak to their hearts, Esay 40 1. though they be quiet] Or, still, well disciplined (as the Turkish Army is, to the wonder of all that passe thorow it:)Turcae perpe∣petuum silenti∣um tenent ut muti. Cuspin. de Caesar. p. 475. there was no falling out, nor complaining in the Assyrian hosts: therefore, and by this means, did their king march on, psse throw. and likewise many] How great an Army they were, may bee gathered from the many thousands of them that were slain by the Angel, Esay 37.36. It is all, one with God, whether it be done against a nation, or against a man onely, Job 34.29. he stands not upon multitudes, who taketh up the Isles, as a very little thing, Esay 40.15. yet thus shall. ey be cut down] Heb. shorn; with as little ado as one would shear a sheep, mow down a meddow, or shave off hair with a sharp rasor. The Prophet seemeth to allude to that Text in Esay (with whom, as his contemporary, he hath many things common) chap. 7.20. and to threaten the Assyrian, that he shall bee payd home in his own coyn: and that as he had done to Israel, so should it bee done again to him. God loveth to retaliate. when he shall passe thorow] Heb. and he passeth, or away he goeth, se, to his own countrey, after the losse of his Army, slain by the Angel, so Hierom. Others, they shall be cut down, sc. by the hand of a mighty One, as Esay 10.34. or of an Angel, when he, that is Sennacherib, and every one of his Army hath passed thorow, sc. the land without restraint, or controul, and now maketh account that hee is master of all. Though I have afflicted thee, yet I will afflict thee no more] sc. by these Nineviten no, nor by any other enemies, unlesse there be very great need, 1 Pet. 1.6. The Church hath ever had her Halcyous, her interchanges of prosperity and adversity. God will not alwayes chide, Psal. 103.9. he delighteth in the prosperity of his ser∣vants, Psal. 35.27. and wisheth, Oh that this people were wise, &c. O that my people had hearkened, &c Psal. 81.13, 14, 15. There is another reading of the words, as may be seen in the margent. This is Iunius. the Chaldee paraphras. thus; Al∣though the Ninevites enjoy great peace, and by peace are so mplied, that they are very numerous, yet shall they be shorn and cut down. Verse 13. For now will I break his yoke from off thee] Lest the promised deli∣verance should be any whit doubted of; the time when, and the misery whence they should be delivered is here laid open. God hath set the time of his peoples suf∣ferings, which shall be neither so little a while as they would; or so long as the ene∣my would. Hold out faith and patience; deliverance is at next doore by. and will burst thy bonds in sunder] By yoke and bonds here, understund those Tributes which the Assyrians, called out by Ahaz, imposed upon the kingdome of Judah, 2 King. 18. God promiseth them here their ancient liberty; which was, soon after this, recovered under Hezkiah, who trusting in God, and reforming re∣ligion, rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him no longer. Shortly af∣ter also, the Persians destroyed Nineveh, dealt more gently with the captive Jews, and gave them good leave to return home again, as many as had a mind to it, Ezr. 1.4. 2 Chron. 36.
Verse 14 And the Lord hath given a commandement.] sc. to his upper and lower forces (for he is Lord of Hosts, Commander in Chief of all creatures.) against thee] O Sennacherib devoted to destruction, for thine intolerable pride and cruelty. God resisteth the proud, Iam. 4.6. he setteth himself in battell∣array against him, as the word signifieth, commanding all his creatures to fall on:. and no wonder. For whereas all other vices flee from God, pride alone fleeth in his face: casteth down the gauntlet of defiance, and maketh head against him. Hence his hatred of a proud person. that no more of thy name be sown] i. e. that no more children be born to thee; so Lyra expounds it: that thy posterity perish, so Gualther. This must needs bee grievous to proud and ambitious persons, who promise themselves a kind of immor∣tality here in their posterity: and that there shall be a perpetuall succession of their name in this world. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, they call their lands after their own names, Psal. 49.11. But their lamp shall be put out in obscure darknesse, Prov. 20.20. there shall be—Nullus, cui lampada tradant. Others sense the Text thus. Thou shalt no more be talked of; but the memory of thy name shall bee utterly extinct. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth, Psal. 34.16. See Esay 10.12, 13, &c. Ier. 49.34. Sennacherib had done great exploits, till he lifted up his hand against heaven, he had been very victorious and famous; but now lies wrapt up in the sheet of shame, and is made an instance of divine vengeance, even among the Heathen: For so Herodotus telleth us, that in Egypt there was Senna∣cheribs statue erected, with his inscription; Let whosoever looketh upon me,. Hero. l 2. learn to fear God. He lifted up himself against his Creatour and Father: hee is therefore slain by his own children. He thought to overturn the true service of God; he is therefore slain at his idoll-worship. He went about to destroy the house of God; he is therefore destroyed in the house of his god, Esay 37.38. Out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image] This, those super∣stitious Heathens held a great losse, a sore affliction. It is reported of the people of the East-Indies, in the Isle Zeylon, that having an Apes tooth got from them, which was a consecrated thing by them, they offered an incredible masse of treasure to recover it. What a noise made Micah after his Ephod and images, Judg. 18.24? and Laban after his Teraphim? Gen. 31. and the men of Ophrah, for their altar and grove? And what a price set Papifts on their pictures and trinkets.Judg. 6.30. I will make thy grave] sc. Of thine idoll-temple, polluted by thy slaughter therein, and so converted into a sepulchre for thee. There is a story (but of no great authority) that Sennacherib, after his shamefull return out of Judea, deman∣ding of some about him, what might bee the reason that the unresistable God of heaven so favoured the Jewish nation, as he had found by sad experience? An∣swer was given him, that Abraham from whom they descended, sacrificed unto him his onely sonne, which purchased this protection to his progeny. If that will win him, saith he, I will spare him two of my sonnes, to procure him to be on my side. Which Sharezzer and Adrammelech his sonnes hearing of, prevented their own deaths by slaying him. It is more likely that they laid wicked hands upon their fa∣ther,Castal. Annot. either out of ambition, or discontent for the losse of the Army. Howsoever, God made use of their cruelty, for the just punishment of Sennacherib: and is here therefore said to have commanded it. After this, cruell warre arose among Senna∣cheribs sonnes, which were the utter overthrow of that nation,In Cyropad. and laid them open as a prey to the kings of Babylou, as Xenophon writeth. for thou art vile] Worthlesse, and weightlesse. All wicked men are so, be they never so great, Psal. 15.4. Dan. 11.21. In his estate shall stand up a vile person, that is, Antiochus Epiphanes, the great king of Syria, whom the Samaritans in flattery stiled, The mighty god. 'Tis vertue onely that enobles. Them that honour God, he will honour: but they that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Sam. 2.30. Contempt shall be their portion, and with ignominy, repreach, Prov. 18.3. Here then the Prophet threateneth the same that Joel had done, chap. 2.20. His stink shall come up, and the ill savour shall come up, becaue be hath done great things, i.e, he hath attempted to do them, but was hindered from heaven. God put a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, and turned him back to Nineveh: where,
within lesse then fifty dayes after, he was slain by his two sonnes, Tob. 1.23. and al∣though his third sonne Asar-haddon reigned in his stead,: yet hee soon after lost both his life and his kingdome, which was devolved to the Babylonians, and all the royall race of Assyria was rooted out. Verse 15. Behold upon the mountains the feet of him, &c.] This Behold is as the sound of a trumpet before some Proclamation, to bespeak attention. Jerusalem is surrounded with mountains, Psal. 125.2. and on the mountains a voice may bee heard afarre off.Pedes Evan∣gelizantis. Vulg. The feet of him that bringeth good tidings,] Or, Of an Evange∣list, that brings news of Sennacheribs ruine: but-especially of Satan subdued by Christ, which is the summe of all the good news in theworld, Luke 2.10. that publisheth peace] Pacem omnimodam; externall, internall, eternall, peace of countrey, and of conscience, by Christ who is our peace: It is usuall with the Prophets to rise from earthly things to heavenly, from corporalls to spiritualls. See Rom. 10.15. Esay 52.7. O Iudah keep thy solemn feasts, &c.] which hitherto hindered by the enemy, thou hast intermitted. Perform thy vows, (made in the day of thy distresse) bring presents to him that ought to be feared.Psal. 76.11. 2 Chro. 32.23 for the wicked] Heb. Belial, that stigmaticall Belialist Sennacherib, that law∣lesse, yokelesse, masterlesse monster, that merum scelus, that is so portentously, so peerlesly vitious. He is utterly cut off] His Army by the Angel, himself by his sonnes, his Monar∣chy by the Babylonians. See Esay 27.1, 2. CHAP. II. Verse 1. HE that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face] Nebuchadnezzar the elder, that maul of the whole earth, Jer. 50.23. that brake and dispersed the Nations, as a Maul or great Hammer doth the hardest stones. See how like a right Pyrgopolynicis he vaunteth of his valour, and victories, Esay 10.8, 9, 10, 11, &c. So Demetrius was sirnamed Poliorcletes, the Destroyer of cities; Attilas called himself Orbis flagellum, the scourge of the World. Julius Caesar was Ful∣men belli, The thunderbolt of warre: he had taken in his time a thousand Towns., conquered three hundred Nations, took prisoner one million of men, and slain as many. These were Dtssipatores indeed, and dashers in pieces, rods of Gods wrath; and this they took to be a main piece of theit silly glory. How much more honour was it to Augustine,M. Cottons pref to Hilder. on Joh. 4. to be stiled Haereticorum malleus, the hammer of Heretikes? and to Mr. Hildersam, to bee Schismaticorum malleus, the maul of Schismatikes? and lastly, to Luther, that he could thus say of himself: Pestis eram vivus, moriens ero mors tua Papa? I living, stopt Romes breath, And dead, will be Romes death? Is come up before thy face] Nineveh lay high; and those that went thither, were said to go up, Hos. 8.9. Nebuchadnezzar is said here, to be come up to it, long be∣fore he did, (which sets forth Gods omniscience: Known to him are all his works from the beginning of the world:Act. 15.18. Psal. 139.2. and present to him are all things, both past and future) and to come up before Nineveh's face; who thought none durst have been so bold as to look her in the face. But though she had been a terrour, yet now shee is a scorn: as was likewise Ephraim, when he offended in Baal, Hos. 13.1. See the Note there. Keep the munition, watch the way, &c.] Ironicè omnia, q.d. Do all this, if you think it will do any good. But 'tis all to no purpose; you are an undone people, your enemies are above fear, and you below hope; you have hitherto delighted in warre, you shall now have enough of it; you have troubled the world with your armes, and Armies; now you shall meet with your match, a people terrible from the beginning. Up therefore, and do your utmost: Neglect nothing that may serve for your necessary defence; but it will not be: for except the Lord keep the city, the watch-man waketh but in vain, Psal. 127.1.
Verse 2. For the Lord hath turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel] Both the ten tribes (carried captive already) and the other two (vexed by Sennacheribs invasion) have taken their turnes, and have had their part of bitter affliction: and shalt thou O Niniveh altogether escape unpunished? Never think it. Especially sith thou hast exceeded thy commission, and exercised an un∣heard of cruelty upon Gods people: for he was but a little displeased, but ye have helped forward the affliction Zach. 1.15. See the Note there. for the emptiers have emptied them out] The Assyrians have spoyled and pillaged till they have left neither men nor meanes behind them; such clean work they have made, sweeping all before them, like a sweeping raine that leaveth no sood Prov. 28.3. Omnia corradunt & converrunt. and marred their vine-branches] that is their sons and their daughters saith Lyra: their cities and villages, say others: like a malicious vinedresser, that not only cuts off the luxurious or barren branches, but pulls up the yong sprouts by the rootes, and so marrs the vineyard. The Assyrians endeavoured utterly to de∣stroy the whole seed of Abraham without any mercy or compassion: and this undid them. The jealous and just God cannot beare with such boares out of the wood, that wast his vines Psal. 80.13. Ver. 3. The shield of his mighty men is made red] Panoplia terrorens auget. All was red a colour much affected by the Medes, Persians and Caldees) to shew that they were a sanguinary nation, and not more gold-thirsty, Esai. 13.Herodot: Diod. Sic. Xenophon Curtius then blood-thirsty. the valiant men are in scarlet] A colour affected by martiall men, that would seem to feare no colours. The Lacedemonians used it much, when they went to fight: that, if they should be wounded, their blood might not appeare upon their apparrell, for the discouragement of themselves, and encouragement of the enemy by such a sight. The Romish Cardinals are clothed in scarlet, and are crea∣ted by a red hat which the Pope giveth them, in a token that they should be ready to shed their blood for the Catholike faith: which if they should do (as never any of them yet did) they would be no better then the Devils Martyrs: sith it is the cause, and not the punishment, that maketh a true martyr. A Tiburn-tippet, (as plain Mr. Latimer was wont to speake) would well become those scarlet-Fathers: who, like bels will be never well tuned, till well hanged; for their blood-guiltinesse, and soule-murther especially. In the kingdome of Naples there were two notable theeves (the one named Pater-noster,Reinold. de idol Rom. prafet. the other Ave-Maria) who at severall times had murthered one hundred and sixteen men, and were there∣fore deservedly put to a cruel death. But nothing so cruel as the Pope and his Con∣clave deserve, for their sending of so many soules daily to that great red dragon; red with the blood of soules which he hath swallowed, as St. Peter hath it, 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev. 12.3. the charrets shall be with flaming torches] Those currus falcati charrets armed with sithes and hookes, with, and in which, they were wont to fight: these shall be with flaming torches carried along in them, either to light them fighting by night, or else to fire the enemies houses, and to terrify their hearts. and the firr trees shall be terribly shaken] with the rattling of the charrets, and clattering of the armour. In a bloody fight between Amurath the third king of Turks and Lazarus Despot of Servia, the noise of warlike weapons, the neigh∣ing of horses and outcries of men were so terrible, and great, that the wild beasts in the woods stood astonied therewith, the trees seemed to be shaken, and the Turkish histories to expresse the terrour of the day, vainely say,Turk. Hist. that the Angels in heaven, amazed with that hideous noise, for that time forgat the heavenly hymnes &c. The word here rendred terribly shaken is rather Chaldee, then Hebrew: as spoken of the Chaldees, comming against Niniveh. Verse 4. The charrets shall rage in the streets] shall run so fast, as if they were mad that drove them. they shall justle one against another] Coxabunt they shall smite side to side, through hast and heate of fighting. they shall seem like torches] Heb: their aspect is as of torches: fire sparkleth out of their eyes that are in them: they look upon the Assyrians, as if they would look through them.
they shall run like the lightenings] Heb. they shall break through as the lightenings; that is, with incredible swistnesse: as lightening in an instant commeth out of the East, and shineth even to the West Mat. 24.27. Luc. 10.18. Verse 5. He shall recount his worthies Or Gallants, Magnificoes. These, Asar∣haddon the king of Niniveh seeing himself straighted, shall muster up, and mind of their duties: bidding them now or never play the men, sith the empire was at stake. they shall stumble in their walk] thorough fearefulnesse and faint-heartednesse: according to that of the Psalmist, The stout-hearted are spoyled, they have slept their sleep: and none of the men of might have found their hands. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep Psal. 76.5, 6. God struck a terrour into the Ninivites upon the first comming of the Chaldees. See Deut. 11.25. Therefore there is no great credit to be given to Diodorus Sicu∣lus, who saith,Cap. 7. Lib. 3. that the Chaldees were thrice overcome in fight by the Assyrians, when as they came in armes to besiege Niniveh. they shall make hast to the wall thereof] The Chaldees shall: taking advantage of the Ninivites feare, that cowardly passion, that disarmeth and disableth a man for his own defence, Or, the Assyrians shall hasten to the wall as fast as their fainting and failing legs will carry them; to try what they can do, to keep out the enemy. So the Emperour of Constantinople, certainly advertised of the Turks purpose for the generall assault shortly to be given,Turk. Hist. fol. 345. after that he had many times with teares requested to have borrowed mony of his covetous subjects, to have been employed for defence of their city; he first commended himself and them to the Almighty by generall fasting and prayer: and afterwards appointed every captaine and commander to some certaine place of the wall, for defence thereof &c. but all in vaine, as here at Niniveh. and the defence shall be prepared] Heb. the covering or coverer, Testudo militaris. Some military engine, or moveable defence. Verse 6. The gates of the rivers shall be opened] Notwithstanding all fore-menti∣oned indeavours to save the city, the water-gates or those that stood neare the ri∣ver Tigris, flew open either by meanes of that inundation above-mentioned, or by the enemies irruption; or the trechery of some that were within. and the pallace shall be dissolved] Or melted, haply by that inundation: how∣soever, by hostile impression: whether we understand it of the Palace Royall, or the Idol-temple or both(the word will beare either) for it was not unusual for Princes to have their houses neare to the temples, as the kings of Judah had Ier. 22.14. The Trojans had their Palladium in the Tower: the Romans their Tem∣ple of Jupiter Capitolinus in the Capitoll: Constantine the great, built the La∣teran Church in his Laterane palace; William Rufus, his Westminster-hall, neare the Minster. Verse 7: And Huzza shall be led away captive] The Queen; so called, be∣cause the stood firm, and was best underlaid of any other, as was thought, Some render it, quae firma stabat, ducta est in exilium. She that was wont to stand at the kings right hand (as Psal. 45.) which is a place both of dignity and of safety. As Christ is at Gods right hand Psal. 110.1. so the Church is at his, Psal. 45.10. and he hath led captivity captive Eph. 4.8. spoiled Principalities and powers, made an open shew of them, triumphing over them in himself, Col. 2.15. This is the saints happinesse: they are out of gun-shot, more then Conquerours, even Triumphers, 2 Cor. 2.14. she shall be brought up] whither she would not, to take horse or coach to go into captivity, as Q. Zenobia was brought in triumph to Rome in golden fetters, by Aurelianus the Emperour. and her maides shall lead her] Her maides of honour; The Gynecium or Serag∣lio shall fall into the hands of rude souldiers; and by them be hurried away into a far country. Neither is it without desert: for omne malum ferè ex Gynaecio; Women are many times meanes of much mischief: and for their miscarriages, men fall by the sword, and the mighty in the warr: the gates also of the city lamene and mourn, Esay. 3.11.25, 26. even for the Ladyes gallantry, whereof we have here an inventory. What a deale of trouble bred Jezabel in Israel, Athaliah
in Judah, those 2. late turbulent Queen-Mothers in Scotland and France? of which later and her Cardinall Lorraine, One made this stinging distich, Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet Effraenis Monachus, plenaque fraud anus. as with the voice of doves] Mourning secretly to themselves, and groaning inward∣ly;In more in co∣lumbarum mussitantium. Esay 38.14. & 59.11. as not suffered to bark at those that carry them captive, (as Hecuba Queen of Troy did, and is therefore fabled to be turned into a bitch) or to fill the air with complaints of their hard fortunes, as they call it, or to ease their grief by loud la∣mentations; but forced to smother it, and take it all to themselves, which is no small aggravation of it: For Expletur lachrymis egeriturque dolor.Ovid. Their tongues and their tears are womens best weapons. Et hic ferè lasciviae, luxus, & libidinis sinis est, saith Gualther here. Lo, such, for most part, is the end of lasci∣viousnesse, luxury, and lust. Let women be warned. tabring upon their breasts] Not singing and playing on instruments after their Ladies, as once: but moaning, and groaning, and knocking their breasts, for the greatnesse of their grief, and heavinesse; whereof this is an excellent, and eloquent description. Verse 8. But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water] Like a fish-pool of water, and therefore happy: The word here used for a pool, or pond, signifieth also a blessing. The Pope was wont to say of England, that it was puteus inexhaustus, his pit that could not be drawn dry. Such a pit, or pool was Nineveh. Populous, wealthy, potent, &c. Esay 8.7. the Magazine of the whole East, a rich Cargazon,Turk. hist. 843. and not unlike the Island Cyprus, anciently called, Macaria, that is, blessed, for the plenty, prosperity, and pleasure there abounding. This invited the Romans to sub∣due it: as the pearls usually cast out at the flood, and gathered at the ebbe,Sext. Ruf. Sueton. in vit. Caesa. cap. 47. drew Caesars affection for the conquest of Britain: and as Nineveh's fish-pool did the Chaldean fishermen. The greater wealth, the greater spoil awaiteth a people, or person, Prov. 1.19. As if a tree hath thick and large boughes, every man desires to be lopping of it. Nineveh's antiquity is here also noted. Of old, or, of a long time she hath been Empresse of the East; She was the seat of the first Monarchy, which she also held longest of any, even above thirteen hundred yeers. Howbeit this shall be now no protection to her, but an article, or an argument against her, that she is an old sinner, and hath been long time heaping up, and hoarding the mammon of unrighteousnesse. yet they shall flee away] as waters do when the banks of a pond are broken down: and as fish do, when the water is drawn out, or dried up: then they friggle any way. So shall the Ninevites flee away, when their city is once broken: pug∣nae obliti, pristinaeque virtutis. Stand, stand, shall they cry] Their own Commanders, desirous to rally them: or their enemies, desirous to ransack them, and make prize of them: Sed surdo fabulam. but none shall look back] Or, cause them to turn. Nemo potest eos resupinare: their hearts are fallen into their heels, and they have much more mind to save themselves by flight, then by fight. Vers. 9. Take ye the spoil of silver, take ye the spoil of gold] This is the voice of God to the Caldeans; incouraging them to fall on, sith they are sure of good booty, plenty of plunder, which he here freely bestoweth upon them. In like sort Mahomet the great Turk, the better to encourage his souldiers to storm Constanti∣nople, caused proclamation to be made thorow his Camp the day before, that hee would freely give all the spoil of the city for three dayes unto them,Turk hist. 345. if they could win it. And for confirmation thereof, he solemnly swore the Turks great oath, &c. Now the love of money is , saith a Father, daring and desperate. For there is none end of the store] Fat plunder, as was at Constantinople: the wealth whereof, the Turks themselves wondered at; and were therewith so en∣riched, that 'tis a proverb amongst them at this day, if any grow suddenly rich,Ibid. 347. to say, He hath been at the sacking of Constantinople. Neither did they more wonder
at their wealth, then derided their folly: for that possessing so much, they would part with so little to their Emperour,Ibid. 345. for the defence of themselves and their Coun∣trey. And the like is reported of Heidelberg. and glory out of all the pleasant furniture] Heb. vessels, or utensils of desire: which are said to yeeld glory, because with men one hath so much glory and respect, as he hath wealth, and rich houshold-stuff. See Gen. 31.1. with the Note. 1 King. 10.23. 2 Chron. 32.27. See here also the just judgement of God upon such, as set their affections upon that costly vanity, rich furniture. (Hezechiah smarted for it, Esay 39.2, 6. 2 Chron. 32.27.) or rich attire, which is superbiae nidus, the nest of pride, saith One. The worst apparell is natures garment; the best, but follies garnish, saith Another. Verse 10. She is empty, and void, and waste] An elegant Agnomination in the Originall,Bukab, umebu∣kah, umbylla. kah. beyond Englishing: whereby the utter destruction, and consternation of the City and Monarchy is graphically depainted, and set forth to the life. See a like elegancy, Jer. 16.15. The last word rendred waste, signifieth burst up, or, void of all verdure; a place where nothing green groweth. Such an horrible devastation followeth upon Gods word of command to the Caldees, verse 9. like as when Christ cursed the barren fig-tree,Matth. 21.20. it withered away immediately, though it be the most suc∣culent of any tree, and beareth the brunt of winter-blasts unwithered. Gods words, however slighted, are not wind, but fire, Jer. 5.13, 14. and the heart melteth] The heart (in quo fortitudo stabulum habet, the seat of courage) fell asunder in their bosomes like drops of water:Crocius. they were cowed out. See Jos. 2.11. & 5.1. & 7.5. Esay 13.7. Ezek. 21.12. and the knees smite together] Genua labant, as is usuall in extreme fear: the blood retreating to the heart,Virg. to releeve it. See Dan. 5.6. Job. 4.4. Esay 35.3. and much pain is in all loins] Such pain as befalleth women in travell, Esay 21.3. and 13.8. Joel 2.6. Mic. 4.9, 10. the doubled form of the Hebrew word implieth the extremity of it. The loins are the seat of strength: whence the Latines call weak men,Elumbes. Loinlesse men. and the faces of them all gather blacknesse] Heb.  pot, i.e. such blacknesse as is on the sides of a pot.Olla, lebes, cacabus. See Joel 2.6. Ioy and sorrow will shew themselves in the face, as in a glasse. Now if for a temporall mischief, there is so great a con∣sternation in wicked men, what shall we think there is in hell? Verse 11. Where is the dwelling of the Lious, &c.] Where is Nineveh, once so terrible, now so despicable? Leoni mortuo vel mus insultat. Once none durst look at it, or mute against it, now each passenger can insult over it, enquire where it stood, and not be afraid to take this Lion by the beard. God powreth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty, Job 12.21. when once they turn tyrants, and exercise regiment without righteousnesse, as Mic. 3.2, 3. Such a mighty hun∣ter, or devourer of men and nations was Nimrod (the first founder of this Assyrian Monarchy) and became a proverb against all tyrants, and persecutours, Gen. 10.9. Such a Lion was Nero, 2 Tim. 4.17. Such a Tiger Tiberius, (of whom One saith, that he laid hold with his teeth on all the excellent spirits of his time) Domitian, (who not content with the blood of Christians, commanded all Jews that were of the stock of David, to be sought out, and put to death) Dioclesian, and the rest of the Primitive persecutours: As also that man of sinne, the whole pack of Popes, successours to Boniface the eighth (who came in like a fox, reigned like a lion, died like a dog) and to Benedict the twelfth, who when he died, had this Epitaph made of him: Hic situs est Nero, laicis leo, vipera clero: Devius à vero, turba repleta mero.ei Medulla hist. Ecles. 321. and the feeding place of the young lions] Where the old ones provided prey fro them, till they could skill to do it for themselves; that which they would soon learn and practise, when once grown up. The Assyrian young-princes were ac∣customed to rapine, and cruelty from the first: being no better then young Tibe∣rims, whom his Tutour Theodorus Gadareus rightly characterized,. when he said, he was Dirt kned with blood: Or, then Nero the lion; of whom his father Domitius
prophecied, that of himself and his wife Agrippina (both notoriously naught) no good man could be born. Mali corvi, malum ovum.Dio in Nerone Of an ill breed, ne catulus idem relinquendus, said the Romans, when they slew one of their tyrants toge∣ther with his young sonne. It was Maximinus, if I mistake not. where the lion, even the old lion walked] The couragious, or hearty lion (named of Leo an heart) walked and stalked with his whelps, and none made them afraid.Labi. but now, his heart melteth, his knees knock together for fear, and faintnesse, as verse 10. his city Nineveh (that was not onely spoliarium latronum,Calv. but spelunca leonum) is now no where: it shall live by fame onely, time shall triumph over it. God will stain the pride of all glory, and bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth, Esay 23.9. So Clara fuit-Sparte, magnae viguêre Mycenae,Ovid. Metant. lib. 15. Vile solum Sparte est, altae cecidere Mycenae. Oedipodioniae quid sunt nisi nomina Thebae? &c. Verse 12. The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps] i. e. that which might have been enough and spare, but that they were unsatiable. So covetous they were and ravenous, that their Posie might have been, Totus non sufficit orbis: their de∣sire of more, was enlarged as hell; greedy lions they were, that could never have enough, Esay 56.11. As a ship may be over-laden with gold and silver, even unto sinking, and yet have compasse and sides enough to hold ten times more: so the cormorants and covetous caitives of this world, though they have enough to sink them; yet never have they enough to satisfie them. and strangled for his lionesses] i. e. for his wives and concubines, by whom they were commanded, being captivarum suarum captivi, as Plutarch saith of the Per∣sian kings; slaves to their she-slaves, whom they enriched and adorned with the spoils of the subdued nations. Cicero in his fifth Action against Verres, saith, that the kings of Persia and Syria, (think the same of Assyria) as they had many wives, so they would bestow upon them whole cities for their maintenance. Antiochus king of Syria, gave two fair cities to his Concubine, 2 Maccab. 4.30. Antony gave all Egypt to Cleopatra. Henry 2. of France, gave to Diana Valentina all the confiscation of goods made in the kingdom for cause of Heresie, Anno 1554. which caused the burning of many good people. Ʋtinam hodie non essent leanae, saith Calvin here. It were to be wished there were not now adayes lionesses,Hist. of Coun∣cel of Trent. 387. that can of themselves strangle and devour: but we see that there are some women that ex∣ceed all men in impudency and cruelty. The Queen-mother he meant, in all likely∣hood, as Beza did her cruell sonne Charles 9. Authour of the Massacre, in that Verse of his, made upon the that new starre in Cassiopeia, 1572. Tu verò Herodes sanguinolente time.Camd. Elizab. and filled his holes with prey, and his denne with ravine] His palaces with trea∣sure, his coffers with cash, raked together by evil arts, and oppressive practises. What else was the whole Assyrian Empire, but a great theevery? Alexander the Great was told to his teeth, that he was the greatest thief in the world. And was not Jul Caesar such another? who said, that for a kingdomes sake right might be vio? and who robbed his countrey of her liberty, for the satisfying of his unlawfull desire of ruledome? But for whom all this? surely for those that never thanked them for any thing, but fought for their spoil. Verse 13. Behold I am against thee] Ecce me contrate: Behold I,Hoc ecce non excitat modo sed perterre∣facit. who am of my self a whole Army of men, Van and Rcare both, Esay 52.12. I am against thee, saith the Lord of Hostss, who have all creatures at command if need were, as Auxiliaries: and can arm your own forces against you, sheath your own swords in your own bowels. Wo be to rhose that have God against them. The Tigurine rendreth it, En me tibi hostem, &c.Deus serierum. and I will burn her charets in the smoke,] That is, saith Danaeus, I will burn all their munition, and furniture for warre, with a most bitter and soft fire, that they may be the more grieved, and the more tormented thereby. Others, by smoke un∣derstand
the suddennesse of the judgement q. d. No sooner shall my wrath begin to kindle,Calvin. but I will consume them: prime impetu, so soon as ever the flame beginneth to break forth, or rather, before. By charets may be also meant, those that were carried in them. The Hebrew glosse here is, By smoke, that is, by a fire whose smoke is seen afarre off. See Judg. 20.40. Such shall be the fire of the last day, as A Lapide here noteth out of Hierom: when all the lions, and lions whelps, that is, all tyrants and oppressours shall be burnt, together with all their charrets, pompes, and messengers, ac imprimis corum dux & princeps Antichristus, and espe∣cially Antichrist their Captain, and Chieftain. He and his Jesuites shall doubtlesse then be cast alive into a lake of fire, burning with brimstone, Revel, 19.20. Let A Lapide note that. and the sword shall devour thy young lions! Thou shalt bring forth children to the murtherer: and those that have taken the sword (though never so young) shall perish by the sword, Mat. 26.52. As a Nettle stings betime, an Urchin is rough whiles young, and a Crab soon goes backward: so sanguinary dispositions will soon discover themselves. And I will cut off thy prey from the earth] Thou shalt be no further terrible, and troublesome to the nations, whom thou hast vexed and spoiled. Of Baldwin that Apostate, One saith, that when he died, desiit simul maledicere & vivere, he ceased at once to live and to rail. And of our Henry 2. the Chronicler writeth, that in a great distemperature against his rebellious sonnes, he departed the world, which so often himself had distempered. Nineveh the great huntresse was now under that wo, Esa. 33.1. and the voice of thy messengers] thy Heralds, by whom thou hast proclaimed war, or made unreasonable demands, or laid hard lawes upon other nations, or exacted grievous tributes, or published thy new victories, to keep people in awe, or lastly, blasphemed my great Name, as Rabshakeh one of thy messengers will do, 2 King. 18.19. These shall all be silenced, an end shall be put to them and thee. CHAP. III. Verse 1. WOe to the bloody city] Nineveh, that delighteth in warre, which One well calleth,. the slaughter-house of mankinde, and Hell of this present world, Esay 95. the Greek word , warre, signifieth mush blood. Besides that, many murthers were committed in her, and connived at, if not coun∣tenanced by a pretence of justice. Such a sanguinary city is Rome: not onely drunk with the blood of saints,Jacob. Rev de vita Pontif. pag. 119. but also of her own children. Brazutus, set on by Hil∣debrand, was the death of six Popes successively, within the space of thirteen yeers. Pope John the 22. (who sat Anno Dom. 1316.) flead a Bishop, who had some way offended him,Ibid. 270. Spec. Europ. and afterwards burned him. Pope Paul the third, poysoned two Cardinalls, Fulgosus, and Contarenus, a Bishop also, and Johannes Baptista Verge∣rius, because he suspected them of Lutheranisme. The Italians generally, as they blaspheme oftener then swear. so they murther more then revile or slander. Such another citie of bloods is Paris in France: witnesse that barbarous Massacre, wherein they poysoned the Qeen of Navarre, murthered the most part of the peerlesse Nobility of France, with their wives and children, with a gre  of the common people, an hundred thousand in one year, in divers parts of  Realm. Besides 6000. Gentlemen, slain there in private quarrels, within the space of ten years, as it appears by the kings pardons. Now if the blood of one Abel had so many tongues as drops, Gen. 4.8. the voice of they brothers bloods crieth unto me, what shall we think will be the woe of such bloody Cities and States? Luther ren∣dreth this Text.Aug. in Psal. & Libera me de sanguin. Woe to the murtherous State. Austin interpreteth it of all hainous offences, wherewith Nineveh was polluted. But surely if other sinnes have a woe hanging at their heels, according to that of Job, chap. 10.15. If I be wicked, woe unto me; bloody men shall have a woe with a witnesse, as those that walk in the way of Cain, Jude 11. See Ezech. 24.6. Hab. 3.12. and remember that it was the ruin of that great city Nineveh.
It is all full of lies]  so the Seventy render it,Ʋniversa, mendacium. she is wholly made up of fraud and falshood, mendacioum loquacissima; no truth in her private con∣tracts, no trust in her publike transactions, and capitulations with other nations; be they never so strongly concluded, or never so solemnly confirmed, yet had they no longer force with them, then stood with their own profit. This was sides Ni∣nivetica, as it was afterwards Punica, and is now Turcica: which will at length prove their downfall; as it befell Nineveh, and Carthage. and robbery] Or, ravage; such as lions exercise, Psal. 7.3. Liars are commonly theeves: fraudulency is no better then robbery. If I have beguiled any man,Laceratio. saith Zacheus, I restore him foure-fold, Luke 19.9. as having wronged him no lesse, then if I had robbed him. Hence they go here coupled. Violence is seldome sun∣dred from conning contrivance; in those especially that hunt after Monarchy, as Nmrod, Julius Caesar,Pellem vulpi∣nam leoninae. assuere Lysander (whose counsell and practise was to eek out the lions hide, with the foxes skin, if need were) Jeroboam, Jehu, Herod, that fox, Juli∣an, Caesar Borgia, whom Machiavel propounds for a partern to Princes; telling them, that Justice it self should not be sought after, but onely the appearance: be∣cause the credit is a help, the use a cumber. That great Elixer, called Reason of State (though falsely so called, unlesse it be seasoned with Justice and Truth) hath so transmutative a faculty, as to make copper seem gold, right wrong, and wrong right: yea, when all pleas fail, it will stand for good, whiles there are forces to support it. The prey departeth not] They fetch in booty continually, they spoil and prey upon others without end or measure. Once they seemed to repent of their luxury and cruelty, at the preaching of Jonas; but now they are  bad again, or worse then ever. They tear in pieces (our English seems to bee made of the Hebrew here) and greedily feed upon those murthering morsels of sin,Tureph. which they must digest in hell, without better repentance, then they were ever yet acquain∣ted with. Verse 2. The noise of a whip, and the noise of the ratling of the wheels] A most elegant and lively hypotyposis or description, of the Chaldees coming to take Nine∣veh, Tam pulchra, saith Hierom, & picture similis, ut omnis meus Jermo sit vilior, so gallant and picture-like a representation of an advancing Army, that no words of mine can come neer it. Virgil is commended for his excellent expressions, suta∣ble to the matter he treateth of. As when he sets forth the cutting down of trees, by —Son a icta securibus ilex: the ferrimans trade, by —fremit ictibus aerea puppis: the gliding of his boat, by —Labitur uncta vadis abies, &c. But all this is but dull shuffe to the divine Rhetorike here to be read. Let those that refuse to hear Gods sweet words, fear lest they be forced to hear the noise of the whip, the ratling of the wheels, &c Psal. 7.12, 13. Luk. 19.42, 44. Prov. 1.24, &c. The enemy is sent to revenge the quarrell of Gods Covenant: the red horse is at the heels of the white, Rev. 6.4. Vers. 3. The horseman listeth up both the bright sword] Heb. the flame of the sword, brandished against the Sunne, which maketh it seem flaming. Such a sword is mans tongue, thin, broad, long, and of a red siery colour. See Psal. 42.10. and 64.3. Prov. 12.18. David cries out of this murthering-weapon in his bones, whereby they killed him alive, as with a tuck, or rapier; and buried him in their throats, those gaping graves, open sepulchres. and the glittering spear] Heb. the lightening of the spear, because of its bright and swift motion. Thus the Prophet perpetuis metapheris & periphrasibus luxuriat (as One saith of Apulius) aboundeth with Rhetoricall expressions,Turk. hist. and continued meraphers. Bajazer the Great Turk, for his valour and skill in handling his arms, was firnaed Gilderum, or lightening. and there is a multude of slain. So that it is not fulgur ex vitro, an empty terrour, a bare fright onely, as a fools dagger, that ratleth and inappeth, but without an edge. ide his effectum. See here the sad effect, loe the tragedy re∣presented, behold a multitude of slain, and a great number of carkasses, &c. This the Prophet spake, not with any delight, further then made for the glory of God, and the Churches deliverance: but that hee may set forth by this example, what they must look for that imitate Ninevites in their practises; for sinne ever
ends tragically:Miror te quo∣rum mores imi∣taris corum ex∣itus non per∣hor rescere. Cic. De Naboth Cap. and God is still the same, as He is set forth Chap. 1.2. I wonder, saith Cicero to Verres, that thou shunnest not their vices whose fearfull ends thou art much afraid of. And St. Amhrose, closing up the sad story of Ahab and Ieza∣bel, whom God destroied for their wickednesse, Fuge ergò dives ejusmodi exitum, saith he Tremble at such dimall ends, and be carefull to avoid them: such ends ye shall avoyd, if ye carefully flie from such flagitious practises. and agreat number of carkasses] Heb. the heavinesse of dead carkasses which lie so thick. that the earth seemeth to groane under the burthen of them. there is none end of their corpses] that lie on heapes like so many mountaines: as they did after the fight betweene Amurath king of Turks, and Lazarus Despot of Servia.Turk hist. 200 which whiles Amurath took a view of, he was suddenly stabbed to daath by a half-dead souldier, starting up from among the carkasles. they stumble upon their corpses] And afterwards, perhaps, use them instead of stooles and tables,Lanquet: Chro. as the Suissers did the Thuricnses their adversaries An. 1443. banquetting in the place where they won the victory. Verse 4. Because of the multitude of the whoredomes of the well-favored harlot] Specious, and therefore gracious with her paramours: of a faire countenance, but foule condition: like Aurelia Orestilla, that had beauty, but no good pro∣perty. Chrysippus cailed beauty the flower of vertue;Cujus praeter formam nihil unquam bonus laudauit. Sa∣luft. but that is not generally true. Diogenes saw cause to say to some faire women in his time, O quam bona domus, sed malus hospes; Here's a faire hcuse, but an ill inhabitant. Niniveh is the well-favored harlot here spoken of; her very name signifieth a faire habitation. Hie∣rome and others interpret it, she was indeed Vrbs formosa et famos, faire and famous, but foolish and filthy, Meretrix meretricissima; she multiplied her whore∣domes both corporall and spir ituall; for these are seldome fundred: as we see in that once well-favored, but now withered whore of Rome, Rev. 17.1. Roma inverted is Amor, prepostrerous love, unnaturall filthinesse is there as com∣monly practised, as Idolatry. And as a common harlot paints and deckes herself to please her lovers; so did Niniveh, so doth Rome in her pompous and men-pleasing worships: I have read of a Lady in Paris, that when she saw the bravery of a Proceslion to a Saint, she cried out, Oh how fine is our religion be∣pond that of the Huguenots. And Sir Walter Rawleigh was wont say, that were he to chuse a religion for fleshly liberty, and lasciviousnesse, he would chuse Pope∣ry: which is indeed an alluring, tempting, bewitching religion, none like it. the mistresse of witch-crafts] Harlots are many of them enchantresses; and have their philtra, their love potions, wherewith to ensnare men, and to draw them on to lewdnesse, and to take away their hearts. Hos. 4.11. Athenaeus brings in Plato bewailing himself, that he was taken so much with a filthy harlot. And Elian telles of a whore that boasted to Socrates, that she could easily get followers from him; not he from her. Of Sampson and Hercules (whom some think to have been the same) those two verses verified, Nam potuit lenam, potuit superare leaenam: Quem fera non potuit vincere; vicit hera. Think the same of idolatry also; and if those forceries, whereby the purple whore hath deceived all nations, as St. John (in allusion to this place) saith of her Rev. 18.23. For in that book of the Revelation the holy Ghost borrowes all the elegancies and flowers in the story of the old Testament: thereby to set out the story of the New in succeeding ages. That selleth nations through her whordoms] maketh prize of them, as those impostours did, 2 Tim. 3.6. and then make sale of them as her slaves 2 Pe. 2.3. or otherwise use them at her pleasure, as homely as the whore of Babylon now doth those her slaves, and soules of men Rev. 18.13. whom she sits upon, even upon peoples, nations, multitudes and tongues, Rev. 17.15. tyrannizing over their consciences, and appointing them to very meane offices: as that posture of hers, in sitting upon them, seemeth to import. Verse 5. Behold I am against thee saith the Lord] And I need say no more; wert thou but sensible of thy misery herein. Be not thou a terrour to me O Lord,
saith Jeremiah, and then let what will else befall me: I shall the better beare it. Doe not you fall upon me your selves, said Sampson to his country men,Judg. 15.12. that came to bind him: and then for the Philistines I shall order them well enough: so faith the good soul, Let not God set against me &c. Tyrants and Oppressours shal be sure to have him thei enemy: and this he telles them here againe and againe: to beat downe their vaine considence in their greatnesse: whereby they think to beare down all before them. And I will discover thy skirts upon thy face] i.e. I will turne up thy clothes about thy eares: and so shew all to, thine utter disgrace; a fit punishment for so filthy a harlot. Esa. 47.3. Ier. 13, 22. Eze. 16.37. And I will shew the nations thy nakednesse] which nature teacheth to cover:therefore when a man hath committed a sinne, he blusheth:Acts & Mon. Honos sit auri-bus. the bloud as it were would cover the sinne, that mother of shame Rev. 3.18. that the shame of thy nakednesse may not appeare. The whore of Babylon is, and more and more shall be served on this sort: Rev. 17.16. Asore God, ye are all bare-toul'd said Mr. Philpot Martyr to the Popish Synod, before whom he was convented. The kings of the earth shall make Rome desolate and naked. Luther and many other Protestant writers have done it already, by laying her open in her colours to the world: taking the the same boldnesse and liberty to discover her lewdnesse, that she did to com∣mit it. And the kingdoms, thy shamo] who shall therehence slight thee and hate thee, together with all thy policies and superstitions, wherby thou hast enslaved them. Verse 6. And I will cast abominable filth upon thee] As they do chamber-pots and worse, upon harlots that are carted. I have read of a heathen people that put the adniterers and adulteresses heads into the paunch of a beast, where all the fth lieth; and so stifled them to death. And make thee vile] Conspurcabo, deturpabo to, I will bespattle thee and make thee stink above ground, as lothsome carrion doth; so the word signifieth. It was long since complained of by one of her own sonnes, that the stench of the Church of Rome was gone up to heaven. And by another,Mat. Paris. that of gold she was become silver, of silver iron, of iron earth, superesse ut in stercus abiret, and now there remained no more, but that she should be looked upon as dung.Theodoricus Vrias Augusti∣nianus. Ac∣cordingly it followeth. And I willset thee as a gazing-stock] The Septuagint renders it for an example, o∣thers a looking-glasse, but Calvin (after R. Salomon and Aber.-Ezra) ponam t quasi stercus, I will set thee as dung, which men gladly look beside.. Luther rendereth it Ponam te in terriculamentum, I will make thee a bug-beare. All this was done to Niniveh that great city: and all was done by God, not by Fate, or Fortune, or any necessity of Nature, that states and kingdoms must have their times and their turnes, their rise and their ruine, as Politicians dote.Osorius'de Nobil. l.3. Ver. 7. And it shall come to pass that all they hat look upon thee shall flee from thee] Thou shalt be a very Magor-missabib a terrour to all that are round about thee: so that they shall decline thee and stand a loof off. Resilient à te, they shall leape back from thee (faith the Vulgar translation) as if they had trod upon a snake. Vbi simul hominum mores exprimit saith Gualther. This is the manner of most people: they measure friendship by profit, and shamefully forsake those in adversity, whom they were wont to follow and fawne upon in prosperity. David complaines of such dealing, and Ovid, and many others. And say, Niniveh is laid wast] which most men held impossible,Tempera fue∣rint nubila so∣lus eris. Cum fortuna pert nulius amicus erit. and never looked to have seen such a day. So Rome was called Aurea, and AEterna and the Romans once thought (as it is said Dionysius did) that the monarchy of the world had been tied unto them with chaines of adamant. But God confuted their golden dreames by breaking their Empire, and giving up their city six severall times in one hundred thirty nine yeares, into the hands of the Barbarians: who exercised therein all kind of cruelty. Besides that, it is observed that Rome since it became Papall was never besieged by any enemy, but it was taken. The finall ruine of it is daily expected, according to that prophecy of St. John,Rev. 18.2. Lib. 8. Babylon is fallen, is fallen: and that other of Sibylla afore recited,
Tota eris in cineres; quasi nunquam Roma fuisses. Who will bemoane her?] Heb. Who will move (his lips) for her. Some perhaps will shake his head, or shoot his bolt at her: but none open his mouth to bemone her. It was the just hand of God to set off all hearts, and shut up all mouthes from her, that had been so unreasonably mercilesse and hard-hearted. Iam. 2.13. Whence shall I seek comforters for thee] q.d. So odious thou art, that none will do thee that good office: or if they would, so calamitous thou art that no comsort will fasten; For as to sore eyes the gentleft medicine is troublesome: so is comsort ministred to such as are in an hopelesse condition. The care that tasteth words, as the mouth doth meat, is at such a time imbittred, and out of tast. Ver. 8. Art thou better then populous No?] Heb. No Amon a great corn-countrey, and therefore populous:Amon i.e. Nu. tritia Alma mater for where victuall and good trading is to be had, thither people will repaire apace. No (that is Alexandria) was the nur∣fing mother of Egypt: and Egypt was called the worlds barn or storehouse, hor∣reum unde hauriatur Gen. 42.1. It is called Ier. 46.25. Amon de No, and Ezek. 30.11. Hamon No, and Verse 14.16. No, without any addition. This was the old name of this city, before it was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar: to whom God had given Egypt as his pay for his paines in taking Tyre. It was reedified by Alexander the great, and he called it after his own name Alexandria. Amon it was called, for the reasons above-given. Though there be that sech that name of it from Ham the son of Noah. Theodoret will have it so called from Iupiter Ham∣mon, whose sonne,Lib. 2 p. 51. Pausan: Lib. 3. Lib. de Isid. et Osirid Alexander desired to be held: and from whom the Egyptian husbandmen were called Ammonii, and their arable Ammonia, as Herodotus writ∣eth. Plutarch also telleth us, that the Africans worship an unknowne God by the name of Amon, that is (in their language) Heus, tu quis es? This city therefore is called No Amon, probably to distinguish it from other cities of the same name; as Alexandria Egypti, Caesarea Philippi, Augusta Vindelicorum. &c. Iosephus saith that it abounded in people,Lib. 2. de bell. Iud. Gap. 16. and wealth: being little lesse then Hierusalem in compasse. Thinkest thou now O Niniveh, (saith God here) that thou art in a better or safer condition, then this city once was? but I am magnum infoelix nil nisi nomen habet. Let Niniveh go to Ierusalem,Succurrat illud mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur. to Shiloh Ier. 7.12. and do as Scipio did, when, be∣holding the downfall of Carthage, he fore-saw and bewailed the like future destiny of Rome his own countrey. That was situate amnng the rivers] which is held the best situation for profit, pleasure,Lib. 17. and strength. That had the waters round about it [The river Nilus begirt it, (saith Strabo,) but could not mott it up from Gods fire. See Psal. 33.17. Prov. 21.30. with the Note. Whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea] She had the Egyptian sea on one side, and the lake of Mareôtis on the other, which the Hebrews called the Sea. Verse 9. Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength] No was the Metropolis of Egypt, and knew no end of her power, as bearing rule over Ethiopia the strong, and Egypt the infinite (some read this text) and as having all the rest of the peoples inhabiting Afrike and Lybia for her confederates.Chus Valida et Egyptij infiniti Drusius See Ier. 46.9. where the Prophet speaketh of such People as brought aide to Egypt against the Caldees, but were foiled and worsted: Of the huge armies that Ethiopia was able to raise, see 2 Chron. 14.9. and 16.8. Egypt for her strength was called Rahab Psal. 87.4. and 89.11. that is mighty and proud. Put and Lubim were thy helpers] By Put, Hierome understandeth Africa (which was over anent Alexandria, the sea between) a wast continent, thrice as big as Europe: and by Lubim Lybia a considerable part of that continent, somtimes put for the whole. These would have been helpers to No, but could not: because
over-powred by Nebuchadnezzar, sent against them by God. Leagues entred into with wicked men, profit not those whom God will punish. The Grecian Churches Anno 1438. being afraid of the Turks, sent and subjected themselves to the Bishop of Rome; that they might have the help of the Latine Churches: but shortly after, they were destroyed, and their Empire subdued, and swallowed up in the Turkish greatnesse. It is gathered by some out of Revel. 16.14, 15, 16. that the Pope and his adherents shall, towards the end of the world, for the restoring of his decayed authority, call in the help, not onely of Popish Princes, but of for∣raign States, out of Asia, Africa, and America, to suppresse the heretikes (as they call us) and to root out Religion; but with evil successe: for they shall associate themselves onely to be broken in pieces, Esay 8.9. these Auxiliaries shall speed no better then those subsidiarie Syrians did, 2 Sam. 10.18, 19. they shall receive a fa∣mous foil at Armageddon; such as Sisera did, at the waters of Megiddo, Judg. 5.19. and a voice from the throne shall say, It is done; vers. 16,17. Verse 10. Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity] Whereof though there be no other record, yet we ought not to doubt of the truth, sith it is here al∣ledged by the holy Ghost, as a thing either done before, or shortly after to bee done, as may be probably gathered from Jerem. 46.25. Ezsk. 30.19, 21. com∣pared with Jer. 20.28. and 44.49. To God (by reason of the vastnesse of his be∣ing) all things are present. As he that stands on an high mountain, and looks down, though to the passenger that goes by, some are before, some behinde; yet to him they are all present: So here. her young children also were dashed in pieces, at the top of all the streets] A ter∣rible spectacle to those that passed by: who were to look for little mercy, when children, in whom there is so little guile, or gall, and who are usually favoured for their innocency, and ignoscency, met with such hard measure. See the Note on Hos. 13.16. Warre is an evil; Esay 45.7. such as no words (how wide soever) can sufficiently set forth. Bellum à belluis. and they cast lots for her honourable men] whether so, for age or authority; the dice were cast on them for slaves, as Obad. 11. A great alteration on the suden. Tamberlanes coach-horses were conquered kings. Adonibezeks doggs, seventy kings, gatherings crumbs under his table. Sapores used the Emperour Valerian for a footstool. Craesus carried captive by Syrus, cries out, O Solon,Procop. lib. 2. de bello Vandal. O Solon. Gilimer led intriumph by Bellisarius, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity: and calls to him for a crust to relieve him, a cittern to solace him, and a spunge to dry his eyes with. Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia silo: Et subito casu, quae valuére, ruunt. Henry the fourth Emperour of Germanie, after ten years reigne, was deposed; and by his enemies driven to that exigent, that he desired onely a clerkship in an house at Spire, of his own founding; which was barbarously, by the Bishop of that place, denied him. Our Henry the sixth, that had been the most potent Monarch for dominions that ever England had, was, when deposed, not the master of a Mole∣hill,Dan. hist. 189 nor of his own liberty, but beaten, and wounded, &c. to shew that mortality is but the stage of mutability; when they that were brought up in scarlet embrace the dung-hils, Lam. 4.5. bound in chains] not of gold, as Zenobia was; but of iron, as the word sig∣nifieth, Verse 11. Thou also shalt be drunken] sc. with the cup of the wine of Gods wrath, Jer. 25.27. thou shalt drink, and be drunk, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send amongst you. This is that , dry drunkennesse of them that are drunk, but not with wine, Esay. 51.21. of them that remember their affliction and their misery, the wormwood and the gall, Lam. 3.19. If the saints sip sometimes of the top of Gods cup, the wicked shall drink deep of it, yea though it be eternity to the bottom. thou shalt be hid] Or, thou shalt lurk, either for fear of the enemy (who wast once above fear, and thine enemies below hope) or, for shame of thine undone condition. See Rev, 6.16. Luke 23.30. Hos. 10.8. Or, thou shalt vanish, and
be brought to nothing; as if there never had been any such. Confer Obad 16. Nineveh is nothing else now, saith One who had been there, but a sepulture of her self, a little town of small trade, where the Patriarch of the Nestorians keeps his seat at the devotion of the Turk. thou shalt also seek strength because of the enemy] Or, from the enemie: beg help of them, to whom thou wouldest once have scorned to be beholden: or of them, against whom thou hast professed, and practised open hostility. Verse 12. All thy strong-holds shall be like fig-trees] i. e. tam infirma ac si∣ficulnea essent. Look how the fig-tree casteth her untimely (or green) figges, when she is shaken of a mighty wine, Rev. 6.13. yea, though it be but of a gentle wind, if the figs be ripe, as here, they fall with little ado: so shall thy munitions, wherein thou trustest. they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater] that is, of the Chaldear, who gape for thy destruction, and desires nothing more then to revell in thy ruines. They shall take thy fortresses as easily, as Timotheus did townes; which were said to come into his toyls,Aemuli ipsius dormientem pinxerant, &c. Plut. in Sylla. Introd. to hist. by Mat. Paris. O vere Phrgiae neque enim Phryges Virg. whiles he slept. Or, as Charles 5. who in 28. battels in America, waged by his Generalls Cortez, and Pizarro, wan 28. kingdoms. Verse 13. Behold thy people in the middest of thee are women] i. e. Fearfull, and faint-hearted: . See Esay 3.12. Jer. 51.30. and 48.41. And this in the middest of thee, where they should be most valiant, like cocks on their own dung-hill, as they say. Lo, those that formerly faced the heavens, and, by a Cylopical-kind of impiety, slighted God, and dared the devil to a duell, how crest-faln they are and couragelesse, when the enemy is upon them: the noise of a driven leaf, affrights them, Lev. 26. a panick terrour seizeth upon them, as it did once upon the Syrians, 2 King. 7. and upon the Imperialists, in the warre against the Hussites, so that they could not strike a stroke: and upon the Burgundians, who expecting a battle, thought long thistles were launces, and turned their backs, with those Ephraimites, Psal. 78.9. It is God that puts mettle into men, that strengthens or weakens the arm of either party, Ezek. 30.24. These lions, as they are called chap. 2.12. that formerly rushing out of Nineveh their den, filled it with ravine, tearing and spoiling all they met with, are now become Harts and Stagges; that have great horns, but do nothing with them, quia dest animus, because they want courage: or as those Eretrians, of whom Themistocles said, that they were like the sword-fish,Plutarch. that had a sword indeed, but not an heart to make use of it. the gates of thy land shall be set wide open] Thy frontier townes and cinque∣ports, those keyes of the kingdom; aperiendo aperientur shall open to give the ene∣mie entrance; as at the siege of Jerusalem, the iron-gate opened of it own accord. the fire shall devoure thy barres] Because God, who is a consuming fire, shall remove out of the enemies way, all obstacles and impediments: so that all shall be pervious, and patent to them. Fire God had threatened once before, chap. 2.13. and it may very well be, that the gates were fired without a metaphor. See verse 15. Verse 14. Draw the waters, for the siege, &c. A most bitter and biting taunt, or mock:Sarcasmus. whereby the Prophet laugheth to scorn the fortifications of the Nine∣vites, and their diligence and providence in defending themselves, which shall nothing avail them, because God will curse their enterprises, Psal. 127.1, 2. See the like Sarcasme chap. 2.1. In those Eastern countries there was great scar∣city of water. Draw thee good store for the better holding out the siege: for if water fail thee, thou must needs yeeld. fortifie thy strong-holds] But they shall soon fail thee, verse 12. as the tower of Shechem did those that fled to it, and as the strong-hold of Zion did the braving Jebusites, 2 Sam. 5.7. If God bee against us, no other help can relieve us. Brasse and iron can fence a man against a sword, but not against fire. go into clay and tread the morter] viz. to make brick of. For in maritine, and moorish places, where stones are not to be had, they used to wall their cities, and make their munitions with brick. This, proud Nineveh is commanded here to do,
by an Irony, as Theophylact noteth: but she shall but labour in the very fire, take pains to no purpose: for God will destroy the works of her hands, Eccles. 5.6. make strong the brick-kilne] Or, repair it, that all may be ready. And these things they did no doubt very diligently: neither were they for that to be blamed. But this was their fault; as it was also the fault of the Jews in like case, Esay 22. that they looked not to the Maker of all, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago. See. verse 8, 9, 10, 11. This, if they had done seriously, though they had made lesse preparation, the enemy might have been daunted, and dismayed as much, as that Duke of Saxony was; who having proclaimed warre against the Bi∣shop of Magdeburg, and understanding by his intelligencers, that the Bishop le∣vied no army, made no preparation, but onely gave out, that he would commit his cause to God, who would not fail to take up arms for him; Insaniat alius,Bucholcer. Chronol. said the Duke, It were a mad prank in me to make warre upon such an one as trusteth in God to right and revenge him. Let who will meddle with such a man: I will not. Verse 15. There shall the sire devour thee] There, that is, in thy strong-holds, where thou thinkest thy self most safe. These shall be to thee pro carcere & pistrino, for a prison, or little-ease; when the fire of Gods wrath shall kindle upon thee, the fire of warre shall consume thee. See Amos 1.4. Joel 1.19. and 2.3, 30. Amos 7.4 with the Notes. Evil shall hunt the violent man to destroy him, Psal. 140.11. neither must he think to be safe any where from divine vengeance, Amos 9.2, 3. Psal. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. Obad 4. which will not suffer them to live, as those Barba∣rians could tell, Acts 28.4. The Heathens, called Nemesis, or Vengeance, ; to shew that no guilty person could shun it. Shufle he may for a season from side to side, as Balaams asse did, to avoid the Angels sword;Num. 22.27. but at length lay down under it, and so condemned her masters madnesse, 2 Pet. 2.16. Running in to God, is the onely best way to escape him: as to close and get in with him that would strike you, doth avoid the blow. the sword shall cut thee off] Est haec vehemens planè comminatio, saith Gualther. This is truely a very vehement threat. See how thick it falls like hail-shot upon them, that they can hardly take breath: and all too little to work upon their hard hearts, which could not repent. These uncounsellable Ninevites were like the Smiths dog. whom neither the hammers above him, nor the sparks of fire falling round about him can awake. Like Leviathan, they esteemed iron as straw, and brasse as roten wood. Darts were counted by them as stubble, they laughed at the shaking of the spear, Job 41.27, 29. It is proper to Gods people to tremble at his word, to stand in awe of his judgements, whilest they yet hang in the threatnings. Wicked men flear, when they should fear; and say in their hearts when God threateneth them, as Frederick the second, Emperour of Germany was wont to say openly, in the greatest threatning of his enemies, Minarum strepitus, Asinorum crepitus. It shall eat thee up as the canker-worm] Which useth to make quick dispatch, and clean work. See Joel 1. & 2. to shear all afore it. make thy self many] Heb. Weighty with multitude: so that the axle-tree of the earth may seem to groan under thy grandeur and massinesse. Do this thou, O king of Nineveh (for the Hebrew Verb here is Masculine.) Do the like thou, O city of Nineveh. make thy self many as the Locust] Which hath its name in Hebrew from multi∣tude: because, as that Legion in the Gospel, they are many: and here the Hebrew Vrb is emini. Ministers must lay about them on all hands; and bee ready to turn themselves, as it were, into all shapes and fashions, both of speech and of spi∣rit, to bring people to the knowledge of God, and his will, of themselves, and their duties. Verse 16. Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the starres of heaven] And so thinkest to have a stake in store, howsoever the dice chance to turn. For these  were very rich, and could furnish her with money, which is the sinewes of ware. Besides, they traded farre and near; and so could give intelligence, and if need were, way-lay and intercept the enemies contributions that it came not to them. But would you know, saith the Prophet, how these merchants will serve  your greatest need?
The canker-worm spoileth and fleeth away] q. d. They will serve themselves up∣on you, and then leave you in the lurch, to make as good shift as you can. They are mere canker-worms, which first eat up all, and then hast away. These false friends, well they may be the causes, but companions they will not be of your cala∣mity: like crowes that flock to a dead carcasse, not to defend it, but to devour it: and no sooner have they bared the bones but they are gone. Such false merchants as these hath this land been much pestered with from Rome, in former ages. Matthew Paris telleth us of one Florentinus, the Popes Legate here, in King Johns reigne, Ferentinus the wiser sort called him, for bearing away so much money. And of another named Otto (one of the Popes merchants,Muscipulato∣res. or rather mice-catchers, as he calleth them) who after three years raking together of money, by most detestable arts, at last departing hence, to avoid a storm, he left not so much money in the whole kingdome, as he either carried with him, or sent to Rome before him. In the year 1235. there were spread thorow England certain Roman canker-worms, called Caursim (quasi capientes ursi, devouring Bears quoth Paris) who had in∣tangled the King, Nobles, and all others that had to deal with the Court of Rome, in their cunning snares, and usurious practises, under colour of supplying with mo∣ney such as wanted present pay to the Pope.Fol. 613. These were called the Popes merchants, saith Speed. Verse 17. Thy crowned are as the locusts] i. e. thy Barons (saith Diodate) and great Lords, wearing diadems and wreaths, in token of dignity: such a Naza∣rite (that's the Hebrew word here) was Joseph, Gen. 49.26. because separate and exempt from other men, as a Chiestain. Calvin likewise rendreth it, thy Princes: the Vulgar Latin, thy Keepers. Some others, thy Nazarites, or, thy religious per∣sons, set apart from the common sort, to pray for the cities safety. Such were those Chemarims, or Chimney-chaplains among the Jews, Hos. 10.5. Zeph. 1.4. Such are the Mailers among the Turks, who call them, the religious brothers of love; and the shaveling-Mendicants among the Papists. These locusts are, Rev. 9.7. said to have on their heads,Turk hist. 477. as it were crowns like gold. and thy Captains as the great grashoppers] Heb. as the grashoppers of grashop∣pers, by an Hebraisme, like that, King of kings, song of songs, &c. The word ren∣dred Captains, is foraigne; R. David and others render it, Imperator, Dux, Prin∣ceps. It seemeth to be a name of dignity among the Assyrians, as Zaphnath-paaneah was among the Egyptians, Gen. 41.45. These are called grashoppers, and locusts, for their uselesnesse, and fearfulnesse. which camp in the hedges] sc. Of the gardens or vineyards, And they are said to camp, in regard of their multitudes, as if they were an army of them. See Joel 2. The Prophet taxeth here Nineveh's vain confidence in her confederates, and such other hanger-on, as might truly say, Nos numeri sumus, fruges consumere nati. We are men of no great moment, such as Aristophanes in Plutarch prettily played upon, when he said, , i. e. Quaestoraes, bubones. but when the Sun ariseth, they flee away] So these trencher-flies, when they have served their own turns upon thee, and now see the tempest of warre growing on amain, they worship the rising Sun, keep themselves on the warm side of the hedge, leave thee to shift as thou canst, and seek out for themselves a better for∣tune. Verse 18. Thy shepherds slumber, O King of Assyria] This Apostrophe to the king is emphaticall. He is given to know, that his Nobles, and Officers, Mich. 5.4, 5, 6. and 7, 14. his Councellours of State, and greatest Politicians, should bee benighted, and not know what counsell to give, or course to take. Or, they slum∣ber, that is, they are dead, as Psal. 76.6. And this is more agreeable to that which followeth: thy Nobles shall dwell in the dust] The Vulgar hath it sepelientur, shall be buried. Others, jacebunt, shall lie on the ground, like beasts, through fear and consterna∣tion of mind, 1 Sam. 28.20. Then Saul fell straight way all along on the earth, and was sore afraid.
thy people is scattered upon the mountains] Diffused and dispersed abundantly: as sheep without a shepherd, whereof none being wiser then other, no man gathe∣reth them, into the sheep-coats of better order. Verse 19. There is no healing of thy bruise] Clades & strages tua irreparabilis est. Thy disease is desperate, thy condition comfortlesse: thou art utterly to be destroy∣ed. When God smiteth his own people, it may well be asked as Esay 27.7. Hath he smitten him, as he smot those that smot him? Or, is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? Surely no: there is a manifest difference. Hee hath torn, saith the Church, and he will heal us: hee hath smitten, and hee will bind us up, Hos. 6.1. Hence that distinction of punishment, or pain, in condem∣nantem, & corrigentem, in poenam vindictae, & poenam medelae. Afflictions, and temporall evils are in the nature, to the wicked of a curse, to the godly of a cure; to the former, mortall; to the latter, medicinall, When the wicked spring as grasse, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is not for any good will that God beareth to them: but it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever, Psal. 92.7. See the Note on chap. 1.9. thy wound is grievous] Not onely incurable, but full of anguish intolerable. Thus, many sorrows shall be to the wicked, Psal. 32.10. and yet all that they suffer here, is but as drops of wrath, fore-running the great storme in hell: or as a crack, preceding the fall of the whole house upon them: The leaves only fall on them here; there, the whole tree. all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands, &c.] As rejoycing at thy ruine, and subscribing to Gods just judgement upon thee: they shall take up this taunting speech against thee, and say, How hath the oppressour ceased? the golden city ceased? The Lord hath broken the staffe of the wicked, and the scepter of the rulers, &c. Esay 14.4, 5, 6, 7. For upon whom hath not thy wickednesse passed continually?] Thy wickednesse, that is, thy wicked counsels, edicts, enterprizes, have they not extended farre and near for mischief to many Nations? and this not for a little while, but jugiter, continually? It hath been thy constant trade from thy youth up (neque enim nova est aut nupera haec tua crudelitas) to wast and weary out other nations, with thine inrodes and hostilities. Thy destruction therefore is of thy self, O Nineveh: the insultations, and complosions of others at thy misery, is no more then thou hast merited. Os quod in sorte tua ceciderit, illud rodas, as the Arabian proverb hath it. Bear the reward of thy wickednesse, which is now come home to thee; Thy wicked∣nesse is the root of thy wretchednesse: this the Prophet here repeateth, and incul∣cateth in the perclose; that he may leave it as a sting in the minds of his hearers, as Gualther well observeth.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of HABAKKUK. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE burden] The Propheticall burden, saith the Chaldee Paraphrast: the burdenous prophesic, saith Tremellius. See the Note upon Mal. 1.1. which Habakkuk the Prophet did see] Amplex∣ator ille, That Embracer, (so some interpret his name) yea, Optimus Amplexator (as they gather from the last Radicall emphatically doubled) That best Embracer. Et certè omen habet nomen, He hath not his name for nought: for (as Luther writeth) in this Prophesie he loveth, and huggeth his afflicted countrey-men: he succoureth and solaceth them, as the mother doth her crying babe, to still it. Hierom and Others, make Habakkuk to signifie Luctatorem amplex stringentem, a Wrastler, that by closing strives to pre∣vail; that by might, and slight seeks to get the better. Such a One was Jacob, whose wrastling was by weeping,Hos. 12.4. and his prevailing by praying. Such another was Habakkuk, who argueth earnestly with God about the state of his people, and prayeth ardently for them; not doubting but that the Lord would preserve the faithfull,Psal. 31.23. and plentifully reward the proud doer. A Prophet he is here stiled, and a Seer, and that's all is said of him: nothing of his pedegree, or time of prophesy∣ing; that the Word (and not the man) might be glorified, Act. 13.47. Regis epi∣stolis acceptis, saith Gregory; When a kings letters are brought to his subjects, it is a ridiculous thing for them to enquire with what Pen they were written; 'tis the matter must be minded. So here. A Prophet, Habakkuk was; and is therefore to be received into our hearts, if we look for a Prophets reward. He received hea∣venly visions, whereunto therefore we must not be disobedient, Act. 26.19. That memorable sentence of his, The just shall live by faith, is more then once made use of by St. Paul, in that weighty businesse of Justification, Rom. 1.17. Gal. 3.11.
which proves the Canonicall authority of this prophesie. The precise time when it was uttered, is not known. In the dayes of Manasseh, most think: but some are of opinion, in Josiah's time rather, or not long before: because he foretelleth the Babylonish captivity, and seemeth to agree with Jeremy in many things. Sure it is, that this Prophet lived not after the captivity (see verse 6.7. of this chapter) as Epiphanius and Hierom would have it:Hierem. in Prolog. grounding upon those Apocryphal additi∣ons to Daniel, which either are false, or else there were two Habakkuks. Vers. 2. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear?] Lo, this is the confidence of a good conscience towards God, 1 Pet. 3.21. when it is parling with him by prayers, and bold intercessions, 1 Tim. 2.1. it dare plead, as Jer. 12.1.. and interrogate, as Rom. 8.33, 34, 35. Esay 63.15. and expostulate, as David often: when God seems to be asleep, he wakes him: when to delay, he quickens him: when to have lost his wonted kindnesse, he finds it for him; so doth Ha∣bakkuk here: for he knew he might do it. See his holy boldnesse beneath, verse 12. and learn to continue instant in prayer, Rom. 12.12. crying, Quousque Domine?Beza in vita. How long Lord? This was Mr. Calvias Motto; ever in his mouth, as Do gra∣tias was, in Austins. even cry out unto thee of violence] i. e. Of all sorts of hainous sinnes, which I have long cryed out upon, and sought by preaching and prayer to redresse, but can∣not; so incorrigibly flagitious are they grown, that I have now no other way left, but to turn them over to thee, with a Non convertentur, They will not be converted. Shall they still escape by iniquity? In thine anger cast down the people, O God:Psal. 56.7. and let them feel the power of thy wrath, that will not submit to the scepter of thy kingdom. Thus the holy Prophet (Elias-like, Rom. 11.2.)Impendam & expendar. maketh intercession to God against Israel (when once incorrigible, uncurable) for whose souls health he would have spent, and been spent. Verse 3. Why dost thou shew me iniquity? &c.] These were Hazais to Habak∣kuks eyes, he could not see them with dry eyes, he could not but vex his righteous soul from day to day, as Lot did at Sodom, with their unlawfull deeds, 2 Pet. 2.8. privately committed, (as here in their common commerce) and publikely, as in the next words, in Courts and Consistories: for all was out of order. and cause me to behold grievance] Molestation and mischief done to those that would live peaceably in the land (Confer Psal. 7.14, 16. and 94.20. and 55.11.) to the poor that are fallen into their nets, debts, bonds, and morgages, Psal. 10.9. It is as if the Prophet should say; Why dost thou not punish these enormous pra∣ctises, but suffer evil-doers to abuse thy long-sufferance, to thy dishonour? Aver∣roes the Philosopher, drew an argument from Gods patience to deny his pro∣vidence. But what saith Austine? Some wicked, God punisheth here,In Psal. 30. lest his providence; and but some, lest his patience, and promise of judgement should be called in question. for spoling and violence are before me] E regione mi vastatio & violentia, so that I cannot look besides them, I cannot but complain of them. Elias, and Jeremy were more passionate, 1 King. 19.4, 10, 14. Jer. 15.10. and 20.14. and there are that raise up strife and contention] These are Satans seeds-men, and kindle-coals. He is an unquiet spirit, and strives to make others so; loves to fish in troubled waters, doth all he can to set one man against another,Greg. that hee may prey upon both: as the Master of the pit suppeth upon the bodies of those cocks whom he hath set to kill one another. Be not make-bates, seeds-men of sedition. Verse 4. Therefore the law is slacked] Desluit lex. An elegant Metaphor from the pulse, which in a dying man beateth faintly. The law is the pulse of the Com∣mon-wealth. If it stirre not at all, the Common-wealth is dead. If it have but slow motion, the Common-wealth is weak. But if it keep an equall course, the Common-wealth is in good constitution. Lex lux, the law is a light, saith Solomon: but the deluge of sin had well-nigh put out this light in Israel; who was now grown in a manner lawlesse, through long impunity. and judgement doth never go forth] Or, it goeth not forth to the utmost,Ʋs{que} ad finem. . to vi∣ctory: it is not carried on to a right upshot, as the Septuagint, and Latine ren∣der it. for the wicked doth compasse about the righteous] As a crown compasseth the
head: He surroundeth and circumventeth him to his hurt. The children of this world are wiser in their generation &c. The Midianites out witted the Israelites Num. 25.18. The Pharisees hemmed in our Saviour to ensnare him: but were disappointed. therefore wrong judgement proceedeth] Distorted judgement. So Ezek. 9.9. the city was full of Mutteh that is of (mishpat din mitteh,. as Kimchi expoundeth it) judgement turned from the biasse: the ballance of justice was tilted on the one side 1 Tim. 5.21. A judge is to retaine the decency and gravity of the law: to do nothing of partiality or popularity; to proceed, not according to opinion or appearance; but as a just law is an heart without affection, an eye without lust, a minde without passion &c. so should he. Else wrong and wrested judgement will soon proceed, to the prejudice of the righteous. Verse 5. Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously] Heb: Wonder, Wonder. This is Gods answer to the former expostulation, which he disliketh not, but incourageth the rest of his people to the like holy boldnesse. It containeth a promise to the Prophet and the rest that were like affected, that he would shortly vindicate his glory and be avenged of the wicked, though he bore long with them. This that he may the better assure, He proceedeth by an elegant Climax; wherein his speech getteth ground and ariseth higher and higher, that the Dspsers might be the more affected. Behold ye despisers So St. Paul after the Septuagint (whose translation, he here followeth as most received, and most ma∣king for his purpose) Act. 23.45. the sense being one and the same. for I will work a work in your dayes] This phrase noteth the strong intention of God upon it, as Ier. 18.18. to devise devises noteth strong plotting to mischief the Prophet. So Christ is said to work a work Joh. 5.36. many do rather play their works, then work them. This is not God-like. He is serious and through in his workes which ye will not beleeve, though it be told you] But put off all, as those in the Gos∣pel did, with a God-forbid: and so go on in sin, till wrath come upon you to the utmost. To this day, we cannot get men to beleeve the truth of Gods judgments, whilest they hang in the threatenings: but one put-off or another they get, through self-delusion, or obstinacy of heart Lam. 3.65. next unto which followeth, Thy curse upon them. Verse 6. For loe, I raise up the Chaldaeans, that bitter, and hasty nation] The Chaldaeans were anciently the Philosophers of the Babylonians: Babylon was a Province of the Assyrian Empire; but not the same with Niniveh, (only walled about by Semiramis and by her called Babylon) as Suidas noteth. Niniveh was the Metropolis, Babylon ruled by Prefects. One of whom, viz Merodach Bala∣dan) rebelling against Esar-haddon King of Niniveh, translated the whole king∣dome to the Babylonians,Gualth. using the help and counsell of the Chaldaeans, famous for their wisdome and authority: which yet was not done without the Lord who then stirred them up, and now sent them against the Jewes, to averge the quar∣rell of his covenant. In like manner God hath in these last times raised up the Turkes that bitter and hasty nation, bitter and bloody, hasty and headlong,  pursuing their victories and subduing in a short space many nati∣ons, and kingdomes to their Empire. Hence the Jews are in the former verse called upon to view among the heathen what havock the Chaldaeans had made; that is, should shortly make by overrunning Syria, the greater part of all Asia, and some part also of Africa. In the greatnesse of the Turkish Empire is swal∣lowed up at this day both the name and Empire of the Saracenes, the most glo∣rious Empire of the Greekes, the renowned kingdomes of Macedonia, Peloponne∣sus, Epirus, Bulgaria, Servia, Bosina, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Egypt, Ju∣daea, Tunes, Argeirs, Media, Chaldaea, with a great part of Hungary; as also of the Persian kingdome,Turk. Hist. pref. to the Reader. and all the Churches and places so much spoken of in scripture (the Roman only excepted, which yet he daily threateneth) and in briefe so much in Christendome, as far exceedeth that which is thereof at this day left. In fine, no part of the world is left untouched by the Othoman monarchy, but America only;Turk. hist. 132. not more happy in her rich mines, then in that she is so far from so great and dangerous an enemy. The King of Spaine, of all other Princes Maho∣metan
or Christian that border upon the Turk, is best able to wage war with him. How far and with what bitternesse and hast he hath carried on his Catholike Monarchy, is better known then that it need here to be related. Q. Elizabeth put a stop to him.Cambd. Elisab. 285. Captaine Drake and his souldiers when they took Sancto Do∣mingo Anno. 1585. (where his arms were to be seen in the town-hall with this inscription, Non sufficit orbis) derided his avarice and ambitions: but the poor Indies groane heavily under his cruelty: and Grynaeus commenting upon these words that bitter and hasty nation, Tribuuntur illis duo, saith he, Two things are here attributed to the Chaldees bitternesse, and swiftnesse in undertaking and dispatching conquests: quibus dotibus Iberos nostra aetate praeditos, proh dolor, expe∣rimur, this by wofull experience we find now adayes too much verified of the Spaniards. Verse 7. They are terrible and dreadfull] Or, horrible Such as were those gy∣ants called Emims Deut. 2.11. Gen. 14.3. and far more formidable then that Dis∣putant at Paris, who would needes be stiled Horribilis Sophista,De caus. cor. art. lib. 3. the Horrible So∣phister, non minorem eam appellationem ratus (saith Vives) quam Africam aut Asi∣atici taking it for as great an honour, as to be a Conquerour. their judgement and their dignity shall proceed of themselves] i. e. They shall do as they list; their lust shall be their law, Pellitur è medio sapientia, vi geritur res. See Psal. 12.4, 5. Exod. 5.2. These Chaldaeans will be their own carvers: ministring law according to their own pleasures.Ipsa sibi judi∣cabit, et decre∣tum suum exe∣quetur: vel ex decreto suo ex∣equetur. Sic Symmachus Vide Plin. lib. 8. cap. 17. and lib. 1. c. 10. cap. 73.  The honour also and dignity of this nation (now base and obscure) shall grow up and appeare. Verse 8. Their horses also are swifter then the leopards] Or Panthers, famous for their swiftnesse: whence the proverb Panther â velocior. The horse is so swift in service, that the Persians (as Pausanias hath it) dedicated him to their god the Sun; as the swiftest creature to the swiftest god. See Iob. 41.20. Prov. 21.31. and are more fierce then the evening wolves] Heb: more sharp set, after that they have been held hunger bit, and empty all the day long. See Virg. Aeneid. lib. 9. ver. 59. &c. Oppian: lib. 1.3. Homo homini lupus, One man (left to himself) is a wolf, nay a devill to another. The Metaphor is here taken from shar∣pest swords, which quickly cut. and their horsemen shall spread themselves] with incredible swiftnesse, which in war is most necessary and usefull, as Julus Caesar experienced, and we in our late commotions. and their horsemen shall come from far] The Jews were secure of the Chaldaeans, as being far remote: but that shall be no hinderance. they shall flee as the Eagle that hasteth to eat] In singulis verbis pondus est, saith Drusius, Here each word hath its waight:Job. 9.26. for he that hasteth on his way is said to flie, and the Eagle is swifter of flight then any bird, and especially when she hasteth to eat. Of the Eagles swiftnesse why and whence, See Ambrose Hexam: l. 1. c. 14. Ver. 9. They shall come all for violence] that by force and violence they may carry all before them. Fit via vi, Cedit viribus aequum. They are set upon't and will have it so. their faces shall sup up as the East-wind] that ventus urens & exiccans, they shall blast all they look upon: Euroclydon-like, they shall overturn all Act. 27.14.Lib. 2. c. 28. Navigantium pestem the Mariners misery Pliny calleth this wind, for the hurt it doeth by sea. Some read it, Their faces shall look towards the East, viz. towards Ba∣bylon, whither they carry the booty they get. and they shall gather the captivity as the sand] So many shall be their captives, and so little accounted of, as the dust or sand they tread upon. Thus the Turks carry out of Hungary and other Christian countries neer unto them, innumerable booties and captives, 15000. at a time. And so the Spaniards, when they had taken the Island Hispaniola in the Indies, within a few moneths they rid it cleane of the inhabitants and natives, whilest they gathered unto themselves captives and slaves. Verse 10. And they shall scoff at the kings] Heb. He shall scoff, i. e. Nebuchad∣nezzar shall, and that not once only, but often: shall make a practise of it,Hithpael uotat assiduam illusi∣onem. as the Hebrew word signifieth. Thus Adonibezek dealt by the kings he took: the
Philistines by Saul 1 Sam. 31. Nebuchadnezzar by Zedekiah Ier. 25. and 29. 2 King. 25. as also by the kings of Egypt, Tyre, Arabia, and others whom he had taken, and used them haply, as Tamerlan did Bajazet, or those other captive kings whom he caused as horses, to draw his charret. How much better Evil∣merodach, who, (mindfull of the instability of all humane affaires) lifted up the head and spake to the heart of his prisoner Jehojakin king of Judah Ier. 52.31. Cyrus who honoured his captive Craesus,Herod. and made him of his Councell? (neither was he lesse iuriched by the good counsell Craesus gave him, then by all the wealth he had from him) Our Edward the third, who having the king of Scotland and the French king his prisoners here in England both together at one time,Speed. gave them stately entertainment, and made them princely pastime, by holding royall justs in Smithfield for their delight? and the princes shall be a scorn unto them] Through the just judgement of God, who scorneth the scorners Pro. 3.34. that is, saith Rabbi Levi, facit ut aliis sint lu∣dibrio he maketh others mock them in their misery, who in prosperity scoffed at those that were better then they. Now therefore be not ye mockers, lest your bands, be made strong &c. Esa. 28.22. they shall deride every strong-hold] as that which cannot long hold out against their assaults, how should they, when God breaketh the barrs and setteth open the gates to them Am. 1.5. and 9.3. Pro. 21.30. for they shall heap dust and take it] i. e. by casting up mounts and ramparts, take it with as much ease,Turk. hist. fol. 317. as if they were in sport. The Turks have their Asapi or, common souldiers, of whom they make no great reckoning, but to blunt the swords of their enemies, and to fill up ditches with their dead bodyes, that they may the better come at the town or fort, which they would take. Verse 11. Then shall his mind change] For the worse: in pejus proficiet, his good and his blood shall rise together, as the proverb hath it: he shall be puft up with his victories. Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis. Pride compasseth prosperous persons as a chain Psal. 73.5, 6. Iob 15.25, 26, 27. their hearts are lifted up with their successes, as a boat that riseth with the rising of the water. Evagrius noteth it for a speciall commendation of Mauricius the Emperour, that notwithstanding his great prosperity, he retained his ancient piety. and he shall passe over] Or transgresse all the bounds of modesty. Pride was an∣ciently pourtraited with three crownes on her head. Upon the first was written Transcendo, upon the second Non obedio, upon the third Perturbo. David calleth wicked men Effractores breach-makers. and offend imputing this his power to his god] Bel, or Iupiter Belus. This was a wickednesse with a witnesse; thus to transferr the glory of victory due to God alone, upon an Idol. When Nebuchadnezzar offended in this sort, God turned him a grasing, till he had learned better, Dan. 4.37. For, be the gods of the heathen goodfellowes saith One: the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his glory with another Esay 42.8. Verse 12. Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God?] Art thou not Je∣hovah the unchangable, and shall we poor sons of Jacob be utterly consumed by these Chaldees?Mal. 3.7. Art not thou my God, my Judex & Vindex, who hast hitherto judged and revenged my cause? and wilt thou now abandon me to the fary of such an enemy? Art not thou mine Holy One, whom I have hitherto sanctified in mine heart and life Esay. 5.16. and whom I have avouched for mine Deut. 26.17. denoting my self wholy to thy feare and service? Art thou not all this and more then this, saith the Prophet, in the name and behalf of the Church here? Well then: we shall not die] I am confident, and dare be bold to say it. Loe here the tri∣umph of faith, and the top-gallant of it, We shall not die, (saith she) abruptly but sweetly that's sure enough. She drinkes to the disconsolate soule in a cup of Nepenthes, and saith, Courage my heart; Why art thou cast down, O my soule!
and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God. If hee be everlasting so shalt thou, If he be thy God, and thine Holy One, thine in an inviolable covenant, in a league defensive, and offensive, shalt thou die? Lo tamuth, Thou shalt not die, (so some say, this text was anciently read) Lo Namuth, We will not die. So the Church promiseth her self upon the former promises: and such an answer shee receiveth in her own heart to her former prayers. And whereas it might be obje∣cted, that they were likely to be little better then dead in the Babylonish captivity (for Mortis habet vices quae trahitur vita gemitibus, an afflicted life, is a lifelesse life) the Prophet answereth; O Lord, thou hast ordained them for judgement] i. e. the Chaldeans, (our op∣pressours) for punishment, for destruction, to burn thy rod, when thou hast there∣with whipped thy children. See Exod. 9.16. and, O mighty God, (Heb. O rock) thou hast established them for correction] Heb. thou hast founded them, sc. thy people Israel: thou hast thereunto appointed them, 1 Thes. 3.3. thou hast both founded and fitted them for thy fatherly chastisements, who are therefore chastened of the Lord, that they may not be condemned with the world. See here the different kinds, and ends of good and bad mens sufferings. It hath been noted before, that Almighty God as he is Piorum rupes, a rock of refuge to the truely religious, so he is Reorum scopulus, a rock of revenge, to dash in pieces the impenitent: as Valer. Max. saith of L. Cassius his tribunall. Verse 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil] sc. with patience, and without punishing it. This I am right sure of: and therefore cannot but conclude, that thou wilt take an order with our oppressours, thou wilt one day pay them home, for the new and the old, though for a time they ruffle, and revell in our ruines. God, as he is , All-eye, neither can we be at any time from under his view: so ; He hath an Holy eye, that cannot behold evil, and bear with it. Hence that of Joshuah to the people, chap. 24.19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, sc. unlesse ye first throw all your lusts out of service: for hee is an holy God, he is a jealous God: he will not forgive your transgressions, nor your sinnes. Now therefore, if Cave, spectat Cato, was such a forcible watch-word among the Romans, and a Retentive from evil; Take heed, Cato seeth you, and will punish you; How much more should this prevail with Christians, Cave, videt Dominus, Take heed, the Lord beholdeth? Ne pecees, Deus ipse videt, bonus Angelus astat, &c. Surely, as they were wont to say at Rome concerning cowards, that they had nothing Roman in them: so may it be said of such as stand not in awe of Gods pure eyes, and dreadfull presence, that they have nothing Christian in them, what ever they pretend: sith it is every godly mans care, and comfort to be in the fear of the Lord all the day, to walk evermore in the sense of his presence, and light of his coun∣tenance. and canst not look on iniquity] Heb. And to look on iniquity thou canst not do it. Lo, this is one of those things that God cannot do: as he cannot he: hee cannot die, he cannot deny himself: so here, he cannot look on iniquity, sc. with appro∣bation, or delight. He cannot but hate it: and (as the next thing to hatred, is re∣venge) he cannot but punish it, such is the holinesse of his nature, Psal. 5.4, 5, 6. He hateth sinne naturally, as we hate poison for it self: and therefore let it be in a toad, or in a Princes cabbin, we hate it still. Neverthelesse, it must be remembred for our comfort, that like as we hate poison in a toad, but pity it in a man, because in the one it is their nature, in the other their disease: So sinne, maketh wicked men the object of Gods hatred, but the saints, of his pity: and accordingly, he chasti∣seth the one, but plagueth the other. Wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously] And yet, such is thy to∣lerance, seemest to take no notice of their trespasses, and treacheries; which I am sure thou hatest with a perfect hatred. Here then the Prophet disceptat potius secum, quam cum ipso Deo, saith Calvin, contesteth, rather with himself then with God, a∣boutthe ordering of thingshere below. He doth not question the divine providence, because good men suffer, bad men prosper, as Aristotle did. Hee doth not say
with Pompey, when discomfited by Caesar, that there was a mist, at least, over the eye of providence: so blaming the Sun because of the sorenesse of his own blear eyes. Hee doth not impatiently cry out with Brutus defeated,  O wretched Vertue, or, O hard fortune. But he modestly expostulateth with the Lord about his proceedings, having before justified him: and now dareth not reprehend what he cannot yet so fully comprehend: but putting his mouth in the dust, conclu∣deth with David, after some conflict with his own doubtings, I know, O Lord, that thy judgements are right, and that thou in faithfulnesse (non ad exitium, sed ad exercitium, and that thou mightest be true to my soul) hast afflicted me, Psal. 119.75. and holdest thy tongue] And so,Quitacet, con∣sentire videtur by silence, seemest to consent (as the Civili∣ans rule is) but thou seemest so onely, Psal. 50.21. Or, Art thou deaf? Nor so neither, Psal. 50, 3. when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then hee] i. e. The Chaldees destroy the Jewes, which were some of them better then they: and the rest were therefore the worse, because they ought to have been better. The truth is, none are so bad as they that either have been good and are not; or that might have been better, but would not. Verse 14. And makest men as the fishes of the sea] that are easily drawn out with hook or net. So doth Nebuchadnezzar with little adoe, bring whole Nations under his power, and pleasure. Here therefore, saith Drusius, Nebuchadnezzar is the fisher, the world is the sea, men are the fishes, the armies and arts of the Chal∣dees, are called the net, drag, hook, to the which Nebuchadezzar ascribed his vi∣ctories, and not to God. Whereas he should have written upon them, as the An∣cients did upon their greatest exploits,Pausan. , and have said, as Titus did, when some cried him up for his sacking the city of Jerusalem; I onely lent mine hand to God, who did the work by me. as the creeping things] Or, the lesser fishes: for in the sea also are creeping things innumerable, Psal. 104.25. See Levit. 11.46. that have no ruler over them] to right and revenge them: and are therefore de∣voured, the lesser by the greater, without remedy. And what will men imagine, but that thy people have no ruler over them, no God to take care of their com∣fort, or to protect them from their enemies? How will they conclude them to be in as bad condition, as those of Brasile, who are said to be, Sine rege, sine lege, sine fide, &c. Or, the old Nomades, sub regno Cyclopico? Verse 15. They take up all of them with the angle] No lesse then all will serve their turns, or satisfie their ambition: as we read of Alexander, who wept that there was but one world for him to conquer: Julius Caesar, who would be aut Casar, aut nullus: this Nebuchadnezzar in the text, sitly compared to a greedy fisher-man, who could wish to enclose, and catch all the fishes in the river, Covetousnesse is boundlesse; and ambition rideth without reins. The curse of unsatisfiablenesse, the disease of a spiritull dropsie, is upon all carnall hearts: so that though one man should ingrosse a Monopoly of all the wealth in the world, and heap up his hoards, and his honours to the starres: yet would his heart be as hungry after more, as if he had nothing. therefore they rejoyce and are glad] This is worse then all the rest, that they please and applaud themselves in their wickednesse, that they hug and stroke themselves on the head, as Doeg did, Psal. 52.2. and those Sodomites, Esay 3.9. This shews that men are arrived at that dead and dedolent disposition spoken of, Ephos. 4.19. and are even stradling over hell-mouth, which gapeth for them. Verse 16. Therefore they sacrifice to their net] Thus wicked men grow worse and worse: their sinne is infinite,, what marvail then, if their punishment bee also infinite in hell?Sejanus sibi sacrificabat. Deo. To all other their iniquities these Caldeans adde this of abomina∣ble idolatry, they sacrifice to themselves, as Sejanus did, to their net, drag, &c, that is, to their weapons, as Ajax called his sword, his god; and thanked it for all his brave atchievments. And as Mezentius (another Atheist) is brought in, saying; Dextrae mihi Deus,Virg. Aeneid. lib. 10. & telum quod missile libro.
So Sesostris, king of Egypt (in Sampsons dayes) would needes be called  Lord of the whole world: and when he had conquered any countrey, he caused these words to be engraven there upon marble pillars, This countrey I gained by mine own strength &c. So Antiochus,. Herod. l. 2. (that little Antichrist) is said to worship his God Mauzzim, that is, his forces and armies Dan. 11.38. It was Nebuchad∣nezzar that was here pointed at: and how he deified himself and his own doings see Es. 10.13. Dan. 4.26. and burn intense to their draggs] whiles they ascribe to the instrument, that which is due to God alone, the chief Agent. Hold out net, said they: well done dragge &c. Hoc ego primus vidi, said Zabarell, Hoc ego feci saith Another. But what saith Luther? By mens boasting in this sort, Haec ego feci, haec ego feci,Luth. in Psal. 127. they become nothing better then mere Faeces, dreggs and lees. because by them their portion is fat] By them, that is, by their net and dragge, they think that their condition is well mended, and their meat is fat, opimus & op∣timus. God (the giver of all this) is not in all their thoughts: but as the moon, the fuller it is of light, the further it getts from the Sun the fountain of her light: so deale men with God. Verse 17. Shall they therefore empty their net?] That they may fill it againe anew, and so draw to themselves as to a pond or pool, the wealth and power of the whole East? Interrogatio precationis speciem habet, saith Gualther. This questi∣on is an effectuall prayer: and it is as if the Prophet should thus say, If, as hither∣to, thou go on to wink at their wickednesse, O God, will they not grow more audacious every day, and mischievous to mankind? Arise therefore O Lord of re∣compences to the help of thy people. Set up and shew thy self above the heathen, that they may know themselves to be but men. and not spare continually to slay the nations?] q. d. This cannot hold long: and that it may not, is mine earnest suite and supplication. Lord when thou makest inquisition for blood, remember their blood-guiltinesse,Psal. 9.12. and forget not the cry of the humble. These cruell Chaldeans do not only subjugate, but slay, not a few, but whole nations and that continually, and that without mercy. Is it not high time for thee to set to thy hand, O preserver of men &c. Note the Prophets arden∣cy in prayer: and learn of him to get upon the battlements, and look up, to see what comes of it, chap. 2.1. This was also Davids practise, Psal. 5.3. where he useth the self-same military word atsappeh: importing that he would be as a Spy upon a tower, to see whether he prevailed with God, whether he got the day. CHAP. II. Verse 1. I will stand upon my watch] To see what becomes of my prayer, and what will be the issue of my doubts and temptations about Gods pro∣vidence, ruling the affaires of the world. See the Note on chap. 1.17. There are spaces betwixt our prayers, and Gods answers. God harkens what Habacuc speakes: and Habacuc must harken another while what God speakes. This he had learned of David Psal. 85.8. Prayer is a Christians angel, seed, dove, mes∣senger: and must be looked after. Who shootes an arrow, or casts a boule, and takes not notice where it lights? They that observe not the answer of their pray∣ers, do as scoffing Pilate, who asked in scorn of Christ what's truth? but staid not for an answer. and set me upon the tower] Heb: set me firme and fast (as a Champion that will keep his ground) upon the tower or fortresse of divine meditation, upon Gods word,Nescio quomo∣do imbecillior est medicina quam morbus. which alone hath virtutem pacativam a settling property to compose the soule when distempered, and to lodge a blessed calme, a sabbath of rest in it, far above all Philosophicall Consolations: whereunto when Cicero had ascribed very much, yet he is forced to conclude, that the disease was too hard for the me∣dicine. And this well appeared both in Socrates who died doubtingly; and Cato, who desperately slew himself, after he had first read Plato's discourse concerning
the immortality of the soule. So foolish a thing it is, to flie in distresse of mind ad consolatiunculas creaturulae, as Luther speaketh: and not to run to the Name of the Lord, that strong tower Prov. 18.10. R. Kimchi reades the text thus, I have set me in a circle q. d. I will not out, till I have an answer, why thou deferrest to pu∣nish the wicked. and will watch to see what he will say unto me] Or, in me, viz. by a Prophetick spirit by internall revelation. 2 Sam. 23.1. Zach. 1.9. and 2.2. Preachers must still hearken what the Lord God saith unto them, and in them; speaking as the oracles of God 2 Pet. 4.11. and able to say with St. Paul, I have received of the Lord that which also I deliver unto you 1 Cor. 11.23. For, ut drachmam auri sine imagine Principis, sic verba Praedicantis sine authoritate Dei, contemnunt homines saith Lipsius. Bring scripture, or else you do but throw forth words without wisdome, and to little purpose, because they come not Cumprivilegio. and what I shall answer, when I am reprooved] Heb: upon my reproof or argu∣ing. Increpationis nomine tentationes intelligit, saith Gualther. Under the name of reproof, he understandeth those temptations whereby his faith was assaulted, when he saw bad men prosper, good men suffer. Satan and the world do usually set upon Gods servants with this weapon to unsettle their faith, and to make them fall from their own stedfastnesse. Dost thou still retain thine integrity? said Jobs wife to him. Seest thou not how little good there is to be got by Gods service? that all things are in a huddle here below, that they run on wheeles, and have no certain course? Thus the devill and his imps suggest to the godly, and thereby greatly disquiet them: setting their thoughts all on an hurricomb. It was the case of David Psa. 73. of Jeremy chap. 12.1.5. Of Basil under the heat of the Arrian persecution, An Ecclesias suas prorsus dereliquit Dominus? saith He; what? hath the Lord cast off all care of his churches? Is it now the last houre? &c. Of many good people in Salvians time, for whose satisfaction he was forced to write those eight excellent bookes De Gubernatione Dei; as likewise Austin (upon a like occasion) did those two and twenty elaborate bookes De Civitate Dei: and as the Prophet Habacuc here doth the following vision which he had for some time waited for, and now receiveth as a gracious answer to his prayer chap. 1. for his own and others settlement, in the doctrine of Divine Providence. Verse 2.Jam. 1.5. And the Lord answered me and said] Wisdome he had sought of God, who giveth liberally; and wisdome is granted him without hitting him in the teeth with his bold expostulations, and contestations about providence. Faithfull prayer never miscarrieth, but is sure of an answer, either before, as the prodigal; See Esa. 65.24. Or in the act, as Dan. 10.12. I am come for thy words, with an answer thereunto. Or so one after, as here. If it come not all out so soon as we would have it, know that ther's water enough in the spring, but the pipes are stopped or broken. write the vision] that is, the following admonition: write it for the use of all posterity. Note this against those Opinionists, that say that the Word of God was not written by his command:Bell. lib. 4. de V. D. Cap. 4. Or that it was written only for the use of the present ages, and of those particular Churches, to whom it was directed or declared. and make it plaine upon tables] Boxen tables (as the Seventy render it) for on box, for the firmenesse of the matter, were the ancients wont to write. that he may run that readeth it] That though he be no great Clerk, or in ne∣ver so great hast of businesse, yet he may read it, being written in great letters and very legible. See Deut. 27.8. Esa. 8.1. and 30.8. Gal. 6.11. you see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand,. the Greek signifieth with what good great text-letters I have written &c. God hath written for us the great things of his law Hos. 8.12. and with much perspicuity and plainnesse in things needfull to be known: he hath written them as it were with the beames of the Sun: that none may plead difficulty or obscurity: See Psal. 19.9. & 119.105. Pro. 6.23. 2 Pet. 1.19. Of the scripture it may be said, & latet & lucet: the knowledge thereof doth even bow down to us as trees do that are laden with fruits, so that a child may gather them. Verse 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time] This he is commanded to
write, that Gods people may learn to wait. He that beleeveth maketh not hast, he can both wait (as knowing that many of Gods promises beare a long date) and also want; go without the good he desireth: being well content that God is glorified, though himself be not gratified. And this is the work of effectuall faith, which is herein like unto Christall, of which it is reported, that the very touching of it quickens other stones, and puts a lustre and lovelinesse upon them. but at the end it shall speake] Effabitur, It shall speak confidently, boldly and freely, to the great comfort of those that antedate not Gods promises, but pati∣ently abide the accomphshment thereof. If any ask when this shall be? it is an∣swered, In the end, that is, in Gods good time. Shall he lose his right, because he hath it not by the day set down in our Kalender? Possibly the Kalender of heaven hath a post-date to ours. Sure it is, that as God seldome comes at our time: so he never failes at his own. Gods Expectants shall shortly clap their hands for joy: and cry out with that holy Martyr, Hee's come, Austin, Hee's come,Mr. Glover. Act. & Mor. Hee's come. and not lie] that is, not disappoint: as the earth is said to lie when it yeelds not her expected increase. God is faithfull, and cannot lie. Christ hath a rain∣bow on his head Rev. 10.1. to shew that he is faithfull and constant in his promises, and that tempests shall blow over the skie be cleared. He hath hither∣to kept promise with nights and dayes, that the one shall succeed the other, Ier. 33.20, 25. and shall he break with his people? How then should he be Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse Rev, 3.14? &c. Every man is a liar either by im∣posture, and so in purpose, or by impotency and so in the event deceiving those that rely upon him Psal. 62.9. But God is a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he Deut. 32.4. though it tarry wait for it] This is the duty, wait: and because it is a very difficult duty (the Hebrews found it easier to beare evill, then to wait for the pro∣mised good Heb. 10.36.) therefore is the promise heere not delivered only, but doubled, and trebled. It shall speake, it will come, it will surely come: nay doubled againe for more surety; It shall not lie, it will not tarry. It is as if God had said, Do but wait, and you shall be delivered, you shall be delivered, you shall be de∣livered, you shall, you shall. Oh the Rhetoricke of God! and oh the certaintie of the promises! It will not tarry] sc. beyond the time appointed of God. In se non tardat, carni tardare videtur. Gods help seemes long, because we are short. A short walk is a long journey to feeble knees. But that God tarries not beyond his appointed time, See Exod. 12.40, 41. at midnight were the first-born slaine, because then exactly the 400 yeers were up. And Dan. 5.30. In that night was Belshazzar slaine; because then ex∣actly the 70. yeeres were ended. Verse 4. Behold his soule which is lifted up] Ebulat, protuberat, which swelleth like a bubble, and breaketh thorough its own weaknesse: Heb. 10.37. Ecce quisemu. nit. Gualth. he that by unbeliefe or carnall security withdraweth from God, and confideth in the creature; seeking to shift and save himself some other way, as he is a proud presumptuous person, so let him know that, his soule is not upright in him] that is, it is very corrupt and crooked, stark naught: and Gods soule can take no pleasure in him; but he will punish him as a run-away, as one that hath fled from his colours, forsaken his captaine, revolted to the enemy Heb. 10.37, 38. Transfugas ubicunque inventi fuerint, quasi hostes interficere licet, was the old law of armes. What God will do to such, See Psal. 125.5. but the just shall live by his faith] This is an answer to those that would ask what shall we do till the vision speake? how shall we hold out till it come? till the seventy yeers of captivity be expired? The just shall live by faith saith He, and shall make a good living of it too: He shall live and be safe by the same faith, whereby he is just. He shall feed upon faith, as some read that Psal. 37.3. And whereas we find in those Apocryphal additions to Daniel, that Habakkuk brought a
messe of pottage to that Prophet in the Lions den; as it seems to be but a Jewish fable, so the Jew that invented it, grounding his conceit upon this text, would ex∣presse thus much,Keck. Phys. that as pottage (that succus benignus, as Keckerman calleth it) pre∣serveth this naturall life from perishing: so doth faiths acting upon the promises, and extracting nourishment from the same, maintain life spirituall: and thereby it was that Daniel stopped the mouthes of the Lions, Heb. 11. How Habakkuk ta∣keth out this his own lesson of living by faith, and not by sense, see chap. 3.17. Although the fig-tree shall not blossome, &c.] See here the life of faith, in the fail of outward comforts, so true is that of Solomon, Prov. 2.7. The Lord layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: When he is in greatest straits, then he hath such quietnesse, soundnesse, and presence of minde, as bears him up above all troubles: like as blown bladders do the body aloft all waters. Faith furnisheth him with strong∣est and most satisfying joyes; such as the flames cannot dry up, nor rivers of blood drown: faith actuated upon the promises maketh the beleever walk above the mid∣dle region of the air (as it were) in a continuall serenity, as Henoch did: and seal∣eth him a double charter of privative, and positive priviledges. See it set down 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Faith makes him live in the mouth of death, by strengthening him against the horrours of it Psal. 23.4. Rom. 8.38. Heb. 11.31. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. and by shewing him heaven beyond it, Heb. 11.13. and therein free∣dome from all evil, fruition of all good. Verse 5. Yea also because he transgresseth by wine] Or, How. Much more because he is a a wine-bibber, perfidious, proud, neither keepeth at home, &c. These four faults the Prophet here layeth to the charge of the Babylonian, and there-hence in∣ferreth for the comfort of the distressed captives, that his destruction cannot be farre off: and therefore the just should mean-while, live by faith, and bear up under af∣fliction. For if those that beleeve not the promises, but shift and shark for help and comfort elsewhere, shall smart for their unbelief, as vers. 4. where shall those appear that are here described? shall these bipedum nequissimi, worst of men escape by iniquity? Never think it. First, their drunkennesse alone would undo them; as it did Amnon,. Arist. Ethic. l. 3. c. 3. . Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 41. Elah, Nabal, Belshazzar, Bonosus, &c. Aristotle saith, that double punishments are due to drunkards: first, for their drunkennesse, and then for other sinnes committed in and by their drunkennesse. Nebuchadnezzar (or, as some will have it, Belshazzar) is here called wine, or, (by an ordinary ellipsis) a man of wine: not onely Meribibulus, but a deep and desperate drunkard, a very tundish (as Diotimus of Athens was called,) a hogshead, as young Cicero. No wonder there∣fore though he were all the rest that followeth. 1. Perfidious, to those that com∣mitted themselves to his trust, or made leagues with him, which he kept no longer then stood with his profit. 2. Proud, or Arrogant, Prov. 21.24. See Dan. 4.30. how he spreads his peacocks tail, and prides himself in it: his great wealth tumoured him up with great swealth. 3. He keepeth not at home] Non habitabit, his own countrey will not contain him, but he encloseth all nations in his draw-net, chap. 1.15.Sheol. 4. He enlargeth his desire as hell] which hath its name in Hebrew, from its unsatiablenesse, Prov. 30.15, 16. and in Latine it is called Infernus ab inferendo, say some, from the devils continuall carrying in souls thither, and yet it is not filled. and is as death] which is the end of all men, Eccles. 7.2. the way of all flesh, 1 King. 2.2. of all the earth, Josh. 23.14. the house appointed for all living, the great Congregation-house, Job 30.23. and cannot be satisfied] Lust is unsatisfiable, and whatsoever it getteth, is but as fuell to the fire. Ambition groweth as the Crocodile doth, as long as he liveth. It rideth without reins, and there is no hoe with it. but gathereth unto him all nations, &c.] All that he could come at; All Asia, and a great part of Africa; and could never have enough, till his mouth was filled with a spade full of mould. Therefore, he shall not keep home, (so some read the words above in this verse) Ideo non manebit in habitaculo His kingdome shall not long continue, but after a few years be over-turned by the Persians: this golden head (as Daniel calleth the Babylonish Monarchy) held not up above 170 years, if we reckon from Merodach-Baladan the first founder, to Belshazzar, slain by cyrus, who translated the kingdome to the Persians, Dan. 5. Verse 6. Shall not all these take up a parable against him?] Shall not the Baby∣lonian,
who is now a terrour, be ere long a scorn? shall he not inherit with ignomi∣nis, reproach? and a taunting proverb against him] Heb. An interpretation, and riddles: For example, Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his: that is both a proverb (because in many mens mouthes) and an interpretation, because it is plain and perspicuous. But that which followeth is a riddle. That ladeth himself with thick clay. This Nut must be broken up, ere the kernell can be come at. See Judg. 7.15. Woe to him that icreaseth that which is not his] Heb. Lo, lo. Some render it,Veshibhro. Hoe, he that multip lieth not for himself, but fro another, sc. for the Medes and Per∣sians, not Woe, but Hoe, a note of insulting, and upbraiding, answerable to the Latine Vah, Vah, tune ille es, &c. Ah sirrah, are you he that increaseth that which is not yours, &c. Euge, . how long?] This is the common complaint of the oppressed nations, groaning out their grievances, and longing for deliverance from those troublers of the world. Neither is this vsque quo in vain; for God is gracious: and may better stile him∣self then the great Turk, Awlem Penawh, that is, The worlds refuge: the poor mans King, as James 4. of Scotland was called. and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay] With gold and silver, that guts and garbage of the earth; fitly called clay, because of the clogging and polluting pro∣perty: and said to load people, as a sumpter-horse laden with treasure all day, but at night turned into a stinking stable, with his back full of gauls, and bruises. He that first called Riches, Bono, Goods, was mistaken; the Scripture calleth them, Thorns snares, thick clay, &c. a great burden to the owner, according to the proverb, Magna navis, magna cura, A great ship is a great care: and the lading oft proves no better then that which Captain Forbisher brought back with him, after his Voyage to discover the Straits, viz. a great quantity of stones, which he thought to be Minerals: from which,Camd. Elisab. 189. when there could be drawn neither gold nor silver, nor any other mettall, they were cast forth to mend the high-wayes. This was labour in vain, pressure to no purpose: and no lesse is theirs that heap up riches without right, Jer. 17.11. or, if by right means, yet set their hearts upon them, Psal. 62.10. still striving (as they say the toad doth) to die with as much earth in their mouthes as may be; till at length their Never-enough, be quit with fire-enough in the bottom of hell. Nenessan the Lawyer was wont to say, He that will not venture his body, shall never be valiant: he that will not venture his soul, never rich. O curvae in terras animae, & coelestium inanes. Is it nothing to lose an immor∣tall soul? to purchase an everlasting death? to sink into the bottomlesse lake under this thick clay. Verse 7. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee?] Rent and tear thee, as hunting-dogs do the beast they pursue. See Esay 13.14, 21. Jer. 58. and 51. The interrogation here used, importeth both the certainty of the thing, and their security: as if no such thing could possibly befall them: Suddenly therefore, saith the Prophet, shalt thou be surprized, and spoyled by the Persians, when thy city Babylon is held impregnable, and boasteth of provision enough laid in for twenty years siege. Security is the certain Usher of destruction; as we see in Benhadads army, and those Midianites, Judg. 7. and the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 30. and Pompeyes marching against Caesar; and the French at the battle of Agincourt: so confident they were of a victory, that they sent to our King Henry 5.Speed. 795. who was then in the field against them, and gat the day, to know what ransom hee would give, &c. Verse 8. Because thou hast spoyled many nations] God loves to retaliate (as hath before been oft observed) to spoil the spoilers, by a remnant of the people, by such as were of no note, and much unlikely to do such exploits. Thus he spoiled these Babylonians by Cyrus, and his Medes; the Persians, by Alexander and his Macedo∣nians (whom they so slighted, that Darius in his proud Embassie to him, called him his servant, but himself the King of kings, and Cousin of the gods.) So the Ro∣man Empire was miserably rent and torn by the Gothes, Vandals, Hunnes, Lom∣bards, people not before heard of: and the Greek Empire, by Turks, Tartars, Sa∣racens, Scythians, &c. taht it might the better appear, haec non sine numine fieri, that it was the Lords own doing: who often suffers his enemies, like Adoniah's
guests, to feast and frollick in a jocund security and promise of continued prosperi∣ty: But at last, when they are at the height of their joyes and hopes, he confounds all their devises, and layes them open to the scorne of the world, and the spoyle of the remnant of the people whom they vilified. because of mens blood] Heb. bloods, every drop whereof had a tongue to cry to God for vengeance saying,Rev. 16.6. Psal. 55.23. Give them blood to drink, for they are worthy, Oh let not bloody and deceitfull men live out half their dayes. That souldier can ne∣ver answer it to God that hath not a good cause, and striketh not rather as a Justi∣cer, then as a souldier. and for the violence of the land] Heb. of the earth, though principally of that land of desires the promised land, and the inhabitants thereof whom he that touch∣ed, touched the apple of Gods eye,hon. that little man in the eye that may not be medled with Zach. 2.8. of the city] Jerusalem, called the city by an excellency, and by a better right then ever Rome was. See Lam. 1.1. and Jeremies elegie there over it, when captivated by these Chaldees. Verse 9. Wee to him that coveteth an evill covetousnesse] For there is a good covetousnesse (which few are guilty of) 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet earnestly the best guifts: And yet shew I unto you a more excellent way: Covet earnestly the best graces, such as are faith, hope and charity, these better then gifts. A shop full of barrells enrich not, unlesse they be full of commodities. Gifts (as to heaven) are but the lumber of a Christian: 'tis grace makes him rich toward God, and of that he cannot be too covetous. But the covetousnesse of the Caldeans here threa∣tened and thundered against, was of another nature. It is called an evill covetous∣nesse, and hath its name in the Originall of piercing or wounding, as Joel 2.8. and fitly, both in respect of a mans self 1 Tim. 6.10. and others Prov. 1.19. Am. 9.1. and here. Woe to such, and destruction too, as Hos. 7.13. The Lord to shew his just indignation against Covetous persons smiteth his fists at them, as Balac did at Balaam Num. 24.10. See Ezek. 22.13. Behold, I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gaine which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the middst of thee. Now lest people should object or conceive that those were but great words: and that the Lord would not do so as he said; or that they should deale well enough with Him: therefore it followeth verse 14. Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the dayes that I shall deale with thee? I the Lord have spoken, and will do it, to his house] i. e. his family and posterity, which he intends to advance, but indeed undoes them, by leaving them a cursed hoard of ill-gotten goods: wherein they do them a greater displeasure then Joab, and Gehezi, did in leaving their children the leprosy for a legacy. Iob speaketh chap. 15.34. as though the wicked, when they set up their houses by pilling and polling, by getting riches without right, did but make a stack of wood, and then comes a spark of Gods wrath, and makes an end of all. As in another place, Brimstone, saith He, shall be scattered upon his habitation chap. 18.15. so that if the fire of Gods displeasure do but light upon it,De vita Con∣stant: lib. 5. &c. Thus Dioclesian that cruell persecutour had his house wholy consumed with lightening, and a flame of fire that fell from heaven upon it, as Eusebius tells us. Add hereunto, that many times there comes a son that is as good with a fork, as his father was with a rake: as great a spend-all, as his father was a get-all. that he may set his nest on high] and there feather it at his pleasure (see Obad 4.) and secure his children, like as the Eagle builds on high, to save her yong from the serpent that seekes to destroy them. that he may be delivered from the power of evill] which he hat cause to feare from others, to whom he hath been so injurious and oppressive. But how will he be hid or freed from the terrours of his own guilty conscience: well he may build cities with Cain, and set up high towers with Phocas, but what said the oracle to him? Though thou set up thy strong-holds as high as heaven, yet sin at the foundation thereof, will soon overturn all, and lay it levell with the ground. Verse 10. Thou hast consulted shame to thy house &c.] Thou hast taken a wrong course both for thy house of the kingdome (so the Persians called the kings palace
Dan. 4.27.) which shall be blown up: and for thine own private family and posterity: it is not all thy care, paines, plotting and practising, that can preserve it from ignominy and utter ruine. God will turn thy glory into shame, and make thy name to rot and stink as putrified flesh Prov. 10.7. and ver. 9. He that per∣verteth his wayes shall be known. And when such a man is raked up in the dust, his evill courses shall be cast as dung in the faces of those whom he leaveth behind him. What fooles then are Extortioners, Muckwormes and Cormorants, that live miserably and deale unjustly, opening the mouthes of all to cry out upon their crtinesse, covetousnesse and cruelty, and yet think to raise up their houses and advance their names, and adorne their children with glory and estimation? by cutting off many people] A poore glory it was to Sylla to have made such a mercilesse massacre at Athens: and after that, to have proscribed and slaine 4700.. citizens of Rome, as he caused it to be publikely recorded, videlicet ne memoria tam praeclarae rei dilueretur, saith mine Authour.Johnst. de Nat. Const. So for Julius Caesar to have been the death of a million of men, Mahomet the great Turk, of 800000. So for Stokesly bishop of London to boast upon his death-bed, that he had in his time brought to the fire fifty heretikes, as he called them: or for the bloody Spaniards, that they have murthered fifty millions of Indians in 42. yeers, as Acosta the Je∣suite testifieth. and hast sinned against thy soule] The worth whereof is incomparable, the losse irreparable, as Christ (who only went to the price of soules) telleth us Mat. 16.26. It was therefore no ill counfell that Francis Xaverius gave Iohn 3. King of Portugall to meditate every day a quarter of an houre on that divine sentence, What shall it profit a man to win the world, and lose his soule? Neither was it any evill answer that Maximilian (King of Bohemia, afterwards Emperour) gave the Pope, who perswaded him to be a good Catholike with many promises of pro∣fits and preferments: the king answered, I thank your holinesse: but my soules health is dearer to me then all the things in the world.Hist. of Counc. of Trent. 429. Speed 496. This pleased not the Pope, who said that it was a Lutheran form of speech. and yet that of Lewis king of France about the yeer 1152. pleased him much worse, who cast his Bulles (whereby he required the fruites of vacancies of all Cathedrall Churches of France) into the fire, saying, I had rather the Popes bulles should roast in the fire, then that my soule should fry in hell. Verse 11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beame out of the timber shall answer it] Here are wofull Antiphonies screech-owles of woe cry aloud from the beames of the oppressours chambers, and make most hideous noises in the eares of their consciences. So that although none other should dare to mute against them, or accuse them of wrong-dealing; yet their very houses built by rapine and blood shall testifie against them: so shall other creatures that grone under their abuses Rom. 8.19, 20, 22. They seeme all to say unto us those 3.Lib. 2. de Ar∣cap. 3. words, saith Hugo, Accipe, Redde, Fuge; Accipe beneficium, Redde Officium, Fuge Supplicium. Now if we harken not to them but do the contrary, they shall be one day as so many swift witnesses against us. and the beame out of the timber shall answer it] Tignum è ligno respondet ei.] An allusion to responsores, as in Quires and musick: And perhaps the Prophet here tacitely taxeth the Babylonian luxury in keeping Quiristers and Musicians for their sinfull delight. God, saith he, will fit you with other singsters shortly, that shall twit you by turns with your murthers and ravages: for the stone shall cry out of the wall, Woe to him that buildeth a town with bloods: and the beame out of the tim∣ber shall answer it, And wo to him that stablisheth a city by iniquity. Verse 12. Wo to him that buildeth a town with blood] This seemeth to be the senselesse creatures black Cantus (as they call it) chaunted out against the wrong-do∣er, by Gods own appoinrment, cui obscura clarent, muta respondent, silentium con∣fitetur, saith an Ancient, —cui servi ut taceant, jumenta loquentur,Juvenal. The very beasts have a verdict to passe upon oppressours; as the dumb Asse did upon Balaam: yea the lifelesse creatures shall ring a dolefull knell of Woe and
alasse in their eares, and cry them guilty: as the earth did Cain, and the heaven did Phocas; and as the tignum è ligno doth here Nehuchadnezzar. His town of Ba∣bylon was built in blood by Seminamis who slew her husband, so was Rome by Romulus, so was Alexandria in Egypt by Alexander that great man-slayer, the founder of populous No, of whose Woe reade Nah. 3.8, 10. with the Note. And for Alexander himself,Speed. he lay unburied thirty dayes together, neither did his bloody conquest above ground purchase him any title for an habitation under ground. The like befell our Conquerour William, who laid his foundation here upon fire-works: and was punished in his posterity for his depopulations at New∣forrest, and elsewhere. and stablisheth a city by iniquity] That thinketh so to stablish it, but it proveth otherwise. Josephus telleth us that Nebuchadnezzar set three severall walles of brick about his Babylon,Joseph. lib. 10. chp. 11. one within another: but all would not do, when once God took it to do. Oppression is a bony sin Am. 5.12, 13. Verse 13. Behold is it not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall labour in the fire] Labour in vaine to quench the fire, wherewith Babylon shall be burnt, Jer. 51.58. Or have laboured to no purpose in building that city, and enlarging that Empire, which now God will have down. Is it not evident, that they have lost oleum & operam, yea hazarded their own lives, as those do that stive against a flame. What profit hath he that laboureth for the wind Eccles. 5.16. much lesse he that laboureth in the fire, that devouring element. See Esay 33.14. Possi∣bly he may besaved himself, yet so as by fire, but his work shall be burnt, that losse he shall suffer 1 Cor. 3.15. As they that seek after the Philosophers stone labour in the very fire to as little purpose as may be: for they must use so much gold, and spend so much gold, and then perhaps they can turn as much into gold by it, as they have spent in making of it. Hence One calles Alchymy A multiplying of some∣thing by nothing; Another, an Omne, Aliquid, Nihil. Another an art without art, never taught by Moses and Miriam, as some have doted, and delivered, that this was a peece of their Egyptian learning. But it is certain that those holy soules ne∣ver either learned or taught any such laborious losse of time and money. Demetrius Phalereus complaineth of these Alchymists long agone not without indignation quod certis consumptis incertorum gratiâ,Athenaeus quae se capturos sperabant, non ceperunt, quod verò habebant abjecerint, that they cast away certainties for uncertainties, that they attained not what they hoped for, but cast away what they had. Julius Scaliger also Fornaculas ist as odi,Ad Cardan. ex∣erc. 83. p. 100. saith He, odio plus quam Vatiniano. Sunt enim noctuae ad aucupia crumenarum. I cannot abide those fornaces: indeed they are pick-purses &c. know there is a true Alchymy called by some the Spagirick art, being in great use in physick. This I condemne not, so it be warily and wisely dealt in. But this by the way only. It seemed to some an impossible thing that Babylon should so suddenly be destroyed as was foretold verse. 7. It will be done certò, citò, penitùs, suddenly, surely, severely, saith the Prophet, for the Lord of Hosts hath undertaken the doing of it. Annon ecce à Domino exercituum? (so the Hebrew hath it by an emphaticall Aposiopesis) Is it not, (look you) of the Lord of Hosts? The people shall labour in the very fire, the nations also shall weary themselves for very vanity] Viz. in seeking to save Babylon, which by a divine decree is to be destroyed without remedy, Psa. 137.8. So is Rome that other Babylon Rev. 18.2. citò itidem casura,De rem. ut. fort. dial. 118. si vos essetis viri, said Petrarch long since. It would soon be down, would you but stand up as men. Neither shall the Jesuites (that ultimus diaboli crepitus) be able to uphold it: there is a cold sweat upon all the limbes of Antichrist already. Verse 14. For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord &c.] He shall make himself a glorious name among the nations of the earth, by exe∣cuting vengeance upon Babylon, and so pleading the cause of his oppressed people (whom he seemed, during their captivity there to neglect) that men shall have cause to say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily there is a God that judg∣eth in the earth, Psal. 58.11. as the waters cover the sea] the chanell of the sea: that is plentifully, and abun∣dantly, See a like promise, Isay 11.9. but to another purpose. That's a famous promise of the comming and kingdome of Christ: and so some Interpreters apply
this. Wherein though they seem to be mistaken, considering the context: yet the Ancients rightly here-hence argued, that Christ would certainly come again to judgement, because many wicked men escape in this world without condigne pu∣nishment, which then they shall be sure of, 2 Thes. 1.6, 9. Then all shall be set to right, though now they may seem lesse equally carried: and the reason of Gods proceedings with men shall be cleared up, which now also we are bound to beleeve to be (sometimes secret, but) ever just. At the day of judgement we shall see an excellent harmony in this discord of things: and all obscure passages shall bee made as plain to us, as if they were written with the most glittering Sun-beam, upon a wall of Chrystall. Then shall this sweet promise have its full accomplishment. The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters co∣ver the sea, in greatest abundance, and redundancy. Verse 15. Wo unto him that giveth his neighbour drink] The Babylonians (a∣mong other their flagitious practises afore-mentioned) were much addicted to drunkennesse, as is recorded by Herodotus, Ctesias, and others. Their land was sick of drink, and would therefore spew them out: Themselves were men of wine, verse 5. (See the Note) and should therefore drink deep of the wine of Gods fierce wrath. They drank to their neighbours, or companions, not in a way, either of curtesie, or charity, but purposely to intoxicate them, to make them drunk, that they might either deride them, or abuse them to filthy pleasure, or both: they buckt them with drink, and then laid them out to be sunn'd, and scorned, as Noah was by his graceesse sonne. Therefore as he cursed Ham (though Scaliger ex∣cuse him) and it stuck to his posterity for ever: so doth God here denounce a woe to drunkards, and so sets it on, as no creature shall ever bee able to take it off. that puttest thy bottle to him] Not thy bowle onely, but thy bottle, that he may drink, and be drunk, and spew, and fall, &c. Jer. 25.27. This is ordinarily practi∣sed by our Roaring-boyes, (as they will needs be called by a wofull prolepsis, Here for hereafter) in their Cyclopicall, . Either by perswasions, or threats, the bottle is set to the mouth, and must be emptied, ere it come thence. The civil, sober, and temperate man is urged, and it may be forced to swallow down long and needlesse draughts (as a horse doth a drench) by domineering drunkards, that they may see his nakednesse, triumph over him, as laid up, or (as the new terme is) satisfied. Their courses are here graphically, and in lively colours described by the holy Ghost; to set forth the hatefulnesse thereof, and how wofull will be the issue. There are that read the words thus. That puttest thine anger to him, thy fervour, and thy fury, viz. if he pledge thee not whole-ones, and drink not all the Outs, as they call them. Domitius, the father of Nero, slew Liberius,Sueton. an honest Ro∣man, because he refused to drink so much as he commanded him. Others read it, That puttest thy poyson to him: and indeed, Ebrietas est blandus daemon, dulce vene∣num, suave peccatum, &c. Drunkennesse is a fair-spoken devil, a pleasant poison, a sweet sinne, which he that hath in him, hath not himself, and which he that runs into, runs not into a single sinne, but is wholly turned into sinne. How often, (saith a grave Divine) have I seen vermine sucking the drunkards blood, as fast as he, that of the grape, or mault, yet would he not leave his hold, or lose his draught? Gualther reads it, Conjungens fervorem tuum, Joyning thine heat, inflaming thy self, that thou mayest drink him under the board.De sua boba∣citate librum conscripsit seu potius evomuit. erod. This was great Alexanders sinne, and ruine: so it was M. Anthonies, (who wrote a book of his abilities to drink down others) and before them both Darius's, as Athenaeus hath left recor∣ded. How much better his successour Ahashuerosh,, who made a law at his great feast, that every man should drink according to his pleasure, Esth. 1.8. So Minos, king of Creet ordered, that his subjects should not drink one to another, , unto drunkennesse. Quinetiam Spartae mos est laudabilis ille, Ʋt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo. Among the old Germans, diem noctemque continuare potando, nulli probrum, saith Tacitus, It was no disgrace to drink night and day together. It is still the sinne
of that nation, as Gualther upon this text heavily complaineth; and it is grown to a proverb, the Drunken Dutch-man. Of them, the English, much commended for their sobriety, learned in the Netherland-warres, to drown themselves by immode∣rate drinking:Camd. Elis.231. and by drinking to others healths, to impair their own: so that in our dayes came forth the first restraint thereof by severity of lawes, saith Camden: who yet, being so great an Antiquary, could not but know, that in the year 959. Edgar king of this land, made an Ordinance for putting pinnes in cups, that none should quasse whole ones. And makest him drunk also] Robbest him of himselfe, and layest a beast in his roome. The same Hebrew word Zolel signifieth a drunkard and a vile person: fil∣thy venemous creatures breed in those fennish grounds Ich 40.21. Behemoth lieth in them; which Gulielmus Parisiensis applyeth to the Devil in drunken hearts: whereas in dry places, sober souls, he walketh about seeking rest but sindeth none Mat. 12.43.Natal. Comes Eist. 84. dae∣mon meridianus The very Heathen in hatred of this sinne fained that Cobali (an hurtfull and pernicious kind of Devils) accompanyed Bacchus: and that Acratus, or the in∣temperate Devil was their Captain. Seneca calleth it a voluntary madnesse, ano∣ther a noon-day Devill, no more a night-walker, as once, 1 Thes. 5.7. The Lace∣demonians punished it severely; so do the Turks at this day, powring ladle-fuls of boyling lead down their throats sometimes: and at least bastinadoing of them on the bare feet, till they are disabled for walking in haste again to their conventicles of good-fellowship.Heyl. Geog. 793. Morat Bassa commanded a pipe to be thrust thorow the nose of a Turk, which was found taking Tobacco: and so in derision to be led about Con∣stantinople. Let men shun this shamefull sinne; and be farre from drawing others to it: for have they not sins enough of their own to answer for? Must they needs go to hell in company? Dives desired that his brethren and companions in sinne, might not come to that place of torment.Luke 16. This he did, not out of any good will to them, but because he knew, if they were ever damned, he should be double-damned. That thou maist look on their nakednesse] Those parts that nature would have co∣vered are called nakednesse per Antiphrasin. To look on them with delight, is by some held a sinne against Nature: the ground of their opinion is Gen. 3.7. To make men drunk for that purpose, is worse. But if for further abuse of their bodies to uncleannesse, (as Attalus the Macedonian dealt by Pausanias a young Cour∣tier, who afterwards slew King Philip,Pansudam so∣um mero Al∣lus non uae tantuin verim & convivarum libi velut scorm. vrle subject, ludi∣  theat.  viuti sunlimus & rigidae inn ∣tiae. Vell. lib. 2. because he would not punish Attalus, for so doing) that's worst of all: and hath a woe, woe, woe, hanging at the heeles of it. Verse 16. Thou art filled with shame for glory] Or, more with shame then with glory. That is thou shalt be filled shortly with ignominy for that glory wherein thou presently pridest thy selfe: thy drunkenesse shall redound to thine utter dis∣grace, as it was to Darius, Alexander, Autoninus, Bonosus, Trajan (a good Empe∣ror otherwise, but a drunkard, and a pederast, as Dio Cassius reporteth him.) Yea Cato, that most severe censurer of other mens manners; to whom it was sometime objected (how deservedly I know not) quod nocturnis potationibus indulgeret, that by night he would drink soundly. This is a blurre to him, if true, and confutes that elogium given him by Paterculus, that he was omnibus humanis vitiis immunis, free from all vices, and as like vertue her selfe as might be. In Scripture, the drunkards stile begins in lawlesnesse, proceeds in unprofitablenesse, ends in misery; and all sht up in that denomination of his pedigree, A sonne of Belial. Drink thou also] Sith thou art so able at it (sith thou hast so well deserved that infamous Epitaph of a certain drunkard. Heus, hic situs est Offellius Buratius Bibulus, Qui dum vixit, aut bibit aut minxit. abi praeceps)Jonsi. de Na∣tur. constant. Drink another while of the cup of shame and sorrow: take thy part of all man∣ner of miseries Jer. 25.26. Obad. 16. Snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempost shall one day be the portion of thy cup: For the righteous Lord loveth righte∣ousnesse Psal. 11.6.7. Yea he loveth to retaliate and will therefore make these drunkards drink also: and those that made others drunk that they might look on their nakednesse, to lie with their fore-skins uncovered to their perpetual reproach. Uncir∣cumcision was a shameful spectacle indeed among that people.
The cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned to thee] Heb. turned about, or shall turn it selse, quia rerum omnium vicissitudo: thy turn is now come to take off the dregs of Gods cup of calamity Ier. 25.15. that hath eternity to the bottome. And shamefull spewing shall be on thy glory] Kikalon a compound word, the vomit. of ignominy; a fit punishment for filthy drunkards, who break their heads as swine do their bellies, over-charge their stomacks as dogges do their gorges, and then dis∣gorge themselves in a shamefull sort, as Antonius did at Narbon amidst his guests at a feast: and as Eccius, Luthers great adversary, whom he merrily called Ieccius from his casting: as Tiberius was nicknamed Biberius. shall be on thy glory] The Hebrew word for glory, properly signifieth weighti∣nesse: as the word twice here used for shame, signifieth lightnesse: an elegant op∣position, shewing that whatsoever the Babylonians gloried in, and held themselves honourable for, should be lightly accounted of, and lie buried in the sheet of shame, as in a dung-hill of filthy vomit. Verse 17. For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee] Here, for the comfort of Gods people (which is the main scope of this prophesie) he repeateth the chief causes of Babylons calamity: viz. her cruelty to Lebanon, that is, to all Ju∣daea (a part being put for the whole.) Or else he speaketh of the violence done to the Temple, which was built of the cedars of Lebanon; as was likewise the Temple of Diana at Ephesus made of Cedar-wood. The devil loves to be Gods ape. This violence in firing the Temple, and desolating the countrey, shall cover thee all over, as a garment doth the body: yea, it shall be as the shirt, made for the murthering of Agamemnon, where the head had no issue out. and the spoil of beasts which made them afraid] Men are here called beasts, as the land, Lebanon: these were spoiled and terrified, these were murthered and massa∣cred by the Chaldeans, who shall therefore be severely punished, and this written, as it were, over their heads, to signifie for what they suffer. Because of mens blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein. See the Note on verse 8. Vers. 18. What profiteth the graven image] The Chaldees promised themselves much help against their enemies from their idols: and were ready to say, as that Roman Emperour Antoninus the Philosopher did, when he was to meet his enemie,Ita refer.- Vulcat. Galliz. in Avid. Cass. Non sic deos coluimus ut ille nos vinceret. We have not so served the gods, as that he should overcome us. The Prophet here rejecteth their confidence, and layeth open their folly. See the like, Jer. 10.8, 14, 15. Zech. 10.2. Esay 44.16, 17, &c. Confer Jer. 51.47, 52. Ezek. 20.30, 32. that the maker thereof hath graven it] And can he hope for help from the work of his own hands? can the image give that to others, which it hath not for it self? In Henry the eights time, one Mr. Cotismore was accused of heresie, for saying,Act & Mon 763. that Images were but Carpenters chips; and that when men go to offer to them, they did it to shew their new gear. The men of Cockram, not pleased with their new Rood, quarrelled with the joyner, and refused to pay him: he complained to the Major of Doncaster, who gave them this counsell; Pay the poor man his mo∣ney, and go your wayes home, and look on it, and if it will not serve for a god, make no more ado, but clap a pair of horns on his head, and so he will make an excellent devil. This the Parishioners took well in worth: the poor man had his money, and diverse laughed well thereat: but so did not the Babylonish priests,Ibid. 1340, saith Mr. Fox. Horace brings in Priapus, that ridiculous garden god, say∣ing, thus, Olim truneus eram ficulnus, &c. He thought no otherwise of the Images of Jupiter, and the rest: but durst not say so, for fear of the people So that of him it might be said, as Augustine doth of Seneca, who wrote a book against superstitions, but colebat quod reprehendebat,De civ. Di. lib.6. c. 10. agebat quod arguebat, quod culpabat, adorabat, he reproved them, but yet used them. the molten image, and a teacher of lies] Pictura falsa veritas est, saith One. It is but a shadow of the person that it representeth. God cannot be pictured, or ex∣pressed
by any image. Images of Christ are not onely defects, but also lies, saith the Homily against perill of idolatry, set forth in Queen Elizabeths dayes. Irenaeus reproveth the Gnosticks for carrying about the images of Christ, made in Pilates time, after his own proportion, Lactantius saith, that there is no religion where there is an image. Varro had said the same long before him, as Austin reciteth him. Plutarch saith, it is sacriledge to worship by images, &c. and telleth us, that Nu∣ma forbad the Romans the use of images in temples; neither had they any for the first 170. years together, no more had the Persians, saith Strabo, nor the old Germanes, saith Tacitus. The old Britones indeed had their idols, Portenta dia∣bolica (so Gildas calleth them) penè numero Aegyptiaca vincentia, ugly for shape, and almost as many as the Egyptians for number. These all fell down together, when Christ was first known here (as they say the Egyptian idols did, when Christ with his parents fled thither, for fear of Herod) but Antichrist soon set up others in their stead, and taught the people that they were Lay mens books. But if they be lying teachers, (as here they are called) they must be lying books too; and there∣fore not to be read by any that would receive the love of the truth, that they may be saved. Bern in Swisserland, was the first town, that after the Reformation, was purged of images; making a bone-fire of them, on an Ashwednesday. The like was done here in England, in King Edward 6. his raigne, on that very day wherein the victory was gotten at Muscleborough in Scotland: and now I hope we are rid of them for ever. The Turks will not endure them, no not upon their coynes; because of the second Commandement: for they also do so honour Mo∣ses his writings,Par. Porleg. in Genes. that they kisse any piece of Paper, wherein any thing of his is writ∣ten, and do exceedingly hate Papists for their abominable idolatry: as do likewise the Jewes. that the maker of his work trusteth therein] Which he would never do, if not bewitcht, and bereft of his right mind. To trust in a god of a mans own making, is a prodigious errour, a stupendious stupidity. to make dumb idols] In the Hebrew there is an elegant Agnomination, Elilim illemim, speechlesse, No-gods, that give no answer to their suitours, and —quorum sunt numina nomina tant ùm. Verse 19. Woe unto him that saith to the wood, Awake] It is wood still, and yet he saith to it, Awake, Arise, &c. as if he would deny his own reason, and un-man himself. When Hezekiah saw that such was the venome of the Israelitish idola∣try, that the brazen-Serpent stung worse then the fiery, he pulled it down, and in contempt called it Nehushtan, that is, a piece of brasse, 2 King 18.4. Pagnins rendreth it,Thes. Ling. sanct. aenusum. Marinus, aeniculum, that is, parum quid aeris, a little piece of sorry brasse. The Jewes at this day say, that as long as they see the Preacher direct his speech and prayer to that little wooden crucifix, that standeth in the pulpit by him, to call it his Lord, and Saviour, to kneel to it, to embrace it, to kisse it, to weep upon it,Spec. Eur. (as is the fashion of Italy) this is preaching sufficient for them: and perswadeth them more with the very sight of it to hate Christian religion, then any reason that the world can alledge to love it. Woe therefore to those Popish Ido∣laters, because of offences: destruction to them, that thus say to the wood, Awake, and to the dumb stone, Arise] A prayer, fit to be preferr'd to God onely, (as Psal. 35.23.) who giveth not his glory to any other, nor his honour to graven images.Esay 42.8. He that is the right object of mens prayers, must be omnipotent, omnipre∣sent, omniscient, a God also in covenant with us, &c. Is any wood or stone so? Is it not inutile lignum a dead stock? Eben dumam, a dumb stone? Our English seems to come of the Hebrew. It shall teach] Dumb, and yet teach? Others read it questionwise, Ipse doceat? Can it teach? What better lesson can ye learn from it then a lie, as verse 18? Bid adieu to it therefore, as King Hen. 8. did to the Pope (if he had done so to Popery too, it had been better for him) in his Protestation against him. England is no more a babe, to be led and fed with lies—. Surely except God take away our right wits,Act. & Mon. 990. not onely the Popes authority shall be driven out for ever, but his name also shortly shall be forgotten in England. We will from henceforth ask counsell of him
and his when we list to be deceived, when we covet to be in errour, when we de∣sire to offend God, truth and honesty &c. behold it is laid over with gold and silver] q. d. Come and see, beleeve your own eyes at least, behold the matter, form, workmanship of this new-made god,Ibid. 1084. and grow wiser. The Rood of Grace with all its trinkets, the blood of Hales (that notable impostor) was laid open at Pauls crosse by Cromwell, and there viewed and torn in peeces by the people. there is no breath at all in the middest of it] No soule,Aesop. not so much as that of a beast. O pulchrum caput, sed cerebrum non inest, said the ape (in the fable) com∣ming once into a cavers shop. The best thing that an image can teach a man is, that it self is dumb and dead: and that the maker thereof cannot give life and breath to it, much lesse a deity. Verse 20. But the Lord is in his holy Temple] It is not enough to condemne su∣perstitions: but we must know and serve the true God in a true manner. Tully wished that he could as easily find out the true religion, as disprove the false ones.De nat. deos. Cambyses destroyed the Egyptian idols, rather in scorne of all religion, then hatred of idolatry. Lucian ieared the heathen-gods: and yet was an enemy to Christia∣nity. Erasmus was no Papist, nor yet good Protestant. Henry the 8. despised the old religion, and yet envied the new. There are many (said He in Palia∣ment) that are too busy with their new Sumpsimus: and others that dote too much upon their old Mumpsimus &c. Hence it is that the Prophet here to those dunghill-deities of the heathens, those dead idols, opposeth the living and onely true God, Jehovah, saith he, is in his holy Temple: that Essentiator who hath his being of himself, and gives beeing to all things else  as St. Paul elegantly expresseth it Act. 17.25. He is in his holy Temple, sc. in heaven by his power and glory and in his Church on earth by his grace and goodnesse. The use of which doctrine followeth. let all the earth keep silence before him] Heb. sc. or be still, all the earth &c. Reverentiae cause silete, Tremble at his judgements, trust in his promises, wait upon him in his ordinances, walk before him in obedience, speake not of him or to him, but as knowing your distance, your infancie. In speaking of God, our best eloquence is silence, saith Mr. Hooker. In speaking to him, quanta cum re∣verentia, quanto timore, quanta humilitate,Bern. de di∣vers. 25. accedere debet è palude sua procedens & repens vilis ranuncula, saith Bernard? with what reverence and godly feare, with what humility, should a poor small frog, creeping out of his mud, draw neer unto this great God, before whom Angels appeare with greatest self-abase∣ments? what abhorrency then and self-annihilation can be sufficient to accompany our approaches to this great God of heaven? And how should the enemies of the Church stand in aw, and even quake before him, wriggling into their holes, as wormes do, when it thundreth, and beeing all husht, as sheep are before the wolfe, birds before the hawk, all the beasts of the field before the lion when he roareth. CHAP. III. Verse 1. A prayer of Habbakkuk the Prophet] Habakkuk signifieth a Wrastler, that by closing striveth to get the better, as hath been before noted on chap. 1.1. To close with the adversary is the best way to supplant him, or to avoid the blow: so is running in to God, the way to escape him. The Prophet had heard Gods speech and was afraid verse 2. He saw his wrath ready to break forth, and therefore gets in with him by this prayer. He knew that, Flectitur irat us voce rogante Deus.Ovid. God suffereth himself oft to be overcome by the prayers of his people: and yeel∣deth much unto them, when most bitterly bent Mat. 24.20. he therefore sers shoulders and sides to work, and wrestle lustily in this chapter. He knew it was a Prophets work, to pray as well as preach: and between these two, to divide his time. God forbid (saith Samuei, who is reckoned the first of Pro∣phets)
that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: I will also teach you the good and right way 1 Sam.Act. 3.24. 12.23. So doth this Prophet: he both pre∣ferreth a prayer (the word, say some, signifieth such a prayer as is made by a Me∣diatour before a judge; we have an advocate with the Father 1 Ioh. 2.1.) and dedicated the same to the people, to be used by them in the time of the captivity: which yet they shamefully neglected to do, as Daniel acknowledgeth chap. 9.13. or if they did any thing towards it, they merely sought themselves in it, and so lost their labour, Zech. 7.5. whereas had they prayed as here is prescribed, con∣fessing their sins,Lam. 3. and beseeching God not to deale with them after their deserts, but according to his ancient loving kindnesses that never faile, they might have found mercy. The Altar of incense stood against the Mercy-seat: and Rev. 9.13. the prayers of the Saints from the foure corners of the earth sound and do great things in the world, make it ring. It was the speech of a learned man: If there be but one sigh come from a gracious heart, it fills the eares of God, so that God hears nothing else. upon Sigionoth] Vocabulum Musicum est, cujus ratio Hebraeis ignota, saith Bux∣torf: it is a Musical terme, the reason whereof is unknown to the Hebrew-Doc∣tours at this day. Yet Rabbi Salomon (and with him the most Interpreters) rendreth it pro ignorantiis, for ignorances, or as touching his own and his peoples errours; which the prophet here (convinced by Gods former answer to his ex∣postulation) confesseth with confusion of face. Ignorance surely is a blushfull sin; especially if affected and delighted in (as the Hebrew word seemeth to imply, confer Prov. 5.19. and 20.1.) Privative ignorance, though it do somwhat ex∣cuse a man (sc. à tanto,. not à toto, Luk 12.47.) yet is it a sin to be confessed and bewailed: for Christ died for the not-knowing of the people Heb. 9.7. and de∣struction is threatened pr non-scientia, or lack of knowledge Hos. 4.7. But Cal∣vin well observeth here, that the Prophet by begging pardon for inorances, doth not omit his own and the peoples more grievous sins: but sheweth, that men must also be sensible of their lesser lapses, and cry out with David (after whose example this whole song is framed) Who can understand his errours (or ignoran∣ces unwitting and inconsiderate sins?) O clense thou me from secret faults. Psal. 19.12. Verse 2. O Lard I have heard thy speech and was afraid] Audivi auditionem tu∣am. I have heard (not thy fume, or thy report, as some render it, unlesse it be in the Prophet Esays sense, chap. 53.1. but) thy preceding discourse, in answer to my disceptation. I have heard that the Babylonians will come, and that my people must into captivity. This was no pleasant hearing: for we all naturally shrink in the shoulder, when call'd to carry the crosse: but those that do what they should not, must look to hear and feel too, what they would not. and was afraid] Fear is constrictio cordis exsensu mali instantis, a passion of the soule shrinking in it self from some imminent evill. The wicked heare and jeere: or their feare driveth them from God, as it did guilty Adam. Contrarily, the god∣ly tremble at Gods judgements, whiles they hang in the threatenings: and draw nigh to him with intreaties of peace. In this feare of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children have a place of refuge, Prov. 14.26. O Lord reviue thy work in the middest of the yeares] i. e. Preserve alive thine Is∣rael, that work of thine hands Esay. 45.11. together with thy work of grace in their hearts: keep that spark alive upon the sea of tribulations and temptations. The Angels (saith a Reverend man) are kept with much lesse care, charge, and power, then we: because they have no biasse, no weights of sin hung upon them &c. There is not so much of the glory of God (saith Another) in all his works of Creation and Providence, as in one gracious action that a Christian performeth. in the middest of the yeares make known] sc. thy power in perfecting thy glory, and not forsaking the work of thine own hands Psal. 138.8. It was Luthers usu∣all prayer,Act. & Mon. Confirm, O God, in us, that thou hast wrought: and perfect the work that thou hast begun in us, to thy glory. So be it. So Q. Elisabeth, when prisoner at Woodstock, pray'd thus: Look Lord upon the wounds of thine hands: and despise not the work of thine hands. Thou hast written me down in thy
book of preservation with thine own hand: O read thine own hand-writing,Engl. Elis. pag. 134.. and save me, &c. But what meant the Seventy here to translate, In the middest of two beasts: which whiles Ribera striveth to defend, he tells us a tale of the babe of Beth∣lehem, born in a stable, and laid in a manger betwixt two beasts, an oxe and an asse. It may very well be, that the Church here prayeth for Gods grace and favour, du∣ring the time of her captivity. In wrath remember mercy] In commotione irae: when thou art most moved against us, and hast as much adoe to forbear killing of us, as thou hadst to forbear Moses, when thou mettest him in the Inne, then remember to shew mercy, call to mind thy compassions which fail not. Look then upon us, and be mercifull unto us, as thou usest to doe unto those that love thy name, Psal. 119.132. The wicked are threat∣ned with an evill, an onely evil, without any mixture of mercy:Ezek. 7.5. this the Prophet here deprecateth, and beggeth mercy. Per miserere mei, tollitur iradei. Verse 3. God came from Teman] The Prophet alludeth to that of Moses in his Swan-like song Deut. 33.2. and alledgeth Gods benefits of old, for his own and their present confirmation of faith: without which prayer would be to no purpose: hence effectuall prayer is called the prayer of faith, Jam. 5.15. Faith is the founda∣tion of prayer, and prayer is the fervency of faith. Whatsoever ye ask beleeving,Mar. 7. Psal. 55. yee shall receive, saith our Saviour. Cast thy burthen (or thy request) upon the Lord saith David. To help us so to doe, it is of singular use to consider what God hath done heretofore: for thou hast, thou wilt, is an ordinary medium of Scripture Logick, see Psal. 85.1, 2, 3, 4. There be six Hasts drawing in the next, Turn us again &c. ver. 4. See also 2 Cor. 1.10. Gods Majesty & might when he gave the Law in Sinai, is here set forth, to shew how easily he can, if he please,Psal. 126.4. turn again the captivity of his people, as the Streams in the south. And the holy One from mount Paran. Selah] He that is Holinesse it self (a title farre too good for that man of sinne, that Merum Scelus, the Pope, Philip the Faire of France did him right, in writing to him thus Sciat tua maxima Fatuitas &c. Be it known to your Foolishnesse, not to your Holinesse) and that must be sanctified in righteousnesse Esay 5.16. mount Paran was contiguous to the mountains Sinai and Teman, otherwise called Seir for its roughnesse Deut. 33.2. Selah. This the Se∣venty make to be a musical notion, rendring it Diapsalma. It seemeth to import an asseveration of a thing so to be, and an admiration thereat. The Iews at this day use it in their prayers for Legnolam i. e. For ever, or Amen. It is probable, that the Singers of the Temple came to a Selah (which word is used 92 times in Scripture, and onely in Psalmes and Songs) they made a pause, that the hearers might stay their thoughts awhile upon the preceding matter, worthy of more then ordinary ob∣servation. Hence Tremellius and Iunius expresse Selah by the adverbs Summe Max∣imè, Vehementissimè, Excellenter. It was doubtlesse a singular mercy of God to his people of Israel, that he came from Teman &c. to speak with them from heaven: and there to give them right Iudgements, and true Lawes, good Statutes and Com∣mandements, Neh. 9.13.14. This when he did. His glory covered the Heavens and the Earth was full of his praise] The Law was given in a most majestick manner (see Exod. 19.) partly to procure reverence to the doctrine of it, partly to set forth the nature and office of it, which is to terrify Of∣fenders, and to drive them to Christ: and partly also to shew that God hath pow∣er, and weapons enow, to defend those that keep his Law, and to punish such as would draw them off from their obedience thereunto. That's a pious meditation of a Reverend Writer, if the Law were thus given, how shall it be required?Dr. Hall If such were the Proclamation of Gods Statutes, what shall the Sessions bee? I see and tremble at the resemblance. &c. Verse 4. And his brightnesse was as the light] The glory of the Lord was as a de∣vouring fire on the top of the mountain. Exod. 24.17. the noon-day light, the Sun in his strength was nothing to this incomparable brightnesse, which was as the light, or as the Sun: se Iob 31.26. and 37.20. Hence the Heathens called Apollo or the Sun Orus, (which is the word here used) Hence also the Greek  to see. He had  coming out of his hand] Or, bright beams out of his side, as the Sun hath: The  the Lord are in every place Prov. 15.3.Rev. 4.6. and every man before him is all  Iob 34.22. the whole world is to him as a Sea of glasse, a clear
transparent body, he shines and sees throw it. Gods hand or side is said to be hor∣ned in the sense, that Moses his face was. Exod. 34.30. And there was the hiding of his power] Not the revealing of it, but velamen, sym∣bolum, integumentum, the veil, the cover, such as God put over him when he shew∣ed Moses his glory. He could see but his back parts, and live: we need see no more, that we may live. God is invisible, incomprehensible, and dwelleth in light unap∣proachable. How little a thing doth man here understand of God, Iob 26.14. the greatest part of that he knoweth, is but the least part of that he knoweth not. Surely as a weak eye is not able to behold the Sun, no nor the strongest eye with∣out being dazled: we cannot look upon it in rota, but only in radiis: so here we cannot see God in his Essence, but onely in his effects, in his works and in his Word, where also we have but a shew, but a shadow of him, we see but his train in the Temple as Esay: the holy Angels cover their faces with their wings as with a dou∣ble scarfe before Gods brightnesse, which would put out their eyes else s. 6.3. see Psal. 104.2.1 Tim. 6.16. Verse 5. Before him went the pestilence) Dever the word signifieth such a disease, as cometh by a divine decree. So Hypocrits call the pestilence , because sext by God in a spiritual manner, a stroke of his own bare hand as it were. Here it is made one of his Apparitours or pursivants, sent before him to destroy the Canaa∣nites, as it had done the Egyptians. And burning coals went out at his feet) Or, the carbuncle burning bile Deut. 32.24 The Vulgar translateth it the devil, Others  a deadly inflammation, where∣of good Oecolampadius died, and was lamented by Melancthon. But Luther very uncharitably (the best have their failings) wrote that he beleeved Oecolampadixm ignitis Satanae telis & hastis confossum,Lib. de Missae privat. subitanea morte perisse, that Oecolampadius di∣ed suddenly, being stabb'd to death with the fiery darts of the devill. Verse 6. He stood and measured the earth] Not Joshuah but God brought his peo∣ple into the promised land, and divided it amongst them, Psal. 78.55. Like as also he had divided the whole earth by bounds and borders to the several Nations Psal. 74.17. and doth still appoint men the bounds of their habitations Act. 17.26. He beheld and drove asunder the Nations] He did it with his looks, as it were: that is, with very little adoe. Let the Lord but arise onely, and his enemies shall be scattered,Camd. Elis. let him but frown, and they fall before him: If Augustus could frown to death Asinius Pollio: and Queen Elizabeth her chancellour Hatton, what shall we think of Gods bended browes? And the everlasting mountains were scattered] i. e. those kingdomes of the Cana∣nites that were held firm and unmoveable as the mountains, yea rivetted as it were upon eternity, see Num. 13.21.31, 22. These were scattered, dissilierunt fell in peeces, and leapt this way and that way, as stones broken with a great hammer. God threshed these mountains, and beat them small, he made the hills as chasse Isay 41.15. No worldly height could stand before him. By mountains here some understand Kings and Princes, as by hills, those of inferiour rank. His wayes are everlasting) Heb. his walks or journies, that is, his government of the world by his power and wisedome is perpetual, he never casteth off the care thereof: There are that referre the word his to the Canaanites, who had of old pos∣sessed the land without disturbance; But the former sense is the better. Verse 7. I saw the Tents of Cushan) King of Mesopotamia, who tyrannized over Is∣rael eight years, after Joshua's death: God selling his people to him for naught, and not increasing his wealth by their price, Psal. 44.12. Judg. 3.8. But delivering them in the end by that valiant Othniel, who brought the tents of Cushan under affliction or vanity. Some render it propter iniquitatem, because of iniquity, and set this sense upon it: It was for sinne that God sold his people into the hands of Cushan Riska∣thaijm, and yet afterwards sent them a Saviour: why then should they now despair of a seasonable return out of captivity, though by their sinnes they have provoked the Lord to wrath: sith if they returne unto him and seek his favour, there is yet mercy with the Lord that he may be feared? Loe, this is the right use of histories: and this is our duty to make observations to our selves, as did the Prophet here, I saw the tents of Cushan: I considered the thing that hath been, it is the same which
shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done &c. Eccles. 1.9. Histo∣riae fidae monitrices. Dicuntur . And the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble] Cortinae vel pelles &c. When by the sword of the Lord and of Gideon they were cut off and discomfited Judg. 7.7. &c. Verse 8. Was the Lord displeased against the Rivers?] As Xerxes, that brutish man, was against the Hellespont, for battering his bridge of boates, beating it and casting a pair of fetters into it? Was God thus angry against Jordan, and against the red-Sea? No such matter. If God seem angry at any time against the reason∣lesse, or livelesse creatures, it is for a punishment of mans sin. But here his end and purpose was to shew; that he did ride upon those horses and charets (the rivers, and sea) for the salvation of his people. He did so when time was: and that he will do so again, when time shall serve, this question in the text shews, that there is no question to be made of it. Verse 9. Thy bowe was made quite naked] sc. Out of the case. He meaneth, thy power was clearly manifested, and powerfully exerted against the nations above men∣tioned: so that all men might see plainly, that thou wert that man of warre, Exod. 15.3. which shootest thine arrowes at a certainty, and never missest thine enemies, thy but-mark. See Job 16.12. according to the oathes of the tribes, even thy word] i. e. according to thy promi∣ses to thy people, confirmed with oathes, even those sure mercies of David, or assured to David. Some render it, according to the oathes, those props of thy word. His word is sure and sufficient of it self: but, for our better settlement, and as a prop to our faith, He hath bound it with oathes: that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. For now we may say with Solomon, For thy words sake, nay more, For thine oathes sake, and according to thine own heart hast thou done all this, 2 Sam. 7.18, 21. Thy love moved thee to make promise, yea, to give oath: and now thy truth bindeth thee to performe. All thy pathes to thy people now are mercy and truth, Psal. 25.10. not mercy onely, but mercy and truth: not by a providence onely, but by ver∣tue of a promise, ratified with an oath: This is sweet indeed; this deserves a Selah] to be set to it. thou didst cleave the earth with rivers] Exod. 17.6. Psal. 78.15, 16. Deut. 8.15. Neh. 9.15. This cleaving the hard Rock, and setting it abroach, this turning of the flint into a fountain, Psal. 114.8. was a work of Omnipotency, and is therefore so much celebrated. It maketh much to the miracle, that the earth was cleft with ri∣vers: this importeth both the plenty and the perennity thereof: for the Rock, that is, the river out of the rock followed them, 1 Cor. 10.4. lest in that dry and bar∣ren wildernesse they should perish for want of water. The same God also who had given his people petram aquatilem, gave them pluviam escatilem,Tertul. de pati∣entia. (as Tertullian phraseth it) Manna from heaven, Quails in great abundance, and never was Prince better served in his greatest pomp. He also defended them from the fiery serpents, and delivered them from a thousand other deaths, and dangers: all which mercies are here implied, though one onely be instanced: and all to ascertain the Saints how much God setteth by them, and what he will yet do for them, as oc∣casion requireth. As he made the world at first, that he might communicate and impart himself to his Elect: so for their sakes doth he still preserve and govern it, ordering the worlds disorders by an over-ruling power, for his own glory, and their eternall good. Verse 10. The mountains saw thee, and they trembled] sc. At the promulgation of the Law, Exod. 19.17. Psal. 114.4, 6. when God came with ten thousand of his Saints, Deut. 33.2. and so terrible was the earth-quake, that it wrought an heart-quake, even in Moses himself, Heb. 12.21. It is the office of the Law to do so: and happy is he, who terrified, and thunder-struck by the threats thereof, runnes to Christ for refuge, as to One who is able to save to the utmost them that come unto God by him, Heb. 9.25. Some take mountains metaphorically, for the Mighties of the earth, and read it thus. The mountains saw thee, and they grieved. See Num. 22.3. Josh. 2.9, 10, 11 The over-flowing of the water passed by] the inundation of Jordan passed into
the dead-sea, the lower part of it, I mean: like as the upper stood, and rose up upon an heap,Gualth. Josh. 3.16. being bounded and barred up by the Almighty power of God. the deep uttered his voice; and lifted up his hands on high] i. e. summo consensis suffragatus est, &c. It voiced, and voted for Gods judgements; helping forward the execution thereof. Verse 11. The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitation] viz. In the dayes of Joshuah, and upon his prayer, chap. 10.12, 13. whereupon One crieth out, O admirabilem piarum precum vim ac potentiam quibus etiam coelestia cedunt, &c. O the admirable power of prayer,Buchol. that worketh wonders in heaven! and oh the heroicall faith of Joshuah, the trophees whereof hee set in the very orbes of heaven. at the light of thine arrowes, they went] By these shining arrowes, and glittering spears, some understand that terrible lightening, mixt with that horrible hail, Josh. 10.11. with Exod. 9.23. and then it is figura planè poetica, a Poeticall expressi∣on: for the poets call lightening ,As the sword of the Lord and of Gideon. Judg. 7. 18. Joves arrow. See the like Psal. 18.14. The huge hail-stones were Gods glittering spears, wherewith he slaughtered his enemies. Others suppose, that these things are meant of the arms and weapons of the Israelites, called Gods arrowes and spears, because used at his command, and ordered by him. This sence Gualther liketh better, as most comfortable to Christi∣an warriours, who fight the Lords battels. Verse 12. Thou didst march thorow the land in indignation] Heb. Thou didst walk in pomp, as a Conquerour, thorow the land, sc. of Canaan, in contempt of the opposite forces, treading upon the neeks of thine enemies, Josh. 10.24. thou didst thresh the heathen in anger] See Amos 1.3. Mic. 4.13. God, by the hands of Joshuah, did all this. The most of the old inhabitants were destroyed. Some few fled into Africk, and left written upon a pillar for a monument to po∣sterity; We are Phoenicians, that fled from the face of Joshuah the son of Nave. Verse 13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people] q. d. Thou wast Generalissimo in our expeditions, in the dayes of the Judges, who therefore were so successefull. How could they be otherwise, when God came with them into the field?Camd. Elisab. If Q. Elizabeth could take for her Motto, Cui adhaereo, praest, He to whom I adhere, prevaileth, how much more may Almighty God say as much? even for salvation with thine anointed] i. e. with David, 1 Sam. 16.12, 13. 2 Sam. 5.3, 16. and 19.22. and 22.51. Psal. 20.7. a lively type of Christ, that Messiah the Prince, the mystery of which promised Saviour, the ancient Jew-Doctours confessed to be contained in this text, It is not altogether unlikely, that the Prophet might intend here to point at Jesus Christ, when he saith, for salva∣tion (Jeshang, whence Jesus) for thine anointed, or thy Christ. There are that read the words in the Future-tense, thus: Thou shalt go forth for the salvation of thy people, sc. when Messiah that great Sospitator cometh: thou shalt wound the head of the wicked, sc. of the Devil, Rom. 16.20. Thou shalt make naked the foun∣dation of his kingdom, unto the neck. Selah: thou shalt utterly destroy sin, death, and hell. A remarkable mercy indeed, a mystery of greatest concernment, and most worthy to be considered. Gualther carries the sence this way: and yet addeth, that if any please to refer the words to the history of the old Testament, they must be understood of those tyrants that persecuted the true Church, and whom God for Christs sake subdued and subverted, together with their kingdomes. Verse 14. Thou didst strike thorow with his staves, the heads of his villages [Heb. thou didst pierce, or bore thorow, as with an awger, with his staves (a Metaphor from shepherdy, according to that, Psal. 23.3. thy rod and thy staffe, &c.) or, with his tribes (the ) that entred the land of promise:Acts 26.7. with these men, or with these weapons, though never so unlikely, thou diddest by the hand of David, wound the hairy scalp of thine enemies, those Pagans and persecutours: and much more wi, by the Son of David, subdue Satan and his Complices. they came out as a whirl-winde to scatter me] Heb. they tempested, they raised an hurly-burly, being turbulent spirits, as the devil is, to disperse me, as the dust of the mountains is scattered before a whirle-winde. their rejoycing was as to devour the poor] i. e, Poor me, they devoured in secret, as if God had been nothing aware of their doings: and this was their exultation,
or rejoycing: they took pleasure in their cruelty, and promised themselves im∣punity. Verse 15. Thou diddest walk thorough the sea &c.] q. d. Shall they thus pre∣vaile by iniquity? and did they carry the ball upon the foot till they had gotten the goale? Hath ever any waxed fierce against God, and prospered, Iob. 9.4? I trow, not. Thou that of old didd'st walk through the red sea, did'st tread it, or,Psal. 56.7. foot it, and that most swiftly, as if thou had'st had thy change of horses. thorow the heap of great waters] which thou laid'st on heaps for thy peoples sake, so that, instead of being swallowed up, they were preserved thereby: Thou Lord, I say, hast many times since, (when all hope failed) opened a faire way for thy servants to escape out of greatest dangers: and so I trust thou wile againe, when they most stand in need of thine heavenly help. Cum res est in acie novaculae &c. God will be seen of his in the Mount. Verse 16. When I heard, my belly trembled &c.] Heard what? That speech of thine, verse. 3. whereunto the Prophet now returneth (after a long digressi∣on for the peoples support and comfort; Digressions in divine discourses are not alwayes and absolutely unlawfull. God sometimes draweth aside the doctrine, to satisfie some soule which the preacher knowes not: and, sparingly used, it quickeneth attention.) O Lord I have heard thy speech (touching Israels captivity, chap. 1. and after that, the Chaldeans calamity, chap. 2.) and was afraid verse 2. Neither was this a slight or sudden pang, and soon put over: but such as soaked to the very roots, so that my belly, or my heart in my belly trembled; See Prov. 20.27. my lipps quivered] through want of naturall heate, which in this fright was gone inward to succour the heart: as souldiers upon the approach of an enemy run into the castle. at the voice] at the dreadfull denunciations of judgements. rottennesse entred into my bones] Poetico more ex signis describit, saith Gualther. The Prophet, in manner of a Poet, describeth his great feare, by the gracious effects and signes thereof in his body. that I might rest in the day of trouble] This was the fruit of his holy feare of Gods imminent judgements, and that contrition of spirit that followed thereupon: viz. that both Hee, and all that took part with him in those pious practises of sen∣siblenesse and self-abasement, should have peace with God, and be able to call their soules to rest in the evill day. when he commeth up &c.] i. e. The Chaldean spoiler. he will invade them with his troops] Or, cut them in peeces. And that this was done, See 2 King. 25. and the book of Lamentations thorowout. Howbeit in judgement God remembreth mercy, as the Prophet had pray'd: for besides the favour that the Jews found at Babylon by meanes of Daniel and others, Cyrus ha∣ving taken that city gave commandment, that no Jews, or any that spake the Syri∣an tongue should be hurt, as Xenophon relateth: and after this he gave them free leave to return home. Verse 17. Although the figtree shall not blossom] Here the Prophet sheweth a well settled and a sedate mind indeed: that he had attained, and by prayer waded unto a blessed composednesse and sabbath of spirit, such as the cock on the dung∣hill medled not with, neither knoweth the worth of: it being the most precious and peerlesse jewel that ever the heart of man came acquainted with. It hat been before noted, that the Prophet here taketh out his own lesson of living by faith in the faile of outward comforts. Origens teaching and living were said to be both alike: Habakkuks were so. Divinity is practicall: If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them: As lessons of Musick must be practised, and a copy not read onely, but imitated: so is it here. It is a blushful thing quando dicta factis erubescant, as Tertullian hath it;Plus sanctimo∣niae conspicitur in ipso libello, quàm in libelli Auihore. when mens lives put their words to the blush, when Sanctiores sunt aures plebis quàm corda sacerdotum, there are more heavenly doctrines in the peoples cares, then ever were in the preachers heart, as Hilary hath it: when (as One said of Erasmus his Enchiridion) there is more holinesse in an Authours book, then in his bosom:
Exemplis sanè qui docet, ille docet. Aristotle requireth in a Teacher,Arist Rhetor. Epist. ad Epbes. that he shew himself a patern of his own rules: and it is a good thing to teach (saith Ignatius,  if thou practise the same that thou teachest. That is an excellent commendation indeed that is given to a late eminent Divine amongst us,Mr. Sam. Crook. that his life was but one continu∣ed Commentary upon his doctrine: and an exemplary sermon consisting of living words, or of words translated into works. The just shall live by his faith, saith Habakkuk: and that I do so, it shall well appear by my living upon God, when I have nothing else to subsist with; by beleeving him upon his bare word, and that against sense in things invisible, and against reason in things incredible. Although the figtree &c.. q d. Let warr come on, and with warr famine; as it befell Ierusalem at the last siege in the dayes of Zedekiah, 2 King. 25.3. Ier. 52.6. Lam. 2.11, 12. there was no relief left for the people, the ene∣my had eaten up all, as Joel 2. and made cleane work, so that faithlesse men were woe-begone, and ready to run mad for the sight of their eyes Deut. 28.24. with 51. and to devour their own fingers, as Pope Boniface 8. did, when shut up close prisoner in St. Angelo and sorely straitened. Verse 18. Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation] This joy of the Lord was the Prophets strength,Nch. 8.10. and kept his head above all waters of affliction. So it was Davids at the sack of Ziglag 1 Sam. 30.6. when Saul at the same time for want of it ran first to the witch, and thence to the swords point. A Good man hath God for his portion: and if any occasion of discontent or trouble befall him, he retireth into his Counting-house, and there seeth himself so well stored with unloosable graces and invaluable privi∣ledges, that he cannot be greatly moved Psal. 62.2. His soule in greatest straights can magnifie the Lord, and his spirit rejoyce in God his Saviour. Dis∣quieted he may be sometimes for a season, till he hath recollected and better be∣thought himself, we are staggering saith the Apostle, but not wholy sticking 2 Cor. 4.8. for not the evenest waights but at their first putting into the ballance do somwhat sway both parts thereof, not without some shew of inequality, which yet after some little motion do settle themselves in a meet poise and posture. Verse 19. The Lord God is my strength] And hence his joy of saith, and ability to beare up under pressures of afflictions as a man that is well lined with∣in, and hath abundance of good blood and fresh spirits, can endure to go with lesse cloths then another &c. And he will make my feet like hindes feet] As these do swiftly and suddenly run up to the top of inaccessible rocks, so shall I quickly escape out of trouble, and walk upon mine high places againe in the holy land: Yea as Jacob after he had conversed with God at Bethel,Gen. 29.1. lift up his feet and went lustily on his way to Padan-Aram, so shall I go lightly on my long journey to heaven; and, having my soule suppled with the oyle of spirituall joy, I shall find it made more lith, nim∣ble and ready to every good work. to the chief-musitian on my stringed instruments] This is David-like indeed, as in the whole prayer or long he resembleth that sweet singer of Israel: and the verse hath caused a cloud. Euthymius saith of David, that he was Primi regis & linguae & cor & calamus, the tongue, hart, and pen of almighty God. In the primitive times, happy was he held that could repeate aliquid Davidi∣cum, any thing of Davids doings. Our king Alured translated the Psalter him∣self into his own Saxon tongue. Andromicus the Greek Emperour made it his manuall, his Vade-mcum. It appeareth by the contexture of this whole chap∣ter, that the Prophet Habakkuk was well versed in the Psalms, which is a sweet field and Rosary of promises, a Summary of the old Testament saith Lu∣ther: the good soules Soliloquie, saith Another; wherein are Amulets of com∣fort
more pleasant then the pooles of Heshbon, more glorious then the tower of Lebanon, more redolent then the oyle of Aaron, more fructifying then the dew of Hermon &c. Most worthy to be laid up in that Persian casket embroy∣dered with gold and pearle which Alexander reserved for Homers Iliads. Our Prophet as he partly imitated, and partly transcribed them in this Canticle, yea in this verse (Confer Psalm. 18.33, 34.) So he concludeth as David many times beginneth, To the chief-chaunter or Musick-master, or To him that ex∣celleth, sc: in the art of singing and playing on Instruments, those holy Levites whose charge it was 1 Chron. 9.33. and for whom he doubted not but God would afford and provide new matter of Psalmody, by compassing his people about with songs of deliverance, Selah Psal. 32.7.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of ZEPHANIAH. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah] which is (by interpretation) Gods Secretary, or Hidden-one, Psal. 27.5. and 83.3. Or, as Hie∣rome and some others will have it, Gods watchman Ezek.Hebraei Pro∣phetarum pa∣tres, quot quot nominatim re∣cesentur, ipsos quo{que} prophetas fuisse dicunt. 3.2. and 33.7. A fit name for a Prophet. the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah &c.] These were, if not Prophets, (as the Jew-Doctours make them) yet men famous in the Church: as were Alexander and Rufus, though they be but mentioned and no more, Mark 15.21. in the dayes of Josiah] who rained one and thirty years, but being in his mino∣rity, began not to reform religion, much corrupted in the dayes of his idolatrous father Amon, till the eighteenth yeer of his raigne, 2 King. 22.1. and 23.22. whether before or after the Reformation, the word of the Lord came unto Zepha∣niah, Interpreters agree not. Jeremiah (his contemporary) began not to prophe∣cy till the thirteenth yeer of Josiah's raigne Ier. 1.1, 2. at what time, (viz. in his twelfth yeer) he had begun to reform with a great deale of zeale, 2 Chron. 34.3. but with all he met with a great deale of opposition from the Princes and people who had been wofully hardened and habituated in their idolatry under Manasseh and Amon, and therefore with much difficulty drawn off. Zephany and Ieremy were singular helps no doubt, to that peerelesse king in his zealous under∣takings for God. But why he should send to Huldah the Prophetesse, rather then to either of them 2 King. 22.13. what other reason can be given but that she dwelt in the Colledge at Ierusalem, and so was next at hand? And why He went up against Pharaoh Necho, and sent not first to any Prophet to ask their advise, what can we say but this, that sometimes both grace and wit are asleep in the holiest and wariest breasts? and that the best of Gods Saints may be sometimes miscarried by their passion, to their cost?
Verse 2. I will utterly consume all things from off the land] Exordium planè tragicum A tragical beginning of a terrible sermon. Hard knots must have hard wedges; hard hearts, heavy menaces: yea handfuls of hell-fire must be cast into the faces of such, that they may awake out of the snare of the devill, by whom they are held captive at his pleasure. 2 Tim. 2.26. It is in the Hebrew, gathering I will gither all things &c. q. d. g. I will pack up, I will take mine owne, and begone. Converram & convasabo omnia, I will sweep away all by the beesome of my wrath, and leave a clean land behind me, for the sinnes of those that dwell therein. The doubling of this denunciation Colligendo Colligam importeth the certainty, verity and vehemen∣cy thereof. Saith the Lord] Dictumm Jehovae. You may beleeve it therefore: for every word of his is sure, and cannot be broken Iohn 10.35. may not be slighted or shifted off Heb. 12.25. Verse 3. I will consume man and beast] Heb. I will gather (as verse 2.) them, and cast them away as they do the sweepings of the house. See the word used in this sense, Psal. 26.9. Gather not my soul with sinners &c. God gathereth his people for a better purpose: both while they are alive, Psal. 27.10. and when they dye, Esay 57.1 The righteous is taken away (Heb. gathered) from the evil to come: as a Shep∣heard gathereth his sheep when a storm is coming: or as a master of a family doth his jewels, when his house is on fire. But as for the wicked, they are gathered too, but it is for slaughter, as beasts in a pound, malefactours in a prison: and at the last day the tares shall be gathered and bundled up together for hels Furnace, Mat. 13, 41.42. I will consume the fouls of the heaven] Made for mans use, to be to him for food, Gen. 9.2. for physick and for delight, as companions of his life: hence it is threat∣ned as a judgement to him to loose them Ier. 4.25. and 10. and here. An the fishes of the Sea] Made likewise for mans use to feed him, Num. 11.5.22. Luke 24.42. hence the latine piscis of pasco to feed, and the Hebrew Berechah for a fishpoole: the word signifieth a blessing Gen. 12.2. with Neh. 2.14. Now the Lord here threateneth destruction to beasts, birds, and fishes, not by way of Hyperbole, as the Rabbines dreams: but because in common calamities, in warlike tumults, and when God will destroy a people indeed, the beasts also are killed up, the foules hun∣ted away, the fish-pooles wasted, &c. Let those that will not beleeve this, look into Illyricum, Thracia, Macedonia, Greece, and divers parts of Turky, laid utterly deso∣late and empty both of men and other creatures. Hierome upon this text, and likewise upon Hos. 4. affirmeth the same of his native countrey, wasted so with Warre, ut, praeter coelum & coenum, & crescentes vipres & condensa sylvarum, cuncta pe∣rierint, that besides ayre and earth, and briars, and forrests, all was destroyed. And that we may not wonder at this severitie of God, hear what the same Father saith elswhere of his ungracious countrymen: In mea patria de us Ven er est, & in dem vivitur, & sanctior est ille qui ditior; In my countrey their belly is their god,Epis.ad Chre∣mat. their glo∣ry is in their shame, they minde earthly things: and so their end hath been destru∣ction, and utter desolation, as Phil. 3.19. Gualthers Note here is very good: here∣in we may observe, saith he, the judgement of God and his wonderfull providence: that whereas we see in populous places, rivers and pooles to abound with fish, woods and fields, with birds and beasts, though they bee continually caught, and carried away: yet where there want men to make use of them, there are few or none to be found. For as they were all made for man, so when men are consumed, they also are consumed, as is here threatned. Non ita temerè fieri putemus, &c. Let Gods hand herein be acknowledged, and his anger appeased by faith in Christ Jesus and repentance from dead works, that our land may be sowed with the seed of men and of beasts. And the stumbling-blocks with the wicked] Those Balaams blocks,In lib. Reg. those moments and monuments of idolatry, that so much offend God, and cause offence and ruine to those that worship them, (as Eucherius interpreteth it) who are here called wicked, with an accent, and by a specialty. And I will cut off man from off the land] Even the better sort of men too, who shall be wrapt up together with the wicked in the common calamity. The good figges as well as the bad are packt to Babylon; but with this difference that God will there
set his eyes upon the good for good. Ier. 24.6. as the corne is cut down as well as the weeds; but for better purpose. Saith the Lord] who hath spoke it twice that you may once well observe it, and lay it to heart. Verse 4. I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah] To whom I have so long stretcht out my hand in vain to reclaime them. Esay 65.2. Prov. 1.25. If God do but put forth his hand to afflict, as Satan sollicited him to doe against Job, chap. 1.11. and 2.5. who can abide it? but if he stretch it out as here, woe be to those that must feele the waight of it. His hand is a mighty hand. 1. Pet. 1.6. the same that spannes the heavens, and holds the earth as a very little thing Esay. 40. Lord, saith David (who had felt it in part) who knoweth the power of thine anger? Even ac∣cording to thy fear, so is thy wrath. q. d. Let a man fear thee never so much, he is sure to feele thee much more who falleth under the stroke of thine heavy hand. Oh keep out of his fingers, who can crush us to death before the moth, Job. 4.19. And upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem] who are therefore worse then others because they should be better: and shall fare the worse for their external priviledges wherein they glory. And I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place] That which remained since Josia's reformation 2 King. 23.3.4.5. saith Diodate shall a Nation be born at once Esay 66.8.? And the name of the Chemarims) Baals chimney-chaplaines, They are translated idolatrous priests, 1 Chron. 23.5. But because we find them here mentioned as di∣stinct from the Priests, therefore many Expositores hold that they were certain Mi∣nisters of their idolatry different from the priests; such as the Monks are among the Papists. The vulgar rendereth it Aedituos Underlings to the other Priests: Elias in Tijby saith they were such as were shut up in cloisters, Chemarim Atrati thy are cal∣led, either from their black garments, or because they were smutched with burning incense, or from the brand-markes they had superstitiously set upon their bodies, or because of their pretended fiery zeal and fervency in their religion, such as are the Saorisici Seraphici among the Papists, who falsly and foolishly call them, the Lights of the World; sc. to light them into utter darknesse. Verse 5. And them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops] Called else∣where the Queen of heaven, the constellations and heavenly bodies: whom they thought to worship so much the more acceptably, if in an open place, and on high, in the very sight of the starres. Observent ista qui hodie Astrologiam judiciariam pro∣sitentur, saith Gualther, Let those amongst us observe this, who professe judiciary Astrologie: for these worship the starres no lesse then did the heathens of old, and doe openly bring in Heathenisme again; whiles (first) they call the starres by the names of those heathenish deities, that ought to be abolished: and next, they sub∣ject to those starres all events of things, yea man himselfe as touching all his man∣ners and fortunes, which the Scripture affirmeth to depend upon the eternal provi∣dence of God alone. This is intolerable impiety and they that fall into it, shall not escape the just judgement of God. And them that worship, and that swear by the Lord (or to the Lord consecrating themselves as by oath to his service) and that swear by Malcham] that is, by their King,Epec. Eur. as the Egyptians did of old, Gen. 42.15. The Spaniards at this day, in the pride of their Monarchy are grown also to swear by the life of their King. There are a sort of mongrell Christians in the East called Melchites,Niceph. as one would say Of the Kings Religion, because they resolved to doe as Melech the King commanded them, though it were to make a mixture of religions, as these in the text would, and as our late Modelatours Sancta Clara, and others, of whom one said well, that they had made a pretty shew, had there been no Bible, to tell us, that the jealous and just God hateth and plagueth halting betwixt two, lukewarmnesse and neutrality in re∣ligion, all dow-baked duties, speckled birds, plowing with an Oxe and an Asse, min∣gled seeds linsey-wolsey garments Lev. 19.19. Upon which text the Doway Do∣ctours note is, Here all participation with heretiks and schismatiks is forbidden. But by Malch most understaud here an Idoll of the Ammonites, otherwise called Mosec served in Tophet near to Ierusalem, and in the mount of Olives, called therefore the mount of corruption 2 King. 23.13. Which God could not but see, as  he looked out of the Sanctuary. These worshippers of Malcham would not
utterly renounce the true God, but they would set up others with him as partners: this would not be endured. Such were of old the Samaritanes among the Jewes, the Ebionites among the Christians, the Papists at this day, who swear by God and Saints, and pray to God and his Saints, and commit themselves to them (together with God) as their Tutelars and Patrons. Verse 6. And them that are turned back from the Lord] Not grosse idolaters, but yet treacherous backsliders, that fall off from their former forwardnesse, that turn from the holy Commandement, 2 Pet. 2.21. that depart à post Dominum, from after the Lord, as the Hebrew here hath it, Apostates, those worst of men, that do not onely not fulfill after the Lord, as Calch, but utterly forsake him. An heavie judgement awaiteth such.Psal. 125.5. God shall lead them forth with the workers of ini∣quity, &c. and those that have not sought the Lord, nor enquired after him] diligently sought him, Heb. 11.6. zealously enquired after him, as after a lost jewel, Jer. 29.13. God will visit for unzealousnesse; and curse those that do his work carelesly, curso∣rily, in a perfunctory, formall, bedulling way. Verse 7. Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God] When his hand is upon thy back, let thy hand be on thy mouth. Chat not against him, murmur not at his menaces, but stand mute before him. He is the Lord God, Three in One, and One in Three: thou art also alwayes in his presence, which thou canst not flee from them, Psal. 139. therefore see Hab. 2.20. with the Note and the rather because God stands over thee with his judgements. for the day of the Lord is at hand] wherein he will powerfully declare himself to be a God that cannot lie, and that his wrath is quo diuturnior eo minacior, the long∣er in comming the heavier it lights. This was soon after fulfilled in the death of their good king Iosiah, with whom died all the peace and prosperity of that peo∣ple: and Judea often changed her masters, but not her miseries, till at length shee was carried captive to Babylon. For the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice] That is, a bloody slaughter of you, by the cruel Chaldees, who shall sacrifice you, that have so much gloried in the mul∣titude of your sacrifices: and God shall glorifie himself as much now in your just destruction, as ever he did in your forefathers commendable devotion. he hath bid his guests] The Babylonians, and (after they have filled themselves) the birds, and beasts, as Rev. 19.17, 18. so that ye shall have sepulturam insepultam, a gravelesse buriall. Verse 8. And it shall come to passe in the day of the Lords sacrifice] Or, good chear: for at their sacrifices they used to feast their friends: and here the Lord is providing dainties for his guests; viz. the flesh of Princes, gallants, courtiers, vers. 9. merchants, 11. who use to eat the fat, and drink the sweet,Jam. 5.5. nourishing their hearts as in a day of slaughter: and now also for a day of slaughter: when the beasts shall tear their flesh, and the birds bare their bones. that I will punish the Princes and the Kings children] Who might seem to bee safest of any, and farthest off from danger: but Gods hand can easily reach them, and shall do with the first, because their faults flie fast abroad upon those two wings of Example and Scandal. See this threatening fulfilled in Josiah's sonnes (those degenerate plants, Heroum filii noxae.) Jehoahaz ambitiously step into his fa∣thers throne before his elder brother, and was soon after carried down to Egypt, and there slain. Jehoiakim the elder brother succeeded him: but rebelling against the king of Babylon, he was carried captive, and dying by the way, was buried with the buriall of an asse, being cast out to be torn by birds and beasts,Jer. 22. according to this prophesie. Jechoniah came after, and was likewise carried into captivity: but because he hearkened to Jeremiah, perswading him to yeeld, and to go into volun∣tary banishment, he had some good dayes toward his latter end, Jer. 52.31, 32. Lastly Zedekiah, another sonne of Josiah, was made king; who as hee was worse then the former, so he sped worse. See Ier. 39.6, 7. potentes potenter torque∣bantur. and all such as are clothed with strange apparell] Those gallants, that imitated in their raiment those whom they most inclined to; some the Egyptians, others the Babylonians. A vanity not known in England, they say, till the warres in
Holland. And (as ex malis moribus bonae leges) then first were great ruffes, with huge wide sets,Camd. Elis. 215. and cloaks reaching almost to the ancles, no lesse uncomely then costly, restrained by Proclamation. Now, what so common with our fashion∣mongers (against whom this is a stinging and a flaming text) then to bee cloathed with strange apparell,Oh what ene∣my of thine hath taught thee so much vanity? said Mr. John Fox to his son, re∣turning from his travels, and attired in a loose Out∣landish fashi∣on. Hist. of Modern Divi. pag. 279. a la mode de France especially, and other Popish countries. But what saith One, Borrow not (fashions) of the Egyptians: if you do, you may get their biles and botches: of the Polonians, lest you get the plica Polonica in your hairy scalps: of the French, lest the lues Gallica befall you. Those that affected the Babylonian habit, were sent captives to Babylon, Ezek. 23.15. and those proud Dames (whose wardrobe is inventoried, Esay 3.16. &c.) were a cause that the mighty men fell in battle, ver. 25.26. Seneca complaineth, that many in his time were more solicitous of their attire, then of their good behaviour; and that they had rather the Common-wealth should be troubled, then their locks, and set looks. And doth not our age abound with such fantasticall Cincinnatuli. Verse 9. In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the threshold] i. e. Great mens officers, who by an absolute power went into other mens houses, and to whom no doors were shut, saith Mr. Diodate. These leap upon the threshold, that is, with great impudency, and insolency, they invade and spoil other mens houses, and do what they list,, like so many Lurdaines, or Lord-danes: neither dare any question, or controul them. Loe such things were done in good Josiah's dayes, without his consent, or so much as knowledge: for none might be suffered to come to him with a complaint; all wayes being shut up by those great Ones about him, whose houses were by that means filled with violence and deceit] that is, with those ill-gotten goods, got by wrench and wile from the right, but unrelieved pos∣sessours, through the might and slight of those unconscionable under-Officers. Verse 10. There shall be the noise of a cry from the fish-gate] called also the first∣gate, Zach. 14.10. whereat the Caldeans entred, and caused a great hubbub, as in such a case is usuall. and an howling from the second] Called by the Chaldee Paraphrast, the bird-gate: there was also one called the horse-gate, Jer. 31.40. Some understand the text, not of any gate,Jerushalaijm. but of the second part of the city: for there was the upper town, and the lower town, (whence Jerusalem is of the duall number) and the tower of David, on the hill of Zion. Others, of the Colledge where Huldad dwelt, 2 King. 22.14. a school of learning, as the Chaldee interpreteth it, and called Mishneh. as you would say, a place of repetition, or of catechising the younger sort; with whom nothing sticks but what is repeated to them over and over, as the knife goeth over the whetstone. Shanan & Shanah repetire, sicut in acuendo. See Deut. 6.7. and a great crashing (or shivering, Heb. shebher) from the hills] Gareb and Goath, Jer. 31.39. and the rest that were round about Jerusalem, Psal. 125.2. The Prophets scope is to shew that all places shall be full of tumult and out-cry, upon the approach of the enemy. They that would not listen to the sweet voice of God inciting and inticing them to repentance, have now their ears filled with hide∣ous and horrid notes, and noises. Verse 11. Howl ye inhabitants of Maktesh] Or, of the mortar, or of the low and hollow place, of the base-town, where corn was brayed in mortars, before Mills were in use. These are here called upon to turn their laughter to mourning, and their joy into heavinesse, to weep and howl for the evils that shall come upon them, Jam. 4.9. and 5.1. but especially for their sinnes, the cause of those miseries: for Gods judgements upon sinners are feathered from themselves: as a fowl shot with an arrow feathered from her own body. for all the merchant-people are cut down] The merchant-men were wont to fur∣nish the mortar-men, such as dealt in corn, spicery, and the like. These shall be cut down, as being more like Canaanites (a people devoted to destruction) then Israelites, a people saved by the Lord, the shield of their help, and the sword of their excellency. Deut. 33.29.Vide Garol. Paschalij legat. cap. 7. p. 24. See Hos. 12.8. with the Note. He is a merchant, the ballances of deceit are in his hand, he loveth to oppresse. See Amos 8, 5, 6. Mic. 6.10, 11, 12. Merchandise well managed, is of great use to Kingdoms and States, for many rea∣sons. 1. For descrying the counsels and strength of other Nations. 2. For
procuring the love and friendship of forreine Princes and people. 3. for exchang∣ing of commodities: for non omnis fert omnia tellus. 4. for gaining experience of many and great matters: this caused Thales, Hippocrates, and Solon to exercise merchandise. 5. It occasioned the building of many famous cities. Massilia for one, as Plutarch writeth. Neverthelesse this honourable profession is much a∣bused by those whom Nahum calleth cankerworms chap. 3.16. for their cove∣tousnes luxury, oppression, bringing in unnecessary wares (that emasculate and dissolve mens spirits) and hereticall books that undoe their soules; and lastly for their carrying out the wealth of their country to strangers, yea to enemies some∣times. Hence they are justly cut down by God, and are to be ordered by the Ma∣gistrate according to Lev. 19.35, 36. Deut. 25. Ezek. 45.9, 10, 11, 12. all they that bear silver are cut off] The rich traders that had marsupia plena, and carried money in great burthens, these shall be also cut off or silenced, have no∣thing to say for themselves why they should not be destroyed with the rest, as those that have been involuti argento as the vulgar translation hath it here, so wrapped up in their money, and affected to it, as that it hath rather possessed them, then they it. Cor habent in aere non in athere, their heart goeth after their cove∣tousnesse Ezek. 33.31. Here they are called Portatores argenti silver-carriers, sumpter-horses, laden with thick clay. Silver is that which the basest element yeeldeth, the most savage Indians get, servile apprentises work, Midianitish Ca∣mels carry, miserable muck-worms admire, covetous Jewes swallow, unthristy Ruffians spend &c. It is to be wondred (saith One) that treading upon these minerals, we cannot contemn them. They lye furthest from heaven: and the best of them are in India furthest from the Church: and yet how many doth mo∣ny make to run quick to the devill on an errand, and payes them home for their paines? Verse 12. I will search Jerusalem with candles] which yet he needs not do, sith the darknesse hideth not from him, but the night shineth as the day: the dark∣nesse and the light are to him alike, Psal, 139.12. Confer Iob 34.22. Ier. 23.24. Deo obscura lucent, muta respondent, silentium confitetur, Night will convert it self into noon before God, and silence become a speaking evidence. His eyes also are a flaming fire, that needs no outward light, but sees by sending out a ray &c. but when Jerusalem is threatened to be searched with ligts, the meaning is, that it shall be set all upon a light fire, and the inhabitants ferretted out of their lur∣king-holes, their Princes and potentates pulled out of privies and sepulchers by the pursuing enemy, as Hierome out of Josephus here affirmeth they once were. Besides that, they shall be brought to a particular and punctuall account for their sins: God will be very exact and accurate with them that way; setting all their evill deeds in order before their eyes Psal. 50.21. and bringing wrath upon them to the utmost 1 Thes. 2.16. This is fearefull Psal. 130.3. and shall be fulfilled especially at the last day, when wicked men shall give an account minutatim of all their Atheisticall thoughts Psal. 14.1. ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken a∣gainst him Iude 15. with the whole world flaming about their eares 2 Pet. 3.7, 10, 12. 1 Cor 4.5. 2 Thes. 1.8. and punish the men that are settled on their lees] Coagulati curded or thickened, congealed and condensed: that are habituated and hardned in their evill practises, that have got a sward, nay a hoof upon their hearts; that have brawny breasts, and horny heart-strings; that stick stifly in the mire of their sins as Moab Ier. 48.11. and, being deeply drowned in the world, are desperately divorced from God, whom they basely fancy to be a God of clouts, one that howere he speak big words, yet will do neither good nor hurt. —mibi haec mortalia curat. that say in their hearts] As that saplesse fellow doth Psal. 14.1. Some set their mouths against heaven, and shame not to utter their reasonings and resoluti∣ons of this kind. These are Epicuri de gregiporci: such as was Lucretius, Diage∣ras, Herace with his
—credat Iudaeus apella.Herat. serm. Nonego, nam{que} deos didici secuum agere aevum &c. Let the Jews beleeve a Providence: not I &c. saith that profane Poet. But be∣hold here were Jews yea and that in good Iosiah's dayes, that said in their hearts (those feculent hearts of theirs, full of dregs and drosse.) the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evill] Nec benè pro meritis capitur, nec tangitur ira. Of such practicall Athiests that say in their hearts there is no God, and live there∣after, there are great store even amongst us: of such dust-heaps we may find in every corner. And when men are once arrived at this Terra del Fuogo this desperate degree of Atheisme, what wonder though they run riot in all sinfull li∣centiousnesse. Verse 13. Therefore their goods shall become a booty] Their evill-gotten goods ver. 9.11.Ecc. 4.1, 2, 3. (for a proof of my providence which they blushed not to deny) shall be carried away by the Chaldees, to their unmedicinable sorrow and heart∣breake. and their houses a desolation] because built in blood. See Nah. 2.11, 12. they shall also build houses but not inhabite them &c.] Ex lege mutuatur minas. That they might the more regard his words, The Pophet makes use of the menaces of the Law Deut. 28.30.39. whereof the Prophets were Interpreters: apply∣ing, as here, the generall doctrine thereof to the people of their times. To re∣buke or exhort men in good words, in Gods own words, is the readiest way to prevaile with them: unlesse they be Lucifugae scripturarum (as Tertullian saith of the Marcionites and Valentinians) which yet will take hold of them howsoever Zech. 1.6. Verse 14.De Resur. carn. The great day of the Lord is neer, it is neer] It is the day of the Lord, that fatall day appointed by him to ruine the nation: for with him it is all one whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only Iob 34.29. Next, it is his great day; because therein the great God will set himself to do great mat∣ters: How much more at the day of judgment called also a great day Rev. 6.17. and 16.14. This great day is neer, yea very neer, it hasteth greatly] it hath wings and wind under those wings, as Zech. 5.9. it will be upon men ere they are aware: neither will any thing more hasten it then their security, and fearelesnesse. Think the same of the last day which cannot but be at hand, and then the transgressours shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shall be cut off Psal. 37.38. even the voice of the day of the Lord] Methinks I heare it. Fallor?Ovid. 5. Fast. an armasonat? non fallimur, arma sonabant. Mars venit, & veniens bellica signa dedit. Hierome speaketh thus of himself, whether I eat, or drink, or sleep, methinks I heare that last trump sounding these words in mine eares, Arise ye dead and come to judgment.Surgite mortui venite in judi∣cium. A very necessary meditation. the mighty man shall cry there bitterly] How much more the turba imbellis, the weak and cowardly? they shall take up a loud lamentation, and cry with the breaking of their loines. Verse 15. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble, and distresse &c.] By this Synathroismos or heape of words, the Prophet would affray and arrouse these dead and dedolent sinners, settled upon their lees, so wedded and wedg'd to their wicked practises, that nothing can sunder them, but an extraordinary touch from the hand of heaven. See Ioel 2.1, 2, 3. and Amos 5.18, 19.20. with the Notes, and confider what the terrour of the Lords last day will be. Verse 16. A day of the trumpet] with its horrid Taratantara and alarme] not of those that shout and praise God, neither with a noise of joy and trumph as
Num. 23.21. Psal. 47.5. Ezra 3.11.12. but of those that shout with broken sounds in the day of battel, as Amos 1.14. in classico with a vocifciation,Turk Hist. and horrible howling, such as the Turks at this day make, when they storm a city. against the fenced cities and against the high-towers] wherein ye trust, but in vaine. These high-towers were built at the corners of the walls. Hence the He∣brew text here hath it, Against the high-corners. Great men and such as beare up the weight of the common-wealth are sometimes called by this name 1 Sam. 14.38. Draw ye neer hither all ye chief of the people: Heb. All ye corners. See the like Zach. 10.4. Judg. 20.2. Neither men nor meanes were ever true to those that trusted them. Our help is in the Name of the Lord, that strong tower whereto the righteous run and are safe Prov. 18.10. Verse 17. And I will bring distresse upon men that they shall walk like blind men] The Dutch have a Proverb, God puts out the eyes of him whom he inten∣deth to destroy: i. e. he besotts and infatuates them they shall be consilij & auxilij inopes: in rebus liquidis aqua baerebit, they grope for the wall like the blind, they grope as if they had none eyes, they stumble at noon-day as in the night, they are in desolate places as dead men, Esay. 59.10. This was long before threatened Deut. 28.28, 29. because they have sinned against the Lord] Sin is the mother of misery. See my Love-tokens pag. 111, 112. &c. and their blood shall be powred out as dust] Then which nothing is more vile and abject, the enemy shall make no more of spilling their blood, then of sprinkling a little dust.Copissimè & adjectissimè. Tarnou. and their flesh as dung] spread upon the land to manure it. The Hebrew word for flesh here may seem to signifie wormes-meat. Our bodyes are no better,Lechum. Drus. why then do we pamper and prink them up? Verse 18. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath] We were not redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold 1 Pet. 1.18. Money hath drowned many a soule 1 Tim. 6. delivered none. See Prov. 11.4. with the Note, Esay 13, 17. Ezek. 17.19. It is righteous∣nesse and not riches that delivereth from death Prov. 10.2. Money can neither pa∣cifie God, nor sill the conscience, nor stop the enemies mouth, but inflame them rather with an unsatisfiable desire of enjoying all, as Rome did the Gaules, and Cyprus the Romanes: and as the pearles, usually cast out with the flood,Sextus Rufus. and ga∣thered at the ebbe, drew Caesars affection for the conquest of Brittaine.Sueton. but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousie] The sins of Gods people are not onely disobediences but treacheries, because of the covenant. God is thereby provoked to jealousie which is cruel as the grave, or hard as hell; the coales thereof are coales of fire which hath a most vehement flame. Cant. 8.6. the wore signifies the consuming flame of God. for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land] Swept clean by God with the beesom of destruction: so that the land was desolate after them Zech. 7.14. Affliction rose not up the second time, Nah. 1.9. See the Notes there, and learn to give God the glory of his severity against sin. CHAP. II. Verse 1. GAther your selvs together, yea together) Excut ite vos, iterumque excutite. Fanne your selves, yea fanne your selves. The precept is doubled,Tremeli. as it is likewise Num. 3.40. and 2 Cor. 13.5. to shew the necessity of our doing it, as also the utility if well done, and lastly our crossnesse and aversnesse thereunto, together with Gods exceeding great desire that it should be throughly done for our greatest good. Grievous things he had threatened in the former chapter: all which to prevent, he here prescribeth them a course of selfe-examination, and thereupon sound conversion: so true is that of an ancient Ideo minatur Deus ut non puniat,Isid. God doth therefore threaten that he may not punish. It is as if God should thus say,
Behold thou art in danger of destruction; is it not therefore high time to search, yea to be serious and exact in the scrutiny? to gather thy dispersed wits together, to summon the sobriety of thy senses before the barre of thy best judgement? to consider and consult what is fit to be done in this case? to have thine eyes in thine head, with Solomons wise man Eccles. 2.14? Yea to have thine eyes like the win∣dowes in Solomons Temples, broad inward 1 King. 6.4. Mens minds are naturally as ill set as their eyes: they turne neither of them inward. Lamiae-like they are sharp sighted abroad to discern other mens faults: but blinde at home to take notice of their own. Nature shewes no sinne: what is our iniquity or our sin, said those in Jeremy when wrath was even breaking out upon them Jer. 16.10? so Hos, 12.8. Men deal with their souls as some doe with their bodies; who, when their beauty is decayed, they desire to hide it from themselves by false glasses, and from others by painting: so their sinnes, from themselves by false glosses, and from others by excuses. But he that thus hideth his sinnes cannot prosper, Prov. 28.13. he must not look for gains his prosperity 3 Joh. 2. but for further hardnesse of heart, Prov. 28.14. and hor∣rour of conscience Psal. 32.3. For God will not scarfe mens bones before they are set, nor lap up their sores before they are searcht. Wherefore Search you, search you O Nation, &c. Search your selves to the quick, sift you to the branne, lay your hands upon your hearts, thrust them deep into your bosomes with Moses, so shall you take them out again leprous as snow Exod. 4.6. Commune with your conscien∣ces and be still, or make a pause. Psal. 4.4. lay a peremptory charge upon them to be true to you, and to doe their office impartially, in laying open how many trans∣gressions are wrapt up in your sinnes, Levit. 16.21. in bringing them all forth to you, as they in Ezra brought forth the vessels of the Sanctuary, by number and by wight,Ezra 8.34. in their circumstances and aggravations. Why should God say unto thee of thy sinnes,, as once Samuel did to Jesse of his sonnes, Are these all thy children? Conscience, if not charged to the contrary, and well watched, will either lye to thee, as Gehezi did to his Master: or at least substract a part of thy sinnes, as Ananias and Saphira did a part of the price. Search therefore, and follow your work close, that ye may say with Ephraim Jer. 31.19. After that I was made known to my selfe, I repented, and with David, I examined my wayes, and finding all out of order, I turned my feet to my testimonies, Psal. 119.59. O nation not desired] As not desireable: having nothing of worth in thee wherefore any should be found of thee, or seek any further after thee, Daniel was a man of de∣sires, chap.ut veniant de∣fiderati omni∣um gentium Jun. 9.23. David a man after Gods own heart. Moses fair to God, Acts 7.20. The Saints are the desired ones of all Nations, as some read that text Hag. 2.7. The precious sonnes of Zion comparable (not to silver onely, as the word here used import∣eth, but) to sine gold, Lam. 4.2. As for the wicked, they are all drosse, Ezek 22.18, 19. and God doth so little desire them, as that he putteth them away, or maketh them to cease as drosse, Psal. 119.119. and commandeth others to doe the like by them, Prov. 25.4, 5. Some take the words in the active sense, and render them, O ntion not desirous: viz. to search thy wayes and turne again to me. Thou that hast no minde to be dealing with thy selfe, or to draw nigh to me, but hadst as leife bee knockt on the head, as doe either: Gens vacua desiderio. O nation void of any good desires.August. Whereas tota Christiani hominis vita sanctum desiderium est, the whole life of a good Christian is one continuate desire after God, his kingdome, and the righteousnesse thereof. Mat. 6.33. he followeth after it Prov. 21.21. as an Ap∣prentice followeth his trade, though he be not his craftsmaster. Some faint de∣sires, luskish longings, short-winded wishes may be found in a wicked man; but they rise not up to the full height of well-knit resolution for God. Like they are to Meteors that are carried above the earth, but not united to the Element of fire: therefore they fall and return to their first principles: like ice which melteth in the day, and hardeneth again in the night: like the sluggard in his bed, that puts out his arme to rise, and then pulls it in again. See Psal. 78.34.38. Verse 2. Before the decree bring forth] The decree is great-bellied, and will short∣ly bring forth, if not prevented. There is an execution towards: and if course bee not timously taken, ye are like to pay, not the debt onely, but charges and damma∣ges: Look to it quickly before the decree &c. Here are three cautionary Befores, as there are four comfortable Yets to be read Zach. 1.17. God yet offers them mer∣cy
as Alezander did those he warred against, whiles the lamp burned: and as Ta∣merlane, whiles the white flag was hanged out. See Ier. 18.7.8. Before the day passe as the chaffe] Before that day of the Lord that is near, very near, chap. 1. Verse 14.15. Passe upon you, and ye become as chaffe before the wind, as the dust of the mountains before the whirlewind. O fan you, fan you: or else God will fan you after another fashion: search you, or he will soone search you with candles, chap 1.12. gather your selves together, or he will gather your souls with sinners, and your lives with bloudy men, Psal. 26.9. would men but judge themselves, God would not judge them, 1 Cor. 11.31. did they but see their sinnes to confession, they should never see them to their confusion Prov. 28.13. would they but meet God, as Abigail did David, they might disarm his indignation. Saving a little pains in this case, doubleth it: and the best that can come of negligence is repentance. It is better that we should try our selves, then that he should try us in his furnace of temptation, or other affliction. Do it therefore before the day passe as the chaffe, or before the chaffe or stubble passe in that day, passe before the wind where∣with God shall winnow you, who would not winnow your selves. The scholer that will not scan his own verses, shall find that his master will scan them to his cost. And the tradesman that will not cast up his books, shall have his books to cast up him at length. Before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you] As a mighty torrent of fire, such as you are never able to avoid or abide. Abused mercy turneth into fury: nei∣ther will God suffer his patience to stand still for a sinning stock. Twice in a breath these hypocrites are here told what to trust unto, for more suretie. Verse 3. seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth] Here the prophet turneth himselfe to the better sort: for upon those hypocritical halters afore mentioned he had but lost his sweet words; he did but wash a blackmore. We read not in Scripture of a∣ny hypocrites conversion, and what wonder? for whereas after sinne, conversi∣on is left as a means to cure all other sinners, what means to recover him who hath converted conversion it selfe into sinne? This made our Saviour say to his Disciples concerning the Pharisees those cankered hypocrites, Let them alone, Mat. 15.14 and himselfe weary of wasting words upon them called to the multitude and said. here ye and understand, verse 10. In like sort this Prophet here, Seek ye the Lord:, for it is past time of day with them to seek him: therefore they shall goe with their flocks, and their herds to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him: he hath withdrawn himselfe from them. Hos. 5.6. Concerning seeking the Lord see the Note on Am. 5.6.8. All ye meek of the earth] This is the character, the distinctive note of a true Chri∣stian: who as he is sure to be afflicted (affliction and meeknesse grow both upon the same root in the holy tongue) so by affliction hee is meekened and mortified, his flesh is crucified with the affections and lusts: and so he is fitted to seek the Lord, to lie at his feet and say, speak Lord, for thy servant heareth. Septuag. The e meek and lowly ones are they whom God will teach Psal. 25.9. beautifie Psal. 149.4. solace Isai 29.19. and 61.1. save, God will save the humble person. Job. 22.29. Now meek∣nesse and humility are a pair of twin-sisters, never asunder.Sorores colla∣ctanea. See how they goe coupled, Mat. 11.29. and the Seventy render this text, all the lowly of the earth, that are as low as th earth, in your own eyes and esteeme. Which have wrought his judgement] i.e. have been doing at it, qui fecistis praecepta etsi non perfecistis who aime at perfection though ye cannot attain to it,, quasi . solo aquatus. Psal. 103.18. who think upon his Commandements to doe them, having respect to them all, and wishing well to the worke, Psal. 118.5, 6. which God graciously accepteth as a working his judgement and yet would have you to abound more and more. Wherefore, Seeke righteousnesse, seek meeknesse] i. e. further measures of holinesse, and de∣grees of grace. Let him that is holy be holy still, let him persevere, grow, and ad∣vance forward toward the high prize proposed unto him taking for his motto that of Charles 5. Plus ultra further yet, perfecting holinesse in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. So 1. Tim. 6.11. But thou O man of God, (that is, O godly man, as the life of God is put for a godly life, Eph. 4.18. see 2 Kings 4.9.) fly these things (what things? heterodoxies. ver. 3, 4, 5. and love of money ver. 9, 10.) And follow after (Gr.
persecute, pursue alacriter & acriter) righteousnesse, this is the totum hominis Ecles. 12.13. the bonum hominis Mic. 7.8. and by way of distribution comprehendeth (as to God) godlinesse and faith, (as to men) love, patience, meeknesse. It may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords wrath] possibly ye may, probably ye shall be; pardon of sinne ye shall be sure of; mitigation also of sorrow, if not pre∣vention: saved ye shall be, or more gently handled, or so inwardly calmed, that ye shall be able to call your souls to rest, when others are at their wits ends. You shall be safe under the covert of Gods wings, and in the hollow of his hand: when o∣thers that are without God in the world, shall be as a naked man in a storm, an un∣armed man in the field, or as a ship at Sea without anchor, subject to dash and split against rocks, and quick sands. Verse 4. For Gaza shall be forsaken and Askelon &c.) Here is dainty Rhetoricke in the Originall. This Prophet was (as Quintilian saith a good Oratour ought to be) Vir bonus, dicendi peritus, a good man, and a master of speech. The Hebrew tongue seemeth to have bin in the prime and flourish when Esay, Micah, and Ze∣phany prophecied, like as the Latine was about Tullies time. The Philistines are here threatened, for a terrour to the impenitent Jews, who should tast of the same whip, and for the comfort of the Godly, who should be hid when these their enemies should be utterly destroyed. Gaza was so forsaken, according to its Prophesie, that it was therehence called Gaza the desart: Askelon according to its name became ig∣nis ignominia the reproach of the fire that wasted it, and (as a mercilesse element) laid it desolate.Act. 8.26. Ashdod (called in the New Testament Azotus Act. 8.) shall also (according to its Etymon) be wasted with fire, and her inhabitants driven into a far country as Captives at high noon, when the Sun (in those hot climates especially) is most parching and scorching: they shall be driven out with all the disadvantage that may be. And Ekron shall be rooted out] Ekron was the place where Beelzebub the Prince of Devils had his throne.Virg. The Poets put it for hell. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheron∣ta movebo. Threatened it is therefore here (not without an elegancy that cannot be englished) with utter extirpation The grand-devill had nested and nestled him∣selfe as near the holy land as might be: &c. but he shall not long rest there, the Hebrew child will disquiet the great Pan: &e. Verse 5. Woe to the Inhabitants of the sea coast] These were the Philistines: they lay between the Jewes and the Sea: God having so disposed of it, that his people might not have much commerce with forreign nations nor learn their manners. Into havens and maritime towns there is usually a conflux of vices, like as there is of waters into the Sea: witnesse Tyre and Sydon, Corinth, Carthage, Capernaum, &c. Hence that proverb maritimi mores: and that censure of such people littorales duri, horridi, immanes, latrociniis dedicit omnium denique pessimi, Those that dwell by the Sea-side are usually ill-conditioned, fierce, cruell, theevish, and the worst of men. These Phi∣listines were no better, and are therefore here put under a woe, and threatened with utter destruction. The nation of the Cherethites] i. e. Destroyers: so the Philistines had stiled them∣selves, as glorying to have conquered and cut off many people. The old Latine translation rendreth it Gens perditorum The nation of Destroyers: so doth Aquila, Theodotion, and Symmachus, Now it comes to their turn to be destroyed, accor∣ding to Esay 33.1. That these Cherethites were a sort of Philistines See 1 Sam. 30.14, 16. Ezek. 25.16. That they were valiant men appears by that legion of them that guarded David 2 Sam. 9.4. and 15.18. and were highly esteemed by him, because they stuck to him in his affliction at Gath, and also when Absolom was up in arms 2 Sam. 15.18. the word of the Lord is against you] And not onely against Israel. This was spoken, as for the terrour of those Philistines, who thought themselves out of the reach of Gods rod, and slighted his word, so for the comfort of the people of God, who thought much that themselves should be so severely dealt with, and the uncircumcised Philistines scape scot-free. O Canaan the land of the Philistines] Indeed of the Israelites, Josh. 13.3. but held by force by the Philistienes, who were of the stock of the Canaanites, but not
subdued; and had detained part of the land from the right owners for 800. years and upwards; and now they come to be reckoned with. Subitò tollitur qui diu toleratur. I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant] No setled inhabitant, that shall fix there, as the word signifieth. Thus Poena venit gravior, quo mage sera venit, the longer God stayes, the heavier he strikes. Verse 6. And the sea-coasts shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds] It shall be wast and untilled, and therefore unfrequented by any but shepherds, who pitch their tents up and down, where they may best feed their flocks in desert places. and folds for flocks] God may do thus in his just judgement upon his ene∣mies, that live in his good land, and not by his good lawes: but wo be to our De∣populatours, that drive out men, and put in cattle: that betray townes, as Rome did Carthage, with a distinction, We will save the city, but destroy the towne. How dangerous it is to prove Abaddons, appeareth by Gods punishing hand upon William the Conquerours, issue in New-forrest, wherein 36. Parish Churches had been de∣molished by him, with the removing of all the inhabitants, to make room for beasts, or dogs-game. There his second sonne Richard was gored in hunting by a Deer;Speed. Rufus his other sonne, mistaken for a Deer, was by chance shot thorow with an arrow. Henry likewise his Nephew, whilest he hotly pursued the chase, was struck by a bough into the jawes: and, as Absalom, left hanging untill he died. Verse 7. And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Iudah] Who had not onely their owne countrey kept empty for them all the 70. yeers of captivity, and not any displaced to make room at their return, (see the Note on Zach. 7.14.) but liberty to make use of the Philistines countrey: which was also further subdued by the Maccabees, but especially by the Apostles, who preached the Gospel, and planted Churches in those parts, as we read in the Acts chap. 8.26, 40. and chap. 9.32, 35, 36. they shall feed thereupon] They shall go in and out, and find pasture, under the great Shepherd and Bishop of their souls, who shall feed them daily,Joh. 10. 1 Pet. 4. and dain∣tily among the lillies by the powerfull preaching of the Gospel among them. In the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening] Ʋbi temporis cir∣cumstantia securitatem notat, saith Gualther, The circumstance of time noteth their spirituall security: evenings are oft dark and dangerous. They shall lie down as cattle do, that take no care; they know whom they have trusted, and are fearlesse. for the Lord their God shall visit them] Visit and redeem his people, raising up an horn of salvation for them, Luke 1.68, 69. His visits are not empty visits, Psal. 8.5. his favours are not like the winter-Sun, that lighteth, but heateth not, &c. and turn away their captivity] to their unexpressible comfort, Psal. 126.1. but especially when Christ ascending up on high leadeth captivity captive, &c. Col. 2.14, 15. Ephes. 4.8. Verse 8. I have heard the reproach of Moab] How can he but hear who is all ear? who is both above us, and within us, in whom we subsist, Col. 1.17. And what will he sooner be sensible of then the reproachings of his people? See Esay 37.23. and 57.3, 4. But draw near hither ye sonnes of the sorceresse, the seed of the adulterer, and the whore. (See how he becalls them) Against whom do ye sport your selves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falshood? The Moabites and Ammonites were great jearers of the Jews, and revilers of their religion. These reproaches leniter volant, non leniter violant, cruell mockings the Apostle calleth them, Heb. 11.36. David felt them as a murthering weapon in his bones, Psal. 42.10. God will call such men to an heavie reckoning one day as deride the power of godlinesse, and the professours thereof. Bede saith, that this was the great sinne of the ancient Britanes, immediately before their destruction by the Saxons: and it is at this day both a presage and desert of our ruine, that as the Turks count all fools to be saints, so men with us account all saints to be fools. and the revilings of the children of Ammon] How good they were at it, we may see in those words of Sanballat, and his copesmate Tobiah the Ammonite, Neh. 4.2, 3. words as full of pride and scorne, as profane wit, or rancoured malice could
make them: and they lay so heavy upon Nehemiahs spirit, that hee could not ease himself but by breathing heavenward, verse 4. Hear, O our God, for we are despi∣sed, and turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity, &c. Hear, saith Nehemiah: I have heard it, saith God. Thou hast seen it, saith the Psalmist, for thou beholdest mischief and spite to requite it with thine hand, Psal. 10.14. and magnified themselves] by speaking big and blustring words, bubbles of words, great swelling words, full of wind, 2 Pet. 2.18. these shall finde, that such words are not winde, but will be required in fire, Jude 15. God is an utter enemy to boasting and threatning Bragadochios. Verse 9. Therefore as I live [This is Gods oath: so, As true as I live, Num. 14.21. with Psal. 95.10. therefore they are to blame that use it in their common talk. Surely Moab shal be as Sodom, &c.] Whereas they think that I either hear not their revilings, or regard them not, I shall make Moab and Ammon smart and smoak for them. even the breeding of nettles and salt pits] They shall not indeed be consumed with fire from heaven: but their land shall lie waste for a long season. Nettles grow in barren places, and are good for nothing, unlesse it be the buds at first co∣ming. Pliny writeth,Hist. Nat. l. 31. c. 7. that where salt is digg'd, little good else groweth. See Judg. 9.45. Psal. 107.34. for a perpetuall desolation] Certain it is, that those nations carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar were never restored: but that in after-times a mixt multitude of vagrants, out of many nations met there, taking upon them the old title of Ara∣bians, and living by rapine and robbery. Out of these came Mahomet, founder of the Turkish Empire and Superstition, who overturned the Christian Churches, there planted by the Apostles, (as was here fore-prophecied, The residne of my peo∣ple shall spoil them, &c. See verse 7.) Confer Gal. 1.17. and soon over-run all the East and South, as Popery did all the West and North, at the same time. Verse 10. This shall they have for their pride] Moabites were as much noted for their pride, as now the Spaniards are: and are therefore here devoted to de∣struction. Pride goeth before a fall, &c. A bulging wall stands not long: a joynt luxated and swelled, till that be down, cannot be set. God resisteth the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. he bringeth those ungodly down to the ground, Psal. 147.6. because they have reproached, &c.] And all this out of the pride of their hearts, which breaketh out, as a master-pock, in their carriage: so that the pride of Moab testifieth to his face, and it shall be to him an abomination of desolation. Verse 11. The Lord will be terrible unto them] For he shall march forth in battle-array against proud persons,. 1 Pet. 5.5. and stain the pride of all their glory: he will pull them down from their pinacle of self-exaltation, and make them know themselves to be but men. Attilas, king of the Hunnes, proudly gave out, that the starres fell before him, the earth trembled at his presence, and that hee would bee the scourge of all nations. But what became of him? He died suddenly by a flux of blood,P. Jovius. breaking out at his mouth and choking him, on his wedding-day at night. It were easie to instance further, in Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, Herod the king of Tyre,Psal. 76.12. &c. With God is terrible Majesty, Job 37.22. he is terrible to the kings of the earth, whiles he cutteth off their spirits. Heb. he slippeth them off, as one should slip off a flower betwixt ones fingers; or a bunch of grapes off the vine; so soon is the businesse done. For he will famish all the gods of the earth] He will cast them into an atrophy, into a consumption. This was fulfilled, partly when Nebuc adnezzar destroyed the Nations,Dan. 4. and proclaimed the true God to be the onely God, but principally when Christ came in the flesh, and sent out his Apostles to decry those Heathen deities, and to preach the everlasting Gospel, saying with a loud voice. Fear God, and give glory to him, &c: and worship him that made heaven, earth, sea, and fountains of waters, Rev. 14.7. Now it was, that Satan fell like lightening from heaven, the oracles were silenced, the Heathen Emperours amazed at the prevailing power of the Gospel in despite of them, the very names of most of the gods of the earth were abolished, the Temple of Apollo at Delphos fired from heaven; and at that
very time when Julians embassadours were there to enquire what should be the issue of the Persian warr. Thus the Heathen superstition fell flat to the ground, their gods were famished for want of worshippers and sacrifices &c. And the same we hope and wait for to befall the Antichristian rout and religion. That Idol is grown very leane, and hath lost a collop as we say. Bellarmine is very sensible,Lib. 3. de Pont. Rom. cap. 21. and bewailes the businesse, that ever since we began to count and call the Pope Antichrist, he hath suffered no small decayes and losses in the christian churches. He hath indeed, and more and more shall do till he be left as leane as a rake, and all his plumes pulled, his credit crackt, his honour laid in the dust. and men shall worship him] Heb. bow down to him. He is thy Lord, and bow thou down unto him, Psal. 45.11. Body and soule both must stoop to God:Zanchy. and both at once 2 Cor. 6.20. Swenck feldians. (Stinkfeldians Luther called them from their ill savour) take away all externall service: so do the Nicodemites. Hypocrites draw nigh to God with their lipps only, when their hearts are else∣where: their bodies are in sacellis, their hearts in sacculis as Ezek. 33.31. But the true Israelites give God both inward and outward worship: he doth ponere dextram in pectore, as Persius phraseth it: being shod with the preparation of the Gospel, he treads it not awry, neither too much outward as the formalist,. nor too much inward as the Swenckfeldian. He looks upon our late worship-scorners, our high-attainers as the last brood of Beelzebub: and reckons that to cast off ordinan∣ces is to cast away the remedy 2 Chron. 36.15, 16. Prov. 29.1. every one from his place] Not at Jerusalem only as once, Ioh. 4.21. but in all places, pure hands and hearts shall be lift up, without wrath, without doubting:1 Tim. 2.8. both in church and chamber: any place whatsoever shall be a sufficient orato∣ry, so that God be worshipped in spirit and in truth, and the publike not neg∣lected. even all the Isles of the Heathen] that is, all countries, though not encompassed with the sea: for the Jews called all lands Islands which they could not come at but by water. That God shall be worshipped in the foure corners of the earth, see the Note on Deut. 6.4. It was the last speech of dying Chrysostom, Glory be to God from all creatures: Let the Jesuites at the end of their books subscribe Laus Deo & beatae Virgini, Let this be the badge of the Beast: let us cry To God alone be glory all the world ever. Verse 12. Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slaine by my sword] which is long enough to reach you, though far remote. The Poets faine that Jupiter was wont to be feasted by the Ethiopians: but that shall not save them from Gods sore and great strong sword. Nebuchadnezzar, to whom God had given Ethiopia, and Egypt and Saba as a ransome for his people Esa. 43.3. See Prov. 11.8. with the Note. The Ethiopians and Egyptians were subdues together Ier. 46.2. Esay 18.1, 2. It is now inhabited by the Abyssines (a kind of mongrell-christians) and called Prester-lohns countrey; where they say they have this custome amongst others: In their great solemnities they have a cup of gold born before them, filled within, and besmeared without with dirt, yet so as the gold appeareth: and next to this cup is carried a crucifix. Hereby they would shew that man should be pure as gold: but being within and without defiled by sin, he is restored by Christ crucifi∣ed, so as that the gold of Gods graces appeareth in him here in part, and shall do hereafter in all perfection. Verse 13. And he will stretch out his hand against the North] i. e. against Assy∣ria (which lay north from Judea) as is presently added by way of exposition.Selnec. paedag. Christ. par. 2. pag. 118. the scripture sometimes hath its own interpretation annexed as Ioh. 2.19, 21. and 7.39. Howsoever, the Rabbines have this saying amongit them, Nulla est objectio inloge quae non habet solutionem in latere; i.e. there is not any doubt in the Law, but may be resolved by the context. and destroy Assyria] cast this rod of his wrath into the fire, after the he had worn it to the stump (as that Martyr said) upon other nations. and will make Niniveh a desolation] See Nah. 2. with the Notes. Verse 14. And flocks shall lie down in the middest of her &c.] Here are various and vehement expressions of the dreadfull face of her desolations. Omnia congerit que vastitatem horribilem denotare solent, saith Gulather, because it was held a thing
almost impossible that Niniveh should be destroyed. Hence that admiration of by∣standers and beholders ver. 15. But what can be impossible to the Almighty? and what will not He do for his churches cause and comfort? See ver. 6. all the beasts of the nations] which shall come from farr to haunt this new-desert. beau-desert. See Isai. 13.21, 22. and observe that Parallell texts, like glasses set one against another, do cast a mutuall light. The lapidary brighteneth his hard diamond with the dust shaved from it self: so must we clear hard scriptures. both the Cormorant (or Pellican) and the Bittern] Those inauspicate birds of prey that are signes both of Gods curse and mans misery Esa. 34.11. The former hath its name in Hebrew from vomiting, and seemeth, saith One, to be the same that we call the Shovelard, which swalloweth shelfishes, and after vomteth them to get the fish.Nat. hist. lib. 10. cap. 3. The later liveth about lakes, saith Pliny, and with her beake bea∣teth the fish out of the shell with great vehemency. shall lodge in the upper-lintels of it] beautified with pomegranates, flow∣ers and other curious garnishes, a are wont to be seen at the proches of places. their voice shall sing in the windowes] the black Saints, as they say; where was wont to be heard all manner of musick and melodious noises, Luxus cedet in luctum, their merry dances shall end in a miserable downfall. desolation shall be in the thresholds] which were wont to be worn out with the abundance of clients and parasites, tracing over them. for he shall uncover the cedar-work] i. e. God, or the enemy by Gods ap∣pointment, shall uncover the roof made of Cedar, for better continuance. Cedar is strong and durable: and by reason of the drynesse of it the timber chawneth not, rotteth not:Physic. l. 2. yea, it hath a property to preserve other things from putrefaction, saith Scribonius. The Ninivites raftered their houses with it, as they say the Africanes do with whale-bones. But now that God shall barr them and expose them to the injury of wind and weather, how can they stand? and what can be in the thresholds but desolation? Verse 15. This is the reoycing city] Exultabunda, that could stand on no ground, but was ready to leape out of her skin as it were: her inhabitants were meer mirth mongers altogether set upon the merry pin: like the people of Tom∣buum in Africke, who spend their whole time in singing and dancing. Now the case is altered, and the Church, out of zeale for Gods glory, thus insulteth over them. that dwelt carelesly] As if scituate in the clouds, above all feare; and altogether insuperable. Security ushereth in destruction. See Ier. 49.31, 32. that said in her heart I am, and there is none besides me] This was a proud word indeed. I am is one of God Almighties names Exod. 3.14. and There is none besides me, is one of his titles Esa. 45.5.21. and 48.12. Thus empty man would be something (the toad would swell to the bignesse of an oxe) though man be born like a wild-asses colt Iob 11.12. and man being in honour understandeth not, that he is,Psal. 49.20. pcoribus mer∣ticinis. Tremel. or shortly shall be, like the beasts that perish: that die of the murraine, and so become carrion good for nothing. Ʋnde superbit homo cujus conceptio turpis, Nascipoena, labor vita, necesse meri? How is she become a desolation!] Here the Prophet Niniven in Theatro statuit, & traducit apud Judaeos (saith Calvin) setteth Niniveh upon the stage, and shew∣eth his Jewes the tragicall end of her: how she should wonderfully be brought down beyond all expectation. God delighteth o make himself marvelous: he is the onely true Thaumaturgus. every one that passeth by her shall hiss and wagg his hand] In scorn, horrour and disdaine; and why, See Nah. 3.19. with the Note. Lam. 2.15, 17. 1 King. 9.8. Ezek. 27.36. Mic. 6.16. Surely God scorneth the scorners Prov. 3.34. and maketh that the mercilesse find no mercy, Iam. 2.13.
CHAP. III. Verse 1. WOe to her that is filthy and polluted] Meaning Jerusalem, once a faithfully city, now an harlot, foedissimum prostibulum,Isay 1.21. of the kind of those sordid men who are called Borboritae, of their miry filthynesse, whom Epiphanius and Oecumenius speak of. The word here rendred filthy comes from a word that signifieth dung, or that signifieth an example: and so it is a metaphor taken from light women that are catted in a disgracefull way and made a publike example, and infamous instance. It is rendred also gluttonous,. or all craw as Levit. 1.6. Ingluvies & tempestas, barathrum{que} macelli. To the oppressing city] Praedatrici, that maketh a prey of others (either by force or fraud) as the silly dove is made a prey to the hawk and other ravenous birds. Verse 2. She obeyed not the voice] sc. of her teachers, nor enclined her ear to them that instructed her, as Prov. 5.13. Hence she was so filthy and oppressive: who if she had harkened to wholsome counsell, and hidden the word of Gods grace in her heart, would have purified her self even as He is pure, 1 Ioh. 3.3. and not have exacted money and corn, but have left off that usury Neh. 5.10. she received not correction] or disciplne, as being incurable or incorrigible, pining away in her iniquity Lev. 26.39. and not accepting the chastisement of her sin. she trusted not in the Lord] but knockt at the creatures doore for help in her distresse, and made flesh her arme, her heart departed from the Lord Ier. 17.5. This God taketh very ill Ier. 2.12.13. as he hath very great reason: Confi∣dence being the least and yet the best we can render to him for all his benefits. she drew not neer to her God] Though he were her God, yet she gat as far from him as she could: and, like a wild beast, would not be tamed nor managed by him. Now if these be undoubted arguments of filthy and polluted State, as surely they are, what shall we think of our selves, who are as deeply guilty as ever Jerusalem was in the promises? what shall the Lord do, or what shall he not do rather to a nation so incorrigibly flagitious, so obliged, so warned, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked? Verse 3. Her Princes within her are roaring lions] Roaring over the meaner sort, and tearing them with their claws, See the Notes on Mic. 3.1, 2, 3. her Iudges are evening-wolves &c.] See Hab. 1.8. This rapacity and bribery they had learned (likely) under Manasses and Amon: and exercised under good Iosiah, who either knew it not, or could not redresse it. Est ergo periculi plena reip. forma, quae ab uno dependet, saith Gualther here. And Tertullian telleth us,Tert. Apol. that one speciall thing the Primitive Christians pray'd for the Emperour was, that God would send him Senatum fidelem a faithfull Senate, pious Councellours, good under-officers. Of Aurelians Councell it was said, that by them the good Empe∣rour, who might know nothing but as they informed him, was even bought and sold. Alphonsus King of Arragon said, that Princes were for this, in a worse con∣dition then other people: because they could seldome heare the truth of things. Augustus bitterly bewailed the death of Varus: because now, said he,Grand. Signi. Serag. 148. I have none about me that will deal truly with me. The Grand Signior goes oft abroad that he may receive poor mens petitions, and right them upon the greatest Ba∣shawes, who, bewitcht by bribery, have denied them justice. And hence it hath been ever observed, that few of his chief officers die in their bed. These evening-wolves many times have not a morrow left them to gnaw the bones in.Rodulphus Archb. of Can∣terb. next after Anselm was surnamed Nu∣gax for his je∣sting & toying. Verse 4. Her Prophets are light] Rash, headlong, futilous, debauched (as the French translateth it) aeriall, fantasticall, waightlesse, worthlesse men, such as in whose doctrine there is no authority, in whose life no gravity, staiednesse, se∣verity, constancy: like the planet Mercury, they can be good in conjunction
with good, and bad with bad: like that French Apostate, of whom Beza saith, that he had religionem ephemeram, for every day a new religion, ab his ad illos, ab illis ad hos leviter iens & levius transiens, double-minded and unstable in all his wayes, Jam. 1. and treacherous persons] Viri perfidiaerum, most perfidious persons, This is their true title, whom the world counteth, and calleth facile, facetious, fair-conditioned, comporting, condescending, people-pleasing preachers. Can there be a worse trea∣chery then to betray mens souls, as your Aiones and Negones do, that cry peace, peace, and so cozen men to hell. her priests have polluted the sanctuary] Or holy services. Cum coelum terrae commiscent sacra profanis. God looks to be sanctified in all those that draw nigh unto him, Levit. 10.3. that they should be singularly holy, handling the word sanctè magis quàm scitè (as One once told the wanton Vestall) and living so, that malice it self may be silen∣ced. God of old appointed both the weights and measures of the sanctuarie, to be twice as large as those of the Common-wealth: to shew, that hee expects much more of those that serve him there, then he doth of others. See 1 King. 7.15. with 2 Chron. 3.15. they have done violence to the law] sc. by their crafty and perverse glosses, set∣ting it on the rack as it were, and so making it speak more then it would: tawing it with their teeth, as shoomakers do their upper-leather, forcing it two miles, when it would go but one, yea murthering it, as Tertullian saith of some, quod caedem scripturarum faciant, that they slaughter the scriptures, to serve their own purpo∣ses: for which cause also he calleth Marcion the heretike, Murem Ponticum, the Rat of Pontus, for his arroding and gnawing the text. Verse 5. The just Lord is in the middest thereof] The unjust Princes were said to be in the middest of Jerusalem as roaring lions, vers. 3. Here the just Lord is also said to be in the middest of her, as a sin-revenging Judge. He sitteth as God in the middest of those uncircumcised vice-gods, (as I may in the worst sence best terme them) he sets a jealous eye upon all their unrighteous proceedings, and is with them in the judgement. Neither eyeth he them onely, but all others in like sort: as the king in the Gospel came in to see his guests. His eye, like a well-drawn picture, taketh view of all that come into the room. O that we could be in his fear all the day! O that we would ever walk uin the sense of his presence, and light of his countenance! Nè pecces, Deus ipse videt, bonus Angelus astat, &c. Sinne not: for God seeth thee, the good Angels stand about thee, Satan will accuse thee,Noli peccare, nam Deus vi∣det, Angeli astant, diabolus accusabit, con∣scientia testa∣bitur, Infernus cruciabit. Conscience will give in evidence against thee, Hell will torment thee: A re∣verend and religious man had this written before his eyes in his study. he will not do iniquity] i. e. He will not let enormities go unpunished, nor passe by the infirmities of his people without a sensible check, Psal. 99.8. See Hab. 1.13. Every morning doth he bring his judgement to light] Daily and diligently doth He both threaten by his Prophets, and execute with his hand, the menaces of his mouth upon those that will not be warned, that refuse to be reformed. He hath in a readinesse to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6. Maturely he will do it, and accurately: It is his mornings work, Psal. 101.8. like as it is theirs to rise early, and corrupt all their doings, vers. 7. He will be up and at it as soon as they. he faileth not] As he may seem to do, when he forbeareth. Non deest, He will not be wanting to his office, to proceed against the uncounsellable. but the unjust knoweth no shame] He can blush no more then a sackbut, as the proverb is. Such an impudency hath sinne woaded in his face, that he basheth no∣thing. Et pudet non esse impudentem, he is past all grace, as we say, and as good at resisting the Holy Ghost, as ever those Jews were that had a whores fore-head, Jer. 3.3. sinews of iron, and brows of brasse, Esay 48.49. When neither fear of
God, nor shame of the world will rein men in, what hope is there of such? Illum ego periisse dico cui periit pudor, saith an Heathen.Curtius. He is an undone man that know∣eth no shame. Prevent it in time: for the modest beginnings of sinne at first will make way for immodest proceedings. The thickest ice that will bear a cart, begin∣neth with a thin trembling cover, that will not a pibble. Verse 6. I have cut off the nations] And hang'd them up in gibbets, as it were, before your eyes, for your admonition, ut ruina majorum sit cautela minorum,Greg. Mor. that their destruction might be your instruction: that seeing your neighbours house on fire, you might look to you own: that observing other to suffer ship-wrack, you might see to yor tackling. This is the use God expects we should make of his judgements upon others, Luke 13.3, 5. and 17.26, 29. Matt. 12.13, 41.42. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, &c. and surely he deerveth to be made an example, that will not take example by others. their towers are desolate] Or, their corners, sc. of their munitions, whereon towers were set. Or their extremities, q. d. I have over-turned them from one end to another. Drusius and Ribera interpreteth it of their Princes. See the Note on chap. 1.16. I made their streets wast, &c.] See chap. 2. vers. 5, 6, 14, 15. To the end, that when my judgements were thus on the earth, the inhabitants of the world (but es∣pecially of the Church) might learn righteousnesse, Esay 26.9. that the righteous seeing the vengeance, might wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, Psal. 59.10. taking warning by his harmes. Observe here by the way, what great account God makes of his people, sith for their instance and instruction, hee thus wasteth the wicked: like as the Persian kings, when their sonnes had committed a fault, made their servants to be beaten before them. Verse. 7. I said surely thou wilt fear me] As in a schoole, when one boy is whipt, the rest tremble; and as in the Common-wealth, poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes: so it should be in the Church. Other mens woes should be our warnings: others sufferings our sermons; others lashes our lessons: Gods house of correction, a school of instruction, where we should hear and fear, and do no more so, Deut. 17.13. He that trembleth not in hearing, shall be crusht to piece in feeling, said that Martyr. and receive instruction] This I promised my self of thee, but am disappointed, Jer. 5.3. See verse 2. thou art therefore ripe for destruction. So their dwelling should not be cut off] They should have redeemed their sorrows, and saved their citie. And this God speaks to others, as weary of speaking any longer to them, to so little purpose. but they rose early and corrupted, &c.] Manicabant, they made hast, that no time might be lost: the wofully wasted that best part of the day, the morning, (which , furthereth every businesse) in corrupting their practises, doing evil as they could. Once (saith a Reverend man) Peters argument was more then probable; These men are not drunk, for it is but the third hour of the day.Drunk. cup. by. D. Harris. Now, men are growen such husbands, as that by that time, they will return their stocks, and have their brains crowing before day. Verse 8. Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, &c.] Stand forth, and hear your doom: which that ye may know, that I do not precipitate, or rashly passe up∣on you. Wait ye upon me, &c. and yet that ye may not presume upon my pati∣ence, know that there is a day set, a determination setled for your full pay∣ment. Nostra Deus sub it is non damnat crimina pocnis: Compensat long as sed gravitate moras. to gather the nations] To put them up as it were sheep, into a pound for slaugh∣ter. See more of this Jer. 25. to pour upon them mine indignation] Here's mention made of Gods prey, of his indignation, fierce anger, fire of jealousie against nations and kingdomes: the better to perswade people to that which they are so hardly drawn to beleeve, viz. that God is not made all of mercy: but, though fury be not in him, to speak properly,
Isay 27.4.Exod. 34.7. Yet that he will not by any means Clear the guilty, but punish them se∣verely, taking vengeance of their inventions, Psal. 99.8. Verse 9. For then will I turn to the people a pure language] Then, when my sword hath rid circuit, Eccles. 14.17. and bin bathed in the blood of all nations, for their many and mighty sinnes; I will turn to the people, I will turn mine hand upon the lit∣tle ones; mine elect, that remnant reserved for royal use. These I will bring, not into the fire onely, but through it, and will refine them as silver is refined &c. Zach. 13.7, 9. so that their tongue shall be as choice silver, Pro. 10.20. their lip shall be a pure lip, at it is here, a lip of excellency, Prov. 17.7. so that they shall scatter pearls, Mat. 7.6. throw abroad treasure, Mat. 12.35. even apples of Gold in shrnes of silver, Prov. 25.11.1 Joh. 3.3. they shall purifie themselves, as God is pure. Old things shall be past with them, all things shall become new: new constitution, new communication, new conversation. Look how the Conquerour sought to bring the French tongue into England, commanding it to be taught in schooles, spoke in courts &c. so doth the Lord Christ, wo rideth about the world upon his white horses, the Apostles and o∣ther Ministers, conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. where-ever he prevails, hee turneth to such a pure language, even the language of Canaan: not the Hebrew tongue (as R. Abraham senses this text) which all nations shall speak, saith he, in the kingdome of Christ (what they doe in heaven, I have not to say, some are confi∣dent) but words of grace, Col. 4.6. words of truth and sobernesse, Act. 26.25. right words, Job. 6.2. spiritual speeches, Ephes. 4.29. Scripture language, 1 Pet. 4.11. That they may call upon the name of the Lord] As all Gods people doe, 'tis their character 1 Cor. 1.2. he hath no dumb children, they no sooner breath but pray Act. 9.11. for prayers is the breath of the spirit, Rom. 8.26. and the fruit of faith: hence it is called the prayer of faith, and under the phrase of calling upon the name of the Lord here is meant beleeving in his name, and reposing upon Christ for safety here, and salvation hereafter. To seve him with one consent] Heb. with one shoulder, that is, unanimously, and with conjoyned endeavours. A metaphor from oxen yoked & setting their shoulders together to the work:. Sept. or else from porters, who set their several shoulders to the same burden. The Saints may the better doe so, because they have the Spirit to lift with them and over anent them, as the Apostles word importeth Rom. 8.26. Let them therefore endeavour by all good means, to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Eph. 4.3. that they may say as holy Miconius did of himselfe and his colleagues at Gotha in Thuringia, Cucurrimus, certavimus, laboravimus, pugnavi∣mus, vicimiv, & viximus semper conjunctissimi. We ever ran together, strove, labou∣red, fought, vanquished and did altogether, in much peace and concord. This is Christian-like indeed, See Act. 1.14. and 2.1.46. and 4.32. animo animaque inter se miscebansur, saith Tertullian, they were all of one heart, and of one minde. The very Heathens acknowledged that no people in the world did hold together and love one another, so as Christians did. To see their travels, (saith Master Fox con∣cerning the Saints here in times of persecution) their earnest seeking, burning zeal, readings, watchings, sweet assemblies, love, concord, godly living, faithfull marry∣ing with the faithfull &c.Act. & Mon. 750. may make us now in these our dayes of free profession (but lamentable divisions) to blush for shame. They served the lord with one shoul∣der, we shoulder one another: they kept unity with purity without schisme, much lesse heresy, glorifying the God and Father of ovr Lord Jesus Christ with one mind and with one mouth Rom. 15.6. with a pure lip, as it is here: we are quot homines, tot sententiae; so many men, so many mindes. How many religions are there now amongst us, saith one? Old heresies new vampt? Our Saviour Christ saith, if the Son of man come, shall he find faith &c? Yes sure he may find many faiths: so many men, so many faiths. Pudet opprobria nobis &c. It is not peace but party that some men mind, saith another:1 Cor. 14.23 their chief studies are studium partium, & studium novarum rerum, part-taking, and novelling. But what saith the Apostle? If ye speak with several tongues, will not he that comes in think ye are mad? so when the world hears of so many dissonant opinions; will they not think wee are runne wild? Is it not a shame to us, that the Turks should say, we may sooner look that the fingers on our hands should be all of one length, then that the Christians should
be all of one judgement? why should any Julian jeare us for our divisions? why should any Campian hit us in the teeth with our many sects and schismes? Pardon may be got for our other sinnes by faith in Christs blood,Ad fratres in Suevia Luthe∣ran. discordiam neque si sanguinem fundamus expiabimus (saith Oecolampadius to the Lutherans of his time) our scan∣dalous discords God will judge. Verse 10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia] Heb. of Chush, that is of Arabia Chu∣saea which lay betwixt Judea and Egypt. Confer Esay 18.1, 7. Some understand it of Ethiopia which is beyond the river Nilus, and hath two very great rivers. See this in part fulfilled by that Ethiopian Eunuch Act. 8.Euseb. lib. 1. cap. 1. Alvarez hist. Aethiopic. neither may we think that he was alone in that countrey, Matthias the Apostle is said to have preached the Gospel to the Ethiopians. The large region of Nubia there had from the Apostles time (as 'tis thought) professed the Christian faith, till about 200 years since it forsook the same. The kingdome of Habassia held by Presbyter John,See Breerw. Enquiries 156.197.159.174. are yet Christi∣ans differing from us in a few ceremonies onely. See the Note on Chap. 2.12. My supplyants] My praying people, that ply the throne of grace, and multiply strong suits pouring out a flood of words in humble supplication (as the Hebrew sig∣nifieth) continuing instant in prayer, as knowing that their safety here and salvat on hereafter is of me alone. Even the daughter of my dispersed] Jews and Gentiles, elect of both sorts Joh. 11.52. scattered here and there as the salt of the earth upon the face thereof, to keep it from putrifying, Danaeus thinketh that there is mention made of the daughter of the dispersed affectionately: namely, both to describe the earnestnesse of the Saints in serving God (for women quicquid volunt, valdè volunt) and that this so goodly and and joyfull a spectacle or sight of women worshipping and servng God, and of Vir∣gins especially, might stirre up and move affections. It is easy to observe, that the New Testament affordeth more store of good women then the old, who can make masculine prayers, mingled with tears: And as Musick upon the waters sounds further and more harmoniously then upon the land, so doe prayers well watered. Shall bring mine offering] Heb. my meat-offering, or rather my wheat-offering, their hodies and souls, Rom. 12.1. that best of facrifices, for a reasonable service,Minchath a so∣lemn present: such that the Chaldee paraphrast might expresse; He translateth it thus: They shall bring as presents unto me the banished of my people, who were carried captive, and shall return by my mercies. Some think that here is foretold the return of the Jewes to their own land, toward the end of the world, to set up the spirituall worship of God there: the famous Church that shall be among them, full of sancti∣ty and ridde of all wicked ones, verse 11, 12, 13. the joy and gladnesse that shall possesse their soules verse 14. through Gods removing of all cause of fear from them verse 15. the encouragement they shall receive from others, verse 16. and (which is the cause of all this) the apparent arguments of Gods great love and favour, vers. 17. the quality of those that shall be received to be citizens of this New Jerusalem, verse 18. the utter rooting out of all their enemies, verse 19 the fame and dignity that this Church of the Iews shall be of among all nations, vers. 19, . Thus they: quàm rectè iudicium sit penes Lectorens. Verse 11. In that day shalt thou not be ashamed] There is an holy shame for sinne, such as was that of Ezra, chap. 9.6. of the penitent Publican, Luk. 18.13. and of those good souls in Ezekiel, who blushing and bleeding loathed themselves for their abominations. To be ashamed on this sort is no shame,Ezek. 16. but a signe of that godly sorrow that worketh repentance never to be repented of, and not to know shame, to be frontlesse, and impudent is the note of a naughty man, Verse 5. But that which God promiseth here is, that he will cover their sinnes, not impute them Psal. 32.1.2. and that he will by his grace preserve them from scandalous and reproachfull practises that might render them ignominious and despicable, see Psal. 19.39. shir∣ing upon them himselfe, and giving them honour in the hearts of others, as he did Solomon. Them that rejoyce in the pride] Or, in thine excellency, as Psal. 68.35. that is the thine external priviledges, wherein thou hast hitherto so prided thy selfe, as the onely peo∣ple of God, holy and beloved.
and thou shalt no more be haughty] Stand upon thy tip-tees, upon thy pantofles, as if there were none such. because of mine holy mountaine] Ier. 7.4. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord &c. cryed they aloud that nothing cared for the Lord of the Temple. So the Jesuites and their Romish crew cry, the Church, the Church, the Catholike church, ad ravim usque like so many oyster-wives: but this is not the guise of Gods people. He will purge his church of such Formalists. Verse 12. I will also leave in the middest of thee an afflicted and poor people] Poor and therein afflicted, therefore despised. Poverity is an affliction, and makes a man trodden upon. Men will be sure to go over the hedge where it is lowest. Hence St.Nil habet in∣soelix pauper∣tus durtus in se, Quam quod ridiculos homi∣nes facit. Paul ioyned them together, I have leared to want and to be abased. They that want must look to be abased. This thy son saith He Luk 15.30. not, this my brother: he would not once own him, because in poverty. But though men will not, yet God will Iam. 2.5. Rev. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but that's nothing, thou art rich: poor in spirit, rich to God-ward, glorying in nothing but this, that thou understandest and knowest me and my will, thy self and thy duty Ier. 9.23. and art therefore a rich Cargazon, a full Magazine, such as the world is not worthy of. and they shall trust in the name of the Lord] As having nothing else o trust to. So St. Pauls widdow indeed, being desolate and left aloue, trusteth in God, who whiles she had an husband trusted too much in him. 1 Tim. 5.5. A noble-woman of Savoy, mother to Iohn Galear Duke of Millaine after her hubands decease, caused a coyne to be made, upon the one side whereof she drew these words, Sola facta solum Deum sequor, Being left alone, I trust in God alone. Verse 13. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity] Sanctity and security are here promised to al the citizns of the Church. Being justified by Christ they shall do righteousnesse and truth: there shall no way of wickednesse be found in them Psal. 139.24. they shall be kept from foule flagitious practises, neither shall they wallow or allow themselves in any known sin unrepented of. Their spot, if any, shall be the spot of Gods children Deut. 32.5. unvoluntary and unavoidable informity, such as there is a pardon of course for: onely they must sue it out by praying daily, Forgive us our trespasses. Nor speak lies] For that's a foule fault, and raely found in a Saint Esay 63.8. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: So he was their Saviour.Tho. Walsingh. It was wont to be as currant an argument, Christianus est, non mentietur, He is a christian, he will not lie, as afterwards it was, Hic est frater, ergo mendax, This is a friar, and therefore a liar. Sophronius testifieth of Chrysostome, nunquam eum mentitum fuisse, that he was never heard to tell a lie. Whereas of Pilat Ege∣sippus telleth us, that he was Vir nequam & parvi faciens mendacium, a naughty man, and one that made little conscience of a lie. it may seem so indeed by that scornfull question of his, What's truth? Ioh. 18.38 neither shall a deceitfull tongue be found in their mouth] Their pure lip ver. 9. is not used to the language of hell, their spirit without guile Psal. 32.2. produceth speech without deceit: for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, Mat. 12.34. See the Note there. for they shall feed and lie down] shall have all that heart can wish, or need require; plenty, safety, security &c. and none shall make them afraid] So as to make them dec iniquity or speak lies: as very good men when frighted have dared to do: witnesse abraham, Isaac, Jacob, but especially David, deeply guilty of this sin 1 Sam. 21.2, 8. and 1 Sam. 27.8, 10. In the sense of which sin he prayeth, Remove from me the way of lying Psal. 119.29. we also should pray, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from that evill one, the father of lies. And having the shepheard of Israel to feed us and tend us; we should not feare Psal. 23.2, 3. but chusing rather to dye then to lye, to suffer then to shift, commit the keeping of our souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creatour 1 Pet. 4.19. Verse 14. Sing O daughter of Zion, shot O Israel: Ioy is the just mans por∣tion, which the wicked may not meddle with Hos. 9.1. In the transgression of an evill man there is a snare or a cord to strangle his joy with, to cheek and choke all his comforts, but the righteous sing and rejoyce Prov. 29.6. they are comman∣ded
so to do: yea the command is doubled and trebbled here and elsewhere in both Testaments: and it is a sin for such not to rejoyce, as well as not to repent. be glad and rejoyce with all the heart] which no wicked man can do: his mith is but the hypocrisy of mirth: like a little counterfeit complexion. It may smooth the face, never cheer up the heart: like a slight dash of raine that soaketh not to the root: or a handfull of brush wood or seare thorns under the pot Eccles. 7.6. As their humiliations are but skin-deep, they rent-their garments and not their hearts, they grieve in the face, and not in the heart Mat. 6.16. so do they re∣joyce in the face, and not with all their heart 2 Cor. 5.12. Verse 15. The Lord hath taken away thy judgments] i. e. He hath remitted thy sins, removed thy punishments, turned againe thy captivity as the streames in the south, commanded his Prophets faying, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people &c. Esa 40.1.2. tell her that all accusations and actions laid against her in the coury of heaven are non-suted, and Gods wrath appeased. This is the summe of all hte good news in the world: this is a short gospell. he hath cast out thine enemy] As rubbish and sweepings of the house are cast out: so hath God dealt by thine enemies corporall and spirituall: repurga. re everrere sig∣nificat. that thou being deli∣vered out of the hands of both, might serve him without feare, in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all thy dayes Luk 1.74, 75. the king of Israel even the Lord is in the middest of thee] In the many testimonies of his powerfull and gracious presence: yea, he hath set him up a mercy-seat, a throne of grace, and bidden thee come boldly thereunto Heb. 4.16. thou shalt not see evill any more] sc. so long as thou retainest God with thee, who is both a sun and a shield Psal. 84.11. and children have a place of refuge Prov. 14.26. Verse 16. Feare thou not] why shouldest thou whilest the king of Israel is in the middest of thee? Be of good cheer said Caesar to the ferriman in a storm, thou canst not miscarry: Caesarem enim fers & fortunam Caesaris, so long as Caesar is in the same bottome with thee. May not the church much more gather comfort, having God in her company; and so many of his servants to fay to her, Feare thou not? True faith quelleth and killeth distrustfull feare: but awfull dread it breedeth, feedeth, fostereth and cherisheth. and to Zion, let not thine hands be slack] Remollescant. Let not thy feares weaken, but rather waken thy diligence in well-doing: lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees Heb. 12.12. Up and be active: pluck up your good hearts, and buckle close to your businesse: your task is long, your time short, your master urgent, you wages unconceiveable. It troubled a martyr at the stake, that he should then go to a place where he should ever be receiving wages, and do no more work. Up therefore and be doing. Be not slothfull, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises Heb. 6.12.Hippoc. Aphoris. Spontaneae lassi∣tudines morbos loquuntur, faithlessnesse argueth a diseased soule. Verse 17. The Lord thy God in the middest of thee is mighty] Even the mighty strong God Esay 9.6. the Giant, as the word signifies, the champion of his church. He being in the middest of thee cannot but see how thou art set upon; and how ma∣ny dangers and difficulties thou encounterest with, and will send thee in new sup∣plies Eph. 1.19. seasonable succour. He will save] This properly signifieth the privative part of mans happinesse: but includeth also the positive. Jesus will do all for his people. He will rejoyce over thee with joy] As a bridegroome doth over his bride Esa.Gesti super te laetitiâ. 62.5. He will take speciall complacency and content in thee, being made accepted in the beloved Eph. 1.6. He will rest in his love] And seek no further. Heb. He will be silent in his love, passing by small faults without any the least signification of his displeasure: as if he were even fond over his church, and did err in his love towards her, as husbands are licensed to do toward their wives Prov. 5.19. Some render it obmutescet in amore suo he shall be dumb in his love, so as he cannot speak through excesse of love. Lovers are so transported sometimes, that they cannot utter their minds. He will joy over thee with singing] As a father doth over his child whom he bea∣reth in his bosome, or dandleth on his knee.
Verse 18. I will gather them that are sorrowfull for the solemne assembly] which now they cannot celebrate, as being in captivity; and are therefore in great hea∣vinesse; as was David Psal. 42.2, 3, 5. Nothing goes nearer to a good heart then to be debarred the benefit of Gods holy ordinances, then to heare the sab∣baths mocked at by the enemies as these good soules did Lam. 2.7. and to be asked as David was, Where is now thy God Psal. 42.3. All outward comforts in this case are meer Ichabods. When the Ark was taken, Eli could live no longer: that word struck him down back ward, and killed him in the fall. No sword of a Philistine could have slaine him more painefully: neither is it easie to say whether his neck or heart were first broken. who are of thee] True children of the church, as appeareth by their strong affecti∣ons to the ordinances 1 Pet. 2.2. Luther said he would not live in Paradise with∣out the word; as with it be could easily live in hell. An infant cannot be quieted with gawdes or fine cloaths without the dugg: so neither cana true chirstian with any thing, but the publike services, the solemne assemblies. to whom the reproach of it was a burden] It lay heavy upon their spirits, and made them send up many a deep sigh to God, who heareth the breathings of his people Lam. 3.56.1 Chr. 15.26. and will restore comfort to such his mourners Esa. 57.18. He that helped his Levites to bear the Ark, will help those that grieve at the want of it, and grone under the reproach cast upon it, which they ever honoured as the face of God Psal. 105.4. Yea as God himself Psal. 132.5. Verse 19. Behold at that time I will undoe all that afflict thee] Heb. Behold Me: Look not to thy self as unworthy or unlikely to inherit such precious promises: for, not for your sakes do I this saith the Lord God, be it known unto you, but for mine own holy Names sake Ezek. 36.22, 32. your unworthinesse shall serve for a foile to set forth the freenesse of my love: your unlikelinesse, the greatnesse of my power: my grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is perfected in thy weak∣nesse 2 Cor. 19.9. Againe, look not to thine enemies, how many and mighty they are, how witty and wealthy, how active and combined (loricaus incedit Satan & cataphractus, said Luther) let thine eyes be upon me, as Jehosaphats were when he knew not whither else to look 2 Chron. 20.12. let thine heart be lift up in my wayes, as his was 2 Chron. 17.6. behold me, behold me Esay 65.1. Look not downward on the rushing and roating streames of miseries and troubles which run so swiftly under thee, for then thou wilt be giddy: but look upward and stedfastly fasten on my power and promise: beleeve in the Lord thy God, so shalt thou be established: beleeve his Prophets, so shalt thou prosper 2 Chr. 20.20. thine enemies also shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places Deut. 33.29. I will undo them, saith God here Heb. I will do them (per Antiphrasin:) or I will bruise them and break them in peeces, as R David rendreth it, by comparing Ezek. 23.3, 21. I will not only represse them but root them out. Those that offer violence to the Church like blind Sampson, they lay hands upon their pillars, to pluck the house upon their own heads. and I will save her that halteth] As enemies shall not hinder the Churches happi∣nesse, so neither shall her own infirmities. Grant she be lame and luxated, mai∣med and disjoynted, so that she goeth sideling and halteth down right Psal. 38.17. Say she be driven out of her countrey as an exile, out of all companies, as an outcast (whom no man seeketh after Ier. 30.17.) and out of all good conceit of her self, as an abject, vile in her own eyes, not fit for the communion of Saints, or kingdome of heaven: Yea I will save her, I will gather her: like as the gathering host in the wildernesse (see Iosh. 6.9.) took up the lame, feeble, and those that were left behind. See Mic. 4.6. with the Note, and Ezek. 32.16. I will seek that which was lost, and reduce that which was driven away &c. and I will get them praise and fame in every land &c.] So that glorious things shall be spoken of thee, O city of God: As thy sin shall be remitted, so thy name shall be healed, thy fame spread, per era hominum volitabis, I will fashion mens opinions of thee, so that those that formerly shamed and shunned thee, shall highly esteem thee, and stand for thee. Verse 20. At that time will I bring you againe] And this I tell you againe, that you may the better beleeve it: only you must wait my time, for in time will I
bring you againe, and in time will I gather you, and in time will I make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, as before I promised: but you must give me time to do all this. He that beleeveth maketh not hast. The vision is yet for an appointed time Habac. 2.3. See the Note there. Limit not the Holy One of Is∣rael, set him not a day, say not Now or never: wake not your beloved till he please. He is a God of judgement, and waiteth to be gracious Esay 30.18. Have patience therefore, yea let patience have her perfect work Iam. 1.4. that ye may receive a full reward 2 Ioh. 8. For behold I come, and my reward is with me, to give you an expected end Ier. 29.11. when I turn back your captivity] Heb. Captivities: that is, all foure captivities together. For the Jews were carried captive to Babylon 1. under Manasseh 2 Chron. 33.11.2. Next, under Jehojachim 2 Chron. 36.6.3. under Jechonias 2 King. 24.12. and 2 Chron. 36.10.4. Lastly, under Zedekiah 2 Chron. 36.17. 2 King. 25.6. All these shall be brought back together by an eminent and signal deliverance. before your eyes] Those eyes of yours that failed almost for my salvation, and for the word of my righteousnesse Psal. 119.123. shall see the accomplishment there∣of, and be satisfied Psal. 54.7. and 92.11. Dexter tibi prae laetitia saliet oculus. saith the Lord] This is the seale of all, and security sufficient, for Dei dixisse est fecisse: God will not suffer his faithfulnesse to faile, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lipps Psal. 89.33, 34. Laus Deo in aeternum.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of HAGGAI. CHAP. I. Verse 1. IN the second yeer of Darius the King] Not of Darius the Mede,Gab. Chro∣nol. as Genebrard doteth, for he was pre∣decessour to Cyrus Dan. 5.31. And Haggai pro∣phecied after Cyrus and Cambyses, Ezra 4.5. and 5.1. Neither of Darius Nothus, as Scaliger in his book De Emend: temporum (the doctrine whereof is almost wholy fictitions, saith One, and founded upon the confines of Nothing:) but of Darius, son of Hystaspes, who succeeded Cambyses in the kingdome of Persia; being chosen king by the Peeres,Herdot. in Thali. upon the neighing of his horse first, as Herodotus testifieth. Whether this Darius were the husband of Queen Esther, as some af∣firm, or her son, as Others, (and was therefore so favourable to the Jews) I un∣dertake not to determine: Onely take notice, that by Heathen Historians it is said,Herod. that the wife of this Darius was called Atossa, which sounds in part somwhat like Hadassah, that is Esther, chap. 2.7. Hadassah was her own Hebrew name: and, after she was made Queen, she was called Esther. He is called Darius the King, as if he were the Onely King on earth. His successour Darius in his proud Embassy to Alexander, called himself the King of Kings, and Cousin of the gods: and for Alexander, he called him his servant: But Alexander soon after became his Lord.. Plato lib. 3. de l gib. Prov. 21.1. For the Kingdome of Persia was lost by that Darius, as it had been re∣stored by this to its former splendour, after the havock made by Cambyses; who among other vile acts of his (as Wickednesse proceedeth from the wicked, according to the preverb of the Ancients 1 Sam. 24.13.) forbad the building of the Temple Ezra 4.12. But He who sets up Princes at his pleasure, and turns their hearts whither soever he will (as the plow-man doth the water-course with his paddle, or the gardiner with his hand) turned here the heart of this great King to his people
the Jews: so that he made a new decree for the advancement of the building, Ezra 5.8. God also seasonably stirred up Haggai, and Zachariah to quicken the peo∣ple, (who were soon after their return from Babylon, grown cold again and careless) and so blessed their Ministery, that the House, that is, the Sanctuary, and the Holy of Holies, was finished in four years space, or thereabouts, Ezra 6.14. The out∣ward Court, and so the whole Temple, in three years after that,Antiq. l. 11. c. 4 as Josephus wit∣nesseth. In the sixth moneth] In the 3444. year of the world,Func. Chronel. as Funccius computeth it, in the Calends of September, (confer chap. 2.19.) when the Jewes were inga∣thering their harvest, and fruits, and found a dearth toward. This the Prophet makes use of, pressing it upon the people, as a just hand of God upon them, for slighting and slacking the rebuilding of his house. It is good for Gods Ministers to set in with him, to strike while the iron is hot, to cry, Hear ye the rod,Mic. 6.9 and who hath appointed it: for as iron is very soft, and malleable, whiles in the fire, and as molten metals ar fit for the mould; so when men are under the crosse, they are more easily wrought upon; they will hearken to instruction, that before laught at it, as the wild asse doth at the horse and his rider, Job 39.18. The wild asse, that is used to the wildernesse, though she kick up her heels, and snuffe up the wind at her pleasure, so that they that seek her will not weary themselves, yet there is a time when she may be taken; in her moneth they shall find her, Jer. 2.24. In the first day of the moneth] Heb. In one day. One for first is ordinary in both Testa∣ments, Gen. 1.5. Num. 29.1. Dan. 9.1. Mat. 28.1. Joh. 20.1. 1 Cor. 16.2. The time of this Prophecy (as of others, Isa. 1.1. Jer. 1.2, 3, &c.) is precisely noted, to teach us what ac∣count we should make of Gods Oracles, and inspirations; and how God will one day eckon with us for the helps we have had, and the time we have enjoyed them. He sets down all: how much more should we, and live up to our means & mercies, propagating our thankfulnsse into our practise? Jeremy prophecied forty years, but with ill suc∣cesse: it was his unhappinesse to be Physician to a dying State.Tunc etiam, doctâ plus va∣let arte malum. The Holy Ghost sets a speciall mark upon these fourty years of his prophecying, Ezek. 4.6. by bidding the Prophet lye fourty dayes upon his right side, and bear the iniquity of the house of Judah fourty dayes, a day for a year. came the word of the Lord] i. e. he began to prophecy,Prophetarum ora sunt Dei os Chrysost. as Ezra 5.1. being sent and set awork by God, whose alone it is, to make meet Ministers of either Te∣stament, 2 Cor. 3.5. to send, gift, and blesse them, Jer. 23.21. by Haggai the Prophet] Heb. by the hand of Haggai, that is, by his means, and Ministery. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. Haggai signifieth merry, and pleasant,Festivus & laetus. as at a solemn feast: which name of his excellently suiteth both with the time of his prophecy, viz. after the return from captivity, see Psal. 126.1, 2. and also with the matter whereof he treats, and whereto he drives, Christ, the Desire of all nations. Wilt thou be merry at any time? saith Seneca, think on Caesar: canst thou be sad, and he be in health? How much more cause have wee to be to be merry in the Lord Christ? Let us keep the feast with all solemnity: let us keep holy-day,. sith Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Let this swallow up all our discontents, and crown the calender of our lives with continuall festivals: Let the ransomed of the Lord return and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy up∣on their heads, &c. Esay 35.10. The Septuagint ascribe certain of the Psalmes to Haggai, and Zachary, in the titles they prefix: though some think that the Hallelujah-Psalmes (as they are called) because they begin and end with Hallelujah, or, Praise ye Lord, were sung by the Jews, returning out of Babylon; those two Prophets beginning the tune, or giving the verse (as they call it.) And hereunto the Prophet Jeremy might have an eye, chap. 31.12. Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together, to the goodnesse of the Lord, &c. unto Zerubbabel the sonne of Shealtiel] Philo saith, he was also called Barachias,He is called Shesbazzar, Ezra 1.8. others Phadaias, out of 1 Chron. 3.17. His name Zerubbabel signifieth, either Born in Babel, or, Far from confusion. A Prince (of all men) should observe order, keep the peace. By the Lawes of England, a Noble-man cannot be bound to the peace; because it is supposed that the peace is alwayes bound to him, and that of his own accord, he will be carefull to keep others in good order. But what a reg∣num
Cyclopicum was at Rome in Nero's dayes, Quando poterat quisque eâ, quam cuperet potiri,Dio in vit. Neron. negare licebat nemini? Tum servus cum Domina, praesente Domino suo, & gladiator cum virgine nobili inspectante patre rem habuit, &c.? Blessed be God for better times. Governour of Judah] Or, Duke, Captain, Provinciall, President. The many∣headed Multitude hath need of a Guide, who may be , peace∣able and prudent,Lib. 1. de leg. (saith Plato) to keep and care for the well-fare of his subjects. Such an one was Zerubbabel,Aug. epist. 179 Nobilis genere, nobilior sanctitate, Noble by birth, but more noble by his piety: drained from the dregs, and sifted from the brannes of the baser sort of people.In loc M. Pemble. In the seventeenth year of his age, he led back part of the people from Babylon to Jerusalem; where he continued Governour for the space of fifty eight years, saith Grynaeus. Those that make Darius in the Text, to be Darius Nothus, must needs allow him a much longer life and government: which God, say they, granteth to some, because hee hath something to bee done by them. The Revolution of States may here also be remarked. This people was first gover∣ned by Judges, or Captains: then by Kings, and now by Captains again. So the Principality of Edom, as it began with Dukes, and rose to Kings, so it returned to Dukes again, after the death of Hadad, in Moses his time, 1 Chron. 1.51. Gen, 36.43.. Adeo nihil est in vita firmum aut stabile. So uncertain are all things. and to Joshuah the sonne of Josedech] A brand pluckt out of the fire, Zech. 3.2. and therefore the fitter for such a preferment,Bernard. ut in alto positus non altum sapiat. David came not to the kingdom, till his soul was even as a weaned childe, Psal. 131.2. Queen Elizabeth swam to her crown, thorow a sea of sorrows. Matthias King of Hungary, was taken from the prison to the throne. But, to the businesse: Joshuah the High-priest was a type of Christ, in regard,Turk. hisi. 1. Of his name, which signifieth a Saviour. 2. Of his Office of High-priesthood. 3. Of his partner-agency with Zerubbabel, in reducing the people home to their own countrey. The Lord Christ,Acts 3.15. Heb. 4. & 7. is both our Prince of life, and our mercifull and faithfull High∣priest, ever living to make request for us. the high-priest, saying,] Zerubbabel and Jeboshuah were the Chieftains of the people: and though not themselves in fault, or at least nothing so much, (for they were both very religious) yet they were not so forward and forth-putting as they should have been in so excellent a work. Howsoever, if the task be not done, the Task-masters are beaten, Exod. 5.14. It is the misery of those, that are trusted with authority, that their inferiours faults are beaten upon their backs. If the peo∣ple gather Manna on the Lords sabbath, Moses and Aaron shall hear, How long refuse ye to keep my commandements?Calvin in loc. Exod. 16.28. It is Mr. Calvins opinion, that Haggai therefore addressed himself to these two principall persons: to the end that they might joyne their forces with him, in reprehending and exciting the people to the Lords work. When the word and the sword go together, there is great likelihood of much good to be done. Upon the sword of Charles the Great was written, Ʋtriusque tabulae custos. And Queen Elizabeth riding progresse once is Suffolk,M. Leighs treat. of Divin. ep. Ded. said, that now she saw the reason, why that County was so well gover∣ned, for she observed that all the Justices coming to meet her, had every one his Minister next to his body. Verse 2. Thus speaketh the Lord of Hosts, saying,] This title is oft used in these three last prophecies (eighteen severall times in that eighth of Zachary) because, being to build, they had many enemies; therefore had need of all encouragement. And Hierom in his Prologue oteth it as an act of great courage in Haggai and Zachary, that against the Edict of King Artaxerxes (or Cambyses) and the op∣positions of Sanballat, and other potent Adversaries, they should stir up the people to build the Temple: and as an act of heroicall faith in the Prince, priest, and peo∣ple, to set upon the work, and finish it, Not by might, nor by power, but by the spi∣rit the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 4.6. See more of this title in the Note on Mal. 3.17. Doct. 1. this people say] Words then have their weight: neither are mens tongues their own: but there is a Lord over them (Psal. 12.4.) that will call them to a strict account of all their waste words, Mat. 12.36, and hard speeches, Jude 15. and then they shall experiment that by their words (which they happly held but winde)
they shall be justified, and by their words condemned, Mat. 12.37. How good is it therefore to carry a pair of ballance betwixt the lips? Nescit poenitenda loqui qui proferenda priùs suo tradidit examini, saith Cassiodore; He that weighs his words before he utters them, shall prevent an after-reckoning for them. the time is not come, the time, &c] He repeateth their frivolous and frigid excu∣ses, in their own very words; that he may the better confute them,Ʋsus est  ut rei indignitatem amplificaret. and the soo∣ner bring them to a sight of their sinne. Sinne and shifting came into the world to∣gether, Gen. 3.12. And this is still the vile poison of our hearts, that they will needs be naught, and yet never yeeld, but that there is reason to bee made, and great sense in sinning. These Jewes (likely) had both Scripture and Reason to plead for their backwardnesse (as there is no wooll so course, but will take some colour: and the sluggard is wiser in his own eyes,Prov. 26.16. then seven men that can render a reason:) For Scripture: To every thing there is an appointed time, a set season, such as we can neither alter nor order, Eccles. 3.1, and verse 3. There is a time to break down, and a time to build up. And that this time to rebuild the Temple was not yet come, some might pretend, that the seventy years foretold,Hieronym. R. David. were not yet fully expired: others (with more shew of reason) that they had been too hasty in laying the foundation long since, as appears by their ill successe, and many adversa∣ries: that, God who had dwelt so long in a Tabernacle, and was now worshipped at his new-created Altar, would bear with them, if they first built their own houses, and then be more free to build his House, which they intended to do hereafter, with great care and cost. This is still the guise of gracelesse procrastinatours, to future and fool away their own salvation. Hereafter, say they, may bee time enough, and what need such hast to build the spirituall Temple? In space comes grace, God is more mercifull then so: and at what time soever a sinner repents from the bottom of his heart, &c.Mat. 23.17. Fools and blind men (as our Saviour calls the Pharisees) that thus stand trifling, and baffling with God, and their souls, being semper victuri, as Seneca saith, alwayes about to do that, which if not well done, they are utterly undone for ever: for upon this little point of time hangs the crown of eternity. The gales of grace are uncertain, the day of grace, (which is very clear and bright) is usually a short one. Non licet in bello bis peccare, said Lamachus to a souldier of his brought before him, and pleading he would doe so no more: So God will not suffer men twice to neglect the day of grace, which, if once past, will never dawn again. Let none therefore when prest to the present Now of meeting God by repentance, answer as Antipater King of Macedony did, when one, presented him a book treating of happinesse  I am not at leisure: Or as Archias the Theban, when forewarned of a conspiracy against him, cast the letters by, with In crastinum seria, and was slain ere the morrow came. Or as these Cunctators in the Text, that had oft in their mouth, The time is not come, the time &c. lest the very next minute they be cut off by death from all further time of repentance, acceptation and grace for ever. Men may purpose, promise, expect a time of healing and happinesse, when they shall be deceived, and find a time of terrour and torment, Jer. 14.19. Some, when a dying, would have given a world for time: as I have heard (saith a Reve∣rend man) one crying day and night call time again: but that could not be.Posthac occasi calva. As in warre, so here, none are permitted to erre twice. Time must be taken by the fore∣lock, as being bald behind. Verse 3. Then came the Word of the Lord &c.] Then after a short silence, as it were,Ribera. profertur Domini quasi cogitata responsio followes the Lords elaborate and deliberate answer, not without some touch of holy tartnesse, at their ingratitude: for, of all things, God can least endure to be slighted, where he hath better deserved. He looks upon such with anger, being grieved at the hardnesse of their hearts, Mark 3.5. He complains of such with a sigh; Ah sinfull nation, Isa. 1.4. he is ready to rid his stomack of them, verse 24. Ah, I will ease me &c. Verse 4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, &c.] Not co∣vered onely, but cieled with cedar, (as the Chaldee here hath it) arched and gar∣nished, as the Greek, carved and trimmed, as Ambrose rendreth it. Sure,Lib. 3. epist. 12. either your beds are very soft, or your hearts very hard, that you can, not onely come into the tabernacles of your houses, but give sleep to your eyes,Psal. 132.4, 5. or slumber to your eye∣lids. Before ye have found a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God
of Jacob. Good David, could not finde in his heart to dwell in an house of Cedar, when the Ark of God dwelt within curtains, 2 Sam. 7.2. Valiant Ʋriah, deemed it altogether unfit and unreasonable, that when the Ark, and Israel, and Judah a∣bode in tents, he should goe to his house to eat, and drink, and to take his ease and pleasure, 2 Sam. 11.11. Solomon first built an house for God, and then for himself. The Christian Emperours, Constantine, Theodosius, Honorius, &c. exceeded in build∣ing Churches,Turk. hist. . Herodet. which, from their statelinesse were stiled Basilica, or places for a King. The very Turks at this day, though content to dwell in mean and homely houses, yet their Moschees or Meeting-houses, are very sumptuously built, and set forth. It is a principle in Nature, that the things of God are elder, and more to bee respected then the things of men. A professor of the Turks law proclaims, before they at∣tempt any thing, that nothing be done against religion. This is better then that which was written over the gate of the Senate-house in Rome (which yet is not to be disliked, in its place and order) Ne quid detrimenti Resp. capiat. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars: but with all and above all, Give unto God the things that are Gods:. Mat. 22.21. The Greek article is twice repeated by our Saviour, when he speaketh for God, more then when for Caesar: to shew, that our special care should be, to give God his due, to seek first the kingdome of God and his righteousnesse, and then all o∣ther things shall seek us.Cicero. Caetera aut aderunt, aut caetera non oberunt. But most peo∣ple are so busied about their own houses, their cottaeges of clay, the body, that Gods house,2 Cor. 5.1. the soul lies wast and neglected: the lean kine eat up the fat: the strength of the ground is spent in nourishing weeds. Earthly mindednesse sucketh the sap of grace from the heart, as the Ivy doth from the Oake, and maketh it unfruitfull. Men are so taken up about the world, that they think not on Gods kingdome: as the Duke of Alva told the French king,Fren. Hist. who asked him whether he had observed the late great Eclipse? No, said he, I have so much to doe upon earth, that I have no lei∣sure to look toward heaven. But is not one thing necessary, and all other but by-busi∣nesses? And have we not in our dayly prayer, five petitions for spirituals, and but one for temporals? Are we not taught to make it our first request, that Gods name may be hallowed, though our turnes should not be served? Is not Esau stigmatized for selling his birth-right, for a messe of broth? And is not Shemei chronicled for a foole,Heb. 12.16. who, by seeking after his servants, lost his life? Pope Sixtus for a mad man, that sold his soul to the devil, to enjoy the Popedome for seven years? what shall it profit a man to win the world and lose his own soul? to win Venice, and then be hang∣ed at the gates thereof, as the Italian proverb hath it? Surely such a mans losse will be 1.Mat. 16. Incomparable, 2. Irreparable: for what shall a man give in exchange of his soul? It was no evill counsel, that was given to John the third, King of Portugal, to meditate every day a quarter of an hour on that divine sentence. It would be time well spent to ponder as oft and as long together on this Text, Is it time for you, O ye, that are so sharp set upon the world, so wholly taken up about your private profits, your pleasures and preferments, to sit in your ceiled houses, as Ahab once did in his ivory Palace, or Nebuchadnezzar in his house of the kingdome (as he vain-glori∣ously calleth it, Dan. 4.30.) and Gods house lie waste, and his service neglected, to whom we owe our selves, 1 Cor. 6.19. our lives Mat. 16.25. our parents, chil∣dren, friends, means Mat. 19.29. our gifts and abilities, 1 Cor. 4.7. our honours and offices, Psal. 2.10, 11, 12. all that we are, and have? How justly may God curse our blessings,Job 16.15.16.18, 21. 1 Cor. 12.21. (as he threateneth these selfe-seeking, God-neglecting Jews both here, and Mal. 2.2.) scatter brimstone upon our houses, drp up our roots beneath, and above, cut off our branches, drive us from light into darknesse, and chase us out of the world with his terrours.Col. 3.2. Phil. 2.21. Surely such are the (ceiled) dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place of him that knoweth not God, that inverteth the order appointed of him, by coveting, not the best guists, but an evil covetousnesse, Hab. 2.9. by setting his af∣fections, not on things above, but on things on the earth, by seeking their own things, every man, and not the things of Jesus Christ. Verse 5. Now therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts] Haggai was but a yong man, saith Epiphanius: Now therefore, lest any one that heard him, should despise his youth, and slight his doctrine, he shews his authority, he comes to them cum privi∣ligio, he delivers not the conceptions of his own brain, but the Word and mind of
God. For as Chrysostom saith of St. Paul, so may we say of all the rest of the pen men of the Holy Scripture, Cor Pauli est cor Christi, their heart is Christs own heart: and their words are to be received, reverenced and ruminated, not as the words of mortal men, but (as they are indeed) the words of the everliving God, 1 Thes. 2.13.Greg. in Reg 3 Excel∣lently spake he who called the Scripture Cor & animam Dei, the heart and soul of God. It is, every whit of it, divinely inspired, or breathed by God, saith the Apostle, and is profitable both for reproof, and for instruction in righteousnesse.2 Tim. 3.16. See an instance here∣of in this Text, together with the Prophets rhetorical artifice in first chiding, and now directing them to reprove, and not withal to instruct, is to snuffe the lamp, but not powre in oyle, that may feed it. consider your wayes] Heb. set your hearts upon them, diligently recogitate, and re∣cognize your evil doings; and so shall ye soon find out the cause of your calamity, Judge your selves, so shall ye not be judged of the Lord, accept of the puntshment of your iniquity: so iniquity shall not be your ruine: your ruth, but not your rums. Capite con∣silium ex rebus ipsis, velexperiment is Learn at least by the things ye have suffered: Let experience the mistrisse of fooles, reduce you to a right mind. Lay to heart your manifold miseries, those  as one calleth them, Free School∣masters, curst enough and crabbed, but such as whereby God openeth mens ears to dis∣cipline, and eyes to observation of his works, and their own wayes;Job. 36.8, 9, 10. according to that of Ezechiel, chap. 40.4. Son of man behold with thine eye, and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall shew thee &c. the senses must be exercised that the heart may be affected with the word, and works of God; according to that mine cye affecteth my heart, Lam. 3.51. and Solomon gat much of his wisedom by observa∣tion, as appeareth by his Ecclesiastes which some have not unfitly called Solomons Soliloquy. It is but little that can be learn'd in this life, without due and deep Consi∣deration: which is nothing else but an act of the Practical understanding, whereby it reflects and staies upon its own intentions: and, comparing them with the rule, it pro∣ceeds to lay a command upon the will and Affections to put them in execution. Thus Da∣vid considered his wayes, and finding all out of order, he turned his feet to Gods testi∣monies, Psal. 119.59. And, to still Gods enemies, Psal. 4.4. he bids them commune with their own hearts and be still, or make a pause, viz. till they have brought their con∣sideration to some good upshot and conclusion. For when consideration hath soundly enlightened a mans mind, informed his judgement according to that light (that candle held to his mind) and determined is will according to that judgement, it must needs bring forth sound resolutions, purposes and practises; as it did in the Ninivites, Ephraim, Ier. 31.19. Iosiah, 2 Chron. 34.27. the Prodigal, Luke 15. the Church in Hosea, chap. 2.6.7. She considered she was crossed and hedg'd in with afflictions, and resolveth to return to her first husband. The contrary inconside∣ratenesse is complained of as a publique mischief. Ier. 6.8. and 8.6. and 12.11. They have laid it waste: and being waste it mourneth unto me: The whole land lieth wasle, because no man layeth it to heart, that is, considereth deeply of the cause of its desolation. Without this, though a man had all poslible knowledge lockt up in his brain and breast, it would be but as rain in the middle region, where it doth no good; as the horn in the Unicorns head, where it helps no disease; or as fire in a flintstone insensible and unprofitable, till beaten out by sound consideration: This makes knowledge to become expreimental, as Psal. 116.6. and Rom. 8.1, 2, this is to follow on to know the Lord. Hos. 6.3. as without this, mens knowledge is but a flash, and may end in ignorance and profanenesse: because never formed and seated in their hearts, never disgested by due meditation and application to their own consciences. Verse 6. Ye have sown much and bring in little] This was visible to them: and they are called upon to consider it. The Philosopher affimes that man is therefore the wisest of creatures, because he alone can compute and consider. And yet how little doth man respect this priviledge, without which he were to be sorted with beasts, or mad men? God harkened and heard, but no man spake advisedly, no man repented of his wickednesse saying, what have I done?Jer. 8.6. no man humbled himself under the mighty hand of God, though god thrust him down, as it were, with a thump upon the back. Most mens minds are as ill set as their eyes are; neither of them look inwards. Lord, saith the Prophet, when thy hand is lifted up, they
will not see, but they shall see &c. Esay 26.11. So, when Gods rods call for reformation, they will not heare it and who hath appointed it, but they shall heare Iob 33.15. Conscience, their domesticall Chaplaine, shall ring this peale in their cares, Consider your wayes: Ye have sowed much but brought in little &c. Omnia fuistis & nihil profuit, you have tried all wayes to live, and 'twill not be, laboured all night, and taken nuthing, laboured in the very fire, and wearied your selves for very vanity Hab. 2.13. as those that seek after the Philosophers stone, the most they can look for is their labour for their paines. Either vanity or violence hath exhausted you, as Zach. 8.10. and Gods vengeance is visible enough in those secret issues and draines of expence at which your estates run out, because he puts not his holy finger on the hole in the bottome of the bag. For it is his blessing alone that maketh rich Prov. 10 23. and except he build the house, they labour in vaine that build it Psal. 127.1. There is a curse upon unlawfull practises, though men be never so industrious, as in Iehojachim. Ier. 22. And all their policies without dependance upon him for direction and successe, are but Arena sine calce sand with∣out lime; they will not hold together, when we have most need of them, but fall alunder, like untempered morter. Hence the Psalmist assureth us, that Promo∣tion comes neither from the East,Psal. 75.6. nor from the West, nor yet from the South where the warme sunshine is, but from the Lord: he putteth down one, and setteth up another. So Hannah, The Lord, saith she, maketh por, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lifteth up 1 Sam. 2.7. And albeit no man knowes either love or ha∣tred by all that is before them, because all things come alike to all Eccles. 9.1, 2. (God maketh a scatter as it were, of these outward commodities: good men gather them, bad men scramble for them) yet if he blow upon a mans estate, and by losses and crosses so beat him down with his own bare hand (as here in the text) that either he hath not to eat, or dare not cat his fill, for feare of wanting another day, or if he do cat, yet the staff of bread being broken, and for want of Gods concurrence, he eats and is not satisfied &c. he hath but prisoners pittance, which will neither keep him alive, nor yet suffor him to dye, he is to be very sensible of it, to consider his wayes, and looking upon his penury (as a peece of the curse for neglect of Gods service Levit. 26.14. &c.) to deprecate that last and worst of miseries, the judgement of pining away in their iniquities Verse 39. This is worse then any scarcity, then any bulimy or doggish appetite, a disease common in times of famine. The righteous cateth to the satisfying of his soule: but the belly of the wicked shall want Prov. 14.25. As his belly prepareth deceit Iob 15.35. so it suffers deceit; mposturam faciunt & patiuntur, as the Emperour said of them, that sold glasse for pearles. Fumos vendidi, fumo pereat, as Another. Ye looked for much and loe it came to little, as it followeth verse 9. and why? but because they thought every little too much for God, and all well saved that was kept from him, Mal. 3.9, 10, 11. See the Notes there. The Popish Commentators upon this text call upon the people, (if ever they meane to thrive) to keep holy∣dayes; to heare Masses &c. yea some Priests in Gersons time publiquely preached to the people,Non crit caecus, nec subito mo∣rietur, nec ca∣rebit sufficienti sustentatione. that whosoever would hear a Masse, he should not fall blind on that day, nor be taken away by suddain death, nor want sufficient sustenance &c. This was more then they had good warrant to promise; and yet they are beleeved. Shall not we learn to live by faith, to trust in the Lord and doe good? so shalt thou dwelt in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed, Psal. 37.3. The wicked in the fulnesse of their sufficiency are in straits. Jeb. 20.22. Contrarily, the godly, in the fulnesse of their straits are in a sufficiency: and this is the gain of godlinesse. 1 Tim. 6.6. Pi∣ety is never without a well-contenting sufficiency, it hath treasure that saileth not, bags that wax not old, Luke 12.33. And shall have hereafter riches without rust, wealth without want, store without sore, beauty without blemish, mirth with∣out mixture &c. Verse 7. Consider your wayes] See ver. 5. Do it early, and earnestly. Excu∣tite vos, iterumque excutite, as Tremellius rendreth that in Zeph. 2.1. Search you, search you, O Nation not worthy to be beloved. So Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our wayes. Not search only but try, and as it were sift them to the brann So 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own selves, as it were with redoubled diligence, in a most needfull but much neglected
duty, of dealing with your own hearts. But if ye will not, see that flaming place Ezech. 16.43. If men will not judge themselves, God will: as though schol∣lers will not scan their verses, their masters will. Men are as loth to review their actions, and read the blurr'd writings of their own hearts, as School-boyes are to parse their lessons and false Latines they have made. But as he who will not cast up his bookes, his bookes will cast up him at length: so those that will not con∣sider their wayes, and take themselves to task, shall find that sparing a little paines at first will double it in the end: and that the best that can come of this forlorne negligence, is the bitter pangs of repentance. Oh therefore that, with Solomons wise man, we had our eyes in our heads, and not in the corners of the earth!Eccles. 2.14. 1 King. 6.4. And that our eyes were, like the windowes in Solomons Temple, broad inward, that we might see our sins to confession, so should we never see them to our confusion. The Israelites confessed their murmuring and stubbornnesse, when God sent evill Angels amongst them, that is, some messengers of his wrath and displeasure. The Prophet Haggai here would have their posterity consider and better consider, sith the hand of God was so heavy upon them, and that he came against them as in were with a drawn sword, how they might disarme his just indignation by a spee∣dy reformation. To which purpose he addeth Verse 8. Go up to the mountaine, and bring wood &.c] Set upon the work, and be serious: build the Temple with like zeale as Baruc repaired the wall Neh. 3.20. acendit scipsum, he burst out into an heat, being angry with his own and o∣thers sloth: and so finisht his task in a short time. It must be an earnest, upright, and constant endeavour of reformation, that must follow upon our sense of sin, and feare of wrath: or else all will be but mous aliquis evanidus (as Calvin on the text hath it) a very slash: It will be but as prints made on water; assoon as finger is off, all is out. It was certainly therefore an excellent saying of Luther (though condemned for hereticall by Pope Leo the tenth) Optima & aptissima poe∣nitentia est nova vita. Amendment of life is the best repentance: neither is there any wiser way to break off our sins, then to practise the contrary duties. He that repents with a contradiction (saith Tertullian) God will pardon him with a contra∣diction. Thou repentest and yet continuest in thy sin. God will pardon thee, and yet send thee to hell. Those that will have God to take pleasure in them, as in his Temple, to love them and come unto them, and make his abode with them Ioh. 14.23. to dwell in them, and walk in them (as they did in Solomons porch, and other walks and galleries about the Temple Zach. 3.7.) to be glorified in them (accounting himself to receive, as it were, a new being, by those inward con∣ceptions of his glory, and those outward honours we do to his name) they must go up to the Mountaine, not of Lebanon (though that was a pleasant and plentifull place Deut. 3.25.) but of Heaven, that Hill from whence comes their help, and bring wood, (growing wood Cant. 1.17. living stones 1 Pet. 2.5.) and build the house 1 Cor. 3.9. Eph. 2.22. laying faith for a foundation, love for a co∣vering, having hope for a pinacle, humility for a pavement &c. washing it with teares, sweeping it by repentance, beautifying it with holinesse, perfuming it with prayers, hanging it with sincerity &c. So shall Christ the King be held in the galleries Cant. 7.5. he shall covet their beauty Psal. 45.12. and be held fast bound to them in the bands of pure affection, and spirituall wedlock. He will take pleasure in them, as he did in those that prayed in or toward the Temple Deut. 12.11. 1 King. 8.29. as he did in Daniel that man of desires chap. 9.23. in David Gods corculum or darling 1 Sam. 13.14. in his Hephsibah or sweet∣heart the Church Esay. 62.4. called elsewhere the beloved of his soule, or his be∣loved soule: And he will be glorified in them by their spirituall sacrifices 1 Pet. 2.5. reasonable services Rom. 12.1. performed in spirit and in truth Ioh. 4.24. by some one of which God is more glorified then by all the actions of unrea∣sonable or unregenerate creatures. Verse 9. Ye looked for much, and loe it came to little] Spes in oculis, luctus in manibus, as Hierome here. The hope of unjust men perisheth Prov. 11.7. etiam spes valentissima his likelyest hope, as some render it: he thinks himself sure, as Esau did of the blessing, but he only thinks so: God cuts off the meate from his mouth Ioel 1.16. takes away his corn in the time thereof Hos. 2.9. confutes him
in his confidences, which prove like the brookes of Tema. Iob. 6.17. and serve him, as Absaloms mule did her master: his high hopes hop beadlesse, as One phra∣seeh it. It falleth out with him as with those perverse Israelites in the wildernesse made to tack about two and forty times, after that they thought themselves sure of the promised land. I did blow upon it] i. e. I dispersed it with case. By a like phrase (for sense) God is said Esa. 25.11. to spread forth his hands in the middest of his enemies, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and to bring down their pride, together with the spoiles of their hands, with greatest facility. The motion in swimming is easy, not strong: for strong violent strokes in the water would ra∣ther sink then support. In like sort God blasted their treasure, or blew their hoards hither and thither, he consumed their substance and cursed their blessings, as Mal. 2.2. See the Note there. why saith the Lord of hosts? because of mine house that is wast &c.] Their sin of preferring their own private interests and self-respects before Gods work and service is here repeated, and exaggerated, as the ground and cause of all their cala∣mities: And all little enough to bring them to a sound and serious sight and hatred of their sins. Such a deep kind of drowsinesse hath surprized us, for most part, that whereas every judgement of God should be a warning-peale to repent, we be like the smiths dog, who the harder the anvile is beaten on, lyeth by and slecpeth the sounder: Or like the silly hen, which loseth her chickens, one by one by the devouring kite, and yet as altogether insensible of her losse, continues to pick up what lieth before her. This is to swelter and pine away in iniquity, as if no∣thing could awaken men Lev. 26.39. and it is threatened last of all, as worse then all their losses, captivities &c. A lethargy is no lesse deadly then the most tormenting disease. Let ministers therefore, by such forcible and quick questions as this in the Text, and otherwise, arrouse their hearers (as they once did here their deare friends in the sweating sicknesse, who, if suffered to sleep, dyed cer∣tainely) that they may awake, and recover themselves out of the snare of the devill &c. It is well observed by One, that the devils particula sin is not once mentio∣ned in Genesis, because he was not to be restored by repentance: But the sin of Man is enlarged in all the circumstances. And why this? but that he might be sensible, ashamed, and penitent for his sin. They say in philosophy, that the foundation of naturall life is feeling; no feeling, no life. And that the more quick and nimble the sense of feeling is in a man, the better is his constitution. Think the same of life spirituall, and of that hidden man of the heart, as St. Peter calles him. and ye run every man unto his own house] Or, ye take pleasure every man in his own house. q. d. Ye are all self-seekers, private-spirited persons, ye are all for your own interests: like the snaile that seldome stirrs abroad, and never, without his house upon his back: or like the Eagle, which when he flies highest, hath still an eye downward to the prey, that he minds to seize. In parabola ovis capras suas querunt.Rom. 16. They serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellyes: or if they serve Christ, it is for gaine, as Children will not say their prayers, unlesse we pro∣mise them their breakfasts. In serving him, they do but serve themselves upon him; as those carnall Capernaites did Ioh. 6. Well might the Apostle complaine as Philip. 2.21. And Another since, that it is his Pleasures. his Profit, and his Preserment, that is the naturall mans Trinity: and his carnall self that is these in Unity. May he be but warm in his own seathers, he little regards the dangers of the house. He is totus in se, wholy drawn up into himself, and insensible of either the publike good, or common danger: though the water-pot and speare be taken from the bolster, yet he stirrs not. Farr enough from St. Pauls frame of spirit or speech, Who is offended, and I burn not? farr enough from his care and cumber, anxiety and solicitude for the house of God, and prosperity of his people 2 Cor. 11.28. Nothing like they are to Ambrose, who was more troubled for the state of the Church, then for his own dangers? Nothing like Melanethon, of whom it is said, that the ruines of Gods house, and the miseries of his people made him al∣most neglect the death of his most beloved children. True goodnesse is publike-spirited though to private disadvantage: as Nature will venture its own particular
good for the generall, so will grace much more. Heavy things will ascend to keep out vacuity, and preserve the Universe. A stone will fall down to come to its own place, though it break it self in twenty pieces. It is the ingenuity of saints, in all their desires and designes to study Gods ends more then their own: to build Gods house with neglect of their own, as Solomon did: to drown all self-respects in his glory, and the publike good, as Nehemiah did: of whom it might be more truely said, then the Heathen Historian did of Cato,Di. Lucan. that he did , over-love the Common-wealth, and that he did — toti genitum se credere mundo, beleeve himself born for the benefit of man-kind. Verse 10, 11. Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from rain, &c.] It's ne∣ver well with man (whose life is ever in fuga, as the Philosopher hath it, and must be maintained by meat, as the fire is by fuell) till God hear the heaven, and the hea∣ven hear the earth, and the earth hear the corn, the wine, and the oyl, and these hear Jezreel, Hos. 2.21, 22. where we may see the genealogie of these good creatures resolved into God. The earth (though a kind mother) cannot open her bowels, and yeeld seed to the sower, and bread to the eater, if not watered from above. The heaven (though the store-house of Gods good treasure, which he openeth to our profit and nourishment, Deut. 28.12.) cannot drop down fatnesse upon the earth, if God close it up, and with-hold the seasonable showres. This the very Heathens acknowledged in their fictions of Jupiter and Juno:Strabo. and the Metapon∣tines, having had a good harvest, consecrated , an harvest cut in gold, to their God, in the Temple at Delphos. Now, when a rabble of Rebels shall con∣spire against God, and fight against him with his own weapons, as Jehu did against Jeboram with his own men, what can He do lesse then cut them short? then make them know the worth of his benefits by the want of them? then call for a drought, (verse 11.) and so for a dearth, (which inevitably followed in those hot countreys) and consequently for pestilence and sword, the usuall concomitants?Pro cherebh legunt cherib. the Septuagint for drought here (by a mistake of points) translate a sword. And in the Originall there is an elegancy past Englishing. Because my house is chareb, that is, wast, therefore I have called for a choreb, a drought, or for a che∣reb, a sword, which shall in like sort lay your land wast, and make your houses desolate: according to that is threatened, Deut. 28. and Matth. 23.38. And in the very next chap. verse 7. Christ telleth his Apostles that those refractary Jewes, and others, that rejected Him the true Temple, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily, that is Essentially (and not in clouds and ceremonies,Col. 2.9. as once between the Cherubims, which they used to call Shechinah) because they loathed the heavenly Manna, therefore they should be pined with famine. They that would have none of the Gospel of peace, should tast deeply of the miseries of warre. They that despised the onely medicine of their souls, should be visited with pestilence. The black horse is ever at the heels of the red; and the pale, of the black, Rev. 6.4. As there hath been a conjuncture of offences, so there will be of miseries: A con∣flux of them abideth the neglecters of Gods House, the contemners of his Gospel. Ʋrsine tells us, that those that fled out of England for Religion in Queen Maries dayes acknowledged that that great inundation of misery came justly upon them, for their unprofitablenesse under the means of grace, which they had enjoyed in King Edwards dayes. Zanchy likewise tells us, that when he first came to be Pa∣stour at Clavenna, there fell out a grievous pestilence in that Town, so that in seven moneths space, there died 1200. persons. Their former Pastour Mainardus, that man of God, as he calleth him, had often foretold such a calamity,Zanch. Miscel. ep. ad Lant∣grav. for their pro∣fanenesse and Popery: But he could never be beleeved, till the plague had proved him a true Prophet; and then they remembred his words, and wisht they had been warned by him. Let us also fear,Am. 5.12. Peccata ossea i. e. fortia. lest for our many and bony sinnes (as the Prophets expression is) but especially, for our hatefull and horrible contempt of his servants and services (never the like known) we pull upon our land Amos his famine, not of bread, but (which is a thousand-fold worse) of hearing the words of the Lord. A famine long since foretold and feared by our Martyrs and Confessours;Am. 8.11. and now, if ever (if God forefend not) in procinctu to fall upon us, as the most un∣worthy and unthankfull people that ever the Sun of heaven beheld, or the sun of Christs Gospel shone upon so fair, and so long together. The best way of preventi∣on
is prevision, and reformation: beginning at our own, as Gidcon did at his fa∣thers houshold, Judg. 6.27. And the best Almanack we can rely upon for seaso∣nable weather, and the lengthening of our tranquillity is our obedience to God, love to our neighbours, care of our selves, &c. Verse 12. Then Zerubbabel the sonne of Shealtiel, &c.] So mighty in operati∣on, so quick and powerfull is the good word of God in the mouthes of his faithfull Ministers, when seconded and set on by his holy Spirit. See for this, Esay 55.10, 11. Jer. 23.28, 29. Act. 19.20. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Heb. 4.12. See that scala coeli, ladder of heaven, as One calleth it, Rom. 10.14, 15. and consider how mightily the word of God grew and prevailed in those primitive times. It spread thorow the world like a Sun beam, saith Eusebius: it was carried about into all places as on Eagles, or rather as on Angels wings. Athanasius of old, and Luther alate were strangely upheld and prospered against a world of Opposites to the truth they preached.Melch. Adm. in vit. Farel. Farellus gained five great cities with their territories to Christ. How admirably and effectually King Edward the sixth was wrought upon by a sermon of Bishop Ridleys, touching works of charity; see his life written by Sir John Hey∣wood, Pag. 169, 170, &c. It is the spirit that quickeneth the seed of the word, and maketh it prolificall, and generative. And as in the body there are veins to carry the blood, and arteries to carry the spirits that quicken the blood; so is it with the word and spirit in the soul. If Gods Spirit open not mans heart, the word cannot enter. If he illighten not both Organ and Object, Christ, though never so powerfully preacht, is both unkent, and unkist, as the Northern Proverb hath it: The word heard profited them not, because not mixt with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4.2. They heard it onely with the hearing of the ear, with that gristle that grew on the outside of the head: whereas they should have drawn up the inward ear to the outward, that one and the same sound might have pierced both. But this all that hear cannot do, because all are not of God, Joh. 8.47. and so have not his ear-mark, spirituall senses habitually exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. ult. they have an heavy ear, which is a singular judgement, Esay 6.10. With all the remnant of the people] i.e. The generality of the returned captives, followed their leaders. A remnant they are called, because but few in comparison of those many hedge-rogues Mr. Dyke calleth them, potters they are called, 1 Chro. 4.23. men of base and low spirits, that dwelt still in Babylon among plants and hedges: being the base brood of those degenerated Israelites, who when liberty was proclaimed for their return to Jerusalem, chose rather to get their living by making pots for the king of Babylon. These are ancient, or rather obsolete things, as Junius rendreth it, worn out and forgotten: and indeed they deserve to be ut∣terly forgotten, and not written, or reckoned among the living in Jerusalem, Esay 4.3. Obeyed the voyce of the Lord their God] with the obedience of faith: and this they did by the good example of their Rulers. Thus, when Crispus the chief Ru∣ler of the Synagogue beleeved, many of the Corinthians beleeved also, Acts 18.8. When the kings of Judah were good or evil, the people were so likewise. Great men are the looking-glasses of their countrey: according to which, most men dresse themselves. Qualis Rex, talis grex. Why compellest thou the Gentiles, said Paul to Peter, sc. by thine example, to Judaize, Gal. 2.14. and the words of Haggai the Prophet] whose mouth God was pleased to make use of. And this is added for a confirmation of the Prophets calling to the work; because of long time before, there had been no Prophet among the people, nor any to tell how long, as the Church complaineth, Psal. 74.9. as the Lord their God had sent him] Heb. according as the Lord their God had sent him, after the same manner they heard, and obeyed the Prophet, as the Lord had sent him: they did not wrest his words to a wrong sence: nor did they que∣stion his Commission; but receiving it as the word, not of man, but of God, they set forthwith upon the work, yeelding as prompt and present obedience, as if God with his own mouth had immediately spoken to them from heaven. and the people did fear before the Lord] as if He himself had been visibly pre∣sent in his own person. So Saint Peters hearers, Acts 10.33. Now therefore, say
they, we are all here present before God, to hear all things commanded thee of God. If young Samuel had known that it was the Lord that called him once and again, he would not have returned to his bed to sleep. If men were well perswaded that the God of heaven bespeaks them by his faithfull Ministers, they would not give way to wilfull wandrings, but hear as for life, and fear to do any thing unworthy of such a presence: they would work out their salvation with fear and trembling, yea work hard at it, as afraid to be taken with their task undone.Psal. 103.3 Eccles. 12. They that fear the Lord will keep his covenant, saith David. Fear God and keep his commandements, saith Solomon. And, in every nation he that feareth God and worketh righteousnesse, is accepted of him, saith Peter, Acts 10.35. Verse 13. Then spake Haggai the Lords messenger] Or, Angel. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. Then speaks] Namely on the four and twentieth day of the moneth, as it is in the last verse: untill which day they had been building, for three weeks together. But Governour Tatnai and his complices came upon them, and discou∣raged the people, and hindred the work, Ezra 5.3. It was but need full therefore, that Gods command should be repeated, and a speciall promise added, I am with you, saith the Lord. Where we may well take up that of Tully concerning Brutus his Laconicall Epistle, Quam multa, quàm paucis! how much in a little. I am with you, saith the Lord, you need not therefore fear, what man can do unto you. God is All-sufficient to those that are Altogether his. See 2 Chron. 15.2.Cint. 2.15 The Church is called Jehovah Shammah, that is, The Lord is there, Ezek. 48.35. God is in the middest of her, shee shall not be moved, Psal. 46.5. Immota manet, may better be her Motto, then Venice's. She is surely invincible, Zach. 12.5, 6, 7. as having a mighty Champion, even the holy One of frael: and this makes her (though but a Virgin) to laugh to scorn her proudest enemies: yea, to shake her head at them, Esay 37.22, 23 as rather to be pitied then envied. There were they in great fear, (saith David, of the Churches enemies) for why? God is in the gene∣ration of the righteous, Psal. 14. Hence those Philistims were so woe-begone, 1 Sam. 4.7. And the Egyptians no lesse, Exod. 14.25. Let us flee, say they, from the face of Israel for the Lord fighteth for them. What shall wee then say to these things? saith Paul, (who had often heard when he was in the enemies hand, Fear not, I am with thee) If God be for us, who can be against us? who dare be so fool∣hardy? so ambitious of his own destruction? Hath ever any waxed fierce against God and prospered? Job 9.4. Where is Pharaoh, Nero, Nebuchadnezzar, &c? Was it safe for these, or any any other to provoke the Lord to anger? were they stronger then he? Oh that men would (according to Solomons counsell) meddle with their match, and not contend with him that is mightier then they!Esth. 7.8. Can God be with his people, and see them abused to his face? Will they force the Queen also before him in the house? Will they, Giant-like, fight against God? will they needs touch the apple of his eye, that tenderest piece of the tenderest part? Will they invade his portion, plunder him of his jewels, pull the signet from his right hand? Surely God is so with his people, that as he taketh notice of the least cour∣tesie done to them to reward it, (even to a cup of cold water) so of the least af∣front, or offence to revenge it, be it but a frown, or a frump, Gen. 4.6. Num. 12.10. Better a milstone were hang'd, &c. Better anger all the witches in the coun∣trey, then one of Gods zealous witnesses, Rev. 11.5. Death cannot hurt them, Psal. 23.3. Hell could no more hold them (the pains of hell gat hold on David, but he was delivered, Psal. 116.3.) then the Whale could hold Jonas: It must needs render them up again, because God is with them. Now I had rather be in hell (said Luther) with God, then in heaven without him, and it were far safer for mee. Verse 14. And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, &c. Here's the Appendix of the foregoing sermon, whereof we have heard but the brief Notes. That one word, I am with you, seconded and set on by Gods holy Spirit, set them all awork. How forcible are right words?Job 6.25 One seasonable truth falling on a prepared heart, hath oft a strong and sweet operation, sc. when God is pleased to work with it, and make it effectuall: this, man cannot do, no more then the hus∣band-man can make an harvest. The weapons of our warfare are mighty,2 Cor. 10.4 through God, to the pulling down of strong-holds. Luther having heard Staupicius say, that
that is kindly repentance which begins from the love of God, found from that time forward the practise of repentance far sweeter to him then before. Galeacius Caracciolus, an Italian Marquesse, was converted by an apt similitude used by Peter Martyr, reading on the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Dr. Taylour, Mar∣tyr, blessed God, that ever he became fellow-prisoner to that Angel of God, (as he called him) John Bradford. Senarclaeus (in his Epistle to Bucer, prefixed before the history of the death of Iohn Diarius, slain by his own brother, as Abel was, for re∣ligions sake) I remember, saith He, when he and I were together at Newburg, the day before his slaughter, he gave me a great deal of grave and gracious counsell, Ego verò illius oratione sic incendebar, ut cum eum disserentem audirem, Spiritus Sancti verba me audire existimarem, i. e. I was so stirred up with his discourse, as if I had heard the Holy Ghost himself speaking unto me; so fervent was he, and full of life; for he first felt what he spake, and then spake what he felt. So should all do, that desire to speak to purpose; and then pray to God, as for a door of utterance, so for a door of entrance to be opened unto them; such as St. Paul had to the heart of Lydiae, and as Bishop Ridley had to the heart of good King Edw. 6. whereof before. and they came and did work. The Governours also, by overseeing others, and ruling the businesse by their discretion. Where Gods glory and the common good is concerned, all sorts must set to their helping hand. Verse 15. In the four and twentieth day] See the Note on vers. 13. The time is diligently noted, to teach us to take good note of the moments of time, wherein matters of moment have been, by Gods help, begun, continued, and perfected in the Church. This will be of singular use, both for the increase of faith, and of good affection in our hearts. CHAP. II. Verse 1. IN the seventh moneth, in the one and twentieth day of the moneth] This is the Preface to the fourth sermon, as some reckon it: noting the exact time when it was delivered. See the Notes on chap. 1.1. and 15. came the word of the Lord] This he often inculcateth, to set forth the truth of his calling, and validity of his commission. See the Note on chap. 1. ver. 5. by the Prophet Haggai] Heb. by the hand of the Prophet. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. Verse 2. Speak now to Zerubbabel, &c.] The better to hearten them on in the work, the Prophet is sent again to them, with a like message as before. Note here. 1. That there are none so forward for God and his work, but may stand in need of continuall quickening: there being more snares and back biasses upon earth, then there are starres in heaven: and the good gift of God having so much need of righting up: For, like a dull sea-coal-fire, if it be not now and then blown, or stir∣red up, though there be no want of fuell, yet will of it self at length dye and go out. Besides that, every inch, every artery of our bodies, if it could, would swell with hellish venome to the bignesse of the hugest Giant, that it might make resist∣ance to the work of Gods sanctifying Spirit.Heb. 10.24 Let us therefore consider one another, and study every man his brothers case, to stirre up, or whet on to love and good works. God will not forget this our labour of love, but abundantly both regard and reward it, Mal. 3.16. See the Notes there. 2. That continuall preaching makes men continue in well-doing. Therefore it was, that Barnabas was sent to Antioch, Acts 11.22, 23. who, when he came and had seen the grace of God was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. And hence also it was, that Paul and Barnabas (chap. 14.21.) re∣turned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch, confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, &c. And ordaining Preachers every where for that very purpose, for the increase of their knowledge, for the strengthening of their faith, for the help of their memories, and for the
quickening of their affections. Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi sed saepè cadendo. Gods tender plants need be often watered, that they may spring and sprout.Plantas tenel∣las frequentius adaquare pro∣derit. Primas. and to the residue of the people] Non enim sacris Eleasiniis, quae in vulgus spargi nefas erat similia sunt oracula Dei, saith an interpreter here. Gods oracles are not to be hid from the common sort, as Sibylla's were, and as the Popish Doctours hold, lest men should be made hereticks thereby, that is, right beleevers.Grynaus. It is heresy, saith One of them to read the scriptures. It was the invention of the de∣vill, saith Another. An husbandman reading the scriptures was possest, saith a third. It is not needfull for the common sort to know more of Gods mind then the Articles of the Creed, saith Aquinas, Bellarmine &c. Iohn Barclay in his Parenesis, ex∣cusing the church of Rome for taking away the scriptures from the Vulgar, saith thus, Sed de his quoque providit Ecclesia concionibus, in quibus Evangelia referun∣tur &c. But for this, the Church hath made sufficient provision by appointing Sermons to be made upon the Gospels for the day, and by permitting books of devotion wherein much use is made of the holy Scriptures. And for the histori∣call part of the old Testament, saith he, men may read Iosephus his Antiquities, where it is set down more plainely and plentifully then-in the Bible &c. But I am weary of raking in this foule channel. Verse 3. Who is left amongst you that saw this house in her first glory?] Some such there were amongst them (as is here implyed) and these must needs be very old, sixscore at least, some say more. Zorobabel might well be one of these; for he was a chiefetaine in the first yeere of Cyrus, Ezra 2.2. And Jehoshuah the high-Priest might be another: for he came out of Babylon with Zorobabel at the same time Ezra 2.22. We see by experience, that mens lives are daily shortened. Na∣turall reasons whereof may be these. 1. Untimely marriages. 2. Cloying our bo∣dyes with variety of meates, and so digging our own graves with our own teeth. 3. Much ease and delicacy. The supernaturall reason may be, that so the world may sooner come to an end. God maketh hast to have the number of his Elect fulfilled, and therefore dispatcheth away the generations, shorteneth life for his Elects sake, fetcheth home his pilgrims, makes their dayes few though evill (Gen. 49.) takes them away from the evill to come &c.Bern. death being to them arumnarum requies (as Chaucers Motto was) yea janua vitae, porta coeli, the day-break of eter∣nall brightnesse. and how do ye see it now?] It is a part of old mens prudence rightly to compare things long since past with things present, and so to conjecture at things to come. Thus the prudent person, by discourse of reason, foreseeth an evill and hideth himself, when the yong foole passeth on and is punished. is it not in your eyes] that is in your thoughts; for God taketh notice of the inward workings of the heart 1 Sam. 16.7. Psal. 139.2. 1 King. 8.39. For he made the heart, and must therefore know all that is in it: as a watch-maker knowes all the wheels and motions of the watch. He also will bring every secret thing into judgement Ecles. 12.14. Therefore thought is not free (as foolish folk dote either from the notice of his eye (he had soon found out these Jows, when they did but despise the day of small things in their hearts Zach. 4.10.) or from the censure of his mouth Heb. 4.12, 13. Rom. 7.14. (the law is spirituall and meets with involuntary motions to sin, ver. 7.) Or lastly, from the stroke of his hand which is a mighty hand 1 Pet. 5.6. and falls very heavy Deut. 29.19. even for a root of bitternesse, as it is there, for vaine thoughts Ier. 4.14. how much more for mischievous, murtherous, covetous, vainglorious and adulterous thoughts &c. It were good therefore to write upon walles and windowes (yea would it were written upon the tables of our hearts) that short Motto, which as short as it is, yet our memories are shorter, Cave, Deus videt. Take heed, God looks on: for he is omnipresent and omniscient. is it not in your eyes in comparison as nothing?] A meer Non-ens or nullity? not fit to be named in the same day with the former Temple? For, first Cyrus appoin∣ted the full proportion of this second House, the height thereof threescore cubites, and the bredth thereof threescore cubites Ezra. 6.3. which was but one half so big as Solomous Temple. Herod indeed,Lib. 15. Ant. cap. 14. to curry favour with the Jews (which yet would never be) built upon Solomons foundation, and bestowed a great deale
of cost, if we may beleeve Iosephus. But so could not these Jews do, that retur∣ned from Babylon: for they were (secondly) but few, and those also poor, and, though helped both by Cyrus and Darius, yet they were glad to build the Temple of common stone, and unpolished, nothing like those precious carved stones wherewith Solomon built 1 King. 6. Thirdly, God hereby would draw their minds from the legall ceremonies and services; the Sun of righteousnesse being now ready to arise upon them, the day-spring from on high to visit them. How∣beit, because they could not have so glorious a Temple as the former, they slight∣ed it in their thoughts, and would have neglected it: Learne hence, That men na∣turally account as nothing of Gods service, if not accompanied with outward pompe and splendour. The Israelites in the wildernesse would needs have a calf, (as the Egyptians had) made of their Jewels and ear-rings. Ieroboam would have two, and those of gold. Nebuchadnezzar dedicated a golden image with all man∣ner of musick Dan. 3. The people wept when the foundation of this Temple was laid Ezra 3.12. because nothing so magnificent as the former. And the Papists explode our religion in comparison of theirs, because nothing so pompous and plausible to the rude people, whom they deceive with apish toyes and trinkets, shewes and pageants. In their petition to King James they pleaded for their reli∣gion, that it was more pleasing then ours, and more agreeable to nature. Iohn Hunt a Roman Catholike in his humble appeale to King James thus blasphemeth:Chap. 6. the God of the Protestants is worse then Pan God of the clownes, which can endure no ceremonies nor good manners at all. Many, like children, like that book best, that hath most babyes in it: neither will they eate their milk, but in a golden dish. This proceedes from a blind understanding and carnall affection. The Church in its infancy was inticed with shewes and shadowes: but now God requires a reasonable service, he calls for spirit and truth. Verse 4. Yet now be strong O Zerubbabel &c.] Here he exhorteth all ranks, first to good Affection, Be strong or of a good courage: Secondly to good Action, Work, or Be doing: for affection without action is like Rachel, beautifull, but bar∣ren.Charach unde  valeo. Sept. vertunt. . Be strong so as to prevaile and carry on the service, all discouragements not∣withstanding. Those that will serve God in the maintenance of good causes must be couragious and resolute 1 Cor. 16.13. For otherwise, they shall never be able to withstand the opposition that will be made either from carnall reason with∣in, or the World and Devill without, for want of this spirituall mettle, this su∣pernaturall strength, this spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Tim. 4.7. oppo∣sed to the spirit of feare that cowardly passion that unmans us, and expectorateth and exposeth us to sundry both sins and snares: when he that trusteth in the Lord shall be safe Prov. 29.25. Here then that we faulter not, budge not, betray not the cause of God, nor come under his heavie displeasure, who equally hateth the timerous and the treacherous; let us 1. Be armed with true faith: for, Fides famem non formidat, faith quelleth and killeth distrustfull feare. 2. Get the heart fraught with the true feare of God: for as one fire, so one feare drives out another Mat. 10.28. 1 Pet. 3.13, 14. 1. Get and keep a clearing, chearing conscience: for that feareth no colours, as we see in St. Paul, Athanasius, Luther, Latimer, and other holy Martyrs and Confessours. 4. Think on Gods presence, as here, Be strong, and be doing, for I am with you. Though David walk thorough the vale of the shadow of death, that is of death in its most hideous and horrid representa∣tions, he will not feare: For why? thou art with me, saith He, Psal. 23.3, 4. Dogs and other creatures will fight stoutly in their Masters presence. 5. Consider your high and heavenly calling and say,Et Turnum fu∣gieutem haec terra videbit? Virg. Shall such a man as I fly &c? Either change thy name, or be valiant, saith Alexander to a souldier of his that was of his own name, but a coward. Lastly look up, as St. Steven did, to the recompence of reward, steale a look from glory, as Moses Heb. 11.26. help your selves over. the difficulty of suffering together with Christ, by considering the happinesse of raigning together. Thus be of good courage, or deale couragiously, and God shall be with the good,2 Chro. 19. vlt. as Iehosaphat told his Judges when to go their circuit. and work] Good affections must end in good actions, else they are scarce sound, but much to be suspected.Num. 23.10. Ruth. 1. Good wishes (and no more) may be found in hels mouth Num. 23. Orphah had good affections, but they came to nothing. God
must be entreated to fix our quick-silver to ballast our lightnesse, to work in us both to will and to doe, that it may be said of us, as of those Corinthians, that as there was in them a readinesse to will, so there followed the performance also. 2 Cor. 8.12. Desire and Zeal are set together, 2 Cor. 7.11. desire after the sincere milk, and grouth in grace 1 Pet. 2.2. John Baptists hearers so desired after heaven, that they offered violence to it Mat. 11. True affections are the breathings of a broken heart, Acts 2.37. Rom. 7.23. But the desires of the slothful kill him, Prov. 21.25. Virtutem exoptat contabescitque relictâ, Good affections are ill bestowed upon the sluggard, sith they boyl not up to the full heat and height of resolution for God, or,Pers. at least, of execution of his will. The sailes of a ship are not ordained, that shee should lie alwaies at rode, but launch out into the deep. God likes not qualmy Christians, good by fits, as Saul seemed to be when Davids innocency triumphed in his conscience, or as Ephraim, whose duties were dough-baked, and whose good∣nesse was as the morning-dew &c. Be ye stedfast and unmoveable,1 Cor. 15. . always abounding in the work of the Lord. Stick not at any part of it: difficulty doth but whet on He∣roick Spirits as a boule that runs down hill is not slugged, but quickened by a rub in the way. If this be to be vile, Ile be yet more vile, 1 Sam. 6.22. who art thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain. Zach. 4.7. And hee said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weak∣nesse. 2 Cor. 12.9. For I am with you saith the Lord of hosts] By a twofold presence. 1. Of help and assistance. 2. Of love and acceptance. Of the first, see chap. 1. verse 13. with the note there. The second seems here intended. The Jews were poore, yet God assureth them they had his love. So had the Church of Smyrna Rev. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but thats nothing, thou art rich, rich in reversion, rich in bils and bonds: yea rich in possession, or All is theirs, they hold all in capite: they have 1. plenty. 2. propriety in things of greatest price: for they have God All-sufficient for their portion, for their protection, I am with you, saith he, and that's enough, that's able to counterpoise any defect whatsoever, as we see in David often, but especially at the sack of Ziklag; where when he had lost all, and his life also was in suspence, the Text saith, he comforted or encouraged himselfe in the Lord his God, 1 Sam. 30.6. whereas Saul in like case, goes first to the witch, and then to the swords point: A godly man, if any occasion of discontent befals him, retires himselfe into his counting∣house, and there tells over his spiritual treasure: he runs to his cordials, he reviews his white stone, his new name (better then that of sonnes and of daughters, Isay 56.5.)Rev. 2.17. he hath meat to eat that the world knoweth not of, the stranger meddleth not with his joy. Virtus lecythos habet in malis. Tua praeseutia, Domine, Laurentio ipsam cra∣ticulam dulcem fecit, saith a Father, Thy presence O Lord made the very gridiron sweet to the martyr Laurence. It made the fiery furnace a gallery of pleasure to the three worthies, the lions den an house of defence to Daniel, the whales belly a lodg∣ing-chamber to Jonas, Egypt an harbour, a sanctuary to the child Jesus &c. He goes with his into the fire and water, as a tender father goeth with his child to the Sur∣geon. Neverthelesse, saith David, I am continually with thee, thou hast holden me by my right hand. Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel: and afterwards receive me to glory. Again, I am with you; that is, I will accept your worships,Psal. 73.23, 24. though in this meaner temple. If God may have the substance of worship, hee stands not much upon the circumstance. The sick may pray upon their beds, the persecuted in cham∣bers, Acts 1. yea in dens and caves of the earth, Heb. 11.38. The Church in Queen Maries dayes met and prayed oft together in a cellar in Bow-church-yard. It was one of the laws of the twelve tables in Rome, Ad divos adeunto castè, pietatem adhi∣bento,Act. & Mon. opes amovento. Sacrifice and Offering thou didst not desire (viz. in comparison of obedience, 1 Sam. 15.22.) but as a better thing, mine ears hast thou opened, Psal. 40.6. Hypocrites by cold ceremonies think to appease God, they observe the circumstance, neglect the substance, they stick in the bark of religion, gnabble on the shel, offer the skin, keep back the flesh, serve God with shewes; & shall be served accordingly. Verse 5. According to the Word] Or, as Tremellius hath it better, Cum VERBO quo pepigeram vobiscum, with the WORD, in and sor whom I covenanted with you, &c. So my Spirit remaineth among you. And so it is a gracious promise that the whole Trinity will be with them. The particle eth seemeth put for gnim and the article
He is emphatical, shewing that by Word is meant the second person, often called the Word both in the Old Testament, 2 Sam. 7.21. with 1 Chron. 17.19. and in the New. Luke 1.2. John 1.1. 1 John 5.7. The Caldee seemeth to favour this in∣terpretation, for he rendreth it, My Word shall be your help. Hierome, Albertus, Nys∣sen, and Haymo dissent not. Haggai, and other Prophets and Patriarches of old did well understand the mystery of the Sacred Trinity. See my note on Gen. 1.1. Elihu speaks of the Almighty his makers Job. 35.10. Solomon the same Eccles. 12.1. Cant. 1.11. which Jarchi interpreteth of the Trinity. Isay hath his Trisagion, or, Holy, Holy, Holy, chap. 6.3. and chap. 42.5. Thus saith God the Lord, He that created the heavens, and they that stretched them out. So Deut. 6.4. When Moses be∣ginneth to rehearse the law, and to explain it, the first thing he teacheth them is the Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One. Three words answering the three persons: and the middle word, Our God deciphering fitly the second, who assumed our nature as is well observed by Galati∣nus: Others observe that the last letters in the Original both in the word Hear, and in the word One are bigger then ordinary; as calling for utmost heed and attention. The old Rabbines were no strangers to this tremend mystery (as appeareth by R. Solomons note on Cant. 1.11. We will make &c.) though their posterity desperately deny it. The Greek Church was not so sound in this fundamental point: therefore their chief City Constantinople was taken from them by the Turks (as Estius obser∣veth) on Whitsunday or (as others) on Trinity Sunday; which day (saith our Chronicler) the Black Prince was used every year to celebrate with the greatest honour that might be,Speed. 723. in due veneration of so divine a mystery. Now, Christ is here and elsewhere called The Word either because hee is so often promised in the Word. Or else, because by him Gods will was manifested and revealed to men, and that either mediately in the Prophets, whence Peter Martyr thinketh that phrase came. Then came the Word of the Lord, that is, Christ, Or immediately, him∣selfe, Heb. 1.2. and 2.3. That I covenanted with you] Or, in whom I covenanted and whence Christ is called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Christ then was a Saviour to those of the Old Testament also,Rev. 13.8. the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. Christ under∣took to pay his peoples debt in the fullnesse of time: and hereby they were saved. A man may let a prisoner loose now, upon a promise to pay the debt a year after. See Heb. 9.15. and take notice of the unity of the faith in both Testaments: they of old saw Christ afarre off in the promises, they saluted him, and were resaluted by him,. Heb. 11. When ye came out of Egypt] Ye, that is, your ancestours. Things done by the parents may be said to be done by the children; because of the near conjunction that is between them. Hence Levi is said to pay tithes in Abraham, and Adams sinne is imputed to us all.Heb. 7. So my spirit remaineth amongst you] Not the substance, but the gifts of the Spirit; not the tree, but the fruits. Those whom God receiveth into the covenant of grace, he endues them with the spirit of grace. See Rom. 8.9.11. How else should they be able to perform their part of the Covenant, sith we cannot so much as suspi∣rare, unlesse he doe first inspirare, breath out a sigh for sinne, till he breath it in to us by his Spirit? Hereby then we may know whether or no we are in Covenant with God (the Devill will be sure to sweep all that are not) sc. if his spirit remain in us Jer. 31.35. working illumination, 1 Cor. 2.14.15. Mortification, Rom. 8.13. Motion, Rom. 8.14. Guifts, 1 Cor. 12.4, 7, 8. &c. Fruits Gal. 5.22.23. strength, Esay 11.2. Courages, as here. Fear ye not] Cur timet hominem homo, in sinu Dei positus?Aug. why should such fear man who have God in Christ by his Spirit standing with them and for them? The righteous may be bold as a lyon: he hath the peace of God within him, and the power of God without him and so goes ever under a double guard, what need he fear? It is said of Achilles that he was Styge armatus, and therefore could not bee wounded. But he that is in covenant with God is, Deo, Christo, Spiritu Sancto ar∣matus, and may therefore be fearlesse of any creature. Verse 6. For thus saith the Lord of hosts] i. e. the three persons in Trinity, as ap∣peareth by the note on the former verse. Howbeit the Author to the Hebrews
chap. 12.25.26. applyeth the words to Christ: whence observe, that Christ is Lord of hosts, and God Almighty: even the same second person that is called had∣dabhar the Word in the former verse, is very God. Compare John 1.3. with Col. 1.14.16. and Iohn 1.9. with Iohn 8.12. and Iohn 1.11. with Acts 3.13.14. &c. See those cohaerencies of sentences, Iohn 9.3.4. and 11.4. and 12.39.40. besides the Apostles argument Heb. 1.4. That one Gospel written by St. Iohn, who was therefore called the Divine by an excellency (as afterwards Nazianzen also was) be∣cause he doth professedly assert and vindicate the Divinity of Christ (ever strongly impugned by the Devill and his agents, those odious Apostates and hereticks anci∣ent and moderne: And no wonder, for it is the Rock, Mat. 16.18.) setting him forth, 1. as coessential to the Father his onely begotten sonne, Iohn 1.14. One with the Father in essence and power, Iohn 10.30.38. and 14.23. 2. As having the incommunicable names and attributes of God Iohn 8.58. and 20.28. Eternity Iohn 1.1. and 17.5. Infinitenesse, Iohn 3.13. Omniscience, Iohn 2.24. and 21.27. 3. As doing the works of God, such as are Creation, Iohn 1.3. Conservation, Iohn 5.17.3. miracles &c. 4. As taking to himselfe divine Worship, Iohn 9.38. and 20.28. and 14.1. This truth men must hold fast, as their lives, and be rooted in it: getting strong reasons for what they beleeve. The second ground wanted depth of earth; The seed was good, and the earth was good, but there was not e∣nough of it; therefore the heat of the sun scorcht in up. Christ is here called the Lord of Hosts, and the Lord of glory, Isay 6.1. with John 12.41. Jam. 2.1. Yet once it is a little while &c.] Adhuc unum pusillum. This little little while, this inch of time, was the better part of five hundred years, viz.Galatin. lib. 4. cap 9, 10. till Christ came in the flesh, Heb. 12.26. the Jew-Doctours say no lesse. A long time to us is but a little while to God. A thousand years is but as one day to the Ancient of dayes. His Prophets also, being lifted up in spirit to the consideration of eternity, count and call all times (as indeed they are in comparison) moments, and points of time, Punctum est quod vivimus, & puncto minus, could the Poet say;D. Hall Peam. What is that to the Infinite? said a certain Noble-man of this Land to one, discoursing of an in∣cident matter very considerable, but was taken off with this quick Interrogation. So say we to our selves, when under any affliction, we begin to think long of Gods coming to deliver us. What is this to Eternity of extremity, which yet we have deserved? Tantillum, tantillum, adhuc pusillum. Yet a very little while, and hee that shall come, will come, and will not tarry: as in the Interim, the just must live by faith, Heb. 10.37. Gods help seems long, because we are short. We are short-breathed, short-sighted, apt to antedate the promises, in regard of the ac∣complishment. We also oft find it more easie to bear evil, then to wait till the pro∣mised good be enjoyed. Those beleeving Hebrews found by experience, that the spoiling of their goods exercised their patience: but staying Gods leysure for the good things he had promised them, required more then ordinary patience, or tar∣riance, Heb. 10.36. Take we heed of prescribing to the Almighty, of limiting the Holy One of Israel, of setting him a time, with those Bethulians. and I will shake the heavens] Not the earth onely, as at the giving of the Law, (to purchase reverence to the Law-giver) but the heavens also: viz, by the powerfull preaching of the Gospel, whereby Satan was seen falling from heaven, Luke 10.18. that is, from mens hearts; and the Saints set together in heavenly places, or priviledges in Christ Jesus, Ephes. 2.6. For he that hath the Son, hath life, hee hath heaven aforehand. 1. In pretio. 2. In promisso. 3.1 Joh 5.1. In primitiis. Here then the Prophet encourageth these builders: telling them that un∣der this second Temple, how mean soever it seemed, he would first send Christ, (called the Desire of all Nations, vers. 7. and Peace, vers. 9. with Ephes. 2.14.) to grace it with his presence. Secondly, he would cause the Gospel to be preached in a pompous and powerfull manner. I will shake, &c. Shake them, to settle them, not to ruine them, but to refine them, shake their hearts with sense of sin, and fear of wrath, that they may truly seek Christ. For the Law was given by Mo∣ses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. And the end of this uni∣versall shake, was to shew saith Chrysostome,Hom. 14. in Matth. that the old law was to be changed into the New, Moses into Messias, the Prophets into Evangelists, Judaisme, and Gentilisme into Christianisme. When Christ was born, we know how Herod was
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him, Matt. 2.3. What a quire of Angels was heard in the air at Bethlehem, and what wondering there was at those things which were told them by the shepherds, Luke 2.18. Eusebius tells of three Suns seen in heaven not long before his birth. Orosius tels of many more prodigies. The Psalmist foretelling our Saviours coming in the flesh, breaks out into this joyfull exclamation; Let the heavens rejoyce, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar and the fulnesse thereof. Let the field be joyfull, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood rejoyce before the Lord, for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousnesse, and the people with truth, Psal. 96.11,Lib. 18. de C. D. cap. 48. 12, 13. and Psal. 98.7, 8, 9. This I know is by some (but not so pro∣perly) understood of Christs second coming to judgement, And both Augustin, and Rupertus construe this text also the same way. But the whole stream of In∣terpreters, old and new, carry it against them: and some of them tell us of sundry strange, and stupendious commotions, that fell out even according to the letter, in heaven, earth, and sea, about the time of Christs birth, death, resurrection, and soon after his Ascension, when he rode about the world upon his white horse, the Apo∣stles and their successours; with a crown on his head, as King of his Church, and a bowe in his hand, the doctrine of the Gospel, whereby the people fall under him,Psal. 45.4. and he went forth conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. Vers. 7. And I will shake all Nations] First, by the civil warres between the Triumviri, not long before Christs Incarnation. Secondly, by the generall taxe, Luke 2.3. when all went to be taxed every one into his own city. Thirdly, by the preaching, and miracles of Christ and his Apostles, whereby the Nations were shaken out of their sinfull condition, and brought to the obedience of faith by ef∣fectuall conversion. Thus a Lapide, I will shake all Nations with wonder at so great a mystery, with joy and with newnesse of life, saith Sa. The Gospel (saith Forbes on Revel. 14.) hath three degrees of operation in the hearts of men. First, it falleth to mens ears, as the sound of many waters, a confused sound, which commonly bringeth neither terrour nor joy: but yet a wondering and acknow∣ledgement of a strange force, and more then humane power, Mar. 1.22, 23. Luke 4.32. Job. 7.46. This may be in the reprobate, Act. 13.41. The second effect is the voice of thunder, which brings not onely wonder, but fear. This may also be in a reprobate, as Felix. The third effect, proper to the Elect, is the sound of harping; while the Gospel, not onely ravisheth with admiration, and shaketh the conscience with terrour, but also filleth it with sweet peace and joy. Hitherto He. Certain it is, that the Gospel maketh a stirre where it cometh, and brings an earth∣quake to mens souls, as it did to the Gaolers, Acts 16. and Peters converts, Act. 2. And this partly through the frowardnesse of our affections, and partly through the malice of Satan, fearing the ruine of his kingdome. For, as for the Gospel, this effect followes it, by accident. See Matth. 10.34, 35. with the Note there. See also Luke 12.49. It is by accident to the Sun, that it maketh the dunghill stink. It is by accident to the Sea, that it maketh the passenger sick: the ill humours in his stomack disease him. So here: And the Desire of all Nations shall come] that is, Christ,Valete meae desideria. Cic. lib. 14. epist. 2. ad uxor. & filiam. for so the Apostle expoundeth it, Heb. 12.25. And the Church saith of him, Totus ipse desideria, Cant. 5.16. he is all-over desireable. And again, Esay 26.9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. And unto Shiloh shall the gathering of the people bee, saith Iacob, Gen. 49.10. as unto the Standard-bearer, Cant. 5.10. the carcase, Mat. 24.28. as the doves scour to their columbaries, Esay 60.8. When I am lifted up, saith He, I will draw all men after me, Joh. 12.32. that is, all mine Elect: these will follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, as the hop and Heliotrope do the Sun. And because the Nations had not heard of Christ, till he came in the flesh: and this comming of the desire of all Nations seems to follow presently upon the preach∣ing of the Gospel, therefore Junius renders it Desiderati, the Desireable ones of all Nations,. and interprets it of the Elect, (the Septuagint also say the same) who should come to the second Temple in a spirituall sence, worshipping the same God that these good Jews did, and should come with strength of affection, (as the He∣brew importeth) should make hard shift to come, Esay 66.20. They shall bring your brethren as an offering to the Lord, upon horses, in chariots, and in litters, that
is, though sick, weakly and unfit for travell, yet rather in litters then not at all. Nei∣ther shall they come empty-handed, but with all their desirable things (so some render this text) colligent omnes suos thesauros, saith Calvin, they shall come with strong affections, with liberall contributions, as Act. 4.34. and as Tyrus who, when once converted, leaves hoarding and heaping up wealth (as formerly) and finds another manner of employment for it, namely to uphold Gods worship, and to seed and cloath his Saints Isa. 23.18. and I will fill this house with glory] This reedified Temple shall be honoured with Christs bodily presence: and the spirituall Temple, which is the Church,Diodate. shall be honoured by my presence in spirit, the abundance of my graces, the light of my word, and power of my spirit, who shall rest upon my people as a spirit of glory, when the world loadeth them with greatest ignominy. 1 Pet. 4.14. rest upon them, by a blessed Shechinah. Verse 8. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of Hosts] Where∣as the Jews might object, that it was not likely the second Temple should be more glorious then the first, sith they wanted that wealth wherewith Solomon abounded: God answereth in like sort, as once he did Moses alledging the slownesse of his speech, Who hath made muns mouth &c? so here, whose is the silver and the gold?Exo. 4.10.11. am not I the true Proprietary, and chief Lord of all? cannot I furnish you out of my great purse the earth and the fulnesse thereof Psal. 24.1?Terra est mar∣supium Demint. what is silver and gold, but white and red earth, the guts and garbage of the earth as one phraseth it? things that I have no need of Psal. 50.13? They lye furthest from heaven: the best of them are in Ophyr (perhaps the same with Peru) furthest from the church. Adam had them in the first Paradise Gen. 2.11, 12. in the second, you shall not need them Iob. 26.2, 3. &c. In defect of other, I my self will be your gold, and you shall have plenty of silver Iob 22.25.Rev. 1.12.13. Christ girt about the paps (that seate of love) with a golden girdle shall walk in the middest of his seven golden candlesticks, with a golden censer in his hand perfuming and presenting the prayers of his people upon the golden Altar, Rev. 8.3. and measuring that city of pearle, his church, with a golden reed Rev. 21.15. Ribera and some others think that God, as of old he had stirred up Cyrus and Darius (both of them Heathens) to contribute to the building of the Temple, so afterwards he stirred up Herod a weal∣thy king, not long before Christ came, to bestow abundance of cost upon the same Temple; and that this was here fore-prophesied. But I should rather in∣cline to Calvin, who doubteth not but that the devill stirred up Herod to do as he did; that the Jews doting upon the splendour of that brave structure (the disci∣ples did no lesse Mat. 24.1, 2.) might cease looking for Christ, or trusting in him. And who knowes (saith He) whether Herod himself might not have such a fetch in his head. Howsoever the devil was in it, doubtlesse, to take off their minds from the expectation of Christs coming, which was now at hand, by those externall pompes: and to withdraw the spirits of the godly from the furni∣ture and gayety of the spirituall Temple; We know how the disciples (who leavened with the leaven of the Pharisees dreamt of an earthly kingdome) were taken with the beauty and bravery of Herods Temple, shewing the same to our Saviour, and fondly conceiting that by that goodly sight he might be moved to moderate the severity of that former sentence of his, Behold your house is left unto you desolate Mat. 23.38. with 24.1. But his thoughts were not as their thoughts. The bramble reckoned it a great matter to raigne over the trees: So did not the Vine and Olive. The Papists hold that God is delighted with golden and silver vessels in the administration of the Eucharist, and offended with the contrary. But the Primitive Christians celebrated the sacrament of the Lords supper in vessels first of wood, and afterwards of glasse. That saying also of Ambrose is well known, Aurum sacramenta non quaerunt, nec auro placent, quae auro non emun∣tur. It was grown to a proverbe soon after Constantines time, Once we had golden Ministers and woodden vessels, now we have woodden Ministers, and golden vessels. Religion brought forth wealth: and the mother devoured the daughter. Verse 9. The glory of this later house shall be greater then of the former] Because Christ shall appeare and preach in it (as ver. 7.) who is the brightnesse of his Fa∣thers glory ac consequenter vrbis & orbis; any relation to whom heighteneth and
ennobleth both places and persons. Bethlehem, though it be the least (Micah. 3.6.) is yet not the least among the princes of Judah (Mat. 2.6.) because Christ was born there. The tribe of Nepthali is first reckoned of those by Rachels side: because at Capernaum, in this tribe, Christ inhabited Rev. 7.6. in which respect also this town is said to be lifted up to beaven Mat.Gen. 42.4. 11.2, 3. Benjamin is called the beloved of the Lord, Gods darling (as their father Ben amin was old Jacobs) because God dwelt between his shoulders, sc. in his Temple built upon those two mountaines, Moriath and Zion Deut. 33.12. The glory of that first Tem∣ple was, that the Majesty of God appeared in it, covering it self in a cloud. The glory of this later house was greater, because therein the same divine Majesty ap∣peared, not covered with a cloud, but really incarnated. For, the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1.14. In this flesh of ours, and under this second Temple, Christ not only uttered oracles, did miracles, and finished the great work of our redemption, but also laid the foundation of the Christian Church.Jam. 1. For the Law (that perfect Law of liberty the Gospell) came out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, to all the ends of the earth, Esay 2.3. Psal. 110.1. From hence it was that the Lord of glory, whom the blind Jewes had crucified, sent out his Apostles, those messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ as they are called 2 Cor, 8.23. to gather together unto him those desi∣rable ones his elect (verse 7. See the Note there) whom he calleth the glory Esa. 46.13. the house of his glory Esay 60.7. a crown of glory Esay 62.3. the throne of glory Ier. 4.21. the ornament of God Ezek 7.20. the beauty of his ornament ib. and that set in majesty ib. a royall diadem in the hand of Jehovah Esay 62.3. and in this place will I give peace] Even the Prince of peace, and with him all things also Rom. 8.32. pacem Pectoris & Temporis, Peace of countrey and of conscionce: this later especially seemeth here to be meant. For the former (viz. outward Peace) was not long enjoyed by these Jewes; and their second Temple was often spoyled by the enemies,Ioh. 14. and at length burnt and overturned. But the Peace of God that passeth all understanding, is that Legacy which the world can neither give nor take from Gods people. And of this inward Peace the Septua∣gint (according to the Roman edition) taketh the Text, and so doth Ambrose. Haec est pax suer pacem, saith He. Christ as he was brought from heaven, with that song of Peace Luk 2.14. Onearth peace, good will toward men, (which is the same with that salutation of St. Paul who learned it belike, of those Angels, Grace be to you, and Peace) so he returned up againe with that farewell of peace Ioh. 14.27. and left to the world the doctrine of peace, the gospell of peace Eph. 2.17. whose Authour is the God of peace 1 Cor. 14.33. whose Ministers are ministers of peace Rom. 10.15. whose followers are the children of peace Luk 10.6. whose unity is in the bond of peace Eph. 4.3. whose duty is the study of peace Rom. 12.18. and whose end is, to enter into peace, to rest in their beds, their soules resting in heaven, their bodyes in the grave till the joyfull resurrection, even every one walking in his uprightnesse Esay 57.2. Psal. 37.33. Verse 10. In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month in the second yeer of Darius] This diligence of the Prophets in noting and noticing the precise time of Gods hand upon them,Scultet. Annal. should teach us to do the like. See the Note on chap. 1. ver. 1.Melch. Adam in vit. Bugen∣hàg. The churches in Switzerland kept that day yearely as an holiday whereon the Reformation began amongst them. Bugenhagius kept a feast every yeer on that day of the month wherein he and some other Divines had finished the Dutch Bible, and called it The feast of the Translation of the Bible.Philipp. Pare∣us in vita Dau. Parei. The University of Heidelberg kept an Evangelicall Iubilee three whole dayes together Anno Dom. 1617. in the Calends of November, in the remembrance of the renowned Reformation of reli∣gion, begun by Luther a just hundred yeers before. Hereby Gods name shall be sanctified, our faith strengthened, and our good affection both evidenced and ex∣cited. By the time here described, it appeareth, that they had now been three moneths building, and the Prophet meane-while had given them great incourage∣ment thereunto. But forasmuch as he found that they stuck in the bark, as they, say, rested in the work done, thought they should therefore win upon God
because they built him a Temple, the Prophet gives them to understand, that there is more required of them then a Temple. viz. that therein they worship the Lord purely and holily, in spirit and in truth: that their divine worships bee right both quoad fontem & quoad finem, for principle and end of intention; for else, they impure all that they touch, and are no whit better, but a great deal the worse for all their performances. This the Prophet teacheth them in the two following oracles pro∣pounded by way of demand to the Priests. How apt are men to lose themselves in a wildernesse of duties? To dig for pearls in their own dunghils? to think to oblige God to themselves by their good works? to spin a threed of their own to climbe up to heaven by? to rest in their own righteousnesse? to save themselves by riding on horses, Hos. 14.3? The Prophets designe is here to beat them off from such fond conceits: telling them that the person must be accepted ere the service can bee re∣garded, as Abels. To the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled,Tit. 1.15. saith the A∣postle. Calvin upon this Text saith no more: and yet Cor. a Lapide is very angry with him for saying so much.Aug. de vera innocent. c. 56. There is in Peter Lumbard this golden sentence ei∣ted out of August inc: The whole life of unbeleevers is sinne: neither is any thing good without the cheifest good. This sentence Ambrose Rybera a Poprsh Postiller, censur∣eth for harsh and cruell: But doth not God here say the same thing?Crudelis est illa sententia. Certain it is that good actions from bad men displease: as a man may speak good words, but we cannot hear, because of his stinking breath. The facrifice of the wicked is abo∣mination to the Lord, Prov. 15.8. Charity is nothing, unlesse it flow out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfained, 1 Tim. 1.5. Verse 11. Ask now the Priest concerning the Law] For who should know the law better then the Priests? And who so fit to resolve cases of conscience as they? It was their office, Levit. 10.10, 11. Deut. 33.10. Mal. 2.7. See the Note there. It was an evil time with Gods people, when he was put to complain, who is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger, that I sent, Isay 42.19?Viu. in Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 4. c 1. When the Prophet was a foole, the spiritual man was mad for the multitude of their iniquity,, and the great ha∣tred, Hos. 9.7. Varro upbraided the Roman Priests of old with their grosse igno∣rance of many things in point of their own rites and religions: and Cicero brake a jest upon C. Popilius an ignorant Lawyer at Rome. For when Popilius, being called for a witnesse to some controversy, answered Nihil se scire that hee knew nothing, Cicero answered by way of jear, Put as fortasse te de jure interrogari you mean (perhaps) that you know nothing in the law, which yet you professe to have skill in. What a shame was it for the Pharisees who took upon them to be guides of the blind, teachers of babes &c. Rom. 2.19.20. to be found, blind leaders of the blind, Mat. Ennis 15? So is it for Divines being asked concerning the Law, or will of God in such and such cases, not to be able to answer discreetly, and intelligently as he did Mark 12.34. as an egregie cordat us homo? But so bungler-like, and so farre from the pur∣pose, that it my well be seene that desiring to be teachers of the Low, they underst and nei∣ther what they say, nor whereof they affirme. 1 Tim. 1.7. How like the motion of a puppet, the language of a Parret is the discourse of such unlearned or uninteressed Casuists? Every Minister of Gods making can truly say, The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know to time a word to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned, Esay 50.4. See 1 Cor. 12.8. Tit. 1.9. Eph. 3.4, 7.1 Cor. 2.13. Verse 12. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt &c.] problemes and parables are notable helps to the bolting out of the truth, and conviction of the gainsayers. For pro∣blemes, see Mat. 21.25. Mat 22.42. &c. For parables, see Judg. 9. that of Jo∣tham,Mat. 21. Mat. 22. Mat. 13. of Nathan, 2 Sam. 12. of the woman of Tekoah, 2 Sam. 14. of our Saviour, concerning the two brethren sent into the Vincyard, the wedding of the Kings son, the sower &c. See the Note on verse 10. and the Priests answered and said no] Roundly and readily: without hacking and hewing, without doubling and dissembling; as those perverse priests, those selfe∣condemned Hierophants, Mat. 21.27. that against their consciences answered Ie∣sus and said, We cannot tell. The wit of gracelesse persons will better serve them to faulter and fumble, deny, or devise a thousand shifts to evade and elude the
truth, then their malice will suffer them to yeeld to it, or professe it. This is to detain the truth in unrighteousnesse, Rom. 1.18. as Plato, who had the knowledge of One God, yet he dared not to communicate it to the vulgar: and as some of the chief champions of Popery, who held justification by faith alone, but refused to say so, lest their Dagon should down, their Diana be despised. Let every spiritual man (but especially Ministers) be ready as to every good work, so to this of comparing spiritual things with spirituall, that he may judge or discerne of all things, 1 Cor. 2.13.15. according to the analogy of faith, Rom. 12.6. the tenour of the Scriptures, his sure Cynosura: and laying up all in his heart, Luke 2.18. he may have a treasure there of new and old, a word of wisdom and a word of knowledge 00, 1 Cor. 12.8. both as a Teacher, and as a Pastour, to bring forth for common benefit. Verse 13. If one that is unclean by a dead body] with a ceremonial uncleannesse. The Hebrew hath it thus, If one that is unclean in soul, that is, in his whole person, as every wicked man is totus totus pollutus wholly covered with corruption, a loth∣some leper from head to foot, wholly set upon sin as Exod. 32.22. lying down in wick∣ednesse or in that wicked one, 1 John 5.19. sick of such a disease as the Physicians call corruptionem totius substantiae, nay dead in sins and trespasses Eph. 2.1. and can therefore doe no better then dead work at best, Heb. 9.14. such as the living God will not be served with, ibid. See the note on Mal. 3.16. doct. 4. Use 1. He is un∣clean, unclean, and impureth all that hee toucheth, according to that which followeth. Verse 14. So is this people, and so is this Nation before me] Though pure in their own eyes Prov. 30.12. and to the world-ward unrebukeable, as Paul the Pharisees Phil. 3. and those self-iustitiaries, Luke 16.14, 15. Ye are those that justifie your selves (and have the worlds good word for you) but God knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God. Sordet in conspectu judicis quodfulget in conspectu operantis.Splendida pec∣ca u. Am. 6.13. Wicked mens services are but glistering sinnes, they rejoce in a thing of naught, as Amos hath it, like as Leah re∣joyced in that whereof She had cause to repent, and said God hath given me my hire, when she had more cause to say, God I fear will give me my hire, my payment, because I have given my maiden to my husband, Gen. 30.18. But she was in the com∣mon errour of measuring and judging of things by the successe: as if God were not many times angry with men, though they outwardly prosper: or as if there were not here one event to the clean and to the unclean Eccles. 9.2. Uutill the day that God shall separate the sheep from the goates, whom for the glory of his name, and the good of his people he suffers for present to goe one among another to make his own to stick the faster together, and to their principles, Shepheards say, that it is wholsome for a flock of sheep to have some goats to feed amongst them: their bad scent being good Physick for the sheep, to keep them from the shakings. Onely let Gods sheep take heed that they contract no corruption by conversing with goats: which is soon done, for sinne is catching, and ill company is contagious. Nemoe∣rat sibi ipsi: sed dementiam spargit in proximos, saith Seneca, No man erres out of the right way alone, but drawes others along, And multos sollicitat soiet as nefanda, saith Chrysostom, evil company solliciteth many to sinke, virtue is oft overcome by vice, saith Nazianzen,Orat. 1. Apolog as a little wormwood sooner imbittereth a great deal of hony, then twice so much honey can sweeten a small deal of wormwood: Or as one spoon∣full of vineger will soon tart a great deal of sweet milk: but a great deal of milk will not so soon allay one spoonfull of vineger. Remove but one stone, and the whole river will rush downward: but you can hardly stop the stream again with a strong damme. Touch pitch and you shall presently be defiled, but touch sope and you shall not presently be made clean, without much rubbing and rinsing. Meentius the tyrant Corpora corporibus jungebat mortua vivis tyed living men to dead carcasses: but the dead did notrevive by the living,Virgil. the living rather putrified by reason of the dead. He that bore consecrated flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt touched bread, or pottage, or wine, or oyle, or any meat, he made it not thereby holy. But if an unclean person touched any of these, he made it unclean. The Donatists abu∣sed this Text, to prove that Baptisme was defiled, and vacated, if administrated by an unregenerate Minister: But Augustine again against Fulgentius the Donatist
vindicateth the Text from their false glosses, and asserteth from it the contrary truth. May not clean corn bee sowed with foul hands, and grow neverthelesse?Aqua baptis∣matis haptiza∣tos ad regnum coelestis mittit, & ipsa postea in cloacam descendit. Greg in Evang. hom. 17. May not a trumpet be well sounded by an impure breath? And is not the water in Baptisme, that clenseth the childe, cast afterwards into the draught? saith Gregory. so is this people, and so is that nation before me, and so is every work of their hands, and that which they offer, &c.] Note the order of the Induction. First themselves were unclean, both people and nation; there was a generall defection and defilement ranne thorough all sorts and sexes, as the woof runs thorow the warp: so that they were all together but one continued web of wickednesse, as it were, spun out and made up by the hands of the devil, and the flesh, an evil spin∣ner,, and a worse weaver: both root and fruit were naught, as Esay 5.4. both head, heart, and foot was out of order, Esay 1.5, 6. and they are barely and boldly told of it by the Prophets. Secondly, the works of their bands were un∣clean: for not onely the praying, but the plowing of the wicked is sinne, Prov. 21.4. all their naturall and civil actions also are abominable. Whether they plow, or play, or eat, or sleep; corruption is like copres, which will turn wine or milk into ink; or leaven, which turns a very Passeover into pollution; or as the Sanies of a plague sore, which will render the richest robe infectious. Thirdly, that which they offer there, their sacrifices, and all their religious performances were likewise unclean: not in respect of God, who commanded them: nor of the matter, for they offered clean beasts; but of the manner of offering (which makes or marres the action) and of the men, who were unregenerate, and rested in the work done, and drew neer to God with their lips, thinking to put God off with an externall worship onely; Ludentes cum Deo tanquam pueri cum suis puppis, as Calvin hath it, that is, playing with God, as children do with their babies.Calv. in loc. The Poets declaimed against this foppery, as Persius: and Another, Non benè coelestes impia dextra colit. Verse 15. And now I pray you consider] Heb. Lay it upon your heart, as chap. 1.5. See the Note there. The often repetition of this precept, sets forth: 1. The necessity of the duty pressed. 2. Their singular stupidity, that were no more affected with such manifest marks of Gods wrath upon them: no, though hee had even snatched the meat out of their mouthes, and kept them hunger-starved, which is the way of taming the most untameable creatures. from this day and upward] To the end that when I shall have blessed you with greater plenty, as verf. 19, ye may recognize your sinnes, the cause of your calamities, and remembring (as Jacob did his baculinam paupertatem, Gen. 32.10.) your former penury, you may thankfully cry out with that Noble Iphicrates;. From how hungry to how plentifull an estate am I raised? Let a profane Demetrius attribute such a change as this to blinde Fortune saying, . But let all Saints sing with holy Hannah; They that were full have hired themselves out for bread: and they that were hungry ceased. The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich; he bringeth low, and lifteth up, &c. 1 Sam. 2.5, 7. from before a stone was laid upon a stone] i.e. before there was any hand set to the work of rebuilding the Temple, which was interrupted for many years, after the return from Babylon. See Ezr. 3.8. and 5.2. Vers. 16. Since those dayes were] Or, as some read it, Antequam essent in to opere. Before they were about that work, minding Gods house more then their own. When one came to an heap of twenty measures] that is, where you expected twen∣ty measures (and experienced good-husbands can partly guesse at harvest, how their corn will yeeld, when threshed out) there were but ten. Gods hand was upon your increase, not in the field onely, but also in the floor; so that you were de∣feated, and your hopes frustrated: and not in the barn onely, but at the wine∣presse too, God hath cut you short. This was that which was long before threat∣ned, but little regarded, Deut. 28.20. Carnall men read the threats of Gods Law, as they do the old stories of forraigne warres, or as they behold the wounds and blood in a picture, or piece of Arras, which never makes them smart or fear.
This hasteneth their judgement, and shews them ripe for wrath, even then when they think themselves farre enough out of the reach of Gods rod. Vers. 17. I smote you with blasting, and with mildew, and with hail] Pugnis pluvi, colaphis grandinavi, I have followed you close with one judgement upon another:Perdidistis frucum cala∣mitatis, &c. Aug. and all to bring you back into mine own bosome: that as ye had runne from me by your sinnes, so ye might return to me by repentance: but behold, I have lost my labour, and ye have lost the fruit of your sufferings, which indeed is a very great losse, were ye but soundly sensible of it. These Jewes were sensible of their calamities and disasters abroad and at home, but they did not wisely inquire into the cause thereof; as David did into the cause of the famine that fell out in his dayes, 2 Sam. 21.1. God had not hitherto give them an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, as it is Deut. 29.4. And as Esay 9.13. The people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts. But after their hardnesse and impenitent heart, treasured up wrath, &c. Rom. 2.5. They could not but see themelves grievously crossed, and cursed in all the labours of their hands.Lib. 3. de nat. deor. Neither were they so blind as not to see God in that they suffered. They had learned that out of Psal. 78.47, 48. Psal. 29.3, &c. Tully indeed thought that God minds not mildew, or hail, &c. Nee si uredo aut grando quippiam nocuit, id Iovi animadvert endum fuit: neque enim in regnis reges omnia minima curant, &c. As kings take not notice of smaller businesses in their kingdoms, saith He, so nei∣ther doth God of these ordinary occurrences. But the Jewes (for the generality) had learned better things. And the Apostle tells those Heathens too, Acts 14. that God had not left himself without witnesse amongst them, in that he did good and gave rain from baven, and fruitfull seasons, &c. Cicero himself likewise, another time, could say, Curiosus est & plenus negotii Deus, God taketh care of all, and is full of businesse. And oh that this truth were as fruitfully improved, as it is generally acknowledged! Oh that men would turn at Gods reproof; his recall reproofs, his vocall rods, Mic. 6.9. and not put him to his old complaint; Why should ye be smitten any more?Esay 1.5. ye revolt more and more. This we may wish, but God alone can effect. For till he please to thrust his holy hand into mens bosomes, and pull off the fore-skin of their hearts; Afflictions (those hammers of his) do but beat cold iron.Salvian. See Ier. 2.30, 31. and 6.29, 30. Lev. 26.41. Plectimur à Deo, nec flectimur tamen: corripimur sed non corrigimur. We are put to pain, but to no prosit, Jer. 12.13. as Abaz, that stiffe stigmatick, 2 Chron. 28.23. and A∣haziah, who sent a third Captain to surprize the Prophet,2 King. 1. after two before consu∣med with fire from heaven: as if he would despitefully spit in the face of God, and wrestle a fall with the Almighty. Verse 18. Consider now from this day and upward] And see how punctually the time of benediction answereth to the time of your conversion: so that you no soo∣ner begin to build, but I begin to blesse. It is said of the men of Issachar, that they were in great account with David, because they had understanding of the times, 1 Chron. 12.32. It is certainly a point of spirituall prudence to consider the times, and to compare things past with present and future. Time is the wisest of all things,Laert. lib. 1 said Thales; the best counsellour said Plutarch. Truth is the daughter of Time,In Pericles: saith Another Philosopher. See the Note on verse 15. Verse 19. Is the seed yet in the barne?] Hierom rendreth it, In germine, In the sprouting, or spirting, as they call it, and so farre enough from the harvest; and yet further, if yet in the barn, and not put into the ground. Neverthesse, for your diligence in building Gods house, I assure you in the word of truth, that you shall have a very great increase, a plentifull harvest. From this day will I blesse you] And it is the blessing of God that maketh rich, as is to be seen in the examples of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob. Others, whose godlinesse was their gain, whose piety was profitable to all things, as having the promises of both lives, 1 Tim. 4.8. Now all that are of faith, are blessed with faithfull Abraham, Gal. 3.9. are heirs of the world with him, Rom. 4.13. and so have right to all things in Christ, the heir of all things, 1 Cor. 3.22. Heb. 1.2. though these things on earth be detained from them for present, by those men of Gods hand, Psal. 17.14. as Canaan
was from Israel by the cursed Amorites, till their sinnes were full;Gen. 14. yet they shall shortly have power over the Nations, and (which is better) Christ will give them the morning-starre, that is himself,Rev. 2.26, 28 and with himself a Cornucopia of spirituall blessings, Ephes. 1.3. The Lord that made heaven and earth will blesse them out of Zion, that is, with better blessings then heaven or earth afforded. We read not here of any other blessings but increase of corn, wine, oil, &c. because this people was wholly almost affixed to earthly things.1 Cor. 2. The Prophet could not speak wisdom among those that were perfect. But better things were implied and assured to the god∣ly, as appearth by the ensuing Oracle. Verse 20. And again, the word of the Lord] Again the same day. Twice-aday-preaching is no new practise then. This Prophet did it: so did our Saviour,Acts & Mon. fl. 940. Mat. 13.1. So did Chrysostome, as appeareth by his Note on 1 Thes. 5.17. So did Luther: which because one Nicholas White commended in him, he was accused of heresie, in the raign of Hen. 8. It is not so long since it was held here practicall Puritanisme. The late Arch-prelate being sued unto by a Noble-man to preferre a Chaplain of his, (whom he commended for an able Divine,Socra: and a twice-aday-preacher) turned away in a great heat, saying, The more fool he. Verse 21. Speak to Zerubbabel governour of Judah] Governours are sure to meet with many difficulties, and discouragements (high-seats are never but un∣easie) and had need therefore of singular consolation, that they may hold on their course, like the Sun in the firmament, and shew themselves to be of an undaunt∣ed resolution. We may well say to Governours, as that Propheticall Simeon spoke to the pillars which he whipped before the earth-quake: Stand fast, for yee shall be shaken. I will shake the heavens and the earth sc. by abrogating and abolishing both Jewish Ceremonies, and Heathenish superstitions, Heb. 12.27. As also by Nationall com∣motions, and translations of Monarchies: The Greeks shall break the power of the Persians, the Romans of the Greeks, the Goths and other barbarous nations of the Romans. But especially, by casting the devil out of the heaven of mens hearts, Luke 10.18. those strong-holds wherein he had entrenched himself,Mat. 24.7. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. that the ransomed of the Lord may receive a kingdome, which cannot bee moved, Heb. 12.28. and partake of those new heavens, and new earth wherein dwelleth righteousnesse, 2 Pet. 3.13. even that world to come, as these dayes of the Gospel are called, Heb. 2.5. See the Note above on vers. 6.7. Verse 22. And I will overthrow the throne of kingdomes] sc. by pouring contempt upon Princes, and causing them to wander in the wildernesse, where there is no way, Psal. 107.40. (as he dealt with Darius the last Persian Monarch) by putting down the mighty from their seat, and exalting them of low degree, Luke 1.52. (as hee dealt with Bajazet the great Turk, and Tamerlan the Scythian shepherd) by changing the imes and the seasons, removing kings, and setting up others in their stead, Dan. 2.21. All this God will do, and all that follows in the Text, viz. de∣stroy the strength of kingdoms, overthrow the charets and their riders, &c. rather then. his Church shall be unhelped, or his kingdome of grace hindered. Our help is in the Name of the Lord who made heaven and earth, and will rather unmake all again, then we shall be unrelieved.Psal. 124.8. Yet have I set my king upon mine holy hill of Zion, Psal. 2.6. Yet, for all the sorrow, for all the malicious machinations, and attempts of his enemies to the contrary: who are therehence admonished to be wise for themselves, and to kisse the sonne, for he must raigne, and all his foes must bee his foot-stool. There is a Councill in heaven will dash the mould of all contrary counsels upon earth. The stone cut out of the mountains without hands (which is Christ the Conquerour) will break in pieces the iron, the brasse, the clay, the silver, and the gold. And in the dayes of those kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdome which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdomes, and it shall stand for ever, Dan. 2.44, 45. So Dan. 7. after that the Prophet had de∣scribed the greatnesse and glory of all the four Monarchies, at length he comes to speak of a kingdome which is the greatest and mightiest under the whole heaven, and that is the kingdome of the Saints of the most High,Dan. 7.27. whose kingdome
is an everlasting kingdome: and all Rulers shall serve and obey him. Verse 23. I will take thee, O Zerubbabel] That is, O Christ, of whom Ze∣rubbabel was both a father and a figure, Luke 3.27. Zach. 4.10. I will take thee, that is, I will advance and exalt thee. See this expounded, and applied by that great Apostle, Philip. 2.5. to the 12. and will make thee as a signet] that is, I will highly esteem thee, inviolably keep thee, and entirely love thee, Cant. 8.6. Jer. 22.24. and all my people in thee, and for thee, Esay 49.16. for I have chosen thee] as Esay 42.1. Quoniam in te mihi complacui, saith the Chaldee. For in thee I am well pleased, as Mat. 3.17. See the Note there. Saith the Lord of hosts] This is three severall times set down in this one verse, for our greater assurance, and confirmation of our faith. I shall close up all with that observation of Divines, that all the Prophets (except Jonah and Nahum) expressely end in some prophecy concerning Christ. He being their mark at which all of them chiefly aimed. Indeed he is both mark and matter, of both old and new Testa∣ment. And therefore if we will profit in teaching, hearing, reading, we must have the eye of our minde turned toward Christ, as the faces of the Cherubims were toward the Mercy seat. Do this, if ever you will do well.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of ZACHARIAH. CHAP. I. Verse 1. IN the eighth moneth, in the second year of Darius] Two moneths after Haggai began to prophesie. See the Note on Hagg. 1.1. These two Prophets did jointly together reprove the Jews, for their sloth in reedifying the Temple, and incite them to set forward the work, Ezra 5.1. contributing their ut∣most help thereunto, vers. 2. They were also a sin∣gular help the one to the other, in the execution of their office. For two are better then one; and why, see Eccles. 4.9. with the Note. For which cause also Christ sent out first the twelve, and then the seventy, by two and two, Mar. 6.7. Luk. 10.1. So Paul and Barnabas were sent abroad; the two faithfull witnesses, Revel. 11.3. , as the Poet speaks of Vlysses, and Diomedes sent to fetch in the Palladium.Acts & Mon, Exod. 4.16 One good man may be an Angel to another, (as Bradford was to his fellow-Martyr Dr. Taylour) nay, a God to another, as Moses was to Aaron. And for others; in the mouth of two or three witnesses a truth is better beleeved by them: and a twisted cord not easily broken. Haggai layes down the mind of God to the people more plainly in direct and down-right termes: Zachary flies an higher pitch, abounding with types and visions; and is therefore worthily reckoned among the abstrusest and profoundest Pen-men of holy Scripture.Praecaeteris ob∣scurus est pro∣fundus, varius, prolixus, & aeigmaticus, Cor. a Lapid. For it must be understood (and let it here be prefaced) that al∣beit all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is prositable to instruct, 2 Tim. 3.16. pure, precious, and profitable, every leaf, line, and letter of it, Psal. 12.6. Prov. 30.5. Yet, between scripture and scripture there is no small difference; some pieces of Gods Book for their antiquity, and some other for their obscurity do justly challenge our greater attention and industry. Of the former sort famous for their antiquity, are the five Books of Moses; whom Theodoret fitly calleth
the great Ocean of divinity,. the fountaine of the following scriptures. Of the se∣cond sort, noted for their difficulty, and that will not be acquainted with us but upon further suit, some are hard through their fulnesse of matter in fewnesse of words, as the Poeticall bookes, wherein (no doubt) the verse also hath caused some cloud: And others againe, by the sublimity of the subject they handle: such as are the bookes of Ezechiel, and Daniel, and this of Zachary, who is totus ferè symbolicus, and is much followed by St. Iohn in his Revelation. Hence Hierome in his prologue to this Prophet saith,Hieron. Ab obscuris ad obscuriora transimus, & cum Mose ingredimr ad nubem & caliginem. Abyssus abyssum invocat &c. We passe from dark prophecyes to that which is much more dark: and with Moses we are en∣tring into the cloud and thick darknesse. Here one deep calleth upon another; and being in a Labyrinth, we hope to get out by Christs golden clue: concerning whose Passion, Resurrection and glory he speaketh more like an Evangelist then a Prophet, and may therefore be rightly stiled, The Evangelicall Prophet. came the word of the Lord unto Zachariah the son of Barachiah] Therefore the same that our Saviour speaketh of Mat. 23.35. Luk 11.51. though I once thought otherwise, after Hierome, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Glassius, Grotius &c. But 1. the name of his Father Berechiah. 2. the manner of Christs account (rec∣koning from Abel the first Martyr to this, penultimus Prophetarum last save one of the Prophets, and last of all that was slaine by the Jewes, after the reedifying of the Temple,Zach. 11.1, 13 whither being assaulted, he ran for sanctuary) easily perswades me to alter mine opinion. As for those that hold that our Saviour there spcaketh of Zachary the Father of Iohn Baptist Luk 1. slaine by the Jewes, because he preach∣ed Virginis partum & Christi ortum, Christ born of a Virgin, Baronius, Tolet, and others, as they affirme it without reason, so they may be dismissed without refutation. Hoc, quia de scripturis non habet authoritatem, eâdem facilitate contem∣nitur, quâ probatur, saith Hierome. the son of Iddo the Prophet] Whether the word Prophet be to be referred to Ze∣chariah,2 Chr. 22.15. or to Iddo, is uncertaine. That there was a Prophet Iado we read, and Zechary might well be of his line, after many descents. He is here mentioned (as also Ezr. 5.1.) ut nepoti suo Zachariae nomen & decus conciliet, for an ho∣nout to his ab-nephew Zechary; according to that of Solomon, The glory of children are their fathers,Prov. 17.6. to wit if they be godly and religious. What an honour was it to Jacob, that he could sweare by the feare of his father Isaac? to David, that he could say,Psal. 116.16. 2 Tim. 1.5. Truly, Lord, I am thy servant, I am thy servant, the son of thine handmaid? to Timothy, that he had such a mother as Lois, such a grandmo∣ther as Eunice? to the children of the Elect Lady, to the posterity of Latimer, Bradford,Ioh 8.33. Mat. 3.9. Ridley, and other of those men of God, who suffered for the truth? If the degenerate Jewes so boasted of Abraham their father, how much more might Zechary (no degenerate plant, no bastardly brood as they were Mat. 12.39.) boast and beare himself bold on his father Berechiah (the blessing of God) and his grandfather Iddo (Gods Witnesse, Confessour, or Ornament) sith he trod in their holy steps, and was adorned with their gifts and virtues? The Papists brag much of Peter, and other Apostles their founders and predecessours: But this is but an empty title, to talk of personall succession (which yet cannot be pro∣ved) unlesse they could also shew us their gifts and graces, as all the world may see they cannot. We read of a painter, who being blamed by a Cardinall, for colou∣ring the visages of Peter and Paul too red, tartly replyed, that he painted them so, as blushing at the lives of their successours. Verse 2. The Lord hath been sore displeased with your fathers] Heb. He hath boyled against your fathers with foaming anger, with height of heate. There are degrees of anger, see Mat. 5.22. and Deut. 29.28. The Lord rooted them out of their land in Anger, and in wrath, and in great Indignation. Surgit hic oratio: and the last of those three words is the same here used in the text: noting an higher degree then the two former, even such a fervour and fiercenesse of Gods wrath, as maketh him ready to kill and cut off (see 2 King. 6 6. and note the affinity of that word with this) like as he had much adoe to forbeare killing of Moses,Exod. 4. when he met him in the Inne; and as Nebuchadnezzar was not only angry, but very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon Dan. 2.12.
Now if the wrath of a king be as many messengers of death Prov. 16.14. what shall we think of the foming and frothing wrath of God, which burnes unto the lowest hell, and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains, Deut. 32.22. After which followeth, in the next verse, I will heape mischiefs upon them,Deut. 32.23. I will spend minc arrowes upon them &c. He had done so upon the Ancestours of these refractary Jewes, who had been saepius puncti & repuncti, minimè tamen ad resipi∣scentiam compuncti, ost punished, but could never be reclaimed; so incorrigibly flagitious, so shamelesly, so prodigiously wicked were they, till there was no re∣medy. This their vile stubbornnesse made him sore displeased with them: and put thunder-bolts into his hands to destroy them; For though Fury be not in God Isay 27.5. to speak properly, he is free from any such passions as we are subject to, yet if bri∣ars and thornes set against him in battle, if a rabble of rebels conspire to cast him out of his throne, saying We will not have this man to rule over us &c. I would go through them, I would burn them together, saith he, in the same breath. Abused mercy turneth into fury. Nothing so cold as lead, & yet nothing so scalding, if molten. Nothing more blunt then iron: & yet nothing so keen, if sharpened. The ayre is soft & tende: yet out of it are ingendered thunder and lightenings. The sea is calme, and smooth: but if tossed with tempests, it is rough above measure. The Lord, as he is Father of mercies, so he is God of recompenses: and it is a fearefull thing to fall into his pu∣nishing hands. If his wrath be kindled, yea but a little,Heb. 10. Psal. 2. woe be to all those upon whom it lights: how much more when he is sore displeased with a people or per∣son as here? For who knoweth the power of thine anger, saith Moses? even accor∣ding to thy feare, so is thy wrath: that is, let a man feare thee never so much,Psal. 90.11 he is sure to feel thee much more, if once he fall into thy fingers. And this is here urged by the Prophet as a motive to true repentance: sith by their fathers exam∣ple, they might see there was no way to escap the dint of the divine displeasure, but to submit to Gods Justice and to implore his mercy: men must either turn or burn, For even our God is a consuming fire Heb. 12.29. Verse 3. Therefore say thou unto them] These Jewes, saith Cyrill, had neither seen their fathers wickednesses, nor heeded their calamities. mittitur ergo ad cos Zacharias quasi paedagogus, Zachary therefore is sent unto them as a schoolmaster or Monitour: that by considering what had been, they might prevent what other∣wise would be: and redeem their own sorrowes. thus saith the Lord of hosts] A farr greater Lord and Potentate then that great King of Persia, who was now their soveraigne. True it is that they had been commanded by a former King to desist from building the city Ezr. 4.12, 21. But there was no one word in that letter to forbid the building of the Temple. There was also now another King set up, and of another family. They are therefore by this Prophet and by Haggai called upon again and again to turn to the Lord, and to return afresh to their work Ezra 5.1. Wherein, because they were sure to meet with many enemies, therefore here and elsewhere (eighteen severall times in that eight chapter) there is frequent mention made of the Lord of Hosts, for their better encouragement. See the Note on Mal. 3.17. turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of Hosts] This is the great Doctrine of the Old Testament: as Repent ye, is of the New. And this He purposely prefixeth, as a preface and preparative to the other Prophesies both of Mercies and Judge∣ments, whereof the whole is fitly made up. Sowr and sweet make the best sauce. Promises and Menaces mixt, make the most fruitsull discourse: and serve to keep the heart in the best temper. Hence Davids ditty was composed of dis∣cords, Psal. 101.1. I will sing of mercy and judgment, and so be both merry and wise. But, to the words of the Text; turn ye unto me &c.] By sin men run away from God (whereby it appeareth that sin is the greatest evill, because it sets us furthest off from the greatest good) and by repentance they return unto him. Deut. 30.2, 8, 9, 10. Mal. 3.7. Ier. 4.1. Hos. 14.1. Act. 26.18. Hence Act, 3.19. Repent and be converted. Contrition is repentance for sin 2 Cor. 12.21. Rev. 9.20. Conversion is repen∣tance from sin Act. 8.22. Heb. 6.1. Hereunto is required first a serious search of our wayes (for it is a Metaphor taken from a traveller) Let us search and try our wayes and turn againe to the Lord Lam. 3.39. I considered my wayes, and
then (seeing my self farr wide) I turned my feet to thy Testimonies. Psal. 119.59. Satius est recurrere, quam malè currere, said that Emperour in his symbol, It is better to stop or step back, then run on, when out of the way: for here he that hasteth with his feet sinneth Prov. 19.2. the faster he runs, the farther he is out. But as the deceived traveller (when once he finds his errour) in his judge∣ment he dislikcth it, in his will he turneth from it, in his affections he grieveth at it, and is angry with his false guides, with his utmost endeavour he not only turns againe to the right way, but makes the more hast that he be not benighted: So is it here, David not only turned his feet to Gods estimonies, from which he had swarved, but he thenceforth made hast and delayed not to keep his commandements Psal. 119.59, 60. For, this true conversion we are speaking of, this repentance never to be repented of, is an upright, earnest and constant endeavour of an entire change of the whole man from all that is evill to all which is good. This is the doctrine of the Gospell, Tit. 2.11. and this is all the fruit Isaey 27.9. To turn from one sin to another, is but to be tossed from one hand of the devill to the other: it is but with Benhadad to recover of one disease, and dye of another: it is but to take paines to go to hell. See this in Saul, Iohn, Herod, Agrippa, and others, who gave but the half turn: turned not from East to West, but from East to North onely: their change was not essentiall but only graduall: it is not a through change for subject and object, but partiall and temporall, as being but morall, or formall, or merely mentall. It proceedes from conviction of judge∣ment onely, and not for aversion of will: from horrour of punishment, not from hatred of sin; which they leave (haply) but loath not: leave it, I say, for the inconveniences that follow it, for the fire that is in it, not for the filthinesse that is in it. Now all these seeming Converts, because they cast not away all their transgressions (All is a little word, but of large extent) are therefore to be recko∣ned among those fooles of the people that passe on and are punished, those enemies of God that instead of turning againe (turning short againe upon themselves with the prodigall,Prov. 22.3. and returning to the Lord with Ephraim) go on still in their trespas∣ses till their hairy scalp be wounded,Psal. 68.21. till evident and inevitable judgements be incurred, till iniquity prove to be their utter ruine Ezek. 18.30. Wherefore now Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of Hosts, Add not to all your other sins that of Impenitency, for which there remaines no more sacrifice (as Herod added to all his former abominations the beheading of the Baptist) but Turn you, Turn you, why will ye dye O house of Israel. And for this, consider these ensuing particulars. 1. Who you are that are required to return: weake and worthlesse creatures, the slime of your fathers loynes, dust and ashes, altogether unable to avert or avoid Gods judgements: beaten rebels you are: and have therefore no help left, but to fall down before God and implore his mercy. Turn and live, except ye repent ye shall all perish. 2. Next, see who it is to whom ye are required to return: Not to some tyrant, or implacable enemy that having gotten us into his hands, will deale cruelly with us, (as the Duke of Alva rosted some to death, starved others, and that even after quarter) but to the Lord your God,Hist. of Ne∣therl. who is gracious and mrcifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and quickly repenteth him of the evill Ioel 2.13. He will surely both assist such as have but a mind to return (why else doth he bid us turn, which he knowes we cannot do without him? and why doth he bid us pray to him to Turn us? when we bid our children ask us for this or that, it is because we meane to give it them.) He will also accept us with all sweetnesse, as he did Ephraim, Ier. 31.19, 20. and the Prodigall Luk 15. The father met him ver. 20. so he will doe us Isay 65.24. The Prodigall came, the Father ran Tantum velis,Basil. & Deus tibi praeoecurret) he fell on his neck, as Jacob did on his deare Josephs, he kissed him, when one would have thought he should have kicked him,Ambros. or killed him rather for his former riotousnesle. He calleth for the best robe, and for the gold-ring, and for the fatted calf. Filsus timet convitium, Pater adornat convivium,Psal. 88.5. Let us eat and be merry saith He, For this my son was dead (given up for dead, free among the dead, free of that company) and is alive againe: He was lost and is found. Of himself he lest his father and ran riot: and yet he is called the lost son, in the best sense. Hunger drove the wolf out of the wood: and
yet he is accepted, as if not necessitated. 3. Thirdly take notice from what you are required to turn. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evill wayes: for why will ye dye, ye house of Israel? Ezek. 33.11. It is your sin only that you are to part with, and why should ye be so fond of it? if you look upon it, either in the Authour of it, the devill, Ioh. 8.44. Or in the Nature of it, as it is an Offence against God (your rightfull Lord, your bountifull Benefactour) and a breach of his Law which is holy, and just, and good; Or in the horrid effects of it (as upon other creatures for mans sake, so especially) upon man himself, whom Sin hath excluded from the possession of the lower paradise, and the possibility of the higher, into an eternity of all extremities, after many a little hell here afore-hand. Or (lastly) in the ransome of it, Christs blood and bitter sufferings, that soule of sufferings which his soule then suffered when God made our sins to meet upon him Esay 53.6. Oh think on these things sadly, seriously, fixedly and copiously, and you will soon see caule enough to turn to him from whom these children of Israel had deeply revol∣red,Isay 31.6. and were therefore grievously plagued, they and their fathers, that they might return to him that smote them. Which because they did not, but stood stouting it out with God (which was their manner from their youth) therefore were the Sy∣rians before, and the Philistines behind to devoure Israel with open mouth: and for all this his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still Isay 9.12, 13. Besides the hinderance and hurt they did to others by standing out: For ifye turn again to the Lord, your brethren shall find compassion, said Hezekiah to his people, moving them to repent 2 Chr. 30.9. And should not we lend them this friendly help. and I will turn to you, saith the Lord of Hosts] And should not such a favour from such a Lord melt them and make them malleable?Rom. 2.4. Ioel 2. If. 55.7. Mat. 3.3. Psal. 130.4. Iam. 4.4. Luk 15. Should not the goodnesse of God lead them to repentance? Should they not rent their hearts because God is gracious? return unto him because he will multiply pardon? repent because his kingdome is now at hand? feare him the rather, because with him there is mercy? draw nigh to him, who thus drawes nigh to them? make hast home with the prodigall, where there is bread enough? Surely nothing worketh so much as kindnesse upon those that are ingenuous. Those Israelites at Mizpeh drew water, and powred it forth before the Lord, upon the return of the Ark. There is no mention of their lamenting after the Lord, while he was gone;1 Sam. 7. but when he was returned and settled in Kiriath-jearim 1 Sam 7.6.2 Cor. 5.14. Tit. 2.14. David argues from mercy to duty Psal. 116.8, 9. Ezra from deliverance to obedience chap. 9.13, 14 The love of Christ constraineth us saith Paul, his grace that bringeth salvation teacheth us to denyungodlinesse, and to live up to our principles.Rom. 12.1. I beseech youby' the mercies of God, saith the same Apostle, as not having any more prevailing, more heart-attaching, attracting argument in the world to presse them with; I have lo∣ved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with mercy have I drawn thee Ier. 31.3. And againe I drew them with the cords of a man, with bands of love, Hos. 11.4. that is, with reasons and motives of mercy befitting the nature of a man, with rationall motives: to neglect mercy is to sin against humanity: not to convert by kindnesse, is to receive the grace of God in vaine: nay, it is to heape up wrath against the day of wrath. A son feeling his fathers love, creepes nearer under his wing. A Saul, sensible of Davids curtesy in sparing him, when he might have spilt his blood, was strangely moified and melted into teares. Shall God offer to turn to us, and we refuse to turn to him? Shall he beseech us to be reconci∣led, and we go on in our animosities and hostilities? Doth he offer to powre out his spirit even upon scorners, and to make known his words unto them, and all this, that they may turn at his reproof Prov. 1.23? And shall they yet turn their backs upon such blessed and bleeding embracements? Had God given us but one Prophet, and forty dayes time only to turn unto him (as he dealt by Niniveh that great city) surely we should have repented long agone in sackcloth and ashes. But how justly (alasse) may he complaine of us, as he did once of Jezabel Rev. 2.21. I gave them space to repent, but they repented not. I have striven with them by my spirit, and wooed them by my word. I have heaped upon them mercies without measure: and all to bring them back into mine own bosom. I have also smitten them with blasting and mildew, with judgements publike and perso∣nall:
and yet they have not turned unto me saith the Lord Am. 4.9. Ah sinfull nation &c. If any ask, What can we do toward the turning of our selves to God? I answer: First you must be sensible of your own utter inability to do any thing at all to∣ward it Ier. 10.23.Btza. Iob, 15.5. Philip. 2.12. Non minus difficile est nobis velle credere, quam cadaveri volare. It is no lesse hard for us to be willing to beleeve, then for a dead carcase to fly upwards. Secondly, know that yet it is possible, feisable, by the use of these meanes that God hath appointed: who also hath promised to make it both possible and easie to us. He bad Moses fetch his people out of Egypt: but himself effected it. He bad the Israelites go and blow down the walls of Jericho: they obeyed him, and it was done: So here. Thirdly as our liberty in externall acts is still some, (as to come to the publike ordinances, to set our selves under the droppings of a powerfull ministery, and there to lie, as he did, at the pool of Bethesda, waiting the good houre) so must our indeavours be answerable. The Bereans brought their bodyes to the Assembly, took the heads of St. Pauls sermon, compared them with the scrip∣tures Act. 17.11, 12. and yet they were unconverted. Fourthly, make much of the least beginnings of Grace, even those they call Re∣pressing: since they prepare the heart for conversion. See Luk. 11.32. Fiftly, Pray, Turn us O God and we shall be turned, Draw us and we shall run after thee. And here remember to be earnest. Ask, seek, knock, as the impor∣tunate neighbour that came to borrow two loaves, or as the widdow that came for justice,Luke 18.1. and would not away without it. He that heareth the young ra∣vens that cry onely by implication, will he be wanting to his weake but willing servants? Lastly wait for the first act of conversion, the infusion of the sap of Grace, which is wholy from God; our will prevents it not but followes it: and whensoever the spirit imbreatheth you, turn about, like the mill; when God hath tuned and doth touch you, do you move and make melody: resigning up your selves wholy to him, and putting your selves out, God into possession. Thus if you turn to him, he will turn to you. The Lord is with you, whiles ye be with him. If ye seek him he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. 2 Chron. 15.2. See that ye refuse not him that speaketh in this text with so much affection and earnestnesse: Heb. 12.25. see that ye slight him not, that ye shift him not of (as the word signifieth:) for if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that thus speaketh from heaven, sc. by his blood, Word, Sacraments, Mercyes, motions of his spi∣rit, crosses &c. When Physick, that should remove the disease, doth cooperate with it, then death comes with the more paine and speed. The stronger the con∣viction of sin is, the deeper will be the wrath against it, if it be not by repentance avoyded. No surfet more dangerous then that of bread: no judgment more terri∣ble then that which growes out of mercy offered, and despised. Verse 4. Be ye not as your fathers] Man is a creature apt to imitate, to be led more by his eyes then by his eares: and children think they may lawfully Be as their fathers. St. Peters converts had received their vaine conversation from their fathers, as it were ex traduce, or by tradition 1 Pet. 1.18. And St. Steven tells his perverse hearers that they were as good at resisting the Holy Ghost as their fathers had been before them Act. 7.51. They used to boast much of their Ance∣stours Ioh. 8.33. and to bind much upon their example and authority Ier. 44. 17. Mat. 5.21. They thought they were not much to be blamed, because they did but as their fathers had done before them. The Prophet therefore dehorts or rather deterrs them from that folly: serting forth both the crime and doome of their forefathers, whom they so much admired, and so stifly imitated, and this he ost repeateth that they might once consider it, and be wrought upon by thosé domestick examples. have cryed] Loudly and lustily;Es. 58.1. according to that, Cry aloud, spare not, Lift up thy voice like a trumpet: sic clames ut stentora vincas, A minister should be a Simon Zelotes, a son of thunder: as Basil was said to thunder in his preaching, lighten in
his life; as Hierome for his vehemency was called Fulmen Ecclesiasticum, the Churches light-bolt: as Harding, before his shamefull Apostasy, wished he could cry out against Popery, as loud as the belles of Oseney: and as Farellus (that notable French Preacher) whose voice when the envious Monks sought to drown by ring∣ing the bells as he was preaching at Metis, he lifted up his voyce adravim usque: and would not suffer himselfe to be outroared. The Saints-bell (as they called it) Pierius useth for an hieroglyphick of a preacher, who must not speak the word onely, but sound it out into all the earth, Rom. 10.18. not preach it onely, but cry it, as the Apostles word signifieth, 2 Tim. 4.2. clangite, clamate, Jer. 4.5. Boâte, vociferate,. Boantis, Voci∣ferantis. Mat. 3.3. Ministers have to doe with deafe men, dead men, living carcasses, walk∣ing sepulchers of themselves. Now therefore as our Saviour lifted up his voice when he said, Lazarus come forth: so must they stand over men and cry aloud, awake thou that sleepest, and stand up from the dead, that Christ may give thee light, Eph. 5.14. turne you now from your evil wayes &c.] This was the constant cry of the Prophets as here, and Apostles as Acts 26.18. to open mens eyes (naturally closed up that they cannot see the evill of their wayes, Ier 2.35. Rev. 3.15.) to turn them from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan to God. and from your evill doings] Heb. Designes, gests, or exercises enterprized advisedly, and prosecuted studiously, of natural disposition and inclination as Prov. 20.11. and 1 Sam. 25.3. This St. Iohn usually calleth committing of sinne. 1 Epist. 3.4, 8, 9. Iohn 8.34. this is to adde rebellion to sinne, Iob 34.37. impudence to impotence, browes of brasse to iron sinewes, Isa. 48.4. This is wickednesse with a witnesse, which if men could but see in its native colours, and cursed consequents, they would soon be perswaded to turn from it. As the eye cannot but be offended with a lothsome object: so neither can the understanding. Take rats-bane, it looketh not evil: bu when a man feeles it boyle, burn, torture him, &c. he hates it extremely. So he should doe sinne: he will doe else at length, when it is too late. For prevention: take the counsell of a Martyr, get thee Gods law, as a glasse to look in — So shal you see your faces foul-arrayed, and so shamefull, mangy, pocky, and scabbed,Bradfords serm. of Repent. p. 20.26, 27. that you cannot but be sory at the contemplation thereof, and seek out for cure: Espe∣cially if you look to the tag tied to Gods law, the malediction: which is such, as cannot but make us to cast our currish tailes between our legs, if we beleeve it. But O faithlesse hard hearts! O Iezabels guests, rocked and laid asleep in her bed! O wicked wretches &c. but they did not hear] Though the Prophets cryed, and spake loud enough to bee heard and heeded. An heavie eare is a singular judgement, Isa. 6.10. An hearing eare, a precious mercy, Prov. 20.12. God must bee intreated to boare our eare Psal. 40.6. and to make the boare so big that the word may enter; to say as Isa. 42.18. Hear ye deaf, and looke ye blind, that ye may see. Verse 5. Your fathers where are they?] Is not the grave their house? have they not made their beds in the dark? are not they gone down to the Congregation house of all living Iob 30.23? Every man should die the same day he is born; as being born a child of death: the wages of sinne is death, and this wages should bee paid him down presently. But Christ beggs their lives for a season 1 Tim. 4.10. he is the Saviour of all men, not of eternal preservation, but of temporal reservation. But what a sad thing is it for men to dye in their sinnes as these in the Text, and their Ne∣phews did Iohn 8.21, 24. How may such men, on their death-beds, say to their sins, as Charles the fifth did of his honours, victories, riches, Abite hinc, abite longè, Go,Mornaeus. go, get you out of my sight: or as Cornelius Agrippa the conjurer did to his familiar that used to accompany him in the shape of a dog, Abi à me perdit a bestia,Joh. Manl. loc. com. 136. P. Sut. de vit. Caribusian. quae me perdidisti, Be gone thou wretched beast that hast wrought my ruine: Petrus Sutori∣us speaks of one that preaching a funeral sermon on a religious man (as he calles him) and giving him large commendations, heard at the same time a voice in the Church, mortuus sum, judicat us sum, damnat us sum, I am dead, judged, and damned. The Devill preached Sauls funeral, 1 Sam. 28.19. though David made his Epitaph, 2 Sam. 1. And do the Prophets live for ever?] Those false Prophets (so Hierome senseth it) that cryed peace, peace to your fathers, and made all fair weather before them, when
the fierce wrath of God was even ready to burst out upon them, as an overflowing scourge. But they doe better that understand it of Gods true Prophets, who are dead indeed (for wise men dye as well as fooles Psal. 4.10. Good men dye as well as bad, Ezech. 21.4. yea good men oft, before the bad, Esay 57.1.) but their words dyed not with them: the truth of their prophesies not onely lived for ever (for ever O Lord thy word is stablished in heaven Psal. 119.89.) but struck in the hearts and flesh of their perverse hearers, like the envenomed arrowes of the Al∣mighty throughout all eternity.Haeret lateri lethalis arundo Wicked men may, as the wounded Hart, frisk and skip up and down when the deadly arrow sticks in their ribbes, but not so easily shake it off. Verse 6. Did they not take hold of your fathers] Overtake and catch them (as Hunts∣men their prey, or as one enemy doth another in flight 1 King. 18.27. 2 King. 25.5.) to drag them down to the bottome of hell. A godly man, as he hath peace with God, with himselfe, and with the creatures: so he hath also with the Ordinances, and may say as Hezekiah, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou hast spoken. Are not my words alwaies good saith God, to them that walk uprightly, Mic. 2.7? Excel∣lently Augustine, Adversarius est nobis, quamdiu sumus & ipsi nobis: quamdiu tu tibi inimicus es, inimicum habebis sermonem Dei. Gods word is adversary to none but such as are adversaries to themselves: Neither doth it condemn any, but such as shall be assuredly condemned by the Lord;Cor & anima Dei Greg. in 3. Reg. for what is the Word, but the heart and soul of God, as Gregory saith. And what saith the Essential Word of God, who came out of the bosome of his father and knew all his counsell? He that rejecteth me and re∣ceiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the some shall judge him in the last day, Iohn 12.48? Oh consider this ye that for∣get God, that slight his word as if it were but wind, that bely the Lord and say, It is not he neither shall the cvill (foretold) come upon us, neither shall we see sword nor fa∣mine. And the Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them, thus shall it bee done unto them, Wherefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, because ye speak this word (and is there not such language of many mens hearts now-adayes?) Behold I will make my words (not wind, but) fire and this people wood, and it shall devour them, Ier. 5.12, 13, 14. The Word of God in the mouths of his Ministers may well be likened to Moses his rod: which whiles he held it in his hand, it flourished, and brought forth almonds: but being cast upon the ground it became a serpent. Semblably, Gods words and statutes, if laid to heart, they yeeld fruit and comfort: but if slighted or snuffed at (as Mal. 1.13.) serpent-like they will sting the soul, and become a savour of death &c. This contempt will also call for a sword, to revenge the quarrel of the Covenant: as it did upon these mens fathers for their instance, and admonition. It is reckoned by Daniel as a great aggravation of Belshazzars sinne Dan. 5.22. that hee was not sensible of his father Nebuchadnezzars pride and fall. And thou his snne Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this. The sinne of these Jewes in the Text was the greater, because their Fathers and Elders (either out of sound conversion, or at least out of clear conviction of conscience) had confessed and remonstrated the truth and justice of God in threatening and executing his judgements upon themselves, saying as Lam. 1.18. The Lord is righteous, for we have rebelled against his commandements: and as chap. 2.17. The Lord hath done that which he had devised, he hath fulfilled his word, he hath thrown down and hath not pittied &c. Hear them in their own words here like as the Lord of hosts (whose power is irresisti∣ble) thought (devised, determined with himselfe,Zamam and accordingly denounced by his Prophets) to doe unto us (who did not the words which he commanded us, Ier. 11.8.) according to our wayes (which were alwaies grievous, Psal. 10.5.) and according to our doings (that were not good, Ezek. 36.31.) so hath he dealt with us: for he loves to retaliate and to render to every transgression and disobedience, a just recompence of re∣ward, Heb. 2.2. Verse 7. Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month] The third month after the former prophecy, when the Jewes probably had practised the doctrine of Repentance, so earnestly pressed upon them: and had humbled themselves under the mighty hand of God, who was now ready to lift them up by this and the seven fol∣lowing most comfortable Visions touching the restauration and reformation of the Church and State. The Devill and his impes love to bring men into the briars, and
there to leave them, as familiars forsake their witches, when they have brought them once into fetters: as the Priests left Judas the traytour to look to himself, Mat. 27.4. and as the Papists cast off Cranmer, after that, by subscribing their Articles, he had cast himself into such a wretched condition, that there was neither hope of a better, nor place for a worse;Melch. Ad. in vita. ut jam nec honestè mori nec vivere inho∣nestè liceret. But such is not Gods manner of dealing with those that tremble at his word, and humble at his feet. Deijcit ut relevet, premit ut solatia praestet, He comforteth those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. commandeth others to comfort the feeble-minded, 1 Thes. 5.14. and noteth those that do not with a black-coal,Nigro carbone notar. Job 6.14. See the workings of his bowels, the rowlings of his compassions kindled into repentance toward his penitentiaries, Jer. 31.20. Hos. 11.8. Esay 40.1, 2. See how he comforts them with cordials according to the time wherein he had af∣flicted them, Psal. 90.15. and in the very thing wherein he had abased them; as he once dealt with their Head, Philip. 2.7, 8. Kerse 8. I saw by night] The usuall time for such revelations. It may note (moreover) the obscurity of the Prophecy: whence also the mention of myrtle∣trees (low and shady) and that in a bottom, as Calvin conceiveth: and all this, that he might give a taste of good hope to the Jews by little and little. and behold a man riding upon a red horse] Not Alexander the Great, riding upon his horse Bucephalus, and translating the Empire from the Persians to the Grecians, as Arias Montanus conceited it: But the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Tim. 2.5. the Captain of the Lords Host, Josh. 4.14. and of our salvation, Heb. 2.10. riding upon a red horse] In the same sense (saith One) that this colour is given to his garments, Esay 63.1, 2, 3. and to the Angels horse, Rev. 6.4. The wild Bull (saith Another) of all things, cannot abide any red colour. Therefore the hunter for the nonce, standing before a tree, puts on a red garment; whom when the Bull seeth, he runneth at him as hard as he can drive. But the hunter stepping aside, the bulls horns stick fast in the tree: as when David slipped aside, Sauls spear stuck fast in the wall. Such an hunter is Christ: He lifted up upon the tree of his crosse, had his garment dipt and died in his own blood, as one that cometh with red garments from Bozra. Therefore the Devil and his Angels (like wild bulls of Bashan) ran at him with all their force, (in that three-hours darknesse especially) but he delivering himself, as a mighty Conquerour, their horns stick fast, as it were in his crosse: as Abrahams ramme, by his horns stuck fast in the brier, &c. and he stood among the myrtle-trees that were in the bottom] Myrrhe-trees some render it. Here Christ, that horseman and head of his Church, keepeth himself, as touched with the feeling of our infiunities, Heb. 4.15. as suffering and sorrow∣ing with his people, who are fitly compared to myrtles, that grow in a shady grove, in vallies and bottoms, and by waters sides.— & amantes littorae myrtos. Virg. Georg. Blessed are ye that sowe beside all waters, Esay 32.20. Myrtles also are odoriferous, and precious, Esay 41.19. and 55.13. so are the Saints, Esay 43.4. Colos. 4.6. they cast a good scent where-ever they go, by the grace of God that is in them: as Alexander the Great is said to do, by the excellent temperament of his body. Lastly, Levit. 23.40. with Neh 8.15. the Jews at their joyfull feast of Tabernacles, used myrtle-branches among others, to testifie their thankfulnesse for a settlement in the promised land, after so long wandring in the wildernesse. The Gentiles also in their solemn feasts, enterludes, and —cingebant tempora myrto, wore garlands made of Myrtle.Virg. Georg: Let us keep the feast: Let us keep holy-day, saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.8. who him∣self did over-abound exceedingly with joy, had an exuberancy of it, at that constant feast of a good conscience. Diogenes could say, that a good man keeps holy-day,2 Cor 7.4. all the yeer about: Christ crowneth the Kalendar of his peoples lives with conti∣nuall festivals here: how much more in heaven? Pliny tells us,Plin. lib. 15. cap. 29. that ex myrto facta est ovantium corona, subinde & triumphantium; of Myrtle was made, among the Romans, the crown or garland, of those that did shout for victory, or ride in triumph. and behind him were there red horses] i. e. horse-men: Nam nimis crassum est illud commentum, fuisse locutos equos, saith Calvin here. These horse men are An∣gels, as verse 10. deputed to severall offices, and executions, for judgement, fo∣mercy,
or both; shadowed by the divers colours of their horses. Verse 9.alvin. Then said I, O my Lord what are these?] Thus the Prophets enqui∣red and searched diligently (as saith Saint, Peter, 11 Epist. 1.11.) for the truth of things,. as hunters seek for game, and as men seek for gold, in the very mines of the earth: who not content with the first oar that offereth it self to their view, dig deeper, and deeper, till they are owners of the whole treasure. See Prov. 2.4. and rest not, till ye see that blissefull sight, Ephes. 1.18, 19. and the Angel that talked with me,] Or, in me, as the Vulgar rendreth it. This was some created Angel, who might reveal things to the Prophet by working on the phantasie, and spirit, by way of information and instruction, as Dan. 9.21. Luk. 1.11. Apoc. 1.1. I will shew thee what these be] How ready are the holy Angels to serve the Saints, Heb. 1.14. rejoycing more in their names of office then of honour, of employment, then preferment, to be called Angels (that is, Messengers, or Inter∣nuntio's) then Principalities, Thrones, Dominions, Ephes. 1.20. accounting it. bet∣ter to do good, then to be great, to dispense Gods benefits, then to enjoy them. Hence they are with, and about the Saints, as their companions, guides, protectours, monitours, and rulers of their actions, as here. Verse 10. And the man that stood among the myrtle-trees] The man Christ Jesus, that is ever with his Church, and in the midst of his people, that feedeth among the lilles, and walketh in the middest of the seven golden candlesticks. He being asked by the foresaid Angel, answered him (in Zacharies hearing) for he is Palmoni hammedabber, that excellent Speaker, as Daniel calleth him, and there∣fore asketh him of the vision, Dan. 8.13. These are they whom the Lord hath sent] As his Epoptai, or Overseers and In∣telligencers. Not that God needeth them, as Princes need the counsell and aid of their subjects. The holy Angels receive möre from God, then they performe, or bring to him. But he maketh use of their service about us. 1. For the honour of his Majesty, and comfort of our infirmity. 2. To make out his love unto us, by employing such noble creatures for our good. 3. To make and maintain love and correspondency between us and Angels, till we come to walk arm in arm with An∣gels,. as Zach. 3.7. and to be like unto them, yea their equals, Luke 20.36. if not more, Ephes. 1.23. Verse 11. We have walked to and fro thorow the earth] Itavimus, we have coursed up and down with incredible swiftnesse. Hence they are called the char∣rets of God, Psal. 68.17. (Heb. Gods-charret, to note out their joynt-service, as of one) as here, his horsemen, ready prest to do his pleasure. and behold all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest] excepting the Church alone, which like Noah's Ark, is ever tossed up and down, till it rest at last on the ever∣lasting mountain: then she shall have her happy Halcyons: then she shall see her enemies afar off, as Lazarus did Dives, or as the Israelites at the red-sea did their persecutours, dead upon the shore. Mean-while, she must not expect to be calm, and quiet for any continuance.Joh. 16.33. Joh. 16.20. Esth. 3.15. Esay 21.10. 1 Cor. 3.9. In the world ye shall have trouble, And ye shall weep and lament: but the world shall rejoyce: they shall revel, and laugh them∣selves fat. The king and Haman sat down to drink: but the city Shushan was perplexed. The Church is called Gods threshing-floor, because threshed with con∣tinuall crosses: and Gods-husbandry, because he will be sure to plow his own ground, and to make long furrows upon their backs, whatsoever become of the waste; and to weed his own garden, though the rest of the world be let alone, and grow wild. Moab is not poured from vessell to vessell,Jer. 48. Job 10.10. but setleth upon the lees: when the Israel of God is poured out as milk, and crudled like cheese, as Job speaketh in an∣other case. Verse 12. Then the Angel of the Lord] That Advocate with the Father, Jesus the Juft One, 1 John 2.2. who appeareth for his afflicted people, and feelingly pleads for them, as being afflicted in all their afflictions, even the Angel of his pre∣sence that saveth them, Esay 63.9. It much moved him, to hear that Gods ene∣mies were in better case then his people: and this put him upon the following passionate expostulation. O Lord of Hosts, How long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, &c.] Ʋsque∣quo
Domine. Calvin had these words much in his mouth: thereby breathing out his holy desires in the behalf of the afflicted Churches,Melch. Adam. in vita. with whose sufferings hee was more affected then with any thing that befell himself. It is said of Melanthon, that the miseries of the Church made him almost neglect the death of his dearest children: and put him upon many prayers and tears; which,Idem in vita Melanch. like musick upon the water, made a most melodious noise in the ears of God. When Luther in a certain Epistle checked him, and chod him for his exceeding great care of the Churches welfare, calling him pertinacissimam curarum hirudinem, &c. he meekly replied, Si nihil curarem, nihil orarem; If I should not care so, I should not pray so. God seemeth sometimes to have lost his mercy, (as here, How long wilt thou be un∣mercifull to Jerusalem) and then we must find it for him. He seems to have for∣got his people: we must remind him. He seems to sleep, delay: we must waken, quicken him, with How long Lord? Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea the set time is come, saith Daniel,Psal. 102.13, 14 who is (proba∣bly) held to be the Pen man of that excellent Psal. 102. (Confer Dan. 9.2.) and he speaks it with as much confidence, as if he had been in Gods blessed bosom the while. This also he spake, not now by a spirit of prophecy, or speciall reve∣lation; but by way of argumentation, or necessary demonstration: For thy ser∣vants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof; They pity her, and melt over her, therefore thou Lord much more: sith all their tendernesse is but a spark of thy flame, a drop of thine Ocean. against which thou hast had indignation, these threescore and ten yeers] There is much ado among Interpreters about Jeremies 70 and Zacharies 70, whether one and the same: or different one from another. That of Scaliger is most unlikely, who reckoneth these yeers of the captivity, from the first year of Xerxes with his father Darius, unto the fourth year of Darius Nothus.Lib. 6. de Emend. Temp. How much better our countreyman Lydiat (whom yet Scaliger so much scorned, saying, Quis est ille ex ultima Britannia Canis, qui Ios. Scaligerum audeat allatrare?) who concludes it to be 70 years from the last destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldees,Lyd. Emend. Temp. Anno M. 3485. to this se∣cond year of Darius Hystaspes, wherein Zachariah prophecyed? That of A Lapide upon this Text, I cannot passe by, Moraliter idipsum dicamus, idipsum oremus & obsecremus pro Anglia, &c. Let us say the same, pray the same for England, Scot∣land, &c. that the Angel here doth for Jerusalem; How long Lord wilt thou not have mercy upon England, where Heresie hath prevailed now these hundred years and upwards? The English fugitives beyond-seas, write upon their Colledge and Church-doors, in great golden letters, Jesu, Jesu, converte Angliam: Fiat, Fiat. Jesu convert England: Amen, Amen. Why, yet this is somewhat better then that of Pererius the Jesuite, upon Genes. 15.16. If any man marvell saith He, why England continueth to flourish, notwithstanding the over-flow of heresie, and cruel persecution of Catholikes, (just execution of Catholikes, he should have said) wee answer, because their iniquity is not yet full, (God grant it, Ier. 28.6.) Sed veniet tandem iniquitat is complementum. But the time is not far off: and for∣bearance is no quittance, &c. Vers. 13. And the Lord answered the Angel] How should God do otherwise then answer his welbeloved Son, with good and comfortable words, sith he is all in all with the Father, and can do any thing with him? Father, saith he,Joh. 12. I know thou hearest me alwayes. Did God hear Abraham for Ismael, nay for Sodom? Did David hear Ioab, interceding for Absolom?Acts 12.20. Did Herod hearken to Blastus making request for those of Tyre and Sidon, with whom he was highly displeased? And shall not God give ear to his Son, praying for his people, that are as dear to him as the apple of his eye? Good and comfortable words he doth surely answer him: such as were once those, Joh. 12.27, 28. when Christ had thus prayed; Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from this hour: but for this cause came I to this hour. Father, glorifie thy Name. Then came there a voice from heaven (Bath-chol the Rabbins call it) saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorifie it again. So, when he shall say in his daily intercession (for he ever liveth to make request for us, at the right hand of the Majesty on high) It irketh me, that the whole earth is at rest, and my Church at so much unrest: Return, O Lord,Psal. 90.13. how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants. Save now I beseech
thee O Lord:Psal. 118.25. O Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity. How can God do less then answer as Isa. 33.10. Now will I arise, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self: Or as in the words next following here (which indeed are all along good words and comfortable words) I am jealous for Jerusalem &c. The Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet chuse Jerusalem; Yet for all the sorrow he shall do it,Ier. 30.17. and for all that Others called her an outcast saying, This is Zion, whom no man seketh after: and she her self concludeth her dolefull ditty with, Thou hast utterly rejected us: thou art very wroth against us. Lam. 4.22. Verse 14. So the Angell that communed with me] See the Note on ver. 10. cry thou saying] q. d. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God, Speake ye comfortably to Jerusalem, speake ye to her heart and cry unto her saying, that her appointed time is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, and so the quarrell is ended: for she hath received of the Lords hands double for her sins. Nothing so much as I have deserved saith she Ezra 9.13. twice so much as she hath deserved, saith He. O sweet contradiction! O beautifull contention! The same Hebrew word signifieth to repent and to comfort 1 Sam. 15.35. Esay 40.1. Gods care is to comfort those that are cast down. His command to his Prophet is to cry comfort to the penitent with an extraordiny earnestnesse, from the God of all consolation. I am jealous for Ierusalem and for Zion with a great jealousie] Love is strong as death, zeal, or jealousie (for the same word signifieth both) is hard as hell. Cant. 8.6. Non amat qui non zelat saith Augustine. He loves not that zeales not. And Basil venturing himself very farr for his friend, and by some blamed for it, answered, Ego aliter amare non didici, I cannot love a man, but I must do mine utmost for him. When one desired to know what manner of man Basil was, it is said there was presented in a dreame to him a pillar of fire with this motto, Talis est Basilius, Lo, such an one is Basil. It is certaine that our God is a consuming fire, who would set the briars and the thorns saith He, that is the churches enemies, against me in battel?Es. 27.4. I would go through them, I would burn them together. And yet he saith in the same place, Fury is not in me:Prov. 6.34. What will he do then when jea∣lousie is in him as here? Iealousie is the rage of a man, and hath these three pro∣perties. First it is exceeding watchfull, and quick-sighted: hardly shall the Paramour escape the husbands eye, a wanton glance is soon noted and noticed. God is no lesse sensible and observant of the least indignity done to his deare spouse, his Hephzibah,Gen. 4.6. Esth. 7.8. be it but in a frown or a frump. Why is thy countenance cast down, saith God to that dog-bolt Cain? Why dost lowre upon my righteous Abel? What will he force the Queen also before me in the house? If Davids enemies mow and make mouths at him,Psal. 40.15. if they cry Aha, Aha, so would we have it, God will reckon with them for it. If Edom say jearingly to the Prophet, Watchman, what of the night? watchman, what of the night? If Ammon clap but his hands at Gods Israel, if he stamp with the feet, and rejoyce in heart only, when it goes ill with the church, God will stretch out his hand upon him, and cut him off out of his countrey, and he shall know that he is Jehovah, Ezek. 25.67. yea that the Lord God of Israel is a jealous God. He will be jealous for his land, and pitty his peo∣ple Ioel 2.18. Secondly jealousie is violent: it is cruel as the grave, the coales thereof are coales of fire Cant. 8.6. The same word is elsewhere put for fiery thunderbolts, Psal. 78.48. also for a carbuncle or burning feaver Deut. 32.24. Jealousie puts a man into a feaver-fit of outrage: arms him with fiery darts, yea with light∣bolts: makes him cast firebrands, be ready to take any revenge: Think the same of God in a way of justice. He will spit in the face of a Miriam, that shall but muter against his Moses:Num. 12.14. what then will he do, (or rather what will he not do) against Jezabel, Athaliah, Herodias &c? Thirdly jealousie is irreconcilable, implacable, Prov. 6.34, 35. He will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content though thou give many gifts, what would not Balaac have given to have had his will upon Israel? What large offers made Haman? he would pay ten thousand talents of silver to those that had the charge of the businesse to destroy the
Jewes. Ahashuerosh yeelded: but so did not God.Esth. 3.9. Esth. 7.4. We are sold (said Esther) I and my people to be destroyed, to be slain and to perish: But God never consented to the bargaine. He had warr with Amalec for ever, and laid his hand upon his own throne, as swearing to root him out Exod. 17.16. And this proud Agagite Haman shall feel the force of his curse in his very bowels. Let the labouring Church but cry out, Help O King, heare O husband, give eare O shepheard of Israel,Isa. 8.8. Isa. 63.15: the enemy is come into thy land O Immanuel, and the stretching out of his wings filleth the whole bredth of it. Where is thy zeale (or jealousie) and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies towards me? are they restrained? Doubt∣lesse thou art our Father, our Redeemer, or neer kinsman, nay, our husband. Thy church is unto thee A sister, a spouse:Esay 58.7. 1 Cor. 6.17. Gen. 14. 1 Sam. 30.18. Ier. 12.7. Ier. 4.10. And canst thou hide thine eyes from thine own flesh? from her that is joyned to the Lord, and is one spirit? shall Abraham venture for the rescue of his kinsman, David of his two wives, and wilt thou do nothing for the dearely beloved of thy soule? shall she be given up into the hand of her enemies? shall the sword reach unto the soule. Let Christ but heare such words from the mouth of his Spouse: and he will soon gird his sword upon his thigh, he will act Phineas his part and execute judgement:Psal. 78.66. he will smite his enemies in the hinder parts (whip them, as men use to do boyes) and so put them to a perpetuall reproach; shame them for ever, as a company of punyes or Zanies. Verse 15. And I am very sore displeased with the Heathen that are at ease] Heb. I am in such a heate as causeth fuming and foaming. I am boyling-hot, and even ready to burst out upon them, to destroy them: for the word here used hath great affinity with another word that signifieth to cut down, and to destroy 2 King. 6.6. and importeth an higher degree of displeasure, a greater height of heate, then either Anger or wrath, as may be seen in that signall gradation Deut. 29.28. The Lord rooted them out of their land in Anger and in Wrath, and in great Indignation. The last of these three is this word in the Text, Fervore maximo ferveo, I am as hot as may be against those Heathens that are at ease, at hearts∣ease, that come not in trouble like other men, neither are they plagued as better men,Psal. 73.5. and are therefore secure and insolent above measure Iob 21.23. haughty and haunty, so that the Church cannot rest for them: they thrust with the shoulder, and push with the horn (as afterwards verse 18.19. with Dan. 8.4.) yea they push the diseased Ezek. 34.21. (which is a singular cruelty.) they help forward the assliction] they fall like dogs upon the wounded Deere. This David complaines of as an unsufferable grievance Psal. 69, 26.Esay 27. For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten: and they talk to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded. God smiteth his in mercy and in measure, in the branches only,Aug. and not at the root, neque ad exitium sed ad exercitium. Displeased he may be with his own, and make bloody wails upon their backs, if need be: but then he lookes that others should pitty them, and not lay on more load and seek to bring them to utmost extremity. God puts his people sometimes into the hands of his enemies, for correction sake. Now they commonly being inraged with haughty, reveng∣full, and malicious desires, exceed their commission, and so derive the mischief upon themselves (See Prov. 24.17, 18,) they cannot doe but they must overdoe (as Nebuchadnezzar the rod in Gods hand Isai 10.) and thereby utterly undoe themselves for ever. For their cruelty comes up to heaven 2 Chron. 28.9. and God soon heareth the cry of his oppressed (for he is gracious) and avengeth himself on their pittilesse enemies: standing over them and saying as Isa. 47.6. I was wroth with my people. I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy: upon the ancient hast thou heavily laid the yoke. And againe: Because these Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a deceitfull heart, to destroy it for the old hatred:Ezek. 25.15, 17. and 26.2. There∣fore I will execute great vengeances upon them with furious rebukes, and they shall know that I am the Lord when I shall laymy vengeance upon them.2 Sam. 13.39. Joab never plea∣sed David better, then when he made intercession for banished Absolom: for the soule of king David longed to go forth unto Absolom, whom yet he had very just cause to be greatly displeased with. God in a heat, as it were, against Israel, offereth Moses a great fortune Exod. 32.10. but would have taken it very ill, that Moss should have taken him at his word.
He is but a little angry with his people] and soon repenteth him of the evill: But woe be to those that help forward the indignation, that deale by Gods afflicted as the Herd of Deer do; which, when any of the herd is shot, the hest push him out of their company.Camden. It is said of Q. Elisabeth, that she hated ho lesse then did Mithridates, such as maliciously persecuted vertue forsaken of fortune. Think the same of God. He weareth his rod to the stumps, and then throwes it into the fire. He sets his horse-leeches to his people (when he findes them sick of a plethory of pride, when fulnesse hath bred forgetfulnesse, saturity security) and suffereth them to suck rill they burst: and then treads them under his feet, and puts them away as drosse Psal 119.118, 119. Verse 16.Psal 42.7. Therefore thus saith the Lord] Thus, one deep calleth another: the lower deep of our misery, the higher deep of Gods mercy. As Craesus his dumb son burst out into Kill not king Craesus: so, when enemies are ready to devoure the Church, Gods bowels work: he can hold no longer but cryes, Save my child, Handle the yong man gently for my sake, See Ier. 31.20. Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever; neither will I be alwayes wroth: for the spirit should faile before me &c. when the child swoons in the whipping, God let falls the rod, and falls a kissing it, to fetch life into it againe. A Physitian, in some cases purgeth his patient till nothing be lest almost, but skin and bone or blooddeth him ad deliquium animae, till he faint and sink, but yet his care is still to maintain nature: so this heavenly Father and Physitian is carefull to keep up the spirits of his suffering Saints, by comforts and cordials, as here: I am returned to Ierusalem with mercies: Miserationibus visceralibus with mul∣titudes of tender mercies that flow from the inwards, from the bowels, from the bosom and bottom of the heart: had that of a Parent, nay of a mother toward her child in an extremity as 1 King. 3.26. And here observes how fully and sweetly the Angels prayer (verse 12.) is answered even ad cardinem desiderij.Aug. Confes. lib. 5. c. 8. God not only grants him according to his own heart, but fulfills all his counsell, as it is Psal. 20.4. Lets it be to him even as he will, nay gives him an enlarged an∣swer, presseth upon him (as Naaman did upon Gehezi's two talents when he desi∣red but one.) How long wilt thou not be mercifull to Jerusalem saith He? behold I am returned to Jerusalem with many mercies saith God.] I went away and hid me from it in my anger Hos. 5.15. but am come again with many com∣forts, to relieve it. As all light is from the Sun, and all waters from the sea: so is all comfort from God. In thy light shall we see light: but Thou diddest hide thy face and I was troubled Psal. 30.7. as when the Sun is eclipsed, all creatures here flag and hang the head, there is a drooping in the whole frame or nature: and as when the extracting force of the Sun leaves the vapours that are drawn up, they fall down again to the earth; So sares it with the Church: If God withdraw, she lyes all amort, yea, she lieth open to all sorts of evils and enemies: for her shadow is departed from her. But he cannot be long absent, such is his love: he will re∣pent for his people when he seeth their power is gone Dent. 32.36. when there is a dignus vindice nodus, an extremity fit for divine power to interpose: when mi∣sery weighs down, & nothing but mercy turns the scale, then (at furthest) in the very turning and criticall point. He will return to Jerusalem with mercies. He will return to her, not as the winter sun, that casts a goodly countenance when it shines, but gives little comfort and heat: but with a Cornu-copia of all manner of blessings will he come. my house shall be built in it saith the Lord of Hosts: and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem] that is both Church and State shall flourish. God will both do good in his good pleasure unto Sion: be will also build the walls of Jerusalem Psal. 51.18. but mark that he saith in his good pleasure, as here in tender mercies; to teachus, that all the good we enjoy is merely of mercy, it is all of free grace: for otherwise, there should not be so much as any face of Church or common∣wealth, as we see in the Jewes at this day; a miserable dissected people, because Lo-ruhamah,Hos. 1. such as have not obtained mercy. Then Ancestours acknowledged with all thankfulnesse for so undeserved a favour, that Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto them a very small remnant,Isay 1.9. they should have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah. Had not the Angels laid hold upon Lots hand, and the good
Lord been mercifull unto him Gen. 19.16. he also had perished amongst those sinners against their own soules. Jehoshua was a brand pluckt out of the fire Zech. 3.2. And when One said to Mr. Bradford the Martyr God hath done much for you since I first knew you, and hath wrought wonderously in you to his glory; he thus answered, Truth it is, for He hath dealt favourably with me,Act. & Mon. 1473. Ezra 9.13. in that he hath not punished me according to my sins, but hath suffered me to live that I might seek repentance. Thou hast punished us lesse then our iniquities deserve, saith Ezra. And it is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, saith the Church, because his compassions faile not Lam. 3.22. Verse 17. Cry yet saying, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts my cities] Here are foure Yets in this one verse, and all very gracious ones: to break their hard harts, and to raise their faith in his promised mercies. For it is as if God should say. Though I was sore displeased with your Fathers, and ye are risen up in their roomes a very rate of rebels, so that I have had indignation against you full seventy yeers, ver. 12. yet I do you to know, and by my Propher I proclaime with great earnestness and evidence of truth, that I do yet own you my cities (so that ye are not disco∣venanted) and will yet prosper you (so that it shall no more be said This is Zion whom no man careth for: for you shall have plentifull increase of men,Ier. 30.17. cattle and all manner fruits of the earth as chap. 2.4.) yea you shall have a fulnesse of all things, not only repletive but diffusive, not only of abundance, but of redundance too; your cup shall over flow into the lesser vessels of others. my cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad] Diffundentur, dissluent, aut effluent. You shall have not for necessity only, but for lawfull delight and honest affluence. and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion] sc. with spiritnall comforts, taking her into his wine-cellar Cant. 2. yea into the wildernesse, and there speaking to her heart Hos. 2.13. and shall yet chuse Ierusalem] That is, settle her in the sound assurance of her. Election and Adoption, whereof those outward blessings are both fruites and pledges. Hence David doubts not to conclude his spiritual good estate, and hopes of eternall happinesse from his externall enjoyments Psal. 23.5, 6. Thou prepa∣rest a table before me, thou anointest mine head, my cup runneth over. Hence he in∣ferrs, Surely goodnesse and mercy shall follow me all the dayes of my life: and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. In all that is here said, we may see that scripture fully made good Ier. 51.5. Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of Hosts: though their land was filled with sin against the Holy one of Israel. And herein God dealt with his people according to hi pre∣rogative, and not according to his ordinary course. When the cursed Canaanites had filed their land from corner to corner with their uncloannesies,Ezra 9.11. they were devo∣ted to destruction. When the Edomites grew insolent and ripe for ruine, they were called the border of wickednesse, and the people against whom the Lord had in∣dignation for ever. Mal. 1.4. See the Note there. Verse 18. Then I lift up mine eyes and saw] That is, I gave good heed to this second vision also: which was added purposely for confirmation of the former promises; which should be certainly accomplished to the Church, notwithstand∣ing her many and mighty enemies. Horns they are called for their might and mis∣chievousnes: by a metaphor, à feris cornupetis from fierce beasts, whose strength and wrath lies in their horns; or else from warriers, who wore iron horns upon their helmets. and behold four horns] Not the foure Monarchies (for the Grecians and Ro∣manes were not yet: and this is spoken here for the present comfort of the afflict∣ed Church) but the enemeis of Israel from all the four parts of the world (fee Psal. 107.2, 3.) for they were surrounded; On the North were the Syrians, Assy∣tians, and Babylonians. (Ab Aqu lone nihil boni, Ier. 4.6. and 6.1) On the East, the Ammonites and Moabites. On the South, the Edomites and Egypti∣ans. On the West, the Philistines, as may be gathered out of Ieremy and Ezekiel. Geneva is at this day a small people, invironed with enemies, French, Spanish, Savoy, Pope, and barred out from all aid of neighbours, cites, and churches: yet, by the mighty arm of God, strangely and strongly upheld and desended.
This Mr. Beza represented in a most elegant emblem of a city depainted as hanged by a twined threed;Melch. Ad. in vit. Bez. 227. sustained and maintained by the mighty hand of God alone. Would any man take the Churches picture? saith Luther: then let him paint a a silly poor maid, sitting in a wood or wildernesse, compassed about with hungry wolves,Loc. com. de perfec. verae Ecclesiae. lions, bores, and beares, and with all manner of cruel and hurtfull beasts; and in the midst of a great many surious men assaulting her every moment and mi∣nute, for this is her condition in the world. Verse 19 And I said unto the Angel that talked with me, What be these?] Though the vision be dark and mysterious, yet the Prophet despaireth not of a right understanding, neither doth he waywardly reject it with a Quod non vult intelligi, vult negligi. But, wanting wisdome he asketh it of God, as St. Iames also adviseth us to do chap. 1.5. and as David practised. Teach me good judg∣ment and knowledge saith He, give me understanding and I shall obserue thy law. Thus Daniel prayed, and had an Angel sent to informe him, not once but often in friendly and familiar manner Dan. 9.21. and 10.11. and 11.2, 3. So had Io∣seph, Cornelius, Paul, &c. And although Angels are not so ready now, or ap∣pear not, at least, so visibly to tell us the mind of God: yet He will not be wan∣ting to his willing servants; but in the use of meanes they shall be all taught of God: as David was by repayring to the Sanctuary Psal. 73.13. and as the Eunuch was by Philip Act. 8. these are the hornes which have scattered] Heb. tossed them up in the ayre, as furious beasts do with their homes,Lud de Dieu in Mat. 22.44. and sorely bruised them. Num not modo disper∣sionem significat quae fit per modum ventilationis, sed etiam quae fit per modum alisie∣nis & contritionis. See Hos. 10.14. and 13.16. Verse 20. And the Lord shewed me foure carpenters] He that before was called an Angell, is here called Jehovah, this shewes him to be Christ, who is God blessed for ever. In respect of his eternall essence he is called the Lord: in respect of his office or Mediatourship, an Angell. foure carpenters] Or smiths: so many horns, so many Artificers to batter and break them. God wants not wayes and meanes to help his at a dead lift: he knowes how to deliver saith Peter,2 Pet. 2.9. and herein usually he goeth a way by himself. Many times he setteth the enemies together by the eares among themselves: whi∣lest that I withall escape, saith David Psal. 141.10. Thus by Nebuchadnezzar, as by a mall or bettle, he brake the rest of those horrible hornes: as at this day the Pope by the Turk, and Spaniard by the French, and that the Church may have her Halcions. N. marvell I slept so soundly seeing Antipater was by and watch∣ed, said Philip of Macedon. We may better say of Antipater, our gracious Father and guardian, the keeper of his Israel. Verse 21. What come these to do?] he asketh not what they were? for by their tooles or weapons he perceived they were Carpenters or smith, (as some think) with iron instruments to breake these iron homes: confer 1 King. 22.11. He inquireth therefore of their imployment only. Futilous and foolish questions should be avoided, Tit. 3.9. so that no man did lift up his head] Turn head, or looke cheerfully as Luke 21.28. but these are come to fray them] deterrere, saith the Vulgar: better deterrere, to fright them, now that they had pusht Israel to the Lord. to cast out &c.] Thus Omne sub regno graviore regnum est. See Eccles. 5.7. with the Note there. CHAP. II. Verse 1. I lift up mine eyes againe and looked] i. e. I looked wishly, not slug∣gishly, as betwixt sleeping and waking as chap. 4. I saw further by the spirit then common sense could have carried me. I beheld Ierusalem in her future glory, I looked intently, I took aime, not by the things which are seen, but by the things which are not seen 2 Cor. 4.18. Heb. 11.27. Gal. 4.26.
and behold a man.] The Man Christ Jesus, as his Mother is called a Virgin Isa. 7.14. the Virgin, that famous Virgin that conceived and bare a Son, that gat a man from the Lord Gen. 4.1. This Man (called before and after an Angel, as appearing in humane shape) is here seen and set forth as an Architect or Master-builder, going to take the plot of his Church (see Rev. 21.15. and observe by the way, how in that book the holy Ghost borrows the allegories and elegancies of the Old Testament, to set out the story of the New, in succeeding ages.) Verse 2. Whither goest thou?] This was great boldnesse; But the Prophet un∣derstood himself well enough; and Christ approves and assents to it in a graci∣ous answer here, and especially verse 4. Great is the confidence of a good consci∣ence toward God. See Esay 63.16, 17. Hab. 1.12. We may come boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16.1 Pet. 3.23. to measure Jerusalem.] This had been promised before, Chap. 1.16. But for their further confirmation, who saw a little likelyhood of such a reedifying and repeo∣pling, it is repeated. Thus the Lord, tendering our infirmity, seals to us again and again in the holy Sacrament, what he had said and sworn to us in his word. Verse 3. And behold the Angel] Zacharies Angel, as One calleth him. Went forth] to take direction from Christ, and to give the prophet further information. See the Note on Chap. 1.9. and another Angel went out to meet him] So ready is Christ to answer prayers, and to satisfie his weak but willing people, that draw near unto him with a true heart. Heb. 10.22. If any such ask and misse, it is because they ask amisse. Jam. 4.3. Verse 4. Run, speak to this young man] Not go, but Run: yea, fly swiftly with wearinesse of slight, as Dan: 9.21. Christ thinks it long ere his praying people hear from him. Onely he will be enquired of by them Ezek. 36.37. Zachary seemes to have been a young Prophet, and Christ remembred the kindnesse of his youth, and became a wonderful counseller to him: He gave to this young man (or green∣headed stripling) knowledge and discretion. Prov. 1.4. Epiphanius saith he was an old man: and that he is called a young man because a client and disciple of the Angel that communed with him. Where Angels are called men, it was no dis. paragement to Zachary to call himself a lad, or servant considering his distance. Thus Abrahams servant, though old, is called his boy Gen. 24.52. by a Catachresis. That's a good Note that One gives here, That the Angel tells the prophet;Mr. Pemble. but the prophet must tell the people: God using not the Ministery of Angels but men (earthen vessels) to bear his Name to his people Acts 8.26. and 9.6. and 16.9 Jerusalem shal be inhabited as towns without wals] Or shall dwell in towns without walls, viz. in the suburbs or villages, there being not room enough within the walls to receive them. This seemed an incredible thing to this poor remnant now re∣turned from Babylon. But it is the property and duty of beleevers to trust God upon his bare word: and that against sense in things invisible, and against reason, in things improbable. for the multitude of men and cattel therein] That is, saith Augustine, of spiritual and carnal persons in the Chuch Catholike. Verse 5. For I, saith the Lord,Igneus qui & cominus arceat & eminus ter∣reat. Theodor. will be unto her a wall of fire] The Church (Christs garden) may seem to lie open to all incursions and disadvantages: but as it hath a well within it Cant 4. So it hath a wall without it, yea round about it, better and stronger then that about Babylon, or Susa in Persia; the stones whereof were joy∣ned together with gold, as Cassiodorus testifieth.Lib. 7. Var. Epist. The Lacedemonians were forbid∣den to wall in their city of Sparta: as being sufficiently fortified by the valour of the inhabitants. The Hollanders will not wall the Hague, though it have 2000 hous∣holds in it: as desirous to have it counted rather the principal village of Europe, then a lesser city. China is said to be surrounded with a strong wall of stone: and England, with walls of wood, sc. A puissant Navy. But what's all this (either for defence or offence) to a wall of fire? who dare venture to scale such a wall? It is not valour but madnesse to fight with a flame. Fire is terrible to the fiercest crea∣tures, as Lions, Leopards &c. Shepheards and travellers were used to guard them∣selves by making great fires round about their night-lodgings, to keep of wild beasts.
Some think the prophet alludeth to that custome: others, to the Angel guarding of Paradise with a flaming sword,Instit: Lib. 2. Cap 13. that is, saith Lactantius, with a wall of fire. The Church may sit and sing, we have a strong city: salvation will God ap∣point for walls and bulwarks. Esay 26.1.Heb 1.7, Gen. 32.1. He maketh his Angels spirits, his ministers a flame of fire. These met and ministred unto Jacob at Mahanaim making a lane for him,These are the watchmen over the walls of the new Ieru. salem, and of the mountains about the same. Isai. 62. as the word importeth. These fiery charets and horsmen appeared, for Eli∣sha by whole legions 2 Kin. 6.17. and do still pitch their camp round about the godly Psal. 34.8. Who therefore cannot but be safe, as being guarded by the peace of God within them, and by the power of God without them, through faith unto sal∣vation. and will be the glory in the midst of her.] God is the Churches both bulwark and beauty: her muniment and ornament. His presence, his worship, his Grace, his pro∣tection is that tower in the midst of her Esay. 5. that golden head of the picture, that tower of the slock and strong hold of the daughter of Gods people Mic. 4.8. Hence the Ark is called the glory Rom. 9.4.5. and all comforts without it but Ica∣bods.1 Sam. 4.20. Hence Judea is called the glorious land: and Heathens are brought in saying, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people. For what nation is there so great that hath God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is, in all things that we call upon him for?Deut. 4.5, 6, 7 And what nation is there so great that hath statutes and udgments so righteous as all this law &c. Surely as Samsons strength and glory lay in his hair, so doth the strength and glory of our land consist in the true religion, and Gods sincere service: which if it should be shaved and deprived of, though every shower were a shower of gold (saith a Divine) every stone in the land a pearl, every begger an honourable Senatour, every fool as wise as Solomon, every weakling as strong as Samson; yet our wealth, honour, strength, wisdom, and glo∣ry are gone, and we shall sing a doleful Miserere with Phineas his wife Ichabod.) The glory of England is gone; for Religion is gone. Verse 6. Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the North] A proclamation to those in Babylon to make hast home, and come away for shame: now they had so fair a way made, and such free liberty given them to return. A man would wonder they should be so backward to a businesse of this nature. But they that were born in hell, know no other heaven, as the proverb is. There they had lived a long season in peace and safety in a rich and fat though a forreine Countrey. There they were at quiet, enjoyed their religion and customs, got wealth, had favourites at Court: and what should they trouble themselves to remove into a Countrey where they were sure to meet with many bitter enemies, the Samaritans and o∣thers? And who can tell whether this Proclamation of King Darius be not a de∣signe to try their affection to their countrey, and so to fall upon such as did offer to return thither? Thus by casting of perils, distrusting of promises, and listening to that Improba Siren Desidia,Antiqr. Lib. 11 Cap. 4. they staid half of them, at least behinde: whate∣ver Josephus hath falsly storied of 4628000. that returned: the contrary whereto see Ezr. 2.64. for I have spread you abroad into the four windes] And do now offer to recol∣lect and reduce you to your own countrey. See that ye shift not off Me that speak from heaven.Heb. 12.25. and 2.3. See that ye neglect not so great salvation. How oft is the Lord even fain to smoak us, and so force us out of our clayie cottages, toward our heavenly home; And what ashame is it to us that a Heathen should say Fugiendum est ad clarissimam patriam:Plotin: apud. Ang de C.D lib. 9. Cap. 16 ibi pater, ibi omnia. We should even flee apace to our own countrey that is above: sith there is our Father, there is All that heart can wish or need require. Verse 7. Deliver thy self, O Zion that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon] q.d. Is Babylon a fit place for thee to abide in? what comfort canst thou take in such lewd company? Save thy self from this untoward generation Act. 2.40. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her in iquity: for this is the time of the Lords vengeance: he will render unto her a recompense. Jer 51.6.7. Shortly after this exhortation to the sons of Zion, Babylon revolted from the Persians,Iustin: lib. 1. Herod. lib. 3. and was taken and sackt by Darius in the fourth yeer of his reign (that is two yeers after this Prophecy was uttered) by the help of his friend Zopyrus. Two thing should prevail with the people of God to shun the society of
the ungodly. 1. Infection of sin, which is more contagious and catching then the plague. Though Lot learned not the evil manners of Sodom, yet his daughters did. 2. Infliction of punishment Zac. 9.2. Hamath lay so nigh Damascus in places that she fared the worse for her neighbourhood. See for both these, Rev. 18.4. and say, if at any time forced to be in bad company, O that I had wings of a dove:Psal. 55.6. for then would I flee away, and be at rest. Or, if this Oh will not set thee at li∣berty, take up that Wo, to expresse thy misery, Wo is me that I sojourn in Me∣shech, &c. Vers. 8. For thus saith the Lord of hosts] Sanchez referreth these words to those aforegoing, q. d. Deliver thy self, &c. for so the Lord commandeth. But herein he stands alone; the current of Interpreters carrying it against him. This preface seems prefixed for procuring more authority to the ensuing promise, which to the poor Jews might seem incredible. If Jehovah speaketh it, and he that hath all power in his hand to effect what he speaketh, why should any one doubt, or despair? After this glory] i. e. these glimmerings of glory, these out goings of grace begun amongst you, and by degrees to be finished. hath he sent me unto the Nations which spoiled you] Or, against the Nation for it is a sending in judgement: and perhaps against either the Caldeans destroy∣ed by the Persians (see the Note on verse 7.) Or, the Persians, afterwards destroy∣ed by the Grecians, and by Alexander the Great. See Esay 33.1. Now, where∣as some object, that Christ is her said to be sent of his Father: and this seems to import an inferiority: It is answered: First, that two equals by mutuall consent may send one another. Mission doth not alwayes import inequality. Secondly, One may be inferiour to another, either by nature, and so Christ is not: or by condition, as he is the Mediatour, and as he did voluntarily abase himself; and so he is, Phil. 2.7. For he that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of his eye] The little man that is in the eye, (as pupilla of pupa) Or, the black of the eye. God,Ishon, of Ish. It is here cal∣led Bath, the daughter of the eye: be∣cause it is as dear to a man as an onely daughter. who at first drew light out of darknesse, doth by an admirable work, draw the light of the body out of the black apple of the eye. Philosophers call it, the Chrystalline bu∣mour. It is the tenderest piece of the tenderest part: to expresse the inexpressible tendernesse of Gods love, saith Salvian. The eye is kept most diligently, and strongly guarded by nature with tunicles. A man can better beat a thultch on the backs then a touch on the eye. Siquis digitum meum mordeat, siquis pungat brachium & crura, siquis etiam duriter vulneret, &c. saith Calvin here. If one bite my finger, prick my leg or arm, yea slash and wound me, I can better bear it, then if he thrust his finger in mine eyes. Amida sonne of Muleasses king of Tunis, cruelly put out his fathers eyes, by holding hot burning basons before them.Turk hist. Robert de Behasme, Earl of Shrewesbury, Anno 1111. playing with his own childe,Speed. 473. for a pastime, put his thumbe in the boyes eyes, and thrust out the balls thereof. We use to say, Oculus & fama non patiuntur joos. The eye and the good name. will endure no jests. Let persecutours take heed how they meddle with Gods eyes. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened himself against God and prospered? Job 94. Some read the text thus. He that toucheth you, touch∣eth the apple of his own eye, that is, he very grievously hurteth himself, as procu∣ring and pullingdown upon his own head, the sharp wrath and vengeance of God. But the former is the better. Verse 9. For behold, I will shake mine hand upon them] Kings, they say, have long hands; and can easily reach those that are farre distant, This is much more true of the King immertall: who can quickly crumble, to crackle the mightiest mo∣narchs: he cuts off the spirit of Princes, Psal. 76.12. he slips them off, (so the Hebrew there imports) as one would slip off a floure between ones fingers: or as one should flip off a bunch of grapes. If the Lord do no more but arise, his ene∣mies shalt be scattered, Psal. 68.1. If he do but shew himself in the field (as Xerxes used to pitch bis Tent on high, and stand looking on his Army when in fight) the Philistines will be heard to cry out; God is come into the camp: Wo unto us; who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods, &c 1 Sam. 4.8. But if he once shake his hand, (that mighty hand, as Saint James calleth it, that
spanneth the heavens, and shaketh the foundations of the earth) how much more if he smite with the hand,Ezek. 6.11. and stamp with the foot, (as the Prophet in another case; and as Pompey vainly vaunted, that with a stamp on the ground of Italy, he could raise an Army) the sinners against Zion are soon afraid;Esay 33.14. Jer. 4.13. fearfulnesse surpri∣zeth the hypocrites. Wo unto us, say they, for we are spoiled. The very shaking of his hand at them, shall make their hearts ake, shake and fall asunder in their bo∣somes, as drops of water. and they shall be a spoil to their servants] i.e. To the Jews, whom they lately spoiled and enslaved. This was fulfilled in Esthers dayes: and afterwards in the time of the Maccabees. Besides, what is yet expected to be done by the nation of the Jews; when, at their glorious conversion, Christ shall dwell among them, vers. 10. and the multitude of Nations shall joyn themselves to Christ, ver. 11. the Jewes inhabiting in their own land, vers. 12. to the silencing, amusing, and a∣mazing of all flesh, vers. 13. whilest the enemies of the Church by them sub∣dued, Zach. 10.11. and possessed, Esay 14.2. Obad. 17, 19. shall willingly, or perforce come under Christs obedience. The conversion of the Gentiles (saith a learned Authour) is many times intimated by the Israelites mastering of them, spoiling them,The calling of the Jews by Sir H. Finch. possessing them for servants, and for hand-maids, as Esay 14.2. Am. 9.11. Obad. 19. and here, which is not meant so much of a temporall sub∣duing, as of a spirituall joyning with them in seeking of the Lord; yet so as the chief soeveraignty and stroke of keeping men within the lists of their subjection and obedience unto Christ, shall remain among the Jews. And so Saint James teacheth us to expound those phrases, Act. 15.17. where that which Amos saith, that they (the Israelites) may possesse the remnant of Edom, James rendreth, that the resi∣due of men may seek after the Lord. The enemy, whom indeed, the Jews shall spoil, root out, and destroy, after they have groaned long under his hard yoke. and bondage, is Gog and Magog, that is to say, the Turk, Ezech. 38. and 39 with whom they shall have a marvellous conflict, as it may seem in their own countrey, Ezech. 39.2, 4. Dan. 11.44, 45. and over whom they shall obtain a noble victo∣ry (God from heaven miraculously fighting for them, Ezech. 38.18, 19, &c. Zach. 14.3, 4, 5.) at, or near Jerusalem, Joel 3.2. Ezech. 39.16. This enemy is not alwayes represented by one and the same name: but sometimes he is called Moab, Edom, Rabbah, Ashur, Javan: haply because those that inhabit the seat of these people shall joyne hands with the Turk, and fall in the same destruction. Sometimes he is called Leviathan,Esay 27.1. Ezek. 38.2. Dan. 11.40. from his quality; sometimes Gog and Magog, from his countrey; sometimes the king of the North, from his territory. But by all these names, one and the same enemy is understood: which marvellously clear∣eth the place in Ezekiel, chap. 38.17. where the Lord by his Prophet speaketh to Gog in this wise; Art thou he of whom I have spoken in ancient time by my servants the Prophets of Israel, which prophecied in these dayes and years. He cannot mean Himself, nor Daniel, which was but his contemporary, much lesse Zachary that came after: but he meaneth, the ancient Prophets long before, who spake of the same person, though not by the same name. and ye shall know that the Lord of Hosts hath sent me] You shall subscribe to the truth of these promises, which now you can very hardly be brought to beleeve: when God shall have fulfilled with his hand that which he had spoken with his mouth, as Solomons phrase is, 1 King. 8.15. Verse 10. Sing and rejoyce, O daughter of Zion, for lo, I come] After a long absence (as it may seem) and great expectation, I come, not to lodge for a night, but to dwell and make mine abode in the midst of thee; partly in my new-built temple, but principally in the Temple of my body, Ioh. 2.21. For the Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, Joh. 1.14. Lo here's habitatie Dei cum carne, God dwelling with men, which the Magicians held impossible, Dan. 2.11. And for this the Church here, though at a great under, is commanded to sing and shout, notwithstanding her present pressures. This might seem to her an unseasonable discourse; which, saith Siracides, is as musick in mourning. But when is physick more seasonable,Ecclus. 22.6. then in time of sicknesse? And when had the Saints more need of chearing up, then when they are pressed down with heaviest crosses? And what grea∣ter comfort to a good soul then Christ Jesus our joy? Christus tecythus habet in malu:
his comforts are such as the world can neither give, nor take away: such as no good thing can match; no evill thing overmatch. Verse 11. And many nations shall be joyned to the Lord in that day &c.] See the Note on ver. 9. And further observe: that albeit the thorough comming in of the Gentiles, for all Nations with one consent to receive Christ, be put off till the Jews famous conversion: yet that nothing hindereth, but that this and such like places that speak of the same may well serve to warrant the first inceptions of their calling. And so doth St. James cite them Act. 15.16, 17. out of Amos 9.11, 12. and Paul Rom. 9.25, 26. out of Hos. 1.10. and I will dwell in the middest of thee] See the Note on ver. 10. and thou shalt know &c.] See the Note on ver. 9. Verse 12. And the Lord shall inherit Iudah his portion] Or his enclosure, his seve∣rall, divided from the rest of the world by a wonderfull separation, as the He∣brew word signifieth Exod. 33.16. And though there were some interruption in shewing favour for a time: yet was there no imercision, and utter breach of covenant: nor is to this time, as the Apostle sheweth Rom. 11.28, 29. About the time when the Turkish tyranny shall have lasted 350. yeeres (saith my former Authour out of Dan. 7.25. and 12.7, 11. Rev. 9.15.) the Jews shall re∣paire toward their own countrey Esay 11.15, 16. and 51.10, 11. Ier. 3.18. Hos. 1.11. where they shall have a great conflict with the Turk Ezech. 38. and be in great distresse for a time Dan. 12.1. but at length prevaile, to the utter ruine of the Grand Signior himself, and the overthrow of his Army; perhaps not far from the sea of Gennezaret, otherwise called the lake of Tiberias Ezek. 39.11. After which they shall dwell in their own countrey Ier. 3.18. and 23.8. Ezech. 37.21, 22. Am. 9.14, 15. They shall inhabit all the parts of the land as be∣fore Obad 15.19, 20. Ier. 31.38, 39, 40. Esay 27.12. and 65.10. The land shall be more fertile then ever it was Ezech. 35. Hos. 2 21, 22. Ioel 3.18. Am. 9.13. Zach. 14.10. The countrey more populous then before Esay 49.19, 20, 21. Ezech. 34.31. and 36.37, 38. There shall be no separation of the ten tribes from the other two: but all make one entire kingdome Ezech. 37.22, 24. Hos. 1.11. and a most flourishing Commonwealth Dan. 7.27. together with a Church most glorious, both for outward beauty Zech. 14.6, 7. Esay 60.20. and 62.1, 2, 3. and inward purity in doctrine Ezech. 37.23. Zacb. 13.2, 3. in disci∣pline, all prophane purged out Ioel. 3.17. Zach. 14.8. abundance of spirituall graces Esay 25.6. &c. safety Zach. 10.12. and 14.11. prosperity Esa. 25.8. and 51.13. and stability Esay 26.1. and 33.16. Ier. 30.20. &c. perpetuity Esay 60.21. Ioel. 3.20. Verse 13. Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord] Heb. Hus, St. Peace and be still, as our Saviour once said to the raging Sea Mar. 4.39. whereupon the wind ceased (which before had blowed and blustered till it was weary againe, as the Greek word there importeth) and there was a great calme, all was suddenly husht,. and silent. the enemies of the Church are no lesse brutish and boisterous then the fierce winds and waves Psal. 107.25, 26, 27. But God who sets a bound to the mighty waters which they may not passe Psal. 104.9. he also resraineth the remainder of mans wrath Psal. 76.10. If he do but (as the Roman Tribune was wont to do) interpose his Veto. If he do but say (st.) Be silent O all flesh,  plot not, prate not, practise not against my people, who dare quatch in his pre∣sence, or gainest and his commands? Who art thou O man that chattest against God? saith Paul. Who is this that darkeneth counsell by words without wisdom?Rom. .20. Iob 38.2. saith God to Iob: how now? Let all flesh be silent: Let God be justified, and eve∣ry mouth stopped. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. He will keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked (whether they will or no) shall be silent in darknesse: for by strength shall no man prevaile. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to peeces: out of heaven shall he thunder upon them (saith holy Hannah.) And then they shall be glad to be quiet,1 Sam. 2.3, 9, 10. and to save themselves as they can: like as the wormes, when it thunders, wrig∣gle into the comers of the earth; and as Caligula (that bold miscreant that dared his Jove to a duel) when it thundered, covered his eyes with his cap,Sueton. running un∣der the bed, or any bench-hole.
O all flesh] fraile and foolish, weak and worthlesse men, who may not com∣pare their wisdome, or oppose their strength to Gods: before whom they can no more stand, then a glass-bottle can before a Cannon-shot. They should there∣fore do well to meddle with their match; and not contend with him that is Mightier then they.Eccles. 6.10. The Church is called Jehovah shammah, or the Lord is there Ezek. 48.35. and although she be but a Virgin, yet she hath a thrice-puissant Champion,Es. 37.22, 23. even the Holy One of Israel. who is now also already raised up] Or arroused awaked as a man out of sleep Psal. 44.23. or as a giant that shouteth by reason of wine Psal. 78.65. out of his holy habitation] That is, out of Heaven Deut. 26.15. where he hath bathed his sword Isa. 34.5. and bent his bow and made it ready Psal. 1.12. Or out of his Temple, which was likewise Gods habitation 1 Sam. 2.20. and thence God would help his people, as they once said to David at Mahanaim 2 Sam. 18.3. Therefore now it is better that thou help us, or cause us to be helped, out of the city: Remarkable is that of the Psalmist, In Salem is Gods Tahernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion.Psal. 76.2, 3. There brake he the arrowes of the bow, the shield, and the sword and the battel. Selah. There? where? In the Tabernacle, in the Assem∣blies of Gods Saints. By all flesh, here may also be meant the unbeleeving Jews, who are enjoyned silence and submission, they are stiled here, as the Levites stiled the people saying,Neh. 8.11. Hold your peace: dispute not, doubt not, distrust not Gods promises, seem they never so improbable, or impossible to be effected: harken not to the murmurings of your own misgiving hearts, but silence your reason, exalt your faith &c. CHAP. III. Verse 1. ANd he shewed me Jehoshuah the High-Priest] In a vision doubtlesse; and that for this end, that both the Prophet, and by him the peo∣ple also, might be advertised, that they wrestled not against flesh and blood, men like themselves, but against spirituall wickednesses, or wicked spirits, who did act them and agitate them against the Church; ride them and spur them to do mis∣chief: as he did that bloody Farnesius one of the Popes Champions,Scito persecu∣torem tuum ab ascensore dae∣mone perur∣geri. Bern. who com∣ing with an army into Germany, swore that he would ride his horse up to the spurrs in the blood of Protestants. It was the devill that stirred up the spirit of Tatnai, Shether-Boznai, Sanballat &c. to hinder the good work now in hand: like as he did Eckius, Cajetan, Cochlaus, Catharinus and many other great schol∣lars (besides the two kings of England and Hungary) to write against the Refor∣mation begun by Luther, and Charles the fifth with all the strength of the Empire to withstand and hinder it. But all in vaine. Here he bends his acculation chiefly against the chief Priest: but thorough his sides, he strikes at the welfare of the whole Church. Ministers are the maine object of his malice; a speciall spite he beares to such: singling them out and sifting them to the bran, as he desired to do Peter: stirring up unreasonable and wicked men against them, as he dealt by Paul when he fought with beasts at Ephesus, with breathing divels where ever he came, being in deaths often. When the viper hung upon his hand Act. 28. the devill doubtlesse thought to have dispatcht him: but he was deceived. So he is ever, when he attempts as an Accuser of the Brethren: he is sure to be non-suted, and his plea to be cast out of the court by our Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who appears for us (as he did here for Jehoshua) to put a∣way sin. Heb. 9.24, 26. and to take away the iniquities of their most holy things. standing before the Angel of the Lord] i. e. before Christ, his best friend, and doing his office as an High-Priest. Such is Satans malice and impudency (saith an Interpreter here) to hurt and hinder us most in our best imployments: and to accuse the Saints even to their best Friend Christ Jesus. He knowes well, that as Sampsons strength lay in his hair, so doth a Christians strength lie in his holy per∣formonces, perfumed and presented by Christ. Hence his restlesnesse in seeking
to set a difference, and to breed bate. Hence also, as the foules seised upon Abra∣hams sacrifice, and as the Pythonisse interrupted Paul and his company when they were praying and well-doing Act. 16.16, 17. so deales he still by Gods best ser∣vants: and that sometimes so, that if after duty, they should put that question to their own heart, as God did to Satan, Ʋnde venis? whence comest thou? it would return Satans answer, om compassing the earth. and Satan] That Adversary the devill, as St. Peter. calleth him: the Accuser of the brethren Rev. 12.9. that trots betwixt heaven and earth as a teaser, and makes a trade of it. Once this name Satan is applyed to an holy Angel going forth as an adversary to wicked Balaam, Satans spelman as One calleth him. standing at his right hand] why there? Because, say some, the Accusation was as true as vehement: and so Satan had the upper hand. For Ioshua was cloathed with filthy garments verse 3. and there was cause enough why his own cloaths should abhorr him, as Iob hath it chap. 9.31. what his particular sin objected to him by Satan, was, is hard to say. Some will have it to be one thing, some ano∣ther. It is plain by Ezra 10.18. the some of his sons and allies had taken strange wives which he might have hindered; but that himself had taken a harlot to wite,Dialog. com. Tryphon. as Justin Martyr affirmeth, is no way likely. I should sooner beleeve with Thedoret and Sanchez, that the sins here alledged by Satan against Ioshuah and laid to his charge were, not so much his own personall sins, as the sins of the whole peo∣ple: quodammodo enim totus populus est in sacerdote, & in sacerdote peccat: for the whole people is, after a sort, in the Priest &c. to resist him] Heb. To Satan yet against him, to do his kind, by frustrating his prayers and intercessions for the people, by laying his and their sins in his dish, and by laying claime to them for his. Carried on still by like hellish hatred of God and his people, he sins that sin against the holy Ghost, every moment: As Pliny speaks of the scorpion, that there is not one minute wherein it doth not put forth the sting. Our comfort is, that 1. We have an Advocate with the Father &c. and he is the propitiation for our sins, the Patron as well as Judge of his Saints. 2. that as Satan stands at our right hand to molest us in holy duties, so do the holy Angels stand there to withstand him Luke 1.11. whence it was that the Curtains of the Tabernacle were wrought full of Cherubins within and without. 3. That if we re∣sist the devill, steadfast in the faith, and strong in the Lord, he will fly from us, Iam. 4.7. For this old serpent, having his head already bruised and crushed by Christ, cannot so easily thrust in his mortall sting, unlesse we dally with him: and so lay open our selves unto him. He shall in vaine strike fire, if we deny tinder. He may knock at the dore, but if we answer him not at the window he cannot get in. Verse 2. And the Lord said unto Satan] The Lord Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen againe, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who then shall condemne us? who shall lay ought to our chage?Rom. 8.33.34, 35. who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Satan may attempt it, but can never effect it. We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not, sc. unto death: but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself (sc. in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life Ind 21.)1 Ioh. 5.18. and that Wicked one or that Troubler of the Saints, toucheth him not, viz. with a deadly touch, so as to poyson him and undoe him. Christus nobiscum, state. The Prince of Persia cannot stand before Michael the King of Saints.Dan. 10.13, 21. the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord] Christ argueth not the case with Satan, but cuts him off short with a vehement check and reproof; turns him over to his father to give him his due, Inhonestum enim est (saith Cyrysostom) honestam matronam cum meretrice litigare, It is not fit for a matrone to scold with a strumpet. Admit the accusation wi true, yet it was maliciously and unreasona∣bly urged. Doeg spoke nothing but truth against David and Abimalech; yet he heareth; What shall be given upto thee? or, what shall be done unto thee, thou salse tongue? Sharp arrowes of the mighty, that pierce deep, wound, deadly;Psal 120.3, 4. with coales of Juniper, that shall burn fierce in respect of thy self, and sweet, in regard of others; for men are wondrous well pleased when such ill members are pu∣nished.
even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem] He chose her for his loves: and now loves her for his choise. He loveth her and washeth her with his blood, that he may present her to himself holy and without blemish. Eph. 5.26, 27. The Per∣sian maids were first purified and perfumed, before Ahsuerus made his choise Esth. 2 Not so here: A fountain of free grace is opened for sin and for uncleannesse to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem Zach. 13.1. And Uranople, or the new Jerusalem hath its foundation garnished with all manner of precious stones, Reu. 21. Now the fundation of God standeth sure, so that the gates of hell cannot prevail against it. Satan must know that God hath chosen Ierusalem, and will not cast away his people which he foreknew.Rom. 11.2. is not this a brand pluckt out of the fire] Titio ex igne ereptus? newly snatcht out of the Babylonish furnace:Psal. 68.12. where they have long lain among the pots, where they have been not only sullied, but scorched and half-burnt: should they then be cruel∣ly cast again into the flames, which they have strangely scaped like as the barbarous Persecutours ran Polycarp through the bowels with a sword, when the beasts would not devour him, nor the fire burn him. Or as the bloody Papists in Queen Maries dayes,Act. & Mon. fol. 1392. cast the woman of Garneseys babe again into the fire, that sprang and sprawled out of his mothers womb, as she was in burning. This was clean contrary to that Apostolical precept, Of some have compassion, pulling them out of the fire.Jude 21. Ean. 3.30. And far short of Nebuchadnezzars practises, who taking the three wor∣thies out of the burning fiery furnace promoted them to great honour and offices. Verse 3. Now Joshuah was clothed with filthy garments] The tottered rags of the old Adam, the nasty filthynesse and superfluity of naughtinesse that yet remained in him (though in part regenerate) and intermingled with his best works. Sin is the Devils excrement: it defiles the soul worse then any jakes can do the body (as the Hebrew word here signifieth, and as our Saviour shews Mar. 7.20. or then the Sanies of a plague-sore doth a garment. Hence that of the Church, We are all as an unclean thing,Esay 64.6. and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. And that of Job, If I wash my self with snow water, and make my hands never so clean, yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own cloathes shall make me to be abhorred, Job. 9.30.31.1 Cor. 4.5. this is the same in effect with that of Paul, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby ustified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord: who when he coms to turn up the bottom of the bag, as the steward did Benamins, he will manifest the hidden things of darknesse, finde out our thefts that we dreamt not of, open all far∣dles on that great fair-day,Sacc soluto  ar∣gentum Ambr. the day of judgement. As in the meanwhile, should Lord but break open that filthy sink of sin that is in the very best of us, we should not onely be lothsome to God Zach. 11.8. and to good men Prov. 29.27. but e∣ven to our own selves also, as Job was (hap. 42.6. Judas was not able to abide is own stench Mat. 27.4, 5. Yea and some holy men (as Mr. Lever, for one) when they have desired to see their utmost uncleannesse, their corruptions in the most ugly colours, God hath heard them. But yet his hand therewith was so heavy upon them, that they went alwayes mourning to their graves; and thought it fitter to leave it to Gods wisdom to give them a sight of their sins, and to mingle the the potion of sorrow, then to be their own choosers. See that excellent text Iob 15.14, 15, 16. And then stand aloof with the Leper and say, I am unclean, I am unclean: yet, Lord, if thou wilt thou canst make me clean. and stood before the Angel] His filthy garments notwithstanding: Though we cannot say our hearts are pure, and our performances perfect: yer if we wallow not in sin, allow it not, if with the daughters of Zion, we look upon our former neatnesse as nastinesse, and finenesse as filthinesse, if we be in any measure purged from the love and liking of sin by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burn∣ning Isai. 4.4. Christ will neither abhor our presence, nor reject our services. Aaron was to bear the iniquity of the holy offerings Exod. 28.38. Christ is this Aaron &c. And though there be an inequality of expressions in duty quoad nos in us; yet there is a constancy of intercession by Christ propter nos, for us. Verse 4. And he answered and spake to those that stood before him] i. e. to the An∣gels that waited upon him. Est autem hoc humanitùs dictum saith Iunius. This is ken after the manner of men: for properly men are washed, justified and san∣ctified
by the Merit and Spirit of Christ alone. 1 Cor. 6.11. But the Lord Christ speaketh thus to the created Angels his Ministers; to shew that He who onely hath power to for give sins, doth yet therein imploy the holy ministery for an instru∣ment. See 2 Cor. 9.18. and Iob 33.33, 24. take away the filthy garments Those symbols of his sinfulnesse, (see the Note on verse 3. so his sins were pardoned in heaven. But because it is small comfort to a condemned person to have a pardon granted him, unlesse he know it, and be as∣sured of it: therefore it followeth. and unto him he said behold] By whatthou hast seen in the Angels stripping of thee. I have caused thine iniquities to passe from thee] Transtuli peccatum as he once said to David, I have taken away thy sin, I have tranferred it upon my self: speaking to my Father for thee, as once Paul did to Philemon for his son Onesimus,Philem. 18, 19. if he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine account, I will repay it. This is the greatest happinesse that can befal a man in this world Psal. 32.1, 2, and could not but be a singular comfort to these poor Jews, priest and people amidst their ma∣nifold afflictions. A man that hath got his pardon is not troubled though he lose his glove, or hankercheife, nor though it should prove a rainy day. Being ustifi∣ed by faith we glory in tribulation Rom. 5.1.3. Feri domino, eri: nam a peccatis absolu∣tus sum, saith Luther: Strike Lord, strike, while thou wilt: my sins are pardoned. I thank thee, O Lord (said Another in his great extremity) for all my pain: and I beseech thee, if thou think good, to adde to it an hundred-fold. But behold a further honour; as mercies seldom come single. and I will cloath thee with change of raiment] i. e. I will change thy rags into robes, thy stained clouts into clean cloathing. Thou shalt be arraied with the righteous∣nesse of the saints Rev. 19.8. that twofold righteousnesse, imputed and imparted: that of justification, and this other of sanctification: that as an undercoat, this as an upper: that clean and pure, this white and bright: both must be had from Christ, who is made unto us of God not onely wisdom, but righteousnesse, sanctification, and re∣demption 1 Cor, 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.19. Surely as our apparrel is not bred of us, neither grows out of our bodies: so neither doth this change of raiment in the Text. But the blessed Lamb of God cloatheth us with his own fleece, which is long enough and large enough to cover all our defects and deformities, and to set us forth to the admiration of Angels. As he taketh upon him our sins, so he putteth upon us his righteousnesse. This is a blessed exchange indeed, a sure pledge of our peace with him, and with God by him. We read in our own Chronicles, that Edmund furna∣med Ironside (in whom England was lost) and Knute the first Danish King, af∣ter many incounters and equal fights, at length imbraced a present agreement:Daniels hist. lib. 1. which was made by parting England between them two, and confirmed by oath and Sacrament, putting on each others apparel and Arms, as a ceremony to ex∣presse the Atonement of their minds, as if they had made transaction of their per∣sons each to other; Knute became Edmund, and Edmund, Knute. Even such an exchange I may say of apparrel is betwixt Christ and the pardoned sinner &c. Christ puts upon his Church his own comlinesse, decks his spouse with his own jew∣els, as Isaac did Rebecca: cloath her with needle-work, and makes her more glori∣ous within then Esther ever was in all her beauty and bravery: rejoyceth over her, as the bridegroom over his bride, yea is ravisht in his love to her, with one of her eyes lifted up to him in prayer or meditation, with one chain of her neck, that chain of his own graces in her Cant. 4. Verse 5. And I said, let them set a fair mitre upon his head] Who said this? The Prophet, grounding his speech on the last gracious words of the Angel, taketh the boldnesse to enterpose this his request for the bestowing of the priestly ornaments upon Joshua, and accordingly it is done. This the prophet knew would be a comfort to the whole people, and a confirmation to Ioshuas faith, for the pardon of his sins: like as it was to Peter and the rest of the Apostles,Mat. 28.19. Joh. 20.21. that Christ after his resur∣rection restored them to their office, after they had all shamefully forsaken him. let them set a fair mitre upon his head] Not a diadem, as the old Translation hath it (that's for a kings head) much lesse a triple crown with the word Mystery (Baby∣lons
motto Rev. 17.5.) engraven in it, as Brocard and many other eye-witnesses affirm of the Popes crown but a Mitre or tiar. It hath its name from compassing about, be cause it invironed the High-priests head. It had a holy crown with it Exod. 29.6. signifying the Deity and dignity of Christ. It had also upon the fore-front of it a plate of pure gold with this caelature, Holinesse to the Lord. Hence it was not lawful for the High priest, (say the Jews) to put off his mitre to whom∣soever he met, were he never so great a man: lest the name and glory of God (whose person he sustained) should seem to submit to any living: With this Mysterious mitre upon his head, with other priestly Ornaments and vestments it was, that Alexander the greatmet the High-priest Iaddus (Nephew and successour to Ichoshuah in the text) as he was maching against Jerusalem with hostile intent: and adoring that God whose name was seen written on the golden plate of his Mitre, he entered the city peaceably, offered sacrifice in the Temple, as the Priests directed him,Dan. 8.7, 20, 21. & 11, 13. and having seen there the prophesie of Daniel concerning himself, he granted the Jews many immunities and priviledges, and so departed. Parmenio, one of his favorites, asked him the reason of his friendly dealing with the Jews,seph. lib. 11. Cap. vlt. who by denying him help and tribute had highly displeased him: He an∣swered, that while he was yet in Macedonia, and but thinking of the conquest of Asia, a certain man appeared unto him in the habit of that High-priest encou∣raging him to set upon the work, and assuring him of good successe therein. and the Angel of the Lord] that is Christ, the Master of these Ceremenies, the ef∣fect of this Levitical office. Verse 6. And the Angel of the Lord protested] Either with an oath or some deep asseveration, or both; as 1 Sam. 25.26. As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth &c. The former is an oath, the latter an asseveration or obtestation only, conjoyned with that oath. Among the Heathens Ex animi seu sententia was instead of an oath: And rather then swear or say more, in a matter of no great moment, Chinius the Pythagorean would undergoe a mulct of three talents. Others render it Testi∣fied, or called witnesse upon his words, the Angels and the prophet there present, for the more assurance. Thus, though Christs word be sufficient (for he is Amen, the faithful and true witnesse) yet for his servants better settlement,Rev. 3.14. he hath bound his promises to them with an oath, and taken heaven and earth to witnesse; which is dignatio stupenda, a wonderful Condescension. Verse 7. If thou wilt walk in my wayes, and keep my charge] That is, if thou wilt walk in all the Commandements (moral) and ordinances (Levitical) blamelesse as holy.Luk. 1 6. Act 20.28. Zachary did, and so approve thy self righteous before God, by taking heed to thy self first, and then to all thy flock, which is thy charge, the Holy Ghosts depositum, and the purchase of Christ's own blood. God linesse is the high-way to happinesse: the good old way that hath been ever beaten by all those saints, that now finde rest to their souls. The very first steps in this way are Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God in Christ Jesus. By these, men return to God from whom they have departed: are brought neare to him, and set in the way of his steps Psal. 85.13. We are his workmanship (saith the Apostle) created in Christ Iesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them. Eph. 2.10. not without good advice, and due direction. Eph. 5.15. Walk circumspectly, walk by rule and by line, Gal. 6.16. Lift not up one foot till you finde sure footing for the other, as those Psal. 35.6. Christians, (and especially Mi∣nisters) are funambulones, saith Tertullian: if they tread but one step awry, they are gone, and may draw many with them. then thou shalt judge mine house, and shalt also keep my courts] i. e. Thou shalt rule in my Temple, and wait at mine altar. The Pope and his Prelates catch at the former, but let go the later: where Christ saith Feed my sheep, Bellarmine saith, the meaning is, Rule like a king; Baronius, Take to thy self the supream govern∣ment of the Church. But a preaching Bishop is a just wonder among them, a Vir portenti, as those priests in the next verse are called. and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by] i.e. Among the Sera∣phims (as the Chaldee here interprets it,) thou shalt walk arm in arm (as it were) with Angels Mat. 22.30. Heb. 12.22. He seems to allude to the walks and Galle∣ries that were about the Temple. Heaven is the reward of walking in the way
that is called Holy: the end of mens faith, the salvation of their souls. Christ tells us that in his Fathers house are many mansions for us, Joh. 14.2. (such as have farre better gardens, and Galleries then Mahomet fondly promiseth his sword∣men in his fools-paradise) And it is a part of his joy, that we shall one day bee where he is, attended with innumerable Angels, John 17.24. who will be glad of our company. How much better cause have we then that Heathen to cry out, O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud animorum concilium coetumque preficiscar:Cic. de se∣neclute. & cum ex hac turba & colluvione discedam, &c. O what a brave and bright day will that be, when wee shall go to that Congregation-house of blessed spi∣rits: and walk no longer in the way of this world, which is (like the land of Chabul) dirty and dangerous, like the vale of Siddim, slimy, and slippery,1 Sam 2. full of lime-pits, and pitfalls, snares and stumbling-blocks, laid by Satan to maime, or mischieve us! O happy they that walk humbly with God, who keep∣eth the feet of his Saints, and hath charged his Angels to bear them up in their hands, lest they dash their feet against a stone! This whiles they are here:Psal. 90.12. and when they go hence, to convey them thorow the air (whereof the devil is the prince) as thorow the enemies countrey, into the heavenly habitations: and there to entertain and welcome them with sweetest varieties, felicities, eternities, sitter to be beleeved then possible to be expressed. Verse 8. Hear now, O Ioshua the high Priest] Hear a sermon of Christ, the Fountain of all this mercy bestowed upon thee, and yet further promised unto thee. Hear for thy self, hear for thy whole Society. Thou and thy fellows, thy fellow-friends, the rest of the priests, thy fellows in service, though inferiour in Office (for there was a subordination of priests, both before the Temple, Num 3. and 1 Chron. 23.4, 5. and under the Temple, 2 Chron. 35.8, 9.) Types also of Christ, and partakers of the benefit, 1 Tim. 6.2. for they are men wondered at] Erant omnibus probrosi, saith Calvin, They de∣parted from evil, and thereby made themselves a prey, Esay 59.15. they were for signes and for wonders in Israel, Esay 8.18. hissed and hooted at, Psal. 71.7. as those that affected to be singular, and seraphicall, They think it strange, saith Saint Peter to his holy converts, that you run not with them to the same excesse of riot: speaking evill of you, as if you were no better then mad-men, Esay 59.15.1 Pet. 4.4. robb'd of your right minds as the word signifieth. It is a French proverb, He that would have his neighbours dog hang'd, gives out that he is mad. The primitive per∣secutours used to put Christians into bears and dogs skins, or ugly creatures, and then bait them: so gracelesse persons put the saints of God into ugly conceits, look upon them as strange creatures, and then speak and act against them. In our wretched dayes (as the Turks count all fools to be saints, so) people account all saints to be fools; and the more zealous among them monsters and miscreants.Holy Stat. As for Athanasius, and Marcellus who have impiously blasphemed against God, and have lived as wicked miscreants, and are thereupon cast out of the Church, and con∣demned, we cannot receive them to the honour of Episcopacy, said those fourscore Bishops in the mock-Synod of Sardis. And Bede testifieth of the ancient Brit∣tains immediatly before their destruction by the Saxons, that they were come to that height of wickednesse, as to cast reproach upon the professours of religion, as upon the worst of men. Doth not Saint Paul say as much, 1 Cor. 4.9. We are made a theatre, or are set upon the stage for a laughing-stock unto the world, and to Angels, and to men, &c? For behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.] The same that grew out of the root of Jesse, when that goodly family was sunk o low, as from David the King, to Joseph the Carpenter. See Esay 4.2. and 11.1. and 45.8. and 53.1. Ier. 33.15. where the Chaldee for Branch rendreth it Messiah, as here al∣so he doth: And some have observed that themagh, a Branch, is by transposition of letters, the same with Masciach, Messias: Samech and tsade, being neer akin; and of the same sound almost. A servant Christ is called by reason of his Media∣torship, taking upon him the form of a servant; yea, of a faulty servant that was to be beaten: yea, that being cruelly beaten was brought forth to the people with an Ecce homo, Behold the man. Behold, saith God here,Joh. 19.5. I will bring forth
my servant the Branch: bring him forth, out of the bosom of his Father, out of the womb of his Mother, out of the types of the Law, &c. Verse 9. For behold the stone, &c.] Another title given to Christ, who is the foundation and chief corner-stone of his Church; and another Behold, prefixed as a starry Note, or as a hand pointing to a remarkable matter. All the Prophets pointed to Christ, who is therefore called, the Branch, the Stone, &c. that in these creatures (every where obvious) as in so many optick glasses, wee may see him, and be put in continuall remembrance of him; It being as necessary to remember Christ, as to breathe, saith a Father. See Psal. 118.22. Esay 28.16. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8. that I have laid, and that I will engrave] The Church is Gods building, and we are his workmanship, this artificiall manufacture, created in Christ Jesus unto good works:. Ephes. 2.10 there being not so much of the glory of God in all his works of creation and providence, as in one gracious action that a Christian performeth. As for the glorious work of our redemption by Christ, it was a plot of Gods own contri∣ving, a fabrick of Gods own erecting: it was the Lords own doing, and it is justly marvellous in our eyes. Ʋpon one stone shall be seven eyes] That is, Christ shall draw all eyes and hearts to him: as the stones of the Temple did the Disciples eyes, Mat. 24.2. and Mar. 13.1. Master, say they to Christ, see what manner of stones, and what buildings are here. Thus some sence it. I should rather by these seven eyes understand the Spirit in his severall operations upon Christ, as Esay 11.2. for he received not the Spirit by measure, as others; but had as much of it as a creature could possibly have. See the Note on Rev. 1.4. where the holy Ghost, for his manifold good gifts and perfect givings, is called The seven Spirits; like as he is also stiled the seven golden pipes, Zech. 4.2, 3. There are that by these seven eyes upon one stone, understand the Providence and Wisdome of Christ in the Government of his Church. Hee is indeed, as One saith , All-Eye, Sic spectat universos quasi singulos: sic singulos quasi solos; like a well-drawn picture hee eyeth all. Christ as he is a living, so he is also a looking stone: he looketh at the miseries and matters of his Church,Exod. 3.7 and saith as once, I have seen, I have seen the afflictions of my people in Egypt, &c. Behold, I will engrave the graving thereof] Hae coelaturae dona & stigmata Christirepraesentant, saith A Lapide. These gravings represent the gifts and wounds of Christ,Lib. 4. in allusion to the polished corners of the Temple. Coelum dictum est quod coelatum, id est signatum sideribus, saith Varro. Heaven hath its name in La∣tine from its being enameled and bespangled with glistering starres, as with curi∣ous workmanship, or costly furniture. Of the third heaven, the habitation of Saints and Angels,Heb. 11.10 God is said to be by a specialty the builder and maker, or (as the Greek hath it) the cunning Artificer, and publike Architect. A great deal of skill and workmanship he laid out upon it: but nothing so much as upon the Hu∣mane nature of Christ, wherein, as in a Temple, dwelt all the fulnesse of the God∣head bodily,Col 2.9 that is, personally, by vertue of the Hypostaticall Union. For the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory (the glory as of the onely begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth,John 1.14 full, full to the very brimme, full with a double fulnesse. Vasis & Fontis, of the Vessell, and of the Fountain. Hence, He was fairer (much fairer, double fairer (as the Originall im∣porteth) then the sonnes of men, sc. with the beauty of wisdome and holinesse: grace was poured into his lips, God had anointed him with the oil of gladnesse above his fellows,Ezek. 28.7 Psal. 45.2, 7. The Priests in the Law were consecrated first with oil, compounded and confected of diverse precious spices: so was Christ with gifts and graces of the Spirit, Act. 10.38. and 4.27, Esay 61.1. not by measure, as we are, Ephes. 4.7. but without measure, as much as a finite nature was capable of: par∣ticularly, he was furnished and polished with wisdome, as a Prophet, against our ignorance; with holinesse, as a Priest, against our guilt; and with power, as a King, against our corruptions: These and all other endowments, he had well heapt, pres∣sed down, and running over, poured into his bosome. Next, as the Priests under the Law were also consecrated with blood, so was the Lord Christ with his own
blood, when his Father engraved him with graving; or, as the Hebrew hath it here, opened him with opening in his bloody passion, baptized him in his own blood, stewed him in his own broth, as it were; when in a cold winters-night hee sweat great clods of blood; which thorow clothes and all fell to the very ground. When after this they digged his hands and his feet, Psal. 22.16. and made his heart melt in the middest of his bowels, verse 14. Wounded he was in the head, to cure our vile imaginations: In the hands, to expiate our evil actions: in the heart, and feet, for our base affections, and unworthy walkings. Tormented he was for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, tanquam pulcherrima corporis caelatura, and by his stripes or bloody wails, we were healed. Adam signifieth Man, red-earth, or Bloody.Esay 53. Christ was Man in his Incarnation, and bloody all over in his passion. This death of Christ therefore look on (saith Master Bradford Martyr) as the very pledge of Gods dear love towards thee: see the very bowels of it as in an Anatomie. See, Gods hands are nailed, they cannot strike theo; his feet also, he cannot runne from thee: his arms are wide open to embrace thee: his head hangs down to kisse thee: his very heart is open, so that therein look, nay even spie, and thou shalt see nothing therein but love, love, love to thee, &c. Cernis ut in toto corpore sculptus amor. and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day] I will remove, i. e. remit and pardon, the iniquity, both guilt and punishment. Of that land, i. e. Of the Church, that pleasant land, more dear to God then all the earth besides. In one day, i. e. together and at once, suddenly and in an instant. See Esay 66.8. Verse 10. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall yee call, &c.] i. e. Yee shall have peace, Regionis & Religionis. of countrey and of conscience. Christus auferet iniquitatem, afferet pacem. Christ, as he saveth his people from their sinnes; so from the hands of them that hate them. When this Prince of peace was born, in the dayes of Augustus, Ʋniversa gentium erat aut pax, aut pactio:Luc. lor. l. . there was a generall either peace, or truce among all Nations. And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into the land—thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, &c. Mic. 5.5, 6. But behold a better thing: This Shiloh, this Tranquillator, Pacificator, by removing iniquity, createth peace of consci∣ence: like as after Jonah was cast over-board, the sea became calme. Of the encrease of his government and peace there shall be no end, Esay 9.7. Where Christ ruleth there is peace, peace, Esay 26.3. that is, perfect, sheer, pure peace, with God, our selves, and others: and the more Christs government increaseth in the soul, the more is peace renued, continued, multiplied.Psal. 119.16 Great peace have all they that love thy Law and nothing shall offend them, saith David. And thou hast been a strength to the poor, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, &c. (Esay 25.4.) better then that of the broad-leaved Vine, and fig-tree, very cooling and comfortable in those hot countreys. See this in righteous Noah: who being justified by faith, had peace with God, and therefore was medijs tranquillus in undis. How securely doth he ride out that uproar of heaven, earth, and waters! He hears the pouring down of rain above his head, the shrieking of men, the bel∣lowing of beasts on both sides him, the raging and threats of the waves under him. He saw the miserable shifts of distressed unbeleevers, & in the mean time sits quietly in his dry cabbin, not feeling, nor fearing evil. How happy a thing is pardon of sinne, and peace with God! what a quiet safety, what an heavenly calme doth it lodge in the soul! what earnest pantings, and strong affections to the salvation of others. Ye shall call, &c.
CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. ANd the Angell that talked with me] See the Note on chap. 1. ver. 9. came again] After some absence, as it may seem: and a new visi∣on or revelation received from God to be imparted to the Prophet. and waked me as a man that is wakened &c.] It fared with the Prophet (not∣withstanding the former visions) as with a drowsie person: who though awa∣kened and set to work, is ready to fall asleep at it. So Peter, James, and Iohn, (those pillars as they are called Gal. 2.) fell asleep at their very prayers Mat. 26.40. such dull metal are the best men made of: and so weak is the flesh, be the spirit never so willing; so ill-disposed is our most noble and immortal part the soule, to supernall and supernaturall employments. Meditation and prayer are the creatures of the holy Ghost Iude 20. and that we may not run out into extra∣vagancies, or put up yawning petitions, we must watch and pray Mat. 26.41. yea watch while we are praying, meditating &c. against corruption within (the sin that doth so easily beset us Heb. 12.1.) and temptations without, whether from the world (the things whereof are so neer us and so naturall to us) or from the devill who is ever busiest with the best (as flies are with sweet-meats) and with the best part of their best performances, as in the end of their prayers, when the heart should close up it self with most comfort. Verse 2. What seest thou?] The sight was already in sight; but the Prophet had not seen it, or noted it, if the Angel had not stirr'd him up to it. If the Lord give us not sight as well as light, if he inlighten not both Organ and Object too, if he shine not into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of himself in the face of Jesus Christ;2 Cor 4.5. seeing we shall see, but not perceive; with Hagar, we shall not be able to discern the fountain that is just before us. I have looked] Carefully viewed the sight. It is expected ut acti agamus: that having a talent of grace we trade with it, that our will, which at first conversion was meerly passive should be afterward active: that we which once were dark∣nesse, but now are light in the Lord, should walk as children of light Eph. 5.9. behold a candlestick] that is the Church, as Rev. 1.20. all of Gold] pure gold as the Candlestick in the Tabernacle Exod. 25.31. which is therefore called the pure Candlestick Lev. 24.4. Exod. 31.8. noting out the Churches purity in doctrine and manners. Chrysostome that golden Preacher testifieth of some Saints in his time, that they were puriores coelo, purer then the visible heaven. Her Nazarites were purer then the driven snow, whiter them milk, ruddier then rubies, their polishing was of Saphire &c. Lam. 4.7. with a bowle] Heb. gullah an oyle-glass, or oyle-cruse; a hollow round vessel quod pariter Latinè rectè gulam appellas saith a Lapide; which you may not unfitly call a gullet or throat: for as the throat receiveth the food and transmitteth it to the stomach: so did this vessel receive the oyle to be transmitted to the lamps. It figured Christ in whom it pleased the Father that all fulnesse should dwell Col. 1.19. for the Churches use Ioh. 1.16. and 3.34. and his seven lamps thereon] signifying the manifold graces and diversity of gifts in the Church by the same spirit of Christ 1 Cor. 12.4, 6. For of his fulnesse we all receive grace for grace Iob. 1.16. and seven pipes to the seven lamps] Heb. seven and seven, that is, seven I say seven, by the figure Anadiplosis saith Sanctius. This is a better glosse then that of those that say the Hebrew text is corrupted; as having two sevens for one. These seven pipes you must imagine to be in the bottome of the bowle, to distribute the oyle to each lamp; the grace of Jesus Christ to each Christian, that he may shine as a lamp or luminary in the world,Phil. 2.15.16. holding forth the word of life, as the hand doth the torch, or the watch-tower the light, and so the haven to weather∣beaten Mariners. Verse 3. And two Olive-trees by it] The two chief branches whereof through the two golden pipes empty the golden oyle out of themselves ver. 12. that is, the
spirit of grace infuseth all precious graces (much more precious then gold that perisheth, though it be tried in the fire) into the Church. Hence grace is called the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. yea Spirit 25. Danaeus his Note here is, though from these two olive trees there was continuall oyle powred into that bur∣ning candlestick that it should never dry up or be put out, yet are not these olives said to be pressed by any man, which notwithstanding amongst us, must needs after an ordinary manner be done, that the oyle may flow or run from them. Nei∣ther is this oyle said to flow, nor with toyle and labour to be carried from one part or place into another, that there may be alwayes oyle for the candlestick: but there stand these olive trees growing, and dropping down oyle into the Bowle, and this of themselves, without the help or service of any men or oyle-mills:Mr. Pemble. to shew, saith Another Interpreter, that Gods grace only is sufficient for his Church, to repaire and maintaine the same without all other meanes, against all opposition of man: and this is the Scope of this vision. Verse 4. What are these, my Lord] Or, Sir; which English word comes from Cyrus, the Persian word for a Lord or great Prince, as H. Stephanus will have it: Others fetch it from  authority, or  a Lord, and so the word Adoni in the text is usually rendred. Others think our word Sir comes from the French Sieur, whence Monsieur my Lord: as the word Lord from the old Saxon Laford which commeth of Laef to sustaine: like as the Hebrew Adonai from Eden a foun∣dation or pillar, that sustaineth the whole building. It is written sometimes with Camets or long A in the end, and then it is proper to God (as having the vowels of Jehovah) and is given to him 134. times in the old Testament. Sometimes it is written with Bathach or short A, and then it is applied to the creatures, as here to the Angell: Hinc Hispanorum Don, saith Drusius. what are these] The Prophet had been before warned by the Angell to behold and heed the vision. This he had done, and yet was to seek of the sense and mea∣ning of it: as a man may look on a trade and never see the mystery of it: or look on the hand-diall, and never understand the curious clock-work within. None can understand the mysterie of Christ, but such as have the mind of Christ 1 Cor. 2.7, 11, 16. such as are spiritually rationall, and rationally spirituall: such as are taught of God, and conducted by his spirit into all truth Ioh. 16.13. No un∣derstanding of Gods riddles, but by plowing with his heifer, as I may say. This the Prophet here knew: and therefore applies himself to the Angell for informati∣on: so did Daniel chap. 8.15. see chap. 9.22. Verse 5. Knowest thou not what these be?] Thus preparation is made to the ensuing interpretation of the vision by this dialogue; that we might give better heed to that manifold wisdome of God made known to and by the Church:Eph. 3.10. wherein the very Angels themselves are great students, and daily proficients. Docent proficiendo, & docendo proficiunt. The best of men know not so much as they might have known. Are ye also ignorant of these things? (saith our Saviour to the twelve) are ye also without understanding? Mat. 15.16. what? know you not &c. seven several times in one chapter 1 Cor. 6. And how doth the Apo∣stle shent and shame his Hebrewes for their dunesse and doltishnesse Heb. 5.12. It was expected, it seems, by the Angel here, that Zachary a Master in Israel should have known more then he did, of the meaning of this candlestick, by Mo∣ses his ancient candlestick. For the godly of those times did not beleeve those rites and ceremonies of the law did of themselves please God, or that they were dumb shewes and insignificant Heb. 9. But they acknowledged them to be figures: the truth and signification whereof was to be sought in Christ. The ceremoniall law was indeed their Gospell. and I said, No my Lord] An ingenious confession of his ignorance: and this was far better then to plead for it (as many now-adayes) or to pretend more skill then he had: that he might at least seem to be some body. Ignorantiam meam non ignoro, saith Origen. Though I know little else, yet this I know, that it is but little that I know. And not only in innumerable other things am I ignorant,Ep. 119. c. 21. saith Austin; but even in the very Scriptures also, my chief study, multò plura nescio quam scio, I am to seek of many more things then I understand. Surely, saith Agur, I am more brutish then any man, and yet he had commerce with Ithiel
and Ʋcal ver. 1. and have not the understanding of a man, sc. of a man in Christ. I neither learned wisdome (though taught it) nor have the knowledge of the holy, that is of the Angels, as Dan. 4.13, 17. and 8.13. Zachary here saw himself farr short of the holy angel that alked with him; and therefore desireth to be taught by him. Verse 6. This is the Word of the Lord] that is, this Hieroglyphique containes the mind of God in it. This is the interpretation of the vision, neither so concise, nor obscure, ut Oedipo sit opus (as a Lapide after Ribera here saith) that it can hardly be understood. For who seeth not by the opposition here made between humane help and divine, that in building and beautifying his Church with safety and salvation God will make bare his own holy arme; and do the work alone, or by the weakest meanes against the strongest resistance? Thus then have we (saith an Interpreter) in three words the scope of this whole vision.Mr. Pemble. That as the making and maintaining of this Candlestick and his Lamps, was without the art and cunning of man by means supernaturall; so Gods spirit without and above all humane helps, should suffice for the reedification and preservation of the materiall Temple, and true Church. unto Zorobabel] The Tirshata or chief magistrate Ezra 2.63. called also (as it is thought Shesbazzar, Ezra 1.8. He was a type of Christ: to whom also God the Father here speaketh concerning his church to be gathered by the preach∣ing of the Gospell. not by might, nor by strength,] as Mahomet in the East, and the Spaniard in the Indies: but by the power of his spirit that great Wonder-worker, whereby the people fall under him Psal. 45.5. and strong holds are cast down before him 2 Cor. 10.4. as once the walles of Iericho. Thus he unwalled all the children of Seth Num. 24.17. viz. by the foolishnesse of preaching: and thus hestill rideth upon his white horses, his Ministers, conquering and to conquer. Rev. 6.2. Bri∣taniorum inaccessa Romanis loca Christo subdita sunt.Tertull. The Romanes could never subdue this Nation: but Christ could. The Germans and other Western peo∣ple embraced the Christian religion in the yeer 772. when the Mahomitan impiety wasted the East. Gods spirit is irresistible, compared to the wind Ioh, to a migh∣ty rushing wind Act. 2. that beares all before it, therefore called a spirit of pow∣er 2 Tim. 1.7. of counsel and of might Esay 11.2. and therefore here fitly op∣posed to an army, and to the arme of flesh, to all humane power and policy whatso∣ever, though the gates of hell come to their help. not by might nor by strength &c.] These two words some take to be Synonymas; Mercor saith that the former signifieth stout and noble acts: the later importeth power and faculty of doing those acts; and is the same that  in Greek. By the Spirit of God we are to understand his power, providence, and Grace 2 Thes. 2.8. Is. 11.4. &c. whereby he helpeth his people with a little help Dan. 11.34. that throug weaker meanes, they may see his greater strength. Thus he helped David against Goliath, and the Israelites against the Philistines of∣ten: but especially then, when unarmed they marched with their slings, and plow-staves, and hooks, and forks, and other instruments of their husbandry, against a mighty and well-furnished enemy, and returned laden both with arms and victory. Sometimes againe, God helpeth his without any visible help, as when he destroyed Senacherib's army by an Angel, swept away Sisera's army by the river Kison, and the Saracens and Persians by the river Euphrates, in the dayes of Theodosius,Anno. 394 Alsted. Chro∣nol. p. 300. (smitten with a Panick terrour, they ran headlong into the river, and were drowned, to the number of an hundred thousand) for whom also the winds sought in that famous battle against Maximus; as both winds and waves did for us against the invincible navy.Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 5. cap. 26. The Church alone deserveth to be stiled invincible, that hath the Lord of Hosts to be her Champion, who hath armies above, and armies beneath (as the Rabbines well observe) 2. generall troopes, as his horse and foot,Magnleh che∣loth & matteh cheloth. ready prest; Legions of Angels, Millions of other creatures. the cur∣taines of the Tabernacle embroidered with Cherubims signified the service and pro∣tection of the Church by the Angels. Let the Pope be the Sun, and the Empe∣rour the Moon (as the Canonists stile them) yet the Sun must not smite the Church by day, nor the Moon by night: but the starrs in their courses must fight
against Sisera, and both the Popes bull, and the Emperours thunderbolt tend ex∣ceedingly to the furtherance of the Reformation begun by Luther. Whereupon Scultetus makes this observation, Ecce tibi adimpletum Psalmicum illud Psal. 54.3. Behold that of the Psalmist made good. He shall send from heaven and save us from the reproach of him that would swallow us up. Selah. God shall send forth his mer∣cy and his truth. He shall: but when will he, may some say? First when his people in distresse cry aloud, I came for thy word Dan. 10.12. He will come, but he will have his peoples prayers lead him. Secondly, when his enemies blaspheme and insult, saying, Where is now their God? When Rabshakeh (a Renegado Jew, as the Rab∣bins report him) shall jear at Hezekiahs prayers as an empty businesse, an airy Nothing, as words of the lips onely; whereas counsel and strength are for the war (thus some read that text Esay 36.5.) Thirdly when the the Church is at lowest, and all seems lost and desperate: when the enemy is above fear, and the Church below hope; when she is talking of her grave, like Israel at the red sea: then is Gods sea∣son to set in; it is his glory to help at a dead lift, to begin where we have given over, to relieve those that are forsaken of their hopes, to come when we can scarce finde faith upon the earth: God sees when the mercy will be in season. When his people are low enough, and the enemy high enough, then usually appears the Churches morning-star: then Christ came leaping and skipping over the mountains of Bether, all impediments that might seem to hinder, (as sins of his people, oppositions of his enemies) and make the Churches mountain to be exalted above all mountains, mole∣hils in comparison of her. Verse 7. Who art thou O great mountain?] So the enemies seemed to them∣selves, set aloft, and overtopping the low and poor estate of those feeble Jews, as they called them Neh. 4.2. But the Virgin daughter of Zion despiseth them here,Esay 37.22. and laugheth them to scorn: she shaketh her head at them, and saith, whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed &c? It is good for thee to meddle with thy match, and not to exalt thy self against the holy One of Israel,Psal. 76.4, 5. Jer. 51.25. Babylon is called a de∣stroying moun∣tain sated upon a rock: yet Gob will level, and lay it low nough. 26. Melch. Ad. who is more glori∣rious and excellent then those mountains of prey. The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep (such as Sisera did) and none of the men of might have found their hands when once they fell into the punishing hands of the living God. He will soon level these lofty mountains. they shall become a plain A champiagne that before seemed unpossible, inaccessible. Christs enemies shall be in that place that is fittest for them, the lowest; that is, the footstool of Christ: when the Church, as it is the highest in Gods love and favour, so shall it be highest in it self Gaudeo quòd Christus Dominus est: alioqui totus des∣perassem, writes Miconius to Calvm upon the view of the Churchs enemies. Glad I am that Christ reignes: for else I had been utterly hopelesse. O pray, pray saith another Saint: for the Pope of Rome, and his Conventicle of Trent are hatching strange businesses. The comfort is that he that sitteth in heaven seeth them: the Lord above hath them in derision. For in the thing wherein they deal proudly, God is above them: and his will shall stand when they shall dung the earth with their dead carcasses. Sciat Celsitudo Tua &c. Let your Highnesse know (saith Luther in a letter to the Duke of Saxony) that things are otherwise ordered in heaven then they are at Ausborough: where the Emperour Charls the fit had madea decree to root out the Reformed religion out of Germany. But soon after, the Turk broke into Hungary, and the borders of Germany: so that Cesar had somewhat else to do then to persecute the Protestants. So the primitive persecutours fondly inscribed upon the publike pillars Deleto Christianorum nomine &c. that they had blotted out the name of Christ and his religion from under heaven: but this they could never effect with all the power of the whole Empire. They found and complained that the Church might be shaken and not shivered: concuti non excu∣ti as 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Faecundi sunt Martyrum cineres, the very ashes of the Martyrs were fruitful, and their blood prolifical. The Church conquers even when she is con∣quered: as Christ overcame as well by patience as by power. The people of Rome (saith One) saepè praelio victus, nun juam bello, they lost many battels, but were never overcome in a set war: at the long run they crushed all their ene∣mies. Bellarmine somewhat boasteth the like of the Church of Rome, that she was never worsted in any set battel by the Protestants. But if he had lived till
these late yeers, he would have known it otherwise: And indeed he could not be ignorant of that famouss Bellum Hussiticum as they called it in Germany, and the many fields fought and won by the Huguenots in France &c. And if at any time the Church lose the day, Victa tamen vincet. Christ hath his stratagems as Joshuah had at Ai: he seems sometimes to retire, that he may return with greater advan∣tage. Certain it is, he will thresh the mountains and beat them smal before his Zoro∣babels: he will make the hills as chaff, Esay 41.15. and he shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings saying, Grace, Grace, unto it] i. e. He shall hold out to lay the very last stone of this new building with joy, and with general acclamations and wel-wishes. There was a promise for it long before Esay 44.28. This Zorobabel was not ignorant of: as neither of that which followeth Chap. 45.1, 2. that, for the effecting of that promise, God would go before him to make the crooked place streight, to break in pieces the gates of brasse and cut in sunder the bars of iron, i.e. to take away all rubs and impediments. There it the like promise in the New Testament, and it may be a singular incouragement to those that go on to build the tower of Godlinesse, to prepare a tabernacle intheir hearts for the holy One of Israel, that he may dwell in them and walk in them &c. the gates of hell shall never prevail against them, sith Christ, as another Sampson, hath flung them off their hinges, hath destroyed the Devils works, and laid the top∣stone of his spiritual temple with shouting saying, Grace, grace, unto it. The mea∣ning is, saith an interpreter, that the Angels, the faithful, and all creatures, re∣joycing at Christs kingdom established in the world, shall desire God the Father to heape all manner of blessing and happinesse upon it:Diodat. See Psal. 118.26. Or, they shall acknowledge and preach, that the Father hath laid up in him all the trea∣sures of his grace and gifts of his spirit. It is the observation of another Reverend man, preaching upon this text, that when we preach of humane wisdom and fore∣sight, we should fall down and cry (as we are here taught) Grace, Grace, unto it,Mr. Tho. Goodwin Fast∣serm. before Parl. Apr. 27.1642. we are not to cry up Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel, any man or means whatever: but to exalt the free grace of God the work of which alone it is and hath been. Zerubbabel should bring forth the head-stone (as master-builders used to do the first and last stone) and the people should magnifie Gods meer free-grace: and acknowledge that he was marvellous in their eyes. Thus that learned Preach∣er: who also by the lighted Candlestick here, understandeth full perfecting, and finishing of the Temple, and restoring the worship of God within it unto its full perfection of beauty and brightnesse. By the two Olive-trees. Zerubb abel with the elders and Ioshua High-priest with the other priests that sat before him, as Chap. 3.8. wite Ezra. 6.14. confer Psal. 52.8. These are said to empty golden oyl, that is, their estates and pains for the finishing of costly work: and likewise be∣cause it was done in fincerity of heart, therefore it is called golden or pure cyl. Fur∣ther, these eminent ranks and sorts of persons that should give their affistance to this work are called sons of oyl verse 15. As being fruit ful and affording plenty of it. Thus Esay 5 1. a fruitful hill and fertile soyl, is in the Original (as here) cal∣led a son of oyl &c. Verse 8. Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,] This is a confor∣mation of the former comfort, and a feal of the former promise; all which was but little enough by reason of the peoples distrust and iufidelity. Against which the prophet here produceth his warrant, Gods own word: q. d. This is a faithful say∣ing, and worthy of all acceptation. This is a pillar and ground of truth. See the Note od 1 Tim. 3.15. Verse 9. The hands of erubbabel have laid the soundation of this house: his hands &c.] Here the scope of this stately vision i plainly held forth, and without a pa∣rable. What the scripture speaketh darkly in one place, it speaks plainly in ano∣ther. The Rabbins have a saying, that there is a mountain of sense hanging up∣on every Apcx of the word of God. They have also another saying, Nulla st ob∣ctio in lege, quae non haber solutionem in latere, i. e. There is not any doubt in the law,Pemble of the Persian Mo∣narchy. but may be resolved out of the law. Zorobalcl is both founder and finisher of the Temple (those that will have it not to be finished till about the sixth yeer of Darius Nothus, make him to be very long-lived: and tell us that God granteth to one a longer life then ordinary, because he hath something to be done by them.)
The distrustful Jews began to despise those small beginnings of a building: and to despair of ever seeing it perfected, by reason of those mountains of opposition they met with, and thought they should never dig down or get over. The work shall the done saith God, and Zerubbabel, how unlikely soever, shall do it. Beleeve the Prophets, and ye shall prosper. It shall never be faid of Zorobabel, as of the foolish huilder This mn began, but could not sinish: Or as an out-lander seeing Christ∣church in Oxford, said of it, Egregium opus: Cardinalis iste instituit Collegium,Luke 14.30. Rod. Gualthe. & ab∣boit culmam. A pretty piece of Work! A colledge begun, and a kitchin finished. It was God that set Zerubbabel awork: and He doth not use do things to halves. He is Alpha and Omega, the Beginner and Ender, the Author and Finisher. Heb. 12.1. I am consident of this very thing, faith Paul, that he that hath begun a good work in you wil perform it Psal. 1.6. And faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it 1 Thes. 5.24. And, the Lord will persect that which concerneth me (saith David) sor∣sake not the work of thine own hands, Psal. 138.8. Look upon the wounds of thine hands, and despite not the works of thine hands, said Queen Elizabeth. Thus if men pray in the holy Ghost, keep themselves in the love of God, and look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ umo cernal life, they shall be builded up in their most holy saith,Jude. 20.21. where by Christ shall dwell in their hearts, as in his holy Temple. and thou shth know] Thou Zachary shalt know, that the Lord of Hosts hath sent me] His Angel as his Internuncio. See Luk. 1.19. Or thou Zerubbabel shalt know, that I Zahary come not to thee of mine own minde, but on Gods message, and am therefore to be beleeved. When Ehud told Egion he had a message from God, though he were an heathen and a fat unweildy man, he stood up to receive it Judg. 3.20. though that message was a messenger of death, a ponyard in his bowels. Should not we harken to the Father of spirits and live?Heb. 12. should the Consolations of God be sinall with us? Job. 15.11. Should we instead of wrestling with God by pray∣er, (so putting his promises in suit) wrangle with him, by cavelling objections? lse dixit among Pythagoras his schollers went currant: if their master said it, 'twas enough: And shall we that are taught of God not give the like credit to our Master in heaven? shall we not yeeld him the obedrence of faith? Verse 10. Tor who hath dspised the day of small things?] Nay, who had not? The generality of the Iews were clearly guilty Ezra 3.13. and are therefore here just∣ly reproved. As Naaman once looked on Gods Iordan with Syrian eyes, and so sllghted the motion of washing therein: so these distrusiful Jews despised the small beginnings of this great work; and the little likelyhood of ever bringing it to any good upshot. Is it not in your eyes as nothing-saith Hagge, (hap. 2.3? They see∣med onely to grieve at it: but God construeth it for a downright contem pt: for he judgeth otherwise of our carnall affections then we our selves, and will have us to know that his thoughts are not our thoughts, neither are his wayes our wayes Esay 55.8. Out of meancst principles he many times raiseth matters of greatest moment: that his own immediate hand may the more appear. The kingdom of heaven was at first but as a grain of mustad-seed Mat. 13.32. The stone cut out of the mountain without hands, as if it had dropt out, or been blown down thnece, became a mountain and silled the whole earth Dan. 1.34, 35. The cloud that rose as little as a mans hand, soon after muffled the whole heaven. God put little thoughts into the heart of Ahashuerosh concerning Mordecai, but for great pur∣poses. Who would ever have thought, that out of Abraham now as good as dead should have come the Messiah? or that out of the dry root of Jesse should come the Branch spoken of in the former Chapter? who would have imagined that going forth onely with his bow Rev. 6.2. and arrows Psal. 45.5. the foolishnesse of preach∣ing, he could conquer in three hundred yeers the whole Roman Empire? that by Hus a goose, and Luther a swan, such strange things should have been done in Bohemia and Germany? that by a scruple cast into Hen. the 8. his minde about his marriage with Katharine of Spain by the Trench Embassador (who came to consult with him of a marriage between the Lady Mary and the Duke of Orleans second son to the King of France) whether Mary were legitimate &c? the Pope should be cast off here, and reformation wrought by so weak and simple means,Spec. Erop. yea by casual and crosse means? this saith one, is that miracle which we are in these times to look for.
For they shall rejoyce] Or, But they shall rejoyce, or, Nay, they shall rejoyce, nay they shall see, viz. that which they despaired of ever seeing, and were therefore much cast down about the perfection of the work, and its glorious accomplishment. And this shall be surely effected by Gods powerful and watchful providence, called here those seven eyes of the Lord which run to and fro thorow the whole earth] called else∣where the seven spirits of God Rev. 5.6. and 1.4. and Gods spirit here Verse 6. so guiding and managing all affaires and occurrences, that all the rayes and beames of providence issuing from those eyes might be seen to meet in the accomplishment of this, as their ultimate ayme, and scope. See the Note on Chap. 3.9. Verse 11. Then answered I, and said unto him] No mean measure of understand∣ing would content the prophet: but he is still enquiring and incroaching upon the Angel, so doth Moses upon God, Exod. 33. He had not been long out of the Mount, but he is asking God to shew him his glory: which when he had seen, yet he resteth not satisfied, but must have more. and yet more; So David, though deep-learned, is ever and anon at it, teach me thy statutes. Spiritual learning is infu∣sed by degrees: our hearts are as narrow-mouth'd vessels, and God delights oft to hear of us. Whither I go thou canst not come now: but thou shalt afterwards. Then shall ye know, if ye follow on to know: provided that ye beg and dig Prov. 2.3, 4, 5, and beat, as the foul doth the shell to get out the fish: and be discontented∣ly contented, till ye come to see as ye are seen, a spe ad speciem &c. What are these w olives &c. And. Verse 12.Joh. 13. Hos. 6.3. What be these two olive-branches, &c.] See the Notes on verse 3. and verse 7. Verse 13. Knowest thou not what, &c.] See the Note on ver. 5. Vers. 14. These are the two anointed ones] Heb. sonnes of oyl. See the Note on verse 7. that stand by the Lord of the whole earth] because by the candlestick and utensils of the Temple and Type of the Church, which is at Christs right hand, Psal 45. as he at his Fathers right hand, Rom. 8. He is with all his to the end of the world: and it is a part of his joy that we shall be one day where he is. This Lord of the whole earth, soveraigne over all: but takes delight onely in such as (Esther like) he purifies and perfumes for royall use: and these he loveth so affectionately as ne∣ver any Lord did his subjects, Zech. 3.17. He loves the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacoh, Psal. 87.2. CHAP. V. Verse 1. THen I turned me, and lifted up mine eyes] i.e. I prepared me to the receiving of a new vision: nothing so comfortable as the former, but no lesse necessary; that the people, by sense of sinne, and fear of wrath, might be taken off their wicked practises, redeem their own sorrows, and be accounted wor∣thy to escape all those things that should (otherwise) come to passe, as verse 11. and to stand before the Son of man, at that dreadfull day. This seemeth to bee the mind of the Holy Ghost,Luke 21.36. in these two visions here recorded: which while some Interpreters attend not, in toto vaticinio neque coelum, neque terram attingunt, saith Calvin, they are utterly out. and behold a flying roll] Or, volume, as Psal. 40.10. or scroll of paper, or parchment, usually rolled up, like the web upon the pin, mi convolvuntur nostrae Mappae Geographicae, as our Mappes are rolled up, saith A Lapide: and as in the publike Library at Oxford the Book or Roll of Esther (an Hebrew Manuscript) is at this day to bee seen:D. Prid. Orat. 4. Amem. Antibarb. lib. 3. Volans velocis∣simum astions incursum signi∣ficat. Chrysost. but here flying] Not onely because spread wide open, as Rabshakeh's letter, 2 King. 19.14. and as that Book of the Prophet Esaias, Luke 4.17. but also as fleeting along swiftly, like a bird ready to seiz on her prey. Nemo scelus gerit in Pectore, qui non idem Nemesin in tergo. The Hea∣thens
thens named Nemesis (their Goddesse of Revenge to take punishment of offend ours) , because no man can possibly escape her. They tell us also that their Ju∣piter writeth down all the sinnes of all men in a book, or scroll, made of a goats∣pelt,. which they call : the very word whereby Aquila and Theodotion (two Greek Translatours) do render the Hebrew of this Text. (See Dan, 7.18. Rev. 20.12.) Symmachus turnes it , a Chapter, or Abstract of a larger Book, full of sinnes, and Woes: and yet it is of an unheard of hugenesse, verse 2. and of very sad contents, like that book of Ezechiel, chap. 2.9, 10. lamentation, and mourning, and woe; or the first leaf of Bishop Babingtons book (which he turned over every morning) all black: to inmind him of hell, and Gods judgements due unto him for his sinnes. Vers. 2. What seest thou] q. d. Mark it well, and let thine eye affect thine heart; let these things be oculis commissa fidelibus. I see a flying book] See the Note on verse 1. Some read it, A double book, (according to the Chaldaick signification of the word) as containing double, that is, manifold menaces and punishments of sinne. But the Chaldee Paraphrast, Sep∣tuagint, and others, render it flying; as hasting, and hovering over the heads of wicked persons. the length thereof is twenty cubits, &c.] Ten yards long, and five broad. Nei∣ther let men say, that words are but wind, as they did Jer. 5.13. For, 1. Even wind, when gotten into the bowels of the earth, may cause an earth-quake; as when into the bowels of the body, an heart-quake. 2. God threateneth those scoffers verse 14. that he will make that word which they tearmed wind, to become fire, and themselves fuel to feed it. And as fire flyeth upon fuell fully dried, Nah. 1.10. and consumeth it in an instant: so Gods flying roll will lick up the evil-doers, no otherwise then the fire from heaven after it had consumed the sacrifice, the wood, the stones, and the dust, licked up also the water that was in the trench, 1 King. 18.38. The threatnings of Gods Law (the same with this Roll) are (as Erasmus saith of Ezek. 3.18.) fulmina non verba, lightbolts rather then words: or if words, yet they are (as One saith) Verba non legenda sed vivenda, Words not to be read onely, but lived: at least, not to be read as men do the old stories of forraigne warres; wherein they are nothing concerned (but as threatening them∣selves in every threat, cursing themselves in every curse, &c.) nor as they read the predictions of an Almanack for wind and weather: which they think may come to passe, and it may be not: but be confident of this very thing, that God who hath denounced it will surely do it, and that he will execute the judgement written in this roll, Psal. 149.9. yea every sicknesse and every plague which is not written in the book of this Law, them will the Lord cause to descend upon the disobedient, untill they be destroyed, Deut. 28.61. Verse 3. This is the curse] Or oath, with execration and cursing.Num. 5.21. . ut & A. Graecè, juramentum et execrationem significat. Mercer. Cursing men are cursed men, and God hath sworn that swearers shall not enter into his rest. that goeth forth] yea flyeth, verse 2. more swift then an eagle, an arrow, a flash of lightening. Or, if not, yet Poena venit gravior, quo magè sera venit. over the face of the whole earth] Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that doth evil: but of the Jew sirst, (Ingentia beneficia flagitia, supplicia) who is therefore the worse, because he ought 'to have been better; and then,Rom. 2.9. of the Gentile also. Theodoret, Lyra, and Vatablus think that Iudaea is hinted in the mea∣sure of the book (twenty cubites long, and ten broad) as being twice so long (and somewhat more) as it is broad: witnesse Hierom in his Epistle to Dardanus.Epist. 129. But let the whole earth here be taken in its utmost latitude, sith the Gentiles that sinne without the Law, are yet liable to the punishments of the Law. And some of them by the light of Nature saw the evil of swearing: but all generally of steal∣ing; but especially of perjury and sacriledge, here principally meant. Confer Mal. 3.8. Neh. 13.10. for every one that stealeth shall be cut off] By stealing understand all sins against
the second Table: as by swearing, all against the first: and so the sense is the same with that of the Apostle, Every transgression and disobedience receiveth a just recompence of reward Heb. 2.2. And cursed is every one, that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do them, Gal. 3.10. Howbeit because these two sins were more frequently and more impudently com∣mitted in those dayes, therefore are they (by a specialty) instanced. The Jewes comming poor out of Babylon, held it no great sin to steal for supply of their ne∣cessities: and then to forswear themselves for the better hiding of their theft, Give me not poverty, said holy Agur, lest being poore I steale, and (as one sin drawes on another) I take the name of my God in vaine Prov. 30.9. See the Note there. Hunger is an evill counsellour, necessity an hard weapon, a sore temp∣tation: when it comes to this, Either I must steale or starve. But then to this must be opposed that of the law, Thou shalt in no case steals. Thou must rather dye then do wickedly. Aut faciendum aut patiendum, Either obey the law, or suffer the curse. as on this side according to it] i. e. According to the curse, described in the rowle, the thees shall be cut off as well as the swearer: they shall speed alike. The tares shall be bound up in bundles, theeves with theeves, and swearers with swea∣rers, and burnt in the fire Mat. 13.30, 40. According to the prediction shall be the execution. Whether on this side, that is in Judea (so some sense it) or on that side, in other parts of the world, such persons appeare, they shall have their payment. and every one that sweareth Not only falsely as verse 4. but lightly, vainely, causelesly, in jest and not in judgement: whether by God, or by creatures and qualities; Judaeis & Pharisaeis vulgare vitium, saith Paraeus on Iam. 5.12. a common fault among the Jewes and Pharisees Mat. 5.34, 35. and 23.16.18. See the Notes there. Among the Christians in Chrysostomes time, as appeares by his many sermons against it at Antioch. And in these dayes, if ever, because of oaths the land mourneth, God hath a controversie Hos. 4.1, 2. We have lived to see iniquity in the fulnesse of oaths and blasphemies unparaleled darted with hellish mouths against God and our Saviour so ordinarily and openly, that some of them are become very interjections of speech to the vulgar, and other some meer phrases of gallantry to the braver. I knew a great swearer (saith a great Divine) who comming to his death-bed Satan so filled his heart with a madded and enraged greedinesse after that most gainelesse,Bolon. and pleasurelesse sin: that though himself swore as fast and as furiously as he could, yet (as though he had bin already among the bannings and blasphemies of hell) he desperatly desired the standers by to help him with oaths, and to swear for him. Verse 4. I will bring it forth] sc. out of my treasuries or store-houses of plagues and punishments Deut. 32.34. Or, That which thou hast seen in vision, I will put in action: I will produce it into the open light, into the theatre of the world: their faults shall be written in their foreheads, their sins shall go before to judge∣ment, my visible vengeance shall overtake them. and it shall enter into the house of the theef] which he calleth his castle: and where he thinks himself most secure, as out of the reach of Gods rod: as i he could mot up himself against Gods fire. But what faith Bildad? His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the king of terrours. It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation, Iob 18.14, 15. so, that if the fire of Gods wrath do but touch it, all's on a light flame.A. Gell. He will unkennel these foxes: and drag (acus out of his denn, to his deserved punishment. Dioclesian the Persecutour (one of those La∣trones publici,Eusub: de vit. Const. lib. 5. as Cato called them) giving over his Empire, after that he had sufficiently feathered his nest; decreed to lead the rest of his life quietly. But he escaped not so: for after that, his house was wholy consumed with lightening and a flame of fire that fell from heaven, he hiding himself, for fear of the lighte∣ning, died within a while after. and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name] Hence Ribera gathe∣reth that by the whole earth in the former verse is meant Judaea only: because none but Jewes swore by the name of the true God, who is indeed the proper ob∣ject
of an oath Esay 65.16. Ier. 12.6. Howbeit in lawfull contracts with an Infidel or Idolater, oaths by false gods may be admitted, and are binding. As for perjury, it is a provoking sin; as containing three great evils. 1. The uttering or upholding of a lie. 2. The calling upon God to testifie and justifie a lie. 3. The praying for a curse upon a mans self: and beseeching God to be a swift witnesse against him, Mal. 3. as he was indeed against Zedekiah, Narcissus in the eccle∣siasticall history, Earle Godwin in Polydor Virgil, Rodulphus Duke of Suevia, Ladislatis king of Hungary, Dr. London (Act. and Mon. fol. 1114.) Richard Long a souldier at Callice in K. Henry the 8. dayes: who deposing falsely against Will: Smith Curat of Callice, shortly after, upon a displeasure of his wife,Act. and Ma. fol. 1117. despe∣rately drowned himself. And within the memory of man Feb. 11. An. Dom. 1574. Anne Averies forswore, her self at a shop in woodstreet London; praying God she might sink where she stood if she had not paid for the wares she took. Hereupon she fell down presently speechlesse, and with horrible stench died. and it shall remaine in the middest of his house] And be a troublesome inmate with him, such as he cannot rid his hands of though never so fain: there it shall roost and rest, in despite of him. If it distast not his dough or empty his basket, yet will it fill his store with strise, or mix the wrath of God with his sweet mor∣sels: his meate shall be fauced, his drink spiced, as Iob 20.23. It is a moth in his wardrobe, murraine among his cattle, mildewin his field, rot amongst his sheep, and oft-times maketh the fruit of his loines his greatest heart-break. with the timher thereof and the stones thereof] As in case of treason or other hor∣rible cines, the very houses of the offendours;Illam domum in qua fuerit inventus haere∣ticus diruen∣dam decerni∣mus. were pulied down and made a jakes, Dan. 2.5. and 3.29. The Popish Councell of Tholose gathered together against those Ancient Protestants the Alpigenses, made a decree, that the very house wherein an heretick was found, should be pulled down. The Mannour-house of Milcot in Warwick-shire, built by Lodovike Greevill deeply guilty of these two grand evils mentioned in the text, and lately burnt to the ground, is commonly lookt upon as a speaking monument of Gods just judgement against Sacriledge and Perjury: whether men personally commit these sins or love them in others Zach. 1.17. Rev. 22.15. Verse 5. Lift up now thine eyes and see] No doubt, saith Calvin here, but the Prophet was frighted at the sight of the flying rowle, full of curses.Psa. 119.120, My flesh trembleth for feare of thee, saith David, and I am afraid of thy judgements. And Habakkuk, when he considered the cursed condition of the Churches ene∣mies, my belly trembled, said he, when I heard it: my lips quivered at the voice. rottennesse entred into my bones chap. 3.6. Daniel was more afficted and troubled for Nebuchadnezzars calamity, then himself was, chap. 4.19. Here therefore the Angell encourageth the Prophet, and biddeth him look up and see a further vision; and not through dulnesle or dejectednesse, to let passe without due observation the notable works and witnesses of Gods providence and power. Curious Artisans when they set forth some speciall peece to publik view, they take it ill when notice is not taken of it: So here. See the Note on ver. 1. Verse 6. And I said, What is it?] i.e. what meaneth it for the vision is very hard and mysterious: lest (saith One) the plaine denunciation of the second overthrow of temple and state might discourage them too much, to go forward in the present restauration of both. Hugh Broughton on Dan. 2.4. observeth, that while the visions are generall, and cause the Jewes no danger, so far Daniel writeth in the Syriack tongue, generall over the East. But when the oppressours be named, and the Jewes plainely described the people whom God defendeth, then the eighth chapter and all after, he writes in Hebrew (a tongue lesse known and studied) and hath a commandement to keep close the plaine exposition chap. 12.4. There is a great deale of wisdome required of those, that are intrusted with the dispensation of divine truths. Our Saviour spake as the people could heare, and not as he could have spoken. See Heb. 5.11, 12. this is an Ephah that goeth forth] The Ephah was the greatest and most common measure among the Jewes: and is therefore generally put for any measure whatso∣ever Deut. 25.14. By false measures (one kind of thest) they had sinned (whence
the Chaldee here, Isti sunt populi qui accipiebant, & dabant mensurà falsâ, These are the people that bought and sold by false measures) by the same therefore, their punishment is set forth and signified; A peece of their punishment it was that they were bounded and limited: that wickednesse was confined and kept within her Ephah. The Vulgar translates it Amphora a pitcher: which when it is once filled with the bitter waters of wickednesse, will soon sink to the bottom. Sin∣ners as they are stinted, so when they have filled up their measure, they are sure to be punished: when they are ripe in the field, God will come with his sickle; when their grapes of Sodom are full ready, he will cast them into the winepresse of his wrath Rev. 15.16. Gen. 15.16. Mat. 23.32. this is their resemblance thorough all the earth] Heb. their eye, their aspect, their colour. This, that is, this Ephah, is their resemblance: sc. that when they have filled up their sins, they shall have their fill of punishment. Or This, mea∣ning some apparition representing Gods providence shewed by the Angel to the Prophet;Tch 3.9. and 4.10. and 9.1. is their eye, that is, the eye of the three persons in Trinity, Gods univer∣fall providence, which presideth over his judgements. Or thus: This Ephah or measure of their punishment, proportionate to their sin, in killing Chst especi∣ally Mat. 23.32. shall be their eye thorough all the earth, i. e. shall be conspi∣cuous and apparent to all sorts: so that all men shall hate them, and hoot at them for a company of Kill-Christs, shall look upon them as a people of Gods curse &c. Thus the Chaldee here, Behold they are made manifst before all the inha∣tants of the earth: for all men shall be witnesles of their horrible both sinns and plagues. Verse 7. And behold there was lift up a talent of lead] A lump of lead, the weightiest metall: noting the immoveable and immutable decee of God or the punishment of the wicked.Esay 3.11. Say to the wicked, tell him so from me, it shall go ill with him: Iniquity shall be his ruine. This lump of lead is fir lifted up, and then let down upon the Ephah as an adequate covering: and betokeneth the grie∣vousnesse and long continuance of the Jewes punishment and banishment for their parricide,. 1 Thes. 2.16. or rather deicide, in crucifying the Lord of glory. A day of grace they had, but they knew it not; therefore is wrath come upon them to the utmost, or, untill the end, or finally, so as it shall never be removed: so some interpret it. and this is a woman that sitteth in the middest of the Ephah] In medio modi: and so she went forth or moved forward with an open face, and upper parts appea∣ring, as not afhamed: the shew of her countenance witnessed against her, she declared her sin as Sodom Esay 3.9. and as Lots daughters who savoured too much of Sodom, when, glorying in their shame, they called their incestuous brts M∣ab, that is the begotten of my father, and Benammi which sounds to the same sense. This woman is also said to sit, as resolved of her course. Confer Psal. 1.1. and 50.20. the Jewes are still a stubborn and refractary people. Antiqum obti∣nent: O that the falvation of Israel were come out of Zion &c. Psal. 14.7. De∣us nos dignabitur clarissimá visione cum reducet Zion, saith Jachiades one of their Rabbines. I add, Fiat, Fiat. Verse 8. And he said, this is Wickednesse] viz. this woman, a figure of the whole sinfull nation of the Jewes: as were Aholah, and Aholibah Ezech. 23. and Babylon the great, the mother of fornications and abominations Rev. 17.5. to whom I may add that grand-daughter of hers Katherine de Medices Queen-mo∣ther: who by her wickednesse wonderfully troubled all France for thirty yeers together. and he cast it into the midst of the Ephah] The Angel, as an executioner of di∣vine justice, throwes her down who before sat perking and priding her self; and claps her upclose prisoner as it were in the Ephah. casting the weight of lead into the mouth thereof] that is of the Ephah, or of the woman, according to that Psal. 107.42. the righteous shall ee it and re∣joyce, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Montanus one of the Talmud addeh, that this woman is compel'd to take this lead into her mouth: that moten lead was powred down her throat, for a punishments of her frauds and thests ver. 3. But the wicked shall not be so excused: sor upon them God shall raine nares, fire, brimstone, and a burning tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup,
Psal. 11.6. and this is farr worse then molten lead, or burning bell-mettle. Compare with this text ler. 51.64. and Rev. 18.21. with 20.1. An Angel a strong Angel, for better assurance of Romes irrepairable ruine, taketh a stone, a great stone. which he throweth, and with force thrusteth into the bottom of the sea whence it cannot be boyd up, whence nothing ordinarily is recovered, much lesse a milstone thrust from such a hand with such a force. What do ye imagine against the Lord? saith Nahum: he will make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time chap. 1.9. that is, the wicked shall be totally and finaily consu∣med at once: neither will God make another doing of it. I have overthrown some of you, as God over threw Sodom and Gomorrah: Am. 4.11. wicked∣nesse is here crushed together as it were in a narrow veslell, covered with lead, and carried into a strange countrey. Verse 9. Behold there came out two women] Winged women, and carried through the ayre with a pleasant wind, to note their ready and speedy obedience, prompt and present. Women they are said to be, to keep proportion with the present vision; lest the meeting and mixing together of men and women in the same matter might minister occasion to some impure surmisings. But that they were men and not women, that are here meant, is agreed upon by all. These were Ezra and Nehemiah, (saith Willet on Levit. 11. after Junius and Piscator on the text) those great Reformers of the Jewish Church. But this stand, not with the last verse. I rather subscribe to those that expound the text of the Romanes, who with great celerity and violence destroyed the Jewes state: and so, that which they feared befell them oh. 11.48. The Romanes, said they, shall come to take away both our place and our nation: and within a few yeers it proved accordingly: as if God had taken them at their word, as he did those murmuring miscreants Num. 14.28. As truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine cares, so will I do unto you. Hereunto the Chaldee Paraphrast consenteth, when by these two women thus described he understandeth, populos leves & expeditos, such Agents and Instuments, as God would imploy in the speedy execution of his wrath upon the Jewish Nation: such as were Titus, Vespasian, and Alius Adri∣an.See my Trite treasure chap. 7. sect. 2. Diodate maketh these two women a figure of God, two properties, namely Mercy towards his Elect, and Justice towards his Enemies, wherewith he trans∣ports upon these last the judgements by which he had punished his own people: which is done with admirable celerity. Thus He. Danaeus makes those two women to be the Anger and Justice of God, which do alwayes follow and wat upon one another, and take vengeance on mens wickednesse. Judium sit penes lectorem. and the wind was in their wings] A masculine Affix resered to a Feminine Noune: to intimate that these women were indeed types of men, saith Mr. Pemble. he Romanes were men every inch of them, as the proverh is: and therefore of cowards they were wont to say that they had nothing Roman in them: and of Bru∣tus, that he was the lasi of the Romans. and they lift up the Ephah between the Earth and the heaven] This betokeneth a deportation and disiection of the Jewish Nation: being tossed as a tennis-ball into all nations, and scattered into the soure winds, as Ier. 48.32. Rupertus hence concludeth them rejected of both carth and heaven. Out of the earth they are as it were banished, by a common consent of Nations: and heaven admitten them not, as those that please not God, and are contrary to all men 1 Thess. 2.15. And as their guide Judas, when they took Jesus, was hang'd betwixt heaven and earth, being caelo terraeque perosus; so fares it with that wretched people, and will do till God shall call them a people which were not a people, and her beloved, which was not beloved Rom. 9.25. Verse 10 Whither do these beare the Ephah?] that is, saith Ribera, Quam∣diu duratura est populi hujus impietas? How long shall this peoples wickednesse last? like as Isa. 6.10, 11. when the Prophet had heard, make the heart of th people fat, and shut their eyes &c. he cryes out, How long Lord? the answer where∣unto is the same in effect with this of the Angel: untill the cities be wasted with∣out inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate; And the Lord have removed men farr away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.
Verse 11. To build it an house in the land of Shinar] That is, of Babylon, Gen. 10.10. and 11.2. where diverse of the Jews still remained in wilfull exile, as loth to leave their houses and gardens, which they had builded and planted there, Jer. 29 5. preferring captivity before liberty. See 1 Chron. 4.22, 23. Hence, upon their finall dispersion by the Romans, diverse of them resorted thither for enter∣tainment. There Peter, the Apostle of the circumcision, had collected an elected Church, 1 Epist. 5.13. and thence he writeth his Epistle to the sojourning Jews scattered thorow those Eastern parts chap. 1.10. from whence also those kings of the East, Rev. 16.12. the converted Jews (as some expound it) are expected. And who can tell whether this land of Shinar be not the same with that land of Sinim, Esay 49.12. Confer Esay 11.16. Zach. 10.11. Or, by the land of Shinar here, may be meant exilium totius orbis, their generall rejection by all nations; the whole world being to them a Shinar, that is, a land of excussion. and it shall be established, &c.] This denoteth the diuturnity, or perpetuity of their punishment. CHAP. VI. Verse 1. ANd I turned, and lift up mine eyes] i. e. I passed on to another vision: and 1 lifted up the eyes of my mind, higher to heaven, saith Hierom, to receive a further revelation from God. And whereas he saith, I turned, he declareth, that God from on every side giveth his Church clear testimonies of his care of her, so that she will give heed unto them, and lift up her eyes. there came four chariots out] i.e. four squadrons of Angels, Gods Warriours, and Ministers of his manifold decrees, which are here set forth by the name of brazen mountains.2 King. 2.11 2 King. 6.17 So Hab. 3.8 See chap. 1.8. with the Note. Chariots the Angels are called in many places: but especially Psal. 68.17. The chariots of God (in the Hebrew it is chariot, in the singular, to note the joynt service of all the Angels) are twenty thousand,. even thousands of Angels. (of chearfull ones, so the Septuagint, of such as serve the Lord readily, and freely, with joy and tranquillity, and so do quiet his spirit,Deut. 33.26 God rideth upon the hea∣vens for Isra. els help, i.e. upon the An∣gels. Heb. as it is said here vorse 8: give him full satisfaction) The Lord is a∣mong them as in Sinai, in the holy place: that is, the Angels by their swiftnesse and warlike prowesse make Sion (the Church) as dreadfull to all her enemies (did not one of them so to Sennacherib?) as those Angels made Sinai, at the delivery of the Law, which was given in fire, Deut. 33.2. The word rendred Angels, in the above-cited Psal. 68.17. (and so the Chaldee plainly expresseth it) is by some (who derive it of Shaan, to sharpen) referred to chariots: to note a kinde of chariots, armed with sharp hooks, used in warres, as many humane Writers record. And so it maketh something to the confirmation of this Interpretation,Statius. Macrob. Vegetius. concern∣ing Angels, rather then the four Monarchies. But the Angel himself is our best Interpreter, verse 5. where, being asked by Zachary, what these chariots were? he answereth, These are the four spirits of the heavens, which go sorth from standing before the Lord of all the earth, a plain Periphrasis of the Angels, chap. 1.10. See the Note there. from between two mountains] tanquam è carceribus, as designed by Gods all disposing providence, and power, and ready prest at his appointment and plea∣sure to run their race, do their office, execute Gods judgements, which are both unsearchable, and inevitable: and this the Poets hammer'd at in their ineluctabile Fatum, as they called it. Gods decrees lie hid under mountains of brasse, as it were, till they come to execution: they run as a river under ground, till they break out and shew themselves. When he hath once signified his will, then we understand it; which before lay hid from us: that is, when these chariots come out from between the mountains of brasse, when the event declareth what was the immutable decrce of God. Hence the Psalmist, Thy right cousnesse is like the great mountains; thy judgements are a great deep: this for the decree. And for the execution, Thou preservest man and beast, (Psal. 36.6.) but by such means, and in such manner as to thee seemeth best. It is our part to say Amen to his Amen, and to put our Fat
and Placet to his. The will of the Lord be done, said those primitive Christians, Act. 21.14. Here am I, send me, Esay 6.8. Verse 2. In the first chariot were red horses, &c.] These severall colours seem to set forth the diverse ministrations of the Angels, deputed to severall employments. The black colour betokeneth sorrowfull occurrences and revolutions. The white, joyfull. The red, bloody. The grisled, sundry and mixt matters, partly joyfull, and partly sorrowfull. But I easily subscribe to Him that said, We must be con∣tent to be ignorant of the full meaning of this vision. Tanta est profunditas Christi∣anarum literarum, saith Austin, so great is the depth of divine learning that there is no fathoming of it. Prophecy is pictured like a Matrone, with her eyes covered, for the difficulty. For which cause Paulinus Nolanus would never be drawn to write Commentaries: and Psellus in Theodoret asketh pardon for expounding the Canticles of Solomon. Verse 4. What are these my Lord?] Difficulty doth but whet desire in He∣roick spirites: the harder the vision, the more earnest was the Prophets inquisition. he was restlesse, till better resolved; and therefore applieth himself again to his Angel-Tutour, rather then Tutelar, whom, for honour sake, he calleth My Lord. See the Note on chap. 4.5. and take notice of the truth of Saint Peters Assertion concerning the Prophetick scrutiny (1 Pet. 1.11.) with greatest sagacity and sedulity. Verse 5. These are the four spirits of the heavens] Angels are spirits, Heb. 1.7, 14. and spirits of heaven, Mat. 24.36. Gal. 1.8. resembling their Creatour, as chil∣dren do their Father, both in their substance which is incorporeall,Hence they are called sons of God, Job 1.6. and 38.7 and in their ex∣cellent properties, Life, and Immortality, Blessednesse, and Glory: a part where∣of is their just Lordship and command over inferiour creatures. For like as mini∣string spirits they stand before the Lord of the whole earth, who sends them out at his pleasure, to serve his providence: so, they have, (as his Agents and Instru∣ments, no small stroke, in the ordering and managing of naturall and civill affairs, as may be seen in the first of Ezechiel. The wheels, that is, the events of things, have eyes, that is, something that might shew the reason of their turnings, if we could see it. And they are stirred but as the living creatures, that is the Angels stirred them: And both the wheels and living creatures were acted and guided by Gods spirit as the principall and supream Cause of all, the Lord of the whole earth, as he is here called. that stand before, &c.] As waiting his commands, and ready to runne on his errand, Mat. 18:10. Dan. 7.10. Jacob at Bethel saw them. 1. ascending, sc. to contemplate and praise God, and to minister to him. 2. descending, sc. to ex∣ecute Gods will upon men, for mercy, or for judgement, Psal. 103.20. For which purpose, Ezekiel tells us that they have four faces, to look every way, when as Gods watch-men they stand sentinell in heavens turret. And that the sole of their feet is like the sole of Calves feet, round, and ready to go either forward or backward with greatest facility: that as they see every way, so they are apt to go every way for the dispensing of Gods benefits, and executing of his chastisements toward the Elect, and vengeance on the reprobates. All this they do justly,2 Sam. 24.17 2 King. 19.35 Gen. 19.11 Acts 12.23 Rev. 16.16 dili∣gently and purely, with faith in receiving Gods commands, Rev. 15.6. clothed in pure white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles. Let us la∣bour to obey God, as Angels do: else we may be Angels for gifts, and yet go to hell. Verse 6. The black horses which are therein, &c. These Angels are appointed to severall Countries. The black horses to Babylon, (which lay North from Judaea) to inflict vengeance. The white horses are sent with them, to deliver the Church out of Babylon: and to bring their brethren for an offering unto the Lord, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts to Gods holy Mountain Jerusalem, Esay 66, 20. And the grisled go forth toward the South countrey] To shew that the punish∣ments of Egypt, and Arabia (which lay South-ward from Judaea) should be some∣what mixed, and mitigated: they should be in better case then Babylon: yet not so good, as that the Jews should dream of a happy estate in those countries: but rather repair to Judaea, and there keep them; sith those that are out of Gods pre∣cincts,
cincts, are out of his protection, Psal. 91.9, 10, 11, 12. Verse 7. And the bay went forth, &c.] Junius reads it, And the strong, or con∣firmed ones: that is, the Angels, armed with power, and authority from God for the execution of his will, Esay 10.34. Lebanon shall fall by a mighty One, that is, by an Angel. 2 Thess. 1.7. they are called the Angels of Gods power: and else∣where principalities, and powers. and sought to go, that they might-walk to and fro thorow the earth] Not onely toward the South, as verse 6. This doth not teach, that the Angels are more care∣full of this world then God is, of whom they desired it. But first, that they can do nothing without commission from Him. Secondly, that they are ever ready to offer their service and to yeeld obedience, upon the least intimation of the Divine pleasure. Verse 8. Then cried he upon me] That I might the better observe it: sith he spake it with so great vehemency. Have pacified my spirit] i.e. perfecerunt voluntatem meam, as the Chaldee here hath it, they have done my work thoroughly, to my great content. When the Churches enemies are slaughtered, God inviteth the birds and beasts to a feast, as it were for joy: and taketh as much delight in their just punishment, as any man can do in a cup of generous wine: whence it is called the wine of Gods wrath, Rev. 14.10. See Deut. 28.63. Verse 9. And the word of the Lord came unto me saying,] This second part of the Chapter, is not a vision, but a Sermon, or an historicall prediction of what was really to be done. For as Gods Spirit was quieted, and as it were comforted by the Angels faithfull execution of their offices: so He seeks by this Prophecy, to qui∣et and comfort the spirits of his people the Iews, that were returned out of Baby∣lon. For these finding themselves beset with enemies, and exigencies, might possi∣bly despair of ever seeing the accomplishment of those promises and prophecies of the kingdome restored to the house of David, and of the great glory of the second Temple above the first. To keep up their hearts therefore, is this declaration made them of the kingdome and priestood of Christ, under the typicall coronation of Je∣hoshuah the High-priest. Vers. 10. Take of them of the captivity] i. e. Of the returned captives, even of Heldai,Num. 16.2. of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah] Men famous in the Congregation, men of renown. That these four mentioned here (taking in Josiah, who is also called Her, verse 14.) were Embassadours from the godly Jews in Babylon, and brought their gists, as Junius thinketh, I cannot affirm. But that they were the same with Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, as the Jews and Hierom tell us, I do not beleeve. Josiah seemeth to be the Hoste to the other three: as Gaius was to St. Paul, and other good people. Though some think rather, he was either treasurer for the Temple, or else a gold-smith, and one that could make crowns. Calvin con∣jectures from the fourteenth verse; (where it is said, that the crowns shall be to these men for a memoriall) that being men of authority, they were deeply guilty of infidelity and impatiency, because they aw not a present performance of the pro∣mises; they were discontented themselves, and discouraged others. Ye have need of patience, saith the Apostle to those short spirited Hebrews chap. 10.36. who found it more easie to suffer evil, thento wait for the promised good. and come thou the same day] Either the same day these men came from Baby∣lon: Or, the self-same day that the Lord spake to the Prophet, is hee commanded to go, not to put it off a day longer: for the people needed a speedy and hasty com∣fort. No sooner had God prepared the people, but the thing was done suddenly, as 2 Chron. 29.36. No sooner were they ripe, but he was ready. He is a God of judgement, a wise God, that knowes when to deal forth his favours: As till then he waits to be gracious, Esay 30.18. His fingers itch to be doing good in his good pleasure to Sion: as the mothers breasts ake, when now it is time the child had suck. He exalteth the lowly, he filleth the hungry with good things. When once David is poor and needy, God will make no tarriance, Psal. 40.17. when his soul is even as a weaned child, then he shall have the kingdom, Psal. 131.2. Verse 11. Make crowns] Two, saith Piscator: one of gold, for the Kingly dignity, another of silver for the Priesthood. Three, saith A Lapide, who makes
it a type as of Christs threefold office, so of the Popes triple crown: which later relateth rather to Prides picture drawn by the old Romanes, with three crowns on her head; On the first whereof was in scribed Transcendo: on the second Non obedio: on the third Perturbo. Danaeus thinks it likely by the 14. verse, that here were foure crowns made according to the number of the foure persons here mentioned, that brought in the gold and silver. Ribera will have it to be all but one crown made of both metalls, and called crowns for the greatnesse of it;Chald. vertit Facies coronam magnam. as Wisdomes for singular wisdome, Pro. 1. Behemoth Beasts, for an huge beast Iob 40. The Verb singular tihieh ver. 14. seemes most to favour this conceit of his. But in Hebrew the singular is oft put for the plurall. Verse 12. And spake unto him saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of Hosts saying] that is, Confidently and Constantly affirme and averr it: that notwithstanding all unlikely hood, and unbeliefe on the peoples part, Almighty God will surely bring it to passe: This heape of words importeth so much: for do ye think the scrip∣ture speaketh in vaine? saith St. James, not without some holy indignation, chap. 4.5. behold the man whose name is the Branch] The man Christ Jesus,Rom. 1.3. who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh: and as a Branch grew out of his roots Esay 11.1. See the Note above on chap. 3.4. Jehoshuah,2 Cor. 12.7. Rom. 12.3. that he might not be exaited above measure with the abundance of this new honour, or think of him∣self more highly then he ought to think, is given to understand, that he is crown∣ned for no other cause then this, that the Jewes might understand, that there should One arise, that should be both a King and a Priest also for ever after the order of Melchisedeck: and his name should be the Branch, Not only because when he was a child, he grew in age and in wisdome, and in grace with God and men, (which is Vatablus his reason) but because he is the oot, fountain, and foundati∣on of all the faithfull, who do grow up and increase in him, with the increase of God: Hence it followeth. he shall grow up out of his place, and shall build the Temple of God] that is, the Church, which at all times hath been gathered together by Christ, through the preaching of the Gospel. and he shall grow up out of his place] Or He (the Branch) shall branch up de sub se, from under hinself: he shall be born of himself, as it were, of poor parentage; for this Branch grew out of the root of Iesse, when that goodly family was sunk so low, as from David the king to Joseph the carpenter. He that writeth the life of King Edward 6. saith of his Tutours Dr. Cox, and Mr. Iohn Cheek,Sr. Iohn Heywood. that they were men of meane birth; but so well esteemed for vertue and learning, that they might well be said to be born of themselves. and he shall build the Temple of the Lord] i. e. the spirituall temple, that Tem∣ple the Church, the glory where of was far greater then the glory of the former Hag. 2.9. See the Note there. And this he should do in the quality of a king, and with royall magnificence. Ye also as lively stones elect and precious are built up a spirituall house, an holy Priesthood &c. 1. Pet. 2.5. Verse 13. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord] The same againe for grea∣ter assurance: as Pharaoh's dream was doubled. Or, Even he shall build it, that is, he shall both begin and finish it (It is the same word againe, but in the future tense) Christ is called the Authour and Fimsher of our faith Heb. 12.2. and he shall beare the glory] Jesus shall, not thou Jehoshuah (in Greek, Jesus) though now thou beare the crown. All thy glory is but figurative of his. Thus saith the Lord, Remove the diadem (or mitre) take off the crown: this shall not be the same &c. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, untill he come whose right it is, and I will give it him, that is Christ the king and priest of his Church. Particularly for his Kingly office, he shall sit and rule upon his throne, as a Soveraigne Lord of all: And for his Priestly office he shall be a Priest upon his throne likewise] for the Church also hath her throne and jurisdiction, though distinct and severed from the civill. and the counsell of peace shall be between them both] i. e. there shall be no clash∣ing between these two offices in Christ; as there was sometimes between the Kings and the Priests of former ages, but they should, as it were, take sweet
counsell together for the good of the Church: Christ having purchased all peace to his people by his Preshood, and maintaining and defending it, by his Kingdome. Verse 14. And the crownes shall be to Halem—for a memoriall] Or monument of their incredulity, saith Calvin, and for their full conviction. See the Note above on verse 10. Or their liberality, fay others, and peradventure with some inseription or remembrance of their names (here recorded) for honour sake. But best of all those that say these duties were for a memoriall in the Temple of the Messiah that was shortly to be expected, and was presently promised. The poor Jewes at this day are said to have a crown hanging in their synagogues, against the comming of their long lookt-for Messiah.Taim. in Sanhed. cap. 11 And that he comes not all thi while, they say it is for their sins which are many and bony, or, mighy, (.) But now seeing he stayes so long, he shalibe, say they, a forerun∣ner of the end of the world,Spec. Eur. and shall gather by his power all nation, into one fold, according to that which here followeth. Verse 15. And they that are farr off] This was fulfilled in the conversion of the Gentiles who together with the Christian Jewes grew up into an holy Temple in the Lord Eph. 2.19. &c. It was also in some sense fulfilled in Cyrus, Darius Atas, Herod, who were at great charge for the Temple-work. See Ezra 7.15, 16. the King and his Councel, the Babylonian and Jewes make a con∣tribution to the work. and ye shall know] sc. by the event, and by your own experience. If you will diligntly obey the voyce] That is, If by faith ye receive Christ held forth in the promise: and then petfift in the obedience o faith unto the end. CHAP. VII. Verse. 1. IN the sourth yeer of King Darits] Two yeers and a month after the former sermon. The word of the Lord was precious in those dayes: T Lod gave the word:Psal. 68.11. but it cannot be said that great was the company of those hat pracha it; during the Captivity they complained that there was no more any Prophet; neither any among them that knew how long their miery should last. Soon after their return, God stined them up Haggie, and Zachary; and after that Malachy: and then there was Chathimath chazon, as the Jewes phafe it, a sealing up or end of Prophesie. Onely they had Bath-gol as they calt it, a voice from heavn sometime, as Mat. 3.17. Ioh. 12.28. This and the pool of Be∣theida only were left them as extraordinary fignes of Gods love to that people. But for a punishment of their killing the Prophets (as they did this Zachary between the Porch and the Altar) and stoning those that were sent unto them (as they did the other Zachary the son of Jehojadah) they had no more Prophet,Mat. 23.37. till the Arch∣prophet, and his forerunner the Baptist came. And now also by thi long vacation of two yeers and a month, it appeareth that Preachers were rare, and that sermons they had but seldome. Neither was it otherwise here in England at the first reior∣mation: for to many churches (for want of Preachers) Readers were sent. Whence one of the Martyrs wished that every able Minister might have ten Congregations committed to his charge, Cant. 180. till further provision could be made. the word of the Lord came unto Zachariah The Lord is said to come to Balaam, Abimelech, Laban &c. But he never concredited his word to these prosane per∣sons; as he did to the holy Prophets, of whom it is said as here, The word of the Lord came unto them. in the fourth day of the ninth month] which answereth to our November; why the precise time of the prophesies is set down, See the Note on Hag. 1.1. Verse 2. When they had sent] They? who? Not the Prnces of Persia that were now proselyted, as the vainglorious Jewes (and after them Heymo and Hugo) would have it, for the honour of their nation. Nor the Samarinans (as some in Theodoret held) as seeming to Judaize in part, to joyne Jewish ceremonies with heathenish rites. But either the Iewes yet emayning in Babylon, as Calvin con∣ceiveth
(blaming them  their sloth  commenthing them for  they  vice) Of else the whole body or  last ome particul man not named  I  in the fifth moneth  Enallage; the singular  name of the whole unto the house of God] Not to  from Bethel (as the  likely. But, to the house of God,  to the  nigh finished: and that  quetion here Sherezer, and Regemmeleeh, and their men] that is, their  were men of rank and fashion; as it was fit they should be in  polyment. And here the Sepuagim, by their correct translating of the  have caused a strange coyle among those that strive to defend them  they translated against their will: and theresore what can we expect from them but slippery doing? It is most sure, that the translation of theirs which we now have, is full of errours: and that they pervert diverse clear propesit  Jesus Christ, and have occasioned many mistakes, being themselves mnay times grossly mistaken as here: unlesse they did it wilfully. Some  men think that the Septuagint that we have now, is not theirs. It was burnt  (as some hold) in the library of Alexandria, or (as others by  when he burnt Serapion. to pray before the Lord] Heb. to intreat the face of the Lord,  prayers and sacrifices in the most solemne sort. The Hebrew properly  Lord with prayers, to set upon him ith utmost  untill he yeeld, to urge him (as they did the Prophet 2  17.)  he be ashamed to deny, till we put m to the bsush, or leave a blot in his  (as she Luke 18.5. unlesse we mrevaile. This must be done, especially when we are to converse with Pronets about soule-businesses, cases of con∣science &c. Verse 3. And to speak unto the P] whose office is to  knowledge and present it too; to teach Jacob God judgement, and to  before him Deut. 33.10. to selfoyle Mae.  9. to bring  8.22. to speake as the Oracles of God, 1. Pet.  sand can skill of Iob 33.23. and to the Prophets] who were extrordinarily raised up some ames by Gods,  assist the Priests in teaching the people, and to shame them for their back ward∣nesse to such businesses. See the Note on ver. 1. should I weep] that is, fast, which, was ever with  17. and affliction of the soule; which indeed is Levit. 16.31. and 23.37. the which, it is but as a brainelesse he or a life  humble day (saith One) without an humble,  but an high provocation, like Zimri  when  Congregation were weep∣ing before the door of the Tabernacl in the fifth moneth] wherein the Temple was consumed to  In a sad remembrance whereof the Jewes  day of  for a solemne fast every yeer, till now separating my self] Heb. Nazar my self, that is abridging my self of meates, drinks and delights. Hence a fasting day is called a day of restraint Iel 2.15.Tsom. . Hence it hath its name both in Hebrew and Greek. Hence  it is spo∣ken of as a foule fault Esay 58.3. Beheld in the day of your fast  The Popish fast is a meer mock fast for they separate themsel  kind of meates only: it is not a to tall abstinence. And here in  ofTurk Hist. 777. the very Turks, who upon their fasting-dayes will  so much  or wash their moths with water all the day long, before  in the sky: and then they-make all the cheer and joy they can  as the At ick Daines in their Thesmophoria (a feast of Ceres) prepare  fasting, but after that laid the reines in the neck and ran riot.
as I have done these so many yeers] Seventy at least. But they seem to reckon up upon so many as was scarce to be told and that therefore God was deep in their debt. Is it not time now to give over, sith the Temple wa almost reedified? This was the great case  ded by these Questionists. Hereunto an answer is made by the Prophet  two following chapters, and this answer is partly Reprehensory Chap. 7. partly Consolatory Chap. 8. The Sun of righteousnesse loves not to set in a cloud: Verse 4. Then came the word of the Lord of Hosts] This is oft prefaced for amhority's Take: and to procure andience and reverence. The Lord God hath Spoken, who can but be affected? See that ye despise not him that speaketh from heaven. The Angel Mat. 28.7. useth no other argument to assure the women of the truth of what he had told them, but this, Lo I have told you. Verse 5. Speak unto all the people of the land] Not to the Embassadours onely: as the cause is common, so let the answer be publike: for they were all too well con∣ceited of their external services, bodily exercises, and made much adoe about a trifle, a practise of their own devising, neglecting the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith Mat. 23.23. and to the priests] Who themselves were to seek belike; And having been the au∣thours and observers of these customs, were backward to abolish them, as those that rested in them without true repentance, faith and new obedience. when ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh moneth] sc. For the slaughter of Gedaliah and the sad consequence thereof 2 Kings 25.22. and Jer. 41.1. even those seventy yeers] wherein ye have lost full sevenscore fasts: and were not a button the better for them: because they fasted rather to get off their chaines then their sins: they rested in their fasts, in the work done, neither regarding how, nor why they should fast. Now God weighes mens actions by their aymes. And with him, though a good ayme doth not make a bad action good (as we see in the case of Uzzah) yet a bad aym makes a good action bad, as in Jehu's reformation. He had a squint eye to his own ends in all (as the eagle hath an eye upon her prey when she flies highest) and so consulted ruine to his own house. did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?] Did you propound me to your selves? Or gat I any thing by the hand? Did you serve me? and not your selves rather upon me? was it not sinful self-love, and base self-seeking that put you upon these practises? lookt you any higher therein, then onely to the satisfying of your own carnal humours? God was not in all your thoughts. This Daniel saw and acknowledged with grief and shame, Chap. 9.13. All this is come upon us: yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniqui∣ties and understand thy truth: Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evil and brought it upon us &c. The Jews no doubt had prayed much and oft during that seventy yeers captivity: yet Daniel denies that they had prayed to any purpose: because they had failed both quoad fontem & quoad finem, they had acted from evil principles, and had been carried on by self-respects. They had not that true-heart spoken of by the Apostle Heb. 10.22. but that wicked minde mentioned by the Wise-man Prov. 21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abominable: how much more when he brings it with a wicked minde: either as thinking to cozen the God of heaven,Hos. 10.1. Cant. 5.4. or at least to stop his judgements, and still the noise of his own consci∣ence by his external services. Thus Ephraim bore fruit to himself, but proved an empty vine: when as the spouse (that fruitful vine on Christs house-side) kept her fruit for her beloved: who therefore fed heartily upon it, and not upon her vine onely, but her milk too, not upon her honey onely, her finer and sweeter services, but upon her honey comb too, that had much wax in it, meaning her worser and courser performances. If the heart be upright all's well betwixt Christ and his people. O labour for that truth in the inward parts, that we may be with Appelles approved in Christ Rom. 16. that he may say of s, as once he did of Na∣thaneel, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile, Great vertues ot, sweet∣ned with sincerity are no ornaments unto us. And Great infirmities, not sowred with hypocrisie, are no great deformities. Those God acknowledgeth not, these he imputeth not.
Verse 6. And when ye did cat and when ye did drink] q. d. In all your actions na∣tural, civil, recreative, religious, you should have sought, served, and set up me, you should have done all to the glory of God, as saith the Apostle: you should have eat, drunk and slept eternall life, as it was faid of a certain Scotch Divine. The way of life is above to the wife Prov. 15.24. he goes a higher way then h neighbour, who contents himself with a natural use of the creature, but he can extract a spiritual. Grace is called the divine nature, as that which Elixir-like by contaction turns all into the same property with it self: meat makes us not accepta∣ble to God 1 Cor. 8.8. The kingdom of God consists not in meats and drnks, Rom. 14.17. Howbeit the Israelites were commanded, as to fast, so to feast . forethe Lord; that is, in faith and obedience: & to do every thing from the heart, as unto him. This these Jews did not; and are therefore worthily blamed. From their feeding themselves without fear of God, is concluded their no respect to him in their fasts and holy services: sith true goodnesse is ever like it self, and car∣ries an uniformity in all proceedings. Verse 7. Should ye not hear the words which the Lord hah cryed] q.d. Hath  not spoken loud enough, long enough? Hath he not sufficiently declared his concerning these external actions, and especially concerning a fast prophaned through wickednesse Isai. 58.3, 4. Jer. 14.12. and eisewhere. Sed surdo sulm; All hath been but as a trumpet sounded in a dead mans ear: you are altogether un∣counsellable, untractable: and all that hath been spoken hath even been spilt upon you. should ye ot the words] So the Original runs, by a concise and short kinde of speaking, well befitting a sharp reproof. Should ye not hear them and heed them? which if you had done, you might have spared that labour of comming to us: and out of the former prophesies have resolved your selves. when Ierusalem was inhibted, and in prosperity] But then their hearts were fat as ease, and the prosperity of those fools destroyed them: who,Frov. 1.3 3 if they had heark∣ned to wisdom, had dwelt sasely: and lived quite from the fear of evil. Surely as those that lie on down pillows cannot well hear: so such as be at case in Sion, cannot profit by good counsel. It is by correction that God openeth the eares of men, and fealeth their instruction. Job. 33.16. when men inh thit the South of the plan] Heb. the South of the plain, that is, the bounds and borders, that part of the countrey that lieth most open to the in∣rodes of the enemy, and hath most of all felt the desolations of war. See Jer. 1.26, and 32,44. Verse And the word] See the Note on Verse 4. Verse 9. Exme true judgement] According to Deut. 1.17. See the Note there. The prophet having here to do with Hypocrites, who boast much of their piety with neglect of charity and seem to be strickt in the service of God, but make over∣bold with men, presseth them to duties of the second table, which yet he would have exercised in the first table: for not onely the second is included in the first, but in the very first commandment of the Law the observation of the rest is commanded, as Luther well observeth. and shew mercy] Or bountifulnesse, kindnesse, favourable dealing. And compassions] Heb bowels q.d. Do it out of deep pitty fiom the heart-root.Esay 57. Draw out, not your sheafe onely, but your soul to the  this way the poorest may exercise his Charity: though he cannot shew mercy, yet he may love it 6.8 he may wish well to it, as these poor wretches that were willing indeed but ne∣ver (alasse) able to relieve the necessitous Mat 25.35. we usually call such poor men, poor souls: but in the bowels of compassions a poor soul may be a rich Christi∣an: and a rich man may have a poor soul. Verse 10. And oppresse not the widow nor the sathese] Widows and Orphans are Gods clients, taken into his special protection. the stranger] Whose right is so sacred, saith one, that there was never ration so barbarous, that would violate the same. nor the poor] whose misery moves compassion without an Oratour. In the low coun∣tries they may not beg, but only look pittifully. To grinde the faces of such is bar∣barous
cruelty: to wrong them, or but wrangle with them, is called, man-eating, Psal. 14.4. and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.] For though you never act it, yet Fecit quisque quantum voluit, saith Seneca It is said, Josh. 24.9. Balac arose and fought with Israel: And yet the story saith nothing so. Sed fieri dicitur quod tentatur aut intenditur, saith Ribera upon Amos 9.5. Hec did not, because he durst not: yet he is said to have done it, because he had a mind to do it. A man may die of an inward bleeding: so of heart-sinnes, which are majoris reatus, as we see in devils, though outward sinnes are majoris infamiae, as the Schools well observe. Verse 11. But they refused to hearken] Being a nation void of counsell, Deut. 32.28. not willing to know what they should do, lest they should do what they would not. Nay (said they once, when they had nothing else to say) but we will have a king. and pulled away the shoulder] As untamed heifers do from the yoke: or un∣toward Porters from the burthen. The Vulgar rendreth it, Averterunt scapulam recedentem, making it a Metaphor from those that scornfully turn their backs upon their betters, when they like not their commands: as the Earl of Essex did once upon Queen Elizabeth;Camd. Eliz. Anno 1598. whereat she waxing impatient, gave him a cuffe on the ear, bidding him be gone with a mischief. Sides and shoulders should be set to Gods work, Zeph. 3.9. and stopped their ears] Heb. they made heavy their ears. See here, how they proceeded by degrees from bad to worse (for Nemo repentè fit turpissimus) noted in the many Ands here used. There is a concatenation of Vices as well as of Graces: and he that is one step down the ladder of hell, knoweth not where he shall stop, till he break his neck at the very bottom. Wherefore Principiis chsta. Meddle not with sin: it is modest and maidenlike at first, but who knows what it may come to? We have heard of Virgins so modest at first, as to blush at the motions of an ho∣nest love, who being once corrupt and debauched, have grown boldly lascivious, so as to sollicite others, so as to prostitute themselves to all commers, &c. Keep thee therefore farre from an cvil matter, Exod. 23.7. have nothing to do with the un∣fruitfull works of darknesse, Ephes. 5.11. Circa serpentis antrum positus non eris diu illaesus.Isidor. He that playes upon the hole of the asp may be suddenly stung. Verse 12. Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant] that hardest of stones, harder then the flint, Ezek. 3.9. then the nether-milstone, Job 41.24. Pliny saith of it; Durities ejus est inenarrabilis, & simul ignium victrix natura &] nunquam incalescens. The hardnesse of this stone is unspeakable: the fire cannot burn it, nor so much as heat it thorow: the hammer cannot break it; and therefore the Greeks call it an Adamant from its untameablenesse. Hircino tamen rumpitur san∣guine, saith the same Authour. Howbeit this hardest stone soaked for a while in goats-blood,. Apocal. 1 may be dissolved and broken in pieces. So may the hardest heart by the blood of Christ (the true scape-goat) applied by faith. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn: He shall look again upon them, and they shall melt much more. A stroke from guilt broke Judas his heart into despair: but a look from Christ broke Peters heart into tears. Now till the heart be thus graciously mollified, instructions glide off it, as rain falling upon a rock: Af∣flictions, Gods hammers do but beat upon an adamant, qui respuit scalptra & malleos, quin & ipsos disrumpit, which will sooner break them, then be broken by them. Ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised in hearts and cars, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye, Act. 7.51. How their fathers did, ap∣pears by this Text, and Neh. 9.29. They had not onely sinews of iron, a naturall hereditary hardnesse, (whereby all men are born averse from, yea adverse to the motions of the Spirit: That which is born of the flesh is flesh) but also browes of brasse, Efay 48.4. an habituall, voluntary, adventitious, wilfull hardnesse; refu∣sing to be reformed, hating to be healed: such a desperate hardnesse as neither Mi∣nistery, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy could possibly mollifie. by the former Prophets] Heb.Manus enim est , Arist. by the hand of the former Prophets, that is, by their mouth and ministery: but to as little purpose, through their singular obstinacy, as when Bede preached to an heap of stones.
Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts] Which argues that they were great sinners before the Lord, as Gen. 13.13. for he doth not use to kill flies upon mens browes with beetles. Verse 13. Therefore it is come o passe] By a most just and equall retaliation. Distributive justice requireth that men should be punished according to the nature,Prov. 14.14 and kind of their offences. The back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own wayes: As he makes a match with mischief, so he shall have his belly-full of it: he hath sold himself to do wickednesse, and he shall be sure to hav his payment. With the froward God will shew himself froward, Psal. 18.26. he will be as crosse as they are, for the hearts of them. If they turn the deaf ear to to him, hee'll do as much for them another time. They shall call and cry for help till their hearts and sides ake, but all in vain: hee'll not come at them. If they pull away the shoulder, he will pull away their supporters, and they shall be overthrown in stony places, Psal. 141.6. If they harden their hearts, he will harden his hand, and hasten their destruction. This shall they have of Gods hand,Esay 50. they shall lie down in sorrow. Verse 14. But I scattered them with a whirl-wind] This is the second part of their punishment. The first was no audience, or help from heaven at their greatest need, verse 13. This was the curse of Saul, 1 Sam. 28.15. of Moah, Esay 16.12. of Davids enemies, Psal. 18.41. The next now is, they were disjected and dissi∣pated, as the dust of the mountains before a whirl-wind: cast out of their native soil, and carried they knew not whither, with a great and fearfull dispersion, and discerption of the same body and nation. thus the land was desolate after them] This is the third degree of their grievous punishment, their land laid utterly waste and desolate: according to that, God tur∣neth a fruitfull land into barrennesse for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein, Psal. 107.34. Here a learned Expositour observeth a wonderfull providence,M. Pemble in loc. that this pleasant countrey, left thus destitute of inhabitants, and compassed about with warlike Nations, was not invaded, and replanted by forreiners for seventy yeers space: but enjoyed her Sabbaths, resting from tillage and all other em∣ployments. for they laid the pleasant land desolate] They, by their sinnes, rather then the Babylonians by their Armies, did all this spoil, as Daiel also confesseth, chap. 9.16. and Nehemiah, chap 1.8. Sin is the great make-bate, hell-hag, trouble-town that hurled confusion over the world at first: and brings desolation still to pleasant countreys. Palestins was very pleasant, not more by the nature of the soil,Ezek. 20. then by Gods speciall blessing: a land that he had espied out for them, flowing with milk and honey, which was the glory of all lands: This land they had laid desolate, or for an astonishment, as some render it: or for an In qua quid? as Montanus reads it, What's here? Nothing of its old pleasantnesse. CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. AGain, the word of the Lord of Hests] As for reprehension in the former chapter, so for consolation in this: that they might not be discouraged, or say as once they did, There is no hope: but lifting up the hands which hung down, and the feeble knees, they might go on to lay the last stone with joy. To which end also no lesse then 18. severall times in this one chapter God is stiled the Lord of Hosts: that resting upon Gods Power, and Goodnesse, (whereof they are assured by many precious promises) as upon the Jachin and Bozez, the two main pillars of a Christians faith, they might have strong con∣solation. Came to me] See the Note on chap. 7.8. Verse 2. I was zealous for Zion] See the Note on chap. 1.14. Jealous as an husband, zealous as a loving Father: for, Non amat qui non zelat, saith Augustine; and a Father being rebuked by some for his exceeding forwardnesse for his friend, answered, Ego aliter amare non didici, I know not how to love any otherwise then
earnestly. God therefore to ascertaine his people of the truth of the ensuing promi∣ses, and to cure their unbelief, lets them know that all this he will do for them of his free grace without their desert. As at first he loved them meerly because he loved them Deut. 7.7, 8. so out of the same love, he will bestow upon them all the good things here mentioned. See the like Esay 9.6, 7. where after a sweet description of Christ, his kingdome, and Benefits, he concludes all with The zeal (that is the tender love and free grace) of the Lord of Hosts will performe this. Feare ye not, So 2 Sam. 7. 21. For thy words sake, that is, for thy Christs sake, and according to thine own heart hast thou done all these things which thou hadst pro∣mised. According to thine own heart, that is, ex mero motu, out of pure and unexcited love, or zeal, which is the top of all the affections, and the heate of the heart. Verse 3. I am returned unto Zion] After a long absence, as it may seem by the late troubles, and that dismall dispersion chap. 7.14. God was gone aside and return∣ed to his place, till they should acknowledge, their offence, and seek his face: in their affliction, said He, they will seek me early. Neither was he frustrated as appeareth Hos. 5.15. with 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord, say they; Do so: and then I will come againe unto you as the raine, as the later and former raine unto the earth, with a Cornu-copia of peace, plenty and prosperity. Neither this only will I do as a stranger in the land, or as a way-faring man that tarrieth for a night. but I will dwell in the middest of Ierusalem] My Shechinaeh,Ier. 14.8. or setled habitation shall be in the middest of it, sc. in my Temple there scituated. Maimonides saith, that the Hebrew word here used signifieth continuationem stationis, a sure and set∣led abode; such as was that of the God-head of Christ in his Manhood. For the Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, . The word seemea to be made of this Shacan in the Text. and Ierusalem shall be called a city of truth] A faithfull city Esay 1.17. A Ve∣rona rightly so called: a place where the sincere service of the true God is set up and practised:. in opposition to other cities (such as Athens was, wholy given to idolatry Act. 17.16.) that went a whoring after lying vanities, and so forsook their own mercies Ioh. 2.8. and the Mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the holy mountaine] This and the former clause may safely and fitly be extended to the holy Catholike Church of the new Testament also: whereof Jerusalem and the Mount Moriah, whereon the Temple stood, were Figures. The Rabbines themselves expect the good things here pro∣mised to be performed when their Messias shall come, quem tantis vlulatibus exposcunt. Verse 4. There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Ierusalem] Because the Ancient of dayes the just Lord is in the middest thereof Zeph 3.5.Iam. 1.17. and he will give every good gift and perfect giving, that is, both Temporall and Spirituall. The Fther of lights will be to His both a Sun and a Shield: and no good thng will he withhold from them that walk uprightly Psal. 14.11. Godlnesse hath the promises of both lives 1 Tim. 4.8. Christ is heire of all Heb. 1.2. and the Saints are his coheires Rom.Esay 9.6. 8.17. He is the everlasting father, and withall the Prince of eace: his Children and subject shall have both the upper and nether spring, both the blessing of the right hand (sprituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ Jesus) and also of the left; Riches and honour, delight and pleasure, life and length of dayes, peace and prosperity &c. Pro. 3.16, 17. and 8.18. Psal. 112.2, 3. Deut. 28. and every man with his staff in his hand] his third leg, as they call it: q. d. they shall live so long that they shall need a staff, a servant or a son (such as Scipio was to his old decrepit father) to leane upon; because the strong men the legs shall bow themselves,Eccles. 12.3. that is, bend and buckle under their burden. They shall not be cut off by the devouring sword of warr, that slaughter-man of mankind, that layes hepes upon heapes, and by chain-bullets cuts its way through a heap of men at once, without respect of old or yong. and the streets of the city shall be full of boyes and girles] Lads and lassed (as the Hebrew seemes to sound) that mind little else but play, as if, with Leviathan,
they had been made to sport, or as those people of Tombutum in Africa, who are said to spend their whole time in singing and dancing. But this they could not do if the times were troublesome, and the souldier at his boody play according to that of Abner 2 Sam. 2.14. Let the yong men now arise and play before us, that is, thrust their swords in their fellowes sider ver. 16. Verse 6. If it be marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people] Here the Lord graciously answereth the secret objection of these Iewes unbeleeving and misgiving hearts. It is impossible, thought they, that these promises should ever have their performance: they are sure, too good to be true. This is the voice of carnall reason: it usually tells a story of impossibilities, and judgeth according to sense, looketh upon Gods Iordan (as Naaman did) with Syrian eyes. But faith can mount higher and see farther: as a lark with a little eye getting aloft, can see that, which an Oxe, with a bigger eye, but being below on the ground, cannot. It is the nature of faith to look upon all things seisable. I can do all things, saith she, thorough Christ that strengtheneth me. Is there any thing too hard for the Al∣mighty? was to that an absurd question of these mens Ancestours, Can he pre∣pare a table for us in the wildernesse? God can do much more then he will do: but whatsoever he willeth that he doth both in heaven and earth. And if faith have but a promise to fasten upon, she can beleeve God upon his bare word, with∣out a pawn: and that both against sense in things invisible, and against reason in thing red ble. uld it also be marvelous in mine eyes.] q. d. will ye measure me by your selves, and make my thoughts to be as your thoughts, my wayes as your wayes? there is no compartion. Abraham caed not for the deadnesse of his own body or his wves, but was strong in faith, and gave God the glory of his power Rom. 4.20. This was it indeed that God himself minded him of when he said unto him Gen. 17.1. I am God Almighty, walk before me and be uprihgt: q. d. Thou wilt ne∣ver do the later unlesse thou beleeve the former. Verse 7. Behold I will save my people from the East] This was in part (no doubt) litterally meant of the scattered Jewes: and fulfilled also, in those five hundred yeers space between the Captivity and Christ, though stories tell us not when and how: and shall be much more at their much-desired conversion. For this is laid down for a generall rule, that all Evangelicall promises made to the Jewes, seeing they neither at first received the Gospel, nor ever hitherto enjoyed that peace, plenty, and prosperity which these and such like promises do purport, cannot but aime at somewhat that is yet to come. Albeit it cannot be denied but that the great and glorious things which in the height and excellency thereof are spoken particularly to them, do in their measure and degree appertaine in common to all the faithfull: and so in the New Testament are ordinarily ap∣plied. Verse 8. And I will bring them] and them they are sure to be brought. For who hath resisted his will? he will breathe life into those dead bones and flesh shall cover them: he will make up those two sticks into one, and David his ser∣vant shall be king over them for ever Ezek. 37. and they shall dwell in the midst of Ierusalem] They shall, they shall. O the Rhetoricke of God! O the certainty of the promises! what a monstrous sin is unbelief? and they shall be my people, and I will be their God] This is a short Gospel: this is the summ of the covenant of Grace. Brevis & longa, planeque aurea est haec clau∣sula, as Pareus some-where speakes of another Teat. This is a long and yet a short clause: short in sound, long in sense, but golden all over. in truth and righeousnesse] I will be their God in truth] that is, in an assured performance of promise. and they shall be my people in righteousnesse] That is, in obedience to my comman∣dements. So here is the covenant renued in a mutuall stipulation. Verse 9. Let your hands be strong] Having therefore these promises dearly be∣loved, let us take heart of grace against all occasions of distrust and feare:2 Cor. 7.1: let us up and be doing, that the Lord may be with us; Let us feare lest such a promise being left us, yea such a bundle of promises as are contained in the New Covenant,
any of you,Heb. 4.1. by shrinking from the service, should seem to come short of it; or by faintly forwarding the Temple-work, should lose the things that he hath wrought,Esay 35.3, 4. but that ye receive a full reward 2 Ioh. 8. strengthen ye the weak hands and confirme the feeble knees. Say to them of a fearefull heart, Be strong, feare not &c.2 Chr. 2.20. Say the same every man to himself, Encourage your selves in the Lord your God, as David did 1 Sam. 30.6. Beleeve the Prophets and ye shall prosper. do ye not heare in these dayes these words by the mouth of the Prophets] my self and Haggai?Iob 15.11. And should the consolation of God be small unto you? will ye not trust us whom you have alread tried? and take comfort by our words now, whom you have formerly found no liars. Verse 10.Ez 3. Iohn 2. Zach. 7. For before these dayes] sc. during those fourty and four yeers, where∣in they ceased from the work, minding only their own houses and managing their own affairs, their labour was unprofitable, their state unquiet thorought forraine forragers, and homebred Malecontents. there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast] Nulla emolumenta laborum, Both man and beast did their parts, but to little purpose. Ludit qui sterili semina mandat humoOvid. They sowed much, and brought in little: they earned money, but put it into a bottomelesse bag Hag. 1.6. (See the Note there) the gaines did not counter∣vaile the paines, the wages the work. neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in] whether a man were within dores or without, he was in danger of the enemy (See the like 2 Chron. 15.5.) he did eat the bread of his soul in the perill of his life: being wholy at the enemies mercy,1 Sam. 24.19. which is mere cruelty. For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go away? said Saul: I trow not, till he have his penniworth of him; as that Monster of Millaine, as the bloody Papists in the Massacre of Paris, as the mercilesse Spaniards on the harmelesse Indians, (fifty millions of whom they have murthered in forty two yeers, as Acosta the Jesuite testifieth) as Ptolomaeus, La∣thur us king of Egypt on these poor lewes, thirty thousand of whom he cruelly killed: and compelled the living to feed upon the flesh of the dead: And lastly as the Iewes themselves, of whom Tacitus takes notice, and gives them this cha∣racter, that there was misericordia in promptu apud suos, sed contra omnes alios hostile odium, that they were kind enough to their own, but cruel to all others, whom they look upon as Idolaters, and therefore think they may safely kill, as they did the Cyprians and Cyrenians in Traans time to the number of 240000.Dio in Tra. thousand? and as they still do Christians where they can without danger of being discovered: whom also they curse in their daily prayers with a Maledic Domine Nazaraeis: and by whom they are every where so contemned and hated, that they are exiled out of the world, cast out of many countries, and where they are suffered (as in Turkey) they are at every Easter in danger of death. For Biddulph telleth us, that if they stirr out of doors between Maundy-Thursday at noon, and Easter-eve at night, the Christians among whom they dwell will stone them: be∣cause at that time they crucified our Saviour, derided and buffeted him. for I set all men, every one against his neighbour] And I set, emisi or commisi, not permisi or dimisi, as the Vulgar hath it: I set on or sent out, not I let or suffered all men. Gods holy hand hath a speciall stroke in the Churches afflictions, whoso∣ever be the instrument. Herehin his all-disposing Providence is not only permissive, but active.Esay 45.7. I make peace and create evill, that is, warr and contention: which is called evill by a specialty, as including all evills. Omega nostrorum Mars est, Mars Alpha malorum. But is there evill in a city, and I have not done it? Am. 3.6. (for a punish∣ment) sent an evill spirit of division and discord between Abimelech and the men of Shechem Iudg. 9.23. not by instilling any evill motions into their minds: but in a way of just revenge for their treachery and cruelty to Gideons family. This God doth 1. by letting loose Satan upon them (that great kindle-coale, and make∣bate
of the world) to raise jealousies, heart-burnings and discontents between them. 2. By giving them up to the lusts and corruptions of their own wicked hearts. 3. By giving occasions of enraging them more and more one against ano∣ther. And here the wickednesse of these factions and fallings out is wholy from their lusts that warr in their members Iam. 4.1. and not at all of God, though his providence do concurr like as the stench of the dung hill riseth not from the Sun, though the Sun-shine upon it be the occasion of it. every one against his neighbour] A sad case, that common misery should not breed unity amongst them: that necessity had not made them lay down their private en∣mities: that being vexed so by the common adversary, they should yet vex and interteare one another. Blowes enough were not dealt by the Samaritans, Am∣monites, and other Malignants; but their own must add to the violence. Still Satan is thus busy, and Christians are thus malicious: that they must needs fall out by the way home, and give bloody-noses too sometimes. St. Iames calls upon such to resist the devil, that is, their unruly passions of rage and revenge,Iam. 4.1.. where∣with the devill empestereth and embroileth their spirits; and, like your cock∣masters, sets one to kill another, that at night he may feed upon both. Verse 11. But now I will not be unto the residue &c.] Now that the Temple is well-nigh perfected, and so the cause of my displeasure removed; the matter you see is already well amended, and shall be yet better; for there is a series, a conca∣tenation of Gods mercies, like the links in a chaine, every former drawes on a fu∣ture, if we break not the chaine by our unthankfullnesse.Psal. 11.16. The right hand of the Lord shall change all this saith Hope, when it is at worst. Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. As when, tis in better case, it saith, Return to thy rest, O my soule, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. It is well for the present, and yet it will be better hereafter. Fury is not in God: or if at any time it seem to be,Psal. 103.9. yet he will not alwaies chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever. It is with God in some sort as it was with David, whose soule longed to go forth unto Absalom:2 Sam. 13.39. for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead. Let the Lord but see the rainbow of repentance appearing in our hearts, and he will presently be pacified: well he may wash us, but he will never drown us. Verse 12. For the seed shall be prosperous] Or, full and perfect, as the Chaldee hath it; it shall be fruitfull and yeeld a plentifull crop, such as shall every way an∣swer the desire of the husbandman. Instead of your late scarcity (whereof See Hag. 1.9. with the Notes) you shall abound with plenty of all things,Act. 14.17. feeding of the fat, and drinking of the sweet, and having your heart filled with food and gladnesse, more particularly. the vine shall give her fruit] so that ye shall swim in wine. and the ground shall give her encrease] her full burden of the best; so that your floors shall swell, and your tables sweat with sweetest varieties. and the heavens shall give their dew] that womb of the morning wherein the fruits are conceived. and I will cause the remnant of this people to possesse all these things] whereas peo∣ple are apt to attribute too much to meanes and second causes of plenty and prospe∣rity; God assumes the honour of all to himself. Raine and fruitfull seasons are his gift Act. 14.17. And Hos. 2.22. he resolveth the genealogie of corn and wine into himself. I will heare the heaven, and the heaven shall heare the earth &c. And both here, and elsewhere he giveth us to know, that the reward of religion is abundance of outward blessings: which yet are not alwayes entailed to godlinesse (whatever Iesuites tell us of the Churches prosperity and plenty, fetch∣ing her mark from the market) to the end that it may be admired for it self, and not for these transitory trappings. Verse 13. As ye were a curse among the heathen] The people of Gods wrath, and of his curse Esay 34.5. ahhorred and accursed by all nations Ier. 24.9. lastly a proverb and a pattern for any fearfull imprecation Ezek. 14.8. as those that had the bloody wailes of Gods visible vengeance on their backs, and (Cain-like) had
his manifest mark upon their persons and proceedings. The Turks at this day so hate the Jews for crucifying Christ, that they use to say in detestation of thing, I would I might de a ew then; Let me be a Jew if I cozen thee &c. Such a taunt and a curse this wretched people are still. As they curse Christ and his followers con∣tinually every day, so it comes into their bowels like water, and like oyl into their bones. Psal. 10.18. O house of Judah, and house of Israel] i. e. Besides the two tribes of Judah and Benamin, diverse of the ten tribes that revolted (for religion sake) unto Judah were carried captive with them, and afterwards returned out of captivity also in their com∣pany. To them therefore, as well as to the house of Judah is made the promise. Twelve thousand of these ten tribes returning are found by computation in that  set down Ezra. 3.64. as the Jew-Doctours have concluded. There are that understand the words of the general conversion of all the Jews in the time of the Gospel; and this may very well be, for ought that I see to the con∣trary. so will  you] Lest you should say in the language of Ashdod,1 Sam. .9. It is a chance, I will do it saith God. and ye shall be a blessing] Not onely a name and praise as Zeph. 3.20 but a form to be used in blessing of others: such as was that Ruth 4 11, 12. And not altogether unlike is that prayer of David Psal. 119.132. Look thou upon me and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy Name. sow not, but let your hads be strong] Be not diffident, but diligent in well doing: in due season you shall reap,Gal.  . if you faine not. See the Note on verse 9. ase feare expectorates and unmans us: banish it therefore, or ye will be betray∣ed by it. Verse 14. As I thought to punish you] He had promised to make them of a curse a blessing, and here he shews them the cause of this change, namely, Gods better thoughts of them, and toward them, upon their return unto him. And because they might haply think that their Fathers had hard measure; he tels them that their panishment was the fruit of their provocation. And whereas they might ex∣pect that God should repent and relent toward them, He shewes here that He had repented so long, that He was even weary with repenting: and that he therefore.Jer 15.6. Crudelem me∣dicum intem∣perans ager facit. Mimus. as implacable, because he found them incurable. Hence he resolved as Ezek. 24.13. and would not be altered. Lo thou far these Jews had sound and felt Gods fingers: and that in his menaces he had been as good as his word. Verse 15. So again have I thought] Sic conversus sum. This change was not in God, but in the people, to whom He is now resolved to shew mercy, and that from a gracious purpose and determination, such as altereth not. sear ye no] Faith quelleth and killeth distrustful fear: but awful dread it breed∣eth, seedeth, fostereth and cherisheth. Verse 16. These are the things that ye shall do] Heb. These are the words. God will not so do all good for his people, but that they should reciprocate and do som∣thing for him by way of thankfulnesse. Particularly; these are the words, or com∣mands, that ye shall not onely know, but do. They are verba vivenda non legenda: as lessons of Musick must be practised, and a copy not read onely but written after. speak the truth every man to his neighbour] Let your words be few, and ponderous, Lie not in jest, lest ye go to hell in earnest. Let Socrates be your friend, and Pla∣to: but the truth much more. Rather die then lie for any cause. execuse the judgment of truth and peace] That is, upright judgment pronounced or delivered with a calm and quiet minde: not angry,Jadicium pa∣cis, dst, placi∣dum & rite compositum. Calv. Deut. 16.20. nor partial, nor of any dis∣tempered or toubled affection; such as hatred, fear, favour &c. All that savours of self should be strained out, and Iustice, Iustice, (as Mss speaketh) that is pure justice wihout mud, should run down as a river. That Magistrate hath too im∣potent a spirit, whose services like the Dial, must be set onely by the Sun o self and sinister respect. He should have, as nothing to lose so nothing to get: he should be above all price or sale,2 Chro. 19.7. and  persons, nor receive gifts.
Verse. 17. And let none of you  7.10. Take notice here that as  proves one to he carnal Eh. 2.3.  the root o bitternesse Deut. 29.18.  somthing in it, that men are here,  to imagine evil (in  particle in their hearts may seem  secret sins that lie conched in the  man of the heart, and never shew themselves to the world men shall be accoable See Heb. 4.12. Eccles. 12.14. Jer. 6.1. Rev. 2.23. The very want of good thoughts is a sin against that  and great commandment  22.30. and concupis∣cence, even before it come to consent, is a sin against the last Commandement Rom. 7.7. But evil thoughts allowed and wallowed  is a flat  of every Commandment: so vain is their plea that say, Thought is fra,  thereup∣on lay the reins in the neck, and run riot in vain and vile imaginations: O Je∣rusalem wash thy heart from wickednesse, if thou meanest to be saved Jer. 4.14. How many (alasse) have we that professe, large hopes of heaven whose hearts are no better then dens of darknesse, dungeons of filthnesse, cages  clean birds, brothelhouses, slaughter-houses, pesthouses of maicious  Atheistical, proud, covetous, malicious and fraudulent projects  continually hammering, and wherewith their wretched hearts are  haunted and pestered? Contrariwise, a godly man is said to  Prov. 12.5. holy imaginations Prov. 12.2. and that his desire  onely good Prov. 11.23. or if worse croud in (as they will) he rids them  and will not let them lodge there Ier. 4.14. he boyls out that filthy  Ezek.  and puri∣fieth himself of all pollutions of flesh and spirit 2 Cor. 7.1. he both  them Psal. 119.113. and forsaketh them Esay, 55.7. and love no false oath] As not only he that maeth a  is  out of heaven, but he that loves it (though made by another) akes it up and divulgeth it Rev. 22.15. So not onely he that taketh a  perswadeth another to it, or that  is a Miosis, lesse is spoken, and more understood  Gods just ha∣tred. for all these are things that I hate, saith the Lord] And as the next effect of ha∣tred is revenge, he will not fail to punish such sinners against their own souls. Verse 18. And the word] See the of Note Verse 1. Verse 19. The fast of the fourth moneth] wherein the city was taken 2 Kings 25, 3. and the fast of the fift, and the fast of the seventh] See and the fast of the tenth] Wherein Jerusalem was first  25.1. This last mentioned was first taken up, upon a like  Constantinople (when the city was besieged by the  advertised of the enemies purpose for a general  mended the defence of himself and the city to the Turk. hist.  345. and prayer: and afterwards appointed every Captain and  certain place of the wall for defence thereof. shall be to the house of Iudah joy and ] God  into feasting, all their sadnesse into gladnesse, all their  their tears into triumphs: and so gives  about Fasting after a larger and most  preface  and making much more to their benefit and  main question proposed by them to the Prophet.  this with them by way of therefore love the truth ]  and the ceremonious observation  wherein ye placed so much holinesse) abolished  on, the duties of Piety and  your selves and though of a good  an evil  much adoe about them, with neglect or the one thing necessary. And now learn
and  the love of the truth that ye may he saved 2 Thes. 2.10 to speak the  love Eph. 4.15. to do the truth 1 John. 1.6.  lest your lives give  the lie. So will God say, Surely they are my people, children  will not  will be your Saviour. Esay 63.8. So shal there  your  Should we have peace upon any tearms, peace without truth, it world be  short  between the Egypti∣an plagues. Peace we may  yea peace we may have to buy turth: but we may not give truth to  He purchaseth peace at too dear a rate, that payes his integrity to get  it be passible,Rom. 12. Esay. 32. as much in you lies, have peace with all men But if you  but with loss of truth, and ship-wrack of conscience, let it go. And  long the  righteousnesse shall be peace, God wil make thine enemies to be at peace with thee. The Historian tells us, that Numa's Temple of  had this inscription . The Temple of faith and peace: But Faith frist, and then Peace. Keep in with God that he be not a ter∣rour to thee (as Ieremie prayes) and then seek peace with men and ensue it,1 Pet 3.10.11. as ever thou desirest long life, and good dayes cheerful feasts, as here in the text, (called good dayes, Esth. 8.17.) as ever thou hopest to have the Calender of thy life crow∣ned with many festivals. Verse 20. It shall yet come to passe that there shall come people] The Prophet cannot shut up with the former Corollary: but further comforts the Jews with a promise of the conversion and conflux of the Gentiles to the Church; yea Christs people shall be willing in the lay of his power;Psal. 110.3. they are like the Isles that wait for his law Esay .8.Esay 66.20. Mar. 12. they are set upon't to come for an offering to the Lord upon horses, in chariols, and in litters; to make any shist rather then not come, in litters rather then not at all. The kingdom of heaven shall suffer violence, and the violent take it by force. Verse 21.  of one city shall go to another] Not onely come upon them when they light on them, and they have a fit opportunity, but they shall go on purpose, one city to another, to gain them to Christ. Propriissimum opus vi∣ventis est generare sibi simile, saith the Philosopher, It is the most proper work of every living creature to  his own kinde. The Divine saith the same. Grace is communicative charity  churl. Birds, when they come to a full heap of corn, will chirp and call in for their fellows. let us go speedily] As so many heavenly Cherubims, winged creatures, as the doves to their windows with wearinesse of flight as counting him happiest, that's first there. Many amongst us fall publikely and shamefully in want of care to come time enough to God . It will be long enough ere such men beg Da∣vids office of  of his : for the door-keeper of Gods of house was to be first in, and last out but these clean contrary. Mr. Fox speaking of out godly Ancestours at the beginning of the Reformation here. To see, saith he, their travels, earnest seekings, burning zeal, readings, watchings, sweet assem∣blies, resort of one neighbour to another for conference and mutual confirma∣tion, and  76. may make us now, in these our dayes of free profession, to blush for shame. to pray before the Lord] To see his face in Zion, to partake of his ordinances, what gadding is these by Popish pilgrims to Hull, Loretto &c. Sic videmus in Italia  ac se invicent coheort ari ad visi∣tandam .i. e. So we see whole towns and villages  and to call one upon another to visit the Lady of Loretto, and to stuff her Churches with vowed presents and memories: though all the thank they have for the same from God, is who required these things, at your hands? and  to be infor∣med of the right way and  instan∣ted as I will ]Act. and Mon.  as my old  will  Go ye,  others with duty: but themselves would do nothing. Mt. 23.4.
good souls in the text: every of whom was as forward for himself, as zealous for another. There are that make these to be the words of the well-affected, in answer to the former invitaion. Let us go speedily, say some citizens: Agreed, say the others; I will go also. Verse 22. Yea many people and strong nations, &c.] The most populous and po∣tent people subdued by Christ,2 Tim. 1.7. Esay 16.1. (not by an army, nor by power, but by Gods Spirit of power, of love and of a sound mind) shall send a lamb to the Lord of the whole earth, submit to the scepter and lawes of Christs kingdome, yeeld the obedience of faith, and be proselyted to the Church. and to pray before the Lord] Heb. to intreat his face, which they behold in his Ordinances, those visible signes of his presence. Popish pilgrims, though used hardly, and lose much of their estates, yet satisfie themselves in this, I have that I came for, viz. the sight of a dumb Idol. What then should not men do or suffer, to see God in his Ordinances? Verse 23. Ten men shall take hold out of all languages] Ten, that is many, out of all languages, therefore not by compact, or fraudulent convention: for they were farre asunder, and of diverse languages, (nam quisque alijs est barbarus, saith Calvine.) of the nations] for God manifested in the flesh, was preached unto the Gen∣tiles, beleeved on in the world, &c. 1 Tim. 3.16. shall take hold, even take hold] as children do on their mothers garments. of him that is a Jew] who shall not shake them off, as bastard Gentiles, wor∣thy (even the very best of them) to have their heads bruised with the serpent, as the moderne Jewes say of us. Come unto me, saith Christ: Therefore my brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord,Phil. 4.1. my dearly beloved, saith Paul. we will go with you] Be of your religion: not for fear, or any other by-respect, as those Persians, Esth. 8.17. (Josephus relates of the Jewes, that they were very carefull how they received Proselytes in Solomons time (because then their state flourished) but out of sound conviction, and good affection. for we have heard] And by hearing, tasted.1 Pet. 2.3. that God is with you] Of a truth, as that plain Corinthian confesseth, 1 Cor. 14.5. CHAP. IX. Verse 1. THE burden] i. e. the bitter and burdensome Prophecy. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. In the land of Hadrach] Better; on the land of Hadrach: whereby is meant,Because Mes∣siah is chad sharp to the Nations, but rach gentle to the Israelites. not thy land O Immanuel, or, O Messiah (as Hierom, after Rabbi Benaiah) nor a countrey that is neer, or lying round about another countrey, as Junius and Da∣naeus expound the Syrian word. But either a province, or a city, of some Note in Syria, not fat from Damascus: Diodate maketh it to be an Idoll of the Syrians; which represented the Sunne: from which the countrey took its name, as Esay 8. 8. Jer. 48.46. Hos. 10.5. and Damascus] The Metropolis of Syria, built say some, in the place where Cain slew Abel; and therehence called Damesech, or a bag of blood; a great scourge to Israel, chiefly famous for Saint Pauls conversion there, and his rapture into the third heaven, during that three-dayes darknesse, Act, 9.9. with 2 Cor. 12.2. shall be the rest thereof] sc. of that bitter burden which shall here abide, and be set upon its own base, as chap. 5.11. See a like expression, Joh. 3.36. the wrath of God abideth upon an unbeleever, tanquam trabali clavo fixa: he can neither a∣vert nor avoid it. when the eyes of man, &c.] That is, of other men the Gentiles also, who as yet are carnall and walk as men, shall be toward the Lord, lifted up in prayer, and con∣fident expectation of mercy. See Psal. 122.2.
Verse 2. And Hamath also shall border thereby] i. e. shall share in the same pu∣nishment with Damascus, and fare the worse for its neighbourhood. though it be very wise] and think to out-wit the enemy: to be too hard for him that way,. 1 Cor. 3.19. . as Midian was for Israel, by his wiles rather then by his warres, Num. 25.18. God taketh these Wisards in their own craft, (as beasts in a toil) and makes very fools of them, notwithstanding their many fetches; specially when they boast of their wit, as Tyrus did, Ezek. 28.3, 4, &c. and trust in it, Prov. 3.5. The Phoe∣nicians and Tyrians were wont to boast, that they first found out the use of letters, &c. Sure it is that by much trading by Sea, they were grown cunning and crafty Merchants, to cosen others: and this they coloured with the name of wisdome. Wise they were in their generation, Luke 16.8. but so is the fox, the serpent, and the devil: who when he was but young, out-witted our first parents. And wee are still sensible of his slights, and not ignorant of his wiles, his methods, and his stratagems. Verse 3. And Tyrus did build her self a strong-hold] Thor did build her self Matsor: An Elegancy not to be Englished. (such as are many in the old Testa∣ment, but especially in Esay) It is as if it should be said, A strong hold (such as Tyrus which was naturally fortified) did build it self a strong hold, sc. by the in∣dustry and diligence of men; so that she might seem impregnable: yet all should not do.A Lapide. Alexander, after seven moneths siege, took it and destroyed it. and heaped up silver as dust] Pulverizavit argentum quasi pulverem. Shee had money enough (by means of her long and great trade with all the world, Ezek. 27.) and so might hire what souldiers she pleased for her defence. The sinewes of warre were not wanting to her. She heaped up her hoards as it were to heaven: her Magazines were full fraught. The word here rendred, heapt up, signifieth to comport and gather in money, as men do corn into barnes and granaries. Exod. 8.10. Psal. 39.7. But riches avail not in the day of wrath. And Tyrus converted, leaves laying up, and treasuring, and falls to feeding, and cloathing Gods Saints, Esay 23.18. Vers. 4. Behold the Lord will cast her out] Or, impoverish her, as some render it: that's for her money. God can soon let her blood in the vena cava, called Marsupium: and make her nudam tanquam ex mari. And then for her muni∣tions: He will smite her power in the sea] She was seated in a Island, upon munitions of rocks: the sea was to her instead of a three-fold wall and ditch. She was bet∣ter fortified then Venice is; which yet hath flourished above nine hundred years, and was never in the enemies hands: whence she hath for her Motto, Intacta manet. But Tyrus was taken Nebuchadnezzar, as his wages; and afterwards by Alexander, who never held any thing impossible that he undertook, how unlikely soever it were to be effected. He found means to fill up the sea with stones, trees, and rub∣bish, where it divided Tyrus from the Continent: and made himself master of it. and she shall be devoured with fire] though seated in the heart of the sea, Ezek. 28.2.Curt. lib. 4. Plin. lib. 5. c. 19 and had motted up her self against Gods fire. Nothing shall quench the fire that he kindleth. Verse 5. Ashkelon shall see it and fear] for, jam proximus ardet Ʋcalegon, her next neighbours house was now on fire; and she might well fear she should be dasht at least with the tail of that over-flowing storm, that had swept away Tyrus. The sword was now in commission: it was riding circuite, Ezek. 14.17. and God had given it a speciall charge against Ashkelon, and against the Sea-shore: there had he appointed it, Jer. 47.6, 7. Now Ashkelon, Gaza, and Ekron, were scituate all along the Sea-coast, Southward of Tyre and Sidon. All these were bitter ene∣mies to the Church: and were therefore destroyed by Alexander the Great, that man of Gods hand. Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrowfull] like a travailing woman, as Esay 26.17, 18. where the same word is used: her heart shall ake and quake within her: she shall have sore throwes and throbs. and Ekron: for her expectation shall be ashamed] Her hope hath abused her, her confidence is cut off, her countenance is covered with confusion. She looked that
Tyrus should have been a bulwark to her: or, at least a refuge, if need were. But now she seeth her expectation shamed: The expectation of the wicked shall perish. They look out of the window with Siserah's mother, and say, Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey, &c? But what saith the Church, So let thine ene∣mies perish, O Lord, &c. Judg. 5.30, 31. and the king shall perish from Gaza] Rex, id est, Regulus: for there were five Princes of the Philistines; each great city having a Prince over it. The Prince of Gaza that is here designed to destruction may very well be that Betis, whom Darius the last king of Persia had set over Gaza. He having kept out Alexander for two moneths, was at length taken by him together with the city, and put to a cruell death, as Curtius testifieth.Q. Curt. l. 4, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited] It was so wasted by warre, and dispeopled, that it became cottages for shepherds, and folds for sheep. See Zeph. 2.4, . Howbeit after this it was reinhabited; for that bloody Herod that slew the Infants was borne there, being sirnamed Ascalonita: and at this day it is a strong garison of the Saracens. Saladine pulled down the walls of it: but our Richard the first set them up again, as Adrichomius telleth us out of Gul. Tyrius. Verse 6. But a bastard shall dwell at Ashdod] Perhaps he meaneth Alexander:In descrip. Tur. san who was a bastard, by his mother Olympia's confession. The Greek here hath , a stranger, an alien, or one of another generation, as the Greeks un∣der Alexander, and afterwards the Jews under the Maccabees. Whence the Chal∣dee turnes this Text thus; The house of Israel shall dwell in Ashdod, and shall be there as strangers which have no father. In the Acts we find that the Jewes were scattered up and down Palestina, and some found at Azotus, or Ashdod, chap. 8.40. and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines] that is, their wealth, strength, and whatsoever else they gloried in, and grew insolent, and injurious to the Church. Verse 7. And I will take away his blood out of his mouth] That is, his bloody prey, (for saith Aben-Ezra, these Philistines did according to the salvage custome of those times, eat of the flesh, and drink of the blood of their slain enemies) and I will keep them from devouring my people any more. and his abominations] Hoc est, praedas abominabiles, saith Calvin, his abomina∣ble spoils, his bloody robberies, and pillages. and he that remaineth The small remnant of Jews not yet altogether devou∣red by these cruell Canniballs, the Babylonians, Philistines, and other enemies. even he shall be for our God] Though they be but an Hee, a small poor compa∣ny of them: yet God will both own them, and honour them. and he shall be as a governour in Iudah] They shall all be Magnifico's, little Prin∣ces, of high rank and dignity: even as Governours in Iudab; God will honour them in the hearts of all men. See chap. 12.8. and Ekron as a Iebusite] i. e. either slain, or slave and tributary. I know this Text is otherwise expounded by Iunius and others: but I now like this Inter∣pretation, as most proper. Verse 8. And I will encamp about mine house] Though it be otherwise but ill fenced and fortified: yet I will see it safegarded and secured from the inrodes and incursions of enemies, who are ranging up and down, and not onely robbing, but ravishing, Psal. 10.9. For what was Alexander but an Arch-pirate, a strong theef, as the Pirate whom he had taken told him to his teeth? And whether here be inti∣mated by these words, because of him that passeth by, and him that returneth] something of Alexanders voyages, who passed by Judaea into Egypt, and to Am∣mons Oracle with his Army; and thence returned to Persia by the same way, not hurting the Jewes; or something about the many expeditions of the Seleucidae, and Lagedae to and fro from Egypt to Syria, and back again: among which hurly-burly the Jewes State stood fast, though sometime a little shaken; I dare not say, (saith a learned Interpreter:) It may be both those and all other the like dangers are here generally comprized. and no oppressour shall passe thorow them any more] Chald. No Sultan: not the Turkish tyrant, Lord of Greece, as verse 13. say those that take the text of the
Jew glorious state at last. Calvin thinkes that by this clause, he only expounds what he had figuratively said before. Danaeus takes it of violence and oppression among themselves, or of wringing and vexing by their own rulers: they shall be free from violence both abroad an at home. for now have I seen with mine eyes] i. e. I have taken good notice of it, I have seen, I have seen, as Exod. 3.7. and mine eye hath affected mine heart. I have well observed that the enemy is grown unsufferably insolent, and therefore come to rescue and relieve my people. The Chaldee hath it thus, I have now re∣vealed my power to do them good: Ahen-Ezra makes these to be the Prophets words of himself, q. d. I have seen all this in a manifest vision. But this is frigi∣dum imo insulsum, saith Calvin and odd conceit: unlesse we refer it (with Monta∣nus) to the following words, and make this the sense, (which yet I like not so well) Behold I see in the spirit with the eyes of my mind, the Lord Christ com∣ming and entring with state, the city and temple. Verse 9. Rejoyce greatly, O daughter of Zion] Draw all thy waters with joy out of this welspring of salvation. Loe here is the summ of all the good news in the world;Ier. 31.12. and that which should make the saints everlastingly merry, even to shout∣ing and singing in the height of Zion, that their king commeth. This should swallow up all discontents, and make them sing Hosanna in the highest: Blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord. behold thy King commeth] Not Zorobabel, or Judas Maccabeus, as some Jewes interpret it: nor yet Alexander the Great (as some others) but a greater then he, even Messiah the Prince, as Christ is stiled Dan. 9.25. who shall cut off the charret &c. as it followeth in the next verse, yea all the 4 charret or Monar∣chies, as some expound chap. 6. how much more Tyrus, Gaza, Ekron, Damas∣cus, &c. of which he spake before in this chapter. unto thee] i. e. meerely for thy behoof and benefit, and not for his own. Other kings are much for their own profit, pleasures, pomp, &c. Christ emp∣tied himself of all his excellencies, that we might be filled with his fulnesse. he is just and having salvation] That he may justifie thee by his righteousnesse: and save thee by his merit and spirit. The Vulgar rendreth it, Iust and a Saviour, so doth the Chaldee. Salvation properly denotes the negative part of mans hap∣pinesse, freedome from all evils and enemies: but it is usually taken for the positive part also, viz. fruition of all good: because it is easier to tell from what, then un∣to what we are saved by Jehovah our righteousnesse. lowly] Or poor, afflicted abject, See them set together Zeph. 3.12. and Phil. 4.12. I have learned to want and to be abased. Poverty rendreth a man con∣temptible, and ridiculous. Pauper ubique jacet, men go over the hedge where it is lowest: the poor are trampled upon, and vilipended as Luke 16.30. This thy Son, he scorned to call him brother: because he was poor. Now Christ be∣came poor to make us rich,2 Cor. 8. Rom. 2.7. a worm and no man (nullificamn populi, as Tertullian phraseth it) that we might be advanced to glory, and honour, and immortality. Neither was he more low and mean in his estate, then lowly and meek in mind: as farr from pride and statelinesse, as as his state was from Pomp and magni∣ficence. riding upon an asse] A poor silly beast used by the meaner sort of people. yea upon a colt the foale of an asse] Heb. asses, because the colt whereon Christ rode ran after two asses coupled together in one yoke, whereof one was his damm Mat. 21.5.. 1.2. See the Note there. These asses used to the yoke Hesiod calleth  wretched, or enduring great toyle and labour. That Christ should ride upon the foale of such a hard labouring asse, a yong wild colt, not yet ready tamed and trained to the saddle, as it shewes his humility, so also his power over the creature (Clarescente gloriâ inter humilem simplicitatem) and his peaceablenesse too, as Kimchi thinkes from that in the next verse, that the Israelites under Christs government should have no need of horses and charrets. All this description of Christs person and kingdome we know was punctually fulfilled in our Saviour ac∣cording to Mat. 21. Mar. 11. Luke 19. Ioh. 12. foure sufficient witnesses. The old Rabbines and with them R.Galatin. lib. 8. cap. 9. Solomon (though a sworn enemy to Christians) take the text of the promised Messias his solemne entrance into Ierusalem: Of Je∣sus
the crucified son of Mary they will not yeeld, because they stumble at his po∣verty and expect pomp: But if they had consulted their own Prophets, they would have found, that Messiah was foretold, as despicable Esay 53.2. Poor, as here: crucified Dan. 9.26. Num. 21.9. among malefactours Esay 53.9. nailed Psal. 22.16. pierced Zech. 12.10. mocked Psal. 69.7. And that their very rejection of him for his meanenesse and meeknesse proveth him to be Christ Psal. 118.22. Act. 4.11. It is reported of Agesilaus, that comming to help the king of Egypt in his distresse, he was despised by the Egyptians, because of the plainenesse of his person, and the homelinesse of his attire: for they thought that they should see the king of Sparta such an one, as the king of Persia was, bravely habited, and pompously attended. Semblably the Iewes expect a Christ like to one of the mighty Monarches of the earth: and they are strongly possest with the fond conceit of an earthly kingdome. Hence, when they saw Mahomet arising in such power, they were straight ready to cry him up for teir Massias. The rich hath many friends, saith Solomon, but the poor is hated, or slighted, even of his own noighbour Prov. 14.20. Christ came to his own: but his own received him not. When it was sometime disputed among the Romanes in the Councell using to deify great men, whether Christ having done many wonderfull works should be received into the number of the gods? the Historian saith, that they would not therefore receive him, because he preached poverty, and made choice of poor men to follow him, whom the world careth not for. Verse 10. And I will cut off the charret &c.] This the same in effect with that of Esay chap. 9.7. Of the encrease of Christs government and peace there shall be no end, and chap. 2.4. they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their speares into pruning-hookes: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learne warr any more. Christ was born in the raigne of Augu∣stus Caesar, then when having vanquished Lepidus, Antonius, and the rest of his enemies both at home and abroad, he set open gates of Janus in token of an univer∣sall peace: and raigned as Lord and Monarch of the Roman world.De invent rr. lib. 4.1. Polydor Vir∣gill out of Orosius tells us, that the self-same day wherein Christ was born, Augustus Caesar made proclamation that no man should thenceforth give him the title of Lord, manifesto praesagio majoris dominatus qui tum in terris ortus est, saith he, not without a manifest presage of a greater Lord then himself then born into the world: greater 1. both for the peaceablenesse of his government, as here; no use of wea∣pons or warllike engines. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritu∣al. 2 Cor. 10.4. Christ shall bring both to Jewes and Gentiles the Gospel of peace and the peace of the Gospel. he shall speake peace unto the Heathen] peace of countrey, and peace of Conscience too: and 2. for the extent of his government, It should be as large as the world, a Catholike kingdome. his dominion, shall be from Sea to Sea] From the red Sea the Mediterranean Sea, or the Sea of Palestina: for these two seas were the bound; of the land of Canaan Num. 23.31. for the Jews scarce knew any other sea but these two. And the Prophet here alludeth to the times of Solomons reigne, a appeares by Psal. 72.8. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea: and from the river unto the ends of the earth: that is, from Euphrates to the utmost bounds of the holy land which by a common custome of speech are put for the utmost quarters of the world. Verse 11. As for thee also] O daughter of Sion, O my Church: not, O Christ the king of the church, as the Grreek and Latine fathers, and after them the Popish commtarours will needs have it; the better to establish their Chimera of Limbus Patrum Christ here, by an Apospsis (an ordinary figure) or keeping back something unspoken through earnestnesse of affection, bespeaks his people in this sort: Eiam tis, As for thee also, I will surely impart unto thee the benefits of that my kingdome, as I have already begun to do in delivering you out of that  that irty dungeon of the Babylonish thraldome. by the blood of thy covenant] by the blood of Christ figured, by the blood that was sprinkled upon the people Exod. 24.8. Psal. 74.20. Heb. 13.20. and by vertue of the Covenant confirmed thereby. I have sent forth thy prisoners] I have enlarged thy captives.
out of the pit wherein is no water] but mud only,Gen. 37.24. Ier. 38.6. as in Iosephs pit, and Ieremies dungeon. The Saints have temporall deliverances also by vertue of the covenant: and if any of Christs subjects fall into desperate distresses and deadly dangers, yet they are prisoners of hope: and may look for deliverance by the blood of the covenant. Verse 12. Turn ye to the strong hold] i. e. to Christ the rock of ages Isa. 26.4. the hope of Israel Ier. 17.13. the expectation of all the ends of the earth. Luke 2.25, 38. Or, to the Promise, that strong tower, whereunto the righteous run and are safe: that are Christi munitissima, as Cyrill here saith, strong hold of Christ. Thou art my shield, saith David, I truth in thy word Psal. 119.114. And againe, Remember thy word to thy servant wherein thou hast caused me to trust, Verse 49. When yong Ioash was sought for to the shambles by his murderous grandmother Athaliah, he was hid in the house of the Lord for six yeers. But whence was this safety? Even from the faithfull promise of God 2 Chron. 23.3. Behold the kings son must raigne, as the Lord had said of the sons of David, that he should ne∣ver want a man to raigne after him. Hence Psal. 91.4. his faithfulnesse and his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Under this shield, and within this strong∣hold of the promises God had made them in the foregoing verses, these priso∣ners of hope, these heires of the promises, were to shroud and secure themselves amidst those dangers and distresses as incompassed them on every fide. And that they might know that the needy should not alwayes be forgotten,Psal. 9.18. the expectation of the poor should not perish for ever, here's as precious promise of present comfort. even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee] Though you be now at never so great an under, yet I do make an open promise unto you, verbis non so∣lum disertis sed & exertis, I do assure you in the word of truth, that I will render unto thee thou poor soule that liest panting under the present pressure, double, that is, life and liberty, saith Theodoret: Grace and Glory, saith Lyra: Or double to what thou hopest, I will be better to thee then thy hopes, saith Hierom: Or double, that is, multiplied mercy; but especially Christ, who is caled the Gift of God by an excellency Ioh. 4.10. the Benefit 1. Tim. 6.2. that which shall abundantly countervaile all crosses and miseries Mar. 10.30. Iob had all double to him. Va∣lentinian had the Empire; Q Elisabeth the Crown. God will be to his Hannah's, better then ten children. Verse 13. When I have bent Judah for me] God himself did the work though by the sons of Zion, as his instruments whom he used, and prospered against the sons of Greece, that is the successours of Alexander the Great, who led them out of Greece against the power of Persia, and who seizing upon Egypt and Syria, crusht and ground the poor Jews betwixt them, as betwixt two milstones. This Prophesie was fulfilled in the Maccabes: but may have on eye to the Apostles, who were some of them of Judah, some of Ephraim; that is, of the ten tribes, as of Zebulon,Psal. 45.5. Nepthali &c. these Christ used as bowes and arrowes in the hand of a mighty man, whereby the people fell under him; the sons of Greece especially, where so many famous churches were planted, as appeares by the Acts and the Revelation. See Rev. 6.2. with the Note. and made thee as the sword of a mighty man] given thee both armes, and an arme to weild them. For it is God that strengtheneth and weakeneth the armes of ei∣ther party in battel Ezek. 30.24. It is he also that rendreth the weapons vaine or prosperous Isa. 54. ult. Ier. 50.9. This Judas Maccabeus well understood: and therefore had his name from the capitall letters of this motto written in his Ensigne, Mi camoca belohim Jehovah, who is like thee O Lord among the Gods? St. Paul also that conquered so many countries, and brought in the spoiles of so many soules to God (whence the change of his name from Saul to Paul, as some think,2 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 15. from Sergius Paulus the Proconsul, whom he converted to the faith Act. 13.9.) The weapons of our warfare, saith He, are mighty through God to the casting down of strong-holds. Not I, but the grace of God that is with me &c. And ye men of Israel, why look ye so earnestly upon us, saith Peter, as if by our own power of holinesse &c. Act. 3.12. Verse 14. And the Lord shall be seen over them] shall be conspicuous amongst them: he shall appeare for them in the high places of the field, he shall make
bare his arm, and bathe his sword in blood. How many do you reckon me at? said Antigonus to his souldiers, when they feared the multitudes of their enemies. May not God say so much more to his? Hath ever any waxed fierce against him and prospered? If he but arise onely, his enemies shall be scattered,Psal. 68.1. and those that hate him shall flee before him. his arrow shall go forth with the lightening] Here the former matter is illustra∣ted by many lofty tropes and allusions, either to those ancient deliverances at the red-sea, and against the Canaanites, and Philistines, by thunders, lightening, and tempest, or else, as Calvin rather thinks to the terrible delivery of the Law, with thunderings and lightenings, and sound of trumpets, to the great amazements of the people, insomuch as Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake. He confers Habak. 3.3, 4, 5. and further alledgeth, that Teman here rendred the South, was the same with Sinai, and lies South from Judaea. Lightening, thunder, and whirl-winds are a part of Gods Armies, which he can draw forth at his pleasure against his enemies. Such things as these fell out oft-times in the warres of the Maccabees. And how the Lord mightily assisted his Apostles, whose arrowes went forth as the lightening, swiftly, suddenly, irresistibly, and whose thunder gave a loud alarum to all Nations, I need not relate. Vers. 15. The Lord of hosts shall defend them] Heb.Paulum quoi∣escunque lego, non verba mihi audire videor sed tonitrua. shall hold his buckler over them, which none can strike thorow. and they shall devour] sc. their enemies, that till then did eat up Gods people as they eat bread, Psal. 14.5. and subdue with sling-stones] with weak means, as David did Goliath. and they shall drink and make a noise] Tumultuabuntur quasi temulenti, 'Tis a Catechresis signifying the very great destruction of their enemies: so that they might be even drunk with their blood, if they had any mind to it: the tongues of their dogges should be dipped therein, as Psal. 68.23, 24. and they shall be filled like bowls, &c.] that held the blood of the sacrifices. and as the corners of the altar] which were all besprinkled with the blood of the sacrifices. A Lapide applies all this to those heavenly Conquerours, and more, that is, Triumphers, the Apostles and Martyrs. Verse 16. And the Lord their God shall save them] Not defend them onely as Lord of Hosts, verse 15. but as a further favour, save them as their God in Cove∣nant with them. as the flock of his people] rescuing them as David did his lamb from the lion and bear, and tending them continually. as the stones of a crown] Costly and precious, or Monumentall-stones, with crowns on the top, and set up for Trophies. Verse 17. For how great is his goodnesse] He shuts up all with this sweet Epi∣phonema, or exclamation, admiring the singular goodnesse of God to his people in all the former particulars: and yet promising them Abundance of outward necessa∣ries, even to an honest affluence: they should have store of corn and wine; so much as should make them succulent and vigorous, full of sappe and good humours. Provided, that first they content not themselves with the naturall use of the creature, but tast how good the Lord is. And next, that they put this promise into suit by their prayers, as chap. 10.1. CHAP. X. Verse 1. ASK you of the Lord rain] Ask it and have it:Hos. 10.12. Open your mouthes wide, and he will fill them. Seek yee the Lord till he come, and rain righteousnesse upon you: Surely as the Sunne draws up vapours from the earth and sea, not to retain them, but to return them: and as thin vapours come down again in thick showers of rain: So God calls for our prayers, for our profit: and does for us exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, Ephes. 3.20. Ask we must, Ezek. 36.37. Prayer is an indispensable duty. Our Saviour taught his disci∣ples to pray. He himself was to ask of his Father, and then he should have the
Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psal. 2.8. He could have had presently twelve legions of Angels to rescue him: but then he was to send to heaven for them by prayer, Mat. 26.53. I came for thy words, that is, for thy prayers sake, saith the Angel to Daniel. As well as God loved him, he looked to hear from him, Dan. 10.11, 12. for he will grace his own Ordinances, and make his people know both their distance and dependance. Rain in the time of the latter rain] Rain is the flux of a moist cloud; which be∣ing dissolved by little and little, by the heat of the Sun, lets down rain by drops out of the middle region of the air. This, if it come right in due time and mea∣sure, it maketh much for the fattening of the earth, Psal. 65.11. laying the heat, nourishing the herb and tree, Esay 44.14. refreshing all creatures, grasse, fruits, &c. Lev 26.4. Jam. 5.18. Esay 30.23. So if otherwise, it proves a great pu∣nishment. Joel 1.Joel 1.10, 11, &c. 17, 19, &c. Great expectation there was in Judaea and those Eastern parts of the former and the latter rain. That, fell in the seed-time about Autumne: this, in the Spring ide, causing the corn to ear, and kearn before harvest. Both were to be sought of God alone. For are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heaven give showres? No, no; These come by a divine decree, Job 28.26. God prepares rain, Psal. 147.8. he dispenseth it in number, weight, and measure, Job 28.25. not a drop falls in vain, or in a wrong place: he also with-holds it when, and where he thinks good, Amos 4.7. The Egyptians used in a profane mockery, to tell other Nations, that if God should forget to rain, they might all chance to starve for it. The rain they though was of God, but not their river: which therefore God threateneth to dry up, Ezek. 29.3, 9. Esay 19.5, 6.Nat. quaest. lib. 4. cap. 2. Art am. l. 1. Jer. 2.13. as also he did (as both Seneca and Ovid testifie) in the raigne of Cleopatra. The creatures at best are but broken cisterns. Not fountains, but cisterns onely; and those broken too; there's no trusting to them: they were never true to those that trusted them. So the Lord shall make bright clouds] Nubes cursitantes, thin clouds, that flie swiftly in the air, most commonly before and after very rainy weather. R. Salomon interprets the word here used, not lighenings, which yet are signes and fore-runners of rain, Psal. 135.7. Ier. 10.13. but clouds bringing rain. Clouds are nothing else but vapours thickened in the middle region of the air, by the cold invironing and driving them together: that they may be as so many heavenly bottles holding water, to be seasonably distilled. How they are upheld, and why they fall here, and now, and by drops, not by spouts (sith they are vessels as thin as the liquor contained in them) we know not, and wonder. and give them showres of rain] Heb. rain, rain, that is, plentifull rain upon his inheritance:Eccles. 12.2. Esay 45.19. the clouds shall return after the rain, and one showre is unburthe∣ned, another shall be brewed. God scorns to say to the seed of Iacob, Seek ye me in vain: or that any of his suitours should go sad away, for want of an answer. David asked his for life: and God gave him more, even length of dayes for ever and ever, Psal. 21.4. Many came to Christ for cure of their bodies, he cured them on both sides: and was better to them then their prayers. Gehezi asked Naaman for a talent of silver: nay, take two, said he: and he pressed it upon him. So saith God to his, Ask and spare not, that your joy may be full. Ye are not straitened in me, but ye are straitened in your own bowels. Ye have not, because ye ask not: and he is worthy to want it, that may have it for asking onely. to every one grasse] Grasse for the cattle, and corn for the food of man, as the Chaldee expounds it. Verse 2. For the idols have spoken vanity] q. d. Therefore ask good things at Gods hands, as rain, food, and all necessary provision: because Idols and sooth∣sayers cannot help you to these things. If they promise you (as they will) beleeve them not: for they lie as fast, as once Rabshakeh did for his Master: when he pro∣mised the people a land of corn and wine,Esay. 36.17. a land of bread and vineyards. And they will finally serve you, as Absaloms mule served her Master: whom she left at his greatest need, to hang betwixt heaven and earth, as rejected of both. Lo such are all creature-comforts golden delusions, lying vanities, apples of Sodom, nec vera, nce vestra,1 Cor. 7. 31. the fashion of this world, saith Paul; the phantasies of mens brain, saith Luke, Act. 25.23. the semblances and empty shews of good, without any reality,
or solid consistency, saith Solomon often. They are, saith our Prophet here, a wicked deceit, and cosinage. An arrant lie, a false dream, a vain or empty comfort that utterly deceiveth a mans confidence, and maketh him, in the fulnesse of his con∣ceited sufficiencie, to be in straights. These here for instance: viz. the Jews that had been carried captives as a flock without a guide, sheep without a shepherd, and ye had not (till after some while at least) abrenounced their Idols, Ier. 44.22. Ezek. 9. therefore they went their way as a flock] Driven by the butcher to the slaugh∣ter-house. Idolatry is a land-desolating sin: as besides these Jews (the more in∣genuous of them at this day confesse, that in all their punishments there is still an ounce of the golden-calf made by them in the wildernesse) the Greek Church was undone by it. The worshipping of Images they defended with tooth and nail (as they say) and established it in the second Councell of Nice; not long before the Turk took Nice, and made it the seat of his Empire, in opposition to Constantino∣ple, which at length he took also; and brought in Mahometisme, that foul impiety, which quickly over-spread the whole East and South, like as Popish Idolatry did the West and North. But this iniquity will be their ruine. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. She hath fallen culpably, she shall therefore fall penally.. And why? She is become the habitation of devils, that is, of idols. See Rev. 9.20. 1 Cor. 10.20. Verse 3. Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds] Pastores Impostores: the greedy priests, and false prophets main causes of the captivity: because through their default, there was no knoledge nor fear of God in the land, Esay 5.13. Hos. 4.6, 7. See Ier. 23.1. Ezek. 34.1. and I punished the goats] The Grandees and Governours, temporall and Eccle∣siasticall. See Ezek. 34.17. They should have been as the hee-goats before the flock, Ier. 50.8. worthy Guides to God. But they were goats in another sence, unruly, and nasty, and lascivious (as those two filthy fellows for instance, whom for their adultery the kind of Babylon roasted in the fire, Ier. 29.22.) and such as begat kids of their own kind, men of their own make, and went before them in wickednesse, as the goats lead the flocks. for the Lord of hosts] Better to read it, but the Lord of hosts, &c. And this is spoken for the comfort of those that called upon God, and abhorred Idols, and Idol-shepherds, that were in speciall covenant with him, and therefore owned by him, as his flock, or peculiar charge. Now, to such he promiseth to feed them as him sheep, and to furnish them as his horse for service, his goodly warre-horse, mainly respected by his Master, as Bucephalus was by Alexander.Plin. l. 8. c. 41. This may in part be understood of the Maccabees victories: but principally of the Apostles, those white horses, upon which they rode thorow the world, conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. Saint Paul is fitly compared to that war-horse in Job, chap. 39.20. whose neck is clothed with thunder, and the glory of his nostrils is terrible. He mocketh at fear, and turneth not back from the sword. He goeth on to meet the armed man, and swalloweth the ground with fiercenesse, and rage, &c. Verse 4. Out of him came forth the corner] Angulus, not Angelus as some Vul∣gar Latine translations have it: and A Lapide justly finds fault with it.Chap. 35. A like fault Surius and Caranza (his fellow-popelings) are content to wink at, nay to defend in the Laodicene Councell, because it makes for their Angel-worship. For where∣as the Councell truely saith, , Christians must not pray to Angels. They make the words to be Non oportet Christianos ad angulos con∣gregationes facere. Christians ought not hold their meetings in corners; and they make the title say, the same thing. but is this fair dealing, thus to falsifie antiquity for their own ends, and to maintain their own errours? As for the Text. Out of his came forth, &c.] That is, Out of Judah shall be had all things ne∣cessary, both at home (and here the Prophet proceeds from the foundation to the nails, or fastening of the house together) and abroad: both for the mastering of the enemy by the Battle-bowe, &c. and the making of him tributary: for Out of him shall come every exactour] sc. Of homage and tribute, as the fruit of their victory. Danaeus senceth it thus. Out of Judah shall go every oppressour which did vex his people before, God driving him forth.
Verse 5. And they shall be as mighty men] Or, as Giants, as Gabriels, they shall be strong in the Lord,Ruth. 2.11. and in the power of his might, they shal do worthily in Ephratas, and be famous in Bethlehem: their bow shall abide in strength, and the armes of their hands be made strong, by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob: from thence is the shep∣heard, the stone of Israel.Plutarch Gen. 49.24. If it could be said of Mithridates, a meer A∣theist, that he never wanted any courage nor counsel; how much of Gods warri∣ours, such as Iudas Maccabeus, especially Messiah the Prince, who treads down his enemies as the mire of the streets, setting his feet in their necks and making them to be found liars unto him, that is to yeeld him at least a forced and fained sub∣jection. and they shall sight because the Lord is with them] This is enough to make them fight up to the knees in blood, that they have God to stand by them: not onely as a spectatour, or Agonotheta (though that's somwhat: dogs and other baser creatures will fight lustily when their masters are by, and to set them on) but as a Captain of the Lord Hosts, as Christ is called, and a Coadjutor, a Cham∣pion, a man of war Exod. 15.3. Yea, he alone is a whole army of men, he is Van and Reie both, Isai. 52.12. The shields of the earth belong to him, the Militia of the world is his Psal. 47.9. he hath magnleh choloth and matteh choloth, as the Rabbins well observe, armies both above, and beneath, as his horse and foot to fight for him people. and the riders on horses shall be confounded] As they were in the conquest of Ca∣naan, where the enemies had horses and chariots, when the Israelites had neither, as Orign observeth: and as they were in all Davids wars, and the rest of the victo∣rious kings of Israel, who according to the Law Deut. 17.16. made no use of horses (but said An horse is but a vain thing for battel &c. God takes no delight in the strength of an horse) and ever fought on foot with singular successe. So did the Maccabees, Zisca, and after his the Bohemians, the English in France at the battle of Spurres (so the battle of Terwin was called in Henry the eighth his time, from the French posting away to save their lives.)Spied. 1000. Verse 6.A Lapide And I will strengthen the house of Judah] Robustos, as quasi Gabri∣cles efficiam. See Chap. 12.8. Esay 10.34. See verse 5. of this chapter. The Saints shall be strengthened with all migh. according to his glorious power, Col. 1.11. at the Resurrection especially, when Christ shall change their vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body in strength, agility, beauty &c. The bodies of the Saints, saith Luther, shall have that power as to tosse the greatest mountains in the world like a ball. Auselme saith such, as they shall be able to shake the whole earth at their pleasure. Our Saviour saith, that they shall be as the Angels of God Luk. 20.36. more like spirits then bodies, while they are here, In quiet and confidence is their strength Esay 30.15. and again in the same chapter verse 7. their strength is to sit still. They expected much strenght from Egypt: but the Prophet tells them that by siting still and waiting for the salvation of God by faith, they shall have an Egypt,Heb. 11.34. and better, out of weaknesse they should be made strong, wax valiant in fight, turn to flight the armies of the aliens, as the Maccabees did, and as Michael and his Angels Rev. 12. the noble Army of the Apostles, who were more then Conquerours: and Martyrs who tired their tormentours and laughed at their cruelty: the valour of the patients, the savagenesse of the persecutours strove together; till both exceeding nature and belief, bred wonder and astonish∣ment in beholders and readers. These were those lion-like men of the tribe of Ju∣dah that took the kingdom by violence. Judah which signifieth the Confessour, had the kingdom, as Levi had the Priest-hood, both forfeited by Reuben who was weak as water. Gen. 49. and I will save the house of Joseph] that is, Ephraim, but for the ten tribes, whom God here promiseth to save, not to bring back, saith the Geneva-Note on Ver. 9. But others there are that gather from these words and these that follow, that God will not onely preserve them, but reduce and resettle them in their own countrey, yea, and multiply them so abundantly, as that their countrey shall not be able to hold them Verse 10. Whence cometh Ashurs and Egypts subjection to Christ; that is, all the tract of the East, and of the South verse 1. and their perpetual establishment in the faith.
Verse 12 And I will bring them again to place them] I will place them in their houses as Hos. 11.11. The Sept. render it, I will cause them to dwell. compos. The Caldee I will gather together their captivity. Some special mercy is assured them by this special word of a mixt conjugation. for I have mercy upon I them] Heres a double cause alledged, of these so great and gracious promises: and both excluding works. First Gods mere mercy. Secondly his Election of grace, for I am the Lord their God. This latter is the cause of the former: for God chose his people for his love, and then loveth them for his choice. The effects of which love are here set down. 1. That he heareth their prayers, I will hear them. 2. That he reaccepteth and restoreth them in Christ, as if they had never offenced against him. They shall be as though I had not cast them off. That was a cutting speech, and far worse then their captivity Jer. 16.13. When God not onely threateneth to cast them out of their countrey into a strange land, but that there he would slew them no favour. Here he promiseth to pitty them; and then they must needs think deliverance was at next door by. and they shall be as though I had not cast them off] And this the sooner, and the ra∣ther, because they called them out-casts, saying, This is Zion whom no man seeketh after Jer. 30.17. The Jewish Nation, saith Tully, shew how God regards them that have been so oft overcome, viz. by Nehuchad-nezzar, Pompey &c. God therefore promiseth to provide for his own great name, by being fully reconciled to his poor people, whom the world looked upon abjects. for I am the Lord their God And if I should not see to their safey,Psal. 119. it would much re∣flect upon me. This David well knew, and therefore prayes thu, I am thine, Lord save me. and will hear them, Or, I will speak with them: speak to their hearts. It is no more, saith One, then if a man were in a fair dining-room with much good company, and there is some speciall friend whom he loveth dearly, that calleth him aside to speak in private of businesse, that neerly concerneth him: and though he go into a worse room, yet he is well enough pleased. So if God, in losse of friends, houses, countrey, comforts whatsoever, will speak with us, will answer us, the losse will be easily made up. Philip Lantgrave of Hesse being a long time priso∣ner under Charles 5. was demanded what upheld him all that time? He answered, that he had felt the favour of God, and the Divine consolations of the Martyrs. There be Divine comforts that are felt onely under the crosse. I will bring her into the wildernesse, and there speak to her heart Hos. 2.13. Israel was never so royally provided for, with Manna, Quails, and other cates, as when they were in the wildernesse. The crosse is anointed with comfort, which makes it not onely light, but sweet: not onely not troublesome and importable, but desirable and delightful, saith Bernard. Thy presence O Lord made the very gridiron sweet to Laurence, saith another; How easily can God make up our losse; and breaches? Verse 7. And they of Ephraim shall be as a mighty man] The same again, and in the same words, for more assurance; because the return of the ten Tribes might seem a thing more incredible, Erant enim quasi putridum cadaver saith Calvin here: they were as rotten carkasses, and they had obiter onely heard of these pro∣mises; as if some grain of feed should be dropt by the high-way-side: for they were now as aliens from the Common-wealty of Israel. and their hert shall rejoyce as throught wine] Which naturally exhilarateth Psal. 104.15. and is called by Plato one of the Mitigaters of humane misery See Prov. 31.6. with the Note. Some nations use to drink wine freely before they enter the battel to make them undaunted. Some think here may be an allusion to such a custom. I should rather understand it of that generous wine of the spirit Eph. 5.18. yea, their children shall see it] Therefore they were not to antedate the promises, but to wait the accomplishment which should certainly be, if not them, yet to theirs after them, even a full restauration in due season. Verse 8. I will hisse for them and gather them] As a shepheard hisseth or whist∣leth for his flock. See Judg. 5.16. where it should not be translated the bleatings of the flocks, but the hissings or whistlings of the shepheards to their flocks, when they would get them together. God, who hath all creatures at his beck and check,
can easily bring back his hanished, gather together his dispersed with a turn of a hand Zech. 13.7. with a blast of his mouth, as here; as if any offer to oppose him herein, he can blow them to destruction Iob. 4.9. He can frown them to death Psal. 80.16. He can crush them between his fingers, as men do a moth Psal. 39.11. and crumble them to crattle Psal. 146.4. Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them: and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling. Psal. 49.14. For I have redeemed them] I have in part, and that's a pledge of the whole; my hands also shall finish it, as Chap 4.9. God doth not his work to the halves; neither must we: but if he shall be All in All unto us, we must be altogether His, Cant. 2.16. His is a covenant of mercy, ours of obedience: which must be there∣fore full and finall, as Christ hath obtained for us an entire, and everlasting re∣demption. Heb. 9.12. and they shall increase as they have increased] By verue of that promise to Abra∣ham Gen. 13.16. I will multiply thy seed as the dust of the earth: and Gen 15.5. as the stars of heaven. This promise was not presently fulfilled; for when they came into Egypt they were but seventy souls of them. But under the Egyptian servitude, they increased abundantly Exod. 1.7. they spawned (as the word signi∣fies) and bred swiftly: so that they went thence 600000. strong. Exod. 12.37. So that they soon became a mighty and populous nation Dent. 26.5. Judea was not above 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad: not near the half of England by much; yet what huge armies had they, when the two tribes and the other ten met in the field, one against another? And even at this day (whatever is become of the ten tribes: whether they be in China, or America) the Jews are a very great and numerous people. It is thought that there is not any one nation under heaven so great in number as that is, if the dispersed Jews might all be gathered together into one place: And who knows what we may (some of us) yet live to see? The late Clavis Apocalyptica promiseth great matters to fall out within these three or four yeers. Verse 9. And I will sow them among the people] Scatter them indeed, but for an excellent purpose, that they may bring forth fruit to God: and be a blessed means of bringing in the fulnesse of the Gentiles harvest. Some kinde of the knowledge of God was diffused by the Jew wherever they came: and when at length the Gos∣pel was preached by the Apostles, they first dealt with the Jews (who had their Sy∣nagogues in all places) as it was necessary Act. 13.46. that as they had been the onely people of God, so now they might be the first invited guest. This invita∣tion when they put from them and so judged themselves unworthy ofternal life, what remained but that the halt and the blinde Gentiles shoul be fetcht in from the high wayes and hedges, that so Gods house might be full. So then their des∣persion was a semination: and their exile opened a gate for the Gospel. hence al∣so it is called  a dissemination, or scattering: as when a man soweth seed abroad. 1 Pet 1.1. Iam. 1.1. and they shall remember me in far countries] Saint Paul testifieth that the twelve tribes instantly served God day and night Act. 26.7. a great deal better, doubt∣lesse, then they do at this day; being as reverend in their Synagogues, as grammer-boyes are at school when their Master is absent,Spec. Europ. saith an eye wit∣nesse. and they shall live with their children, and turn again] They or their posterity shal. Gods promises bear a long date many times, and the beleeving Hebrews are told that they had need of patience, or tolerance: that after they had done the will of God, and suffered it too, if need be, they might receive the promise. Heb. 10.36. And they are further exhorted to run with patience the race that is set before them:Heb. 12.1. wherein he that beleeveth maketh not hast, but can want and wait for what he wisheth, till God please: being desirous rather that God may be glorified then himself grati∣fied, if both may not stand together. Verse 10. I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt] whither they fled for fear of the Babylonians Jer. 44.Antiq. l. 11. Chap. 2. and where it seems they became a mighty peo∣ple, if that be true which Iosephus writeth, viz. that Ptolomic Philadelph sent back
an hundred and twenty thousand of them into Judea, and by that royall benefi∣cence obtained the seventy Seniours to be sent by Eleazar the High-priest,Gualther: prae∣lat. in Com. in Mae. for the translating of the Hebrew Bible into Greek. His successour Ptoiomaeus Lathurus was nothing so courteous: for he slew 30000. of them with unheard-of cruelty: and made the living devour the dead. and gather them out of Assyria] whither the ten tribes were carried captive, and scattered all abroad through the one hundred twenty and seven province, as Ha∣man suggested to the king Esth. 3.8. and I will bring them into the land of Gilcad and Lebanon] that is, into Judea (the bounds whereof were Lobanus and Gilead) a figure of the Church, that land of delights. See Cant. 4.1, 8. Gods Hephsibah Isa. 62.4. O praeclaram illam dieculam? when shall it once be? The comfort is, God can make a nation conceive and bring forth, both in one day Esay 66.8. O pray, pray, pray, as Psal. 14.7. and as the poor Jews pray at this day, Let thy kingdome come speedily,Bimherah bejamenu. and even in our dayes. Verse 11. And he shall passe thorough the sea &c.] who shall? The people for want of roome, saith Junius: they shall enlarge their quarters into Egypt,Transiens per mare angus. Assy∣ria and other nations subduing them to Christ. God shall (say others, and I think better) he shall fright the sea, and miraculously deliver his people, as once he did at the red sea, which threatened to swallow them, but God made it to preserve them. He will remove all rubs and Remora's, all obstacles and impediments: Nei∣ther Egypt, nor Assyria shall be able to hinder what God will have done. See Isa. 11.15. The misunderstanding of this and the like texts to this, might haply occasion that unhappinesse that befell the Jews in Creet Anno 434, The devill under the name of Moses (whom he personated) perswaded those poor creatures, that he was sent from God, to bring them home againe to their own countrey. This they soon beleeved (as they are wondrous apt to work themselves into the fooles paradise of a sublime dotage) and leaving all their good to others, fol∣lowed this seducer (who had spent a whole yeer in travelling over the countrey for the purpose) together with their wives and children to the top of a steep rock that hung over the sea. Thither when they were come, this mo Moses com∣manded them to wrap their heads in their upper garments, and so to th them∣selves from the rock toward the sea, assuring them of a safe passage. They rea∣dily obeyed him: and in that sort perished a great many of them. And more had followed, but that (as God would have it) some Christian fishermen, being there at that instant, took up some of them as they were soting upon the waves, and ready to perish: who afterwards returning to the rest of the Jews, told them how they had been cheated, and how narowly they had escaped:Funcc. Chron. whereupon they being all enraged (as they had reason) sought for this Seducer to put him to death. But when he could not possibly be found any where, they soon concluded that it was the very devill that old man-slayer: and diverse of them, moved by this calamity, became Christians. The Jews generally beleeve that their Messias when he commeth shall do such miracles as Moses wrought at the red sea.Hieron. Remig. Huge. They tell us also that in the time of the Maccabees, diverse Jews that had sled into Greece passed through the narrow sea of Propontis, that runs betwixt Chalcedon and Con∣stantinople, to go back into their own countrey. and all the deepes of the rivers shall dry up] As once Iordan did before Joshuah and the people: and as Rev. 16.12. Euphrates shall do before those kings of the East, which some make to be the Eastern Jews: and the drying up of Euphrates, to be the downfall of the Turkish Empire. Event will be the best interpreter, when all's done. Verse 12. And I will strengthen them in the Lord] that is, in Christ the head of the Churches: for by his own strength shall no man prevaile, saith holy Hannah 1 Sam. 2.9. and without me ye can do nothing, saith Christ the true vine,Ioh. 15.5. from whom we have both the bud of good desires, the blossom of good resolutions, and the fruit of good actions. Only we must fetch our strength by faith from Christ: and pray as Esay 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord. and they shall walk in his name] i. e. in his strength and to his glory. See that sweet promise Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. See also the Note above on verse 6.
CHAP. XI. Verse 1. OPen thy doors O Lebanon This chapter is no lesse comminatory, then the two former had been Consolatory. The tartnesse of the threate∣ning maketh men best tast the sweetnesse of the Promise. So wre and sweet make the best sawce: Promises and threatnings mingled, serve to keep the heart in the best temper. Hypocrites catch at the Promises, as children do at sweet-meats: and stuff themselves therewith a pillow as it were, that they may sin more secure∣ly. Here therefore they are given to understand, that God will so be mercifull to the penitent, as that he will by no meanes cleare the guilty. That's the last letter in Gods name Exod. 34.7. and must never be forgotten. It is fit the wicked should be forewarned of their danger; and the gody forearmed. This chapter hngs over Jeruslaem as that blazing-starr in the form of a bloody sword is said to  none for a whole yeres-space, a little before that last destruction of it, that is here  retold five hundred yeers before it fell out. open thy doors O Lebanon] i. e. lay open thou thy self to utter ruine: for it is  cannot be avoided. Lebanon was the confine of the countrey on that , whereby the Romans made their first irruption, as by an inlet Doors  attributed to this forrest; because against Lebanus is set Athbanus,  mountain; which is joyned unto it as it were with a certain wail: so that these were and are narrow passages and gates kep sometimes of the kings of Persia by a speciall officer, the defended  2. Neb. 2.8. and fortified by nature: yet not so strong∣ly, but that the Romanes brake in this way, and much wasted the forest, to em∣ploy, the tree for the besieging of Jerualem; as Esay 14 8. The Chee Para∣phrast by Lebanon here understandeth the Temple, which was built of the Cedars of Lebanon: and Ezech, 17.3. Lebanon is put for Jerusalem: which also had in it that house of the forest of Lebanon, built by Salomon 1 King. 7.2. where∣in he had both his throne of judgement ver. 7. and his armonry chap. 10.17. So that by Lebanon may be very well meant the whole countrey of Judea: but es∣pecially the city and Temple,Lib. . de ell. Jud. cap. 12. the iron gates whereof opened themselves of their own accord, that had not been open in seven yeers before: and could scarce be shut by twenty men, saith losephus. This fell out not long before the city was taken by Titus,R. David. Ira Galain. l. 4. c. 8. whereupon Rble Jonathan the son of Zachi cryed out, En vati∣cinium Zachriae, Behold the Prophesie of Zachary sulfilled: for he foretold this, that this temple should be burnt, and that the gates thereof should first be opened. that the fire may devour thy Cedars] Warr is as a fire, that feedeth upon the people Isa. 9.19. or like as an hungry man snatcheth &c. ver. 20. there is in warr no measure or satiety of blood. the Greek word to warr signifieth much blood. The Hebrew word, devouring and eating of men, as they cat bread. The Latine Bellum, à belluis. it destroyes the Lord as well as the losell, the cedar as well as the shrub. Tamberlanes coach horses were conquered kings. Adoni∣bezecks dogs, seventy kings gathering crumbs under his table. Let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon Iudg. 9.15. that is, Let fire come out som Abimeleck, and devour the men of Sien. ver 20. Verse 2 Howle firrce that is ye of lower rank: or ye meaner cityes, those daughters of leusalem, that felt the Romans force: , take up a loud out-cry, a doleful ditty after the manner of those that are carri captive by the enemy. Psal. 137 3. For there they, that carried s away captive, required of us a song: and they that wasted us, qui contumulaban nos, that threw us on  (so Tre∣mellius endretht, conser Isa. 25.2.) or those that made us  nostri, (so Shindler) required of us mirth. because all the mighty are spoiled] the magnificos, the men of power as they are called Psal. 76.5. stout hearted and every way able for strength, courage and riches; which oft take away the life of the owners, and expe them to spoile; as every man desireth to lop the tice that hath thick and large boughs and branches.
howle O ye oakes of Bashan] Ogs countrey, who only remained of the remnant of Gyants Deut. 3.11. The Iews fable that he escaped in the flood, by-riding astride on the Ark. By the oaks of his countrey understand, the strong and eminent. The Chaldee rendreth it Satrapae provinciarum, ye provinciall Gover∣nours. for the forrest of the vintage] Or the defenced forrest, viz. of Lebanon i. e. Ierusalem that seemed impregnable, but at length came down ruit alto à culmine, as a cedar that is felled by a Mighty One Esay 10.34. Death hewed its way tho∣rough a wood or forrest of men in a minute of time from the mouth of a murde∣ring peece, or some such warlike engine. When the sword is once sharpened, it makes a sore slaughter: it contemneth the rod Ezek. 21.10. q. d. what does this silly rod do here? these lesser and lighter judgements? let me come, Ile make work amongst them: down with these oakes, down with this defenced forrest &c. Verse 3. There is a voice of the howling of the shepheards] Potentes potenter tor∣quebuntur. The loftinesse of man shall be bowed down: and the haughtinesse of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.Esay 2.17. The she∣pheards were grown foolish ver. 15. Idol-shepheards 17. they cared for no other instruments but forcipes & mulctram the sheares and the milk-paile: they were become greedy dogs,Esay 56.11. which could never have enough (they were sick of the bulimy or appetitus caninus) yea they were as so many yong lions ramping and ravening, as it is here, and Ezek. 19.2, 3.Psal. 78.72. Both Princes and Priests were tur∣ned tyrants: and instead of feeding the people in the integrity of their hearts, and guiding them with the skilfulnesse of their hands, prey'd upon them and pluckt the skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones Mio. 3.2. for the pride of Iordan is spoiled] the swelling of Iordan dryed up by the Ro∣mans, as Hierome interprets it: Or the proud and stately palaces and possessions that the great Ones had gotten upon the banks of Iordan for fruitfulnesse and plea∣sance, as à Lapide; Or the numerous and proud nation of the Iews likned to the yearly overflowing of Iordan, whereof see Iosh. 3.15. Ier. 49.19. as Diodate. Verse 4. Thus saith the Lord my God, Feed the flock of slaughter] so lately pul∣led out of the jawes of those lions ver. 3. with Am. 3.12. and yet destined to destruction by the Romans, those Raptores Orbis (their former preservation be∣ing but a reservation to future mischief) for their desperate obstinacy and incorri∣giblenesse. feed them] saith God to the Prophets: for their ordinary shepheards have cast off all care of their good. Tell them what evill will betide them, unlesse they repent: forewarn them to flee from the wrath to come:Mat. 3. Luke 21.36. to take course that they may escape all these things that shall come to passe. O the goodnesse of God to a nation so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked! Besides himself, the Shepheard of Israel that led Ioseph like a flock Psal. 80.1. and neglected no good office of seeking and feeding them, of handling and healing them, of washing them and watching over them &c. how carefull was he ever to raise them up seven she∣pheards and eight principal men,Mic. 5.5. till at length he sent the man Christ Iesus who is the chief of ten thousand, the chief Shepheard as St. Peter calls him 1 Epist. 5.4. that One and only Shepheard, as Solomon Eccles. 12.11. that gteat Shepheard of the sheep, as Paul Heb. 13.20. who came to look up the lost sheep of the house of Israel, whom (to move compassion and affection) here calleth the sheep of slaughter, untill the time prefixed for their totall dispersion, by reason of their ingratitude. Verse 5. Whose Possessours stay them] flaying their skin from off them, eating their flesh, breaking their bones &c. Mic. 3.3. feeding themselves, and not the flock of God Ezek. 34.2, as if they had been Lords over Gods heri∣tage 1 Pet. 5.3. Owners and Possessours as here, vel precio vel praemio: and as the Pope and his Curia Romana quae non vult ovem sine lana, as the old Proverb was. and hold themselve not guilty] Non peccant. They fault not themselves: they are not found guilty by others. Such an illimited power over Gods people they
have usurped, as if they might use them at their pleasure, and never be once questi∣oned, or punished for the same; but scape scotfree. This was the extremity of tyranny; such as the cruell Spaniards exercise over the poor Indians: they sup∣pose they shew the wretches great favour, when they do not, for their pleasures, whip them with cords; and day by day drop their naked bodies with burning ba∣con; which is one of the least cruelties they inflict upon them.World encom∣passed by S. F. Drake 53. and they that sell them] Sell them for slaves (whom they ought to redeem ra∣ther with their own blood) and grow rich by them: being greedy of filthy lucre, not without foule blasphemy against God, whom they entitle to their riches sacri∣legiously and most theevishly gotten; whilest they say, blessed be the Lord, for I am rich] Deo gratias, Blessed be God is a very good say∣ing, and was much in Austins mouth. But as the fountain of goodnesse will not be laden at with unwashen hands: so fair words from a foul mouth, are infinitely dis∣pleasing to him that inhabiteth the praises of Israel.Psal. 22.3. Hypocrites are not unfitly compared to Monkies, that have the gravest countenances of all creatures; but are uncessantly doing mischief: or to the Harpies, that are said to have Virgins faces, Vultures tallons. Mel in ore, verba lactis: Fel in corde, fraus in factis. Pharisees, under pretence of long prayers, devoured widdows houses Mat. 23.14. whiles their lips seemed to pray or praise God, they were but chewing and champing some sweet morsel snatcht from the flock, but sawced with the wrath of God Job 20.15. See how our Saviour sets them out in their colours Mat. 23.15, 16, 23. &c. Such fair professours, but foul sinners were their predecessours, Esay 66.5. who when they had done evil as they could, thought to salve all by saying, Let the Lord be glorified. And such also are their Successours, The Pope and his followers. Verba tua Dei planè sunt, facta verò diaboli (said one once to Pope Innocent the third preaching peace but sowing discord) you speak like a God, but do like a divel: wherefore you shall receive the greater damnation. When one of our persecuting Bishops read the sentence of excommunication against a certain Martyr: and be∣gan as the usual form was,Act. and Mon. In the name of God, Amen, the Martyr cryed out, you begin in a wrong name. And it grew to a common proverb, In nomine Dei incipit omne malum. All mischief begins on that maner. Gentilis that impious Anti-Trinita∣rian gave out, that he suffered for the glory of the most High God. Becket the Arch∣traitour pretended to submit to his Soveraign, but with this false reserve, Salv honore Dei. The Swenckfeldians entituled themselves the confessours of the glory of Christ. And Conradus Vorstius his late monster hath De Deo in the front: and A∣theisme and blasphemy in the text. and their own shepheards pitty them not] Which yet they ought to have done, had they had never so much right and reason to destroy them. A shepheard hath his name from friendly feeding: in Greek from earnest desire and love to the sheep. David when he was hunted from Samuel the Prophet, he fleeth to Abimelech the Priest: as one that knew Justice and Compassion should dwell in those breasts, that are consecrated to God and his people. But these shepheards through want of Gods holy fear Iob. 6.14. had brawny breasts, horny heart-strings, their hearts first turned into earth and mud, did afterwards freeze into steel and adamant: cursed children they were,2 Pet. 2.24. having their hearts exercised with covetousnesse and cruelty. Verse 6. For I will no more pitty the inhabitants of the land] Or surely I will no more &c. A feareful sentence, written in blood, and breathing out nothing but utter destruction, David knew what he did, when he chose rather to fall into the hand of the Lord, then of men. For his mercies are many, and it soon repents him concerning his servants:Prov. 12 10. but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Those shepheards in the former verse were grievous wolves: what wonder therefore that they spared not the flock?Act. 20.29. But yet whiles God pittied them there was hope in Is∣rael concerning this thing, as He said Ezr. 10.2. whereas now that Gods soul is disjoynted from them, and his bowels shut up, desolation must needs be at ext door by Ier. 6.8.Jer. 17.17. Be not thou a terrour unto me, O Lord, said that Prophet, and then I care not, though all the world frown upon me, and set against me. But woe be to Lo-ruamah, the people of Gods wrath, and of his curse. I have noted before out of Ier. 16.13. that Gods I will shew you no favour, was worse then I will cast you out of this land.
I will deliver the men] Heb. I will make them to be found, pulling them out of their starting holes, and lurking places. Evil shall hunt the violent man to destroy him. Psal. 140.11. every one unto his neighbours hand] As into the hang-mans hand. this was ful∣filled, especially during the siege by the seditious within the walls of Jerusalem,Josephd bel. Jd. l. 6. cap. 2. and 4. one man proving a wolf, nay a devil to another. and into the hand of his king! The Roman Emperour, who disclaimed indeed the name of a king to avoid the hatred of the people, and yet exercised the full power of kings both at home and abroad. These lews first subdued by the Romans and reduced into a province, did afterwards rebel (though they had once in oppositi∣on to Christ cryed out, we have no king but Caesar) and were therefore, after five moneths siege utterly ruined: For what with extremity of famine and what with the fury of the sword, there perished in Jerusalem, and in the province ad∣joyning,Joseph, vi supra as Eusbuis affirms about 600000. able men to bear armes. Or as Jo∣sephus holds, who was an eye-witnesse, and prelent in the war, there died 1100000. besides others taken captive, to the number of 97000. and I will smite the Land] So that it hath lain, as it were bed-ridden ever since. Verse 7. And will I seed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poor of the flock.] Or, as Mntanus readeth it, for you, for your sakes, O poor of the flock, i.e. O ye that are poor in spirit, pure in heart, my little little flock, as our Saviours expression is in Luke. Even for your sakes will I yet for a time spare the reprobate goates, feeding them by my Prophets, and provoking them to repentance. The word and Sa∣craments, and all Gods common temporal favours are, in respect of external participation, communicated to Reprobates by way of Concomitancy onely: be∣cause they are intermixed with the Elect. Thus tares mingled among wheat, par∣take of the fat of the land, and moysture of the manure, which was not intended for them. and I took unto me two staves] viz. That I might therewith do the office of a shepheard: and yet in more then an ordinary manner. For shepheards com∣monly carry but one staffe, or crook: or, at most, but a staffe on their shoulders, and a rod in their hands, as David shews in his Pastoral Psal. 23.3. But here are two staves taken: to shew, saith Mr. Calvin, that God would surpasse all the care and pains of men, in governing that people. the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands] What these two should mean, much adoe is made among Interpreters. Some are for the two Governants: O∣thers for the two Testaments: Others for the order of Christs preaching, sweet and mild at first, terrible and full of threatnings at last, as appeareth in Ma. 24.24, 25. But what a wilde conceit was that of Anth Arch-Bishop of Florence, who understood the words of Dominick and his Order; construing them thus: I, that is God took unto me two staves vir. Beauty, that is, the Order of Preachers,Hist. Proph. 3 tit. 23. and Bonds, that is, the Order of Minorites, who are girt with a cord? The sounder sort of lixpositours make it to be a figure, of the two wayes which Christ useth at all times in feeding of his Church; the one by love, guiding them by his word and Spirit: the other by severity, punishing them by the cruel hand of their enemies. See Esay 10.5. Thus Vaai lus, Dodue &c. And that this is the true sense, saith A Lapide, it appeareth: First, because this oracle of the Prophet is of the time to come, and not of the time past. Secondly the event, (that best in∣terpreter of prophecies) maketh for it. For first Gods government of the com∣mon-wealth of Israel was beautiful, and gentle in the time of the Maccabees, and of Christ: and then terrible and destructory, in the time of the Romans, of Ne∣ro, Vespasian, Adrian &c. Thirdly because that a little after the Prophet saith, that he brake both the staves, that is, he utterly rejected the Jews, and brought his wrath upon them to the utmost, which cannot be meant of any other time then that of Christ, and of Titus. Especially since (in the fourth place) the Pro∣phet declareth Verse 13. that the stff of Beauty was broken at the death of Christ, for their unworthy selling and slaughtering of him, as if he had been some slave or base person, and I fed the slock] q. d. I did my part by them. Thy destruction therefore is
of thy self, O Israel. England is a mighty Animal (saith a Politician) which can never die, except it kill it self. The same might be much more said of the Jesish Common-wealth, which Iosephus truely and trimly calleth a Theocratia, or a God-government for the form and first constitution of it: and Moses in this respect, magnifieth that nation above all other Deut. 4.6, 7. Verse 8. Three shepheards also I cut off in one moneth] That is, in a short time, I took away and displaced even by the heathen Princes, many proud princes, and Priests: such as were Menelaus, Jason the Aristobuli, Hireani, Annas, Caiaphas, and others: Or, I removed those three sorts of shepheards of the old Law, viz. Princes Prophets and Priests. Thus Theodoret and Vatablus. Diodate understands the text of the three chief Empires that had tyrannized over the people, ver. 6, 3, and 12,10. Namely the Caldean, Persian, and Grecian Empire, which were destroyed by the Son of God, Dan. 2.45. But they do best in mine opinion, that by these three shepheards understand those three sects among the Jews at Christs coming in the flesh; viz. Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes: whereof, though the Pharisees were the best, and most exact for the outward observation of the Law, yet are they in the Gospel for their putid hypocrisy, first sharply taxed by our Saviour (after the Baptist) and then plainly rejected, and even sent to hell by a chain-shot of eight links of woes Mat. 23. and my soul loathed them] Or, was taken off from them, or was straitned for them; be∣cause I saw that they received my grace in vain, and considered not of my care for their good. Theodotion and Srmmackus render it Anima mea exanimata est, I am dispirited as it were, and even disheartened to do any more for them. and their soul also abhorred me] And so they became God-haters as Rom. 1.30. and therefore hateful to God Tit. 3.3. hateful as hell (so the word imports) yea more,. and worse, for hell is but an effect of Gods justice: but wickednesse is a breach of his Law. The Prophet here seemeth to allude to those murmurers in the wildernesse, that disdainfully cryed out, Our soul loatheth this light bread Num. 21.5. Let Gods servants take heed how they hang loose toward him: and lest, by disuse and discontinuance of a duty, there grow upon them an alienation of affection, a secret disrelishing and nauseating at that which we oughtmost deeply to affect, and duely to perform. Surely as loathing of meat and difficulty of breath∣ing are two symptomes of a sick body: so are carelesnesse of hearing, and irksomness of praying two sure signes of a sick soul. Verse 9. Then said I, I will not feed you] Now the wrath of the Lord arose a∣gainst his people, so that there was no remedy, as 2 Chron. 36.16. Now his de∣cree brought forth Zeph. 2.2. Now he growes implacable, inexorable, peremp∣tory. Wherein neverthelesse the Lord might very well break forth into that speech of the Heathen Emperour, when he was to passe sentence upon a malefa∣ctour, Non nisi coactus, I would not do this, if I could do otherwise. Christ could not tell Ierusalem without tears, that her day of grace was expired, that her de∣struction was determined. As a woman brings not forth without pain: as a hee stings not, till provoked: so neither doth God proceed against a sinfull people or person, till there be an absolute necessity; lest his truth and justice should be questioned and slighted. See Ezek. 12.22, 23, 24, 25. Fury is not in God, till our sins put thunderbolts into his hands: and then, who knoweth the power of his anger?Psal. 90.11. Es. 33.14. who can abide with everlasting burnings? If he but cast a man off as here, and relinquish the care of him, he is utterly undone. Saul found it so, and com∣plaines dolefully (but without pitty) that God had forsaken him,1 Sam. 28.15. and the Phi∣listines were upon him: all miseries and mischief came rushing into him, as by a sluce. Let us so carry matters, that God may not abandon us: that he may not refuse to feed us, and take the charge of us as a shepheard. He yet offereth us this mer∣cy, as Alexande did those he warred against, while the lamp burned. that that dieth, let it die] viz. of the murraine, or pestilence, For man being in honour, if God but blow upon him, abideth not, but is like the beasts that perish, pecoribus morticinis, saith Tremellius the beasts that die of the murrain. Vatablus thinks pestilence, sword and famine, are here threatened under the names of death, of cutting off, and of devouring one another. All which befell the refractary Jews in the last siege: the history whereof will make any mans heart
bleed within him, that hath but the least spark of grace, or good nature. It went hard with them, when the rest, that the pestilence and sword had left, fell to eating the flesh one of another; when the mother killed and boyled the dead body of her harmlesse suckling, and eating the one half, reserved the other for ano∣ther time. Behold O Lord, and consider to whom thou hast done this? saith the Prophet: Shall the women eat their fruit and children of a span long?Lam. 2.20 Oh the misery, or rather mock of mans life! And oh, the venemous nature of sinne, that moves God (who is not , a man-hater, but delights in mercy) to deal so severely with his poor creature. Verse 10. And I took my staffe even Beauty, and cut it asunder] In token that he had cast off his office of shepherd, he breaks his staffe the ensigne and instru∣ment of his office: and this in token that he had broke his covenant which hee had made with all the people  i. e. with all the tribes of Israel, which were as so many severall peoples, over whom God had reigned (but now rejected) and in whom He delighted more then in all the nations of the world besides. The Saints are called All things, Colos. 1.20. because they are of more worth then a world of wicked men, Heb. 11.38. And the Jews have a saying, that those seventy souls that went with Iacob into Egypt, were as much as all the seventy Nations in the world. What great account God once made of them above others, see Esay 43.3, 4. Deut. 33.29. But now behold they are discarded, and discovenanted: I have broken my covenant, and (ver. 11.) it was broken in that day] that is, in the day that they put them∣selves out of my precincts, I put them out of my protection. That peace that I had granted to my people, that they should bee no more molested by any strange Nation (which was verified from the time of the Maccabees till a little be∣fore the coming of Christ) shall now be forfeited. The glory is departed, the Beauty broken in pieces, the golden head of the picture, Religion defaced, and good order banished: all things out of order both in Church and State, for so they were when Christ came to his own, and his own received him not: he found them in Dothan, that is, in Defection, as Ioseph found his brethren) therefore he now dis∣owns and disavowes them as much as once he did when they had made a golden calf. Thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves, saith God to Moses; upon whom he now fathereth them,Exod. 32 7 as if he had never been in covenant with them. Danaeus upon this Text concludeth, that the Jews are now strangers from the covenant of God: and that this is hereby confir∣med, for that they are without Baptisme, the seal of the covenant. Verse 11. And it was broken in that day] When they filled up the measure of their fathers sinnes, and added this to all their other evils, that they crucified the Lord of glory: the Mediatour of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.24. Now they were, by an irrevocable decree, to bear their iniquities, and to know Gods breach of promise, as once was threatened to their faithlesse fathers, Num. 14.24. and so the poor of the slock] i. e. the lowly and meek,Mat. 11.19 the Apostles and other of wisdomes children, these all justified her, and glorified God when they saw his severity against their refractary countreymen,Euseb. Hist, lib. 3. cap. 5. and themselves sweetly secured and provided for at Pella. See the Note on verse 7. that waited upon me] Heb. that observed me, by obeying my precepts. Pagnine tendreth it, Qui custodiunt me, sc. as their most precious treasure, wherein they hold themselves very happy, and wealthy, though otherwise poor and indi∣gent. Knew that it was the word of the Lord] Were sensible of Gods heavy displea∣sure upon the land; which others passed by as a common occurrence, or a chance of war. The Elect made benefit of that generall visitation: and acknowledged that the warres moved by the Romans were the effects of Gods providence, accor∣ding to the ancient prophecies. This the rich and noble (whose hearts were fat as grease, Psal. 119.70. Qui animas etiam incarnaverunt, who were desperately bard and bruitish) took no notice of. Verse 12. If ye think good, give me my price] Pay me for my pains, lay mee down my shepherds wages. Is not the labourer worthy of his hire? Shall I be for∣ced to say of you as my servant David of Nabal, that unthankfull churl; Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow had in the wilderness,1 Sam. 25.21. so that nothing was missed
of all that pertained unto him, and he hath requited me evil for good. If God will be Davids shepherd, David will dwell in Gods house to all perpetuity, Psal. 23.1, 6. If the Lord deal bountifully with him, he will sit down and bethink himself what to render unto the Lord for all his benefits, Psal. 116.7, 12. A Christian counts all that he can do for God, by way of retribution, but a little of that much he could beteem him: and thinks nothing more unbeseeming himself, then to receive the grace of God in vain. His two mites of thankfulnesse and obedience, he daily presents: and then cries out as the poor Grecian did to the Emperour, If I had a better present, thou shouldst be sure of it.. But Ingratitude is a grave, which re∣ceives all the bodies (the benefits) that are put into it; but will render none up a∣gain, without a miracle. Hence that passionate expostulation, Deut. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye foolish people and unwise? Sic etiam stomachosè lo∣quitur Deus hoc loco, saith Calvin upon this text: i.e. So likewise doth the Lord here in high displeasure and with great animosity, or stomach bespeak his people, Give me my wages howsoever: or, if not, forbear till I fetch it, till I recover it: you shall be sure to pay then, not the debt onely, but the charges likewise: I will be paid both for my pains and patience too. In the mean space I need you not, nor care for your wages; for I am no hireling, &c. So they weighed for my price, thirty pieces of silver] that is, thirty shekels, or shillings. The price of a slain servants life, Exod. 31.22. This they weighed, as the manner of paying money then was, Gen. 23.16. Jer. 32.9. But they heaved their hands very high, it seems, when they valued the Lord Christ at so vile a rate. See Mat. 26.15. with the Note. Verse 13. Cast it unto the potter] q. d. Do they deal with me as with some sor∣did swineherd? Do they award me lesse then Carters wages? throw't away, let the potter take it: and let us see how many tiles he can afford us for it, to repair the roof of the Temple. Their undervaluing and vilipending of me in this sort, is not onely injurious, but contumelious: it is to turn my glory into shame; to spet in my face: or to use me as homely as Rachel did her fathers gods, which she laid among the litter, and sat upon. A goodly price that I was valued at of them] So he calleth it by an Irony, or a holy jear. Poor Joseph was sold for lesse; for twenty pieces of silver, Gen. 37.28. They sold the just one for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoots, Amos 2.6. The Hebrews tell us,Pirk R. Eliez. cap 38. that of those twenty shekels, every of the ten brethren had two to buy shooes for his feet. The Jews that bought Christ for thirty pieces of sil∣ver (this goodly price) of the traytour that sold him, were themselves afterwards (by a just hand of God upon them) bought and sold thirty of them for a peny by the Romans,Hegesipp. de excid. Hierosol. p. 680. ad illudendum, saith mine Authour, for a scorn to their Nation. God loves to retaliate; and to set the scales even; mens cruelty in the one, and their reward in the other. If we be at any time under-rated by the world, (as we are sure to be; for the world knows us not, 1 Joh. 3.2.) what so great matter is it, sith Christ himself was no more set by? We must be content to passe to heaven (as he did) as concealed men. It must suffice us, that our precious faith shall bee found to praise, honour, and glory at that great fair-day: when all fardles shall be opened, and our best wares exposed to publike view. and cast them to the potter] I gave them for the potters field,1 Pet. 1.7 as the Lord ap∣pointed me, saith the Evangelist, expounding the Prophet, and applying the words to Christ,Mat. 27.10 who is hereby also proved to be God. So true is that observation of Divines, that the old Testament is both explained and fulfilled in the New, by an happy harmony. in the house of the Lord] That thereby he might the more sharply prick the Priests: whose care it ought to have been, that God should be better prized by the people, and his service better observed. Verse 14. Then I cut asunder mine other staffe, even Bands] Or, Binders: the the bond of unity, say some: by sending a spirit of perversities among them, such as that was which made way for the ruine of Egypt, Esay 19.14, 16, 17. But see for the sence hereof what is noted on verse 7. of this chapter. God seems to say, that he will now no more govern this people in mildnesse and clemency: nor yet exercise his shepherdly severity in saving corrections and visitations, as formerly
hee had done that  house of  Rehoboam besides  twelve thousand at  And in Jerusalem  and of the children  brotherly conjunction, and  it, or a nationall covenant. This God  to  so that Ephraim shall be against Manasseh,  and both against Judah, Not many, yeers hefore  two brethren Hircanul and Aristobulus fell out about the  priesthood; and called in Pompey, who subdued the  a province. And not many yeers after Christs  utterly broke the brotherhood between  them, that like those priests in Ezra, they have  not one another by their tribe, or family, nor  of them that were in Spain, and are now  they hold to be of the tribe of Judah: and the other  of the tribe of Benjamin: who in honour of the more  with them the better, do learn the Spanish tongue, which Verse 15. Take unto thee yet the instruments  present in a type, or figure the wicked and depraved  punishment of their frowardnesse, and  people The instrunts of a foolish shepherd, that  seeking Magistrate, are not virg a & , a  mulctra, sheers to clip them, and a milk-pail to,  they look after. Now it is threaten  hate you shall reigne over you  bed in the next verses England was  burdens and impositions. An Emperor  the King of France was king of Asses  his Exactours received from his subjects  saith our Chronicler  ∣fections; the joynts  A  the third, became a precedent to the next  greatest, popular insurrection that ever was seen  of our Historians. and what sad effect  duct-money, and other opprelin  known to all. But, what  lancthon; that when he want  of his, and reqire of him what he  would knock out first one of his teeth  like by all the rest, in case the money ere not brought in by  not this one of those foolish, or rather  in the next  eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their  that shall  drink thy milk, as another Prophet phraseth  lit quam  Christe:  plaineth. And no lesse  Another, Some follow the  as a trade onely: with an unquenchable, and unconscionable  justifieth the common  of ill Governours  the sheep  defence in weather, he is sure to loe  seek to Courts of Justice to he  his mind: who  to hell, and the other to the  to  the other. Verse 16. For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land] Evil she
is Rulers in State, and , see Jer. 6.3. Nabum 3.1. Eisay 44.28  are set by. God for a punishment of a sinfull people. See the Note on Verse 1, The evil shepherd the pherd here meant; was Antiocha Ephiphanes, saith Theodoret: Herod the Infanticide, saith  Titus and the Romans, saith  Castro: All the per∣verse Priests and Princes that  over the Jews, after the time of this Prophecy, saith A Lapides as Jason, Mentlaus, 2 Machab. 4.  Herod, Pilate, Annas and Caiaphas, the Scribes, and sees: But especially Antichrist, (according to Joh. 5.43.) whose fore-runners all the former were. Of one Pope, it is said by those of his own side, that he entred upon the government of the Church as a Fox, reigned as a Wolf, died as a Dog: and its true enough of all the rest, and to them the following words do most fitly agree. who shall not visit those that be cut off] Or, look for the thing that is lost. Illos  erraverunt, non quaeret, saith the Chaldee: the word signifieth, such as are hid in thickets, hang'd among thorns and briers, and there like to perish without help. neither shall seek the young one] the tender lambs of Christ, which Peter was double-charged to feed. Stolidam non requiret, saith the Tigurine Translation. Lambs are silly things, very apt to straggle; and least able of any creature to find their way home again. nor heal that that is broken] David, by leaping over the pale (as it were) of Gods precepts, brake his bones, Psal. 51.8. and felt the fall the longest day of his life: So may any of Christs flock. The good shepherd therefore in pera gestat unguentum, hath his medicines ready in scrip, to apply as need requireth. Not so the Idol shepherd, who will rather break the sound, then bind up the broken. nor feed that, that standeth still] Or, that is well underlaid, and is full of vi∣gour: Vatablus rendreth it, Eam quae restitat, non portabit. He will not carry that which can go no further. Hitherto the negligence of these evil-shepherds. Followeth next their cruelty, and that is more then bestiall. For the ravening beasts lightly leave some foot or bone undevoured, Am. 3.12. But these do not onely eat the flesh of the flock, and suck the fat, but barbarously tear the claws also in pieces, exercise utmost immanity; as it is here graphically and gallantly de∣scribed. Verse 17. Wo to the idol shepherd] The Vulgar hath, O pastor & idolum, O thou shepherd and idol: thou that hast the shew onely, and semblance of a shepherd; the name, but not the thing, thou that art the ape of a shepherd, non verus sed va∣nus, non vivus sed pictus & fictus pastor, that art cleped a shepherd, as an idol is a god: but shouldst be called rather a dumb-dog, a greedy-dog; a shepherd that cannot understand, Esay 56.10, 11. a foolish shepherd, as verse 15. an , Per agnominatio∣nem alludit ad  ver. 15 one that hath nothing in him of any true worth; but art vain and vile, and of no value, as this word is rendred, Job 13.4. and 11.17. Vae, vae, vae, tibi. Christ (the great shepherd of the sheep) will surely pull off they visour, wash off thy varnifh with rivers of brimstone, brand thee for an hireling, that leaveth the flock] to shift, as it can, among theeves and wolves, Joh. 10.13. See the Note there. The sword shall be upon his arm, adn upon his right eye] i. e. The curse of God shall light upon his power,Many Pastors say as He, Pan cures oves oviumque ma∣gistres. Virg. and policy, both which shall be blasted. his arm shall be clean dried up] as a keck, or stick. and his right eye shall be utterly darkned] Or, shrivelled up, wrinkled and dusk: as in old bisons. The idle and evil servant had his talent taken from him, and worthily. The barren fig-tree was cut down from cumbring. God will recover his gifts from those that misuse,Mar. 25.28 Luke 13 Mos. 2.9 or but disuse them, Away they go, as strength went from Sampson, wisdome from Solomon: they cry unto God under our abuse, who thereupon gives them the wings of an Eagle, and layes aside their owner, as so many broken vessels; causing them to be even forg otter as dead meout of mind. Esal. 31.21. This is now especially fulfilled among the Jews, who  son have been without God, without a teaching priest, and without  15.3.
CHAP. XII. Verse 1. THE burden of the word of the Lord] That is, a declaration of his mind and counsell for Israels comfort, and his enemies confusion. To the Israel of God it is onus sine onere, such a burden as the wings are to the bird, a burdenlesse burden. To the enemies, a burdensome stone, verse 3. heavier then the sand of the sea, Iob 6.3. For Israel] Not, against Israel, though Calvin so taketh it: and by Israel understandeth the ten tribes, and those other captives that, loth to leave those houses they had built, and those gardens they had planted in Babylon, Ier. 29.5. neglected to return to Jerusalem for fear of the Samaritans and other ill neighbours, whole ruine is therefore here foretold by three excellent similitudes, after a stately preamble, drawn 1. From the power of God, whereby he stretcheth forth the heavens, that huge expanse, as a curtain, or as a molten looking-glasse.Job 37.18 Job 26.7 2. From the wisdome of God, in laying the foundation of the earth, and hanging it, by Geometry, as we say, in the midst of heaven, like Archimedes his pigeon, equally poized with its own weight. Terra pilae similis, nullo fulcimine nixa,Ovid. Fast. l. 5 Aere subjecto tam grave pendet onus. 3. From the goodnesse of God, who formeth the spirit of man within him] who hath made us these souls, Esay 57.16. which he doth daily create and infuse into mens bodies; yea and that alone, without any help of their parents: hence hee is called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9. and the spirit of a dying man is said to return to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. This last text con∣vinced Augustine (who held sometime, with Origen, that the soul as well as the body was begotten by the parents) farre more then the peremptory rash∣nesse of Vincentius Victor: who censured boldly the Fathers unresolvednesse,Chemnitius.(when hee doubted concerning the originall of a rationall soul) and vaunted that he would prove by demonstration, that souls are created de novo, by God. Aristotle (Natures chief Secretary) was much puzled about this point of the soul: which indeed cannot fully bee conceived of, nor defined by man. Onely this we can say, that the soul as it comes from God, so it is like him; viz. One immateriall, immortall, understanding Spirit: distinguisht into three Powers, which all make up one Spirit. Verse 2. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling] Or, slumber, or poyson. A Metaphor taken from a cup of generous wine, but empoysoned; so that those that drink of it, do presently tremble, grow giddy, sleepy, sick as heart can hold. Poyson in wine works more furiously. Thou hast made us to drink the wine of giddinesse, saith the Church, Psal. 60.3. In the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red, it is full mixed, &c. The Prophet here seems to allude to Jer. 25.15. Esay 29.8. Jer. 31.7. Ovid saith of the river Gallus, that whoso, drinketh of it runneth mad immediatly. Hierom telleth of a Lake neer Naples, whereinto if a dog be thrown he presently dieth. The like is reported by Josephus of the Lake Asphaltites. Jerusalem shall be a murthering morsell to those that swallow it. His meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of aspes within him. Hee hath swallowed down her spoil, and he shall vomit it up again:Job 20.14, 15 God shall rake it out of his belly: He shall have as little joy of his tid-bits, of his sweet draughts, as Jonathan had of his honey: whereof he had no sooner tasted, but his head was forfeited. Pliny speaketh of a kind of honey that poysoneth: because it is sucked out of poysonous flowers. Our Chronicler telleth us,Speed. 1210. that at Alvelana three miles from Lisbon, many of our English souldiers under the Earl of Essex perished, by eating of honey, purposely left in the houses, and spiced with poyson. The ene∣mies
of the Church make a dangerous adventure, they are even ambitious of destru∣ction: they run to meet their bane, as did those Philistines at Mizpeh, 1 Sam. 7. And had they but so much wit as Pilats wife in a dream, they would take heed of having any thing to do with those just men, of eating up Gods people as they eat bread, Psal. 14.4. of bowsing in the bowles of the Sanctuary with Baltasar, who fell thereupon into a trembling,Dan. 5.6 so that his loyns were loosed, and his knees knockt one against another. when they shall be in the siege] And so about to do their last and worst against the Church. The people of Rome was saepe praelio victus, nunquam bello, saith Florus: they lost many battles, but were never overcome in a set warre: at the last, at the long-runne, as they say, they crushed all their enemies: so doth the Church. See Psal. 129. thorowout: and the story of the Maccabees. Verse 3. I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone] Such a stone as that where∣with the woman brake Abimelech his brainpan, at the tower of Thebez, Judg. 9.53. He had slain all his brethren upon one stone, verse 5. he receives therefore his deaths-wound by a stone: and that by the hand of a woman, which was his greatest grief. The like death befell Pyrrhus, king of Epirotes, slain at the siege of Argos, with a tyle thrown by a woman from the wall. So was Earl Simon Mountfort, that bloody persecutour of the Albigenses in Irance. A woman discharged an engine at him,Cades Justif. of the Church. from the walls of Tholouse, and by a stone parted his head from his shoul∣ders. The virgin daughter of Zion shall do as much as all this comes to for her besiegers: though all the people of the earth be gathered together against her. For why? she hath a strong champion; that, in maintaining her quarrell, will dash them to pieces, and grind them to powder, Luke 20.18. They are no more able to stand before him, then a glasse-bottle before a cannon-shot. Hence her confidence, her laughing and shaking her head by way of derision at her stoutest enemies, Esay 37.22. She knows that all that burden themselves with her shall be cut in pieces. Hamans wife could tell so much. If Mordecai (said she) be of the seed of the Jews,Esih. 5.13 before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely fall before him. A Jew may-fall before a Fersian, and get up and pre∣vail. But if a Persian, or whosoever of the Gentiles begin to sall before a Jew, he can neither stay, nor rise. There is an invisible hand of omnipotency that strikes in for his own: and confounds their opposites. That little stone cut out without hands, (Christs humane nature is called a tabernacle not made with hands, not of this buil∣ding, Heb. 9.11. that is, not by an ordinary course of generation) smiteth the four mighty Monarchies, and crumbleth them to crattle, Dan. 2.34. Hierom upon this text (and after him other Interpreters, both Ancient and Modern) tell us that the Holy Ghost here alludeth to a certain exercise, or game, used much among the Jews, namely to take up a great round stone for the triall of a mans strength; lifting it up from the ground, sometimes to the knees, sometimes to their navels, sometimes to their breasts, and sometimes as high as their heads, or above their heads. At which sport many times they did grievously hurt themselves, or at least scarify and make cuts in their flesh. See Levit. 21.5. where the same word is used. The Churches enemies shall strive, and try who shall do her most hurt: but the stoutest of them all shall be fooled and foiled in the end. The irrepairable ruine of Rome is graphi∣cally described and even set forth to the eye (Rev. 18.21.) by a notable grada∣tion. An Angel, a mighty Angel taketh a stone, a great stone, which he not onely casteth, but thrusteth into the bottom of the sea, whence it cannot be boyed up. This Angel might well be Luther, (with his Book de captivitate Babylonica: confer Jer. 51.63.) whom God strangely preserved from the rage of Rome and Hell: like as he did from that deadly danger by the fall of a stone, whereof Mr. Fox writeth thus.Acts & Mon. Upon a time, saith He, when Luther was sitting in a certain place upon a stool studying; a great stone there was in the Vault over his head where he sate: which being staid miraculously so long as he was sitting, assoon as hee was up, immediately fell upon the place where he sat, able to have crusht him in pieces, if it had light upon him. But no malice of man or devil could antedate his end a minute, whilest his Master had work for him to do: as the two witnesses could not bee killed till their businesse was dis∣patched, Rev. 11.7.
Verse 4.Turk. Hist. I will smite every horse with astonishment] Great is the strength of the horse and the rage of his rider: Jehu marched furiously; Bajazet the great Turk, of his fierce and furious riding, was surnamed Gilderun or Lightening; But God can make the Egyptians to appear men, and not Gods, and their horses flesh, and not spirit: When the Lord shall but stretch out his hand. (and that's no hard matter of motion) both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they shall all faile together Esay 31.3. See Psal. 76.5, 6.Psal. 33.17. An horse is a vain thing for safety, though a warlike creature full of terrour; but safety or victory is of the Lord Pro. 21.31. In nothing be terrified, saith the Apostle Philip. 1.28. The Greek word is a metaphor from horses when they tremble and are sore af∣frighted: as it fell out in the Philistines army, when the Angels made a bustle among the mulbery-trees 2 Sam. 5.24. in the Syrians army, when the Angels likewise made an hurry-noise in the ayre, of charrets, of horses, and of a great host 2 King. 7.6. in the army of Sennacherib, when at Gods sole rebuke both the charret and horse were cast into a dead sleep Psal. 76.6. Lastly in the German wars against Zisca and the Hussites in Bohemia: where God smot every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madnesse;Parei Meduè, hist. Profan. pag. 785. such a panick terrour seized upon the enemies of the truth, though they came in with three potent armies at once, that they sled before ever they looked the enemy in the face. How this Prophesie was litterally fulfilled to the Maccabees, see 2 Mac. 10.30. and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah] who before seemed to wink, or to be asleep. Now will I awake, saith the Lord, Now will I arise,Isa. 33.10. now will I lift up my self, for the relief and rescue of my poor people: and that because they called them outcasts, saying, This is Zion whom no man looketh after Ier. 30.17. Verse 5. And the Governours of Judah] The Dukes of Chiefetaines: meaning the Maccabes, who ware not any kingly crown, but were only Governours, Rulers, Commanders in chief, such as went before others: like as in the Alphabet Aleph is the first letter: So, Omega nostrorum Mors est, Mars Alpha malorum. Saith the Poet wittily. shall say in their hearts] i. e. shall say heartily, from the root of the heart, and not from the roof of the mouth only. Profession of the truth and prayer (for so some make this verse to be) are not a labour of the lips, but a travel of the heart. The voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet, as that which comes from the depth of the brest. As in instrument-musick, the deeper and hollower the belly of the Lute or Violl is, the pleasanter is the sound; the sleeter, the more grating and hash in our eares. the inhabitants of Iorusalem shall be my strength] Though now there be few found in it: yet it shall be much repeopled and fortified: so that, under God, it shall be a fortresse to the whole countrey; and the Governour shall so take it to be, Or thus. there is strength to me and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem in the Lord of Hosts their God.] Every governour shall say so for his own particular. (And this seemes to me to be the better reading) The Maccabes did so as appeared by their posy (whereof before) their prayers, and their singular successe, as appeares by their history, and by Josephus. Deo confisi, nunquàm confusi, They that trust in God shall never be confounded. Our fathers trusted in thee, and they were delive∣red. O trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. Look not down on the rushing and roaring streames, lest ye grow giddy: but look up to the heavens from whence comes your help, and fasten by faith on Gods power and promises. Faith unseined breeds hope unfaileable, such as never mis∣carrieth. O trust in him at all times ye people &c. Psal. 62. for with God is wis∣dome and strength Iob. 12.13. Plutarch saith of the Scythians that they have nei∣ther wine nor musick: but they have Gods. Say that the Saints have nei∣ther power, nor pollicy as their enemies, yet they have all in God who is more then all. Verse 6. In that day will I make the governours &c.] This is the third simili∣tude,
whereof the scripture is full: according to that, I will open my mouth in parables &c. These are of excellent use to adorn and explain: and yet they are evermore inferiour to the matter in hand. They are borrowed from things well known, and easy to be conceived: as here from an harth of fire among wood; Now we can all tell how great a matter (or wood) a little fire kindleth Iam. 3.5. As when Nero, for his pleasures sake set Rome on fire, among other stately buildings that were quickly burnt down, the Circus or race-yard was one: being about half a mile in length, of an ovall form with rowes of seats one above another, capable of at least an hundred and fifty thousand spectatours, without uncivil shoulde∣rings. As the fire burneth a wood: and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire: So persecute them with thy tempest: and make them afraid with thy storme, saith the Church Psal. 83.14, 15. Thus they pray'd, and thus it is here promised: and was accordingly performed in those first warrs of the Maccabees: as appeareth in the first book of their story,Antiq. lib. 12. and in Josephus. Diodate and others understand this text of the Apostles and Evangelists, who should fill the world with wars and dissentions by preaching the Gospell Luke 12.49. whereby the enemies should be ruinated,Hieron. Remig. Albert. A Lapide. and the church reestablished Obad. 18. thorough the spirit of judgement and of burning Esay 4.4. To which purpose Chrysostome saith, that Peter was a man made of fire walking amongst stubble. Basil was compared to a pillar of fire. Iohn Baptist is by our saviour said to be a burning and a shining lamp. And Eliah (in whose spirit the Baptist came) was a man of that transcendent zeale, that to heighten the expression thereof, some have legended of him, that when he drew his mothers breasts, he was seen to suck in fire. and Ierusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place] sc. where she was built at first, and not in another neare place, as Tyrus was; and Rome is at this day quite off her old seven hills: so that a man may look for Rome in Rome. And Ierusalem that now is hath mount Calvary in the very middest of it (which was anciently without the city) and not one hundred families of Iews are therein to be found. That they shall one day cast out therehence Gog and Magog, inhabit it in the old place,Breerew. Enquir. and have excellent strength and valour ministred by God to them, all equally for their common defence, none lifting up themselves above another, but all alike ascribing the glory unto God, is concluded by some (and those not in∣considerable) Divines out of this and the following verses. Verse 7. The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first] Or as at first, sc. when they came out of Egypt, and had no strong holds to take to for their defence. Lord, (saith Moses,) thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations Psal. 90.1. He was so of old, and ever will be: the faith whereof made the fathers well con∣tent to dwell in tents Heb. 11.13. and those holy Rechabites Ier. 35.7, 8. till Nebuchadnezzar came up into the land ver. 11. But here God promiseth to de∣liver those Jews that dwelt in the open fields, without the city; and then after∣wards to deliver Ierusalem it self from the rage of the Antiochi; and so he did (1 Maccab.) in a wonderfull manner: they were helped indeed with a little help Dan. 11.34. to take away boasting; as it followeth. that the glory of the house of David &c.] that is, the glorious house of David, and the glorious inhabitants of Ierusalem, by an Hypallage. Non est gloriosior po∣pulus sub coelo, quam Judaicus.Alst. Chron. There is not a more vainglorious people under heaven then the Jews are saith Alsted. They were so of old Ioh. 8.33. Mat. 3.9. Spaniards are said to be impudent braggers: and extremely proud in the low∣est ebb of fortune; so are the Jews. But God will teach them better things, and make him that glorieth glory in the Lord 1 Cor. 1.31. Verse 8. In that day shall the Lord defend &c.] Prosequitur eandem sententiam saith Calvin.Prov. 21.24. He proceedes in the former argument, to assure the feeble Iews (as Sanballat that proud haughty scorner called them Neh. 4.2.) of safety and pro∣tection. God will blesse the righteous:Psal. 5. vlt. with favour will he compasse them as with a shield. Now there is no comming at the body but thorough the shield, if well handled; no comming at the Saints, but through Gods own sides, as I may say. He beareth his people as on Eagles wings Exod. 19.4. Deut. 32.11. Now the Eagle carries her yong upon her wings (and not between her talons as other birds do) so that they cannot be shot, but thorough the body of the old
one. Oh the dignity and safety of a Saint! Well might Moses sing, Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people! saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thine excellency: and thine enemies shall be found  unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places.Deut. 33 29. Let all that would be safe indeed, as in a tower of brasse, or town of warr, labour to be found written among the living in Ierusalem Isa. 4.3. to be of the Church of the first-born which are enrolled in heaven Heb. 12.23. like as in Ierusalem were records kept of the names of all the citizens Psal. 48.3. Get under Gods wing, and nothing can annoy thee. As if he be angry, where shall a man shelter? Brasse and iron can fence him against a bullet or a sword: but if he be to be cast into a furnace of fire, it would help to torment him: if into a pit of water, to sink him. Now our God is a consuming sire Heb. 12.29. and his breath a stream of brimstone Isa. 30.33. To run from him to other refuge, is but for a man to run his head into a barrel of gunpowder, for a shelter against the force of a fire kindled over him. and he that is feeble among them] So that he cannot stand but stagger (as the word importeth) as did Miles Cobelite a Christian souldier sore wounded, so that he reeled like a drunken man and fell down diverse times, for want of strength. This man drawing nigh to Amurath the third king of Turks, as he was viewing the dead bodies after a bloody fight, making as if he would have craved his life of him.Turk Hist: fol. 200. suddenly stabbed him in the bottome of his belly with a short dagger which he had under his souldiers coat; of which wound that great king and conquerour present∣ly died. shall be as David] who was a mighty man of valour (as Hushai told Absalom and bid him beware 2 Sam. 17.8.) and had such a band of worthies about him, as were not to be matched 2 Sam. 23.8. These had a house by themselves to dwell and exercise feats of armes: as Lyra gathereth out of Neh. 3.16. where mention is made of the house of the mighty. The Maccabes (slighted as abjects) did greater exploits and got greater victories then David had done: and the con∣dition of this poor people was to be shortly after (sc. under the preaching of Christs gospel) far better and happier then ever it had been under the rich and flourishing kingdome of David: for then they should be able to say, Gods grace is sufficient for me: his strength is made perfect in my weaknesse. I will glory in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me: for when I am weak, then I am strong. I can do all things, suffer all things thorough Christ that strengtheneth me. The weak shall say I am strong Ioel 3.10 And indeed how can they be otherwise, that have a mighty strong God Esay 9.6. a strong word, the Lords own arme, the power of God to salvation Rom. 1.16. Act. 20.32. a strong spirit 2 Tim. 1.7. strong consolations Heb. 6.18.Prov. 18.10. strong armour both offen∣sive and defensive Eph. 6.18.Isa. 40.31. and the name of the Lord as a strongtower where∣unto the righteous run and are safe, and where waiting upon the Lord they re∣new their strength, they mount up with wings as Eagles, or rather as Angels. for the house of David shall be as God as the Angell of the Lord before them] i. e. As Christ the Angell of Gods presence, and that went before the people in the wildernesse. Such were those of the blood-royall, and that succeeded David in the government: but especially such were the Apostles, Christs Mighties, who should be endued with so many graces in majesty, Authority, Strength, and truth, that men should receive them (Cornelius like) as so many Angels of God, yea even as Christ Jesus Gal. 4.14. Verse 9. I will seek to destroy] I will make inquisition and diligent scrutiny: I will draw them out of their lurking-places to execution: as Sal went to seek David upon the rocks of the wild-goats; those high, steep and craggy rocks,1 Sam. 24.2. which could not but be very tedious both to himself, and to his souldiers to march in: But he was set upon't, and would leave no place unsearched. See his charge to the Ziphites to take knowledge of all the lurking-holes where he hid himself, and to bring him word that he might seek him thorough all the thousands of Judah 1 Sam. 23.23. The Lord need not do so, to find out his enemies; for in him they live, move and subsist Col. 1.17. they are everunder his view, and within his reach. He sitteth upon the circle of the earth Is. 40.22. and can easily shake them out of it, as by a canvasse. Yea, he sits in the height of heaven, and wherein they deale
proudly, he is above them Exod. 18.11. disclosing their cabinet-counsels, as he did Benhadads; and blasting their designes. to destroy all nations God stands not upon multitudes; he takes not the tenth man, but destroyes all nations, be they never so many of them that come against Ierusalem, that oppose or affront his people, either with their virulent tongues or violent hands. When a rabble of rebels shall set themselves against the Lord, and against his Christ, his mysticall Christ the Church, he will utterly destroy them;Mercer. the word signifieth he will destroy them ut nihil reliquum maneat, that there shall be no remainder of them. Woe therefore to the Churches enemies; for their destruction ever goes with the saints salvation Philip. 1.28, 29. Esay 8 9. Prov. 11.8. Gods jealousie Zach. 1.14. and justice 2 Thess. 1.6. will effect it surely, severely, suddely. Verse 10. And I will pour upon the house of David] Pour as by whole paile∣fuls; God is no penny-father; no small gifts sall from so great a hand; he gives liberally Iam. 1.15. and is rich to all that call upon his name Rom. 10.12. abun∣dant in kindnesse Exod. 34.6. plenteous in mercy Psal. 103.8. the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ hath over-abounded,. hath overflowed all the banks 1 Tim. 1.14. indeed it hath neither bank nor bottom. Oh pray for that blisse-full sight Eph. 1.18. and 3.18, 19. that Spirit of wisdome and revelation. of grace and of supplications] Or deprecations of that utter destruction that shall befall other nations. God will save his people, but so as by prayer Psal. 32.6. 2 Chron. 7.14. Zach. 13.9. he will grace his own ordinance, draw many suitours, and derive many prayses to himself. See Ezek. 36.37. Psal. 50.15. and 116.2. Some render it a spirit of grace and of lamentations, sc. before the Lord, when they felt the nailes,. where with they had pierced Christ, pricking their own hearts Act. 2.37. punctually pricking and piercing them. and they shall look upon the whom they haue pierced] Dacaru, whom they have dggered or digged, as Psal. 22.16. him they shall look upon and lament, ,Rev. 1.7. Lam. 3. their eye shall affect their heart; for the eye is the instrument both of sight and of sorrow; and what the eye never sees the heart never rues. The Sun looketh upon the earth, draweth up vapours thence, and distilleth them down again: so doth the Sun of the understanding; which till it be convinced, the heart cannot be compuncted. Sight of sin must precede sorrow for sin. The The prodigall came to himself, ere he repented of his loose practises, men must bethink themselves, or bring back to their hearts (as the Hebrew hath it 1 King. 8.47.) ere they will say, We have sinned and dealt perversely, we have committed wickednesse. See Ier. 8.6. Psal. 38.18. An infant in the womb cryes not be∣cause he sees not; but as soon as it comes into the light, he sets up his note. Get therefore your eyes anointed with eye-salve, with this spirit of grace and suppli∣cations: so shall you soon see (saith Mr. Bradford martyr) your face foull arrayed, and so shamefull, saucy, mangy, pocky, and scabbed, that you cannot but be sorry at the contemplation thereof. It is the spirit that convinceth the world of sin; neither can the waters till his wind bloweth Psal. 147.18. A sigh is not breathed out for sin, till the spirit imbreach the same into us. and they shall mourn for him] Or, for it, viz. for their crucifying the Lord of glory in their forefathers, and having a great hand in it themselves; sith their and our sins were thorns and nails that pierced him, the lance that let out his heart∣blood &c. We bound him with cords; we beat him with rods; buffetted him with fists, reviled him with our mouths, nodded at him with our heads, &c. We were the chief actours and principal causes, that set awork Judas, Pilat &c. Oh stand a while with the devout women, and see him bleeding, groaning, dying, by the wounds that we gave him; and mourn affectionatly over him as here. they shall mourn] with such outward pomp and rites as are used at fune ralls; as wringing the hands, beating the breasts, shaking the head, and the like externall gestures and expressions of heavinesse. and shall be in bitternesse] by inwardnesse of extream grief; as when Davids heart was leavened with it Psal. 73.21. it was sowred with goodly sorrow, and sowced in the teares of true repentance. So Peter went forth and wept bitterly Mat. 26.15. waters of Marah flowed from Mary Magdalens eyes, which were
as a fountain for Christs feet: here sorrow was deep and down-right, pro∣ducing repentance never to be repented of. The sorrow we conceive for an un∣kindnesse offered to Christ must not be slight and sudden, but sad and soaking: like that of the Israelites met at Mizpeh, when they drew water before the Lord 1 Sam. 7.6. whereunto the Prophet Jeremy seemeth to allude, when he seri∣ously wisheth that his head were waters &c. Ier. 9.1. and David with his ri∣vers of teares Psa. 119.136. His heart was soft and soluble: now softnesse of heart discovers sin; as the blots run abroad, and seem biggest in wet paper: and as when the Cockatrice egge is crushed, it breakes forth into a viper Isa. 59.5. Now to make and keep the heart soft and tender, the consideration of Christs dolorous passion must needs be of singular use and efficacy: as the sight of Csars bloody robes brought forth, greatly affected the people of Rome, and edged them to revenge. The hardest heart soundly soaked in the blood of Christ (the true scape-goat) cannot but relent and repent for such a horrid villany. as one mourneth for his onely son—for his first born] sc. with a funerall-sorrow: such as was that of the Sunamite, and of the widdow of Naim, of Rachel, who re∣fused to be comforted &c. There is an Ocean of love in a fathers heart: as we see in Jacob toward Joseph, in David towards Absolam, in the father of the Prodigall &c. Christ was Gods only son in respect of his divine nature: he was also the first∣born amongst many brethren. And yet God so loved the world &c. So? how? So as I cannot tell how: for this is a Sic without a Sicut: Even so should our sorrow be, for having a wicked hand in his dolorous death. The Prophet here seemes to be at a stand as it were, whence to borrow comparisons to shaddow it out by. Great is the grief of children for their deceased parents, as of Joseph for Iacob Gen. 50.1. he fell upon his fathers face, as willing to have wept him alive again if possible. So our Edward the first returning from the warrs in Palestina, rested himself in Sicily: where the death of his son and heir comming first to his eare, and afterwards of the king his father, he much more sorrowed his fathers departure, then his sons: whereat King Charles of Sicily greatly marvelled,Speed. 646. and demanding the reason, had of him this answer: The losse of sons is but light, because they are multiplyed every day: but the death of parents is irremediable, because they can never be had againe. Thus He, Howbeit, love rather descen∣deth then ascendeth, and Abraham could better part with his father Terah, then with his son, his only son Isaac whom he loved Gen. 22.2. Before he had him, Lord God, said Abraham, what wilt thou give me so long as I gee childlesse.Gen. 15.2. His mouth was so out of tast with the sense of his want, that he could relish no com∣fort. But now to be bereft of him, and that in such a manner, as he might con∣ceive by that probatory precept Gen. 22.2. this must needs go to the very heart of him, for though he had put on grace, yet he had not put off nature. Both Iacob and Iacobs father (as Iunius understandeth that passage Gen. 37, 35.) wept savourly for Ioseph, and would go down into the grave unto their sen mourning. True it is, that the losse of some wife may be greater then the losse of some son, (Abraham came from his own tent to Sarah's tent to mourn for her Gen. 22.2. and she was the first that we read of in scripture mourned for) but the Pro∣phet here speaketh of the mourning of husband and wife together: and they can lose no greater outward blessing, then their first-born, if an onely-one especially. Verse 11. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem] Magnifica∣bitur luctus (so the Hebrew hath it) their mourning shall be greatened, their heavinesse heightened, they shall rise in their repentance above all that is ordina∣ry. The Casuifts and Schoolmen affirme sorrow for sin to be the greatest of all sorrowes. 1. In conatu: the whole soule seemes to send springs into it, out of eve∣ry faculty. 2. In extensione: It is a spring which in this life more or lesse is con∣tinually dropping; neither would God have the wounds of godly forrow to be so closed up at all, as not to bleed afresh upon every good occasion. 3. In appreci∣atione: the true penitentiary doth ever judge that a good God offended, a Saviour crucified, should be the prime cause of greatest grief. 4. In intensione: for inten∣sion of displicence in the will; there being no other things with which,Adrian. Scotus. Soto. or for which the will is more displeased with its self, then for sinning against God. There is more cause of grief, say they, for sinning, then for the death of Christ:
because therein was aliquid placens, but sin is simpliciter displicens. But is it not god∣ly mourning, may some say, unlesse it be so great? I answer, that other mourn∣ing may make more noise, like a dashing shoure of rain, or a land-flood that by a small shallow channel comes down from an hill. When a man mourns for his onely son, or the like, this comes from God as a judgement; it comes down hill as it were, hath nature to work with it, and nothing to hinder it: but this mourning and melting over Christ, is as a stream that goeth up hill, and through many reeds and flagges,M. Cotton. as a Reverend man expresseth it. as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon] Where good Josiah was slain, and where the people saw (to their unspeakable grief, and heart-break) family, Church and Common-wealth pluckt up by the roots, in the losse of that one man, who was the very breath of all their nostrils, as Jeremiah sadly acknowledg∣eth in his Lamentations, composed on that very occasion, and when he died, all their prosperity here died with him; and themselves were no better then living Ghosts, walking sepulchers of themselves: a being they had, but not a life: those that before seemed to touch heaven with their finger, fell down to the earth,—nunc humi de repente ser∣pere siderates esse diceres. as if they had been planet-struck, as Budaeus speaketh of the French courti∣ers at the death of Lewes the twelfth. When Augustus died, orbis ruinam timue∣ramus, saith Paterculus, we thought all had been lost, and that the world would have fallen about our ears. When our Edward the sixth (that second Josiah) was taken away, Cardan sung this sorrowful Epicedion; Flete nefas magnum, sed toto flebitis orbe Mortales; vestrûum corrit omnis honos, Verse 12, 13, 14, And the land shall mourn] Not the generality of the Jews (un∣lesse it be at their last general conversion, that resurrection from the dead, as it is called Rom. 11.15.) but the elect according to grace, who are here called the land, because more esteemed by God then all the other Jews besides: for he reckoneth of men by their righteousnesse, as he did of Lot at Sodom. every family apart] To shew the soundnesse of their sorrow, the sincerity by the secrecy: for Ille dolet verè qui sine teste dolet. He grieves with a witnesse, that grieves without a witnesse. There is a worldly sorrow that hardeneth the heart: and indisposeth it for repentance; as did that of Nabal. There is also an hellish sorrow, a desperate grief for sin, poenitentia Iscariotica, as was that of Judas. There is no birth without travel: but some children die in the birth: are killed with the pains of the labour.. 2 Cor. 7 Lastly, there is a sorrow according to God, whereby we weep kindly after God, inquiring the way to Zion, with our faces set thitherward, and renewing our covenant Jer. 50.4, 5. Against thee, thee onely, have I sinned, saith David Psal. 51.4. Lo, there lay this pinch of his grief, that he had offended so good a God. It was the Myrrhe and its scent, that Christ had dropped on the bars of the door, that waked the drousy Spouse, and made her bowels fret Cant. 5. This made her first weep in secret, and then seek out after him, whom her soul loved. She first went to enquire of the Lord, as Rebecca did Gen. 25.22. and then she hears from him those sweet words Cant. 2.14. Oh my dove! that art in the clefts of the rocks, that hast wrought thy self a burrough a receptacle of rest in the Rock of ages, in the secret places of the stars, whither thou art retired as for security so for secre∣cy, to mourn as a dove, and to pray for pardon. Shew me thy face, which now appeareth most orientally beautiful, because most instampt with sorrow for sin: Let me hear thy voice, which never sounds so melodiously, as when thy heart is broken most penitentially: for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance comly. and their wives apart] Sarah had her peculiar tent Ge. 24.65. wherein she dwelt Ge. 18.6. & died Ge. 23.2. Rebecca likewise had her retiring-room, whither she went to enquire of the Lord Ge. 25.22. Rachel & Leah had their several tents, apart from Iacobs Ge. 31.33. Miriam and her women do apart by themselves praise God for deliverance Exo. 15.20.Esth. 4.16. I and my maidens will fast likewise, saith Esther. In a time of solemn hu∣miliation, let the bride-groom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet, Ioel 2.16. See 1 Cor. 7.5. Amongst both Jews, Greeks, and Romans, the women were separated from the men, in publike acts and assemblies; in times of common
calamity especially, as may be gathered out of Plutarch, Athenaeus, Virgil, Livy.—ad templum non aequae Pal∣ladis ibant Iliades — Stratae passim Matres crinibus Templa verrentes, veniam irarum coelestium exposcant, saith He; The men by themselves, and the women by themselves, sought to ap∣pease the angry Gods. Here they are severed, to shew that they wept not for company, sed sponte & proprio affectu; as Calvin hath it, but of their own accord, and out of pure affection; they freely lamented not so much for Christs dolorous death, as for that themselves had a chief hand in it, and were the principal causes of it. The best kinde of humiliation is to love and weep, as that woman did Luk. 7. who made her eyes a fountain to wash Christs feet in, and had his side opened for a fountain to wash her soul in, as it is Chap. 13.1.A remnant ac∣cording to the election of grace. Rom. 11.5. all the families that remain] Out of every family of this people, God will have some converts. A thing so incredible, that to perswade it, the Prophet may here seem to some prophane person to use more words then need∣eth. CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. IN that day there shall be a fountain opened] Nunc fructum poenitentiae adiun∣git, sath Calvin here. This is the fruit of their repentance. No sooner mourn they over Christ, but they are received to mercy. I said, I will confesse my transgressions unto the Lord: and (or ever I can do it) thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin; that is, both the sting and stain of it, the guilt and the filth,Psal. 32.5. the crime and the curse. Repent and your sins shall be blotted out, saith Peter to those nefari∣ous Kill-Christs Act. 3.9. God will crosse the black lines of your sins, with the red lines of his sons blood, 1 Ioh. 1.6. A fountain shall be opened: not a cistern, but a spring: a pool better then that of Siloam which is by interpretation Sent Iohn 9.7. and so a type of Christ, who loved us, and washed us from our sins with his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God, and his father: to him be glory and domi∣nion for ever and ever, Amen. To seal up this matchlesse mercy to us,Rev. 1.5.6. he sent first by the hand of his forerunner, and baptized those that repented for the remission of sins, Mat. 3.2. Act. 2.38. And afterwards he set wide open this blessed foun∣tain, this laver of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost Tit. 3.5. Saying by his Ministers to every beleever, as once to Paul, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins calling on the name of the Lord. Act. 22.16. whereunto salvation is pro∣mised Rom. 10.13. Ioel 2.22. Baptisme also is said to save us 1 Pet. 3.21. sc. sacra∣mentally, for it sealeth up salvation to the beleever Mar. 16.16. and is of perpetu∣al and permanent use to him, for that purpose, his whole life thorowout, ut scatu∣rigo semper ebulliens, as a fountain bubbling up to eternal life. Here then the Sacrament of Baptisme is prophecied of and promised. And hence, haply the Bap∣tisme of Iohn is said to have been from heaven Mat. 21.25. All the Levitical purifi∣cations pointed to this Kings-Bath of Christs meritorious blood, this ever-flowing & overflowing fountain: for the grace of our Lord Jesus hath abounded to flowing over (as S. Pauls expression is) with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.. Neither can it ever be dried up, as was the river Cherith, the brooks of Tema &c. but is an inexhausted fountain, a fresh-running spring, for all that have but a minde to make toward it. Tam recens mihi nunc Christus est, ac si hac horâ fudisset sanguinem, saith Luther; Christ is still as fresh and soveraign to me, as if this very hour he had shed his blood. He was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; and shall be so to the end thereof. Cruci haeremus, sanguinem sugimus, & intra ipsa Redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus linguam, saith Cyprian of the Lords Supper; i. e. We cleave to the crosse at this holy ordinance: we suck Christ's blood, we thrust our tongues into the very wounds of our Redeemer, and are hereby purged from all pollutions of flesh and spirit. to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem] i. e. To all sorts and sexes of penitents, be they noble or ignoble, strong Christians or weak (see Zach. 12.8.) none shall be secluded from this fountain, thus opened or exposed to all, not sealed and shut up, as that Cant. 4.12. God is no respecter of persons, but in e∣very
nation he that feareth him,Act. 10.34, 35. and worketh righteousnesse is accepted of him. for sin and for uncleannesse] i. e For all sorts of sinnes, though they be such, as in their desert do separate us from communion with God, and company of men. (See Levit. 12. and 15.) render us worthy to be excommunicated, proscribed, and banished out of the world, as pists and botches of humane society by a common consent of nations: as the obstinate Iews are at this day for their inexpiable guilt in crucifying Christ. The vulgar here hath it, Ad ablutionem peccatoris & menstru∣, For washing clean the sinner, and the menstruous woman: alluding (as doth also the Chaldee) to the waters of expiation made of the ashes of a red cow Num. 19.11, 17. See the Note there: and importing the purging both of he sinners and she-sinners: Or, as some will have it, both of Actual and Original sin. Lo this is the vertue of Christs merit and spirit, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. far beyond that of Aba∣nah & Pharphar, of Jordan and Siloam, which yet are said not onely to wash and scour, but also to heal and cure. The Saracenes naturally stink like goats: but by washing themselves and their children in the pool of Siloam,Saligniacus. Adrichom. Plin. lib. 31. cap 11. Isidor. lib. 13. Orig c. 13. Heyl Geog. 285. they become sweeter. The Turks make use of it to sharpen their eye-sight. At Cyzicum there is a well called Cupids well, the water whereof is said to quench the fire of lust. This is better yet then those Bathes of Rome: concerning which Seneca no lesse wittily then truly complained, Postquam munda balnea inventa sunt, spur∣ciores sunt qui lavant: Or those wanton Bathes of upper-Badin in Helvetia, much fre∣quented, yet not so much for health, as filthy pleasure. They that are in Christ, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts Gal. 5.24. they are not onely washed from their wickednesse Jer. 4.14 but bereft of their swinish natures, nè tanquam sus ad volutabrum &c, 2 Pet. 2.22. Verse 2.gnotsabim ter∣riculorum scar-crows I will cut off the names of the idols] Heb. of the fray-bugges (as they are likewise called 1 Sam. 31.9. 1 Chro. 10.9. Psal. 115.4. in contempt, as Priapus in Ho∣race — furum qnium{que} Maxime formido—) Or grievous idols, as Psal. 16.4. because they tormented the mindes of the superstitious, and put them to great pains to no purpose; as is to be seen in Popish Pilgrims, who though used hard∣ly, and lose much of their estates, and other comforts, yet satisfie themselves in this, I have that I came for, viz. the sight of a dumb idol, as Calvin noteth on that place Seek ye my face. Now of these mawmets and monuments of idolatry, these Balaams blocks, the Lord here promiseth to rid the land, as he did under the Maccabees. And as in the Primitive Church he did by the Christian Emperors, stiled therefore by the superstitious Iconomachi, and Iconaclastae: and of late by the renowned Reformers, as at Geneva, Bern, Basile (where they were burnt all toge∣ther on an Ash-wednesday of Gods own making) and here in England by the com∣mand of King Edward the sixth: who the self same day obtained a signal victory at Muscleborough-field. and they shall no more be remembred] Unlesse it be with shame and detestation, as Ezech. 16.61. Psal. 16.4. Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with idols? He shall pollute the idols which he once perfumed, and say unto them, Get you hence, Isay 30.22. I was an obstinate Papist (saith Latimer of him∣self) as any was in England, and a grosse Idolater &c. But after that he came to a sight of his errour, he so far forth abhorred idols, that being brought forth af∣ter he was condemned to die to see a procession,Act. and Mon. fol. 1230. he ran as fast as his old bones would carry him to one Spensers shop neer Karfax in Oxford, and would not once look toward it. and also I will cause the Prophets] So they will needs be called and counted: when as they are no better then unclean spirits (see the Geneva-Note here) or at least are acted and set on work by that unclean spirit the Devil, (See Mat. 12.43. Mar. 1.26. Iohn 8.44. Rev. 16.13. with the Notes) indeed they are false Prophets Mat 7.15. false teachers, who privily bring in damnable heresies 2 Pet. 2.1. vanae orationis, cui nulla veritatis vel virtutis ratio subest, sunt artifices stultè loquaces & garruli, saith Montanus, they are loud & lewd liers, inspired by that unclean spirit the father of lies,Junius in loc. ut impurati impurent alios & seducant seducti, that being them∣selves defiled and seduced, they may defile and seduce others. For by corrupt teach∣ers Satan catcheth men: as a cunning fisher by one fish catcheth another, that he may feed upon both.
and the unclean spirit to passe out of the land] This connexion is worthy to be noted, saith reverend Calvin here: because it shews us the source of all errours, viz. the letting loose the reins to perverse teachers. I confesse, saith He, we are apt enough of our selves to run after falsities, such is the corruption of our natures. Sed interea ubi grassatur licentia quidvis docendi, necesse est corrumpi totam pieta∣tem, & sic misceri omnia ut nihil differat lux à tenebris, &c. But where in matters of Religion, every man may think that he lists, and utter what he thinks, and de∣fend what he utters, and publish what he defends, and gather disciples to what he publisheth, this libertas prophetandi, this liberty, or licentiousnesse rather of prophecying (alasse poor England!) must needs bane the Church, and bring in confusion. God therefore here gives us to know, that a Church canot stand, un∣lesse false teachers be forbidden to turn the truth into a lie, and to prate at their pleasure against the word of God: and this, saith He, is diligently to be noted. Videmus enim ut hodiè nebulones quidam, &c. For we see how at this day, certain vile persons take it up for a principle, that the Church is not free, unlesse every man may be suffered to preach, or broach what he pleaseth: and that it is greatest cru∣elty to punish an heretike, and not to give him leave to blaspheme the truth. But the Prophet here sheweth, that the Church of God cannot be kept in pure state, nor stand intire and safe, unlesse the rashnesse and impudency of such be restrained, as dare pervert sound and sincere doctrine. Thus He. Verse 3. And it shall come to passe that when any shall yet prophesie] Here the Prophet sheweth how God will effect the former promise. He will first give unto his people a spirit of judgement, and then a spirit of burning, as Esay 4.4. so that they shall be able to discerne both good and evil,Heb. 5.14. 2 Pet. 2.17 and not be led away with the er∣rour of the wicked, to fall from their own stedfastnesse. they shall also be adeo percici zelo, so carried on by a zeal of Gods glory, and so blessedly blown up, as I may so say, in his cause, that they shall fall upon their dearest relations in this case, and labour to bring their own children to condigne punishment, according to the Law of God in that behalf provided, Deut. 13.8, 9. Neither let any object here,Ob. Sol. that this is Old Testament: we find no such thing in the Gospel. For the Prophet here speaketh of the times of the Gospel (chap. 12.10.) and of the kingdom of Christ. Sequitur ergo, saith Mr. Calvin here well and worthily, non modò legem illam fuisse Judaeis positam, quemadmedum nugantur fanatici hemines, qui vellent hodie sibi permitti orbis turbandi licentiam: sed extenditur ad nos etiam eadem lex. It followeth therefore, that that Law Deut. 13.9. was not made for the Jewes onely (as some brain-sick people conceit it, who would fain get leave to trouble the world with their fopperies) but the same law extendeth it self even to us. For if at this day theeves, and witches, and adulterers, &c. are held worthy of punish∣ment: how much more are heretikes, seducers, blasphemers, who poison mens souls, rob God of his glory, confound the whole order of the Church, &c. See Rom 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and hold to that old Rule, Non distinguendum, ubi scriptura non distinguit, Men must not distinguish, where the scripture doth not. that his father] In whose heart there is naturally an Ocean of love to his own child, as we see in David toward Absalom, in old Andronicus the Greek Emperour, in our William the Conquerour, and Maud his wife toward their unnaturall sonne Robert Curtuoise, whom she maintained out of her own coffers, in his quarrell for Normandy: which the king her husband knew,Speed. 452. and took as a cause rather of dis∣pleasure then of hatred; as proceeding from motherly indulgence for advancing their sonne. that begat him] This is twice here repeated for honours sake to these zelots; who forgat all naturall and carnall respects for the vindication of Gods glory, and his sincere service. See Mat. 10.37. with the Note there. thou shalt not live] sc. to do more mischief, and to draw more souls to the devil, Non Catilinae te genui sed patriae, said Aulus Fulvius, when he slew his, own sonne taken in Catalines conspiracie: I begat thee not for Catiline, but for thy countrey. More to be commended a great deal then Philip that bloody king of Spain, who said openly, that he had rather have no subjects, then Lutheran subjects; that he would not leave a Lutheran in his dominions; that if he thought
his shirt smelt of that heresie, he would tear it from his own back: And out of a blind zeal he suffered his eldest sonne Charles to be murthered by the cruel Inqui∣sition, because he seemed to favour our profession. For which noble exploit, that mouth of blasphemy,Hieron. Catina. the Pope, gave him this commendation, Non pepercit filio suo, sed dedit pro nobis. He spared not his own sonne but gave hm up for us. O hor∣rible. for thou speakest lies in the name of the Lord] Lies in hypocrisie, doctrines of devils,1 Tim. 4.12 Rev. 2.24 depths of Satan, that artificer of lies, and father of them, Joh. 8.44. which yet he would fain father, and fasten upon the God of Amen, or of truth, as he is called, Psal. 31.5. like as varlets beget bastards, and lay them at honest mens doors to be kept; Thou speakest lies in the name of the Lord. This is to substitute the devil in the place of God, or to transform God, so as that he should nothing differ from the devil. No wonder therefore, though he that break the least com∣mandement, and teach men so,Mat. 5.19 be called least in the kingdom of heaven: especi∣ally if he pretend Gods authority for it, as the false Prophets of old, and the Swenckfeldien heretikes alate entitle themselves, The Confessours of the glory of Christ. For this is the highest indignity, or rather contumely, that can be put up∣on God: It is a more detestable evil, then to kill an innocent man; yea to com∣mit parricide, or treason. Imo quaecunque poterunt numerare scelera non perveni∣ent od hoc crimen, saith Calvin upon the text. Let Sectaries and Seducers look to it, those harmlesse, hornlesse creatures, as they would be accounted. shall thrust him thorough when he prophesieth] As Phineas did that stinking couple, in the flagrancie of their lust, Num. 25.8. and as Levi, in like case, con∣secrated himself to the Lord, even every man upon his sonne, and upon his brother, Exod. 32.29. He said unto his father and mother (when Gods glory required it) I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor know his own children, Deut. 33.9. All naturall relations and self-respects should be drown'd in the glory of God, and the good of our own and other mens souls. They should be even swallowed up thereby, as the fuell is by the fire, and as the sorcerers serpents were by Moses serpent, or the fat kine by the lean. Verse 4. The Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision] Of their Midia∣nitish dreams, which they had first dreamed, and then told it for gospel to their fond neighbours. They shall be so clearly convinced, that they shall blush and bleed to think how they have been besotted, how many souls they have murdered, how oft they have even stradled over hell-mouth, and yet have been preserved, 2 Thess. 2.10, 12. See the Note. This makes them shame, and shent themselves in the presence of God and his people,Ezra 9.6 saying, O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee my God: for our imquities are increased over our head, and our guilt is grown up to the heavens. This was fulfilled in those Scribes and Pharisees that afterwards became beleevers, and said with Saint Paul, Beware of the concision. For we are the circumcision,Philip. 3.2, 3 which worship God in the spirit, and rejoyce in Christ Jesus, and have no considence in the slesh. Luther revolted from the Popish religion which he had held and maintained, taking it for an honour to be called Apostate by them; that is, as he interpreted it, One that had fallen off from the devil. Bugenhagius when he first read Luthers book de captivitate Babylonica, pronoun∣ced it to be the most pestilent piece that ever was published.Qui fidem di∣abolo datam uon servavit. But afterwards, when he had better considered, he grew ashamed of that rash censure, and protested that Luther onely was in the right; and all that held not the same that he did, were ut∣terly deceived. Latimer was of the like mind after that he had once heard Bilneys confession. Vergerius after he had read Luthers books with purpose to confute them. Denckius, and Hetserus, two great Anabaptists in Germany, retracted their former false doctrines, and repented of their licentious and abominable pra∣ctises.Sultet. Annal. the former of them, being converted by Occolampadius, grew ashamed of his pretended visions, and died piously at Basile. The later was beheaded at Con∣stance for his multiplied adulteries:Ibid. which first he sought to defend by Scripture, but afterwards died very penitently, confesting his former filthinesses, giving glory to God, and taking shame to himself. These two were learned men, well skilled in the Hebrew: and had joyned their forces, in translating the Prophets into the Dutch tongue. But, oh how few such as these, and of that sort of people shall a
man meet with now-adayes? Copp indeed that Arch-Ranter, Venereus ille furci∣fer, & Cleri dehonestamentum, is said to have newly set forth his Recantation, which I have not yet seen, and therefore cannot tell what to say to it. Onely I wish he deale not as Bernard Rotman that first Anabaptist, and Islebius Agricola that first Antinomian did in Germany: who both of them having condemned their own errours, and recanted them in a publike Auditory, printing their revo∣cation:Sleidan. Horndorf. yet afterwards they relapsed into the same errours, and stoutly stood to them, when Luther was dead, and more Liberty was afforded. So hard a thing it is to get poison out, when once swallowed down; and having once said yea to the devill, though but in a little, to say him nay again, when a man pleaseth: such a man especially quem puduit non fuisse impudentem,Augustin. 2 Thes. 2.12. who hath gloried in his shame, and taken pleasure in his unrighteousnesse: qui noluit solita peccare, as Sene∣ca saith of some in his time, that is, none of the ordinary sort of sinners, but hath sought to out-sin others, as unhappy boyes strive who shall goe furthest in the dirt. I will not say but such, by the almighty power of God, may be reclaimed, and made to see that there is no fruit to be had of those errours and enormities where∣of they are now ashamed,Rom. 6.21, 22 sith the end of those things (in the desert of them) is death. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, they will have very great cause to be thankfull to God for the cure: sith Jealousy, Frensy, and Heresy, are held hardly curable, the leprosy in the head concludes a man utterly uncleane, and excludes him the camp: Heresy is by the Apostle compared to a precipice vortex or whirle-poole, that first turns a man round, and then sucks him in: And by others to the Syrens bankes covered with dead mens bones, Heb. 12.9. to Goodwins sands that swallow up all ships that come neare them, or to the Harlots house whence few or none return alive Pro. 7.26, 27. Verse 5. But he shall say, I am no Prophet]  I am no Monk, no Clerk, I am not book-learned was the ignorant mans, plea in Chrysostomes time, and so it is still to this day; though it serves not his turne. But here the like speech is taken up for a better purpose. Hoc et enim principium est resipiscentiae, saith Calvin here. Here begins their repentance, viz. in a free acknowledgement of their ignorance and utter unfinesse for the office they had usurped.Si ventribene, si lateri. Horat. I am no prophet] (as for self respects that my belly might be filled, and my back fitted, I sinfully took upon me to be one) but I am an husbandman: and can better hold the plow then handle a text, feed and follow a flock of sheep, then feed the flock of God (that have golden fleeces, precious soules) taking the oversight there∣of, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.1 Pet. 5.2. for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth] q.d. Shephardy and husban∣dry I have been ever trained up to, and can better therefore skill of then of Preaching, which is certainly Ars artium & scientia scientiarum, the Art of Arts, the science of sciences as One said. Whereunto Melancthon. addeth that it is the misery of miseries. And of the same minde was his Colleague Luther, when he said, An housholders pains is great, a Magistrates greater, but a Ministers greatest of all: and afterward added, that if it were lawfull for him to leave his calling, he could with more ease and pleasure dig for his living, or do any other hard la∣bour, then undergo a Pastorall charge. The mystery thereof is not an idle-mans occupation, an easie trade, as some fondly conceit. The sweat of the brow is nothing to that of the brain: besides dangers on every hand for the works sake, and armies of cares that give neither rest nor respit, 2 Cor. 11.25. agmen subinde irruens. Illyr. but are ready to over∣whelme a man. This made Luther affirme that a Minister labours more in a day many times then a husbandman doth in a moneth. Let no man therefore, in taking up the ministery, dreame of a delicacy: Neither let slow-bellies either invade it, or hold it (as popish asses and some impudent Alastores now-adayes do) to pick a living out of it. It was an honest complaint of a Popish writer, we, saith He, handle the scripture tantum ut nos pascat & vestiat, only that it may feed us and cloath us. And Cardinall Cajetan not without cause cryes out,Com in Mat. 5. that those amongst them that should have been the salt of the earth had lost their savour: and were good for little else, but looking after the rites and revenues of the Church. Now for such as these that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, that
like body-lice live upon other mens sweat, or like rats and mice, do no more but devoure victuals and run squeaking up and down; good is the counsell of the Apostle, Let him that stole steale no more: but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth, Eph. 4.28. let him earne it before he eate it 2 Thess. 3.10. This is hard to perswade those Abby-lubbers that live at ease in cloysters, feeding on the fat and drinking of the sweet: and those Idoll-shepheards that feed themselves and not the flock. O Monachi vestri stomachi. Erasmus truely told the Electour of Saxony, that Lu∣ther,Scultet: Anna. pag. 52. by medling with the Popes tripple crown, and with the Monkes t paun∣ches, had procured himself so great ill will amongst them. One of them brake out in a sermon into these angry words: If I had Luther here, I would teare out his throat with my teeth;Act. and Mon. and then make no doubt with the same bloody teeth to eat my maker at the Eucharist. How much better were it for such false prophets with quietnesse to work and eat their own bread 2 Thess. 3.14. then to drink the blood of other men with their lives (as David spake in another case) yea with their soules which perish by their insufficiency and gastrimargy? Sed venter non habet aures.1 Chr. 11.19. But the belly hath no eares. Ease flayeth the foolish. Non minus difficulter à deliciis abstrahimur, quam canis ab uncto corio: Among other scaudals and lets of the Jews conversion this is not the least, that they must quit their Goods to the Christians?Spec. Europ. And the reason is, for that in baptisme they renounce the de∣vill, and all his works, part whereof (say the Papists amongst whom they live) are the Jews goods; being gotten either of themselves or of their Ancestours by usury. Now this is such cold comfort to men of their mettall, that they have little mind to turn Christian. And as little doubtlesse have such as with these in the text, have got their living by lying: and through covetousnesse with fained words made marchandise or prize of mens precious soules, to return to the hard labour of husbandry or any other lawful but painfull employment. Yet this was done both in Wicklifes dayes by many Fryars that fell to him, and embraced his opinions: and in the reformation by Luther; many Monkes and Nuns betook themselves to honest trades; renouncing their Popish vowes and orders; yea Scultetus re∣porteth that at Aushborough in Germany, by the powerfull preaching of Dr. John Speiser Ann. 1523. some harlots forlooke the publike stews, and married to honest men, lived chastly, and were great pains-takers. Verse 6. And One shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?] Hierome here supposeth the false Prophet crucified for his false doctrine, and thereupon thus questioned. This is better then that of the Popish Interpreters, who will needs have it to be meant of Christ, Mat. 27 63. that cozener to our very faces. Eustath. and of his wounds on the crosse, as a deceiver of the people. Lucian the Atheist villanously tearmeth him  the crucified Cozener. But the Text is clear, that the person here spoken to, and returning an anser, is the false-Prophet, now a true Convert; as appeareth by his fruits which he beares quick and thick: being like Aarons rod soon changed from a withered stick, into a flourishing tree. Ashamed he is at heart of his former falsities: and as in heart, so in habit he is altered: for he will no longer weare a rough garment (the garb of Prophets in those dayes) to deceive, as the Cappuchines and other orders of Friars (or rather Lyars) at this day.2 King. 1.8. Isa. 20.2. Mat. 3.4. He abrenounceth and abjureth quasi conceptis verbis his former profession of a Prophet or chief speaker amongst others. I am no Prophet] But a plain husbandman, or a shepheard: that's all I can tru∣ly pretend to. And lastly, in this verse, having passed thorough the churches di∣scipline as a seducer,Iosh. 7.19. he shall doe, as Ioshuah advised Achan, Give glory to the Lord my son, and confesse thy sin: he shall approve of the Churches severity used for his correction, though he should go maimed or marked for it, to his dying day. In point of seducement (saith Mr. Cotton, descanting upon this text) if a man upon conviction shall see the wickednesse of his way, and humble his soule before God,The powring out of the 7. viuls. third viall. 11. and give satisfaction to the Church and State, where he shall be convinced; on such conviction and repentance we find liberty to pardon, but yet stigmatize him. Thus He. But what reason had the Convocation held at Ox∣ford to set a brand of ignominy upon the cheeks of those outlandish Divines that came to assist them, because they pleased them not in the point of Priests mar∣riage,
which they defended? Or Bishop Laud for his Stigmata Laudis on renouned Mr. Prinne, for his constancy to the truth? How much better his predecessours, Stephen Langton (who crucified that Pseudo-Christ, who shewed marks of wounds in his hands, feet and sides, Anno 1206.) And Odo Severus (who burnt King Ed∣wins Concubine (whom he most doted on) in the forehead with a hot iron, and banished her into Ireland, Anno 934, &c.) Verse 7. Awake O Sword against my Shepheard] A powerful expression, con∣taining a commission given out to the sword by way of Apostrophe. Awake] or, up, as the Septuagint: up and about, thou that hast long lain lockt up in the scabbard. Thus the sword is of Gods sending; it is bathed in heaven, Isa. 34.5. Ezek. 14.17. Jer. 47.6, 7.] It is he that awakes it, and sets it on work: he commands it, Am. 9.4. and ordereth it, Jer. 50.25. Let this patient us under it, as it did Job, Chap. 1.15, 17, 21. Among Philosophies, the most noted sect for patience was that of the Stoicks, who ascribed all to destiny. O sword] Framea, which seems to come of  (the Septuagints word here) by putting  before , or Gldie, which comes à claae from destruction: like as the Hebrew word Chereb, from desolating and laying wast. Hence the sword is said to contemn the rod, Ezek. 21.10, 13. that is all lighter and lesser judgements, which are but its forerunners, and whereof it seemes to say, What does this silly rod doe here? Will not-men stoop? Let me come: Ile make them either bend or break; either yield, or Ile have their bloud. against my shepheard] i.e. saith Calvin, against Magistrates and Ministers, Gods undershepheards and Associates in feeding the flock, Labourers together with him, 1 Cor. 3.9. But because Christ is the great shepheard, Heb. 13.20. and the good shepheard, John 10.11. Optimus maximus, that is, Gods fellow-mate, and yet, sus∣pending his glorie, became a man, to seek him out a flock in the wildernesse: and afterwards laid down his life for his sheep, John 10.11. underwent the deadly dint of Gods devouring sword put into the hands of those men of Gods hand, Psal. 17.13. who put him to many a little death all his life long, and at length to that cursed and cruel death of the crosse: at which time the Shepheard was smitten and the sheep scat∣tered, as this Text is most fitly applyed, Matth. 26.31. therefore I understand it thiefly of Christ, the chief Shepheard and Bishop of our soules,Esay 53.5. who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, &c. And this not by chance, or malice of his enemies only (though they laid upon him without mercie, nailing him to the tree in the hands and feet, which in all men are the most sensible parts of the body (as being fullest of nerves and sinews) but in him much more as being of the sinest temperature and most exquisite sense) but by the determinate counsel of God, as St. Peter shewes those Kill-Christs, Acts 2.23. and according to the Scriptures, that went before of him, and foretold all his passion, even to the casting of the dice upon his cloathes, Psal. 22. and Isai. 53 by the reading of which lively description of Christs sufferings in that Chapter,Hoc ego inge∣nuè confiteuor ait ille, caput illud ad fidem Christime ad∣duxisse. Johannes Isaac a Jew confesseth that he was converted to the faith of Christ. He is called Gods Shepheard, because God anointed and appointed him to that Office, putting a charge into his hands, John 10. and 17. that he might tend them and tender them, and at length return them up again to his heavenly Father, without losse of any one. He is also called the Man by an excellency, that matchlesse man the chief of ten thousand: as his mother is called hagnalma that famous Virgin, whom all generations are bound to call blessed. He is Man-God both in one: and is therefore also called Gods-fel∣low or Mate, as being Consubstantiall to the Father according to the Godhead, and very neer akinne to him according to the Man-hood, by reason of the hypo∣staticall union of both natures into one person, the Man Christ Jesus. Smite the shepheard] that that blessed Fountcin of his Bloud (mentioned verse 1.) may be opened, and the flock of God washed, and healed, and satiated, as the peo∣ple were, when the Rock was smitten and so set abroach: and as when God clave a hollow place in the jaw-bone of the Asse, so that there came water thereout, Sampson drank and was revived: And as when the Alabaster-box of ointment was broke, all the house was filled with a sweet savour.Judg. 15.19. And the sheep shall be scattered] scattered and scattered; shifting for themselves, and leaving Christ to the mercy of his enemies, who seized upon him, as so many
Carrion Kites upon a silly Dove. Thomas (who once said come, let us go dye with him) disappeares and is lost: Peter followes aloof off, but better he had heen far∣ther off. John (if at least it were he) flies away stark naked for hast: Iudas comes nearer to him, but to betray him with a kisse. But is this thy kindnesse to thy friend? Christ had indented with the enemie aforehand for their securitie, Joh. 18.8. so that they needed not have retreated so disorderly, and scattered as they did. But the fear of man bringeth a snare.Prov. 29.25. Howbeit mans badnesse cannot break off the course of Christs goodnesse. For though they thus unworthily forsake him, and leave him at the worst (as they say) yet I will turn my hand, saith he, upon the little ones, i.e. I will recollect my dispersed flock (how little soever either for number, or respect in the world) and bring back my banished. So soon doth it repent the good Lord concerning his servants.Mich. 7.18. Psal 136 23. He remembreth not iniquity for ever, saith the Prophet, because mercy pleaseth him: and again, He remembreth us in our low estates: for his mercy endureth for ever. He looked back upon Peter when his mouth was now big swoln with oathes and execrations, and set him a weeping bitterly. He called for Thomas after his resurrection, and confirmed his weak faith by a wonder∣full condescention. He sealed up his love to them all again, restoring them to their ministeriall imployment: and not so much as once upbraiding them with their base dereliction, but only with their unbelief. Lyra and others sence the Text thus: I will turn my hand upon the little ones, that is, I will so smite the Shepheard Christ, that not only the sheep shall be scattered, but the little lambs also, even the least and lowest Christians shall have their share of sufferings, shall feel the weight of my hand, shall pledge the Lord Christ in that cup of afflictions that I have put into his hand; shall be conformed to the Image of Gods Son, as his co-sufferers, that he may be the first born among many brethren, Rom. 8.29. And this was fulfilled in the persecutions that followed soon after our Saviours death. Ecclesia haeres crucis, saith Luther: and Persecutio ect Evangelij genius, saith Calvin. Persecution is the black Angel that dogges the Church, the red horse that ollows the white at the heels. All the comfort is, that Gods holy hand hath a speciall stroke in all those afflictions that are laid upon his faithfull people, I will turn mine hand, &c. Verse 8. Two parts therein shall be cut off and die] q.d. they shall, they shall, how strange or incredible soever this sad tidings seem to you: it shall be even so, take my word for it. Behold the severity of God, Rom. 11.22. In the Greek it is the Resection or Cutting off, as a Chirurgion cutteth off proud and dead flesh. The Just Lord is in the middest thereof:. he will not do iniquity, &c. Zeph. 3.5. Fiat ju∣stitia, ruat coelum may seem to be his Motto. In point of justice he stands not upon multitudes, Psal. 9.17. It is all one to him whether against a Nation or against a man only, Job 34.29. National sins bring national plagues: heinous sinnes, heavy punishments. In the universal deluge God swept away all: as if he had blotted out that part of his title, The Lord, the Lord, gracious, merciful, &c. and had taken up that of Attilas, Orbis flagellum, The worlds scourge, Sodoms sinnes were multi∣plyed above measure: therefore God took them away as he saw good, Ezek. 16.49, 50 and hath thrown them out, as St. Jude speaketh, for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.. Jude 7. Herodotus a Heathen Historian saith the very same of the destruction of Troy, viz. that the ruines and rubbish thereof are set forth for an ex∣ample of that noted Rule, that God greatly punisheth great offences, and that hainous sinnes bring hideous plagues. Here we have two parts of three cut off in the land of Judea: as it fell out at the last destruction thereof by the Romans: at which time more then a million of men perished, see Matth. 24.21. with the Note. And what think we shall become of Babylon the great? Her sinnes reach up to heaven, whereunto they are even glewed and fastened as the word signifies,. Rev. 18.5. therefore she shall be brought down to hell with Capernaum (for flagitium & flagel∣lum sicu acus & filum) therefore shall her plagues come in one day (to confute their fond conceit of an eternal Empire) death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly overthrown with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her, full able to ef∣fect it,Rev. 18.18: seem it to Babels brats never so improbable, or impossible. It was never besieged since it became Papal, but it was taken: whereas before, it was held in∣vincible. Sinne that lyeth at the bottom, will easily undermine and overturn the walis, though never so strong built: as the voice from heaven told Phocas the Mur∣therer.
The bloud of that innocent Lamb of God lyes heavy upon the whole Na∣tion of the Jews to this day. Their last devastation and present dismal dispersion is such, as that one of their own Rabines concludes from thence, that their Mesliah must needs be come: and they must needs suffer so much for killing him. but the third shall be left therein] A holy remnant kept for a reserve. Good hus∣bands cast not all their corn into the oven, but keep some for seed.Esa. 6.13. But yet in it shall be a tenth, saith another Prophet:Es. 17.6. there shall be 'two or three berries in the top of a trce, four or five in the outmost branches. Gods Elect are so very few, that the world shall wonder; Esay 8.18. and even hoot to see Christs flock so very little, little,1 Kin. 20.27. as our Saviour speakes, Luke 12.22. as Israel stood like two little flocks of kids, when the Syrians filled the countrey. There were but a few names in Sardis: and many bad in the best Churches: as at Philippi, Chap. 3.18. Christ wondered at one good Nath. nacl, as rara avis in terris: and when he comes; shall he find faith? How many (think you) shall be saved in this City? saith (Chrysostom in his fourth sermon to the people at Antioch. It will be a hard speech to you, but I will speak it: Though there be so many thousands, yet there cannot be sound an hundred, that shall be saved. And I doubt of them too, &c. And again in his third Sermon upon the Acts, he breaks out into this speech, Non arbitror inter sacerdores, multos esse qui sàlvi siant, I do not think that there are many, no not among the Ministery, that can be saved, sith many are called, but few are chosen: like as all the people were called together by Samuel, but Saul only was chosen king. Only the called according to purpose are elected, and shall be glorisied, Rom. 8.28, 29. Christ at last day will do as Joshuah did to find out who had stolen the Babylonish garment: there were many brought together, and all to finde out one. So, all shall then appeare: out of them a small number deducted, that have heard of Christ.Josh. 7. Out of them, those that have professed him, and out of them, those that have professed him, in sincerity, and these will be Mithe mispar, a small few indeed.They are as a fold in a wide field: as a gar∣den in a wild wast. Juvenal. P. de exculp. Hence they are cal∣led pearls, which are but few to the number of pibbles: Jewels which are but little to the lumber: strangers that are nothing so many as home-dwellers: sons of God, and of the bloud royal; and of such there are but a few to common subjects. Rari quippe bo∣ui, saith the Poet. And Pauci sunt qui Philosophantur saith UIpian the Lawyer; &c. Verse 9. And I will bring the third part through the fire] Few they were, but not faultlesse: they must therefore thorow the fire, that there they may leave their dreggs and drosse behind them. For Quod ignis cst auro, lima ferro, ventilabrum truico, lixivium pano, sal carni, hoc tribulatio est viro usto, saith Corn. a Lapide upon this Text: that is, what the fire is to the gold, the file to iron, the fanne to wheat, the sope to clothes, the salt to flesh, that is tribulation sanctified to a righteous man. God is said to have his fire in Zion, and his surnace in Jerusalem, Esay 31.9. to carry his thorow fire and thorow water, Psal. 66.12, from above to send fire into their bones, Lam. 1.13. to put them to the fiery tryall, 1 Pet. 4.12. yea he him∣self is a Refiners fire unto them, and Fullers sope, Mal. 3.2. (see the Note there.) He knowes them to be right gold, which will endure the seventh fire (Alchymy gold will not so) and therefore he puts them to't: that the tryall of their faith being much more precious then that of gold that perisheth, though tryed in the fire, may be found to praise, and honour, and glory, 1 Pet. 1.7. himself, mean-while, goeth with them into the fire and pulleth them out as a brand, Zech. 3. Non sic impij,Psal. 1. not so the ungodly. True it is, the tryall of their works also shall be by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13.Deut. 32.3. and they shall give an account one day with all the world on a light flame about their ears, 2 Pet. 3.12. Then shall they find, that the law they are judged by is a fiery law, the tribunall is of fire, Ezek. 1.27. the Judge a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28.. his attendants Seraphims, that is, flaming creatures, Heb. 1.7. his pleading with sinners in fire of flame, 2 Thess. 1.7. the place of punishment a lakeof fire fed with a river of brimstone, Isa. 30.33. a formidable fire it is, fed with tormenting temper, and kindled by Gods own breath instead of bellows. Bellarmine is of opinion, that one glimpse of this fearfull fire were enough to make a man not only turn Christian and sober, but Anchoret and Monk, and to live after the strictest order that can be. Pope Clement the fifth, upon the death of a Nephew of his and one of his Cata∣mites, sent his Chaplaine to a Conjurer,Jac. Ren. de vit. Pont. 159. to enquire how it fared with him in the other world. The Conjurer shewed him to the Chaplaine lying in a bed of fire
in hell; This news so affected the wretched Pope, that he never held up his head, but (Nabal-like) died within a few dayes after it. But oh what a dreadfull shreek gave his guilty soul, to see it self lanching into an infinite Ocean of scalding lead, and to think that it must swim naked therein for ever. and will refine them, as silver is resined] This is all the hurt he doth them by the fire; he hides pride from them, Job 33.19, &c. and divides betwixt the sinne which he hates, and the sonne whom he loves. For by this the iniquity of Jacob shall be purged: and this is all the fruit, the taking away of their sinne: which they may very well spare,Esay 27.9 and never hurt themselves. Surely, as one poison is antidotary to another: so is affliction to sinne: when sanctified, it is no more penall, but medi∣cinall; not a curse, but a cure. As oil of scorpions is good against the biting of scorpions. As the wine wherein a viper hath been drowned cureth a leprosie. As the juyce of hemlock (a deadly plant) heals hot corroding ulcers, and asswageth the inflammation of the eyes: Or, as Rhubarb, though full of choler, doth migh∣tily purge choler. Moses neglected to circumcise his child (as we do our hearts, it is such a bloody work) till God met him and would have killed him. David could never see the benesit of affliction, till God by those sharp waters had clea∣red up his eye-sight. Geheza's leprosie cured him: his white forehead made him have a whiter soul. Surely, as the fining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, so is affliction to the soul. Corrections of instruction, are the way of life, Pro. 6.23. But he that refuseth correction despiseth his own soul, Pro. 15 32. Winds and thunder clear the air (whereof they are the beesoms, saith Ruperius) so do crosses the soul. f the outward man decay, the inward is thereby renewed: and the winter of the one,2 Cor. 4.16 is the spring of the other. As the viper when he is lashed, casteth up his poy∣son: so doth the good soul when afflicted, purge it self from all filth of flesh and spirit, striving to perfect holinesse in the fear of God. These Jews after they had been in the Babylonish furnace for idolatry, hated and feared that sinne as much as the burnt child dreads the fire. They would die any death rather then admit an idoll. Josephus tells how stoutly they opposed Pilate, and Petronius, that would would have set up Cesars statue in their Temples, offering their throats to the swords of the souldiers, rather then they would endure that idoll in Gods house. What God is now doing with them, and for them, in this long time of their sad desola∣tion and dispersion, who can tell? There are that think, that after much purging and proving, as here, God will gather a Church of them to himself: according to that which followeth; They shall call upon my name, and I will hear them, I will say, it is my people, &c. And that upon their profession of Christ, shall come the so∣rest time of affliction that ever was, chap. 14.1, 2. when Gog and Magog with all his troops, and armies shall compasse the beloved city, Rev. 20.8, 9. But the Jews shall get a glorious Conquest: for God himself from heaven will miracu∣lously fight for them, verse 3, 4, 5. together with all the holy Angels, the mini∣sters of his judgements, verse 5. Sure it is, that the Turks fear some such thing as this: and therefore they cannot abide that any Jew amongst them should turne Christian. In the yeer 1528. a certain Jew dwelling in Constantinople became a good Christian, and was baptized: which the Turks understanding were vehement∣ly exasperated against him for it; fearing lest his conversion should prove preju∣diciall to their Mahometan religion, and therefore they apprehended and cruelly murthered him. and try them as gold is tried] viz. that when I have tried them, they may come forth as gold, Job 33.10. Hence Gods people fall into manifold temptations, Jam. 1.2. they fall, they go not into them step by step, but are precipitated, plunged in∣to them: and not into one of them, or a few, but into manifold temptations, or trials: yea fiery trials, so afflictions are called, because thereby God proves what is in his people, Deut. 8.16. Rev. 2.10. Not to better his own knowledge of them neither; for he knows all things, and is intimo nostro intimior nobis, Job. 2.25. Act. 1.24. Heb. 4.12. Artificers perfectly know the nature and properties of their own works, and shall not God see, Psal. 94.9, 10. But tentat ut sciat, hoc est, ut scire nos facat,August. he trieth us. 1. That he may make discoveries of himself unto us, espe∣cially of his power and goodnesse: and so get him a name, as Esay 63.11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 12.9. Elias would have water poured upon the sacrifices, yea the Altar
covered therewith, that Gods power might the more appear, in consuming it with fire from heaven, and the people thereupon might cry, Iehovah he is God,1 King. 18.39. Iehovah he is God: think the same here. 2. That he may make discoveries of us to our selves, and to others; who are apt to misjudge and undervalue us: as not onely Satan did, Iob chap. 1.9. but even Elihu, also (though otherwise a good man, and the best of his friends) chap. 34.36. But when they see our holy carriage under the crosse, they can say of us as that Centurion did of our Saviour, Luke 23. Verily this was the Son of God: and as one Culocerius in the Church-history, when he saw the piety and constancy of the Martyrs, he cryed out, Verè magnus est Deus Christïanorum, The Christians God is a great God indeed. But as by afflictions we are made known to others, so to our selves much more. We are apt either to over-value, or else to under-value our selves, till put to the triall: as is to be seen in the history of Saunders and Pendleton. Hard weather tries what health; wind and stormes what sap: withered leaves soon fall off. Rotten boughes with heavy weights quickly break. Woodden vessells, set empty to the fire, soon break and leak; not so vessells of gold and silver. The best divination what men are is at the parting-way, as Ezek. 21.21. When the fire comes to green wood, it will ap∣pear what's within: when the pond is empty, what's in the bottom. It is not known what corn will yeeld, till it come to the flail: nor what grapes, till it come to the presse. Grace is like the stone Chrysolampis, quem lux celat prodit obscurum, which shine brightest in the dark. The skill of a Pilot is unknown but in a tempest:Solinus. the valour of a Captain, but in a battle: the faithfulnesse of a wife, but in an as∣sault. The wicked tried are found to be but reprobate silver: or at best, but Al∣chymy-gold, that endureth not the seventh fire. They are , as Crocodiles, Chameleons, Bats, Spunges, &c. They murmure when tried, as Psal. 78.40, 41. Or curse, as Micah's mother, Iudg. 17. Or fret, and howl upward, as Wolves when hunge-rbit, Esay 8.21. Or faint in the day of affliction, as Saul, who lay upon the ground like a beast, 1 Sam. 28.20. Or Nabal, who lay in his bed like a block. Or desert God and his cause, as those Renegado's, Dan. 11.32. and those in the Palatinate, who fell to Popery as fast as leaves fall off the trees in Autumne. Many titular Christians amongst us, were, in times of peace, but as wolves in a cage, but as lions tamed by art: they wanted nothing but liberty and opportunity to shew their wolvish and worrying natures, which now these late shedding and discrimi∣nating times have sufficiently discovered. Have all these workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up Gods people as they eat bread, and call not upon God? They shall call upon my name, and I will hear them.Psal. 14.4. No time for hearing of prayers and obtaining of suits like that of affliction. Those are mollissima fandi Tempora, the time of affliction is the very time of supplication: then our hearts are largest, then Gods ear is openest. Then the saints may have any thing for asking, Psal. 50.15. and 91.15. Thus Lot had Zoar at his request, Deut. 29.23. Paul had all the souls in the ship given him, Act. 27. Jacob greatly fearing to be bereft of his Benjamin prayed, God give you bowels of mercy before the man, Gen. 43.14. He prayed it, and he had it, ver. 30. For Ioseph made hast: for his bowels did yern upon his brother, &c. God reserves his best comforts for the worst times: as the feast-maker kept his best wine till the last, Ioh. 2. as the mother brings forth her conserves and cordials, when the child sis at sickest, Israel was never so royally provided for, as in the wildernesse. I will bring her into the wildernesse and speak to her heart, Hos. 2.13. As a bone once broken is stronger after setting: and as lovers are never greater friends then after a falling out: so is it betwixt God and his people. Affliction exciteth devotion,-as the bellows doth the fire, and excited devotion prevaileth much, Iam. 5.16. I will say, It is my people and they shall say, The Lord is my God] by a gra∣cious complyance they shall with highest estimations, most vigorous affections and utmost endeavours bestow themselves upon that God that hath so farr owned and honoured them as tost rike a covenant with them: the fruits whereof are sure mercies, compassions that faile not, all the blessings of this and a better life. A co∣venant is the collection of many promises; as a constellation is the collection of many starrs: and though it be (in summ) but one promise, I will be thy God, yet it is such an one as comprehends all: and is therefore fifteen times, at least, men∣tioned
in scripture. It is the substance of the Covenant of grace, saith Junius: the soule of it, saith Pareus: the head or top of it, saith Musculus: Deus meus & omnia, saith Luther, God is mine, all's therefore mine. But then, as God must be our All-sufficient, so we must be his Altogether: and when he cryes out, Who is on my side, who? One shall say I am the Lords: and another shall call himself by the name of Iacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel Esay 44.5. O it is ablessed signe that God hath cho∣sen us first 1 Ioh. 4.19. when we chuse God as Psal. 73.25. sincerely avouch∣ing him for our God. Sincerity (or Evangelicall perfection) is the only abso∣lute condition of the Covenant of grace Gen. 17.1. God and the Saints have ever judged of men by this: Judge me, O Lord, according to mine integrity, saith Da∣vid, The promises are made to it Psal. 119.1. Mat. 5.8. Gods eye is upon it as in David the man after Gods own heart. He blesseth the little that such have, as in Nathanael, Cornelius, the Eunuch. He passeth by their infirmities, as in Asa 1 King. 15.14. and accepteth their services neverthelesse. as 2 Chron. 30.19, 20. CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. BEhold the day of the Lord commeth] Jerusalem had her day, and knew it not Luke 19.42. (Jerusalem was not Jerusalem: the vision of peace, saw not the things that belong'd to her peace) God therefore will have his day of vengeance, as she had of visitation. He hath his season, his harvest for judgment Mat. 13.30. and when wickednesse is ripe in the field, he will suffer it to grow no longer, lest it shed and spread: but cuts it up by a just and seasonable ven∣geance. These Jews were by their own confession the children of them which had killed the Prophets:Act. 2 23. and, by killing the Lord Christ with wicked hands, they had filled up the measure of their fathers Mat. 23.31, 32. what could therefore the Lord do lesse to a nation so incorrigibly flagitious, then bring wrath upon them to the utmost 1 Thess. 2.16? then send forth his armies and destroy those murthe∣rers, and burn up their cities? When God did this execution here mentioned, is hard to say:Mat. 22.7. Whether by Antiochus Epiphanes (or rather Epimanes, as some truly called him,Act. 26.11. Gal. 1.13. for that being exceedingly mad against the Jews, he persecuted the Church of God and wasted it) Or by the Roman spoilers at that last devastation under the command of Titus. Or by Cosroes the Persian, and Homar the Arabian, who successively harased and rased Jerusalem, rifling the houses, ravishing the women, killing whom they pleased, and making the rest pay deare for the very heads they wore: which servitude lasted till Godfrey of Bullin set them at liberty: so the Glosse here senseth it. Or lastly by Gog and Magog, that is, by the great Turk (for Magog is the Scythian nation from whom came the Turks, Lords of Me∣shec and Tubal, that is, of Cappadocia and Iberia where they first began to raigne) as is before hinted; I take not upon me to determine. The most understand it of the last overthrow of the Romans. The Spirit might have an eye to the Anti∣christian persecutions of the Orthodox Professours of the Romish Edomites. and the spoile shall be divided in the middest of thee] Freely and fearelesly, none rising up to make them afraid, the vanquished shall be so disabled and dispirited. Thus the silly doves are glad to save themselves by flight, not fight; sometimes they sit in their deve-coats, and see their nests destroyed, and yong ones killed, not daring once to rescue or revenge. Verse 2. For I will gather all nations] The Romans that stiled and held them∣selves Lords of all nations, and who had levied a mighty army out of all nations to fight against Ierusalem. See Joseph. lib. 3. belli Iud. chap. 1. and 3. Or Gog and Magog with all his armies and aslociates Ezek. 37.4, 5, 6. shall compasse the beloved city Rev. 20.8, 9. See Verse 1. with the Note. Would any man take the Churches picture?Lec. com. then let him, saith Luther, paint a silly poor maid sitting in a wood or wildernesse, and compassed about with hungry lions, wolves, boares and beares &c. and in the middest of a great many surious men assaulting her every
moment: Let him give her say I, that of Martial for her Motto. In me omnis terraeque, aviumque, marisque rapina est. and the city shall be taken] Non tamen ad exitium, sed ad exercitium. I have forsaken mine house: I have lest mine heritage (saith the Lord Ier. 12.7.) I have given the dearely beloved of my soule into the hand of her enemies. At which times there is usually, as at Athens when taken by Sylla  a bloo∣dy butchery. and the houses risled] As at the sack of Constantinople by the Turks: where the souldiers are said to have divided money among themselves by whole hat-fuls: and were therewith so enriched, that 'tis a proverb amongst them at this day, if any grow suddenly rich, to say, he hath been at the sacking of Constantinople.Turk. bist. 347 The Em∣perour had in vaine many times with teares requested to have borrowed money of his covetous subjects, to have been employed in the defence of the city;Hid. 345. but they would still sweare that they had it not: as men grown poor for want of trade. Which in few dayes after, their enemies found in such abundance, that they won∣dred at their wealth, and derided their folly, that possessing so much they would bestow so little in the defence of themselves and their countrey. and the women ravished] These are the common calamities of war: in the in the lawlesse violence whereof those three commandements, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steale: as they are ranked together in the law, so they are usually violated together, Hence Isa. 13.16. Their chil∣dren also shall be dashed to peeces before their eyes, their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. The Irish rebels bound the husband to the bed-post, whiles they abused his wife before his face. In the time of K. Edward the third,Donec mulier fatigata spiri∣tum exhalare. Walsing. the French souldiers at Winchelsey in Sussex took their lustfull turns upon a beautifull woman in the Church, and at the time of divine service, untill they had turned her out of the world, as a learned man phraseth it. and half of the city shall go forth into captivity] An evill, an onely evill, threate∣ned Deut. 28. and sulfilled to the utmost upon this nation, so shamelesly, so law∣lesly wicked, as can hardly be peered or parallelled. I have noted before, that this their last captivity and dispersion is such, as that one of their own Rabbines conclu∣deth from thence, that their Messiah must needs be come, and they must needs suffer so much for killing him. They use to say that there is still an ounce of the golden calf in all their publike calamities. There is another thing lieth more heavily up∣on them to this day, were they but sensible of it. Let us be sending up, and sigh∣ing out for them that of the Psalmist, O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! when the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. Psa. 14.7. and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city] A remnant shall be reserved as it were for royall use: whether a third part as chap. 13.8. or an half, as here, 'tis not much materiall: in numeris non est anxiè laborandum, saith Calvin here; for the direct number, it is neither here nor there as we say. God shall reserve unto himself a set and select number. He who comforteth those that are cast down, speaketh this to his, for encouragement. The Church may be shaken, not shivered: persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed 2 Cor. 4.9. Verse 3. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations] Some read it, Among those nations: He shall be the Archistrategus, the Commander in chief of those Armies, which he hath brought together against Ierusalem, to revenge upon her the quarrel of his Covenant. But I like the other way better: because it is purposely spoken for the comfort of Saints in evill times. When therefore there is dignus vindice nodus, & periculum par animo Alexandri, as he was wont to say, when it is time for God to arise, that his enemies may be scatte∣red, and those that hate him, fly before him; he will arise and have mercy upon Zion; he will awake as in the dayes of old: he will come forth from his holy place to the relcue of his praying people. There brake he the arrowes of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battel, Selab.Psal. 76.3, 4. There he appeared more glorious
and excellent then the mountaines of prey. There he did, and there he will: for this is a common and currant Scripture-medium.Esay 10. God shall fight against those nations, the very rod of his wrath: which after he hath worn to the stump, he will cast it into the fire. The wicked are called Gods sword Psal. 17.13. But it will fall out with them, as with that sword which Hector gave Ajax; which so long as he used against his enemies, served for help and defence: but after he began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtlesse beasts, it turned into his own bowels. as when he fought in the day of battel] with his own bare hand as it were, Esay 52.10. and in a miraculous manner, as he did for Israel at the red sea, for Ioshua, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah &c. and as he shall do at that last great battle against Anti∣christ and his Adherents Rev. 20.8, 9, 10. which is here (haply) pointed at. Let the Lord but arise only and his enemies shall be scattered: but if he once take hold of shield and buckler, (for defence) he draw out the spear and sword (those weapons of offence) and appear as a man of warr Exod. 15.3. or as a Lord and Victour of warrs (so the Chaldee there hath it) he will charge thorough and thorough, he will burn them together Esay 27.4. and in the same place 2 Sam. 23.7. Verse 4. And his fcet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives] that is, he shall so put forth his power for defence of his people, as if he did visibly appear amongst them, and beheld the fight from the top of a mountain: like as Zerxes used to pitch his tent on high, and stand looking on his army when in fight, to encourage them, and to send out orders. From this Mount it was, that God departed after many former removes, from Ierusalem Ezech. 11.23. And what wonder, when as Har Hamischa the mount of Unction was become Har Hamas∣chith the mount of Corruption 2 King. 23.13? the bold lews having let up their Idol in this mount Olivet, even in the sight of the Lord: so that he never looked out of the Sanctuary,Iohn 18. Mat. 26.30. but he beheld that vile hill of abominations. From this mount it was that our Lord Christ ascended into heaven, Act. 1.11. There he was apprehended by the Jews: there therefore it is prophecied that he shall stand against them by the Romans, say some, out of Josep. de Bello Jud. lib. 6. cap. 3. And that when these things should come to pasle the Jews might know that their utter destruction was neer at hand. So God shewed unto the Ninivites on what side their city should be taken: and what at that time should be the power and the attempts of the enemy against them, Nah. 2. and 3. and yet neither of these repen∣ted for all this. Others (more probably) hold that here is promised such a power∣full presence of God for the relief of his people, as shall farr exceed the glory that appeared at the promulgation of the law, when the mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs:Psal. 114.6. Heb. 12.21. so terrible also was the sight, that Moscs said, I exceedingly fear and quake. I also see and tremble at the resemblance (said an holy man) betwixt that giving of the law, and the requiring of it at the last day. In the one Mount Sinai only was on a flame: all the world shall be so in the other. To the One, Moses (that climbed up that hill, and alone saw it) sayes, God came with ten thousand of his Saints. In the other, thousand thousands shall minister to him, and ten thousand thousands shall stand before him. Hereunto some refer that obscure passage in the next verse, The Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee: and that at the day of judgement Christ shall descend with all his Angels into mount Olivet, which hangs over the valley of Jehoshaphar, that there he may plead with all nations, for his people, and for his heritage Isracl, whom they have scattered, and parted their land Ioel. 3.2. Further they say, that mount Olivet shall then be shaken with a very great earthquake: so that it shall cleave in the middest, and leave a very great valley: it shall enlarge the valley of Iehosa∣phat, that it may be able to receive those that are there to be judged by Christ. Thus Lessius, Sa, à Costa, à Lapide, who also citeth for his purpose Clemens Ro∣manus lib. 7. Constit. Ap. cap. 33. speaking thus, Mons ipse Oliveti gloriae ve∣nientis cedet & in quaetuor partes dissectus longissimè diffugiel, ut tribunali judicis theatrum totius orbis assistat. i. e. Mount Olivet shall give place to the glory of Christ when he commeth; and being clest into foure parts, it shall flie far afonder, to the end that the theatre of the whole world may stand before the tribunall of the
Judge. Thus He. and surely the following verses, 6, 7, 8, &c. seem to favour this interpretation, and to have relation to the last Day. But in Prophesies not yet fulfilled (as this may be one) it is better and more sure to expect and stay for the explication by the event, then to give it without any certain ground. Verse 5. And ye shall slee to the valley of the mount ains] Or, ye shall flee the valley of the mountains, sc. of mount Olivet, made by God (verse 4.) by whom the Romanes were set awork to garrison Mount Olivet against the Jews: and,Joseph. lib. 6. cap 13. by digging down a great part of it, to fill up the brook Cedron or the town-ditch, and to bring a wall (wherewith they compassed about the whole city) thorow the middest of this mount: whereby the city was greatly pressed, and much annoyed. This Moun∣tain ye shall flee (as many of you as are Azal; that is separated: confer Exod. 24.11. Esay 4.4.) and repair to Pella, a place of rest provided for you. Not without some perturbation of spirit (though causelesse) as in common calamities it falleth out; and the like shall befall the very Elect also at the last day, till they have re∣collected themselves, till they remember that now their redemption draweth nigh. And ye shall flec] sc. with utmost hast and fright j death being that terrible of terribles, as the Philosopher calleth it, Natures slaughterman, Hells Purveyour, &c. like as ye fled from before the earthquake] which might be as sad and as suddain as that at Pleures in Rhetia, Anno 1618. Aug. 25.Alst. Chronol. the whole town was overcove∣red with with a mountaine, which with its most swift motion oppressed 1500. people. in the dayes of Ʋzzaah king of Juda] Whether this earthquake fell out just at that instant time when Ʋzzaah offered incense, and was therefore smitten with leprosie (as the lewish Doctors affirm) i have not to say. But of the horror of it (besides Am. 1.1. Joscphus relateth, that a mountain towards the West cleft in sunder and removed from its proper place the space of four furlongs, or half a mile: and far∣ther it had proceeded, had not a great mountain towards the East stayed its course. Camden reporteth the like hereunto to have fallen out in Heresord hire, Anno 1571. Cal. Martij 12. about six of the clock in the evening, a great hill lifted up it selfe with a huge noise, and ascending into an higer place, carryed along with it trees,Camd. Britan. flocks of cattle, sheep-coates, walked about from Saturday night till Monday noon, overturned a certain Chappell that stood in its way, &c. This kind of earthquake Philosophers call Brasmatia. and the Lord my God shall come] q. d. Let scoffers doubt and deride, saying, where is the promise of his coming? My God will effect with his hand what he hath spoken with his mouth, he will, he will, Habac. 2.3. There is an Emphasis in the word My (q.d. The God whose I am, yea  wholly his, as Aristotle saith of a ser∣vant) and another in the following Apostrophe. and all the saints with thee] The Prophet in an holy indignation at his hearers obstinacy and untractablenesse, turns him thus to God: like as doth old Jacob, Gen. 49.18. and our blessed Saviour tyred out with the peoples perversenesse, Mat. 11.25, 26. See the Note on both places. Verse 6. And it shall come to passe in that day] that is, saith Diod uc, after the de∣struction of Antichrist shall the son of God come in, who shall bring the Church into its glory: where, without any vicissitude or variation of day and night, of calamity and prosperity, of knowledge and ignorance, it shall enjoy eternall light by the sight of God, Isai. 16.19, 20. Rev. 21.23. and 22.5. Thus he. Betwixt this fall of Antichrist and the Consummation of all, some place the full and finall restau∣ration of the Iews, and make this a description of that glorious Church they shall then erect. There shall be no darknesse, but perpetuall light. It shall not be saith our Prophet here, sometime clear, sometimes mistie, (variable and uncertain wea∣ther, now fair, now foule) but one day, not of day and night: for in the evening when night is wont to come it shall be light: as if he should say, it shall be alwaies day and no night  a nightlesse day, a morning without cloudes, a clear shining after raine, as David in another case, 2 Sam. 22.4.Heresath d re rust. and asvith the Hyperbo∣rians the whole halfe year is said to be but one continuate day; so that they sowe and reape in a day. Verse 7. Which shall be known to the Lord] And that should suffice us, without
further curious enquiries,Calvin. de re nobis & toti mundo abscondita, concerning the set times and the seasons which the Father hath put in his own power, Act. 1.7. The Muscovites use to say in a darke point, in a difficult question, God and our great Duke know all this;Heyl. Geor: And in other talk, all we enjoy health, and life, & all from our great Duke: therefore let us leave all to him. hould not we much more to God? Time hath already confuted those learned men, who from Dan. 12.11. pitched their calcula∣tion for the Jewes restauration upon the year 1650. Those that shall live a few years longer shall see what will become of their confidence? who have undertaken to prove out of Daniel and the Revelation,Clavis Apoca∣lypt p. 134.136. that the Prophetical numbers come to an end with the year of our Lord 1655. because then the seventh Trumpet shall sound; and then the six thousand years from the Creation of the world do expire as they compute. Verse 8. Living waters shall go out from Jerusalem] i.e. Abundance of spirituall graces frequently in scripture compared to waters, for their cooling, cleansing, quicke ning property, Isai. 44.3. Ezek; 36.25. and 47.1. John 7.38.. And of these waters without all doubt, our baptism ordeined of God is a figure and sacra∣ment. Living waters they are called: that is running as a Spring, not standing as a poole. The godly esteeme of life by that stirring they find in their souls, Isa. 38.15, 16. In all these things is the life of my spirit: else they lament as over a dead soule. "O live,D. Hrris. live (saith a Reverend man) live quickly, live much, live long. Many live more in a day then others in a year: for life consisteth in action: and so much every man liveth, as he acteth graciously. Up therefore and be doing something of worth: whereof ye may testifie that ye have lived. And for this, get a prin∣ciple of life, the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, and then, if ye live in the Spirit, yhall also walk in the spirit, Gal. 5.25. and not fulfill the lusts of the siesh, verse 16. The waters of the sea, though by their natural course they follow the center, yet by obedience to the Moon they are subject to her motion; and so turn, and return, ebbe and flow, and are kept in continual motion, to keep them from corruption: so those that are spiritual, though naturally they are carried downward, and the best that of themselves they can do is but dead work: Yet so farre as they are spi∣ritualized, heavenlized, they are acting for God, and all their deeds are wrought in him, John 3.21. It is their great care to weare out, not rust out: to burn out, not to be blown out: yea to flame out, not to smother out: to serve out their gene∣ration, as David did not to idle it out: to live their utmost, and not (as Job. 27.15. with 23.) to be buried, before half dead. in summer and winter shall it be] such is the perennity and perpetuity of true grace: it ever flowes—more perennis aquae. As it is not like the River Araris of which Cesar saith,Cs de bel. Gal. l. 1. that it cannot with eyes be discerned whether it flow forward or backward (so slow and still is its motion:) so neither is it like the brook Cherith, that dryed up before the Prophet,1 Kin. 17.7. because there had been no raine in the Land: or like the River Novanus in Lombardy which (saith Plinie) at every Midsomer solstice swelleth and runneth over the banks; but at mid-winter, is clean dry. But as the waters of the Sanctuary,Lib. 2. cap. 130 Ezek. 47.4, &c. And as the poople of Siloe, which ser∣ved all Jerusalem, and was for every use to the citizens: or Hezakiah's watercour∣ses, 2 Kin. 20.20. Neh. 3.15, 16. whereunto some think that the Prophet here allu∣deth. He that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living waters. But this he spake (saith the Evangelist) of the sprit which they that believe on him should receive, John 7.38, 39. Verse 9. And the Lord shall be King over all the carth] At the sounding of the seventh Angel, the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ: and he shall reigne for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15, 17. Cosmo∣graphers tell us, that if we divide all the known world into thirty parts, the Hea∣thens part is as nineteen of this thirty: the Mahometans as six, the Christians as five only. And of those that professe the name of Christ, three parts at least of those five are possest by Idolatrous Papists; who say they believe in one only true God, but indeed set up many He-saints and She-saints, whom they adore with divine worship: and therein are no better then Pagans. Hence they are called Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. and are said to worship Divels, Rv. 9.20 with 1 Cor. 10.20. Cardinal Bombus saith of their Saint Franci, that he was in numcrum Deorum
ab Ecclesia Rom. relatus. At Ruremund in Gelderland, a play was acted by the Je∣suites,In Hist. Ven. Anno Dom. 1622. under the title of the Apotheosis of St. Ignatius the foun∣der of that Order. In the year 610. Boniface the fourth ordained the feast of All-saints, after that he had obtained of the Emperour the Idol-temple at Rome called the Pantheon;Jac. Ren. de vit. Pont. 309. wherein he placed the Virgin Mary in the roome of Cybcle the Mother of the Heathen Gods. Now the time is yet to come (and oh that it were come!) that, all false worship laid aside and abandoned, the fulnesse of the Gentiles shall be brought in: and from the Jews (as some gather from this Text compared with others) shall the Gospel go out to all Nations of the world, Isay. 2.3. who with one consent shall submit themselves to Christ. Ashur and Egypt, all those large and vast Countries, the whole tract of the East and of the South shall embrace the faith of Christ and be converted, Isa. 19.23, 24, 25. and 27.12, 13. Mich. 7.11, 12. Psal. 68 31. and 72.9, 10, 11. Rev. 21.14. O dieculam illam! Nei∣ther need we think it incredible: God can hisse for them and fetch them in 'sud∣denly: he can cause a Nation to conceive and bring forth in one day, Esay 66.8, 9. A Text that Cardinall Poole in a letter to Pope Julius the third abused: by applying it to the bringing in of Popery again so universally and suddainly in Queen Maries dayes. shall there be one Lord] Be the Gods of the Heathen good-fellows saith One, the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his glory with another. Be it that to Pagans and Papagans there are Gods many and Lords many: to us there is but one God, and but one Mediatour betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus. As for all others, say we of them, as that Heathen once did, Comemno minutos istos Deos modò Jovem propitium habeam, I care not for those petty-deities, so long as Jehovah fa∣voureth me. Heare O Israel (saith Moses, Deut. 6.4.) Jehovah thy God, Jehovah is one. The Hebrew word there used for One hath Daleth the last letter (which also stands in number for our) extraordinary great in the Originall: to signifie say the Jew-Doctors, that this one God shall be worshipped in the foure corners of the earth. and his Name one] that is, One way of worship; all Superstitions being abo∣lished, see Mich. 4.5. Or, his Name, that is, his glory as Psal. 8.1. his transcendent excellency shall be supereminent: He shall have a name above all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee may bow. Thus the word Name is used both in Divine and Humane Authors, Gen. 6.14. Men of Name, that is, of Renown: so Numb. 1.16. and 16.2. Acts 1.15. the number of Names, that is, of the chiestaines that were fit to act in the Election. Contrary whereunto is men without name, Job 30.8. men written in the earth, Jer. 17.30. shrouded in the sheet of shame,—ingloria vi∣ta recedit. and whose happinesse it is to be forgotten in the City, Eccles. 8.10. So the Poets call Eminent and famous men Nomina, as Ovid doth Augustus: Vive tibi, & longè No nina magna fuge. And speaking of some famous person he saith Claros inter habens nomina clara viros. Vers. 10. All the land shal be turned as a plain.] Or, shal be compassed about as a plain, ut aquore plano, so the Tigurine translation. Godshal enlarge the bounds of his Church; he shall lay all level, that people may come in amain from all parts. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough-wayes smooth, Luk. 3.5. The wildernesse, and the folitary place shall be glad for them, and the desert shall re∣joyce and blossom as the rose: It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoyce even with joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it; the excel∣lencie of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the ex∣cellencie of our God, Esa. 35.1, 2. The Prophet here sheweth that all the land shall be inhabited from one end unto another; From Geba the North-con∣fine, to Rimmon, the South-order, Josh. 15.32, 57. And from Benjamins gate unto the place of the first (or old) gate, Neh. 3.6. which stood Westward, unto
the corner gate (See 2 Chron. 26.9. & 25.23.) or the gate that looketh East∣ward. The limits of the Church shall be greatly enlarged; the rough and rug∣ged mountains being made as the smooth and pleasant champions. The saithful shall pass from Geba to Rimmon,Cant. 4.6 from the mountains of Myrrh and hils of Frankincense, to the Pomgranates (for so Rimmon signifieth, and from the plen∣ty of that fruit there,Masius in Josh. 19.13. this place seemeth to have taken its name) that is, from Humiliation and Supplication for pardon and power against corruption, to Love and good Works, looking up, and pressing hard toward the high prize proposed un∣to them; as the many grains within the case of the Pomgranate do point, and as it were all look up together unto the crown or circle that is without, upon the head of it. To the kings wine-presses] which were on the West-side, where the so rmer two half-compasses did meet to make up a whole compass. Certain it is, that Jerusalem was a very large and spacious city, comprehending thirty furlongs at least, say those that have written of it. There was in it the upper and the ne∣ther town,Vide typ. Jero∣sol. ap. Adricho. whence it is called, Iie-rushalaiim in the dual. There was afterwards the old town and the new, called Boretha, or Caenopolis. But Ezech. 40.41, 42. &c. God sheweth the Prophet a new Temple bigger then all the old Jerusalem put all together: and a new Jerusalem bigger then all the land of Canaan; by these very dimensions shewing, that these things cannot be understood but spi∣ritually. And the new Jerusalem in the Revelation as it lieth four square, looking every way to the four corners of the earth (like as Constantinople doth,Turk. Hist. which is theresore said to be a city fatally founded to command) so the measure of it is twelve thousand furlongs:Rev. 21.16. which (according to some) make no less then 1500 miles. Vers. 11. And men shall dwel in it.] Heb. They shall dwel in it, sc. Multitudes of men. The new Jerusalem, the Church gathered by the preaching of the Go∣spel shall not be thinly inhabited, as the wildernesse of Judea was: it shall not lye waste for want of people, as divers parts of Turkey do. It shall not need to call in the countrey,Neh. 11 as in Nehemiahs dayes, to replenish it: but it shal be ful thrust as an hive is with bees, where they hang out on heaps through want of room within or as Jerusalem was wont to be at the three solemn feasts; or lastly, as the Tem∣ple was at those feasts where the people were so crowded, that they were glad to stand and pray, for kneel or bow they could not. See Esay 51.3. Jer. 31 38, 39, 40. Obad. 19.20. And there shall be no more utter destruction.] Heb. Che∣rem, which the vulgar Interpreter rendreth, Anathema; There shall be no more curse, no execrable or accursed thing; no casting out by excommunication; no cause to do so. (See the same, Rev. 22.3. No Canaanite in the Lords house, as verse 21. Then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no stranger pass thorow her any more, Joel 3.17. such shall be her sanctity. Others expound it of her safety and security (as in the following words, Jerusalem shall be safely inha∣bited. See the like, Jer. 23.6. & 33.16. In those dayes shall ludah be saved, and Ierusalem shal dwel safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, Iehovah tsidkenu, The Lord our righteousness. A stately name indeed, and that which carries safety in the front of it. In Ezekiel the Church is called, Ihovah Shamma, The Lord is there: and the Psalmist gives the notation, and this note upon it, God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved: God shal help her, and that right early.. Mat. 1.21 Psal. 130.8 But the Lord our righteousnesse is a more August name. It is Christs own name: and imports that Christ will save his people from their sinnes (which would lay them naked to the wrath of God, and rage of enemies) he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities, and then he need not fear what man can do unto him. It was said of Achilles, that he was Styge armatus: But every childe of the Church is, Coelo, Christo, Deo armatus: he hath the peace of God within him, and the power of God without him; and therefore cannot but be safe as in a tower of brass, or town of war. Ps. 90.1. Verse 12. And this shal be the plague where with the Lord wil smite, &c] The precedent promises that were so great and glorious, the Prophet doth now far∣ther enlarge, and illustrate in the following verses: and first the conquest of the enemies, verse 12, 13, 14, 15. Next, the profession of Christ among all nations of the world, verse 16, 17, 18, 19. And lastly, the sanctity of the Church, verse
20, 21. The conquest of the enemies is set forth, First by Gods strange judge∣ments upon them, verse 12. Secondly, By the means, both they shal dispatch one another; and Judah shall fight bravely against them, verse 13, & 14. Thirdly, their wealth and substance shal become a prey, verse 14. Fourthly, their horses of service, and all the beasts they bring with them shalbe as strangely plagued as the men themselves, verse 15. That have fought against Ierusalem.] God will go forth and fight against them, verse 2 so that they shall wish they had never med∣led. Haec erit plaga qua plagabit. God hath a mighty hand, Iam. 4.9. and it is a fearful thing to fall into it, Heb. 10.31. for, who knoweth the power of his wrath? Psal. 90.11. One stroke of this hard and heavy hand, broke the angels backs, and cast them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgement, 2 Pet. 2.4. Iob felt but his little finger, as it were, and yet cryes out for help, Have pitty upon me, have pitty upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me, Iob 19.21. It had but lightly tonched him, and yet he was hardly able to endure it. Oh the bloody wails that Gods hand hath left upon the backs of his best children! Wo then to his enemies when he comes forth to fight against them. Their flesh shall consume away, whiles they stand upon their feet.] They shall pine away in their ini∣quities, Levit. 26.30. their beauty shall consume away like a moth. Psal. 39.11. they shall melt as wax before the sun, or as the fat of lambs before the fire. God if he be not unto them as a lion to tear the kell of their hearts in sunder, yet he will be as a moth, and as a worm, insensibly to consume them, Hos. 5.12, 14. If he break not their teeth in their mouths by smiting them upon the cheek-bone, yet he will make them to melt away as waters which run continually; as a snail which melteth, and as the untimely birth of a woman that never seeth the sun, Psa. 58.6, 7, 8. God hath secret wayes to wast his enemies, and to bring them on their knees when they are best under-set. He can trip up their heels when they are standing upon their feet, and lay them low enough in the slimy valley where are many already like them, and more shal come after them, Iob 21.31, 32. God hath a Marasmus, an evil messenger for a malicious persecutor; as he had for Antiochus Epiphanes; for both the Herods; for Maximinus the Tyrant;1 Machab. 6. Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 11. for Philip the se∣cond of Spain, Charles the ninth of France, Queen Mary of England, Steven Gardiner, Arch-Bishop Arundel, Nestorius, Arrius, and other odious Hereticks, and enemies of the Church: amongst whom à Lapide the Iesuit reckons here Calvin, and saith, That like another Hered, he died a lowsie lothsom death: and for his authority thinks it enough to say, uti refert Bolsecus in ejus vita. But it must be understood, that the lives of Calvin and Beza were spite∣fully written by this Bolsecus their sworn enemy, that twice banished and thrice runnagate Friar (liar I might have said) and Physician: for those names his often changes and hard chances have given him. This man being request∣ed by the popish side (and its likely hired by them) to write thus,Spec. Eur is in all their writings alledged as Canonical. And their eyes shal consume away in their holes.] Physicians tell us of two thousand diseases that annoy mans body, two hundred whereof affect the eyes: All these are part of Gods hosts, which are as much at Gods command as the Centurions servants and souldiers were at his, when he said but, Go, or come, and they did accordingly. He can make mens eyes drop and cease, not without any intermission, as Lam. 3.49. till they melt out,Mat. 8.9. as the He∣brew here hath it; even the very same word as before. he can smite men with sudden blindness (as he did the sinful Sodomites, that had eyes full of adultery) such as tormented their eyes, as if they had been pricked with thorns, as the He∣brew word signifieth, Gen. 19.11. Failing of eyes, and sorrow of minde, is threat∣ned as a judgement, Deut. 28.65. yea thou shalt be mad for the fight of thine eyes, which thou shalt see is another piece of the curse, verse 34. See 1 Sam. 2.33. And their tongue shal consume away in their mouth.] As did the tongue of Nestori∣us the Heresiarch eaten out of his mouth with worms: Tho. Arundel, and Ste∣ven Gardiner, two bloody persecutors, died of a like disease. Diodate understands all this to be a description of hel-torments. Their flesh shall consume, yet never be consumed; for they still stand upon their feet, or subsist, that they may still suffer; having no end, that their pain may be endless. Their eyes shal consume, &c, that is, saith he, though they be alive and can see, yet shall they be deprived of light in
infernal darknesse: having neither eyes nor understanding, but onely to see and judge of their extream misery. Their tongue shal consume away, &c. as did the rich gluttons, Luke 16.24. M. Calvin observeth here, that all is delivered in the sin∣gular number; his flesh shal consume; his eyes shal melt; his tongue, &c. (for so runs the Original) to note that every of Ierusalems enemies shal taste of Gods wrath; though some of them may haply hold themselves out of the reach of his rod. And, Secondly, that God can as easily destroy them all, as if he had to do but with one fingle man. Verse 13. A great tumult from the Lord shal be among them.] He shall fright them as he did the Philistines by a sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, 2 Sam. 5.24. and the Syrians by a hurry noise in the air, causing a Pannick terror, 2 King. 7.6. Therefore some render it, Erit strepitus vel fragor Domi∣ni magnus in eis, ut 1 Sam. 7.10. with 1 Sam. 2.10. Or, he shall exasperate and imbitter them one against another; as he did Abimelech, and the men of Shechem, by sending an evil spirit between them, Judg. 9.23. that is by letting loose Satan upon them, that old man-slayer, that kindle-coal and make-bate of the world: and this in a way of just revenge for their treacherous conspiracy against the house of Gideon. Thus God first divided, and then destroyed the Midianites by setting every ones sword against his fellow, Judg. 7.23. So he dealt by the Philistims, 1 Sam. 14.15, 20. So the Kings of Syria and Egypt that succeeded Alexander, and were enemies to the Jews, destroyed one another: So did the Primitive Persecu∣tors, the Turk and the Persian, the Spaniard and the French. In the year 1526. Charles the fifth Emperour of Germany, set at liberty his prisoner Francis King of France,Scultet Annal. Dec. 2. pag. 2 upon this condition (among others) that they should joyne their forces and do their utmost to suppresse and root out the Lutheran Heresie; that is, the truth of the Gospell, out of both their Dominions. But soon after they fell at variance amongst themselves, (the Pope blowing the bellowes) whereby the Church had her Halcyons, sic canes lingunt ulcera Lazari. shall take the hand of his neighbour] as those yonkers of Helcath-hazzurim did, that sheathed their swords in their fellows bowels, 2 Sam. 2.16. Verse 14. And Iudah also shall fight at Ierusalem] Shall fight like a lion, and do great exploits for his countrey; as Judas Maccabeus did: as Hunniades, that Maul of the Turks, and Scanderbeg, who killed 800. Turks with his own hand, and fought so earnestly sometimes, that the very blood burst out at his lips. So did Zisea, and the rest of Christs worthy warriours: who by faith, (and yet by force of arms too) waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens, sub∣dued kingdomes, fought the Lords battles, Heb. 11.32, 34. They saw by faith, what is on the other side of the shore of this mortality: and that put mettle into them. The valour of the Gauls was admired by the Romans: it proceeded from that in∣struction they had from their Druides,The life of the K of Sweden by M. Clark. of the immortality of the soul. The Swedes upon the same ground shewed incredible courage in the late German warres: running into apparent danger, like flies into the candle (saith One) as if they had not seen it. Faith fears no colours. What brave spirits hath God raised up amongst us alate, fighting as it were in blood to the knees for Religion and liberty, resolved either to vanquish or die, as the Black Prince; , with that Lacedemonian, either to live with the Gospel, or to die for it? And how valiant the restored Jews shall once be upon their enemies the Turks, who now hold their countrey till their iniquities be full, who can tell? Sure it is that Israel after their victory over Gog, shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord God, Ezek. 39.10. And then perhaps it is, that the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be gathered together (as a prize or booty) gold, and silver, and appa∣rell in great abundance] Look how Abraham stripped the four kings of their plun∣der, Gen. 14.16. Gideon, the Midianites, Iudg, 8. David, the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 30.18. Iehosaphat, the Ammonites, (they were three dayes in gathering the spoil it was so much, 2 Chron. 20.25.) so it may fall out one day with their posterity. The Jew Doctours, as they have a saying, that whatsoever befell unto the Fathers is a figne unto the children: so of Abrahams victory over the four kings, they write, that it befell unto him, to teach that four kingdomes (those kingdomes spo∣ken of in Daniel) should stand up to rule over the world: and that in the end his
children should rule over them, and they should all fall by their hand,R. Menachem on Gen. 14. and they should bring again all their captives, and all their substance. Verse 15. And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel] All the beasts of service, made use of by the enemy, shall consume in like sort, as their masters. First, for a punishment to their owners, who must needs suffer losse thereby. Hence Saul was so sedulous in seeking the lost asses. Secondly, to shew how God is displeased with, and will severely punish all that are instrumentall to the Churches calamities, or serviceable to their sinne. The serpent is cursed, cut shorter by the feet, and made to wriggle upon his belly, yea confined to the dust for his diet. So God curseth and abhorreth all instruments of idolatry, Esay 30.22. Num. 31.22, 23. Deut. 7.25. The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: the very visible heavens, because defiled with mans sinne, are to be purged by the fire of the last day. Verse 16. Every one that is left of all the nations] i.e. that hath escaped the plague, verse 12. and is beaten into a better mind: as those Hunnes, that, vanqui∣shed by the Christians, concluded that Christ was the true God, and became his subjects. God had promised before to subvert the Churches enemies, but here to convert them, which is farre better. And it shall appear to be so (as conversion cannot be hid; you cannot turn a bell, but it will make a sound: and report its own motion. See Gal. 1.23.) for they shall even go up] sc. to the Temple, which stood upon mount Moriah: to worship the king the Lord of Hosts].Esay 16.1 to send a lamb (or an homage peny) to the Lord of the whole earth. and to keep the feast of Tabernacles] In a due manner, which had not been rightly done (a marvellous thing) all along during the reigne of David, Solomon, and all those succeeding Reformers, till about these times; as appears Neb. 8.16, 17, 19. The sence of this text is, that the converted Gentiles shall joyn with the Jews, in the sincere service of God according to his will, and not according to their own brains and fancies: that they shall worship him with the same rites, in the same places and assemblies which they do: that Jehovah may be one, and his name one amongst them, as verse 9. that there may be no more Jew, and Gentile, Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free, but Christ may be all, and in all.Col. 3.11 That those two sticks being joyned into one, Ezek. 37.16. all Israel may be saved, Rom. 11.26. and raised as from the dead, verse 15. the Gentiles also may have their part in the same resurrection. All this is here set forth in such termes, and under such types as were then most in request: as of going up to the Temple, keeping the feast of Tabernacles, &c. All which expressions are parabolicall, symbolicall, and enigmaticall: framed to the capacity of the Jews, much addicted to these le∣gall rites and shadows, then in use, but now done away, Col. 2.17. Heb. 10.1. whatever the Jews conclude from this text for their continuance under Messias his kingdome. Christians have their feasts or holy-dayes too, 1 Cor. 5.8. yea their feast of Tabernacles in a mystieall sence, 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 11.1, 9. Verse 17. Even upon them shall be no rain] i. e. Nullam misericordiam asse∣quentur, saith Theodoret: They shall get no good at Gods hand. Judaea was sumen totius orbis, as One saith, a very fat and fertile countrey: but yet so, as that her fruitfulnesse depended much upon seasonable showres, the former and latter rain: and the Prophet seemeth here to allude to that of Moses, Deut. 11.10, &c, If God did not hear the heaven, and the heaven the earth, the earth could not hear the corn, wine, and oil, nor those hear Jezreel, Hos. 2.19. Judaea was not like that countrey in Pliny, ubi siccitas dat lutum, imbres pulverem, where drought made dirt, rain made dust: but if the heaven were iron over them, the earth would soon be brasse under them, and not yeeld her increase, (See Psal. 65.9. Esay 30.23.) and then where would they be quickly? sith Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est, life would be lost, if not maintained by daily food. Rain is in Scripture put 1. Properly, for water coming out of the clouds, Deut. 11.11, Prov. 16.15. nourishing the herbs and trees. 2. Metaphorically for Christ, his Gospel, and his graces, wherewith the souls of men are made fruitfull in good works, Esay 45.8. Deut. 32.2. Hos. 6.3. The want of rain is on the contrary made here, and Rev. 11.5. a signe of a curse. It waiteth not for the sonnes of men, Mic. 5.7.
but it accomplisheth what God appointeth, Esay 55.10, 11. Why it falleth here, and now, we know not, and wonder. Vers. 18. And if the family of Egypt] So called from one Aiguptos, a King there. In the Hebrew it is called, (mostly) Mizraim, from one of that name, Gen. 10.6. sometimes, for its power and pride, it is called, Rahab, Psal. 87.4. and 89.11. Esay 51.9. The family of Egypt is here put for the whole Nation (see the like Amos 3.1.) because, after the confusion of tongues especially, Nations took their originall and denomination from the head of some family; as did the Egyptians from Mizraim, Chams second sonne. go not up, and come not] But they did receive the Christian religion with the first: had Christian schools, Doctours, and Professours, after that Saint Mark had there planted a Church at Alexandria, now called Scanaeroon. This was fore-prophecred, Esay 19.21. The Lord shall be known to Egypt, &c And the Lord shall smite E∣gypt, he shall smite and heal it; &c. he shall cause them to passe under the rod, and to bg them into the bond of the covenant, as it is Ezek 20.37 th have no rain] Others read it thus, It shall not rain upon them. For they also needed rain in some measure, as well as other nations. See Psal. 105.32. though not so much, by reason of the overslowings of the river : which if it arise to a just height, sc. of fifteen or sixteen cubits, as Pliny ells us, it  the land very fruitfull: so that they do but throw in the seed, and have our  har∣vests in lesse then four moneths.S. H. Blant  Indeed where the Nile arrives not,  no∣thing, they say, in Egypt, but a whitish fand, bearing no grasse, but two tile weeds, colled Suit and Gazul: which, burnt to ashes, and conveyed to Venice, make the finest thrystall-glasses. The Chalee enders it, Non creset ejus Nns. God loves to confute men in their confidences, to dry up their Nilusses, (See Ezck. , 9. Isa. 19.5, 6.) as he did for two yeers together in the time of Cloopatra, a little before Christs birth: and once before for nine years space. there shall be the plague] q.d. If they escape the forethreatened evil, a worse thing abides them: their preservation from famine is but a reservation to those everlast∣ing burnings Verse 12. And though here they abound even to satiety, and surfet (the Egyptians were wont to boast that they could feed all men, and feast all the gods, without any sensible diminution of their provision) yet at the last day they shall be cut short enough, eat fire, drink brimstone, God himself uttering those or the like words Esay 65.1, Behold, my servants shall cat, but you shall e hurgry, ehold, myservants shall drink, but you shill be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but none shall be ashamed. Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for exation of spirit. Verse 19. This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment] Or sin: In∣deed the sin of sins to slight Gods Ordinances and offers of grace; and to neglect so great salvation as is tendred in and by Christ. This very sin is it: own punish∣ment. This is condemnation, or hell asorehand, John 3.19. This brought Ca∣pernaum down from heaven to hell, Mat. 11.23. Pagans that never heard of Christ shall havean easier judgement then such, Mat. 10.23. for they shall have a double condemnation. One from the law which they have broken, wherein Christ found them: another from the Gospel for rejecting Christ, and the bath of his blood, to the which even the Prines of Sodo are invited, Esai 1.10. See Iohn 2.48. Mat. 21.44. It is with such as with a malefactour that being dead in law, doth yet refuse a pardon. Danaeus observeth here that mention is made of the feast of Tabernacles especially. 1. Because this least was now most solemnly kept among the Jews, Neh. 8. And secondly, because it was a most evident testimony of the first gathering together of the people of Israel. that is of a free ordained Church. Therefore it was better liked of the people, and a more evident sign of their uniting or knitting together within themselves, as is unto us the holy sup∣per of our Lord Jesus Christ. Verse 20. In that day shall there be upon the bels of the horses] hang'd upon their heades, or about their necks: as Iudg. 8.26. the Midianitish camels ad rich collars and chains about their necks, for ornament sake. It was a witty conceit of a modern Divine,D . that many deal with their Ministers, as carriers do with their horses; lay heavy burthens upon them, and then hang bels about their necks: they
shall have har work and great commendations: but easy commons, good words, but slight wages. This was better then that bald conceit of Theodoret  others,Lib. 1. hist. cap. 18. Ruff. in lib. 1. c. 8. Socat. 1.1. that this Prophesie was then fulfilled when as Constantine the Great (or h mother  for him) caused the bits of his horse-bridle to be made of the nailes of the crosse of Christ. I confesse the word is by some rendred bridles, by others trap∣pings, Frontals, collars. 'Tis  read only here: and hence this varie∣ty of interpretations. Calvin renders it stables of horses: which although they are but contemptible places and usually stink: yet the Prophet saith, they shall be ly to the Lord. Hereby the Prophet teacheth, saith He, that God shall so be king of the world; as that all things shall be applied to his worship: neither shall any thing be of so common and ordinary use that shall not change its nature, and be sanctified to Gods service. The comparison here is made betwixt things profane, and the inscription on the high-Priests mitre, which was Holinesse to the Lord. This is a manifest testimony of a godly mind, when godlinesse runs thorough a mans whole life, as the woose doth thorough the web: whenordinary actions are done from a right principle, and to a right purpose: according to that old and good Rule, Quicquid agas, propter Deum agas, Whether ye eate or drink, or what soever ye do,1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Tim. 4.14. Holinesse must be written up∣on our bridles when we warr, upon our cupps when we drink Dr. Harris. de all to the glory of God. Receive every creature with thank sgiving: in serving men, serve the Lord Christ: exercise your general calling in your particular: do earthly bu∣sinesse with heavenly minds: Content not your self with a naturall use of the crea∣ture, as bruit beasts do, but tast the sweetnesse of God in all: and in all thy wayes acknowledge Him, depending upon him for direction and successe, consulting with him, and approving thine heart and life unto him. This is to go the upper way Pro. 15.24. which indeed is both cleaner, shorter, and safer. This is to be of that royall Priest-hood, that hath for its posy, Holinesse to the Lord. This is to be harmelesse, and blamelesse, the sons of God; known by their holinesse as Davids children were by their garments of diverse colours. For as he that hath called them is holy, so are they also holy, and that in all manner of conversation and commu∣nion too, even when they deale with carnal men, and in common matters. and the pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowles before the Altar] All this must be understood of the spirituall service, which should be in the Christian church: described by the ancient ceremonial service, as Isa. 60.7. and 66.23. Mal. 1.11. And it is to shew, that the efficacy, force, and operation of the holy Ghost, shall be far more plentifull through Christ in the Church of the Gos∣pell, then it was in times past, under the law. See Heb. 8.6. Eph. 3.5. Isa. 44.3, 4. Verse 21. Yea, every pot in Ierusalem &c.] That is, saith Danaeus, God shall as God-like be worshiped of every faithfull person in his own house, as he was of old in his Temple by the Jews. Calvin adds, ut quicquid aggrediantur homines sit sacrificium, so that whatsoever good men enterprize, shall be a sacrifice. God shall smell a savour of rest from them, they of life and peace from him. there shall be no more the Canaanite] The merchant, saith the vulgar after Aqui∣la, and the Chaldee; that is, the Simoniack, the Church-chopper, such mony∣merchants as Christ whipt out of the Temple Mat. 21.12. Ioh. 2.15. But better render it Canaanite,The Phenici∣ans those great merchants were Canaa∣nites. who were indeed great Merchants Hos. 12.7. Ezek. 17.4. but here it stands for a wicked man, an hypocrite, that botch of Christian society. Pura erit Ecclesia ab omnibus inquinamentis, saith Calvin: the Church shall be purged of all such Pests. See Rev. 22.27. no such owles shall be seen flying in the Churches welkin. God will, by the due exercise of discipline, and otherwise, be daily purging out all scandals, as such men are called Mat. 13.41. and causing the unclean spirit to passe out of the land Zach. 13.2. I conclude with Theodoret, Dominus Omnipotens hanc vocem veram esse hoc tempore praestet &c. God Almighty make good this promise unto us at this time: that there may be no cursed Canaanite found amongst us; but that we may all live according to the doctrine of the Gospell, and expect that blessed hope and comming of the great God our Saviour Jesus; to whom with the Father and holy Spirit be glory for ever. Amen.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophesie of MALACHI. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE burden] that is, the burdenous Prophecy (as Tremellius renders it) A burden; as 1. enjoyned and imposed upon the Prophet to utter,Lyra. Figuicr. to cry a∣loud, and not spare, to life up his voice as a trum∣pet &c. straining every vein in his heart to do it; declayming lustily against sin and sinners, and pro∣clayming hell-fire for them in case they amend not. This is a businesse of some burthen,Chrysost. onus ipsis eti∣am Angelis tremendum. This was typified in the staff-rings that were made to conti∣nue upon the Ark: the Kohathites shoulders felt wherefore. If God had not helped those Levites, they could never have borne the Ark 1 Chron. 15.26. St. Paul was very sensible of the ministeriall burthen, rowling upon him daily 2 Cor. 11.28. And Latimer leaped, when lighted of his Bishoprick. 2. As burdening the peo∣ple with their sins, and breathing out threatnings for the same; for sin (how light∣ly soever accounted of) hales hell at the heels of it, and procures divine vengeance, which is a burthen unsupportable. It brake the Angels backs, and made the son of God groan piteously,1 Pet. 2.24. then when he bare our sins in his body on the tree. His soul was heavy therewith even to the death: and had he not had the better shoulders, had not God laid help on One that was mighty (even the mighty strong God, as he is stiled Esay 6.6.) he had fainted and failed under his burthen. David complaines, that his sins were gone over his head, and like a sore burthen, were too heavy for him to bear Psal. 38.4. That which comforted him was, that no sooner he had said Peccavi I have sinned,2 Sam. 12. but the Prophet Nathan said, Transtulit Deus peccatum tuum, God hath translated thy sin upon Christ, hath caused thy sin to passe over to him, and (as it were) by a writt of Remove, hath cast thy burthen upon his shoulders. And this incomparable merey David afterwards celebrateth Psa. 32 4, 5.
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: the guilt of finne, and sense of wrath quelled him and killed him almost; for his naturall moisture was turned into the drought of summer: he was turned into a very skeleton, or a bag of bones, a bottle in the smoke, wofully wanzed he was, and wasted. But for remedy, I acknowledge my sin unto thee (saith he) I fled by faith to the true Scape-goat Christ Jesus on whom was laid (as a burthen) the iniquitie of us all, Isai. 53.6. Rom. 5.8. And thou pre∣sently forgavest the iniquity of my sinne, that is, the guilt of it, that till then lay like a load of lead upon my conscience, and, as an obligation, bound me over to condigne punishment. Cam for want of this comfort, ran roaring up and down, my sinne,Gen. 4.13. that is, my punishment is greater then I can heave. And a farre better man then Cain (even holy Job, with whom God was but in jest, as it were) cries out that his ca∣lamitie was havier then the sand of the sea, Job 6.3. and that yet his stroake was hea∣vier then his groaning, Chap. 23.2. Those that have ever felt the misery of a laden conscience, can tell what an evill and bitter thing sinne is.Jer.  Those that now run a∣way with it, and make as light of it as Sampson did of the gate of Gaza, shall one day groan out Woe and alas, when God shall set himself to load them with tortures in hell, who do now load him with their sinnes, and weary him out with their imquities, Esay 43.24. For prevention, oh that they would be perswaded to believe the Pro∣phets, that their souls might prosper, to be sensible of sins burden, that Christ might ease them: to take upon them his burthen which is onus sine onere, and would be no more burthen to them then the wings are to the bird, whereby he is born aloft, that they would imitate porters, who being called and offered money to beare a burden, will poise it and weigh it in their hands first, which when they see they are not able to stand under, no gain will entice them to undertake it. Do we pro∣voke the Lord to anger? are we stronger then he?Heb. 10. Is it not a fearfull thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living God? Is the the wrath of a King as the roaring of a lyon, as the messengers of death? surely they that tremble not in hearing,Bradsord.  2 Pet. 3.3. Job. 41.27. shall be crusht in pieces in feeling, as that Martyr said, and let all those scoffers that make childrens play of Gods dreadfull menaces (as St. Peters word importeth) that (Le∣viathan-like) esteem Gods iron as straw, that read his Propheticke burdens, as they do the old stories of forraine warres, or as they behold the wounds and bloud in a picture or piece of Arras, which never makes them smart or feare; Let all these, I say, read and ruminate that flaming place, Jer. 23.33, 37. and let them know, that if they belong to God,Am. 5.12. he will cripple their iron sinews by the sense of their many and massy or bony sinnes. As if otherwise, he will fall upon them with his full weight, and grind them to powder, Mat. 21.44. Cavete: cavebitis autem si pave∣bitis. to ] The two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, with those few of the ten Tribes that returned amongst them from the Babylonish captivity. These, though we never find them again going a whoring after Idols (the sinne that they had paid so dear for, and had now bought their wit) yet forgetfull of former both beatings and benefits; (as children) are, they soon returned to their old flagiti∣ons practises of Polygamy, blasphemy, sacriledge, defilement of Divine Worship, unlawfull marriages, &c. and so had lost in a manner, the fruit of their sufferings: putting God to his old complaint, why should ye be smitten any more, &c. and cau∣sing him to sigh out, as even sick of them, Ah sinfull nation, &c. Reprobate silver shall men call them, &c. by Malachi] Heb. by the hand of Malachi, i. e. by his mouth and Ministery.Isai.  Jer. 6. Hand is put for Mouth by a Catachresis: because the hand is the Instrument of In∣struments, as saith the Philosopher. See the like, Exod. 9.35. Numb. 4.37, 45.. Isai. 8.11. One Expositor noteth here, that this expression by the hand is used to teach us, that Prophets and Ministers must preach not with their Tongues only, but with their hands too: lest they be found in number of those Pharisees that say but doe not, that bind heavy burdens, and hard to be born, upon other mns shoulders, but they themselves touch them not with one of their fingers, Mat. 23.3, 4. Let our hands also preach as well as our tongues, nè dicta factis deficientibus erubescant, as Tertullian speaketh, lest talking by the Talent, and working by the the Ounce, our hands give our tongues the lye. by Malachi] i. e. Mine Angel, or an Angelicall man. Not an heavenly Angel,
as Origen held:Litera Jod in fine format no∣men adjecti∣vum, ut in Nochri alienus Chopshi liber. nor as told and taught by an Angel how to deliver and deport him∣self in his office; like as when that Bathgol or voice from heaven came to Christ, Joh. 12.28. the people that stood by and heard it, said, that it thundered, others said, an Angel spake to him, ver. 29. But either he was so called by his parents at his birth and circumcision (as Angelus Politianus and others) or else so sirnamed by the good people of those times; as whose disposition, communication, conversation, coun∣tenance and whole carriage were Angelicall. Chrysostom, for like cause, calleth Paul, Angelum terrestrem an earthly Angel. And the Authour to the Hebrewes speaking of those faithfull Martyrs that lived and suffered soon after Malachi's time, he saith, Of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.38. Meaning, that they were fitter to be set as Angels in heaven, to be fixed in the region of happinesse, to shine sull fair upon the Coelestial shelf (as that Martyr said) then to abide here among sinners.Act. and Mon. Chrysostom in his 55. Homily upon Matthew calleth certain religious men of his time Angels, for their sanctimony and celestiall conversation. And Dr. Tailor Martyr blessed God, that ever he came in company with that Angell of God John Bradford. Verse 2. I have loved you saith the Lord] Thou hast loved us (might they reply) whilest we were willing and obedient. Thou lovest them that love thee, Prov. 8.17. and shewest mercy to thousands of them that love thee and keep thy commande∣ments,Lam. 5.22. Exod. 20. But now thou hast utterly re ecled us, thou art very wroth against us. Nay saith God, I do love you, so Tremelline renders this Text: I am Jehovahs, I change not, Chap. 3.6. I do rest in my love, and will seek no further, Zeph. 3.17. Surely Israel hath not been forsaken nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of Hosts, though their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel, Jer. 51.5. Thus it was before the captivitie. But how after? See Zach. 1.17. The Lord had professed before, that he had been sore displeased with their Fathers, verse 2. and it appears ver. 3, 4. they were no better then their Fathers: all which notwithstanding, see a sweet promise, ver. 17. Cry yet saying, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, My cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet chuse Jerusalem. There are four Yets in the Text, and all very gracious ones: to shew, that the fulnesse sinne in us doth not abate the fulnesse of love in God to∣ward his people. And the same in effect is thankfully acknowledged by those holy Levites at their solemn fast, held much about the time of our Prophet Malachy, Nehem. 9. where they make a catalogue of the many fruits and expressions of Gods love to themselves and their fathers. Besides extraordinary favours not a few, he gave them good Lawes, verse 13. good Sabbaths, verse 14. his good spirit to instruct them. 20. He forsook them not when they dealt proudly against him, 16, 17. but crowned them with outward comforts, 21, 25. afflicted them when they provoked him, 26, 27. sent them Saviours when they cryed to him, 27. after often revolts, was often intreated, 28. with held his worst and consuming judge∣ments for a long time, 30, 31. And was there not love in all this? Might not God well say, I have loved you? Ribera thinks there is an Aposiopesis in the words, as if God would have said more: but very grief breaks off his speech, out of a deep sense of their detestable ingratitude. David hath such an abrupt expression, Psal. 116.1. I love: because the Lord hath heard my voice. Such a pang, such a passion he felt, that he was not able to say, I love the Lord, but I love, and sobreakes off abruptly. The like whereunto may here be conceived of God; who cannot en∣dure to have his love lost, his grace undervalued, as it was by these obstreperous Questionists, who put him to his proof, as those did, Jer. 2.25. yet ye say, wherein hast thou loved us] Their late captivity and calamity so stuck still in their stomacks, that they could not see wherein he had shewed them any love. But had they considered Daniels weekes, they might have known that (be∣sides their free election, all blessings flowing therefrom, as verse 3.4.5.) for their seventy years captivity, they had seven seventies of years granted them afterwards for the comfortable enjoyment of their own countrey. Sed ingrato quod donatur, deperditur, saith Seneca. And Amare non redamantem est amoris impendia perdere, saith Hierome. All's lost that is laid out upon an unthankfull people, who devoure Gods best blessings as bruit beasts their prey: haunch them up and swallow them, as swine do swil: bury them as the barren earth doth the seed: use them as homely,
as Rchel did her fathers gods, which she laid among the litter, and sat upon; yea, sighting against God with his own weapons (mercies, I meane) as John. did against Ichoram with his own messengers, as David did against Goliath with his own sword, as Benhadad against Ahab with that life that he had given him: as i God had hired them to be wicked &c. was not Esau Jacobs brother] Did they not both tumble in a belly?Isay 51.1. were they not both digged out of the same pit, hewen out of the same rock? and yet (as the great Turk, and his brethren born of the same parents, the eldest is desti∣ned to a diadem, the rest to an halter, so here) Esau, though the elder, and heire, was rejected, at least he was lesse loved (for so the word hated is to be taken, Gen. 29.31. Luke 14.20. M. 10.37.) Jacob though the younger and weaker (for Esau was born a manly childe, born with a beard, as some think, and was therefore called Esau, that is, Factus & persus pilis, a man already, rather then a babe) yet was Gods beloved one. And so were his posterity too, the people of Gods choyce, above the Edomites; who were now left in captivity at Babylo, when as the Jews were returned into their own countrey: yea, for the Jews sakes, and as a testimony of Godslove to them, were these Edomites still held captives, and their land irreparably ruinated because they shewed themselves mercilesse, and bloody in the day of Jerusalems calamity, Obad. 10.11. Psal. 137.7. God had charged the raelites, saying, Thou shalt not abhor an Edote: for he is thy bro∣ther Deut. 23.7. But as Eau began betime to persecute Jacob, bristling at him, and bruising him in their mothers womb Gen. 25.22. so his posterity were bitter enemies to the Church, joying in her misery, and joyning with her enemies. wherefore thus saith the Lord God, I will also stretch our mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from t &c. Ezck. 25.13, 14. yet I loved Jacob] And preordained him to a crown that never fadeth, as Paul expoundeth this text Rom. 9.13. of election to eternal life, which is the sweetst and surest seal of Gods love. Let us secure our election (and so Gods special love to our souls) by those two infallible marks 2 Thes. 2.13. First, belief of the truth, that particularity and propriety of assurance. Secondly sication of the Spirit, o the obedience of the truth. And as God loved Iacobs person, so he loved his posterity the Israelites above all other people: not because they were more in number, or better in disposition, ex meliore luto &c. But because the Lord lo∣ved you, therefore be set his love upon you, and chose you, saith Moses Dut. 7.7, 8. the ground of his love was wholly in himself; there being nothing in man, no∣thing our of Gods self, that can primarily move, and incline the eternal immuta∣ble, and omnipotent will of God. The true original and first motive of his love to his creature is, the good pleasure of his will. See. Eph. 1.5. where all the four causes of Election are shewed to be without us. Verse 3. And I hated Esau] i. e. I loved him not as I did Iob: I passed him by, and let him alone to perish in his corruption, and for his sin. And for his poste∣rity; whereas they were carried captives by Nebuchadnezzar (as Isreal also was) I have not turned again their captivity, but laid their land desolate; rased and harased their cities and castles made them an habitation of dragons and devil and all this as an argument of my deep hatred and utter detestation of them. True it is, that Judea lay utterly waste, during the seventy yeers of their captivity; the land kept her sabbaths resting from tillage. Upon the slaughter of Gedalah all the Jews that were left in the land fled into Egypt: and God kept the room empty, and free from invasion of forreiners, untill the return of the Natives out of Babylon. Now it was far otherwise with Idumea: the desolation whereof is here described to be both total and perpetual, (according to that foretold by Eze∣chiel Chap. 35. O mount Seir, I will make thee to be most desolate,Ezech. 35 3, 7, 15. or (as the Hebrew hath it emphatically and eloquently) wastnesse, and wastnesse, extreme and and irrecoverable. A , or utter ruine befel that countrey, being part of Arabia Petrea (hence mention of their mountains) and abounding naturally with with serpents, or dragons; it being in the wildernesse of this country of Edom where the Israelites were so stung with fiery serpents:Num. 21.6. hence it became afterwards a very den of dragons lurking there. Verse 4. Whereas Edom saith we are impoverished] Or, thrust out of house and
home, and reduced to extreme indigency: yet we will return, and build the desolate places. We will do it all, despito di Deo (as that prophane Pope said:) if it be but to crosse Gods prediction, and to withstand his power and providence. Thus these earthen pots will be dashing themselves against the rocks, against those moun∣tains of brasse (so Gods immutable decrees are called Zech. 6.1. Thus Lamech will have the oddes of God seventy to seven (so Iunius interprets it) Gen. 4.24. Thus, when God had threatened to root out Ahab and his posterity, he would try that: and to prevent it, took more wives, and so followed the work of gene∣ration, that he left seventy sons behinds him, 2 Kin. 10.1. Thus Pharaoh (that sturdy rebel) holds out against God to the utmost, and sends away his servant Moses, threatning death to him, even then when he was compassed on all hands with that palpable darknesse. Thus the Philistin Princes (while some plagued) ga∣ther themselves together again against the humbling Israelites at Mizpch:1 Sam. 7. and so rum to meet their bane. Thus the proud Ephraimites Isai. 9.10. The bricks in∣deed, say they, are fallen down, but we will build it again with hewen stones. The The wilde sigtrees are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars. Thus the Pha∣risees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves Luk. 7.30. yea would needs be found fighters against God,Act. 5.39. as Gamaliel truly told them. Thus those primitive persecutours would needs attempt to root our Christian religion; the Jews by the leave and help of Iulian, to despite the Christians, would reedifie their city and Temple,Job. de Colum∣na in Mari∣histor. but were hindred from heaven. Otho the Emperour would make the city of Rome his Imperial seat (which was long before pointed and painted out for the Nest of Antichrist) but could not effect it. The esuits would fain heal the Beasts wounded head, and reestablish their kingdom of Idolatry, But this they must never look for. Christ shall raign, and all his foes shall be his footstool; The Romish Edomites shall come to rume. thus saith the Lord, They shall build, but I will throw down] Ruit alto à culmine Roma, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen: her downfal is sure, sore, and sudden, Versa eris in cineres quasi nunquam Rema suisses, said Sibylla of old. And there was something surely in that which we have read, that when the wars began in Germany Anno 1619. a great brasse image of the Apostle Peter (that had Tu es Pet rus &c. fairely imbossed upon it) standing in Saint Peters Church at Rome, there was a great and massie stone fell down upon it, and so shattered it to pieces, that not a letter of all that sentence (whereon Rome founds her claime) was left whole so as to be read; saving that one piece of that sentence Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, I will build my Church, which was left fair and entire. Surely when popish mountains and Monasteries shall be desolated and demolished, when the Pope (who was wont to say that he could never want mony as long as he was a∣ble to hold a pen in his hand) shall be miserably impoverished,Rev. 16.12. and his Euphrates of revenues dryed up, the mountain of the Lords house shall be set above all the mountains,Ezek. 21.29. and the Lord Christ alone shall reign in glory: he shall overturn, overturn, overturn all Antichristian power and policy: he will utterly destroy those crows-nests (as Henry the eighth called the religious houses that he pulled down) ne iterum ad cohabitandum convolent,Sanderus. lest those unclean birds should build again. they shall build but I will destroy] It is the Lord then that both plants and puls up kingdoms, nations and peoples: that makes and destroyes States publike or private at his pleasure: they are all in his hand and done by him, and fall not out by any fortune, or fatal revolution, and vicissitude. Dan. 2.21. Luk. 1.52. And they shal call them the border of wickednesse.] Chiefly for their insulting over the people of God in their affliction, Obad. 10. That wicked one, the Pope, is grossy guilty of this Edomitish inhumanity. What feasting and sending of gifts was there, when the two witnesses were slain? What joy and jollity when the Waldenses (those ancient Protestants) were worsted in battel? What pro∣cessions and bone-fires at Rome upon the news of the Parisian massacre? Thua∣nus tels us, that the Pope caused it to be painted in his Palace: and that the Car∣dinal of Lorrain gave him that brought the first tidings of it to Rome, thirty thou∣sand crowns for a reward. I do the rather parallel the Edomites and Romists, be∣cause the Rabbins usually by Edom, understand Rome: and the Thargum renders O
daughter of Edom, Lam. 4.21. thus; Romi Reshignah, O wicked Rome, which is answerable to this in the Text, The border of wickednesse, that is, the land of wickednesse, haply called the border, or limit, as the Non ultra of impiety,Philip of Ma∣cedony assem∣bled all the in∣famous and wicked persons into a certain city of Thracia and then called it Poneropolis The Preachers travels, 106. of im∣parallel impiety: Or else because men shall onely come to the bounds and borders; and standing there aloof off, as abhorring to go further, shall as it were point and say, Ah, wicked, Ah, wicked place, Terra de diables, as the Spaniards call one countrey in America, or the Mouth of hel, as another place is named. Italy is at this day little better; a second Sodom. M. Ascham, Queen Elizabeths Tutor, was but seven dayes in Venice, but he saw more wickednesse there, then he had seen in seven years in London. As for Rome (that Radix omnium malorum) that once faithful city is now become an harlot; yea the great harlot, Rev. 17. yea the mo∣ther of harlots and abominations of the earth, verse 5. tota est jam Roma lupa∣nar, it is turned into a great brothelhouse, the habitation of divels,Petrarch. and the hold of every foul spirit, Rev. 18.2. Bethel is become Bethaven; the house of God, the border of wickednesse: Har hamishcah, is become Har-hamaschith, the Mount of Unction, the mount of Corruption, 2 King. 23.13. What is the trans∣gression of Iacob? Is it not Samaria? And what are the high places of Iudah? Are they not Ierusalem? Micah 1.5. And the people amongst whom the Lord hath indignation.] The people of Gods wrath, Isay 10.6. and of his curse (so Idumea is called) Isa. 34.5. And such a people was Amalck, with whom God (laid his hand upon his throne, and) swore that he would have perpetual war for their ill usage of his Israel Exod. 17.16. He charged also his people never to forget them, Deut. 25.19. Neither did they: Saul was sent to make an utter end of them, 1 Sam. 15. And wherein he failed of doing it, God stirred up the Simeonites in Hezekiah's dayes to smite the rest of the Amalakites that were escaped, 1 Chron. 4.42, 43. The like judge∣ment whereunto is befallen the Edomites long since: their very name is extinct, no memory of them being left in posterity. The destiny of Doeg their countrey∣man is come upon them, Psal. 52.5. God hath beaten them down for ever: he hath taken them away, and pluckt them out of their dwelling place, and rooted them out of the land of the living. Selah. It is ill angring the Ancient of dayes. His wrath lasts longer then the coals of Juniper, Psal. 120.4. his judgements are severe and durable; as we use to say of winter, they never rot in the skie, but shall fall; if late, yet surely, yet seasonably. He that saith, Vengeance is mine, I wil repay, repayeth oft times when we have forgiven, when we have forgotten; and calls to reckoning after our discharges, as he did Nabal. It is dangerous of∣fending any favorite of him who can have (as here) indignation for ever: whose wrath and revenge is (as that of the Athenians is said to be) , Everlast∣ing, whose destructions are perpetual. Verse 5. And your eyes shal see.] The righteous shal see and fear, and shall laugh at him, and say, Lo, this is the man, &c. said David of Doeg the Edomite:Psal. 52. And the same is here promised by God to his people as a pledge of his love, and a special priviledge: Others should hisse at Edom, and say by way of by-word, This is the border of wickedness, &c. but the saints should make more of it (a Bee can suck honey out of a flower, so cannot a flye) they should busie their eyes, and regard the work of the Lord;Isai 5.12. Psal. 35.27. Ezek. 3.12. yea they should so consider the operation of his hand, as to say sensibly, Let the Lord be magnified: Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place. God hath delivered me out of all trouble, saith David, and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies. The Edomites stood looking on, and laughing at the Israelites destruction, Obad. 12.13. God saw this and it displeased him, (as he is wondrous sensible of the least indignity done to his people) He therefore payes them home in their own coyn, and promiseth his Israel that they shall rejoyce when they see the vengeance;Psal. 58.10. they shall wash their feet in the blood of these wicked ones; become more cantelous by their just destruction. Learn we hence, First, To have our eyes open upon the judgements of God, whether gene∣ral, or personal: that nothing of this nature passe our observation, lest we incur the curse denounced, Isa. 5.12. and be made examples to others, because we would not be warned by the example of others.Lege historiam ne fias, historiae. Sodom and Domorrah are thrown
forth (as Saint Iude hath it) for an example;. June 7. Ingentia, bene∣ficia, flagitia, supplicia. . Lib. 2. suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. And Herodotus saith, That the ruines and rubbish of Troy are set forth for an ex∣ample of this rule, That National sins bring national plagues, and that God great∣ly punisheth great offences. Let him that looketh upon me, learn to fear God. These words were engraven upon the standing picture of Sennacherib (after that God had by an Angel slain his Army, and sent him back with shame to his own coun∣trey) as the same Herodotus testifieth. Secondly, Learn we how far forth we may look upon the overthrow of the wicked with delight: viz. Not as our own private, but as Gods professed enemies. Not simply for their ruine, but as it is a clearing of Gods glory, and of our integri∣ty. Psal. 9.16. 1 Sam. 25.39. Not out of private revenge, but pure zeal for God and his cause. I say pure zeal: for it is difficult to kindle and keep quick the fire of Zeal, without all smoke of sinister and selfe-re∣spects. And ye shal say, The Lord will be magnified, &c.] Or, The Lord hath magni∣fied himself, i. e. hath declared himself mightily to be a great King above all Gods, by executing judgement upon these Grandees of the earth;Exod. 18.11 and making out, that In the thing wherein they dealt proudly, he was above them. Hnce it is that praise wait∣eth for God in Zion,1 Sam. 12.28 his Name is great in Israel. He is sent unto (as sometime Io∣ab sent to David, to come and take the city of Rabbah) to take the glory of all their deliverances and victories. Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, say they, but to thy Name be the praise. Hunniades would not own or accept the peoples applan∣ses and acclamations,Turk. hist. but ascribed all to God. So did our Henry the fift at the bat∣tel of Agincourt,Speed 799. where he won the day. He would not admit his broken Crown, or bruised Armour to be born before him in shew (which are the usual ensigns of war-like triumphs.) He also gave strait order that no ballad or song should be made or sung, more then of thanksgiving to the Lord for his happy victory and safe return, &c.Dan. 101 Polyd. Virg. lib. 19. So our Edward the third after his victory at Poictiers (where he took the French King prisoner, Anno 1356.) took speedy order by Simon, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, that eight dayes together should be spent in magnifying the Lord from the border of England. From the borders of Israel.] Or, from beyond the borders of Israel; viz. throngh∣out the wide world. The Saints have large hearts, and could beteem the Lord much more praise and service then they have for him.Psal. 1.45.2. Psal. 48.10. Psal. 103. They would praise him infi∣nitely, and according to his excellent greatness, filling up the distance as it were, and calling in all the help they can get, of Angels, men, unreasonable and insensible crea∣tures, as David did, &c. Verse 6. A son honoureth his father.] Heb. Will honour his father. Nature teach∣eth him this lesson, to reverence his father. Pater est, si pater non esset, said the young man in Terence; Hierocl. It is my father, I must not crosse him. Our parents are our houshold Gods, said another heathen, and to have all possible respect from us. To God and our parents, saith Aristotle, we can never make recompence. There is no nation so barbarous that acknowledgeth not this natural axiom, A son must honour his father, and a servant his master; as Eleazar did Abraham; the Centurions ser∣vants him,. by being at his beck and check in all things. Servus est nomen officii; A servant is not one that moveth absolutely of himself: but he is the masters instru∣ment, and wholly his, saith Aristole: and therefore oweth him all love, reve∣rence and obedience, as if he were many Masters in one: the word here used for Master, is plural. Now from this Principle in nature thus laid down, the Lord tacitly accuseth them First, Of Ingratitude for his great love to them, evinced and evidenced in the former verses. Secondly, Of contempt cast upon him and his service: as appeareth, first, by the application of that natural law confirmed by the custom of all coun∣tries. If then I be a father, &c.] As you commonly call me, and claim me, Ier. 3.4. Iohn 8.41. We have one Father, even God. And you have been long since taught Io to do by Moses, and told by what right I come to be your Father, though with an exprobration of your detestable undutifulnesse Deut. 32.6. Do ye thus requite
the Lord—? Is not he thy Father (and is not he by the same right and reason thy master too?) that hath bought thee? Hath he not made thee, and established, or preserved thee? Hath he not (more then all that) adopted and accepted thee for his childe;1 Pet. 1.3 begetting thee again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unlesse thou be still in thy sinnes, then the which thou canst not chuse unto thy self a worse condition? All which considered, what more equal then that I should have both love from thee as a father, and fear as a master? A mixture of both is required of all Gods children and servants, that they yield unto him an a∣micable fear, and a reverent love, that they look at once upon his bounty and se∣verity, Rom. 11.12. and so call God Father, that they spend the whole time of their so∣journing here in fear: that they fear God and his goodness, and Iacob-like,1 Pet. 1.17 when they see nothing but visions of love and mercy, as he did at Bethel, yet then to cry out, How dreadful is this place?Psal. 130.4 There is mercy with thee that thou mayst be feared. unto you, O Priests] Whom I look upon as the chief of my children, given me in lieu of Israels first-born, the lot of mine own inheritance, that stand ever be∣fore me, and should by soundnesse of doctrine, and holinesse of life, vindicate my name from contempt, and get me honour before the people. Singular holinesse is required of ministers above others: a double spirit they had need to wish for, as Elisha. Things in the sanctuary were double to those that were common; as the shekel, cubit, &c. Ministers are called Angels, and they must walk as angels, ne sit nomen inane crimen immane, lest God renew his old complaint, The leaders of his people have caused them to erre, Isa. 9.16. It was the complaint of Pope Pius the second,In hist. Austri∣aca. that there was no notorious wickednesse committed in the Catholick Church cujus prima origo à sacerdotibus non dependeat, the first beginning where∣of arose not from Church-men. John Hus cryes out of the priests of his time, Multa quae illi ordinem dicunt, &c.Bel. Hussit. p. 9 Many of those things that they call by the name of order, have brought all things in Christendom out of order. Cornelius à Lapide upon this text, in his popish way bewaileth it, that the ignorance and profanenesse of many of their priests, had given occasion to Luthers heresie to spread the further. We also have no lesse cause to complain, that the insufficiency and impiety of some of our ministry hath opened the black mouth of Campian, and his popish complices to bark out, Ministris eorum nihil vilius, Their Ministers are very base. For pre∣vention, let the souls of ministers be purer then the Sun-beams, as Chrysostom saith they should be; and let their lives be so unblameable, that no man may speak the least evil of them without a manifest lie, &c. that despise my name] This is the crime they are directly and expresly char∣ged with. They had not honoured God as a Father, feared him as a Master; there∣fore they had despised and slighted him. Not to do God right, is to do him wrong: not to reverence him, is to rob him: not to blesse him, is to blaspheme him, Job. 1.5. That's an excellent saying of Fulgentius, Deum si quis parum metuit, valde contemnit: hujus qui non memorat beneficentiam, anget injuriam. i. e. who∣so feareth God but a little, slights him overmuch: and he that maketh not honour∣able mention of his bounty, doth him a great deal of injury. The very not serving of God, the not sacrificing to him, is a crime, Mal. 3.18. Eccles. 9.2. How much more then a slubbered service, a corrupt sacrifice? There is a contempt in this lat∣ter, which is worse then a bare neglect; and displeasing service is double dishonour. Hence the present contest with those greasie priests that despised Gods name: the Septuagint hath it, Ye that esteem my name at a low rate, that misprise it, (as the French translateth it) that have base and bald conceits of me and of my nomen Ma∣jestativum,. Majestick Name (as Tertullian termeth it) that take me not into your hearts under the name and notion of an infinite Highnesse, the great and mighty Maker and Monarch of the whole world. Our safest eloquence concerning God, is our silence, saith Hooker: But if we take in hand to say any thing of him, Nullis vo∣cibus tam plenè Deum significamus (saith learned Scaliger) quam its quae ignoranti∣am nostram praetendunt, We can set forth God so fully by no words, as by those that set forth our ignorance of his excellency. The very heathens when they would swear by their Jupiter, out of the meer dread and reverence of his name, for∣bare to mention him. The Jews would not pronounce the name Jehovah,Suidas. here
used in the text. The first among the Christians that pronounced Jehovah, was Petrus Galatinus,Psal. 111. following the pronuntiation of the Syriacks and Greeks. If at any time we take Gods holy and reverend Name into our thoughts, and (truly we should think of him almost at every breath we draw, according to that Let every breath praise the Lord) Remember to think of God as of One at all to be thought of;Psal. 150. as one whose Wisdom is his Justice, whose Justice is his Power, whose Power is his Mercy, and all himself, Good without quality, great without quantity, Everla∣sting without time, Omnipresent without place, containing all things without ex∣tent, &c. This is to magnifie God, to make roomth for him in our hearts, and the contrary is, to despise his name. And ye say wherein have we despised thy Name? Loe, the impudencie of these frontlesse Hypocrites. They traverse their aceusation, stand upon their justificati∣on, and put God to his proofs. How ordinary is it with people still, to palliate their sinnes and plead their innocencie? Hos. 12.8. In all my labours, they shall find none imquity in me: that were sin, that were a foul business. But men have learned to draw a fair glosse upon a foule hand, to cast a colour, as the Calf-fish doth, to de∣ceive the fisher-man: to hide their sinnes as Adam, Job 31.33. by down right de∣nyall as did Cain, Gehezi, Ananias and Sapphira, or else by excusing and extenua∣ting,Gen. 4.9. 2 Kin. 5.25. Acts 5.8. as Saul, 1 Sam. 16.20, 21. Or at least by a senselesse silence, not acknowleg∣ing their sinnes, or being affected with them; but rather out facing, as Judas, John 13.21. with Mat. 2.24. Sinne and shifting came into the world together, and so they continue. Satan knowes there's no way to purge the sick soul but upwards: therefore he holds the lips close, that the heart may not disburden itself, and have ease, Prov. 28.13. Verse 7. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar] Bread, that is, Sacrifices and Ob∣lations (so Rabbi David expounds it out of Levit. 21.6. and Levit. 3.3. and Num. 28.2.) For the Hebrews call all kind of meat by the name of bread, though it be flesh of Oxe, Lamb, or Goat, offered in sacrifice to God, whom they made account that they feasted in their sacrifices.Psal. 50.13. Hence that of the Psalmist in the person of God, will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the bloud of Goates? Now the bread was reckoned polluted when it was neither lawfull, nor acceptable, but prohibited, and therefore abhorred; as much every whit, as Ezekiels bread prepared with mans dung, Cap. 4.13. of which he saith, verse 14. Ah Lord God, behold my soul hath not been polluted: neither ever came there abominable flesh into my mouth. What sacrifices God had flatly forbidden, see Levit. 22.20, 21, 22, &c. Take we heed that we despite not the Lord with seeming honours: we pollute him with our sacrifices, whiles either for the matter of them, we present him with will-worship; as those of old that sacrifi∣ced their children (in a foolish imitation of Abrahams offering his sonne Isaac) and the Papists at this day in their unbloody sacrifice for the living and the dead, and many other unwarranted fopperies. Or else, when for the manner, devotion is placed more in the massy materiality of the outward works, then purity of the heart, from which they proceed. This made God complain, Isai. 1. that all his five senses, nay his very soul was offended and vexed at their hypocriticall performan∣ces, verses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. their very incense (that pretious perfume) that was made up of so many sweet spices, and pure frankincense stank in his nostrils. Gods sharp nose easily discerns, and is offended with the stinking breath of the hypocrites rotten lungs, though his words be never so sented and perfumed with shews of ho∣linesse. Never did the five cities of the plaine send up such poisonous vapours to God, as the prayers and other performances of a corrupt and carnall person. And God, not able to abide these ill sents, sends down upon such, a counterpoyson of fire and brimstone. Good actions from bad men displease: as a man may speak good words, but we cannot hear them, because of his stinking breath: and as we abhorre to tast of a dainty dish, if brought to table by a foul nasty sloven that hath been tumbling in a jakes or wallowing in a quagmire. The very Heathens, as they were very curious in the choice of their sacrifices, that they were every way sound and of the best,Procul hine este profani. so they carefully shut out all profane persons: the Priest cryed out  who is here? those that were present at the sacrifice answered,  here are many,Erasm. Adag praefat: & those all good men. And hence it was that Jehu sees and
searches that no servant of Jehovah be crept into the throng of Baals worshippers. Well might this search have bred suspition, were it not that in all those idolatrous sacrifices the first care was to avoid the prophane. Even Baal will admit no mixture: how should the true God abide it? Let all Cainists take heed how they draw nigh to him: so Luther calleth offerentes non personam, sed opus per∣sonae, all those that offer to God the work done, but do not offer themselves withall.Luth. in decal. We may fitly call those also Caimsts that offer polluted bread: as if Gods table were contemptible; that think any thing good enough for God, that comes next hand,Gen. 4.4. Heb. 11.14. as Cain did: when Abcl brought of the sirstlings of his flock, and so offered a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, God testifying of his gifts: as likewise Christ did of Maries spicknard of great price, defending her against Judas the thief, that held it wast; whereas he secretly taxeth those rich wretches of basenesse, who cast their brasse-money into the Treasury,. Mar. 12.41 as holding the worst piece they had good enough for God and his poore. Surely Papists with their vowed presents of the very best they have to their He-saints and She-saints: and Turkes with their Moschees or Temples stately built, when their private houses are low and homely, shall rise up in judgement and condemn such sordid Christians, as cannot beteem God the best of the best. Solon the Athenian Lawgiver appointed,. Rous Archae. pag. 57. . Puarch. . Plu: Cypr, de oratio∣ne Chrysost. that their sacrifices should be chosen and selected: that the sacrificers should purifie themselves some dayes before, and that none should serve God obiter, slightly and slenderly, but in all best man∣ner, and with the best preparation they could make aforehand. Numa Fompilius King of Romans would not have them worship their Gods  for fashion and dissolutely: but freed from all other cares and cumbers: in the time of Divine Service, the Priests, to prevent distraction, cryed out oft to the people, Hoc agite, mind the businesse you are about. So in the Primitive times of the Church, the Deacons called oft upon the people sursùm corda, lift up your hearts. And again, Oremus, attendamus, Let us pray, let us attend. For why? Prayer without intention, and hearing without attention, is as a body without a soule. This sentence is written in Hebrew upon the walls of the Jewish Synagogues, et si nullibi minus intentionis sit quam in ipsorum precibus, &c. saith mine Authour,Buxtorf. Abbreviat. Spec. Europ. though there is as little true devotion to be seen amongst them in their services, as among any people, unlesse it be among the Papists (of whom perhaps they learned it) whose devotions are prized more by tale then by weight of zeale, whose ho∣lynesse is the very outward work it self, being a brain-lesse head, and soule-lesse body. In the Isle of Sardinia, as they give way, in the very time of their Masse, to vain talking, and toying, and tumults, so after Masse done, they fall to dancing in the middest of the Church:Heyl. Geog. singing in the mean time songs too immo∣dest for an Ale-house. Henry 3. King of France Processiones religiosas non intermit∣tit, at tepidius celebrat, saith the Chronicler would not neglect their religious pro∣cessions, but shewed little devotion at them. For betwixt him and his Cardinall, there went at same time a Jester, whose work was to make sport then, when the businesse required greater seriousnesse. How much better the great Turke, who when he comes into his Temple laies aside all his state, and hath none to at∣tend him, but a Professour of their law, whose Office is to proclaim before they begin, that nothing be done against religion? yet ye say wherein have we polluted thee?] They well understood that by offe∣ring polluted sacrifices they polluted God hinself (as much as in them lay) and that the dishonour done to Gods service reflected upon himself, and was a despising of his name verse 6. whereof his true worship is a part Mic. 4.5. and 1 King. 5.3, 5. Hence they say not, wherein have we polluted thine Altar? but Wherein have we polluted thee? This is much more done under the New Testament by all unworthy Communicants, and Unhallowed Worshippers, that present the great God with dough-baked duties, slubbered services, carelesse and customary perfor∣mances; which they turn over as a task, holding a certaine daily stint of them, as malt-horses do their pace, or mill-horses their round, merely out of form and for fashion sake. These do enough to pollute the God of purity, and to cast con∣tempt upon him from the sons of men; who will be apt to conclude, that he is a contemptible God, sith he will be content to take up with such contemptible sa∣crifices and services. But more especially those that come hand over head, and
without due preparation to the Lords supper, are guilty of polluting Gods holy things, and of crucifying afresh the Lord of glory, putting him to an open shame. Dum enim sacramenta violantur, ipse cujus sunt Sacramenta, violatur, saith Hie∣rome. When the Sacraments are violated, he also, whose the Sacraments are, is no lesse violated. And as these in the text are said to pollute God, in that they of∣fered polluted sacrifices, though they never touched God himself: so unworthy Receivers are guilty of the Lords body and blood,1 Cor. 11.27. although they never touched ei∣ther his body or blood with their impure mouthes. They are as very Kill-Christs as Judas was in a proportion: And look whatsoever blasphemies, irrisions, scorns, contumelies, reproaches, the miscreant Jews belched forth, and practised corpo∣rally against Christ, the same are spiritually repeated and iterated by the unworthy Receiver: who polluteth the very outward elements that he toucheth, and so offereth indignity to Christ whom they represent: like as he that doth rent, de∣face, trample under foot, and villanously abuse the image, scal, or Letters Patents of a Prince or State, is guilty of high treason: so is it here: The Donatists that cast the holy Elements to dogs, did it to the disgrace of Christ: and by a just judg∣ment from him, were themselves afterward devoured of dogs. Dr. Monton re∣ports a story of his own knowledge, of one Sr. Booth a Batchelor of Arts in St. Iohns Colledge in Cambridge, who being Popishly affected, at the time of the Com∣munion took the consecrated bread, and forbearing to eate it, convei'd and kept it closely for a time, and afterwards threw it over the Colledge wall. But a short time after,Instit. of the Sacr. lib. 5. cap. 3. Sect. 5. not enduring the torment of his guilty conscience, he threw himself headlong over the battlements of the chappel: and some sew hours after, ended his life. God seemeth to say of every one that commeth to the supper of his son, as sometime Solomon said of Adoniah, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there shall not an bair of him fall to the earth: but if wickednesse shall be found in him, he shall die 1 King. 1.52. in that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible] Gods infinite patience in vouchsafing not only to reply to these malapert Priests, but thus to rejoyne, and to approve the Assumption of the last Syllogisme, which they so shamelesly deny∣ed, is much to be admired. How justly might he have answered them with blowes instead of arguments: and have dealt with them as he did with Pharaoh, that sturdy rebel, that proudly asked, who is the Lord? Hereunto God made a large reply by a great many plagues, one after another, till Pharaoh was forced to answer himself, The Lord is righteous, but I and my people am wicked. And as Gods patience appeareth in his proceeding with these Priests in the text, so hiswis∣dome too, in his thus instancing in particulars of their sins, that he might the sooner evict them, and bring them to a saving sense and sight thereof. Thus he dealt by our first parents in paradise: and afterwards by Cain. Whereas, without any more adoe, the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this. cursed art thou &c.Gen. 3. He was not so much as questioned, or convinced, because God meant him no mercy: but presently doomed, because of meer malice he had offended. ye have said] i. e. ye have thought, as Psa. 32.5. and 30.7. and as good ye might have spoken out: for I hear the language of your hearts: I understand your thoughts long before,Psal. 139.2: or at a great distance. the table of the Lord] that is, the Altar of burnt offerings See Ezek. 41.22. which is therefore called a table, because by their sacrifices God did as it were feast the Lord, as is above noted. And as God prepared the Israelites a table in the wildernesse, so they also (in a sense) prepared him a table: Hence Moses tells Pharaoh,Exod. 5.1. that they must go to keep a feast to the Lord. And how God accepted of their kindnesse, See Hos. 9.10. I found Israel, saith He, like grapes in the wilder∣nesse: which, to a wearied parehed traveller, how welcome are they? And how the good soule still entertaineth her Christ, as Esther once did Ahashuerosh at the banquet of wine, is sweetly set forth in many passages of Solomons song. See cap. 1.12. with the Note. is contemptible] Or, lightly set by. Some are poor and cannot: others are prophane and care not to cover Gods Altar with their sacrifices. Hence the whole ministery is slighted, because impoverished. For ad tenuitatem beneficiorum,
necessario sequitur contemptus Sacerdotum,Panormit. Horat. R. David. Lean benefices make contemptible In∣cumbents: And Nil habet infelix paupertas &c. Poverty rendreth men ridiculous. Or thus, The table of the Lord is contemptible, so they esteemed it, because the fat and blood powred upon the Altar were things but base and despicable in them∣selves: and they considered not for what end God had appointed these sacrifices, and how they were to be led to Christ by them. For the ceremoniall law was or ought to have been their Gospel, it was Christ in figure. And this, if these Bu∣zards had seen, they would never have counted the Table of the Lord contemptible; as holding forth the Lord Christ unto them, that Pearl of Price, who is better then Rubies; and the Altar or Table, that typified him, or presented him to his people, was not an oyster-board as the Papists in K. Edw. 6.Act. and Men Joseth Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 2. Cedron. comp. hist. pag. 817. time scornfully ter∣med our communion-table; but far more precious then either that rich table sent by Ptolemy Philadelph to Eleazar the Jews high-Priest, or that costly communion∣table that had in it all the riches of land and sea, offered up by Justinian in the tem∣yle of Sophia in Constantinople. Ver. 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice &c.] Their prophanesse in polluting Gods Altar is here further evinced and evidenced. 1. By the Illegallity of their prac∣tise, whiles they offered the blind and lame as good enough for such a contemptible Altar. 2. By the incivility and indecency thereof; whilest they presented that to the Emperour of the world, that they would have been ashamed or afraid to present to some petty Prince, that had any power to punish such an affcont. The Law for sacrifices see Levit. 22.20. Deut. 15.21. A blind sacrifice he offereth, who worshippeth he knoweth not what Ioh. 4.22. that is, to seek, and grope in the dark Act. 17. when they yeeld not the obedience of faith, bring not to God an intelligible reasonable service,Rom. 12.1. such as whereof they can render a sound reason out of the word of God; who binds us not to any blind obedience, as the Popish Padres do their Novices. And yet the most people are to this day wofully to seek for the warrant of their worships; resting on that old Popish rule, to follow the drove, and beleeve as the Church beleeves.Act. 19.32. As at Ephesus (so in our Church-assemblies) the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. They will say in generall, to serve God. But who he is, how to be served, wherein and in whom to be served, they know not. There is in a printed sermon a memorable story of an old man, above threescore, who lived and died in a parish,Mr. Pemble Serm. misch. of lr. where there had been preaching almost all his time. This man was a constant hearer as any might be, and seemed forward in the love of the word. On his death-bed being questioned by a minister touching his faith and hope in God, he made these strange answers. Being demanded what he thought of God? he answered that he was a good old man. And what of Christ? that he was a towardly yong youth. And of his soule, that it was a great bone in his body. And what should become of his soule after he was dead? That if he had done well, he should be put into a pleasant green meddow. These answers astonished those that were present to think how it were possible for a man of good understanding, and one that in his dayes had heard at the least two or three thousand sermons: yet upon his death∣bed in serious manner thus to deliver his opinion, in such main points of Religion, which infants and sucklings should not be ignorant of. But we may be sure this man is not alone: there be many hundreds whose gray haires shew they have had time enough to learn more wit, who yet are in case to be set to their A. B. C. againe for their admirable simplicity in matters of religion. Blind they are, and blind sacrifices they offer: never once opening their eyes till death (if then) as Pliny reporteth of the Mole; but alwayes rooting and digging in the earth, as if thorough the bowels of it they would dig themselves a new way to hell. is it not evill?] Or, as some read it, It is not evill. q. d. 'tis good enough, and may serve turn well enough. Or thus, It is not evill in your opinion, who rather then you would lose any gaine, say, Melius est ill quàm Nil ('tis Osianders rime) better that which is ill and bad, then nothing at all. But they which count all good fish that comes to net, will in the end catch the devill and all. The sense is much clearer in the interrogative, Is it not evill? It is, It is: and therefore studiously to be declined and avoided, as poyson in your meat, or a serpent in your
way,1 Thess. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evill, saith that great Apostle: how much more from all apparant evils, such as stare you in the face, and are so directly con∣trary to the plain word of God? Such are sins with an accent, wickednesse with a witnesse, great transgressions Psal. 19.13. and if ye offer the lame and languishing] He offers the lame that brings his sacri∣fice with a wicked mind, Pro. 21.27. as Balac and Balaam did Num. 21.1, 2. that walks not evenly before the Lord, and with an upright foot Gen. 17.1. that halts between two opinions, as the people did 1 King. 18.21. inter coelum, ter∣ramque penduli hanging betwixt heaven and earth, as Meteors; uncertain whe∣ther to hang or fall. Such were Ecebolus, Baldwin, Spalatensis, Erasmus , Cyprian calleth such ancipites, palpatores temporum, in levitate tantum constantes, doubtfull-minded men. St. James calleth them double-minded men, unstable in all their wayes,Jam. 1.8. Bradsords letters. Rev. 3.14. as he is that stands on one leg, or as a howle upon a smooth table. But what said that Martyr? If God be God, follow him: if the Masse be God, let him that will, see it, heare it, and be present at it, and go to the devill with it. But let him do what he doth, with all his heart. God cannot abide these Neuter∣passives (I would thou wert either hot or cold.) He requires to be served truly that there be no halting, and totally, that there be no halving. To halt between two opinions, to hang in fuspence, to be in religion as idle beggars are in their way, ready to go which way soever the staff falleth, how hatefull is it? When some took Christ for Iohn Baptist, some for Elias, some for Jeremias, But whom say you that I am? said our Saviour: to teach us that Christ hates to have men stand doubtful and adhere to nothing certainly: to have them as mills fit to be driven about by the devil with every wind of doctrine: or as hunting dogs betwixt two hares, running assoon after this, assoon after that; and so losing both. This for point of judgement: And for matter of practise, the soule is well carried, when neither so becalmed that it moves not when it should, not yet tossed with tempests to move disorderly. A wise mans course is of one colour, like it self: he is homo quadratus, a square stone fet into the spirituall building 1 Pet. 2.7. he is Semper idem as Joseph was; no changling, but one and the same in all places and estates of life: his fcet stand in an even place (as Davids did Psa. 26.12.) that is, in an equall tenour. Uniformity and ubiqui∣ty of obedience are sure signes of his sincerity: when godlinesse runs thorough his whole life, as the woof runs thorough the warp. But the legs of the lame are not equall saith Solomon Pro. 26.7. The hypocrites life is a crooked life, he turneth aside to his crooked wayes,Psal. 125.5. saith David, as the crabfish goes backwards: or as the Planets though hurried from East to West, yet by a retrograde motion of their own, steal their passage from West to East. It's a crooked life when all the parts of the line of a mans life be not straight before God; when he lifteth not up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, and maketh straight paths for his feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way,Heb. 12.12, 13  and not rather healed and rectified, or set to rights, as the Apostles word signifieth. That's a sick soule that is not right set for heaven: and that's a gasping devotion, a languishing sacrifice that leaneth not upon Christ, and that is not quickened by his spirit, fitly called by the Apo∣stle, a spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound mind 2 Tim. 1.7. Surely as a rot∣ten rag hath no strength, so an unsound mind hath no power to do ought that may please God. Frustra nititur qui Christo non innititur, saith a Father. He loseth his labour that leaneth not upon Christ (who is the power of God and the wisdome of God) that leaneth not wholy upon him, but will needs have one leg upon the earth, and the other upon the water, as that Angel in the Revelation: one foot upon the solid ground, and the other upon a quagmire: that rest upon Christ, but as a part-Saviour, as Papists: or trust to him, as the Apricock tree that leaneth against the wall, but it's fast rooted in the earth: so some seem to lean upon Christ in their performances, but are rooted (mean-while) in the world, in pride, fil∣thinesse &c. Or, lastly as the Ivy, which though it clasp about the oak and draw∣eth much from it, yet brings forth all its berries by vertue of its own root. Thus hypocrites also offer sacrifice, but its a sick facrifice, because it is srom themselves and in themselves: they do all in their own strength, that is, in their own weak∣nesse. For our strength is to sit still,Isa. 30.7. Isa. 26.4. and to work our selves into the Rock of ages. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. The
blind and the lame Jebusites when they had secured themselves in the strong hold of Zion, insulted over David, as if he could not come in thither,2 Sam. 5, 6, 7 though he did his utmost to get in to them: the very blind and lame there inclosed should be able to withstand him. But both their hold and their hope deceived them. Neverthelesse, saith the Text, David took the strong-hold of Zion, the same is the city of David. But they that get into the Rock Christ Jesus, shall neve be visited of evil,Deo confist nunquam con∣fust. nor dis∣appointed of their hopes: but of weak they shall be made strong, Heb. 11.34. able to present their bodies a lively (not a languishing) sacrifice, holy, acceptable un∣to God, Rom. 12.16. they shall do all things thorough Christ which strengtheneth them, Philip. 4.13. Offer it now unto thy Governour] Be it but some petty Provinciall President, some Duke of Venice, or Despot of Servia. Jacob can tell, that the Lord of Egypt will look for a present: and therefore biddeth his sonnes take of the best fruits in the land in their vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balme,Gen. 42.11. and a little honey; spices and myrrhe, nuts and almonds, of every good thing somewhat, though it were the lesse: for to do much, it was not in the power of their hands; but see that it be of the best, saith He. The poor Persian that met Artaxerxes with a hand∣full of water, out of the river Cyrus, went away well rewarded. So did the gar∣diner that presented the Duke of Burgundy with a rape-root, because it was the best they were able to do. Semblably, the Almighty takes any thing well aworth from those that are willing indeed, but alasse, not able to bring a better present. Vow and performe (saith He) unto the Lord your God: bring presents unto him, that ought to be feared, Psal. 76.11. Say not, I fear to present, because I have nothing worthy of him. Send a lamb to the Ruler of the earth, Esay 16.1. Or, if thou hast not a lamb, offer a pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons: but see they be young, and that thy lamb be the best in thy fold, and it shall be accepted. Every man cannot do as Solomon did at the dedication of the Temple:1 King. 8.63 when he offered two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: Or, as great Alexander, of whom Pliny reporteth, that in his childhood when he threw incense upon the Altar in great plenty, his Schoolmaster checkt him for so doing; and bade him sacrifice on that sort when he had conquered the incense-bearing countreys, and not till then. Alexander when he had subdued Arabia remembred his School-master, and presented him with a ship laden with frankincense: largely exhorting him to spare for no cost, when he sacrificed to the gods. But no man must come before the Lord empty-handed: if it be but an handfull or two of flour, or a corn or two of salt.Lev. 5.6, 11, 12. & 14.30, 31. Casaub. in Theoph. Scholiost. Aristop. So the Athenians thought the gods would be well-pleased with a poor man, if he offered but meal; especially if he could mingle it with oyl and wine: for they held that every man was bound to bring his best, and not to be base in saving charges in this case. Hence it was, that when the famous Artificer Phidias advised them to make the statue of Minerva rather of marble then of ivory. 1. Because it was more durable: this passed with allowance. 2. Because lesse chargeable: at the mention hereof with insinite indignation they commanded him silence. Their meat-offerings were to be sound and without blemish, whether it were an ox, sheep, goat, swine, calf. The more wealthy did cast frankincense on the altars: and in their blind devotion,Vide Pollucem. lib. 1. thought they could hardly over-do in honour of their dunghill-deities. What then shall become of those base wretches amongst us, that think every thing too good for God, too much for his Ministers? that study to beat down the price of heaven, and will not deal except they may have it under foot? Will he be pleased with thee?] I trow not. The Vulgar renders it, Si placuerit, &c. If it please him, or if he accept thy person: q. d. then let me never be be∣leeved. But the other reading is better, and more agreeable to the Original. Or accept thy person?] Heb. Accept thy face, that whores forehead of thine, hatcht with so much impudence, that thou darest bring him a worse present, when thou hast a better at hand, but holdest it too good for him. Araunab,2 Sam. 24.23 though a subject, yet as a king, he gave unto the king, oxen for sacrifice, and threshing in∣struments for wood. And although David accepted of his courtesie, but not of his cost, yet God hath crowned him and chronicled him for his munificence, Zach. 9.7. Ekron, that is, the barbarous people of Palestina, shall be as the Jebusite, that
is, as this famous Jebusite Araunah, a Proselyte, a true Convert, as appeared by his ready parting with his free-hold to God, and the best that he had to his Prince. Let all those that look for acceptance in heaven, honour the Lord with the prime of their age, with the choice of their dayes, (as the Hebrew hath it, Eccles. 12.1.) with the primrose of their childhood, with the best of their time, and of their talents: and not unworthily, and wofully wast and cast away the fat and marrow, the flower of their age, the strength of their bodies, the vigour of their spirits in sinfull plea∣sures and sensuall delights, in pursuing their fleshy lusts that hale hell at the heels of them. Will they give the devil the best, and then think to serve God with the dregs, the bottom, the snuffe, the very last sands, their extreme dotage, that them∣selves and their friends are weary of? Surely, God takes no pleasure to pledge the devil, or drink the snuffes that he hath left. If men reserve the dregs of their dayes for him, He will likewise reserve the dregs of his wrath for them. He will put them over to the gods whom they had chosen. as Judg. 10. and make them to know the worth of his good acceptance, by the want of it. He that should set be∣fore his Prince, a dish of meat that had been half-eaten before by hogs, or dogs, would he not be punished with all severity? What then shall become of those that serve God with the devils leavings? that sacrifice to themselves, as Seja∣nus did,Dio in Tiberio. that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies, as those Seducers, Rom. 16. that say to God, Depart from us, and to the devil, Reigne thou over us, that are serious at his work, sleighty in Gods, &c. Verse 9. And now I pray you, besecch God] Heb. Weary God with your prayers, presse him till he be even sick of you: improve your uttermost interest in him, if at least you have any. Pray hard, if ye can at least: for all men cannot pray, wicked men are gagg'd by the devil: and their character is, They call not upon God. They may cant or chatter out a charm when Gods chastening is upon them, yea, be with childe, as it were, of a prayer, and yet bring forth nothing better then winde Isai. 26.16, 17, 18. In prosperity, they may have some few short-winded wishes as Balaam (satans spelman) had; yea, they may by strength of wit or memory devise an handsom prayer, and seem to set it forth with much life, that they may passe for men of parts and gifts: But will the hypocrite pray alwayes? Iob 27.10. will he persevere in prayer when God seems to cast out his prayers, and to multiply his crosses? will he not rather curse in that case: as Iob's wife, and Micah's mother? will he not how lagainst heaven as the wolf, when hungerbit? and as the Parrot when beaten, leave imitating man, and turn to his own natural harsh voice? But say that wicked men do (Ioab like) run to the horns of Gods altar, when in distresse or danger: say they roar out a consession, when they are upon the rack,Hos. 6. Psal. 78.34 (as Pharaoh) and call for good prayers: say they seek him with their sacrifices as Israel did, when he slew them, then they sought unto him &c. and made their voices to be heard on high, as the prisoner at the bar, as the hog under the knife, as a bull in a net; Say they weary out God with their many words, as those sacrificing Sodomites Isai. 11. & those hypocrites in the Gof∣pel, that hoped to be heard for their much babling:Mat. 6. yet all this is but the prayer of the flesh for ease, and not of the spirit for grace: it is but the fruit of sinful self-love, to rid themselves of Gods rod, or to still the noise of their consciences, or out of a vain hope to stop Gods judgements, &c. And hence it is that they mis∣carry, that they pray to so little purpose (as here is hinted) and that they are not a button the better for all their long prayers. For either God answers them not at all, he hath no respect to their sacrifices (which was Cains and Sauls unhappinesse. The Philistims were upon him, and God was departed from him) Or else he an∣swers them according to the idols of their hearts, bitter answers; Or if better, its but as he answered the Israelites importunity for a king, for a scourge to them, and for quails to choak them: Deus saepe dat iratus quod uegat proprtius, God often gives that in anger which he denies in mercy. If it were otherwise, the devil should have received mercy from God, when, upon his suit, he was suffered to enter into the swine. Let our chief and constant Petition therefore be in all our our addresses to God, that he would be gracious unto us:] that he would cast a loving aspect upon us, that what ever else he denie us, corn, wine &c. yet that he would lift up the light of his countenance upon us. This David preferred before his crown and
scepter. He had a crown of gold, but he valued not that, in comparison of that other crown, Psal. 103.4. he crowneth thee with loving kindnesse and tender mer∣cies. Hence Saint Paul having himself obtained mercy, beginneth and concludeth all his Epistles with wishes of Grace, mercy, and peace: as not knowing what bet∣ter to wish those whom he wished best unto. This was Abrahams prayer for Is∣mael, O that he might live in thy sight, that is, be joynt-heire of the promise of grace with Isaac. God answers, Divers Dukes shall come of Ismael, but with Isaac (as a token of special grace) will I make my covenant. This was also Iosephs prayer for Benjamin Gen. 43.29. God be gracious unto thee my son. This the priests were appointed to pray for, as a blessing upon the people, Num. 6.24, 25. The Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee. And hereunto the Prophet seems to allude in this text, q. d. you are the Lords Priests, and your office is to preach and pray Deut. 33.10. They shall teach Iacob, they shall put incense be∣fore thee. Shew now what ye can do in a time of necessity: Beseech the Lord that he would be gracious unto us. This is the main, the mother-blessing that compre∣hends all the rest. Every man seekes the face of the Ruler, Prov. 29.26. I humbly beseech thee that I may sinde grace in thy sight, my Lord O king: q. d. that's better to me then all the land thou hast given me, said that crafty Sycophant Ziba 2 Sam. 16.4. How much more is the grace of God to be preferred before all outward blessings whatsoever? The Lord that made heaven and earth, blesse thee out of Zion,Psal. 134.3. saith the Psalmist, intimating that blessings out of Zion are above all the blessings be∣sides, that heaven and earth can yeeld us; What is the ayre without light? what was Haman the better for all his honours, when the king frowned upon him? How can a wicked man be happy though wealthy, so long as God is his enemy? As that father speaks of Ahab: he describes him sitting in his ivory palace in the time of the three yeers famine in Samaria: he had gold, silver, and jewels in every place: but what good did all that when the heaven was brasse above, and the earth iron beneath? Cry therefore as those in Zachary, Grace, Grace unto us, pray for our selves and others, as David did for Ittai the Gittite, mercy and truth be with thee, 2 Sam. 15.20. Stir we up our selves to take hold of God, and to get of him Gaius-his-prosperity, dona throni, soul-blessings, and such as accompany salva∣tion. Jesus Christ when he came into the world, brought grace and truth with John 1.17. And God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, Not imputing our sins, but stretching out to us the golden scepter of his grace. Get in to him therefore till this be done; though thou shouldest spend thy time in gathering up pearls and jewels, thou art an undone creature. this hath been by your means] Heb. From your hand q. d. You Priests have effected it, and are in fault about it. It is long of you that I and my service are so slighted, as hath been before demonstrated, you have eaused the people to abhor the offer∣ing, 1 Sam. 2.17. you should have better instructed the people in their duties, and not have suffered them so to pollute mine altar with their carrion-sacrifices, and if God reject your prayers, as here, and even curse your blessings as Chap. 2.2. and curse your seed, ver. 3. you have to thank your selves. All this is by your means. Accept therefore of the chastisment of your iniquity, leave quarrelling, and lay the blame of all where it should be, wash you, make it clean &c. For till then will he regard your persons? will he receive you to favour, and hear your prayer? Or will he think the better of you, for your office and dignity of Priest-hood? No sure, but the worse; For, scdes prima & vita ima, the highest place, and the basest life agree not. Dignit as in indigno est ornamentum in luto, even royalty without righteousnesse is but eminent dishonour: and men of mark are therefore the worse, because they should have been better. Height of place ever addes two wings to fin, Example, and Scandal, whereby it soars higher, and flies much further. If the Sun be eclipsed and obscured, a thousand eyes gaze upon it: a lesser star may be darkned, and none take notice. A small flaw is noticed and noted in a jewel; a small spot in a swan, not so in a swine. One fly may corrupt a box of precious ointment: when a hundred flies in a tar-barrel, do no hurt to it. Verse 10. Who is there amongst you that would shut the doors] To be a door-keeper in Gods house, to have any the meanest employment about him, David (though destined to a Diadem) looked upon, as an high preferment. Those Ne∣thinims,
mentioned in Ezra and Nehemiah, were none other but the Gibeonites, who were made drawers of water to the Temple, as a kind of punishment. God (who is a liberall paymaster) made this crosse a mercy. Their employment so neer the House of God, gave them fit occasion to be partakers of the things of God. The Lord did wonderfully both reward and honour them. So he did all others, though but porters, that had any office about his house. Know ye not, saith Paul, that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar (though but to kindle a fire upon it) are partakers with the altar?1 Cor. 9.13. Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Should have, if not tythes as they had, yet honorary stipends, double honour,Calvin. 1 Tim. 5.17. daplex, id est, multiplex, as Esay 40.1, 2. Jer. 17, 18. Or, double, comparatively to that of widows indeed, verse 2. which yet was honourable maintenance, Et ex publico alebantur. The Priests of the old Testa∣ment were plentifully provided for by tythes and other revenews appointed them by God. True it is, that in the captivity little commodity was made of the priest∣hood: whereupon some priests who had married themselves into the noble family of Barzillai, took scorn to be in the priests register, but called themselves after the family of then wives. Now after the return from Babylon, the priestood grew into some gain and grace again: and then these degenerate priests, would fain have thrust in among the priests of the Lord: but the Tirshatha would not suffer them, Ezra 2.61. Howbeit those priests that had stuck to their offices, and been faithfull in them, did not serve God on free-cost: neither was he behinde hand, or in arrere with any of them, as appears by this text: but as they did their work, so they had their wages. God put into the heart of good Nehemiah to take order, that these tythes were duely payed in to the treasurers for that purpose appointed, Neh. 13.10, 11. What reason had these priests therefore to be so gripple and greedy of filthy lucre? as to take such lame and lean sacrifices of the people, or if fat and good, to change them for worser of their own, as holding any thing good enough for God? which because they did, I have no pleasnre in you, saith the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an of∣fering at your hands] I care not for your persons, I respect not your performan∣ces. The Lord had respect, first to Abel, and then to his offering, Gen. 4.4. and Psal. 4.3. But know (saith David, to those that vilipended him) that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself: and this he makes the ground why his prayer should be heard. The blood of a swine may look better, and brighter then the blood of a sheep; yet might it not be offered unto the Lord, because it was of a swine. Sordet in conspectu judicis, quod fulget in conspectu operantis. A piece of wood may shine in the night from its rottennesse: and that be fair in the sight of men that is abomination before God, Luke 16. The swan was rejected for sa∣crifice, because of his black skin, notwithstanding his fair feather, Lev. 11.18. The wicked mans incense stinks of the hand that offereth it: and all his devotion is but a beautifull abomination. There is in Lombard this sentence quoted out of Augustin, Omnis vita infidelium peccatum est: & nihil bonum sine summo bono, The whole life of unbeleevers is sinne, neither is there any good without the chiefest good. Ambros Spiera the Postiller saith, Crudelis est illa sententia, This is a cruel sentence. But saith not the holy Scripture the very same in effect, Prov. 15.8. Heb. 11.6. Joh. 15.5? What though Papists talk much of Opus operatum? and teach that good works by whomsoever performed are accepted of the Lord, as justice in an Atheist is a good and acceptable work to him?Jam. 5.16 Saint James assures us, that it is the effectuall fervent prayer of a righteous man onely, and of one reconciled to God, that availeth much.Psal. 32.6 Psal. 50 And, for this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, saith David. The lepers lips should be covered according to the law. And to the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do, &c? It is said of witches and their good prayers, (as they call them) Si magicae, Deus non vult tales: si piae, non per tales. If those prayers be abused to witchcraft, God will have none of them: and if they be never so good, God will not have them from such kind of people. Before they pray, men should see whether they are persons fit to pray: for God accepts not of a good motion from an ill mouth, Jer. 11.10, 11. Joh. 9.31. 1 Joh. 3.22. Psal. 66.16. A wicked man wants contrition, humility, faith, hope, feeling, fervency: he hath not a
spirit of grace and supplication, to endite his prayers; he hath not an Intercessour in heaven to present and perfume his prayers. The breath wherein our prayers ascend should be like pillars of smoke perfumed with Christs myrrhe and incense. Otherwise our words will be like the Egyptian pots, recking out the strong smel∣ling onions and garlick of our own corruption, such as God can take no pleasure in, neither will he accept such an offering at our hands. Verse 11. For from the rising of the sun &c.] where as they might object, If you will not have service from us, you can have none at all: for other people walk eve∣ry one in the name of his God Mic. 4.5. and the Gentiles have their vanities, and doctrines of vanities Ier. 14.22. and 10.8. wherewith they are wholy ta∣ken up. Take you no care for that, saith God here. for from the rising of the sun, to the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles] I will provide for mine own great Name, that is, for my glo∣ry (for so Gods Name is used in that sense Exod. 9.16. Psal. 8.1.) I will be no loser by your rejection: for I have other people that will more reverence me, and do me better service; so that I need not be beholding to you. I have from East to West those that will make hard shift but I shall have service done me. I can set a signe, and send to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud &c. that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory,Isa. 66.19, 20. and they shall declare my glory among the Gen∣tiles. And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and in charrets, and in litters &c. that though sick, weak∣ly, and unfft for travell, yet they shall come on end; and rather in litters then not at all: they shall be content to suffer any hardship for heaven, as the stone will fall down to come to it's own center, though it break it self in an hundred peeces. The Gentiles once converted shall fly as a cloud Isa. 60.8. that is, with great∣est pernicity and swistnesse: yea they shall in such flocks come to the Church, as if a whole flight of doves, driven by some hawk or tempest, should scour into the columbary, and rush into the windowes. There are that have observed,. Deus, Dieu Gott &c. that the name of God in all the maternall languages confisteth of foure letters, to inti∣mate that he hath his people in all the foure quarters of the earth, out of all coun∣tries, nations, and languages, Deut. 6.4. Heare, O Israeh The Lord our God is one Lord. In the Original, the last letter of the word. Heare, is greater then the rest, as calling for all possible heed and attention. So likewise is the last letter in the word One, which being Daleth, and standing usually for Four (as a numerall let∣ter) signifieth, say the Hebrew-Doctours, that this One God shall be worshipped in all the four corners of the earth. This, Cyprian hath also gathered from the Greek letters of the name Adam:A . A . M . which do severally signifie the four quarters of the world, East, West, North and South: to teach, that Christ, the second Adam, will fetch his people from all parts: and hath therefore built his Church, his new Ierusalem four-squar Rev. 21.16. and placed on the East three gates, on the North three gates, on the South three gates, and on the West three gates, ver. 13. that all from all parts may have free and open accesse unto him. Babylon was in like manner built four square, as Heredotus testifieth:Lib. 1. and Constantinople is so scituate betwixt Europe and Asia, as if it were fatally founded to command both. This is much more true of Ʋranople, the city of the great King,Turk hist. 1153. open to all commers, as the Aedilis or Chamberlains house in Rome was. O thou that hearest prayers, to thee shall all flesh come (saith the Psalmist) come with a cou∣rage,Psal. 65.2. sith they are sure as of accesse, so of successe in all their suites thorough Christ the Mediatour, who hath made both one,Eph. 2.14. and hath broken down the middle-wall of partition between Iews and Gentiles. This the perverse Jews could never abide to heare of: nor can they to this day. And therehence is it that they have in their expositions basely depraved this text, and corrupted the true sense of it, as is to be seen in the Chaldee Paraphrast, and David Kimchi: calling us still Goi Mamzer bastard Gentiles, and cursing us in their daily prayers, which are not (sure) that pure offering mentioned in this verse, and interpreted by them of the prayers of the holy Jews every where disperst. The rejection of the Jews and acception of the Gentiles into grace and favour is a hidden mystery: such as maketh the Apostle of the Gentiles cry out, O the depth 1 Rom. 11.23. yea it is a part of that great my∣stery of Godlinesse 1 Tim. 3.16. that God manifested in the flesh should be preached
unto the Gentiles, and beleeved on in the world. Let us pitty the poor hardened Jews: and pray the rending of the vail that is yet spread over them: that the rebuke of Gods people may be taken away from off all the earth Isa. 25.7, 8. Let us also praise God who hath made us Gentiles meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light Col. 1.12. And take heed that we sin not away our light, and cause God to take his kingdome from us, giving it to a nation that will bring him better fruit Mat. 21.43. we have a fair warning given us by the example of the Jews Rom. 11. Seest thou another shipwrack? look to thy tackling. from the rising of the sun] from the East of Judaea the sun of Christs Gospel pas∣sed by the south of Greece to the West of the Latine Church, and these Islands of ours that lye in the Sea,Ʋide Scapul. in Them . into which the Sun is said to go down, or to lye down, as in its tabernacle of rest (which is an expression of the old Greek Poets, and the Originall word here used agreeth to it.) All the danger is, lest the Gospell in this it's Solar motion, be travelling for the West of that other world, the Ameri∣can parts; and quitting it's present places of residence and unworthy possessours; And then sarewell England. Oh let us pray that that dismall day may ne∣ver arise, wherein it shall be said, that the glory is departed from our English Israel. my name shall be great] Name for fame as Exod. 34.5, 6. Philip. 2.9. Gen. 11.4. Renouned men are called men of name Gen. 6.4. and base men are called men of no name Iob 30.8. shall be great] Not that God is great, or lesse. Magnum & parvum sunt ex ijs, quae sunt ad aliquid, saith Aristotle. But Gods name is said to be great, when he is declared or acknowledged to be great, as the word (sanctified) is used Mat. 6.9. and the word (justified) Mat. 11.19. Iam. 2.21. Gods fame and glory is (as himself) eternall and infinite; and so abides in it self, not capable of our addi∣tion or detraction. As the Sun which would shine in its own brightnesse and glo∣ry, though all the world were blind, and did wilfully wink. Howbeit, to try how we prize his Name, and how industrious we will be to magnifie and exalt it, he hath declared that he esteemes himself made glorious; and accounts that he hath received, as it were, a new being by those inward conceptions we have of his glory, and those outward honours we do to his name. and in every place incense shall be offered] Not at Ieusalem only, as the Jews held; nor in mount Gerizim, as the Samaritans Iob. 4.20, 21. but any place (without difference) be it but a chimney might make a goodly Oratory 1 Tim. 2.8. All religious difference of places was taken away by Christs death. There∣fore so soon as he had said Ioh. 19.30. It is finished, he gave up the Ghost, and presently the vail of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom Mat. 27.51. And from that hour there was no more holinesse in the Temple, then in any other place. Though till then, the Temple was so holy a place, and such religious reve∣rence did Gods people beare to it, that after the Caldeans had burnt it, they ho∣noured the very place where it had stood, and esteemed it holier then any other. This appears by those eighty persons whom Ishmael murthered Ier. 41.5. and by Daniels opening his windowes toward Ierusalem, when he prayed Dan. 6.10. Incense shall be offered, and a pure offering] Insigne testimonium pro sacrificio Missae. saith Bellarmine. This text is a notable testimony for the sacrisicing of the Masse, which Papists will needsly have to be the sacrifice here meant and mentioned. Much like that Sorbonist that finding it written at the end of S. Pauls epistles, Missa est,Bee-hive of Rome fol. 93. &c. bragg'd he had found the Masse in his Bible: So another reading John 1.4. Invenimus Messiam, made the same conclusion. We shall wave their argu∣ments as sufficiently answered by others: and take the meaning of the holy Ghost here to be of such spiritual sacrifices of the new Testament, as all Christians, even the whole royal priesthood,1 Pet. 2.5. are bound to offer up to God. These are called In∣cense and Offering by Analogy, the type for the thing thereby shadowed, as Irene∣us, Tertullian,Rev. 5.8. Rev. 8.3, 4. and Augustine interpret the Text. This incense is prayer, and praise, Psal. 141.2. Heb. 13.15. Hos. 14.4. Psal. 51.21. This pure offering is every saithful Christian together with all the good things that he hath or can do. It is simplex oratio de oonscientia pura,Cont. Marcion. lib. 4. saith Tertullian. Thus those good Macedoui∣ans
gave themselves to the Lord, saith S. Paul, and vnto us by the will of God. 2 Cor. 8.5. I hus the Romans had delivered themselves up to the form of Doctrine,Rom. 12.1. that had been delivered unto them, Rom. 6.17. and are yet further exhorted to exhibit, present, make tender, yield up and offer as spiritual priests, their bodies (and much more their souls) to God, as a living sacrifice, by a willingnesse to do what he re∣quireth, Psal. 40.6 Rom. 15.16. and to die for his fake if called thereunto. Phil. 2.17. 2 Tim. 4.6. Swenk feldians took away all external service, saith Zanchy. Libertines say, it is sufficient that we sacrifice to God the hidden man of the heart. The Pope saith to his vassals, My Son, give me thy heart: be a papist in heart, and then go to Church, dissemble, do what ye will. But God requires to be Glorified with our spirits and bodies both, because both are his.1 Cor. 6.20 The very Manichees that de∣nied God to he the Author of the body, fasted on sundayes, and in fasting exerci∣sed an humiliation of the body. But (2) as the true christian sacrificeth himself to God, so all that he hath, or can; and is ready to say as that Grecian did to the Emperor, If I had more, more I would bring thee. It comforts him to consider,. 2 Cor. 8. 1 Tim. 1.5 That if there be a willing minde, God accepts according to that a man hath, and not ac∣according to that he hath not. Noahs sacrifice could not be great, yet was it great∣ly accepted, because of clean beasts, and offered in faith. It is the godly mans care, that his offering though it be poor, yet may be a pure offering, proceeding from a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfained; and then he is sure it is pure by divine acceptation through Christ. 1 Pet. 2.5. In confidence whereof he lifts up holy hands, 1 Tim. 2.8. And although sensible of his impurities & imperfections, his heart misgives him sometimes as Jacobs did, lest his father should discern him; yet when heremembreth that he is clothed as Jacob was, with the garment of his elder bro∣ther, the robe of Christs righteousnesse (which is not a scant garment, as Bernard saith, but reaching to the heels and covering all the parts of the soul) he goeth bold∣ly to the throne of grace, and covers Gods altar with his evangelical sacrifices. Such as are contrition and self-denial, Ps. 51.17. Confidence in God, Ps. 4.6. Obedience to the preaching of the gospel, Rom. 15.16. Beneficence to the poor, Phil. 4.8. &c. In all which his aim and endeavour is to worship God in spirit, and to do all, more out of thankfulnesse, and lesse out of constraint of conscience. For he knows that as the greatest growth of sinners is in spiritual wickednesse (as in those that sin against the holy Ghost) so the greatest growth of grace is in spiritual holinesse; in wor∣shipping God more in spirit and truth. Verse 12. But ye have prophaned it.] Ye Jews in general, though my peculiar people, and called by my name. You that quarter armes with me as it were, and should therefore lift up my Name as an ensign: that you should use me thus course∣ly, and cast dirt upon my name by your irreligion: this moves me not a little: so that I cannot but once and again complain of it. Had it been an enemy,. I should better have born it. But it was thou my familiar, &c. What, thou my son Brutus? Friend, betrayest thou the Son of man, and that with a kisse? Scipio had rather Ha∣nibal should eat his heart with salt, then Laelius his friend do him the least discur∣tesie. God wil take that of a profane person, that he will not of a professor. Philistins may cart the ark, & scape scotfree. But if David do it, God will punish him in the death of Ʋzzah. Augustus Caesar may send forth a decree that all the (Roman) world should be taxed or numbred, Luk. 1.2. but if David number his people, God wil make bloody wailes upon his back: & if he make Gods name to stinck among the heathen, God wil scour out that blemish cast upon his name with Davids tears and blood, See Ezek. 36.21. & 39.7. Amos 2.7. Levit. 10.3, I will be sanctified in all th that draw near unto me. Sanctified he will be either actively or passively: either in the sincerity of their conversation, or else in the severity of their condemmnation. If Solomon for∣sake the Lord that appeared unto him twice, God wil chastise him with the rods of men at least. If Israel professe Gods name, and yet profane it, God wil cast them off, and turn to the Gentiles. And indeed what could he do lesse to a nation so incorri∣gibly flagitious, a nation so unthankful for mercies, so impatient of remedies, so un∣capable of repentance, so obliged, so warned, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked? The table of the Lord] that is the Altar: see verse 7. And the fruit thereof.] Or the revenue, the income of it: It is a base allowance
that the Priests have; prisoners pittance: they live that's all. Or thus, The ta∣ble of the Lord is polluted, &c. That is, it is no better worth then to be polluted; neither do his Priests deserve either countenance or maintenance. So many wretch∣ed people in these dayes think there is more ado made then needs in the worship and service of God, Colo Deum, ut par est. Whereas indeed we that have recei∣ved so many mercies, and have lived in such an age of miracles, should not onely servire Deo, sed & adulari as Tertullian phraseth it, serve God, but be unsa∣tisfiable in serving him. And as Gods service is slighted, so his ministers are well night starved in many places: the vulgar holding the ministry no better then a idle uselesse trade, taken up to make a living of. How Shamefully are Gods ablest servants defrauded, mocked, misused. A sad prognostick of a dying State, 2 Chron. 36.16. Verse 13. And ye have said also, Behold what a wearinesse is it, and ye have snuf∣fed at i: &c.] At what? At the chiding you have had for your lame and lean sa∣crifices. A little offensive breath hath blown you up into rage: This is a kinde of blasphemy, Ezek. 20.27. when gracelesse men fall into a fustian-sume, as they say, by hearing of their faults: and bristle against a reproof, though never so just. Or thus, Ye have puffed and blown, as almost breathlesse, by carrying some carrion sheep for a sacrifice: as if it were so fat and full of flesh, that you could hardly bring it without breaking your winde; whereas ye might have blown it away, it is so thin and light.Bern. Hateful Hypocrisie! And it sped accordingly. For should I accept this at your hand? No, no; Sapiens nummularius est Deus: nummum fictum non reciptet. God is a wise mint-man: he will take no counterfeit coyn. He not onely detects the cozener, and detests him as here, but curseth him bitterly in the next verse. He rejects the hypocrites sacrifice and plagueth such Prometheusses; when as he wipes not out any of the good services of his sincere people, Neh. 13.4. but abundantly blesseth them. Labour therefore for that truth in the inward parts, that we may be with Ap∣pelles approved in Christ,Psal. 51 5 John 1 Rom. 16. and with Nathancel, an Israelite indeed. Be we the same that we would seem to be: and, if not as the windows of the Temple were, wider within the a without; yet to be no more in shew then we are in truth. It stands us in hand when to deal with God, to have the greater part of our ware in the inner part of the shop, and not all on the foreside, on the board or stall: and to see, that though our work be but mean, yet it may be clean; though not fine, yet not foul; soyled and slubberd with the slur of a rotten heart. Sweet powders can make even leather an ornament, when the Sanies of a plague-sore wil render a rich robe lothsom, and infections. Verse 14. But cursed be that deceiver] Cursed with a curse both verbal and penal; temporal and spiritual. These last light heavy (such as are hardnesse of heart,Mal. 3 9 Rom. 1 28 Mat. 27 5 Psal. 109 18 and horrour of conscience) though lesse observed; because they come into the deceivers bowels like water, and like oyle into his bones: They soak and sink in∣to his soul insensibly. He hath his death about him (as we say of one that hath drunk poyson, or eatenah Italian fig) though he fall not down dead immediate∣ly. He is accursed, and he shall be so, as (in a contrary sense) Isaac said of his son Jacob, He is blessed, and he shall be blessed. But usually the visible vengeance of God, doggs the deceiver at the heels: his sin findes him out, and layes him open to others, as an accursed person. This was Cains case and curse, Gen. 4.15. God sets a mark upon him; probably it was the perpetual trembling of his hands and whole body through the horrour of his conscience. So, not long before, when Adam had played the deceiver, and hearkened to that old Impostor the subtile Serpent, God spared him, but cursed the ground (as the Persians, when their Noble-mens sons had made a fault, hangd up their coats and whipt them in their presence) Cursed is the ground for thy sake:Gen. 3 17 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth. And the truth is, it was never beautifull nor cheerfull since that curse in∣flicted: but lyes bed-rid, waiting for the comming of the second Adam to free it from that heavy curse. Rom. 8.20. The barren figtree felt the power of Christs curse even to admication Mat. 21.20. For when the disciples saw it, they mar∣velled saying, How soon is the sigtree withered away? They might marvel well enough: for the figtree is the most juycefull of any tree: and beares the brunt of
winter-blasts, without withering. But the blasts of Christs mouth are more pow∣erfull. Hecan blow men to destruction Job. 4.9. as so many dust-heaps; yea frown, not some single fig-tree onely, but the whole vineyeard to desolation. It is burnt with fire, it is consumed: they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance, Psal. 80.16. Men may curse, and no hurt follow; the curse causlesse shall not come, Prov. 26.2. Michah's mother cursed when she lost her mony, Jud. 17.2.Act. & Mon. But who cared or fared the worse for that? And the like may be said of Julius Palmer the Martyrs mother, when he craved her blessing upon his knees, she drove him out of doores for an heretike, and said, Gods curse and mine go with thee. What was David the worse for Shemei's cursing of him, or Jeremy for the peo∣ples,Jer. 15.10. or the reformed Churches for the Popes? the silly people in Italy are made to beleeve, that ever since the Pope excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, the peo∣ple of England are all as black as devils. The Pope is like a wasp, no sooner an∣gred, but out comes a sting: which being out is like a fools dagger ratling and snaping without an edge. We may say of his curses (with bell, book, and candle) as Vegetius saith of chariots armed with sithes and hooks, that at first they were a terrour, and after a scorn. But Gods curses are terrible, and light heavy.lib: 1. cap. 24. Toge∣ther with word there goes forth a power (as it is said in another case) and what he speaketh with his mouth, he maketh good with his hand. And it is a fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living God: those that have felt his fingers will say so. This the deceiver is sure to do if timely course be not taken. Currat ergo poenit entia, ne praecurr at sententia. that deceiver] That fraudulent fellow, that crafty companion, that coz'ner, Qua∣druplator, Machinator, that dealeth subtilely with the Lord, as the Egyptians did with his people, and thinks to out-wit him, as the Medianites did the Israelites. (See Num. 25.18. Psal. 10.25. in both which places the same word is used, as here) that casteth and fetcheth about (versutulus & versatilis) how to deceive both God and man with shewes of devotion; not afraid to be damned, so he may seem to be saved, and seeking so long to deceive others, that in fine he deceiveth his own soul, (which is the worst kinde of deceit, as self-murther is the worst sort of murther) winding himself into the fools paradise of a sublime dotage, and that in matters of greatest consequence and concernment. Imposturam faciunt & pati∣untur, as that Emperour said of them that sold glasse for pearl; they mock and are mocked, deceiving or being deceived, as Paul saith, like some drunken stage∣player, they have acted a kings part so long, that now they begin to think them∣selves kings indeed: and like sleeping Sisera they dream of a kingdom, when as Jaels nail is neerer his temples then a crown. A curse he is sure of, set on by God (who then shall take it off?) and seconded by men, yea by men that were with∣out God in the world. Witnesse that law of the twelve tables in Rome, Sacrum, sacrove commendatum qui clepserit rapseritve, parricida esto. Let him be punished for a parricide, that shall commit sacriledge of any sort. Now an hypocrite is by Ba∣sil rightly called  a sacrilegious Church-robber: because he steals from God  himself dedicated to God by profession of Christianity: and so becomes  accursed, yea, Anathema Maranatha double accurst, and put o∣ver to God to punish: who hath prepared the hottest fire in hell for such, because their sin is increased by their knowledge: as the sin of Solomon in honouring idols which he knew to be no gods, was far greater then that of his wives, which belee∣ved them them to be gods, as Tostatus truly observeth. which hath in his slock a male] A flock he hath then, and is a sheep-master: able perhaps to say as he in the Poet —mille meis errant in montibus agni. Were he a poor man, he might be the better excused: of a little God accepts a little. Again, he hath a male in his flock, a sound, tidy, fat lamb, or ram: and reserving that for his own use, though he had voluntarily vowed it to God, he brings a corrupt carrion, or a lean starv'ling for a sacrifice. This deceitful dealing is his sin, that subjects him to the curse. This was the sin, (and became the calamity) of those in Jeremy Chap. 4.22. that served not God with the best of their understanding: of those in Haggee. that dwelt in their ceiled houses, and let the Lords house lie waste:Hag. 4.4. of Solomon (some think) that bestowed twice as much time in building his own house as Gods house: of all those that seek not Gods kingdom in the first place, that
give not God the best of the best, the primrose of their age, the first thoughts in the morning, the fittest and freest times of the day for prayer &c. Scipio went first to the Capitol every day, and then to the Senate-house. David prevented the night watches to pray. Christ was at it a great while before day Mar. 1.35. Of Charls the Great it is reported, that he spoke and conversed more with God then with man.Dan. hist. sol. 13. Our King Alfred cast the natural day into three parts; Eight hours he spent in prayer, study and writing: eight in the service of his body, and eight in the affaires of his State. The Jews divided the businesse of the day into three parts. The first, ad Tephilla, that is for prayer: the second ad Terah, for the study of the Law: the third ad Malchah, for work: this they did on working-dayes; besides their weekly sabbath and other holy-dayes stricktly observed, which made Seneca (that profane Heathen) say of them, that they lost more then a seventh part of their time. How much better might he have bewailed his own losse of time, and neglect of the one thing necessary in the words of Bernard, Totum vitae meae tempus perdidi, quia perdite vixi, I have lost my whole life, because I have lived without God in the world? what a happinesse had it been to him, if he had ob∣served Aristotles rule (and Thales his examples, viz. that a Philosopher may get riches,. Arist. Pelit. lib. 1. cap. vlt. but that's not their main businesse. Many are so busied in the world, that they think not of Gods kingdom (which yet they vowed to do when they were baptized) as the Duke of Alva told the king of France, who asked him, whether he had observed the late great Eclipse? No, said he, I have so much to do upon earth, that I have no leasure to behold the heaven. How much better Anaxago∣ras the Philosopher, who being asked wherefore he came into the world? answe∣red, Ut coelum contempler, that I may contemplat heaven? men should certainly minde heaven most and first; and not suffer the leane kine to eat up the fat, the thin ears of corn the good: but honour God with the best of their substance and with the best of their abilities (if they stand bound by vow especially, if they have vowed a male to God.) Let it not be according to the Italian Proverb with us, Sciapat il morbo fraudato il Santo, when the danger is escaped, the vow is neglected) lest else God curse them, as here, for a company of cozeners: and make them know and rue his breach of promise. Num. 14.34. Surely if Jacob was afraid when he went about to seek a blessing, lest his blinde father should discern him, and his deceit in dealing with him,Gen. 27.12. and so he might get a curse instead of a blessing; How ought men to take heed and fear to dissemble or deal deceitfully with the All-seeing God? especially since he is so great a God (see him set forth in his greatnesse Deut. 10.17) and therefore lesse patient of affronts and indignities: he lookes to be served like himself, and according to his excellent greatnesse. for I am a great king saith the Lord of Hosts] Yea a great King, because Lord of Hosts. See the Note on Chap. 3.17) . He is absolute Monarch of the whole world: and by him it is that all other kings reign, and Princes rule Prov. 8.15. All other Soveraignes are but his substitutes, his Viceroyes; he makes them, and unmakes them at his pleasure, as proud Ne∣buchadnezzar was forced to acknowledge. Hence he is rightly stiled a great King (a title anciently given to the kings of Persia,Dan. 4: and now to the Grand Signior) yea,Joh. Manl. loc. com. he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, in another sense then Maxi∣milian the Emperour of Germany said that he was, because the Princes and cities of the Empire were free states, and yeelded him little obedience. God hath all the Kings of the earth at his beck and check: Constantine the great, Valentinian, and Theodosius, three Emperours, called themselves Vasallos Christs, the vassals of Christ, as Socrates reporteth. And well they might; inasmuch as all nations (ta∣ken together) are in comparison of him, but as a drop of a bucket, and as the dust of the ballance: behold he taketh up the Isles as a very little thing, as one would take up a feather at his foot. And if a sacrifice fitting for him should be prepared, Lebanon would not be sufficient to burn, nor all the beasts thereof for a burnt-offering. All nations to him are as nothing &c.Act. 1  Esau. 40.15, 16. Simon Magus gave out, that he was some great matter: and the world hath been troubled with Alexan∣der the Great, and Pompey the Great &c. But what's now become of all these Gran∣dees, with their swelling titles, and loud bragg's. Hath not God long since cut off the spirits of these petty-Princes, and become terrible to the kings of the earth?
Psal. 76.12. where the word rendered cut off, signifieth that he slips them off, as one would slip a flower betwixt ones fingers, or a bunch of grapes off the vine. The kings of Persia were wont to give laws to their people, sitting in a chaire of State, under a vine tree of gold, that had as it were bunches of grapes made up of sinaragds, or em'ralds, and other stones of greatest price.Athenus lib. 12. The King of heaven sits upon a throne far more costly and stately: as may be seen Ezek. 1. Esai. 6. Dan. 7. Omnino igit ur portet nos, orationis tempore, curiam intrare coelestem, in qua Rex Regum stellato sedet solio &c. as Bernard excellently inferreth, it behoveth us therefore at prayer-time, to enter into the Court of heaven,Bern de di∣vers 25. where the King of Kings sits in his starrie and stately throne, environed with an innumerable num∣ber of glorious Angels, and crowned Saints; with how great reverence there∣fore, with how great fears, with how great humility ought a poore base toad creeping and crawling out of his ditch to approach so dreadfull a pre∣sence? and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen] It was ever so from the very distin∣ction of men into Hebrews, and Heathens. At the first, before the covenant made with Abraham, all Nations were alike before the Lord. But as soon as it was said, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, the Church was evidently divided from the world, as light was from darknesse at the first creation. The Hea∣thens God suffered to walk in their own wayes. Neverthelesse, he left not himself without witnesse: but his Name was ever terrible and tremend amongst them.Act. 24.16, 17. The Hittites honoured Abraham as a Prince of God, Pharaoh was raised up on purpose, that on him God might get him a name throughout all the earth, Exod. 9.16. Jethro heard of his doings in Egypt, and became a Proselyte. The hearts of the Cana∣anits melted, and they were made to say, The Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath, Josh. 2.11. The Philistins were woe-begon when they beheld the Ark of the God of Israel brought into the field: and were ready, as worms, to wriggle into their holes. The king of Babylon sent Embassadours and a present to Hezechiah, because he had heard that for his sake God had caused the Sun to go back. Daniel records what a Name God had gotten him in his dayes all the world over. And after the captivity neer Malachi's time, the famous vi∣ctories gotten by the Maccabees were far and neer discoursed of. Judis M ccabaeus had his name from the capital letters of this motto written in his Ensigne Mi ca∣mocha Elohim Jehovah, who is like unto thee O Lord among the Gods? But besides, and above all this, Gods name is dreadfull among the Heathen in a special manner now; since the calling of the Gentiles, and the conversion of so many nations to the faith of Jesus Christ, Maugre the malice of earth and of hell. This made Ca∣locerius an Heathen say, Verè magnus es Deus Christ anorum the God of the Christi∣ans is a great God indeed. And another  your God is a most Majestick God. What a mouth of blasphemy then opened that des∣parate Papist John Hunt in his humble appeal to King James? The God of the Protestants, saith he, (whom he knowes to be the Father, Son,Chap. 6. of that Pam∣phlet. and holy Ghost) is the most uncivil, & evil-manner'd God of all those who have born the name of gods upon the earth: yea, worse then Pan God of the clowns, which can endure no ce∣remonies, nor good manners at all; True it is, that humane inventions in his ser∣vice, and Popish will-worships, our God will not away with. Such strange fire if any presume to bring before him, they may look to speed as Ndab and Abihu, Core and his complices did: but he expects and requires that all his worshippers should come before him with reverence and godly fear: For even our God (no lesse then the Jews God) is a consuming fire. He is terrible out of his holy places Psal. 68.35.Heb. 12.28. And albeit he loves to be acquainted with his people in the walkes of their obedi∣ence: yet (as a great King) he takes state upon him in his ordinances, and wilbe trembled at in his word and Sacraments. Hence Chrysostome calles the Lords table,. that dreadful table: and other Ancients cal Sacraments  terrible mysteries. He that comes to this table without his wedding garment may look to be taken from the table to the tormentor. That's a remarkable Text Exod. 34.10, 11. upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink. So dreadful is God, and so infinite is the distance betwixt him and the greatest Noble that comes to his table, that it is an honour they may be
suffered to live in his sight: how much more then to partake of his ordinances. Kings and judges are instructed to serve the Lord with fear, and to rejoyce before him with trembling, Psal. 2.10, 11. This is horror saccr, saith à Lapide upon this text descanting upon their vulgar interpreter, who rendereth the word dreadful horrible, Et nomen meum horribile. But what an odde conceit was that of a cer∣tain Sophister at Paris,L. Vives de caus. corr. art. l. 3 who would needs be called the horrible Sophister, non mine∣rem eam appellationem ratus q Africani aut Asiatici, saith Vives. Perhaps he had read this Text in the vulgar Translation. Unlesse they had the same law at Pa∣ris that they had in Italy,Espenc. in Tit. 1 that none should read the Bible, lest they should thereby be made heretikes: but rather study Aristotle (whom Peter Lombard had brought into more request then Saint Paul, as the Sorbon at Paris complained (or the Ca∣non-Law, whereof Carolostadius had been eight yeers Doctour, ere he began to read the Scripture: and yet at the taking of his degree had been pronounced, Sussicientissimus. CHAP. II. Verse 1. ANd now, O ye priests, &c. Now, that is, Now again, I must have the other bout with you, besides what I had chap. 1.6, 7, &c. for as once from the Prophets (so now from the Priests) in Jerusalem profamesse is gone forth into all the land.Jer. 23.15 Their white Ephods covered many foul sinnes: and their evil example proved a publike mischief. Hence the Prophet is so round with them: for he knew that a wicked Priest is the worst creature upon earth. Unsavo∣ry salt is fit for no place; no not for the dunghill. It is an old proverb, that hell is paved with the shaven crowns of evil priests. The word priest is never used by the Apostles for a Minister of the Gospel:De culiu Sanct. l. 3. c. 4. Hem. 3. in Act. no not by the most ancient Fathers, as Bel∣larmine himself confesseth. Indeed in Chrysoscome I sinde this piercing passage; Non arbitror inter sacerdotes multos esse qui salvi fiant, I do not think, saith He, that among all our priests, there be many that shall be saved. Bernard comes after him and complains, that in the court of Rome good men failed, bad men grew amain:Lib. 4. de Consid. and that the Bishops of his time, were not Doctours but seducers, not Pa∣stours but Impostours, not Prelates but Pilates. Yea Pope Pius the second hath left it in writing, that no villanous act had been for a long time committed in the Ca∣tholike Church,In hist. Austr. apud Callenat. hist. Neap. l. 4. the first beginning whereof proceeded not from the priests. Corne∣lius à Lapide upon this chapter, cries out of the ignorance and wickednesse of the Popish Clergy, as the cause of the contempt cast by us upon them. And I would we had not cause to say, that many of our Ministers neither feed liberally by cha∣rity, nor soundly by doctrine, nor religiously by life: which opened once the mouth of that dead dog Campian, maliciously to bark out, Ministris corum nihil vilius, Their Ministers are most vile and vicious. this commandement is for you] i. e. that curse, chap. 1.14. implying a comman∣dement: that if you desire to escape that heavy curse, you forthwith obey this commandement (Aut faciendum enim aut patiendum) to procure the purity and integrity of my worships, and to see that there be a present reformation of Reli∣gion. Reformation is a work that hath ever gone heavily on, and hath met with much opposition. As that made by Elias, by Iosiah, by Nehemiah, and by Heze∣kiah, who found the Priests and Levites very backward: which the good king per∣ceiving, began first himself, and awaked those sluggards with these words. Oh be not deceived, my sonnes: God hath chosen you for this service, 2 Chron. 29.11. The like backwardnesse was found in the Popish Clergy to a generall Councell, so much urged and called for by the Bohemians, Germans, and other Nations, that groaned under the yoke of Papall tyranny. Luther truly and trimly compared the Cardinals and Prelats that met at Rome about Reformation of the Church, to foxes,Sleidan Com∣ment that came to sweep an house full of dust with their tails: and insteed of swee∣ping it out, swept it all about the house, and made a great smoke for the while: but when they were gone, the dust fell all down again. When nothing could be ob∣tained of the Pope, Luther began to reforme in Germany, where he had a great
door open, but many adversaries, and none more violent then the Pope, whose tripple crowne, and the Monks, whose fat paunches he so nearly touched, as Eras∣mus merrily told the Elector of Saxony. Bucer and Melancthon framed a form of Reformation with approbation of the Peers and States. But the Clergy of Collen rejected it with scorn and slander, saying that they would rather submit to the go∣vernment of the great Turk,Melch. Ad. in vita Enc. then to a Magistrate that followed or furthered such a Reformation. Here in England something began to be done in the time of Hen∣ry the 8. but it was so envied and opposed by the Church-men, that little could be done to what was expected. There are many (said He, sitting in Parliament) that are too busie with their new Sumpsimus, and others that dote too much upon their old Mumpsimus. The new religion though true, He and his Clergy envied: the old, though his own, he despised. Magistrates are to have the main stroke in Re∣formation of Religion, (though Papists would utterly exclude them for having to do in matters Ecclesiasticall) but Ministers also must move in their own Orb, and do their part too. (why else are the priests here commanded and menaced?) 1. By teaching. 2. By exercising discipline. And here Magistrates must hemme Mi∣nisters in with boards of Cedar, Cant. 8.9. provide for their security, whiles they do their duty, that they may be without fear among them, as Timothy, 1 Cor. 16.10. Envied they must look to be, and hated for their zeal to Gods house, which they seek to purge. But publike respects must (like the rapt motion) carry our hearts contrary to the wayes of our own private respects, or concernments: and consider, that as it is not the tossing in a ship, but the stomack that causeth sicknesse; the cho∣ler within, and not the waves without: So the frowardnesse of men, that quarrell with reformation; and not the work it self, which is Gods commandement, as here the Prophet calls it. Verse 2. If ye will not hear] that your souls may live, Isa. 55.3. but for∣bear, and so shew your selves a rebellious house, Ezek. 2.8. so adding rebellion to your sinne. If you will needs resemble the deaf adder, which although by spitting out his poyson, he might renew his age, stoppeth his ears by applying one to the earth, and covering the other with his tail, lest he should hear the voyce of the charmer. Or, if ye do hear with that gristle that growes upon your head onely, and will not lay it to heart] Heb. upon your heart, as a weight to keep it down from rising in rebellion against the Lord. If you esteem my command a light mat∣ter, and instead of pondering it in your hearts with Mary, cast it behind your backs, Psal. 50.17. or, suffer it to run thorow you as water runs thorow a riven vessell, Heb. 2.4. If thirdly, you will not give glory unto my Name, by confessing your sinnes, Iosh. 7.19. (so submitting to my justice, and imploring my mercy, which will make much to my glory) and redresling your wayes, Psal. 50.23. by breaking off your sinnes, and bearing much fruit, Ioh. 15.8. studying mine ends more then your own, and drowning all self-respects in my glory. If you will not observe and fulfill these three fore-mentioned conditions of exemption; I will even send a curse upon you] that evill Angel of mine, that shall bring with him fiercenesse of anger, wrath, indignation and trouble Psa. 78.49. The Vul∣gar Interpreter renders it, I will even send poverty upon you; a curse well suting with their covetousnesse, and agreeable to that threatened by another Prophet: As the Partridge sitteth on eggs and hatcheth them not: so he that getteth riches and not by right (as these Priests had done) shall leave them in the midst of his dayes,Jer. 17.12 and at his end be a fool. A poor fool God will soon make of the covetous caitiff: and reduce him to extream want; than the which he knowes no greater hell, no curse comparable. But the Originall is more generall, I will execrate you, or pro∣nounce a curse against you. Howbeit, Non nist coactus, No otherwise then as com∣pelled to it; as that Emperour said, laying his hand upon his mouth for a good while, before he would pronounce sentence of death upon one that had deserved it. Histories tell us of Augustus, that it went as much against the heart with him, as it did against the hair with the malefactour, when he adjudged him to con∣digne punishment. Vespasian wept over those he sentenced. Nero, in his first five years, being to signe a warrant for execution of certain Malefactours said,Act. & Mon. O utinam literas nescirem, O that I could not write. Our King Edw. 6. could not be perswaded by all his Councill to put his hand to a warrant for the burning of
one Ione Butcher, that had well deserved it. Our gracious God might well say As I live, I delight not in the death of sinners, but rather would they should convert and live:Ezek. 33.11. why else doth he here in threatening a curse, interpose condition of repentance? why doth he warn before he wounds, and premonish before he punish? Well might the Heathen Historian say, H redot. God loves to foresig nisie. Well might that Father say, Minatur Deus ut non puniat. God therefore menaceth misery that he may not inflict it. And another, Ideo prolata est sententia, ut non fiat. The sentence is, therefore pronounced, that it may not be executed. Witnesse that we read Am. 4.12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee. Thus? how? He nameth not how, that they may fear the utmost, (as Ribera noteth) and yet he addeth, Because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Surely as a woman brings not forth without pain; And as a bee (usually) stings not, till much provoked: so neither doth God curse his creature, till there be no other remedy 2 Chron. 36.16 And then, Patientia laesa fit furor: abused mercy turns into fury. If men will not accept of conditions of peace, though never so fair and reasonable (as here) but pervert his mercies to wantonnesse, his patience to presumption, he will not alwaies bear with their evill manners: but, repenting him of his kindnesse so cast away upon those that prized it not, as David repented of the good he had done unworthy Nabal,1 Sam. 25.21. he will make them know the worth of his blessings by the want of them. I will curse your blessings] saith He here, I will recover mine own and be gone, as Hos. 2.9. I will cut off the meat from their mouths, and blast all your hopes of abundance, and destroy you after that I had done you good Iosh. 24.20. Thus God dealt by his unfruitfull vineyard Esay 5.5. he puld up the hedges and let in the wild-bore. Thus also he dealt by the unprefitable servant: he took away his talent, and turned him over to the tormentour. And thus he deales by diverse now adayes, in whom it is no hard matter to observe a waine and decay of their gifts and abilities, upon their disuse, or misuse thereof. How many have we that are wofully fallen from the affections of prayer they were wont to find and ex∣presse? how many idle and therefore evil ministers, rejected by God, and laid aside, as so many broken vessels: whiles he causeth the night to come upon their divination, puts out their right eyes and dryes up their right aermes Zach. 11.17? till at length they may say with Zedekiah, When did the spirit depart from me? Woe to me, for I am spoiled Ier. 4.13. And in very deed what should a Prince do but take away a sword from a rebel? what should a mother do, but snatch away the meat from the child that marrs it? And what can God do lesse then take away his corn,Hos. 2.5, 9. wine and wooll from those that not only own him to it, but go after other sweet-hearts with it? yea I have cursed them already] for a pledge of more malediction. For as in blessings, every former is a pledge of a future: so in curses. As one cloud fol∣lowes another till the Sun disperse them: so doth one curse succeed another till Repentance remove them. No sooner doth that rain-bow appear in our hearts, but God remembring his covenant, clears up our coasts, and lifteth up the light of his countenance upon us. Take the bark from the tree, and the sap can never find its way to the branches. Take sin from the soule, and God will soon be reconci∣led. But if ye walk contrary unto me, I will punish you yet seven times more, and seven times,Lev. 26. and seven to that; till I have dashed you in pieces: as Dagon, never left falling before the Ark till his neck was broke. Sin doth as naturally draw and suck curses to it, as the Loadstone doth iron, or Turpentine, fire. The Chal∣dee and the Vulgar make these words but a repetition of the former: for they read the Text thus:Idem repetit & in culcat. à Lapide. I will curse your blessings, and I will curse them: to intimate his peremptorinesse in the thing, and that he was unchangably resolved upon it. Now when God will do a thing, who shall hinder it? Nature may be resisted and hindred in its course; as when the fire burnt not the three worthies, when the Sun stood still in heaven, yea went backward. Men and devils though never so potent may want of their will, and be crossed in their designes and desires. But if God will have this or that to be done, ther's no gain-standing him. If he have a mind to blesse his people, they shall be blessed. If he will have pitty for his own names sake, which the house of Israel had prophaned Ezek. 36.21. If he
will come in with his Non-obstante, Neverthelesse he saved them &c. and dealt with his servants not according to his ordinary rule, but according to his prero∣gative, who shall contradict him? In like sort, if he will redouble his strokes upon his enemies, and not only curse them, but curse them bitterly, as the Angel did Meroz, who can hinder or object against his proceeding in that behalf?Judg. 5 His judgements are sometimes secret, but alwayes just: and if he once say, I will curse, yea that I will, there is as little hope of altering him, as there was of Pilate, when he had once pronounced, what I have written, I have written, It shall surely stand. because ye do not lay it to heart] As he had repeated their curse, so he doth here their sin; instancing in that branch of it that most offended him: and that was their stupidity and senselesnesse either of their sin, or danger. This is a God-provoking evill, oft complain'd of, but especially when it proceeds from presump∣tion, as Deut. 29.19. Esay 22.12, 13, 14. Ezek. 24.13. The Lord cannot satisfie himself in threatening such: as if the very naming of it had enraged his jealousie: neither is he more absolute in threatening, then he will be resolute in punishing. Verse 3. Behold, I will corrupt your seed] And so mar your hopes of an harvest: I will bring famine upon you, that fore judgement, worse then that of the sword,Lam. 4.9. which yet is the slaughter-house of mankind, and the very hell of this present world. By this scourge God will tame his prodigals, and starve their bodies;Hag. 1.4. who by the contempt of his ordinances starve their own soules. Either by immo∣derate drought God can cause a famine, Ioel 1.10. Or by immoderate moisture, Verse 17. The seed rotting under the clods &c. to revenge the quarrel of his cove∣nant. Israel was plagued with famine for breaking their faith with the Gibeo∣nites. What may they expect that keep not touch with God?2 Sam. 21.1. David knew that the naturall cause of that famine was drought: but he enquired (though, twere long first) after the supernaturall. As Jacob enquired who stood on the top of the ladder and sent the Angels to and fro? so must we in case of publike calamities,Gen. 28.13. ascend, to the top of them, and see who sends them, and what is the cause of them, that we may cast the traitours head over the wall, and he may return and repent and leave a blessing behind him. For till then, we may look that he should cut off our provision and victualls, as wise Princes use to do from their rebels whom they have gotten up into a walled town. and spread dung upon your faces] cast contempt upon you, and cover you with confusion: make you to stink above ground, so that men shall shun and abhorr your company. This is another fruit of sin, and piece of the curse: and many wicked men are more afraid of it, then of the sin that causeth it: as Chaereas in Terence not ashamed to deflour a virgin, was yet ashamed to be seen in an Eu∣nuchs habit the signe of that sin. True it is, that the best may have dung cast into their faces, as St. Paul and his precious companions had 1 Cor. 4.13. We are faith he, the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things. The later word signifieth the dung-cart that goes thorough the city,. into which every one brings and casts his filth: to note, that every foole had some filth to cast upon those Worthies of whom the world was not worthy. And truely all publike persons that are faithfull to their trust, had need carry a spare handkerchief to wipe off dirt and drivell: which yet many times will hardly stick, as dirt will not upon marble, though it will upon a mud-wall. The wise shall inherit glory: when shame shall be the promotion of fooles Pro. 3.35. A fair promotion: but good enough for them, unlesse they were better. If the precious sons of Zion comparable to fine gold, be at any time esteemed as earthen pitchers as Lam. 4.2. or trodden in the dirt by the fat buls of Basan, God will in due time make all his that have laine sullied and slurred among the pots, to become as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with pure gold Psal. 68.13. In the mean while, they have the Euge of a good conscience, which is better then the worlds Plaudite. But profane and profligate persons with their spiritual nastinesse and super fluity of naughtinesse, stink worse then these cityes of the plaine in the nostrils of God and all good men, whiles they live, (according to that, The name of the wicked shall rot, And again,Pro. 10.7. & 9 He that perverteth his wayes shall be known.) And when they dye they shall be
carried thorough the dung-gate of death, to the town-ditch of utter destruction. At which time,Iob. 20.6, 7. that in Iob shall be verified of them, Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen him (in his flourish) shall say, Where is be? Let those dehonest amenta Cleri look to this; all idle and evill Ministers, who as unsavoury salt are fit for no place but the dung-hill, even to be buried in a dung∣hill, as Bishop Bonner was, and (mean-while) to be trodden under foot, which is a thing not only calamitous, but extremely ignominious. Mat. 5.13. even the dung of your solemne feasts] i. e. for the iniquity of your most solemn services, which you have slubber'd over and made to stink, I will make you also abject and abominable: as the dung of sacrifices offered in great number on festi∣vall dayes, was carried into some by-corner, and set out of sight. And here it is remarkable that God calleth the solemn feasts their solemn-feasts, as if they had been none of his: he would not own them. So Ier. 7.21. in scorn he calles their sacrifices flesh, ordinary flesh, such as was bought and sold in the shambles. And Hos. 9.4. he calleth the same sacrifices, their bread for their soule, or for their naturall sustenance, and saith it shall not come into his house. And yet he speaks there of that meat-offering Lev. 2.5. appointed by God himself for a spirituall use, which is neverthelesse called the bread for their life, or livelyhood: because God esteemed it no other then common meat. In a like sense it was, that after the people of Israel had set up the golden calf, God would own them no longer, but fathers them upon Moses: Behold thy people, saith He to Moses, whom thou broughtest out of Egypt &c. Exod. 32.7. David also, when he had sinned in numbring the people, was counted and called but plain David, Go and say to Da∣vid &c. 2 Sam. 24.12. whereas before that, when he purposed to build the Lord a Temple &c.2 Sam. 7. then it was, Go tell my servant David &c. The Saints them∣selves, when they sin against God, are in a sort suspended from the covenant. Therefore it is usuall with them, when they seek the Lord for any speciall mercy, to begin with humbling themselves, and taking pains with their own hearts, as Da∣vid, Daniel, Ezra, &c. Verse. 4. And ye shall know that I have sent &c.] That is, ye shall know by wofull experience: your punishment shall advertise you: the curse appendent to the com∣mandement shall teach you as Gideon taught the men of Succoth so. with thorns and and briers of the wildernesse, Jud. 8.16. and as David taught the children of Am∣mon better behaviour, by making them passe thorough the brick-kilne, 2 Sam. 12.31 and as the Phrygians wax not wise, unlesse they be beaten to it, when Gods judg∣ments are in the earth,Judg. 3.20. the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousnesse Isai. 26.9. Smart makes wit, and vexation giveth understanding. Ehuds ponyard was a mes∣sage from God; who as he is said to hold his peace when he punisheth not Psal. 50.21. Esay 42.14. so to preach and teach when he doth Esay 28.19. his scourges are mens school-masters , One calls them, Gods free-school-masters,) curstand crabbed enough, but such as whereby he openeth mens ears to discipline, and commandeth them to return from iniquity:Iob 36.8, 9, 10. Then he sheweth them their work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded, that they have slighted the commandement which he had sent them, and that now he would plead with them another way, so. with patience, and with blood, Ezek. 38.22. and so would cause them to passe under the rod, that thereby he might bring them into the bond of the covenant, purging out the rebels, and them that transgress, Ezek. 20.37, 38. God should have no tribute from men (as those Malignants suggested against the returned captives, Ezra 4.13: if he did not make them know his breach of promise Num. 14.34. if he did not break covenant with them that first play false with him, and keep no condition on their part required. See 2 Chron. 15.2. and when thou art making a covenant with sin, say to thy soul, as Boaz said to his kinsman Ruth 4.4. At what time thou buyest it, thom must have Ruth with it. If thou wilt have the pleasure of sin, the wages of wickednesse, thou must also have the curse &c. and let thy soul answer as he there doth, No, I may not do it, I shall mar and spoil a better inheritance. Polanus and others dislike the reading of this text in the future tense ye shall know that I haue sent this commandment, and tell us that the scope of the Prophecy re∣quires,
that it be read in the present tense thus, Nam citis, For ye do know that I have sent &c. You know your dignity and duty as Priests:Vos probe cog∣nitum habetis &c. Polan. . and yet ye wilfully crosse your own knowledge and conscience. Knowledge is a divine gift: it is the great talent of all other: there is a (much) set upon it, Lak. 12.48. there is a special dpsuum in it, as the word there used importeth. To know heavenly things is to scend into heaven saith Agur Prov. 30.4. But as the devil (that know∣ing creature, that hath his name in Greek from the largnesse of his objective know∣ledge) was once an Angel of light till he fell from his dignity, Jud. 6. quasi  so those that corrupt themselves in that they know Jude 10.Rom. 1.18. that imprison the light they have (as a prophet from God) in unrighteousnesse: that know the commandment sent from God, as here, and yet after that they have known the way of righteousnesse, do turn from the holy commundement delivered unto them, the latter end will be worse with those men then the beginning 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. they have but aspired to an higher pitch that their fall might be the more desperate. Neronis illud, Quantus artifex perco quadrabi tin te peritum & periturum saith One. Thou doest but carry Uri h's letters about thee to thine own utter destruction. Thou maist go to hell with much knowledge in thy head: as a bull with a coronet and garland goes to the slaughter. Thou mayest also, for this one fault meet with an hell aforehand in thine own conscience, as Spira did; crying out to those about him, to learn of him to take heed of severing knowledge and practise. What else was it that brought such o ring and troubles both inward and outward on those Esay 59.11, 12. and that when sal∣vation was looked for? Our iniquities, say they, testifie to our faces, and we know them. All sins offend conscience: but sins against knowledge waste and destroy it. A dangerous degree, drawing neer that sin to which sacrifice is denyed. For sins against the law, though against knowledge, there was an attonement, Levit. 6.1. to the 8. and he instanceth in perjury. But to persecute the known truth with ma∣lice,Heb. 19 26. for this ther's no sacrifice. that my covenant might be with Levi] Levi did not thrust himself into the Priest∣hood: but was taken by God into special covenant. See Num. 8.13, 14. 1 Sam. 2.28. Heb. 5.4. No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Or if he do he shall smoke and smart for it, as Saul, Vzziah and others: no man might come uncalled to the king of Persia, upon pain of death: much lesse to the King of heaven, as Kore and his complices, whom God hath hanged up in gibbets, as it were, for example to all bold intruders upon that tremend function of the Ministery. Men out of office are not sent of God, there∣fore they may not preach though gifted men Rom. 10.15. with Esay 52.8. All that are in office to preach are Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastours or Tea∣chers Eph. 4.11. Elders onely my preach Tit. 1.5. And the contrary would pre∣vent, the Apostle willeth that in the Church all things be done decent'y and in order,1 Cor. 14.4. which could not be if all were teachers: for then there would be no distinction of Ministers and people. But Are all teachers? saith the Apostle 1 Cor. 12.29. And he answers himself, No, but onely those whom God did set, verse 13. like as he set apart the tribe of Levi, to execute the Priests office: which whiles Corah, Dathan and Abiram sought to impugne, and level, they went quick into the pit Num. 16.30. Meddle not therfore without a calling; that in the day of Gods displea∣sure you may appeal unto him with Jeremy, and say, As for me I have not hastened or thrust in my self for a Pastour after thee: neither have I desired the woful day, thou knowest: that which came out of my lipps was right before thee.Jer. 17.16. And being able safely to say this, thou mayest binde upon it, that God who is in covenant with all his Levi's, his faithful Ministers, will be their shield and their exceeding great reward, how ever the world deal with them. Verse 5. My covenant was with him of life and peace] Now Gods covenant (saith an expositour here) is of four sorts. 1. General made with all creatures Gen 9.2. 2. With the Church in general Gen. 17. 3. With the Church of the Elect Jer. 31.33. 4. With some particulars of some special graces, as here with Levi, of life and peace. So then to ministers (above others) hath the Lord bound himself by spe∣cial covenant to be their mighty Protectour, and rewarder: to give them life and
peace! that is, long life and prosperous. See Num. 25.12, 13. Life of it self, though pestered with many miseries, is a sweet mercy, and highly to be prized. Better is a living dog then a dead lion, Eccles. 9.4. And why is the living man sorrowful, a man for the punishment of his sins? Lam. 3.39. As who should say, let a man suffer ne∣ver so much, yet if he be suffered to live, he hath cause to be contented. It is the Lords mercy he is not consismed. When Baruc sought great things for himself, Jere∣my tels him he may be glad (in those dear years of life,Jer. 45.5. Gen. 45.26. when the arrows of death came so thick whisking by him) that he had his life for a prey. Jacob took more comfort of his son Josephs life, then of his honour. Joseph is yet alive &c. Quis vi∣tam non vult? saith Austin, who is it that desires not life? When David moveth the question, what man is he that desireth life, and loveth many dayes, that he may see good? Austin brings in every man answering I do, and I do. Long life and happy dayes is every mans desire. If God give these blessings to those that are gracelesse, it is by vertue of a providence onely, and not of a promise, and that's nothing so comfortable; life in Gods displeasure is worse then death, said that Martyr, if wicked men live long, it is that they may make up the measure of their sins; and by heaping up sin, increase their torment. If godly men die soon, God taketh them away from the evil to come: as when there is a fire in an house or town, men secure their Jewels: And though they fall in wars, yet they die in peace,2 Chron. 34.28. Hieren. as good Josiah did: who also in brevi vitae spacio tempora virutum multare∣plevit, lived quickly, lived apace, lived long in a little time. For life consists in acti∣on Esay 38.15, 16. The Hebrews call running water living water. Now Gods faith∣ful Ministers, if they work hard, and so wear out themselves to do good to others, (as a lamp wasteth it self to give light, or as that herb mentioned by Ply, that cures the patient but rots the hand that administreth it) if like clouds they sweat themselves to death to bring souls to God, yet shall they be sure to finde it a bles∣sed way of dying: they shall mori vitaliter die to live for ever. God will not send any of his to bed, till they have done their work. The two witnesses could not be slain, till their testimony was finished. No malice of man can antedate their ends a minute. The dayes of mourning for my father will come said Esae, and then Hekll my brother Jacob, Gen. 27.41. Here Esu, that rough reprobate, threateneth his fa∣ther also, as Luther conceiveth. For it is as if he should have said, I will be aven∣ged by being the death of my brother: though it be to the breaking of my fathers heart. But what's the proverb? Threatened falk live long: for even Isaac who died soonest, lived above forty yeers beyond this. My times are in thy hands saith Da∣vid, and that's a safe hand; And blessed be God that Christ liveth and reigneth, alioqui tot us desperassem, or else I had been in ill case, said Miconius in a letter of his to Calvin.Ren. 1. Ministers are stars in Christs right hand, and it will be hard pul∣ling them thence; They must carry their lives in their hands, and be ready to lay them down, when it may be for the glory of their Master: but they shall be sure not to dye (whether by a natural or by a violent death) till the best time; not till that time when, if they were but rightly informed, they would desire to die. But whether their death be a burnt-offering (of Martyrdome) or a peace-offering, (whether they die in their beds as Elisha, or be carried to heaven in a fiery chariot as Elijah) let it be a free-will-offering, and then it shall be a sweet sacrifice to him who hath covenanted with them for life and peace. They shall by death, as by a door of hope,Esay 56.2 Eccles. 5.12. enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, yea, in Abrahams bosome: and as the sleep of the labouring man is sweet unto him, whether he eat little or much: so heaven shall be so much the more heaven to such as have here had their purgato∣ry. Mark the upright man,Psal. 37.37. saith holy David, and behold the just, for (how troublesome soever his beginning and middle is) the end of that man is peace. and I gave them to him] Here's the performance of Gods covenant to Levi and his posterity. God doth not pay his promises with fair words onely, as Serto∣rius is said to do: Neither is he like Amigonus  (ignominiously so called, be∣cause) forward in promising, slack in performing. But as he hath hitherto kept promise with nights and dayes, Jer. 33.20, 25. that one should succeed the o∣ther, so much more doth he keep promise with his people: for as his love moved him to promise, so his truth bindeth him to perform. See both these together,
2 Sam. 18, 21. For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart hast thou done all these things. According to thine own heart, that is, of thine own meer motion; out of pure and unexcited love thou didst give thy word and promise: and for thy words sake hast thou performed it. There was nothing in Aaron or his seed that God should make his special covenant with him of life and peace. His rod was as dry and dead as any of the rest, til God made it to blossom. But when God had once passed his promise, and so made himself a voluntary debter, he failed not to per∣form it to him and his. Aaron himself lived one hundred & three years, Phineas three hundred, as it is thought, and as some Chronologers do observe. Joshua the son of Josedech lived (according to Helvicus) 110 years in the office of the high-priest∣hood. To these and others was expresly fulfilled a Covenant of life and peace: and God would have been ready to have performed it to these to whom Malachy pro∣phecieth, had not themselves hindred. For they like men (or like Adam) trans∣gressed the covenant: Or (as Junius and Tremellius read it) not tanquam homines,Hos. 6.7 but tanquam hominis, they made no more of breaking it, then if they had had to do with dust and ashes like themselves, and not with the great God. Remember them,Neh. 13.29 O my God, saith good Nehemiah concerning these covenant-breakers, because they have defiled the priest-hood, and the covenant of the Priest-hood and of the Levites. for the fear wherewith he feared me, &c.] that is, the good priests did so, the bad did otherwise: but God reckons of men by their righteousnesse. and this was the re∣stipulation, or the condition on the priests part performed: for in a covenant both parties undertake to do somewhat. As in the general covenant of grace, God promiseth to be the God of his people, that is, an universal good, All-sufficient, sa∣tisfactory, and every way proportionable and fitting to their souls. And they (in∣terchangeably) promise to be his people; that is, to bestow themselves wholly up∣on him with highest estimation, most vigorous affections, and utmost endeavours, giving up their names and hearts to the profession of his truth. So that when he eryes out, Who is on my side? Who? one sayes,Esay 44.5 I am the Lords: another calls himself by the name of Jacob: another subscribes, &c. Semblably in this particular covenant with the tribe of Levi, God promised them life and peace; and they assured him of fear and humility. Fear is an affection of the soul shrinking in it self from some imminent evil. Hereof there are three sorts, natural, carnal and spi∣ritual. The first is not to be disliked, if it do not degenerate into the second. The next is a base fear of the creature more then of the Creator, who is God blessed for ever. The third is nothing else but an awful respect to the Divine Majesty. Spiritual fear we called it in respect, 1. Of the Author of it, Gods holy Spirit, called therefore, A Spirit of know∣ledge, and of the fear of the Lord. 2. Of the object of it, The Father of Spirits, who is therefore, by an Appel∣lative proper, called Fear, Ps. 76.11. 3. Of the effect, which is to spiritualize both us and our services: and was therefore fitly vowed to God by those of the spirituality that stood before him continually, and were to be exact in their whole deportment, at their peril: God is of purer eyes then to behold evil. He cannot look on iniquity in any, Hab. 1.13. Moses' and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name: They called upon the Lord, and he answered them: he forgave their iniquities: howbeit he took vengeance of their inventions. Psal. 99.8. He met Moses in the Inne and had much ado to forbear killing him Exod. 4.44. And for Aaron; when, (to∣gether with Miriam) he murmured against Moses, l'olan. Conterchatur Consternebatur  Mar. 14.72. and Marim was thereupon smitten with leprosie, Aaron was spared, not so much for the honour of the Priest-hood (as Chrysostom gives the reason, but because of the feare wherewith he feared the Lord, and his humiliation that followed upon that fear. for he was afraid before Gods name] Or, as others better render this text, Prop∣ter nomen meum humiliatus est, He was amazed, affeighted, humbled because of my name, he withdrew himself (so some render it) or threw himself out of doores, as Pe∣ter did into alone place where he might sowce himself in the salt tears of godly
sorrow. Or, he shrunk and shriveld up, and so testified the trouble of his mind by the horror of his body. Horripilatus est, his heart fell down, his hair stood upright. See Psal. 119.53, & 120. His humiliation was deep, and down-right, soaking and sowring his heart, Psal. 73.21. The word here used is pailive, but Levi his humiliation was active: he was not humbled onely, but humble; low, but lowly: he knew that no sacrifice could be accepted, but that which was laid on the low altar of a contrite heart, which sanctifies the sacrifice. Verse 6. The law of truth was in his mouth] Hitherto hath been set forth what the Priests of old were for their own particular, and as private persons: they were not high-minded but feared God. Now as Pulpit-men and publike Teachers, they have here a four-fold commendation. And first, that Truth was their study and trade: they were expert in it, and had an excellent faculty in communicating their conceptions of it to others; so that if they did but open their mouthes almost, it was a sermon: they had a ready and easie way of discourse, an holy volubility and dexterity of delivering themselves to the benefit of others: as the law of God was in their hearts, so their mouthes spake wisdome, and their tongues talked of judgement, Psal. 37.30, 31. Out of the good treasure of their hearts they could throw forth at pleasure good things, for the edification of others: yea, like full clouds, they willingly distilled, and like full paps they were in pain till eased of their milk. Nei∣ther medled they onely with toothlesse truths, lest themselves should be lest tooth∣lesse, (as One said, Truth is a good mistresse, but he that followeth her too close at heels, shall have his teeth struck out) as Balac bad Balam neither curse nor blesse at all: and as the Papists were wont to say, Missa non mordet, the Masse bi∣teth no man:Ezek 13.10 But they held, that truth must be spoken however it be taken: and abhorred to be looked upon as the devils dire-dawbers, and upholsters, to dawb with untempered morter, or to sowe pillows under their elbowes. They affected rather to be stiled (as Arrianus the Historian was) , Lovers of Truth, plain-dealers:Eâ libertate scripsit Impe∣ratorum vitas ua ipsi vixe∣nt. Lib. ult hist. Exod. 28.30 and, as it is reported of Suetonius, they took the same liberty to cry down sinne, that men did to commit it. Elian tells us that the High-priest among the Egyptians wore about his neck a Saphir-stone, which was called , Truth. This was but an apish imitation of Aarons Ʋrim and Thummim, s. e. light of truth, and integrity of life. Mercuries Priests were wont to feed upon figs, and then to say, , Truth is sweet. It is so indeed to those that have their senses exercised to discern good and evil.Heb. 5. ult. But most men cannot brook down right truth: the hearing of it galls them, as they write of some creatures, that they have fel in aure, their gall in their ears. Hence Truth breeds hatred, and plain-dealing is generally disgusted: it is bitter in the stomacks of those that hear it, though sweet in the mouth of those that utter it, Rev. 10.9. Micaiah would not budge, or be base in his errand to Ahab, though he were sure to kisse the stocks for his stoutnesse. Azariah the high-Priest withstood king Ʋzziah to his face, and put him out of the Temple. Which whiles Ʋriah did not, but wickedly complied with idolatrous A∣haz, in making and setting up the altar of Damascus, 2 King. 16.11, 16. he is branded with a black-cole for a court-parasite, and shall be infamous to all poste∣rity. His contemporary Esay was of another spirit,Implevit post me. Num. 14.24. and fulfilled after God. (as it is said of Caleb) He kept the law of truth in his mouth, and rolled it as sugar under his tongue, though he suffered for it. For (as Hierom tells us) he was sawn asunder by his wicked countreymen, for two causes. First, because he said he had seen the Lord.Hier. in Isa. 1. ex Rabbin. Secondly, because he called the great Ones of Judah, Princes of Sodom, and Rulers of Gomorrah, Quintilian saith of Vespasian the Emperour, that he was patientissimus veri, very patient of truth, though it never so much touched him. But not many such to be met with. Asa though otherwise a good Prince, yet fell out grievously with Gods Prophet, for his plain-dealing, and layed him by the heels. Queen Elizabeth dealt little better with a Bishop that had in a zealous Sermon ad∣monished her to think on her last end,The Newlan∣ders cure by Sr. Wil Vaugh. by reason of her great age, which few Prin∣ces had attained unto, and of the Clymactericall year of her life, which happened at that time. The Bishop had the Queens Apage, but Gods Enge. And so shall all Truths-Chaplains have, however the world entertain them. Wisdome shall be justified of her children,Act. 20.26, 27 and God will see to their safety, modo audeant quae sentiunt, so they shew men all the counsel of God, and keep back nothing, that they have in charge to deliver.
and iniquity was not found in his lips] Heb. Crossenesse or Crookednesse: Chal∣dee, No falsenesse. He did not preach distorted doctrines that produce convulsi∣ons of conscience, as those Seducers did Act. 20.30. He did not handle the word of God deceitfully, or fraudulently, as those deceitfull workers did 2 Cor. 11.13. Neither did he broach errours, and writh from the right way for self-respects, setting his diall by that Sunn; 1 Thess. 2.3. But being of a most mas∣culine, disingaged, and noble spirit, that hath received the truth in the love of it, he will not be drawn to falsity or faulter, to huckster the word, or handle it craf∣tily and covetously: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God &c.2 Cor. 2.17. Without mixture of errours, or humane inventions. Let Pharisees soure mens soules with their leaven of false doctrine. Let those Inhabitants of the Sea (as they are called Rev. 12.12.) Popish Padres set abroach grosse, troubled, brack∣ish Tenents which rather bring barrennesse to their hearers, and gnaw their bow∣els, then either quench thirst, or yeeld good fruit: He that feares God can pitty poor soules made prize of by Sectaries and Seducers;Col. 2.8. and knowing that he that breaketh the least of Gods commandements and teacheth men so, shall be least in the kingdome of heaven Mat. 5.19. (that is, nothing at all there Mat. 20.16.)Psal. 19.104 he hateth every false way with David: and takes care that no iniquity be found in his lips. he walked with me in peace and equity] i. e. He kept constant correspondency and communion with me, so that we never disagreed or differed. For can two walk together, and they not agreed? He was like-minded to me in all things, and observed my law in every point and part thereof. An high commendation and a necessary qualification in a minister, that he not only talk of God, but walk with him: and that not loosely and at all adventures, but stricktly and exactly, as a pattern of the rule, as a transcript of his own sermon, ne verba factis deficientibus erubescant, lest his words blush for want of deeds accordingy:Tertull. ne virtutis stragu∣lum pudefaciat, lest he put honesty to an open shame, as Antipater did, when being vitious he wore a white cloke, the ensigne of innocency: lest his life gives his lips the lye, as it fared with those Pharisees that said and did not Mat. 23.3. The foolish Virgins were found with their Sic dicentes so saying, but the faithfull servants shall be found with their Sic facientes so doing. And when men come to give account, it shall be enquired non quid legerint, sed quid egerint non quid dixerint, sed quomodo vixerint, not what they have taught others, but what they have practised themselves. Origens preaching and living were said to be both one. Quod jussit & gessit. So did Mr. Bucer, whom his friends could never sufficiently praise: nor his foes in any point find fault with his singular life and sin∣cere doctrine.Bern. Act. and Mon. and did turn away many from iniquity] The effect of his unspeakable labours and unblameable life was conversion of soules, and those not a few. God some∣times gives a Pastour after his own heart to such places, where he takes but one of a city, or two of a family. Ier. 3.14, 15. Quod si decimus quisque, si unus per∣suasus fuerit &c. saith Chrysostom. If one in ten be gained, nay if one of ten thousand be turned from iniquity, it is a great mercy. Nay (saith He) say that none be converted, the faithful Minister that indeavours their conversion, though he effect it not, non minus praemii, shall have no lesse reward, then if he had pre∣vailed for their conversion. Some good Divines think he shall have more then those that do convert; because they have praemium ante praemium, that which may encourage them in Gods work: but he does his utmost amidst all discourage∣ment. Well may Ephraim love to tread out the corn, because while he treads,Hos. 10.11. he seeds on the corn: but to beare and draw, to plow and work, where no refresh∣ing was to be had till the work was done, this that delicate heifer cared not to doe. But he is an happy man that hath any hand in turning men from iniquity, though fruit, for present, appear not. The new birth of some is like the birth of the Elephant, foureteen years after the seed injected into the womb. And that divine Proverb is not seldome verified, One seweth, and Another reapeth.Ioh. 4.37. The Ministry is Gods arme to gather people into his bosom: and the weapons of our warfare are mighty thorough God 2 Cor. 10.4. Surely as the rain commeth down and the snow from heaven &c. Esay 55.10, 11. And as the rain from heaven
hath a fatnesse with it, and a speciall influence more then standing water: so hath preaching more then reading. Howbeit there may be fruit and yet invisi∣ble, as in Elias his time.Act. 18.10. And that which doth not yet appear, may hereafter, when the day of visitation comes. See Iob 33.14. &c. God may have much people in the city, and Paul, for the present, not know so much. A master doth not use to setup a light, but there is some work to be done by it: and seldome doth he send his servants afield with their siths, to mow thistles only. Let Gods faithfull witnesses prophesie out their 1260.Rev. 11.3. dayes: bending themselves to that office un∣cessantly, being instant in season, and out of season, and turning themselves, as it were, into all shapes and fashions, both of speech, and of spirit, to turn people from iniquity:2 Chron. 19. and then God will be with the good, as that Prophet speaks in ano∣ther case. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life: and he that winneth souls, is wise Prov. 11.30. Say he cannot win as he would, but labour all night and take nothing, yet he shall be paid for his paines: as the Physitian is, though the pati∣ent dye. Curam exigeris, non curationem, saith Bern. It is the care, not the cure of your charge that is charged upon you. You may speak perswasively, but it is God only that can perswade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Sem: Paul may plant &c. but God only giveth the increase. You shall be held wise, and shine as starrs in heaven, whether you win soules or not. As there are diversity of gifts, so of operations 1 Cor. 12.6. and the Holy Ghost may and doth work when and how he pleaseth: but usually he delights to honour those of most sincerity, with most successe as 1 Cor. 15.10. Verse 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge] How else should he be in∣stant in lip-feeding?Dan. 12.3. how should his lips present it, unlesse they preserve it? How should he wise others, unlesse he be wise himself? The Pope brags of an infalibilli∣ty, and pleads this Text for it: avouching, that he knowes all things knowable, and hath all wisdome and skill lockt up in scrinio pectoris, in the cabinet of his breast. But what will they say of sundry of their Popes that have been manifest hereticks? Iohn the 23. was accused in the Councell of Constance, for denying the Resurrecti∣on of the body, and everlasting life. And of all their Popes we may safely say as the Venetian Embassadors did: when the Pope laid his hand upon his breast and said, Hic est Arca Noae, Lo here is Noahs Ark (meaning that he was the Church virtuall, and was enriched in all knowledge and in all utterance) One of them pre∣sently replyed, that in Noahs Ark there were unclean beasts, as well as clean: and so lest him further to apply. The Priests lips indeed should keep knowledge. But those of Malachi his times, had forsaken the way, and caused many to stumble ver. 8. How this was we shall see when we come to it. Meane-while, we may take notice, that non libro sacerdotis, sed labro, non codice; sed corde, conservatur scientia: knowledge should be kept, not in the Priests book, but in his bosom, as a storehouse: neither should it lye low or long there, but sit upon his lips, that all may have benefit by it. For the manifestation of the spirit is given to profit withall. 1 Cor. 12.7. And it was death for the Priest to enter into the sanctuary without his golden bells about him, that he might be heard by all. Greg. Pator. A minister must be both able and apt to teach. Praedicationis officium suscipit quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit, saith Gregory. Hee's no minister, that's no preacher. Nor can he be a Preacher, that is not sto∣red with knowledge of Gods will, and peoples duty. See Mat. 13.32. with the Note. Walter surnamed Malclerk was surely no fit man to be Bishop of Carlile; as he was by evill and corrupt meanes Anno. Dom. 1223. If the blind lead the blind both will fall into the ditch Mat. 15.14. but the blind guides will lye lowermost,Vives in Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 4. cap. 1. Pompon. Laet. de Rom. Sa∣cerdot. and have the worst of it. Varro complained of the Roman priests, that they were ignorant of many things about their own rites and Religions. Mucius Scaevola (being their High-Priest) derived Pontifex of Posse & facere. This deri∣vation pleased not Varro: but it intimated that such should both be able and active to teach the people knowledge.B. Andr. It was a witty observation of a Bishop who (was call∣ed in his time the gulfe of learning) that Doceo to teach governs two accusative cases: according to that Esay 28.9. Whom shall I teach knowledge? Ministers, saith He, must have whom to teach, & what to teach, viz. knowledge; and must therefore give attendance to reading, that they may the better to exhortation and doctrine. 1 Tim.Ier. 3.15. 4.13. that they may feed the people with knowledge and understanding.
And they should seck the law at his mouth] as at an oracle; they should depend up∣on the ministery, as the people hung upon our Saviours lips, Luk. 19. vlt. as David went into the Sanctuary to be resolved of his doubt Psal. 73. though himself were a prophet: and as Cornelius was appointed by the Angel, to send for Peter, for further information. But what must men seek at the Ministers mouth? The law,1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Cor. 2. 2 Cor. 1. Lib. 1 de Con∣sider. the sincere milk of Gods word, the minde of Christ, the testimony of Jesus, non nugas & fabulas, saith Bernard, not trifles and fables, not strong lines, and strains of wit, but the simple and plain words of God. Non Oratorum fili sumus sed Piscatorum, said Nazianzen. Ministers are not to study so much to please as to profit, to tickle mens ears, as to work upon their hearts. They must not so paint the window as to keep out the light: nor so put the sword of the spirit into a velvet scabberd, that it cannot prick and pierce the heart. Let them handle, and set out the Law as skil∣fully, and adornedly as they can: but still remember, that it must he dispensed, san∣ctè magis quàm scitè, solidè potius quàm floridè, with fear and reverence, rather then with wit and dalliance. If in King Edward the fourths dayes a citizen in Cheap-side was executed as a traitour for saying he would make his son heire to the crown,Speed(though he onely meant his own house having a crown for the signe) more danger∣ous it must needs be to witwanton it with the Maiesty of God, Loquamur verba scriptu∣rae, utamur sermone spiritus sancti &c. Let us speak scripture-language,Pet. Ramus let us use the speech of the holy spirit, and not go about to correct the divine wisdom and elo∣quence with our sophistry and vain-babling. To the ears of that which Saint Pe∣ter calls the hid man of the heart, the plain-song alwayes makes the best musick.1 Pet. 3.  If heaven door may be opened to it by a key of iron, it cares not for a key of goid. A sermon works not upon the heart as it is thus elegant or admirable, but as well fraught with testimonies of holy scripture (that most powerful Rhetoricke) it is an instrument of God appointed to such an end. Let the people hear often, This is the law, this is ipsissimum Dei verbum, the very word of God; Shew scripture for what you deliver, and that will carry it. But ut drachmam auri sine imagine prin∣cipis, sic verba hortantis sine authoritate Dei contemnunt homines.Lipsius. The Law carrieth a Majesty in it: and if Tully durst say that the law of the twelve tables did exceed all the Libraries of Philosophers, both in weight of authority, and worth of matter, how much rather is this true of the Law of God? Wherefore as Aeschines said of an Oratours, so let a ministers discourse, and the Law be unisons: and let the people ask the Priests concerning the law, as they did Haggee 2.11.. and not be like tidlings, that will not eat their milk unlesse it be in a silver-dish: but account it a singular happinesse to live under those lips (how thick soever, a thin lip is a signe of eloquence Job. 12.20.) which both keep knowledge, and utter it. for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts] Heb. the Angel (See the Note on Chap. 1.1.) and so the Septuagint and Vulgar render it. His office is as to stand before God and praise Him, so to carry messages from him to his people, and to be in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. Knowest thou not, (saith Chrysostom) who the Minister is? He is Gods Angel: he speaketh not of himself, if thou despisest, thou despisest not him, but God that sent him. And to the same purpose Ambrose: The minister is Gods Angel to set forth the kingdom of Christ and eternal life: non specie tibi aesti∣mandus sed munere; he is not therefore to be judg'd of by his outside,Hom. 2. in ep. 2. ad Tim. Lib: de ini∣tiand cap. 2.  but by his office. Those Sodomites that sought to abuse the Angels, are thrown forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Iude 7. Behold, Christ himself hath assured us that Sodomy it self is not an heavier sin, nor more severely punished in hell, then the dispising or abusing of a Minister in the faithfull discharge of his duty. We should therefore welcome such with trembling, as the men of Bethlehem did Samuel, and as Cornelius did Peter; Commest thou peaceably? said the Bethle∣mites, as suspecting the purpose of some judgement. Now therefore are we all here present before God (not onely before thee,Act. 10.33. said Cornelius) to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. If Ahab had been like-well-affected as these good souls, he would never have asked Eliah that absurd question, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? Alas what had the righteous Prophet done more than what by his office (as Gods Ambassadour or Messenger) he was bound to do? he taxed their sin, he foretold the judgment: he deserved it not, he inflicted it not: yet he smarts, and they are guilty. As if some fond people should accuse the Herald, or the trumpet, as the
cause of their war: Or as some ignorant pesant, when he sees his foules bathing in his pond, should cry out of them, as the causes of foule weather. Saith a Divine It is a good thing to stand in awe of Gods Angels, and with reverence to receive their message howsoever distastful unto us; considering they are but messengers. Verse 8. But ye are departed out of the way] Heb. from that way, viz. that good old way of your progenitours: you are nothing like Levi, but are wofully dege∣nerated from the practise of your Predecessours, and have swerved from your fa∣thers foot-steeps: though ye have the same place, and enjoy the same priviledges. This is a foul fault and condemned even by the Heathen Sages. Seneca tells us with indignation, that Socrates his sons were more like their mother, a froward woman, then their father the wisest of men: according to that, say∣ing, Partus sequitur ventrem, the birth follows the belly. Young Cicero was for his intemperancy,Heroum filij nox. and excesse in drinking sir named Tricongius. Caligula, that monster, was the son of Noble Germanicus. But we have scripture instances not a few. Not to speak of Eli his sons, and of Samuels, Solomon degenerates from his father David who had carefully taught him better Prov. 4.4. and so had his mother Prov. 31. (which one calls Bathsheba's Catechisme, another Lemuels lesson) Iehoran is taxed for his not walking in the wayes of his father Iehoshaphat, and his Grand∣father Asa, as if there had been no intervention of an Hezekiah. Ionathan the son of Gershom the son of Manasseh that Idolatrous Priest mentioned Iud. 18.30. is thought to have been the grandson of Moses: so the Hebrews tell us: and that therefore the Nun in Manasseh is suspended above the rest of the letters.Euxtorf. Certain it is that Nabal the fool was of the line of faithful Caleb 1 Sam. 25.3. to teach us, that vertue is not, as lands inheritable. All that is traduced with the seed is either evil, or not good. Grace is by gift, and not by descent. Hence that prayer of Davids courtiers 1 King 1.47. God make the name of Solomom better then thy name. Agreeable whereunto is Hectors prayer in, Homer for his son — I wish he may be a better man then his father. And that of Juvenal, Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodò tu sis Aeacidae similis, Vulcania{que} arma capessas, Quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles. ye have caused many to stumble at the law] Which is a very dangerous thing: like as it is to stumble on a bridge: A bridge is made to give us a safe passage over a dangerous river: but he who stumbles on the bridge is in no small danger to fall into the river. The word is given as a means to cary us over hell unto heaven: But he who stumbles at this means (as by snuffing at it Mal. 1.13. chatting against it and contesting with it, as oft in this prophecy, casting reproaches upon it, Jer. 20.8, 9. gathering odious consequences from it, Rom. 3.8. &c.) shall fall in thither, from whence otherwise he had been delivered by it. This mischief many fell into, in Malachi his dayes, by the means of those ungodly Priests who either taught them not better, or otherwise drew them into sinful courses by their corrupt glosses, or leud practises. Evil examples of ministers have a strong influence upon their people: and the sins of Teachers are the teachers of sins: The leaders of this people have made them to erre Esay 9. Corruption commonly (as in a fish) begins at the head;Cicero. ne{que} solùm obsunt Principes, quòd illi ipsi corrumpuntur, sed etiam quòd cor∣rumpunt: plusquam exemplo quam peccato nocent, saith the Oratour: they that are in office do a great deal of mischief by incouraging others in evil, through their evil example. Jupiters adulteries drew the people to like wantonnesse. Magis intuen∣tur quid facerit Jupiter quam quid docuit Plato, saith Austin; They look more what Jupiter did, then what Plato taught. I have read of a woman, who living in pro∣fessed doubt of the God-head, after better illumination and repentance, did often protest, that the vicious life of a great schollar in that town did conjure up those damnable doubts in her soul.Mr Wards Serm. In the time of Pope Clemen the fifth, the Church was so ill governed, and things so corruptly carried at the court of Rome, that Frederick King of Sicily duobted much of the truth of the Christian religion: but
was confirmed, and his minde better setled by Arnoldus de villa nova who shewed him, that Offences must come, but wo be to them by whom they come.Jacob. Reu. de vit Ponti. p. 198. A scandalous priest is a singular mischief: for he falls not alone, but (as when a main stone in a building, or a tall cedar falls) he draws many with him into fellowship of errours, and enormities: as did Hymenaeus and Philetus, 2 Tim. 2.18. and as the dragon with his long and strong tail, drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and threw them to the earth, Rev. 12.4. When the Pastours become bruitish, all the flocks are scattered, Ier. 10.21. ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi] The covenant on Gods part with Levi was a covenant of salt, and could not be corrupted, Num. 18.19. non comutrest vetustate, saith Flaccius, it putrifieth not with age, or long standing: as that pil∣lar of salt into which Loss wife was turned, and of which Josephus saith, that some∣thing of it was to be seen till his time. But these degenerate priests had abandoned Gods holy fear, they did not humble and tremble before his Name, as Lovi their father had done, verse 5. they had falsified with God, and so forfeited his favour. It was with them as Cajetan complains, and confesses of the Popish priests; that whereas by their places they should have been the salt of the earth, they had lost their savour, and were good for little else, but looking after the rites and revenues of the Church: therefore God held himself disobliged,Comment. Matth. and was resolved that they should bear the iniquity of their priesthood, Lev. 18.1. that is, the punishment of their iniquity notwithstanding the priesthood. That should be no protection to them, but an aggravation: because they fell as if they had not been anointed:Ideo deteriores sumus quia meliores ee debemus Sal∣vian: and were therefore the worse, because they should have been better. God holds himself not bound to perform covenant with them that break with him: for why should he give the childrens bread to dogs? why should he cast away his favours upon those that value them not? We have the Covenant, the Seals, the Ministery, &c. (and this is a singular happinesse, Esay 19.25. Assyria is the work of Gods hands, but Israel his inheritance.) But alasse, are not these blessings amongst us as the Ark was among the Philistines, rather as prisoners, then as priviledges? rather in testimo∣nium & rninam quam in salutem, for a testimony against us, and for our further ruine, then for our safety here, and salvation hereafter? O consider how God hath cast off the Israelites, notwithstanding his covenant with their fathers: and when in their necessity, they would have forced acquaintance with him, he would not look upon them, Judg. 10.14. The sword hath broken in pieces those seven golden candlesticks in Asia, merely for their covenant-breaking. See the Note on verse 5. Verse 9. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base [And so have cried quittance with you, and returned you your own with usury. God loves to re∣taliate, and to proportion jealousie to jealousie, provocation to provocation, Deut. 32.21. frowardnesse to frowardnesse, Psal. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety, Lev. 26.18, 21. contempt to contempt, 1 Sam. 2.30. and here How these un∣worthy priests had sleighted God, and exposed his Name and Service to contempt and obloquy, hath been before set forth sufficiently. And now it is come home to them. It was threatened before verse 3. (see the Notes there) and now it is ex∣ecuted. Gracelesse men are apt to imagine that God threateneth in terrorem one∣ly: and are ready, with those miscreants in the Gospel, to say, God forbid: we hope he will be better then his word, and not be so unmercifull as the Preachers would make him. They beleeve the predictions of Scripture, but as they beleeve the predictions of an Almanack, which saith, such a day will be rain, and such a day winde: men think it may come to passe, and it may be not. But shall God say the word, and not see it fulfilled? Is not his dicere, his facere? his word, his deed? Yea, doth he not sometimes, dicte citiùs, break out upon his enemies, as he did upon Nadab and Abibu, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, &c. God had poured contempt already upon these degenerate priests. And the like he had threatened to those, Jer. 23.40. See Mich. 3.7. Zach. 13.4. Ribera upon this Text bewailes the businesse in their Romish Clergy, now become despicable by reason of their evill manners. Petrarch complain'd long before, that the stench of that sink the Court of Rome was come up to heaven. Erasmus layed them open in their colours, and did them more mischief jocando, by his jearing
and jesting at them, then Luther did stomachando, by dry blowes and invectives, as One well observeth. He made the world look up (that had been long luld asleep) and take notice of the truth of that which Chrysostom had long before discovered and lamented, Multi sacerdotes, & pauci sacerdotes, multi in nomi∣ne, pauci in opere. There are many Priests, and yet but few: many so in name, few so indeed.Marcidi. rebaulde. Parisiens. Fy on such rascall rebaulds said the excommunicated Barons in K. Iohns time (in their declaration) concerning the Pope and his Cardinals, and yet they were no Protestants. No more are the Venetians: and yet how they slight their Pope (who is now, like the cuckow in June, heard but not regarded by them) is sufficiently manifested by their Manifesto's to the Christian world. In Biscany (anciently Cantabria) a province of Spaine, they admit no Bishops to come amongst them: such an hatred they have taken against that order of men. And when King Ferdinand came in progress thither, accompanied amongst others by the Bishop of Pampeluna, the people arose in armes, drove back the Bishop, and gathering all the dust on the which they thought he had trodden,Heyl. Geog. pag. 55. flung it into the sea. What our Bishops did in Q. Maryes dayes we all know: that bloody Bonner especially, buried at length in a dung hill (too good a grave for him.) Sure it was an unhappy proverb that was then learnt, The Bishops foot hath trodden here. They are now utterly cashierd, and lye wrapt up in the sheet of shame for this very sin (amongst others) here charged upon these Priests, their disho∣nouring Gods great Name, his services, and servants. For it was come to that height of wickednesse amongst us, a little before the late troubles, as to cast odium in religionis Professores tanquam in adversarios, an evill report upon the profes∣sours of religion, as so many adversarles, as Bede saith the ancient Brittains did immediately before their destruction by the Saxons. He that would not be an Arminian, was therefore accounted a practicall Puritan. He that was not for the Jure divino of Episcopacy, was little better then a publike enemy. If the Ministry of England be under any abasures at present, as they are thorough the ini∣quity of the times, and the overflow of errours and Atheisme, let it serve to humble them for their desire of vainglory, and not seeking the honour that commeth from God onely Ioh. 5.44. let it also work in them a greater care to approve themselves to God, that they may be glorious in his eyes and to his people, who dare not but honour such as feare the Lord Psal. 15.4. and have his Ministers in singular esteeme for their works sake. 1 Thess. 5.13. according as ye have not kept my wayes] q. d. your dignity is decayed, like as your duty hath been neglected: You are fallen out of the hearts of good people, and are aviled by all. Neither is it any wonder: for a vicious life breeds vileness of estimation: but vertue is a thousand escucheons. Hence that close connexion, If there be any vertue, if any praise Phil. 4.8. this treads upon the heels of that as it were; followes it as close as the shadow doth the body. When Adam stood in innocency, the savage beasts did him reverence. And the same God which did at first put an awe of man in the fiercest creatures, hath stamped in the cruel∣lest hearts a reverend respect to his own Image in his faithfull ministers, as in Saul to Samuel, Herod to Iohn Baptist, those gallants of Israel to that mad fellow, as they were pleased to call the Prophet that came to anoint Jehu: upon whose words (as mad as they made of him) they will presently adventure their lives, and change the crown. Gods Image (as Gods name Psal. 111.9.) is holy and reverend: And they that would have good repute and report amongst men, must carefully keep (or, as the word here used may be rendred) watch Gods wayes. He shall have enow that will watch for his halting, and take any little occasion to re∣vile him with open mouth, as Shimei did David, when he had declined Gods way. It is therefore excellent counsell that Solomon giveth, and worthy of all acceptation. Pro. 4.25, 26, 27. Let thine eyes look right on: and let thine eye∣lids look straight before thee. Ponder the path of thy feet: and let all thy wayes be ordered aright. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left: remove thy foot from evill. Lo, this is the ready road to honour and estimation. Do worthily in Ephrata, and so be famous in Bethlehem. Ruth 4.11. Sic famam extendere factis Hoc virtutis opus. But those Balaams that perswaded by their Balacks, seek for
honour by evill-doing, these seek the living among the dead, figs of thistles, hea∣ven in hell &c. but have been partiall in the law] Heb. ye have accepted or acknowledged faces in the law. i. e. you accept persons; you deal partially in expounding and apply∣ing the law, making it pinch the poor, and favour the rich. The Church hath ever been pestered with such Aretalogi, such parasitical Preachers, whose pra∣ctise hath been like Ahabs Prophets, to speak magis ad voluntatem quàm ad verita∣tem, more to please then to profit. And there is a very great sympathy between great ones that have first flattered themselves, and these false flatterers, who prove a sit helve for such an hatchet, and meet lettice for such lips. Such an one was Ʋriah the high-priest to Ahaz 2 Chron. 28. His motto seemes to have been Mihi placet, quic quid regi placet. Such were those dirt-dawbers for the devill in Ezekiels dayes chap. 13.10, 11. &c. the Herodians, the Arians, the Armi∣nians,Buchole. Ʋtenbogardus &c. the Queen of Navarr's Preachers, who perswaded her, out of politick respects, to consent to that unhappy match that gave opportunity for the Parisian Massacre.1 Tim. 5 21.  The Apostle chargeth his son Timothy to do nothing of popularity or partiality, by tilting the ballance on the one side, as the word signifieth: but as a just law is an heart without affection, an eye without lust, a mind without passion, a treasurer which keepeth for every man that he hath, and distributeth to every man that he ought to have: so should a Minister be; remembring that of Iob chap. 13.10. He will surely reprove you, if you secretly accept persons, that is, he will chide you, smite you, curse you for it, and so set it on, as no creature shall be able to take it off. If you reprove meaner men, and wink at the faults of great Ones, reproving he will repro you,  will not do it to halves: no, he will rather do it double; you shall have it both surely and severely. Let your resolution therefore be that of Elihu Iob 32 21.22. I will not now accept the person of any man, neither will I give flattering titles to man. For I may not give flattering titles, lest my Maker should suddenly take me away, lest my Master, whose steward I am, finding me unfaithfull in the dispose of his mysteries, should confound me before you. Ier. 1.17. Nisi fideliter dixerim, vobis erit damnosum,Timeo itaqu damnum ve∣strum, timeo damnationem meam. Bern. de T. mp. 99. mihi periculosum, If I should not deale faithfully and freely with you, it would be to your loss, but to mine utter undoing. Verse 10. Have we not all one Father?] Here begins a second contestation, viz. with the people (as the former was with the Priests) for their unrighteous dealing; where we have so many words, so many arguments. In brevitate ver∣borum est luxuries verum. How many Ones are here, and all to perswade to uni∣ty. See the like Eph. 4.3, 4, 5. Let those that take upon them to perswade others to equity and unanimity, learn to marshall their matter handsomely, and to fill their mouths with arguments, such as may fall thick, and prevail,Iob 21.4. being se∣conded and set on with intimation of heartiest affection. Oh that I could some∣where meet with you both together said Austin to Hierome and Ruffinus (hearing of their differences) I would fall down at your feet with much love, and many teares, I would beseech you for Gods sake, for your own sakes,Hei mihi qui vos alicubi invenire non possum &c. for weak Christi∣ans sake &c. not to suffer these dissentions to spread further. So Mr. Bradford in a letter to a distressed Gentlewoman that was in a despairing condition, I be∣seech you, saith He, I pray you, I desire you, I crave at your hands with all my very heart, I ask of you with hand, pen, tongue and mind in Christ, through Christ, for Christ, for his name, blood, mercy, power and truths sake,Act. and Mon. that you admit no doubting of Gods finall mercyes toward you, howsoever you feel your self. Oh that I could get words (said Another holy man to his hearers) to gore your very hearts with smarting pain, that this doctrine might be written in your flesh? By this One Father in the Text is meant Adam, say the most Inter∣preters, who was the common Parent of us all, and the very stock and root, from whence all mankind did spring. It is therefore a sin against Nature it self and com∣mon humanity, to deal treacherously against another, or to hide thy self from thine own flesh Isa. 58.7. This is to be more unreasonable then beasts, birds, and fishes, which love their own kind; and those that seed on flesh will not eat the flesh of their own kind. But our Age over-aboundeth with unnaturall Man∣eaters, that (not only fike a pickrell in a pond, or shark in the sea, devour the
lesser fishes of another alloy, but also) eat up Gods people, as they eat bread, make no more conscience,Psal. 14.5. nay take as much content in undoing a poor brother, as in eating a meals-meat, when they are hungry: they make but a breakfast of a whole representative Nation; as those gun-powder-papists designed to do. How oft are wicked Oppressours compared to hunters, for their cruelty, and fowlers for their craft? to shew that they spare none that fall into their nets: young, old, male, female, all go together into the bag. This raised a great cry of the people, and of their wives against their brethren, those usurious Jews, that had both robb'd and ravished them,Psal. 10.9 Nehem. 5.1. And what could they say for themselves, but the same in effect with this in the text. Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children, &c? have we not all one father? hath not One God created us?] Here the Prophet riseth higher, viz. from Adam to God, out of whose mint when Man came first, he shone most glorious, for he was Gods own workmanship created unto love and good works:Ephes. 2.10 yea, as iron put into fire, seems to be nothing but fire: so Adam, come fresh out of Gods hands, who is perfect love and goodnesse it self, was no other then a very lump of love to God, and kindnesse to his fellow-creatures. But now alasse, we may sit and sing, O quantum haec Niobe, &c. how strangely are we altered, and fallen from our first love! and what great cause have we, with those in Ezra, to think of this Temple that was burnt, and lament? yea, write Lamen∣tations with Jeremy, and say, as He; They ravished the women in Zion, and the maids in the cities of Judah. Princes are hanged up by the hand, the faces of the El∣ders were not honoured, &c. Lam. 5. The wonder was the lesse, because these that did all this were of a different reion.  for those that serve the same true God, the Creatour of all, to jarre and warre (as we, alasse, do at this day) this is lamentabile bellum, and speaks a great decay and defect of the power of godlinesse: true religion being of an uniting nature: and the strongest tye. Sanatior sane est copula cordis quam corporis. This Iosephs brethren knew, and therefore held it their best plea, Gen. 50.17. And now we pray thee forgive the trespasse of the ser∣vants of thy fathers God. They had one common father: but, as a better string to their bowe, they had one common God. The very Turks are found to be much bra∣ver souldiers upon the Christian,Voyage into Leuant. p. 89. then upon the Persian, because they begin alate to be infected with Persianisme, whom they acknowledge better Mahometans then themselves. why do we deal treacherously] Or, fraudulently. The Prophet puts himself into the number though innocent, that his reproof might the better take with them. That which he taxeth them for, is their wrong-dealing (in generall) one with an∣other; whether it were by force or by fraud, by violence or cunning contrivance, which what is it else, but crimen stellionatus, the very sinne of cousenage, and hath God for an avenger? 1 Thess. 4.6. Now it is dangerous offending him whose dis∣pleasure and revenge is everlasting, and who oft calls to reckoning after our dis∣charges. Take heed therefore of all sorts of injustice. Curse not the deaf, lay not a stumbling-block before the blind: but fear the Lord Jehovah, Lev. 19.14. And considering that to deal treacherously with another (a brother especially) is a sinne (as hath been above-said) both against nature and religion: both against Race and Grace (which teacheth righteousnesse as well as holinesse, Tit. 2.12. and turning the leopard into the lamb, &c. causeth that none do hurt to, or destroy another in all Gods holy mountain, Esay 11.6.) let us so carry our selves, as that, with blessed Paul, we may glory and say, We have wronged no man, we have consumed no man, we have defrauded no man, &c. 2 Cor. 7.2. by profaning the covenant of our fathers] i. e. by degenerating from the pro∣mises, and practises of our pious progenitours. Of this see verse 8. A certain popish Prince said, It is not amisse to make covenants: but wo be to him that is ne∣cessitated to keep them. He had learned, (belike of Machiavel) fidem tamdiù servandam esse quamdiù expediat, that covenants are to be kept so long as a man shall see cause.Eos foedera nescire. That which was anciently said of the Thracians is now verified of the papists, that they keep no covenants, with heretikes especially. The Turks (taught by them) say, There is no faith to be kept with dogs, that is with Christi∣ans. Their leagnes grounded upon the law of Nations, and solemnly confirmed by
oath, have with them no longer force then standeth with their own pleasure and profit. And if Turks and Papists onely were truce-breakers, and fedifragies, it were the better to be born with. But what shall we say to those Christianecategori (as Bellarmine saith a certain sort of heretikes were called of old) those blots and botches of Christian religion, and holy society, that can say and unsay at pleasure,De. eccles. triumph. l. 2. c. 11. make vows to God in their distresse, and break them as fast when delivered? Just like those Jews in Ieremy, chap. 34. that set free their servants when the ene∣my lay before the walls: but reduced them into bondage, when the siege was raised, though they had cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof; a most solemne way of sealing up covenants. So dealt their fathers before them, Psal. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. And so dealt here their Nephews after them. They profaned the covenant of obedience to Gods commandements, that their fathers, for themselves and their successours, entred into. But should men thus play with covenants as children do with nuts? should they slip them at pleasure, as Monkeys do their col∣lars? should they snap them in sunder, as Sampson did his cords? Had Shimei peace that brake his oath to Solomon? or Zedekiah that kept not touch with Nebuchad∣nezzar? &c. Verse. 11. Judah hath dealt treacherously] Judah the consessour) as his name im∣ports) Iudah that once ruled with God, and was faithful with the Saints:Hos.: 1.12. Indh in whom God was known, his name was great in Israel Psal. 76, 2. Prospers conceit was, that Iudai were so called because thy received us Dei, the law from Gods mouth: whence Ioscphus calls the Common wealth of Israel  a God go∣vernment. For, to them pertained (among sundry other precious priviledges recited Rom. 9.4, 5.) the Covenants, that is, 1. The moral law in two tables. 2. The gi∣ving of the law, that is, the Judicial law. 3. The service, that is, the seremonial law, which was their Gospel: whence Iudea is called the glorious land Dan. 11.41. (or the land of delights, or ornaments as the Hebrew hath it) a pleasant land, or a land of desire Ier. 3.19. because as it is Ezek 20.6, 15. it was the glory of all lands. Je∣rusalem the metropolis, was not onely the most famous of all the cities of the East, as Pliny confesseth it,Psal. 31.21. but also of the whole world si insignia Dei spectemus benesicia, as one saith, if we consider Gods marvellous kind csse shewed to it in a strong city, as David hath it. But, as ingentia beneficia, flagitia, supplicia, the greater the priviledges of any place or people are, the more hainous are their offen∣ces, and the more hideous their punishments; so sell it out with this nation so ad∣vanced, so obliged, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked. They were but newly retur∣ned from captivity, scarce yet warm in their nests, when they fell afresh to their old trade of treachery, doing wickedly with both hands earnestly. Abomination was committed in Israel and in Jerusalem, even such as Gods soul abhorred, and was ready to be loosened or dis oynted from them Ier. 6.8. because in the land of up∣rightnesse they dealt unjustly, and would not behold the majesty fhe Lord say 26.10. Indah had profaned the holinesse of the Lord which he loved, that is, the very place that he had espied out for himself, and that was dedicated to his name and ser∣vice, the holy and separate land, the Isle, as it is called Tsai. 20.6. (though part of the continent) because compassied about with Gods favour as with a shield. Psal. 5.12. In such a consecrated countrey to act their villany, was no small aggravation of their wickednesse: this made it swell like a toad in the eyes of the Almighty, it was an abomination. Filthynesse in a stewes, in a strumpet, is nothing so odious, as in a pretended Virgin. A nettle on the waste is better born with then in a garden. To see the Devil in hell is no wonder: but what makes he in Paradise? England was anciently called the kingdom of God it may much better be so called now,Auglia regi Del. Pol. Vhg. that Gospel of the kingdom is preached amongst us. It was also called Albion quasi Olbion (Happy or fortunate, the fortunate Island say some) or ab albis rupibus from the whitenesse of the rocks. True it is, we were black all over with supersti∣tion, first Pagan, and then Papagan; But Christ hath made us white again as snow in Salmon. And do we again sully and soil our selves with sinnes filthinesse, with that unclean kitchin-stuffe? do we profane the holinesse of the Lord, which he loved, to drive him away from us by degrees, as those Jews did, Ezek 8.9, 10, 11. sinne is the leaven that defiles our passeover; and urgeth God to passe away and de∣part from us. Sin is the snuff that dimmes our candle-stick, and threatens the re∣movall
of it. Let those that live in Gods good land, but not in Gods good Laws (as Aristotle complained of his Athenians to like purpose,Laert. l. 5. c. 1 and as Seneca said to the Romans, that they were become more filthy since they had bathes to wash in) look forward to the following verse, and tremble at that utter destruction there threatened to such, Disperdet Dominus &c. And thereunto Saint Paul seem∣eth to allude 1 Cor. 3.17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him will God de∣stroy. and hath married the daughter of a strange God] This is that particular sin where∣by they had dealt treacherously against their brethren, profaned the Covenant, polluted the Church, and committed abomination in Israel: they had married with women of a strange worship, and joyned in affinity with the people of those abominations, as holy Ezra phraseth it Chap. 9.14. and withall setteth it forth for such a sin in those newly-returned captives, as he thinks heaven and earth might well be asha∣med of. A sin it is, flatly forbidden in both Testaments, Deut. 7.3. 2. Cor. 6.14. and reasons added: as 1. Danger of defection at least, from former forwardnesse: but most commonly of infection, as in Solomon 1 King. 11. Nehem. 13.26. what's the reason the Pope will not dispense in Spain and Italy, if a papist marry a Pro∣testant; yet here he will, but in hope to draw more to them. See 1 King. 12.25. and 2 King. 8.27. 2 Great inconveniency: as 1. Of grief to the godly parents Gen. 26.35. and 27.36. 2. Ill education of children, who commonly take after the mother (as did most of those Idolatrous kings of Judah) and follow the worser side, though it be the weaker, as the conclusion in a Syllogisme follows the weaker proposition. The birth, we say, followeth the belly: and most men, we see, do matrissare take after the mother, in matters of religion. Hereunto might be added, that Gods service must by these unequal matches necessarily be hindered, if not altogether omitted, (to gratifie a froward Zipporah, or a mocking Michol) and the better party forced to see and hear that, that cannot but grieve the Spirit of God. Besides danger of disloyalty, and a cursed posterity, as Edomites of the daughters of Heth.D. Hall. Here then I could joyn with that Reverend Contempla∣tour in that holy wish of his, that Manoah could speak so loud that all our Isra∣elites might hear him; Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all Gods people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Phili∣stines? If Religion be any other then a cypher, how dare we not regard it in our most important choyces? how dare we yoke our selves with any untamed heifer that beareth not Christs yoke? what mad work made that noble pair of naughty∣packs, Iezabel and Athaliah in the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, the later begin∣ning her reigne in the same year that the former perished, as Bucholcer observeth? And who knoweth not what a deal of mischief was done to the poor people of God in France, by Katherine de Medices, Q. Mother, with the advice and aslistance of the Cardinall of Lorrain? Concerning which two it was said, Non audet stygius Pluto tentare quod ander Effraenis Monachus plenaque frandis anus. Verse 12. The Lord will cut off the man that doth this] Though the Magistrate be carelesse and corrupt: though he either cannot punish this evil, it being growen so universall, or will not (and so impunity in the Magistrate maketh impenitency in the offendours) God will take the sword in hand, and cut off every mothers child that doth this,Metaphora est à Medicis la. Polan. (nisi currat poenitentia) as a chirurgion cutteth off a rotten member, so will God destroy such for ever: he will take them away, and pluck them out of their dwelling places, and root them out of the land of the living, Psal. 52.5. Neither shall this be done to himself onely, but to his wretched posterity (such a legacy like Joabs leprosie, leaves every gracelesse man to his children) for so the Chaldee here rendreth and interpreteth that proverbiall expression in the text, both the ma∣ster and the scholler,Sic & R. Salom. filium & filium filii, his sonne, and his sous sonne, though he teach never so well by wholesome instruction, and politic advisement, to prevent the mischief: Agreeably hereunto for sence Piscator rendreth this text thus, The Lord will cut off his children that doth thus, the children that he begets of the daughter of a strange god. An heavy curse surely, and frequently inflicted, as upon
Ahab: though he to avoid it, so followed the work of generation, that he lest se∣venty sonnes behind him; which yet would not do. and him that offereth an offering &c.] that is, Although he be a Priest, Or Although he seek to make peace with me by an offering: as hoping thereby to stop my mouth or stay my hand to expiate his sin, or to purchase a dispensation as those Mic. 6.6, 7. and Esay 58.2, 3. Thus Saul sacrificeth, Ahab trembleth and humbleth, Ieroboams wile goeth to the Prophet, Ioab taketh hold of the horns of the Altar: the king of Persia having lost some of his children by untimely death as Ciesias reporteth) sends earnestly to the Jews for prayers for him and his, Ezra 6.10. So did Maximinus in like case to the Christians. Tully tells us that they which prayed whole dayes together and offered sacrifice, Dvr. ut s liberi superstites sibi essent, that their children might out-live them, these were  called superstitiou persons: afterwards the word was taken in a larger sense. But devotion without holy conversation availes nothing to avert Gods judgements Isa. 1.12.15. and 6.3. He that killeth an Ox unlesse withall he kill his cur∣ruptions is as if he slew a man: he that sacrisiccth a lamb, unlesse by faith he ley hold upon the Lamb of God, is as if he cut off a dogs nick: he that effereth an old∣tion &c. This men are hardly drawn to, viz. to part with their sins, to cail the traytours head over the wall, to hang up the heads of the people before the Sun. Sin harboured in the soule, is like Achan in the army, or Jonas in the ship; much paines the marriners were at, and much losle too, to have saved Jonas from the sea, they ventured their own casting away ere they would cast him over-board: but there could be no calme, till they had done it effectually. So it is here. Full fain men would keep their sins, and yet lave their foules: but that's impossible. God will not be bribed Psal. 50. nor brought to suster sin unrepented to escape unpunished. Poor soules when stung by the Friers sermons, they set them penun∣ces, pilgrimages, all sorts of good works, which stilled them a while: and for them they thought they should have pardon. So many run now mongst us to holy duties, but with the same opinion they did them, a bribes for a pardon. These dig for pearle, in their own dunghils, make the meanes their mediat urs, think to save themselves by riding on horses &c. Verse 13. And this have ye done againe] Or, in the second place. q. . Nor content to have married strange wives, yea have brought them in to your lowfull wives, to their intolerable vexation, so adding this sin to the former, as a grea∣ter to the lesse. This is still the guise of gracelesse men, to add druakesse to thirst, rebellion to sin, to amasse and heape up one evill upon another, till wrath come upon them to the ut mest. For three transgressions and for soxr I will not turn away their punishment Am. 1. that is, so long as the wicked commit one or two inuities, I forbear them: but when it comes once to threes and fours, (how much more to so many scores, hundreds, thousands, as one cipher added to a fi∣gure makes it so many tenns, two so many hundreds, three so many thousands &c.) God will bear with them no longer. Of those old Israelites it is deman∣ded, not without great indignation on Gods part. How oft did they provoke him in the wildernesse, and grieve him in the desart? Yea they turned ba and tempted God &c. Psal. 78.40, 41. Good men, if they fall once into foule practises, they fall not often. Of Judah it is expressely recorded that he knew Tamar no more. Lot indeed committed incest two night; together: but the orifice of his lust was not yet stopped by repentance. Think the same of Solomon, Sampson, Ionah, &c. their acts were as it were continued acts: and, in the interim, little or no remorse or regret. Let us that have received merey, be admonished to sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto us.Ih. 5 There is a woe to such as draw iniquiey with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cartrope Isa. 5.20. Babylons sins in the Revelation reached up to heaven, or they were thwacked together thick and threefold one upon another Rev. 18.5. there was a concatenation, or a continu∣ed series of them: therefore she fell surely and suddenly. When wickednesse is once ripe in the field, God will not let it shed to grow again: but cuts it up by a just and seasonable vengeance. covering the Altar of the Lord with teares] That is, You caused your poor wives, when they should have been chearfull in Gods service, as 1 Sam. 1. and
in many other places it was required of the Israelites to rejoyce whensoever they appeared before the Lord, Earthly Princes love not the company of mourners Esth. 4.4. to cover the Lords Altar vith tears, with weeping, and with crying out, to throw themselves, blubbered and swoln with tears, upon the Altar, which was a profanation of it: so that God regarded not the offering any more. 'Twere happy if we could be so affected with our unkindnesse to Christ, our husband, that wee could cover his Table, when we come to it, with our tears. How should the Lord regard our service so much the more? how should it be unto him as Musick upon the waters, farre more harmonious! What a gracious respect had He to the weep∣ing women that followed him to the crosse; and what an honour was that to one of them, (Mary Magdalen I mean) that she had the first sight of the revived Phoenix,Psal. 91.13. whom she held fast by those feet that she had once washed with her tears, and that had now lately trod upon the lion, and adder, &c? It was appointed by Moses law that the bond-woman should bewail her father and mother a full monet before she might become an Israelites wife.Deut. 21.13. We, that are strangers to the Com∣monwealth of Israel, as we cannot be presented a chast virgin to Christ, but as weeping over him that bled over us, so we never please him better, then when we weep over our tears,Ipsae lachrymae sunt lachrya∣biles, &c. sigh over our sobbes, mourn over our griefs, as not propor∣tionable to our miscarriages. But to return to the Text: The Jews as they are no∣ted for a nation overmuch effoeminate, and given to women, (as they say) so when they have satisfied their lust, and served their own turns, they are as willing to be rid of them as Amnon was of Tamar. Hence those many cautions in the law to put bounds to their petulancy: and that politick permistion of a divorce, for the relief of the poor despised woman, lest she should come to a mischief, by the hatred of the churl her husband, Deut. 22.13, 14 with chap. 24.3. At this day they look upon women, as not having so divine a soul as men, but are of a lower creation, made onely for the propagation and pleasure of man. They use them as their drudges, lay upon them with their unmanly fists, are ready to cut out their tongues (as the Welsh-men dealt by their French wives,Heyl. Geng. pag. 93. lest they should corrupt the language of their children) put them away upon every slight occasion, covering that violence with the garment of the law, as verse 16. Or if they kept them, they took other wives to them, to vex them, and to make them to srt, 1 Sam. 1.6. or (as the word there signisies) to thunder: not onely tabring upon their breasts, with the voyce of doves, (as Nahums expression is) but filling the air, yea cove∣ring the altar (as it is here) with their laments and lwings,Nah. 2.7. Lamentis ge∣mituque & foe∣minco ululatu Tecta fremunt-Virg. Aeneid. flctu & mugitu, (so the Vulgar rendreth it) for their husbands harshnesse, and their concubines inso∣lencies, and indignities. Hierom tells us, that these returned captives slighted their old wives brought with them from Babylon, (as being by that tedions journey be∣come infirm and deformed) and matched with slrangers, who were fresh, fair, rich, &c. this he gathers out of Ezra 9. and 10. whereas they should rather have nou∣rished and cherished them as their own flesh, Ephes. 5.29. they should have hand∣led them gently, because of their weaknesse, as so many chrystall-glasses. They should have given them all lawfull content, as Abraham did Saral, his faithfull fellow-traveller. They should have given all honour unto them, saith Saint Peter; and why?1 Pet. 3.7. Mark his many reasons. 1. They are the weaker vessels, and are there∣fore to be handled with all tendernesse. Some translate it the weaker instrument: and (as Luther speaks of it) as a knife with a tender edge men will not cut stones, brasse, or iron with it: so here. 2. They are heirs together of the grace of life, that is, of the life of grace, and of glory too: for souls have no sexes, and as every one is in Christ, all are equall, so that the husband is bound, in this respect, to make his wives yoke as easie as may be, sith she draws even with him, though on the left side. 3. That your prayers be not hindered, as they will be, where there is not so much conjugium, as conjurgium. How can they pray together com∣fortably, that live so discontentedly? How can they bring their gift to that altar that is covered with the tears, and moans of their justly aggrieved and abused wives? Or, if they do, will God regard their offering any more, or receive it with good will at their hands? Will not the tears and groans of their distressed wives (who yet hold out their devotion, and will not be hindered by their just grief, from praying to God, and pouring out their souls before him) move God more
then their sacrifices can do? Especially if they bring them with a wicked mind, as Solomon hath it: and as Lyra maketh it to be the sence of this Text:Prov. 21.27 Ye have covered the Altar of the Lord with tears, &c. but he regardeth not the offer∣ing any more, &c. that is, (saith Lyra, and he hath it from Chrysostom) you are resolved to retain your idolatrous wives, though God have declared against it: And that ye may expiate this wickednesle, and make amends by your good deeds for your bad; you run to the Temple, and there with many tears, and groans you beg pardon. But all in vain, because you have no purpose at all to break off your sins, but will needs persist in your unlawfull marriages. See more of this in the Note on chap. 3.16. doct. 4. use 1. Verse 14. Yet ye say wherefore?] A senselesse question: but there is nothing more stupid, and stubborn then an hypocrite: he will not yeeld, though never so clearly convinced, but will have still somewhat to say though to small purpose, as had Saul to Samuel, 1 Sam. 15. and these Questionists here to God, whom (as before oft, and again after) they put to his proofs. (See the Note on chap. 1. verse 2, 6.) and his answer is ready: Because the Lord hath been winesse between thee and the wife of thy youth] The Heathen could say, Maxima debetur pueris reverentia siquid Turpe paras: — And again, Turpe quid acturus te, sine teste, time. We should not do wickedly if but a child be by. And, when thou art about to do ought amisse, fear thine own conscience, which is a thousand witnesses. But if God be by as a witnesse, should not men fear to offend him? Tremble thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. He that dares sin, though he know God be an eye-witnesse, is more impudent in sinning then was Absalom, when he spred a tent upon the top of the house, and went in to his fathers concu∣bines, in the sight of all Israel, and of the Sunne. These treacherous husbands could not but know that they had entred into a covenant of God, Prov. 2.17. when they married: that the bond was made to God, and that upon the violation of it, he would be ready enough to take the forfeiture: for whoremongers and adul∣terers God will judge, Heb. 13.3. That God had been witnesse,Protestatus est. or had protested (so Montanus renders it) and withall had, by interposing of his own authority, confir∣med the contract and compact, saying, verbis concept is, as Hos. 3.3. Thou shalt not be for another man, so will I also be for thee, and not for another woman, till God shall separate us by death. Indeed if the husband or the wife be dead,Rom. 7.2. the surviving party is at liberty to marry again (whatsoever the Canonists say against bigamy.) Hierome tells us of an old man in Rome that had buried twenty wives, which hee had married one after the death of another: and that he had taken to wife the one and twentieth, who also had buried nineteen husbands. And that,Hier. apud Lo∣nicer in Theat. histor. p. 734. burying that wife too, he followed the corps to the Church (so his neighbours would needs have it) with a garland of bayes upon his head in manner of a triumpher. But against Polygamy (which is, when a man or woman couples himself or her self in mar∣riage to more then one) here are an heap of arguments in the text, which we shall take as they lie in order. Mean-while it is worthy our observation, that the first Authour of Polygamy was that Thrasonicall Lamech, noted for a profane and wic∣ked person: as was likewise Esan another Polygamist. Laban though he had che∣ted Jacob into the having of his two daughters to wife, yet he could not but con∣fesse it to be a sinne against the light of Nature. Hence at parting he takes a so∣lemne oath of Jacob, Gen. 31.50. If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives besides my daughters: no man is with us: see God is witnesse betwixt me and thee. Some of the Fathers were herein faulty, as Abraham, David, &c. and some say it was their priviledge: but that's not likely. Rather it was their ig∣norance or incogitancy, (they considered not that it was a breach of the first in∣stitution of marriage) or, as some conceive, it was their meer mistake of that Text, Lev. 18.18. Thou shalt not take a wife to her sister, to vex her,Confer Ezek. 1.9. to uncover her naked esse, besides the other, in her life time. Here they took the word (sister) for one so by blood, which was spoken of a sister by nation, as those clauses to vex her,
and daghter life, do evince. One thing was, the commonnesse of the sinne, and the  custome of it. So long had it continued, and was grown so fashionable, that it seemed to be no sinne. But debt is debt, whether a man know of it, or not: And sin, as a debt, may sleep a long time, and not be called for of many years, as Sauls sin in killing the Gibeonites slept fourty years; and Joabs killing of Abner slept all David's dayes, &c. Another thing that might cause desire of many wives, was want of love and chast affection to the wife of their youth. Isaac is noted for a most loving husband to his Rebecca: and he never desired more wives then her. Re oyce in the wife of thy youth: Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, &c. This will keep thee from being ravished with a strange woman, or ombracing the bo∣somc of a stranger, Prov. 5.18, 19, 20. The Hind and the Roe are most loving to their mates, and therefore most faithfull to them. So, among birds, are the turtle∣dove, and the stork. The former, they say, as he keeps close to his mate, while she lives; so when she dies, he groans and moans continually, and never sits upon a green bough. The later are chast, and severe, in punishing those of the kind that are not. It iscredibly reported by some that have seen it, that whole flocks of Storks meeting in a medow, they have set in the middest of them two of their com∣pany that have been found disloyall,Sphi. Philos. pag. 231. and runnning upon them with main force have killed them with their beaks. So that the company breaking up, and all the rest fly∣ing away, the two offending Storks onely have been found dead in the place. against whom thou hast dealt treacherously] viz by superinducing another wife contrary to thy covenant, This is not a simple injury against thy lawfull wife; but such as is joyned with contumely, which the Greeks call : and the children that come of such copulation they call , because they are subject to contu∣melies. The Hebrews call them brambles; Aimelech was such an one, Iudg. 9.14. a right bramble indeed, who grew in the base hedge-row of a concubine; and scratcht and drew blood to purpose. Lo, this is the Prophets first argument against Polygamy: it is treachery against both God, who is deeply interested in the mar∣riage-covenant, and against the true wife, who is hereby extremely desrauded, and defeated. Follows not the second: yet she is thy companion] thy compeer, and copartner, thy consort, and fellow-friend, such another as thy self (so the woman is called, Gen. 2.18.) a second∣self, a mate meet for thee, a piece so just cut out for thee, as answereth thee right∣ly in every point, in every joynt. A wife is not a slave, (saith One) but a com∣panion: a yoke-fellow, standing on even ground with thee, though drawing on the left side. From the left side (say some) she was taken where the heart is, to teach, that hearty love should be betwixt married couples. Made she was of a rib, a bone of the side; not of the head, (the wife must not usurp authority over her husband) nor yet of the foot, she may not be trampled upon, or disregarded as an underling. A bone, not of any anterior part; she is not raelaa, preferred before the man: neither yet of any hinder-part, she is not postposita, set behind the man: but a bone of the side, of the middle, of the indifferent part, to shew that she is thy companion and the wife of thy covenant. A bone she is from under the arm: to put man in mind of protection, and defence to the woman. A bone, not far from his heart; to put him in mind of dilection and love to the woman. Neither can the rib challenge any more of her, then the earth can do of him. And as he was ignorant when himself was made, so he knew as little when his second-self was made out of him: both that the comfort might be greater then was expected; as also that he might not upbraid his wife with any great dependance or obligation; he neither willing the work, nor suffering any pain to have it done. Shine she must with the beams of her husband: Share she must with him, in his masterly govern∣ment of the family, as Sarah did with Abraham by Gods allowance, Gen. 16. and as the Roman Ladies were wont to say to their husbands, Ʋbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caia, where you are Lord, I am Lady. That over-lordly carriage of husbands towards their wives, and that usage of them as drudges, is condemned by the Heathen Phi∣losophers, in the very Barbarians themselves, as a great ataxy, and disorder in the family. and the wife of thy covenant] And is it nothing to be covenant-breaker with a wife; especially where God also is ingaged, as above said? Foedus .
, ab eadem radice, perform your trust, make good the troth you have plighted. Otherwise, if the fruits of the flesh grow out of the trees of your hearts, surely,Ser. of Rep. p. 70. surely, saith Master Bradford Martyr, the devil is at inne with you: you are his birds, whom when he hath well fed, he will broach you, and eat you, chaw you, and champ you world without end, in eternall wo and misery. Verse 15. And did not he make one] Another forcible argument against Poly∣gamy, and adultery. See our Saviours explanation of it, Mat. 19.4, 5, 6. with the Notes there. The onely wise God made but one woman for one man at the first creation: and ordained that those two should be one flesh, two in one flesh, not three, or four, or as many wives as a man is able to maintain, as among the Turks, who (as a just hand of God upon them) are grievously vexed with jealousie, not suffering their women to go to Church: nor so much as look out at their own windows:Bunt. 106. Or if they go abroad upon any occasion, they must go muffled, all but the eyes. Sardus tells us, that the old Brittains would ten or twelve of them take one woman to wife. Belike women were rare commodities with them. As likewise men were in Judaea, when seven women took hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparrel: onely let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach, Esay 4.1. That is, we will maintain our selves and thee: onely be thou an husband to us, and let us have children by thee. yet had he the residue of the spirit] Or, breath: so that he could as easily have made more, and breathed into their faces the breath of life. And although it is not said of the woman, that God breathed into her the breath of life, as of Adam, (whence Tertullian concludes, that she had both body and soul too from Adam) yet Austin rightly gathereth, that their souls were both alike imbreathed by God:10. Lib sup. Genes. Otherwise, the scripture would not have been silent in it, no more then it is in the new manner of the creation of her body. Thence also it is that Adam saith not, This is soul of my soul, but bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, Gen. 2.23. Souls are not propagated by the Parents, but created of God, and joined to the bo∣dy, by an occult operation. Augustine following Origen, held the contrary for a long time. At length he began to doubt, and after a while changed his opinion: Hierom stoutly defending the contrary against him: Aristotle also understood the truth hereof, and concluded, that the soul was divine, and came from above: and.. Lib. 2. c. 9. de gen. anim. though of nothing, yet is it made a matter more excellent then the matter of the heavens, in nature not inferiour to the Angels. An abridgement it is of the invisi∣ble world, as the body is of the visible. And why may we not say, that the soul as it came from God, being divinae particula aurae, so it is like him? One, immateriall, immortall, understanding spirit, distinguisht into three powers, which all make up one Spirit. In this respect it is said, Gen. 9.6. that in the image of God made he man. There is a double image of God in the soul. One in the substance of it: this is never lost, and of this that text is to be understood. The other is the supernatu∣rall grace, which is an image of the knowledge, holinesse, and righteousnesse of God, and this is utterly lost, and must be recovered. This the ancient Heathens hammered at, when they fained that the soul once had wings: but, those being bro∣ken, it fell head long into the body; where when it hath recovered it's wings, it flies up to heaven again. That was very good counsell given by a godly man to his friend, not to busie his brains so much in enquiring how the soul entred into the body, as how it may depart comfortably out of the body. And seeing the soul is more excellent then the body, (saith another grave Divine) like as Jacob laid his right hand upon the younger, but his left upon the elder, so our best care, and the strength of our thoughts should be for the soul, younger as much as it is, then the body; they should be but left-hand thoughts for the body. and wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed] Heb. a seed of God: not a bastardly brood, a spurious issue, a Mamzer, as the Hebrews call such, that is, labes aliena, a strange blot, a seed of the adulterer and the whore, Esay 57.3. but such as God appointeth, and approveth, such as may be holy, with a federall holinesse at least, if not sanctified from the womb, as some have been, and are.: lastly,1 Cor. 7.14. such as in and by whom the Church and religion may be propagated and not idolatry spread and increased. therefore take heed to your spirit] that is, to your wife, which is the residue of
your spirit; keep and cherish her: so Remigius and Lyra interpret it. But they do better that expound it by that of Solomon, Keep thy heart with all diligence, Prov. 4.23. and by that of the Apostle, Mortific therefore your members which are upon earth, fornication, uncleannesse, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, &c. Col. 3.5. These are those that defile the man, Mat. 15.19, 20. These make his heart a filthy dung∣hill of all abominable lusts, and his life a long chain of sinfull actions, a very con∣tinued web of wickednesse, therefore take head to your spirits, that is, to your affe∣ctions, keep those pure and chaste: abstain from fleshly lusts that fight against the soul. Take heed where you set gunpowder, sith fire is in your heart. Austin thanks God that the heart and temptation did not meet together. Look well to the affecti∣ons: for by those maids Satan woes the mistresse. Look to the cinque-ports, the five senses: shut those windows that death enter not in thereby. Take heed to thy fancy: we allow an horse to praunce and skip in a pasture; which if he doth when backt by the rider, we count him an unruly and unbroken jade. So, howsoever in other creatures we deny them not liberty of fancy, yet wee may not allow it in our selves, to frisk and rove at pleasure, but by reason bridle them, and set them their bounds that they shall not passe. The Lord quieteth the sea, and turns the storme into a calme, Psal. 107.29. If then the voluptuous humours in our body (which is but as a cup made of the husk of an acorne in respect of the Sea) will not be paci∣fied when the Lord saith unto them, Be still, every drop of water in the sea will wit∣nesse of our rebellion and disobedience. and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth] He had convinced them of this sinne before, verse 14. Now he admonisheth them to abrenounce and abandon it. Lo this is the true method and manner of proceeding, in administring admonitions. The judgement must be convinced, ere the affections can be wrought to any thing: like as in the law, the lamps were first lighted, before the incense was burned: First, know thine iniquity, and then turn from it, Jer. 3.13, 14. Exhor∣tation is the end of doctrine, science of conscience, reformation of information, conversion of conviction: and wo be to those that being convinced, or reproved for their faults, get the bit between the teeth, as it were, and run away with their rider. When I would have healed Ephraim, then his iniquity brake out (as if it were to crosse me) like the leprosie in his forehead, Hos. 7.1. what can such sturdy rebels expect better, then that God should resolve, as Ezek. 24.13. as if he should say, Thou shalt have thy will, but then I will have mine too: I shall take another course with thee, sith thou refusest to be reformed, hatest to be healed: thou shalt pine away in thine iniquities, Levit. 26.39. O fearfull! Verse 16. For the Lord the God of Israel saith, that he hateth putting away] Heb. Put away, q. d. God hates that Put her away, Put her away, that is so much in your mouthes. For, because you are justly reproved for Polygamy, for keeping two wives, you think to mend that fault by putting away your old ones, and plead you may do it by a law, licensing divorces. But the Lord would ye should know, that he hates such your practises: and the rather because you maliciously abuse his law, as a cloke of your wickednesse. Divorce is a thing that Gods soul hateth, unlesse it bee in case of adultery, (which breaks the marriage knot) and malicious perpetuall de∣sertion. This last was the case of that noble Italian convert,1 Cor. 7.15. Galeacius Caracciolus Marquesse of Vico (as is to be seen in his life, written by my much honoured brother, Mr. Samel Clark, in the second part of his Marrow of Ecclesiasticall history, pag. 101.) who by the consent of Mr. Calvin, Peter Martyr, and other learned Di∣vines (who met and seriously debated the case) sued out a divorce against his for∣mer wife, who had first maliciously deserted him, and had it legally by the Magi∣strate at Geneva granted unto him: after which he married another, Anno 1560. The Civill Law of the Empire permitted divorce for diverse other causes. And these Jews, for every light cause (if but a blemish in the body, or crookednesse of manners) pretending to hate their wives, would write them a Bill of divorce, and turn them off. Our Saviour deals against this, matth. 5. and 18. See the Notes there. This sinne was also rife among both the Athenians (who were wont to put away their wives upon discontent,Archcol Attic. 140. or hope of greater portions, &c.) and the Ro∣mans, whose Abscessionale, or Writ of divorce was this onely, Res tuas tibi habeto; Take what is thine, and be gone. It is ordinary also among the Mahometans: But
the Lord God of Israel saith here, that he hateth it: and it appeareth so by his practise to his Spouse the Church. See Jer. 3.1. Joh. 13.1. and then say, that Gods mercy is matehlesse; and that he takes not advantages against his revolting people, but follows them with his favour: no otherwise then as when a man goes from the Sun, yet the Sun-beams follow him, shine upon him, warm him, &c. Zanchy (and some others) reads the text thus, If thou hatest her, put her away, in that discourse of divorces, which he wrote upon occasion of Andreas Pixzardus his divorce, as indeed agreeing best with the matter he undertook to defend. But in another book of his he utterly disliketh the doings of Luther, and some other Dutch Divines, who advised Philip, Lantgrave of Hesse to marry, alteram, hoc est,Zanch. Misc. Epist dedit. adulieram, his former lawfull wife being yet alive. Archbishop Grindall, by cun∣ning practises of his adversaries, Leicester and others, lost Queen Elizabeths favour,Camb. Elizab. Arslibishop Abbots also died in dis∣grace for op∣posing Sem∣mersets abhor∣red match with the Countesse of Essex. Figuier. as if he favoured Prophecyings, &c. but in truth, because he had condemned an unlawfull marriage of Julio an Italian Physician with another mans wife, whilest Leicester in vain opposed against his proceedings therein. for one covereth violence with his garment] This Text had been easie, had not Commentatours (the Hebrew Doctours especially) made it knotty. Rabbi David in opening of it, obscurior videtur, quam ipsa verba quae explicare conatur, seems to be more obscure then the words themselves which he undertaketh to open; saith Figueir, who also reciteth the expositions of severall Rabbines. Concerning which, I may say as One did once, when being asked by another, whether he should read such a Comment upon Aristotle? answered, Yes; when Aristotle is understood, then read the Comment. The plain sence is this: These wicked Jews pretended the Law of God, as a cloke and cover of their sinne, that it might be no sinne to them. And though the Lord had protested to hate their divorces, yet they pleaded I know not what liberty permitted them by Moses: but this was but a politike co∣verture of iniquity, Mat. 18.8, 9. The like hereunto was the sin of Saul, 1 Sam. 15. of Jezabel, 1 King. 21.13. of those Jews, Joh. 19.7. of those Libertines, 2 Pet. 2. Jam. 2.8, 9. of all Heretikes, that plead Scripture for their heresies: and some others impudently impious, who lest they should seem to be mad without rea∣son abuse Gods holy word to the defence of their unreasonable and irreligious pra∣ctises. These mens judgement now of a long time lingereth not, and their dam∣nation sleepeth not, 2 Pet. 2, 3. therefore take heed to your spirit] A repetition of the dehortation: of which see verse 16. Good things must be often inculcated, Phil. 3.1. one exhortation must peg in another, till they stick in our souls, as forked arrows in the flesh. Men do not use to lay ointments onely upon their lame limbes, but rub them, and chafe them in; so here. Austin perswades the Preacher, so long to insist upon a necessa∣ry point, till by the gesture and countenance of the hearers he perceiveth, that they understand and relish it. Chrysostome being asked by his people, when he would give over preaching against swearing? answered, Never till you leave your swearing. Verse 17. Ye have weared the Lord with your words] Laborare scstis Dommun, so the Vulgar renders it. Ye have put the Lord to pain, as it were; ye have even tired out his patience, whilest yee have made him to serve with your sinnes, and have wearied him with your iniquities, Esay 43.24. I have long time holdon my peace, I have been still and refrained my self, saith the Lord:Esay 42.14 Now will I cry like a travailing woman, that hath long time bitten in her pain, I will destroy and divour at once. God can bear and forbear as well as any other: Who is a God like unto thee for this, saith Micah, chap. 7.17? Were the patientest man upon earth in Gods room, but for a very short space, to see and hear the provocations, and indignities daily done unto him by the sinfull sonnes of men, he would soon be weary of it, he would quickly make a short work upon the earth, Rom. 9.28. It would trouble his patience to spread out his hands all a day long to a rebellious people, Esay 65.2. to give forty dayes respite to Nineveh that bloody city, full of lies and robbery, Nahum 3.1. to be grieved fourty yeers long with a perverse people, and to suffer their evil man∣ners in the wildernesse, Acts 13.18. to bear four hundred years with those wretch∣ed Amorites, who had filled the land from one end to the other,Ezek. 4.5, 6 with their abominable uncleannesses, Ezra 9.11. In the fourth of Ezekiel God is brought in as lying upon
his left side for three hundred and ninety years: a long while to lie on one side, without turning on the other) and all to set forth his long-sufferance. Our text tells us, that hee is patient even ad defatigationem usque, toward the wicked: he bears till he can bear no longer. See the like Rom. 9.22. and the reason, Rom. 2.4. and the ill use that is made of it, Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13. till they tire out him that is indefatigable, Jer. 15.6. and make him weary of repenting. But is this a safe course they take?1 Cor. 10.22 Do they provoke the Lord to wrath? Are they stronger then he? Hear ye now, O house of David: Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but yee will weary my God also? Esay 7.13. Will he not put an end to his abused patience, that justice,Deut. 16.20 Ezek. 1. justice, (as Moses hath it) actuall and active justice may take place? God in Ezekiel is said to sit upon a throne, to shew his slownesse: but this throne hath wings, to shew his swiftnesse to come, if need require. His patience passeth along as a pleasant river. But if men stop the course of it by their blasphemies, and contumelies as here, and presse him with their provocations, as a cart that is loaden with sheaves, Am. 2.13. God will surely have his full blow at them, Nah. 1.2, 6. Rom. 2.4. Heb. 12.29 with your words] that is, with your continuall contentions and quiblings: or with those ensuing words, blasphemous enough, and Atheisticall: together with your bold justification of them: yet ye say, wherein, &c. when ye say, every one that doth evil, &c.] As if they should say, God punisheth not but prospereth the wicked: therefore he loveth and favoureth them above bet∣ter men. Job, Jeremy, and David were once, for a fit, in the same errour, but soon recanted it, when once the waters of the Sanctuary had cured their eye-sight, Psal. 73.17. for such are sand-blind, and cannot see far off, 2 Pet. 1.9. or where is the God of judgement?] q. d. No where: either there is no God: or at least,Corn. à Lapid. not a God of that exact, precise, impartiall judgement. (such an Emphasis there is in the Heb.) Diagoras turned Atheist, because his adversary that had robbed him was not presently thunder-struck. The like is recorded of Porphyry, Lucian, Averroes, and others. See the Notes, on chap. 3.14, 15. CHAP. III. Verse 1. BEhold, I will send my messenger] It is well observed by the learned, that this whole Prophecy of Malachy, though distinguished (as now) into severall Chapters, yet is but one entire Sermon, at once delivered. Those Athe∣ists that asked in the precedent verse, (and they did it with an accent too, that they might not be slighted) where is the God of judgement? are here fully answered: and that they might the better attend, they have it with a note of pregnancy. Be∣hold, I will send, &c. q. d. differtur quidem judicium sed non aufertur. Tandem ve∣niet, profectò veniet. Judgement comes not so soon as you call for it: but come it will, be sure it will. For behold, I send (in the present tense) my messenger, the Baptist, and (at his heels, as it were) Messiah the Prince, who shall reforme and rectifie all disorders. For judgement, saith He, come I into the world, that they which see not might see, and that they which see, might be made blind, Joh. 9.39. And then, you that call for judgement shall have enough of it: when ye see my Messenger, harbinger, or herald, know that I am hard at hand. Behold, this is set here as the sound of a trumpet before some Proclamation, to arouse mens attention. I will send] Heb. I do send, or, am sending: though the thing was not done till four or five hundred years after: but in Gods purpose and promise it was a done thing already. All things are present with him, for he is a pure act; his whole essence is wholly an eye, or a mind: he is all things eminently, exemplarily, and contains all things in himself. Hence he knows temporal things after an eternall manner, mutable things immutably, contingent things infallibly, future things pre∣sently. Hence he calleth things that yet are not, as if they were, Rom. 4.17. and this, as in the works of Creation, Renovation, Resurrection, so in the accomplish∣ment of his promises, which we must not antedate, as we are apt to do; but learn
to live by faith, Hab. 2.2. Possibly the Kalendar of heaven hath a post-date to ours. Strive to be strong in faith, and glorifie God. my messenger] Not Christ, as Ensebius doated: nor Meslias the sonne of Jseph,Lib. 5. de de∣mon. Evang. cap. 28. that is, of the tribe of Joseph, as Rabbi Abraham would have it. (For the Jews soolishly expect two Meslians's, one the sonne of David, and the other the sonne of Joseph) Nor an Angel of heaven, as Rabbi David interprets it, according to Exod. 23.20. But John Baptist, as our Saviour expounds himself, Mat. 11.10. who is here called Christs Messenger, or Angel, by reason of his office: one, by whom he would manifest his mind to his people. He was a burning and a shining light,Joh. 5.35 or lamp, and shone for a season, till the Sun of righteousnesse came in place: as lights and candles are of good use till the Sun riseth. See 1 Sam. 3.3. and he shall prepare the way] Expurgabit, Everret, emundbit. He shall clear the way, sweep it, accoutre, or dresse it. He shall remove all rubs, and remora's out of the way, he shall pare and pave a path for Christ into the soul, open those ever∣lasting doors that the king of glory may come in, he shall make ready a people for the Lord. Luke 1.17. Mans heart is full of mountains and vallies, Luke 3.5. These must be levelled, ere Christ can be admitted: and that's not done but by repentance unto life. As John Baptist was Christs fore-runner into the world; so must repen∣tance be his fore-runner into the heart: for he that repenteth not, the kingdom of heaven is far from him: viam apertam & o∣culis intuenti∣um conspicuam faciet. so he that cannot see it (as the Hebrew word here used im∣ports he must do) for his lusts that hang in his light. and the Lord whom ye seek] Dominator, that Lord Paramount of whom David speaketh, Psal. 110.1. and for whose sake Daniel desireth to be heard, chap. 9.17. Messiah the Prince, verse 25. the Prince and Saviour, Act. 5.31. Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. the God of judgement, whom they called for, Mal. 2.17. and whom they are said to seek for. As God he is not very sar from any one of us, saith Paul Acts 17.27. not so far as the bark is from the tree; for in him we all live, and move, and subsist. And as God-Man he shall suddenly come to his Temple] suddenly, that is, in the fulnesse of time, (which is but a short time in respect of the long ex∣pectation of the Patriarches) and speedily after John Baptists birth; suddenly also, because unexpectedly to the most, who stood amazed at his preaching, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works? Is not this the carpenter, &c? To his Temple he came, when presented there to be circumcised, Luke 2. when he put forth a beam of his Divinity there, in his disputation with the Doctours, verse 46. But especially when he purged the Temple: 1. By his Doctrine, Matt. 5. and 15. and 2. By his Discipline, Joh 2.14, 15, 16. and 12.12. at which time, Tell ye the daughter of Zion, saith God, Behold, thy king cometh unto thee,Mat. 21.5. meek and sitting upon an asse, &c. Not upon a stately palsrey, as an earthly Poten∣tate. And that was the very cause, that these in the text that are said to see him, when they had him amongst them, could by no means think well of him in respect of his mean and despicable condition. They had a certain notion of the Messiah: and were in expectation of him, and of temporall deliverance and felicity by . Of which, when disappointed, they were as blank, as when they saw the hoped issue of their late Jewish Virgin turned to a daughter: or as when they saw Mahomet eat of a camell; whom till then, when they saw him arising in such powetr,D. Halfs Peacemaker. hey were rea∣dy to cry up for their long looked-for Messiah. even the messenger of the Covenant] viz. of the covenant of grace: for in Christ God reconciled the world to himself. And of this covenant Christ is the Angel, or Messenger, because 1. He revealeth it, and we must take heed how we slight it, Heb. 2.3. shift it, Heb. 12.25. 2. He mediateth it, 1 Tim. 2.5. and in, and by him it hath accomplishment, 2 Cor. 1.20. Hence Esay 9.6. he is called the Prince of peace, and (according to the Septuagint there) the Angel of the great Counsel.. Let all that would receive mercy from God, get into Chrst, and so into Covenant For as the Mercy-seat was no larger then the Ark, so neither is the grace of God, then the covenant of grace: And as the Ark and Mercy-seat were never separated, so neither are such from God, as are found in Christ. whom ye delight in] They delighted in his day (the better sort of them) though afar off, Joh. 8.56. they saluted him, and were resaluted by him, Heb. 11.13. They promised themselves through Christ malorum ademptionem, bonorum adepti∣onem,
freedom from all evil, and fruition of all good. Hence he is called, the de∣sire of all Nations, Hag. 2.8. The Church in the Canticles, saith he is totus deside∣rabilis, altogether desireable, chap. 5.16. The Church in Esay desires him with her whole soul, chap. 26.9. and chap. 64.1. as impatient of further delayes, crieth out, Oh that thou wouldest rent the heavens, and come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence. Drop down ye heavens from above, and let the skies pour aown righteousnesse: Let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, &c. chap. 45.8. Lo what earnest pantings and inquietations were in those ancient beleevers after Christ, what continuall fallies, as it were, and egressions of affection. behold, he shall come] He shall, he shall: nay he is even come already: for so the Hebrew hath it. Hinneh ba, behold, he is come: me-thinks I even see him. A like text there is, Habak 2.3. The duty required is, Wait: the promise is delivered, doubled, and trebled: It shall speak, it will come, it will surely come. Nay doubled again. It shall not lie, it will not tarry. It is as if God had said, Do but wait, and you shall be delivered, you shall be delivered, you shall be delivered; you shall, you shall. Oh the Rhetorike of God! oh the certainty of the promises! A Lapide his Note is not here to be passed by. This word Behold, signifieth that this com∣ming of Christ in the flesh, should be 1. New, admirable, and stupendious. 2. Sure and certain. 3. Desireable, and joyfull. 4. Famous and renowned. saith the Lord of Hosts] And that's assurance good enough: for hath he said it, and shall he not do it? Here is firm footing for faith: and men are bound to rest in Gods Ipse dixit. Abraham did, and required no other evidence, Rom. 4. He cared not for the deadnesse of his own body, or of his wives womb. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbeleef, &c. No more must we, if we will be heirs of the world, with faithfull Abraham. Gods truth and power are the Jachin and Bozez, the two pillars whereupon faith must repose: beleeing God upon his bare word, and that against sense in things invisible, and against reason, in things in∣credible. Verse 2. But who may abide the day of his coming?] The Prophet Esay asketh, Who shall declare his generation?Esay 53.8. Daniel. 2.11. that is, the mystery of his incarnation, (that ha∣bitatio Dei cum carne, which the Magicians held imposlible) or the history of his birth, life, and death (as some sence it) whose tongue shall be able to speak it, or pen to write it? Who can think of the day of his coming? so the Vulgar reads this text: viz. of all the glory, graces, benefits of that day? But the Hebrew word is the same, as Prov. 18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: and is so rendred here by the Chaldee and Kimchi. Who can sustain, or abide the day of his coming, sc. in the flesh? What wicked man will be able to endre it? for he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, (that is, the consciences of carnall men glued to the earth) and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked, Esay 11.4. And this is spoken of the Branch that grew out of the root of Jesse, vers. 1. when th goodly family was sunk so low, as from David the king, to Joseph the Carpen∣ter. With what terrour struck he the hearts of Herod, and all Jerusalem by the news of his nativity? Mat. 2.3. And si praesepe vagientis Herodem tantum ter∣ruit, quid tribunal judicantis? If Christ in the cradle were so terrible, what will he be on the Tribunall? The Text that troubled those miscreants, was Mic. 5.2. which some (taking tsagnir in the Neuter Gender) render thus: And thou Beth∣lehem Ephrata, it is a small thing to be among the Princes of Judah: out of thee shall come a ruler, &c. This, Herod and his complices could not hear of without horrour: as neither could that other Herod, of the same of Christs mighty works, Mart. 14.1, 2. such a glimpse of Divine glory shone in them. The sinners in Zion are afraid: fearfulnesse surprizeth the hypocrites: and they run as farre, and as fast as they can from Christ, with these frightfull words in their mouthes. Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who shall abide with the everlasting burnings? The Ruffianly souldiers were flung flat on their backs, when he said no more but, Lam he,August. Joh. 18.6. Quid autem judicaturus saciet, qui udicandus hoc fecit? What will he do when he comes to judgement, who was thus terrible now that he was to be judged? Oh that the terrour of the Lord might perswade people to forsake their sins, and to kisse the Son, lest he be angry. Though a lamb, he can be terrible to the kings of the earth: and though he break not the bruised reed, Matth. 12.20.
yet his enemies he will break with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a pot∣ters vessell. Be wise now therefore, O ye kings, &c. Psal. 2.9, 10. And as the Sun, Moon, and eleven Starres in Joscphs vision, did obeysance to him; so let our souls, bodies, all our temporall, naturall, morall, and spirituall abilities bee sub∣ject and serviceable to Christ, as ever wee hope to look him in the face with comfort. and who shall stand when he appeareth?] Heb. at the sight of him. True it is, that Christ coming to help us in distresse, for the want of externall pomp in his Ordinances, and worldly glory in his Ministers, and members, and splendour of humane Eloquence in his Doctrines, is despised by those that form and frame to themselves a Christ like to the mighty Monarchs of the earth: like as A∣gesilaus King of Spartans, coming to help the King of Egypt, was slighted in that countrey for his mean habit, and contemptible outside. But if the Centurion were worthy of respect, because he loved the Jewish Nation, and built them a Synagogue; Shall not Christ much more, even as Prince of the Kings of the earth, sith hee loved us, and washed us with his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father, Revel. 1.5, 6? By whom also hee is made unto us, righteousnesse, (imputatively) wisdom, sanctisica∣tion, and redemption, effectively, by way of inherency and gracious operation? Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God?1 Sam. 6.20. Jer. 10.7. as the men of Bethshemesh once said. Who would not fear this king of Nations, saith Jeremy, this king of Saints, saith John? for to him doth it appertain:Rev. 15.3, 4. sith there is none like unto him: neither can any stand before him when he appeareth, any more then a glasse bottle can stand before a Cannon shot. O come, let us worship, and bow aown,Psal. 95. let us keel befoe this Lord our maker. If we harden our hearts he will harden his hand, and hasten our destruction. There's no standing before this Lion, no bearing up sail in the tempest of his wrath: you must either be his subjects, or his footstool: either vail to him, or perish by him. Thine arrows are sharp i the hoat of the kings enemtes, whereby the people sall under thee, Psal. 45.5. What a world of miseries have the refractary Jews suffered, and do yet, for rejecting the Lord Jesus? They might have known out of their own Cabalists (besides Dntels seventy weeks, and other Scripture-evidences) that the Mesliah was amongst them: for it is there expressely recorded,Vide Malcolin. in Act. 18.28. that Messias should come in the time of Hillels disciples: one of whom was Son the , who embraced the child Jesus in his arms: who also foretold that that child was set for the  and rising again of many in Israel, and so a signe which shoui spkn against,Luk. 2.34, 35. thu the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed. And to the same purpose St. Peter 1 Epist. cap. 2. ver. 7, 8. But before them both, Our Prophet here. For he is like a refiners fire] Intimating, that the times of the Messiah would be discriminating, shedding times: and that he would separate the precious from the vile, the gold from the drosse, the sheep from the goats: That Nabal should no more be called Nadib, the vile person liberali, the churle bountifull, Esay 32.5. but that good people should be discerned, and honoured; hypocrites detected, and detested, as was Judas, Magus, Denias, &c. slit up and slain by Christs two-edged sword, by his presence and preaching,. Surely his sanne is  his hand, though the devil and his imps would fain wring it out,Augustin. Mat. 3.12. Jer 23.20. and he will throughly purge his loo (mali in area nobiscum esse possum, in horrco non pessunt) he will drive the chaff one way, and the wheat another: for what is the chiff to the wheat, saith the Lord? he will purifie the souls of his Saints, in obeying the truth through the spirit, unto unfained love of the brethren, 1 Pet. 1.22. So that they shall be united to such, and separa∣ted from sinners. Fire, we know, congregat homog nea, segregat heterogenea: for what fellowship hath light with darknesse? The spirit of Christ, called a spirit of judgement, and of burning, washeth away (lo here resiners fire, and sullers ) the filth of the daughter of Zion, and purgeth the blood of Jerusalem from the midest thereof, Esay 4.4. By silth and blood understand their exceslive bravery, mentioned chap. 3. which now they had learned to call by another name, since their own names were written among the living in Jerusalem, verse 3. And here God made good to them that he had promised, Chap. 1.25. that he would purely purge away theeir drosse, and take away all their tinne: and that though their sinnes were as sear let, they should
be white as : though red like crimson, they should be as wooll verse 18. Fullers , as some render it) is of singular use to fetch out stains and spots, and to a biter wooll:5 Pnaria. de Puin. lib. 1. chap. 3. . So (much more) is the blood and spirit of Christ, to whi∣ten sinfull , and to make men his Candidates. Such were those Corinthians 1 Eph. 6.11. Such were some of you, (that is, as bad as bad might be, lepers all over) but ye are washed sc. by that Fuller of soules Christ Jesus. And if any ask, How washed? It sollowes, but ye are sanctified, but ye are just ified in the name, that is,. by the merit of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. The Jews in their Talmud hammer at this, when they question, What is the name of Messi∣as? Their answer is Hhevara Leprous (sc. by imputation 2 Cor. 5.0. Esay 53.6.August. de Rna in Concil. Basil. whence also he is said by one to be Maximus peccatorum, the greatest of sinners) and he sitteth among the poor in the gates of Rome, carrying their sick∣nesses, according to that, Himself took our infirmities, and here our knesses. There are two things in guilt. 1. The meit and desert of it  took not. 2. The obligation to punishment: this he took, and so he , that is, bound to the punishment of sin: which also he suffered even to the sion of his blood (that true Pactolus, or rather Jordan) whereby he hath cleamed his peo∣ple from sins both guiltinesse and filthinesse. We have inveterate staines, which will hardly be got out till the cloth be allmost rub'd to peeces  leaves so close to us,Jer. 1.13. that fire and fullers sope is but needfull to setch it off. Nature and custome have made our spots like that of the Leopard, which no art can cure, no water wash off: because they are not in the skin only, but in the flesh and bones, in the sinews and in the most inner parts. Hence David prayeth again and again to be washed thorowly, to be purged with hyssop, to be washed and wrung in this fullers sope of Christs blood, and with the clean water of his holy spirit. This is the only true Purgatory, the Kings bath, the fountain opened for sin and for un∣cleannesle Zach. 13.1. Here Christ washeth his, not only from outward defile∣ment, but from their swinish nature: that when washed clean they may not, (as else they would) wallow in the next guzzle. Here are those soveraign mun∣difying waters of the Sanctuary, which so wash off the corruption of the ulcer, that they cool the heat, and stay the spred of the infection: and by degrees heal the same. Hither poor sinners need not come as to the poole of Bethesda one by one, but, as Turks to their Mahomet, Papists to their Lady, by troops and Cara∣vans, true Christians to their All-sufficient Saviour, how much more? In that poole of Bethesda, the Priests used to wash their sacrifices; because no unclean thing might come within the Temple.Itinerar. Scrip. pag. 20. The water was of reddish colour, and ran into that place in great abundance; and therefore it was called saith One, the house of effusion. This shadowed out, that every of Christs sheep must be washed in the poole of his blood, before they can be meet sacrifices, an offering unto the Lord in righteousnesse, as it is in the next verse. Other blood slaines what is washed in it: this blood of the spotlesse lambe whiteneth as fuilers sope, and purifieth from all pollution of flesh and spirit Rev. 7.14. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ: not by water only but by water and blood 1 Ioh. 5.6. The Priests of the old law were consecrated first with oyle, and then with blood: So was Christ, first with the spirit Esa. 61.1. and then with his own blood for our benefit. Verse 3. And he shall sit as refiner] i. e. he shall stick to the work, and not start from it, till he bring forth judgement to victory Mat. 12.20. that is, till he have perfected the work of grace begun in his people, (for he is Authour and fi∣nisher of their faith Heb. 12.2.) and by patience, made them perfict and entire, wanting nothing, Iam. 1.4. Christ, who is the God of all grace, and hath called them to his eternall glory, will, after they have suffered , in his fornace or fining-pot (Pro. 17.3.) of afflictions, wake them perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle them 1 Pet.2 Cor. 9 8. 5.10. yea make all grace to abound toward them: that they alwayes having all sufficiency in all things may abound to every good work. For which holy purpose, Christ our Refiner hath his fire in Zion, and his furnace in Ierusalem Isai. 31.9. his conslatories, and his crucibles, wherein his third part being brought thorough the fire shall be resined as silver is resened, and tried as gold is tried Zach. 13.9. that the triall of their faith (who have glorified him in the
very fires Isa. 24.15.) being much more precious then that of gold that perisheth, may be found to praise and honour and glory 1 Pet. 1.7. True gold will undergoe the tiall of the seventh fire, which Alchymy gold will not. Christ Jesus after that he hath been to his people as a refiners fire, and fullers sope, that is, after that he hath justified, and sanctified them also in some part, will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, that is, he will be serious, accurate, and assiduous in scouring them from corruption by correption, in purging out the remnants of sin by affliction sancti∣fied. For by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin, Isa. 27.9. Christ hath bought off all our corruptions, redeem∣ed us from all iniquity Tit. 2.14. and God will have the price of Christs blood out: what the word purgeth not, the rod must; like as what evill humours Summer purgeth not out by sweating. Winter concocts by driving in the heat. And as winter is of use for mellowing the ground, and for killing worms and weed &c. so is the crosse sanctified for quelling and killing fleshly lusts that fight against the soul. He that hold, the winds in his fist, stayes his rough wind, Esay 27.8. and lets out of his treasury such a wind as shall make his yong plants fruit∣full, and blow away their unkindly blossomes and leaves. Black sope makes white clothes, if God set in and set it on with his battle-dore, as that Martyr phrased it. Fowl and stained garments are whitened and purified, by laying abroad in cold srosty nights. Scouring and beating of them with a stick, beats out the mothes and the dust: so do afflictions, corruptions from the heart. Aloes kills wormes: so do bitter crosses crawling lusts. Rubarbe is full of choler, yet doth mightily purge choler. Hemlock is a deadly plant, yet the juyce applyed heales ignis sacer and hot corroding ulcors: and much asswageth the inflammation of the eyes. The sting of a scorpion, though arrant poyson, yet is an antidote against poyson. No∣thing is better to cure a leprosie, then the drinking of that wine wherein a viper hach been drown'd. The viper (the head and tail being cut off) beaten and applied cures her own biting. Affliction is in it self an evill, a fruit of Gods wrath, and a peece of the curse. Christ alters the property to his, and makes one poison an∣tidotary to another, and cures security by misery: as Physitians oft cure a lethar∣by a fever. Every affliction sanctified rubbs off some rust, melts off some drosse, empties and evacuates some superfluity of naughtinesse, strains out some corrupti∣on. Iob 10.10. Christ straines out our motes, whiles our hearts are powred out like milk, with grief and fear: he also keeps us from setling on the lees, by emptying us from vessel to vessel: Ier. 48.11. when as the wicked have no changes, and therefore they fear not God:Psal. 73. they come not in trouble like other men, therefore they face the heavens, and their tongues walk thorough the earth: All that are Christs people are sure of sore and sharp afflictions, fiery tryals and tri∣bulations, piercing and pressing crosles Psal. 34.19. Iam. 1.2. He will be sure to plow his own ground, whatsoever becomes of the wast; and to weed his own garden, though the rest of the world should be let alone to grow wild. He will cast his purest gold into the fire of afflictions: but they shall lose nothing by it. Gold cast into the fire wasteth not, cast into the water rusteth not. No saint was ever the worse for his sufferings, but the better: the least that can come of it, is to do good duties with greater zeal, and large affection Esay 26.9. Now, who would not fetch such gold out of a fiery crucible? and he shall purifie the sons of Levi] Whom he had before faulted chap. 1. and 2. Or he may mean the Ministers of the Gospell, called Priests and Levites Esay 66.21. Or rather, all the royall Priest-hood of Gods people, whose office is to ffer up spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus christ. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Rom. 12.1, 2. Now for these, Christ 1. Of bad make them good, as he did Joses the Levite Act. 4.36. and many priests Act. 6.7. He makes them passe under the rod, and so brings them into the bond of the covenant Ezek. 20.37. 2. Of good he makes them better and brighter, he powres them forth as molten mettall, so the Septuagint read this text. Gold that is melted in the furnace, is not only purified, but also made malleable: yea fit for the mould. Their bearts are brought down, they speak as out of the ground Esay 29.4. in a low language, and like broken men: they put their mouths in the dust, they lie low at Christs feet, and say, Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth. Thus haughty Hagar humbled by
a stion harkeneth to the Angell, and submits to her mistresse: that yong gal∣lant, that in the pride of his prosperity, in the ruffe of his jollity would not be war∣ned; when s flesh and his body was consumed, when his bones clattered in his skin,Prov. 5.11, 12, 13. and the mourners expected him at the doors, he is of another mind, and he  talked with: then like the beaten viper casteth up his poyson both of high mindednesse and of earthly-mindednesse, and if you have any good  to give him, he is ready to receive it. See the like Iob 33.19, 20, 21. &c. and purge them as gold and silver] Colabit cos,Si  saith the Vulgar. He shall  them as some liquor or liquid matter: so that the purer part shall go tho∣ro. the strayner or colander, and the dreggy may be left. The same thing is again and again promised, as for more certainty sake, so to shew that the purity should be very great in the dayes of the gospell. Howbeit for the comfort of his poor people who are conscious of more drosse then good oare, Christ hath pro∣mised that he will resire them, but not as silver, he will not be over-exact with them,Isa. 48.1. he will not mark all that's amisse he will not contend very much, lest the choice spiri of his afflicted people should faile before him Isae. 57.16. when the child sworms in the whipping, Christ lets fal the rod, and falls a kissing it, to fetch life  it again. As 'tis a rule in physick still to maintain nature: so God  to keep up his peoples spirits by cordials; though he purge them  till he bring them almost to skin and bone, that there may be a spring of bett  its. the Lord an affering in rightcousnesse] Or a right offering, a  holy dties from a right principle, and to a right purpose. Two things make a good Christian, good , and good aymes. Though a good ame doth not in e a bad action good (as we see in Ʋzza) yet a bad ayme makes a good action bad, as we see in John. If Gods work be not duely done, we may meet with breaches instead of blessings 1 Chron. 15.17. David faled but in a cere∣mony: yet God waangry. Jh's eal was rewarded in an act of justice quoad sub∣tion, aperis, in regard of the substance of the work: and yet punished as an act of policy, quoad mdum for the perverse end. Let no man measure himself by the matter of things done; for there may be malum opus in bona materia, an evill k in a good matter: Works materialy good may never prove so formally and  gion is a curious clock-work: if but one wheel be distempered, all may go wrong. David in numbring the people omitted that duty Exod. 30.12, 13, 14, 15. a thence, the plagne. Verse 4. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem] That is, of the Latine Church, and of Rome, saith Ribera. A partiall fancy of a Ponish Interpreter bold∣ly prpou , barely proved: and therefore as he affirmeth without reason, so h may b dismssed without refutation. Uaderstand it rather of the whole church whsover, in Cities, or Countries: and observe, that neither Judah nor Je∣rudm, how highly soever honoured or favoured otherwise, shall have their oftering accepted in heaven, unlesse their hearts be first purified by faith. Till then,Rom. 12.1 their sacrifices, how specious soever, are neither living (but dead works, as the uthow to the Hebrews calles it) nor holy, that is, pure and unpolluted 1 Cor. 7.34. unlesse themselves be partakers of the grace of life 1 Pet. 3.7. and can bold∣ly say with David, preserve my soule, for I am holy, or one whom thou favourest. Psal. 86.2. So Psal. 4.3. he makes this the ground of his hope, that his prayer shld  heard, that the Lord looked upon him as a godly person. God regards  the praye, if the man be not right. The blood of a sheeep and of a swine are like: yea, it may be the blood of a swine is better and sweeter then of a sheep, yet was t not to be offered, because of a swine. See Heb. 13.16. Philip. 4.18. Joh. 15.16. Psal. 147 11. Esay 62.4. Heb. 11.6. Look how light, saith Chry∣sstne, maketh all things pleasing to men: so doth faith to God. True faith is like te salt that healed the waters 2 King. 2.21. O pray Christ to cast in a curse∣ful it into our hearts, or else we lose all our services; nay we do worse then lose our labour, for displeasing service is double dishonour: we do but take paines to go to hell. See more of this matter in the Notes on chap. 1. verse 9, 10.
as in the dayes of old, as in former years] i. e. As the sacrifices of Abel, Abra∣ham, Aaron, &c. as the prayers and holy performances of David, Eliah, Sa∣muel (who is thought to be the same with Pethul lo 1.1. which signifieth a I'erswader of God, and that he was so called, because he could have what he would of God) Cornelius, Paul &c. were very effectuall and available, and did won∣ders even to the opening and shutting of heaven,Iob. 41 14. as Eliab to the opening of the doores of Leviathan, as Ionah, to the delivering even graves of their dead, as Heb. 11.35. &c. so they shall be still, as effectuall, as those Ancient Saints, we draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evill conscience, and our bodyes washed with pure water Heb. 10.22. See Iam. 5.16, 17, 18. and Hos. 12.4. The Prophet speaking of Jacob his wrestling with God by weeping, and his prevailing by praying (so that he was knighted for his good service, and dubb'd Israel, or a Prince of God) subjoynes for our comfort, God found him in Bethel, and there he spake with us. So then, what encouragement accesse and successe Iacob had at Bethel, the same have we: provided that we so carry the matter, that it may be said of us, as Psal. 24.6. This is the generation of them that seek him; of them that seek thy face: this is Jacob: Provided that as Jarob wrestled in the night, and alone, and when God was leaving him, and upon one leg: so do we, amidst all difficulties and discouragements. Verse 5. And I will come neer to you to judgement] q. d. You conceit mea great way off, and put far from you the thoughts of my comming, having been so bold as to ask, Where is the God of judgement &c. Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me. Not, as you desired, to avenge you of your enemies, but as justice requireth, to be avenged of you for your impieties which I have here billed up against you. And that ye may not think to escape, know that as I am a Judge at hand, so a present witnesse, test is festinantissimus a most swift witnesse, to evict and punish you, for your most secret sins. So then, howsoever the Lord spare long, yet he will be at length, both a hasty witnesse and a severe Judge against those that abuse his patience: he will not alwayes stand them for a sinning-stock, but pay them home for the new and the old. Ier. 6.6. Mic. 1.3 God owed a revenge to the house of Eli: and yet at length, by the delation of Doeg, takes occasion to pay it. It is a vain hope that is raised from the delay of judgement: No time can be any prejudice to the Ancient of dayes. If his word sleep, it shall not dye: but after long intermissions breaks forth into those effects which men had forgotten to look for, and ceased to fear. The sleeping of vengeance causeth the overslow of sin Eccles. 8.11. and the overslow of sin causeth the a wakening of vengeance Psal. 50.21. so that sometimes he strikes ere he gives any sinther warning: as Absa∣lom intending to kill Amnon, spake neither good nor evill to him. Subito tollitur qui diu toleratur. Till the fiery serpents, God had ever consolted with Moses, and threatened ere he punished. Now he strikes and sayes nothing. The anger is so much more, by how much lesse notified. Still revenges are ever most daugerous and deadly, when God is not heard before he is felt (as in hewing of wood, the blow is not heard, till the axe be seen to have struck) or if he be heard to say as Neh. 1.9. what do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an utter end: afflicti∣on shall not arise up the second time: its a signe he is implacably hent, and meanes to have but one blow. The wickeds happinesse will take its end surely and swiftly. The end is come, is come, is come, saith Ezechiel chap. 7. The Lord is come near to you to judgement, and he will be a speedy witnesse, Judge and witnesse both: which in mens courts cannot be: but God being infinitely both wise and holy, may be and will be both witnesse and Judge against the workers of iniquity: and when they are (as Adonijah's guests were 1 King. 1.) at the height of their joyes and hopes, he confounds all their devices, and layes them open to the scorn of the world, to the anguish of their own guilty hearts, and the dint of his own unsup∣portable displeasure, which is such as none can avert or avoid. Ad poenam tardus Deus est, ad praemia velox, Sed pensare solet vi graviore moram. Poena venit grovior, quò magè sera venit.
against the sorcerers] Or Juglers, Wizzards, Negromancers &c. See the several sorts forbidden, and to be punished Deut. 18.10. By Gods law such might not be suffered to live, Exod 22.8. yet did this evil prevail in Israel 2 Chron. 33.6. Jer. 27.9. and here, It was done by unlawful means, as Saul said to the witch, Divine unto me by the familiar spirit, 1 Sam. 28.8. and it was a thing hateful to God, even as high rebellion, 1 Sam. 15.23. sith the ground of this familia∣rity is a diobolical contract ovort, or covert, explicit or implicit. It is fitly cal∣led the black Art, for theres no true light in them that use it Isai. 8.19. they de∣part from God and his testimony, ib. and so tempt the devil to tempt them. This was Sauls sin, for which the Lord killed him 1 Chron. 10.13. and hath threatened to cut off all from among his people, that do enquire of such, Levit. 20.6. Thou hast been partaker with the adulterer, Psal. 50.18. so are such with sorcerers. Sure∣ly the wounds of God are better then the salves of Satan; as Ahaziah found it. And they which in case of losse or sicknesse &c. make hell their refuge, shall smoke and smart for it in the end. Satan seeks to them in his temptations, they in their consultations seek to him: and now that they have mutually found each other, if ever they part, it is a miracle: He is an unspeakable proud spirit, and yet will stoop to the meanest man or woman to be at their command (the witch of Endor is twice in one verse 1 Sam. 28.7. called the Mistrisse of the Spirit, because in covenant with him) whereby he may cheat them, and their clients of Salvation. Every one that consults with him, worships him, though he bow not, as Saul did: neither doth that old man-slayer desire any other reverence, then to be sought unto. and against the adulterers] Sept. the adulteresses. Adultrinum, qu si ad alterum, out alterius torum, a going up to another mans bed, as Reuben did, and was severely sentenced for it, Gen. 49.4 It was to be punished with death, even by the law of Nature: because the society and purity of posterity could not otherwise continue amongst men. Nebuchad. nazzar roasted in the fire Zedekiah and Ahab two false prophets of Judah, because they committed adultery with their neighbours wives, Jer. 29.22, 23. The Egyptians used to cut off the nose of the adulteresse: the Prophet alludes to this Ezek. 23.25. The Athenians, Lacedemomans, and Romans were very severe against this sin; as Plutarch recordeth in his parallels. The old French and Saxons also, as Tacitus tells us. By Gods law they were to be stoned to death; and the High-priests daughter was to be burned for this fault, Lev. 1.9. a peculiar punishment, and not to be paralleld in the whole law. If men fail to fall upon such (it is an hainous crime saith holy Job, and an iniquity to be punish∣ed by the Judges,Venus ab an∣tiquis  dicla See Pro. 5.8. Chap. 31.10.) God himself will do it, Heb. 13.4. and did it ef∣fectually, 1 Cor. 10.8. and on the filthy Sodomites, Gen. 19. and on Charles 2. King of Navar who was much addicted to this sin, which so wasted his spirits, that in his old age he fell into a Lethargy. To comfort his benumbed joynts he was bound and sewed up in a sheet steeped in boyling Aquavitae. The Surgeon having made an end of sewing him, and wanting a knife to cut off his threed, took a wax candle that stood lighted by him. But the flame running down by the threed, caught hold on the sheet, which according to the nature of the Aquavitae burned with that vehemency, that the miserable king ended his dayes in the fire. But say the adulterer be neither stoned, nor burned: yet God usually stoneth such with a stony heart, Hos. 4.11. which is a most fearful judgment: and when they die burneth them with the hottest fire in hell. Prov. 2.18. the whores guests go down to the dead. Heb. el Rephaim, to the Giants: to that part of hell where those damned monsters are. See 2 Peter 2.10. and mark the word Chiefly. and against false swearers] A sin of an high nature, condemned by the height of nature, and punished by the Heathens. Perjurij poena divina exitium; humana, de∣decus; This was one of the laws of the twelve tables in Rome. God punisheth perjury with destruction: men with disgrace. Tissaphernes the Persian General, be∣ing ovecrome by Agesilaus King of Spartans, craved three-moneths truce, and had it: They both sware to be quiet on both sides. Tissaphernes soon brake his oath:Cornel Nepos in vit. Ages. but Agesilaus religiously kept it, saying, that Gods and men would favour him for his fidelity, but curse and execrate the other for his perjury. God shewed
Zachary a flying role long and large, ten yards long, and five broad, full of cur∣ses against the false swearer, with commission to rest upon his house,Zac. 5.3.4. which he he holds his castle, and where he thinks himself most secure. Michael Pale∣ologus Emperour of Constantinople made the Greek Church acknowledge the Popes supremacie, and did many other things contrary to his oath: and therefore lieth obscurely buried, shrouded in the sheet of defame, saith the Historian.Turk. hist. So doth Rodulphus Duke of Sueveland, who by the Popes instigation broke his oath of al∣legiance to Henry the Emperour, and by the cutting off his faithlesse right hand lost his life. So doth Sigismund the Emperour, for his false dealing with John Husse. Ladislaus king of Hungary, for his perjurious setting upon Amurath the great Turk at the battle of Varna, where he was deservedly defeated. What a blur was that to the old Romans, if true, that Mirchanes the Persian General should say of them, Roman is promitcere promptum est &c.Procop. 1. de. bello Persic. The Romans will promise any thing, and swear to it, but perform nothing that makes against their profit? There were at Rome such as could lend an oath at need: and would not stick to swear that their friend or foe was at Rome and at Interamna both at once. How slippe∣ry the Papists are, and how bloody, both in their Postions and dispositions, is well known to all. But God is the avenger of all such: because they call him to witnesse a falshood: and dare him to his face to execute his vengeance. See Zach. 8.17. and against those that oppresse &c. Either by denying, diminishing, or delaying their wages. The vulgar rendereth it, Who calamniate, or make cavils to detain wages, which is the poor hirelings lively-hood, whereupon he setteth his heart Deut. 24.15. and maintaineth his life; which is therefore called the life of his hands,Isai. 57.10. because upheld by the labour of his Hands. He gets it, and eats it: and is in his house like a snail in his shell; crush that, and you kill him. This is a crying cruelty Jam. 5.4. and hath a woe against it Jer. 22.13. Jam. 2.13. Laban is taxed for it Gen. 31.7. and for those that are guilty, if they mend not, and make restitution, Master La∣timer tells them they shall cough in hell. the widow] A calamitous name: she is called in Hebrew from her dumbnesse Almanan: because, death having cut off her head, she hath lost her tongue, and hath none to speak for her. A vine, whose root is uncovered, thrives not: so a widow, the covering of whose eyes is taken away, joyes not. God therefore pleads for such as his clients, and takes special care for them: the Deacons were anciently ordained specially for their sakes Act. 6.1. 1 Tim 5.3. and Pharisees doo∣med to a deeper damnation for devouring widows houses, Mat. 23.14. and Ma∣gistrates charged to plead for the widow, Isai. 1.17. as judge Job did Chap. 31.16. and all sorts to make much of her, and communicate to her, Deut. 24.19, 20, . and the fatherlesse] We are Orphans, and fatherlesse, saith the Church Lam. 5.3. And we are all Orphans, said Queen Elizabeth (in her speech to the children of Christs Hospital) let me have your prayers, and you shall have my protection. That Hospital was founded by her brother King Edward the sixth for the relief of father lesse children, after the example of the ancient Church, which had her Orphan∣otroph Orphan-breeders. With God the fatherlesse findeth mercy Hos. 14.3. and all his vice-gods are commanded the like, Psal. 82.1, 2, 3, 4. unlesse they will consult shame and misery to their own houses, and Joab-like, leave the leprosy to their little ones for a legacy. Better leave them a wallet to beg from door to door, then a cursed hoard of Orphans goods. and that turn aside the stranger] The right of strangers is so holy (saith Master Fox) that there was never nation so barbarous that would violate the same. When Steven Gardiner had in his power the renowned Peter Martyr then teaching at Ox∣ford,Act. and Mon. fol. 1783. he would not keep him to punish him: but when he should go his way, gave him wherewith to bear his charges. and fear not me] This is set last as the source of all the former evils. See the like Rom. 3.18. and Psal. 14.1. where Atheisme and irreligion is made the root of all the sin in the world. Gods holy fear is to the soul, as the banks are to the sea, or the bridle to the horse, it was so to Isaac, who reigned in the reverend fear of God, when he saw that he had done unwilling justice, durst not reverse Jacobs bles∣sing,
though prompted to it by natural affection and Esaus howlings, Gen. 27.33. It was so to Job, Joseph, Nehemiah, Daniel &c. who could easily have born out their oppressions by their greatnesse. And indeed whereas other men have other bits and restraints, great men, if they fear not God, have nothing else to fear: but dare obtrude and justifie to the world the most malepart misdemenours, because it is facinus major is abollae,Juvenal. the fact of a great one, who do many times as easily break through the lattice of the laws, as the bigger flies do through a spider-web, as Anacharsis was wont to say of his Scythians.Exod. 18. Hence Jethro would have his Justice of peace to be a man fearing God: And this qualification he fitly placeth in the midst of the other graces requisit to him, as the heart in the body, for conveying life to all the parts, or as a dram of musk perfuming the whole box of oyntment Exod. 18.21. Nothing makes a man so good a patriot as the true fear of Gods blessed name, and a zealous forwardnesse for his glory, goodnesse, and good cau∣ses. This, this alone is it that can truly beautifie and adorn all other personal sufficiencies, and indeed sanctifie and blesse all publick imployments, and servi∣ces of state. Whereas on the contrary, sublat à pietate, sides tollitur, take away piety, and fidelity is gone; as we see in the unjust judge Luk. 18.2. in Abra∣hams judgement of the Philistines Gen. 20.11. and in Constantinus Chlorus his ex∣periment of his Councellours and Courtiers: whence that famous Maxime of his recorded by Eusebius, He cannot be faithful to me, that is unfaithful to God: re∣ligion being the ground of all true fidelity and loyaltie to king and Countrey. Hence that close connexion Fear God, honour the king: And that again of Solomon, My son, fear thou the Lord, and the king: and meddle not with them that are given to change Prov. 24.21. Verse 6. For I am the Lord, I change not] I am Jehovah. This is Gods proper and incommunicable name. It imports three things. 1. That God is of himself. This Plato acknowledged calling God , and , Julius Scaliger by a wonderful word calleth God  One that hath his being or existence of himself, before the world was, Esay 44 6. 2. That he giveth being to all things else, for in him they both are and consist. He sustains all, both in respect of being, excellencies and operations, Heb. 1.3. The grea∣test excellencies in us do as much depend upon God, as the essigies in the giasse upon the presence of the face that causeth it. 3. That he giveth being to his word, effecting whatsoever he speaketh. Hence when either some special mercy is promised, or some extraordinary judgment threatened, the name of Iehovah is affixed. See Exod. 6.3. Esay 45.2, 3. Ezek. 5.17. The Ancient Jew-Doctours make this distinction between Elohim and Iehovah. By Elohim say they, is signified Middath dir, a quality or property of judgment. By Iehovah, middath Rachamim, a quality or property of mercy. And here unto they apply that text Psal. 56.11. In God (Elohim) I will praise the word, in Ie∣hovah I will praise the word, that is, five ure agat mecum, five ex aequo & bono, whe∣ther he deal strictly with me, or graciously, I will praise him howsoever. But this distinction, as it holds not alwayes; so not here. For to shew the certainty of the judgement denounced verse 5. is this subjoyned, I am Iehovah &c. And if Ie∣hovah come of Hovah (which signifies Contrition or destruction) as Heronymus ab Oleastro will have it, what can be more sutable to the Prophets purpose? it is some∣what like that in Esay chap. 13.6. Shod shall come from Shaddai, destruction from the Almighty, or from the Destroyer as some interpret Gods Name Shad∣dai. I change not] I am neither false nor fickle, to say, and unsay, to alter my minde, or to eat my word Psalm 89.34. The eternity of Israel cannot he, nor repent, said Sa∣muel to Saul (and it was heavy tidings to him, as Ahi ah said to Ieroboams wife,1 Sam. 15.29. I come unto thee with heavy tidings) For, he is not a man that he should re∣pent. Men are mutable, and ther's no hold to be taken of what they say. Of ma∣ny it may be said, as Tertullian of the Peacock, all in changeable colours: as often changed as moved. Italians all, as Eneas Sylvius said of Italy, Novitate quadam ni∣hil habet stabile, ther's no taking their words. Of a certain Pope and his Nephew it is storied, that the one never spake as he thought, the other never performed what he spake. But God is not a man that he should repent: or if he do, it is after another
manner then man repents. Repentance with man is the changing of his will: re∣pentance with God, is the willing of a change. It is mutatio reinon Dei, affectus non affectus, facti non consilii. Gods repentance is not a change of his will, but of his work. It noteth onely, (saith Mr. Perkins) the alteration of things and acti∣ons done by him, and no change of hi purpose and secret decree, which is immu∣table. What he hath written, he hath written, (as Filate said peremptorily) there's no removing of him. If the sentence be passed, if the decree be come forth, none can avert or avoid it, Zeph. 3.5. Currat ergo poenitentia ne praecurrat sententia.Chrysolog. Go quickly and make an atonement, as Moses said to Aaron, Num. 16.46. Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, Amos 4.12. Mite preces & lachrymas cordis legatos: meet him with intreaties of peace agree with him quickly: who knowes if he will return and repent? for he is gracious and mercifull, slow to anger and of great kind∣nesse, and repenteth him of the evil, Joel 2.13, 14. It should seem so indeed by this Text: For even whiles he is threatening, and ratifying what he had threate∣ned, his heart is turned within him, his repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8. And hence the following words, Therefore ye sonnes of Jacob are not consumed. A strange inference, (considering the sence and occasion of the foregoing words, as hath been set forth,) and not unlike that Hos. 2.13, 14. I will visit upon her the dayes of Baalim—she went after ber lovers, and forgat me, saith the Lord. Therefore (mark that Therefore) behold I will allure her, and bring her into the wil∣dernesse, and speak comfortably to her: And I will give her, &c. So Esay 57.17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousnesse was I wroth, and smot him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly, &c. I have sten his wayes, and will heal him: Wayes? what wayes? his covetousnesse, frowardnesse, &c. and yet I will heal him. I will deal with him not according to mine ordinary rule, but according to my Prerogative. If God will heal for his names sake (and so come in with his Non obstante, as he doth, Psal. 106.8) what people is there whom he may not heal? Well may these sinfull sonnes of Jacob be unconsumed: well may they have for their seventy years captivity,Ezek 20 8, 14, 22, 45. seven seventies of years (according to Dans ls weeks) for the re-enjoying of their own countrey: and Gods mercies shall bear the same proportion to his punishments, which seven (a complete number) hath to an unity. Provided, that they return to the Lord that smot them (as in the next verse) for else he will surely punish them seven times more, and seven times, and seven to that, Levit. 26.21, 23, 27, &c three severall times God raiseth his note of threatening, and he raiseth it by sevens, and those are discords in Musique. Such sayings will bee heavy songs: and their execution heavy pangs to the impenitent. Verse 7. Even from the dayes of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordi∣nances] The more to magnifie his own mercy (by a miracle, whereof they had hitherto subsisted, by an extraordinary prop of his love, and long-suffering) God sets forth here their utter unworthinesse of any such free favour, by a double aggra∣vation of their sinnes. First, their long continuance therein, so that their sinnes were grown inveterate, and ingrained, and themselves aged and even crooked there∣in, so that they could hardly ever be set strait again. from the dayes of your fathers, &c.] q d. Non hoc nuper facitis: nee somel ut erroris mereamini veniam: sed haereditariam habetis impiettem, &c as Hirom pa∣raphraseth this Text. You are no young sinners: it is not yesterday, or a few dayes since you transgressed against me: you are a seed of serpenis, a rae of rebels: you are as good atresisting the Holy Ghost, as ever your fathers were. Act. 7.51. Secondly, their pervicacy and stiffenesse: they would not yeeld or be evicted. But ye say wherein shall we return? as if they were righteous and needed no repent∣ance. Still they put God to his proofs, as Jer. 2.35. and shew themselves an un∣perswadeable, and gainsaying people, Esay 65.2, and this had been their munr from their youth, Jer. 22.21. when they were in Egypt they served idols there, Ezek. 16. and 23. In the wildernesse they tempted God ten times, and hearkened not to his voice. Num. 14.22. Under their Judges, and then their Kings, they vexed him, and he bore with them, till there was no remedy, 2 Chron 6.16. After the captivity, they do antiquum obtinere, and are found guilty here of sundry both omissions, and commissions, calling for a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2.
All which notwithstanding, Deus redire eos sibi non perire desiderat. God solici∣teth their return unto him here by a precept and a promise,Chrysolog. two effectuall argu∣ments, if any thing will work: and ratifieth all with his own authority, which is most authentick, in these words, saith the Lord of Hosts. A stile oft given to God, as elsewhere in Scripture, so especially in these three last Prophecies to the people returned from Babylon, because they had many enemies, and therefore had need of all encouragement: For God is called the Lord of Hosts, quòd ille numine suo & nomine terreat terras,Alsted. temperet tempora, exercitusque tam superiores quam inferio∣res gubernet, to shew that he hath all power in his hand, and doth whatsoever he pleaseth in heaven and earth. See the Notes on verse 17. of this chap. doctr. 1 And for the Doctrine of returning to God (from whom we have deeply revolted) by repentance, see the Note on Zach. 1.3. But ye said, Wherein shall we return?] This was their pride, proceeding from ignorance: they were rich and righteous, as those Laodiceans, Rev. 3.17. not in truth, but in conceit, vainly puft up by their carnall minds, drunk with self-dotage, as Luke 16.15.Elementum in suo loco non ponderat. Hence they stand upon their pantofles, and none must say, Black is their eye. Sin is in them as in is proper element, and therefore weighes not: till by long trading in wickednesse, they grow to that dead and dedolent disposition, Ephes. 4.14. their heart fat as grease, their conscience cauterized, 1 Tim. 4.2. that is, so benummed, blotted, lenselesse, filthy, and gangrenate, that it must be seared with an hot iron: whereupon it growes so crusty and brawny, that though cut or pierced with the sword of the spirit, it doth neither bleed nor feel: and though handfulls of hell-fire be flung in the face of it, yet it starts not, stirres not: but is deprived of all even paslive power, and so Satanized, that there's no help for them. Verse 8. Will a man rob God?] Adam pillage Elohim? frail weak man seek to supplant (so the Septuagint render it) the great and mighty God? Giant-like boldnesse! Cacus met with his match, when he robb'd Hercules. Mercury (say the Poets) had a mind to steal Jupiters thunderbolts, but durst not meddle, lest hee should speed as Prometheus had done, for stealing fire: or lest they should burn his fingers. The Eagle in the fable, that stole a piece of flesh from the Altar, and car∣ried it together with a live-coal that stuck to it, to his nest, set his young and all on a light fire. Dionysius, that robb'd his god, was cast out of his kingdome, though he was wont to boast,Aelian. lib. 2. Var. hist. that he had it bound to him with chains of Ademant. Bel∣shazzar paied dear for his bowzing in the bowles of the Sanctuary. Cardinall Wolsey and five of his servants, employed by him in interverting consecrated goods, though perhaps to better purposes, came all to fearfull ends, as Scultetus no∣teth, and thereupon wisheth, Ʋtinam his & similibus exemplis edocti discant ho∣mines res semel Deo consecratas timidè attrectare.Scult. Annal. 332. It is a snare to the man that devoureth that which to holy, Prov. 20.25. They may be compared to those that, being of a cold and flegmatick stomach, eat hard and cholerick meats: well they may please their palates, but it cannot be for their health: no more can the mur∣thering morsels of such sacrilegious persons, as devouring holy things, have their meat sawced and their drink spiced with the bitter wrath of God. See Job 20.23. Polanus reads the Text thus, Will a man rob his Gods? q d. Will any Heathen do so? did not they that worshipped Idols, abhorre sacriledge? Ws it not one of the lawes of the twelve tables in Rome, Sacrum sacrove commendatum qui clepserit rapseritque, parricida esto; Let every sacrilegious person passe and bee punished for a parricide? And doth not Tully affirme of those Lawes, that they did exceed all the libraries of the Philosophers, in weight and worth? Did not those old Ido∣laters freely bestow their most precious things upon their Idols, Ezech. 16.16, 17, 18, 19. Exod. 32.3? yea their very children in sacrifice to Moloch, or Saturn? 2 King. 16.3. and 17.17. being as mad upon their Idols, as ever was any wicked wanton upon his harlot, lavishing out of the bag, &c? And are not our moderne Idolaters the Papists, as bountifull to their He-saints, and she-saints? so that their Churches are not able to hold their vowed presents and memories,Spec. Europ. but that in many places (as at Loretto, Sichem, &c.) they are fain to hang their Cloisters and Church∣yards with them? Shall they in their petitions to our Parliaments plead for favour and forbearance upon this ground, because their ancestours (they say) bestowed
so great cost upon this land for church-maintenance: and shall it be said (now that they are worthily cast out) Possidebant Papistae, possident Rapistae, Wicked Papists had them, ungodly Rapists have them: Improprietaries, I mean, that hold by an improper title, and all others that appropriate that to them and theirs which the Almighty is invested in. This is here instanced as a capitall crime, and called robbing of God, as well it may; forasmuch as ministers maintenance (being tythes) is called the Lords, and holy to the Lord Lev. 27.30. because separated from man and mans use, and therefore might not be altered. Verse 28. Or if any had a mind to redeem them, they were bound to add to the price every fifth peny above the true value. Verse 31.Nunquid homo fraudabit Deum? sic ver∣tunt Aquila, Symmachus & Theodotion. Let all those look to this whether Impropriators false Patrons (Latrones rather) or others that either by force or fraud rob God of his right, doteyning part of the due at least, as Ananias and Sapphira did; God hath a Quare Impedit against them, which one day they must make answer to. yet ye have robbed me] Because ye have robbed my Ministers who are in my stead 2 Cor. 5.20. and in whom he receiveth tythes, of whom it is witnessed that he li∣veth, like as did Melchisedeck, as a Priest and tyth-taker, and type of Christ. Heb. 7.7, 8, 9. And as God is sensible of the least curtesy done to a Prophet to reward it, even to a cup of cold water Mat. 10.42. (so that he is anggard to himself, that scants his beneficence to a Minister) so for those that wrong and rob them, that deny them that double honour of countenance and maintenance that he hath appointed them, and hold them to hard allowance: muzzling the Ox, or giving him but straw at the best, for treading out the corn, they will dearely answer it before God, who holds all done to them as done to himself.Legati quòd erant appella i superbius, Co∣rinthum Pa∣tres vestri to∣tius Graeciae lu∣men extinctum esse moluerunt. Cic. pro lege Man. Surely as David could not but feel his own cheeks shaven, and his own coat cut in his Embassadours; they did but carry his person to Hanun: So here. And as there was never any king so poor and weak, but thought himself strong enough to revenge any wrong done, or a∣buse offered to his Embassadours: So the king of heaven will not fail to curse with a curse whole nations that forget God and forsake his Levites Deut. 13.19. it being all one to God to deal in this case against a nation or against a man only. Ioh 34.29. in tythes and offerings] He had told them before they had robbd him: or (as some ead it) stabbed him as with a ponyard. And here they should have confess∣ed the action and craved pardon. But because they did nothing lesse; standing upon their justification (as before often) God descends to the particular wherein they robbed him, In tythes and offerings: The originall hath it, Tythes and offe∣rings, without the particle (in) and it is as if the Lord should say, you may easily know my meaning without so many words, but that you love to contest. You cannot be ignorant, that the Levites, for want of maintenance, are sled every man to his field, and so my work and worship is lest undone. Good Nehemiah was sensible of it chap. 13.10. and because he knew that, by this means, religion it self would be soon undermined and overturned, he contended with the Rulers, and made all the people pay their tythes: and this he worthily reckons among his good deeds, praying God to remember him for it, and not wise it out chap. 13.10. Hezekiah, that great Reformer, shewed the like zeal in commanding the people that dwelt in Ierusalem to give the portion of the Priests and Levites, that they might attend upon the law of the Lord (so the Vulgar) that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, so we read 2 Chron. 31.4. that is, that they might not follow their call∣ings heavily for want of maintenance, but cherefully bend themselves wholy to the service of the Lord. And here (as Ferus once wished for the Romish syna∣gogue) I would we had some Moses, said He, to take away the evils of the times: non enim unum tantum vitulum sed multos habemus, for we have not one golden calf, but many: So have we of these times cause to wish we had some zealous Nehemiahs and Hezekiahs to stickle and stand for Christs Ministers, not de∣frauded of their due maintenance only (a signe of gasping devotion) but trampled upon by the foul feet of the basest of the people, as the filth of the world and the offcouring of all things. Tythes they say are Iewish: but if Melchisedech tythed Abraham, by the same right whereby he blessed him:Heb. 7. and if tythes by all lawes of God, Nature, Nations, have been hallowed to God, as Junius and other modern
Divines alledge and argue: and lastly, if things consecratd to Gods service may not be alienated, out of case of necessity Pro. 20.25. Gal. 3.15. it will appear to be otherwise. Or if tythes be Jewish, and yet Ministers must have a mainte∣nance (Christ having so ordained 1 Cor. 9.14.) and that both honourable 1 Tim. 5.17, 18. and liberall Gal. 6.6. how else shall they be given to hospitality, 1 Tim. 2.2? (if they be not hospitable, they will be despicable) how will men satisfie their consciences in the quota pars: the particular quantity they must bestow upon them? The scripture speaketh only of the tenth part. Sed manum de tabula. Enough of this, if not more then enough. Verse 9. Ye are cursea with a curse] Vuig. ye are cursed with penury and scar∣city of victuals, according to Deut. 28.23. &c. and so great was this peoples poverty, that they were forced for food to sell not their fields only, but their sons and daughters Neh. 5. They had pinched on Gods side, and he had paid them home in the same kind: they thought in the famine to have kept the more to them∣selves, and they had the lesse, for keeping from him that which was his. A just hand of God upon all church-robbers: for most part they are alwayes in want and needy, their wealth melting away as snow before the sun, and their fields of blood purchased with the spoiles of Christ, proving as unfortunate and fatall to them as the gold of the Temple of Tholose did to Scipio's souldiers: of which whoever carri∣ed any part away, never prospered afterward. What get men by such a detiny that shall prove their fatall destiny? Say they leave the gold behind them, yet they are likely to carry the guilt to hell with them Iem. 5.1, 2. yea to cough in hell, as Latimer phrased it, unlesse they make restitution, to disgest in hell, what they have devoured on earth, as Austin. Because Pharaoh faith the river is mine own, therefore faith God, I will dry up the river Ezek. 29.3, 9. The Merchant that denyeth to pay his custome, forseits all his commodities: so here. for ye have robbed me] And therefore I have cursed you. God never punisheth people, but there is just cause for it, could they but see it: but that the are hard∣ly drawn to, as here, and Esay 26.11. the root of the matter is in themselves, as job speakes in another case; the plague of their own hearts 1 King. 8 38. procureth them all the mischief, and may say to them as the heart of Apo us the tyrant seemed to say to him; who dreamed one night that he was steaed by the Scythians, and boyled in a caldron, and that his heart spake to him out of the kettle, It is I that have drawn thee to all this. Let men therefore, when under any misery, lay their hand upon their heart, thrust their hand into their besom with Moses, they shall be sure to bring it out lepious: let them turn short again upon themselves, and say every man, What have I done? what evill have I com∣mitted, or at least admitted? what good have I omitted, or intermitted? Pro∣fane Esau, beguiled of the blessing cryes out of his fathers store, of his brothers subtlety: not a word of his own prophanenesse in slighting and selling his birth∣right: he had forgot since he did eat and drink, and went his way Gen. 25.4. The lerusalem-Paraphrast adds, that he also despised his portion in the world to come, and denyed the resurrection. But this he never taketh notice of. So Pompey beaten by Caesar out of the field blamed the divine providence for his ill successe: when he should rather have faulted his own retchlesse security (that he never considered into what place he were best to retire if worsted) and especially his sacriledge not long before that defeat, when he sackt Jerusalem, and ransackt the Temple. He might have considered what became (a little before his time) for the same offence of Alcimus,1 Maccah. 9.54, 55, 56. 2 Maccah. 3.24, 25. and 4.39, 41.42. and 5.15, 16. and 13.4, 8. and 15.30. 34 Heliodorus, Lysimachus, Antiochus, Menclaus, and Nicanor, all no∣torious Church-robbers, and all hang'd u in gibbets, as it were, for example and admonition to all that should come after. Sacriledge is a share (saith Solomon, Pro. 20.25.) that 1. catcheth suddenly. 2. holdeth surely. 3. desroyeth cer∣tainly. Cavete. even this whole nation] The disease was grown Epidemicall, like that which Physicians call corruptio totius substantiae, or that which: he Prophet Esay also com∣plaineth of chap. 1.5, 6. The whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint &c. This sin of sacriledge was grown Nationall: there was a conjuncture of all sorts in this wickednesse; a rabble of rebels they were, ripe for judgement: yea though
Gods judgements were upon them, yet they persisted Neh. 13.18. and en∣creased wrath Ezra. 9.13. God had smitten them, but they sorrowed not:Ier. 5.3. but to be revenged on him, as it were, for laying famine upon them, they took away his tythes &c. Verse 10. Bring ye all the tythes into the store-house] All, whether praediall, or personall, all, and of every kind. into the store-house] the standing place for tythes, as it is called Neh. 13.11, 12, 13. the tyth-barn, as the Vulgar hath it. that there may be meat in my house] Tereph, unde : and the English, prey: that there may be maintenance for my Ministers;Cibus qui dis∣cerpi, dividi, disiribuiq, polest. enough not for themselves only, but for to be distributed to those that are about them: that they may not cat their morsels alone, that they may not be slaves to others, servants to themselves: that they may not bite with their teeth, and cry peace, teach for hire, and divine for money Mic. 3.5, 11. that is, be fain to main∣tain themselves with sordid and unworthy flatteries. Balaam the false Prophet rode with his two men Num. 22. God; Levite had one man Iudg. 19.11. Augstin lived neither like a Lord, for he cate his meat in woodden and marble dishes: neither lived he like a begger, for he used to eat with silver spoons.Possidon. in vit. Aug. What pitty was it that Luther was forced to cry out in his Comment on Gen. 47. Nisi superesser spolium Egypti quod rapuimus Papae, omnibus ministris verbi fame percundum osset. Quod si sustentandi essent die contributione populi miserc profectò & diter viverent. If it were not for the spoil of Egypt which we have snatcht from the Pope, all the Ministers of the word must have been affamished. For if they should be put to live upon the free contribution of the people, they would cer∣tainly have a miserable hard living of it. Alimar ergo &c. We are maintained then, as I said of the spoiles of Egypt: and yet that little that we have is prey'd upon by the Magistrate: for the parishes and Schooles are so spoyled and peeled, as if they meant to starve us all. Thus Luther. Melancthon comes after him and complaines in the year 1559. Principes favebant Luthero: sed jam iterum vi letis ing ratitudinem mundi orga ministros &c. The Princes did at first favour Luther: but now ye see again the unkindnesse of the world to the Ministers of the word. Calvia was so ill dealt with at Geneva (together with other faithfull Ministers there that he was forced once to say, Certè si hominibus servivissem &c. Truly if I had served men in my Ministry, I had been very ill requited.Melch. Adam. in vita. But its well that I have served Him who never failes his: but faithfully performeth with the better who sever he hath promised them. Our Doctour Stoughton observed, that the manner of very many in the City was to deal with their minister as Carriers doe with their horses; viz. to lay heavy burthens upon them, and then to hang bels about their necks; they shall have hard work, and great commendations,Serm. n 1 Sam. 2.30. but easy commons; be applauded for excellent preachers, have good words, but slight wages. Thus in the City; but what measure meet men with in the Coun∣trey? Hear it from a Countrey-Minister mouth. How many thousands in this land (faith He) stand obnexious in an high-degree to the judgements of God for this sin of sacriledge, which is the bane of our people, and blemish of our Church? Some there are who rob God of his main tythes, yet are content to leave him still the lesses: they pluck our fleeces, and leave us the taglocks, poor Vicarage tithes, whilest themselves and children are kept warme in our wooll, the Parsonage. And and others yet more injurious, who think that too much, would the law but al∣low them a pair of sheers, they would clip the very taglocks off.Mr. Reg. his Strange Vin. in Valest pag. 303. These (with the deceitfull taylour) are not content to shrink the whole and fair broad-cloth to a dozen of buttons, but they must likewise take part of them away, and nimme the very shreds, which only we have left. After they have full gorged themselves with the Parsonage grains, they can sinde means either by uncoscionable leases or compositions, to pick the Vicaridge-bones &c. Thus He and much more to the like purpose. Our blessings (faith Another eminent Divine) are more then those of old, our burthen lesse. And yet how unwilling comes even a little to the painsullest Minister? And those, that upon a kind of conscience pay other duties, think all lost that goes to the maintenance of the Ministery,D. Sclaiter. and that wish such repining, as if that were mony of all other worst bestow∣ed &c.
and prove me now herewith] Dignatio stupenda, A wonderful condescension, that God should call upon man to take experiment of him, to make but a triall, to put it to the proof whether he will not prosper the penitent. This is somewhat like that other passage Psal. 34. O tast and see that the Lord is good &c. or that, Come and let us reason together. O the never-enough adored depth of Gods goodnesse, that he should stoop so low to us clay and dirt, dung and wormes-meat 1 He is so high,Psal 113.6. that he is said to humble himself to behold things done in heaven. If he look at all out of himself, to see but what the Angels do, he doth therein abase himself. That he will deal so familiarly with us (who are no better then so many walking-dunghils) as to bid us prove him what he will do for us, this deserves acknow∣ledgement and admiration in the highest degree. Should he have used martiall law with these malapert miscreants in the text that had robbed him of his rights: and not only have reproved them and cursed them wit a curse of penury, but have (Draco-like) written his lawes in blood upon them, he might have justified his proceedings. But thus to commune with them, and not only to prescribe them a remedy for removall of the curse, Bring ye all the Tythes &c. but thus to perswade with them,Suhest jurandi spectes. Figuier. and to permit them to prove his bountifulnesse in giving, and his faithfulnesse in keeping promise with them, and that with an oath (as some conceive.) if I will not open the windowes of heaven] then never beleeve me more; what a wonderfull goodnesse was this? Surely we may well say of it, as Chrysostom doth of the happinesse of heaven, Sermo non valet exprimere: experimento opus est; We can never sufficiently praise it, but must take the counsell he gives us, and prove it, Prove me &c. There is an unlawfull and damnable proving or ra∣ther provoking of God, when men separate the means from the end, holinesse from happinesse, will needs live as they lift, and yet presume they shall be saved by the unknown mercies of God. Such were those that tempted and provoked he most high God, and kept not his testimonies Psal. 78.56. like as before they had lusted exceedingly in the wildernesse,Psal. 106.14. and tempted God in the desert; whilest, bearing themselves over-bold upon their external priviledges, they refused to ob∣serve his statutes, and keep his lawes. This sin, in the new Testament is called tempting the Spirit of the Lord Act. 5.9. Ananias and Sapphira did so, when by a cunning concrivance they would needs prove and make triall whether God could deicry and would punish their hypocrisy: So did Judas the traytour when he boldly demanded, Is it I Lord. So do all gross hypocrites that present unto God acarcase of holinesse, like Cham, or that cursed Cozener Mal. 1.14. Such also as refuse Christs offers of grace: and when he bids them as here, Prove him if upon their obedience to the lawes of his kingdome, he will not open the windowes of heaven and rain down righteousnesse upon them, even mercies without measure: and (for confirmation) wills them as once he did wicked Ahaz, Ask thee a signe of the Lord thy God, Ask it either in the depth, or height above; they churlishly answer him in effect as he did, I will not ask, neither will I try the Lord. Where∣upon the Prophet that made the motion, in an holy indignation, Heare ye now saith He, ye house of David, Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but ye will weary my God also? Isa. 7.12.13. if I will no open you the windowes of heaven] Vulg. the cataracts or flood∣gates, or spouts of heaven: meaning the clouds, those bottles of raine, which God here promiseth to shour down abundantly,Gorn. & Lapid. tantâ copiâ, impetu, & fragore, ut ruere potius quam fluere videatur. A phrase noting great plenty 2 King. 7.2. for in those hot countries drought ever made a dearth. Hence the proud Egyp∣tians whose land is watered and made fruitfull by the overflow of the river Nilus, were wont in mockery to tell the neighbour nations, that if God should forget to raine, they might chance to starve for it. They thought the rain was of God, but not the river. God therefore threateneth to dry it up Ezech 29.9. Isa. 19.5.6. and so he did: Creditur Aegyptus caruisse juvantibus arva. Imbribus,Ovid. at{que} annis sicca fuisse novem.
To teach both them and us, that both plenty and scarcity, drought, and rain are his work: he carries the keyes of the grave, of the heart, and of the windows of heaven the clouds, under his own girose. Vessels they are as thin as the Equ which is contained in them. There they hang and move, though weighty with their. burden. How they are upheld, and why they fall here, and now, we know not, but wonder at it, as Gods handy work. In the island of t. Thomas,s Grg. pag 251. on the backside of Airike, in the middest of it is an hill: and over that, a continuall cloud, wherewith the whole Island is watered. In the middle region of the air, God  made drukesse his secret place: has pavilion round about  is dk  cloude of the skie, Psal. 18.11. These he weighes by measure, so that not a dr falls in vain, nor in a wrong place, Job 28.15. When he uttereth his voice  is a multitude (or noise) or waters in the heavens, and he causeth the  to ascend from the ends of the earth: he maketh lightenings with rain, &c. Job. 10.. A wonderfull thing surely, that out of the middest or water, God setcheth , and hard stones out of the midst of thin vapours. This is the Lords own do and it is (worthily) marvellous in our eyes. Are there any among the vanit or the Gentiles that can given rain? or can the heavens give snowres? (So the ∣ralisis will needs have it: but what saith the Prophet?)  Gad? therefore we will wan upon thee: for , Jer.  A pious resolution surely, and that which the Lord here would have this people to take up: viz. in the way of his judgements to wait upon him,Esay 25.3. and work b him, to honour him with their substance, and with the first fruits of al their in∣crease. So should their barnes be filled with piency, and their presses burst out with new wine, Prov. 2.9, 10. The   shall be , Prov. 11.25. God will poure him our a blessing] because he , as the Hebrew hath it in that place of the Proverbs last cited, and he shall have rain  plva erir, as Kchr rendreth the last words there. e shall be a sweet and  showre to himself and others. Theresore they shall  of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodnesse of the Lord, for whe,  and for oil, and for the young of the stock, and of the hed: and their  a waered garden, and they shall not sorrow any more , Gen. 31.12. O precious promise, every syllable whereof drops myrrhe, and merey!  that  of , (so we may call him as the  the ather of Vows, because he is the first we read of in Scripture that vowed a vow unto the Lord) had this promise of abundance plentifully performed unto him. So had  the first Christian Emperour, the Churches great Benesactour. ,De civ. Dei i 5. c 25. faith Agstine, Constimum Alagnum  mullus under et. The good Lord filled , with so many temporall blessings, as never any man durst with for. There shall not be ] ,Nop tanm quod sufficiat, sedti mquod supersit Rah. Drvil. Ʋltra suffici∣ens. Montat. so that you shall say, It is enough: Thus the Chaldee rendreth it.  shall hove more then enough, as the areptan had,  King.  the cruse never cea∣sed running till there was no room. Borrow of ,  the Prophet, but sh: the doors . It was time to shut the doors,  One, when many greater vessels must be supplied from one little one. shee had a Prephets reword with a witnesse. And so had the Shunamite. Her table, and bed, and stool was well bestowed: That candlestick repaid her the light of her future life and condi∣tion; that table, the means of maintenance; that stool, a seat of  bed, a quiet rest from the common calamities of her nation. So  a pay∣master is God: his retributions are more then bountifull: he will not be overcome by his creature in liberality, Jam. 1.5. They shall be sure to have their own a∣gain with usury, either in money, or moneys-worth. What they want in tempo∣ralls (a sufficiency whereof they shall be sure of, if not a ) he will a  up in spirituals, joy and peace through beleeving, as much, or more then heart can hold. Some holy men have so over-abounded exceedingly with joy, that they have been forced to cry out, Hold Lord, stay thine hand, &c. their spirits were even ready to expire, with an exuberancy of spirituall ravishment: as the Church in the Canticles was sick of love, and therefore calls to the Ministers,Cmt. 2.5. to stay her from sink∣ing
and swooning, to bolsier her up, being surprized with a love-qualme: as the Queen of Sheba rapt with admiration, had no more spirit in her: as Jacobs heart saintd,Godfr. in ult. Bern. Epist I. 1. Confess. l. 6. e. 22. when he heard the good news of Joseph alive. Bernard, for a certain time after his conversion, remained as it were, deprived of his senses, by the excessive consolations he had from God. Cypran and Austin testifie the like of them∣selves. Vese 11. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes] Caterpillars, Canker∣wormes, and such hurtiull creatures, Gods terrible army, as they are notably set forth in their march and mischief, Joel 2.2, 3, 4, 5, &c. with chap. 1.4. to tame his rebels to ease him of his adversaries, and to avenge him of his enemies, Esay 1.24. These he will rebuke (for every creature is at his beck, and check) as he re∣buked the red-sea, and it was dried up, Psal. 105. and as he rebuked the winds, Mat. 8.26. the fever, Luk. 4.39. the devil, Mat. 7.18. he will say unto them, Abite  hine. Get you hence, and that's enough, for they are all his servants, Psal. 119.91, He is the great Centurion (or rather Lord of Hosts) that faith to this creature Go, and he goeth, and to another, Come, and he cometh, &c. if he do but say, Who is on my side, who? all creatures look out at their windows, as ready prest to do his pleasure: neither is there any so mean amongst them, or so despica∣ble that cannot, if set on by him, make the proudest on earth stoop, and say, This is the singe of God. But of this see more in the 1. Dost. on vers. 18. of this Chap∣ter. Let all that look for Gods blessing, either upon their persons or possessions, make their peace with God (the genealogie of corn, and wine is resolved into him, Hos. 2.22.) and bring him all his tythes into the store-house, &c. les hee blast their fair hopes, out off the meat from their mouthes, take his own and bee gone, take away his corn in the time thereof, and his wine in the season thereof, &c. Hos. 2.9. The Jews in our Saviours time, suis malis edosthi, were punctuail in paying their tythes, even to a potherb, Marth. 23. And at this day, though not in their own countrey, nor have a beviticall Priesthood, yet those of them that would bee reputed religious,Godw. Heb. Antiq p. 277. do distribute, in lieu of tythes, the tenth of their increase unto the poor: being perswaded that God doth blesse their increase the more: For their usuall proverb is, Dectma in dives fias, ythe and be rich. Of the young Lord Harrington (the last of that name) it is reported by Mr. Stock, who preached his Funerall, that he constantly gave the tenth of his yearly revenue to pious and charitable uses. And of reverend Mr. Will Whately Minister of Banbary, it is likewise recorded in his life, that he set apart and expended for many years before he died for good uses, the tenth part of his yearly comings in, both out of his tempo∣rall and ecclesiasticall means of maintenance: and that he never thrived in his out∣ward estate, till he took that course. Besides the sweet comfort that the spirits of his wealth thus distilled, as it were, brought to his conscience, both in life and at death: and the blessing of a good name left behind him, according to that which follows next in the text, And all nations, &c. Verse 12. And all nations shall call you Hessed] viz. for the abundance of out∣ward comforts and commodities, by the which the Nations measured mens happi∣nesse saying, Blessed is the people that is in such a ease, Psal. 144.15. Cyprus was for this cause anciently called Macaria, that is, the blessed countrey, as having a sufficiency of all things within it self: and England was called Regnum Dci, the king∣dome of God, or the Fortunate Island, and Englishmen Deires, as those that were set safe de ira Dei, from the wrath of God. In the time of Pope lement the sixth (as Robert of Avesbury testifieth) when Lewis of Spain was chosen Prince of the Fortunate Islands, and for the conquest thereof was to raise an Army in France and Italy; the English Agent at Rome, together with his company departed and gat home, as conceiving that the Prince was bound for England, then the which they thought there was not a more fortunate Island in the world. Of the Island of Ly∣cia, Sol nus saith,Lyciam Ho∣ratius claram dicit. that all the day long, the sky is never so cloudy, but that the Sun may be seen there. Semper in Sole siva est Rhodos, The Rhodes is ever in the Sun∣shine, saith Aeneas Sylvius. And of Alexandria in Egypt, Ammianus Marcellizus observeth, that once in the day the Sun hath been seen to shine over it. I confesse the same cannot be said of England: I remember also what I have read of a certain Frenchman, who returning home out of England, and being asked by a countrey∣man
of his that was bound for England, what service he would command him into this countrey? Nothing but this, said the other; When you see the Sunne,Per duos enim menses quibus ibi fui, Solem mihi videre non licuit. Ga∣rincieres de tabe Anglica. p 84. Ʋt finem at{que} initium lucis exiguo discri∣mine in ter∣noscas. Noment{que} ex eo sortitam. Polyh. c. 17. have me commended to him: for I have been there two moneths, and could never see him in all that space. Belike he was here in the deep of winter. For at Summer Solistice Tacitus (in the life of Agricola) hath observed, that the Sun shineth con∣tinually in Britanny, and neither setteth nor riseth there; but passeth so light by us by night, that you can searce say, we have any night at all: But if we speak of the Sunshine of Gods grace and favour, either for spirituals or temporals: as Delos is said by Solinus, to have been the first countrey that had the Sun shining upon it, after the generall deluge, and therehence to have had its name: so was England one of the first Hands that both received Christ, and that shook off Antichrist. And for temporall blessings, all nations call us blessed, and count us a delightsome land in∣deed, a land of desires, such as all men would desire to dwell in, for the exceeding fruitfulnesse and pleasantnesse of it: it being the Court of Queen Ceres, the grana∣ry of the Western world, as forreigne Writers have termed it, the paradise of pleasure, and garden of God, as our own Chronicler. The truth is, We may well say of England, as the Italians do of Venice, by way of proverb: He that hath not seen it, cannot beleeve what a dainty place it is: and he that hath not lived there some good space, cannot understand the worth of it. Our Mr. Ascham, Schoolmaster to Q. Eizabeth, had lived there some time, and had soon enough of it: for though hee admired the place, he utterly disliked the people for their loose living. And the like (alasse) may be too truly affirmed of us. We live in Gods good land, but not by Gods good lawes: we eat the fat and drink the sweet, but we sanctifie not the Lord God in our hearts, we live not as becometh Christians. Our hearts (like our Climate) hath much more light then heat; light of knowledge, then heat of zeal; our lukewarmnesse is like to be our bane, our sinnes our snuffes, that dimme our candlestick, and threaten the removall of it. O si siat id in nobis (saith One) quod in Sole videtur, qui quibus affulserit, ijs etiam calrem & colorem impertire solet! O that the Sun of righteousnesse would so shine upon us, as to warm us, and trans∣forme us into the same image from glory to glory, as by his Spirit! O that he would set up his own kingdome here more and more amongst us! then should were be more happy then the Israelites were under the raigne of king Solomon, or the Spa∣niards under their Ferdinand the third, who reigned 35. years: in all which time there was neither famine nor pestilence in the land.Lopez Gloss. in prolog par. 1 Vers. 13. Your words have been stout against me] Or, reenforced, or strongly confirmed. Superant me verba vestra, so some have rendred it. By your hard and hatefull words you have been too hard for me, as it were. And it is, as if God should say, I have given you my best advice o break off your sinnes, and to bring me my tythes, that I might blesse you both with store, and honour. But I have lost my labour: I see well, my sweet words are worse then spilt upon you, who are so hardened in your errour and blasphemy,Prov. 23.8. Verba quid in∣cassum non pro∣ficientia perdo. Mal. 2.17. that you are still clamouring and casting out odious words against me. Once before you had set your foul mouthes against me, and like so many wolves (that were wood) you held up your heads and howl'd out these ugly words, Every one that doth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them, &c. (was it possible that the wit of malice could devise so high a slander?) And now you are at it again, creaking like doors that move upon rusty hinges, nay clattering and blustering out such hellish and hideous blasphemies, as at the hearing whereof, it is great wonder if the heavens sweat not, earth gape not, sea roar not, all creatures conspire not to be avenged upon you: as the very stones in the wall of Aphek turned executioners of those blasphemous Aramites, when as being but ignorant Pagans, their tongues might seem no slander. Your words have been stout against me] Yea stouter and stouter: your wicked∣nesse frets like a canker, and encreaseth still to more ungodlinesse, 2 Tim. 2.17. Evil men and deceivers grow worse and worse, 2 Tim. 3.13. as being given up by God, Rom. 1.28. acted and agitated by the devil, Ephes. 2.2. serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. which to satisfie is an endlesse piece of businesse. Neither let any here say, they were but words that these are charged with, and words are but wind, &c. for words have their weight, and are marvellous provoking. Leviter volant, sed non leviter violant. You shall find some, saith Erasmus, that if death
be threatned, can despise it: but to be belied they cannot brook, nor from revenge contain themselves. As a murthering-weapon in my bones, saith David, mine ene∣mies reproach me, Psal. 42.10. Desperate speeches and blasphemies that impose up∣on the Lord any thing unbeseeming his Majesty (a thing common among the Jews, even at this day) he can by no means away with. See how God stomacketh such proud contumelious language, Psal. 73.11. and 94.4, 5, 6, 7, &c. Zeph. 1.12. Ezech. 9.9. See how he punished it in him that bored thorough his great Name, Lev. 24.11. Ludovike commonly called St. Lewis, caused the lips of blasphemers to be seared with an hot iron. Philip the French King punished this sin with death, yea though it were committed in a Tavern. The very Turks have the Christians blaspheming of Christ in execration: and will punish their prisoners sorely, when as, through impatience, or desperatenesse, they wound the ears of heaven: Yea the Jews in their speculations of the causes of the strange successe of the affairs of the world,Specul. Europae assigne the reason of the Turks prevailing so against the Christians, to be their blasphemies: and among other scandals and lets of their conversion, are all those stout words darted with hellish mouthes against God in their hearing, so ordinarily and openly, by the Italians especially, who blaspheme oftner then swear, and murther oftner then revile or slander. Andrew Musculus in his discourse, in∣tituled, The devil of blasphemy, hath a memorable story of a desperate dice-player in Helvetia, Anno 1553. at a town three miles distant from Lucerna. Where, on a Lords-day, three wretched fellows were playing at dice, under the town-wall. One of them, named Ʋlricus Schraeterus, having lost a great deal of money, swore that if he lost the next cast, he would fling his dagger at the sace of God. He lost it, and in a rage threw up his dagger with all his might toward heaven. The dag∣ger vanished in the air, and was seen no more: five drops of blood fell down upon the table where they were playing, which could never be washed out, (part of it is still kept in that town for a monument) the blasphemer (to say the best of him) was fetcht away presently body and soul by the devil, with such an horrible noise, as affrighted the whole town. The other two came to a miserable end shortly after. The truth of this relation is further attested by Job Fincelius, and Philip Lonicerus, Theat. histor. pag. 142. yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee?] Chald, What have we multiplied to speak before thee? As if they should say, t is not so much that we have spoken, that thou shouldest make such a businesse of it. Nothing more ordinary with gracelesse men, then to elevate and extenuate: great sins with them, are small sins, and small sins no sins: when as every sinne should swell like a toad in their eyes, and the abundant hatred thereof in their hearts, should make them say all that can be said for the aggravation and detestation of it: sith there is as much treason in coyning pence as bigger pieces; because the supreme authority is as much violated in the one as in the other. But this sin of theirs was no peccadillo, as ap∣peareth by the following instance. Verse 14. Ye have said, It is vain to serve God] Vulg. He is vain that serves God. Ye are idle, ye are idle said Pharaoh to the Israelites when they would needs go sacrifice, and to Moses and Aaron, Ye let the people from their works. Any thing seems due work to a carnall mind saving Gods service: that's labour lost, time cast away, they think. But this is their want of spirituall judgement; they see not the beauty of holinesse, they taste not how good the Lord is: they discern not things that are excellent, they measure all by present sight sense, and taste, as do children, swine and other bruit creatures: And therefore they themselves are vani & vanissi∣mi, as an Expositor here speaketh, vain, and most vain, and that for two reasons, and in two respects. First, for that they take themselves to be servers of God. Se∣condly, they stick in the bark, serve him with the out-side onely, honour him with their lips, and not with their hearts, to bring him vein oblations, empty perform∣ances, serve him wih shews and formalities which he delights not in, nay he rejects them with infinite scorn, as he did the Pharisees devotions, Luk. 16.15. because they were but skin-deep, and not heart-sprung; therefore they were not a button the better for them. God loves and looks for truth in the inward parts, Psal. 51.6. he looks that men should do his will from the heart, Ephes. 6.6. and serve him in their spirits, Rom. 1.9. In doing whereof there is great reward, Psal. 19.11.
praemium ante praemium, that Euge of a good conscience: this the stranger med∣leth not with, conceives not of, the wealth of Gods pilgrims standing more in Jewels, and gold, things light o carriage, and well portable, then in house and land. His servants have that here that doth abundantly pay them for their pains afore-hand: righteousnesse being it own reward; and they knowing within them∣selves, that they have in heaven a better and an enduring substance.Heb. 10. But hereaster oh the rich recompence that God shall make them! oh the heaped up happinesse of such at the last! when these vain talkers in the text, and all that are of their mind, shall roar out Nos insensati, We fooles counted their lives madnesse: But now &c. See more of this in the following Note on ver. 16. doctr. 5. what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance] The Chaldee hath it, Quod mam∣mon adeptisumus? what mammon or wealth have we gained? Mammonists are all for gain, their very godlinesse is gain, still they have an Eagles-eye to the prey, when they seem to sly highest toward heaven: If they may not get by God, they soon grow weary of his work. What shewes soever they make of better, sure it is their belly is their God, they mind earthly tings. These will follow the chase, as Jonathan, till they meet with the hony-combe; or as a curr followes his ma∣ster till he meet with a , These come to Christ (as that young Pharisee did) hastily, but the ; because they consider not. that with the Lord are durable rich's Prv. 8.18. and that godlinesse as it hath many crosse, so it hath many conts against ;Virtus lecy∣ habet in malis like as no countly hath more venomous crea∣tures then Egypt,  Antidotes. This there Sensualists, having not the spirit, understand not  hence their complaint of a disappointment; casting a stirr upon Gods  as those spies did upon the promised land,Num. 14. and ready to run back into Egypt toth air flesh-ots, garlik, and onions there. Lo, this is the guise of , wath whom th' the best religion that brings greatest advantage  thi life. if the Ark bring a blling with it, as it did to Ohed-Edom, it  upon as worthy of entertainment; but if a plague of poverty , these Philistines will be glad to id their hands of it. The garishnesse of ho , wealth, and pleasures do so azle their eyes, that they think it the only happinesse to have and to hold. Such fooles they are, and such great beasts, if David may judge Psal. 73.22. to fly a fooles-pitch, and to goc hawking after that that cannot be had, as Solomon faith Pro. 23.5. Or if had, yet cannot be held, as being of swisrest wing, and  soon gone, as a post that passeth by. Godlinesse hath the preomise of th lives: and we read of some godly men in scripture, that were richer then any other. But God will have it sometims to be otherwise that godimesse might be add for it self: and to shew that his people serve him not for  Iob 1.9. But that none serves God for nought, no not so much as  a d or . See before ch. p. 1.10. that  have kept his ordinances] which if they had done indeed, they would never have th gged, much less blasphemed: they would have accused them∣selves,  livine providence; they would have said with holy Ezra, All this is come upon us for our vill deeds, and for : and thou, our God, hast punished us less then our iniquities deserve. Atest thou not be justly angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should the no remnant nor esea∣ping? Ezr. 9.1, 14. Thus the good wheat falls low at the feet of the faner, when th chaff  and flyes at his face. Thus the sheep, when shorn, Hat and lookes downward: whereas the hang rbit wolf lookes up and howlesa∣gainst heaven. Hypocrites use to wrangle with God and expostulate the unkind∣ness of his non-acceptance of their services as Esay 58.3. Wherefore have we fast∣ed, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we aslicted our soule, and thou ta∣kest no knowledge? God was, in their opinion, far too short and much behind with them; and therefore much to blame, and they must give him the telling of it; They do so: and they have their answer. So they shall have here in the following verses, and the next chapter, which ought not to be divided from this, as some conceive. They upbraid the Lord as with their observances, so with their humiliations. and that we have walked mournfully] Or, in black, the habit of mourners:
whence that of the Heathen Oratour, Athenienses non nisi atrati &c. The Atheni∣ans are never so good as when they are all in black; that is, under some heavy afflicti∣on. And a great Satesman of this kingdome had this verse written upon his stu∣dy door. Anglica gens est optima flens & pessima ridens. Great Brittain all in black, is in its best condition. But what is it to wear sackcloth,1 Kng. 21.27. and walk softly, with Ahab, when he had sold himself to do wickedly? what is an humbling day without an humbled heart? not only an irreligious in∣congruity, but an high provocation; like Zimri's act, when all the congregation were weeping before the dore of the Tabernacle. Surely God may say to such pretenders, as Isaac did to his father, Behold the fire and the wood, but wher's the lamb for a sacrifice? or as Jacob did to his sons that brought him the bloody coat, Loe her's the coat, but wher's my child? your garments are black, but your hearts and lives are much blacker. Go, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purisie your hearts, you double-minded. Be afflicted, in good earnest, and mourn to some purpose, and weep, soak and souce your selves in teares of true repentance: let your sorrow for sin be deep and downright: turn your laughter to mourning, and your joy to heavinesse. Jam. 4.8, 9. And then come, let us reason together, saith the Lord. All these unkind contestations shall cease, and all loving corresponden∣cies shall passe betwixt us. God had said as much as all this before to them verse 7, 10, 11. Sed surdo fabulam, their adamant was too hard to be mollified. Their bulrushes, though bowed down for a day, while some storm of trouble was upon them, was now so pierkt up, as if it would threaten heaven. witnesse their con∣tinued contumacy, their robustious language in the next verse also, stouting it out still with God. Verse 15. And now we call the proud happy] Such as, boyling and swelling with spite and spleen against God and his people, deal arrogantly and insolently, doing wickedly with both hands earnestly Exod. 18.11. and 21.11. and working their own ends confidently and daringly: these we call and count happy, because weal∣thy and well underlaid, as they say, because they live in the height of the worlds blandishments. But the whole book of Ecclesiastes is a clear and full confutation of this fond conceit, had they but ever read or regarded it. How can the proud per∣son be happy that hath God for his profest enemy? what was all Hamans honour to him, when the king frown'd upon him? what was Ahah the better for his ivory palace, his gold, and his jewels in every place, when the heaven was brasse above, the earth iron beneath? Surely God abhorreth pride as an abomination of desolation:Psal. 31.23. and though he preserveth the faithfull, yet sooner or later he plensifully rewardeth the proud doer. Like metall in the fire when they shine brightest, they are nearest to melting: and like a bulging wall, they will shortly fall. Swelling is a dangerous symptom in the body, so is pride in the soule. Telluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore ruant. Neither are they therefore to be reputed ever awhit the more happy, because they come not in trouble like other men, but prosper in their wickednesse. For God is never more angry with such, then when he seemes best pleased. Pharaeh had fair weather made him, till he was in the middest of the Sea: fatting cattle are but fitting for the shambles. Never was Jerusalems condi∣tion so desperate, as when God said unto her, My fury shall depart from thee, I will be quiet and no more angry Ezek. 16.42. Nor Ephraims, as when he said, I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom. And, Ephraim is joyn∣ed to idols, let him alone Hos. 4.14, 17. sc. till I come and setch my full blow at him. Clem. Alexandrinus cites Plato expressing himself thus: Although a righte∣ous man be tormented, although his eyes be digged out, yet he remains a blessed man: and the contrary. they that work wickednesse are set up] Heb. they are built up] sc. in posterity, and prosperity of all sorts. The Psalmist expresseth it thus: They are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.Psal. 17. Thus God built the midwives houset, that is, he gave them children, for their mercy to those new-born-babes Exod. 2.21. Thus he builded David an house 2 Sam. 7. And thus those that return to the
Almighty have a gracious promise that they shall be built up Iob 22.23. That these stout and stift Stigmaticks were built up and prospered, though (after so sweet an invitation) they turned not to him that smot them, we need not won∣der, sith it is their portion, as David sheweth, all they are like to have, or must everlook for. Besides, Is not God the true proprietary of all? Is not the earth the Lord; purse, with the sulnesse thereof,Mat. 20.13. and may he not do with his own as he pleaseth? Add hereunto that what wicked men have, they have it with a curse, and for mischief: their table is a snare to them; they are like to pay dear for their sweet morsels, as Haman did for his wine at Esthers banquet. Bernard calles the wicked mans prosperity misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem,In Psal 91. a merey more cruel, then any adversity. Austin affirmeth, Nullum mare tam profundum, quam est Dei cogitatio ut mali floreant &c. No sea is so deep as the divine dispensa∣tion that good men should suffer, bad men prosper. They are built up with bles∣sings, as they say the Phenix builds her nest with hot spices, wherein she is after∣wards burned. They build as those at Babel, and feather their nests, as if their lives were rivetted upon eternity: but as their foundation is laid upon fire-work, so brimstone is scattered upon their habitations Iob 18.15. If the fire of Gods wrath but touch it, all will be quickly consumed. Dioclesian that bloody persecutour despairing of ever rooting out the Christian religion as he had endeavoured to do, gave over his empire in a discontent, and decreed to lead the rest of his life quietly. But he could not escape so: For, after that,Fuseb. de vita Constant. lib. 5. his house was wholy consumed with lightening, and a flame of fire that fell from heaven, he hiding himself for fear of the lightening, died within a little after. Their inward thought is (saith the Psal∣mist of such wicked Atheists) that their houses, (honours, riches, nephews) shall continue for ever: and their dwelling place to all generations; they call their hou∣ses after their own names; as Cain called his new-built city Enoch after the name of his son, that he might leave him Lord Enoch of Enoch. Neverthelesse man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish Psal. 49.11, 12. The use to be made hereof see ver. 16. Be not thou afraid when (a wicked) one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased &c. yea they that tempt God are even delivered] Still these Miscreants are grunting out their grudges aginst God. What this sin here instanced, viz. of tempting God is, hath been shewed before in the note on ver. 10. of this chapter: Here it is to be taken for an audacious daring of God to take vengeance, as Num. 15. These very worst fort of sinners are sometimes not only spared, but prospered Ier. 12.1. &c. Their Epha is not yet full, their iniquity not found to be hate∣full enough yet. But the wicked is kept (by the patience of God) unto the day of destruction: and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath, as condemned Male∣factours are to execution, some by posterns and by-gates, others thorough the market place: so here. He that hath stollen a good hose, ride gallantly moun∣ted for present, till shortly after, followed close by Hu and cry he is soon appre∣hended, sentenced, and brought to condign punishment. And this is the very state of presumptuous sinners, and will be. I know well, that because sentence is not presently executed, therefore the hearts of the sons of men are set in them to doe wickedly. Felix scelus virtus vocatur, as we see here, The proud are called happy,Eccles. 8. Cicero. because, for present, in prosperity. See the like Ier. 44.11. Gen. 30.18. Dionysius, after the spoile of an Idol-temple, finding the winds favourable in his navigation, Lo, said he, how the Gods approve of Sacriledge. But the weak∣nesse of this argument see set forth by Solomon Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3. with the Notes there. God gives outward things to the wicked, no otherwise then as if a man should cast a purse full of gold into a jakes. He gives them riches to furnish their inditement out of them: as Joseph put his cup into their fack to pick a quarrel with them, and lay theft to their charge. The sunshine of prosperity ripens their sin apace, and so fits them for destruction. Let God therefore be justified, and every mouth stopped. Verse 16. Then they that feared the Lord &c.] Then:Gen 6.12. Hos. 4.1. when all flesh had corrupted their wayes: and the whole world turned Atheists. Then when there was no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land (none, to speak of) but that it was even darkened with profanenesse, as Egypt was with those very grie∣vous
locusts that covered the eye thereof, Exod. 10.14, 15. Then when the faith∣full city was become an harlot:Esay 1.21, 22. her silver turned into drosse, her wine mixt with wa∣ter: her people not dilute onely, but dissolute: her self exaurea facta est argentea, ex argented ferred, ex serred, terrea (as One once said of Rome) of gold become , of  iron, of iron earth, or rather muck. the Lord] Those few names that had not desiled their gar∣ments in so  a season:Rev. 2.4. 1 Jch. 5.18. but had kept themselves unspotted of the world, undefi∣led in the way; so as that that wicked One had not touched them, had not thrust his deadly sting into them, had not transformed them into sins image. These stood up to stickle for God, to stop the mouth of blasphemy, and to stablish one another in perswasion of Gods holy truth, and constant care of his dear children. spake often one to another] Montanus renders it, Tune vastati sunt timentes De∣minum; sc. ab impijs & Atheis impune cos invadentibus; That is, Then were those that seared the Lord Wasted and destroyed, viz. by those wicked Atheists, who fell from fierce words, to bloody blows: so the word is used, 2 Chron. 22.10. Psal. 2.5. But this is far set, and nothing so agreeable to the mind of the Holy Ghost here, as our English after other approved Translations. It is the same word that is used verse 13. Those spoke not so much against God, as these did for him, and about him to each other,Heb. 12.13. for mutuall confirmation, that that which was halting haply might not be turned out of the way, but healed rather. Great is the benefit of Chrillian conference, for strengthening the weak knees, and comforting the feeble minded.Job 6.25. How Forcible are right words? One seasenable truth falling upon a pre∣pared heart, hath oft a strong and sweet operation: as some speeches of Staupici∣us had upon Luther:Lise of Lk. by Mr Clack pag 85. Of whom it is also storted, that he was much cheared up by conference with an old Priest discoursing about  by faith, and explain∣ing the Articles of the Creed to him. Latimer likewise was much furthered by hearing Bilneys confession, and having frequent conference with him, at Heretikes-Lill, as the place where they most used to walk in the fields at Cambridge,Acts & Mon. fol. 1574. was cal∣led long after. Surely, as a little boat may land a man into a large Continent: so may a sew good words suggest matter sient for a whole lives meditation. This  well knows, and therefore as he did what he could to keep God and Daniel asunder, Dan. 6.7. So he doth still to keep the saints one from another, that they may not build up themselves in their most Loly faith pray in the holy Chost, pull one another out of the fire, &c. How were the Apies persecuted for their Christian meetings, the primitive Christians banished and confined to Hes and Mines,Jude 2, 23. where they could not have accesse one to another, as Cyprias complains: the poor faints here in times of Popery, meeting as they could for mutuall edifica∣tion; and therefore accused of sedition: for prevention whereof it was ordained, that if  should flock secretly together above the number of six, they should be attached of treason: so the Protestants at Milcenburg in Cermany were forbidden upon pain of death to speak together of Scripture-matters And at Nola the Je∣suites straitly charged the people not to talk of God, either in good sort or in bad. See more of this in my Treatise on these words, called The kighteous mans Recom∣ponse. Chap. 4. Docl. 3. annexed to this Commentary. and the Lord hearkened and heard] He not onely heard, but hearkened, or lisie∣ned; Gist us hit est diligenter auscultantis, Esay 32.3. It imports, not onely atten∣tion of body, but intention of minde, (as when a man listeneth as for life, and makes hard shift to hear all) and retention of memory. For which purpose also a booke of remembrance is here said to be written before him, or by his appointment. Liber monnmemi, A book of Acts and Monuments, in allusion to the custome of Kings. See Esth. 2.23. Tamerlan (that warlike Scythian) had alwayes by him a catalogue of the names and good deserts of his servants,Turk, hist. sol. 227. which he daily perused, and whom he duely rewarded: not needing by them, or any others in their behalf, to be put in remembrance. Much lesse doth the Lord, who bottles up the tears of his people, files up their prayers, puts all their holy speeches and practises on record, that he may make all honourable mention of them at the last day, in that great Am∣phitheatre, that generall Assembly: not once remembring any of their misdeeds, Mat. 25.35. Heb. 8.12. See more of this in the Righteous mans Recompense, Chap. 5. & 6.
and that thought upon his Name] That had God before their eyes, Psal. 10.8. that minded his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. that thought upon his commandements to do them; Psal. 103.18. that can truly say with the Psalmist, How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God? how great is the summe of them, Psal. 139.17. See more of this verse in my Righteous mans Recompense, Chap. 7. Doct. 16. Verse 17. And they shall be mine] by peculiar right: Et suum cuique pulchrum: we all affect and admire our own things most: God chuseth them for his love: and loves them for his choice. I will be a Father unto them: and they shall be my sonnes and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. which is all one with that here, They shall be mine saith the Lord of Hosts. Concerning all which see my Righteous mans Recompense, Part 2. Chap. 1. and 3. In the day when I make up my jewels] viz. from the worlds malignities, and misusages. They shall not plunder him of his Jewels, rob him of his chief treasure. None shall take, or pluck them out of Christs hands, Job. 10.29. they that attempt it, shall find it a work not seisable. When one desired to see Great Alexanders trea∣sure, he bade one of his servants shew him not his gold and silver, but his friends.Liban. prog. Chria. 1. Henceforth I call you not servants — but I have called you friends, Joh. 15.15. And a friend is as a mans own soul, Deut. 13.6. The Church is the dearly beloved of Gods soul, Jer. 12.7. yea his dearly beloved soul, as the Septuagint, and Vulgar render it, &c. See my Righteous mans Recompense, Part 2. Chap. 2. and I will spare them] Or, indulge them, as David did Mephibosheth, 2 Sam. 21.7. Vide ubi supra, Chap. 4. & 5. Verse 18. Then shall ye return and discern] See The Righteous mens Recom∣pense, ad calcem. CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. FOR behold the day cometh] This Chapter should not be divided from the former: for here Gods different dealing with the righteous and the wicked, proposed in the former verse, is further amplified by diverse effects of Christs coming in the flesh. And if any ask, saith an Interpreter, how this was ve∣risied of that his first coming? we answer, It was inchoative, and by way of pre∣paration then: and shall be consummate in the day of the last judgement, This day comprehendeth all that time that is called by the Apostle, the ends of the world, 1 Cor. 10.11. and the world to come, Heb. 2.5. all the administrations of Christs kingdome, from his Incarnation to the end of all things, which also is at hand, and, as it were, under view already, Behold, The day, that notable day, so long-looked for by the Jews, who boasted of a Redeemer, and promised themselves all possible comforts then: Tune nm Deus nos dignabitur clarissima visione, (saith Jachiades on Dan. 12.4.) tunc intelligemus res ipsas prout sunt. Then shall we have a most clear vision of things as they are, &c. Lo that day cometh: not such a day as you imagined, but like that in Amos, A day of darknesse, and not light: even very dark,Am. 5.20. Dan. 3. Ezek 7.6. and no brightnesse in it. A day that shall burn like an oven: Nebuchadnezzars oven, seven times more heated then it was wont. This day is come, the end is come, it watcheth for thee, behold it is come. It was fulfilled in part upon this people at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, and their miserable exile ever since for their unbelief. Howbeit, all these are but the beginning of sorrows: their present sorrows but a typicall hell, the pile whereof is sire and much wood, the breath of the Lord, like a stream of fire, doth kindle it.Isa. 30 33. It is said to be prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. 25.41. as if the All-powerfull wisdome did deliberate, and, as it were, sit down and devise most tormenting temper, for that most formidable fire. The fire of the last day shall surely be very terrible, when all the world shall be on a light fire, and wicked men shall give account with flames about their ears, with the elements melting and falling like scalding lead, or burning bell-mettall on their heads. But all this will be but a shadow, or spark of that fire of hell, the smoke whereof ascendeth for ever and ever, Rev. 19.3. Some have held the fie of hell to be no true materiall, and corporeall fire, but metaphoricall, qualem novit Deus.
The most conspire in the contrary Tenent: because bodyes are to be punisht by it.De civ. Dei lib. 21. c. 10. How spu its are also thus tormented as the rich gluttons Luk. 16. Austin sits down and admires he mystery: He tells us that for vehemency of heat, it exceeds our sire, as far as ours doth fire that's painted on a wall. I would we had not cause to complain that preaching of hell is but as the painting of fire: which men can look on and handle without hurt or affrightment.Esse aliquos Manes Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui non∣dum are la∣vantur. Juven. Surely he that observes the impiety of this age, may say to us as Cato did to Caesar, Credo, quae de info is dicuntur, falsa existimas, I beleeve you think hell to be a very fable. and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly &c.] Those proud whom you pronounced happy chap. 3.15. because jolly, and full of worldly prosperity, rich and renowned: those workers of wickednesse whom you looked upon as set up, built upon a firm basis: God shall abase every one that is lifted up, he shall re∣pay the wicked-doer to his face Deut. 7.10. and into his bosom Esay 65.6. What ever arrowes are in the bow-string, will one day sly and hit, and strike deep. They shall be as stubble, saith the text, as stubble that is fully dryed Nah. 1.18. even when they be folden together as thorns. Who would set these briers and thorns against me in battle? saith the Lord: I would go thorough them, I would burn them together Esay 27.4. Did he not deal so by Pharaoh, Senacherib, Herod, the Primitive persecutours, &c? Those mighty Magnifico's that here seemed fortes, ferrei, & aenei, strong, and made up, as it were of brasse and iron, shall appear to be but as stubble that cannot stand before Gods fire. the day that cometh shall burn them up] Heb. shall so burn them ut flamma ex ipsis excitetur, as to set them aflame. Here Ghrist burneth up his enemies with invisible judgements, inward terrours and torments, pangs and plunges, a very hell in their consciences, a fore-tast of eternall torment, (as was to be seen in Bel∣shazzar, and our Rich. 3.) But what willthey do at the last day, when the law they shall be judged by is a fiery law Deut. 33.2. the tribunall of fire. Ezak. 1.27 the Judge a consuming fire. Heb. 12.29. his attendants flaming Seraphims, his pleaing with sinners in flames of fire 2 Thess. 1.7. the place of punishment, a lake of fire fed with a river of brimstone Isa. 30.33? what can be the fruit of such a fiery proceeding but utter excision? Surely this fie will leave them neither root, nor branch. Verse 2. But unto you that fear my name What shall be the condition of graesse persons, hath been said already. Now for the righteous, that they have not served God in vain, it shall well appear by the many benefits they shall reap and receive by Christ: five whereof are hee recited. 1 Imputation of Christs righteousnesse; which is compared to the illightening of this lower world by the beames of the Sun. 2. Remission of sins, which is compared to the healing or diseases. 3. Regeneration, which is likened to a sick mans walking forth, when he is somewhat recovered. 4. Spirunall grouth, as calves of the stall. 5. Victory over all enemies corporall and spiritual, which shall be trodden under foot, as ashes of the furnace ver. 3. shall the Sun of righteousnesse arise] So Christ is called (as by other Prophets Isa.Psal. 84.11. 60.1, 2, 19. Luks 1.78. Ioh. 8.12.) to signific the joy of Gods elect at the sight of him: as those that have long layne in darknesse count it a Pleasant thing to see the light. A Sun of righteousnesse he is said to be. 1. As afferting and vindicaing the righteousnesse of God, called in question by those Blasphemers 2. As bestowing upon his people a double righteousnesse (Imputed and Imparted) as the Sun doth his light Ioh. 1.16. It is further said here, that he shall arise, that is, he shall appear and shew himself on earth, who now lieth hid, as it were in heaven; as the materiall Sun doth under the Horizon. God was manifested is the stesh 1 Tim. 3.16. Manifested out of the bosom of his father, out of the womb of his mother, out of the types of the law &c. In his Nativity he came forth as the Sun doth, as a bridegroome out of his chamber. In the whole course of his life he rejoyced as a Gyant to run his race. He enlightened and warmed the dark and dry hearts of men, he filled them with the fruits of righteousnesse Ioh. 15.5. He could not be stay'd or stopped in his course: He made his gospel to run and be glorified. He was and is still in continuall motion for the good of his Church: as the Sun in heaven is for the good of the world. He went under a cloud in his passion, and brake forth again in his Resurrection. From heaven he daily darts
forth his beams of righteousnesse, and showres down all spirituall blessings in hea∣venly priviledges Eph. 1.3. The Sun sucks up foul water from the earth, drawes it up into the ayte, not to hold it there; but first purifies it, and then distilles it down again with a fattening and fructifying property. Hereupon the thankfull earth brings forth most fair and fragrant fruits and flowers &c. Semblably this un of righteousnesse took on him our sins and miseries, sordes nostras induit, assumed our humane nature, not to retain it, and glorify it in himself alone,Philip. 1 10 but that we might be conglorisied, and, in the mean space, filled with those fruits of holinesse, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. And as the Sun the nearer he runns to the earth, the weaker he is in operation (as in winter-time) But the higher in heaven, the more effectuall: So while Christ was not yet ascended, the holy Ghost and his grace, were not in that full measure imparted, nor Church∣es gathered as afterwards Ioh. 7.39. Lastly at that last and great day he will shew himself in speciall manner a Sun of righteousnesse: clearing all obscurities, bringing to light the hidden things of darknesse, causing his peoples most holy faith, that now lyes hid in great part, to be found to praise, honour and glory, Chearing up their spirits after manifold tribulations, healing all their spiritual maladies; for he comes with healing under his wings] and making them as so many Sampsons (whose name signifies, a little Sun) in the Noon of their full strength.Ipse est ergo nester Apolle sanitatis prae∣ses. A Lap. Solisus. For the righteous shall shine as he Sun in the kingdome of their Father Mat. 13. I shall shat up this discourse with that observation of an Ancient: When the Sun of righteousness was yet in his Mothers womb, he might be said to be in Virgo: when on the Cross, in Taurus: when he rose from death, in Leo: when he shall come again to judgement, in Libra. And as when the Sun is in Libra the day is of an equall length: so when Christ cometh, all shall be perfected. with healing in his wings] that is, in his beames. This implies sicknesse in all, to whom Christ comes: the world being as it were a great Hospitall, or Neso∣romium (though few feel it) and that true of every person that is spoke of the whole people Esay 1.6. The whole head is sick &c. O my head, my head, said the Shunamites son: my belly, my belly, faith the Prophet, my leaenesse, my leanenesse &c. And surely it were happy if men would be more sensible of their malady, and make out to this Jehovah Rophe, this Almighty Physitian,Exod. 15.26. that wants neither will nor skill to cure all that come unto him. See him hanging out his tables as it were, and setting to sale his eye-salve Rev. 3.18. for there he begins the cure Act. 26.18. Hear him. 1. Complaining of our dulnesse, backward∣nesse, frowardnesse Ior. 8.22. Ezech. 24.13. Hos. 7, 1. 2 Wishing we had more care of our poor soules. Oh that this people were wise &c. Why will ye dye? 3. Threatening Ezek. 24.13. 4. Promising Hos. 14.4. mat. 11.28. 5. Per∣forming Psal. 103.3. 2 Cron. 30.20. Lastly providing all sorts of physick for us preventing, purging, restoring, corrosives of the law, lenitives of the Gospel, plaisters of his on blood (for here Sanguis medici est curaio phrenetici) and requiring us no more but to come unto him (as they of old did to the brazen serpent) with sorrow for sin, and faith in his name, having a good opinion of our Physician, and casting our selves wholy upon him for cure: Calling upon him, as blind Bartimaeus did, and crying out as that Martyr did at the stake, Son of God shine upon me; and immediatly the Sun shone out of a dark cloud so full in his face,Act. and Mor. fol. 1398. that he was constrained to look another way. What shall I say more? this bloss∣ed Sun of Righteousnesse must be sought in the West, if we will get the kingdome (as Strato's servant in Justin did by the advise of his master,Lib. 18. whom he had preser∣ved) upon the cross I mean, and in the state of his Abasement: so shall we be sure to finde healing in his wings, that is, the gracious influence of the holy Spirit convaying the vertue of Christs blood to the conscience, as the beames of the Sun do the heat and influence thereof to the earth; thereby calling out the herbes and flowers, and healing those deformities that winter had brought upon it. and ye shall go forth] To shew that ye are thoroughly healed, ye shall rise up and walk? Where the spirit is, there is liberty: live things love to be stirring:2 Cor. 3.17. and those that are restored to health after sicknesse, are not satisfied till they can go about their businesse in their accustomed strength, Quod sanitas in corpore, id
sanctitas in corde. Holinesse is to the soul, what health is to the body. Let men  out, that Christ Jesus hath wrougtht a cure upon their soules, by being  and  in his work. Life consists in action Esy 38.16. O Lord by  and in all the things is the life or my spirit, saith Hezekiah: And,  in them saith the Lord; as the fish lives in  lives in the oyle, and as the creature by his food. Ʋp ; Live betime, live quickly, and apace. Some men live , then others in a moneth: as wie men speak more in two words,  two hundred, or as one piece of gold is more worth then twenty of  what to do for God, as David did Psal. 116.12. serve out your  as he Act. 13.36. do not idle it out, wear out, do not wast out: slame out,Hie suns est Vacla.  out: burnout, be not blown out. Be not buried alive as  out of the world ver. 23. as acia in Seneca. Fall not from , as leaves in Autumne, as that saplesse fellow Nabal did: and as  in Sr. Jude, Without fruit, twice , pluckt uply the rootes. God expects that,  first by him, we should act as the inferiours do, when  by the Superiour, that when he hath infused sap, we should fructifie,  when he hath tuned u and doth touch us, we should make musick, when he  willing, he requires that we both will and work that which is  When we set victuals before an hungry man, we expect he should  socking child to draw the brest when it is once put to the  as we use to say He that made us without us, doth ;2  but expects that our wills, which at first conversion were , should be after ward  in adding to  out our salvation with sear and trembling Thil. .12. Here∣  us, as our Savioud dw finish the work which  to do  17.4. This work  him with our bodyes  it be . 1.19. Ye to glorifie him  bodyes, and nour , which  Cor. 16.2.20. God selis s  of grace for sweat,  One. He gives it as  gave Ruck corn, chap. 2.1, 16, 17. He could have given her at  Ephah of ; and it had been no more charge to him: but he will have her gather it, glean it, beat it out, use her endeavour, and that should be the price she should pay for it. So here Gods people healed must go forth or leep about, use legs and have  &c. This I had because . 119.6. What had he?  an ability to keep Gods law ver. 55. he kept it: because he kept it:  every new act of obedience fits the soule for a following act  And to you that hear shall be more given Mark. 4.24. and grow up as calve of the stall] ye shall battle and  both in flesh and fat,1 2. Ioh. 15.2. as . David expound it: your  shall be  and  as waters of the sanctuary they shall use higher, as threes plant  paradise, they shal bring so thnw fruit every moneth: acth  shall shine more and more unto the perfect day Pro. 4.18.2 Tim. 3.13. when the  grow∣ing worse and worse stumble in darknesse ver. 19. so that they lie down in for∣ Isa. 50.10. Th blessing on man in the first creation was increase and multi∣ply: in the second, Grow in grace Esay 61., 11. A Christian hath his degrees of growth, and his severall ages, of childhood, youth, o will-grown age, full-grown, and old age 1 Ioh. 2.. These things write I unto you, that beleeve in the name of the Son of God, that ye may beleeve in the name of the Son of God, saith the same Apostle that is, that ye a grow in that , as ye grow in dayes and: , proceeding from faith to faith: as the Church in the Canticles hath her first light like the day dawning, her second beauty like the Moon, her third de∣gree like the Sun Cdnt. 6.10. A Christian (though in some sense perfect) yet hath he still his Plus-ultra, and may take for Motto Charles the fifth his Ʋlterius Further yet: he must be still adding grace to grace, that he may have on entiance further and further into Christs kingdome 2 Pet. 1.5. and 11. as by step and stain they went up to Solomons temple. And the Apostle there gives us to under∣stand, that those that thus add not to their stock of grace shall have little comfort either from the time past, for they shall forget that they were purged from their sins; or from thoughts of the time to come, for they shall not be able to see things farr
off ver. 9. because they delight not in high-flying as Eagles: their wings, as the Ostriches, do little more then bear them above-ground. Many care for no more grace then will keep life and fool together, that is, foul and hell asunder. This is a low and unworthy strain, and comes not near that of St. Paul, who set up for his mark the resurrection of the dead Phil. 3.10. that is, that perfection of holi∣nesse that accompanieth the refurrection. To the attaining hereunto he followed haron, reaching forth, and stretching out head, hands, and whole body, to lay hold on the high prize proposed unto him. ver. 12, 13, 14. and would have all men to be thus minded. Runners in a race look not how much they have run, but how much remameth: and although moderate in the beginning, (for hot at hand feldom holds out) yet the nearer they grow to the goal, the faster the speed their course; that their last dayes may be their best dayes: accounting that day lost wherein they have not some sensible commings in from Christ; like as good hus∣bands in dead times when stirrings fail, are discontented, when they have had no takings. Verse 3. And ye shall tread down the wicked] Christ the Champion of his Church hath already won the field, and will shortly set his peoples feet upon the necks of all their enemies. The broken horns of Satan himself shall be the trum∣pets of their triumph and the cornets of their joy Rom. 16.20. See what ho∣nour all the saints have in this respect Psal. 149.7, 8, 9. See what comfort Ioh. 16.33. See what conquests Rom. 8.37. How much more at the last day, when the thrones shall be set &c. Mat. 19.28. Rabbi David Kimchi, under∣stands this text of temporall victories only. And no wonder, as being a Jew, and minding earthly things, he ascends no higher. Such grashoppers, if at any time they leap above the earth, they soon fall down to it again: and as they are of the earth, so they speak of the earth, and the earth heares them.Ioh. 3.31. Petrus à Figu∣iero writing upon those words in the former chapter ver. 12. For ye shall be a de∣lightsome land, Nota modum loquendi, saith He: Mark that expression, He saith not your land shall be a delightsome land, but ye shall be &c. Fortè exim tacitè Judaeos percellit terrameos vocando. It may be the Lord hereby closely meets with them for their earthly mindednesse: as those that by promise of earthly blessings, were soonest prevailed with to serve God, when as these should have been but as steps or stirrops to mount their hearts up to a desire of the things above. Victo∣ry in their sense is doubtlesse a speciall mercy: and is so promised to the obedient Deut. 28.13. The Lord shall make thee the head only and not the taile: and thou shalt be above only, and not beneath &c. Hence the Israelites, delivered from the Egyptians at the red sea, sang The Lord is a man of warr Exod. 15.3. the Chaldee there hath it, The Lord and Victour of Warrs. The Gre∣cians delivered from the Persians (vanquished and driven out by Themistocles) called their Jupiter, thereupon  The Deliverer. It was the thankfull ac∣knowledgement of Generall, Captaines, and souldiers at Edge-hill-fight, that the Lord was seen in the Mount, Never lesse of man in such a businesse, never more of God. But what shall it prosit a man to conquer countries,2 Tim. 2.26. and yet be vanquished of vices? to tread upon his enemies, and yet be taken captive by the devill at his pleasure? to command the whole world, as those Persian kings, and yet were commanded by their concubines, so by their base lusts, by yeelding whereunto they give place unto the very devill, and receive him into their very bosomes Eph. 4.26. who therehence leads them away naked and barefoot, as the Assyrian did the Egyptians Isa. 29.2. How much better Valentinian the Emperour, who said upon his deathbed that among all his victories over his enemies this one only com∣forted him, viz. that by the grace and power of Christ Jesus he had got the better of his corruptions, and was now more then a Couquerour, even a Triumpher. for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet] Even the ashes of that stubble burnt in Christs oven Verse 1. This shewes their utter and ignominious destructi∣on. And the like is foretold of mysticall Babylon Rev. 18. Tota eris in cineres quasi nunquam Roma fuisses, sang Sibylla of old. Fiat, Fiat. Our corruptions also shall one day be incinerated (they are already buried Rom. 6.4. Col. 2.12.) the fiery spirit of Christ will do with the body of sin, as the King of Moab did with the King of Edom Am. 2.1. burn its bones into lime.
In the day that I shall do this] sc. partly here, but perfectly at the last day. Mean while sinne may rebel in Gods people, but it cannot raigne. Satan may nib∣ble at their heele, but he cannot come at their head: the world may kill them, but cannot hurt them: Re of good chear, saith Christ, I have overcome the world, Joh. 16.33. All evils and enemies shall cooperate for their good, Rom. 8.28. saith the Lord of Hosts] Who hath also said, Heaven and earth shall passe, but not one jot or tittle of my word &c. Verse 4. Remember ye the law of Moses] viz. Now henceforth, in the fail of Prophecy, for Malachy knew, that after him untill the dayes of John Baptist, no Prophet should arise. Hence this exhortation, to read and remember the Law, as leading them to Christ: the Law I say in all the parts of it; not excluding the Pro∣phets, those Interpreters of the Law, and most excellent Commentaries thereupon, with like reverence to be read and received. The Jews at this day read in their Sy∣nagogues two lessons: One out of the Law, by some chief person, another out of the Prophets correspondent to the former in argument, but is read by some boy, or mean companion: for they will in no sort do that honour, neither attribute they that authority to any part of the Bible, that they do to their Law. But this their way is their folly:Psal. 49.13 yet their posterity opprove their sayings, as the Psalmist speaketh in another case. Two things offer themselves to our observation from these first words. First, the little coherence that this verse hath with the former: the Pro∣phet chusing rather to fall abruptly upon this most needfull, but too too much ne∣glected duty of remembring the Law, then not at all to mention it. See the like Rom. 16.17. where the Apostle breaks off his salutations, to warne them of their danger by seducers: and that done, returns thereto again. Secondly, In the He∣brew word rendred Remember,Buxtorf. in Comment. Mafor. c. 14. there is in many Bibles, a great Zain: to shew, as some think, the necessity and excellency of this duty of remembring the law of Moses. It is well enough known, that since the fall mans soul is like a filthy pond, wherein fish die soon, and frogs live long: profane matters are remembred, pious passages forgotten. Our memories are like sieves, or nets, that retain chaffe and palterment, let go the good grain, or clear water: Gods word uns thorough us, as water runs thorough a riven vessell And as hour-glasses, which no sooner turned up and filled, but are presently running out again to the last sand, so is it here. And yet the promise of salvation is limitted to the condition of keeping in memory what we have read or heard, 1 Cor. 15.2. And Davids character of a blessed man is, that he meditateth in the Law day and night.Psal 1.2 Hoc primum reetens opus,Nor. ep. 6. hoc postremus omittens. Bishop Babington had a little Book, containing three leaves onely, which he turned over night and morning. The first leaf was black, to inminde him of hell and Gods judgements due to him for sinne: The second rod, to minde him of Christ and his passion: The third white, to set forth Gods mercy to him through the me∣rits of his Son. in his Justification and sanctification. The Law of the Lord, as it is perfect in it self, so it is right for all holy purposes, Psal. 19., 8 It serves to disco∣ver sinne, Rom. 3.20. and 7.9. shews the punishment due to sinne, Gal. 3.10. scourgeth men to Christ, Gal. 3.24. And is a perfect rule of obedience: it being so penned that every man maythink it speaks de se, in re sa, as thanesivs saith of the book of Psalms: and must therefore be of all acknowledged to be , Gods own invention.Demost. Moses was but the Pen-man onely, though it be here called his Law: because God gave him the Morall Law written with his own hand, Deut. 10.2. adding it to the promise made to Abraham, that thereby guilt being disco∣vered, &c. men might acknowledge the riches of free-grace, and mercy: and that they might walk (as Luther hath it) in the heaven of the promise,Gal. 3.19 but in the earth of the law: (that, in respect of beleeving, this of obeying) that they might live as though there were no Gospel, die as though there were no Law, passe the time of this life in the wildernesse of this world under the conduct of Moses, but let none but Joshuah (Jesus) bring them over to Canaan the promised land. This the generality of the Jews could not skill of, (though the Morall-law drove them to the Ceremoniall, which was then, Christ in figure, as it doth now drive us to
Christ in truth) they would needs have Moses for a Saviour: and being ignorant of Gods righteousnesse (wilfully ignorant) they go about to establish their own, Rom. 10.3. and so lose all. They jear at an imputed righteousnesse; and say, That every fox must pay his own skin to the fleare. They blaspheme Jesus Christ, and curse him in a close abbreviature of his name; and call those among them that convert to Christianity Mtshumadim, that is lost, or undone.Buxtorf syn. Jud. cap. 5. Schicard. de jure reg. Jiebr Moses Law they extoll without meature: It must not be written on any parchment but what is made of the skin of a clean beast: nor read but in a clean place. No man must touch it but with the right hand, and not without a kisse of reverence (they usually carry it in procession about their synagogue, with many ornaments of crowns and scep∣ters, the children kissing it as it passeth by them) No man must sit in the pre∣sence of it, nor so much as spet before it, &c. Whereas the Gospel of grace they utterlly reject, and abominate, as a Volume of vanity: That Italian Translation that they had of the New Testament, is called in, and taken from them,Evangel Aven gelaion Eliah in Thesh Rad gillaion. Buxorf syne. cap. 1 p. 4. for their horrible abuse of it: this being still the twelfth Article of their Creed; I believe with a perfect faith, that the Messiah is yet to come. No marvell if the Apestle would not have us ignorant, that blindnesse in part is happened to Israel, Rom. 11.23. That lesser part, or rather particle of them that are proselyted to our religion, they pre∣tend that they are none other then poor Christians hired to personate their part.Voyage into Levant. And yet they give compleat dispensation to counterfeit Christianity, even to the degree of Priesthood. In the day of their expiation their Rabbi doth absolve them from all their perjuries and deceits used against Christians. He also assures them that they are not bound to keep any oath but what is sworn upon their own Torah, or Law of Moses, brought out of their Synagogue;Weemse. to the reading where∣of they depute one third part of their day: and wherein they are generally so ex∣pert, that they have it as ready as their own names. The mischief of it is,Facilius qu nomen soum recitat Joseph. Cont Appion. lib. 2. that they are too much affixt to it, and will needsly be saved by it; which the Law cannot do for them, as being weak through the flesh, Rom 8 3. The Law is a yoke of bondage, as Hierome calleth it: and they who look for righteousnesse from thence, are like oxen who coil and draw, and when they have done their la∣bour, are fitted for slaughter. Luther fitly calleth such drudges, the devils Mar∣tyrs: they suffer much, and take much pains to go to hell. And in another place he saith, Qui scit inter Logem & Evangelium disting siere, grati agat Dto, & sciat se esse Theologum. He that can rightly distinguish between Law and Gospel, hath cause to praise God: and may well passe for a Divine. Moses my servant] A farre higher title then Sonne of Pharaohs daughter: for this was to be Pharaohs God, Exod. 7.1. and higher then the kings of the earch, Psal. 89.27. No marvell though Moses so esteemed it:. when Nt king of Ro∣mans an Heathen did: and Augustus the Emperou, cigratius fuit  pieta∣tis quam potestatis, saith Tertultian, he preserred prety before Monarchy: so did those three succeeding Emperours, Cstantine,  and , who called themselves Vassallos Christi, the vassals of Christ, as  reporteth. It was noted, as a great both presage and desert of Dins his ruine, when in his proud Embassie to Alexanaer he called himself the King of kings, and Cousin of the gods: but for Alexander, he called him his servant. That was worse in John Oneal, father to the Earl of Tirone, that rebell, Anno 1398 who blasphemously inscribed himself in all places: 1 great John Oneal, Cousin to Christ, friend to the Queen of England, and foe to all the world &c.Camd Eliz. 2 Pet. 2 What big bbbles of words were these, as Peter calls them? His pretended Successour stileth himself the servant of Gods servants: and one day in the yeer, in an apish imitation of our Savtour, washeth certain mens feet. But he acteth as Domins gnorum muni, which is one of the Devils titles: and can endure to be called by his Parasites. Dominus Deus noster Papa: Our Lord God the Pope. Moses held it honour enough to be the servant of the Lord, and yet he was Vir Do longe acceptissimus quo  habuit an∣tiqua aetas, mitius, sapientius, sanctius, highly accepted in heaven, and the most meek, wise, and holy man that Antiquity ever had or mentioned, as Bellarmine him∣self acknowledgeth. which I commanded him in Horeb] Moses then was not the Law-maker, (as So∣lon, Lycurgus, Zaleucus, &c.) but onely Gods Minister to utter what he would
have him deliver; or, at utmost, a Mediatour, Gol. 3.19. not of expiation (for so Christ onely) but of communication of the Law to all Israel, Exod. 20.19. where∣in he was faithfull in all Gods house as a servant, Hob. 3.5. Famulus inginuus, a servant of the better sort,. a man of worship, as the word there seemeth to im∣port. The place where Moses received the Law is mentioned, Horeb (the same with Sinai, Act. 7.30. Exod. 19.1, 18.) to inmind them of the terrour of the Lord on that mountaine, when God came down upon it with ten thousand of his Saints:Deut. 33.2 from his right hand went a fiery law for them, Heb. a fire of law. And surely that fire wherein the law was given, and shall one day be required, is in it still, and will never out. Hence are those terrours, which it flashth in every con∣science that hath felt remorse of sinne. Every mans heart is an Horeb: and resem∣bleth to him both heaven and hell. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15. to all Israel] And it is reckoned as a singular priviledge to that people, Neh. 9.14. Rom. 9.4. Prospers conceit was, that Judaei were so called because they received Jus Dei, the Law of God. Josephus calleth their Common-wealth a Theocratie, or God-government. That of Philo is not so solid, that their law was given in a wil∣dernesse, because it is to be learned in a wildernesse, seeing there we cannot be hin∣dered by the multitude. But what a wretched conceit is that of the Jews at this day, that the law of Nature shall bring to heaven those that observe it: but the Hebrews (unto whom the Law of Moses was peculiarly given) by keeping it, shall have a prerogative of glory? How shall the Lion of the tribe of Judah roar upon them at that day, and say, Do not think that I will accuse you: there is one that ac∣cuseth you,Joh. 5.45. even Moses in whom ye trust. Get you to him whom ye have chosen: but cold comfort ye are like to have from him: a very froward generation he ever found you, children in whom is no faith, Deut. 33.20. with the statutes and judgements] that is, with the Ceremoniall and Judiciall Law. But what meant that false Rabbin to adde to this Text these following words, Quamdiù non venit dies juicy;R. David. Till the day of judgement comes: as if men were bound till then to the observation of the ceremoniall and judiciall Law? But it is ordinary with those Jew-Doctours to corrupt the Text for their own purpose; adding, and altering at their pleasure. The judiciall law was fitted to the jews, and was the best that they could suffer, as Solon said of the Athenian Lawes. The ceremoniall law was their Gospel, pointing them to Christ: and therefore abolished by him, as having no use in the Church after his death, but by accident. As for the Morall law, (called here by an excellency the Law of Moses) it is established for ever in heaven:Psal 119.89 and albeit some duties of certain commandements shall cease when we come to heaven, yet the substance of every one remaineth. This perpe∣tuity of the morall law was noted by engraving of it in stone, Exod. 34.27 2 Cor. 3.7. The Jewshave a saying, That God hath more respect to the letters of the Law, then to the stars of heaven,Mat. 5. And Christ either alludes to, or confirms it in that say∣ing of his, Heaven and earth shall passe before one jot or tittle of the Law passe. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law (viz. the Morall Law) or the Prophets, who presse Morall duties, as explainers of the law: they do as it were unfold and draw out that Arras which was folded together before. These therefore together with the Law of Moses must be daily and duely read and remembred.Lege Mela∣chim meum; meum, inquam meum: quicquid enim didicimus & tenemus no∣strum est. ro∣log in lib. Reg. Scripturas san∣ctas memoriter tenebat. His rom calls the books of Kings his own; because by the frequent use and reading of them, he had got them by heart, and as it were made them his own. Of Paula he testi∣fieth, that she had most of the Scriptures by heart. Of Nepotian likewise, that with daily reading and continuall meditation he had made his heart Bibliothecam Christi, the Library of Christ. See my True Treasure. pag. 315. Verse 5. Behold, I will send you Elijab the Prophet] Not Elijah the Thishite, as the Septuagint corruptly read: and the Popish Expositours make no smail use of it, to prove that the Pope is not Antichrist, because Enoch and Elias are not yet come, and yet are to come in his time, before the day of judgement (as they sond∣ly fable) to preserve the Elect in the faith of Christ, and to convert the Jews. But we have better Interpreters of this Text. 1. An Angel, who applies it to Iohn Ba∣ptist, Luk. 1.17. 2. Christ, that Angel of the Covenant, Mat. 17.10, 11 and 11.14. Hear ye him, against all Antichrists Agitatours. Saint Mark begins his
Gospel with these very words of Malachy: to let us know, that this Elias is the Baptist, who is called Eliah the Prophet, because of the like gifts, calling, and mini∣stery, office of reforming habit, people with whom they dealt, &c. The like almost may be said of Lather, a third Elias for boldnesse, courage, zeal, knowledge, suc∣cesse, &c. But yet we see no footing in this Text for Lucas Osianders conceit, viz. that the Prophet here pointed at Luther as well as at John Baptist: and that men must receive his Doctrine, or else look to be smitten with a curse. Howbeit this is more passable and possible then that of the Jesuites, who presume to controul Christs own Exposition: and give out, that as the Devil stirred up Luther to call the Pope Antichrist. so God raised up them to resist Luther. But what a mad fel∣low was that Spaniard (of whom Severus Sulpitius writeth) that professed himself first, to be the Prophet Eliah, and afterward when he had gained authority,Lib. 1 de vita S. Martini fere in calce. to be The Christ: carrying himself so cunningly in his collusion, that Bishop Ruffus was led away with the errour, beleeving in him, and adoring him as God: for which he was justly deprived of his dignity? Had we not need receive the truth in the love of it, lest God give us up to the efficacy of errour, 2 Thess. 2.10.? lest being first in∣fatuated, we be seduced, and then being seduced we be damned, as Austin glosseth on that Text? before the coming of the great and dreadfull day of the Lord] Great, in respect of the good, and dreadfull, or horrible, in respect of the wicked, as Montanus interprets it, paralelling it with Mat. 3.12. Or, great, because it shall be a beginning of great changes, both to the godly and the ungodly: and dreadfull to the bad, yea and to the best also at first; till they have recollected and better bethought themselves, as Another senceth it; as taking it of the last day, which is the generall mistake of Popish Expositours, and that upon this ground, because Christs first coming was an acceptable time, and a day of salvation. But though it be so to Gods people, yet to others it was terrible, as hath been shewed in the Note on Chip. 3. verse. 2. and is so described Luke 2.34. and 3.9, 17. and 19.44. Mat. 21.44. Esay 11.4. He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with his two-edged sword he shall slay the wicked. See the like, Rv. 2.16. And by his Ministers he doth it still, 2 Thes. 2.8. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. 2 Cor. 10.6. Vengeance is as ready in Christs hand as in the Ministers mouth, for the disobedient. Some read the words thus, Before the day of the great and dreadfull Lord come: like as others read that Jam. 2.1. Have not the glorious faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons, Both readings are good, and the Text will bear both. Verse 6. And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, &c.] John Baptists office and efficacie is here described; He shall, as a powerfull instrument (by preaching repentance, Mat. 3.2. and prevailing, as he did, with all sorts, even to admiration; so that all men mused in their hearts, whether he were the Christ or not, Luke 3.10, 12, 14, 15.) convert sinners from the errours of their way, re∣duce them to the faith of the old Patriarches, make them unanimous in the love of God and of one another, and tye them up together, as it were, by his Baptisme. For the multitude of beleevers were of one heart and one soul, Act. 4.32. (animo ani∣maque inter se miscebantur, as Tertullian phraseth it) neither was there any controver∣sie at all amongst them, as One ancient Greek copy subjoyneth there. Controversies there were great store among the Jews, when the Baptist came. As Joseph found his brethren in Dothan, (which signifieth Defection) so did he. They were all gone out of the way: and, being led aside by the errour of the wicked, they were fallen from their own stedfastnesse. Many strange opinions and dotages they had taken up, and were wofully divided: specially by those three different Sects, Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes: which the Prophet Zachary calleth three shepherds, that were to be destroyed in one moneth, at Johns coming, Zach. 11.8. The Pharisees were held the best of those three, si ad legem respexeris, saith Tremellius, if you look to the law: and Saint Paul, who was once a Pharisee of the Pharisees, calleth them the most strictest Sect of the Jewish religion, Act. 26.5. (like those district ssimi Monachi among the Papists:) and yet there were seven sorts of Pharisees,Talm. tract. Suta. cap. 3. as we find in their Talmud. Hence much alienation of affection amongst them, and great animosities: father hating sonne, and sonne father, for truths sake, as Mat. 10.35. So powerfull should John be in his Ministery, that although the leprosie were gotten
into their heads, and were therofore held incurable Lev. 13.44. yet he should tuen the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdome of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord Luke 1.17. All head-strong and butih affections should be calmed and corrected, as Isa. 21.6, 7, 8. and the peaceable v. isdome from above intilled lam.Eph. 4.3. 3.17. so that they shall indea∣vur to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. And albeit some jarrs may fall out (a betwixt Paul and Barnabas) yet Gods people can soon pecce again, and reunite.Job. Worver. in Polymath. Ʋt  percussus non laeditur, into no dividitur quidm, sed resundit es, & spissior redit &c. As the ayre divided by a stone or stroke, soon closeth and thickencth the more. Certainly, there is no such onenesse, and entirenesse any where as among the saints: their love is spirituall Cant. 6.9. The very Hea∣then acknowledged that no people in the world, did hold together and love one another so as Christians did. Tacitus observeth of the Jews, that there was misericordia in promptu apud suos, but contra oms alios hostile odium, mercy enough for their own countreymen amongst them, but hostile hatred against all others: they use to say, that there is no Gentile but deserves to have his head brui∣sed &c. But John Baptist by hi preaching made Jewish Pharisees, and Roman soubliers (according to the phrase that Josephus useth of him) to convent, and knit together in baptisne.. Antidib. 18. cap 7. I conte and sinite the earth with a curse] that is, lest coming I smite &c. For there is no doubt to be made of his coming: and as little of his smiting, if men amend not. These words menace as many as resisted Iohns ministry, with utte destruction; whether it be done against the whole nation, or against a m on∣ly. Iob 34.29. The Romans came and took amay both their place and their Nation: not for leng Christ alone (as they feared Iob. 11.48.) but for laying wicked hands upon him, and putting to death the Lorn or life. Act. 2.23. Iohn also preached damnation to them Mat 3. and so did our Saviour Aat. 23. where by eight dreadfull woes, as by so many links of an adamantine chain, he drawes chose irreformable hypoerites down to hell, their place: and thn laves them to be re∣served unto judgement. S. Jerome wa called  the Church∣thunderbolt. Mr. Perkins was a most cast preacher, and would prn unce the word Damne with such an Emphasis,M. Fullers Holy State 90. as lest a  in his Auditouts eares a good while after. And when, Catechist of Christ-coeage,  pun∣ding the commandernents he applyed them so home, that he made his hearers hearts sall down, and their hairs to stand opright almost. And surely this  the way to work upon hard-harted sinners: whence the Apostle bids Tns rebuke with all autoty: and then turning him to the people (as Carvin sth it) chang th em not to despise him for so doing. Tit. 1.15. The Apeille knew well that men are, for most part, of delicate eares: and can  abide plain dealing. Ahab hates Miciah, and hath him in prison, ever since that creadsull denuncia∣tion of displeasore and death, for dismissing Benhadad (for he was, probably, that disguised Pophet:) for which he was ever since sast in prisn, deep in disgrace. But truth must be spoken, how ever it be ken: and those that will not be prick∣ed at heart as Act.. 2. ut take up bucklers to ward oss the blow, must have the sword of the spirit sheathed in their bowels, and bthed in their blood: for mall this we are a sweet savour unto God 2 Cor. 2.15. yea though a savour of death unto death. The barren earth must be smitten with cusing, and they that minde earthly things (Terra autem sunt, qui terrona sapiunt, sai A sbon) have damna∣tion for their end,De civ Deil. 20. c. 29. so that St. Paul cannot speak of them  teares of com∣pssion Philip. 3.18, 19. Oh that it might expresse from them teares of com∣punction! Oh that they would be forewarned to slee from the wrath to come ! Oh that they would think upon eternity, and by breaking f their sins, disarme Gods indignation justly conceived against them. He therefore threateneth that he may not smite: he proceed, not to punish till there be no remedy 2 Chron. 36.16. Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger sacit: An unly patient makes a cruell Phy∣sician. O that we could all resolve to deal by our sins as Levis King of Fiance did by the Popes Bulls (whereby he required the fruits of vacancies of all Cathedrall Churches of France,Speed. 496. about the year 1152.) he cast them into the fire, saying, he had rather the Popes Bulls should restin the fire, then his own soul should fiy in heil.
For a perclose of all, take an observation of Amamas, and before him of Bax∣torfes: that in many Hebrew Bibles, the last verse save one of this Propesy (as also of Ecclesiastes, Isaiah, and Lamentations) is repeated again in the end thereof, though without pricks, lest any thing should be thought added to Gods word. Factum hoc ex Scriharum decreto &c. This the scribes thought fit to do, either for the dignity of those repeated verses, that the Reader might again ruminate and remind them: or else (as some will have it) because all those bookes end in threatenings and sad speeches. And therefore, lest the Sun of Righteousnesse should seem to set in a cloud, or not to shine upon the departing passenger, they thought sit to leave the verse before to be last; as being sweet and full of comfort, that the Reader might Sampson-like, goe his way, feeding on that hony-comb. Laus Deo in aeternum.
The Righteous mans Recompence. OR, A TRUE CHRISTIAN CHARACTERIZED, AND ENCOURAGED, Out of MALACHI 3.16, 17, 18. Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to ano∣ther: and the Lord harkened, and heard it: and a booke of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name. CHAP. I. The Text opened and analyzed. THAT which was anciently spoken of Iohn Baptust, who was more then a Prophet,Math. 11.9. may not unfitly be apply∣ed to Malachy the last of Prophets,Prophetarum ultimum & veluti sigillum &c. Petrus à Figuiero pro∣aem in Mal. Judaei in hujus prophaeta obi∣tum collocant.  id esi obfignatio∣nem proplietrae. In ejus locum successisse aixnt  filam voci, id est, oraculum divinum, quo post propheta∣rwn tempo a dicunt suisse revelata futura. Alsted. Chron. that he is the boundaryMalachias à Terrulliano limes in tervetus & novum Testam. vocatur, ad quem desineret Judaismus, & à que inciperet christianismus and buckleIoh Baptista fuit ut ita dicam legis & gratiae fibula Chrysol of the Law and Gospel, the gol∣den girdle that knitsup and ties together those two brests of ConsolationIf. 66.11. the old and new Testament: between the which he seemes to lie as a bundle of Myrrhe, or cluster of Camphire, the sweet scent whereof fills the whole house of God,1 Tim. 3. 15. and greatly affects all such as have their senses habi∣tually exercised to discern both good and evillHeb. 5.1. Summa libri est, quòd cùm Judaei nuper reversi essent in patriam, statim simul redieru ad ingenium: & immemores gratiae dei, ita se dediderant multis corruptelis, ut nihilo melior essestatus eorum, quam patrum antè suerat, quasi Deus operam lusisset castigando corum scclera. Calvin. in Malach. proem. Such were these good soules, the subject of our text. Reserv'd they were to those last and losest times of the Jewish Church after the return from Babylon; where it seemes their seventy years capti∣vity had not much mended the most of them: h such (alasse) is the hardnesse of mens hearts, that till the Spirit mollify and make them mallcable, Afflictions (Gods hammers) do but beat cold iron. Little good is done, nay much hurt by accident: for unsanctified persons grow worse with afflictions, as water more cold after a heat: witnesse these proud misereants that gave the occasion of this text. Gods correcting hand had laine long time sore upon them, to turn them from their enterprizes, and to hide pride from their heartsIob. 33.17.. But he had not his end upon
this untoward generation,Cohaerence. nor they the best use of this affliction. Witnesse their words above the text, where they stand stouting it out with the Lord of Hosts ver.ver. 13. 13. and stick not to charge him with deep oscitancy, and forlorne neglect of his best servants, ver. 14. yea with flat iniquity, and most unequall administati∣on of his earthly kingdome.14. For now we call the proud happy, say they, and those that work wickednesse are set up, yea they that tempt God are even delivered. As who should say,15. Surely there is no reward for the rightcous: verily there is not a God that doth judge in the earth. Either things are not ordered by a divine provi∣dence, but left at randome, and let run at sixes and sevens, as it happens: or else, there is not an equall hand held over the sons of men, but partiality, and un∣rig hteousnesse found with the judge of all the earth:Gen. 18.25. whiles the proud thus tempt God, and trample upon his people, and are not only not punisht, but even preferr'd for their labour. Thus they in their madnesse set their mouthes against heaven,Psal. 73.9. and spare not despitefully to spit their venome in the face of God himself. At the bearing of which abhorred blasphemies,Mirum vide∣tur coelum hoc dicto non suda∣re, terram hi∣are, mare non conuno veri &c Cart. Hist. Xpti. I wonder, if the heavens did not swear, the Sun blush, the Earth wax weary of her burthen, and Hell gape wide and en∣large her self,Esay 5.14. for these prodigious Atheists, these Gyants. Act. 5.39. & 23, 9. these monstrous men of condition. I am sure the Godly of these times were much affected with it, and met often about it; not without a great deal of good conference, and much holy duty perform'd, on all hands, to that God with whom they found all best audience and acceptance for the present, together with a promise of fuller and further reward for the future, to the comsort of his people, and consusion of his enemies. 16. The they that feared the Lord, spake often one to another: and the Lord harkened and heard it, and there was a booke of remembrance written be∣fore him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. 17. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts &c. The words present unto us 1. aduty per∣formed: set forth 1. in the circum∣stances. 1. of time, Then 2. of persons, they that feared the Lord. thought upon his Name. 2. in the substance, they spake often one to another 2. A mercy returned: and that's double. 1. Gods grcious accep∣tation, in that for present, he regards what they did, the Lord harkened, and heard is. future, he records it; And a booke of remembrance was written &c. 2. his righte∣ous retri∣bution of 1. Mercy to his people, respecting. 1. their persons which 1. own, they shall be mine &c. 2. honour, in the day when I make up my Jewels. he will 2. their performances, I will spare them, as a man spareth his owne son that sorveth him. 2. Judgment to his enemies: ver. 18. Then shall ye return, and discern &c.
CHAP. I. Doctr. I. Saints must be best in worst times. THem] men were arrived at this height of impudency and prophanenes, as to say, Twas to no purpose to serve God: even then, when their black mouths were now big swolne with such like blasphemies,Illis de Dei judicio blasphe∣mantibus. Hie∣ron. Tunc cum blasphemi talia loquerentur. Pet à Figu∣iero in locum. Doct. then, they that fcared the Lord were thus busied as in the text. Note hence, That Gods servants must labour to shew themselves best in the worst times: and then most bestirr them in his businesle, when others are most carelesse of it, and contrary to it. SECT. 1. The Point consirmed  by precept 2, by practise. THis you shall see confirm'd, and commended to us. 1. by precept from Gods mouth: 2. by the constant practise of his best children in allages. For precept, first, what can be more direct and expresse, then those common texts, Thou shalt not follow a multitide to do evill.Exod. 23.2. Save your selves from this untoward generation.Act. 2.40. Come out from among them my people, and be ye separate.2 Cor 6.17. Be not ye conform'd to this world, but be ye transform'd by the rencwing of your mind.Rom 12.2. Have no fil∣lowship with the unfruitfull works of darknesse: but reproove them ratherEph. 5 11.. with a number more that I might add with ease. That one of Solomon for all, My son, saith he, if sinners entive thee, consent thou not. If yet they say Come with us, let us lay wait for blood &c. Cast in thy lot amongst us, let us all have one parse; My son, walk not thou in the way with them: resrain thy foot from their path.Pro. 1 10, 11, 14, 15. For their way (in the issue of it) is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.Prov. 7.27. Even that second death (as the scripture tearms it) which though hand joyu in handProv. 16.5. and they muster up and unite their forces (as hoping haply to scape in the croud, or to carry it away cleanly, because a multitude) yet they shall never be able to avoid or abide. For the wicked (be they never so many of them) shall be turn'd into hell, and whole nations that forget God.Psal. 9.17. This the Patriarch Noah (that I may shew you secondly the practise of the point in some particular examples of ancient and later times) this, I say, Noah be∣leeved ere he saw, and therefore lived to see what he had afore beleeved: not whole Nations only, but a world-full of wicked people swallowed up together in one universall grave of waters: their spirits being now in prison,  in ever∣lasting chaines under darknesse, unto the judgement of the great day1 Pet. 3.19. The fore∣sight whereof by a lively faith, (being war of God of things not seen as yetHeb. 11.7..) made him walk uprightly with God evea in his geaerationGen. 6.9. Now for him to walk alone in a divers way to a worid of wicked people, as Chrysoscome hath it,Solus ipse di∣versâ mbula∣vit viâ, virtu∣tem malitiae praeferens &c. Chrysost. Hom. 22. in cap. 6. Genef. to keep himself unspotted in such a foul season, as anotherspeakes of him,inter corrup∣rissimos mine∣re incorruptn̄. Pare in Gen 6 nay, like a right orient and illustrious planet, not only to hold out a constant counter∣motion to that of the vulgar, but also to shine so fair with a singularity of heaven∣ly light, spirituall goodnesse, and Gods sincere service, in that dakst midnight of damned impiety; this was that whereby he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousnesse which is by faithHeb. 11.7. The next, in the Apostles roul there remembred and registred is Abraham, that precious man, pall'd as a brand out of Ʋr of the Chaldees: from whence he went forth (forsaking father.f Iosh. 24.2. house and friends who served other Gods beyond the slood) not knowing whither he went, saith the text,Hb 11.8. nor much daring, so long as he had God by the hand. For whom also his first care was, where ever he came: setting up Altars to JehovahGen. 12.6 7 8. & 13.4, 18. in the mid'st of those Idolaters, and making open profession of his service before
the people or the land; which was a reall confutation of their heathenish foppe∣ries. Thus Aoraham then: and thus, after him, Johua by his example; which he therefore useth and urgeth in that parliament he called and held at Shechem, a lit∣tle afore his death. I took your father Abraham (saith he there, in Gods behalf) from the other side of the flood, &c.Josh. 24.2 whose children ye shall shall well approve your selves, if ye walke in the sheps of his fithRom. 1.12, by putting away the trange gods from among you, as he, and serving the LordJosh. 24.14. In which holy practue how∣ever you come off, choose you this day whom you will serve (though in evils of sin there be no choise) whether the gods of your sathers leyond the slood,Malorum non est electio. At. or tke gods of the Amornes, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve Jehoveh. The time would fail me to tell of Job, who would not part with his Integrity, to die for it,Job 27.5, 6 though instigated thereunto by the wife of his bosome,Job 2 9 Chrysostom. set on doubtlesse by the Devil: who of all the parts of his body had let his conue onely free from blisters, if haply he might be drawn to curse God therewith and die. To tell you (next) of David, who therefore loed Gods statutes exceed ngly, because min had made void his Lwsal. 119.126, 127. and Psal. 39 2 resolving first uqon filence among wic∣ed compa∣ny, could not hold his spirit so burnt, &c. p 1 King. 19.10. Rom. 11.3. Of Elias, who though alone and singular, continued therefore zealsus for the Lord of Hosls, because they had argg'd down has As, &c. Of Micaah, who would not flatter the King, though 400. false prophets had done it afore him1 King 22 Of Obadith, that fea ca God , in a common defection,1 King. 8.12 &c. Look to the New Testament, and there you have our Saviour eaten up with the zeal of his Fers house, when by all sorts pollutedJoh. 2.17: his Apostles, soon after his de∣parture, resolving to obey God even comora goutes, against whatsoever opposition, and not to swim down the stream of the times for any menaces of the CouncilAct. 4.. Pul, (that heavenly spark) burning in spirit against a Church full of unbeleeving Jewes at CorinthAct. 18.5. , intus & apud se aestuabat, prae zeli ardore., and openly contesting with the Gentiles at Athens about their senselesse superstitionAct. 17. So he gave thanks afore meat in the midst of Infi∣dels. Act. 27.25.. What should I stand longer to tell you of Timothy, so ab∣stemious and temperate among the luxurious EphesiansA people so dehauched, that they made a law, , Let there bee never an ho∣nest man a∣mougst us. And it is sto∣ried, that they therefore cast our one Hermodorus, as by an ostracisme, because he was a good busband and a temperate man., that Saint Paul was fain to prescribe him a le wine for hish alihs 1 Tim. 5.23.. Of Antipas, who held forth the word of life, even to the death, where Savans hone wasRev. 2.13.. Of Neo's family, to whom Saint Paul sends salutationsPhilip. 4 22.: Of Poly, that blessed Martyr of sus Christ, who being sollicited by the Tyrant to do sacrifice to the doll, and so to pro∣vide for his own safety, as diverse others had done before him. Fourcore and dde yzers, sud he, have I served my Master Christ, and e never deceived me: an shill I now desem him? God forbid me any such wickednesse: I scorn to be delivered upon any such dishonourable termesOctoginta sex annos illi servio, nec ulla in re me unquam laesit, & quomedo possim maledicere, &c. Euseb. Eccles. hist l 4. c. 15.. Of Orig, who chose rather to continue a poor Catechist at Alex inda, in daily danger of his life, then with Plonus, his fellow∣pupill. to live at Court in great authority and favour, would he but, with him have reneagued Christ, and renount'd the FaithErasmus in vita Grig oper. praesixa.. It were easie to come lower, and nearer our own times and to bring upon the stage a great fort of such as held forth the word of life, by a bold and wise profession, in the darest mid-night of damned popery, and Satans universall raigneLegatur Illyr Catalogue testium. Dr. sher, graviss. quaesti. Cade, &c.: But I shut up with , that notable Champion of Christ, and stickler for the truth: to the defence where∣of he stood stoutly, when all the Christian world besides was turn'd AraIngemuit orhis & mirabatur se facurn esse Arrianum. Hieron. centrae Lucrferianos. Iste vir totius orhis impetum sustinuit.; as a Father phraseth it. Whence, it went abroad of him, That the whole world was set against Athanasius, and Athanasius against all the world. A brave commenda∣tion, a stately praise. Such honour have all his SuntsPsal. 139 ult.. Wisdome ever hath been, you see, and ever must be justified of her childrenMarth. 11.19. against all obloquies, and op∣positions of the mad multitudeHaud pend in crimme incendij quam Oio Hmni generis convicti sunt Sic de Christianis sub Nerone whis incensae falso accusatis. Tacit, lib. 15. Et Fertallianus in Apologet. ait, in Christianis nomen damnari & puniri, non crin & scoelus., ever besides it selfe in point of salvation.
SECT. II. The point confirmed by yeasons 1. from God. 2. scom men, both 1. good. 2. and bad. ANd there's good reason for it too, as you shall soon see, whether ye look up. ward or downward, to God or men, the saints themselves, or others. All which Reasons are grounded upon our Text, and shall be therehence gathered. For God, first, his people should therefore strive then to be best, when others are at worst. 1. Because he graciously accepts it, he hear kgns and hears,Ver. 16. saith the text. 2. He plentifully rewards it, for there is a book of remembrance, &c. that this, their labour of love may never be forgotten.H. b.6. For themselves next, Gods saints shall hereby well approve, that they are. 1. True Christians, fearing the Lord. 2. Zealous Christians, such as think upou his name. Lastly, for others. 1. Good men shall be thereby notably confirmed, whiles they speak often one to another for mutuall quickning, and encouragement. 2. Bad men shall be utterly confuted and confounded, while they return, that is, change their minds, and discerne, perforce, a plain and palpable difference between them∣selves and Gods servants. Yea whiles they are constrained by the testimony of their own evil consciences, and by the evidence of their own evil experiences, to see and say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that judgeth in the earthPsal. 8 11. Here then to begin with the first Reason, taken from God, and therein (not to urge his command, which yet is reason sucient, and tacitely implied in the text: for what the Lord approveth and rewardeth, that he certainly willeth and requireth; sith his approving and prescribing will are (though distinct yet) not different the one from the other, but) to make use of so much onely in the text, as lies above ground for our present purpose. First, the Lord doth curiously observe,Res. 1. and graciously accept of such his servants as continue constant with him in depraved times, in a genera declension, when sinne is grown usuall, and almost versall. The Lorab. kud and heard, saith the text: It imports, that he was much taken with their sweet conferences, and those savoury speeches that fell from their mouthes. No noise so delightfull, no musick so melodious to his heavenly ears; which therefore he applies close, and layes near to their honey lips. De Nestore suo Homerus., as loth to lose any part of that precious language. Well might Saint Peter say, out of the Psalm: The eye's of he Lord are upon the righ cour, and his care are  we read, are  to their prayers1 Fet. 3.12 Psal. 34. Reas 2., but the Originall is more emphaticall, his ears are unto their prayers, or rather into their prayers; so farre is he affected therewithall. And look what the Apostle speaks there of their prayers, by way of Instance) the same is as true of their whole Christian practise. Not a prayer they make, not a good work they do, not a good speech they utter, nay not a good thought they take up, but he both notes it well, (he hea ked and had) and sets it down in his note-book too: for a book of remembrance was wrtion besere the Lord for them that but thought vpon his Name in an evill time, when mens words were stout against God, verse 13, 14. and their thoughts Atheisticall verse 15. But what will the Lord do for such? (which is the second branch of this first Reason drawn from God) It follows in the Text; And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, &c. His, not by a generall right onely, as his creatures, but by a spe∣ciall title, as his saints; such as have made a covenant with  by sacrificePsal. 50.5., and he, interchangeably, made a covenant with them of saltMam. 18.19 2 Chron. 13.5, that is, permanent and in∣violable. And both sides hy a mutuall stipulation, that he will be their God, and they shall be his people: he shall be their portion, and they his; for the Lords por∣tion is his peopleDent. 32.9., saith Moses: they are his proper goods, and most esteemed treasure text: Peculium, pro∣prium, fingula∣re, thesaurus., the top of his wealth, the best of his gettings, the people of his purchase 1 Pet. 2.9. Such as com∣preheud all his gettings.
(as Saint Peter after the Septuagint renders the word here found in our Text:) in summe, his Jewels, whom he will highly prize, and safely set up by him in the golden cabinet of his speciall providence, and fatherly protection. Not cast∣ing them out for every small flaw, nor lesse esteeming them for every little dust that falls upon them, and fouls them; but prizing them aright to their utmost value, and giving them their allowance, (as men deal by light gold) he will take them for currant: And wherein they come short of what they should be, he will spare them as a man spareh his own sonne that serveth him. Then the which I know not what the Lord could have spoken more effectuall for the glory of his own rich grace, or the shirring up of our utmost affections to an holy contention in godlinesse, be the times never so bad or boisterous: sith in doing thereof there is so great rewardPsal. 19 11 Perinde ut homo cum ho∣mine amico, vel Domino suo ubi{que} & judi∣ulse inambu∣lans, &c Aug.. In which respect, how fitly doth the Authour to the Hebrews close up the story of  hs heroicall faith, with that golden corollary, He that cometh to God, (as He∣noch did, who walked familiarly with God, as a man with his friend * with whom he is in covenant: for can two walk together, (saith the Prophet) and they not be a∣greed?Am. 3.3.) must beleeve that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek himHeb. 11.6. The Greek text hath it, that seek him out., namely when he is cast into a blind corner, (if I may so speak with reverence to the Divine Majesty) con∣veyed out of the way and covered (as it were) with the calumnies and stout words of the wicked, those hard words (against which Malachy here, and Henoch anciently propheciedJade 14, 15 . Ver∣bum , durum, inconve∣niens, &c.) of ungodly persons, whose throats are as open fepulchresPsal 5.9 to bu∣ry Gods Name in, as much as they may: were it not for Henoch and such as hee, that do daily and diligently vindicate that reverendPsal. 111.9 Name, from their false as∣persions; and as it were dig it out of the grave, wherein they had villanously con∣ceal'd, after a sort, and cover'd it. But what lost Henoch by this labour of loveHeb. 6.10? had he not this testimony from heaven hereupon, that he pleased GodHeb. 11.5, was hee not translated, as a Jewel of price, into the heavenly Cabinet. Rev. 11.19? and were not the fewnesse of his dayes on earth, in comparison of his forefathers, recompensed in that longest life of his sonne MethuselahGen 5.27? And why all this? but because he walked with God (when others walked aster the lust of their hearts, and sight of their eyesEccles. 11.9) seeking to take men off from their lewd and lawlesse courses, by the terrou of the Lord, which he most powerfully denounced, Jude 14, 15. In doing whereof, though (to his own thinking) he laboured in vain, and spent his strength for nonght, yet surely his udgement was with the Lord, and his reward with his GodEsay 49.4, whith was the first reason taken from God. The second follows, respecting our selves. And so; by cleaving close to Jehovah in corrupt times, it shall well appear; first, that we are the same we would all seem to be, Men searing God. For, this is pure religion indeed, to keep a mans self unspotted of the worldJam. 1. ulc.. There must be heresies amongst you, saith the Apostle, that they which are approved may be made manifest1 Cor 11 19. And, by a like reason, there mustNen à Den, sed ab hominis corruptione vo∣luntaria. Beza. be a perverse and gracelesse generation, a viperous broodMar. 3.7, amids whom Gods sunts may shine as lamps in the world, and so approve themselves blamelesse and harmelesse, the sonnes of God without rebuke, Holding forth the word of lifePhilip. 2 15 . Great lights. for an En∣signe., by a bold and wise profession, and practise of the truth that is in Jesus; then, when it is most oppos'd, and opprest by the sonnes of Belial. This is the guise of a man that truely fears God: he cannot blow hot and coldErasm. Adag. p. 350. ex codem are cali∣dam frigi∣dum esslare., as they say: he dare not swear by God and MalchomZeph. 1.3, he will not hold the truth in indifferency2 Thes. 2.10. God, he knowes, must be worshipt trucly, that there be no halting1 King. 18.21, and totallr, that there be no halvingHos. 7.8: for what communion hath Christ with Belial? and what fellowship hath the temple of God with idols2 Cot. 6.16? Out upon those Rimmonites, that plead for an upright soul in a prostrate body2 King. 5.18. Thou shalt not how down to them, nor worship themExod 20, for any mans pleasure. And why? for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, &c. therefore let my fear fall upon thee, as a strong counter-blast to the base fear of any tyrantAs the fifth commande∣ment is the first with pro∣mise, so is the second the first with pu∣nishment, which the Lord severely threatens there, to them that worship him not a∣right, because men com∣monly inflict punishment on them that do.. For as one fire drives out another, so doth the fear of God, the fear of the creature. Obadiah (for instance) that good steward of a bad Lord, that Non-such-Ahab. I mean, a man that had sold himself to do wickednesse1 King. 21.20. Not so Obadiah: but (whatever my Lord the King, and the whole State do) I fear God greatly, saith he to the Prophet1 King. 18.12 13.. I, but how shall this appear, Obadiah? Why, when Jezabel kid up the Lords Prophets, I (not standing to cast perils) hid them, and fed them by fify in a cave, not without the hazard of
my head if it should ever have been noticed. Loe here's a man of courage fearing God,Exo. 18.21. and he gave the best testimony of it, by ruling with God, and contiuuing faithfull with the Saints, as Judah; then when Ephraim compassed him about with lyes, and the whole house of Israel, with deceit.Hof. 11.12. Real. 4. c 2 Chr. 7.14. But secondly, as the practise of this point proves one a Christian fearing God, so a zealous forward christian, one that solicitously thinks upon Gods name; that high and holy Name whereby he is called, and wherewith he is intruded,2 Chr. 12 13 with charge not to take it in vaine,Exod. 20. but to bear it up aloft (as the word elevavit, evexiticonfer. Esay 5.26. elevabit vexil∣lum ad gentes. in that third commandement signifies) to lift it up as a standard, saying Jehovah NisiExo. 17.15. the Lord is my banner: or as servants do their masters badges upon their shoulders, so they Gods Impress upon their forcheads, yea, upon the bridles of their horsesZach. 14.20, 21. (in their common conversation also) even Holinesse to the Lord. Being consi∣dent of this very thing, with Paul, that in nothing they shall be ashamed: but that with all boldnesse,. as alwayes, so now Christ shall be magnified in their bodyes, whether it be by life or death. See an inslance of this in the holy Apostles standing before the Councill. We cannot, say they, but speak the things we have heard and seen, what ever be the issue of itAct. 4 20.. they being now (albeit afore fearfull and faint-hearted to the deserting of Christ. and betraying a good cause by their cow∣ardise, yet now being) not, drunk with new wine, as those scoffers cavil'd them,Act. 2 13.  cavillan∣tis. Beza con∣tumeliam irri∣sionis indicat. Malcolm. but filled with the holy GhostEph. 5.18. (a wine that would makven the lips of them that are asleep to speakCint. 7:9.) were necessitated2 Cor. 5.14.  allu∣dit ad vatum furorem. Beza. to an holy fo wardnesse and forth∣putting: being like vessels, that when they are fill'd and stopt up, must either vent or burst without remedy. See it again in St. Paul, that precious man, who when once he became a chosen vessell to the Lord Christ to bear his name,Act. 9.15. never was he so madAct. 26.11. afore in havocking those that called upon that name in all placesAct 9.14, 21 Sunt qui pro∣phetiam Jacobi de lupo proces∣suio è tribu Benjam. Paulo applic. as he was now fierce and fiery against all that did any thing contrary to the Name of Jesus.Act. 26.9. Not to meddle with his encountring of Elymas the sorcerer; he set his eyes upon himAct. 13.9. . 10. faith the text, as it he would have run thorough him: After which lightening followed that terrible thunder-crack, O full of all subtlety, and mischief &c. But more to our purpose is his handiing of Peter, a man that feared God as well as himself, put yet thought not all out to well upon his name (for that time at least) as he did: whom therefore Pal withstood to his face.Gal. 2 11.13 He did not halt with him for company, as good Barnabas had done (being carried away. by the author by of the man, against his old associate t. Paul, with whom also he had once before had a bitter bickeringAct. 15.39. . animorum ex∣acerbatio, in qua aliquid suit aceti  enim acetum senat. a stting fit:) but blamed him before a great sort of Peters own disendes, whh found him temporizing shame∣fullyCavendo seandlum levius-gravius dedit id{que} geminum &c. pare{que} and not footing it aright according to the  that is in Christ,2. Cor. 11.3. and the truth of the Gospel.Gal. 2.14. Indeed Cardinad Baro withstands Paul as stifly as ever Paul did Peter: and dares maintain that Peter was net to be blamed, but Paul a great deal too busie rather, A bod censure and well befitting a Jesuite, with whom what more common (when they are in place where) then to vilityOr mine own knowledge and hearting, some of them teach in the pulpit, that St. Paut was not secure of his preaching but by conforence with St. Peter: nor that he durst publish his epistles till St. Peter had allowed them. I have heard also credibly reported that some of their Jesuites of late in Italy, in solemn sermons, —commending St. Peter for a worthy Spirit, have cntured St. Paul for a hot-headed person; who was so trans-Ported with the pangs of zeal, and eagernesse beyond ad compasse in most of his disputes, that there was no great reekoning to be made of his Assertions; yea he was dangerous to reade, as savouring of heresy in some places, and better perhaps he had never written. Agreeable to which Theard other of their Catholikes deliver, that it hath been heretofore very seriously consulted among them, to have censured by some meanes, and reform'd the epistles of St. Paul&c. Sr. Edoein Sands in his Relation of the western Religion. Oh tongues worthy to be pulled out of their heads, cut into gobbets, and driven down their throats, that durst utter such prodigious and till alate un∣heard of blasphemies against the Lord Christ, and his heaven-inspited Apostle. this prime Apostle, for dealing so roundly with their God Peter, and so to put the lye upon the Holy Ghost himself. But I hasten to the third and last rank of Reasons respecting others. And so Good men first shall be, by our holding out in hard times,c  much confirm'd and comforted, whiles we cease not to speak, as these in our text, and speak of ten one to another: for thats the force of the Hebrew word here used (sermonis fre∣quentationem
significat, it imports a frequency of speech, saith Kimchi)In Radicibus. And that's the property of true grace, to knit mens hearts in a holy communion, as al∣wayes, so in evill times especially; for misery breeds unity. And, although a friend love at all times, yet a brother is born for adversity.Prov. 17.17. Sheep when they are coursed, nay swine, when they are lugg'd, will get together, and grunt toge∣ther, and make what head they can against a common adversary, for each others safety. And shall not the saints of God, who are linked together by the same spirit, and knit together by the same bond of love (that bond of their perfectionColof. 3.14. that unites persons and vertues, and perfects them by frequent actions and offices tend∣ing to mutuall confirmation and encouragement) shall not such, I say naturally. Philip. 2 21. care for the estate one of another? and striving together for the faith of the gospel,. Philip. 1.27. build up each other in that most holy faith, keep themselves carefully in the love of God, pray together in the holy Ghost looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ; of some having compassion, making a difference, and others save with fear. pulling them out of the fireJude 20.21, 22, 23. Hieron: vocat sanctam vio∣lentiam, optabi∣lem rapinam.? Blessed Bradford reckoned that hour lost, during his imprisonment, wherein he had not done good to some one or other of his brethren and companions in tribulation, and in the king dome and patience of Jesus Christ,Rev. 1 9. ei∣ther by tongue, hand, or penFox Marty∣rolog. Ibidem. Ibidem. Neither was the Lord wanting unto him in the good successe of his holy endeavours that way, as appeares in the following instan∣ces. Bishop Farrar being in the kings-bench prisoner, was travell'd withall of the Papists, in the end of Lent, to receive the sacrament at Easter in one kind; who, after much perswading, yielded unto them, and promised so to doe. Then so it fell out by Gods providence (saith mine Authour, in whose own words I relate the whole story) the Easter-eave, the day before he should have done it, was Bradford brought to the kings bench prisoner; where (the Lord making him his instrument) Bradford only was the meanes that the said Bishop revoked his promise, and would never after yield to be spotted with that papisti∣call pitch. At another time, B. Ridley being prisoner in the Tower, had the liberty of the same, to prove belike (saith mine authour) whether he would go to masse or noe: which once he did. But Mr. Bradford being then prisoner, and hearing thereof, writeth an effectuall letter to perswade him from the same, which (God be honoured) did Mr. Ridley no little good: for he repented thereupon and did no more so. Hence St. John, I write unto you, saith he, that do beleeve on the name of the son of God, that ye may beleeve on the name of the son of God1 Ioh. 5.13., that is, that you may, by my writing, be further confirmed, continued and increased in the faith once received.Memini, in∣quit Lutherus, initio meae cau∣sae D. Staupi∣cium-ad me dicere:boc mi∣hi placet, quod de doctrina quam praedicas, gloriam & om∣nia soli Deo at∣tribuis. Deo nutem (quod luce cla∣rius est) nimi∣um glorie & bonitatis tri∣bui non potest. Eavox me vehementer confirmavit & consolata est Melchior A∣dam vit. staup. The zealous forwardnesse, and godly care of good people in bad times being a matter of singular availe for the settling, strengthening, and stablishing of the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees which else would buckle and warp, and turn out of the way.Heb. 12.12.13. Reaf. 6. Lastly, as good men shall be hereby confirmed, so bad men convinced and confoun∣ded, not only in the last and general judgement (when the Queen of the south shall rise up and condemne such a sluggard as Herod the king, who desired to see ChristLuc. 9 9. Tamen ne pe∣dem regiâ ex∣tulit at illum videre, tramet∣si sibi in ani∣mum induxe∣rat deum pro∣phetā excitas∣se à mortuis. Ex que quam verum illud sit Luc. 16. ult videre licet. Cart. Hist. Christi. (of whose great works he had heard but would not stirr a foot to finde him out) but in this present world also, they are made many times to return and discern between the rightcous and the wicked, between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. Witnesse those two mighty Monarchs in Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar and Da∣rius. How was the first of these appaled and abashed, when he saw the well-knit resolution, and redoubted courage of Gods three worthies, in changing the kings word and yeelding their bodyes that they might not worship a strange GodDan. 3.28.29? And the latter, how was he amused, and amazed, when Daniel had stopt the mouthes of lions (like another Lysimachus) by the force of his faithHeb. 11.33. after he had stood it out stoutly to the face of his adversaries, who could finde none occasion against him but in the matter of his GodDan. 6.5.? How did the innocency and piety of these godly men triumph in the consciences of those two tyrants; making them afraid of the name of God whereby they were called,Deu 28.9, 10 and compelling them to vote and voice the same way that they had persecuted:Dan. 3. & 6. yea and to proclaime that God for the onely true God, whom yet they had no minde to set up for their own God. For so it is, that even naturall conscience cannot but stoop and do ho∣mage to Gods image fairely stampt upon the natures and works of his people:
so that when men see in such, that which is above the ordinary straine, and their own expectationDilesianus Imperium de∣posuisse diitur, quodam wentis stupoe, & con∣sternatiene, postquam singularem Christianorum in morte constantiam perspexisset. Bucholcher. Chronol.; their bearts ane within them many times, and they stand much amazed at the height of spirit, and resolution that posseseth their hearts, and at the sober and undaunted majesty that shines in their facesActs 6 15. Ʋnde judicature cocouserentiae puritas cavsaeque bonitas. Malcolm. in loc. A godly man that is immovable, and resu∣seth to praise the wicked, or justisie the ungodly, and when he hath cause will contend with them, and not be like a trenbled sountain, or a coriup spring, he may sor the time receive ill words from the wicked, but their hearts are afraid of him, and their consciences admire him, Prov. 24 25 and 28.4. 25.6.. SECT. III. Ʋse 1. A sharpe Reproof of 1. Lukewarm Laodiceans, 2. Timerous Temporizers. NOw for Application of all: Is this so,Ʋso 1. that Gods liege people should shine most in the greatest darknesse, and then shew them∣selves most zealous for their Lord, when others are most andacious in sinne? This then serves, first, for the just and sharp reproof, of all our lukewarme , our Vespertilian-professours, (as one call them) the Neuter passive Christians, (as another) the Polititians  our time: who against one prescript rules of Gods holy word, the cov∣stant practise of to many famous Saints, the irrefragable, and endoubte truth of the point in hand, hold it best and safest, when all's done, to serve the timesRom. 12.11. Omnino legendum puto , za. non  us as, in a sence rre otherwise then Saint Paul meant it, (if ever he meant it Epist. Tomi jeundi  ad Mar∣cellam.) to  down the common current, to keep them selves still on the warme side of the hedgeAd latus navis falicius,  emporum atione, sese in∣dimant; pro re nata religto∣nem on,  nunc illùc in∣ectunt, & commedis sais at∣temperant Bucholter. Chro∣nol p. 559, to comport and comply with the present company, though never to bad; approving and applau∣ding them in their wretched courses, studiously shunning, as the greatest dgrace to be counted Seraphicall, and singular: and therefore resolving to do as the most do, though in so doing they be utterly undone for everMarth. 7. 13. Ralus ex Phrysum . And (that they may not seem sine ratione insanice, to be out of reason mad) they plead Seripture for defence of their basenesse; would you think it? But what marvell, when as the devili also. (their master in this black Art) can come with b ble under arm, and pretend seriptum estMarth 4., perverting the holy Seriptures to his yet  damna∣tion: as these unlearned and unstable. 2 Pet 3.16. also do, whiles they spare not to wrest and abuse to their wicked purpose that of the Preacher, W him that's aloneEccies. 4.10. and 7.16.: and again, Be not rightcous over much: and that of Saint Paul, Offer unto God a reasonable soriceRom. 12 1., and i became all things to all men1 Cor. 9.22. How shall these cry out one day with Severus the Em∣per; Cnua jui & nihil exped . Hence they think themselves sufticiently secured, and shrowded from the dint of any such reproof as this is: pleusing themselves in a cold and carelesse mediocrity in spirituall matters; and fearing nothing more then to be esteemed too precise, fellows of an odde humour, and engrossers of more grace then ordinary. Which imputa∣tion to decline and avoid, they hold that for Gospel; He that  dissemble is not in case to live in a common-wealth, which was all the Latine that Low is the eleventh of France would have his some to learn. And that they may keep correspondency at once (as they fondly drea it) with God and the world (sooner then which, they may  fire and water, yea bring heaven and earth together, and gripe them  in a fist) they can, Chamoeleon like, turn themselves into any coloum accommodate themselves to any company; and like the planet Mercury, they can bee good in conjunction with good, and bad with bad. nature figuris. In quamcunque voles verte, decorus ero. Propertius.
Such of old were those Assyrian Colonies, 2 King. 17.41. that seared the Lord, and withall served their graven imagesRedald K. of East Sax∣ons, the first of his nation that was baptized: but as∣terwards seduced by his wife, he had in the fels same Chappell, one Altar for Christs religion, and auo∣ther for factces unto de∣vils Bede.. And such for all the world, were their successours the Samaritans, of whom Josephus re∣cordeth, that they could weather-cock-like, turne with the timesPro prssentitemporum con∣dirtone mutabiles . Quoties Judaeos faeheites de∣gere videant, cogn to eorum se appellant, utpote à Joseph oruni: quanao vero cos re bus adversts cons el∣lignt, ., and shift fail, with the sea-man, to the sitting of every wind. The Jews, while they flourished, should be their dear Cousins; but, if at any time under-hatches they would not once own them. Such also may the an∣cient Nazarites seem to have been, who (as the learnedJunius in parasis. conceive) misled at first by example of Saint Peters Judaizing at AntiochGal. 2 11., fell afterwards to defend such halting betwixt two religions, and sought to bring in a miscellany of both. In detestation of which new-bred heresie (falsely fastned upon them by the infamous name of Nazarites) it is thought that the Church of Autich protesting against that Sect and title, called themselvesAct 11.26. by the (once honorable, but now among the An∣tichristian rout, despicableIt is notoioutly known, that the most honoutable name of Christian is in Italy and a Rome a name of re∣proach, and usually abused to siguitie a fool, or a dolt. Fuik. on the Rhem. . Act. 11. sect. 4 t of . Franch Coll. Jesuit in fine.) name of Cristians. Such were the ancient Ebionites, and the modern Libertines, Nioodemites, Familists. Of the former, Eushius tells us, that they would keep the Sabbath with the Jews, and the Lords day with the Christiaes: like men that would seem to be of all religions, when in truth they were of noneSabbata cum Judaeis, nohis∣cum diem Domum in ho∣norem  observa∣runt. Ebionaei verè pauperes in agnitinne gloriae Chrisli. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 27.: Of the lat∣ter, Calin and many others complain, that they held it no sinne to serve idols with their bodies among Papists and Pagans, so they kept their heart free to God; pretending for their practise, that counsell of Apo∣chryphall Baruc, Chap. 6 Wherefore when  see the mulituae of peo∣ple worshipping them bhind and before, say in your beares, O Lord is is thou that oughtest onely to be worshipped. Such a Polititian was EcehlusEcebolius se ad Imperato∣rum ingenia & naturam con∣formans, &c. Srat. Eccles∣bist. l 3 c. 11. Such also were the Melchites, a kinde of mongrell Christians that would be of the kings reli∣gion whatever it was. Brier∣woods Eisies ex Niceph. of old, and Baldvinus alate: of whom Beza restifies, that he had religiom epemevam, for every day a new religion, ab his ad illos, ab illos ad hos levitèr ieas & lvius transiensMelchi-r Vius exter 225; to day a Papist, to mor∣row a Protestant, in nothing so constant as in his unconstancy. And have we not now adayes (that I may come lower and nearer home) more then a good manyHeu quam mults tales um doctrâ um morthus Samari∣tanos—inter Christianos hodie reperias qut et in religione sunt , dubij at{que} neutra∣les, & ad latus navis foelici∣us, pro temporum ratione. sese inclinant, &c. Buchol. Chronol., brats of the same breed, beasts of the same litter, that stand halting between two, in utrunque paratt, unresolv'd to either, and ready to be any thing with the State. These ask not of their father (saith a Divine) a fish but a scorpion: for a fish would teach them to go onely forward, but a scorpion doth teach them to go backward and forward. Like they are to Barnacles, saith Saint Austin, that are neither flesh nor fish: to Bats, that are neither birds nor beasts: to the mongrell Israelites, that spak both Hebrow and AshdodNchem. 13.24.: to Ba∣laam, that could both blesse and curseNumb 23., to the sonnes of Issachar, mea skilfull in the times1 Chron. 12.32.. Using religion for a cloak, to wear abroad, cast off at home; or to put on, onely upon high-dayes, when they are to converse with their betters, as Jeroboams wife did her demure clothes1 King. 13.2., when she was to speak with the Prophet. Of all which kind of persons, I may justly ask, as Jacoh once of his lost Joseph, Here's the coat but where's the manGen. 37.33.? a party-colour'd coat, a double minded manJames 1.8. ., stable in all his wayes, imprisoning the truth in uarightcausmsseRom. 1.18. , and dissem∣bling it ever and anon for carnall respects; palling in his horns, with the snail, for every pile of grasse, and ashamed of his Masters cogni∣zance for every light counterblast of disgrace or danger. Oh detestable sheepishnesse, and dastardlinesse, fit for such a doom, even to be turned out among dogsPev 22 15. and hell hounds. For the fer u, and unbelreving, and the abominable, and murderers, &c. shall all have their part in the burning lakeRevel 21.8.: but the fearfull first. Lo these are heid worthy to be set in the front, and to lead the ring-dance of such rehrohates, as shall be hurl'd into hell. The Lord holds all such white-liver'd soulders in such speciall detestation, that he will not employ them so far, as to break a pitcher or to bear a torch in his serviceJudg 7.3.. And for as many as are ashamed of Christ asore men, he will one day be as shie every whit, and as much ashamed of them before his Father, and the blessed AngelsMark. 8.38.:
at what time he will make most ample relation, and all honourable mention of eve∣ry such Oaesiphorus as was not ashamed of his chaine,2 nn. 1 10, 17, 18 but fed him hungry, cloath∣ed him nakd, visited him imprisonedMar. 25.53. &c. the good Lord will grant them to fiade mercy, nay glory and honour and immortality in that dayRom 2.7. And lastly for all luke-warm Laodicean, prosligate professours, and tempori∣zing Gospellers that can tune their siddles to the base of the times, resolving to play nothing but what the company calls for, the Lord will spew such parasies out of his mouth,Rev. 3.16. Nhil Salvator medium amat, tepidos evemiit Hieron. as too loathsome a morsell for his nice stomach to brooke or beare with. Now when a man spues he gets him into a corner: so will Almigh∣ty God rid his slomack of such into Hell. Ab, saith he, I will ease me of mine enemies,Esay 1. I will lay up this loathsome stuff that lies so hard upon my sto∣mach, which done, the devill, as a dog, stands ready waiting to lick up Gods vomit: he works up and down, saith St. Peter for the nonce) seeking whom be may swallow down:1 Pet. 5.8. . whence also he is eliewhere called thegreat red dragon:Rev. 12 3.  cuen∣tur gnus, in∣sernalis. Use 2. a dragon for his cruelty, and a greatred dragon, for the blood of soules he hath suckt, and wherein he hath drencht and even dyed himselt red again. SECT. 4. Ʋse 2. A sortable Exhortation to courage for Christ, with foure helps . WHose madnesse let us all learn to enjoy,Optimum est al ena sui insia. and (for a second use) be exhorted to sett seriously in hand with the practne of th most , but much neglected duty: labouring to shine forth in these evill time,Ephes 5.16 like the Lam? that shined out in the smoakie surnace:Gen. 15.17 like the bright Harr that shewe it  in the midst of darknesse:Marthew 2 nay like God himself who then , best works when men are at worst,1 Pet. 1 5 with 2 Tim. 3 1 2 Pet. 3 3 overcomming our evill with his good, and not sufr∣ring our perversenesse to inte rupt the course of his kiednesse.Hos. 2 13. Beye  herem of God, as dear children,phe. 5 1 As  srred up his sheng  when he heard the Philins were upon him let your piety and patience then most appear, when impiety and violence do most prevail. Let your zeal (by an holy  ristasis) then slame out and break thorough all impedimants, when most oppos'd and oppugned: like lime which is kndled with water: like gold that gstrs most in the fire: like the rose that smels sweeter in the still then upon the stalk Sauls malice serves but to enhance Davids zl: the more outragiou, was the one, the more couragious was the other; As the colder the ayre, the more the fire scorcheth, and as the harder the weather the more the bah scaldth. And what though David here traytor1 Sam. 22.8 from Saul, and runnagate1 Sav 25 10 from Naal, and all that naught is from the abjects and base companims, that came round about him and made mouthes at him.Vsal. 35.15 It is a brave thing to do well and har ill,: Mog. in Plut. Apaph  his Martyr. said that Heathen-Prmce. And, Doe well and hear ill is written upon heaven gate, said that Martyr u once, that was hasting thither Elias-like) in a fiery charret. Gods way was ever evill-spoken of, and such a trodd it, as little favoured of the world, as David was of the Philistin-Princes.1  29.9 But what saith the son of Dvid, who himself also was called traitour and Beelzebub, and had trll of cruli mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonmnt?Heb. 11.36  are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evill against you for my sake, Rejoyce and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven.Mat. 5 11.12 Gentiles chri∣sitanos dixe∣runt hemici∣das. sacrilegos, incestos, hojies publicos, ado∣raiores asini &c Teull. Take up the reproach of the mad multitude (that speak  of that good  know not,2 Pet. 2.12 having hearts as barren of grace as Michols womb was of children) and say: It was before the Lord2 Saru. 6.22. Ego Datitem plu  cit. Grg lib. 27. cap 26. who hath done such and such great thing for me, and therefore if this be to be vile, Ple be yet more vile to you, that I may be more preciously esteemed of God. What though you finde few or none that will set in, or side with you in this important worke, in this one thing neccssary?Lake 10.42 what though all men forsake you, as they did st. Paul at his first answer2 Tia. 4.16, 17 18 and ep∣perance before Neroes tribunall: yet the Lord will stand with thee, and strengthen
thee, as he did him, yea preserve thee safe and entire to his heavenly kingdom. Lift up the hands therefore that hang down, and the feeble knees:Heb. 12.12. yea list up your eyes, and see heaven open over your heads with Steven,Act. 7.55.56 Agnotheae di∣cebantur, qui sacris certami∣mbus praeerant erantqdecem. viri. Jul: Polie God and his holy Angels looking on and applauding him: yea see Christ himself (that heavenly Agonotheta) standing over thee, as there,Heb. 12.12. and holding out unto thee an immar∣cescbl crown with this inscription, VINCENTI DAEO. To him that overcom∣mith, will Lgrant to sit with me in my throne, even as Lalso overcume and am sett down with my father in his throne.Rev. 3 21. In confidence of which high prize, let the saints be encouraged, Ioshua-like, to advance forward in a holy singularity, with all sweet content, and undauntednesse of spirit, toward that incorruptible and unfadeable1 Pet. 1.4.  Yea like pearles which though they grow in the sea, yet retain the colour and brightens of heaven Chrrs. crown above: not swimming down the stream of the times, nor being carried along by the swinge and sway of the place where they love: but like sishes retaining their naturall sweetnesse in the salt sea:Orcus avius in Pencum illabitur, quem nec Peneus recipit, sed instar osei super nuanteth brevi spatio portatum abdicat, nec penales aquas, Dirisque genitas, argenteis suis aquis misceri permittit. Solin. like Salamander unscorchtin the fire: like oyle that will overtop all other liquors, but not com∣mingle:Orcus avius in Pencum illabitur, quem nec Peneus recipit, sed instar osei super nuanteth brevi spatio portatum abdicat, nec penales aquas, Dirisque genitas, argenteis suis aquis misceri permittit. Solin. ever holding a constant countermotion to the course of the world, and the corruptions of the time; that ainidst all, you may keep a good conscience, that richest treasure, and dearest Jewel (as One sarth well) that ever the heart of man was acquainted with. To help you herein for it is a duty of greatest difficulty) take these few rules and directions. Lirst. presse upon your could nees the former precepts; Follow not a melcitudeExod. 23 2. Sturham in∣vitari volueri∣tis, inter paucos angustam cram amoulantes non eritis Aug. &c. with the rest above recited: consider withail the equity and reasonablenesse of those commandements: for there is not any one law of God but is holy and just and good,Rom. 7.12. Majer pars meliorem vin∣cat. Non possa∣miss negare plures esse ma∣sos; & tam plu∣resut inter eosprorsus non op∣pareant grana in area. Aug. in Psal 47. Could we but see into it. Who cannot say that the greater part overcommth, the baster, and that the most are ever the wor; and shall we go against common fense, and univer sall experience? Besides, the seriptures are plain in this point as in all other, simply necessa y to salvation) telling us that the way to hell is broad and well beaton: and the many go in there, at. But o how straight is the gare, and narrow the way that leades to life, and how few there be that sinde it.Mat 7.14.  In vetustis codici∣bus legitur  id{que} Theophylactus interpretatur, quasi particula n sit admiran tis, & ita serip∣tum esset ; Christ slock hath ever been found a little flock:Luc. 12.32. . standing, as the host of lsrad, like two little slocks of kids: when the wicked (on to'ther side) like the Aramites, fill the country.1 King. 20.27. in This the put blind Philo∣sopher could see, and therefore say, Sapiendum cum puc is: m and Diogenes thought he should ever do best, when he did least what the most did. And Cassianus coun∣sels us in his epistles. Vive ut pauci, &c. Live as those sewest live; that with the few ye may be found in the kingdome of heaven.ut cum pau∣cis inveniri merearis in regno dei. It was a brave answer of Liberius an orthodox Bishop in the primitive times who when he was pressed by the Emperour Constantius to forsake the truth, and vote for Arrianisme by this argument.Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 16. Quota pars es tu orbis terrarurn? Art thou wiser then all the world?Mali undi{que} persirepunt, Quare sic vivis? Tu solus christianus es, quare non facis quod facium alijs Aug. in Psal. Dementia est-re solum in doctrina relrgionis majorem esse lucem consecutum putare, quam tot hominum millra multis jam seculis videre potuerunt &c. Malvenda apud Senarchaenum in vita Johan Diazij He very honestly and discreetly reply'd, The truth is no whit prejudiced by my alonenesse in standing out: nam & olim tres soturn &c. for of old also there were there only that would withstand the wicked edict of the king of Babel. And re∣markale is the speech of Nicolas the first, Bishop of Rome to Michael the Empe∣rour of Constantinople.Numerus pusillus non obest ubi abundat pietas, nec multiplex predest ubi abundat impietas. It matters not how srnall the number he, if godly: nor how great, if ungodly: sith multitude and Antiquity are but ciphers in Divinity, and not much to be stood upon, surther then they will bear waignt in the ballance of the Sanctuary.Non numeran∣da suffragra sed expendenda. Non numero haec judrcantur sed pondere. Tull Off.. Secondly, study that great but much neglected art of self deniall; and learn to say peremptoryLuc. 9.23.  with a stout and constant de∣nial again & again, to so unreasonable a request. nay to any whether person or thing (theugh never so deare or delightfull) that would coole thy courage for Christ, or call thee cst this most
savoury course. And first, if carnall Reason come in and offer to obtrude that twise-sodden colewortCrambe bis posita foetet. Eras. of hers (perswading thereby to a politick forbearance of forwardnesse by the fear of what may follow) Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wiseEccles. 7.16. q. d. be discreet and wary, and stand not so strictly up∣on tearmes of conscience: why shouldst thou destroy thy self? why shouldst thou incurr the needlesse danger of envy and vexation, by thrusting thy self over-eager∣ly into observation? Stop thine eares, I say, to this subtle enchantresse,Mat. 16.24. and rather harken to the voice of Gods spirit in the verses immediatly following. Be not wicked overmuch (saith he, in opposition to that former, Be not just over∣muchEccle 7.17 See Pemble in locum.) q. d. He that slackes, and remits but a little in goodnesse, and (for his owne ease and honour) qualifies it, though but with a little degree of badnesse, the same is wicked, and over-much wicked: Neither be foolish (in opposition to that above-said, Be not wise over-much) as all are, that temper spirituall wisdome with carnall pollicy: for why shouldst thou dye before thy time? to wit, by an un∣seasonable death from Gods hand; then when it were better for thee to do any thing then to dye: sith after death there is judgement, and hell-fire, and all to be passed thorough by the poore soule. This is the voice of heaven, wherewith ye are to still and stop the mouth of that wisdome which descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.Iam. 3.15. Next, for carnall friends, deny your self also in themDeut 33 9. if you mean to keep in with Christ. They'le be ready enough with PeterMat. 16.22. . to prompt you to be good to your self, and not rashly to run the hazard of a singularitan, to your I know not how great disgrace and disadvantageIf my father stood wee∣ping on his knees before me, and my mother hang∣ing on my neck behind me &c. I would sling my mother to the ground, run over my sacher, and tread him un∣der my feet, thereby to run to Christ, when he calls me. Hierome. &c. For a counter-poison, consider: is there any friend to God? or any foe to him? Did not Eli pay dear for displea∣sing the Lord, to please his children1 Sam. 2.29. See the story of Rebezies the Prench martyr Act. & Mon f 842.? and had it not like to have cost Moses his life for forbearing to circumcise one child (as he had done another) for angring his wifeExod. 4.24.? Tell me not here shall be mockt, and hooted at, if I refuse to be fashio∣nable. why, what of that? if a lame man laugh at thine upright walking, wilt thou therefore halt v. Plato.? if dogs bark and bounce at the Moon, shall she therefore hide her head, and cease to shine any longerEn peragit cursus-surda Diana, suos.? David becam the drunkards song, and a by-word among the sons of Belial, who came round about him, ma∣king mouths and mowesPs 35.15, 16 was he ever a whit the worse man for that? Did not Paul hear Pest,Act. 24.5. , a botch. Elisha baldpate2 King. 2.23. Ascend thou bald-pate as Eliah did be∣fore thee Sarcasticè, our Saviour himself Conjurer,ob. traitour, mad-man? So true is that of Chrysostome,sol. Mad sinners censure all for mad that come short of themselves in madnesseInter insanos. insanus videtur quisquis non insanit.. A very Philosopher could pitty those that set him at naught, and count it his honour and happinesse to be despised by the many.. And Seneca's enemies could not faster learn to raile, then he to neglect.didicit ille maledicere, & ego contennere 3 Deny your selves further, in your libertiesI am in phson till I am in prison said Sincere Saunders. Act. Mon. p. 1358. 1 King. 22 26, 27. with Michaiah, who would not biasse for any mans pleasure, nor voice with the rest of Ahabs parasiticall Prophets, though he were sure to kiss the stocks for his stiffnesse, and there to be fed with hard-meat, till the kings return in peace. Deny your selves astly in your lives, if call'd unto it. What cared the three children for Nebuchadnezzars wrath, burning seven times hotter then his furnaceDan 3.16.19. I occidere potes, lsdere non potest. Patus de Nerone apud Dion: Cass:? kill them he might possibly,Mihi vita eripi porest, at non consessio verit atis. Basil. burt them he could notMat. 16.24. abdicat semetipsum, & perinde habet atque si nihil adse pertineret. Beza, and that made them so resolute. For he that truly feares God, and thinks upon his name, dreads no danger,Hie est ille Farellius qui nullis difficulta∣ibus fractus, ruallis minis, convitiis, verberibus deni{que} inflictis territus &c. Melchior Ad. in vit. p. 115. feares no colours, denyes himself utterly, m takes Christs crosse upon his shoulders, a fagot in his armes, and his life in his hand,1 Sam. 19.5. and so resolves to follow Christ thorough thick and thin, thorough fire and water, poi∣son and sword, or any thing else that stands in his way. * Thirdly blow up thy smaller spark into a flame of zeal; which is an extream heat of all the affections, love, joy, defire, indignation, detestation, and the rest This as it will make us come off more roundly in Gods hardest or hottest services,
(fervent in spirit serving the LordRom. 12.11. , boy∣ling. It is said of Baruch in, repaiing the wall of Jeru∣salem, he re∣paired ear∣nestly; or as some read it, So accendit, he fired himself from others chilness, and so simshed his portion in a thorter time., saith the Apostle) so it will kindle it self from others coldnesse, sharpen it self from others dulnesse, quicken it self from o∣thers slownesse and heavinesse to duty: like as the cold of the air makes in us our naturall heat the stronger, and as water causeth the fire in the forge to flame the faster. See an instance of this in David: My zeal, saith he, hath consumed me, because thine enemies hath forgotten thyPsal. 119.139 word. Lo, his anger so burnt against the sinners of his time, that it eat him upPsal. 69 9., yea it inflamed his very hatred. So far was he from running along with them, that he abhorred them in his heart: for do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee, and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine enemiesPsal 139.21, 22. Verse 20. Quoed Sol eo∣demi inere me∣abit, quo nnc meat, eoúsque nunquam socie∣ratem cam Xerxe coibi∣mus I acedaem. ap. Plut.. Da∣vid knew well that patience in Gods cause, and in case of his offence, was but blockishnesse; moderation, mopishnesse; connivence, cowardize; and that mad∣nesse here was better then meeknesse: which made him hate such wicked ones as spoke against God, and took his Name in vain, with perfection of hatred: and not make dainty upon any politique respect, to cast down the gauntlet of defiance to the faces of them, as his utter enemies. Now the blessing of God light on that Good heart that hath a stomack (as David, and the good people in the Text had) against God; dishonour. But 'tis a fearfull thing, and a sore signe of a spirituall declension, when Christians can comport with Gods enemies; and disgest their oaths and other outrages, with as much ease, as the Ostrich doth the hardest iron. The angel of Ephesus could not abide them that were evil, nor away with those coun∣terfeits, that called themselves Aostles, and were noneRev. 2.2., and is highly commended for it: though otherwise none of the forwardestVers. 4. Avaritiae no∣mine taxari videtur bonus alioqui Episcopus. Pareus. Si fuit Timothcus, u quidam centendunt, &c. ib. ver. 1.. When the contentious Corinthi∣ans heard carnall, for comming so near, and looking so like the wicked, that they could hardly be distinguished. Are ye not carnal, and walk as men1 Cor. 3.3. .? A foul fault in a Christian. Lastly, Think sadly and seriously upon thine hh and heavenly cal∣lingHeb. 3.1., and labour to walk as  Apostle often ex∣hortsEphes. 4.1. Colos. 1.10. 1 Thess. 2.12.: And know, that God will  from others which he will not abide in his own.. Every caling hath a Decorum, a seemlinesse, a suitablenesse appertaining to it. A Gentleman hath another manner of behaviour then a scullion, a Courtier then a Carter, a Prince then a pesant: and so should a Christian too, then another man. He should demean himself nobl, heavely, gellantly, Heb. 13 18 , Rom 13.13. , Tit. 2.3. . 1 Thes 2.12. , Eph 5 15. , to go to the utmos of a thing., worthy of God, and as be∣commeth a saintEphes 5 3., a citizen or heaven, and a burgesse of the new Je∣rasalemEph 2.19.: Not clownsnly, unworthily, basely foolishlyEph. 5.15., like an in∣habitant of the earthRev. 12.12., or a ree-holder or hellMat. 24.51. .. Greatest States afford least libertyIn maxima fortuna minima licentia. Salust in Cat., and therefore are such worse (saith that ather) though they be no worse then others, because they ought to be betterIdeo deteriores smus quia melires esse debemus. calvi.. It is some singular thingMt 547. . that God looks for from his people; and that which is excellent, extraordinary, and above vulgar pollibility. Should such a man as I she? said good NehemtahNeh. 6.11. q. d. Though other men aply may, yet  may not do it: though the Philistines might carry Gods Ark in a new cart, and hear no further of him1 Sam. 6 10, 11: yet if Israel at∣tempt such a thing God will make a breach upon them2 Sam. 6 8. This is that which the Lord hath said, I will be sanctified in all them that draw near unto meLvi. 10 3., Sanctified he will be, one way or other; either in us or upon usAut a nobis, aut in nos Aug. Keeping their vertue fll like a pear in a puddle.. 'Tis sure, he will be no loser by us: as he should be in a high degree, should not we be harmelesse and blamelesse, the sonnes of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and prerse generation amongst whom we shine as lghtsPhil. 2 15.. so that the Sun may go unseen, as soon as suchQai in excel∣so aetatem agnt, eoum facta cunclin. ales novire. Salust. ad Caesarem.. And as the least aberrarion is quickly espied in those heaven∣ly bodies, so in the saints of God: nothing they do escapeth sight and censure; all is markt and observedOmnium oculi in te sunt con∣vesi Sm. Sip. They watch for my halt∣ingJer 20.10. , 1 Pet 2.2 They are not observed that do as the most: but if any vary from the multitude, all eyes are upon him. Bishop Halls Contemp., saith Jeremy, as those that would desire no better sport: they pore and prys into every particular, if haply they may take us. trip∣ping in any thing; they search into our whole conversation more nar∣rowly,
more thoroughly, then Laban once did into lacobs stuffeGen. 31.34 ready prest, and prepared to blaze, and blaspheme for the least slip they can lay hold on, be it but in a rash and indiscreet speech that falls from us, or the like. Now what a glory is it to slaughter envy it self? to stop an open mouth? nay to reprove their darknesse by our lightEphes. 5.11., their covetousnesse by our contentednesse, their pride by our lowliness, their peevishness by our patience and peaceableness, &c. and so to clothe them with their own shamePsal 109 29, by our unblameable behaviour, that they shall self condemned, Tit. 3.11. Iustinus martyr fatctur se, con∣spectá Chrisi i∣anorum plotate in vita, con∣slantiá autem in morte. colle∣gisse veram es. se, quam pros∣terentur, do∣ctrinam. return and discern between the righteous and tho wicked: and be forced to testifie of us, as Saul of David, that we are more righteous then they1 Sam. 24 17. This is to shine as lights. Psal. 2.15. in the world. Herein indeed, like the Sun, which although wicked men may at sometimes hate, because it discovereth their deeds of darknesse, yet are they so convinced with its beauty and excellency, that they cannot for shame speak against it. Now to wind up all in a word: Look to your slves that we lose not those things that we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward2 Joh. 8.. The ends of the world, you see, are come upon us1 Cor 10.11, cast we are upon the last and worst times of allhis uimis & pessimis temporibus. Berrard., those hard and perillous times2 Tim. 3.1. ., which the Apostle long since prophecied of: wherein because iniquity aboundeth, the love of many is waxen coldMat. 24.12.. Who seeth not every age worse then other, and (to go no further) this then the lastIt is remark∣able that Mr. Fox relates of our Ancesios even in K. H. 8. time. Cerres the servent zeal of those Christian days seemed much superiour to these our times, as ap∣peared by their sitting up all night in reading & hearing, &c. To see their travels, ear∣nest seekings, burning zeals, readings, watchings, sweet assem∣blies, love. concord, god∣ly living, saithfull mar∣rying with the saithfull, may make us now in these ci dayes of sree prosession to blush  shane Act. & Mon. or the Church. fol 750. Do not diverse among us fall from the love of the Gospel? Is not religion turned, with many, into a meer formality and policy? our ancient heat and forward∣nesse, into a generall coldnesse in profession, lukewarmnesse in religion, denying the power of it in our lives and conversations? Well, I say no more to as many of you in our Thyatira as have not the doctrine of Iezabel, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, but this, That which ye have already, hold fast till Christ comeRev 2.24, 25.. And seeing ye know these things before, take head lest ye also, being pluckt away with the errour of the wicked, fall from your own sledfastnesse2 Pet. 3.17.. Take heed that ye prove not, with the Prophet Esay, men of polluted lips, by li∣ving among a people of polluted lipsEsay 6.5.: that ye learn not to swear, with IosephGen. 42.16., by conversing with swearers: and to curse with PeterMat 26.74., by being awhile among the ruffianly souldiers. The worse any times are, and the lesse comfortable, the better should we be, and the oftener in Gods presenceMich. 7.6, 7.: therefore walking ex∣actly Ephes. 5.15., (or, as in a frame) and redeeming the time, by a redoubled diligence in all holy duties, because the dayes are evil. Let others strange. 1 Pet. 4.4. and wonder what's come to us alate, that we refuse to run with them (as once) into the same excesse of riot: say thou to thy selfTo walk with God is a precious praise, though none do it but my sell and to walk with man, with the world, with a town, or arish in wicked wayes, is a deadly sin, though lhous do  B Babington upon Gen. 6.8; Better go to heaven alone, and with the ill will of my neighbours, then to hell with never so much company, and with the love of all the world. But indeed ye are not alone, however it may seem so (as it did once to Elias1 King 19.10.): for ye have many fellows abroad, your brethren and companions in the kingdom and patience of Iesus ChristRev. 1.9., who will be ready, as here, to joyn with you in speaking often one to another for mutuall edisication, and encouragementClouds of wimesses thousands thousands of  and every of them worth ten thousand of others, as St Chrysost. speaks, Hom. 26. ad Pop. Antioch.. Beside those other also above, (whom you may see by the eye of saith) the crow∣ned and glorfied Saints, I mean: all which trode the same tract of holinesse with you, have gone to heaven alone, and been hated for itJoh. 15.15: yet is not any one of them heard now to say. Oh what fools were we, when time was, to be so strict and conscientious, to stand upon such nice points, to sequester our selves from the cor∣rupt courses and companies of others2 Cor. 6.17, to deprive and abridge our selves of the pleasures of sin, and delights of life &c. Oh, no such word is ever heard to fall from their holy lips: but they rejoyce rather, and infinitely exult and glory in that God, that gave them an heart to do as hath been said, and in those rivers of ex∣quisite and unmixed pleasures, with the which their good hearts are even inebria∣ted. Joh 2.10. Hag. 1.6., and (in a sober sence) made drunk again; whiles they continually behold his face, with whom they once walked in the flesh, as a man with his friend. In who e presence is the fulness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for ever morePsal. 16. ult..
CHAP. II. Doctr. II. Of the severall sorts of Feares, and That every faithfull Christian feareth the Lord. Hth rto of the Duty here performed, as touching the first circumstance, to wir of time, noted in the particie Then: The second followes, and that's of person, who they were that thus spake often one to another. And these come here described unto us, under a double notion, first as fearing the Lord, secondly, an thinking upon his Name. As to the first:Constriciia cordis ex sensu mali instantis. Pareus in Mt 25 Hinc Geci  cant. lig∣menum, eò quod quasi glu alringit Nai∣anzorat. 7. Fear (in a generall sence) is no∣thing lse out an astection of the soule shinking in it self from some imminent evill. Hereof there are three sorts usually reckoned. 1. Naturall. 2. Carnal. 3. Spiri∣tuall. The first of these we cannot justly fault, if it do not degenerate into the se∣cond: for every thing, by an instinct of uncorupted Nature, desires the conser∣vaion of it self, and fears the contrary. You may se an instance of it in our bles∣sed aviour who, to manfest himself a true man, subject to like passions with , yet still without sin,It being with Cht as with a chri∣stal glass full oiear water which is still pure howsoe∣ver is he sha∣ken. P. B. trembled at the apprehnsien and approach of Death, which ito nature of all terribles the most terrible, as the PhilosopherAristot. Ethic. l 3.: and the king of feares as Iob defines it.Iob 18.14. To him, you must needs think, it was so (if ever to any) whose soule suffered the very soule of sufferings, as one expresseth it,Purchas Mi∣crocsm: which made him offer up prayers and suplications with strong crying and teares to him that was able to save him from death; and was heard in that he feared.Heb. 5.7. Next, there is a carnall feare, and that is of the CreatureMajore for∣midin & cal∣lidiore li∣tate Caesarem  Sed  ratiore  sed ment prae∣sentatrae  &c. Tert. de Ro  Apologe op. 27. more then the Creatour, the great, the mighty, and the terrible GodNche. 9.32. as Nehemiah stiles him. itaristh partly from want of fath in the power and providence of the Almighty: the Aposties were therefore  carnally-fearsull, because  petty-sidians or small-saulsMat 8.25: Partly also from want of Spirituall fear, to the which there∣fore it is usually opposed in holy scripture, as in that of our Saviou. Fear not them that kill the body &c. but fear him which after he hath killed, hath ower to ast into hell: yea ay unto you fear himMat. 10.28. And this latter is that third sort of fear, which being nothing else but an aw∣sull respect to the Divine Majesty, we therefore call Spirituall. 1. from the object God, wh is both a SpiiIoh. 4. and the father of SpiritsHeb. 11., the proper object of this and all other affections of uns ouleLuc. 10.27.. Whence it is that by an appeilative proper he is  Fear, by the Psalmist. ring presents unto FearPsal. 76.11. so runs the Origiall; that is, to him that ought to be feared, as it is usually read and rendred. 2. from the principall efficient and chief Authour of it, and that is Gods holy Spirit, called therefore a spirit of fearEsay 11.2. 3. from the blessed effect it hath upon the spirit of a man, for it spiritualizeth and sanctisieth both us and our servicesPsal. 2.11. , uae parit. . Doct:; and is therefore here rightly made the mark of a spirituall-minded man, the con∣stant charter of a true Christian, and a plain distinctive note, whereby to discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serth God, and him that ser∣veth him not. What may we learn hence but this? That every faithfull Christian feareth the Lord, neither is he any true servant of God, that hath not his heart possest and seasoned with the spirituall reverentiall feare of God. SECT. I. The Doctrine cleared, and confirmed by Scripture. THe truth of which Assertion will soon appear, if we take notice how the holy scripture 1. conjoynes Gods service and his fear, making them go hand in
hand, as individuall friends and companions 2. confounds them and takes them for one and the same thing. 3. gives it ordinarily for a just description of a godly Christian, that he truely feares the Lord. First, you shall finde Gods true service and his holy fear go coupled and hand∣fasted in sundry scriptures. Some few for a tast: Now therefore fear the Lord, saith Joshua in his last farewell to the world, and serve him in sincerty and truthIosh. 24.14: intimating that there is no sincere service done to God, where his fear is not found. So the Psalmist, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce before him with reverencePsal. 2.11.. Fear then, must be one thing in Gods works, and reverence ano∣ther, whatsoever be the third. Indeed it is the first second and third in Gods true serviceAs Demost∣henes once said of Elocu∣tion in an Oratour.. Hence, the Apostle, Let us have grace, saith he, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.Heb. 22.  quae parit . As who should say; A fear∣lesse heart is certainly a gracelesse heart: neither let such a man think that he shall ever receive any wages at Gods hand for such unacceptable work; sith displeasing rvice is a double dishonour. But secondly, as Gods true fear and service are in some places of scripture con∣joyned, so in other some they are confounded and indifferently taken the one for the other as tearmes convertible. See for this Deut. 6.13. compared with, Mat. 4.10. and again Mat. 15.9. with Esay 29.13. whereupon Solomon the wise makes this fear of God the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and last in Gods businesse. The basis and beginning of all he sets it for, in the beginning of his ProverbsProv. 1 7.: the end and upshot of all he concludes it, in the close of his Ecclesiastes. Let us hear the end of all, saith he, Feare God, andEccl. 12.15. Hoc est enim totus homo. Ergo si hoc est omnis homo, abs{que} hoc nihil est homo. Bern. super Cant ser. 20. keep his commandements, for this is the whole man,Act. 13.16. as Broughton (after the vulgar) reads that text. Lastly, to perswade this, the scripture usually describes a godly person by this property; sets him out by this periphrasis, not only here in the text, but a few verses below chap. 4.2. But unto you that fear my name (set in opposition to the proud and wicked ver. 1. as these here to those stout rebels ver. 13.14, 15.) shall the Sun of righteousnesse arise &c. So elsewhere up and down Gods booke. Men of Israel, saith the Apostle, and ye that fear God give audienceAct. 13.16. A close connexion you see: for All that are Israelites indeed, Jews inwardlyRom. 2 29. do fear God, according to that of Solomon, He that walketh in his uprightnesse feareth the LordProv 14.2. Whence it is pinn'd as a badge upon the sleeve of every faithfull Christi∣an, as of Iob (for instance) in the old Testament,Iob 1.2. Act. 10.2. and Cornelius in the New, that they fared God, and eschewed evill, u for by the fear of the Lord men depart from evill, Pro. 16.6. The scripture then is expresse for us you see, that every servant of the Lord feares the Lord: Neither need we want Reasons for it whether we look upon this holy fear in its 1. Causes 2. Consequents 3. companions. 4. contaries, the opposites I mean, in either extreames. SECT. II. The Doctr. further confirmed by Arguments drawne from the 1. Causes, 2. Consequences, 3. Companions, 4. Contraries to the true fear of God. FOr the causes, first, the principall efficient cause and authour of this reverentiall fear is God in Christ, by the hand and operation of the Holy Ghost; whose sole work it is to spiritualize that natural affection of Fear, common to all mankinde: and (by putting it into a right frame, turning it into a new channel, that it may thence for∣ward run forth-right upon God) to make it the fear of sons, the fear of Gods elect, partakers of the heavenly calling,Hob 3.1. & that Covenant of grace, one special claus where∣of is this, I will put my fear into their hearts ('tis a fruit then of Gods own setting, and taken off the tree of life, for they shal never depart from me, but I will rejoyce over them to do them good, and will plant them in truth with my whole heart, and with my whole souleIer. 32.40. 'Tis a blessing of Gods own right-hand. I will put my sear &c. I,
is emphaticall, and exclusive. q. .d I, and only l. 2. And not a common blessing neither, but such as he will bestow on his own alone, with whom he is in speciall covenant: Thirdly, And this by way of infusion, that all may be of grace: for he will put his fear into their hearts: Fourthly, and for the best end; all this is, that they may never depart from him. For this is a filiall fear, out of ingenuity: and the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the Son abideth for ever,Ioh. 8.35. saith the naturall Son of God that came out of the bosome of his father, knew all his coun∣fell, and upon whom the spirit of the fear of the Lord rested for his members. Some other subordinate, and lesse principall causes also of this grace in speech I might here mention, as making to ourpurpose: such as are 1. a lively faith in all the glorious and gratious attributes of God, especially his fatherly compassion and kind∣nesse,Hos. 3. vlt. Psal. 130.4. which is better then life,Psal. 63.3. 2. an adent child-like affection to God as a father, whose displeasure we therefore fear and feel more bitter then deathEccles 7.26. Neoffendamus quem diliga∣mus & ne ab eo separemur. M. Sentent: l. 3. dist. 34. Reas. 2. In via Dei à timore incipitur, ut ad fortitu∣dinem venia. tur. Non siut in via seculi, timor debilita∣tem; it a in via, Dei timor for∣itudinem gig∣nit. Greg.. But these with some other graces that concur as principles to the constituting of the right fear of God,  passe for hast, and come to the second Reason. And that is taken from the effects and consequent of this holy fear, and they also are such as suite only with Gods dear children, and are found in none other be∣sides. To instance only in two of them (till we come to the Application:) First, Christian conrage, and a confident reliance upon Gods fatherly love and affection for safety and salvation. In the fear of the Lord, saith Solomon, is strong confidence, and his children (for such only sear God, which is the point in proof) have a place of resuge,Pro. 14 26. what even siorme be up, they have God name to repair unto for shel∣ter. Now the Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run to it and are safePro. 18 10.: safe, Iay, it not from the common destruction, yet surely from the common disraction; those slinging frights, horrible amazements, and woefull perplexities, wherewith the hearts of those that sear not God are miserably pestred, and even eaten up me day of evill. Thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes that thou shalt see,Deut. 28.34. saith God to such: And again, they shall be at their wits ends,Psal. 107.27 nay, at their lives ends for fear, and for looking after those things that are comming upon them.Luc. 21.26. . Nabal for example, whose heart even dyed within him ten dayes be∣fore he died upon the apprehension of his late danger: and he became as a stone1 Sa. 25.37. But now 'tis otherwise far with those that fear God, that fear before him.Eccl 8.12. God is our refuge and our strength, saith the Church, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be remooved, and though the mountains be carried into the mist of the SeaPsal. 46 1, 2. In pavidos fe∣rient ruinae. Hor.. See an instance in David, he having made God his fear, could sing a requiem to hi soule,Psal. 116 7. Quid timet ho∣minem hemo in sinu dei posi∣tus Aug. rock it asleep in a holy security, and not once be afrad for ten thousands of people that had hemmed him in and despe∣rately given out, that salvation it self could not save him out of their hands.ps 3.2, 5, 6, 8 A∣gainst all which blasphemie, and bravadoes of his enemes, he encourageth himself in the Lord his God, and comfortably concludes the Psalme, with, Salvation is of the Lord, and I have devoted my self to his fear,Psa. 119.38. therefore I cannot miscarry so long as he is in safety. If a child have his father by the hand, though he be in the dark, he is not afraid: so is it with us, whiles by saith (the mother of this fear) we sit and see him that is invisibleHeb. 11.27. at our right hand,Psal. 16.8. to support and save us. A second effect of Gods holy fear is a carefull thinking upon his name, a reverencing of the commandementsPro. 13.13., a conscionable endeavour of doing his whole will, to the obedience whereof this fear doth strongly incline and enable us: For which cause it is, that the Lord having delivered his law in great ter∣rour, wisheth that the heart of his people might be alwayes fraught with his fearDeut. 5 29.; which might be as a domesticall chaplaine, a faithfull monitour in their bosomes to quicken them to obedience. And the preacher in this respect com∣priseth in this one grace alone, all other vertues and dutyesEccl. 12.15. because it involves and carryes along with it a religious care of all the commandements though never so harsh and uncouth, even to the denying of a mans self in all his selves. 1. For his naturall self: Isaac was reind in by this religious fear from reversing Jacobs blessing (though naturall affection within, and Esau's roarings without prompted him thereunto, but,) he did not, he durst not do it, because he trem∣bled with a great trembling exceedinglyGen. 27.33., when now he saw that he had done
unwilling justice. 2. For his carnall self, his own ease, honour, comfort, pro∣sit, and other personall respect; and conveniences: see it in Jonah, who after he had known the terrour of the Lord2 Cor. 5.11. in the heart of the sea, in the belly of the whale, how willing was he on his way to NanvehIon. 3 3.? So the Prophet Esay after he hd en God  his majsty, was so subdued by his fear, to the obedience of his will, that no sooner could the Lord say, whom shall en? but he replyed, here am , sand Esay  8., though before he were wondrous unwilling to so unwelcome an er and. 3. in his spirituall self, his own undeitanding, judgement, reasn, I mean. Abra∣hu was excellent at this: for as in beleeving the promise of a son , he censed not the drynesse of his own body, nor the deadnesse of Sarah's wo nb: he cared not for that, but silencing his Reason esalted his saith, giving glory to God:Rosq. 18, 19 so in parting with him again at Gods appointment he conserred not with slesh  blood (as St. Paul speake, in another caseGal. 1.16.) but getting up earlyGen 22.3. (which shewed his wilingnesse on his way) he went an end with the work, and therefore head from heaven; Now I know that thou fearest me &c.ver 12. 4. Lastly in his second self, wise and kind ed: a, Iob, who retained his in∣tegrity, and nyed himself in his wicked wife that bad him cue God and dyeIob 2.9. The Septua∣gint help Ioby wise to scold adding a whol verse of semal passion: I must now, saith she ge wander, and have no place to rest in &c.: for he feared God, and so eichewed that evill also. The like we may say of Moses the servan of the Lord, who after he had met God in the Inn, and was surprized with his fear, not only circumcised his son, though to the great discontet of his froward wife,Exod. 4.26. but also sent her away upon that occasion and trouble (as it is like∣ly) to her fathers house again; who met him at Eoreb, and reslored him his wife and children.Exod. 18.2. Thus the fear of God fame a man to an umversall self-denyal and makes him willing to be whatsoever the Lord world have him to be, in every part and point of dut,: than which I know not what uer signe can be shewed of a sancisied soule. Thirdly for the companions of Gods fear, they are such as do accompany salv∣tionHeb. 6 9. . Scholia Ps. 119.155. eas. 3.: which as far  the wickd as they are from se  Gods shatues h. These are, First sound judgment and saving knowledge of God and his will, our selves and our dutyes. Hence they are set so neer together in the prophet. The spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the LordEsay 11.2. ver 3.. And in the next verse, This same spirn shall mk him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, to discerne of things that be excellent: such as none of the pn as of this wold ever knew, but God hth revede them to us (that desire so fear his  with Neon bNeh. 1.11.) by that spiit of his, that srcheth ad thgs,  things of God, causing us (for a largesse) to know the things tht are srely given us of God1 Cor. 2.10.. And this way it is that the secret of the Lord is with them tha , and he will (yet) shew them his CovenantPsal 25 14.. Such shal be both of his Court, and his Councill, as Abraham (for instance) betwixt whom and the Amighty, was much mutuall correspondency, and exchange of curetesy.  was the  of GodEsay 41.8., and God was the Fear of Abaham: for I  the thus  me, said the oracle, hooans thou hist not withheld thine enely sonre from Gen. 22 12 Now if A∣braham withheld not his sonne from God his Feare, shall God withhold his se∣cret from Abraham his friend? Noe: but he shall snow Gods mind with the firstGen. 18.19 when the blind Sodomits shall not see, till they feele hell rame down from heaven upon their hides (as a Father speakes) for saile of ten such men as Ara in five great townshipsGen. 18.32 that feared God, and thought upon his name. For the froward is abomin iton to the Lord, but his secret is with the righteousProv. 3 32. And the feare of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fooles (for want of this fear) despise wisdom, and instructionProv. 1 7 A second companion of this holy fear is sweetest complacency, and all dearest delight in God and his wayes. This also is an adjoynt of Gods holy fear, and an indulgence granted only to his sons, and daughters. A good man is like a good AngellMat. 18 10 Timor transit in charitatem. Gregor., alwayes looking upon the face of God: and the more he lookes, the more he loves, and the more he loves the more he feares: he loves in sear, and feares in love: that like as in God, mercy and truth meet togetherPsal 85.10, so in the child of God, love and fear do kisse each other. By the first their mouth is filled with laughter, and their hearts with joyPsal. 126.2, By the second they are troubled at his
presence, and when they consider his absence, they are afraid of itIob 23.15. In re∣spect of both, the Psalmist saith, serve the Lord with feare, and reoyce before him with reverencePsal. 2.11.. These two concurre in the godly in their journey to hea∣ven, as they did in Jacob journying to Padan Aram. How fearfull is this placeGen. 28.17 saith he, where yet neverthelesse he saw nothing but blissefull and beatifical vi∣sions. Or as they did in the good women in the gospell, who departed from the sepulchre with feare, and great IoyMat. 28 8. A strange composition of two so diffe∣rent affections: will you know a reason? All other base-borne feare hath paine in it1 Ioh. 4.18 Omnis timor supplicamen∣tum habet. Tertul. but this fear, that issues from love, carryes meate in the mouth: for it is not anxious and tormentfull, but delicious, and comfortable. Hence feare and joy are set so close together by the psalmist. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, and (at same time) delighteth greatly in his commandementsPsal. 112.1. (a practise proper to Gods free hearted peoplePsal. 110.3. Neh 1.11.) And the churches are said to walke in the feare of god, and in the comfort of the holy ghostAct. 9.31. And here it might be easie to enumerate and reckon up many more Companions of the fear of God,Timor virtu∣turn omnium custos est. Hierony. such as are. 1. Humility for by humility and the fear of the Lord are riches and honour and lifeProv. 22.4. 2. Care of sincerity and truth in Gods service: Now therefore fear the Lord saith Joshua, and serve him in sincerity and turthIosh. 24.14. 3. Hope in Gods mercy, for Let them that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, saith the PsalmistPsal 115.11. 4. Godly sorrow for the least sinne2 Cor. 7.11 Fuit Iosephi vita coelum quoddam luci∣dissimis virtu∣tum stellis ex∣ornatum: erga Deum quidem timoris ac pie∣tatisierga he∣rum &c. Bu∣cholcer: p. 211. &c. But it shall suffice, in this hast of time, and croud of matter, to shaddow out unto you the lovely traine of heavenly graces that guard and attend the true fear of God in that on example of Joseph, a man famous for this fear, and noe lesse eminent in the attendants and companions of it: as is well observed by that divine Chronologer, in whose words I will relate it. Josephs life saith he, was, a kind of heaven, gayly belpangled, and richly stor'd with orient starres of excel∣lent vertues. Towards his good God, he shewed forth all holy fear and piety: toward his loving master, thankfulnesse and fidelity: toward his immodest mistresse, shamefast'nesse and chastity: as touching himself, all godly wisdome and continencie: Toward his father (after this) tender respect and more then Storke-like affection: Toward his brethren, greatest mercy and tender compassion. In adversity, none so patient,Ferrum in carcere transiit animam ejus Psal. 105. Sed peccatum non transiit, vel sauciavit con∣scientiam ejus ib. Reas. 4. in prosperity, none so provident &c. And all flowing from this fountaine of Gods holy feare, most eminent and exemplary in Joseph, if ever in any, as ye all know that are any whit vers'd in his heart-melting history. Lastly, look a while upon the feare of God in the Opposite on either hand, and you shall plainly see that none but the truely religious holdeth the meane. It is he that walkes in the middle way, though not without some stumbles in it, and strag∣glings out of it otherwhiles, to the right hand or to the left: which yet he quickly perceives, and assoone recalles and recovers. These extremes are 1. In the defect, a carnal security and senselesnes in sin. 2. In the excesse, an hellish and slavish fear of God, as a judge, or tyrant. The first of these is nothing else but that bold venturousnes, whereby gracelesse and ungodly persons presume to rush desperatly, without fearProv 14.2. or wit, into sins of all sorts: flattering themselves with false hopes of impunityDeut. 29.19 against all the judgments of God denounced in the word, and executed in the worldExemplis tragicis non ca∣ret ulla domus., yea though their imiquitie be found to be hate∣fullPsal 36.1.2. These the scripture tearmeth fooles, to whom t is a pastime to do mischiefeProv. 10.23 Heu vivunt ho∣mines tanquam mors nulla se∣quatur &c.: living as if there were neither heaven nor hell, God nor devill; till (coming at length to that dead and dedolent disposition of such as being past feeling do work all uncleannes with greedinesse,Eph. 4.19. .) they work out to themselves their own damnation; and be made to feele that unsupportable wrath and vengeance, which they would never be drawn to fear or stand in awe of. For, Blessed is the man that feareth alwayes, but he that in a desperate boldnesse or Cyclopicall contempt of the divine Justice, hardneth his heart shall fall into mischiefeProv 28 13, yea shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedyProv. 29.1. In executing of which dreadfull sentence, though the Lord be slow, yet he is sure, his forbearance is no quittance. But although a sinner, in high contempt of Gods heavy displeasure, do evill an hundred times, and his dayes (through Gods infinite patience) be prolonged, yet surely I know, saith Solomon that it shall be well with them that feare that Lord, which fear
before himEccles. 8.12.. That is, that fear him in his ministers and deputies, trembling at his judgments, while they hang in the threatningsIsa. 66.2. melting, as Josich2 Chr. 34 27 at the terrour of his menaces; nay by the kindnesse of his mercyes, which dissolves their good hearts, as weake water doth some thin substances, or as the hot un doth the hard ice. An instance hereof ye have in that solemne meeting at Mizpeh: where Is∣rael, which had found the misery of Gods absence, is now resolv'd into teares of contrion and thankfulnesse, when he was once returned and settled in Kiriath-jea∣rim. Then they mett together at Mizpeh and drew water and poured it out before the Lord1 Sam. 7 6. In signum expi∣ationis iniqui∣tatum juta Iob 11.15. R. Slomon di∣cit quod hc feerunt in sig∣num humiliati∣onis q d sicut aqua effusa ad nihi 'um valet ultra. siin con∣spectu tuo nihil sumus aut vi∣demur. 2 sal 86.11.. Whether 'twere teares out of their eyes, or water out of their vessels (as a ceremony, or pledge of their hearty humiliation) the difference is little. Sure, it was to testify the tendernesse of their hearts, which, having hang'd loose a long time from the Lord, began now to unite again unto his fear*. It is certaine that the mercies of God draw more teares from his children, then his judgments do from his enemies: who as in prosperity bec use they have no changes, therefore they fear not GodPsal. 55.19. so in adversity their hearts are the more hrded thereby from his fearIs. 63.17. . Rom. 8.15. . 2 Tim. 1.7. (as in Pharaoh and Ahaz) till at last, by long trading with the devil in the wayes of sin, they come to lose, with him, all passive power also of being wrought upon; and arrive at that that height of incurable hardnesse, that neither ministry, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy can possibly mollify: Which is the greatest plague that can befall a man out of hell, and the very next step into it. But the second extreame, standing in as full opposition to that fear of God, we are treating of, is, that slavish and hellish fear and terrour that evill spirits and men conceive of God, whom they look upon only as an implacable sin revenging judge, or tyrant rather, ready to teare the very kell of their hearts in suderHos. 13 6. Quem metunnt Oderunt, Enni∣us. Odium ti∣merem spirat. Tert: and to send them packing to their place in hell. Hereupon follows an exulcerate ha∣tred of God, (according to that of the Poet, whom men fear they hate) a des∣perate unning away from God, with Cam, Saul, Ahrzath2 King. 1.2. Quem quis{que} odit pernsse ex¦petit. Ennius. &c. A secret rising up against God, and an inward desire, that there were no such thing as God, that so they might never be called to an Audit and account of their wicked wayes, and sinfull courses, as they are sure to be in that dreadfull day. This the Devill and his impes beleeve and therefore trembleIam. 2.19... The Greek word seemes to imply such an excesse of fear as causeth gnashing of teeth like the clashing of armour, or horrible yellings like the roaring of the sea est ma∣ris agnatio Hom: Iad: . vide Eustach: in locum. Nullum male∣ficium sine for∣midine. quia nec sine consci∣entia sai. Tert. They have no rest day nor night. Apoc. 14.11. The reason of which outrage is rendred by Teruiam. No sinner, saith he, escapes fear of Gods wrath, and all because he can never possibly shake off Conscience: which (being Mans spie and Gods overseer) if it be not desperately feared or sealed up securely with a spirit of slumber against the day of slaughr, doth sting the evill-doer (betwix whilesRom. 2.15.) with unquestionable conviction and horrour. And thus it fares ordinarily with a wicked person. But now tis otherwise with the godly, when they are out of temptation (for then, you must know, it is ego non sum ego with them: they are not themselves, neither can any right judgment, as then, be made of them) But usually their hearts being purisied from an evill conscienceHeb. 10.22 through the blood of sprinkling1 Pet. 1.2 cast upon them by the hyssop bunch of faithRom 5 1, they have peace with god their reconciled father in Jesus Christ. Whom therefore they love in fear, and fear in love, wishing nothing more then his being. Let he Lord livePsal. 18.44., saith David) as the principle of their well-being: for it is good for me to draw neer to JehovahPsal.73.28: Into whose presence they therefore flee, as the doves unto their windowesEsay 69 8. I will come into thine house in the mulutude of thy mercies, there's his reverencePsal. 5.7 Loe this is the guise of a godly person, whiles himself. He feares and loves, feares and hopes, feares and prayes, feares and feastsIude 12., feares and workes, yea workes out his whole salvation with fear and trembling: and all because he knowes that 'tis not of himself, but of God (a most free agent) that gives both to will and to worke, and all of his own good pleasurePhilip 2.12.13., as the Apostle there en∣forceth it.
SECT. III. Objections and Queries touching the Fear of God, cleared and answered. IF any object here that of Saint John, Perfect love casleth out fear1 Joh. 4.18 That is,Sol. Duo sunt timo∣res Dei, servi∣lis & amicalis. Bedain Prov. 1 (say we for abswer) servile and base fear, which love is perpetually purging upon For as for filiall and friendly fear, it is never cast out, no not in the state of perfection neither: for the very angels cover their faces and feet before GodEsay 6.2., as knowing their distance. But is the fear of Gods children here purely filiall, without all mixture of that which is servile? No: nor need it be. For first, servile fear (I mean fear of punishment) is a good legall preparative to filiall, the spirit of bondage to the spirit of Adoption, which it introduceth, as the needle or bristle doth the threed that follows it. Secondly, as it cannot be utterly cast out whiles we are here, so it is of singular use to a Christian in his way homeward: for being patly flesh, and partly spirit, it is profitable for the unregenerate part (which is a slave and not a sonne) to be con∣tain'd in duty, and restrain'd from sinne by the fear of Gods justice, power and pu∣nishments. And hence it is (saith One) that the fear of God is so much urged in Scripture:Cum audis quod Dominus tuus dulcis est, attende quid disigas: cum audis quod re∣ctus, attende quid timea: ut amore & ti∣more Dei excnatus legem ejus custodias. Cass super Psal 25. Dulcis & rectus Dominus. Si amor Deite tenere no potest saltem teneat & terreat amor judicis, meius gehennae, laquemtis, olors injer ni, ignis urens, vermis corrodens, &c. Hug. l. 3. de anima. to shew a difference between mans first integrity (wherein he needed no other motive to duty then love) and the renovation of Gods image in us since the fall; which being but imperfect, and in part onely, therefore hath God purposely fixed in us the affection of fear, and sanctified it in his own, to the restraining of them from sin, and provoking them to duty. How farre forth then may it be lawfull to stand in fear of Gods wrath and judgements? Divines determine it thus: we may not fear the punishment onely, and not the offence,The chief ob∣ject of godly fear is evil of sin: a just man is one that feareth an oath, Eccl. 9.2. Gods offence rather then his own distresse: which appears, in that however God spare him yet he will not spare himself, he is a law to himself. nor yet the punishment chirefly, and more then the offence: but the pu∣nishment must be feared with the offence, the offence being feared first and most. And this is both commanded by the Lord ChristMa 10.28, 29., and commended unto us in the examples of DavidPsal. 119.120., Jostah2 Chron. 34.27. HabakkukHab. 3.16. and diverse other saints. And the reason is ready rendred by Moses. Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even ac∣cording to thy fear, so is thy wrathPsal. 90.11.: that is, As any man fears thy displeasure more or lesse, so shall he feel it, as some understand that Text. SECT. IIII. Use. 1. Information. They that scar not God are not his: and who these are by their Character out of Psal. 36.1, 2, 3, 4, &c. Ʋse. 1. NOw for Use of this point: Is it so, that every faithfull servant of God, fear∣eth God? hence then in the first place, will follow, as a consectary, that all such as are destitute of this reverentiall fear of the Almighty, are (notwitstand∣ing all their other commendable parts and properties (to be esteemed no better then gracelesse, and irreligious persons. Hence it is so often made the brand of a sonne of Belial, that there is no fear of God before his eyes: and this is purposely reserved in Scripture (after a large bedroll of other abominations found in mens hearts
and lives) to the last place of allRom. 3.18 Mal. 3 5.; to intimate: that the want of Gods fear is the ground of all the forementioned mischiefs, the mother of all the misrule in the world: As in that unjust Judge, (for instance) who was therefore unjust because he fear'd not God, nor regarded manLuk. 18.2.. And surely the fear of God is not in this place, therefore they will slay me, said Abraham of the men of GerarGen. 20.11.. Lo, he could promise himself no good at all of that place and people, where God was not feared. God was not feared, may some say: what a reason's that?. Timendus, ter∣ribili, per Me∣tonyā Deus cui timor debe∣tur. Shindler. there is no people so barbarous, or person almost so bruitish, that feareth not God. For answer: I confesse there is nothing more naturall then to stand in awe of a Deity. Whence also it is that God in the Greek tongue hath his Name from fear, as some derive it. And the Chaldee Paraphrast sometimes useth the word, Fear or Terrour, for God, because of the fear (confessedly) due to him. Hence Jacob coming from Syria, and being to swear to a Syrian, sware by the fear of his father IsaacGen. 31.53.. But that all fear not the true God, or, 2. that they do not truely fear him, and so are none of his, 'tis more then evident. First, 'tis certain that all men fear not the true God, but some thing else, which they set up in his room. Who seeth not that some fear idols and devils1 Cor. 10.20. Lev. 17.7. Seghnirim of their horrour, and terrour which they cause to men. as Pa∣gans: some hee-saints, and shee-saints, as Papagans: some the Queen of heavenJer. 44.17. as the superstitious person, that consults his calendar, and scars nothing more then to fall sick upon an evil day. Some again fear digrace, as Saul1 Sam. 15.30. see Jer. 38.19.: danger and displeasure of great Ones, as Pilate; who fear'd, if he released Clirist according to his conscience CaesoteCaius Impe∣rator. should (as indeed afterwards he did) pull his purple over his ears, and kick him off the benchContra pro∣priae couscien∣tiae testimoniū, & ores sui enuntiatum, he delivered up to death the Lord of life, & so not only drew up∣on Casar and his throne the guilt of inno∣cent blood (in which respect Christ is said to have been crucified at Rome, Revel. 11.) but also ran himself at once vpon Gods and the Emperours heavy displea sure, & short∣ly after be∣came his own deaths-man. Eurrop. 1.7. Eus b.l. 2 c. 7.: some fear losse of goods, as the rich young man, that went away sorrowfull, for nothing more, then that Christ should require such conditions as he was not willing to yeeld toMat. 19 20, 21: Some fear losse of liberty, as those that forsook Paul the prisoner, and were ashamed of his chai2 Tim. 4.16: some fear losse of life, making much of a thing of noughtPsal. 39.5., shrinking in the shoulder when called to carry the crosse of Christ, or to suffer with him, though it be to bee glorisied togetherRom. 8.17. Thus men can make a shift to fear any thing, so what they should fear; God, I mean,  proper object of this, and all other our affections whatsoever. There is (I confesie) a nd of fear of God, abusivelyTimor Dei  sic appellatus. Polan. Synt. so called; a generall fear, a fear at large,  in the wicked: such as were those mongrell Samaritans, who feared the Lord, and worshipped their own Gods after the manner of the nations2 Kin. 17.33. but this is rather a fright then a fear, a spirit of restraint, a pnick terrour, falling eftsoons upon the foulest hearts, for the saegard of the saints; curbing even the rebellious from outrage, that the Lord God may dwll upon earthPsal. 68.18 in his servants, and subjects: Which else these hard-hearted Labans, and rough-handed Esat's would never suffer, did not Fear of their father IsaacGen. 31.53 Lupus venit ad ovile quaerit invadere, jugulare, devorare. Vigilant pastores, latrant canes, &c. Lupus venit fremens, redit tremens, lu∣pus tamen est & fremens & tremens. Augde verb. Apost. serm. 21. bridle them: did he not put his hook into their noses, and his bit into their jaws, turning them back by the way they came outEsay 37.28.. This is thought to have been that hornel mentioned by Moses, wherewith the Lord drave out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite before the IsraeliteExod. 23.27, 28: causing them by the furies of their own evil consciences where∣with they were haunted, to fear their own shadows, and to slre at a shaken leafLev. 26.36., as a sparrow out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of AshurHos. 11.11.. Thus Zebul was terrified with the shadow of the mountainsJudg. 9.36.: the Midianites with their own dreams and fanciesJudg. 7.13.: the Syrians with an imaginary noise of charrets and horses2 King. 7.6. French History. History of the Councel of Trent. Catilina non mediocriter solebat pertimescere, si quid crepuisset.: the Burgundians (about to give their enemies battle) with the sight of long thi∣stles which they thought to be launces: Cardinall Crsntius at his own conceits, and phantasies. For as he was writing to Rome from the Councel of Trent, against the Protestants, he thought verily he had seen the devil like a black dog walking in his chamber, and at last couching under his table: which cast the man into such a melancholy dump, that he died of it. This was a terrour from the Lord, but this was not that fear of the Lord here mentioned in the set, and wherewith few are acquainted. For even of those that professe to fear the true God, how very few are there found that do fear him in truth? which is our second accusation, and action laid against most men, and comes now to be proved.
And first, for the wicked of the earth, it is most certain, that they have greatest cause to fear of any men (if they knew all:) for the direfull and dreadfull threats of Gods mouth are against them: Sinne lies sculking at the doorGen. 4.7. of their consci∣ences, like a ban-dog, ready to worry them: the devil stands watching to lay claim to them, and to devour them1 Pet. 5 8: the rage of all the creatures (though they little think of it) is ever arm'd and addrest to seize upon them as traytours and rebels to the highest majesty, and to drag them down into the bottome of hell In all which respects, the sinners in Sion should be afraid, fearefulnesse should surprize the Hypocrites. Cause enough they have to run away with those despe∣rate words in their mouthes, who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among vs shall dwell with everlasting burningsEsay 33.14.? Or rather (which indeed were more to be wisht) to grow to that conclusion of the Authour to the Hebrews, Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence, and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fireHeb. 12.28.29.. But how little (alasse) of this reverent fear, (and so consequently of any other saving grace whatsoever,Timor Dei est virtus & vitutu n cu∣stos. Bucholcer. Ps. 36.1, 2, 3, 4 expounded.) there is in the hearts of wcked and unregenerate persons, appears in their practise: and that the Psalmist ma∣keth good both in respect of evill to be avoyded and of good to be performed. Psal. 36 1, 2, 3, 4. For evill first, my minde gives me, saith the Prophet, and I am veri∣ly perswaded that there's nofear of God in such a mans heart. ver. 1. But what's the ground of this perswasion? may it not be a rash and uncharitable censure you passe upon him?Ob. No saith he: for, first, for evill thoughts, he makes no scruple, no conscionce of them, for he holds that thought's free, and therefore layes the raines in the neck:Sol. and lets them rove any way, yea even then when his reines should teach him better things, in the night seasonPsal. 16.7.. He deviseth mischief, saith he, upon his bed. Psl. 36.4. Secondly for his words, as to God they are stoutMalac 3.13., so to men they are slippe∣ry: so that ye cannot tell where to have him, neither how to beleeve almost any thing that he speaks: the words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit. ver. 3. Thirdly for matter of deeds, he abhorrs not any evill. ver. 3. well he may leave some sin, but he loaths it not: forbear it he may for some politick respects (as fear of the law, shame of the world, and speech of people) but 'tis sure he hates it not in his heart. A man may withdraw himself from some particular sin, give it over, seeme to be divorc'd from it, yet have a monthes minde to it still. As Aha∣shuerosh, when the heat of his passion was over, remembred Vashti and what was decreed against herEsth. 21., and could have wishe it otherwise: Or as the husband of Michal, who when she was taken from him, yet he came weeping after her afar off2 Sam. 3.16.. And this way a man may be as wicked in his fearfull abstaining from sin, as in his furious committing of it. But usually this generation of men that have not the fear of God before their eyes, are so wedded to their wicked courses, that they will at no hand depart from iniquityProv. 3.7. Malach. 3.5., but are wise, and cunning to palliate and plead for that they doe: Yea against all the terrours of the Lord (casting hand∣fulls of hell-fire into their faces in the ministry of his word) which should make them tremble and sin notPsal. 4.4., they (contrarily) sin, and tremble not. Yea (which is worst of all, and sets them farthest off from mercy) they please and blesse them∣selvesDeut. 29.19, 20. in that iniquity of theirs which God and good men descry to be hateful, Psal. 36.2. not only not standing in awe of his judgements as they ought, while they hang in the threatenings: but fleshing and slattering themselves, as if the bit∣ternesse of death were past1 Sa. 15.32., because sentence is not speedily executed, and for that God forbeares for a time to punishEccle 8.13., as waiting their returne2 Pet. 3.9., Loe, this is the disposition of wicked and ungodly people, as touching that which is evill: and this sufficiently shewes them utterly voyd of Gods true fear, whiles they plunge them∣selves into sins of all sorts with all delight and greedinesse. Next for the performance of that which is good; it is manifest, saith David, that the wicked person hath no fear of God before his eyes, for he hath left off to do good Psal. 36.3. he restraines prayerIob 15 4. and other holy duties, saith Eliphaz: he seeth not need to seek the LordPsa. 34.9, 10 saith the Psalmist again: he counts it a bur∣then, a course of no boot or benefit, to be religious, saith our Prophet here above the textMal. 3.14.15. He is no whit troubled at his own insufficiency or infirmity,Iob 37. ult. he takes no notice of Gods great judgements abroad the world, he will not declare his
worksPsal 64.9.. What should I stand to multiply words in a case so cleare? Leave we theseSons of Belial.  yokelesse, fearelesse, frontlesse, people to the just judgement of God which will surely seize upon them (if they take not course with him by timely re∣pentance) tearing off the brawninesse of their hearts, and washing off the var∣nish, that is upon the faces of the more refined amongst them with rivers of brimstoneEsa. 30.33.. As for the better sort of men, be it that backsliding Israel have plaid the harlot, yet why should Judah offend for want of this fearIer. 3.8.? And yet (with grief I speak) there is but too great a defect of this holy fear to be discovered in Judah also: Gods own dear children, I mean, many of them at least; as were easy to evince. For How should we all fear God in his name, that we dishallow it not?Deut. 28.58 fear him in his presence, that we pollute it notIer. 5.22.? fear him in his ministers that we discou∣rage them not2 Cor. 7.5.? fear him in his people that we oftend them not1 Cor. 10.32? fear him in the mysteries, of godlinesse, that we prophane them not: fear him in his promises that we neglect them notHeb. 4.1.? fear him in the works of his providence, that we slight them notEsay 5.12.? How should we be godlyly jealous over our selves and one ano∣ther, mistrusting the corruption of our own natures2 Cor. 7.1.: and for others, fearing lest good men should fall from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus2 Cor. 11.3., and lest bad men should be hardened, and hindered by us, or ruine themselves when we might help themJude 23.? Lay your selves now, every man, to the rule laid before you, and see your own swerving and be humbled. Take the rod into your own hands, and afflict your selves seasonably, with voluntary sorrowes for your de∣fects in this duty; lest else he stand over you, and tutoring you to his fear, at every lash let you hear the rod sayMicah 6 9., If I be a father, where's my honour? and if a master, where's my fear?Mal. 1.6. But a word to these wise is sufficient. SECT. 5. Ʋse 2. Examination, where markes of the true fear of God, inrespect 1. of evill both in judgement, and practise. 2. of good toward 1. God, 2. men, both rich and poor, 3. our selves in prosperity and adversity. SEcondly, is this fear of God an infallible note of an honest heart? Let a man then examine himself1 Cor. 11.28 . as à Lapidary doth his gemmes and Jewels. Quest. Answ. Solus Dei ti∣mor est qui mentes corrigit, fugat crimina, innocentiam servat, & om∣nis boni tribuit facultatem. Chrysost ser. de Joan Baptist., and so learne to settle the soundnesse of his gracious estate by securing this to his own soule, that he is a man truly fearing God. But how may I come to know it, will some say. I answer, enough hath been said to this already in the foregoing discourse. If any yet would have fur∣ther satisfaction, try your selves carefully by the effects, which this fear will certainly produce, where ever it lodgeth; causing that man diligently to endea∣vour 1. the shunning of all that's evill, 2. the doing of all that's good. First this clean fear of GodPsal 19.9., (as David fitly stiles it) is of soveraigne and sin∣gular use to a man for the casting out of all that's evill, whether in judgement or practise, as fast as it comes to knowledge. For point of Opinion, first, Fear God, saith the Angell, that had the everlast∣ing Gospell to preach unto them that dwell in the earth (understand it you may of that heroicall Luther, and the rest of the Renowned Reformers of later times) fear God, saith he, and give glory to himRev. 14.7. (viz. by abdicating and abjuring your hereticall and erroneous conceits and opinions, and receive the love of the truth that ye may be saved2 Thes 2.10.) It is the property of this fear to make humbleProv. 22.4: Now an humble man can never be an heretick, for it is but shewing him his errour, and he will quickly yeeld, and subscribe to truth.Ioannes Denckius hae∣reticus sed vir doctus & de∣missi animi, resipuit tandem conversus ah Oecolampadio, & piè obijt Basileae. Anno. 1528. Scultet. Annal. The like we say for matter of practise, The fear of the Lord is to depart from evillProv. 3.7., whether publike, private, or secret. For the first, wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you (saith Jehosaphat in his charge to his judges, as
they were going their Circuit) take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts2 Chr. 19.7. And Iob tells us that howsoever he could easily have borne out his oppressions by his greatnesse, yet he durst not, for he feared God and eschewed that evill alsoIob 31.13, 34.. Next, as in publike negotations, and places of judiature it casts out corruption: so in pri∣vate commerce, and enterdealing betwixt man and man. Thou shalt not curse the deaf saith the Lord why what if I do (might a man reply) he cannot hear me? Thou shalt not lay a stumbling block before the blind, why what it I do; he cannot see me? But thou shalt fear the LordLevit. 19.14 Deo obsura clarent, mata respndent, si∣lentrum confi∣tetur. as it followes there) who both heareth thy cures and seeth thy stumbling blocks. Night will convet it self into noone before God, and silence prove a speaking evidence. Earth will cry Cam guiltyGen. 4.10, or if earth do not, heaven will reveal the iniquityIer. 20.27 Servi ut tae∣ant, jementa lo∣quentur luvenal.. Yea the very beasts have a wordist to passe upon evill-doers, as the asse upon Balaam2 Pet. 2.26: A bird of the ayre shall carry the voice, and tell the matterEccle. 10 20. Or it all tlese should faile, yet the eyes of the Lord run to and fo beholding the evill and the goodProv. 15 3 . Mus:. Neither is he an  as the Epicures dreamt, but he hath a revenging eye (as the hra∣then Poet.) and hand toEsa. 5.25.: (as the holy Prophet assure, us) the remembrance whereof reyn'd in Ioseph from yeelding to the wicked motion of his wan on mi∣stresse, though he might have commtted that folly, and the world have been ne∣ver the wiserGen 39 9. Lastly, it cleanseth also from secret sins, such as the world never comes ac∣quainted with; for such as fear the Lord shall not be sited of evillProv. 19.23. It weeds by pcrisyIosh 24.14 out of the heart, and pride and arrogancy and every  wayProv. 8.13, be it but in thought: as is to be seen in Iob, who durst not once  (ully) upon a maid, because God, he knew, saw his wayes, and coumed Iob 31.1, 1. Loe this was it that mde him retrain wanton lookes, and  wckednesse, cleausing himself from all filt himsse of slesh and spirit, so persling holss  the fear of God.x|2 Cor. 7.1. Secondly this holy fear, as it frames the heart to a shing of sin, so it formes it no lee to the ding of duty: and that 1. toward God, 2. toward men. For God, first, it mketh a man 1. beleeve him 2. y him. First, it trem∣bleth, all out as mch, at the threats of God mouth as at the stokes of his handEsay 66.2, as is to be seen in HabakkukHab. 3 16. And the scripture noteth  of the Patriarch Noah, that moved with fear he beleevedHeb. 11.7 ., Ad the denvered Israelis, possest with this filiall fear, beleeved God and is servant MoesEx 14. nlt.. Thus it frames a mans heart to saith in Gods wordProv. 13 13. And so it doth secondly, to the obedience of his will: for they that fear the Lord, will keep his covenantPs 103.13.18, yea they will work hard at itAct. 10.35, as afraid to be taken with their tasks undone. Thus it orders us in point of duty toward God, and no lesse toward men, both our selves and others. For others first: this fear of the Lord teacheth both rich, and poor, their se∣ve all duties. The rich it teacheth 1. not to brow-beat or oppresse their poorer brethrenGen 42 18. This do and live, saith Ioseph, for I fear God and thats your secty: As if he should say, ntend you no hut. though ye are fallen into my danger; for it stands nt with that scar of God that hath taken up my heart. And, ought ye not to have walked in the fear of GodNehem. 5.9? said Nehemiah, to those mercilesse usurions Israelites, that had engrated upon their brethren. 2. To be hospitable and haborous, ready to relecve the necessitous: such especially as are of the houshold of saith. This we see in Obadiah1 King. 8.12, 13, for the old testament, and Cornelius, for the new: he feared God, saith the text, and he gave much almesAct 10.1, 2. As on the other side, to him that is afflicted, saith Iob, pitry should be shewed from his friend, but he forsaketh the fear of the AlmightyIob 6.14 What cares Nabal the churle though worthy David dye at his doore, so long as he may sit warme within, eating of the fat, and drinking of the sweet. All his Logick is lit∣tle enough to conclude for himself. Shall I take my bread and my flesh that I have kill'd for my shearers, and give it to men, whom I know not whence they be1 Sam. 25.11? No, why should he, say: but the fear of God would have taught the fooleNabal is his name and fol∣ly is with him moe wit. But Secondly, as it formeth the rich to their duties, so the poorer sort too;
whom it rendreth, 1. Content with their pittance, as knowing, that Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure, and trouble therewithProv. 17 122. Far from envying the rich, sith God hath meted out to each one the portion of his allowanceActs 17 26 ., with this condition, that where much is given, much shall be re∣quiredLuke 12.48. Let not thine heart envy sinners, saith Solomon, but (for an antidote a∣gainst that evil disease) be thou in the fear of the Lord all day longProv. 23.17. Lastly, for our selves (in what estate soever) the fear of the Lord will make and keep a man in prosperity, 1. humble, 2. thankfull; as in adversitie, 1. patient. 2. confident. In prosperity it teacheth: 1. Humility, according to that of the Wise-man; By humility and the fear of the Lord are richesProv. 22.4 &c. where you may observe a very close connexion of humility and the fear of the Lord, set forth by an elegant asyndeton in the originall: there being no grammaticall copulative set between them; but such a near affinity intimated, as if they were the very same thing, and the one praedicated of the other, as termes convertible. 2. Thankfulnesse; as appears in the example of Job and David: and may be gathered out of that text in Jeremy: Neither say they in their hearts, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that giveth rain, both the former and latter rain in his season, &c.Jer. 5 2. One would think, he should rather blame them there, for not saying, Let us praise the Lord our God, &c. but that former includes this latter: for he that truely feareth God, will not fail to be thankfull. Next, in time of adversity, the fear of God is of no small use and benefit; for 1. It makes men patient, willing to bear Gods hand, and to wait his lei∣sure: to seek remedy onley in Gods wayes, and to accept of it onely upon his termes: Thus those holy women in Peter, being under the crosse of unequall yoke-fellows, might not seek to win their loves by plaited hair, or garish attire, but by a meek and quiet spirit, and by a chast conversation coupled with fear1 Pet. 3.3. Adde hereunto (in the last place) that the fear of God keeps men confident in the evil day, holds up their hearts from dejection and disquietment. For it brings a man before God in prayerProv. 14.26, as it did distressed DavidPsal. 119 38, and fainting HabakkukHab. 3 16, 17.; who after he had poured forth his soul before God, with reverence and godly fear, rose up off his knees as confident as might be, that Although the fig-tree shall not blossome, nor fruit be found in the vines; the labour of the olive should fail, and the fields yeeld no meat: the flock should be cut off from the fold, and there be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, saith he: I will joy in the God of my salvation. The Lord God is my strength, &c. So true is that of Solomon: In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence: and his children have a place of refugeProv. 14.26. And this is that fear of God that speaks a man truly religious. Apply your selves now every one to the rule, and search and see in some of you an utter nullity; in o∣thersome, a fearfull deficiency of this reverentiall fear of God. SECT. VI. Ʋse 3. Exhortation to get and grow in this holy Fear: with six Motives, and three Means tending thereto. ANd for a third Use of the point, learn we all, first, to get; and then to grow in this grace. Let the fear of the Lord be upon you, and do it2 Chro. 19.6. Give all diligence to fashion your hearts to this reverent regard of God: considering the terrour of the Almighty, which we must needsly know either as slaves or sons: but better as sons, that in the day of distresse he may spare us, as a man doth his own sonne that serveth himMal. 3.17 Motives to the fear of God.. If yet ye look for further Motives to this duty, Consider that the fear of God is 1. But equall and reasonable. 2. Gainfull and profitable. 3. Needfull. 4. Honourable. 5. Acceptable. 6. Comfortable. 'Tis equall, first, for it is our bounden duty, sith he hath so often commanded and required it upon our allegeancePsal. 2.11 psal. 33.8 prov. 3.7 Esay 8.13 Heb. 12.28: besides, that it of right appertaineth unto him as a due, though he should never have called for it. Bring presents unto him that
ought to be fearedPsal. 76.11, saith David, and who would not fear thee, ô king of nations? for to thee doth it apprtain, because there is none like to theeJer. 10.7 Eccles. 12.13. It is then (you see) and act of justice to fear the Lord. And when we have done our utmost that way, we have done no more then was our duty to doLuke 17.10. Secondly, 'tis a practise no lesse gainfull then equall (whatever those profane mis∣creants above the text blasphemed to the contrary.) Profitable it must needs bee, for it hath the promises of both lives. In the life present, he that hath the fear of the Lord shall not be visited of evilProv. 19.23, in generall: Not of the evil of sinne, for te fear of the Lord is to hate that evilProv. 8.13: Nor of pain, for the fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to escape the snares of deathProv. 14.27: Say hee meet with troubles with∣out, or terrours within, yet he that feareth God shall come out of them allEccles. 8.12. Thus for evil: And for good, both to us and ours after us. By humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honour, and lifeProv. 22.4 Esay 33.6. One would think that were enough: yea, but then here's more then enough: They that fear the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is goodPsal. 34 Ob. Sol.. Ey. but what shall their poor children do when they are gone? Well enough: for their seed shall be mighty upon earth, and their generation blessed, Psal. 112. thoroughout. Thus for temporalls they are provided for: And for spirituall blessings in heavenly thingsEphes. 1.3, The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear himPsa. 147.11: he will teach such a one in the way that he shall chusePsal. 25 12, guide them he will with his counsell, and afterwards receive them to his gloryPsal. 73 24. Surely Gods salvation is nigh them that fear him p, saith David, and the covenant of life and of peace was with Levi, because he feared GodMal. 2.5, saith Malachy. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed, that feareth the LordPsal 128.4. Thirdly, this holy fear is wondrous needfull, for it inciteth and inableth to all Christian duties: Whence it was that the Lord both delivered his Law at first in a fearfull mannerExod 19., and afterward, wished that the hearts of his people might bee season'd with his fear, that they might keep his commandements alwayesDeut. 5.29. Serve the Lord with fear, saith DavidPsal. 2.11: yea, he thou in the fear of the Lord all day longProv. 23.17, saith Solomon. The primitive Christians walked in the fear of the Lord (saith St. LukeActs 9 31) and it is a spot in your feasts to eat an drink without fearJude 12 ., saith St. Jude. Fourthly, 'tis honourable: for (besides that God takes himself highly honoured by it, and therefore calls for it in this Name; If I be a father, where is mine honour; and if a Master, wher's my fearMal. 1.6?) we our selves are not a little dignified here∣by. The woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised: and though many daughters had done vertuously, yet she excelled them allPr. 31.29, 30. This grace winnes a man a wonderfull deal of respect both from God and men; as it did Job, of whom God himself boastedJob 1.8: and Abraham, who was a Prince of God to the Heathenish HittitesGen. 23 6. Fifthly, 'tis a grace very acceptable: for it gives grace and vertue to all other graces and duties; which else are unpleasing to the Almighty. For to him will I look, even to him that trembleth at my wordEsay 66.2, 3: as to none else, be his sacrifice ne∣ver so specious or costly. And to shew how highly God esteemeth this fear, you shall find it not seldome set for the whole service of God in holy Scripture, as was said before. Lastly, it is exceeding comfortable, for it freeth the heart of all base fears; (which vanish out of sight before this, as the lesser lights before the Sun) and fills it with strong confidence and consolations: making the man in whom it is to hold up his head in the greatest hurly-burlie, and to walk about the world as a conque∣rour, void of all fear what man or devil can do unto himPsal. 3 tho∣roughout.. You see that this holy fear comes commended unto you by many names: what remains, but that ye set your selves in all good earnest, for the attaining thereunto in a diligent use of the means. These are among others:. First,Means of get∣ting the fear of God. set on serious meditation, and first upon your selves, Reflect, and see, 1. your own miserable condition, by reason of sin imputed to you, sin inherent in you, and sin issuing from you: together with the deserved punishment, all torments here, and tortures hereafter, which are but the just hire of the least sinRom. 6. ult.. 2. Your utter inability to free your selves either from sin, or punishment. From the former you can no more free your selves, then the blackmore from his skin, or the leopard
from his spotsIer. 13 23: And for the later, there's no power, wit, or any other meanes in our selves or the creature, either to abide or avoyd it. This meditation made Peters converts cry out for fear, Men and brethren what shall we do to be savedAct. 2.3? Next, busy your thoughts upon God, be thinking upon his name, with those in the text. See him as he stands described 1. in his word. 2. in his works. The word sets out God for our present purpose, 1. as a God of transcendent ex∣cellency and surprissing glory: and thence inferrs a necessity of his fear: Who would not fear thee O king of NationsIer. 10 7 &c. saith Ieremy. And thou art more glor∣ous and excellent than the mountains of prey, that is, then the flourishing Assyrians, with all their goodly Monarchy: therefore (as a consectary) ring presents unto him that ought to be searedPsa 76.4, 11. 2. As omnipresent and omniscient: one that beholdeth and taketh knowledge of all we doe, as much as of any thing in his own heart: for all things consists in himCollos 1.17. And the wayes of a man are before the Lord, he ponderth all his pathsProv. 5 21. And will ye not tremble at my presence saith the LordIer. 5.24. Ioseph did, and so kept him∣self untouch: and Iob did, and so frighted his conscience from sin by this whole∣some considerationIob 31 1, 2.. 3. As armed with infinite power and might, to reward us if we fear him, and to punish us if we neglect him. Shall servants ear their masters, because the have power over the slehColos 3 23., and shall not we ear him that is ale to cast body and sonle to hellat 10 29. No man will pu his hand into a fiery crucible to setch gold , be∣cause he knowes it will be re hi did we as truly be∣leeve and far the fire of hell &c.? 4. As infinitely just, and singularly carefull to punish sin, where ever he finds it; be it in the earest of his own, nay in his onely son, who being mae sin for us2 Cor. 5.21, and found in the shape and stead of sinfull fleh3 . 8 2  &c Liturg. Graec., was made to undergo those dolorous and concerveable sorrowes, that drew clotted bloodLue. 22.44 . from his body: and were joyn'd with a temporary desertion to his soule: yet the very pes of hell, which he selor a seasonPs 22.1 &c. Who would not therefore fear before this just and impartial God? See that sweet song of the triumphant saints, that had overcome the beast by the blood of the lamb. Iust and true a e thy wayes &c. who shall not fer thee, O Lord, and gloifie thy nameRev. 15 4. &c. 5. As abundantly and unpeakeably kind and loving to us in Christ. This pro∣perty in God throughly thought upon will inflame our hearts with his love, and so make us fearfull to displease him as the dutifull spouse her loving husband, or the gratious child his indulgent father. This is to fear God and his goodnesseHos. 3 5, to fear God through delight in his wesPsal 112.1 to reioyce in fearPsal 2 11 and therefore to fear to offend, him with hope, because there is mercy with hmPsal. 130.4, as the psalmist hath it. Thus meditate on the attributes of God, set forth in the word. In the world next, you may see God in his workes. And first, those standing miracles, the hanging of the earth upon nothingIob 26.7, the bounding of sea, that it cannot transgresse his wordIer. 5.24. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. He gthereth the waters of the sea together as a hep: he laveth up the depth in storehouse. Let all the earth se the Ld. let all the  of the world stand inawe of him. For he spake, and it was done, he commnded and i stood fastPsal 33 6, 7, 8, 9 &c. Secondly turne your eyes and thoughts upon the judgments of God: and first particular, executed upon others for our warning and learning. The righteous hall see this and fearPsal. 52.6, as David speakes, and as Dvd did too: as himself testifieth, my st harembleth for fear of thee, and I am aaid of th udg mentsPsl. 119, 120. When one child is whipt in a schoole, the rest will tremble: so it should be with us, when we see others pun shed: which because  did notDan. 5 21, 22.27 Dscite justi am monai & non temnere &c. Pndit Herodotus suo temnore con∣spctam esse in Aegvpto statu∣am Sna heri∣b cum hac in∣sptinne, . when his father was turn'd a grasing; therefore was he found too light in the bal∣lance, and his kingdome given to his neighbour, that was better then he. 2. Premeditate upon the generall judgment, and the unconceivable terrour of that dreadfull day, when the heavens shall passe aw with a grenose, nd the el∣ments shall mslt with fervent hea: the earth also, and th workes tht are theein hal burnt up2 pet 3 10. Faelix (though a pagan) trembled at Pls discourse of this great dayAct 24 25. The devils when they think of it, shake and shadder: the joynts of their loines are loosed with Belhizzar, and their knees smite one against anotherDan 5.6.. And can any man think seriously of this last judgment, and not be moved with fear? Fear God saith Solomon, and, as a help hereunto, consider, that God will bring every
work into judgement, with every secret thing whether it be good or evillEccles. 12.14. And this is the first meanes of getting Gods holy fear, viz. Meditation. The second is like unto it, and that is faithfull and fervent prayer to the father of lightsJam. 1.17., for it is a supernaturall gift to fear God as a father. Thus David goes to God for this gift, Ʋnite my heart (which of it self is wofully divided and scattered up and down upon lying vanities) to fear thy namePsal. 86.11. And Eliphaz gives this as a reason, why men cast off fear, because they restrain prayerJob 15.4. And it may easily be observed, that to fear God, and to seek God, are often in scripture (especially Psal. 34.) used for one and the same: this being the ready way to that, and in∣deed the onely way. For, I will yet for this be sought unto by the house of Israel, saith the LordEze. 36.37 concerning the benefits and contents of the new covenant; One clause whereof (for our encouragement to ply the throne of grace by prayer) is this, I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever. I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from me for everIer. 32.39, 40. CHAP. IIII. The Text expounded, and the duty of Christian conference propounded. Then they, that feared the Lord, spake often one to another. &c. THey spake, Sermonis fre∣quentationem significat in hac conjugat. and they spake often: for that is the import of the Originall word here used: and that's the summ of the service here performed. The circum∣stances whereof (so far as they lye in our way at least) being already dispatcht, we now passe on to the substance in these words, They spake often one to another. Hap∣py soules that thus improv'd their holy meetings in laying out themselves to the best advantage one of another in that generall Apostasy. Gods holy fear had so taken up their good hearts that they could never depart from him, no not in a common defectionJer. 32.40. Though all men forsake thee, Lord, yet Il'e stick to theeMat. 26.33 Meliùs semper animatus quam armatus. Cart.. So Peter promised (being better alwayes affectioned then appointed, as one well saith of him:) but so such only have performed, as with these in the text, having their hearts fraught with Gods fear, and solicitously thinking upon his name, tooke all good occasions of uttering their holy thoughts among themselves (at least) not without the inestimable benefit and edification one of another. That which we may hence observe is thus much. That Christians (in bad times especially) should, by godly conference and otherwise as they can, carefully imploy, and wisely improve all their best abilities and interests one in another for mutuall confirmation and encouragement. SECT. I. Christian conserence and mutuall confirmation confirmed by Scripture. THus the good people here: they gat together, and spake together: in op∣position doubtlesse to those wicked above, that multiplyed to speak mischief ver. 13. seeking to turn Gods glory into shame, and not knowing that God hath set up, yea and set apart him that is godly for himselfPsal. 4.2, 3.: the Lord will hear him when he callesPsal. 4.2, 3., nay, he will harken and hear and a ooke of remembrance was written
before him &c. as these ancient Christians aver'd by way of reply to these wick∣ed blasphemers, as some will have it.Treellius Polanus alij. Ths they here combin'd together for mu∣all strengthening: and thus, before them, Abraham and MelchisedechGen 14 19., Moses and AaronExod. 4.14, 15, 16, Jethro and MosesExod. 18.19, Samuel and David1 Sa. 19 18, David and Ionathan1 Sa 32.16 Eliah and Elisha2 King 2 11; they were going on and talking, when the charet of heaven came to divide them. Surely had not that conference been needfull and divine (saith a right Reverend Writer of our Church) it had given way to meditaion; and Eliah had been taken up rather praying then talking. But he knew best what was fittest to be done, and happy is that servant whom his master when he cometh shall finde so doingMatt. 24.46. And thus the master himself (in whose one example is a globe of proofes, a cloud of witnessesHeb. 12.1) He therefore (as himself was confirm'd by Moses and Elias, who appeared unto him in the mount, and talked with him of his deceaseLuc 9.31 ., so) what paines tooke he with his disciples for their strengthen∣ing and settling? But especially with Peter; forewarning him, first, of his su∣ture fallMar. 26.34. praemonitus praemunnitus., calling him afterwards out of it by the cock, but more by hi lookeLuc. 2.61: confirming him, after it, partly by his message to him by Mary Magdalen, Go faith faild notLuc 22.32: and partly by his threefold charge to him, feed my sheep, feed my lambsIoh. 21.15, (so assuring him that his sin was pardoned by his ministry restored:) And, when thou art converted streng then thy brethrenLuc. 22.32 Nemo enim ex Aposlolis gra∣viorem senten∣tiam contra Apostatas sert. 2 Pet. 2. & to∣ta illa epystla serpta est con∣firmandis fra∣tribus Par.: which accordingly he performed to purpose, even to his dying day. Hear him else, I will not be negligent to put you alwayes in remembrance. Nay, that's not enough: Yea I think it meet so long as I am in this tbernacle to rouze you up2 Pet. 1.12, 13 . (so the Greck word signfieth) by put∣ting you in remembrance of these things, though ye know them and be established in the present truth. For (as good as they were) they might nod sometimes with the wise viginsMat. 25.5 . Quandoque b∣nus dermitat.: and so have need of rowzing: as Peter himself had at Anti∣och; where he was justly taken up for halting by St. PaulGal. 2.10: and as Paul him∣self might need to be served by Peter, or a far meaner man: for I long to see you, (saith he to his Romans) that I may impart unto you sme spirituall gift, to the end ye may be establshed. That is, that I may be comsorted together with you by the mu∣tuall faith boh of you and meRo. 1.11, 12 . Nazianz.. So that, there is, we see, no depth of know∣ledge, height of holinesse, degree of grace, or measure of zale, but may be bles∣sedly increased, and inlaged by conference with other christians. And that shall be one Reason of the point (in its proper place) if we shall first (by your patience) begin from him who is the beginning and end of all our endeavours in this worke of his. Whether then we looke to God or men, our selves or others, the good or the bad, we shall se sufficient reason to confirme the pont, and to ensorce the duty. SECT. II. Reasons of the Point. 1. from God, commanding, rewarding. 2 from men, and 1. our selves shall be hereby sealed, seured. 2. others. 1. Good men. Who shall be 1. curbed from sin, 2. quickened to duty. 2. Bad men. Who shall be 1. consuted. 2. defeated. FOr God, first, he both requires it, and requites it: bids it be done, and then blesseth it in the deed. First, I say, he commands it; aad therefore we should do it. This is a poiv∣erfull kinde of reasoning used by the great doctour of the Gentils: In every thing give thanks: And why? for this is the will of God in Christ Iesus1 Thes 5.18 that ye be thankfull: and so 'tis also that ye be, this way, usefull and profitable one to an∣ther. Not pleasing your selves, but every one pleasing his neighbour for his good to edificationRom. 15.112 .: not forsaking the assemblyes of the saints as the mnner of some is, (which also is the high rode-way to finall impenitency, to utter Apostacy, nay to the unpardonable sinHeb. 10.23, 24, 25 .) but exhorting one another dayly, yea considering, and studying one another, to where on to love and good works. Not making our selves our
owne mark onlyPhilip. 2.4 ., but looking and ayming at, every man, the things of another, as being his brothers keeper. Not living to our selves, or being all for our selvesMan is Na∣tures good fellow . Arist.(as wild beasts who delight to luk alone in their dens; or as swine, styed up till ready for the knife) but as every man hath received the gift, so ministring the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God1 Pet. 4.10. No man is either born or born again for himself. The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withall1 Cor. 12 7. What should I heap up more testimonies in a truth so clear? God, you see, hath plainly and plentifully reveal'd his will, that sove∣raigne Rule, and most sufficient Reason that swayes most with a Christian. So Paul presseth it, and so David held it (every where in his psalmes) and hath there∣fore this testimony that he fulfill'd all (not the will only, but the) wills of GodAct. 13.22 : though never so danger-full or difficult. The Rechabites were rigid observers of their fathers command;Ier. 35 2, 3 &c., and were well rewarded for it. And shall not we much more of this command of God? especially, sith n doing thereof is so great rewardPsal 19.11: which is the second branch of this first Reason from God, who as he commands mutuall confirmation, so he rewards it too, and that, many wayes. For 1. Donorum in∣crementum ac∣cipiunt qui concessis prio∣ribus fideliter utuntur Mal∣colm: in Act. 6 he listens and layes his eare to their sweet words, as loth to lose any part of that precious language. He harkened and heard, saith the text. 2. He bookes them up, and writes them down in his register, as matters of mark. 3. He adds to their stock of grace, which they husband so well, causing it to grow in the use, as once the loaves did in Christ hands, or the oyle in the widdowes cruse 4. He secretly and sweetly comforteth their hearts, himself making one among them (as our Saviour dealt with those twoLuc 24 travelling to Emaus) according to his promise, where but two or three are gathered together in his name (and fear to do him service, and to help one another toward heaven) there is he in the midst of themMat. 18.20.: to water and prosper their holy endeavours that way with the dewes of many sweect and glorious refreshings: a very foretast unto them of that life eter∣nall. Where 5. the reward shall be according to their work in this kinde. He that hath wised others shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament: and he that hath turn'd many to righteousnesse, as the stars for ever and everDan. 12.3.. He that with his two talents hath (by trading with others gain'd) five, shall be made ruler over five cityes. And he that hath gain'd ten, shall be ruler over tenLuc. 19.16, 17. Besides (6) a free largesse of his lords joy to boot: Enter thou, good servant, into thy ma∣ste joyMat 25.21. A joy more fit for the Master then for the sevant: and yet behold such a master do we serve (when we serve one another in loveGal. 5.13,) as will reward his servants with such a joy. And thus stands the first Reason for a srequency of christian conference, taken from God, who both indispensably requires it, and a∣bundantly rewards it. A second followes taken from our selves: And so we should give all diligence to this duty of mutuall confirmation and encouragements: if but for our own sakes, who shall hereby be 1. sealed up and setled in al good assurance of our gracious estate for present: 2. secured, and well enabled to proceed and profit therein for the future. For the first: the text, you see, makes it a mark of men truly religious, to be often speaking one to another: for as sincerity is the life of religion, so society is the life of sincerity. And therefore no sooner did Ephraim acknowledge their offences, and seek Gods face, but in the next chapter, first verse, they call upon each other, Come let us return to the LordHos. 5. ult. & 6.1 &c. And those three thousand soules Act. 2. were no sooner added to the church, but they (to give proofe thereof) presently made conscience aswell of christian society, as of hearing and praying and breaking of breadAct. 2.41 42: which some understand, of receiving the Lords supper. And the Philippians so soon as ever they were converted to Christ, held a fruit∣full fellowship in thegospel from the first day untill now. Which made St. Paul confident of this very thing, that God had both begun a goood worke in them (which was the first branch of this second reason) and would also finish it to the day of ChristPhili. 1.5, 6. Reas. 4.: And that's the second. This speaking often each man to his neighbour, as it comfortably assures and seals us up for present, that we are of those righteous whose lips feed manyProv. 10.21 (even as
many as they can opportunelyGal. 6.10 and orderly1 Cor. 14.40 extend themselves to) to it effectu∣ally secureth and setleth us for the future: and is of excellent use and avail for our proceeding, and profiting in the Chistian course. For 1. there is a secret tyc to constancy in the communion of saints: But woe be to him that is aloneEccles. 4.0. He is not likely long to hold fast the profession of his faith, without wavering or warping, that doth not consider himself and others, to provke to love and good worksHeb. 10.23, 24. He that forsaketh the assembling of our selves together (as the Apostle speaketh) is not farr from inward or outward Apostacyib & Heb 3.12, 13. Against which woefull evll, tx∣hortation is there fitly prescribed as a precious preservative. For indeed and thats a second settlement) he that hath exhorted another to duty, hath after a sort ingag'd himself to the performance thereof: and laid a new tye upon his own conscience to perseverance therein; lest haply he hear, Physitian heal thy selfLuc. 4 23, or, Thou that teachest another teachest thou not thy self?Rom 2 Besides, thirdly, the promise of in∣crease made to this spirituall, no lesse then to that other corporall almes; that he that soweth bountifully shall reap bountifully2 Cor. 9.6. And the liberall man deviseth libe∣rall things, and by liberall things he shall standIsa. 32 8. And to him that hath (namely for use and increase) shall be given, and he shall aboundMat. 25 29. Whereas, from him that hath not (in manner aforesaid) shall be taken away even that he seemed to have, with the slothfull servant he shall surely come to poverty, for withholding that which was meet with Solomons sluggard: when he that scatterth increasethProv 11 24: He shall have his arme clean dryed up, and his eyes uterly darkened with those Idol-she∣pheardsZach. 11.17 in Zachary that had eyes, and saw not, hands, and handled not, the law, I mean which they ought to have seen into, and hanaledIer. 2 8 : dividing it aright as St. Paul speaketh2 Tim 2.15  and as good sewards of the manisold grace of God received, distributing to every man his just measure of sit mat in due seasonLuc. 12 42  Servi (inquit Donatus) qua∣ternos modios frumenti acci∣piebant in men∣sem, & id de∣mensum dice∣batur.. So that it is a high point of spi ituall thirst to be much in holy confrence and calling upon others to duty: which they that do often, are as gardens whose spices slow outCant 4.16 a, liberall house keepers, the dores of whose lips are a wayes open to the feeding of of manyPro 10.21: their path is as the morning light that shines more and more to the perfect dayPro 4.18, they shall never be of thoe that draw back to perdition: but of them that beleeve to the salvation of the souleHeb. 10. ult. Reas. 5.. And that's a second reason drawn from our selves. The third followeth respecting others, and Fist the better sort shall be hereby 1. curb'd, and cal'd back from sin: 2. quickened and confirm'd in duty. Next, the worser sort of people shall be hereby partly consutd patly defeated. For the first of these: This mutuall encouragement in well doing, this chri∣stian confere  and grave advise, this turning of a sinner from the errour of his way, may (if God be so pleas'd) save a soule from death, a hander or cover a multitude of sinsIam. 5. ult.. Now sin is an evill so mischievous, so murtherous to man∣kinde, that all sorts should set against it, and do thr utmost to club it down where ever they meete with it. As grace (o' tother side) is so amiable so pro∣fitable, that every one should strive by word or dd to propagate and further it wheresoever, and whereinsoever he is able. A maine help to both which is god∣ly conference, and christian exhortation. And 2. for recovering others out of their revolts, and relapses, who can tell how far David would have run on in the revenge of a private injury, had he not been timely taken off and disarm'd by a discreet Abigail? Doh he not soone after blesse God for her, blesse her for her counsell, and her counsell for his restraint from that bloody designe1 Sa. 25.23? And another time when he had grflly and grievously over-shot himself in the matter of Ʋriah, did not the Prophet Natan joynt, and restore him againeGal 6.1 . after a long relapse, by a private admonition2 Sa. 12.13? So forci∣ble are right words,Job 6.25 saith lob: And a word upon his wheels, saith Solomon is like apples of Gold with pictures of SilverProv. 25 11  upon his cir∣cumferences. 1. circumstan∣ces.. Nathans private discourse (so God would have it to shew his liberty of working by what ordinances he best pleaseth) was at that time more effectuall with David, then any or all the lectures of the law, or dayly services of the Temple. And the words of Naamans servants greater in operation then the words of that great Prophet Elisha2 King. 5 13 In vita.. Iunius pro∣fesseth of himself that being strongly tempted to Atheime and prevail'd with, the very first thing that helped him out, was the talking with a country-man of his
not far from Florence,B. Ridly was converted by Bertrams book of the Sacrament: and confirmd by conference with Cranmer, & Pet. Martyr Act. an I Mon: of the church. Ib. and his manner of expressing himself. And, I was an obsti∣nate papist (saith Latimer) as any was in England. Insomuch that when I should be made Batchelour of Divinity, my whole oration went against Philip Melanc∣thon and his opinions. Bilney (afterwards Martyr) heard me at that time, and perceived that I was zealous without knowledge: and came to me after∣wards into my study, and desired me, for Gods sake to hear his confession. I did so, and to say the truth, I learn'd more by his confession, then afore in many yeers. So from that time forward, I began to smell the word of God, and for∣sake the schoole-doctours, and such like fopperies. I need not repeat here, how those two godly bishops Ridly and Farrar were both taken off from their evill purposes and promises, the one of going to masse, and the other of receiving the Eucharist in one kinde only, by the sweet and seasonable disswasion of blessed Brad∣ford, their fellow-prisoner. Neither is this christian conference more availeable for the curbing of some from committing of sin, then for quickening of others, to the doing of duty. The words of the wise are not only like nailesEccl. 12.11 or shepheards-pinns (whereby they used to fasten their sheep-folds to the ground) to rectifie and restrain from sin, to hold up the hands that hang down, and the seeble knees, lest that which is lame be turned out of the wayHeb. 12.13.: but also like goads to prick forward those that are slow of heartLuc. 24.25.: like whetstones, to edge and encager them that be dull of hearingHeb. 5.11., (for as iron shar peneth iron, so doth the face of a man his friendProv. 27.17..) like cor∣dials, to fetch againe those that are fooeble minded1 Thes. 5.14. .: lastly like bellowes, to blow up that sparke2 Tim. 1.6. . of the spirit in another mans breast into a lively flame, that else, like a dull-seacoale sire (if it be not now and then blowne or stirr'd up, though there be no want of fuell, yet) will of it self at length dye, and go out. We will remember thy loves more then wine, saith the spouse, therefore the Virgins love theeCan. 1.4. This fruit commeth upon the remembring and mentiong Christs loves, that his Saints are confirmed and increased in it. Those daughters of Ierusalem that at first wondredCant. 5.9. why the Church should make such adoe about Christ; when they had conversed with her awhile, and heard her speake with such a deal of admiration and affection, they are inflamed, and induced to seeke Christ with herCant. 6.1. God usually fines and siles the tongues of his upright ones to be trum∣petters of his glory and beauty. In setting forth whereof, they have words at will, their tongues never linn, but become as the pen of a ready writer, in speak∣ing forth the things they have made concerning the king, till such time as Gods people accord together to praise him for ever and ever.Ps. 45.1. & ult. Reas. 6. Contra syco∣phantae morsum non est remedi∣um Seneca Lastly, bad men shall be hereby 1. confuted, the mouths of  shall be stopt as are ever complayning of, and accusing Christian meetings to be not for the bet∣ter, but for the worse: scarce to any other purpose, but to detract, defame, slan∣der, censure &c. Or if such mouthes will not be shu, yet the consciences of chri∣stians may rejoyce in their contrary innocency, and not be dejected by such false testimony. 2. they shall be deseated and disappointed hereby of their devilish purposes and practises of casting down starrs from heaven,Rev. 12.4 and deceiving if it were possible the very electMat. 24.24 .. So far forth as to be led away by the errour of the wicked, and so to fall from their owne stedfastnes2 Pet. 3.17. All ungodly persons (and they have it by kinde too from their father the devillIoh. 8.44) are strangly ambitious of sending the plague to their neighbours with the Ekronites1 Sam. 5. Hab. 1.13, of drawing others into partnership of their condemnation, of devouring the men more righteous then themselvesMat. 23 15. They compasse sea and land, saith our Lord, to make a Proselyte: which when they have done, they make him two-fold more the children of hell then themselvesMat. 23 15: The devill also is a busie walker1 Pet. 5.8, a great compasseIob 1.7 Pecora fratris tui errantia jubet ut redu∣eas frari tue, nedum ipsum sibi. Tertul. seeking whom he may devour. And is it not good reason that we should walke as fast, and compasse our weake brethren round, seeking whom we may deliver from the devill and his instruments: who like a wall-nut-tree roote labour to imbitter all the rootes that are about them.
SECT. III. Ʋse. 1. Reproof of idle and evil speakers together. NOw for Application: First, take notice with me, by this point, what cause we have all to cry out with David, Help Lord, for the godly man ceafeth, for the faithfull fail from among the children of men. They speak indeed, and speak often, but (alasse) 'tis vanity they speak every man to his neighbour, with slattering lips and with a double heart do they speakPs. 12 1, 2, 3,  Pythag. Inter mille se∣cularium ser∣monumtalenta, vix cemum de∣narios peteris invenire spiri. tualium verbo∣borum imo nec decem q idem obolos Cassiod. in cap 1. Mat.. How much better were it for such to keep silence then so to vent themselves, as most men do in their carnall conventicles, and good-fellow-meetings: nay in their trading and trafficking, and ordinary commerce and inter-dealing? Wherein, what shall a man hear from them, the whole day throughout, but words, at the best, waste and idle; but, for the wost part, grossely wicked and evil; vile and venemous speeches, rotten and stinking communicationEphes. 4.29 . trefio.; men bringing up their excrements as it were by a peristaltick motion (as Physici∣ans call it, in the disease they terme ) thorow the dung-portNeh. 3.13 of their foul mouthes, to the annoying of some, and corrupting of others. For evil words corrupt good mannersC 1.15.33 They are the Devils drivel.. Thus it is with the more rude and outragious. And for the civiller sort, of those that are not yet fanctified, the plague of the serpent fies sore upon them, alwayes to be feeding upon dustGen. 3 15, talking of trash altogether. They are of the earth, they speak of the earth, and the earth hears them1 Joh. 4.5 & 3 31.  terram redolet. Beza terrenus est Easm ter∣ra est. August.. Amidst all which, let a man seek to charme their tongues, interrupting and bespeak∣ing them, as once the Prophet, with O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the LordIer. 22.29. Ye that are earth by creation, earth by corruption, earth by resolution (for dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt returneGen. 3.9 ) Hear and give ear, bee not proud, for the Lord hath spoken it. Give glory to the Lord your GodJer. 13.15, 16 &c. they turn the deaf ear with the perverse adder, to such wholesome enchantmentsPsal. 58.5, and grow as sick of such a one straight, as the Gergesites were of our SaviourMat 8. Good conference they count plain babbling, as the Athenians esteemed Pauls preachingActs 17.18 . Metaph ab aviculis quae garitu perpe∣tuo sunt mo∣lestae.: they find no more rellish therein then in the white of an egge, or a dry chip. Nay, they hold it the onely marre-mirth (as one speaks) able to damp all the jollity, and to cast the whole company into dumps of Melancholy. Which to prevent, they do their utmost to drown the shrikes of their awakened consciences with a louder volley of the language of hell: pouring out themselves in a great deal of froth and filth, refuse, and rotten speechesCyprianus notavit inter omnes partes divuis llius de quo habetur parabola, Luk. 16.24.  & linguam perpe∣ti acerbissima tormenta, quia plus lingua, & ore peccaverat. Epist. l. 1 ep. 3, base and bedlam talk, oathes, and blasphemies, scoffes and scurrilities against the power of godlinesse, and professours of Religion. Lo this is all that many men do toward the practise of the point in hand. nstead of strengthening the hands and hearts of Gods people in well-doing, as good She∣chaniah did Ezra's; Arise, saith he, for this matter belongeth unto thee, we also will be with thee, be of good courage, and do itEr. 10.4, they do their utmost to hinder and discourage them: as those spies of old, did the people; as Elymas the sorce∣rer did the Deputy, and as those mercenary prophets did the Incomparable Nehe∣miah. For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not doneNehem. 6.8 To such, I say no more, but onely admonish them to remember that a bitter curse Nehemiah in the spirit of prophecy wishd to such back-friends; Hear, O our God, for we are despised, and cover not their imquity, neither let their sin be blotted out from before theeneh 4.5. A fearfull execration, a hea∣vy curse: which who so dreads not, but professing himself an Israelite, dare yet expresse himself in the broad dialect of AshdodNeh. 13 23, 25., it were much to be wished that there were some good Nehemiah found to smite him, and pluck off his hair, till he learn better language. Howsoever, let such know, that their tongues be wray them what countreymen they areMat. 26.73. Certainly he cannot be of the Common∣wealth of Israel, that speaks familiarly the language of hell. Stinking breath ar∣gues corrupt inwards: so doth unsavoury speech a rotten heart. If the discourse be naught, the religion is vain, saith St. JameJam. 1.26: and they want the character of a true Christian, according to our text, that speak not of good things, and that speak not often of them, one to anothers
SECT. IIII. Ʋ. 2. Complaint against the better sort, too too barren, and backward to holy Conference. WHich if it be so, how may we (for a second Use) justly complain of a double defect, found in some of the more forwardly: who as they meet not so often as they might for mutuall edification, (Satan hindring them1 Thes. 2.18) so when they do, became either unprofitable, or idle in this work of the Lord, to what they might be, were they but as they should. 1. Unprofitable they prove to one another, whiles the precious time of their coverse is squandred out and wasted in speculative curiosities, nice and impertinent questions, some ceremoniall unseasona∣ble controversies, not tending to edification, but contention rather, novelties, some more remarkable accidents and affairs abroad, other mens matters and infirmities, which are brought forth upon the stage, either untrulyWe must both . Ephes. 4.15 1 Joh. 3 18 or at least untimely, and not in an ordinance, as one speaks. These are the canker womes that eat out the heart of godly and profitable conference: these are those trosis that nip better speeches in the bud: these are those leaner kine that devour the fat, and leave no room nor time for mutuall edification, to the scandall of the weak, and scorn of the wicked. A second sort here justly met with, are such as are idle and uselesse, backward and barren in godly speeches when they light into good company: dumb and dull Christians, that either say nothing there, or as much as nothingInsulsus di∣catur sermo qui vel nocet, vel minimè pro∣dest. Ep. Sarisb Colos. I know there are a sort of such as are over-talkative, speaking much, but saying little. De Alcibitade Plutarch. Nunquam de∣sunt Domnio∣nes qui non quid sed quan∣turn dirant pon∣derare consue∣verunt. Hiero. in Apologet ad Domnionem.. A fool also (quoth the Wise-man) is full of words, prodigall and profuse, ingrossing all the talk, as if himself were the onely speaker. Which redious and troublous custome of his is there elegantly set forth by way of imitation. of is vain tautologies. A man cannot tell what shall be: and what shall be after him who can tellEccles. 10.14 Sic Ovd. de Batto (unde ) montibus, in∣quit, erant & erant in mon∣tibus illis. Cui Mercurius par pari referens. Me mihi perfi∣de prodis? me mihiprodis? ait? Here's a great deal of small talk, you see, to as little purpoe as may be. And such babblers are to be found, not a few; bunglers ye may better call them; for so indeed they prove themselves in the issue: dancing in the air,. Socr. ap. Plat. like light Meteors that want a suffici∣ent Orb wherein to move: speaking great sweelling woras of vanity2 Pet. 2.18: or (if they stumble upon a better subject, the high points of religion) not knowing what they speak, nor whereof they affirm1 Tim. 1.7 but doing all by roat, as Socrates taught his schollers, and betraying themselves ever and anon, by their lisping SibbolethIudg. 12.6, to be Ephraimites and not Gileadites: counterfeitsJacob must name himself Esau with the voyce of Ja∣cob. Tis hard if our tongue do not be∣wray us what we are, in de∣spite of our habit D. Hall. or, at best, new converts, rank hypocrites, or else but indiscreet and unexperienced Christians. For as ye may discern a lame man by the unevennesse of his legs: so ye may a lame Christian (ma∣ny times) by his unequall discourse in divine matters. For he usually exceeds, and speaks more then his part comes to, and then he is able well to weild; or else his words agree not together, his sentences are senselesse, and unsuitable: in a word, he talks like a bungler. But this onely by the by, and as in a digreslion. We were speak∣ing erewhile to the other extreme, and finding sault with those, rather, that speak not when they should, then that speak when they should not. I would not hee thought to inveigh against forwardlinesse in favoury discourse, so it be seasonable. Isocrat. and soberAct. 26.25 No: my quarrell is rather to such as having both opportunity and abi∣lity thereunto, are over-shie and shamefast, or otherwise averse and awkward to this godly conference: slipping or slighting those many fair occasions and opportu∣nities of doing and receiving good that way, that God even thrusts into their hands. It is true, that every man is naturally possest with a dumb and deaf devil, till Christ say to his soul, Epphata be openedMark 7.34. But what, I marvell, should hinder the righteous from opening his mouth with wisdome, when once the Law of God is in his heartPs 37.30, 31? Should not a good tree bring forth good fruit? and a good man out of the good treasure of his heart being forth good thingsMart. 12.35? Should we not, as the Corinthians, abound in all speech, and in all wisdome1 Cor. 1.5? Should we not,
with the beleeving Romans, be silled with all knowledge and goodnesse, able and rea∣dy to admonishRom. 15.14 and comsent one another in love? The blessed Virgin could not conceal the comfort she had conceived upon the conception of her Saviour; nor rest, till she had imparted it to her cousin ElizabethLuk 1.3, 40.. The Apostles could not but speak the things they had heard and seenActs 4.20, they must do it. And Saint Paul was so constrained by the love of ChristCor. 5.14 shed abroad in his soul, that he could do no lesse then perswade other men to the like Christian coarse of life: yea he had aimest perswaded Agrippa also to be a ChristianAct. 26.28 Fox.. Holy Bradford reckoned that hour lost wherein he had not done some good to other, by tongue, hand, or pen. And how comes it then (beloved brethren) that such a sore deadnesse, and dump of zeal and heavenly mindednesse doth haunt the hearts even of Gods hidden onesPsal. 83.3 in these unhappy dayes of security and forme, that ye cannot finde your tongues in Christian company, nor have a word (hardly) to utter there to any good purpose? Is it because ye need not learn, or be confirmed in the present truth, that ye are so still? is there nothing yet lacking to your faith or growth1 Thes. 3.10 that ye are so tongue∣tied? God I am sure hath commanded another thing: Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his brother; what haeth the Lord answered, and what hath he spokenJer 23 25? And again, They shall stand in the wayes, and enquire for the old wayJer. 6.16, &c. If a passenger know not his way, yet we say, he hath a tongue in his head, and he may seek direction; and so he will if he be his own worthy. Why then do not we, that are travellers toward heaven, use our tongues when we meet with company, asking of one another the way to Zion with our faces thither∣ward, going and weeping, and seeking the Lord, and sying, Come and let us joyn our selves unto the Lord in a perpetuall covenant that shall never be forgottenJer 50.4, 5. Is it fit to say to God with those in Job, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy wayesJob 21.14? or if we do desire, are we too good to ask with the EunuchActs 8 34, to seek with the Church in the CanticlesCant. 3.1, to knock at the door of their lips for a spirituall alms, who as liberall house-keepers feed manyProv. 10.21? is it stiffenesse in us, that we will not be beholding; or bashnesse, that we would not be thought too forth-putting? or is it not dulnesse rather, and disaffection, that we receive no more good, and iron-boweld selfishnesse that we do no more good? looking up∣on our own things onely with Cain, as if we were not our brothers keeperso∣Gen. 4.9: bearing fruit to our selves onely with EphraimHos. 10.1., as if the Lord would be content with such empty vines: living and lording it, as if our lips were our ownPsal. 12, and we not bound to serve one another in loveGal. 5.13; yea, and though free from all, yet to make our selves servants to all, that we might edisie, some1 Cor. 9.19. I doubt not but dumb Christians are as well to be disliked and censur'd as dumb Ministers. The manife∣festation of the spirit is given to presit withall1 Cor 12.7: and the Philippians were all partakers, or fellow-partners of St. Pauls geacePhilip. 1.7 .; which he else-where calls, the gift bestowed on us for many2 Cor. 1.11. Why should any of us then hide his candle under a bushell? thrust his hand into his bosom? dig his talent into the earth? shall it not be taken from us unlesse we improve it for common benefit? and our selves be laid by as broken vessells, whereof there is no further use? How many have wee known in our little experience, that once flourished like green bay-trees, and yeel∣ded much refreshing, like Jonas his Gourd; who yet ceasing afterwards from Christian exhortation, have been blasted as sorward buds with untimely frosts, and withered, as Jonas his Gourd smitten with the worm? How is the door of their lips (as one justly complains) that whilome was wont to open with the law of graceProv. 31.26 now lockt up from good words, or moves as a door on rusty hinges, with murmuring and complaining, and speeches tending rather to the perverting of the hearers, then godly edifying? Oh look upon the fields of these slothfuil persons, and when ye see them all grown over with thistles and nettles, for want of manuring, receive InstructionProv. 24.30, 31, 32 And that's a third Use.
SECT. V. Ʋse 3. Exhortation to be forward and free to godly Discourse. INstruction, I say, and that in the Apostles words: Let no corrups communication proceed out of your monthes, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearersEphes. 4.29. Covet after spirituall gifts, but chiefly that ye may edisie1 Cor. 12.31. Let no man please himself, but please every one his neighbour for his good to edisicationRom. 15.2, being ready to distribute, willing to communicate1 Tim. 6 18 . Ad liberalem quorumvis bo∣norum cominu∣nicationem re∣spicit. Scultet. obser., and ex∣change common comforts, sweetest soul-secrets, spirituall consolations, and con∣sultations with whatsoever Christians. Bear ye one anothers burdens, saith St. Paul, and so fulfill the law of Christ.Gal. 6 2 What is that law? hear it from his own mouth. Little children, yet a little while I am with you: ye shall seek me, and as I said unto the Iews, whither I go, ye cannot come, so now I say unto you. A new com∣mandement give I unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved you, &cJoh. 13 33, 34. Post consolatio∣nes quas ei co∣gitatio divina∣rum promissio∣num, & invo∣catio adfere∣bant, dicebat se non habere aliam levatio∣nem maestitiae, nisi coll quia optimorū fia∣trum, & alie∣rum bonestorum ac doctissimo∣rum virorum. De Georgio Principe An∣baltino Mel∣chior in vita. which seepch of his, our Saviour shews, that whereas they might be grieved at the losse of his bodily presence, he had prescribed them a course for the supply of that comfort; to wit, as loving friends and fellow-members, to sort together, side to∣gether, live together, love together, and by all means possible to delight them∣selves in a fruitfull fellowship one with another: than the which I know not whe∣ther there be any thing in the whole earth more comfortable and glorious. Sure it is, if there be any heaven upon earth, next unto communion with God, it is in the communion of Saints; which differs onely in degrees from heaven: for there the Lord commands his blessing, saith David, and life for evermorePsal. 133. ult Ne sitis negli∣gentes corrigen∣dis vestris, ad curam vestram quoquo mdo pertinentibus, monendo, do∣cendo, hortando, terrendo, Aug. de verb dom. ser. 18.. Away then with that sinfull retirednesse affected by some, that neglect of profitable and com∣fortable fellowship with our brethren. Did Christ leave heaven to converse with us, and-shall we stie up our selves, and live reclused? Did he, at his return to heaven, lay this last charge upon us, the very night afore his death, to love one another, as he loved us, and do we neglect it? He dwells still (by the presence of his grace) in the assemblies of his SaintsPsal. 89.7; yea there he hath a delight to dwell. Why should not we account it our happinesse, yea our heaven, that we may have leave to dwell where the God of heaven and authour of all happinesse loves to dwell? The Church is called by Christ, ChephsibahEsay 62 4. And the Saints were Da∣vids chephsibamPsal. 16 3, his darlings, His eyes were upon the faithfull in the land, that they might dwell with himPsal. 101 6, and he with them: and although a king, yet he held it no disparagement to be companion to all thm that feared God, and kept his sta∣tutesPsal. 119 63, though never so mean in the worlds eye and esteem. Hence his thrift in the trade of godlinesse; it being a course of incredible profit. For, when the mi∣sticall body of Christ is so fitly joyn'd together and compacted, that every joynt makes a supply, then there is a blessed increase of the whole body, unto the edifying of it self in loveEphes. 4.16. As on the other side, it is no better then a sinfull shamefastnesse, or blancht-pride, when Christians are so retired, or reserved; chusing rather to remain needy, then to discover their poverty; and like foolish and beggerly shop-keepers, content themselves with a vain shew, and a few painted papers stuft with straw or rags, rather then they will use any spirituall trading with others, or lose the name and opinion of wealthy men,Ob. by taking up such wares as they want. Oh but I am so barren of matter, and unprovided of fit words, when I come into good company, that I am even ashamed to shew my head amongst them, and ex∣ceedingly to seek.Sol. To seek are you? of what? surely of affection rather then of expression; of hearts rather then words. For love makes eloquenceAs in Croesus his sonne in Heredot. . Kpoīoov.: as you may lee in the true mother of the child in controversie: who though a harlot, and of mean rank and breeding, yet how doth she pour forth her self in a flood of rhetoricall expressions in pleading for her child before the king1 King. 3.17, though a man of great majesty, and a master of speechEccles. 12 9, 10, 11.: and all because she loved it, it is the property of love to frame a mans tongue to a ready and easie discourse of the thing beloved: as the
scholler of his books, the huntsman of his hounds, &c. and so the Saints of their God, and the things of his kingdome: as is well to be seen in the Church in the Canticles, whose heart being inflamed with the love of Christ, her tongue was as the pen of a ready Writer: it ranne with great facility and skill while she spake of the things which she had made of the kingPsal. 45.1. Let the blame therefore rest where it should (hardly) and learn here to fault your disaffection to goodnesse, in case you prove barren and unfruitfull in godly conference. SECT. VI. Helps to an holy dexterity this way. How to 1. get it. 2. Use it. BUt what's to bee done when I finde my selfe dull and indisposed to this duty? First complain of it to God, and entreat him to open thy lips, that thy mouth may shew forth his praise. Complain of it also to others, where thou comest. For this, at least, will follow; that thou shalt hereby minister occasion of godly confe∣rence, to your mutuall kindling, and quickning. When Silas and Timotheus came, Paul burn'd in spiritActs 18.5, who before perhaps, was not altogether so forwardly. You see how one stick kindleth another, if laid together: nay take me two flint∣stones and smite them together, and although both be naturally cold, yet by mutuall collision, fire will be expressed So 'twill be here between Christian and Christian. Let them be never so dry and dull to this duty, if they but begin once to bewail, betwixt themselves, their present indisposednesle, way will be made to a better tem∣per. For as when wicked men are mute and all amort (as they say) one evil word sets abroach many: so will one good word draw on another among the godly, to the singular advantage of the whole company. Secondly, make use of all Gods means for the greatning of this gift, the want whereof ye so much bewail; labouring to abound, with the Corinthians, in know∣ledge, faith, and utterance2 Cor. 8.7: being full of all goodnesse with the Romans, able to admonish one anotherRom 15, or as these ancient beleevers in the text, to be often speaking one to another by heavenly counsell, confirmation in grace, and spirituall encouragement. For this purpose; 1. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, in all wisdome, this will ena∣ble you to teach and admonish one another in Psalms and hymns,Colos. 3.16 &c. For there is edification also in the appointing of fit Psalmes1 Cor. 14.26. The holy Scriptures are therefore called the word, among other reasons, because they should be the matter and boundary of our words. If any speak (saith St. Peter) let him speak as the Oracles of God1 Pet. 4. And whatever ye do in word or deed, (saith St. Paul, after he had laid down this rule in speech) do all in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and according to his word dwelling richly in youCol. 3.16, 17. They are also called chieftains, or leadersProv. 8 6 ., and Lords of collectionsEccles. 12 11  (according to some) because they are as Leaders, and Lords Paramount above all other words and writings of men that ever were collected into volumes. Hence the Prophet sends us to the law and to the testimoniesEsay 8 20 (those sound words2 Tim. 1.13 . Sarae literae hominum ani∣mos imbuere so∣lent hac arte sapiè loquendi. Nam in verbo sal ille recon∣diur, quo ser∣mones condi∣endi. Ʋnde A∣postoli verbo divino instructi diuntur sal Terrae, &c. Episcop. Sarib in Coloss that have a healing property in them above all filed phrases, and humane expressions) assuring us, that if any speak not accor∣ding to this word, it because there is no light in them. This David knew, and there∣fore, By the words of thy lips, saith he (which I have well disgested, and by long practise made my proper language) I have kept me from the path of the destroyer, and am fully purposed that my mouth shall not transgressePsal. 17.4, or passe the bounds; to wit, of Gods holy word, which he had set up for a Directory of all his speeches, both for matter, end, and measure. So of the godly woman it is said in the Pro∣verbs, that the law of grace is upon her tongueProv 31.26, that is, she was so well versed in the holy Scriptures, that she had there-hence gathered and gotten an ability of speaking with profit and power in the things of Gods kingdome. 2. Pray for the gift of utterance, and beg the prayers of others for you, as Paul doth often with greatest earnestnesse of intreatyEphes. 6 19 Colosl. 4.3: and yet hee was a man passing well-spoken, and able to deliver himself in as good termes as another: but
what of that? he saw sufficient cause to send to heaven for utterance and bold∣nesse of speech, and to use all the help he could make for that purpose: For who hath made mans mouth—? have not I the LordExod: 4.11? There may be such and such preparations in the heart of a man, but, (when all's done) the answer of the tongue is from the LordProv. 16.1. Let a man be as eloquent as Aaron, as powerfull in the Scrip∣tures as Apollos, as full of matter as Elihu, who was ready to burst for want of ventJob 32.18, 19., yet unlesse God open his lips, his mouth can never speak to his praise. This David came to see and acknowledge upon second thoughts, Psal. 51. For having promised that his tongue should sing of Gods righteousnesse, he retracts, as it were, and corrects what he had spoken in the next verse. Not as one that repen∣ted of his promise, but as one that had promised more of himself then he was able to performe, and therefore subjoyns, Lord open thou my lips, and then my mouthPs. 51.14, 15, &c, The reason we speak no better to men, is because we speak no oftner to God, to teach us to speak as we ought, knowing how to answer every manColos. 4.6. 3. Lastly, practise much this duty of holy conference: run into the company of Gods people, that speak the language of Canaan naturally and familiarly; and there imitate such as are most expert, and best gifted that way. Accustome your selves also to speak there (as you have occasion, right wordsJob 6.25, sober wordsActs 26.25, savoury wordsColos. 4.6, seasonable wordsProv. 15.23, wholesome words2 Tim. 1.13, the words of grace and of wisdome1 Cor. 12.8, the words of eternall lifeJoh. 6.68, finally all such words as issue from those inward graces, (that good treasure, as our Saviour calls it) of know∣ledge, faith, love, joy, zeal, desire, forrow for sin, &c. and advance those main ends, Gods glory, the salvation of others, and our own safety. Not barrelling and hoording up our gifts, as rich cormorants do their corn: nor yet so close and cu∣rious of our words, as to say no more in company then what may breed applause and admiration of our worth and wisdome, as proud self-seekers: but as good house-keepers, having that honey and milk of good matter under our lipsCant. 5.15, that we may plentifully pour forth to the feeding of manyNot like a curst cow, that will not give down her milk; but opening our mouhes for mutuall edifi∣cation.. Certainly the gifts of such shall not perish in the use as temporall commodities doCant. 5.15, or be the worse for wearing, but the better, and brighter, as the widows oyl, or plow mans coulter. It is use that makes masteries in any skill, and so in this. If your tongue shall ever be as the pen of a ready writerPsal. 45.1, inure it much to Christian communicationLet your speech bee with grace that ye may know how to answer, &c. Colos. 4 6. so that by speak∣ing well, we learn to speak well.. It is practise (and not precepts so much) that makes a good scribe: and although a man be at first but a bungler at it, yet by use and exercise he will attain to write both fairly and swiftly too, after a time. So here. I conclude this second directi∣on with that of our Saviour. Wherefore, let every Scribe that is instructed to the kingdome of heaven be like unto a good housholder that bringeth forth out of his trea∣sure (as need requires) both new and oldMat. 13 52. Thirdly, labour and learn the well-using, and wise ordering that ability of dis∣course and utterance you have attain'd unto. A work of no lesse pains then profit; hard, I confesse, but highly concerning all that would give up a comfortable account of the talents they have been entrusted with. And here (that I may hasten) pre∣cious and worthy of all acceptation. 1 Tim. 1.15 is that counsell of St. Paul. Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how to answer every manColos. 4.6 Non quòd sem∣per loquendum sit; est enim tempus tacendi: sed quòd curn loquimur, sem∣per curandum ut loquamur prout oportet. Daven.. In which text there is not a word but hath its weight, not a syllable, but its substance. First, Let your speech, saith he, be with grace, and alway so. Not that we must be alway speaking, for in the multitude of words wanteth not sinne: but hee that refraineth his lips is wiseProv. 10.19 , à Luciano & Aristoph. di∣cuntur stulti, quòd aperto hi∣anteq, ore esse, plerunque siul∣titiae sit argu∣mentum. Pasor. in .. To lay on more words upon any businesse (though never so good) then the matter requires, argues impotency of mind, excesse of af∣fection, or pride in speaking. Be not therefore ever speaking (for an open mouth is a purgatory to the master) but ever when ye do speak, let your speech be with grace. And so it is: 1. When it proceeds from a habit of heavenly-minded∣nesse, from a principle of grace, a good treasure withinMat. 12.35. 2. When for manner, it is delivered with a grace: whiles we do not turn over these discourses lightly and profanely, as news or table-talk, but with such reverence and affection, as may shew, we are inwardly touched with the majesty of Gods truth; and that we speak not by rote, but experience; as having felt the power of that we speak upon
our own hearts and consciences. My heart is inditing (or frying) a good matter. I speak of the thing I have made touching the kingPsal. 45.1  unde  sartago.. 3. And chiefly, when the matter of our discourse is good, and such as ministreth grace, (not vile) to the hearersEph 4.29. Not but that it may be lawfull for us to confer of morall and civill bu∣sinesse also, betwixt whiles: but this must be done, 1. More sparingly, as chiefly minding that One thing necessaryLuk. 10.42, and most expert in our own Countrey dialect. 2. Lesse affectionately; wee may not shew that earnestnesse, life, and comfort here as in speaking of the things above. Not jesting, or foolish talkingEphes. 5.4, (think the same of other lesse necessary. That do not so mainly conduce to the chief end. . Xenoph. lib. 4. de dictis & fae Socrat. discourses) but rather giving of thanks. There's a great deal of force lies in that word (rather.) 3. In communing of these com∣mon and ordinary things, wee should shew the inward grace and sanctification of our hearts: soaring on high (many times) in a low matter; and still keeping our souls upon the wing. As St. Paul, who writing to Philemon of so mean and abject an object, as a poor vassall and bond-slave, presently mounteth up into the very heavens, and sets a grace, a glosse upon base matters by his holy character of gracious speech. Our civil conversation, also (and communication too) should be in heavenPhilip. 3.20 . Sicut rota quae in terra voluitur, pare imâ & minimâ eam tangit, cartera exstat, & est in alto: Sie nos oportet decurrere pey hac humilia, optimá parte altos, & elevatos. Lips. in Epistol.. Lastly, our speech is with grace, when for the effect, it renders us gracious and acceptable in the ears of God and his people; and makes his remem∣brance of us sweet and precious when absent, for the good fruit reapt and received by our company and conference, when present. Secondly, let your speech be seasoned with salt, saith the Apostle:Downam. Tenuissimus ingenij fructus jocuri Cicero. Linguam ha∣bes, non ut alios salibus tuis mordeas, sed ut Deo gratias agas. Chrysost. he meaneth it not of salt jeasts, close squibs (the fome and froth of wit, as One calls them) scurrillous and bitter frumps, scornfull and spitefull taunts and abuses, impeaching the credit and comfort of our neighbours: This is not that the Apostle here intends; but, 1. The salt of mortification, that dries up, and drives out by degrees, that superfluous and sinfull humour in evil words, that easily corrupts good manners1 Cor. 15 Sunt qui non salem in se ha∣bent, sed tabē, putredinem & pestem, quam aliis afflare satagunt. Episcop. Sarisb. in locum.: and sets such a blur upon the hearts both of speaker and hearers, as nothing can fetch out again but the blood of Christ. 2. The salt of discretion, teaching to observe all due circumstances; as when, where, and before whom we speak. So shall we in profiting others reap the fruit of it in our own hearts: for, as Solomon saith, A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due season how good is itProv. 15.23.? Good it is to the speaker, and good also to the hearers, every way profitable, and precious, even as apples of gold in pictures of silver.Prov. 22.11. D. Staupicius ad Lutherum Augustae coram Cajetane Card. comparentem dixit, memor esto, frater, te ista in nomine Dom. nostri Jesu Christi incoepisse. Quod verbum non quasi à Staupicio, sed per eum dictum accepit memorique animo semper tenuit. Thirdly, the end of this Apostolicall precept followes, and that is, that ye may know; and, how to answer every man. There is a Science, an Art of spirituall speech, of holy Rhetorick, which every Christian is bound to look into: studying well to answer before we speakProv. 15.2, keeping us carefully within our line2 Cor. 10.13, both of our callings, and the measure of the knowledge and grace that God hath given us; being content to learn daily, as well how to speak, as how to live; especially since we are bound to be examples to others, not onely in faith and conversation, but also in words, and communication1 Tim. 4 12 , a stamp for speech.: The skill whereof is no where else to be learn'd but in Christs school. For though Reason yeeld us conceipts, and Nature a tongue, yet it is God alone that can give us to speak with the tongue of the learned, to mini∣ster a word in season: that is, to time a wordEsay 50.4 , (as Esay phraseth it) and to set it upon the wheelsProv. 25.11, (as Solomon) that it may run right upon the proper ob∣ject; whiles we know, first, and know how, next, to answer every man, whether he be weaker or stronger then our selves. For one kind of answer will not serve to all sorts of men, but discretion is to be used here, as much as in any thing.Quod de So∣lomone scribi∣tur id ad omnes pios suo grade extendi potest. Quaesivit ver∣ba utilia, & sermones re∣ctissima con∣scripsit. Eccles. 12.12. Episcop. Sarisb. in Col. Eve∣ry good man is not capable of every good speech, nor any man at all times alike. Some weaker Christians, as they cannot bear all exercise of religionMat. 9.15, 16, so nei∣ther all kinds of discourses of religion. The Hebrews (such was their unskilfulnesse in the word of righteousnesse) had need of milk, and not of strong meatHeb. 5.11, 12. Him
that is weak in saith, saith Paul, receive you, but not to doubtful disputationsRom. 14.1. Holy Iob wisheth that his friends would hold their peace, that it might be imputed to them for wisdomIob. 13.5: because they spoke many good things, but besides the purpose, and his present necessity. For to him that is in misery pitty should be shewed from his friendIob. 6.14.. To such we must give good words and comfortableZac. 1.13. pleasant words, such as may be sweetnesse to the soul, and health to the bonesProv. 16.24, and more esteemed then necessary foodIob. 23 12 &c. comfort the feeble minded, support the weak be patient toward all men: addresse your selves wisely to each mans necessities, and state of soul, and so comfort your selves together, and edifie one another (saith the Apostle to his Thessalonians) even as also ye do1 Thes. 5.14, 11. And as for such as are better then our selves, and beyond us in gifts and abili∣ties. 1, As at feasts and publike meetings, we give the first place to the more ho∣nourable, so yeeld to such prioritie of speech as ElihuJob. 32.6.17, 18, laying our hands upon our mouths (though top-full of matter, as he) till our turns come, which they that do not, but interrupt and disturb their betters by their talkativenesse, as they bewray their own indiscretion, so they do no small wrong to the whole company, being herein at least, worse then the foolish Virgins (saith one) who desired not to put out the lights of the wise, but onely to share with themMat. 25.8. 2. Be sure to put the abler sort of Christians upon such discourses as are most proper, and wherein they are most excellent, observing well their singularitie of gifts, and specialty of endowments, wherewith God hath graced them, and accordingly framing your questions, and casting forth the occasions. Many a good discourse lies buried in the brests of abler Christians, and all because the well is deep (as she said) and there wants a bucketIoh. 4.11. Some Christians you shall finde more dexterous and sufficient at discussing of controversies, some in resolving of cases, some in ex∣pounding scriptures, some in comforting of consciences, some in discerning and discovering the devils depth, and fetches, some in one thing, some in another, whensoever you come into the company of such, know that there is a price put into your handsPro. 17.6., and see that ye neglect it not. 3. Be still getting, and gathering from such: exact of your selves a sensible ad∣dition to your talents by treading with these spiritual Merchants; who having found the pearl of price themselves, do daily cast pearls before others, in their graci∣ous speechesMath. 7.6 Quae circumvo∣litas agilis thyma? Hor. epist., if we have but grace to pick them up. This were the way to be a∣ble to answer every man for their spiritual use and benefit. Up therfore and be doing as ye have any opportunitie. Be still sucking from the wiser sort of godly people, as the bee from the flower, she will not off, ye know, till she have got somwhat out of it) storing up in your lives that which may help in time of spen∣ding. Suffer we should the word of exhortationHeb. 13.22. . from those that come short of us: so did Moses from Jethro, David from Abigail, Job from the meanst of his servants,Iob. 31.13 being ready to learn of any bodyAct. 18.26., as knowing we have cause to say with Agur, surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of a manProv. 30.2 &c. But from those that excel us we should covet it, drawing and drain∣ing from them that milk, and honey that lies under their tonguesCant. 5.15. Counsel in the heart of a man, is like deep water: but a man of understanding will draw it out. And the more he draws, the more he addes to his own skill, and the others store: it being here as with wells and fountains, which are bettered by drawing, as Basil long since observedProv. 20.5. . Basil epist. 81. ad Eustathium. Salienti aquae∣rum fonti un∣das si tollas, nec exhauritus, nec extenuatur, sed duleescit. Sci∣entia, docendi officio, dulcedi∣nem sentiat, non sentiat mi∣nutias. and is found true by experience &c.
CHAP. V. Doctr. IIII. The text further expounded: and withal the Doctrine of Gods gracious acceptance of our upright performances propounded. Then they that feared the Lord, spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkned and heard it &c. HEre begins the second general part of our Text, and that's Gods part. They had done their best endeavour amidst an ungodly nation, for they feared the Lord: and gave very good proof of it, whiles they both thought upon his name for their own support and comfort, and spake good of his name, for the con∣futation of the bad, and confirmation of the better sort of people. Thus did these good soules busie and bestir themselves, both within doors and with∣out, at home and abroad: among their foes on the one hand, and their friends on the other. But what does God in the mean while? Verily no man serveth God for nought, as those wicked would needs have it: being (therein at least beyond their father the devil, in lies and blasphemiesJob. 1.9.. Gods retributions are bountiful witnesses, the words following, the Lord hearkened and heard &c. He heard not onely but hearkened and heard, which is the gesture and behavi∣our of a very heedful hearergestus dili∣genter auscul: tantis. Shindler: in , one that is much taken with the discourse: accord∣ing to that of the Prophet, The eyes of them that see shall not be dim; and the ears of them that hear shall hearkenEsay. 32.3. Tis somwhat to hear, but more to hear∣ken and; hear for it imports not attention onely but affection too; whether of grief or delight, as the matter calls for. It was not then a little or light regard the Lord had to his people here, when they thus gat togethe, and spake together of him and his name: but it appears that he took special notice of it, (for he heard) and singular content in it, (for he hearkened and heard) which is a degree beyond the former, in short, he was much affected and delighted with their godly speeches, and other religious performances: and therefore earnestly listened, and laid his ear close to their gracious lips, as loth to lose any particle of that preci∣ous language: what may we hence observe but this? That the Lord is very much taken, and marvelously well-pleased with the godly conferences and other holy performances of his faithful people. SECT. I. The doctrine confirmed by Scripture. THis to assure us of, it is, that the Lord every where almost in holy scripture, 1. So commands and calls for service from us: and that upon tearms of grea∣est incouragement. For, thus saith the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his maker, Ask me things to come concerning my sons; and concerning the work of my hands command ye meEsay. 45.11 2. So seekes and sues for it, as a man would do for some mat∣ter of price and good account. The father seekes after such, saith our Saviour,John 4.23. facem & sti∣mulum addat cultoribus Dei, quod se à Deo expeti sciant, er ei esse in deli∣cijs. Cart. to worship him, as worship him in spirit and in truth. It was death to sollicite the Per∣sian kings uncalled: for God is so pleased with our accesse, that he sollicits fui∣tours 3. That he so indents and bargains with us for service in lue of his love, in exchange of his blessings. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee. and  other side shalt glorifie me. This the people of God (knowing his minde  restipulate, and ingage themselves unto by covenant on their part: as Iacob in that vow of his, upon the way to Padan-Aram, if God saith he,Psal. 50.15 will
be with me and keep me &c. Then shall the Lord be my God, and I will build him an house, and pay him tith of allGen. 28.20. So David in his poenitential, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, then will I teach transgressours thy way. Deliver me from blood∣guiltinesse, so shall my tongue sing aloud of thy righteousnessePsal. 51.14.15 4. Hence it is, that the Lord so chides and blames his people for doing him no more, no better ser∣vice. Why do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which profiteth not? hearken diligently unto meEsay 55 2 &c. And again, why will ye not come unto me that ye may have lifeJoh. 5.40? And hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name: ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be fullJoh. 16.23 5. Lastly he signifieth and sealeth up his good account, and dear acceptance of our service, when he can come by it, by the abundant content and complacency he takes therein. He delighteth not in the strength of an horse, he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man. the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in them that hope in his mercyPsal. 147.10.11 See this in two or three powerful expressions, and love-breathing passages in that song of songs. O my dove that art in the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of the staires (1. thou that art hid and laid up as a jewel of price, in the golden cabinet of my gracious providence, and so set safe out of the gunshot of hels power and policy) Shew me thy sight (1. Appear often before me in holy duties) le me hear thy voice (viz) lift up in prayer, godly conference &c.) for thy voice is sweet and thy countenance comelyCant. 2.14. expounded. (so it seemed to him that had made it so by his comelinesse put upon her: and also accepting her for such, all wants and weaknesses notwith∣standing.) So in another place, Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thouhast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, (that single eye of thine lift up in praier, and heavenly contemplation) with one chaine of thy neckCant. 4.9, (thy profession and practise of my lawes and ordinances: which is as an orna∣ment of grace to thy head, and chaines about thy neckProv. 1.8, 9.) Loe here the Lord Christ himself, that was not moved one whit with the proffer of the whole world, and all its gloryMat. 4.8 Amore incompa rabili ita cor∣reptus esi, ut nostrum amo∣rem ambiat. Joh. 15.9. Beza in loc., is yet lost in love to a sanctified soule: his heart wounded and wonne by her religious deportments. So verse 11. of that same chapter, Thy lips, O my spouse, saith he, drop as the hony-comb, hony and milk are under thy tongueCant. 4.11. Behold how sweet to Christs palat are the graci∣ous words of his people: sweeter then any hony to his mouthpsal. 119.103. Nay he eateth not only of their hony, but of their hony-combe too, and drinkes not of their wine alone, but of their milk also; takes content not only in their more excellent, and more exquisite performances, but in their meaner services too; he not only bottles up their teares, and bookes up their praiersPsal. 56.8 and frutifull con∣ferences, but harkens even to the sighs of his prisonersPsal. 79.11, nay to their breathingLam. 3.56 also and their chatterings; as of Hozekiah, who was so opprest with grief and extremitie, that he could not speak but chatterEsay 38.14 only, when he came to pray; and yet the Lord took such delight in that he did, (weake though it were) as he presently bad Isaiah (before he was yet gone out into the middle of the court) turne again with a quite contrary message: Yea and yeelded him more then he asked; full fifteen yearesEsay 38 5, which we commonly call two mens lives, with advantage. He asked of thee life, saith the Psalmist, and thou gavest it him, even length of dayes for ever and everPsal. 21.4.. SECT. II. The Doctrine confirmed by reasons from God the father, Son, and Holy Ghost. NOw the reason of this so gratious disposition and dealing of the Lord, with his faithfull people respects either him, or them. The first Reason from God hath a threefold prospect: for it lookes 1. to∣ward the Father, 2. toward the Son, 3. toward the Holy Ghost For the Father first: It must be considered, that originally  mercy moves him hereunto, without the least concurrence or contribution of any
worth or desert at all in the creatures. He takes pleasure in the saints and their sacrifices, only for the good pleasures sake of his own will. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we should be a kinde of first-fruites of the creaturesJam. 1.18.. And of the same his own will, doth he take delight in the duty we do him, being thus begotten: that like as naturall parents delight to hear their own little ones prattle, or do some small chare, and think it fine and hand∣some, when others think it foolish and troublesome. So it is between God and his deare children. Any good thing from them is very good, takes wonder∣fully with him; and although it were easie for his pure eyesHabac. 1.13 to finde out many flawes in their best workes (as good Nehemiah well aw, and therefore craved pardonNehe. 13.2. so oft of his zealous reformations) yet he seeth no sin in JacobNum. 23.21. Or if he do (as indeed he doth) yet he spares them as a man spareth his own son that serveth himMal. 3.17.. Thi is God the father. Secondly, it is for God the Sons sake; and by meanes of his merits and mediation, that our services (simple as they are) finde any grace or favour with the Almight: whilst our wants go cover'd with Christs intercession: and out suire and services are followed in heaven by his advocation1 Joh. 2.1. Look what ever holy duty we performe, the Lord Jelus (the mediatour of the new Covenant,) not only presents it to his father, but refines it first and perfumes it wi his odoursRev. 5.8.. And hence it is that God sinelles a sweet savour of rest and peace from our sacrifices, which else would stck worse in his no∣strils, then the onions and ga lick of the Egyptian flesh-pots. Hence that of the Apostle, By him let us offer the sacrifice of praise (and so any other spirituall service, that shall finde acceptance) to God continuallyHeb. 13.15.. And, by him we have accesse, by one spirit, unto the fatherEph. 2.18.. This was shadowed out (of old) by the door of the tabernacle: which as it never was or any hard or debarring matter, but of a veile easily penetrable; so at the passion of our avour, it did (of its own accord) rend in sunder; to shew our easie accosse unto, and high acceptance with God in any holy duty, through Christ the peace-makerEph. 2.14.. This also was not obscurely typified by the high Priest's plate, wherein was fairly engraven, Holinesse to the Lord: which was to be upon his forehead, the fore∣front of his miter, that he might beare the iniquitie of the offerings, which the children of Israel should offer in all their holy offerings, and it should be alway on his forehead to make them acceptable before the LordExo. 28.36, 38.. But thirdly, as it is by the mercy of the father and the me it of the son, so is it also by the hand of the holy ghost upon them, that God is so greatly pleased with the suite, and services of his people, the Apstie instancet in ne religious duty: we may safely extend it to all the rest. Likewise, saith he, the spirit helpeth our infirmitiesRom 8.26. ., he sets his shoulder to the work together with us, as th word there imports. For we (silly soules) know not what we should pray for as we ought, we neither know what for the matter, nor as we ought for the manner. But the spirit it self (against all the roarings and repinings of the flesh) maketh loud and shill intercessions for us in this case with groanings which cannot be utteredExcitat ve∣hemens deside∣rium liberatio∣nis, accendit quoque alios af∣fectus ammi, ut gaudium et a∣morem, adeò ut ardeant supra modum e natu∣ram communem longè exape∣rent. Rolloc.: and that thus. 1. He lets us see our want of God, which nature studiously covereth. 2. He sets before us the excellency and worth of finding favour with God; the thought whereof never entereth the naturall mans heart1 Cor. 2 9.. 3. He stirreth up and kindleth in us strong affections in prayer, dictating words and expressions answerable to those affections. In short, he workes all our workes in usEsa 26.12. Quoties video te susphrtem, non dubito spi∣ritum aspiran∣tem. yprian., as the prophet saith: for we cannot so much a suspirare, unlesse he do first inspirare, breath out a sigh for sin, except the spirit do first breath it into us. Much lesse can we make an effectu∣all and comfortable prayer, or do any thing else, that's truely good without him. Sith prayer (think the same still of any other holy duty) is the breath of the spirit, the pulse of the spirit: without whom, what is prayer else but an empty ring, a tinkling Cymball? Pray (saith St. Iude) in the holy ghost.Iede 20. set 1 Cer 14.15. Eph 5 18. And then he that searech the heart, will easily know the minde of the spirit, that he intercedeth for us according to GodBom. 8.27. ., or worthy of God, and to his greatest liking. Such another phrase the Apostle hath of Godly sorrow. 2 Cor. 7.
where he calleth it, A sorrow according to God2 Cor. 7.10.  So Luke 6.12 he conti∣nued all night.  in the prayer of God., that is a spirituall god-like sor∣row, and such as issueth from the spirit of God. For the wind must blow ere the waters flowPsa. 147.18 Dike. saith the Prophet. And it is the fire of the spirit (saith a Divine) in our hearts (as in a still) that sendeth up those dews of repenting tears into our heads, that drop forth of our eyes. Think the like of christian watch∣fulnesse: Even Peter, James, and John, (those pillarsGal 2.9. .,) will be ready to sleep and buckle; yea and that in the houre of remptationMat 26.41. too, if the spirit do not quicken them, and as it were hold up with forks their heavy eye-lids. And for reading of the Scriptures, look how the Philistines could never under∣stand Sampsons riddle, till they plow'd with Sampsons, heiferJudg 14.18., so neither can we conceive or relish the deep things of God without the ayde and assistance of the spi∣rit of God1 Cor 2.10 .. As on the other side: With his holy spirit, and by it, we are sanctified unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus1 Pet. 1.2, purified in obeying the truth unto unfained love of the brethren1 Pet. 1.22, quickened unto all goodnesse, righteousnesse and truthEph. 5.9, caused to keep Gods commandementsEzek. 36.27, himself setting us to work, working all our works for usEsay 26.12., sanctifying all the works of our hands, yea sanctifying the offering up both of our selves and our services to God, as the Altar sanctifies the giftRom. 15 16., and opening us a welcome accesse to to God in all our performancesEph. 2.18, who as he knowes the meaning and minde of his spiritRom. 8.27 ., so he cannot but accept that sacrifice that is kindled by the fire of his own spirit, upon the true Altar Christ, his own son. This is the first Reason ta∣ken from the three persons in the Godhead. SECT. III. The Doctrine further confirmed by reasons from the Saints. THe next respecteth the saints themselves, whose persons, first, are elect, ho∣ly, and beloved:Colos. 3.12 whose performances in the second place have a true and re∣all goodnesse in them, and are therefore dearly accepted, and highly accounted of in the sight of God. For the first, It cannot be denied but that by nature all are alike hatefull to the Almighty;  Neither is it for any goodnesse he discerns in one more then another, that he puts any difference. He loves his people merely because he loves themDeut. 7.7, the ground of his love being only in himself. He adopts them according to the good-pleasure of his willEph. 1.4, without the least defect in himself, or desert in the creature. It is otherwise with us then it was with those maids in Ahshueosh his time: they were first perfumed and purified afore he chose one for himselfEsth. 2.10. God found us in our blood when he said unto us liveEzek. 16.6: and Christ gave himself for his people that he might sanctifie and present them to himself a glorious churchEph. 5 26. What was Aarons rod better then the rest, that it alone should bud, and the rest lye dry by itNum. 17.8? every name was alike written in their rod: there is n difference in the letters, nor in the wood: it is Gods choise that made the distinction. So, what was the floore of a Jebusite to the Lord above all other soles to build an Altar on after the raging plague in Davids time2 Sam 24.18? As in places, so in persons God maketh men to differ1 Cor. 4.7, and that is ever worthiest that he pleaseth to accept. Araunah a Jebusite by nature, but made a Proselyte by grace, giveth his freehold as a King to the King2 Sa. 24.23. This deed of his, or rather this work of Gods free grace, is long after remembred by the prophet (as some not improbably inter∣pret him.) Ekron shall be as the IebusiteZach. 9.7, That is, say they, the barbarous people of Palestina shall be as the famous Araunah: by kindred indeed a Jeusire, but by Gods gracious acceptation and adoption an Israelite. Like as (elsewhere) Jether that was by his country and Ismaelite1 Chro. 7.17, is for his faith and religion called an Israelite2 Sam. 17.25. So then to summ up this reason; albeit by nature that's never a better of us; but all are in the same hatefull and wofull condition: all cut out of the same cloth, as it were (the sheers only going between:) Yet when grace once comes and sets a difference, when that divine nature2 Pet. 1.4 (as St. Peter calleth
it) is transfused into a man, and he begins to be like unto God in some truth of resemblance, the Lord cannot chuse but love and delight in his own image, where ever he meets with it. Now the persons of such being once in acceptation through Christ (Gods beloved oneEph. 1 6 .) their sacrifices cannot but be well accepted also. Thus the Lord had respect to Abel and his offering, to Noah and his burnt-sacrifice, to Abraham and his intercession for Sodom, to Iobs request for his friends, to Davids for his people, to Pauls for those in the ship. Will you know a reason? Abel was a righteous personHeb. 11.4, Noah his favouriteGen. 6.8, Abraham his friend, Iob his servantIob 1.8. David his corculum1 Sam. 13 14 or darling, Paul his elect vessellAct. 9.15. Hence their high acceptance in the court of heaven: and hence that singular delight and complacency that God took in their services. For, though the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, yet the prayer of the upright is his delightProv. 15.8 Psal 4.3.. The blood of a swine is as well coloured and as fair, to see to, as the blood of a sheep: but the former was an abhomination to the Almighty, and present death to the party that brought it: when the later might with good leave and liking be powred about his Altar, and the sacrificer depart (with the publican) justified and accepted. And that's the second thing we were speaking to; respecting the services of Gods people: in all which there is something of Gods, and something of their own. This later God graciously overlooks, taking notice only of his own part in that we do, and hence our acceptance. If this be not plain enough, take it thus: The Lord leadeth his people by his spirit into good works by governing the habits of grace infused, and producing therehence acts of grace: which though mixed with corruption as from us (for who can bring a clean thing out of an uncleanIob 14.4 Denominatio fit à potiori. saith Iob?) Yet are they good before God, who winks at the imperfections; and have a true goodnesse in them, being therefore denominated and called from the better part, good works2 Tim. 2.21, good fruitesMat. 12.33, fruits of the Spi∣ritGal. 5.22, who exerciseth our faith, hope, love, zeal, fear of God, humility, and other graces in producing them. Whence it is, that passing by infirmities in the manner, God looks upon all our religious performances as fruits of the vineEsay 5.4, where∣upon he is pleased to feed heartily: the Church her self (as knowing like another Rebeccah such savoury meat as he best loved) inviting him thereunto; Let my be∣loved come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruitsCant. 4. ult.: which accordingly he did, as followeth in the next chapterCant. 5.1. SECT. IIII. Ʋse 1. Its otherwise with the wicked. Their persons are hated, their performances rejected, and why. FOr Use of this point: God gives diligent heed to, and takes great pleasure in the religious performances of his faithfull people: this, as it must needs be marve∣lous comfortable to the saints, so it cannot but be exceeding terrible to the wick∣ed and unregenerate; with whom (alass) it is farr otherwise, if they mark it: For they are all Cursed with a curse, even with Cains curse, the Lord had no re∣spect to his sacrificeGen. 4.5, with Sauls curse, whom the Lord would not answer neither by dreames, nor by Urim, nor by prophets1 Sam. 28.6: with Moabs curse, he shall come to his Sanctuary to pray, saith the Prophet, but shall not prevailIsa. 16.12.: with the curse of Davids enemies, who cryed out, but there was none to save them. Yea, to the Lord but he answered them notPsal. 18.41. Or if he do hear them (as he did sometime that Non-such Ahab1 Kin. 21.29: nay the devill himselfMatt. 8 32) yet it is for no other end, then that he may come upon them the more justly, and consume them after he hath done them goodIosh. 24.20: their preservation is no better then a reservation to some further mischief. But usually the Lord frownes upon such, and turnes the deaf ear unto them: and worthily, for these three causes among many. First they cannot present him with any service truly good and acceptable so long as they are out of ChristHeb. 11.6. All
their actions naturall, civill, recreative, religious, are abhomination. Not the plowingProv. 21 4 onely, but the prayer of the wicked is sinneProv. 15, 8, saith Solomon. Pray they cannot indeed, (to speak properly) because they want the spirit of prayer: that spirit of grace and of deprecationZach. 22.10. Say they may, (with those many in the Psalm) Who will shew us any good? but pray they cannot, as there, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon usPsal. 4.5.. Wish they may with Balaam, the Soothsayer, O let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end bee like unto hisNum. 23.10. But 'tis a David onely that can pray in like case; Lord take not away my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody menPsal. 2.9. The same we may say concerning Christian conference, or any other holy duty whatsoever. How can ye which are evil speak good things, saith our Saviour to the PhariseesMatt. 12 34? Speak they may, (no doubt) and speak they do many times, more then their part comes to, or then they have any thank for. Yea good things they may speak, materially good I mean, and to the great good of the hearers, as those that prophecied in Christs Name, and yet were shut out of heavenMat 7.22.23. But for no good to themselves at all, because they fail still in the good they do, either quoad fontem, or quoad finem. Either they bring not sorth those good things out of the good treasure of their heartsMat. 12 35., they want a good principle of grace within, or else they have not right aims and intentions in the good they do, They bring forth fruit to themselves with EphraimHos. 10.1, when the Church (o' tother side) keeps her fruit for her belovedCant. 5.1 Spira cried nestly for grace, for a drop, because he could not bee saved without it He said he saw no excellen∣cy in i, he desired  not for it self, and therefore thought his prayers should not be heard. They seek more the applause of men, then Gods approof in their religious oiscour∣ses; and the relief of their necessities, more then the setting forth or Gods glory in their prayers and other services, which they performe to God more out of car∣nall self love then any true delight in the duty. Will he delight himself (saith Job of the hypocrite) in the Almighty? will he alwayes call upon GodJob 27.10? And that's a second reason why God rejects their services: which as they are not right and reall, so neither are they constant and continuall. In an extremity, haply, or when they have not whither else to turne themselves, then God shall hear of them, then they runne with Joab to the horns of Gods Altar, which in prosperity they seldom or never compassedPsal. 26.6. Then they catch at Gods good∣nesse, as a drowning man at a little twig, which while afe upon the shore, he ne∣ver lookt after: then they cry and roar for mercy, which till then they despised, as a prisoner at the barre, or as a pig that's to be stickt. But all to no purpose; the justice of God so ordering of it, and not without their own desert procuring it For to seek God in extremity onely, is no proof of a mans piety, no triall of his true affection: but savours strongly of self love and hypocrisie. Lets dog he riel up short, and when he is hungerbit he will howl, and be heard all the house over. And verily such service, done at such times, and by such persons, God no more regards then a man would do the howling of a dog They ow upon  beds for corn and wine, saith HoseaHos. 7.14, they roar as bulls that are batedEsay 51.20, saith Esay; and God must ome quickly to their help, or else he comes too late; for they will try another course. And that's the third defect God findes in the pretended services of unsanctified persons; they are impatient of delayes with Saul1 Sam. 13.8, they cannot stay, they can∣not wait, they will not be deferr'd. If God come not the sooner, they betake themselves to their own shifts, and seek to help themselves another way: like the Chinois that whip their Gods when they answer them not; or that resolute Russus, that painted God upon the one side of his shield, and the devil on the other with this inscription: If thou wilt not have me, here's one will be glad of meSi tu me no∣lis, isle rogitat.: or that desperate King of Israel: Behold, saith he, this evil is from the Lord, and what should I wait for the Lord any longer2 King. 6.33? Lo this is the guise and dispositi∣on of a godlesse person; He seemeth to serve God sometimes, but indeed it is to serve himself upon God: who, if he will not be at his beck, and come at his whistle, away to the Witch of Endor with Saul1 Sam. 28.7, to the god of Ekron with A∣haziah2 King. 1.2, to Baalim and Ashtaroth, with the revolted IsraelitesJudg. 10.6. And there∣fore the Lord either answers them not at all, makes no reckoning of their devoti∣ons, or shapes them an answer according to the Idols of their heartsEzek. 14.3; as hee did those ancient Idolaters. Ye have forsaken me, saith the Lord, and set up other Gods: wherefore (take it for an answer) I will deliver you no more. Go and cry
unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your tribula∣tionJudg. 10.13.. As for me, I will go and return to my placeHos. 5.15, and wo be unto you when I depart from youHos. 9.12. Oh when it is come to that once, that Gods soul shall take no pleasure in a man, thatHeb. 10.38 Gods soul shall depart or be disoynted from himJer. 6.8, that not his senses onely shall be offendedIsai. 1.11, 12, 14, but his very soul shall hate his new moones, and appointed feasts, when he shall go to seek the Lord with his sacrifices, and shall not finde himHos. 5.6; I know not whether there can befal a man a more hard and hor∣rid condition upon earth. Oh therefore the madnesse and misery both of these wicked and wretched men and women, that are out of Christ! would God their eyes were once opened, that they might see their rueful plight and estate, and at length discern that direful dilemma that sin and the Devil hath driven them to. Do good duties they must, or be damned for their neglect: and yet they are damned also for doing them, because they do them no better; that I say not double-damned, and that for this very offence, if they had done no more: sith displeasing service is a double dishonour to God, because we displease him in that, wherein he specially looketh to be pleased. How then may we run by this first use with terrours into the eyes and ears of unregenerate persons? but all to no purpose, (no though we could cast handfuls of hell-fire into their faces) except God please to break up their hearts, and pierce their inwards. Rebeccah may cook the venison, but 'tis Isaac must give the blessing, we may cry out upon them with all our might, and forewarn them to flee from the wrath to comeMath. 3., but unlesse God speak withall to their consciences, and (thrusting his holy hand into their bosomes) pluck off the forskin of their hard and brawny hearts, nothing will work or take impression, till out of the bottom of hell they roar and bewail their own madnesse with desperate and bootlesse teares. SECT. V. Use 2. admonition. Let the wicked break off their sins, that they lose not their services. VVHich to prevent, come we now to a second use of Exhortation. And this we addresse unto two sorts of men. 1. To all unregenerate and wicked people. 2. To those truly religious, that are thus highly accepted and favoured (with DanielDan. 9.23.) in the court of heaven. To the wicked, first, God saith what hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth? so long as thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behinde theePsal. 50.16, 17? even the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomina∣tion, saith Solomon, how much more when he bringeth it with an evil heartProv. 21.27.. As who should say; though such a man have never so good a meaning to serve God in his sacrifice, yet he doth worse then lose his labour, when he doth his best, for he committeth that which is abomination before the Lord: and so in seeking to shun hell, he doth but take pains to go to hell. And to the same purpose another Prophet, He that killeth an oxe, saith he, (unlesse withall he kill his corruptions) is as well-pleasing to God as if he slew a man. He that sacrificeth a lamb (unlesse he sacrifice his lusts too) is as if he cut off a dogs neck, he that offereth an oblation (un∣lesse he present also his body a living oblation, holy, acceptable to GodRom. 12.1) is as if he offered swines blood: he that burneth incense (if it stink of the hand that burneth it) is as if he blessed an idol.Isai. 66.3. Even your incense is abominationIsai. 1.13. saith the Lord to those sacrificing SodomitesIsai. 1.10.. Lo there, that precious perfume made up with so many sweet spices, and fragrant odours, stanck odiously in Gods nostrils, he could not abide the scent of it. Nay, not his smelling faculty onely is offended by the sinful mans services, but the rest of his senses also. For his taste, their burnt-offer∣ings of rams, and fat of lambs, he could not relishver. 11., they delighted him not, but were sowre to his palate. For his feeling, their new moons and appointed feasts, were a burden to him, he was weary to bear them. And for his sight, he tells them, though they spread forth their hands, he will hide his eyes. And for his hearing, when they
make many prayers he will not hear.15.16.12. And for their whole service, he demands who required this at your hands to tread in my courts? As if he should say, it were fitter, a fair deal for you to be in your shops, or in the alehouse, or any where else then here, unlesse ye were better. This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into itPsal 118.20. As for others, thus saith the Lord, will ye steal, and commit adul∣tery, and swear, and then come and stand (goodly) before me in this houseJer. 7.10.11? Do ye think to expiate your sins by your prayers, and set off with God by your good deeds for your bad? No, that's not the way to get in with God, and to be enfeoffed, into his favour. But what is? may some say. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, ease to do evil, learn to do well &c. Come now and let us reason together as friends, when this is once well done to purpose, saith the Lord. For then, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snowIsai. 16, 17, 18. &c. as till then, it boots not to bow your selves before the most high with thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oyl: no not to offer your first born for your transgres∣sion, the fruit of your bodies for the sins of your soulsMicah. 6.7.. Away therefore will the love and liking of every lust, cast away all your transgressions, throw all your sins out of service, your beloved sin especially; be it as an hand for ptofit, off with it, be it as an eye for pleasure, out with it: be it what it will, and never so neer or natural to us, if a sin, say of it as Haman did of Mordecai, what availeth me any thing, if he yet live? All that are Christs (and none but such may appear before God in holy duties) have crucified the flesh with the affections and lustsGal. 5.24.. Da∣vid would not presume to compasse Gods altar, till he had washed his hands in inocencyPsal. 26.6, nor could he conclude that God would shew him mercy or receive his prayer, till he had brought his heart to an utter disregard of whatsoever iniquityPsal 66.16. . Achilis Homericus.. The le∣pers lips were to be covered according to the law, and our Saviour would not admit of a fair word from a foul mouthMar. 1.25.. The lip of excellency saith Solomon, becometh not a foolProv. 17.7.: and the best dish (though never so well cookt) is extreamly loathed, if presented by a leper, or brought to table by a nasty sloven: so is any holy duty (whether of piety or charity) displeasing to the Almighty, if perfor∣med by one that is yet in his pure naturals, a stranger to the power of grace, and un∣acquainted with the daily practise of mortification. Hence that of Saint Iames, Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to youIam. 4.8.9, 10. expounded ob.. Oh but we dare not come near the Lord, neither can we serve him, for he is an holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not forgive our transgressions, nor our sinnesJosh. 24.19 Sol.. No, be sure of that; except ye confesse and forsake themProv. 28.13. Therefore wash your hands, ye sinners, saith the Apostle there, (neither so onely for Pilate washed his hands, as if all the guilt had stuck in his fingers ends) but cleanse your hearts ye dou∣ble minded. Yea,Ob. but how must that be done? for, though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much sope, yet thy iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord GodJer. 2.22. Sol.  mise∣ri estote. Par.  Pas. Curaeleves &c.. Afflict your selves, saith the Apostle: or, as the word there signifies, be miserable: you are so, but see your selves such, and be sensible, even unto godly sorrow, and the tears of true repentance: weep, saith he, or if ye cannot do that (as some constitutions are naturally dry, and do not yeeld tears, and some sorrow is bigger then tears, and above them) yet mourn at least: and that ye may not mourn a little, for so great sins as ye are guilty of, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heavinesse. Vse al good means to work your hearts to a through humiliation: turning al the streams of your affections into this one channel, that serves to drive the mil for the grinding of the heart. Thus humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shal lift you up, yea, thou shalt lift up thy face unto God, and have delight in the Almighty. Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee and thou shalt pay thy vowsJob. 22.26, 27.. He shal remember all thine offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice. He shal grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy counsel.Psal. 20.3, 4, In the time of the Levitical service, there were two several altars; one without the tabernacle, to slay the beasts on: and another within, to offer incense upon. To teach us, that if we would be the temples, and tabernacles of the living God, and have him pleased with our sacrifices of righteousnesse, with our offerings and whole burnt-offeringsPsal. 51. vlt., we must slay our bullocks, on the outer altar, mortifie our beastly sins, I mean, that
raigne in the outward man; the deeds of the body, by the spiritRom. 8.1, before we kin∣dle our incense of devotion in the inward man. So shall God smell a sweet savour of rest from us, and we (interchangably) of life and peace from him. But thus much be spoken to them. SECT. VI. Ʋse 3. Exhortation to the best., to be humbled for their 1. not prizing their priviledge. 2. not praising God for it. 3. not improving it to the utmost. NExt, to all such as are already in favour with God, and can tell as much by his good acceptance of their services; mine exhortation from this point is double. First, to reflect, with Pharaohs butler, and calling to minde their sins this day be humbled for a threefold evill. First, for not prizing this priviledge to the worth, of having Gods eye alwayes upon us, his eare open unto us, his presence with us, his providence over us, the good-will of him that dwelt in the bush round about usDeut. 33.16, his goodnesse and mercy to follow us all the dayes of our lives, we dwelling in the house of the Lord for everPsal. 23. ult.. Secondly, for not praising God as we ought, for this inestimable benefit. So David held it and celebrated it often. Blessed be God, saith he, which hath heard the voice of my supplicationPsal. 28.6. Blessed be God which hath not turned away my prayer nor his mercy from mePsal. 66. ult.. Who am I? and what is my people that we should offer so willingly after this sort? Now therefore O our God, we thank thee and praise thy glorious Name.1 Chro. 29.13, 14.. &c. O look upon this thankfull man, and chide your selves soundly for your unthankfulnesse; or at least, for your few and feeble pray∣ses, for so many services well taken at your hands. Hath God enlarged himself to us, and are we thus straitened in our own bowels2 Chr. 6.12.? Hath God harkened to He∣zekiah's chattering, and shall he not render according to what he had received2 Chr. 32.25, especially having vowed better things, so deeply as he didEs. 38.19.20? 'Tis possible then ye see, that the best should forget themselves in this kinde: and twenty to one, but we have also. Oh see it by your selves, and be humbled for this shamefull unthankfulnes. Thirdly, for not improving this indulgence, by making our best of it: fall∣ing into that sin by supine negligence, that Ahaz did of stubborn wilfulnesse. Ask thee a signe, saith the Prophet, of the Lord thy God, Ask it either in the depth or heighth aboveEs. 7.11.12 Expounded.. Here was a fair offer to a gracelesse caitiff, that where sin a∣bounded grace might superabound. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I try the Lord: as if he should have said: Il'e ask no askes, I know a trick worth two of that: let God keep his signes to himself: I crave no such curtesy at his hands &c. This is that Ahaz, a stiff Stigmatick, an unworthy churl, a prophane bedlam. Now as in water face answereth to face, so doth the heart of a man to a manProv. 27.19 As there were many Merij in one Caefurt so there are many Cains and Ahaz's in the best of us all.. Tis certain, ther's none of us but have within, that which may send forth as great a wickednesse as his: and 'tis well if the best of us have not coasted upon his unkind usage of his God, by rejecting his sweet offers, or at least by not making often triall of his gracious acceptance after manifold experience, Oh how should we abound in Gods work2 Cor. 9.8 1 Cor. 15. ult., yea abound more and more1 Thess. 41, as the Apostle would have it: sith he harkens and heareth, and ever looketh upon our labour of love with an eye of delight: so that if we would but do him eye-service, it were sufficient. How should we be dayly and hourly serving such a Master that giveth such large incouragement, by his both assistance and acceptance! how should we be continually sowing more good performances into his bosome, the fruit whereof we should be sure to reap in our greatest need? for as sin lies at our door to do us hurtGen. 4.7: so doth every christian service lye at Gods door to do us good. It is
certain, that he is so farr taken with them, that of his kingly munificence he bids us ask what we will, and it shall be given usIosh. 15.17. And surely he is deservedly mise∣rable, that will not make himself happy by asking a better condition. Oh that ever any beloved Esther, any faithfull soul, I mean, should sit feasting and ban∣quetting with God, her Ahashuerosh, in the ordinances of life, feeding on the fat, and drinking of the sweet; and not bethink her selfe then, what suites she hath to commence, what boones to beg, what Hamans to hang up, what Mor∣decaies to preferr; what grace, I mean, to get, what corruption to quell, what friend to speak for, what child to prefer &c. How should she be sure of her re∣quest, even to the whole of Gods kingdome? why art thou thus lean from day to day, said Jonadab to Amnon, Art not thou the kings son2 Sam. 13.4? and so maist have any thing for asking? why is thy countenance sad, sith thou art not sickNeh. 2.2, said the king to Nehemiah? How sensible (saith a great Divine thereupon) do we think the father of mercies is of all our pensive thoughts, when a heathen master is so tender of a servants grief? How ready should our tongues be to lay open our cases and cares to the God of all comfort, when we see Nehemiah again so quick in the expression of his grief to an uncertain eare? That we have come off so heavily with our good God, and done so little heretofore in his work, upon so great in∣couragement, let it heartily humble us. SECT. VII. Ʋse 4. Exhortation to the Saints 1. To admire this mercy: Helpes thereunto respecting God, and themselves. ANd for the future (that I may speak forward) here is a threefold du∣ty to be commended from the point in hand to your christian care and practise. First, doth the Lord of heaven and earth so abase himself as to take the least no∣tice of our poor performances; Yea as the bridegroom is glad of the bride, doth our God so rejoyce over usIsa. 62.5? doth he delight to see our faces, to hear our voy∣ces, to smell our odours, to taste our fruits, to be handled and embracedHeb. 11.13. . by our faith? Is he so farr taken by the poor things that passe from us, that he rests in his love, and will seek no further? Yea that he joyes over us with singingZeph. 3.17? Oh how should the due appehension of this dear love of his ravish and affect our hearts with deepest admiration? and how should we even stand amazed at the ne∣ver-enough-adored depth of his love unto us in this behalf? To help you herein, the wonder will appear the greater, if we first look up to God, and there see 1. what he is. 2. how little either need he hath of us, or gain he makes of our services: and then, secondly, look down again to our selves, and consider 1. who we are, 2. what are our best works in themselves. For God, first, he is the high and mighty Monarch of heaven and earth, of transcen∣dent perfection and excellency, even above all degrees of comparison: for he is greatPsa. 77.17, greaterIob 33.12, greatest of allPsal. 95.3, greatnesse it selfPsal. 145.3. Again, he is goodPsal. 106.1, betterPsal. 108 9, bestPhil. 1.23, goodnesse it selfMat. 19.17.. So that if men should attempt to serve God, and do sacrifice to him according to his excellent greatnessePsal. 150.2 and goodnesse, all the wood of Lebanon would not serve to burn, nor all the beasts that be in it suffice for sacrificeEsa. 40.15, 16: Yea little enough would all the wood in the world be, and all the cattle therein to make up but some one sacrifice. Next, see how little this mighty and All-sufficieut God, either needs us, or gets by us. For the first, hear what he saith Psal. 50. from the seventh to the sixteenth. Hear O my people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testifie against thee: I am God, even thy God. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings &c. For every beast of the forrest is mine, and the cattel upon a thousand hills &c. Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie
mePsal. 50.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, &c.. Lo this is all he looks for at our hands. Not but that he could well enough be without that too, sith his glory (being eternall and infinite as himself) is no way capable of any our addition or detraction. For, as the Sunne would shine, though all the world were blinde: so should God be glorified, though we were all condem∣ned; Yea he could glorifie his justice by our eternall damnation: There's all the need he hath of us. And for matter of profit, If thou be wise, thou art wise for thy selfProv. 9.12, saith Solomon, what shall the Lord gain by it? And if thou be righte∣ous, what givest thou to him, saith Elihu, and what receiveth he at thy handsJob 37.5? And yet we see how highly he esteems, and how greatly he respcts that little Nothing of our endeavours of doing him the least service, and bringing honour to his Name. Secondly, take notice what we are? and what the best of our works? To the first, Abraham answereth, I am but dust and ashesGen. 18.27, then when he stood before the Lord to mediate for Sodom. Jacob answereth, I am losse then the least of thy loving-kindnessesGen. 32.10, then when he wrestled with excellent wrestlings, and prevailed with GodGen. 30.8. David answers, I am a worm and no manPsal. 22.6. Esay answers, I am a man of polluted lipsEsay 6.5. Peter answers, Depart from me, for I am a sinfull man, or a man a sinnerLuk. 5.8 .; that is, a very mixture and hodgpodge of dirt and sinne: for ever since the fall, whole evil is in man, and whole man is evil. Lastly, the whole Church answers, It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumedLam. 3 22, that hee plungeth us not in the ditch, and that our own clothes abhor us notJob 9.31. Especially since all our righteousnesses (which is an answer to that second demand, what are the best of our works?) are but as filthy cloutsEsay 64.6, such as a man would be afraid to touch, and asham'd to take up. The best we can present God withall passeth from us no otherwise, then as pure water thorow a muddy sink, or sweet wine thorow a sowre cask. See it in Jonas's prayer, or rather brawlJon. 4.1. Jobs request, or rather curseJob 6.8, 9. Sarah's heat and hast to send for God by a post to arbitrateGen. 16.5. Moses his carnall expostulation, his former tergiversation, and at last cast (when he had nothing else to reply) his flat and peremptory refusall to go upon Gods errand to the King of EgyptExod. 4.1, 13. & 5.22, 23. The conscience of which weaknesse, or rather wickednesse in himself, drives holy David so often to pray for his prayersPsal. 119.169, 170: and good Nehemiah, to crave pardon for his best performancesNehem 13.2, &c. Horreo quic∣quid de meo est, ut sim me∣us. Bern.. In any of which if the Holy Ghost had not his hand, there would not be (as from us) the least good∣nesse; no, not so much as truth and uprightnesse: without which the Lord Jesus would never present them for us to his Father: nor the Father once vouchsafe to look upon, or hearken after such refuse stuffe; which yet he doth; such is the de∣delight he taketh in the exercise of his own graces, in the fruits of his own Spirit. And this is that that may justly drive us into a deep extacie of admiration at his incomparable love, and more then fatherly affection. SECT. VIII. 2. To retain it, and if lost, to recover it, and how. With answer to some Queries and Objections made by a misgiving heart. SEcondly, you that are possest of this priviledge, to be ever at Gods elbow, as his favourites, and to have the royalty of the kings ear; as you must admire at this mercy, so labour and learn (in the next place) how to retain and keep your selves in this love of GodJude 21., as Saint Jude exhorteth. And that is done by keeping close and constant communion with this God All-sufficient, walking before him continu∣ally, as Abraham, and being uprightGen. 17.1. The Lord is with you, (saith that Prophet in the Chronicles) while ye be wih him2 Chro. 15 2. He is with you in mercy, so long as ye are with him in duty. If ye sek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. The Lord is not so fond of his own children, but if they forget him, he may and sometimes doth forsake them in partPsal. 119.8, without breach of covenant. If they prove unconstant and start aside from their station, he can quickly (and doth otherwhiles) withdraw his grace to their thinking, and the power∣full operation thereof in very deed (for a time at least:) as in David relapsed, and
for a while desertedPsal. 51.11, 12. He also seemes to frown upon their suites, and shuts out their prayersifight, against them with his own hand, meets them, as the angell did Balaam with a maked sword in his hand, as if he meant to dispatch them out of hand, and send them packing to hell. Thus it fared sometime with David, I thought upon God (saithhe) and was troubledPsal. 77.3: with Ethan, thou compassest me about with terroursPsal. 88.16, 17: with Jeremy, I shout and he shuts out my prayerLam. 3.8. God turnes his back upon his Absoloms, his Josephs, when they grow proud, presumptuous, secure, slothfull: nay he turnes them into Bedlam, when he findes them frantick; and to all other their afflictions addes this, that he will not once come at them, call they never so long, never so loud after him. At such a time, he seemes to have lesse good remembrance of his deare children, then the Ostrich of her egges, which she leaes loose in the sandJob 39.14, 15: or than the sea-monster of her young, which resuseth not, (though cruell enough,) o draw forth her brests unto themLam. 3.3. He puts his Sion sometimes to that sorrowfull complaint; the Lord hath forsaken me, my Lord hath orgotten meEsay 49.14, yea to that desperate conclusion of the church in the Lamentations. First, she prayes, Turne thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our dayes as of old. But as if she had lst her labour in such a bootelesse suit, she subjoynes this for a perclose of all, But thou hast utterly reject∣ed us, thou art very wroth with usLam. 5.21, 22.. Now in such a pittifull strait, in such a forelorne condition as this, what can a poor soule do for the regayning of his God more then 1. make mone. 2 make out in the use of the meanes, and then 3. wait his return with patience. First, you must bewaile the want of Gods gratious presence and acceptance: make like moane as Rouben for IosephGen. 37.30 Heu quid a∣gam perijt puer ille puer, puer ille., as David for his Absolom2 Sam. 18.33, as Rachel for her childrenJer. 31.15: Sing no new songPsal. 137.4 till thou hast recovered him. Do in this case of spirituall desertion, as Mephibosheth in the absence and exile of his Soveraigne, he neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes from the day the King departed, untill the day he came againe in peace2 Sam. 19.24. Secondly, set up a loud cry after him, as Iacob after his Ioseph, Elish a after Eliah, Micah after his lost godsJudg. 18.24. Say ith Absolom, when out of savour, Let me see the Kings face, and if there be iniquity in me, let me die2 Sam. 14.32. Returne, O Lord: How long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servantPsal. 6.4. & 90.13. I had rather be thy door-keeper, then of Sathans privie-chamber. O Lord, other lords besides thee have had dominion over vs: but by thee only will we make mention of thy NameEsay 26.13. Encline thine eares: O Lord, and hear, open tine eyes, O Lord and seeEsay 37.17. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not for thine own sake, O my GodDan. 9 19 &c. And then thirdly, if God please to hold off longer, refuse not to wait his leisure, sustayning your selves, in the meane, with those two cordiall places: who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, though he walketh in darknesse and have no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his GodEsay 50.10. Again, sine the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the eare, neither hath the eye seen, O God, besides thee what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for himEsay 64.4. In which waiting estate shouldst thou be taken away by death (which seldome falles out, saith one) if thy heart be still set against sin, and linger after the light of Gods countenance, thou shalt be certainly saved, because the spirit of truth faith, blessed are all they that wait for himEsay 30.18. Thirdly, let such as have part and portion in this glorious priviledge, of having open accesse and all assured acceptance, with the most high in all their holy per∣formances; learn to improve this happy opportunitie, by apprehending, and making all best use of it for their everlasting advantage. Is any among you af∣flicted? saith St. Iames, Let him pray. Is any merry? Let him sing plalmesJam. 5.13. Feare we any evill? want we any good? In nothing be carefull, but in all things by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known to GodPhil. 1.6. Note, that he bids us come with supplication and thanksgiving at once; as intimating, that we need not once doubt of good speed, but have our thanks ready in our hand, as sure of a gratious answer to our prayers. After which, the peace of God which passeth all understanding, shall guard your hearts, set them
in as much safety, as if they were in a tower of brasse, or town of war. Thus Esther, after she had been with God, took boldnesse to go to the king (uncalled for) with∣out fear of deathEst. 4.16. And thus our Saviour, though at first afraid, yet when he had conferred with his father by prayer, arise, let us go, saih he, behold, he is at hand that betrayes meMath 26.46 .. Again, want we any good? 'tis no more but run to God for it; who takes it in high scorn we should seek to any other. If any man want wisdmi,) and by consequence any good thing else) let him ask it of GodJam. 1.5. expounded ob. sol. ob. sol.  &c. Antigon. apud Plutar. ob. sol.. Oh but my deserts are nothing. They are as much as he looks for, he gives unto all men, not sels, or payes them for wages. I know, his reward is with him to give unto every man according to his works: and then my share will be a very smal, or nothing rather. Nay, he gives liberally, saith the apostle, not as befits us to receive, but as be∣comes him to give. Now no small things can fall from so great a hand as his. Yca, to such and such he will give, and liberally. Nay, to all men without exception, can they but name the name of the Lord Jesus in prayer, and do their good will to depart from iniquity, they shall be saved. Oh but I have these and these discouragements. My sins presse me down,2 Tim. 2.19 . oh. that I cannot look upPsal. 40.12 sol., and prick me in the foot that I cannot come neer. Fear not for this: God upbraides no man; neither with former faults, or pre∣sent failings, if heartily disclaimed, and soundly set against. The Publican departe Gods presence never awhit the lesse justified for his former extortions, because truly humbledLuk. 18.14. Take heart therefore upon all occasions, to go boldly unto the throne of Gods grace in full assuranceHeb. 4. ult of finding him facile to stretch out his golden scep∣ter, upon the first sight of us, as we appear in his Christ, in whom he is abundant∣ly well pleasedMat. 3. ult .. Look what Zedekiah spake faintly and flateringly to his Princes, you know that the king can denie you nothingIer. 38.5. Hence their stile. .: and what the Heathens falsely report of some of their Princes, that never any departed pensive out of their pre∣sence the same is most true of our God. Never came any unto him aright in his ordinances, but he received thus much comfort and incourage∣ment at least, that he would come again. Noah's dove brought an olive leaf in her mouth at first, and that was encouragement to send out a second time, and a third also, and then better tidings. So though the Lord hold his people off at first, and seem to slight them, yet his heart is still toward them, and his hand is still under them, there is a secret supporting grace, upholding the Saints in their grea∣test desertions. God hears sometimes when he seems to do nothing lesse: and love entirely where he makes shew to hate extreamly; as David dealt with his Absolom, and s the son of David with the woman of Canaan. But how shall I know that God hearkens and hears, when he seems to neglect, and suspends his answer? well enough: and 1. By a cast of his countenance. 2. By the verdict of thine own conscience. First, you may guesse at Gods good minde and meaning towards you by a smile of his face, by a cast of his countenace: as a petitioner may read in the kings looks, while his petition is in reading, what the successe shall be. If the king smile upon it and look cheerfully, he is made, as if the king frown, and bend his brows upon it, he is dashed. Just so it is between God and his people in performance of religious duties. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, as wel as his ears open to their cryesPsal. 34.15, 16.. As, o' to'ther side the face of the Lord (as well as his heart) is against them that do evil, as the Psalmist there opposeth them. A good man gathers by Gods counte∣nance cast upon him in his service, how he shall speed. And this is his privi∣ledge, to be admitted into Gods presence-chamber, when the wicked stand with∣out doors amongst dogs, and devilsRev. 22.15. For an hypocrite shall not come before himIob 13.16., saith Job, but the upright shall dwell in his presencePsal. 140.13, saith David. The wicked man stands at the gate like a vagrant, but comes not into the house, to see whether the master be preparing for him an almes, or a cudgel, whereas a good man, like a good An∣gel, stands alwayes before the face of God, who doth not hide his face from him, but when he cryes unto him he hearsPsal. 22.24. Secondly consult thine own sanctified conscience, for thy better satisfaction and
resolution in this case. Conscience is Gods spie, and mans over-seer, excusing, or accusing, cheering or checking in Gods stead, as there is occasion. It may fitly be called our God in the sence that Moses was PharaohsExod. 7.1. Come, see a thing that tells all that ever we have doneJoh. 4.29., nay, all that ever God doth (as touching our salvation:) being enlightened and sanctified, by the holy Ghost. For as God knows the meaning of his spiritRom. 8.27., so doth the spirit know the meaning of God. Now this spirit witnesseth together with our spiritsRom. 8.16.. Nay it disdaineth not for our comfort, to give in evidence at the bar of our consciences, that we are Gods children, and our services good in his sight: refreshing our hearts, after holy actions, with a secret content,Weemse. with a hidden approbation. Now therefore as the High priest of the old Testament might read Gods minde in his Urim and Thummim born upon his brest, though he heard no voice, though hesaw no shape: so may a christian inform him∣self from within, what the Lord thinks of him and hi works, he need but reflect upon his own conscience (if not bemisted or abused by Satans temptaions) and it will do him to know what his acceptation is in heaven. If our hearts condemn us not, saith Saint Iohn, then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him1 Joh. 3.21, 22. either in the same kinde we ask, or a better. By a clearing chearing conscience God testifies (as once by fire from heaven) that he is well plea∣sed with our sacrifices, &c. CHAP. VI. Doctr. V. God perfectly remembreth, and plentifully requiteth all our labours of love to him and his. And there was a book of remembrance written before him for them that feared the Lord &c. A Figurative speech,Oblivis enim in Deum non cadit. Parabo∣licw̄c hac dicta sunt, & pro humano captu. Pol. and framed to our capacity: for it befalles not God to be forgetful, or to stand in need of a remembrancer. It was in a distemper, you may be sure, that David asked, Hast thou forgotten to be mercifulPsal. 77.9? and that Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, my God hath forgotten meEsay. 49.14. The Butler may forget Ioseph, and Ioseph his former toyl, and fathers houseGen. 41.51., but God cannot forget his people whom he hath chosenRom. 11.1. Can a woman forget her sucking childeEsay. 49.15? pos∣sibly she may: some tigresses have proved unnatural to their own birth, and bow∣elsRom. 1.31 ., but so cannot God. He is not unjust to forget your labour of loveHeb. 6.10.: or if he should (as I abhor to imagine) beold there is a book of remembrance written before him, for them that fear the Lord, and that think upon his name. A borrowed speech (for our better apprehension) from kings and great personages: who use, for me∣mories sake, to keep a catalogue, a calendar of such as whom they minde to reward for some special service; as Ahasuerosh did Mordecai, when he had read his name in the roll of those that had deserved well of the kingEst. 6.3 So Tamerlane had alwayes by him a cata∣logue of the names and good deserts of his servants which he dai∣ly pernsed. Knol. Tu r hist. p. 227.. Those stout rebels above my text, were grown so bold and bedlam, as to give out, that Gods service was no∣thing worth: and that it was a course of no profit, to keep his ordinancesMal. 3.13, 14 15.. The con∣trary whereunto is here vouched, and the truth vindicated. God, (saith our pro∣phet) both hearkened and heard the holy language of his people, and so sealed up his dear respect unto them for present: and also caused a book of remembrance to be written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name, and so setled it in his heart to requite them for the future. That like as in the work of creation there went with Gods dixit, his benedixit, and with his ordinavit his or∣navit, so in the administration of all things (especially in that which is special and proper, to the elect) with his remembrane, there goes a recompence, and with his
regard a reward. Note hence, That God doth perfectly remember, that he may plentifully requite all the good srvices done him by his saints and people. SECT. I. The truth confirmed by Scripture. HE not only harkened and heard what good things passed between them here, but registred up and ingrossed the same in his book of remembrance: called elsewhere the book, by a specialtyDan. 12.1, the writing of the house of IsraelEzek 13.9, the wri∣ting to life in JerusalemIsa. 4.3, the book of lifePhilip. 4.3, the book of life of the lambRev. 21.27, wherein he records, and where-out he will relate, at last day, all the good works of his childrenMat. 25., not once mentioning their sins and infirmties, which he hath promised to remember no moreHeb. 8. Our labour of love he will not forget, but be ever mindfull of his covenantPsal. 115.5. The Lord hath been mindfull of us saith the Church (and as an effect thereof) he will blesse us; He will blesse the house o Israel, He will blesse the house of Aaron: He will blesse them that fear the Lord both small and greatPs. 115.11 12. Cornelius for instance, he feared God winh all his bouseholde, and he made good proof thereof, for he gave much almes to the people, and pray'd to God alway: and therefore both his prayers, and his almes came up for a memo∣riall before GodAct. 10.1, 2, 4. Thus God remembred his NoahGen. 8.1, AbrahamGen. 19.20, RachelGen. 30.22, JosephPsa. 105.20, whose fetters he changed into a chain of gold, his rags into fine linnen, his stocks into a charret, his goal into a palace, Potiphars captive into his Ma∣sters Lord, the noyse of his chains into Abrech; and all because heremembred his Creatour in the dayes of his youthEccles. 12.1, and thereby kept himself pure from the great TransgressionPsal. 19.13. SECT. II. The truth confirmed by six Reasons. THe ground of which gracious dealing in God is first his incomprehensible wis∣dome, and fore-knowledge. The Lord hath the Idoea, the perfect plat∣forme and paern within himself, of all persons and things, together with the severall occurrences of either. Hence it is that he knowes all things Simul & se∣mel, together and at once; not successively or by discourse, collecting one thing from another, as we do; but in one simple and eternall act knowing and comprehending all things. He need but reflect upon himself, and there he seeth all things before him as in a glasse. So that to speak properly, there is neither foreknowledge nor remembrance in the Almighty; all things both past and future being ever present with him. Tine eyes did see my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book were all my members written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of themPs. 139.16. In this fore-knowledge of God (so we call it for teaching sake) as in a book are recorded the persons, birth, quality and death of every man and woman; together with their severall deeds and practises, that they may receive according to what they have done in the flesh whether good or evill2 Gor. 5. And this is our first ground of this point. Known to the Lord are all his works from the beginingAct. 15 18. The Lord knoweth them that be his2 Tim. 2.19, Yea he knowes the whole way of the righteousPsal. 1. ult.. And this his knowledge of them and their good works is a knowledge of singular apprbation, yea of infinite delight and complacency, which makes him wait to shew them mercyEsay 30.18. Heremembreth, saith the Psalmist, when he writes up the people, when he makes up his jewelsMal 3.17, that such a man was bornPsal. 87.5, 6 there: and that being born by a second birth, and having followed him in
the regenerationMat. 19.28, they shall not lose the things they have wrought, but receive a full reward2 Ich. 8.. Secondly,, God is just and faithfull, hence his remembrances and remunera∣tions of his peoples services. Not of duty (I must tell you) but of mercy: it be∣ing a mercy in God even to reward men according to their worksPsal. 62.12, were they better then they be, or can be. To thee, O Lord, belongeth merey: for thou rewardest every one according to his worksPsal. 62.12. But this by the way. We were drawing a second reason for the point from Gods justice and faithfulnesse. And this we borrow fom the Apostle Heb. 6.10. God, saith he, is not unrighteous to forget your works, and labour of love which ye have shew'd toward his name, in that ye have ministred to the saints and do also ministerHeb. 6.10. For the better understanding of which argument, it must be premised, that there is a double Justice of God; one of Equity (which is the giving of every man his own, as ye all know) and another of fidelity, according to that of St. Iohn, If we confesse our sinns, he is faithfull and just to forgive us our sins1 Ioh 1.9. Posset alioqui justus esse De∣us, &c. sed quia se verbo suo nobis con∣strinxit, justus censeri non vult nisi ignoscat Calvin: in locum.. And in this sence, as it is a righteous thing with God to recompence tribulation to them that trou∣ble you (which is the justice of Equity) so, to you that are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Iesus shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that beleeve2 Thes. 16, 7, which is the justice of sidelity, for faithfull is he that hath promised who also will do it. Take it thus: God having made himself our volun∣tary debter, not by receiving any thing from us (for who hath given unto him first and he shall be recompensedRom. 11 35? not one) but by promising all good things unto us; what ever unworthinesse be found in us, Yet he abides faithfull, he cannot deny him∣self2 Tim. 2.13: nor forget to crown his own graces in us with that life eternall, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world beganTit. 1.2. He hath, of his own ac∣cord, smitten a covenant with us of mercy, and given us his band for ou security: nay his oath, nay his seal, both the privy seal of his spiritEph. 1.13 and the broad seal of the sacramentsRom 4.11., That by so many immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lye, we might have strong consolation, which have our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set before usHeb. 6.18. Reas. 3.. Thirdly God is gratious and hountiful, as well as righteous and faithfull. He is rich in mercy to all that call upon himRom. 10.12, or do him any other businesse. Doth Icb serve God for noughtIob 1.9.? No, nor any man living: he is a large paymaster. Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought? neither do ye kindle a fire upon mine altar for noughtMal. 1 10: David indeed would serve him on free∣cost2 Sa. 24.24: but di the Lord dye in his debt? nay did he not pay him his charges are the Sun went down the same day with usury? At another time David had but a purpose to build God an house, and God promised thereupon to build him an house for ever2 Sa 7.2, 16: Again, he had but a purpose of confessing his sinns, and before he could do it, the Lord forgave him the iniquity of his sinPsal. 32.5. The Apostle tells us, that a poor servant, if in serving his master according to the flesh, he do withall serve the Lord Christ, doing it heartily as to the Lord, and not as to men, let him know, saith he, that of the Lord he shall receive the reward of inheritanceColoss. 4.24. He meets, it may be, with a hard master that both belly-beats him, and back-beats him too; gives him very hard work and litle or no wages; but Christ will do all. Not wages only shall he receive as a servant, but inheritance as a son. Nay, the poor begger that gives but a cup of cold water, with desire of doing more, if he had wherewithall; Verily I say unto you, saith our Saviour, he shall not lose his rewardMat. 10 42. Saul when he went to enquire about the Asses, had but five-pence in his purse to give the Seer1 Sam. 9.8.: the Seer after much good cheer gives him the king∣dome. Such is Gods deaing with us: he liberally rewards the small offerings of his weak servants, when he perceives them proceed from great love. How often doth he send away his poor Oratours, as Boaz did Ruth wit their bosome full ofblessingsRuth. 3.15, as David did Mephibosheth, with a royal revenew2 Sam. 9.7: as Solomon did the Queen of She∣ba with what soever heart can wish1 King. 10.13: or as Caleb did his daughter AchsahIudg. 1.15 with upper and nether springs, a confluece of spirituall comforts: temporall contentments, and all of the riches of his grace doth he thus give us all things richly to enjoy1 Tim. 6.17 Reas. 4.? Fourthly, God is wondrous tender an chary of his own glory, seeking the
setting forth thereof mainly, (and indeed onely) in all his works. Now the glory of God is no way more advanced and enlarged then by keeping open house, as it were: giving all best entertainment and incouragement to those that frequent him: not forgetting the labour of love that is shewed to his Name. For this is it, that will draw in much ompany about him, and make men very obsequious and obser∣vant, when they se for certain that there is a reward for the righteousPsal. 58.11; yea, stedfast, and unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord, as knowing that their labour is not in vain in the Lord1 Cor. 15. ult. Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Sion; and unto thee shall the vow be performedPsa. 65.1, 2, 3 Sint mecoena∣tes, non dee∣runt, Flacce Marones. Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt. Mart.. But how comes it about that men are so officious and forwardly, as to stand waiting at the posts of the gates of Wisdom, with free offer of their best devotions and services? It followes there; O thou that hearest prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come. As who should say, It is for no marvell, though men come thick about thee; and thou have followers good store: for a little eutreaty serves turne for the obtaining of great suits, of all sorts, and mercies without measure: And it is seldom seen, that a good house-keeper wants company; 'is pitty he should. Fifthly, God rewards even wicked men that do his will,Reaf. 5. though against their own will, and beside their own intentions: as he did Nebuchadnezzar, (his involuntary and unwitting servant) to whom he gave Egypt in way of wages, or military pay, for the long labour, and hard pains he had taken in the siege of TyrusEzek 29.18: Howbeit he thought not so, but imagined to destroy, and cut off not a few nationsEsay 10.7. Likewise those that serve him out of servile respcts, and sinfull self-love, he rewards out of the abundance of his bounty; as Ahab, to whom he requited a temporary re∣pentance with a temporall deliverance. Nay, those men of Gods bandPsal. 17.14, that do him no service at all, but walk upon the face of the earth with hearts full of hell, and faces set against heaven, he not onely commands his Sunne to shine, and his raine to fall upon themMat. 5.45, but further fills their bellies with his hid treasure, and gives them more then heart can wishPsal. 73.7: their prosperous successe doth oft-times ex∣ceed the conceitings of their minds. And shall he forget his entire friends, that thus remembreth to requite his profest enemies? Never was Prince so served in his greatest pomp, as the rebellious Israelites in the wildernesse: how good shall we finde him then to those that please him? Lastly, godly people themselves, nay honest Heathens are carefull to requite such as are diligent about them, and dutifull toward them. What honour hath been done to Mordecai, saith Ahashuerosh, for thisEsth. 6.3? Surely Mordecai did but his duty: he had hainously sinned if he had not revealed that wicked treachery: yet Ahashuerosh takes thought for his remuneration. And shall not God much more remember to recom∣pence the weak obedience of us, though (at best) his unprofitable servants. So Revel, the Prince of Midian, requiteth Moses, for assisting his wronged daughters, against their rude countreymen, that sought to drive them from the water that themselves had drawnExod. 2.20. Shall a courteous Heathen so bountifully reward the watering of sheep, and shall not our God be as forward to recompence, be it but a cup of cold water given to a disciple? If the king of Sodom could find in his heart to leae the goods to Abraham, as a pension for his pains in the pursuit of the four kings, whom he overtook and discomfitedGen. 14.21: what marvell though the king of heaven appear unto him shortly after in a vision, and say, I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great rewardGen. 15.1. SECT. III. Use 1. Confutation of the contrary minded, that say, or conceive at least, that its in vain to serve the Lord. THis then serves, first, to confute and convince of singular impudency, and falshood all those profane Atheists above the Text, together with the whole rabble of their wretched heirs and successours, abroad the world at this very day, that hold it to be a vain thing to serve God, a practise of no profit at all to be re∣ligious. This corrupt opinion of God and his works is an old canker'd sore, that
lies festring in all mens hearts, and doth blister out upon the tongues of good men sometimes, of bad men more frequently. Certainly, saith David, I have cleansed my beart in vain, I have washed my hands in innecency, or to very small availPsal. 73.13. This was his speech in a passion, for the which he found a time soon after to befool and be-beastVers. 22 himself well-favouredly, when he was come to himself, and the distemper a little over. And good reason he should; foeside the dishonour done to God hereby, in bringing up (as those spies) an ill report of Gods service, he saw that in so saying, he had offended agains the whole generation of Gods chil∣drenVers. 15: from henceforth therefore he laid his hand upon his mouth. Once he had spoken, ut he would not answer, yea twice, but he would proceed no furtherJob 40.4, 5. With the wicked it is more ordinary. Their words are stout against the LordMal. 3 13, (saith our Prophet) they stick not to give him out for a hard man, a slack pay-master, reaping where he sowed not, and gathering where he strawed notMat. 25.24. Hear them awhile in their own language. What is the Almighty, say they, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we should pray unto himJob 2.15? What profit is it that we have kept his Commandements, and that we have walked humbly before the Lord of HostsMal. 3.14? Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest it not? Where∣fore have we afflicted our souls, and thou takest no knowledgeEsay 58.3? Lo these many yeers do I serve thee, said that self-justiciary to his heavenly Father, neither ransgres∣sed I at any time thy commandement: and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friendsLuk. 15.29. Thus these Malecontents of old: and to the same purpose in effect many now-adayes, that think and speak basely of Gods service, as if godlinesse were not gain, but rather gain godlinesse1 Tim. 6.5, heaven a name, and not worth looking after: but the onely happinesse to have and to hold. As ap∣pears when they spare not to foam out their filthy froth, and say: What get these forward fellows by gading to sermons, reading so much, praying so oft, being so precise and conscientious?Tull. Philosophandum sed paucis: 'tis good to be godly, but withall to be wise: zealous, but with discretion: we cannot live (beleeve me) by hearing of sermons: religion will ot buy food and raiment: we have our hands full of work, and our houses full of children; and should we spend half an hour or lesse in a morning, and as much at evening in prayer and devotion, all would run to wreck, and our families be but ill proided for. It there not such language as this, heard in some mens hearts, nay houses otherwhiles? Conceive they not as dishonourably, and as disdainfully of Gods best and busiest servants, as Pharaoh did sometimes of he Israelitish sacrificers. They are idle, they are idle, said he, let them get them to their taksExod. 5.17. Moses speaks of devotion, Pharaoh of idlenesse: Moses talks of sacrifice, Pharaoh of work. Any thing seems due work to a car∣nall minde saving Gods service. He cries out of any time or pains laid out that way, as Judas once of the Spikenard: To what end is this wastMat 26.8? As Seneca did of the Iewes weekly Sabbaths; that they lost the seventh part of their time: Or, as Jeroboam did of Gods publike worship at Jerusalem, he persaded the peo∣ple that it was too much labour to repair t the Temple, they should take a shorter cut to the golden calves at Beth-aven1 King. 12.28. Of this sort are such as send in their ecuse, when invied to the ordinances; and say with those recusant guests in the Go∣spel, We have oxen and farmsMat. 22.5 and other fish to fry, we cannot intend it, and they were fools if they should. Tell them of the unlawfulnesse of their lying, cog∣ging, over-reaching, cozening, usury, they'le answer you straight: What would e have us to do? we are neither Saints nor Angels: we must do as the world does, or else look to be undone for ever. Plain dealing indeed is a jewel: but (would ye should know) he that useth it, shall die a begger. Presse them to works of mercy, and liberality to Gods poor; alasse, say they, we are poor men our selves, and have many to care for. A man cannot tell what shall come after him, and what shall come after him who can tellEccles. 6.12? O fools, and slow of heart to beleeve all that the Prophets have afore-time spokenLuk. 24.25. Hath not God said, The liberall man deviseth liberall things, and by liberall things he shall standEsay 32.8, not fall, or come to ruine. That he is able to restore any Amaziah more then the one hundreth talents come to2 Chro. 25.9, lost or rather laid out for Gods sake, and in is service? that whosoever forsaketh all, and follows Christ shall receive a hundred-fold here, and heaven hereafterMark. 10.30. Ruth for instance: she (while Orphah wants bread in her own countrey) is grown a
great Lady in Bethlehem; and advanced to be great-grand mother to the King of Israel, nay to Christ the heire of all. But the ground of this perversnes and misjudgment made by men of Gods work, and is wages is, that damned in∣fidelitie that is rooted in our natures: cansing that we dare not rely upon God, nor trust his bare word without a pawne; but think 'tis beft every man to shift for one: that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush (as the prodi∣gall, that called for his portion here; and that carnall Cardinall that wouldnot part with his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise) that wherever we see God 'tis best tusting to our selves: which what is it better then to give God the lie,Cardinall Burbon. to charge falshood upon the Almighty? should some man promise me an hundred pound, doing some small chare for him, though I told him not plainely, he did but seek to gull me with words, yet if I should go my way from him, turn againe and laugh in his face, and never make use of his offer, or triall of his curtesie, I should, in ef∣fect, say as much as all that comes to. Think the same of such as reject Gods just precepts, and despise his large promises, slighting his work, and slandering his wages, what do they lesse then put the lie upon him in grossest manner? then the which I know not what greater indignitie can be offered to the God of truth: Whereat though he seemes to wink for a season, and they conceive basely and ab∣surdly of him thereupon, as if he were altogether such a one as themselves, yet he will shortly reprove them, and set their sins in order before their eyesPsal 50.21, as they stand recorded in the roll of remembrance. For as there is a book of remem∣brance written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name; so no lesse for them that despisd the Lord, and set light by his Name. That therein (as in a table) they may run and read their own destiny written faire, and so returne and discerne between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. SECT. IIII. Ʋse 2. The wicked shall be surely and severely punished. ANd that's a second use of this point, and 'tis for terrour to all gracelesse and profane persons, that serve not God but Mammon, not the Lord Christ, but their own bellyesRom. 16.18, that forsake their Maker, and pursue after lying vani∣tiesJon. 2.8, that say, after all, The Lord hath for sakenthe earth, he will neither do good nor evillEzek. 9.9 Zeph. 1.12. He hath said in his heart, (quoth David of the Atheist) God hath forgotten, he hideth his face, he will never see itPsal. 10.11. And again by way of com∣plaint. Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they bluster and speake hard things? and all the workers of iniquitie boaft themselves. They break in pieces thy people &c. Yet they say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Iacob regard itPsal. 94.3 &c.. They hide God from themselves, and then think themselves hid from GodStruthioca∣melo cum de∣lit escendum est, solum caput penitus in con∣denso loco seu frutice occul∣tat, reliquum corpus in aper to relinquit. Ita dum in ca∣pite seeurus est. nudus qu mor t. capi∣tur totus  Capite. Plin.  10. tap. 1. Impiorum dicta et facta simili∣ter in Dei com∣mentariis refe∣runtur &c. Gualth in tex∣tum.. Whose folly we can better revince then in the following words. Vnderstand ye bruitish among the people, and ye fooles, when will ye be wise? He that planted the eare shall not he hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? He that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know? Yea, the Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. He knowes them, and ponders them: he records and writes them down particularly in his ook of remembrance. The sin of Iudah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamondJer. 17.1. Be∣hold it is written before me, and I will recompence it into their bosomesEsay 65.6 saith the God of recompenceJer. 51.56. And as he writes up their actions for future vengeance, so (as men do their chief evidences, which they are most carefull to keep safe) God is said to lay up these records in store with him, and to keep them seal'd up among his treasuresDeut. 32.34. And for what end doth he this? but that he may produce them as so many swift witnesses against the workers of iniquity in that day. Her sinnes have reached to heaven, and God hath remembred her iniquities: Reward her therefore even as she hath Rewarded you, and double unto her double,Mal. 3.5 according to
her works, said that mighty angel concerning BabylonRev. 18.5, 6 Jacob Revlus in hist. Pontific p. 177. Lente gradu, ad vindictam sui, divina procedit ̄ura, tarditatem∣que supplicij gravitate com∣penset. De Dio∣nysio Val. Max. Iib. 1. cap. 2. .. And the same sai th the mighty God concerning all impenitent persons, well they may shuffle for a season, and shift rom side to side (as Balaams asse before the punishing Angel) but surely their sin will finde them out, and ring them such a heavie peal, as Pope In∣nocent the fourth heard once from heaven, and was found dead the next day in his nest, Veni miser in judicium, come thou wretch and receive thy judgment. What though the Lord defer the execution of his sentence: The master of that evilser∣vant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and at an houre when he thinkes not, and shall cut him in twain, rend his soul from his body, and appoint him his portion with unbeleeversMat. 24.51 Luk. 12.46.. What though they flourish awhile here, and spread themselves like a gren bay treePsal. 37.35. exorientur, sed exurentur., it is that they may be cut off for ever. What is fairer then the corn-field a little before harvest? then the vineyard, a little before the vin∣tage? Thrust in thy siclke, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for her grapes are fully ripe, and cast t into the great wine-presse of the wrath of God.Rev. 14.18, 19. SECT. V. Ʋse, Let them therefore hasten out of the Devils danger, and get into Gods service. How that may be done KNowing therefore the terrour of the Lord, we perswade men2 Cor. 5.11.; And oh that we could perswade all unregenerate prsons, first, by this point, to do as Saint Peter adviseth all in their case, Repentye, saith he, and be converted that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the LordAct. 3.19.: Bloted out, I say, and first out of Gods book of remembrance, where they stand written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamondJer 17.1.: Secondly, out of the book of their own consciences, where they stand recorded for future time, as ye may see in Josephs brethren. Their own hearts condemned them, and called them miscreants, twenty years after the fact committedGen. 42.21.. their consciences also bearing witnesse, as saith the Apostle, and their thoughts between themselves, accusing one a∣notherRom. 2.15.  formavit pinaeit. Where it is remarkable that the Syriack translatour useth a word for conscience that signifieth a written or painted thing. For the conscience now is as a table wherein are many things painted, which sort of writting is fitly compa∣red to that we write with the juice of an onion or lemmon, hold it to the fire, and it is legible. So when the conscience is once put to the fire of Gods wrath, all will out, and old sins come to a new reckoning. The onely way to spunge out this writing, is by weeping upon it repentant tears, that God may wash us throughly with the blood of his Son. For if we confesse our sins against our selves with David u, he is faithful and just to sorgive us our sins1 Joh. 1.7, 9; and to crosse out of his debt∣book the black lines of our sins, and arrerages, with those red lines of his sons blood. I even, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sinsEsay. 43.25. And again, I will be merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and their sins will I remember no moreHeb. 8.12.. Lo, if we but remmber our misdoings, he will forget them: if we reveale them with shame and sorrow, he will co∣ver themPsal. 32.1., if we but see them to confession, we shall never see them to our confusion, if we but acknowledge the debt, he will cancel the bond, blot out the hand-writting that was against usCol. 1.2, 14, and cast all our sins behinde himMicah. 7.19, (as off-cast eidences that are past date) into the depth of the sea: so that we shall never see them again, otherwise then the Israelites saw their enemies, the Egyptians, dead upon the shoare. 2 Next, doth the Lord so remember to requite the services of his people? is there such a lively remembrance, and ample recompence preparing for them (how should this fire up the affections of all unregenerate persons, to hire themselves out to God for servantsRom. 6.13, to swear with DavidPsal. 119.106, to vow with IoshuaJosh. 24.14. to serve Ieho∣vah; renouncing the devils drudgery, to whom they have hithereo damned them∣selves voluntary slaves, to their inestimable disadantage. It is a point (I wot well) they will not hear of, that the devil is their good Lord, that he sets them awork,
and will pay them their wages. You know how ill the Jews took it to be told as much by our Saviour ChristIoh. 8.44. But that it is no better with them, the scripture is clear, and the joynt testimony of all Gods redeemed ones concurrent: for we our selves also (even I Paul, and thou Titus) were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasuresTit. 2.3, hampered and enwrapt in the invisible chaines of the kingdom of darknesse, being taken alive captive by the devil at his pleasure2 Tim. 2.25 ., hurried about by him as Bajazei in his iron cage: toiled out of all true com∣fort, as Samson at his mill: opprest with unreasonable tasks, and insupportable bur∣dens, as hrael in the iron-furnace: this is their work. And for wages, they are exposed to a world of plagues and curses, armies and changes of sorrows, and cala∣mities here, their whole life being but one continuate vexationEccles. 2.17, besides the fear of death (that upshot and center of evils to evil men) making them subject to bon∣dage all their life timeHeb. 2.15. And worthily: for terrours take hold of them (then) as waters, they make them afraid on every sideJob. 27.20 & 18, 19. Trouble and anguish make them afraid they shall prevail against them; as a king ready to the battleIob. 15.23, 24. Death seizeth upon them, as a mercilesse officerPsal 55.15, takes them by the throat as that cruel servant in the Gospel: feedeth upon their flesh, as a greedy lionPsal. 49.14, stings them to the soul as a fiery serpent1 Cor. 15.55, gripes them to the quick as a bear robbed of her whelps: comes upon them with a firmae Ejectione as an inexorable Landlord: carries them away as Gods executioner, yea as the messenger and forrunner of the second death, where the worm never dieth, where the fire never goes outMar. 9.44.: where they seek death but finde in no, yea desire it, but it fleeth from themRev. 9.6. It is reported of Roger somtimes Bishop of Sal shury (the second man from king Steven) that he was so tortured in prison with hunger and other calamities usually accompanying people in that case, ut vivere noluerit, mori nescierit, live he would not, die he could not. How much more true think we) is this of all those that are thrust into that outer-dark∣nesse,Nubrigensis. . that darknesse beyond a darknesse (as the word seems to import) that ut∣most dungeon of the damned, where there is nothing but weeping and wailing and gnaihing of teeth. Weeping for extremity of heat, and gnashing of teeth for ex∣tremity of cold. Weeping is the expression of sorrow, and sorrow cools the heart; and cold makes the teeth to chatter. Thus those miserable creatures do, at some time, freez and fry, weep and gnash, live and die, a dying life a living death, not for a time, or times, or half a timeRev. 12.14. (oh happy they, if ever they might hope an end!) but ever and ever, and beyond all time, throughout all eternity. Oh consi∣derchis, all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver youPsal 50.22. Save your selves from this tormenting Tophet, and be forwarned to flee from the wrath to come. See what miserable slaves ye are to Satan (being altogether as much in his power and clutchesAct. 26 18 as he that goes gyved is in the gaolers: or he that goes up the ladder pininond and hoodwinkt in the hangmans) and for how little good advantage ye lay forth your selves, and toyl out your lives in wearisomeIer. 9.5 Psal. 55.10 wicked∣nesse. Do but summon the sobriety of your senses afore your own judgments, and see what uncessant pains ye are at, and all to go to hell; whiles you do wickedly with both hands earnestlyMic. 7.3., working hard at the works of the flesh, but putting your gets into a bottomlesse bagHag. 1.6.. Nay that's not all: for he that soweth the winde shall reap the whirelwindeProv. 22 8 Hos. 10 12, saith Solomon, that is, he that soweth the wind of sin and va∣nity, shall reap the whirlwinde of vengeance and misery. And he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the fiesh reap that corruption, that is contradistinguisht to life ever∣lastingGal. 6.8.: for the wages of sin is deathRom. 6. ult. Sursum cursum nostrum diri∣gamus, & mi∣nantem immi∣nentem & ex∣terminantem mortem atten∣damus, ne si∣mul cum cor∣poris fractura, animae jactu∣ram faciamus., temporal, spiritual and eternal. And is it nothing to lose an immortal soul? to purchase an everliving death? hear then set thy self in good earnest to see and sigh under Satans servitude: be sensible of his yoke, as galling thy neck, and let it make thee cry out, O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this unsufferable servitude! Behold, I am more mi∣serable then Samson at the mill: for he had hope in his death,Prov. 14.32 but what hope have I, When God shall take away my soulJob. 27.8: I am more miserable then Zedekiah in cold irons; for though he los his eyes, yet he escaped with his life: but I, alasse, am am dead while alive1 Tim. 5.6, a very living ghost, a walking sepulchre of my self. I am more miserable, then Ieremy in the dungenon: for he found friends, and means of en∣largement: but to which of the Saints shall I turn my selfJob. 5.1., or where shall I finde help or rescue in heaven or earth? I am more wretched then Israel in Egypt: for if
they performed their tasks, they escaped the lash: but I, after all my best services done o the devill, am laden with stripes, and shall be scourged with scorpionsnsideret his quilibet quam jod 1 sir servi∣tus, servhe priacipi immò tyranno diabolo qui subditos si∣bi infandis di∣vexat modis. Bucer.. Thus make moan to thy self, first: and tenmake out to Christ, next, for manumission and enlargement: for if the son set you free, you shall be free indeedIoh. 8.36.. Cry to the Lord Christ in the words of the ancient Church, O Lord, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but we will remember thee only and thy nameIsa. 26.13.. Thy name is as an oynt munt powred out, theresore the Virgins love theeCant 1.3. O pour upon my dry soul of that precious oyntment, and stablish me with thy free spiritPsal. 51 12, for where thy spirit is, there is liberty2 Cor. 3.17, from both the commanding and the condem∣ning poer of sin and Satan. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove to these wicked ones x: in thy righteousnesse rid me and set me free. For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand other-where. I had rather be a dore-keeper in the house of my GodPs. 84.10, 11, then to be Satans chlef-favourite, or one of the privy chamber: For the Lord God is a Sun and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory; large wages! grace and glory? what things be these? one would think that were reward enough for such sorry service, as we can do him, a best: ey, but then her's more then enough, for no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Oh bountifull God! who would not chuse and covet to be thy servant? who would not gladly stand waiting at the posts of thy gatesProv. 8 34, if haply at any hour of th day he might hear thy happy call, and be hired into thy heavenly Vineyard? who would not un through thick and thinQuidam ad omnia viae & vitae hujus ex∣ercitia non so∣lum ambulant sed & currunt imò potius vo∣lant Bern. Serm. 3. de Asc. Dom. to compasse such a gainfull service? And yet 'tis a world to see, a wonder to behold how strangely men hang off here: how hard they are to be wonn to the setting in hand with the works of the Lord: miserably slighting God; offers, and letting slip their golden opportunities of get∣ting into his employment. They talke sometimes of the wages, but shrink at the work, as the Israelites talked of the reward of Goliath's conquest, yet fled from it when they had done1 Sam. 17.24, 25. The land is good; said those faint-hearted spies, but the cityes are walled up to heaven, and the inhabitants unconquerable. They wish well other-whiles to heaven, as he that kneeled to our Saviour with good masterMat. 19.16 Turpe est impi∣os diabolo tam strenuèservire, nos Christo pro sanguinis retio nihil rependere Cyprian: lib. de oper: et eleemos: in his mouth: they could be glad with Balaam to dye the death of the righteous, but to live their precise and austere life, that goes to the heart of them: they cannot frame to it. O blinder then Beetles! the merchant refuseth no ad∣venture for the hope of gain: the hunter shrinketh at no weather for love of game; the souldier declineth no danger for desire of glory or spoile: the bear breaks in upon the hives, contemning the stings; And shall we fain to our selves an ease in not understanding, or an idlenesse in not seeking after that service that will be a means unto us, not only of avoyding intollerable, and endlesse torments (which is the devills meed and wages) but also of attaining immeasurable and immortall glory, pleasure and gain, which is Gods reward and guerdon: For glory, ho∣nour, and peace to every man that works good, to the lew first, and also to the Gen∣tileRom. 2 10. And contented godlinesse is greatest gain1 Tim 6.6  in pietate. 1 Tim. 4.8, saith the same Apostle, such as wherein all losses are recompensed, all wants supplied, all curses removed, crosses sanctified, promises accomplished, blessednesse procured, Satan conquered, Death destroyed, the grave sweetned, corruption abolished, sanctification per∣fected, and heaven opened for a more happy enterance. What should I say more for a conclusion of this first Exhortation to those that are in their naturall conditi∣on? There is no gain to that of grace, no increase to that of Gods service. The Usurer gaines six in the hundred, but the gain of godlinesse is an hundred∣fold here, and eternall life hereafter. Oh who would not then turne spirituall purchaser?
SECT. VI. Ʋse 4. Exhortation to Saints to abide in Gods love, and to abound in his work: sith their labour of love is not in vain in the Lord. OUr second Exhortation is to be addressed to all those that are true of heart, whose names are written in heavenheb. 12.23, whose services are set down in Gods book of remembrance. How should these first, rejoyce in this priviledge, more a great deal then if devils were subdued unto themLuc. 10: what a mercy is his, that God should set so highly by their poor performances, as to record them in the high court of heaven: to gratifie and grant them thereupon great suites on earth; to glory and bost of them before the Prince of hell; as he did of IobIob 1.8, because he was jealous over himself and his with a godly jealousyIob 1.5. How should the Saints delight themselves in such a master, and make their boasts of God all day longPsal. 44.8? How should they sing with David, Lord thou hast dealt bountifully with thy servant according to thy wordPsal. 119.17: carolling out, and calendring up the noble acts of that LordPsal. 105.5, who shall count when he writes up the peoplePsal. 87.6, that such a man was born there, and there was faithfull in all his house, as a servantHeb. 3.5, with Moses: kept his word, and not denyed his name with Pergamus and Philadel∣phiaRev. 2. & 3: instantly served the Lord day and night, with the twelv tribesAct. 26.7 . &c. These things he carefully recordeth, and honourably mentioneth, and is it not a shame for us to be slothfull, and silent? to be forgetlull of him that thus remem∣breth us, and the poor things that pass from us? Of all things God cannotabide to be forgotten: See how ill he takes it at the hands of his people. They are a froward generation, children in whom no faith saith he. For of the Rock that be∣gat them they are unmindfull, and the God that formed them they have forgotten. And when th Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of this provoking of his sons and of his daughtersDeut. 32.18 20. And a fire was kindled in hisanger thereupon, even such as burneth to the lowest hell. For the wicked shall be turned into hell, and who too? With all them that forget GodPsal. 9.17.. But what shall become of them in the mean while? Behold, I even I will utterly forget you (and so pay you home in your own coyne) yea I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetuall shame which shall not be forgottenIer. 23. 39.40. See this exemplified in the rich glutton Luc. 16. who because he remembred not that God gave him his corne and wine and oile, and multiplyed his silver and his goldHos. 2.8, but sacrificed to his own net, and burnt incense to his own yarn, because by them his portion was fat, and is meat plenteousHabak. 1.16, therefore is he not so much as once called by his name in holy scripture, but lyes wrapt up in the sheet of infamy, and buried in everlasting reproach which shall not be forgotten. When as the poor beggar that set God alwayes before himPsal. 16, with David, that remembred his name in the night, and thereby kept his lawPs. 119.55, is thought worthy to have a name in Gods book, and a nayle in Gods houseEzra. 9.8, the Lord saying unto him as once to Moses, I have known thee by nameExod. 33.12, thy memori∣all shall endure to all generationsPsal. 112.. Nay the Lord Jesus remembreth such still, now he is in his kingdomeLuc. 23.42, that bestirr themselves all they can, and despatch a great deal of work in a little time, as that samous theef did, who therefore by a com∣mendable thest, after he bad offered violence to Gods king domeMat. 11.12 . Arripiunt, vel diripiunt, ut ci∣tatur ab Hila∣rio: Metaph.  castris aut arce quapiam quae irrumpentibus hostibus diri∣pitur. Beza., stole heaven, and supt in paradise. SECT. VII. BUt secondly, Doth God remember his Saints and their services? then let us learn hence not only to reciprocate by remembring him and his mercies, but also (as his remembrancers) to put him in minde (in case he seem less forward to
do us good) of his ancient proceedings, and gracious promises. This is that the Prophet exhorts unto: Ye that are the Lords remembrancers keep not silenceEsay 62.6, 7. This the Psalmist constantly practised; Remember O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy lo∣ving kindnesses, for they have been for everPsal. 25.9. And this the Lord though he need∣eth it not, yet every where stands upon. He exacts and expects it from us, as a part of his service, and as a condition on our part to be fulfilled in the new covenant. Where, after he had promised great things (concerning Justification, Sanctification, and preservation) he subjoyns. Yet I will for this be enquired of by the house of Is∣rael to do itEzek. 36.37. So in another Prophet, I will blot out thy transgressions, and not remember thy sinnes. But then, Put me in remembrance, lit us plead together: de∣clare that thou mayest bee justifiedIsa. 42.25, 26. Whereby you see what's to bee done on our part, if we would be remembred with the mercies of Gods people. Plead wee must the gracious promises: spread them before the Lord, as Hezekiah did Sennacheribs letterEsay 37.14. Pray them over, as David often, and so put him in mind of the good he hath spoken concerning us. He loves to be importuned in his own words, to bee bur∣dened with his own promises, and to be urged with rguments taken from his old proceedings Arise, as in the dayes of old, and performe the mercy which thou hast sworn to our fathers from the dayes of oldMic. 7.14, 20. This Moses and Elias well understood: and therefore the former as in pleading for the people, he minds the Lord often of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and JacobExod. 32.13, and treats with him to that purpose by his Name Jehovah (that empha∣ticall and comfortable NameExod. 6.3:) so when he had foretold a plague to the Aegypti∣ans, or the remove of it, yet he omitted not to pray the accomplishment. And the later, when he had by warrant from heaven promised rain to Ahab after three yeers draught yet he went afterward to the top of Carmel, and prayed earnestlyJam. 5.17 ., (saith St. James) he prayed toughly, lustily, laboriously; he strained every vein of his heart (as it were) in prayer, for he stoopt, and stretcht, and put his face be∣tween his knees, saith the story, and this for a great while together, till at length a cloud, and after this a cataelysme of raine and waters came of it; when once he had prayed to purpose,1 Kin. 18.42 and not till then. For the Lord, though he be liberall, yet he is not prodigall: and although he reject not our weak services, yet he throwes not away his mercyes upon such as hold them not worth whistling after, as they say. Be his children never so deare unto him, yet they shall know their distance, and their duty: and although he love to be acquainted with them in the walkes of their obedience, yet he taketh state upon him in his ordinances, and wilbe sought unto for his mercies. Seek the Lord, saith the Prophet, and then will he raine righteousnesse upon youHos. 10.12. For like as the Sun drawes up va∣pours from the earth, not to retaine them, but to return them to the moistening and so fattening of the same: so doth the Lord draw from us our devotions and other duties, not for any benefit of his own, but to raine them down againe upon us in so many blessings. SECT. VIII. LAstly, this (me thinks) should mightily encourage good peoples hearts and strengthen their hands in well-doing, to consider, that the Lord doth perfectly remember plentifully to requite whatsoever service. The pains cannot be cast away that we resolve to lay out, nay to lose for Christ. Master, saith Peter, we have laboured all night, and have taken nothing. Neverthelesse at thy word wee will let down the netLuk. 5.5, 6. And he sped accordingly; for he enclosed a great draught of fishes, even to the breaking of the Net, &c. So true is that of the Apostle, He that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon himRom. 10.12: He gives exceeding abun∣dantly, even above all that we ask or thinkEphes. 3.20. Thus David asked life of the Lord, and he gave him length of dayes for ever and everPsal. 21.4. Solomon asked wisdome (not wealth) and he had wisdome and wealth too. Hezekiah asked one life, and God gave him two: added fifteen yeers to his dayes, which we count two mens lives, and a yeer over. The palsie man seeking health at Christs hands, had health and heaven to boot. Zacheus striving to see Christ, not onely seeth him, but heareth him speal∣ing salvation to him and his.
Yea, (may some say) God may crown his people with salvation:Ob. John Baptist was without any law, right, or reason, be∣headed in Pri∣son, as though God had known no∣thing at all of him. George Marsh Martyr. Act. & Mon. fol. 1423. Sol. but they are hardly put to't in the mean while, many of them, and sorely vexed by the oppres∣sions of their enemies, who make pitifull havock of them, and God regards it not. First, this is not for their diligence, but negligence rather in the work of the Lord: lazy servants must be quickned. Secondly, God hereby tryeth the truth, and soundnesse of their graces; makes it appear that they serve him for himself, and not meerly for provender, or for a whole skin, as the Devil accused JobIob. 2.4. Thirdly, God in humbling them remembreth them, for his mercy endureth for everPsa. 136.23. Is Ephraim my dear sonne? is he a pleasant child? for since 1 spake a∣gainst him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lorder 31.20. Lastly, heaven will pay for all, and the lesle they take up of their wages before hand, the more they shall receive at the quarter day. It we suffer together with him, we shalbe glorified togetherRom. 8.17. This made Abraham content to dwell in tents, because he looked for a more enduring cityHeb. 11.9.10: Moses chose the repreach of Christ, (the worst part of him) before the honour of Pharaoh's court: & this when he was no baby neither, but at mans estateHeb. 11.24, &c. and therfore knew well what he did; and all because he had respect to the recompence of Reward. This made the beleev∣ing Hebrewes suffer with joy the spoiling of their goods, as knowing that they had in heaven abetter, and more enduring substanceHeb. 10.34 Nudus opum, sed cui coelum terrae{que} pate∣rent. De Ar∣chimede suo Silius lib. 14.. Ezekiel willing to deliver an unpleasing message, and suffer for it too, because God took him up and let him heare the noise of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the LordEzek. 3 12. Nay our Saviour Christ helped himself over the hardship of his crosse, by cast∣ing his eye upon the Crown: leaving us an example to follow, a copie Pet. 2.21 . to write after. And indeed it is a matter passing difficult to obey God, when carnall reason suggesteth likely hood or damage or other danger. But if it were a suffici∣ent reason to move Jacob to neglect his stuffe in the land of Canaan, because Pha∣raoh promised him the best things of EgyptGen. 45.20. How much more should the assurance of heaven (that true treasure) make us carelesse of this earthly trash? How should the very fore-thought of that exceeding, exceeding weight of glory2 Cor. 4.17 . There ye have an elegant treble Antithefis, & double hy∣perbole be∣yond english∣ing. A super∣lative tran∣scendent phrase (saith one) such as is not to be found in all the Rheto∣rike of the Heathens, be∣cause they never wrote of such a theme, nor with such a spirit., make us plentifull in Gods worke: cause and even compell us to hear much, pray much, live holily, deale uprightly, be constant and abundant in well∣doing, what ever come of it: Not standing upon the worlds censure, who are apt enough to call thee foole for thy forwardnesse, and two fooles for thy foole∣hardinesse, (so they usually call and count the care of good conscience, and cour∣age in a good cause:) let them work on, and spare not, but scare thou God: and against all theirNigro carbo∣ne notandus. Juven. black coles, comfort thy self with bis white stoneRev. 2.17. Let them think basely of thy course, but do thou think busily of Gods name: and he will think as carefully of thy recompence, even above all that thou canst aske or thinkeEph 3 20. Up therefore (that I may resume the exhortation, and shut up all) Up. I say, and be doing, and the Lord shalbe with you1 Chr. 22.16. Why stand ye here idle all the day longMat. 20.6? Why linger ye and look thus one upon anotherGen. 42.1 Dies brevis est & opus multum, & operarij pigri, & paterfam: urget. Quare castigemus mores & moras nostras R. Simeon. Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam multa tulit fecitque, sudavit & alsit, Hor.? You see your work, you know your wages. It is but an inch of time you have to take paines in, and then eternitie of rest and recompence: Where it would repent you nothing more (if 'twere possible there to repent) then that you had begun no sooner, wrought no harder. It is no small incouragement (in the mean-while) to know, that he sets down in his book of remembrance, not how many yeares only, but dayes, nay hours we spend in his service: what heat we suffer, what cold, what hunger, what thirst: what losse, what straights: waht danger, what difficulty, what every thing. There was found in a besieged city a poore wise man, (saith Solomon) and he by his wisdome delivered the city, yet no man remembred that same poore manEccles. 9.15. merces mundi. This is the course of the world, but tis othewise with
God. I know thy workes, and thy labourRev 2.2, saith he to Ephesus: not thy work only, but thy labour in working: not thy love only, but thy labour of love: not thy hope only, but thy patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our father1 Thessalonians 1.3: Not thy crosses only, but the number, time, place and measure of our crosses are with God:Ille non tan∣tum quat annes sed quat dies atque horas in illius cultu con∣su imus apugillinribus suis notat; aestum, frigora, famem culturam bonorum &c. Cart.: Not thy peroson only, but thy flittings are in his book, and thy tearesin his bottlePsal. 56.9: yea the haires of thy head are num∣bredMatthew 10.30. Quae pretio habemus ea numeramus &c., not one of them shall perish: much leste the head it self. But though washed a little, with Paul in the ship-wrackAct. 27., yet thou shalt be landed safe at the Key of Canaan, the kingdome of heaven. CHAP. VII. Doct. VI. Such as fear the Lord, will be thinking upon his Name what it is to do so. And that thought upon his Name. HEre's a further description of the parties in speech by a second property. As they feared the Lord, so they thought upon his Name. Where comes to be considered, first, what is meant by Gods Name, the object of their thoughts: se∣condly, what by thinking upon this Name, which is the act of these ancient belee∣vers, about that object. Name here hath reference to God: and his Name signifieth. 1. Gods self, in his unsearchable Essence, or that unutterable subsistence that each person hath in the God-headShindler: in  Pro. 30.4. Jud. 13.18.. 2. All such names and titles of God, his attributes, actions, or∣dinances, and al things else that have any special print of Gods image stampt upon them, are said to be gods Name upon them: because by them he is known as a man by his name. Next, to think upon this Name of God, is diversely glossed, and expounded by interpreters. He doth best (in my opinion) that saith, to think upon Gods Name, is nothing else, but by sundry sad and serious meditations, well to weigh and deep∣ly to disgest whatsoever a man hath heard and learned of God, and his wayes Thus Polanus succinctly and pithily. This then was the guise of those godly ones of old: and this is stil the property and practise of Gods faithful people: who as they feared the Lord, (which is the first signe they are here set out by) so, as a fruit or rather rootaestimantibus gloriam nominis ajus Cald. Paraprast. sapientibus corde, & peri∣tis mysterio∣rum Dei R Abraham. in intellectu suo inve nientibus omnes vias ejus judicium esse &c. R. David Quigloriam Dei asserunt &c. Gualther. Qui supputant 1. in pretio ba∣bent nomen Dei Calvin: Certain memi∣nis cognitio∣nein assiduâ mentis rumi∣natione pensitantes. Folan in locum. of that holy fear, they think diligently upon his Name; that is they bend and busie their best thoughts upon the things of his kingdome. Hence we we may learn, That it is the part and property of a man truly fearing God to be much in the meditation of he things of God. Such as fear the Lord in truth will be thinking upon his Name.Hac lautione pietatis verae fontem indicat &c. Gualther: in locum. Doct.
SECT. I. The Point proved by Seripture YOu see they go coupled in the text, as individual companions: and other where in scriptur, it is made the mark of a man truly religious that he hat right thoughts, that is, well set upon those rightest objects, God and his Name. The thoughts of the righteous are rightProv. 12 5. And again, the desire of the righteous is onely goodPro. 11.23. Not that any man, in this viatory condition, is so happy as to have his heart altogether empty of evil thoughts and desires:Magno studio superfluae co∣gitationes am putandae sunt: Sed tamen am∣putare fundi∣tùs nequaquam pessunt. Semper enim caro su∣perslua gene∣rat, &c. Greg. Moral. but that's the thing he strives unto, and breaths after, he suffers not evil motions to roost in his minde, to keep residence there, to lodge in his inwards as Jeremies expression is: he serves God in his spirit with Paul (at least in his general resolution and intention) He sets the Lord alwayes at his right handJer. 4 14.  with David: he walks continually in the sense of his pre∣sence, and height of his countenance, with Henoch, Noah, Abraham, and others, he wholly followeth after the Lord his God with CalebJosli. 14 19. Num. 14.24 implevit post me. As a ship under saile, which is car∣ried strongly with the wind &c.; in desire and endeavour at least he waites for God in the way of his judgements with the Church in Isai. And the desire of his soul is to Gods name, and the remembrance of himJsai. 26.8. In which holy course if he be at any time interrupted (as the best is many times) he cryes out mournfully with the Church in the same Chapter: O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us,Rom. 1.9. yet through thee onely will we make mention of thy nameEsay. 26.13.Psal. 16.8. I finde a law in my members warring against the law of my minde (that frame of holy thoughts) and carrying me captive to the law of sin and of deathRom. 7.23.. The law truly is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin; I consent to the law that it is good, even then when I transgresse it, and do that I would not. Nay more, I delight in the law of God after the inward man: yea with the minde, I my self serve the law of God, then, when with the flesh, the law of sin. Thus the regenerate part in a christian still hankers and hangs toward God, as the sea-mans needle toward the North-pole, as the mise∣rable captive toward his own countrey, as the distressed spouse toward him whom her soul loved: she slept indeed, but her heart wakedCant. 5.2., all the while God is the pro∣per and most pleasing object of a good mans thoughts and affections,14. as David often avoweth him in the book of Psalms.16. And though he be hard layed at som∣times; ey,22. and not seldom seducedIam. 1.14. . and hurried aside by armies and changes of evil thoughts, noysome lusts, satanical injections,25. and other grievous temptations both from within and without: Yet for the main bent, the general inclination and intention of his thoughts and affections, he is still with God, as David, when I awake I am still with theePsal. 17., saith he. And oh how precious are thy thoughts unto me O GodPsal. 139.17! how great is the sum of them? in the multitude of my perplexed thoughts with∣in me, thy comforts delight my soul. And to like purpose the Church: All this is come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee,Psal 94 19. neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy wayes. Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death, If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretcht out our hands to a strange God, shall not God search out this? for he knowes the secrets of our heartsPsal. 44.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And that consi∣deration as it kept their thoughts within compasse: so it may well minister unto us a ground of good reasoh for the point in the first place. SECT. II. The Point proved, and enforced by five reasons. GOds people are much taken up in the thought of his name, for they know that he knows the secrets of their heartsHeb. 4.13 (as he that makes a watch knoweth
every turning and winding in the watch.) And that as he knowes them, so he owes them too: For 'tis he that made us these spiritsAll tings are (for the out∣lide)  naked, and (for the in∣side)  dislected, quar terd, clest thorough the back-bone, as it were., and therefore he requires to be served in our spiritsIoh. 4.24: It is he that gave us our thinking faculties, we can∣not move (no not with a motion of the minde) but in himAct. 17.28. Both the preparations of the heart, and answer of the tongue is of the LordProv. 16.1. And is it not reason therefore that he should have a tribute of our thoughts, a thought-service also? It is true our bodies with the members thereof, must be offered up and presented to God as a living sacrificeRom. 12.1. But that sacrifice can neither be living, nor well pleasing, where the heart is wantingIsai. 29.13. Hence he so called of old for all the fat of the inwards in the sin offeringExod. 29.39: and testified afterwards by David that he delighteth more in a broken heart then in all sacrificesPsal. 51 17; he rolles himself in it as in a bed of spicesCant. 6.1, and seemes to say of it to the sonnes of men, as some∣times Joseph to his brethren concerning Benjamin his brother, or as David to Ab∣ner concerning Michol his wife; ye shall not see my face except ye bring itGen. 43.3. He will have the heartProv. 23.26 Deut. 6.6 or nothing, because it is the treasury of all our thoughts, speeches and actions: but first of our thoughts, which are the next and imme∣diate fruit and issue of the heart, whence, the services done him by them, cannot but be most pleasing, sith they are most spirituall, and farthest off from pollution of hypocrily; whereunto they cannot be so subject as outward services, which are performed sometimes more out of respect to the Creature, then to the Creator. Hence the Church in that fore-alledged Psalme, seeking to approve her selsto God, pleades the sincerity & goodnesse of her thoughts, as a sufficient testimony of her truth & integrityPsal. 44.17. &c.. But this is not all: Gods people are thoughtfull of his Name, not only moved with feare (as the text here couples them,) because he searcheth out the secrets of their hearts, and calles principally for their thoughts: but also out of love, and strength of affection (as the spouse acknowledgeth:) the property whereof, is to set the thoughts aworke upon the thing beloved: according to that in the proverb, the minde of a man is not where it lives, but where it lovesAnimus est ubi amet, non ubi animat. And so it is here. Gods Name is as an oyntment powered out, therefore the virgines love himCant. 1.3. They have tasted and seen how good the Lord isPsal. 34.8. They had often heard by the hear∣ing of thee are, but now their eye hath seen himIob 42.5. His good name hath been sweeter to them, then a precious oyntmentEccles. 7.1; it hath filled their hearts, as Maries Spikenard did the houseIoh. 12.3. This maketh the virgines, that follow the Lamb wheresoever he goeth, that stand with him upon mount Sion, having his fathers name written in their foreheadsRev. 14.1.4; to love him for the odour of his good ointments, though they see him not1 Pet. 1.8. And out of the deare respect and love they bear unto his Name, to be continually thinking upon that which their soule loveth. The more they love, the more they think, and the more they think, the more they love: God having shed abroad his love (that part of his Name) in their heartsRom. 5.5 as a sweet oyntment, by the Holy ghost, that anointing that is given unto them, and which teacheth them all things1 Ioh. 2.20. And that's a third Reason, why the Saints are so set upon the thoughts of Gods Name, they are taught and inabled thereunto by that holy spirit, their domesticall Monitour and sweet inhabitant. For, know ye not that your bodies are the temples of the holy ghost that is in you1 Cor. 6 19. And if their bodies are the Spirits temples, surely then their soules are his Holy of Holies; wherein are continuall pillars of incense ascendingCant. 3.6; good and holy thoughts, (I meane) abounding, by the operation of the Holy ghost; (whose immediate motions they are) we being not able of our selves to think one good thought2 Cor 3.5. There never entred into the heart of a naturall man, the things that God hath prepared for them that love him1 Cor. 2.9, 10. But God hath revealed them to us by is spirit: whose worke it is. 1. To enlighten. 2. To enlarge the heart, wherein he takes up. His first work is to beat out new windows in the dark soules of men, to let in a new light thereinto to give us thereby some fight of God, some sense of his sweetnesse, some glimpse of his glory. Not as he is in himself, in the brightnesse and perfection of his essence: for so he is incomprehensible, and the light where∣by he should be seen inaccessible1 Tim. 6.16. Nor yet so perfectly here, as he stands de∣scribed unto us by his Attriutes and actions, that's reserved for a better life.
But his back-partsExo. 33.23 only (with Moses) that holy and reverend Name of his, Jehovah Jehovah strong, mercifull gratious, longsuffering &c.Exod. 34.6 Thus much the spirit gives us to see of God, though somewhat obscurely,1 Cor. 13.12 . as through a grate only, or as in a glasse, in a riddle, or as an old man through spectacles: the greatest part of our knowledge being but the least part of our ignorance. And Secondly, having thus opened our eyes, and turned us from darknesse to light, he turnes us next, from the power of Satan to GodAct. 26.18: that whereas heretosore we were acted and agi∣tated by the Prince of the power of the ayreEph. 2.2, the God of this world, who had first blinded our minds2 Cor. 4 4, and then set abroad upon our hearts and affections, hatch∣ing out thence whole swarmes of evill thoughts, and litters of lusts that fight a∣gainst the soul1 Pet. 2 11: So now, being possessed by a better spirit, we are enlarged and enabled to captivate and conforme our thoughts to the soveraignty of Gods grace, the rules of his word, and the remembrance of his Name. Fourthly, their new Nature, (that blessed frame of Gods grace erected in them by the spirit; that great Architect, that plants the heavens, and layes the founda∣tion of the earth, that he may say to Zion, Thou art my peopleEsay 57.16) This Divine Nature2 Pet. 1.4 as Peter calls it, and renewed Image of God, this habit of heavenly-mindednesse put∣teth Gods servants upon a continuall fresh succession of holy thoughts. For besides that their phantasy or thinking-faculty (being a chief inward sense of the soul) is sei∣zedupon for God to the utter dessolving of that old frame of vile thoughts and lusts (those strong-holds wherein satan had entrencht2 Cor. 10.4 5  himself) the whole spirit, soul and body of a Christian is sanctified throughout1 Thes. 5.23. God writes his law in our heartsHeb. 8.10, stamps his image upon the spirit of our mindsEph. 4.23, makes us partake of the god-like nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world thorough lust2 Per. 1.4 &c. Hence an ability of holy thoughts and affections, for as the man is, such are his dispo∣sitions and meditations. The liberall man deviseth liberall thingsIsa. 32.8. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good thingsMat. 12.: And as from within out of the old heart proceed evill thoughtsMark 7.21 &c. so from the sancti∣fied heart proceed sanctified thoughts, and gracious considerations and respects to God, and his Name. Lastly, we may argue for the truth and certainty of this point of the godly mans practise, from the many near and dear relations he stands in to God: toge∣ther with the daily dealings he hath and often use he makes of his Name, For God first, he is the good mans friend, and father, Prince and portion, God and guide, his All in AllColos. 3.11: he hath given up his name to Gods truth, devoted himself to his fearPsal. 119.38, sworne himself to his servicePsa. 119.119, and endeavours nothing more then to love him with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his thought, which is that first and great commandement of the law, whereupon the rest hangMat. 22.37 , as a hing upon a nail, or as beads upon a string. And secondly for the name of God, they run to it in any stresse, as to a strong towerProv. 18.10: they walk in his nameMicah. 4.5 as in a Garden or gallery: they rejoyce in it as in all treasurePsal. 119 14: yea what ever they do in word or deed they do all in the name of the Lord Jesus ChristColos. 3.17 &c. Now can we possibly rejoyce in Gods name, run to it upon all occasions, walk in it, talk of it, do all in it, and yet not minde it, not be much in the thought of it? Again, can we acquaint our selves with the Almighty, vouch him for our God, set him up for our Soveraigne, coverse familiarly with him as our friend, walk before him1 King. 9.4 in uprightnesse and integrity, walk with himGen. 6.9 in an humble familiarity, walk after himDeut. 13.4 by an entire obedience and ready conformity, and yet not frequently think on him? 'tis not possible. SECT. III. Ʋse 1. Those that habitually think not upon God, fear not God. NOw for application: Are all Gods people such as think upon his Name? This then serveth, first, to shut all such out of this holy society, andto
evince them void of Gods true fear, that think not dayly and diligently upon God, that make not his name the matter of their meditation, that say not in their hearts, Let us now fear the Lord our GodIer. 5.24 &c. The wicked saith David, through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughtsPsal. 10.4: Eating and drinking, buying and felling, building and planting, plowing and reaping &c. are in his thoughts, but God falls not into his thoughts the whole day thoroughout. Or if in a whole lottery of thoughts, he stumble haply upon God and his Name, yet his heart is merely passive in it (as was Sauls and Balaams:) it is only as a thorough-fair for such thoughts: they give him a joy and away: they salute him as he in the Comaedy did his fellow with good-morrow, and farewell both in a breath.Salve, Vale. He is soon sated, nay jaded and tired out at a sermon, or so, where he hath occasion of better thoughts then ordinary. He savours not these things of GodRom. 8, he finds no more relish in them then in the white of an egge, or a dry chip. Hence it comes, that they soon pass away from him, like Nebchadnezzars dream, which himself could not remember by morning. Nothing settles or 'bides with him of this nature. They consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their wickednesseHos. 7.2. Some transient thoughts they may have that way, in cold blood other whiles, but to little or no purpose. They turn not short again upon themselves with the prodigallLuc. 15.17: they sit not aloneLam. 3 28 with the Church in the Lamentations, to entertain and nourish good motions: they cal not themselves to a domesticall audit, 'tis death to them to do any thing that way: they do not commune with their own hearts upon their bedsPsal. 4.4. They summon not the sobriety of their senses before their own judgements, to set themselves down by right reason, to argue the case with their own consciences, and to say every man to himself, what have I doneIer. 8.6 ; Pythag.? what do I mean? what doth God think of me? what will he do with me? what's my case here? and what will be my condition a thousand yeers hence? These savoury thoughts, these wholesome considerations seldome or never enter into the confines of their hearts. Or if they do (as sometimes they do) upon some sudden unexpected evill accident, (as the death of a dear friend, some more remarkable losse in their estates, the hearing of a powerfull sermon, or the like) oh what shift will these men make to rid their hearts of such unwelcome guests, that they may be no longer rackt and diseased by them? how do they bring their buckets to quench such a spark of the spirit kindled in their breasts? how do they choak and throttle, before it it draw breath, such a motion made them by the holy ghost! desperately saying to God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy wayesIob 21.14. Cast∣ing Gods word behind them,Math. 24 39  as the old world did Noahs preaching (it was even more then spilt upon them, whiles they would know nothing of all that was fore∣told them till the flood came, and swept them away, as vermine) hating to be healed, resusing to be reformedPs. 50.17, drowning the noise of their clamorous con∣sciences, with the hurry, and clutter of worldly businesses and imployments; as the old Italians in time of thunder used to shoot off their greatest ordnances, to ring their biggest bells,Sigon. and to make all the fragour they could, to drown, as far as they might, the noyse of the heavens, that it might not affright them. And for that other faculty commonly called , to make all safe there, they lay fast hold upon all the principles in their heads, and imprison themRom. 1.18 ., as the Apostle speaketh, tearing out their soules, as much as may be, those common notions. of truth and falshood, right and wrong, good and evill, whether left in mans nature at the fall, or superinducted since, I will not dispute: There, I am sure they are by a good providence of God for the conversation of civill society: till razed and rooted out, or lockt up at least in restraint, by such as would sin securely without disturbance, till at length they arive at that dead and dedolent dispositionEph. 4.19 . of the debauched Heathens, little differing from that of the very devils, and so wrath come upon them to the utmost1 Thes. 2.16.
SECT. IV. Of those that think base and bald thoughts of God. BUT secondly, if the bare not thinking upon God and goodnesse shew a man to bee unsanctified; what shall we say of such as think of God indeed, but think basely of him and unworthily: cast him, as it were into a dishonourable mould, by those bald conceits they take up of God. They become vain in their ima∣ginationsBon. 1 23 Ann 403. quae∣stio quamvis stulta & ridi∣cula videatur, An Deus corpo∣reus sit? id est, An divina es∣sentia sit corpus quoddam ma∣nus habens, &c tamen mazimas inter Mona∣chos Aegypti turbas excita∣vit. Rudiores enum ex ijs ali∣ter non semie∣bant. Func ius Chronol. Alcc∣ranus trad  Deum habere essentiam cor∣poream, &c. Alsted. Chron. about him, as those Philosophers spoken of by the Apostle, that chan∣ged the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to a corruptible man. So do many ignorant people, now-adayes, conceive of God (and will not be bea∣ten out of it) as of an old man sitting in heaven, with a crown on his head, and a scepter in his hand, administring his kingdome, as an earthly Prince, &c. Others that are not altogether so grosle-witted, but yeeld you, that God is a spirit, and not a bodily substance; yet they set him not up for such a spirit as he stands desert bed in the holy Scriptures; Holy, pure, just, jealous, omnipresent, omniscient, om∣nipotent, recompencing the righteous, and repaying the wicked to his faceDeut. 7.10, &c. Of this sort of sinners were these above text, that denied Gods speciall providence, and care of his people, &c. And such amongst us are found, not a few, that con∣ceive God either to be wicked altogether, such an one themselves, because he keeps silence at their sinnesPsal. 50.21: or else so made up of mercy, that he will save them how∣soever, and not destroy the work of his own hands; or lastly, so ignorant and wretchlesse, that although he reckon with them for other misdemeanours, yet thought shall go free. By beleeving and pleading of which most false proverb, and pestilent principle, what do they else but profane Gods spirituall nature, ma∣king a meer mock and an idol of the Almighty, as if he knew not mens thoughts, and had no soveraignty over them? But they shall find, to their sorrow, that God searcheth the hearts, and trieth the reinsJer. 11.20 & 17.10, those seats of lusts, and most retired parts in all mans body: Yea, and kills men with death, because they will not beleeve itRev. 2.23. That he knowes (as the meaning of the spiritRom 8.27, so) of the flesh too; though it never put forth it self in the outward man: that he sets our secret sinnes also in the sight of his countenancePsal. 90.8: and will not fail to bring every secret thing to judgementEccles. 12. ult., even all their Atheisticall, vainglorious, covetous, ambitious, adul∣terous, malicious thoughts, and projects against the Lord and his Christ, his crown and dignity. And that none may be ignorant, he makes Proclamation there∣of (as it were in open Sessions) by the voice of his holy Prophet, with a solemn Oyes; Hear O earth, behold, I will bring evill upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughtsJer. 6.19. Where ye have to observe; that the heavy wrath and vengeance of Almighty God is both the just desert, and certain event of evil thoughts: and count you that a small matter? Is it nothing to fall into the punishing hands of the living GodHeb. 10.31? Is there not a fire kindled in his wrath (even for some one root of bit∣ternesse, (that is inward distemper, and mentall abomination harboured and allow∣ed) that burns as low as the nether-most hell?Deut. 32.22 SECT. V. Against thoughts of Atheisme, Blasphemy, Infidelity, and Rebellion. BUT in the third place, most of all to be condemned of want of Gods holy fear, are such, as not onely, not think of God, or not duely think of him; but unto all other their sinnes, adde this, that they think thoughts against him, directly opposite to his Name, Devise things contrary to the Name of JesusActs 26.9, taking up high and haughty imaginations, such as exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, and obedience of Christ2 Cor. 10.4,5. And of this sort of sinners is that heavy complaint made by God himself in the Prophet Hosea; Though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me; though I have bound, and strengthened their arms,
yet do they imagine mischief against meHos 7.13, 15 Hitherto may be referred; 1. Thoughts of Atheisme, as to think there is no such thing as God: or if any, yet that hee seeth not, careth not, doth neither good nor evilZech. 1.12 Deos didici securum agere aevum: Nec si∣quid miri faci∣at Natura Deos id Tristes ex al∣to coeli demit∣tere tecto. Horat. serm., walks in the circle of heaven, and hides himself in the thick cloudJob 22.13, without any respect at all to this inferiour world. 2. Thoughts of blasphemy, as to murmur, grudge, and speak against him in our hearts: and secretly to mock at his mighty works, his powerfull ordinances1 Cor. 1.23, the promise of his coming, &c. 3. Thoughts of infidelity, and despair; as that God doth not heed me, will not help meGen 4.13, save me, make good his word unto me, &c. This is to make God a lier1 Ioh. 5.10 Cum Leoni X. Papae Bembus Card. aliquid ex Evangelio obijceret, sub∣ridens ille dix∣it. Nunquid non compertum ab∣unde fuit quantum nobis & coetui no∣stro contuler it haec de Christo fabula. Alsted. Chronol. p. 398, saith St. John, and (upon the matter) to averre and avouch that there is no such thing as Christ: or at leastwise, no such ver∣tue and efficacy in his death and life,2 Pet. 3.4 as to save all those that repose upon him. 4. Thoughts of high-treason, and open rebellion against heaven: as when men rise up against God in their hearts, as the horse against his rider; thinking within themselves, (though they shame to say as much) Who is the Lord that wee should serve himExod. 5.2? Who made thee a Prince or a Ruler over usAct. 7.27? Our lips are our own, who shall controll usPsal. 12.4? The word that is spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord we will not do. No, but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouthIer. 44.16, 17; say the Prophets and Preachers what they can to the contrary. Against all which detestable and damnable Atheists, yokelesse, and frontlesse Beli∣alists. Behold the Lord cometh (saith that ancient Enoch) with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgement upon all, and (by vidicating his glorious Name, from their base surmises, and blasphemous aspersions) to convince all that are ungodly a∣mong them, of all their ungodly deeds, which (upon such false and abhorred princi∣ples) they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have (out of the abundance of their hellish hearts) spoken against himIude 14.15. Where wee leave them for present, to chew awhile upon that fearfull doom that abides them, till we hear of their amendment, and hasten to a second Use. SECT. VI. Use 2. Examination. Where trialls of the goodnesse of our best thoughts, by their 1. cause. 2. effects. IS this so, that the thoughts of the righteous are rightProv. 12.5, and that wheresoever the true fear of God is, there are great thoughts of heartIudg. 5.15, concerning God and his Name? This then serves, next, for an Use of Triall: And so, let every man learn hence, to take a true estimate, to make a right judgement of his spirituall good estate, by the quality of his thoughts. For ever as the man is, such are his thoughts: and as the thoughts are habitually, and ordinarily good or evil, so is the man. Purity in the inward parts is the most sound and infallible evidence of our portion and interest in the power and purity of Christs saving passion, and sancify∣ing bloodshed. Whereas if our speeches and actions be never so Angelicall, yet if the thoughts of our hearts be not forgiven usActs 8.22 Verse 23. Quum reprobo∣rum mentibus occasto perpe∣trandi peccati deest, desideri∣orum cogitati∣ones eorū cor∣dibus nullate∣nùs desunt: & quum non sem∣per diabolum sequuntur in opere, valdè ta∣men se illi ob∣ligant in cogi∣tatione. Greg. Moral. lib. 14., and we enabled to keep them in some good compasse, by the spur of the first, and curb of the last commandement, we are in no better case then Simon Magus was: who for all his fair pretences, stuck fast still in the gall of bitternesse, and bond of perdition. A civil honest man, a painted hypocrite, a gracelesse and wicked persn dare insatiably mind, and muse upon those foul evils, which, for want either of ability, or opportunity, or both, he cannot act. Now such a man as this, (though his outward behaviour be never so fair, and unrebukeable, yet) the Scripture every where brands for a sonne of Belial, one that hath nothing of the spirit of God in him2 Cor. 10.5, but is filled with the devil (that foul spirit) from corner to corner:Act 5.3, 4 a man not washed from his wicked∣nesseJer. 4.14, such as hath no part in Christ, nor portion in his kingdomeGal. 5.23. Nay, he passeth in Gods Book for a PaganRom. 1.21, such as hath no blood of a Cristian in him; for an EpicurePhil. 3.19, 20, the worst of Pagans; for an Atheist, the worst of EpicuresPsal. 10.4 for an hypocriteActs 8.22.23, the worst of Atheists; for an open rebellEsay 65.2, the worst of hy∣pocrites; lastly, for a reprobatePhil. 3.23, the most desperate of rebels; such as being ene∣mies to the crosse of Christ, have destruction for their end, whereunto also of old they were appointedJude 4..
I know what such kinde of people (the ruder sort especially), are apt enough to object. They will never beleeve, they say, that the matter is so hainous,ob. the danger so great, as the ministers would make of it, for first, they have as good hearts as the best: and although they be not so strait-laced as to make such a businesse about idle and evil thoughts, as some would seem to do, yet so long as none can tax them, for external outrages, and reproachful offences, they shall think never awhit the worse of themselves for all that. Hereunto we answer,sol. that this very brag of the goodnesse of their loose and lewd hearts speaks them at once. 1. Ignorant. 2. Proud. 3. Impenitent person. First, I say, Ignorant of God and his will, of themselves and their duties: as if they were not bound to love the Lord their God with all their thoughts alsoMath. 22.37. Now without knowledge the minde is not good, saith Solomon, and he that (hood∣winkt with such blinde conceits) hasteneth with his feet (in away good enough as he fondly imagineth,) sinnethProv. 19.2.. Secondly, they are stuft up with pride, and self-conceitednesse: as the Laodi∣ceans, who not knowing their own spiritual beggery, and blindnesse, gave out themselves for great rich men, and in as good case as the bestRev. 3.16.. The pure in heart, are withal poor in spiritMath. 5.3, 8., humbled for nothing more then their inward impurities; those vain thoughts, deceitful dreams, carnal fears, worldly cares, end∣lesse and needlesse plodding upon earthly things that haunt their hearts, and passe the forge of their fancies every day, in despite of whatsoever endeavours to the con∣trary. Together with those innumerable bythoughts and distractions that will needs throng in upon them, even in the interim of divine duties, when they would be most free and reserv'd to God. These be the things that most gall and grieve the godly man, and bring him ful often upon his knees for pardon of in∣ward failings in those duties, for the outward well-performance whereof other godly people do many times both approve and applaud him. But now it is other∣wise with the wicked: if he can wash his hands with Pilate: keep his fingers from picking and stealing, and his tongue from evil speaking: curb and keep in his in∣ordinate lusts from budging and breaking forth in his outward practise; he eares not how fowl his inwards are, how irregular and enormous the motions of his minde be: thinks though he never lay lawes upon those but suffer them to run riot, at pleasure, upon whatsoever vanities or villenies, yet he shall speed well enough, and perhaps step into heaven before the purest of them all. Here's a heart as full of pride, as empty of goodnesse for he that lifteth up himself, his minde is not upright in himHab. 2.4. Thirdly, They are impenitent (and so out of the state of salvation) till they be∣think themselves of a more thorough reformationLuke. 13.3. For repentance, where it is sound, begins at the heart. It is not a cleansing onely of the outside of the plat∣ter, but a changing of the inward thoughts affections and purposes: according to that of the Prophet, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, &c.Esay. 55.7. not else. And that of Peter to Simon Magus; Thy heart is not right in the sight of God: repent therefore, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven theeAct. 8.22.  postulat . And that lastly, of the Prophet to the people. Oh Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickednesse, that thou mayest be saved (no heaven to be had, you see, where the heart is not washed) how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee.Jer. 4.14. No surer signe, of a foul and wicked heart, then the residence and raign of vain and vile thoughts. Let no man therefore bear himself in hand, or boast hereafter of the goodnesse of his heart, if his thoughts be habitually and allowedly evil. Oh but we have many good and holy thoughts in our hearts:ob. God and his name is much in our mindes and mouthes, and we think frequently upon his word we hear, and his works we see &c. You have many good thoughts you say, 'tis well:sol. a reprobate also may have good motions in his minde: and not be a buton the better for any of them. Try your good thoughts therefore before you trust too much to them: and 1. By the causes. 2. By the effects. For the causes, first, wee'l suppose them (for the matter) good and religious:
but for their efficient cause, first, whence be they, let me ask. Are they inbre'd and native to your sanctified hearts, or are they onely injected from without and meerly adventitions? cast in by God, who now affects thine heart by a good mo∣tion, thy self no way concurring, but being meerly passive in the whole business? If so, Nebuchadnezzar might have as much comfort and hope here-hence as you. God put into his heart a good thought, viz. to turn his course against Israel the peo∣ple of Gods wrath, and to revenge the quarel of his covenant upon an hypocritical nation. Howbeit he meant not so, saith the Prophet, neither did his heart think so, but it was in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few &cIsai. 10.7.. Secondly, for the form and fashion of your better sort of thought; are they set and solemn some times; with choice of fit matter, time and place? Do ye sit in the door of your hearts (on set purpose) to entertain good motions, as Abraham was wont, in the door of his tenr to entertain strangers? Or are they not onely occasional and accidental, falling in by the by, and besides your intention by rea∣son of some sudden occurrence? &c. These holy men in the text did not onely think upon Gods name, as a thing that fell into their thoughts by chance: but sollicitously, throughly studiously, serously, they set themselves to work in good earnest, and in Gods fear, to consider of his fatherly providence, and most righteous proceedings damnably depraved and maligned by the wicked of those times; and stayed up their hearts against all discouragements with that wholesome meditaionMal. 3.16.. Thirdly, see to the end of your good thoughts: both that of intention, and the other of duration. For your drift and intention first. Do ye (in taking up some holy thoughts) ayme at God and the advancement of those main ends, the setting forth of his glory in your own and other mens salvation? ordo ye not rather there∣fore think of holy things. 1. That ye may set off with God, and make him some manner of a∣mends, for your other infinite worldly ploddings, and wicked imaginations? or, 2. Is it not to collogue with the Lord, and curry favour, to get off the sooner, and easier when you are smarting, and it may be bleeding under his hand? Thus the false Israelites served him in the wildernesse: when he slew them, then they sought him apace,Vexatio dat intellectum they remembred that God was their Rock, and the high God their redeemer. These were good thoughts, had they been as well intended. But alas their project and device was onely to ease themselves of God; and to get from under his hand; for they flattered him with their mouthes, and lied unto him with their lips. Their heart was not right with him(that is, their aymes and respects were sinister) neither were they stedfast in his covenantPsal. 78.34, 35.36, 37., and so they failed in the end of continuance also. 3. Is it not to still and stifle the noise of your conscience, and to give it some sorry satisfaction, when it shall tell us (from the Pulpit, or when we are all alone, that God is to be thought upon, and his name to be had in remembrance of all that love him: that such onely as do so can be comfortably assured of their gracious estate &c. For if we do this or any other holy duty, not out of any delight we taken in it, but merely to stop consciences mouth, and to ease our selves of that unrest and disquietment that we feel within, till the thing be done, our good thoughts are defective in the end of intention, and can yeeld us little comfort. Next for the end of duration and continuance: Are those good thoughts you bind upon fixt and setled,Principium fervet, medium tepet, exitus alget. constant and parmanent? Or are they not rather flitting and fugitive, transient and temporary: assoon gone as come, almost like a flash of lightning in the aire, like a dive-dapper upon the water, like a post that passeth swiftly by the door, or (to speak with the scripture) like the morning dew that melt∣awayHos. 6.4? such were Sauls resolves1 Sam. 26.21., and Balaams wishesNum. 23.10, Ephraims goodnesseHos. 6.4, and the stony-grounds fruit. The seed started up straight, and straitway also withe∣red. That is, saith our Saviour,  man heares the word and anon with oy he receives itLuc. 8.6 Math. 13.20, where by one affection of joy, ye are to understand any other: even that of grief, if the nature of the discourse call for it, let comfortable matter be handled in his hearing, he is wonderfully taken and ravished therewith (for he doubts not with Haman but himself is the man whom the king wil honourEsther 6.6.) As if terrible or mornful his thoughts are sutable being affrighted, affected, enlarged, distressed, disposed as the matter requireth. O this is a passing fine temper of soul, and thus it should be with
us all, when we come to heareVide August lib. 4 de doct. Christ. cap. 12.. But how long wil this hold, think you, with the Temporary? so long only as he is in the church, or not many hours after. This motion towards heaven is too violent to be lasting with him. The good ground therefore is said to be such, as brings forth fruit with patienceLuc. 8.15  oponitur  de qua Heb 10.38.. The word signifies, with continuance or tarriance untill the fit time of fruit bear∣ing: in opposition, doubtlesseto that (straight way) of the stony ground, whose fruit was no sooner ripe then rotten; much like the Psalmists grasse upon the house top, which withereth afore it groweth upPsal. 129.6 Like Charles 8. of whose expedition to Naples Guicci∣ardine saith, that he came into the field like thunder and lightn∣ing, bt went out like a snuffe: more then a man at first, and lesse then a woman at last. Lo such are the good thoughts of ungodly men, they take them wings & are gone, they dye before they see the light, an untimly birth is better then they. Secondly, having thus lookt upon thy good thoughts in the causes: see next, what effect they work in thee. Doth the thought of Gods presence and purity make thee tremble and sin notPsal. 4.4? of his mercy and patience, lead thee to repen∣tanceRom. 2.4? of his power and All-sufficiencie worke thee to an even-walking, and integrityGen. 17.1? Do thy thoughts of heaven, weane thee from earth? of the vanity of life, fit thee for death? of the uncertainty of things temporall, edge thy desires after things eternall? Davids holy meditations were driven all to this issue. His thoughts of God and his Name made him turne his feet to Gods testi∣moniesPsal. 119.59. The lively remembrance of Gods benefits, made him take the cup of salvationPsal. 116.12 &c. Apprehensions of mercy in God, wrought resolutions of o∣bedience in himPsal. 23. ult.. The consideration of his own present indisposition to do God service, made him chide himself out of that distemper, with, why art thou so sad my soulePsal. 43. ult. &c. I thought, saith he, I would confesse my transgressions unto the Lord, and I did confesse themPsal. 32.5. I will meditate on thy precepts: and what upshot will you drive it to? I will have respect, saith he, to thy wayesPsal. 119.15, 16. Thus David and very Godly person: And thus if you can approve your thougts truly good by the causes: and have improved them (thus good) to such holy effects and purposes, you may safely thence conclude your good estate; and com∣fortable condition. SECT. VII. Ʋse 3. Exhortation. Settle the soundnesse of your Sanctification, by the goodnesse of your thoughts; motives thereunto. THirdly, this point serves for Exhortation: and so it calls upon us all, to make our sanctification sure to our selves by this infallible signe: to approve out selver men truely fearing God by this character of a Christian, this thinking upon Gods Name.Motives. A subject (if you look for motives) for the excellency of it (first) wo thy of your best thoughts; and such as will perfect and transforme you dayly into the same image of his, from glory to glory2 Cor. 3 ult.: causing you to shine as the pearle, which being often beaten upon by the Sun-beames, becomes at length lightsome & radiant as the Sun it self. By walking much in the hot Sun men gather blaknesse: but there is a glistering luster set upon their hearts and faces, that (with Moses) ascend up into the mount of God, and behold his gloryExod. 34.29: That take a turn or two every day upon Mount Tabor, and contemplate his beauty and bright∣nesseMath. 17.2. These get such an excellency of experimentall wisdome hereby, as makes their faces shineEccles. 8.1 valere est phi∣losophari, inquit Seneca: Ego verò dixerim valere est me∣ditari eloquia divina. Horum meditatio vale∣tudo mea, vita mea. Scultet: Observ: in Marc., and their lives Angelicall. Secondly for the sweetnesse and pleasure of it, who would not wish himself an Anchoret pent up in the voluntary prison-wales of Divine meditation? David met with marrow and fatnesse, hony, and hony-comb, surpassing delight and cordiall comfort in his heavenly exercise: For, in the multitude of my perplext thoughts within me, thy comforts refresh my soulePsal. 94.19. How precious are thy thoughts unto me O GodPsal. 139.17 &c. And Moses after forty dayes converse with God in the mount (where he had been rapt and ravished in spirit all the while) was so little satisfied therewithall, that he presently after he came down againe,
maketh a new motion: I beseech thee O Lord, shew me thy GloryExod. 33.18. Indeed this Divine meditation is a very heaven upon earth, a beginning of that beatifical vision, a hansell of heavens happinesse, an having of one foot already in the porch of Paradise, a very foretast of eternll life. It is none other to the Saints then as the fiery Charret was to Elias: for by it men are transported from earth to heaven in their spirits, to have their conversation above, and to be so far ra∣vished sometimes in their thinking upon Gods Name, as that they know not those things that are before themAugustinus dum sanctae Trinitatis my∣sterium solus in cubiculo sedens contemplatur, ita à seipso ab∣scesserat, ut à muliere quae il∣lum consulere cupiebat saepius interpellatus, nihil responde∣ret, imò ne re∣spiceret qui∣dem: mulier de∣nique quia se contemptam pu∣tavit, abiret tristis. Ma∣rul. lib. 2. cap. 4. & Sab. lib. 2. cap. 6., minde not those persons that are about them. But being in the body are carried, as it were, out of the bodyMat. 17.4, and so far lost in the endlesse maze of spirituall ravishments, that they could almost wish with Peter still to be thereMat. 17.4, that they cannot well tell, with Paul, whether they are in the flesh, or out of the flesh2 Cor. 12.3: this only they can tell, that they see un∣speakable excellencies, tast incomparable sweetnesses, in that good name of his, such as no tongue of men or Angels is able to expresse. Thirdly, as it is pleasant, so it is profitable, and that 1. to others: for medi∣tation makes a full man, and fit for Christian conference; which is nothing else but the cloathing of our mentall conceptions, with suitable expressionsVerbaq, pro∣visam rem &c. Hor.. 2. to our selves: and first, for the avoyding of evill meditaion upon God and his name, awakeneth the drowsy heart, weeds out inward corruptions, prevents the intru∣sion of trifling fancies, deceitfull dreams, vain hopes, carnall fears, foul and fleshly lusts, which else will muster and swarm in the best heart like the flyes of Egypt; Leaves the devill no room, for his black, and blasphemous suggestions and injections: defeats the world that wily adversary, which else will be ready to catch us up and defile our hearts with spirituall fornication: if, Dinah-like, she finde them roving. And secondly, for furtherance in good it is many wayes pro∣fitable: for hereby we shall get intimate acquaintance with God the fountain of goodnesse, grow up in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ2 Pet. 3.17, (which is the ground-work of all true religion, and is therefore by a specialty call∣ed TheologyAs St. Iohn and after him Greg. Nazian∣zen .:) attain to a great measure of spirituall wisdome and holinesse a∣bove our ancients:Ps. 119.97, 98 treacherous enemies: prove tall christians, expert chri∣stians, full of all goodnesse, filled with all knowledgeRom. 15.: not without a comunica∣tion of Christs secrets, even to have the minde of Christ1 Cor. 2. ult. &c. Lastly, is is also necessary: both in regard of God, and our selves. For God first, he calls for it, requires a Thought-worship, a service of the spirit: for why? himself First, is a spiritIoh. 4., and every one requires to be served like himself. Secondly, he gave us these spirits, endued us with reasonable soules, with thinking faculties, that we might return them upon him again, by thinking industri∣ously upon his Name2 Cor. 6.20. Thirdly, he upholds mans minde in its thought and workings, for in him we move, with the motions of the minde no lesse than of the bodyAct. 17.28. Fourthly, he will account with us for our thoughts, as his precious talentsEccles. 9.11 & 12. ult. Rom. 2.15.. Fiftly, he will reward us for the right managing of them, as he did David2 Sam. 7.16. the prodigallLuc. 15 18, and these good people in the text. Secondly, in respect of our selves this duty is necessary: Thoughts are the principles of ActionPro. 4.23. Cogitation is the fountain of all both communication and conversation; causing the current of both to run either muddy or clear according to its self. For this is the manner and method of it, as the learned have well ob∣served. Thoughts tickle andexcite the affections, first, which kindle upon a thought, as tinder upon a spark. These stirr and carry the will, as winds do the ship: The will, as a Queen, commandeth all the inferiour powers to execute what the thoghts have suggested, the affections seconded, and her self accepted: And is there not a just necessity then of well-imploying the thoughts?
SECT. VIII. Directions. 1. For the matter of good meditations. BUt because he that exhorts to a duty, and directs not how to do it, is as he that snuffs a lamp, and powrs not in oyle to maintain it: let us lay down certain Rules and directions for 1. the Matter. 2. Manner. 3. Measure. 4. Means of better performing this piece of Gods service, and part of our duty. For the Matter, first, of our best thoughts, it must be Gods holy Name (according to the text.) A little word, but of large extent, and very compre∣hensive. For besides that it signifies Gods self (as is above said) it noteth out also 1. all that is or can be known concerning God by the reasonable creatourRom. 1.19 .: such as are his essentiall Attributes communicable and incommunicable (Indeed they are all incommunicalbe, to speak properly and as the thing is, for they are infinitely otherwise in God then thy are in the creature, in whom they are only by some  resemblance and proportion) These are his Simplenes, Infinitenes, Life, Love, Wisdome, Power, Holinesse, Justice, Goodnesse, &c. All which are but one in God (for whatsoever is in God, is God) they are distinguished only for our better apprehension: the Lord speaking to us of these things as divers one from another, only in regard of our shallow capacities. And this truth though we can∣not so well comprehend, yet we are bound to beleevePhilip. 3.12 Credise vult Deus, non exa∣minari, non ju∣dicari. Aug. Our safest elo∣quence con∣cerning God is our silence, Hooker. Deus sphaera est, cujus cen∣trum ubi{que} pe∣ripheria nus∣quam Empedo∣cles.: though we cannot sub∣due it to our understandings, yet we must strive to be subdue unto it. Here then think of God as one not to be thought of, as one whose wisdome is his justice, whose justice is his power, whose power is his mercy, and all himself. Good without quality, great without quantity, everlasting without time, present eve∣ry where without place, contayning all things, and yet sustayn'd of nothing. And here the well is deep, and we want a bucketJoh. 4.11. A wise ignorance therefore, in these high points, is better then a foolish wisdome. It is sufficient here that we be of Gods Court, thogh we be not of his CouncelWe cansee but his back∣parts and live: and we need see no more, that we may live.. But secondly, Gods Name, as it notes out the properties of God, so his Or∣dinances also: I mean all these means whereby he is pleased to manifest himself unto the world. As 1. his works: whether common to the world, as Creation and providence, the making and maintyning of all things: by both which he may be groped outAct. 17 27. , (as the Apostle speaketh) in the dark, or rather, he is made visibleRom. 1.20 . We cannot see the Sun in rota, as the School-men speak, that is, in the eircle wherein it runs, but only the beams of it: No more can we see God in his essence: you may see him in his word, in his works &c. Preston of Gods Attri∣butes., as the same Apostle saith elsewhere, to the dimmest eye; as the beams of the Sun are by re∣flection, or as letters refracted and broken in a pair of spectacles. And here in contemplating these generall works of God, remember to tast the sweetnesse of God in the creature, and to delight thy self more in a spirituall, then in a naturall use of the same. Secondly, those works are Gods Name that are more proper and peculiar to the Church; such as are Predestination, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification &c. Precious blessings, and never enought thought upon and admired; no though we should think upon nothing else all the dayes of our lives, nay as long as the dayes of heaven shall last, as that Martyr once said. These are the works of God: Se∣condly his wordAct. 9.15 Mal. 1.9, 7, 11, 12 Micah. 4.5 and all other means of salvation, as the Sacraments, Prayer, discipline &c. with whatsoever belongeth else to Christian religion, is comprised under this Name of God. Her's a large field then of matter, you see, wherein you may freely and fruit∣fully expatiate and feed your thoughts with these sweetest varieties, and most ne∣cessary, pleasant profitable, and excellent objects. And to them that think upon these good things shall be mercy and truthProv. 14.22.
SECT. IX. 2. For the manner of doing this duty well, both for substance and circumstance. BUt then secondly see as wel to the manner as matter of your meditaion. For it is the manner that makes or marrs every action of religion: and as a good garment may be marr'din the making, so may a good duty in the doing. The rules here to be observed, if we would do this good work well, concerne 1. the circumstances 2. substance of this service. The circumstances are time and place. For the time first, there must be a taking heed lest at any time there be in us an evill heart of unbeleef to depart away from the living GodHeb. 3.12. But besides a continuall care of keeping alwayes a good conscience, and communion with God, and of raysing up the heart by occasionall meditation, taken up from matters ever where occur∣ring and offering themselves to our senses, that may minde us of God (as the spiri∣tuall mans fire will ever be aspiring, NehemiahNeh. 2.2, for instance, that man of eja∣culations, and much acquaintance with God:) But besides this, I say, there must be a set and solemn thinking upon Gods Name on sett purpose; all the pow∣ers of the soul being concentricke, and drawn into one point, that we may attend upon God all the while, as near as may be, without distraction1 Cor. 7 .. And there∣fore I should judge it fit, that some convenient portion of time should be redee∣med from other occasions, and purposely allotted and appointed, for the better and more thorough discharge of this most necessary, but yet much neglected duty. Secondly, for the place where we meditate, let it be retired and secret, for the preventing of distraction, which else will certainly grow upon us, by the singular policy and malice of the devil: who taking all advantages of our carnality, and knowing how near and familiar earthly things are to our senses, how remote and supernaturall heavenly thingsProv. 24.7, he labours therefore (all he can) by outward objects to distract and divideDivide & regna. Machia. Anima disper∣sa fit minor. the faculties of the soul by uncomely motions, and impertinent thoughts: so to slaken the earnestnesse of our affections, and be∣reave us, if possible, of the benefit of our best meditations. Retire we therefore into some secret place, whensoever wee would meditate. Peter did it upon the leadsActs 10.9, Isaac in the fieldGen. 24 63, David in his closetPsal. 4.4, Jacob upon the high-way to MesopotamiaGen. 21.12, to whom therefore so good a day was followed with so sweet a night: For he saw the blessed Angels climbing up and down that sacred ladder, at the top whereof is the Father, the whole length whereof is the Son, the Spirit firmly fastning all such thereunto as duely meditated, that they may bee transported unto blisse eternall. Now in the next place, for the substance of this duty, let it be done in manner and form following. First cheerfully: for God loves not to strain upon any, neither cares he for an ill-willing service. Delight thy self in the LordPsal. 37.4 Virtus nolen∣tium nulla est., if he shall delight in that thou dost: let it be thy recreation to walk into Gds Garden, to muse upon his word, and works, to be thinking upon his Name. Secondly, do it soberlyRom. 12.3 . Qui scrutatur majestatem, op∣primetur à gloria Aug., not prying into Gods secrets further then hee hath revealed them: lest ye lose your selves in the search, and be swallowed up in a maze, or whirl-pool of errours and heresies. Thirdly, do it spiritually, without framing any grosse image of God in our mindes, or representing him by the similitude of any creature in our hearts; for his is idolatry. Onely this may help our understandings much: when we think of God, to conceive that God is in Christ (that expresse image of his Fathers per∣sonHeb. 13. ) and there we may finde firme footing for our fickle thoughts. He is that ladder of ascensionJoh 3.13, by which we may climb safely up to God; whilest we fix the
eye of our minds upon his humane nature: in which the Godhead dwelleth bodilyColos. 2.9 . Wee may not set before our eyes Christ∣man, and so worship with∣out any more ado: but if we conceive of the Man-Christ, and then worship that God-head that dwelleth in him, we do right: and besides we attain to a point further, which is, to conceive of God in Christ. Bifield on 1 Pet. 2. pag. 530., that is personally. So then, like as when I see the body of a man, there I know his soul is also: and therefore I speak to his understanding, when and where I see his body, because they are not severed: so viewing by the eye of my minde, that hu∣mane nature of Christ, now glorious in heaven; I can there also look upon the great God, because I know he is there personally united. Fourthly, do this divine work reverntly, taking heed that we defile not his NameDent. 28.58, by our slubbering services: as those greasie priests did in the beginning of this pro∣phecyMal. 1.8, whiles they thought any thing good enough for God. But undertake we this duty with trembling hearts, and wel-composed affections, coming into his dread∣full presence with the best preparation we can get: considering that he is a great king, and stands upon his seniority, as he tells them there: yea his Name is dread∣full among the Heathen. ib.Verse ult. Lastly, do it constantly, never going off, nor giving over the holy matter of our meditation (whatever it be) till wee have made somewhat of it; till it bee form'd and seated in our hearts, till it be well disgested, and improved for practise. Else what will it profit us to knock at the door of our hearts by some good thoughts of God and his Name, if we stay not an answer? Thon shall we know, if we follow on to know the LordHos. 6.3, saith the Prophet. SECT. X. Directions about the measure of divine Meditation: where is shewed how men offend 5. wayes in thinking on earthly things. HItherto the manner of our thinking upon Gods Name. The measure follows; and that must be modus sine modo: For the generall, it must be without mea∣sureCum Cypri∣no modum esse putemus in pic∣tate nullum te∣nere modum. Quocunq, tem∣pore non cogi∣taveris Deum, puta tempus illud amisisse. Casarius monit. 2. c. 3. Omne tempus, quo de Deo non cogitasti, cogita te perdidisse, Bernardus, Magit Dei me∣minisse debe∣mus quam re∣spirate. Heidfield.. In particular, think we must upon the things of God more plentifully, largely, affectionately, constantly then of all other things in the world laid toge∣ther. This is a duty of the first Commandement, yea this is that first and great Commandement of the Law, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all, &c. Not, but that it is lawfull to think also of other necessary businesses in their due place and season: but te offence is, when 1. We think of them primarily, and in the first place: letting them have the first-fruits of our thougts in a morning, which indeed is due to God alone, and was paid him in kind by David: When I awake, I am still with theePsal. 139 18, saith he. And by Esay, With my soul have I desi∣red thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee earlyEsay 26.9. That rule of our Saviour is generall, and holds here, Seek ye first the kingdome of GodMat. 6.33, &c. 2. Unseasonably, at prohibited times, as on the Lords dayEsay 58.13, and in the In∣terim of divine duties any dayHoc age. Gel.: for then to give way to earthly thoughts, is to commit dalliance with strangers before Gods face: yea to think of the best things out of season, when the duty in hand calls for the whole heart, is sinfull: and in that case we must answer the tempter, as Hushai did Ahitophel, Thy counsell is not good at this time2 Sam. 17.7. 3. Too savourily, or with over-much delight, or confidence in the same; being wedded and wedg'd unto them in our thoughts, and affections, laying our whole waight upon them (as it were:) as David did, when he had got∣ten him upon his mount, and said, He should never be movedPsal. 30.6, 7, and as Job, when flourishing and swimming in all abundance of wealth and ease, hee made no other reckoning but to die in his nestJob 29 18. 4. Sollicitously, distrustfully, anxiously, when (Martha-like) we trouble our heads about many thingsLuke 10.4 ., and turmoil our spirits, with fretting, vexing, carking, and corroding cares, and thougts of the things of this life, contrary to that Evangelicall precept, Take no thoughts u, and again,
In nothing be carefullPh lip. 4.6. 5. Needlesly, endlesly, and superfluously; laying out far more thoughts upon these earthly things then the matter amounts to Live not in carefull suspenceLuke 12.29 . The word sounds thus much, Hang not like Meteors, make no tedious and superfluous discourses in the air. It notes out the covetous persons endlesse framing of projects, and tossing of thougts, this way, and that way, and every way, for the compassing of his greedy desires, and worldy designes. But do not you so, saith our Saviour: rather be paring off superfluities this way, and contract your thoughts into as narrow a compasse as may be1 Cor 7.29 Zacheus con∣verted pre∣fac. Illuminati stamunt opud se nil agendum seri in tota vi∣ta prater cae∣lestia, reliqua obiter: Rolloc: in Ioh. 4.32. It is enough to look at the world slightly, aloof off, and out at eyes end, as it were: the main waight of our thoughts must be laid upon God, and the advancing of his Name. It is affirmed, to his singular commendation, of a worthy Divine of Scotland, that he did eate and drink, and sleep eternall life. Whom that you may expresse, and imitate, harken lastly, to the means of thinking fruitfully upon Gods Name. These are two. 1. Shun the hinderance, 2. Use the helps to this duty. SECT. XI. Directions to the means of fruitfull thinking on Gods holy Name: where 4. hindrances to be avoided, and 7. helps to be use. THe hinderances are 1. pride and conceitednesse of a sufficiency in our selves to conceive of God, or think of any thing else that's good, to good purpose2 Cor. 3.5 God imparts his secrets to none suchPsal. 25.9, but leaves them commonly to dote and busy their brains about questions, or vain disputations that tend to nothing but strife and ostentation1 Tim. 6.4, 5. 2. Passion, He that is hasty of spirit, well he may exalt follyProv. 14.26, saith Solomon, but he shal not lift up many holy thoughts; ('lle give him that gift:) For these require a heart meek and at rest from the confused hurry of troublesome passions. 3. Impenitency, a wilfull continuance in any known wickednesse. For the pure in heart only see GodMat. 5.7; sith there must be some proportion between the eye and the object: so between our minds, and God the object of our minds. Of all the body, the eye only receiveth the light, and that because it is like the light. so he that hath any sound hope of sceing God (one day as he is, in the mean time as we may) must purify himself as God is pure1 Ioh. 3.3. But as black can take no other dye: so an impenitent heart is uncapable of divine contemplation2 Tim. 3.6. 4. Lastly, Earthly-mindednesse: this distracts and divides the heart, and in∣disposeth it to thinking upon God and goodnesse1 Cor. 7.31, 32.: Indeed it eateth out the very heart of goodnesse, by eating all goodnesse out of the heart. It causeth that a man cannot care for the thing of the Lord,lb.. minde and affect the things aboveColos. 3.1, 2, have our conversation in heaven, attend upon the Lord without distraction: for who can serve two masters &c? Remove the hinderances first, rid thy heart of these evill guests. And this done, make use of the following helps. Fist, Accustome your selves to awak with God, and forget not to begin the day with thoughts of him and his mercyes renewed upon you ever morningLam. 3.23 every moment. This will sweetly season and supply the soul, putting it into an happy and hevenly temper for the whole day following: as it did DavidsPs. 108.1, 2, 3. And here, remember to close up your heart, at your down-lying at night; and, if possibly you can, to fall asleep out of some heavenly meditation: so shall your sleep be the more sweetProv. 3.21, 24, 25 and securePro 6.21, 22 Christian courseau. Ars artium est regimen ani∣marum Greg: in Pastor., and your heart in better plight whensoe∣ver you awake. He that thus raketh up his fire ore-night, shall finde fire in the morning. Secondly, keep your hearts with all custody the whole day thorowout. 1. Coun∣tergard them continually from corruption within, from infection without: especi∣ally that which is drawn from those three poisonous objects, mentioned by St. Iohn, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life1 Ioh. 2.16: that is, plea∣sure,
profit, and preferment the worldly mans Trinity (as one fitly stiles them) A heart scatered up and down with these vanities will be as far to seek when it should wait upon God, as a wild horse turn'd up in a wide field, tat cannot be taken when he should be sadled. 2. Be often elevating, and winding up your hearts as the weights of a clock, that bear downwards naturaly, and are yet drawn lower by the sin that doth so easily surroundHeb. 12.  begirteth us. and oppresse us as a talent of leadZach. 5.8: Ʋnto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul, saith DavidPsal. 25.1, and Nehemiah was often darting up some good desire to God, whatsoever his emplyment, was. And our civill conversation also is in heavenPhilip. 3.20 . Prov. 15.24 The godly ma goeth an higher way then his neighbour even in the common bu∣sinesse of this life. Quicquid judet dicere, pudet et cogitare. Est tutissimum & perjecium ut assuescat ani∣mus sollicita semper & per∣vigili custodia discernere co∣gitationes suas, & ad primum animi motum vel probare, vel reprobare quod cogitat: vel bonas cogi∣tationes a lat, vel statim ma∣las extinguat. Hier: in Epist: ad Demetriad: mens non cessat parere cogitati∣ones: tu autem malas evelle, bonas excole. Chrysost. Dum in cogita∣tione voluptas non reprimitur, etiam in actio∣ne dominatur., saith Paul: we exercise our generall call∣ings in our particular, and go about our earthly businesses with heavenly minds using common things as a stirrop to mount us up to things of an higher straine, and exacting (by a divine Alchymy) heavenly meditaions out of earthly objects and occasions. Thirdly, examine your thoughts often, and let not an idle motion, flying fan∣cy, or sinfull dream pass without a sharp check, a censure of the word. There is a sharp eye to be set, and a strict hand to be held over a mans thoughts if ever he will have good of them; they being so infinite, nimble, slippery, and in so se∣cret a place, free from the worlds censure. Call them therefore often to a do∣mesticall Audit, cherish the good, check the bad, let them have the law if they be extravagants. Remember that an evill thought uncontrolled, may vex thee on thy death-bed, as little and as light a matter as many make thereof. Fourthly, get a sound and clear judgment, able to discern of things that be excel∣lent, and to prefer God and the things of God incomparably before all other things whatsoever. Make those things above your treasure once, and then your heart will be chiefly set, and your thoughts will chiefly run on themMat. 6.21. Fiftly, greaten your love to God and goodnesse: for strong affections make strong impressions, and cause great thoughts of heart. A man cannot but think much of that he loves. Oh how I love thy law, saith David (and as an effect of that love) it is my meditation day and nightPs. 119.97. But especially, love to be Gods servants on the sabbath dayEsay 56.6.; let the entire concurrence of the whole man be his alone that day, as much as may be: so shall ye be the better able to think profitably of him, the whole week after. Our infinite week-day wandrings, and wofull trisling out our golden hours in idle and evill thoughts comes (much-what) from our custo∣mary and carnall keeping of Gods holy-dayEsay 58.13. Sixtly, exercise your selves in the word of life: be swift to hear and  Gods holy word. Search and study the scripturesIoh. 5.39. These will 1. free the heart from impure lusts. Wherewithal shall a young man (one that is in the heat of his passions) cleanse his wayPsal. 119.9 , or rub off his filth? (It is a metaphor from glasse, which though rub'd never so clean, will soon gather dust again.) Answer is made there, by ta∣king heed thereto accrding to thy word. 2. It will fill the head with good noti∣ons of God, and his nature, his word, and his works &c.Hieronymus de Nepot: vit. cum assiduâ lectione & me∣ditatione diu∣turnâ, pectus suum bibliothe∣cam christi effecisse. Cogitationes innumerae sunt uno die: cas quis colliget, quis corriget? quis reprimet, quis exprimet? Sphinx philos., so that no rome shall be left for worse thoughts, which else will be stirring. For the thoughts of a man are never idle, as ye know, save when he sleeps; nor then many times; but are like a mill that turns round uncessantly, while it hath water, and if it want other grist, will grind and grate upon it self. Lastly, (to sett all the former awork) add hearty prayer to him that is both the heart-maker, and heart-mender too. Pray him to make the meditations of our hearts ever acceptable in his sightPsal. 19.: and when we are in a good frame, to keep it ever in the imagination of the thoughts of our hearts, and to prepare our hearts unto himself1 Chron. 19.18., as David beggs in the behalf of his people. Pray him to open your un∣derstandings, to sanctify your wills and affections, to raise up and ravish your hearts, to fix your quicksilver as one speaks; that is in meditating upon good things to grant you strength of memory, stedfastnesse of imagination, staednesse of minde, sharpnesse of conceit, soundnesse of judgement, and all other ne∣cessary gifts and abilities, that ye may so meditate upon Gods precepts, that withall ye may have respect to his wayesPsal. 119, 15, 16..
SECT. XII. The Conclusion. LOe this is the way, walk in it: Ands as many as walk after this direction peace shall be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of GodGal. 6.16. For, Do they not erre that devise evill? but to them that think upon good things shall be mercy and truthProv. 14.28. Mercy and truth be with you2 Sam. 15.20 Amen. The Righteous mans Recompence. OR, GODS JEWELS MARKT AND MADE UP, FROM MENS MISUSAGES. The Text: MALACHI 3.17. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels: And I will spare them as a man spareth his own sonne that serveth him. CHAP. I. The Text divided. GODS gracious acceptation of his people and their holy services, hath been hitherto described, and discovered. Followes now his righteous remuneration, and rich respects to their persons, which he highly prizeth; for They shalbe mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels. 2. To their performances which he bountifully re∣wardeth. And I will spare them, as a man spareth his own sonne that serveth him. Then shall ye return and discern &c. The former, without forcing points us to these three positions. 1. That God is the Lord of Hosts. 2. That this Lord of Hosts will have his day to do good to his people: and to make them up as his Jewels from the worlds misusages. 3. That this people of his shall be gratiously owned, and greatly honoured in that day.
SECT. I. That God is Lord of Hosts. What these Hosts are, why called Hosts: what it is to be Lord of Hosts. FIrst, God is the Lord of Hosts. So he is frequently stiled in the old Testament, Lord of Sabaoth (which is all one) in the New; thought this more seldome, be∣cause the old Law was given in fear, the new in love, as Hugo will have it. Now touching this title here, and elswhere given to God, let us see, 1. What these Hosts, or Armies are, whereof he is Lord. 2. Why they are called his Hosts. 3. What it is to be Lord of these Hosts, and what honour accrues, and is a scribed to God by this Attribute. In treating whereof, I must intreat my Rea∣der, the same that the Oratour did His, (when he spake of Socrates,Ʋt majus quiddm de is, quàm quae ripta sunt, suspicarentur: Cic. 3. de Oratore. Loquimur de Deo non quantum debemus sed quantum possumus. Gratian. Imperator and Lucius Crassus) that they should imagine some greater matter then here they finde writ∣ten: forasmuch as in speaking of God we speak not what we ought, but what wee are able, as that Emperour hath well observed in his Epistle to Ambrose. First then, these Hosts whereof God is said to be Lord Soveraigne are all creatures heaven, in earth, and under earth. 1. In heaven there are. 1. Angels, which are caled, The Host of heaven, 1 King. 22.19. An heavenly Army, or the mul∣tiude of the heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. the armies that are in heaven, following the Lord Christ upon white horses, &c. Rev. 19.13. The Authour to the Hebrews calles them the heavens (as some conceive it) Chap. 7.26. Not because they were coworkers with God in the creation of the world, as the Rabbins will have it:Goodw. Child. of Light, &c. 102. for though Angels are called Elohim, Psal. 8.5. yet it was Jehovah Elohim onely that made all things of nothing, Gen 2.4. Esay 45.24. Neither yet, because they move the heavens, and governe the whole world, as the Jews (after the Platonists) beleeved, and thereupon fell into the sinne of Angel worship,Ratione plu∣ralis Elohim, ex Hebrais aliqui existi∣mant so iar∣chum Deo Angelos in opere creatio∣nis, &c. Pa∣reus in Gen. 1.1. Hebrai Platonicis imbuti opinionibus Angelos coelorum motores ttiusque mundi gubernatores esse putabant, &c. Pareus in Heb. 2.5. intruding into those things that they had not seen, Colos. 2.18. and curiously prying into those secrets whereof there is neither proof, nor profit. Howbeit, that they have, under God, a main stroke in ordering the course of naturall and civil affairs, it may be proved out of Ezekiel, Chap. 1. where the beasts are said to stir the wheels, as themselves are stirred by the Spirit of God. And for the manner of their motion, every one of them is said to have four faces, that is, they can look every way at once; and to have calves feet round, that is, they are apt to go every way: and this with the greatest facility that can be. Next below the Angels in Gods hosts, are the Sunne, Moon, and Stars those Coelestial bodies, 1 Cor. 15.40 the glorious furniture of the visible heavens,The Queen of hea∣ven, Jre 44 17. called also, the Host of heaven, Deut. 4.19. Act 7.42. Zeph. 1.5. These fought in their courses against Sisera, Gods enemy, Judg. 5.20. And so they do still by their light,Vidore licebat in eodem loco aquam ignemque si∣mul de coelo cadere. Ignis non attingebat Romanos, neque imber juvabat barbaros, sed eos non. secus inflam∣mabat, ac oleum, &c. Dio Cass. in vita M. Antonin. Philos. heat, and influence: causing stormy, tempe∣stuous, and unseasonable weather, to the annoyance of the Adversary, as once of the Quades, and Marcomans, upon the prayers of the thun∣dering Legion (as they were afterwards called) in the dayes of Marcus Antoninus the Phisosopher, Emperour. And as in the Battle between Ed∣ward the third of England, and Philip of France (who being enraged with a former defeat, marched with fury into the field, elevated with a false hope of triumphant victory) there fell at the instant such a piercing shower of rain, as dissolved their strings, and mae their bowes unusefull. And at the breaking up of the showre,Daniels Hist. of Eng. fol. 237. the Sunne shone full in the face of the French, dazeling their sight, &c. and on the backs of the English, as
it all made for them.Milies nobis, qui aant, retulerunt, ex∣torta sibi esse de manibus quaecun{que} jacu∣libantur, cùm à Theodosij par∣tibus in ad∣versarios ve∣hemens ventus iret, qui & ipsorum tela in eorum corpora retorqueret. Aug. de civ. dei. lib. 5. cap. 26. Rupertus ventos nominat scopas mundi, qued Deus ills everrat, & expurget aeris corruptionem. Job 38.23. Hence the superstitious Heathens, and some degenerate Jews in seremies time worshiped this  of heaven (as they called it) set up the con∣stellations of heaven for gods. oposition to which petty Gods, he is called Lord of Hosts, God of these gods, maker and master of them all. And these are his heavenly hosts, his cavalry, his high-land forces: not to mention here the meteors (whether fiery, as thunder and lightning, or aiery, as winde and earth∣quakes, or watery, as rain, hail &c. All which God is said to keep by him in his treasury, and to bring them fort in the day of battle. Secondly Gods armies in the earth are al terrestiall bodies 1 Cor. 15.40.Rabbi Kimchi well obs∣eth, that God hath magnleh chelo b, and matteh cheloth his upper nd lower troops, as his horse and soot rea∣dy prest. Mark 16.15 . Eurip. . Xnoph. Ejus conciliis militant etiam qu ejus conci his repugnant. Greg Agunt quod vult Deus, sed non volunt quod vu Deus Bern The Turks bear no wea∣pons but in travel, then some of them seem like a wal king armory. Blounts voy∣age p. 79. D Willet on Rom. Gorran in Rom. 9.29. 1 Tim. 1, 20. expounded. both lifeless and living creatures. All which continue and keep their station this day according to hiae ordinnce, saith David: for they are all thy servants: Psal. 119.91. and at thy beck and check Esay 45.12. Plato was wont to say, that the earth was a kinde of living creature, having stones for bones, rivers for veines, trees for haire &c. Put Philo better sayth, that the world is after a sort, a great man, and a man little world. In the Gospel man is called every creature. Go forth into all the world saith our Saviour, and preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, to man the Model of the whole creation, the master-piece of Gods handy-work. A wise Phi∣losopher could say that man is the end of all things in a semicircle: that is, All things else were made for him, and he imself is made for God. His servant he is, and sworn souldier, as Nebuchadnezzar is called and Cyrus: and Ashur, the rod in his hand. For even the wicked also do the will of God, though unwittingly: partly besides, and partly against their own wils. And in this sense, one nation may be Gods host to punish another, or to sheath their own swords in their own bowels, as Midian. But especially this holds true of the Church militant, which is terrible as an army with banners, and every member thereof is a spiritual warriour, harnessed, like a travelling Turk, capapee, with that heavenly Panophe Eph. 6.13. resisting the devil, who fleeth from him, Jm. 4.7. The Is∣raelites marching out of Egypt are called the Lords hosts Exod. 12.41 In rela∣tion whereunto, some have thought that God assumed to himself this title; because the Ark, (that testimony of his special presence) marched in good aray, and all comly equipage, in the midst of the camp. But to speak forwards. Thirdly, under the earth, besides those creatures that passe thorough the pathes of the sea, Psal. 8.8. Whales and whirl-pooles, Dragons and Leviathans, that serve to swallow up Gods Jonasses, and afterwards to ship them to land again. The very Devils also are at Gods command, and appointment: as is intimated (accor∣ding to some) in that Angelical risagion Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, that is saith Gorran, of Angels, men, and devils. True it is, he is called Prince of the air but that is by divine permission for a season. And God of this world: but no otherwise then Absalom was once called the king, viz. by usurpation. Take him in his greatest power, what is the Devil else but Gods officer or exe∣cutioner, to blinde the reprobate, and to teach others that belong to God, not to blas∣pheme: that is by afflicting their bodies, and buffeting their consciences, to warn them not to walk unchristianly, to the scandal of the weak, and the scorne of the wicked. These then are Gods hosts. Hosts they are called (and so we descend to the second quaere.) 1. For the huge number, and mighty multitude, infinitely surpassing those numerous armies of Xerxes, Tamerlane, 2 Cor. 14.9.the Ethiopians in Asa's time, that brought a thousand thousand into the field, the biggest army that I remember to have read of in holy Writ: but no way comparable unto the Lords hosts who (besides all o∣ther creatures innumerable attendant) hath thousand thousands of Angels ministring unto him,Dan. 7.10. and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before him, as waiting an er∣rand, and that would be glad of an office. He bringeth them out by number, and calleth them all by their names Esay 40.20. which no earthly Generall can do.
2 They are called hosts for their Eutaxie, quasi milites in statione  collocati sunt. Shindler Pentag. Acceperunt pro tsebi jucun∣dites decus or∣namentum. Ib. Reas. 3. Math. 8. the comly and lovely order of them, keep∣ing their stations, as it were in martial manner, and battel-ray. Whence the Septu∣againt commonly render this word used for Hosts by  and Hierome, Ornatus; for order makes an army beautiful. 3. For their obedience which is no lesse admirable, then their order amiable. No souldier is so obsequious, so active, so ready prest at the command of his ca∣ptain, as all creatures are at the command of God: So well disciplined are they and trained to it, (not by rules of art, but by instinct of nature, Psal. 119.91.) that if he say but to any go, he goeth: if come, he cometh, if do this, he doeth it. Never was any Emperour so observed as he is, even to a nod or beck. Psal 123.2. Fiftly, therefore is he stiled somtimes Lord of Hosts, and other times Lord God of Hosts, to denote and set forth his infinite and irresistible power, and that there is no standing before him (thus armed and appointed) if his wrath be kindled, yea though never so little: which is an answer to the third quaere.Beza in Rom. 9.29. exauditi sunt & domino multo potentiore quam ipsi sitis. Ad infinitas ipsius vtres & copias expli∣candas. Beza. in loc.  sets forth his ab∣solute power and soveraign∣ty over all creatures whence he is called the one or onely Lord. Ephe. 4.5.  est dissipare, per∣dere, quod victori cone∣nit imprimis. . Hoc epitheto sum∣ma tribuitur Deo potentia, saith a grave and learned interpreter, Chiefest power and soveraign authority is given and ascribed to God by this attribute. For this, it is often used, and urged in the old Testament; as in the new, the very Hebrew word Sabaoth is retained for more Emphasis, Iam. 5.4. The cryes of them that have rea∣ped your fields, and yet received no wages, are entred into the eares of the Lord of sabaoth: that is, they are graciously heard by a Lord far more mighty then you are any, saith the same interpreter. And in his larger Annotations, this saith he, is added to shew his infinite forces, and matchlesse might. The like may easi∣ly be collected from Rev. 4.8. compared with Esay 6.3. Where the holy Ghost rendereth Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, by Holy, holy, holy Lord God Al∣mighty, , not  onely, such a one as hath not the sole command alone, but the whole command of all the creatures. In heaven he hath good servants; in hell bad: in earth both. The other Apostles call him Lord (it is Gorrans observation) Iudas calls him not so, but Rabbi Mat. 26.22, 25. because he had shaken off the yoke of obedience, but they that will not bend must break, as he did, when shortly after he became his own deathsman, after that he had delive∣red up his master, and all by the determinate counsel of God, the might strong God, as he is stiled Esay 9.6. the Al-sufficient God Gen. 17.1. Aben Ezra renders it The conquerour: and the Lord Christ is said to go forth riding on his white horse conquering, and to conquer. Rev. 6.2. The Septuagint render it Self-sufficient able to do all without help of any; how much more when having such hosts at com∣mand. Aquila renders it  strong: lusty; valiant. Pagnine and Iunius, Om∣nipotent. Now, dicitur Omnipotens, quia omnium tenet potestatem, saith Isidore. And this David the King acknowledgeth in all ample manner (yea Nebuchadnezzar the tyrant Dan. 4.37.) Thine O Lord is the greatnesse, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty. For all that is in the heaven is thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all &c. 1 Chron. 29.11.12. SECT. II. The Pope will needs be Lord of Hosts VVHat meaneth then that man of sin, that mouth of blasphemy (that I may apply) to speak so great things of himself Rev. 13.5. 2 Thes. 2. Psal 100. Fran. Zabar. Bellar. lib. 4. de. Pot. Ro∣quia in omni∣bus admirabi∣lis, stuper mun∣di. to boast himself so much in mischief Psal. 52.1. to lift up himself above all that is called God, sit∣ting in Gods temple, and shewing himself there as if he were Lord of Hosts? For although he hath but some angle, and not all the corners of the earth, though he is but a fox in a hole, yet his discreet doctors say of him, that he can do all that Christ can do: that God hath put all things in subjection under his feet; the beasts of the field, that is men living on the earth, the fishes in the sea, that is souls, in purgatory the fouls of the aire, that is the souls of the blessed. It sufficeth not Mosconius, to derive Pape of Papae the interjection of admiring,
because the Pope is the worlds wonderment:Rev. 13 3 Admiratio pe∣perit philoso∣phiam, sic et Antichristia∣nismum. habens in toto mundo utrunqe gadium &c. Dulia adoran∣dus. De mi∣nistr. milit. Eccles. l. 1. cap. 1. Os papae et eu∣lus diaboli in eodem sunt prae∣dicamento. Jgnatij Con. clavs. pag. 139. vide Pareum in Apoc. 13.3. Orâclis vocis mundi modera∣ris habenas. et merito in ter ris diceris esse Deu. Super Angelos eleuatier papa, adeo ut eos ex∣communicare possit, ait Joh. 23. in extra∣vag Luk. 4.6 Dr. Featly his Transub. ex∣ploded. (that beast, he should have said, in the Revelation, that all the world wondered after) and Pontifex, because he makes men a bridg to blessednesse, but he will have him to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, having the power of both swords throughout the world; yea command over all reasonable creatures. Boniface the 8. wrote to Philip K. of France, that he was Lord of all, both temporals and spirituals, in all coun∣tries, which is one of the divels titles. Math. 4. Ʋalladerius shames not to say of Pope Paul 5. that he was a god, lived familiarly with the Godhead, heard Predestination it self whispering to him, had a place to sit in councel with the most divine Trinitie. And another of the same Popes parasites, dedicates a book to him thus: To Paul the 5. Vice-God, the most invincible Monarch of the Christian common-wealth, the most mighty defender of the Pontifician omnipotency. Our Lord God the Pope, saith a certaine Canonist: And, to thee is given all power in heaven and earth, said the Councel of Lateran, the very year before Luther stood up against that Romish Antichrist; who weares a triple crowne, in token that he is Lord of heaven, where he may canonize saints, of hell, where he may free soules out of purgatory, of earth where he saith, as once the divel did: All power is delivered unto me, and unto whomsoever I will, I give it. But how haps it then that he gives no more to many of his best ser∣vants? To instance in some of our own fugitives: Allin had a Cardinals hat, but with so thin lining (meanes to support his state) that he was commonly called the starveling Cardinall. Stapleton was made professour of a petty universitie, scarce so good as one of our free-schooles in England. Sanders was starved. Will. Raynolds was nominated to a poore vicarage under value. On Harden his Holinesse bestow'd a prebend of Gaunt, or to speak more properly (saith mine Au∣thour) a Gaunt prebend &c. But this by the by onely. SECT. III. Wo to Rebells against the Lord of Hoasts. FOr a second Use. Is God the Lord of Hosts? and doth he with them whatso∣ever he will in heaven and earth? Wo then to rebels and refractaryes, to trai∣tours and transgressours,Job. 21. sons of Belial, children of disodedience, that say to the King Apostata, that break his bands, and send messages after him, saying, we will not have this man to rule over us: that refuse to be reclaimed, and stick not to oppose with crest and brest, whatsoever stands in the way of their sins and lusts. God (saith the Psalmist) shall wound the head of his enemies. But are there any such, may some say?Psal. 68.21. so desperatly mad, as to bear armes against heaven? yes, saith the prophet, and ye shall know who they are too. He shall wound the hairy scalp of such a one as goeth on in his trespasses. All those then that lye sucking at the botches of carnall pleasures, grinding in the mill of worldly lusts, listning  the suggestions of Satan the Lord profest adversary,—caesariem in∣tonsam et capi∣ta alta ferentes. . Lacones co∣ammnutriebant ad terrorem. and principall Counter-facti∣onist. All that against the rich offers of Gods free grace, the menaces of his mouth, the strokes of his hand, chuse to go on still in their lewd and lawlesse courses, refusing to be reformed, hating to be healed, all these are to be reputed Gods enenies. And although their scalps be never so hairy, their lockes never so bushy, their lookes never so lofty and haughty, fierce and furious: though they have marrow in their bones, and milk in their breasts, though their natural moist∣ure be no whit decayed, through age or unbealthinesse, with Moses, much lesse turned into the drought of summer, with David, which might occasion baldnesse (as in elderly people) but that being young and youthy, yea strong and sappy, they had haire by weight,Cruentbit ca∣put inimicorum suorum. Beza. as Absolom, yea were rough all over with Esau, which which makes them look grim and terrible with the Caldeans, that people of fierce countenance, yet that shall little availe them, when God shall take them in hand Hee'le crack their crownes, hee'le cleave their sculs, hee'le wound through the hairy scalpes of all such, as obstinating themselves in an evill course,
will needs on in their trespasses, whatsever it stand them in. In the doing of which fearfull execution upon his enemies, the Lord of hosts will not much trou∣ble himself neither. For he needs no more but arise, and his enemies shall be scattered: yea all that hate him shall flee before him, as it is in this same Psalme, ver. 1. He needs not arme himself, as David, against this giant-like generation, with weapons offensive or defensive: for with his bare hand only he can beat the proudest of them, yea make a puny-boy and a very baby of him. Thou hast smitten all thine enemies saith David upon the cheek-bone;Psal. 3.7 thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly. As if he should have said,Dio. Those that think them∣selves tall fellowes, and dare challenge the very devill to a duell (as Caligula once did his Jupiter) are as children in thy great hands, and fare accordingly, For thou boxest them about the ears, clappest them on the cheeks with the palms of thy hands, buffetest the about the lips with thy clutch-fist, till they spit blood again, and be made to look their teeth in their throats, thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly. But if yet they will not yeeld, but wrestle with thee, with the froward thou wilt wrestle Psal. 18.26. Thou wilt be as froward as they for the hearts of them. If they will needs try a fall with thee, thou wilt fell them,Act. 9.4 Joh. 18.6 and quell them, thou wilt lay them at thy feet, (as the Lord Christ did Saul, and the souliers that came to surprize him) yea thou wilt smite them in the hinder-parts (where we use to whip unruly boyes) and so put them to a perpetuall reproach. Psal. 78.66. But what need the Lord (as I was saying) be at all this pains with himself, or once so much as foul his fingers with them, who hath such mighty armies, and so many Hosts afoot to chastise his rebels?Pomp. Mag. nostrâ miseria tu es magnus. Pub. Minus. so that if he do but once wag his little finger, or stamp with his foot only upon the ground (as that Roman vainly vaunted) he can presently command and call for legions of Angels to subdue Senacherib, millions of starrs to fight against Sisera, vollyes of thunder and light∣ning to blast and burn up the Philistins, cart-loads of massy hailstones to brain the kings of Canaan. These are Gods hosts in heaven. Neither is he to seek of sufficient forces here beneath, both by sea and land. There he hath whales and dragons to devour his enemies: here he hath, besides armies of diseases within them (Physitians reckon 2000. severall sorts, 200. whereof belong to the eye) that lye in wait for the precious life: let him but say with Jehu, who is on my side? who? and all beasts, fouls, and exeeping things innumerable will straight looke out at their windowes, and tender him their service. God cannot possibly want a staff to beat his dogs with; a weapon to wound his rebels with.Facile est in∣venire baculum quo canem caedas. If He set against a world-full of wicked doers, the water will take his part: If against Sodom, fire: If against murmurers, earth: If against blasphemers, fiery serpents: If against Idolaters, lions: Dan. 6. If against mockers, bears: If against Herod, wormes:2 King. 2.24 Act. 12. Hatto Bonosus Praesul Mogun∣tinus, à muri∣bus devoratus An. Dom. 969. ut ait Wildero∣gus episcopus Argentinensis A. D. 997. Alsted Chron. Fit cruor ex undis, conspur∣cant omnia ra∣nae. Dat pulvit cimices, postea musca venit. De in pestis post ulcera, grando, locusta, tenebrae. Tan∣dem prototocos ultima plaga necat. If against Hatto, mice: If against Pharaoh, all. Now a host of frogs distresse him, now of flies, now of lice, now of Caterpillers, now of grashop∣pers &c. God made the earth fight against him, the ayre fight against him, the fire fight against him, the water fight against him: he left him not till he had beaten the very breath out of his body with stroke after stroke, and so made good with his hand, what he hath also said with his mouth. The Lord knoweth how to re∣serve the unjust to the day of punishment: And, In the thing wherein they deal proud∣ly, he is above them. 2 Pet. 3, 9. Exod. 18.11. He hath an eye to follow them, a goard to look to them, and a goaler to bring them forth, whensoever he shall call for them. In case they should make escape (as they cannot) he hath armies above them, armies below them, armies about them, armies upon them, yea armies within them, to bring them back to execution. For a wicked person is not safe from his own tongue to peach him, from his own hands to dis∣patch him, from his own phantasy to disquiet him, from his own conscience to affright him, from his own friends to betray him, from his own beasts to gore him, from his own fire to burn him, from his own house to brain him. Thus it is with him, whiles at home: as if he look abroad, to every creature he meets he may say as Ahab once said to the Prophet, Hast thou found me O mine enemy? For as every good souldier will fight for his Generall; and as a Noble-mans ser∣vants will soon draw, if their Lord be set upon; so there is not a creature in all the world, that is not ready prest to fight Gods battles, and revenge his quarrell
upon an ungodly person.Gen 4.14 What Cain sometimes said he hath good cause to take up and second;Job 18.15 Every thing that findeth me shall slay me. Brimstone is strawed upn the house of the wicked, saith Iob, so that if the fire of Gods wrath do but light∣ly touch upon it,Job 9 5 Eccles. 6.13 Necesse est ut eum omnibus doctorem ag∣noscam qui tri∣ginta habet le∣giones Phavo∣rm: de Adria∣no mp: apud Spartian. they are suddenly consumed: they walk all day long upon a mine of Gunpowder, either by force or stratageme they are sure to be surprised. Had Zimri peace that slew his master? Hath ever any waxed fierce against God and prospered? Oh that these gracelesse men would once learn to meddle with their match, and (according to the wise-mans counsell) beware of contending with one that is mightier then they, this Lord of Hosts, I mean, the Lord mighty in battle, Psal. 24.8. this man of warr as Moses calls him whose name is Jehovah sabaoth: before whose dreadfull presence, and unresistible puissance they are no more able to stand, then is a glasse-bottle before a cannon-shot. SECT. IIII. Tremble before this mighty Lord of Hosts. THirdly, Is he the Lord of Hosts with whom we have to deal? be we all hence exhorted and excited to the pracise of divers duties. And first to tremble before this mighty God: who having so many millions at his beck and obedience, can with as much ease, and in as little time undo us as bid it be done. So Caesar once threatened Metellus in a bravado; but so, God only and easily can do indeed to such as set against him. If the breath of God blow men to destruction Iob 4.9. for we are but dust-heaps: if he can frown us to death with the rebuke of his countenance, Psal. 80.16. what is the waight of his hand (that mighty hand as James calls it) wherewith he spans the heavens,Jam 4.1 Isay 40.22 and weigheth the earth in a ballance? He sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants are as grashoppers: he shakes them out of it, at pleasure, as it were by a canvass, or as out of ones lap, so much the Hebrew word imports Iob 38.13. Who would not therefore fear thee O King of Nations?Jer. 10.6, 7 Mat 22.21 . for to thee doth it apper∣tain; forasmuch as thowart great, and thy Name is great in might. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, saith Christ, and unto God the things that are Gods. Where it is remarkable that the Article in the Originall is twice repeated when he speaks of God, more then when he speaks of Caesar, to shew, saith a Di∣vine, that our speciall care should be to give God his due: Now shall we far to break the penall lawes of a King,Prov. 19 12 Prov. 16.14 Prov. 20.2 because his wrath is as the roaring of a lion, and as the messengers of death, so that whoso provoketh him to anger, sinneth against his own soul? And shall we not fear this King of Nations, who hath Armies of creatures to do us to death, and after that, legions of devils to torment us in hell? shall we fear fire, water, lions, leopards; bulls, bears, and other common souldiers, yea the wrath of a fool, because it is heavier then the sand of the sea Prov.. Mat. 10.28. Philip. 3. ult. 27.3, 4. An shall we not fear the great Emperour of all these, that hath them all at his beck and obeisance? These may kill us, but they cannot hurt us, as he once told the tyrant destroy they may the body, but neither keep the good soul from heavents nor the body from a glorious resurrection. But God can do all this, yea more then this: and shall we not fear his heavy displeasure? Es∣pecially since according to his fear, so is his wrath, Psal. 90.11. That is (accor∣ding to some) as any one doth more or less fear Gods indignation, in the same degree and measure shal the feel it: as he trembles at it, he shall tast of it. Or as others, (and perhaps better) Let a man stand in never so great awe of thy wrath, yet his fear shall not prove proportionall, or ever be able to match it: he shall ne∣ver fear thee so much as thy wrath amounts to, let him fear his utmost. For there is a fire kindled in his anger, and it burns unto the lowest hell Deut. 32.22. Now Bellarmine is of opinion that one glimps of hell, were enough to make a man not only turn Christian and sober, but Anchorite and Monke, to live after the strict∣est rule that can be. I conclude with the Apostle, Wherefore let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire Heb. 12.28, 29.
SECT. V. Trust in his power for fulfilling his promises. SEcondly, is He the Lord of Hosts? This should teach us to rest confidently upon his power, for the fulfilling of his promises: For what should hinder? First, God is not as Man that he should lie; he payes not what he hath promised,Plutarch. as Sirtorius is said to do, with fair words. Secondly, hee is not off and on with us, he doth not say and unsay,Mal. 3. he is Jehovah that changeth not. Thirdly he is the Lord of Hosts, and cannot be resisted, or interrupted in his course. Nature may be, and was, when the fire burnt not, the water drown'd not, the Lions devoured not, &c. Men may be withstood though never so mighty, as the potent Prince of Persia was, Daniel 10.20. And as Asa was, who although he brought five hundred thousand men into the field, yet was he encountred and over∣matcht by an Army of a thousand thousand and upward, so that he was fain to flee to the old Rock for refuge. Devils may want of their will, though never so many,Esay 26.4. as that Legion in the Gospel, and though never so well united, as they there were: for though many,Squama Levi∣athan ita cohae∣rent, ut quasi loricatus ince∣dat Satan & cataphractus. Luther. D. Preston. yet they say, My name, not Our name, they speak and act as One in that possession. But God doth whatsoever he will in heaven and earth, with∣out controll or contradiction. In the creatures, (saith One) there is an essence, and a faculty whereby they work; as in fire, the substance, and the quality of heat: between these God can inder, and so hinder their working, as in the Babylonish fire, Dan. 3. In the A geis there is an Essence, and an executive power. God comes between these, ote, and hinders them from doing what they would. But now its otherwise in God: he is most simple, and entire, without mixture or composition. Hence his Almightinesse is his Essence, and his whole Essence is Almighty. Hee is not mighty in respect of some part, or faculty, as the creature is, but all in God is mighty. He is not dependent upon another for new supplies, as the creature, whose power will cease and determine, if not renewed and confirmed by God, Jer. 32.18, 19. He is El-shaddai, absolutely self-sufficient, not needing any subsidiary help from without, though he please otherwhiles to make use of the creatures, as his Hosts, to tame his enemies, and performe his word to his people.Tamen tantum effecit ut tota Aegyptus defi∣ciens exclama∣re geretur hunc esse digi∣tum Dei Philo. Quid ciniphe vlius? saith Philo. What's more base then a lowse? yet all Aegypt could not stand before this poor creature, but was forced to acknowledge it the finger of God. If any Pharaoh oppose to him, he can soon subdue the strongest Rebell by the weakest instrument. As if any Gideon build and bind upon his promise, of weak he shall become strong, Heb. 11.34. Deo confici nunquam confusi. He that beleeveth shall not be ashamed, he need no more but stand and see the salvation of the Lord. The Lord shall fight for you,Exod. 14.14 saith Moses to Israel, namely by his red-sea, that shall cover your enemies, (as it did ours in 88.) but ye shall hold your peace. Commit your wayes therefore unto the Lord, trust also in him,Psal. 37.5 and hee shall bring it to passe. Stand not upon these and these dangers, and difficulties that stand in the way. Found your faith fast upon the infallible promises of God All-sufficient; put them also in suit by faithfull and fervent prayer, and then though you see not how, or which way such a mercy should be attained, or deliverance compassed; yet give glory to Gods power with Abraham, Rom. 4.18. and buy the field at Gods bidding with Jeremy, Chap. 32.17-27. thought the captivity were then foretold unavoydable. What talke wee of any thing impossible, or improbable to the Lord of Hosts? This is to limit the Holy One of Israel, with those Rebels, that asked, Can the Lord provide a table for us in the wildernesse? or with that Infidell Lord of Samaria: Behold, if the Lord should make windowes in heaven, might this thing be? Can the Lord? and, Might this be? Why? what a questi∣ons that? He can give bread from heaven, and drink out of a rock: He can com∣mand the ravens to feed Elias, and the most hurtfull creatures to be usefull to us, as poyson in Physick. He can do more then ever he will, as he could have rescued his Sonne Christ by a legion of Angels, Mat. 26.23. Some things God can do,
but will not,2 Tim. 2.13. Heb. 6.18. Mat. 3.9. Some things he neither will, nor can; as he cannot lie, die, deny himself, break his promise, &c. But whatsoever God willeth, that without impediment he effecteth, Esay 46.10. For who hath resisted his will? And yet I know not how, 'tis natural and usuall with us in an exigence, to question Gods power one while, (If thou canst do any thing, help us) his will another while, (Master, if thou wilt thou canst make me clean) and to tie him so to the means, that if they fail, he cannot help. When the bottle was spent, Hagar falls a cry∣ing as utterly undone. Whence shall we have bread to feed so many thousands? Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people?Ioh. 6 Num. 11.13.22. Ver. 23. Dei dicere est facere. shall the flocks be all slain, and all the fish of the Sea gathered together for them to suffice them, said Moses? But what said the Lord to it? Is the Lords hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to passe unto thee, or not. Gods word is his deed, his promise sure-hold: never any yet miscarried that could produce and plead it: sith he wants neither power nor will to make it good. Peter had a good will to de∣liver Christ out of the Jews hands, but wanted power. Pilate had power enough to do it, but wanted will. God wants neither, but will put forth both forthe safe∣ty and salvation of his faithful people. Hence holy Job, having spoken of Gods power speaketh of his thoughts, (as Calvin observeth) to tell us that his power and will are things inseparable, his minde and hand agree together, the one to determine, the other to execute. Job. 42.2. All his shall have whatsoever heart can wish, or their condition require, 2 Sam. 22.2.3. even marvellous loving kindness from God in a strong city above all that can be uttered: The prophet is fain to ex∣presse himself above it, by an exlamation Psal. 31.19, 20, 21. The Lord of Hosts is for them, the God of Iacob is their refuge. He hath entred into a covenant with them both defensive and offensive, so that all his is theirs, as Iehosaphat that told his con∣federate King of Israel. 1 King. 22.4. SECT. VI. Stoop his power, and submit to his Soveraignty. THirdly, is he the Lord of Hosts? what then should we rather and sooner do then stoop to his power, and submit to his soveraignty? And sith we must be either his servnts, or his slaves, his subjects or his foot-stool, chuse the for∣mer condition, that we may escape the latter? for certain it is, he will fetch us in by one Pursivant or another (and he hath enow ready) if we make not hast with Shimci, to come down, and meet the Lord with intreaties of peace, that he may embrace us, and take us in to his princely favour. Do not ask me here, (as Pharaoh once did Moses) who is the Lord that I should serve him? God Attributes are of two kinds, which either shew what he is? or who he is? to the question of Moses what he is; God gave a short answer: I am. To the second of Pharaoh, who he is, he made a large reply by his armies of lice, flies, hail, locusts &c. Till Pharaoh was compelled to answer for him, The Lord is righteous, but I and my peo∣ple are wicked, This was a faire confession, but extorted: for he was no sooner off the rack, but he bit it in again, and became more hard and hardy, as water grows more cold after a heat. And such, for all the world, was the forced and fained obedience of those Israelites im the wildernesse while God slew them (by fiery ser∣pents, and others his warriors) then they sought him, yea they returned, and en∣quired after God,Psal. 78.34.36 as if they would have done the deed. Neverthelesse they flatte∣red him with their mouthes, and lied unto him with their lips. So must not we do, if ever we mean to do well: but throwing away our weapons, lay our selves low be∣fore his foot-stool, unfainedly submitting to the scepter of his kingdom, obeying from the heart that form of doctrine whereunto we have been delivered. For, what a shame is it for us not to do that homage to God,Rom. 6.17. that all other creatures so gladly pay & perform? what a monstrous thing that man amidst al Gods handy-works that revere the Almighty, and readily do his will, that he I say, should prove a great Heteroclite, an open rebel, a profest adversary to God his soveraign Lord, his crown
and dignity? Oh send a lamb (in token of homage and fealty) to the ruler of the world Vow and pray to the Lord your God, bring presents unto Fear, that is, to him that ought to be feared. And for as much as with your ten thousand you are not able to encounter this great King, that comes against you with twenty thousand times twenty thousand; send an embassage quickly of prayers and tears, whiles he is yet on the way,Irent propè, ne remorando iram victores exasperarint. Tacit hist. lib. 2 Mittamus preces & la∣crymas cordis legatos Cyprian 1 Kin. 20.32. The British Embassadours came in torne garments with sand on their heads, in the time of Valentinian the third. Daniels hist. of Eng. The Callice men came to Ed. 3 bare headed, bare-footed in their shirts with halters about their necks &c. lib. p. 240. Psal. 27. and desire conditions of peace. Luk. 14.32. You know how Jacob disarmed that rough man Esau that came against him with 400. cutthroats at his heels: how Abigail appeased that enraged man David, that had desperately vowed the death of so many innocents: how the Syrians prevailed with that non-such Ahab, for the life of their Lord Benhadad. Having heard that the kings of Israel were merciful men, they put sackcloth upon their loines and ropes upon their heads, and in this form of humble suppliants they came to the King, and said, Thy servant Benadad saith, I pray thee let me live. And a like ad∣dresse we read of in our own histories of the old Brittones to Aetius the Roman Governour, and of the Calice-men to one of our Edwards; Oh let their practise be our pattern. We have heard abundantly that there is a matchlesse mercy in God for all penitent persons, above that ever was found in the best king of Israel: this mercy we have a promise of, if we submit to the condition, (in thee the father∣lesse findeth mercy Hos. 14 3.) So had not the Syrians: their best encouragement was a general hear say. This condition is no more then what every man will yeeld to be reasonable, viz. that we lay down the bucklers first: that we come before him in lowliest manner, with ashes on our heads (so they of old) as unworthy to be above ground, with sack-cloth on our loyns, as unworthy the coursest cloa∣thing, with ropes about our heads, as deserving to be destroyed: yet hum∣bly begging that we may live in his sight with Ismael, yea that we may serve in his presence with Moses, and dwell in his house with David all the dayes of our lives, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple. This is all that God requires, and this was that one thing that David beg'd so dearly at Gods hands Psal. 27.4. and accordingly obtained it. Hence he so confidently calls his soul to rest amidst a multitude of molestations and incumbrances. Hear him else, Psal. 3. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set them∣selves against me round about. I laid me down and slept, I awaked &c. He never brake his sleep for Absalom and all his forces, the up in arms against him. For why? salvation, saith he, is of the Lord, his blessing is upon his people. (Ver. 5, 6, 8.) whereof I am one, and shall therefore be in safety. Behold I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed, said Isaac of Iacob: saith the God of Iacob, of all those that rest confidently upon his power for their preservation, that hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto them, at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.13 At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh, saith Eliphaz, neither shalt thou be a∣fraid of the beasts of the earth. For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Iob. 5.22, 23. SECT. VII. Set his power awork, by prayer. The power of prayer. LAstly, is God Lord of Hosts? how should this consideration quicken and call us up to a constant instancy in prayer to that God,Eph. 3.21. 2 Cor. 8 Phillip. 4 Oratio fidelis omnipotens est. Luther. Est quaedam omnipotentia precum. Alsted syst. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 2. Luk. 18.6. who is able to do for us above that we are able to ask or think, that we having all sufficiency alwayes in all good things, may abound unto every good work through Christ that strengthneth us. Many and glorious things are spoken of the power of prayer in the book of God. Indeed there is a kinde of Omnipotency ascribed unto it, and not without cause. For certainly whatsoever God can do, prayer can do: sith prayer sets God awork, God sets his power awork, and Gods power sets the creature awork (as at Peters "enlarge ment) and then what wonder the thing come on an end, though never so difficult. For shal any thing be too hard for God? or shal not God avenge his praying people that cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Asa and Iehosaphat prayed down their enemies, so did the
Jewes in Esthers time, the Saints in the acts, the thundering legion. The death of Arrius,Acts 4. Secrat. lib. 1. cap. 15. was precationis opus non morbi. He was brought to confusion by the prayers of Alexander the good Bishop of Constantinople. Luther had ob∣tained of God, that whilst he lived the enemie should not plunder his countrey: when I am gone said he,Acts & Mon. let those pray that can. So, when the states of Germa∣ny were once assembled to consult about points of Religion then in controversy, he, though thirty miles distant, at the very house wherein it was concluded, that the reformation should be established, came leaping out of his closet, (where he had been tugging with God by prayer) with Vicimus, Vicimus in his mouth, we have over∣come, we have overcome.Spec. belli sacri Dr. Powell in Cambr. histor. Non disputationibus sed rogationibus, saith Bodine. The busines of religion is more dispatcht by prayers then disputes, yea or then by force of armes. A great Queen is reported to have said, that she more feared the fasting & prayers of John Knox and his disciples, then an army of thirty thousand men. Leoline Prince of Wales, when by some about him he was moved to make war upon our third Henry; I am more afraid, sad he, of his prayers and almes, then of his preparations and armies.Alius insaniat utibellum in∣ferat ei qui cnsitse deum defensorem ha∣biturum. Buc∣holc. Index Chron. Idem in Cron. Cruciger. Ber medi. de∣votis. cap. 5. The like we read of a cor am Duke of Saxony, that having raised forces to fight against the Bishop of Magdeburg, and under∣standing by his Intelligencers, that the Bishop made no kinde of Warlike provi∣sion, but said that he would wholly commit his cause to God, who would not faile to fight for him. God blesse me said the Duke, from waging war with him that trusts in God for defence and deliverance. Numa (a Heathen) reposed so much confidence in his gods, that when he heard the enemies were at hand, he laughed and said, At Ego rem divinam facio. But I am about the service of the gods; and so long I can not but be in safety. Jacob wrestled with God by prayer, and had the better of him. Of Luther it is said, that e could have what he would of God. St. Bernard in his meditations giving diverse rules of strict∣nesse, purity of heart, humilitie and holinesse: Et cum talis fueris, saith he, memento mei, when thou art thus fitted for prayer, thou maist have any thing, pray for me. God requires no more of us but to bring before him lawfull petitions, and honest hearts, and then doubt not, but if the thing be feasable, prayer can effect it; Especially, if in prayer we rest upon Gods infinit power ingaged for our reliefe, and plead it, he cannot say us nay. It was a notable and an imitable piece of policy in the ancient church, Psal. 80. to found her prayers upon Gods Power. Stir up thy strength, and come and save us. Verse 2. And in suing for her liberty, to presse God with this prevayling argument, Thou art the Lord of hosts: yea by waving her wings often, to gather that winde under them, that might mount and beare her up to the presence of the Almighty with more facility and efficacy, growing every time in fervency by her threefold iteration and repetition; of the self same petition in prayer. Turne us agine O God,Cumin collo∣quium descen∣dimus cum Dee, replice∣mus licet, du∣plicemus, tripli∣cemus, et qua∣druplicemus Alsted, in Gen.  Tantus fulmi∣nator ad Jesa∣belis minas  trepidat fachis seipso imbecilli∣or Buch   cognationem habet cum ver∣bo , attendere, in∣tendere. Novarin. saith she (ver. 3.) and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. This was a good prayer, but somwhat flag: therefore she stirres up her self againe, and takes better hold of God, by this title in my text: Turne us againe, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved; ver. 7. Here he is somwhat thriven in her devotion. Before 'twas O God onely, with∣out any further attribution. Now tis O God of hosts, Thou that hast all power in thine hands, do it for us. But lastly, as if that were too little, she trebbles her forces (as Abraham did for Sodom) and by a new addition, Turne us again, saith she. O Lord God of bests, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. And having thus said, she rests satisfied; so dosing up her prayers, as not doubting in Gods due time, of a gratious answer. The effectuall fervent prayer of a righteous man, saith St. James, availeth much, or is greatly powerfull. And this he ex∣emolifies in Elias; a man (saith the Apostle) as other men are, and therefore had originall sin in him, mixing with his prayers. And a passionat man too, subject to like passions as other men are: for we read how on a time, when he sate un∣der the Juniper: he would have died in a passion: and yet he prayed, and prayed that it might not raine; and at his prayer, it rained not on the earth by the space of three yeares and six moneths. And he prayed againe, and the heaven gave raine, and the earth gave her fruits, not without a miracle of Gods mercy. For raine in an ordinary course had come too late to a land that had laine so long
parcht and scorcht: the very roots of herbes and trees being now decayd and dryed up, and all in a manner past recovery.. But faithfull and fervent prayer never comes too late, and that because God never comes too late. Prayer is a great won∣der-work in heaven and earth. No good thing can match it, nor evill over∣match it. The flood could not drown the old world, till praying Methuselah was laid up in peace. The fire could not consume sinfull Sodom, till praying Lot was provided for. It is not in the power of Labans hand to hurt Iacob, because,Quasi manu facta, Deum ambiunt oran∣tes. Tertull. Preces sunt bombardae & instrumenta bellica christi∣anoum Luth. Ligatum ha∣bent Sancti Deum, ut non puniat, nisi per∣miserint ipsi. Bern in Cant. serm. 30. upon his yester-nights prayer, God had rebuked him. Nor could Esau touch him, be∣cause Iacob had wrestled with God all night, and would not away without a blessing of deliverance, and a guard of Angels. The plague cannot fasten upon the people, for Moses will not yeeld to it: nor Amalec prevail in the vale, because he held up his hands on the hill. If ever the enemy shall do good on't, and God have decreed it so, he first takes order for the silencing of his prophets, whose prayers would, as it were, tranfuse a dead palsy into his hands, that he could not smite, Ier. 7.16. pray not saith he for this people, neither lift up cry, nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear. As if the Lord should have said thus: Had there been any good to be done in this case, prayer would have done it. But I am fully bent: and therefore though Moses and Samuel (those men of prayer) stood before me, yet my minde could not-be to∣ward this people. I am inexorable Ier. 15.1. what then? shall Gods servants lose their prayers? No, this they shall have of my hand, they shall deliver their own souls, they shall have their own lives for a prey. Something there is that God will yeeld to prayer then,Cartwr, in loc. when he is most bitterly bent against a people or person Mat. 24.20. Pray saith our Saviour (after he had foretold such an afflicti∣on as never had been, nor should be the like) pray saith he, that your flight be not in the winter, for that will be tedious, nor on the sabbath, for that will be grievous. Whereupon a learned Interpreter makes this note. In maxima severi∣tate aliquid permittit precibus. Something God will graciously yeeld to prayers, in his greatest severity. Admirable is that, and for the present purpose most apt and apposite, that Polanus reports of a terrible earth-quake in the territories of Berne in Swisserland: by means whereof, a certain high mountain carried vio∣lently over other mountains, 'ore-whelmed and covered a whole township, that had ninety families in it, one half house only excepted, wherein the master of the family with his wife and children were with bended knees calling earnestly upon God. This fell out no longer ago then in the year 1584.Polan. Syntag. Theolog tom . lib. 5. cap. 21. de terr aemotu mortuus est Po∣lan: Anno. 1610 Mat. 21.21 and is related by Aman∣dus Polanus a famous Divine, who lived not many yeers since at Basill, not many miles distant from the place where the thing fell out. In which notable example who seeth not, as in a mirrour, the marvelous force and efficacy of faithfull pray∣er, standing, (Aaron-like) with his incense, betwixt the living and the dead, and verifying that of our Saviour: Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove: yea be thou removed and cast into the sea, and it shall be done? And, All things whatsoever ye shall aske in prayer, beleeving; ye shall receive? Oh blessed Saviour!Eph. 1.19 what could have fallen from that sweet mouth of thine more for the glo∣ry of thy free grace and our greatest encouragement to ply the throne of grace with dayly suites, that God would open our eyes to see the exceeding greatnesse of his power towards us that beleeve, according to the working of his mighty power. There is in the Originall a sixfold gradation, and all too little. Words are too weak to utter it. SECT. VIII. Be comforted in the consideration of his power: where diverse objections of weak Christians are answered. SIngular comfort to all that belong to the Lord of Hosts, to consider that God hath a power alwayes prepared, an army ever in readinesse 1. to preserve them. 2. to provide for them.
For their preservation,Dan. 3.17 first, Our God is able to deliver us, either from the fire, or in it: this was the support of those three brave Worthies in Daniel, and may be ours, that lean on the Lord and the power of his might. Shall the Phi∣listins rely upon their Goliath, Papists an their he-saints and she-saints, Turks on their Mahomet, Heathens on their Tutelaries, and not we encourage our selves in the Lord our God as David? not cheer up our hearts in this man of warr, whose name is the Lord of Hosts, the Lord mighty in battle? Oh say with the church in Micah,Micah. 4.5. All people will walk, every one, in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. For their rock is not as our Rock,Deut. 32.31 our enemies themselves being Judges. Contemno minutos istos Deos, modo Jovem propitium habeam, said that Heathen, If God be for us, what need we fear what man or devill can do unto us?Rom. 8 31 Ob. Sol. Oh but mine enemies are many, and mighty. Yea but thy champion is the Lord of hosts, with whom it's nothing to save whe∣ther with many or with no power. I his staid up Asa's heart against a thousand thou∣sand enemies.2 Chron. 14 22 But they are fierce and furious.Ob. Sol. What of that? I know whom I have trusted, saith Paul, and I am sure that he is able to keep that I have committed to him against that day 2 Tim. 1.12. I have been delivered out of the mouth of the lion; And the Lord shall deliver me from all evill &c. 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. Did not the Lord appear to Joshuah with a naked sword in his hand,Nudatum ni∣mirum ensem suum nunquam deposuit, sed in∣de us{que} ab Adae lapsu eum in Ecclesiae suae defens. &c. Bucholc. as captain of the Host? Did not the Angels fight for Hezekiaeh, and environ Iacob at Mahanaim, Elisha in the mount &c? and hath not the Lord charged them still to pitch their tents round about the righteous. They appear not unto us, (it's true) now as of old, because the church now needs not such confirmations, and Christ being ascended, and the spirit plenti∣fully bestowed, God would that our conversation should be in heaven, and not that the Angls should converse so visibly with us on earth. But they still pitty our humane frailty, and secretly suggest both counsell, and comfort: they also keep us from perils and dangers of body and soul, who else could not subsist, no not an hour. Next for provision of necessaries, God hath taken and bound over the best of the creatures to purvey for his people, and to bring them in maintenance, the heaven,Pro. 20.30, 31 Rex ferarum Isidor. lib. 10. c. 2.  the earth the corne, the wine, the oyle, the best of the best is for them. Hos. 2.20, 21. The Lions saith the Psalmist (and the Lion is the king of beasts) or, the ricb among the people (as the Septuagint have it) shall hunger and starve, those that will be sure to have it, if it be to be had: wicked rich men not only rob but ravish the poor,Psal. 10.9, 10 when they have gotten them into their nets, that is, their debts, bonds, mortgages, as Chrysostom expounds it. Hence they are called men-eaters, Cannibals Psal. 14.4. Loe these Cormorants, these yong Lions, shall lack and suffer hunger, but those that seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good.Psal. 78.14 Pluviam esca∣tilem petram aquatilem. Tertull. Vix unquam major fuit glo∣ria illius popu∣li in terra Ca∣naan quàm in deserto. Buchol. He will rain down bread from heaven, and set the flint-stone abroach, and turn the wildernesse into a Paradise, before his people shall pine and perish. Never was Prince so served in his greatest pomp, as the rebellious Israelites in the desert. How good shall we finde him then to those that please him? Elias is fed one while by an Angell, another while by a Raven. But if both should have fai∣led him, as the brook Cherith did, yet he that took away his meat, could have taken away his stomack, as he did also, for 40. dayes together in the mount of God. In a word, the Lord of hosts hath a thousand means ready and at hand to provide for his people: his strength and wisdome ever busieth and bestirreth it self for their comfort. The Lord (saith Peter who had tried it) knowes how to pre∣serve his own,2 Pet 2.9 Phil. 4.12.13 1 King. 22. Heb. 11. Act. 7. and to deliver the godly out of temptation. And I can do all through Christ that strengtheneth me, saith Paul, whether it be to be full or to be hungry, to abound or to be abased. A beleever walks about the world like a Conquerour, as Michaiah did after he had seen the Lord on his throne, with all the host of heaven about him: So Moses after he had by faith seen him that is in∣visible: and Steven after he had seen the son of man on the right hand of God, Angels, authorities and powers being made subject unto him. 1 Pet. 3.22, And as in temporall so in spirituall regards also, this holds true for the soul
and inward man of the heart, much distressed many times by wicked spirits in high places Ephe. 6.12. about our interest in heavenly pri∣viledges. . De Xerxis ex∣ercitu, Aristi. . Phil. 1.19.2 Cor. 12 9 Luke 22.31 Rev. 12.8, 11 . Rom 8 37 They have the upper ground of us (which is no small advantage) they assault us out of the air, and there-hence buffet and batter us with their fiery darts (so called for the dolour and distemper they work in us, like a fire in the flesh, and the likest hell of any thing) with the haile-shot, hell-shot of their temptations. But God succours us by the supplies of his spirit, and by the visible ministry of his angels, as he did our Saviour in his agony, and after his great temptations. His grace is sufficient for us, his strength made perfect in our weaknesse. The serpents head is broke, his work dissolved; his trenches thrown down, and himself driven out of the field, by the Captain of our salvation, the author and finisher of our faith, who hath also prayed that our faith fail not, even at such times as Satan desires to have us, as a challenger Goliath-like, desires to have one of the other side to combate with. Michael and his angels, have disarmed and driven out the dragon and his angels, they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb: yea, the saints do over∣come, or are more then conquerours, because through faith in Christ they over∣come before they fight, they are sure of victory aforehand. And although Sa∣tan is said to make warre upon the Saints, and to overcome them, Revel. 13.7. yet this is but spoken according to humane conceit, and in regard of outward per∣secutions. But thanks be to God, who maketh us alwayes to triumph through Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14. The gates of hell shall not prevail against us: that is,Mat. 16.18 all the power and policy of hell combined: for in the gates sate the Elders to consult in time of peace; and at the gates was planted the best munition in time of warre. Impostours should deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect (as that third part of the stars of heaven) but that cannot be. Object not here, that Satan with a full mouth (as a fell Lion) roars upon you, and threatens to ruin you. It is a Spanish Proverb, The Lion is not so fierce as he is painted:Sol. Satan in sidiis tanquam Leo , 1 Pet. 5 8. Christus insub. sidiis tanquam Leo  1 Thes. 1.10 Obj. Rev. 12.15 Draco multis ; Scali∣gero  Quia animal venenatum & homini infestū. Sol. Rom. 16.20 Colos. 2.15 1 Cor. 15.55 1 Joh. 4 nor is the De∣vil so powerfull,  he makes himself: well he may shake his chain at us, but he can∣not set his fangs in us: well he may nibble at the heel, but he cannot hurt us in the head. He that is born of God keepeth himself, and that wicked One toucheth him not, that is, Tactu qualitative, saith Cajetan, with a deadly touch. Besides, Christ is a Lion also, even the Lion of the Tribe of Judah (the victorious Tribe) that can out-roar Satan, and easily over-master him. As for thee that humblest thy self at his feet for mercy, assure thy self he will never trample on the yeelding prey. Oh but Satan is not onely a Lion, but a dragon: hee not onely roars, but spets poyson, yea spews out of his mouth floods of venemous and violent temptations: yea he is a great red dragon, colour'd and died red, as it were, with the blood of souls he hath swallowed; and besides he hath seven heads to plot, and ten horns to push me into the pit of perdition, Rev. 12.3. True all this: but Mi-ca-el? who is as the strong God? Christ, our onely Mi∣chael, hath with his sore, and great, and terrible sword, punished Leviathan, that crooked piercing serpent, and slain the dragon that is in the sea, Esay 27.1. Under our feet he will tread him shortly, as he hath done already under his own: trium∣phing over him on the crosse, with Death, where's thy sting! hell, where's thy victo∣ry! To be brief: The Lamb with his two horns can do more, then the dragon with his ten. Stronger is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. Christ is that stronger man, that casts out the strong man armed out of his castle, and spoils his goods. Oh, but he hath so strongly entrenched himself in my heart, by a herd of base lusts, and a frame of evil thoughts, that he will hardly ever out, if at all. The weapons of our warfare are not carnall,Sol. but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong-holds (or trenches) casting down imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity, every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Christs Ministers are called his white horses, whereon he rides about the world, conquering,Rev. 6.2 and to con∣quer. And although for their persons, they be mean and contemptible, yet their message and ministery is that power of God to salvation,Rom. 1.16 Luk. 10 which the Devil cannot stand before. Our Saviour saw Satan falling as lightning from the heaven of mens hearts, when the Apostles were abroad preaching the Gospel. We preach Christ
crucified, saith St. Paul, unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Gentiles foo∣lishnesse. But unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdome of God, 1 Cor. 1.22, 23. And a verse or two before. It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that beleeve. As unlikely a means in the worlds eye, to do such a feat, as the blowing of rams horns, to over-turn the walls of Jericho. But what matter is it, how unlikely the means are, if in the hands of Omnipotency? An Ox-goad in the hand of a Shamgar, an Asse-bone in the hand of a Sampson may do much: so here. The De∣vil must needs down, if God once send forth his Pauls, to open mens eyes, to turn them from darknesse to light,Acts 26.18 and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgivenesse of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith that is in Christ. Oh, but the Devil tells me, I shall never inherit, for I am not sanctified by faith. Settle that first (be sure) by sound and infallible evidences:Sol. See that thy faith and other graces be of the right stamp, effectuall faith, laborious love, patient hope, &c. 1 Thes. 1.3. and then sing a Requiem to thy self, as Luther once did (after a grievous conflict) the Psalm De profundis,Joh Manly. loc com: in contemptum Diaboli, in de∣fiance to the Devil. Onely be advised, not to pore over-much upon thy sanctifi∣cation, which in the best is unperfect, but to take comfort of thy Justification, which is compleat, and absolute. In confident consideration whereof, St. Paul triumphantly cries out;Rom. 8.33, 34 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? so long as it is God that justifieth? Or, as Austin reads it, Shall God that justi∣fies us? Who is he that condemneth? Do Angels? No, they rejoyce in our con∣version, and call us their fellow-servants. But who then? Do the insensible or unreasonable creatures? They, in their kind are in covenant with us, Hos. 2.18. and in earnest expectation groan, nay travell together with us, waiting (and, as it were lying bed-ridden the while) for our full manifestation, en the redemption of our bodies, Rom. 8.19, &c. But who is it then? Do our own hearts condemn us? No neither, if not bemisted, and abused by Satan: for being justified by faith, we have so farre peace with God, that we glory in tribulation by the confident in∣tergatory of a good conscience toward God.Rom. 5.1.3 . 1 Pet. 3.21 1 Joh. 3.20 But say our own hearts do wrong∣fully accuse us, yet God is greater then our hearts, as well for good as for evil; to do us right, notwithstanding a misgiving, or misguided heart of our own. But say then: who is he that condemneth us? Is it the Devil and his wicked imps? Let them do their worst.. Rev. 12. He is indeed the accuser of the brethren: but Christ our Ad∣vocate is ever ready to non-suit and cast out all his accusations. The Spirit also is in direct and full opposition to this Accuser, called , the Comforter, or Pleader for us,Yea, what apology, or clearing of your selves. Rev. 12.10 pleading our evidences to our spirits, and helping us upon true re∣pentance, to make apology for our selves, 2 Cor. 7.11. such as God admits of and accepts. As for that old Serpent (the Accuser of the brethren) he is cast down already, and all his limbs shall bee cast after him ere long, into the burning lake. In the mean while, what cares the prisoner at the barre, though the gaoler and his fellow-prisoners passe sentence of death upon him in the gaole, so long as the Judge acquits him from the bench. And as little need any servant of the Lord of Hosts stand upon the censurs of earth, and hell, so long as God thinks well of him, and all the Hosts of God combine for his comfort. Oh, but I have hosts within me, that do me all the despite and displeasure. The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and other-whiles gets the better of it. Besides, there be bands of fleshly lusts,1 Pet. 2.11 which like armed souldiers, lie billetted in my bosome, and ever and anon fight against my soul. Yet bee of good comfort, the spirit also lusteth against the flesh, so that thou canst not do what thou (naturally) wouldest,Sol. Gal. 5.17 thy new nature will not suffer thee: as Paul would have gone to a certain place, but the Spirit forbade him. As for thy lusts (be they never so lordly) God can easily cut the combes, nay the throats of them, and let out their life-blood. My Father is stronger then all, and None can take you out of his hands. The weak brother shall be holden up (amidst a world of scandals without,Joh. 10 Rom. 14.4 and staggerings within) for God is able to make him stand. He can preserve a fire alive upon the face of the Ocean, a spark of the spirit,
amidst a world of wickednesse within. He can cause weak and worthlesse grashop∣pers to become a great nation Ioel 1.6. a mighty people chap. 2.2. a huge army ib.Esay. 30.22. Psal. 19.5. He can make the house of Israel pollute the idols, which they had once perfumed with incense, and to say to their familiar devils, get thee hence. He can stop or strike back the course of the Sun, though it rejoyce as a strong man to run his race. Na∣turally and freely it giveth light, but he can turn it into darknesse and blood. The mountains of themselves are ponderous and pressing, yet at Gods command they skip like lambs. Think the same of our dull and undutiful hearts. God can quickly oyl them and nimble them, drawing us by his free spirit, so as we shall run after him: as a baldder of it self is a heavy substance, and unapt for motion, but being filled with winde, it will scarce 'bide in a place. So we being filled with the holy Ghost shall finde our feet as hinds feet upon the everlasting mountains: no longer shackled by corruption,Psal. 119. but at very good liberty to run the wayes of Gods commandments. Its most sure we are not strained at all in God, but in our own bowels. He is both able and ready both to cover and cure our sins and sicknesses. In the dayes of his flesh, he offered himself to his patients, and was found of them that sought him not. He heal'd them also of diseases hereditary, and such as all the Physitians in the countrey might have cast their caps at. Now he hath lost no∣thing by heaven, you may be sure, neither of his will nor skill to do the same cures upon mens souls, as once he did upon their bodies: nay he cured their bodies onely in reference to their souls, and still hangs out his table of cures,Math. 8.17.18 to draw custome Rev. 3.18. Lo thus we have searched, and so it is, Hear it and know it for thy good. Iob. 5.27. CHAP. II. The Lord will finde a fit time to make up his jewels from the worlds misusages. And they shall be mine saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels GOd is the Lord of hosts. This is a point hath been hitherto proved, and impro∣ved. Followes now a second Observation. Confir∣mat haec locutio Deo esse suam opportunitatem &c. Calvin in locum. Baiom, in isto die. Jom sig∣nificat per Sy∣nechdoch tem∣pus certum at{que} id praecipuè cum de juturo agitur Shindl. pentag: 2 Thes. 1 10. 1 Thes. 5.2. 2 Thes. 2.2. 2 Pet. 3.12. Rom 2 5.16. Guaber. Figuter Alii. 1 Tim. 5.24.25. This Lord of Hosts will not fail to finde a fit time for the making up of his jewels, from the worlds misusages. There is a day here specified in the text, a set and solemn day, a particular time, a certain season, wherein God will make himself glorious, and to be admired in all them that beleeve in that day. So speaks the Apostle of that last day, called else∣where the day of the Lord, the day of Christ, the day of God, and the day of the declaration of the just judgement of God according to the Gospel. And of this last and great day of general judgement, the most interpreters understand this text. And truly I beleeve it is partly, if not principally intimated, and mainly, though I cannot think onely here intended. Some mens sins are open afore-hand, going before to judgement, and some men they follow after. Likewife also the good works of some are manifest before hand, and they that are otherwise, cannot be hid. Some sinners are here punished, that we may acknowledge a providence: and yet not all, that we may expect a judgement. But a day there will be, as sure as day, (whether sooner or later I have not to determine) wherein God will take out the precious from the vile, the corn from the chaffe, the sheep from the goats, the good fish, and good figs from the bad, wherein he will set a price upon his pearls, make up his jewels, advante his favorites, his darlings, his peculiar people, and put away all the wicked of the earth as drosse, Psal. 119.119. And albeit he delay haply to do it, because his hour is not yet come: yet his forbearance is no quit∣tance
to the bad,Vide Calvin in loc. nor deniance to the better sort. God first writes things down in his book of remembrance, and then afterwards executes them, which requires some time between. But a time he will finde, and that must needs be so, for these rea∣sons, some respecting God, and some the saints themselves: but both sorts groun∣ded upon the text, and there-hence borrowed. SECT. I Reason 1, From Gods providence. FOr God, Sic spectat uni∣versos quast singulos: sic singulos quasi solos. Aug. 1 Tim 4.10. Curiosus & plenus negotij Deus Tull. de. nat deor. first, there be many things in Him, that may well infer the point in proof, as his providence, power, Faithfulnesse, Goodnesse, and Justice. First his good providence, which like a well-drawn picture eyeth each one in the room. Neither is he a bare spectatour onely, but as chief Agent, he wisely ordereth all the worlds disorders to the good of his children. He saveth, that is, he preserveth all men, but especially those that beleeve, saith the Apostle, he is cu∣rious and full of businesse, saith the Heathen, my father worketh hitherunto, and I also work, saith our Saviour. And this is meant by those seven eyes of the Lord Zech. 4.10. That run to and fro thorow the whole earth, causing that none shall have cause to despise the day of small things, (Gods jewels are little in bulk, great in worth) for as small as they are they shall see the plummet in the hand of Ze∣rubb bel with, or by those seven. And the eyes of the Lord, saith another Pro∣phet, run to and fro thorow the earth, to behold the evil and the good, and not so only, but to shew himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect to∣ward him, and to give them an expected end. And this reason is secretly couched in that clause of our text. There was a book of remembrance writ before him: Est autem hic liber providentiae,2 Chron, 16.9 Jer. 29.11 (saith Polanus) this is the book of Gods providence, wherein as all our members are written, which in continuance of time were fashioned, (had he left out an eye in his common-place book thou hadst wanted it) so are all our services,Polan in loc. Psal. 139.16. that they may be recompensed, yea and all our sufferings too that they may be remedied and revenged, when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.Act. 3.19. Thou tellest my wandrings, saith David, put thou my tears into thy botile, are they not in thy book? And there-hence he rightly concludes the point in hand, ver. 9. Then shall mine enemies turn back in the day that I call: this I know that God will be for me,Psal. 56.8.9. or that God will be mine as the same phrase is rende∣red in this text. SECT. II. Reason 2. From Gods power. NExt there is an almighty power in God (called therefore Lord of Hosts in the text) exerted and exercised for the relief and rescue of his poor people trampled on by those fat buls of Basan with the foule feet of contempt and cru∣elty: whereby he taketh course that they be not over-trod, or too long held un∣der by the insolencies and insultations of their enemies. But when they shall seem to themselves and others utterly forlorn, and undone, so that salvation it selfe can∣not save them, (which was good Davids case Psal. 3.2.) then shall the Lord be a shield for them, their glory, their strong tower, and the lifter up of their head. Ver. 3. And this he shall do with a great deal of ease and expedition, as being Lord of Hosts, that is, of all creatures, by the hands of whom he shall send from heaven, and save them from the reproach of him that would swallow them up. Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth. Psal. 57.3.
SECT. III. Reason 3. from Gods Truth. ANd that passage points us to two other reasons for the point; God will send forth his mercy and truth. And first his truth: I meane his faithfulnesse, intimated also in these words of our text. Saith the Lord of Hosts. These things saith he that is faithfull and true, they shall be mine in the day &c. I will have a time to make up my Jewels in much mercy. Now hath God said it, and shall he not accomplish it? Is not his decree his facere? shall he not fulfill with his hand, what he hath promised with his mouth? God is not as man that he should lye:. Mal. 3.6 neither is he unconstant as other friends, that he should change: no, nor yet unmindfull that he should forget; least of all is he unfaithfull that he should falsify. God is faithfull, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able &c. 1 Cor. 10. He will give patience under the temptation, a good use of it, and a good issue from out of it, in the best time. SECT. IIII. Reason the 4. from Gods goodnesse. BUt besides; God will send forth his mercy, as well as his truth, for the alvation of his people. This mercy moved him at first, to make a sure covenant with them, and to marke them out for his own, and doth still to shew himselfe (as he did oft for Moses) seasonably and sweetly for their support and succour. For they shall be mine saith the Lord of Hosts &c. So they were ever, may some say.Ob. Sol. Yea, but then they shall be mighty and mercifully declared to be the chil∣dren of God, by a kinde of resurrection from the dead, as the Apostle speaketh of the head, and it holds as true of the members. Rom. 1.3. Thus God left his people in Egypt, and afterwards in in Babylon till their civill estate was dead and buried, as it were. As after the captivitie, these good soules in our text, seemed so far given up and cast off by God, as if he had had no fur∣ther care of them, or part in them. But they shall be mine saith the Lord of Hosts in the day &c. That is, the time is at hand, when it shall well ap∣peare by my mercies to the one, and judgments on the other, who are mine, who not, which are pearles, which are pibbles, which precious Jewels, which re∣probate silver, which are sons, which bastards; though all things now seeme to tend to a confusion, and no such difference be yet discerned and acknowledged. And the sooner shall this day come, because the proud adversary lookes upon my people as outcasts, my servants as abjects, my children as fatherlesse. For in thee the fatherlesse findeth mercy. Hos. 14.3. And, because they called thee an outcast, saying, This is Sion, whom no man seekes after, therefore I will heal thee of thy wounds &c. Jer. 30.17. The righteous shall see this and rejoyce: but all iniquitie shall stop her mouth. Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even he shall understand that it is of the loving kindnesse of the Lord. Psal. 107. ult. SECT. V. Reason 5. from Gods, Justice. LAstly, I might easily (& not unfitly) argue out of ver. 18. of this chapter, from the Justice of God, ingaged for his oppressed people. For being judge of the whole,
earth,Gen. 18.25 (as Abraham once urged it for his Nephew Lot) he must needs deal righteously between man and man, rendring to every one according to his works. Now who seeth not for present that dayly verified, that above was wickedly objected. Be∣hold we call the proud happy, yea they that work wickednesse are set up &c. ver. 15. when godly men, o'tother side, are usually held under hatches, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, even such of Gods worthies as the world is not worthy of, yet such unworthy usage they mostly meet withall. Now that Gods Justice may be cleared and every mouth stopped, what more requisite then that God should set forth a fit time to set all to rights among the sons of men, and to rectifie those things which even to godly men, other-whiles, seem less equally carried, that Gods dear children being propitiously pardoned, preciously estee∣med, and graciously recompensed, the wicked may self-condemned return and di∣scern between the righteous and themselves, between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. It is even  righteous thing with God to render tributional to them that trouble you, but to you who are troubled rest with us (if not before, yet certainly) when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. &c. 2 Thes. 1.6, 7. SECT. VI. Reasons from the Saints themselves. SEcondly from God, turne your eyes to the people of God, and so they come here commended and described unto us 1. by their near relation to God, they are his,Sub persecutio∣ne Ariana Ba∣sillo Magno ista aliquando in∣jecta est cogita∣tio: An Ecclesi∣as suas prorsus dereliquit Do∣minus? an no∣vissima hora est? Psal. 34.19, 21 his Jewels, his sons, his servants, his serviceable sons, his righteous servants, and can such be alwayes unremembred? So some have feared, but time hath confuted them. 2. By their rare qualifications. For 1. habitually they are men fearing God, religious and godly persons, and therefore heires of the promises of good things for both lives 1 Tim. 4.8. And for evills be they never so many or great, he that feareth God shall come forth of them all, Eccles. 7.18. Many saith David the father, are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth him out of them all: but one affliction slayeth the wicked, because his shadow is departed from him. And of the same minde is Solomon his son. Though the righteous man fall seven times into misery, yet he hath time to rise again: but the wicked at one evill fall downright Prov. 24.16. 2. They actually expresse this holy habit of Gods true fear in their hearts. 1. by setting their thoughts awork, to chew upon Gods holy name, and to roll it as sugar under their tongues, that thence (as Sampsons out of his hony-comb) they might suck out strong consolations. For the Name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous run to it and are safe. And, In the fear of the Lord is strong confi∣dence, and his children have a place of refuge.Prov. 10. Prov. 14.26 Now shall the saints think upon Gods name, and he not think upon their needs? Yea, I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evill, and all to give you an expected end.Jer. 29.10, 11 For after 70. yeers be accomplished at Babylon (loe they must have their time of suffering, as he hath his of saving) I will visit you, and performe my good word toward you, to cause you to returne to this place. 2. By setting their tongues a work to vent those holy thoughts of theirs, as opportunity was offered: And first for the vindicating of Gods glory so much opposed and obscured by those above-said Belialists moved with a great zeal for the Lord of hosts, as Elias once was against the pleaders for Baals service, and saying (as some will have this text to be read) Verily the Lord (whom you blasphemously charge with deep oscitancy or foul iniquity) doth harken and hear, both your detestable contumelies, and his peoples pious perfor∣mances, and there is a book of remembrance written before him &c. Next, they spake often one to another, as often as they met and might, for mutuall help and incouragement: stirring up themselves among themselves to take better hold of God; and not, by a shamefull recidivation or comporting with the times, to lose
those things that they had wrought, but that they might receive a full reward.a Ioh. Thus were those ancient Christians occupied both within dores and without, at home in their own hearts and houses, and abroad also among their foes on the one hand, and their friends on the other: and what their practise was then is still the guise of godly persons. Now should God in the mean-while be unrighteous to forget their work, and labour of love, that they have shewed toward his Name,Heb. 6.10 which they have stoutly vindicated, and toward his saints to whose souls they have ministred, and do minister by wholsome admonition, and Christian incou∣ragement? SECT. VII. When God will make up his Jewels. BUt what is that time, and when is that day, that the Lord mill make up his Jewels, and shew himself propitious to his afflicted people? 1. Generally and indefinitely, at any time, no one day excepted, or exempted. God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day. Psal. 7.11. Thus God judg'd David, that is, he justified him, and avenged his quarell, when he was angry with Nabal the churle,Nabal pam∣phagus. and after ten dayes sicknesse struck him with death. Blessed be the Lord, (saith he upon the news thereof) that hath judged the cause of my rebuke at the hand of Nabal,1 Sam. 25.39 and so hath cleered his own glory, and mine integrity. There is no time wherein the righteous may not rejoyce, when he seeth the vengeance,Psal. 58.10 11 and wash his feet in the blood of the wick∣ed: So that he shall be able to say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, Verily He is a Go that judgeth in the earth. Particularly, and for instance, there are three more speciall dayes of deliverance to the people of God. First, in an exigence, and utmost distresse, when they know not what to do with Jehosaphat, nor whither to turn them with David:Cùm duplicen∣tur lateres, Venit. Moses. Capino. when they are at a dead list with Ionah, and at their wits end with the children of Israel under the Egyptian bondage, and at the red sea: when the children are come to the birth and there is not strength to bring forth, as in Hezekiah's dayes. Senacherib had already in his hopes and conceit swallowed up the city,Omnibus Judae∣is, perde ac si unum jugulum haberem, ex∣tremum ictum intentabat. Bucholc Statuae Sena∣che ihi inscrip∣tum refert He∣rodot lib 2. . 1 Sa 23 26, 27 Esay 37.7, 9 Canes lingunt ulcera Lezari. Turca mitigat edictum Au∣gustanum. Scul∣Annal. and was fetching his dead∣ly blow at all the people of God, as if they had all had but one neck: when God put a hook into the nostrills of that great Leviathan, and turned him back: yea sent sorth an Angel that destroyed his army, to the terrour of other nations. God delights to bring his people to the mount with Abraham, yea to the very brow of the hill (as the Nazarenes brought our Saviour Luk. 4.) till their feet slip, and then delivers them. In the Mount will the Lord be seen for the saving of his Isa∣acs from the fatall stroke, of his Peters from the destroying sword, of his Daniels from the lions gripe, of his whole Church from Hamans plots and Papists conspi∣racies. When Saul had hemmed David in on every side to take him, there came a messenger (in the nick) to Saul saying, Hast thee and come, for the Philistines have invaded the land. When Senacherib had taken all the defenced cities of Ju∣dah, and was advancing toward Jerusalem, God sent a blast upon him, and made him hear a rumour that Tirhakab King of Ethiopia was come forth to make warr with him. When Charles the fifth was mustering his forces to root out the Lutheran heresy out of Germany, he was called off by God to fight with the Turk who at that very time made an irruption into Hungary, and the cosine countries. Secondly, in a common calamity, in an overflowing scourge, a sweeping showre, that takes all afore it. Such as was that horrible devastation and destructi∣on of Jerusalem, first by Nebuchadnezzar, when God manifestly made up his Jewels, graciously provided for his Ieremies, Baruchs, Ebedmelechs, Gedaliahs, whose father Ahikam had formerly freed the prophet Ieremy out of danger, chap. 39.24. and 48.5. and 26.24. As for those faithfull ones that went into captivity,
God had for their sakes sent the good figs (Daniel with his three fellowes and o∣thers) before them in a former captivity under Jeconiah,Jer. 2.4. as so many Josephs to pro∣vide for them in a farre-countrey. Next, when the City was razed, and harased by the Romans: which calamity seems to be here principally and particularly poin∣ted at, as appeareth by the first, second, and third verses of the fourth Chapter. For behold, the day cometh that shall burn like an oven,Repetit eorum verba non sine spe ie ironicae. Calvin. and all the proud, and all that do wickedly (which those blasphemers above had pronounced happy, and high above others) shall be stubble, and the day that cometh shall burne them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch, that is, neither sonne, nor nephew, as the Chaldee Paraphrast, and after him Kimchi expounds it. This was literally and punctually fulfilled upon the unbeleeving Jews, thirty eight yeers after our Saviours Resurrection.1 Thes. 2.15, 16 Quodvis ver∣bum exaggerat crimen. Rolloc. in loc. Joseph de bell. Jud lib 6. c 4. & l. 7. c. 18 Who forasmuch as they would not know, at the least in that their day, the things that belong'd to their peace: but both kil led the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets and Apostles, being displeasing to God, and thwart to all men, so filling up the measure of their sinnes, therefore came wrath upon them to the utmost. But what will God do for his Jewels in this com∣mon combustion, in this utter desolation, and dissolution of the Jewish Nation? See what follows: But unto you that fear my Name (the proper badge and cha∣racter of a true Christian) shall the Sun of righteousnesse arise with healing in his wings, (It is fair weather with Gods children mostly, when it is foulest with the wicked: At once the fire falls upon Sodom, and the Sunne riseth upon Zoar: Abra∣ham stands upon the hill, and sees the cities burning) and ye shall go forth (sc. to Pella, and other hiding places provided for you, and there) shall ye grow up as calves of the stall. And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be ashes (in refe∣rence to the burning oven above-mentioned) under the soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, (that is, in the day when I thus make up my Jewels) saith the Lord of Hosts. Which second and third verses of the fourth Chapter (for the first verse depends on Chap. 3.18. and explains it) as they contain a just Com∣ment upon my Text, so do they acquaint us with diverse precious pledges and priviledges, whereby God will seal up his dearest love to his most esteemed Jewels, in most afflicted times of common calamitie. These are, 1. Light, (that is joy) by the arising of the Sunne of righteous∣nesse upon them. See Esther 8.16. 2. Health to their souls, and healing to their state: for this Sunne shall arise with healing under his wings, that is in his beams. See Psal. 60.1, 2. with 2 Chron. 7.14. 3. Liberty, for ye shall goe forth,Calvin.  to wit, out of the strait prison, the little-ease of Affliction, and grow up, or frisk about for joy (so some render it) as fat calves, and young cattle in the spring. 4. Prosperity, ye shall grow up, as the Palme tree, notwithstanding your oppressions:Ʋtaër percus∣sus non loedi∣tur, imene di∣viditur quid̄e, sed refundit sese, & spissior redit. Job. à Woover. ye shall break out, and get up, as blown bladders aloft all wa∣ters, as the Sunne from under a cloud, as the seed from under a clod. 5. Victory: for ye shall tread down the wicked, and they shall be as ashes under the joles of your feet, which, erst, rode over your heads, and made you passe thorow fire and wa∣ter, Psal. 66.12. But when shall all this be? In the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord, q. d. Not so soon as your selves would, for then it should be presently, you would be pulling at the fruit afore it were ripe, and plucking off the plaister afore the sore were healed) nor so long hence as the enemies would,Hoc esset poma acerba adhu decerpere. Cyp. for then it should be never: but in Gods good time, when he seeth fit, who hath kept that key of times and seasons under his own girdle. Not seldome, in this life; as when Constantine overcame, and trampled upon Dioclesian, Maximian, Maxentius, Li∣cinius, and other persecuting Tyrants, according to that of Solomon. The evil bow before the good,Prov. 14.19 and the wicked at the gates of the righteous. But most certainly at the day of judgement, (which is the third particular day of deliverance we have to speak to) called, that day, by an appellative proper. Then, at utmost, God will make up his jewels in much mercy, (and of this last day, the most interpret it) then will he both bring to light the hidden things of darknesse,Vatablus Figuier Gualther, &c. Psal. 83.3 and also those Hidden ones of his, that are all glorious within, though for the outside mean and despicable; together with all their secret services, and mental performances, even the counsels of their hearts shall be made manifest; and then shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4.5. That is, every jewel, every Jew inwardly, every Israelite
indeed whose praise is not of men but of God, shall be graced by the judge himself,Rom. 2.29 before a world of men and angels. For without the least mention of their sins Ezek. 18.22. Rev. 14.13. Their good parts and practises onely and amply, shall be re∣membred and rehearsed. And those not strictly censured (for he will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him) but onely produced as proofs and evidences of that effectual faith of theirs, wherby they have a plentiful entrance fur∣ther and further into the kingdom of God 2 Pet. 1.10.11. SECT. VIII. Comfort under publike Calamities. For application: the main vse of this point, and that which the holy Ghost in this text chiefly drives at is, Singular comfort and incouragement to all and e∣very of Gods faithful servants, both in regard of the Church universal first, and themselves, next, in their own particular. First then, for the labouring church, what can be a greater comfort to every good child of hers then to hear that God will have his time ere long, to ease her of her adveraries, and avenge her of those her enemies that now revel in her ru∣ines, crying, down with her, down with her, even to the ground?Psal. 137. Ille dolet quo∣ties cogitur esse ferox. Ovid. Trist. Cui{que} ferè paenam sumere paenasua est. ib. Lam. 3.31.32 33. Ier. 30.7 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Niteris incas∣sùm Christi submergere navem. Cant. 2.2. This is the horrid and hideous voice of Babels brats, and Edoms rufflers, flesht in blood, and used to the spoil, as birds of prey: But what saith the Oracle? Comfort ye, comfort ye my people saith your God, speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her set time is expired, that her iniquity is pardoned, and so the quarrel fairely ended: for she hath received of the Lords hand double for all her sins. So it hath seemed to him, that waited all this while to shew her mercy, and thought long of the time she was in misery, as being himself afflicted in all her afflictions, and bearing a part. Surely it is not willingly (or from his heart, saith the original) that he doth at any time af∣flict, or grieve the Children of men, said that church that was even then under the lash: but though he cause grief (such is our untowardnesse that will not else be ordered) yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his merceies; he will not cast off for ever. This was her comfort and this may be ours: when we hear how ill it fares with Gods people abroad, and what preassures and grievances they groan under at home, say, This is the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. Troubled the Saints are on every side, but not distressed: doubting but not despairing, persecu∣ted but not deserted, cast down, but not cast off. Tost the Church might be with Noahs Ark, but not orewhelmed, washt with Paul in the shipwrack, but not drowned, fired with Moses bush, but not consumed, pressed with Davids bay∣tree, but not oppressed, prickt with Solomons lillie among thorns, but not choaked, growing in a bottom with Zacharies myrtle tree. Chap. 1.8. Yet not overtopped: a burdensome stone, a torch of fire, a cup of trembling in the hand of her enemies (Zach. 12.2, 3, 6.) who have but a time Dan. 11.24, 39. The wicked plotteth a∣gainst the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. The Lord shall laugh at him, saith the Psalmist, for he seeth that his day is coming Psal. 37.12, 13. And thereupon afterwards he inferreth, mark the upright man, and behold the just, for (let his beginning or middle be never so troublesome,) the end of that man is peace. God delighteth to make fools of his enemies, and lets them bring their designes to the utmost, and then defeats them,2 Chro. 32.21 Esther. 7.10 1 Sam. 17.51 suffers them to proceed very far that they may return with the greater shame as Sennacherib; that their high hopes may end in a haltar, as Hamans, that their own swords may be sheathed in their own throates as Goliaths. When they are tumultuating, and triumphing, as if they day were their own, and they were masters of the field, with Gog and Magog, then shall God come down as it were in an engin, to rescue his saints, and to dissolve the Gordian knots of all Antichristian power and policy.. Psal 112.4 2 Cor. 4 6 This he doth also for his own grea∣ter glory, to make himself a name in the earth, when thus in a moment, in the turning of a hand, he turns the wheel; causing light suddenly and sweetly to spring forth, not onely in, but out of deepest darknesse.
All that we have here to do is to leave the labouring Church in Gods everlast∣ing armes,Deut. 33.27. , agens de  Melch. Adam. Jer 8.20. Psal. 90.13.14.15. Isai. 45.15. as Moses speaketh, crying out unto him day and night; How long Lord, holy and true, doest thou not judge, and avenge our blood on them that dwel on the earth? Lord, how long shal the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? How long wilt thou not have mercy on Ierusalem, and the cities of Iudah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore yeers; Thou shalt arise and have mer∣cy upon Sion, for the time to favour her, yea the set time is come Psal. 102.13. (The sight of the rubbish moved affections of prayer, hence they knew the set time of help was at hand, as when we bid our children ask us any thing, it is because that we mean to give it them) the harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved. Return O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants. O satis∣fie us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoyce and be glad all our dayes make us glad according to the dayes wherein thou hast afflicted us, and the yeers wherein we have seen evil &c. This was the course that Daniel took in like case, when he understood by books the number of the yeers, that the set and appointed time was now past, he set his face by earnest prayer, to seek out that God that hideth himself; and so to draw him out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their cruelty, and to plead the cause of his oppressed people. Isai. 26.21. A time there is set we all now, for the fall of Antichrist.Roma diu titu∣bans vartis erroribus acta Corruet, & mundi desinet esse caput. Luk. 18.7, 9 This cannot be far by all signes and tokens well nigh fulfilled and accomplished. And for the elects sake should not those dayes be shortned, would they but cry day and night to him that heareth prayers, though he bear long with them, I tell you that he would avenge them spee∣dily. And that he doth it no sooner, may we not thank our own dulnesse and slacknesse to ply the the throne of grace with faithful and fervent prayer. For when the son of man cometh (to destroy that wicked one, with the brightnesse of his coming) shall he finde faith upon earth?1 Thes. 2. such a vigorous and victorious faith as would make Gods remembrancers pray and faint not (which is the drift of that parable of the importunate widow) to make mention of the Lord, and to give him no rest till he establish, and make his Jerusalem a praise in the earth Isaiah 62. 6, 7? SECT. IX. Comfort under personal crosses and grievances. NExt,. Athanas. apud Socrat. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 14. Isai. 26 Heb. 10. Hab. 2 Rev. 22. Psal. 37. Hab. 2. Heb. 10.38. . A military word from souldiers who recoyle and leave their standing. Prov. 31. . Heb. 11. here's a word of comfort and encourragement to each particular Christian as touching his personal crosses and encombrances whatsoever. Let none faint or shrink under the heaviest burden of their light affliction, sith it is but for a mo∣ment, as Paul hath it; for a few dayes onely, while you would say what's this? as Jacob computed it: Mourning lasteth but till morning, saith David, for a very little while saith Esay, for a smal pittance of time saith the Author to the Hebrews after Habacuc, and then he that shal come, will come and will not tarry. Behold, I come quickly, saith Christ, and my reward is with. me. But what shall we do in the mean while? Feed on faith, saith David, The just shall live by faith, saith Habacuc; yea, and make a good living of it too. For 1. It will rein him in that he shall not run from his colours, forsake his captain to seek for help of the God of Ekron, to bring it in by the back-door, that he shall not make more hast out of his, present presures then good speed, according to that, He that beleeveth, ma∣keth not hast, he can be content to wait Gods leisure, and not to anticipate his time. 2. Faith again fetcheth comfort and support, as the merchants ship doth treasure from afar: it makes a man look thorough the present durance to the furure deli∣verance, which faith saluteth afar off, and resteth as confident of the accomplish∣ment of Gods promise by hope, as if it were already in hand. Faith taketh, and individuateth the promise, applies and appropiates that to it self. He shall deli∣ver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee. No devoratory evil, as Tertullian, termeth it shall touch thee, tactu qualitativo, as Cajetan hath it, with a deadly touch. Touch thee it may to thy smart, but not at all to thy
hurt. Touch it may thy feet, as Jordan did the Priests feet that bore the Arke, but sure the proud waters shall not go over thy soule.Psal. 124.5 Psal. 94.13 Ezek. 36.11 For God will give thee rest from the dayes of adversity, untill the plt be diged for the wicked. Yea I will settle you after your old estates, & will do better unto you then at your beginnings and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Now all these and the like promises, saith takes for pre∣sent pay, counts them sure-hold, and so lives upon them, and the just by it. 3. Faith puts a mans head into heaven; gives him to walk with God in affliction, sets him as it were into the upper region, above all stormes, as Henoch: who seing and walking with him that is invisible, was taken up even before he was taken up. Here below are many changes of weather, but above with God, there is a continuall serenity. Now the way of the righteous is on high, saith Solomon: and as waters abide not on ground that lyes high, so neither doth the sense of afflictions lye long on mindes lifted up in heavenly contemplations. I will not say but such may be surprized by a common calamity, by a deluge of destruction that overspreads the whole land: But usually God doth either hide his Jewels then in the golden cabinet of his gracious providence, that they shall not be much the worse for it, as he did the Israelites in Goshen, the disciples in Pella, the marked mourners in the hollow of his own hand: Or if they be wrapt up in a common condition with others,Psal. 129.34 yet God will make a manifest difference in that day. For either he will give them their lives for a prey (Thou hast afflicted me sore, saith David, but not given me up to death. The plowers plow∣ed upon my back, but thou hast cut asunder their traces) and provide liberally for them in the land of their captivitie, as he did for Ezekiel, Daniel, and others, he will be a little sanctuary unto them there, and supplie the defect of all other comforts. Or if he call them to higher sufferings, he will give them an higher spirit: if he free them not from the common destruction, yet certainly from the common distraction. If they resist unto blood, yea unto losse of life, yet in the midst of death, they shall live, conquer and raigne. For blessed are they that dye in the Lord (especially if withall they dye for the Lord) for they shall rest from their labours; rest in their beds, each-one walking in his uprightnesse.Esay. 57.3 Heb. 4 There remaineth then a rest unto the people of God, an eternall Sabbatisme, such a day as knowes no evening, or end, or toile of travell, that great Sabbath-day that com∣prehends and accomplishes all the Sabbaths of the law. These were first the weekly Sabbaths, wherein they rested from their week-day labours. Secondly, the seven-yeares-sabbath: for every seventh yeare the ground also rested from til∣lage and manuring. Thirdly, the fifty-yeares-sabbath: for every seventh seventh year was a year of Jubilee. And then, all debts were remitted, all prisoners re∣leased, and all mortgages restored to their right inheritours. Heaven involves all these: And that great day of the Resurrection (when God shall chiefly make up his Jewels, and redeeme Israel out of all her troubles, called therefore the day of Redemption of the purchased possession for Gods peculiar,Rom. 8.21 Psal. 16.11 Rev. 3.21 2 Tim. 4.8 Rev. 2.26 2 Pet. 3.13 Heb. 12.22 Psal. 16 9, 10, 11. & 17. ult. Rom. 8.19. . as a bird out of a cage, as longing for liberty or as a prisoner out of a grate looking for a pardon: or as one out of a turret, ex∣pecting his friends co∣ming. the people of his purchase) This day, I say, shall set Gods people at rest from their labours, and the creatures (which now lye bed-ridden, as it were, waiting the good houre) at rest from all their burdens and bondages, into the glorious Jubilee of the chil∣dren of God. Who shall then have all their wrongs righted all their sins par∣doned, debts discharged, bonds cancelled, graces perfected, desires satisfied, and that heavenly inheritance (mortgaged in paradise, and long since forfeited) shall be then restored. Where they shall be possesed of all the pleasures at Gods right hand, seated as Princes in thrones of Majesty, crowned with diadems of immar∣cessible glory, having power over all creatures, and plenary possession of that now heaven, and that new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse. Beholding, and being filled with the vision, and fruition of Gods glorious presence; amidst a world of blessed angels and crowned saints, even all the court of heaven, who shall joyfully meet and welcome them. Oh let the forethought of those unut∣terable varieties, felicities, eternities lighten our spirits, smooth our countenances, and chear up our hearts, as it did Davids; and doth all the servants of God, who with stretcht out necks, look up, long after, and even hasten that happy day, cry∣ing all with one minde, and with one mouth, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; and exhaling their broken spirits in continuall sallies and egressions of love, af∣fecting not only a union but a unity with Christ.
SECT. X. Reproof of forwardnesse and saintheartednesse in affliction. SEcondly, will the Lord indeed finde a set time to free his poor people of all their sorrowes and sufferings? this then serves sharply to reprove that impatiency and shortnesse of spirit found in not a few of Gods dearest Jewels: who because they are vilipended, and undervalued by the blind world, who know not the price of a heavenly Jewel, and for that they are trode under foot for a time by these swine, and slurried with the mire of their contempt and cruelty, are drawn thereupon one while to fret, and another while to faint; begin to be out of all heart, and hope of a better condition, and to make against themselves these or the like desperate conclusions: Surely I shall never winde out of these dis∣graces and distresses,Esay 38.15 I shall go softly all my yeers in the bitternesse of my soul: My state is past recovery, I never look to see joyfull day more. Abraham had a spice of this disease, when he could enjoy nothing, because he wanted one thing. Gen. 15. 1, 2. But Iacob was farr over-gone with it, when (together with his wife Rachel) he refused to be comforted,Gen. 37.35 and would needs go down into the grave unto his son Ioseph mourning, as if all his merry dayes were past. So the children of Iacob in Egypt,Exod. 6.9 that could not take comfort in the sweet words of Moses and Aaron, for the greatnesse of their oppressions: The eare that tryeth words as the mouth doth meat,Psal 34. was so imbittered with their extreme bondage that they could not relish any thing, nor tast how good and sweet the Lord was. This was Iobs fault, when he cursed his day, and the consolations of God were small unto him. Elias also wisht himself dead in a passion, and wist not that he was to be carried up ere long in a fiery charret. And what can we say for David, when he repent∣ed him of his repentance Psal. 73.13. and another time said, I shall surely fall one day by the hand of this same Saul, notwithstanding Gods promise to me of the kingdome.1 Sam. 27.1 Gen. 25.32 Were it not better for me to save one, (Behold, I am going to dye, and what profit shall this birth-right do to me?) and to shift for my self by flying to the Philistines,1 Sam. 27.1 Psal. 116.11 then by 'biding longer here to hazard my life upon the hopes of a kingdome, being a mere uncertainty, sith all men are liars, not the Prophets themselves excepted. Thus he in hast. And thus the whole Church upon as little good advice, Lam. 3.18, 19. I said, my strength, and my hope is perish∣ed from the Lord: Remembring mine affliction, and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.Lam. 3.18, 19 Lam. 4.22 Fidei murus tentationem ariete, durius aliquantò pul∣satus, & con∣cussus, facilè nutare acrui∣nam minari in∣cipit nisi divi∣nitus sustente∣tur. Bucholc. Psal. 43.7. This made her desperately conclude the book: But thou hast utterly re∣jected us, thou art very wroth against us. And the very truth is, the best faith, long tried will something flag and hang the wing. The best minds when troubled yeeld inconsiderate motions, as water that is violently stirred sends up bubbles. Adoò nihil est in nobis magni, saith One, quod non queat minui. But, for this we must take up our selves roundly, and chide our hearts out of these distempers, with, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Why doest fret? Why doest faint? Hope in God: for I shall yet praise him &c. Should I conclude that it will never be better with me, either I should deny that I am Gods child, and one of his Jewels, which were to bely my self, and deny the work of Gods grace in my soul: or basely and blasphe∣mously to joyne with those ranke Atheists above-mentioned, that charge him with heedlesnes and improvidence, as one that laid his Jewels at his heels, and cared not what became of them. Which were to set my mouth against hea∣ven, and like a breathing-devill to bely the Almighty, whose secret is upon my tabernacle, Iob 29.4. that is, his secret and singular providence, who ordereth my down-sitting, and mine uprising Psal. 139.2. who cutteth out my whole condition, and not only keepeth my bones, not one of them is broke, but numbreth all my haires, not one of them is missing. Things are therefore numbred, that none of them may be diminished. Lo, the hairs of our heads are numbred (as the three
childrens were in the Babylonish furnace) not one of them can fall to the ground without your heavenly father. And if not a hair much less the head it self.Mat. 10.29 Zion may say, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lordhath forgotten me. But that was but her mistake, and misprision of the matter.Esay 49.14 Psal. 94.14 For the Lord will not utter∣ly cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance for ever. For a small moment he may forsake them (to their thinking) but with great mercy will he gather them: In a little wrath, he may hide his face from them, for a moment:Esay 54.7, 8 Esay 57.16 but with ever∣lasting kindnesse will he have mercy on them. He will not contend for ever, nor be alwayes wroth, for the spirit should faile before him. When the childe swouns in the whipping, God lets fall the rod, and falls a kissing it, to fetch life into it again. In some diseases blood must be let usque ad deliquium, till the patient faint again: Yet it is a rule in Physick still to maintain nature: so doth God uphold the spirits of his children by cordials of consolation in their deepest affliction. This we should never doubt of, but constantly shame and shent our selves in Gods presence for our forwardnesse and faintheartednesse. SECT. XI. Exhortation to diligence in duty. THe last use we shall put this point to, for present, is an Exhortation to a dou∣ble duty 1. Diligence in doing Gods will. 2. Patience in suffering it. For the first: It's encouragement enough to shew all good Conscience and fi∣delity in our generall and particular callings, to consider that sooner or later God will not sail to requite our labour of love even to a cup of cold water, or a bit of bread cast upon the waters, and so cast away, (as a man would think) but after many dayes thou shalt finde it. Give a portion to seven and also to eight:Eccles. 11.1 for he that giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord, and that which he giveth will he pay him again. Not down upon the naile, it may be,Prov. 19.17 but he is a sure and a liberall paymaster, he gives double interest,Mat. 19.29 nay a hundred fold here (as Isaac had a hun∣dred sold increase of the seed he sowed in the land of Canaan) and eternall life here∣after. When we have laid our grain in the ground, we look not to see it the same day in the barne or garner (as he saith of the Hyperborean people farr North, that they sow shortly after fun-rising, and reap before sun-set;Heresbach: de re rustica. Spes alit agri∣colas: spes sul∣cis credit ara∣tis Semina, quae magno foenore reddit ager. Tibull. for with them the whole half-yeer is but one continuall day) but we are content to wait for a crop till the yeer be run about, living in hope mean-while, and therewith sustaining our selves. And shall we not shew like patience in waiting Gods good leisure, with∣out being dismayed or dishartened, though not presently requited? light is sowen for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Lo it is but seed-time with the saints, while here, and that's commonly a wet time and dropping. But they that sow in tears shall reape in joy. He that goeth forth, and weepeth bearing precious seed, shall doubtlesse come again with rejoycing,Psal. 126.5, 6 Ob. Sol. Rev. 22.12 Act. 13.36 Act. 13.25 2 Tim. 4.7, 8 Gal. 6.9 1 Cor. 15. ulc bringing his sheaves with him. Ey, but when? Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give unto every man accor∣ding to his works. David served out his time, and it entred into his masters joy. Iohn Baptist did up his work, and is gone to take up his wages. St. Paul finish∣ed his course, and hath received his crown. Wherefore let us not be weary of well doing: for in due season we shall surely reap, if we faint not. Yea, be ye stedfast and unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord: for as much as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.
SECT. XII. Exhortation to patience in misery. NExt let this Doctrine of gods day of delivering, and doing good to his peo∣ple, patient our hearts, and quietly compose our spirits in an humble submissi∣on to Gods holy hand, and a hopefull expectation of the day of grace, walking and waiting in the midst of our houses till he come unto us.Psal. 101.2 It is but a little while that we have to wait: that he futures us yet, and comes no sooner, it is for the more effe∣ctuall triall of our faith and patience, and for the better exercise of our hope and prayerfulnesse. When that's once done, He will send his Mandamus (as Psal. 44.4.) by some swift Gabriel, who brought an answer to Daniels prayers, with weari∣nesse of flight, Dan.Esay 64.1 9.21. Yea he himself will break the heavens and come down, he will come riding upon the wings of the wind, he will come leaping as a hind over the mountains of Bether (all lets and impediments) to our relief and release. In the Courts of Princes there is ,Cant. 8 delayes, and discardings. But God is quick to help, and constant in his care, even when he seems to cast off: hee hates putting away,Jam. 5.7 whatever he makes shew of. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord, saith St. James: and sweeten your present tears, (yea though God should make you a diet-drink of them) with the hope of future comforts. Look upon the husband-man, saith he, who, although his barn bee empty, and his seed cast into the earth, not yet appearing above ground, yet hee waiteth for the crop, and hath long patience for it, untill he receive the former and latter rain.Verse 8 And what of all this? Be ye also patient therefore, and stablish your hearts, for the comming of the Lord draweth nigh. And to the same purpose St. Paul:Philip. 4.5 Let your patient mind be known to all men. Why? the Lord is at hand, to right your wrongs, and plead your cause against an ungodly Nation. Yea it may be God will look upon Davids affliction the sooner, and do him good the rather, for Shimei's cursing this day.2 Sam. 16.12 God gives over the wicked many times to exceed their commission, that he may hasten deliverance to his chosen, destruction to their enemies,Gen. 15.16 their sinnes being once full. See for this, Psal. 119.126. Jer. 51.33, 34. Zach. 1.15. I am very sore displeased with the Heathen, that are at ease. For I was but a little displeased (with Israel my people) but they helped forward the affliction: that is, they were excessively outragious, above that they were bid to do: I gave them an inch, they took an ell. Now therefore, lest the righteous (put be∣yond his patience) should reach forth his hand to iniquity, now will I arise, saith the Lord, I will set him in safety, from him that puffeth at him, Psal. 12.5. God seeth it but high-time to make us heave (other-whiles) with manifold afflicti∣ons. But blessed is the man that endureth temptation, for after hee hath suffered awhile, he shall receive the crown of life. For this light affliction, which is but for a moment,Jam. 1.12 2 Cor. 4.17 . A levitate & agilitate cer∣vgrum nomen habet. Chemnit Leve pondere  pluma Cor∣nel. à Lapide. Heb. 5.8 Luke 17 Psal. 27.14 Eccles. 3.1, 11 Deut. 5 worketh for us a farre more exceeding and eternall weight of glory. An exceeding, excessive, eternall weight of glory is wrought out unto us by our short and light afflictions. God will look upon us as those that have been judged alrea∣dy, and account the present sufferings sufficient unto us, 1 Pet. 4.13. Good therefore is the counsell of our Saviour, who himself was perfected by sufferings, In your patience possesse your souls. And that of the Psalmist, Wait on the Lord, and be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart: wait, I say, on the Lord. He hath appointed a time for all, and every thing is beautifull in its season. The Israelites had their flesh at Even, and bread in the Morning. God will be waited on, and give the consummation of his blessings at his leisure. Their journey from Aegypt to Canaan, might have been dispatcht in three dayes, as Philo tells us: but God led them up and down the wildernesse, as if they had been treading a maze, and held them sometimes a yeer together in a place, to their grief no doubt, but for their good, that He might humble them, and try them, and do them good in their later end. Water was not turned into wine, till the wine failed. Joseph was not set out of prison, till the set time came. The Israelites went not out of
Egypt, till the very last day of the four hundred yeers was well-nigh at an end. Smyrna must be in prison ten dayes at least, that she may be tried, and that the trial of their faith being much more precious then that of gold that perisheth, though tried in the fire, might be found to praise, honour, and glory. The day of the churches restauration by Christ here promised was not perfor∣med of 400. yeers after: yet when the fulnesse of time was come,Rev. 2.10. 1 Pet. 1.7 Gal. 4. God sent his son made of a woman, made under the law &c. Say it had been 4000 years, a thousand years is to God but as one day, because in him there is no flux, nor motion. Our purblinde eyes see nothing but that which toucheth the lid, as it were, when Gods quick sight vieweth that as present that is a world off. But now, when all was at worst in Church and common-wealth, and scarce a Ioseph or a Simeon left, that looked for the consolation of Israel, scarce a Mary or an Anna that waited for salvation in Ierusalem, then came the desire of all nations:Hag. 2 then the sun of righteous broke out, with healing under his whings. What shall I say more? Christ himself, the Captain of our salvation was fourty dayes, and four∣ty nights tempted by the devil, before the Angels ministred unto him; his soul was heavy unto the death, ere his heart was glad, and his glory rejoyced.Math. 4 Psal. 16.9. Rom. 8.17. We also must suffer together, ere we can be glorified together, as two pieces of iron cannot be fastned, till both hath passed the fire. SECT. XIII. Helps to patient waiting upon God for deliverance. VVHerefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees,Heb. 12.12. and for suport, consider First, that life it self, in its full length and latitude, is but short: the afflicti∣ons therefore of life cannot be long. To live, saith one, is but to lie a dying.Venire me. oper. tet & praeterire ut horam. Epist. Multos often dunt terris bo∣na fata, ultrà esse sinunt —. . Hom. Iliad. l. 12. Thetis de Achille, Dego à de & ago. Ita degi∣mus quum quia  minus fit, & nos unà Bèdman. de Orig. Rev. 7.16. There is a time to be born, and a time to die, saith the wise-man. He saith not, There is a time to live, for death borders upon life; and a mans cradle stands in his grave. Oh what a short cut hath the longest liver ab utro ad urnam, from the womb to the tomb, from the birth to the burial. We chop into the earth before we are a∣ware, like a man that walking in a field covered with snow, falls suddenly into a marle-pit. Few and evil are the dayes of my pilgrimage, saith old Iacob. Evil they are, but few and evil. Man that is born of a woman is of few dayes, and full of trouble. Troublesome his dayes are, but soon determining, sharp his sufferings, but short withal: as the paines of a travelling woman, whereunto they are oft com∣pared. Every day we yeeld somewhat to death: and death at utmost cures all dis∣eases, as that Martyr said. Secondly, this life once ended, heaven begins and makes amends for all. For they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, nor shall the sun light on them, nor any heat, but the lamb shall feed them, and lead them to the waters of life, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, as a nurse doth from the eyes of her tender babe. Now she is a sorry spouse, saith one, that cannot make shift with an uneasie horse, while she rideth to see the consummation of her love with her betrothed husband. I reckon, saith that great Apostle (that had seen as much of this, and the other world as ever man saw) that the afflictions of the present time, are not worthy to be compared, or are in no comparison, worthy of the glory that shall be revealed in us. Rom. 8.18. For (that ye may see the inequality of the com∣parison) our light and momentary affliction worketh for us, a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of glory. In which text there is well observed to be a triple Antithesis, with a more then superlative description of heavens happinesse,2 Cor. 5.14. Mr. Leigh of the promises. Hicsi usquam. Claudicat in∣genium delirat lingua{que} mens{que} Lucret. by an hyperbole above an hyperbole. For, for affliction here's glory for light af∣fliction a waight of glory, a heavy massy substantial glory; for momentary af∣fliction an eternal excessive weight of glory. A lively & losty kinde of expression, but such as falles far short of that inexplicable felicity, that abides us, and is wrought out unto us, by our shortest sufferings; Words are too weak to uter it.
Thirdly,Rev. 21.4. consider that its here that God must meet with us, or no where. Here∣after there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. Here we must have it, or in a worse place. This world is our purgatory, our little-ease, our wash∣house our place of penance, penalty, pilgrimage. Here he rubs off our rust, scours off our scurf, hewes us (as in the mount) to be living stones in the coelestial Temple. 9 54. Here he fines us, files us, polisheth us, thresheth us out of the husk, that we may be meat for the masters tooth, as that Father phrased it. In a word this is all the hell, we are like to have, let us make us merry with it, and sing sweet songs, as David did, in this house of our pilgrimage. Home's hard by. In the mean while, fourthly, life is a mercy, though never so full of misery. A living dog is better then a dead lion.Eccles 9.4. Lam. 3.39. Ioseph is yet alive, that's more, then Joseph is the second man in the land. Why is living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin. q. d. Suffer he never so much, never so long, he receives but the due desert of his evil deeds, as that penitent thief told his fellow. And that he yet lives amidst all, and cuts not off, as a weaver the thrum of his wretched life, Hezekiah held it a pre∣cious indulgence. The reason whereof he yeelds a little after. The grave cannot praise thee: they that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth. Death cannot celebrate thee, that is, dead men cannot be exemplary, and so shine before men that they may see their good works,Esay 38.12.18.19. and glorifie thee. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day, the father to the children shall make known thy truth. Adde hereunto for a fist consideration, that no man is so hard beset with sor∣rows behinde and before, but he hath some lucida intervalla, some refreshings, some respits, and breathing-whiles betwixt. Iobs case is not every mans, nay, it is scarce any mans, to be visited every morning, to be tried every mom: to be held uncessantly on the rack, and not so much liberty left him, as while he swallows his spittle. This was an hard case, and might be any of ours, as well as Jobs. Now that it is not, see ground of patience, nay of thankfulnesse to that God, that might have doomed man at first to be ever in sweating out a poor living (called therefore the life of his hand,Esay. 57.10 because it is upheld by the labour of his hand) and women to be ever labouring in the extream paines of child birth, neither yet to be saved after all,1 Tim 2.15. no though she should continue in faith and charuy, and holinesse with sobriety. Sixthly, God is with us al the while we are in durance; & optimum solaium, sodalium can we have better company? He goes along with us into the fire, as with the three children, and into the water, as with Ionas: yea though hel had closed her mouth upon us, and swallowed us up into her bowels, yet it must (in despite of it) render us up again, because God is with us and for us. Hels stomack could not long hold us, no more then the whale could brook Ionas, which if he had light upon the marri∣ners, he would devoured and disgested twenty of them in lesse space. Seventhly, God accounts what we suffer now sufficient for all: and lookes upon us as those that have been judged already, yea that have received double for al our sins. The time is now that judgement begins at the house of God 1 Pet. 4.17 And when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be con∣demned with the world 1 Cor. 11.32. Abiathar, though worthy of death, shall live, because he had been formerly afflicted with David. So shall we, which have suf∣fered with Christ raign for ever with him,Psal. 94.12. Prov. 6.23. 2 Cor. 7.6. Esay. 30.13. Sustine tu il∣lum qui susti∣nuit te. Susti∣nuit ille te, dum tu corrigeres vitam malam: sustine tuillum, dum coronet vitam bonam. Aug. Esay. 26.9. 1 Pet. 5.6 who else had been but dead men, had not God chastised us, and taught us in his law, by those corrections of instruction that are the way to life. Lastly, consider that God, that comforteth the abject, hath set a certain time for our deliverence, a day to do us good in: waiting (mean-while) to shew mercy, and counting, as it were, the slow minutes till we become capable Iob. 13.36. Now shall he wait upon us, and sall not we wait for him? Yea, we have waited for the Lord, saith the Chruch in the way of thy judge∣ments. And humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, saith Peter, and he will lift you up  in the opportunity of time. To prescribe to the most wise God were intolerable presumption, and to antevert his season, dangerous preci∣pitancy: to set him a time with that king of Israel 2 King. 6.33. to send for him by a post with those Bethulians, either be must save us now or not at all, how
can he endure it? Rebeccah was too nimble with her, If it be so, why am I thus? & as ill-advised, when she said; I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. And she and her son Jacob should have had the patience, to wait Gods leisure for the blessing, and not to have gotten in by the back-door. But we are all naturally impatient of delaies, and too ready to think we should sow and reape both in a day. As our grand-mother Eve, who having received the promise of a Messiah, thought that her first-borne Cain must needs have been the Man: and therefore, as pleased with the conceit thereof, she said, I have gotten that Man (that famous Man, even the man Christ Jesus) of the Lord. But she was fairely deceived: and so are all such like to be, as are in like hast, and cannot frame with patience to wait for the Lord, as David-Psal. 40.1. Yea to pant, and somtimes to faint, as Ieremy, with long looking after his coming. Now the God of all grace, who hath called us to his twofold kingdom of pow∣er, and of patience, by Jesus Christ, Reg∣num Patien∣tiae. Poten∣tiae. Rev. 1.9 1 Pet. 5.10. after ye have suffered awhile (for so you must) make you perfect, settle, strengthen, stablish you. To him be glory and power for ever and ever Amen. CHAP. III. God will owne, and honour his Saints. And they shall be mine saith the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I make up my Jewels &c. OF the three points gathered out of the former part of the 17. Verse. Two are already dispatcht. The third now followes. That Gods faithfull people shall be graciously owned and acknowledged, Nota quod ipst futuri sint Deo inter , quo die suum peculium sit confecturus. Polan. yea preciously esteemed and accounted of in that day. They shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts: there he ownes them. And I will make them up as my Iewels, there he honours them. I know the words are by some, somwhat otherwise read and rendered, as thus: They shall be to me in the day that I shall do this (or that I shall make or set out) for a flock. So the Geneva Translaters, after the vulgar, Vatablus, Pagnine, Calvin, and the whole streame of Interpreters. Our last most accurate Translation, after Tremellius, Polanus and Shindler, hath it better, and nearer to the naturall genuine, grammaticall sense of the Originall, thus: And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts. In die quo confecturus sum peculium,. 1 Pet. 2.9. . Tit. 2.14 Deut. 32.9 Iob 22.25 Psal. 148.14 Psal 125.2 . Plato. Deut. 26.17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 2.9 Heb. 13.15 in the day that I make up my Jewels, or peculiar treasure, my proper goods and most pre∣cious substance, my silver and my gold, my gemmes and my Jewels, the people of my purchase (as St. Peter after the Septuagint renders it) and those that compre∣hend, as it were, all my gettings: they are as it were, all he hath, that he makes any account of. The Lords portion is his people, saith Moses, and Iacob the the lot of his inheritance. God is their portion, and they are his. They his glory and gold, and He theirs: they are round about him, and he interchangably, round about them, as the mountaines are round about Jerusalem. They make their boast of God, and God boasts as fast of them. Hast thou considered my servant Iob, that there is not such a man in all the earth? He avoucheth them for his people, high above all nations in praise, in name, and in honour: And they o'tother side (such a sweet correspondency there is) avouch him for their God, to walk in his waies, and to keep his statutes, to shew forth his vertues, as examples of the Rule, and as a kingdome of Priests to cover Gods altar with the calves of their lips, and to offer up spirituall sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ; in whom he hath chosen them (as vessels of honour) before the foundation of the world &c. Eph. 1.4.
SECT. I. Reason 1. ANd that's indeed (sith we are here fallen upon it) the first and chief ground of the point.Greevinchomi∣us. Tales nos amat Deus quales futuri sumus ipsius done non quales sumus nostro merito. Concil: Arausi∣can: sec: canon 12. . Sic Beza testa∣tur in vetustis: suo cedice, nec non in com∣ment: Chrysost. & Origenis plurimis locis legi. In homini∣bus beneplaciti Sic Vulgata, In hominibus bonae voluntatis. The Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a speciall people (or, a Jewell) to himself above all people, his mere mercy making the difference. Thou canst not say as that proud heretick did in answer to the Apostles quere, who made thee to differ? Ego meipsum discerno. For lest any should dreame of fore∣seen faith, or previous merits, the Lord, saith Moses, did not love or chuse you because ye were more or better then others, but he loved you because he lo∣ved you: And out of this preventing love, he chose you for a peculiar treasure to himself above all people Exod. 19.5. The Originall word there used is the same with that in our text, and the Chalde Paraphrast expounds it by another word, that signifies beloved ones. For as his love first moved him to make us his own, so being now his own, he cannot but love us. He chose whom he would love, and now loves for his choise. For ownenesse makes love. Having loved his own, to the end he loved them, Ioh. 13.1. and therefore loved them because his own, because the people of his good pleasure, as the Angels call them Luc. 2.14. and as Gabriel had before called Daniel a man of desires, or greatly beloved of God. Dan. 9.23. SECT. II. Reason 2. 2. A She hath elected us to this high honour of old, so he created us to it in his own due time by a new and wonderfull creation.Eph. 2.10 . Ut quando quis aliquid opus producit secun∣dum praecepta artis propriè dictae. . Factura. Valla. Rev. 3.14 Esay 51.16 Eph. 1.19 For we are his work∣manship, his artificiall curious exquisite workmanship, whereon he bestowed like skill and industry as he did in making mans body Psal. 139.15. or the third hea∣ven, whereof he is called the Artificer, Heb. 11.10. and it is called not the work of his hands, but of his fingers, Psal. 8.4. Lo thus are we his facture or workmanship, created unto good works in Christ Jesus, who is not ashamed to stile himself the beginning of this creation, and to say that he planted the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth that he might say to Zion, Thou art my people. St. Paul also testifieth that God putteth forth the same almighty power in the working of saith in us, as he did in making the world for us: that being as great a wonder as this, and the analogy is very excellent. The first God creates here also is light of knowledge: next (as on the second day) the firmament of faith. 3. seas and trees, repentant tears, and worthy fruites. 4. the sun, heat of zeal with light of knowledge. 5. fishes to play, and fouls to fly: so to live and rejoyce in a sea of troubles, and to fly heaven-ward by prayer and contemplation. 6. And, these things performed, man is made a new creature, advanced to a dominion over all the works of Gods hands, yea to a blessed fellowship with Gods only son, who rejoyceth in this habitable part of Gods earth, and his delights are with the sons of men.Prov. 8.31 SECT. III. Reason 3. 3. HE hath bought us with a price: the church is an Acheldama a field of blood, a field purchased with blood, not with that goodly price the Jews valued our Saviour at, 2 Cor. 6 20 Zech. 11.13the price of a slave; but with the blood of God, Act. 20.28.
For we are not redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold (poor things to purchase a soul with, more likely a fair deal to drown it desperately in perdition and destruction) but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled,1 Tim. 6.9 1 Pet. 1.18, 19 1 Pet. 1.2 Tit 2.14 and without spot: who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify us to himself (by that blood of sprinkling, that saved us from the Destroyer) a peculiar people, and present us to himself a glorious church not having spot, wrincle, or any such thing Eph. 5.27. SECT. IIII. Reason 4. 4. HE hath effectually called us with an high and heavenly calling. Heb. 3.1. Whereby we that in times past were not a people (as St. Peter, after the Prophet, hath it) or if any, a disobedient and gainsaying people Rom. 10.21 a people laden with iniquity Isay 1.4. a people of Gomorrah, ver. 10. a naughty people, Ier. 13.10. good for nothing, but to be cast off as a rotten girdle (ibidem) and therefore the people of Gods wrath, Isa. 10.6. and of his curse Esay 34.5. are now by a gracious calling, and speciall priviledge become the people of God, a righteous people Esay 60.21. a holy people Esay 62.12. wise and under∣standing above all people Deut. 4.6. a people in whose heart is Gods law Isa. 51.7. the epistle of Christ written not with inke, but with the spirit of the living God, known and read of all men 2 Cor. 3.2. whiles we walk,Phil. 2.15. as examples of the Rule, harmelesse and blamelesse, the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and corrupt nation, amongst whom we shine as lights in the world, hol∣ding forth the word of life (as an ensigne or badge of our high and honourable vocation) and as an holy nation, a peculiar people, shewing (or preaching) forth the vertues of Christ that hath called us out of Egypt into Goshen, out of palpa∣ble darknesse into his marvelous light. And this the rather,1 Pet 2.9 1 Cor. 1.24 because not many wise, mighty, or noble are called: 'tis a wonder that any. But God hath made known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepa∣red unto glory, even us whom he hath called according to purpose, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. As he saith also in Osee, I will call them my peo∣ple which were not my people, and clepe her beloved which was not beloved Rom. 9.23, 24. yea, I will betroth her unto me in faithfulnesse, and marry her in mercy for ever. Now marriage in it self is honourable among all men:Hos. 2.20 Heb. 1.2 How much more when to such and such an honourable personage as the Heir of all things? Especially since to make her a fit spouse, he purifies her, as they did Esther, and beautifies her as Abrahams servant did Rebeccah: for he puts a Jewel upon her fore-head, earerings in her eares, and a crown royall upon her head, Ezek. 16.12. he decks her as a bride-groom, and as a bride adornes her self with Jewels Isa. 61.10. thus is her beauty perfect through his comelinesse put upon her. And herein the Lord Christ goes beyond all earthly bride-grooms what∣soever. Moses married a blackmore, and could not change her hue, Solomon an Egyptian, and could not convert her to the truth. But Christs conveys and communicates his beauty to his bride (every grace in that chaine about her neck wherewith Christ is ravished Caent. 4.9. being as a costly Jewel set in fine gold) and whensoever he calls a man to an heavenly kingdome (as once Saul to an earth∣ly) he makes him to be of another spirit then before, and to walk worthy of God, and worthy of the vocation wherewith he is called. Eph. 4.1. SECT. V. Reason 5. LAstly, God hath already glorified his people (so the Apostle doubts not to deliver himself of sanctification begun here, Rom. 8.30and to be perfected hereafter) set
them together with Christ in heavenly places, given them the earnest of their in∣heritance for a pawn of the whole bargaine,Ephes. 2.6 the first-fruits of the spirit as a fore∣taste, a pledge of the whole harvest, garnished them with that grace that will one day be glory, nay is so already: for what is grace but glory begun? and what is glory, but grace perfected; They differ not in kinde: but degree only: whence it is that grace is in scripture put for glory; and glory again, is used for grace: yea that Gods people,1 Pet. 4.14 for their graces, are called, the Glory, Esay 4.5. & 46.13. as having the spirit of glory and of God resting upon them. Indeed there is a natu∣rall glory stampt upon the very persons of true Christians (Colos. 2. ult.) such as those that are but meer civil men cannot chuse but honour, as the Hittites did A∣braham; Thou art a Prince of God among us: nay the wicked and worst of men, as Jehoram did the Prophet Elisha, over whom, when sick, he wept out, O my fa∣ther,Acts & Mon. my father, the horsemen of Israel, and charets thereof: And Master Brad∣fords death is said to have been bewayled of many Papists also that knew his piety in his life, and patience in his death: so much honour God did him, in the consci∣ences of his very enemies.Ʋnde indica∣tur conscientiae puritas, & causae benitas. Malcolm. in Act. 7 Ephes. 4 Mat 4 Cant. 4. Wisdome maketh the face to shine, as it did St. Servens. They saw his face as the face of an Angel: such was the goodnesse of his consci∣ence, his cause, and his courage. And could they have seen his inside, they should have discerned and admired a farre greater glory; that new man, I mean, that new world above-mentioned, that after God (or according to the likenesse of the hea∣venly paterne) is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse. The transcendent beauty and bravery whereof is such, that the Lord Christ himself, who was nothing moved with an offer of the glory of the whole world, professeth himself ravisht, and lost, in love toward a sanctified soul. For albeit we are sanctified but in part, and there be yet many flawes, and blemishes in the best, whiles here, yet he consi∣ders us as we are in himself, and as we shall be in the state of perfection, (like as we do kings children,Colos. 3.3 whiles yet in their nonage.) For when Christ, who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. Israel, in the mean-while, is his glory, Esay 46.13. a crown and a diadem in the hand of Jehovah, actually possest of heaven aforehand, as it were by turf and twig, Joh. 5.24. 1 Joh. 3.14. And albeit the Saints have not yet attained to the full degree of the shining bright∣nesse of their immortall happinesse,2 Cor. 4. ult. yet from glory to glory they shall be trans∣formed and translated, till at length they become like the Ancient of dayes. It doth no yet appear, saith Saint John, what wee shall bee, (hence the world so much mistaketh, and misuseth us) but we know that when he shall appear, we shall bee like him, in the quality of our glory, though not in an equality, 1 Joh. 3.2. For we shall shine as the most radiant Jewels and Jaspers Rev. 21.11. Nay that's not all: we shall shine as the firmament, with its glittering furniture, Dan. 12.3. nay as the Sun in his strength, Mat. 13.43. nay like Christ the Sun of righteousness, Col. 3.4. And this 1. In regard of our souls, which shall be filled with knowledge, wis∣dome, purity, as the ayr is with light, 1 Cor. 13.11. Moses and Elias appeared in the transsiguration,Luke 9.31 and conferred with Christ, concerning his death: the myste∣ry whereof they understood far better now, then when they were in the flesh. 2. In regard of our bodies, which though now muddy and massy, shall then shine as transparent-glasse,Rev. 21.11 or clearest chrystall: partly from the glory about them, and partly from the spirit within them, (as a lanthorne shines from the candle put into it) be∣ing clarified from all dregs, fashioned like Christs most glorious body the standard) in respect of incorruption and immortality, beauty and brightnesse, grace and fa∣vour, strength,Ecclesia in fine saeculi expectat quod in Christi corpore prae∣monstratum est. Aug. . Ʋbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caia. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22 and nimblenesse, majesty, and such Angelicall excellency, as shall render them rather like heavenly spirits then earthly bodies, for the surpassing glo∣ry that shall be put upon them. Lastly, for our totum compositum, the whole per∣son together considered; Every true Christian is the spouse of the Lamb, and so actually invested into his dignity, and made partaker of his glory. For Ʋxor fulget radiis mariti (it's a Maxim in the civil law) the wife shines with the beams of her husband; and whatever he hath, she hath; all is in common between them: so that as Luther saith, there is nothing differenceth man and wife but sex onely. Think the same to be true in the mysticall marriage betwixt Christ and his people. All is yours, because you are Christs: His treasures, riches, beauty, glory, power, kingdome, all is yours, so farre as you are capable. For you shall bee next unto
Christ, Luk. 22.30. yea one with Christ, Joh. 17.21. even as He and the Father are one: and so above the most glorious Angels: for are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them that shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14?Bucan. loc. con. p. 76. This (according to some) the devil and his black guard (once bright Angels) could not brook, or bring their hearts to, and therefore fell (through envy and malice to the known truth, Joh. 8.48.) from their first estate, and left their own habitation to dwell in darknesse, rather then they would endure to honour such a Mordecai as man, a clod of clay: a bag of wind, so poor a thing, merely made up of soul and soil, of breath and body (a puff of wind the one, a pile of dust the other) nay now since the fall, a very mixture and compound of dirt and sinne. But whether the devil will or no, the Church shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needle∣work: the virgins her companions also shal be brought, unto him. With gladnesse and rejoycing shall they be brought, they shall enter into the kings palace, and be set on his right hand (a place of dignity and safety) in whose presence is ful∣nesse of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.Psal. 45.14, 15, 9. Psal. 16. vlt. For quali∣ty, ther's joy and gladnesse: for quantity, a fulnesse of both: for certainty at Gods right hand, and for perpetuity, for evermore. SECT. VI. It shall be far otherwise with the wicked. NOw for Application: this in the first place, is no good newes to the wicked that persecute Gods people, and cast dirt on his Jewels, to hear that they shall one day be so dearly acknowledged, and highly honoured by the God of heaven. For as in a pair of buckets, when the one is at well top, the other is down at bottom, as when David grew stronger and stronger, the house of Saul waked wea∣ker and weaker: and as Mordecaies rise was Hamans downfal: so when God shall make up his Jewels, he shall put away the wicked of the earth as drosse and of∣scouring, and when soever he doth best to his chosen,Psal. 119.119. then doth he worst of all to reprobates. This is so constant a thing with God, that could we but go as far back with the feet of our mindes as Gods decrees, and then come hand in hand with him again, and view all his particular acts of Execution, we should soon see, that when he is chusing the one, he is refusing the other, when he is redeeming one, he is renouncing another, when he is comforting one, he is terrifying another, when he is converting the one, he is hardning the other, when he is rewarding one, he is revenging another, when he is quickning one, he is killing another, when sa∣ving one, he is damning another. And yet all his works are holy, and just and good, though he do not alwayes (as often he doth) give a reason of his proceedings. Job. 33.13. This day of the Lord, here mentioned in the text, wherein (God shall mercifully make up his Jewels) as it shall be to them a day of light, life, liberty, prosperity, and victory Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. so shall it be to the wicked, a day of black∣nesse and darknesse, for it shall burn them as an oven, and themselves shalbe as stubble, whereof neither root nor stalk shall be left untou ht, but all turned to ashes, (in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord) under the feet of those that fear my name. Then shall the sinners in Sion be afraid, horrour shall surprize the hypocrites, who shall run away with those sad words in their mouths. Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? But whither alasse will they run from him that is every where?Esay 33.14. If to the creature, a horse is a vain thing for help, the Egyptians are men and not God, their horses flesh and not spirit &c. If to the creatour, he doth utterly disclaim and disown them: for if any have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his,Rom. 8.9 be he whose he will be. These indeed, shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts &c. such a good man I know, and such a godly woman I know, but who are ye? Then shall they say unto him, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and eat and drunk in thy presence, that is communicated at thy table, and heard thee teaching in our streets. But he o' to'ther side will as deeply disavow them, as they do boldly
lay claim to him:Math. 7.23. for then will I professe to them I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity. And if they shall offer yet to make request for their lives with Ham, and to speak for themselves, as once those Israelites, we have sinned, do thou unto us, whatsoever seemeth good unto thee, deliver us onely, we pray thee, this day; he will answer them according to the idols of their hearts, as he did those of old,Ezek 14.4 and say, Ye have forsaken me, and served other gods; where∣fore I will deliver you no more, go and cry to the gods that your selves have chosen, let them deliver you in the day of your tribulation:Jud. 10 13, 14, 15. Formidaehilis erat Adamo Dei vox cùm lenitèr & pa∣ternè eum alo∣quehatur in pa∣radiso in aura aurorae, nedùm cum in furore & turbine &c. Ca w. Heb. 9.27. Dan. 12.2. At the day of Iudgement, secrt things shall be brought to light, as packs and fardels are not open∣ed till they come to the fair or market D.Willet. than the which I know not what more dreadful or direful sentence can possibly fall from Gods holy mouth, unlesse it be that last irrevocable doom of damnation, go ye cursed &c. At the first hearing whereof, their very heart strings shal crack, and their hearts fall asunder in their bo∣soms, like drops of water. Well were it with the wicked in that day, if they might trudge directly on to damnation, and not be forced to see the face of the Judge, that they have buffetted, and to hear his voice that they have despised. But (alasse for their misery!) it may not be. For after that all in vain, they have ti∣red out the deaf rocks and mountains, with their continuate cryings, Fall upon us, cover us, hide us, dash us, and quash us to pieces, grinde us to powder, do any thing to dispatch us, they must perforce, in person, measure the place and race of judgement. It is appointed for all men once to die and after death judgement. Not a man that sleeps in the dust of death, but must needs awake, some to everlasting life, and preferment, and some to shame and everlasting contempt; as those that have all their evil deeds, as it were written in their fore-heads, so that all shall see and say, Behold the man, and behold his works. These and these things hast thou done, will the Judge then say, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such as thy self, but I will set thee down, and set them down in an or∣der before thee to thy perpetual confusion. As the word goeth forth of the kings mouth their faces shall gather blacknesse, and be covered as Hamans, and themselves shall be speechlesse. They shall be confounded, and troubled for ever, they shall be put to shame and perish. That men may know that he, whose name is Jehovah, is the most high over all the earth. Psal. 83.17, 18. Enoch foretold this day of judge∣ment before Noah foretold the flood. That day is longer ere it comes, but shall be more terrible when it is come. SECT. VII. Terrour to those that set themselves against the Saints. Secondly, Doth the Lord graciously own and honour all that fear his name? how should this terrifie and take off all those dogged dogs, and bedlam Belialists, that offer any manner affront or offence to such? sith how mean soever and mi∣serable in the worlds eye, they are dearly beloved of God as Daniel, highly fa∣voured inheaven,Dan. 9. . Luk. 1. . Act. 7. Heb. 12. Rom. 8 Psal. 45. 1 Cor. 4.13. Rom. 3.8 Nemo me im∣punè lacessit. Irascipop. Rom. nemo sapienter possit. Tacit. as Mary, dearlings to the Almighty, as David, faire to God as Mo∣ses, and not only faithful as he in al Gods house as servants, but such as have a naile & a name there, better then of sons and of daughters Esay 58.5. For they are the first-born whose names are written in heaven, as free denisons: yea, they are heires of God, and coheires with Christ, who is not ashamed to call them brethren, fellows, friends, favorites, any thing, every thing that may evidence the dear respects he bears un∣to them. Now were it a wise-mans part to fall out with the Kings favourite? to lowre upon his son and heir? to deface his picture, to tread under foot his Jewels, to spit upon his royal robe, or imperial diadem? How as Balaam slain by the Lord, for but wishing evil to his Israel? Goliath for but defying his host? Nabal for re∣viling his David, which was scandalum Magnatum, and in the new Testament ter∣med blasphemy? How was Cain schooled for but scowling upon Abel? and Laban threatened for but following after Iacob? and Abimelech plagued for but an unwit∣tingabuse to Abraham? Thus he suffered none to do them wrong, yea, he reproved even kings for their sakes Psal. 105.14. will ye know the reason? he remembred his covenant to Abraham, and his oath to Israel, ver. 8.9.
There is a straight league betwixt God and his people, such as was that be∣twixt Jehosaphat and Ahab, nay such as passed betwixt David and Abiatbar. Look what David said once to him, the same saith god to his. Abide thou with me, feare not: for he that seeketh my life, seeketh thy life, but with me shalt thou be in safeguard. He is a Sun, saith the Psalmist, to refresh his people,1 Sam. 22.23 Psal. 84.11 and a shield to shelter them. As the shield is betwixt the body and the dart, so is God betwixt his people and their hurt. He carrieth them on his wings, as the Eagle doth her yong; so that there is no wounding of them but through his sides,Deut. 32.11 Aquilae pullos suos in alis portant, alites reliqui inter pe∣des. Munster  ex rabbi Solo∣mon. Zach. 3.8 Acts 9.4 2 King. 19.22 nay no touch∣ing of them, but ye touch the apple of his Eye. As the eye is vexed with the least mote that gets into it, so is he with the least indignity done to his people. If Saul tread upon the least toe in Christs my sti∣call body, the head will try out from heaven, why hurtest thou me? If Rabsha∣keh raile upon Hezekiah, Against whom hast thou railed, saith God, and whom hast thou provoked to wrath? even the Holy one of Israel. In pushing at any of these lively stones in Gods temple, men spurne at the corner-stone it self, and so kick against the prickes. In offending the least of Christs little ones, they pre∣sently proclaim open war against Him; who keepeth all their bones, bottles up all their teares, yea numbreth all their haires, not one of them is diminished, but he accounts himself damnified. You know how dearly the proud Ammonites paid for the hair they shaved off from Davids servants.2 Sam. 10 Luke 18.7 1 Sam. 2 Psal. 91 And shall not the son of David avenge his own elect, though he beare long with them? He keepeth the very feet of his Saints, saith holy Hannah, and chargeth his angels with them, to beare them in their hands, lest at any time they dash their feet against a stone. If they stumble and fall, yet they shall get up againe: for the Lord puts under his hand Psal. 37.24. Yea the everlasting armes are underneath Deut. 33.27.Am. 1 They that swear by God and Malchom shall fall (as old Eli did) and never rise againe: but the Saints of God, though Ioseph-like, they fall into a pit, yet, as prisoners of hope, they shall come forth, by the blood of the covenant. Zach. 9.10. Good Mordecai, a Jew, may fall before a Persian and get up againe; yea prevaile and prosper. But if wicked Haman begin to fall before a Jew, (that is in covenant with God) he can neither stay when he stumbles,Esth. 6.14 nor rise when he is down. God himself is so far interested and ingaged in the quarrels of such (as I was saying erewhile) that who so toucheth them, touch∣eth the ball of his Eye. The eye is a tender part we know, and a small matter offends it. God is every whit as choice and as chary of his people,What part is more sensible of the least touch then the eye? or being hurt canseth great∣er smrt and rage? or if put out, brings more deformity to the face? God is as tender of us &c Pemble on Zach. 2.8 as a man is of his eyes. Now a good thump on the back is better borne then a light touch on the eye. Take heed, I advise you, how you meddle with Gods Eye, lest you heare of him to your cost. For although we must turne t'other cheek also, yet he will not take a blow on the eye for the proudest of them all. No man will stand still while his eyes are pecked out, much lesse will God. Thou know∣est, saith dying David to his son Solomon, what Ioab did to me. He meaneth it of the slaugher of Abner and Amasa, which David appropriats, and makes it his own case. The soveraigne is smitten in the subject, neither is it other then just, that the arraignement of mean Malefactours runs, in the stile of wrong to to the Kings Crowne and dignity. Gods people are his crowne, let none pre∣sume to attempt against it: his dignity, his glory, let none turne it into shame Psal. 4.3. His pearles, let no swine trample them, his holy things, let no dogs profane them, by holding their lives madnesse, and their ends without honour, by speaking basely of their persons, actions, sufferings, as if they were vile and inglorious. It was an heavy indictment doubtlesse Psal. 14.6. You have sha∣med the counsell of the poore, because the Lord is his refuge. Thus those miscre∣ants, that mocked and railed at Christ upon the crosse, upbraided him not with any evill, but only for the good he had done in saving others, for his trust in God, and prayers to God. Thus also they deale with David, they that render evill for good, are mine adversaries (or hate me like divels) and why?Psal. 38.20 they satanical¦ly hate me. Because I do the thing that good is. And the very truth is, that were wicked mens insides turned outward, it would well appeare, that when they disgrace those that make con∣science of their waies under the infamous names of puritans, singularitans, zelots, and the like termes of reproach, it is for the good that is in them, and for the true
glory that God hath stamped upon their persons and performances. This savours strongly of the Devill of hell,Tertull. 1 Ioh. 3.12 Graecinum Ju∣lium virum egregium Caesar occidit ob hoc unum, quod me∣lior vir erat quam esse quem∣quam tyranno expediret. Sen. l. 2. de benef. c. 21. whose property it is to hate and persecute any foot∣step of Gods holy image, where-ever he finds it (as the Tigre if he see but the picture of a man, he flies upon it and tears it to peeces) And it proves men to be the posterity of Cain, the devils Patriarch, as one calls him, who was of that wick∣ed one (of the serpents seed) and slew his brother, And wherefore slew he him, but because his own works were evill, and his brothers good? That was all the quarrell then, and is still. All that viperous brood bear an aking tooth to the better sort, they do maliciously and mortally hate all holy impressions of grace wrought upon any by the sanctifying spirit, though they restrain sometimes the expression and exercise of this hatred for advantage and in policy, by accident, and for by-re∣spects, it may be. SECT. 8. 9. 10. Exhortation to honour them that fear the Lord: and what great cause men have and shall have so to do. LEt us that know and professe better things approve our selves to be of the fa∣mily of heaven,, and followers of God, as dear children by contemning a vile person, though never so glorious a magnifico in the worlds eye and esteem, but honouring them that fear the Lord, though never so much under-prized and vilipen∣ded by the wicked of the earth. This is a note of Gods houshold-servant Psal. 15.4.Nabal shall not be stiled Nadtb. 1 Ioh. 4.17. 1 Pet. 2.17 and of one that hath share in Christs kingdome, wherein the vile person shall no more be called liberall, nor the churle bountifull. Esay 32.5. Further, would we have boldnesse in that last and great day, and be able to lift up our fa∣ces before the son of man, let love be perfect in us toward the brotherhood, loving them in truth, and for the truths sake, and being ready to serve the saints in love, to wash, yea to kisse their very feet, and to lay down our lives for the brethren if called thereunto. And because this can never be done, except men see more in them then ordinary to move them; labour and learne to know the price of a saint, and to esteem them very highly in love, for their worths sake. The Jews tell us, and truly, that those seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt were as much worth as all the seventy Nations of the world besides. It is not for nothing (sure) that the saints are called All things Coloss. 1.20. and Every creature Mar. 16.15.Mat. 5. Is. 6.11. statu∣men terrae. Tren. and the salt of the earth, that keep the rest from putre fying the substance and support of the earth, that keep the rest from shattering, I bear up the pillars of it, saith David, and the Innocent delivereth the Island, saith Eliphaz. Iob. 22.30. For their sakes it is that God spares and prospers the wicked as he did Laban for Iacobs sake, Potiphar for Iosephs, Sodom for Lots, when they were carried captive by Kederlaomer. Whereas else he would make a short work upon the earth, Rom. 9.28. If the mourners were once marked, and set safe out of harmes way, he would soon say to the Angell,Ezek 9. Smite and spare not. Look what Elisha once said to Jehoram King of Israel, the same saith God to all ungodly persons. Surely were it not that I regard the presence of Iehoshaphat the good king of Judah,2 King. 3.14 I would not look toward thee, nor see thee. Add hereunto, that God not only spareth, and blesseth, but also graceth and gifteth the wicked with excellent abili∣ties and endowments for his peoples behoof and benefit: as Saul with a spirit of government for Israels sake, and of prophecy, for Davids safety: the Egyptians with Jewels for the use of the sanctuary, and those that shall hear, Depart ye, with the power of prophesying and doing miracles for the Churches use and bene∣fit: Nay more,Prov. 21.18 the wicked shall be a ransome for the righteous, and the trans∣gressour for the upright. Thus God gave Egypt, for Israels ransome Isa. 43.3, 4. I gave Ethiopia and Seba for thee. And why? Since thou wast precious in my sight thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: Therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. Thus is the righteous delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead. Prov. 11.8.
SECT. IX. OH but we see it otherwise often, that those you call righteous are not delive∣red.Ob. Sol. And what more sure then sight? First, sight (though the most certain sense) may be deceived about its own object, if it want a clear middle. For example: A man beholds a staff, part through the clear ayre, and part through the dark water, and so deems it crooked, when indeed it is straight: So the purblind world beholding the Christian life thorough the dark middle of prejudice, judgeth it miserable and disconsolate: not knowing that to the righteous there ariseth light out of darknesse, joy out of grief, good out of evill, comforts out of crosses, and those equivalent to deliverances. Those mentioned in that little book of Martyrs Heb. 11. though tortured and tympanized, yet they would not be delivered, that they might obtain a better re∣surrection.. It was never merrier with the three children then in the midst of the furnace where the son of God was walking with them.Dan. 3. Gen. 28. Iacobs heart was never so light as when his head lay hardest. Secondly, there is a double deliverance: One keeping us from the evill, and another keeping us under it, that it shall not hold us, much lesse hurt us. And this later way, at least, every of Gods Jewels is made up and delivered. For, though ye have layne among the pots, all burnt and swooty, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers of yellow gold.Psal. 68.13 Delivered then the righteous are, we see, though not delivered. That they are not here fully freed from trouble, they may thank themselves in a great measure. For as the subjection of the creature to us depends upon our subjection to God; and our peace with men upon our keeping peace with him, Iob 5.23. So our subjection to God, and peace with him here being only inchoate and imperfect, we recover our safety from the creatures and peace with men, but in part, and unperfectly. But look what is wanting therein, is recompensed with spirituall peace even here, Ioh. 16 3. how much more hereafter? And say that God suffer his Jewels to be killed all day long, and counted as sheep to the slaughter: yet precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his saints,Psal. 116.15 Rom. 8. and neither life, nor death, shall sunder them from Gods love in Christ Jesus. So that if they 'scape not his sword without, yet they shall 'scape the terrour within, which is that that sets an edge upon the sword, and makes it enter into the soul. The godly man shall be able in the worst times to call his soul to rest with Da∣vid,Psal. 116.7 1 Sam. 30.6 Luc. 21. Deut. 20. and to comfort himself in the Lord his God in a common combustion, then when others shall be at their wits ends, and even mad again for the sight of their eyes, and perplexity of their spirits. Death, he knowes is the worst that can be∣fall him, and that (ever since it ran through the veins of Christ crucified) is so sweetened unto him, that he is little or no whit amazed at the fore-going gripes, which are but as the throwes of Child-birth, by which the soul is borne out of this lothsome body into endlesse felicity. Oh therefore the safety and dignity of a true Christian, whom very pain easeth, whom death reviveth, whom dissolution uniteth, whom lastly his very corruption preserveth, and sin glo∣rifieth! As for our full deliverance from all annoyances, we grone within our selves and with patience wait for it, even the redemption of our bodies Rom. 8.23, 24.Pectatum ta∣metsi non bo∣num, tamen in bnum. Aug. And when that happy day once begins to shine forth, then look up if ever, for your redemption draweth nigh, Luc. 21.28. The Lord Christ will then lift up your heads as Pharaoh did his Butlers, take you from the prison to the palace, and restore you to your ancient honours and offices loft in Adam: as to be Kings, Priesty, Judges, Benchers &c. He shall say unto you then as once to Israel, Be∣hold I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you then at your beginnings, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.Ezek. 36.11 This meditation setled David eedingly Psal. 17. where having spoken of the men of this world,Psal. 17.15 which have their portion here, he presently subjoynes, As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousnes, I shall be satisfied when I awake (that is, out of the dust of
death) with thine image. This also kept Jobs head above water, when else he had been overwhelmed with floods of affliction.Job 19.25, 26 I know that my Redeemer liveth, &c. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God. Daniel 12.1, 2. Though things be otherwise darkly delivered, yet when the Jews were to lose land and life, then plainly the Resurrection is named. And Heb. 11.35. we read of some that were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.Joh. 11.24 I know, saith Martha, that my brother shall rise at the Resurrection, at the Consolation, saith the Syriack Translator. And well he might call it the Consolation to the righteous, for these prerogatives and priviledges that shall befall all such in that day. SECT. X. FIrst, a glorious resurrection of their dead bodies, by vertue of the mystical Union they have with Christ. The bodies of the Saints, though sundred from their ouls for a season, are not separated at all from Christ, as neither was Christs body sundred from his Deity, when laid in the grave. A substance there is still pre∣served, by a secret influence, proceeding from Christ as a head. This substance is (by rotting in the grave) refined, and shall by the same influence be raised incor∣ruptible. This rotting of the body is but as the rotting of corn under the earth, that it may shoot up into an harvest, or as the melting of a battered piece of plate in the fire, that it may be brought forth of a better fashion. Hence they are said to sleep, and to sleep in Jesus, and to be dead in Christ, who shall raise our vile bo∣dies, and make them like unto his glorious body, &c. like unto the Angels in hea∣ven, Mat 22.30. nay like unto God himself, whom they shall resemble as children do their father.Luke 20.36 Hence they are called, children of the resurrection, in a like sence, as when God raised up Jesus again, he said, (as the Apostle Paul applies it) Thou art my Son, Psal. 1 5. pro quo Graecus in∣terpres reddi∣dit, , unde posteà emana∣vit eorum er∣ror qui resur∣rectures nega∣runt. Mali resurgent, sed non beneficio resurr. Christi, sed illius maledictionis vi quo die comederis, mrieris, ad condemnatio∣nem. Malcolm. this day have I begotten thee, Act. 13.3. Reprobates also shall rise again (though some of the Ancients, grounding upon that, Psal. 1.5. thought otherwise) but after an other manner, by another mean, and for another end. They shall be dragg'd, as malefactours out of the prison of the grave, and driven before Christs tribunall, by vertue of his judiciary power, and of the curse of the law, to be tumbled thence into torment, Rev. 1.7. but the Elect shall be raised, as mem∣bers of Christs body, by vertue derived from his Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.20, 22, 45. A second priviledge they shall then have, is priority in the Resurrection: for the dead in Christ shall rise first, and those that are alive and remain shall be caught up, together with them, in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, 1 Thes. 4.16, 17. Thirdly elevation, or lifting up the head for joy, when all the wicked shall wail for wo,Revel. 1. , Luke 21.36 . Consistatis, .i. ita apparentis ut judicis vultum & sententiam sustinere possitis. Beza. and look gastly: their hearts failing them for fear of what will follow. The godly shall then stand before the Son of man, with much courage and confidence, Rom. 8.33, 34. Luk. 21.36. Fourthly, Collection by the Angels, who shall easily discern them from the rest, as the servants of the house do their masters harvest, or as the corn from the tares: their lively looks also shall distinguish them. Fifthly, Assumption, to meet the Lord in the air, and ascension in a cloud, in manner as Christ himself ascended.1 Thes. 4 16, 17. For as birds being hatched do flie lightly up into the air, which being egges were a heavy and slimy matter: so the bodies of Gods Elect (which by nature are massie and ponderous) being hatcht, as it were, by the Resurrection,Zanch. de oper. Dei. shall be made pure, powerfull, nimble, and able to mount up into the heavens.
Sixthly Aggregation, or gathering together to the signe of the Son of man,6. Math. 24. Cartwr. Hist. Christi in Mat 24.31.  2 Cor. 2.14. that flag, not of defiance, but of deliverance, that he shall then hang out, those colours that he shall then display for an ensigne or royal standard, that his people may repair unto, not to give battle to the enemy, but to share with the Conquerour, to divide the spoil, and take part in the triumph. 2. Cor. 2.14. Seventhly, Collocation, or placing them at his right hand, as Solomon did his mo∣ther for honour-sake, when the goats shall be on the left. Math. 25.33. where our Saviour seems to allude to that in Deut. 29.11. where the six free-born tribes blesse the people from mount Gerizim on the right hand, and the six other curse from mount Ebal on the left. Eightly, Inchoation, or taking beginning of the judgement from them.8. Math. 25.34. . Ita ut nihil ad eam salutem possit amplùs defi∣derari Beza. in loc. For the separation being made, then shall the king say (first) to them on the right hand, Come ye blessed, &c. glad to see them, as Jacob once to see Ioseph, or as ever any father to see his childe, that had been long absent. Thus, as judgement here began at Gods house, insomuch as the righteous scarcely were saved: so there, the judicial sentence shall take beginning from the righteous, who shall thenceforth be saved with a mighty salvation: to the utmost Heb.. 7.25. Ninthly, Commemoration or an honourable recital of all their good parts,9. Luk. 7.44.45.46. and practises (as once of that good womans that washt his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head) together with an open declaration of all their righteousnesse desired or done 2 Cor. 5.10 and that with such fervency of affection in the judge, that he will see and set forth nothing but their goodnesse, not so much as once mentioning their faults and frailties Math. 25.34 to 41. For in this day of making up his Jewels, he will spare them as a man spares his own son that serveth him: their good works onely shall follow them. Rev. 14.13. Tenthly Pronunciation of that sweetest sentence of absolution,10. Math. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. A speech that breathes out nothing else but crowns, scepters, kingdoms glories, beauties, Angelical entertainments, beatifical visions, unutterable ex∣stasies, sweetest varieties, felicities, eternities. Lastly, Execution of the sentence, and first upon the wicked. For although the godly shall first be sentenced, yet the wicked shall first be executed, and all for the saints sake. 1. That they may rejoyce when they see the vengeance, being wholly swallow∣ed up with a zeal of Gods glory Psal. 58.10. and 79.10. 2. That they may more fully acknowledge the greatnesse of their own felicity, in the sight of the others remedilesse misery. For these shal go away into everlasting pu∣nishment, into eternity of extremity, but the righteous into life everlasting Mat. 25.45.Math. 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.2.3. They shall not onely sit with Christ as Assessours and approvers of this righteous sentence, but the judgement once ended, they shall triumphantly ascend with him into heaven, and there enjoy the most exquisit and unmixed pleasures, the high∣est pitch of preferment, plenty without want, and fulnesse without satiety.Rev. 6.9, 10. For their apparrel it shall be long white robes (washed in the blood of the lamb) such as betoken perfect purity, clarity, dignity, and festivity. For their habitati∣tion, they are stately Mansions in a lightsom city. For their company, the sacred Trinity, the glorious Angels, the crowned Saints.Ioh. 14.2. Rev. 21.23. And if it be such an honour to converse. familiarly with kings, and great personages, what is it then with the King of glory, and all those heavenly courtiers, to enjoy the company of the blessed Patriarches, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessours, our dearest friends and acquaintance, whom it is probable we shall know, as Adam did his wife upon the first sight in paradise, &c. Chrys. and as Peter and Iohn did Moses and Elias in that glimps of heavens glory they had in the monnt? Sure it is, we shal perfectly love them as our selves, and rejoyce in their happinesse, as much as in our own, whereby our joyes shall be according to their innumerable number, multiplied and increased. Next for their dignity, and glory, they shall sit upon Christs throne with palms in their hands, and crowns on their heads. Now beyond the excellency of a crown mortal mens wishes extend not. But the crown we are speaking of is a crown of glory 1 Pet. 5.4. A crown of righteousnesse. 2 Tim. 4.8. A crown of life Iam. 1.12. an incorruptible crown 1 Cor. 9.25. A crown not consisting of some pre∣cious
thing without us,Corona signifi∣cat absolutio∣nem, consum∣mationem & perfectionem & evinciendo capiti destina∣tur, quae & ab∣solutiss. & emi∣nentissima pars est. Scultet. . 2 Cor. 12.4. but of royal excellency, such as wherewith our souls and bodies bedight and adorn'd shall out-shine the sun in his strength: what shall I say more? but indeed why do I say so much? For as one being asked what God was, answered, Si scirem, Deus essem. So if I should undertake to describe heaven, it were requisit, that I should have been at heaven. And yet he that had been there (St. Paul I mean) could say no more then that he had heard there wordless words, words unspeakable, not possible to be uttered. And when he doth speak of heavens happinesse, he commonly useth a transcendent kinde of expression, as finding words too weak for such a purpose. Lo thus shall it be done to the man whom the king immortal will honour in the day when he makes up his Jewels. Consider him well, as God bad the devil do Iob, and know that there is none like him in the whole earth again. Goe forth (saith the spouse) and behold King Solomon, with the crowns wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals. So say I, behold the godly Christian as crowned with all the forenamed priviledges and prerogatives:Cant. 3.11. look upon him as once the city of Shushan did upon Mordecai when the king would do him honour, and then tell me whom you have to esteem and account of, to set up and side with, to prize and prefer in your best affections and expressions: Not the rich, but the righteous, not the great, but the gracious, not the worlds minions, though never so accomplished with all the ornaments of nature, art, pol∣licie, preferment, but Gods Jewels and darlings, righteous and religious persons,Psal. 16.3. Sapè sub attri∣ta latitat sapi∣entia veste. Heb. 11 Sic Bruti ba∣culus apud Plutarch: cu∣jus intùs soli∣dum aurum corneo velaba∣tur cortice. Joh. 6. Esay. 53.2 Ʋt templo Dei corporaliter in eo habitantes. Bez. those excellent ones of the earth, in whom was all Davids delight, and should be ours also. Despise them not for their outward meannesse: the true trea∣sure is carried in earthen vessels, and there may be a precious pearl in a leathern purse: Iohn Baptist had a girdle of skin about his loins, and Elias was a rough hairy man, for his outward habit it was course and homely. Those ancient worthies went about the world in shipskins and goat-skins, but they were like the Ark whose out-side was of goats-hair, and badgers skins, but the inside pure gold. Christ himself whom that Ark typified, was hid for awhile under the carpenters son. The carnal Capernaites could see nothing in him more then in another man, how can this man, said they, give us his flesh to eat? he had no form, nor comlinesse, saith that Evangleical Prophet, and when we shall see him, there is no such beauty that we should desire him. And yet in him the God-head dwelt bodily, that is, personally: and in him were hid all the treasures of wisdom and worth Colos. 2. And the like may be said of many a poor Christian cast out by the world as unworthy their company or countenance, but readily received, and highly honoured by God him∣self the blessed spirit, and all men that have their senses exercised to discern good and evil. But as the root of Iesse was rugged and unsightly, so are his branches, many of them. Howbeit the kings daughter is all glorious within, that's her com∣fort, black she is,Cant. 1.5.6. vide Plin. lib. 6. c. 28. & So∣lin. cap. 36 Psal. 83.3. See Ptov. 15 24 but comly as the curtains of Solomon, as the tents of Kedar which were rough, but rich, as pitcht in the deserts of Arabia. Gods servants are called his Hidden ones. According to the fashion of the wealthy, he pleaseth himself in hidden treasure. It is enough that his own eyes behold his Jewels, and such to whom the father shewes them. The ideots of the world set a very low rate, a light price upon Gods precious ones: but its all the wit they have, for wisdom is above to the foo∣lish, saith Solomon, he cannot skill of it. It sufficeth to wisdom that she is justified of her children, who know how to do her reverence, in what garb soever she please to shew her self. I know thy poverty saith Christ to one of the seven churches, but that's nothing.Rev. 2 Jam. 2.5 God hath chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heires of his kingdom in Christ. Who can have the face to despise any one for his outward wants and indigence, when Abraham the father of the faithful, and heir of the world, had not a foot of land, that he could call his own, more then a burying-place? when Christs mother was not wealthy enough to bring a lamb for her purification? when Christ himself had not twenty pence at hand to pay the tribute mony, nor a pillow to rest his head on, Syllarium vo∣cabat Caesar. Dio. Act. 12. when tired out with hard toile and travel? And who o't'other-side would admire any for his worldly wealth, and outward magnificence, when Pharaohs horses had costly trappings Cant. 1.8. and the Midianites camels had chaines of gold about their necks? Iudg. 8.26. when Dives ruffles in his silkes every day, and Herod glitters in his cloth of silver: who yet to the eye of heavenly wisdom were no bet∣ter
then so many stinking carcases stuck over with flowers, magnified dung, guilded rottennes, golden damnation? who knowes not how sharply St. James takes up the partiall Christians of his time, for admiring mens ease, wealth, and pomp, rather then grace, and true spirituall worth? This, saith he, is to despise Christs poor, and to be judges of evill thoughts.Tanti vitrum  quanti Marga∣ritum? Melius est pal∣lens aurum quam fulgens aurichalcum. Ber. in cant. 6. Davids desire, by Rob. Abbots Vertue is a thousand Escuche∣ons saith one, and it is grace alone that animateth and ennobleth, all other good parts and abilities, which else are but as a glassy bugle, saith Hierome after Tertullian, to the pearle of price, or as gold to brasse, saith Barnard; and a little of the palest and counterfeit gold, is far better then much of the finest and brightest brasse: so is the meanest of Gods servants better then the most magnificent glorious worlding that ever trod upon earthly mould, and so let us esteeme them. Mr. Fox, when he was asked whether he knew a certain poore man who had received succour from in time of trouble, answered, I remember him well: I tell you, I forget Lords and Ladies to remember such. SECT. XI. Exhortation to practise holinesse, that is so honoured. FOurthly, are those that are sound faithfull so highly honoured in heaven? This, me-thinks, should much raise the price of religion, and bring godlinesse into greater request amongst all those that would be of any reckoning, or repute with God at that day. It will go to the hearts of ungodly men, I wot well, to see some of all sorts sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,Rev. 21.8. Job. 29. in the kingdome of heaven, and themselves shut out amongst dogs: to see such as they would have disdained to have set with the dogs of their flocks, to be set then upon thrones judging their judges, and having power over the Nations, to binde their Kings with chaines, and their Nobles with fetters of iron; To execute upon them the judgments written,1 Cor. 3 and yet this honour have all his Saints (Psal. 149.8, 9.) For know ye not, saith the Apostle, that the Saints shall judge the world? yea the angels. Who would not therefore rule with God, as Iudah, by labouring to be faithfull with his Saints? Hos. 11.12. We see with what a deal of eager∣nesse, honours and offices, rich prizes and great places are sought and pursued after. Balaams asse never gallops fast enough to fetch in profit and preferment. Set but a wedge of gold in sight, and Ioshua that could stop the course of the Sun, cannot stay Achan from courting and catching at it.In cepeet allium impensa 1600 talenta in pyra∣midum una ex∣truenda refert Heredot. Viri beni avi∣ditas tuta est. Sene. epist. 23.  Ambitiese quip∣piam contende∣re, sic ut te non patiaris ab alio vinci. Eras.  Sump∣ta est metapho∣ra à procis Ze∣lotypis. Beza. . Act. 24.16.  su∣baudi  interea duut resurrectiouem expecto. Beza. . And yet what are riches, and honours, but golden gyves the Noble miseries of this wretched life? And what do they that are so set upon them (with the neglect of hea∣venly honours, and that wealth of a better world) but prefer the onions of Egypt, before the bread of angels, paltry pibbles before precious pearles, thick clay before pure gold, counterfeit coine before true treature? Oh see and be∣waile this so great a folly in your selves and others: and (for future) learne to covet spirituals, to be greedy of grace, to encroach upon God for more and more of his favour and fellowship as Moses did. Exod. 33.12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19. & chap. 34.9. To be ambitious of peace 1 Thess. 4.11. And of pleasing God 2 Cor. 5.9. To seek for honour and glory by well-doing Rom. 2.7. To be zealous of the better things 1 Cor. 12.31. To pursue after the perfect knowledge of Christ, having it as it were in chase (as St. Paul had Philip 3.4..) as the hunter hath his prey, or as the persecuter hath him that he persecuteth. He had once been mad in persecuting the saints Acts 26.11. And breathed out threatnings, lay panting, as it were for breath, like a tired wolfe. Acts 9.1, 2. Now when God had turned the streame, he was judged by some as mad the other way. 2 Cor. 5.13. Whilst, knowing the terrour of the last day, he perswaded men, and in the meane-while, he laid his policy and bent his best wits (as the word there signifies) to keep a good con∣science, that richest treasure, and most precious Jewell, that ever the heart of man was acquainted with.
SECT. XII. Why. TO quicken you to the pursuit and practise of this duty. Consider that Grace is the only thing that God looks after in this world. God looked down from heaven saith David, upon the sons of men, to see, not who were wealthy, witty, mighty,Psal. 14.2 magnificent &c. but to see if there were any that did understand or sought God And he bids the Propher Jeremy run to and fro through the streets of Jerusa∣lem, to sef he could finde a man,Ier. 5 1, 2 . Diog. Lucernâ accen∣sâ Hominem quabat Aesopus. Ipris stijs bestor est hmatione vigers. & ra∣tione non vi∣vens. Bern in Cant. 5 Rati∣one homines jurentis reli∣gione hommes hominibus an∣testant. Boet: de consol. l 4. Pros. 3. Ʋltra homines prove nit probitas so∣la, infra horni∣nem detrudit improbitas tb. . Hom. that is, a righteous man that feareth God and kept his commandements: Hoc est enim torus homo, for this is the whole man, saith Solomon. And it is as if he should say, He is not a compleat man that's voyd of Gods holy fear, framing him to obedience, though otherwise never so west accomplished. This is that whereby one man doth as far excell another, as any man excells a beast, saith Bernard and Boetius. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbour, laith Solomon, let him dwell where he will. He is of better birth and breeding, of better alliance and atendance, of better place and office, of higher degree and dignity. The Holy Ghost stileth such the Nobles of the earth Ps. 16.3. honoura∣ble personages Psal. 45.9. plants of renown, Esay 5.3. privy-councellours to the great King Psal. 25.14. Princes in all lands Psal. 45.16. Kings and Priests to God Rev. 1.5. yea higher then heathen kings Psal. 89.27. and better then those mighty Monarks Dan. 7.37. Where it is very remarkable, that the Pro∣phet having set forth the greatnesse and glory of the Princes, Potentates and migh∣ty states in the four Monarchies, comes to speak at last of a kingdome which is the greatest under the whole heaven, and that is the kingdome of the saints of the most High. Hence is it that God himself makes a challenge to all the world besides in the be∣half of his Israel Deut. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee O people saved by the Lord! meaning mdeed, that no Nation under heaven, how happy so ever, was comparable to them. And hence it is also that the kings of the earth shall bring their glory to the church (as Constantine did) and coming to see, (as Theodosius did) an excellency in grace, a beauty in holinesse above any outward trappings, they shall leave the throne and palace to seek the sweet delights of the faithfull, and to sing their songs, Psal. 138.4, 5. Aencas Sylvius relates of Ingo King of Draves and Veneds,Chap. 20. that making on a time a stately feast, he invi∣ted thereunto all his Nobles (at that time Pagans) together with a multitude of poor christians. His Nobles he set in his hall below, and those poor Christians with himself in his presence-chamber, giving them all royall entertainment and attendance. At which when his Nobleswondred and stomacked, he told them this he did, not as he was King of Draves, but as King of another world, wherein these poor ragged people should be his compeeres and fellow-Princes. These Heathen∣Nobles might haply stumble hereat, as the Saracen Prince once did at a like speech of Charles the great His custome was to have ever at his meals a board of beg∣gers, feeding not farr from his table. This Prince Aigoland (for so was the Sa∣racens name) coming gallantly accompanied to the French Court, pretending that he would be baptized,Viri annis pan∣nis{que} obsiti. Melancthon apud Ioh. Manl. loc. com. pag. 361. and become a Christian, and being feasted by King Charles, asked what those Lazars and poor people were? Answer was returned, that these were the friends and servants of our God, whom we Christians worship. Whereupon he speedily depatted, desperately protesting, that he would not serve that God which could keep his servants no better. This man knew not that God hath chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of his king∣dome of glory. Smyrna the poorest of the seven Churches hath the richest price set upon it. The poor man indeed speaks supplications, and the rich man answe∣reth him roughly.Prov. 18.23 The world despiseth the poor though never so vetous, as the Prodigalls elder-brother did him, This thy son saith he, not this my brother, he disdains to call him brother, because of his poverty. So doth not the Lord
Christ. Of Queen Elisabeth it is said, that she hated no less, then did Mithri∣dates, such as maliciously persecuted vertue forsaken of fortune.Camdens Elisa. fol. 531. The poorest bondslave (if a free-man of Christ) when he suffers hard words, and ill usage from his master for well-doing, doth herein finde acception with God. 1 Pet. 2.19,Quales sunt pleri{que} verae Ecclesiae cives. Beza. 20. Be a man never so poor in estate, if withall he be poor in spirit, and pure in heart, the kingdome of God is his, Mat. 5.3. Gods kingdome indeed is not of this world, commeth not by observation, neither consisteth in meat and drink, in pomp and outward splendour, but in righteousnes and peace (as did that of Mel∣chisedech) and joy in the holy Ghost, unspeakable and glorious joy,Mr. Boltons Disc. of true Happ. Epist. dedicat. concerning which hear him that had felt it, and spoke by experience: Certain it is (saith a late Reverend Writer) that if a man were crowned with the royall state and im∣perial command of all the kingdomes upon earth: if his heart were enlarged to the utmost of all created capacity, and filled with all the exquisite, and unmixed pleasures that the reach of mortality and most ambitious curiosity could possibly devise, and might (without interruption and distast) enjoy them the length of the worlds duration, they were all nothing to the precious and peerlesse comforts of the kingdome of grace, but even for an hour. I speak the truth in Christ, and use no hyperbole, the spirit of all comfort, and consciences of all true christians bearing me witnesse. Hitherto He and I cannot better conclude this discourse, then he doth that, with a little alteration. Be we all entreated with a proportio∣nable zeal and fervency to encline and enlarge our affections to the pursuite and practise of so excellent and glorious a happinesse, that God may guide us with his counsell, and afterwards receive us to his glory Psal. 73. SECT. XIII. Let the Saints see their dignity, and be thankfull. LAstly, let Gods Jewels be hereby excited to a double duty. 1. Let them be joyfull in glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God be in their mouths,Jam. 1.9, 10 and a two-edged sword be in their hands Psal 149.5, 6. Let the brother of low degree rejoyce in that he is exalted (to that Christian parity spoken of Colos. 3.11.) but the rich in that he is made low: that is, that he is taken off from that high esteem he once had of outward honour and excellency before his conversion: whereas now he seeth they are but fading flow∣ers, things not worth the while: and is therefore called upon here to rejoyce in that true treasure, that fellowes him with his poor brother, poor in purse but rich in faith, before him haply in the best things, though far behinde him in worldly wealth and worship. The best is, that in Gods kingdome money bears no mastery, (as that Martyr said) neither is there respect of persons with God,Act. 10. but in every rank and degree of people, he that feareth him and worketh righte∣ousnesse is highly accepted in heaven. One such shall stand before him to turne away wrath, as Abraham and Lot, when ten thousand Sodomites shall not be look∣ed upon. And this is that that may stay up the heart of a poor despised christian against all the contempts and oppositions of the ungodly. God is his gold and his portion for ever Iob 22.25. Neither doth any covetous person so entirely love his gold (his god) and so set by his hid treasure, as God doth by his dear children: He will surely see to his own (will not every Infidell do as much?) and makes up his Jewels safe in the golden Cabinet of his gracious providence; as he did Noah in the Ark, Jeremy in the prison-court, Luther in his Pathmos, as he called it &c. God will one day right their wrongs, and clear thir innocency,Psal. 37.6 bring forth their righteousnesse as the light, and their judgements as the noon-day. The Church in the Canticles was wounded by the watch-men as an evill-doer, judg'd as a disho∣nest woman, whose feet would not abide in her house, no not in the night∣season: they beat her, and took away her vail, branding her thereby with a note of infamy and disloialty to her Lord,Ez. 23: 25, as and husband whom she went to look out Cant. 5.7. All which notwithstanding the daughters of Jerusalem, the
truely religious, discetned her beauty in the dark night of her tribulation, and con∣fessed that she was fair and glorious, Chap. 6.1. Christ also passing by her former remissenesse, and unworthy usage of him, professeth that she was as amiable in his eyes as ever: her hair, teeth, temples, all, as fair and well featured, yea that she was fair as the Moon, cleer as the Sun, that Sun of righteousnesse, having blotted out all her sins, as a cloud, Isa. 44.22. so that none of her transgressions could be found: though lookt for, Fer. 50.20. but every tongue that rose up against her should she condemn, Isa. 54.17. Further, he hath provided that every body do love and honour his people, he hath given a charge to that end in diverse scriptures. Now what is wan∣ting in men, himself will make up, honoring & pleading for them in the hearts of their very enemies, who cannot but be confounded many times, and stand amazed at the height of spirit, and resolution that possesseth their hearts, and at the sober and undaunted majesty that shines in the faces of those that fear the Lord. Now if he say, Grace, Grace unto us, it should suffice to encourage us in building the towre of godlinesse. Yea it should make us hold out, to lay the very last stone thereof with joy, Zach. 4.7. being vexed at nothing more then at the vile dulnesse of our hearts, that are no more affected with there indeleble ravishments. SECT. XIV. Let the Saints see their duty and be carefull. 2. Next,1 Pet. 2.9 Mat. 5.14 Qui in excelso aetatem agunt, corum sacta cuncti mortales novere. Salust. ad Caesarem. . 2 Thess. 3.2 compact of meer incon∣gruities. . Nazian in Mat. 19 Ideò deteriores sumus, quia meliores esse debemus. 1 Sam. 6.3 In maxima li∣bersate mini∣malicentia. Salust. Deus in circuitu sanctorum. . Ephes. 5.15 . Posse & nolle nobile est. Benesicium po∣stulat officium. as Gods servants must see their dignity, and take comfort in it, so must they also look to their duty, and take care about it. And thisis to walk wor∣thy of the high and heavenly vocation wherewith they are called: remembring alwayes, that they are a chosen generation, a royall priesthood, a peculiar people, the light of the world, the salt of the earth to season the rest, a city seated on an hill, conspicuous to all the countrey. The Sunne may go assoon unseen, as they unobserved: there are that watch for their halting, and snatch at any thing, where∣at they may snarl and cavil; be it but an indiscreet speech that falls from such, it's enough to break down the banks of blasphemy. Oh labour to silence these absurd men, to stop an open mouth, to cut off all occasion of obloquy. Any spot is spied in white apparrell, and the least stain doth evil upon a royall robe. A small flaw in a jewel is a great blemish, and so is a small defect in a Christian. His heart is made pure by the blood of Christ, and fine white linen is sooner and deeper stained then course rags. Therefore are such worse, saith Salvian, though they be no worse then others, because they ought to be better. Adde hereunto, that it is some sin∣gular thing that God requires of his servants. He will take that from Philistines, that he will not brook from Israelites; who thought they might carry Gods Ark in a new-cart, as those Pagans had done before them, but they payed for their pre∣sumption. Greatest States afford least liberty. His Saints are round about him, and, like good Angels, they stand always in the presence of their heavenly Father. All holy circumspection therefore and exact walking is required of them, even an excellency above ordinary. Every Calling hath a comelinesse appertaining to it. The Scholler behaves himself otherwise then the clown, the Courtier then the car∣ter, the Prince then the pesant: so should a Christian otherwise then an unbeleever, then a profligate professour, a carnall Gospeller. He should walk nobly, bravely, gallantly, worthy of God, and as becometh a Saint, considering that of Bernard, in every enterprize of his, an liceat, an deceat, an expediat: whether the thing bee lawfull, seemly, suitable to his state. Not stretching alway to the utmost of his chain, lest he break a link, but beating off a sollicitation to sinne, as Nehemiah did to cowardize, Shall such a man as I do it? God forbid that I should part with my patrimony, said Naboth: that I should leave my fat, and my sweet, said the Vine in Jothams parable: that I should look back with Lots wife, having set my hand to Christs plow: that I should flinch from my colours, having taken his presse∣money, disgrace his house, being received into his retinue. Great things are be∣stowed upon me, great things are expected from me. Every mercy calls for duty:
every deliverance commands obedience. God hath elected me for a vessel of ho∣nour, shall I defile my self with the kitchin-stuffe of uncleannesse? He hath bought me with a price shall not I yeeld my self up to his service? He hath adopted me for his childe, shall not I carry my self as a childe? he hath sanctified me by his spirit, shall I pollute his temple? He hath inrighted me to a kingdom, and keeps a crown for me, shall I lay it to gage for ever trifle? shall Isay with Esau, what is this birth-right? Oh let there be no root of bitternesse, no profane person amongst you, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birth-right, and is therefore so often branded for it with this is Edom. CHAP. IIII. God is a Father to all his faithfull servants. And I will spare them, as a man sparethhis own son that feareth him. VVHat gracious respects and high honours the God of heaven puts upon the persons of them that fear him,Psal. 115.13. both small and great, hath been said already. That which follows in the text, concerneth their performances.Psal. 19.11. For every childe in Gods house know's his own work; in doing whereof as there is great reward, so there is no little favour shewed him, in case it be not all out so well done. For I will spare them, saith the Lord of hosts, as a man spareth his own son that serves him, I will be no lesse propitious unto him, then is the most indulgent parent to his most obedient childe. Videmus ergo &c. We see then, saith judicious Cal∣vin, the Prophets purpose in this precious promise. 1. That they shal serve God, and serve him as sons do, that is, ingenuously and freely. 2 That God will graciously accept the service of such, taking in God part from them what they are able, and pardoning the rest. These are his notes upon the text, and these shall be ours. 1. That God is a father to all his faithful servants: Deus nobis est, Pater, & nos sibi reconcilia∣vit in Christo Calvin in loc. He looks upon such as serve him in sincerity as upon sons and daughters. 2. That he will surely shew like mercies and mildnesse to his children in their faults and failings, in their wants and weaknesses, as the kindest father would do to his dearest son that serveth him. For the former point: The promise of pardon is here fitly made sub patris parabola, saith Gualther, under the similitude of a father.Figuier in loc. And the sense is thus much, saith another Interpreter,: although I seem for a time to the blinde moles of the world, to be negligent of those that are diligent about me, of my best, and busiest servants; yet I think upon them still as my dearest children, and when I may be thought most carelesse and cruel towards them, then am I a most propi∣tious and sin-pardoning father, fully reconciled unto them in Christ, for there comes in the kinred, according to that of our Saviour in his message by Mary to his distressed disciples after his resurrection, I ascend unto your father,Iohn. 20.17. and my father, mine and yours, and therefore yours because mine. For as many as recei∣ved him, saith St. Iohn, to them he gave priviledge to become the sons of God.Ioh. 1.12. And again, when the fulnesse of time was come, saith another Apostle, God sent forth his son (his natural, onely begotten son) made of a woman (and so by per∣sonal union of the two natures in one Christ, his son by a new relation,Gal. 4.4. according to that, This day have I begotten thee, and all to the end,) that we may receive the adoption of sons. That we which by nature were children of wrath, and by practise, children of the devil, might by divine acceptation and grace be made the children of God: who had predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,Ephe. 1.4, 5. to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved One.
SECT. I. Reasons hereof drawn from the causes. IN which heavenly Text, we have the first and chief ground of this doctrine, drawn from the causes of our spiritual sonship. 1. The fundamental and original cause, Gods decree of election by grace; we have an act for it in Gods eternal counsel. According as he hath chosen us in Christ before the soundation of the world &c. For which cause also the predestinate are called the Church of the first-born who are written in heaven. Heb. 12.23, And whom he did foreknow, saith Saint Paul, them he did predestinate also to be conformed to the image of his son: like him in glory, as well as in sufferings, like in being sons, as he is a son, that he might be (even according to his humanity) the first-born among many brethren.Rom. 8.29. 2. The meritorious and procuring, or working cause of our adoption, is here set forth to be the Lord Christ, in whom he (as a father) hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things Ephe. 1.3. but all in Christ, and all in this order. A christian by the Gospel is made a beleever. Now faith afteran unspeak∣able manner engrafteth him into the body of Christ the natural son, and hence we become the adopted sons of God: it being the property of faith to adopt as well as to justifie, ratione objecti by means of the object Christ, up whom faith layeth hold. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.26. Children, I say, not by creation as Adam is called the son of God Luk. 3. because he was produced in the similitude of God; but by marriage and mystical union with Christ the fecond Adam, the heir of all, who hath 1. Laid down the price of that great priviledge Heb. 9.15. even his own most precious blood, redeeming us thereby that were under the law, that we might re∣ceive the adoption of sons Gal. 45. 2. He hath sealed it up to us by his spirit, that earnest of our inheritance Eph. 1.13. called therefore the spirit of adoption, and the spirit of Gods son (as springing out of his death,Rom. 8.15. Joh. 16.14. Gal 4.6 and procured by his intercession) For because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts crying Abba, father. 3. Here is the motive and impulsive cause: and that is the good pleasure of his will,Joh. 1.12 1 John 3.1. 2 Tim. 1. vlt. his absolute independent grace and mercy was the sole inductive. He giveth us this dignity, saith St Iohn in his Gospel. And what more free then gift? he shew∣eth us this love, saith he in his epistle, because it was the time of love, that we should be called the sons of God. So that our Adoption is not a priviledge purchased by con∣tract of justice,Rom. 8.23. Prov. 16.4. but an inheritance cast upon us of free grace and goodnesse. The Lord shew mercy to Onesiphorus in that day when our adoption shalbe crowned with its ful accomplishment. Lastly here we have the final cause of our adoption,: heprise of the glory of his grace. This is the end God propounds to himself in this, as in all other his works, as having none higher then himself, to whom to have respect, for he is the most highest. God hath made all things for himself, yea the wicked also for the day of evil: viz. for the glory of his Justice and power (as he told Pharaoh Rom. 9.17.) but especially of his grace: sith all that his justice doth in the Repro∣bation of some, tendeth to this ultimate end of all, that the riches of his grace may be the more displayed in the election of others. SECT. II. Reasons from the effects of his father-hood. A Second reason followeth from the effects, and those are no lesse demonstrative of the point then the causes. These are 1. Gods fatherly affections. 2. His expressions, both which speake him a father to all his.
For his affection, first, to his people: Albeit they be but his Adopted chil∣dren, yet he loves them more then any naturall father doth his own bowels.Jam. 1. ult. Hence he is called the father by an eminency, as if there were no father to him, none like him, none besides him, as indeed there is not originally and properly. Called he is the father of all mercies,Eph. 3.15  Paternitas, pae∣rentela. Math. 23.9 the fountaine of all that mercy; that is found in any father: all is but a spark of his flame, a drop of his ocean, Yea he is stiled the father of all the fatherhoods in heaven and earth. Whence also our Saviour, Call no man, saith He, your father on earth, for one is your father, even God. To enter comparison in some few particulars. First a father loves freely, not so much for that his child is witty, or wealthy,Patriam amat quisque, nonquia magna, sed quia sua. Sen. ep. 66. sic et pro∣lem De mercatore pro filijs suis duobus captis seipsum offe∣rente, ut filijs servatis ipse interficeretur; lege Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 24. or wel-favour'd, as for that he is his. There needs no other argument to a father but that, this is my child. So is it with God. Deut. 7.7. Ezek. 36.32. Secondly, a father loves hugely: there is an ocean of love in a fathers heart: he loves his child as well if not better then himself; as Joab twitted David with his excessive love to his unnaturall Absolom. There is also an immense, incompa∣rable, incomprehensible love in God toward his children, an hyperbole, an excesse of love, a love passing knowledge Eph. 3.19. And that passeth all the dimen∣sions. It is higher then heaven Psal. 36.5. deeper then hell Psal. 86.13. longer then the earth, and broader then the sea Psal 98.4. & Psal. 104.24. a transcendent, boundlesse, bottomlesse love, truely exalted above the love of na∣turall parents, which yet is wonderous great. Psal. 103.13. Esay, 49.15. But infinitly short of Gods love, it makes not the tith of it. Thirdly, a father loveth constantly and unchangably, yea though his child be never so untoward and disobedient, as David did his Amnon, and his Abs∣em, even to the last of them did he love them. So, and much more then so doth God his children. For as himself is an everlasting father, so is his love everlasting. Esay 9.6. & 49.14. His compassions faile not. Lam. 3.22. He cannot grow out of kinde, nor be weary of loving. Having loved his own, saith the evangelist, to the end he loved them. Ioh. 13.1. Frown he can, if need be, hate he cannot: hide his face he may for a while, but his heart is ever ear∣ning towards them, his bowels are turned within him, his repentings are kin∣led together: scoe them he doth (other-whiles) with the rods of men,Hos. 11.8 Psal. 89. Esa. 57.7, 8, 9  Rom. 1 Psal. 27.10  Heb. 13. but the sure mercies of David he will never take from them. Naturall parents may prove unnaturall: not so our heavenly father, he is all bowels: they may hate where they loved, they may loath whom they liked; but he rests in his love. Zeph. 3.17. He hates putting away. Hos. 2. Davids father and mother may cast him out, but then God will gather him. Father Abraham may forget us, and Israel may disown us. Esay 63.16. But God hath said, I will not leave thee. I will not not not forsake thee. The Fathers and governours of the Church may, under a faire pretence of zeale, cast us out, and say, let the Lord be glori∣fied: but then shall God appeare to our joy, and they shall be ashamed. Esay 66.5. The fathers of our flesh are mutable, and fickle-minded,Jam. 1.17 but with the father of light is no shaddow of change, his love lasteth to all eternity without any alteration. SECT III. Other reasons from the effects of his fatherhood. NExt, as Gods affection to his children is more then fatherly, so are his expressi∣ons and provisions for them too. For, 1. Besides his eternall electing them to the adoption of children Eph. 1.4. It was he that took us out of the womb Psal. 22.9.Hos. 13.13 . Math. 28.19 that we might not (Ephraim-like that unwise son) stay over-long in the birth, and dye before we saw his marve∣lous light. It was he that baptized us into his own name, whereby we are called as a childe by his fathers. 2. He loves the very places they first breathed in the better for their sakes Ps. 86.7.
and the very ground they tread upon. Hence Judaea, the seate of the church, is called a delightsome land Mal. 3.12. the glorious land,Zach. 7.14 om. 4.13. Psal. 89.12 the land of desires or ornaments Dan. 11.41. yea Canaan, for this, is called the whore world, and Tabor and Hermon is put for the East and West of the world. 3. He chargeth all sorts, as they love him to love his lambs, his little ones, to handle them gently for his sake. He feeds them with sincere milk streaming from those full∣strutting breasts of consolation, the lively oracles, he brings them forth butter in a lordly dish Judg. 5.25. he makes them ready and unready,Esay 66.11 Act. 7. Ezek. 36.25 as new-borne-babes, lulling them asleep in a holy security, shifting them in their scapes by the clean water of his spirit in their sanctification, and the clean linnen of Christs righteous∣ness in their justification. He keepeth them from fire & from water, the fire of temp∣tation which the Dragon spers, and the water of persecution which he spews out of his mouth, as a flood,Rev. 12.4, 15 to drown thet avelling church, and to devour her babe as soon as it was borne. All this God doeth for his children assoon as they are any thing. Afterwards, as they grow up to any bignesse, he beares them in his bosome as a nursing-father bears the sucking child Num. 11.1. carries them in his armes till such time as they can go Esa. 46.4. guides them with is eye when they begin to finde their feet (I taught Ephraim also to go,1 Thes. 2.7 taking them by their armes Hos. 11.3. leads them in his hand, as a horse in the wildernesse Es. 63.13. If the way be too rough for their tender feet, or too long for their short legs, he lifts them over by his spirit, he chargeth also his angels to bear them in their hands, who are as glad of such an office as the ser∣vants are to get their yong master in their armes. It's certain that no yong Prince goes better guarded and attended then a childe of God. Heb. 1. ult. Next for their diet and apparrell: God feeds his children with the kidnyes of wheat, with the hidden Manna, with the bread of life, with the best of the best, fat things full of marrow,Gen. 47 12 Luk. 15. . Diog: apud Plutarch. Prov. 15.15 wines on the lees well refined Isa. 25 6. Thus he nourish∣eth them (as Ioseph did his fathers family in Egypt) as a little child is nourished. And for apparell they have it of the finest. Bring forth the best robe, and the best ring &c. the righteousnesse of the saints, even the red upper-coat of Justification, and the white under-coat of sanctification. They are ever in their holy-day cloaths, their festivall apparrell every day-being the christian mans holy-day, and he having within him a continuall feast. 6. For their teaching and tuition, Prov. 1.4 . Ioh. 16.8 Eph 5.9 Cant. 2.4 Such comfort there is in Christs pre∣sence, (though but in the womb) as it made Iohn to spring. Luc. 1 Shindler: Pen∣tag. Buxtorf. Lexic. Cartw: Harm. The North is a nipping∣wind, the South a che∣rishing wind, but both for the saints. D. Sibbes they are all taught of God Esay 54.13. who 1. by his word makes them wise to salvation, gives subtlety to the simple, and to the youg man knowledge and discretion. 2. by his spirit of revelation convin∣ceth them of their false principles, refells their fallacious reasonings, unteacheth them the devils learning, and then leads them into all truth and goodnesse: for the fruit of the spirit is in all goodnesse, righteousnesse and truth. And of this teach∣ing speaketh St. Paul 1 Thes. 4.0. and St. Iohn 1 Epist. 2.27. 7. Next for their delight and recreation, he allowes them his garden to walk into, his wine-cellar to go down into. He pleaseth himself wondrously in their company, be they but two or three of them, he is in the midst: as once he made the third with those two going Emaus. He sets them between his legs (as it were) so some read that text Deut 33.3, He loved tho people and (as an effect thereof) they sat down at thy feet, or, they were set between thy feet, as the fa∣thers darlings. Moreover, when he hath them there, he rejoyceth over them with joy, yea he rejoyceth ouer them with singing. Zeph.p 3.17. like as earthly parents dandle, dance, and sing their little ones upon their knees. Further, he is wondrous choyce and chary of his children, so that he cannot abide the cold wind should blow upon them. The sun must not smite them by day, nor the moon by night, and what wind soever blow, whether North or South (and what more contrary then those?) they must blow good to Gods children Cant. 4. ult. In a word, he thinks nothing good that he hath to himself, except they may share a part. And is not this the part of a loving parent? 8. Lastly, for matter of maintenance, and outward subsistence, your hea∣venly father knowes that ye need these things also Mat. 6.32. and it's enough for you that he knowes it. He holds them to hard-meat sometimes, but then they have it of free-cost, when the wicked pay deare for their tid-bits, and dainty
morsels. Their meat is sawced, and their drink spiced with the wrath of God, Iob 20.14. their very table is a snare to them. The Inne-keeper gives his guests the bests dishes, but reserves the inheritance for his children: so here, God gives his people mony in their purses, so much as will serve turne to beare their char∣ges home, to buy them necessaries, and to keep them true men at least; though they have not to lavish and riot, because he knows their weaknesse that way; and therefore holds them (mostly) to straight allowance. Not out of niggar∣dize, I must tell you: for he could beteeme them more meanes, and so he doth also to some of his better children, that have grace to use it, and make them friends with it. But the less he allowes them here, the more he layes up for them in heaven. Psal. 89.28, & 31, 19. And when they are once come to the full stature of a man in Christ (for now they are in their nonage) the whole inheri∣tance shall be given them of the father Rom. 8.16. They shall have power over all creatures Rev. 2.26. and possession of that new heaven and new earth. 2. Pet. 3.13. And if these be not the expressions and provisions of a bountifull father, pray y' what is? SECT. IIII. God no Father to the wicked, what ever they pretend to him. NOw for Application, Doth God the Lord look upon such as sons and daugh∣ters as sincerely serve him? How then (think we) doth he look upon all such as serve not God but Mammon, as serve not the Lord Christ but their own bellies their base lusts, this present evill world, nay the God of this world,Matth. 6. Rom. 16. 2 Cor. 4.4 Ioh. 8. 1 Ioh. 3.8 Ver. 9.10 . whose works they do, and will do, and are therefore of their father the devill. This, saith St. Iohn, entitles the devill to a man; for he that commits sin is of the devill, that's flat. And again, In this the children of God are manifest and the children of the devill, He that is borne of God doth not commit sin. Well he may slip into it of infir∣mity, and at unawares Gal. 6.1. A sheep may slip into a slough, but delights not to wallow in it. He doth not work iniquity on set purpose, he doth not sell over himself to sin with Ahab,Rom. 6. Eph. 4. he doth not hire out his members as weapons of wickednesse, working all uncleannesse with greedinesse. No, this is not the guise of a childe of God, but of an impe of hell, of a brat of fathomlesse perditi∣on. They have corrupted themselves, saith Moses,Deut. 32.5 their spot is not the spot of his children, they are a perverse and crooked generation. And yet who so forward as these to claime kindred of the Almighty, to fawn upon God, and call him father? Wilt thou not from this time (saith He to Idolatrous Israel, that had in this behalf an whores forehead, a wainscot face hatcht all over with impudence) wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, my father, art thou not the guide of my youth? Will he reserve his anger for ever? will he keep it to the end? Here were good words: Sed quid verba quaero, facta cum videam? How canst thou say,Judg. 16.15 Ier. 3.2, 3, 4, . thou lovest me, when thy heart is not with me? Behold, saith God in the same place, thou hast spoken and done evill things as thou couldest, thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredomes and wickednesse, and hast thou yet a sace to call me Father? Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God 2 Ioh. 9. He that walketh not in the steps of Abrahams faith, hath not Abraham to his father Rom. 4.12. what-ever he pretends to him with those braving Jews. Ioh. 8. Tell me not here that God hath blessed you, as a father, sustein'd you with corne and wine Gen. 27.37. given you of the fatnesse of the earth, and of the dew of heaven &c. for Esau had as good a portion as this, and yet a cast-away: and Abraham gave the moveables to the children of the concubins, whom he lesse respected, but Isaac had the inheritance. Oh but we are children of the free-woman, borne and bred in the bosome of the church, and enjoy many outward priviledges. So did Esau, and yet was ha∣ted of God, so did Iudas, and yet a firebrand of hell. Mat. 3. Neither is it any such businesse, as many make of it, that they have had their Christendome. For unlesse they be withall baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire,
with the spirit of judgement and of burning,Esay 4.4 whereby they have so put on Christ, as that they are become the children of God, by faith in him, Gal. 3.26, 27. Its pity that ever Font-water was spilt upon their faces. Saul was circumcised, and yet Da∣vid calls him Cushite,Psal. 7. Title. or Ethiopian; and unregenerate Israel is to me as Ethiopia, saith God, Amos 9.7. and as Gomorrah, Esay 1.10. notwithstanding all their ex∣ternall services, and sudibrious devotions. Christ shall one day rid his house, and wash his hands of all such unworthy hang-byes, and powerlesse pretenders. Depart from me, shall they hear, to their everlasting amazement. Go, get ye to the gods whom ye have chosen.Esay 51.1 Look to the rock from whence ye were hewen, and to the hole whence ye were digged: see what your father the devil will do for you, for Ile take no further charge of you: his work ye have done, and his wages ye shall have. And sith ye have runne out with the Prodigall, and loathing such wholesome fare as my house afforded, ye have fed hungerly on those murthering morsels of iniquity, the devils husks, therefore shall they stick in your throats, like the envenomed arrows of the Almighty, thoroughout all eternity. SECT. V. Terrour to those that maligne or misuse Gods children. BUt secondly, is God a Father to all faithfull Christians? how ill-advised then are all such as either by their violent hands, or virulent tongues, misuse or ma∣ligne them? yea, that offer them the least affront or offence, despite or displea∣sure? For know they not whose children they are, and to whose charge they be∣long? Shall not God avenge his own, though he bear long with them? Very Infidels and worse will defend their own. Very beasts will see to the safety of their young ones, and spend their lives freely for their rescue. Amongst fowls, the Phoenix is famous, and the Pellican much more, for reviving her dead birds, with her heart blood. Now, is there mercy and good nature in a man, in a bird, in a beast, in the creature, in the unreasonable creature also, and can we without blas∣phemy, or extreme injury,It is a Spanish proverb: He that wipeth the childs nose, kisseth the mothers check. Gen. 4. Num 12.14 imagine worse of God? It's more then evident to him that hath but half an eye, or doth observe any thing at all in Gods word, or works, that as he taketh notice of smallest curtesies, even to a cup of cold water, to requite them, so of their least or lightest indignities, and injuries to repay them, be it but a frown or a frump. Cain shall answer it before the Lord, if he but lowre upon Abel. Miriam shall be a leper seven dayes at least, and stand ashamed of her fathers spetting in her face, if she but mutter against Moses. An Ammonite, or a Moabite shall be bastardized, and banished the beauty of holinesse, the thre∣shold of the Sanctuary, to their tenth generation, merely for an omission, because they met not Gods first-born Israel with bread and water in the wildernesse: How much more because they hired Balaam to curse him, Deut. 23.3, 4. which when he could not do, God turning his curse into a blessing unto his children, because he loved them, verse 4. yet for that he shewed his good-will to have done it, and more∣over taught Balac to lay a stumbling-block before Gods Israel, to eat things sacri∣ficed to Idols, and to commit fornication, Rev. 2.14. therefore was he slain by the sword of the Lord.Gen. 34.31 For is she not our sister? should be make our sister a whore? said those two brethren in iniquity: which if it seemed a sufficient plea to them, (as likewise to Absolom, in the behalf of his sister Tamar) for that barbarous and bloo∣dy massacre, how shall the Lord drench and drown the sword of his justice in the bowels of such as wrong his children to his face, and do them all the despite that may be?Esth. 7.8 what will they force the Queen also in the house? will they offend Gods little-ones, rake into his bowels, pollute his presence with the slaughter, or but misusage of his children?Job 9.3 Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? Hath ever any waxed fierce against God and prospered? Look to it, all ye that smite any child of his, either with hand or tongue. 'Twere better a milstone were hanged about your necks, and your selves drowned in the depth of the Sea, then that ye offend one of these little-ones,Mat. 18.6, 10 if a beleever. For I tell you (Christ tells you) that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of their heavenly Father, waiting for a commission to do speedy execution on the enemies of his children.
SECT. VI. Try your title to God as a Father: Marks. EXhortation, and first, to try our title to God as a loving Father, by our care to serve him as obedient children. There be sundry distinctive notes of a child of God sparsed here and there, up and down the Scriptures: but that in the Text shall suffice for the present, and it is infallible. I will spare them, as one spares his own sonne that serves him. Every sonne then of his serves him, we see, and not as a slave his Lord, but as a son serves his father. How's that? First, cheerfully and willingly: Every one that is born of God, serves him with gladnesse, Psal. 100.2. loves to be his servant, takes hold of his covenant, counts it his meat and drink to do the will of his heavenly Father, in whose house therefore he hath a name better then of a sonne or daughter, Esay 56.6. Next, reverently, with a filiall fear and awfull respect to God as his father, whose favour he finds better then life, and whose displeasure he fears, and hath felt more bitter then death, Heb. 12.27. 1 Pet. 1.17. Psal. 2.11. How fearfull is this place, said Jacob? where yet he had seen visions of love.Gen. 28 Thirdly, confidently and with an humble boldnesse, as well assured of his Fathers both assistance and acceptance: treating with him ever and anon by affectionate prayer (as God hath no dumb children) and making his requests known unto him with affiance of accesse, and successe in all his suits: which the phrase of crying Abba, Father, also importeth. See Heb. 4.16. Sincerely, and entirely, both 1. For subject, not having a heart and a heart, (as that desperate Neapolitan said, he had one for God, and another for the devil) not carrying two faces under a hood, (as one wittily saith of Haymo and Remigius:) which double-dealing is most detestable in a child toward his father, (we say of an arrant dissembler, He would not spare to cozen even his own father) and no good child will offer it. But serving him with singlenesse of heart; yea with all the heart,Dent. 10.12 Rom. 12.1 2 Cor. 6.20 and all the soul: presenting our bodies also, as a whole burnt sacrifice, which is our reasonable service, yea glorifying him with both our spirits and bodies, which are the Lords: Not offering to detain from him that hath bought us with a price, any part of his purchase; for why should we lie to the Holy Ghost? All Gods children are such as will not lie, Esay 63.8.Act. 5.3, 4 but obey from the heart that form of doctrine, whereunto, denying themselves, they have been delivered, rather seeking to be good, then seeming to be so. 2. For object: Every true child of God obeys his father in all, as well as in any part or point of duty.Rom. 6.17 He is a doer of righ∣teousnesse, 1 Joh. 3.10. a fulfiller of all righteousnesse, Mat. 3.1 Joh. 3.10 something (at least) he is doing at it, as he is able (and this distinguisheth him from a child of the devil, saith St. John) he follows after it (as Solomons expression is) as a man follows his trade, wherein use makes mastery: he lifts at the latch, though he cannot do open the door: he shews his good will, and is humbled for his failing: when either he mis∣seth of his work, or marres it in the manner. So purifying himself by the practise of mortification, as God is pure, in some truth of resemblance, and all out of a right hope, that he is his child, 1 Joh. 3.2, 3. Constantly, and unweariably. A good child will be serviceable to his father, in whatsoever he can, so long as they two shall live together. Semblaby, Gods chil∣dren serve him in righteousnesse and holinesse, all the dayes of their lives.Luk. 1.75 Thus David, as he swore himself to Gods service, and promised to dwell in his house for ever, without shifting his service, so he performed it accordingly: for he served out his whole time, as an Apprentice to the trade, Act. 13.36, 22. and spent all his dayes (after he was once bound) in doing all the wills of God,. one as well as other. Lastly, unanimously with the rest of his fellow-servants, with one consent, and one shoulder, as the scripture speaketh, Zeph. 3.9. observing our Lords last charge, the same in effect with that of Joseph to his brethren: Fall not out by the way, but bee at peace among your selves, loving one another out of a pure heart fervently. For, by this shall your selves know, that ye are my children, 1 Joh. 3.10, 13. and
by this shall all men know,Heb. 4 that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another: and seale up this love by stirring up your selves, among your selves, to love and good workes. Lo, These are the signes of such a servant of God as he will own for a son, and account of as a Jewell to be made up in his Magazine. If ye be such, ye are made for ever: As if otherwise SECT. VII. Settle this, that ye are Gods children, and how. MY second Exhortation is, that ye give no rest to your eyes, nor sleep to your ey-lids, till you have secured and settle this to your selves: it being a mat∣ter of that moment, that without nothing can be safe, nothing comfortable. Now to become children of God there is no other way under heaven, then to passe thorough the narrow womb of repentance, and be born againe. For flesh and blood cannot inherit:1 Pet. 1.3 Gal. 5.21 and all unrighteous persons are utterly excluded from the benefit of Adoption, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And yet such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified. And how justified? but by the name, that is, by the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ apprehended by faith, which adopts as well as justifies? And how sanctified? but by the spirit of our God,1 Cor. 6.10: 11 Homo templum Dei: Deus ara hominis. whose office and operation it is, to transfuse the divine nature into us, and to erect that faire fabrick of the new man in our hearts for a temple to himself; that he may dwell in us, and walk in us, yea secretly and sweetly say to us, being now separated from all il I courses and companies, I will be a father unto you,2 Cor 6.1.6, 17, 18. and ye shall be my sonnes and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. SECT. VIII. Let all Gods children know their Father: and how. INstruction to all such as are received into the number of Gods children, as ever they expect his blessing, or respect their birth-right, to discharge that duty that this dignity calles for. And first to know their father: So to know God as a child doth his father, not only with an apprehensive but an effective knowledge, that unites the heart unto him, labours not only after an union, but a unity with him. We are all by nature like runagate children, who would never have kept neer their parents house,Hos 4 but assembled themselves by troopes, in harlots houses, with the prodigall, where whordome and wine, and new wine hath taken away our hearts: the things of this life are so neer and naturall to us, so present and pleasant, that we cannot ascend into heaven to learne wisdom, to get the knowledge of the Holy One, Prov. 30.3, 4. The spirit of fornication hath so besotted us, that we have not so much as a mind to look toward God. Hence that complaint. I have brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox knoweth his owner, and the asse his masters crib, but Israel doth not know; my people doth not con∣sider. Do ye thus requite the Lord,Isa. 1.2, 3 Deut. 32.6 Psal. 14.3 Esa. 64.7 Judg. 18.24 Isa. 65.1 1 Chron. 28.9 O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy fa∣ther &c? But there is none that understandeth, and seeketh God, none that stir∣rith up himself to take hold of God &c. Gracelesse and heedlesse impes we are all, that will not once take knowledge our of father, or cry after him though lost, as Micah did after his lost idols: albeit we have so tasted of his sweetnesse, and he hath said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by his name. But thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy fathers, yea God thy fa∣ther: for, I will be his father and he shall be my son, said the Lord to David.
2 Sam. 7.14.Telemachus apud Homer. Odyss. a. 1 Ioh. 2 13 We use to say (and we have it from the Greeks) that he is a wise child that knows his father. But he is no child of God, that knowes not him for his father. I write unto you babes, saith St. Iohn, because ye have known the father. Loe he is not yet a babe in Christ that hath not some knowledge of this, that God is his father. True it is that the most gray headed, and most experienced Christian knowes but in part, and imperfectly, because he is taught but lamely, we prophecy in part 1 Cor. 13.9.. Exod. 33. Isa. 6.2 Pet. 3.18 Heb. 1.3  Lumen de lu∣mine. we see here but as in a glasse ob∣scurely, we see but Gods back-parts, the later end of his traine: we hear of him here by the hearing of the eare, but it is no more then as the later end of a sen∣tence, or so much only as the Eccho resounds. But we must be getting and grow∣ing in this grace, even in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. He is the brightnesse of his fathers glory, and the expresse image of his person. The beam of the Sun is not so like the body of the Sun, the character on the wax is not so like the seal that imprints it, nay milk is not so like milke, as Christ is like his father. He is up and down the self-same that his Father is: they differ in nothing,Christus est alius à patre, non aliud. but that the one is the father, and not the son, the other is the son, and not the father. Hence that of our Saviour to Philip, when he said, Lord shew us the father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? He that hath seen me,Ioh. 14.8, 9 hath seen the Father, and how sayest thou then, shew us the Father? The very same All-powerfull God, who in fellowship of his sacred person hath a soul and body glorified, the same spirituall nature is the nature of the Father: As if the same soul and body that is in you, were communicated with the person of your child. Well might our Saviour therefore say, If ye had known me, ye should have known my father also. John 14.7. Oh learne and labour there∣fore to profit more and more in the mystery of Christ, to know him better in his natures, in his offices, in his workes both of Abasement and Advancement, of Humiliation and Exaltation: but especially to know him as St. Paul did (for the other you may easily know out of every Catechisme) to know him and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death Phil. 3.10. This is the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus ver. 8. this is life eternall Ioh. 17.3. We know no more of God and his will, then we pra∣ctise, and have experience of: Christ is said to know no sin, because he did none: and Eli's sons knew not the Lord; (though priests) because they feared him not: they deteined the truth, they knew, in unrighteousnesse, as those Philosophers did Rom. 1.18. SECT. IX. Let them thankfully acknowledge his free grace in their adoption: and why. A Second duty we owe to God as his children is thankfull acknowledgement of that never-enough adored depth of his singular love in our Adoption. The absolute and independant freedome of his grace herein was such, that without any the least colour of cause, or shew of reason in us, without any defect on his part or desert on ours, He drew us out of the most vile and servile condition that could be, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. David was to be gathe∣red to his fathers,Psal. 132.11 Esay 9.6 1 Tim. 1.17 Psal. 2. and it was therefore a singular favour to him that he should have children to sit upon his throne after him. But God is the King immortall, as St. Paul stiles him, the everlasting Father, as Esay, and therefore needs no son to succeed him. But if he did, he had a son of his own as like him as is possible, whom also he hath set as King upon his holy hill of Sion. Amongst men, those that have children of their own, if they adopt another mans childe, it is common∣ly because their own are unfit for succession either from some bodily weaknesse as not likely to leave issue, or for basenesse of spirit, and badnesse of behaviour, as uncapable and unfit for government. Now none of all this can without horrible
blasphemy be said of the Lord Christ. But admit the case had so stood with God, that it had been requisite he should have adopted any for his sons, and heirs, the good Angels might have drawn away his affection from us by their holinesse, or the evill angels his compassion, for their wretchednesse: or he could, for a need, of very stones have raised up children to himself, to be heirs of his king∣dome in Christ. It was his will only, and nothing else, that moved his will to set his love upon us, as we may see both in the type Deut. 7.7. and in the truth Eh. 1.5. Surely as there was no defect or need in him, so there was as little me∣rit or desert in us. For whereas in the civill adoption (as when Pharaohs daughter adopted Moses, Mordecai adopted Esther, Jacob the two sons of Joseph) there is something in the Adopted that moveth the Adoptant: cither some outward in∣ducement, as kindred, beauty, favour &c. or some inward, as the gifts of the minde, understanding, ingenuity, hopefulnes &c. there was nothing at all in us to move God to such a mercy. For outward respects, there was neither kindled to mte him (for our father was an Amorite,Ezek. 16.3, 4, 5, 6. Christ calls his spouse first his Love, and thn his fair one. Ct. 2.10. Homo est in∣verss decalo∣gus. Eph. 2.1, 2. our mother a Hittite: we were the sons of the perverse rebellious woman, as Saul reproached Ionathan) nor yet beauty to intice him, for we were in our blood, in our blood, in our blood, when he spread the skirt of his garment over us, and said unto us, Live. Blood is so many severall times there named, to note our extreme filthinesse: so little amia∣ble were we when he set his love upon us. And for any inward motive, grace (which is the only thing that God looks after Psal. 14.2.) is not at all to be found in the naturall man. Nay he stands a∣crosse, and is quite contrary to it; as being acted and agitated by the devill, and held captive, as a slave by him, at his pleasure. Loe this was our estate, thus the Lord found us when he came to adopt us. And indeed Adoption (to speak properly, as it is a borrowed terme from the civil law) imports as much. For it is the raking of one fo a son, who is, for present, in some servitude to another. And so Lawyers distinguish it from Arrogation, which is, say they, the chu∣sing of one for a son that is free, his own man, & not under the command of another. But such (alass) was not our case:. Gal. 3.23. for both Jews and Gentiles were shut up under sin, fist shut up close prisoners in the devills dungeon, whose works we did, as slaves, and could not but do them, whose image we bear, as sons, and could not but resemble him: being as like the devill, as if we had been sptout of his mouth, and had perish∣ed together with him in our own filth and blood like that forlorne infant, Ezek. 16. had not he of his mere grace and goodnesse, when it was thetime of loves, said unto us, Live, yea when we were weltring in our blood, he said Live. Oh let the deep and due consideration of this matchlesse mercy and free favour ravish and affecti hearts, to greatest cheerfulnesse and thankfulnesse: let it swallow up an otents, and make us send up many an humble, joyfull, and praisefull heart to him. SECT. X. Let them honour their father: and how. A Third duty we are to performe to God as a father is Reverence, according to that in the Prophet,Mal. 1.6 A son honoureth his father. If then I be a father, wher's mine honour? and that in the Decalogue, Honour thy father and thy mother, which, saith St. Paul, it the first commandement with promise. Promise, I say, of long life to him that (by honouring them) lengtheneth his parents life.. Hirocl. Reverence and loving respect to parents never went unrecompenced, as in Iapheth, Isaac, Ruth, others: much lesse shall that to God: for, them that honour him he will ho∣nour. Here then we are 1.1 Sam. 2. to have an high and honourable esteem of God in our hearts: lifting up, and laying open those everlasting doors, that the King of glo∣ry may come in,Psal. 24. and come in state, in his own likenesse. Ignorant people cast him into a dishonourable mould as it were: they have bald and base conceits of God: they think him altogether such a one as themselves, or worse: they change the
glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man &c.Psal. 50.21. Rom. 1.13.26. . 2 Cor. 6.16 they dis∣honour him, and therefore he gives them up to passions of dishonour, or vile affections. For as a king will take it ill to be entertained no otherwise by his subjects, when he comes amongst them, then if he were some Knight or meaner man: so will God, when we have low conceptions of him, when we glorifie him not as God, when we enlarge not his roome, and let him in-dwell richly in us, when we conceive not of him as the onely potentate; represent him not to our thoughts in the apprehension of one that is in and of himself All-sufficient, Omnipotent, onely wise, and in Christ our most merciful father, yet still our father in heaven; who with∣out respect of persons judgeth according to every mans works:1 Pet. 1.17. whom therefore if we call father we must passe the whole time of our sojourning here (till he send for us home) infear. Lo this is to honour God in our hearts. And this is that. that is required so often in scripture, under the term of magnifying God, or making him great, and of glorifying God, or making him glorious: so he is pleased to account of it, when we get so far, as to conceive of him above all creatures: and that is when he comes into our hearts as a king of glory, far above all the glory that can be found in earthly princes. 2. We must honour him in our speeches, both to him, and of him. 1. In our prayers to God, we must take unto us words, neither too curious,Verba nec leca sint nec neg∣leca. nor too carelesse, we must speak supplications, with the poor publican, we must addresse our selves unto him in lowliest manner, as the Prodigal did, Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy childe. A ser∣vants place in thine house is too good for me. Briefly, our words to God in prayer must be, as the words use to be of a childe to his father, humble, earnest, and direct to the point, avoiding vam babblings This is to be sober in prayer 1 Pet. 4.3.Eccles 5.2.  interparlance 1 Tim. 2.1. Omnino opor∣tet nos oraio∣tionis tempore curiam intrare coelestem, in qua Rex regum stella sedet sol &c. Quant  ergo cum reveremia quanto timore, quanto illuc humilitate ac∣cedere debet epalude su procedens & repens vilts ra∣nuncula? Bern. Lev. 19.12. when con∣sidering that God is in heaven, and we on earth, considering the infinite distance, and disproportion between him and us, therefore our words are few. We are allowed to parle with God by prayer, to use an holy and humble familiarity, and to come boldly unto the throne of grace; but yet we must so couch our petitions, that all needless heartlesse repetitions, superfluous endlesse digressions, tedious and unneces∣sary prolixities be carefully avoided. Humble and pithy prayer findes freer accesse to God, and returns with better successe to us. 2. As we must thus honour our heavenly father in our speeches to him, so in our speeches also of him to others. Take heed, that we take not up that great and terrible name of his, unreverently, lightly, loosely, disrespectfully: for he hath vowed that he will hold none guiltlesse, he hath sworn that no vain swearers, or other dishallowers of his name shall ever enter into his kingdom. Reviling of parents was banishment by Plato's laws, death by Gods laws Exod 21.17. How shall they escape that bore thorough the glorious and dreadful name of God, tos∣sing it in their common talk as filthy dogs do stinking carrion; that swear in st and not in judgement; that play with oathes as apes do with nuts, not considering that there is a large roll of ten yard; long and five yards broad full of curses against the swearer, and that shall rest upon his house, which he calls his castle, and where he thinks himself most secure. Zach. 5.2. Oh what will become of those hellish mouthes that belch out blasphemies against him. (whom yet they daily call Our father which art in heaven) so ordinarily and so openly, that some of them are become very inter ections of specch to the vulgar,S. Edw. Sands. and other-somemere phrases of gal∣lantrey to the braver, as one complaineth. How should we grieve at this, as those good men did when David was reviled by Shimei, how should our hearts rise to hear our heavenly father thus dishonoured? surely good blood will not belie it self. 3. God is to be honoured as a father in our whole conversation, remembring that we are ever in his eye: and should therefore walk before him in an holy bashfulnesse, as ashamed and afraid to do any thing unworthy of his presence, or that may give him discontent. It was ordered in Moses law, that when any went forth of the camp to ease nature, they should dig a hole with a paddle, and cover their excrements: And why? For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, therefore shall it be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee Deut. 23.13, 14. Now there was more in this law, then every man looks unto. Sin is the souls excrements: St. Iames therefore calls it the super∣fluity
of naughtinesse,Jam. 21. Hb. 1.13. Amos 3.3. 2. Sain. 12.9. . 10.33.  Heb. 4.13. Gen. 27.12, 41 Prov. 17.2. as Samuels and  sons as onathan the four Gr∣shom, the son of Menesseh, or as some copies have it, the son of Moses. In ac∣curatissimis li∣bris Num sus∣pensum est su∣pra las lite∣ras in signum, cam siteram adesse vel abes∣se pesseut sit & silius Mosis & Manassis 2 Reg. 21. istius, prosapiâ, hujus imitatio∣ne. Buxtorf Tiber. Amam Coronis. in reference to the dung of the beasts that were slain in sacrifice. Now God is of purer eyes then to behold sin with patience, in his own especially: for can two wal together and they not be agreed? David is grievously threatened for despising God his father, that is, for daring to do that before him, that he would not have done before a childe of a dozen yeers-old. Cornelius and his company set themselves as in Gods view, looked him ful in the face, and carried themselves accordingly: so must we, remembring that al things are naked and open be∣fore the eyes of him, with whom we have to do. Iacob feared to displease his father; lest he should get himself a curse, and not a blessing: yea that profane Esau would not offer to attempt any thing against Iacob his brother during his fathers dayes, for fear of displeasing him. Epaminondas rejoyced in nothing more, then that he had done noble exploits, and atteined great victories: whiles his parents were yet alive, that they might share with him in the comfort and credit thereof. Oh let it be our constant care so to carry our selves, that we may not shame our fathers house, as Solomons fool, but to get him honour from others Mat. 5.16. that they may see and say that we are the seed that the Lord hath blessed Esay 61.9. It is not for noble mens sons to be lingering and lodging in the stable or gate-house, (that's a place for grooms and hindes) much lesse to be found filling muck-cart. the No more doth it sute with the sons of God to be loading themselves with thick clay, to have their hands elbow-deep in the world, to busie themselves about many things with neglect of the one thing necessary, to run sqeaking up and down the world, as rats and mice good for nothing but to devour victuals. This is not to walk worthy of God their father, and of Christ their elder brother. SECT. XI. Let them resemble their father, and wherein. GOds children must resemble him,M. Rob. Har∣ris Math 23. . Euseb. as well as reverence him. The child is but the father multiplied; the father of the second Edition, as One speaketh, like him ordinarily, both in countenance and condition. The Pharisees were so like their fathers they were the worse again. Isaac trod in his fathers foot-steps, and heyred him, even in his infirmities, Gen. 26.7. Constantines sonnes exactly re∣sembled their father in his good parts and practises. We must also be followers of God as dear children. 1. In light, 1 Joh. 1.5. being transparent as a chrystall glasse with a light in the midst of it. 2. In love, Ephes. 5.1, 2. for have we not all one father, Mal. 2.10. Ephes. 4.5, 6. love therefore as brethren, 1 Pet. 3.8. fall not out by the way, Gen. 45.24. let there be no difference, for we are bre∣thren, and the Canaanite is in the land Gen. 13.7, 8. How can we look our father in the face, or expect his blessing, when we know that he knowes there is dissention amongst us? Oh how happy and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to be at unity; there surely it is that God commands the blessing Psal. 133.1, 3. He never came at Abraham that we read of till the breach betwixt him and Lot was made up again; live therefore at peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. 3. In mercy Luk. 6.36. loving them that hate us, blessing them that curse us, doing good to them that persecute us: for so shall we be the children of our heavenly father, who doth good both to the just, and to the unjust, causeth his sun to shine, and his raine to fall, not onely upon flowers, and fruit-trees, but also upon briers and thorns of the wildernesse, such incarnat devils, as march up and down the earth with hearts and hands as full as hell, with al manner of malice and mischief. Such a childe of God was Elisha that feasted his enemies, & Steven that prayed for his persecutours, and that Martyr, that when he could not obtain a fair hearing before Steven Gard∣ner, cryed out. Send me to my prison again among my frogs and toads which will not interrupt me, whiles I pray for your Lordships conversion. 4. In sanctifying the sab∣bath, Exod. 20.11. Esay 56.5.6. by resting not only from corporal labour, but spi∣ritual idlenesse:Acts & Mon. as God rested on that day from creating, and yet works hither∣unto in preserving and upholding all things by the word of his power. The baser
sort of people in Sweth-land do alwayes break the sabbath,Davids desire by Rob. Ab∣bot. p 16 saying that its onely for gentlemen to keep that day. And in many places amongst us Gods sabbaths are made the voyder and dunghill for all refuse businesses. But the Pharisees (taking it for granted that Christ had done that he could not justifie on that day, (where in they were mistaken) rightly conclude: If this man were of God he would not have broke the sabbath day: this not the guise of Gods children. 5. Lastly,2 Cor. 7.1 1 Pet. 1.14, 15 in all holy life and pure conversation, according to that, Be ye holy as I am holy, pure as I am pure, perfect as I am perfect. Our lives should be as so many visible commentaries upon Christ's life: we should preach forth his vertues,Coloss. 2.6 1 Joh. 2.6 and expresse him to the world in all his imitable praises, and practises. Then we are said to walk in Christ, yea, to walk as Christ walked, when we resemble him; not as an image doth a man in out-ward lineaments onely, but as a son doth his father in nature and disposition, in affecti∣on and action. Our utmost good consists in communion with God, and confor∣mity to him: in keeping inward peace with him that he abhor us not, because of the provoking of his sons and of his daughters Deut. 33.13. and in seeking and keeping (if it be possible, and as much as in us lies) peace with all men, and holinesse; for such shall both see God (which is not every mans priviledge,)Heb. 12.14 and be counted and called the sons of God Math. 5.10. they shall have both the comfort and credit of divine A∣doption. SECT. XII. Let them love their Father: and how to expresse their love. IF God be our Father, it's but fit we should love him;5. . Avi magis a∣mant nepotes, quàm suoslibe∣ros. Heidfeld. Cos amoris amor. Joh 3.16 God having tied parents and children together with cords of love, saith Nazianzen. Love, I grant, though of a fiery nature, yet (contrary to the nature of fire herein) descends ra∣ther then ascends. Hence, grandfathers oft love their grandchildren better then their own. But love should (and in good children doth) ascend also. It is but reason they should reciprocate, and return their parents love for love: do not publicans the same, Mat. 5.46? Do not our clothes warmed by us, warme us again? That God loves all his with a love more then Fatherly, hath been abun∣dantly proved above. God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Son. This is a sic without a sicut: there is no sufficient similitude in nature to expresse it by. Herein, if ever, he made naked unto us the bowels of his Fatherly affection, as in an anatomy. God so loved his Son, as he gave him all the world for his possessi∣on, Psal. 2. but he so loved the world, that he gave Son and all for its redempti∣on. Thus (ô ye sinfull sonnes of men) Gods bowels are open unto you, his heart is enlarged. Yee are not straitned in him, but yee are straitned in your own bowels. Now for a recompence in the same,2 Cor. 6.11, 12, 13 Conjungendo lumen suae aeternitatis limo tuae mor∣talitatis. Bern. . Psal. 18.1 Psal. 119.97 Psal. 84.1 Pinkes Serm. of love. (he speaks unto you as unto his children) be ye also enlarged. Amate amorem illius, saith St. Bernard. Oh love, that love of his, who for love of thee coupled his love to thy love, by abasing himself, by ad∣vancing thee, by uniting the light of his eternity to the mire of thy mortality. Whom therefore having not seen, ye love, saith Peter, 1 Epist. 1.8. and My love was crucified, said Ignatius. And, I love thee dearly, O Lord my God, saith Da∣vid. And again, O how I love thy law! O how amiable are thy Tabernacles! he even wondereth at his own love, and vents himself by an exclamation. For, Amor Dei est extaticus, nec se sirit esse sui juris, saith One. There is a two-fold love, (and both due to him in whom there is a concurrence of all attractives, and reten∣tives of our love) 1. Of Desire; this is an earnest longing after that which wee beleeve would do us much good, if we could attain to it. 2. Of Delight, or com∣placency, when having attained that which we desired, we hugge and imbrace it, and solace our selves in the fruition of it. Now Christ, (the Everlasting Father, Esay 9.6.) must have both these, and that in the highest degree: For he is white and ruddy, white in his life, and ruddy in his death, the chief of ten thousand, or the standard-bearer of ten thousand.Cant. 5.10 . For as the tallest and goodliest men use to carry the Ensigne, to display the Banner, or Standard: such is Christ: All excel∣lency is invested in him, all good is conveyed unto us by him, all love is therefore
due from us to him.Non bene con¦veunt nec in una sede mo∣rantur Majes∣tas et Amor. Juvenal. . 1 Pet 2.21 We say that Majesty & love cannot dwell together, because love is the abasing of the soul to all services. But its otherwise in Christ. Majesty and love could cohabite in his heart, & hereof he gave us the best assurance, when the Lord of life was crucified to death. Love is most seen in suffering: as it self is a passion, so it is tried rather by passions then actions. He sealed up his love both by doing and dying for us: leaving us a Copie to write after, (as St. Peter hath it) to do whatsoever he bids us to forbear whatsoever heforbids us, and to lay down our dearest lives for his sake, if called thereunto, according to that: For thy sake are we slain all the day long,Acts & Mon. fol. 14 8. Ib. 1430. we are in deaths often. Ye were every haire of my head a man, (said Ardely the Martyr, to bloody Bonner) I would suffer death in the opinion and faith I am now in. The heavens shall sooner fall, then I will forsake my Christ, said William Flower.Ib. 805. My wife and my children are so dearly beloved unto me (said George Carpenter burnt at Munken) that they cannot be bought from me for all the riches and possessions of the Duke of Bavaria: but for the love of my Lord Christ I will willingly forsake them. He that loveth father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me Math. 10.37. If a man hold not the Lord Christ worthy of more love then his dearest friends, he hath no part in him. All our love must be bestowed upon him as most worthy, there is not one particle of it to be bestow∣ed on any other thing. But then he gives us our love againe, and then we may disperse it here and there, and love other things: but no otherwise then as they con∣vey love to us from Christ, and may be meanes of drawing up our affections to Christ.Pinkes Serm of love. p. 21 My love unto my Saviour (saith one) although it came occasionally and im∣pulsively from my love of my self, yet it is terminated principally in his glory, though accessorily likewise, as he is contented it should, in mine own happinesse.D. Sibbes Ser on 1 Cor 2.9 But it is a kind of miracle (saith another) in evill, when we love other things besides God; or better then God, baser then our selves: It is as much as if a river should turne backward. What a base thing is it for a man to suffer such a sweet streame as love, to run into such a sinke? And a little after, It was a miracle, saith he, that the three young men should be in the midst of the furnace, and be there as if they were in another place, no hotter. And it is as much a miracle, that men should be in the midst of all incouragements to love God, and yet love any thing more then God. He is absolutly good, and so is to be loved absolutly and for himself,Vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum. Aug. but all other things in him, and for him, as our friends are to be loved in the Lord, and our foes for the Lord. This is child-like indeed. SECT. XIII. Let them depend upon their Father, both for prevention of evill, and provision of good. LAstly, learn we to depend upon God as a father, for both prevention of evill and provision of good.Phil. 4.6. In nothing be carefull, but in all things make your request known to God with thanksgiving, saith Paul. And marke, that he bids us bring our thanks together with our request,2 Sam. 13.4 to have the one as ready as the other, for we are sure to speed. Why art thou then pale and leane from day to day with carking cares,1 Pet. 5.5. Psal. 55.22. and disquieting feares of this or that danger? Art not thou the Kings son? and will he deny thee any thing thou askest? Cast all thy care upon God, for he cares for thee. Roll both thy self upon him, and thy Gift upon him, saith David: that is, whatsoever thou wouldst that God should bestow upon thee, cast it first upon him by faith and it shall be effected:Rom. 8. Qui misit uni∣genitum immi∣misit spiritum, promisit vultum quid tandem tibi negaturus est. Br. de tem. he shall bring it to passe. Away with the spirits of bondage to feare againe: we have now received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba father: yea, for an unquestionable pledge of his infinite love, he hath given us his son: how shall he not then together with him, give us all things also? That's St. Pauls argument. If ye which are evill can give good things to your children, how much more wil your heavenly father give to
them that ask of him? that's our Saviours argument. Whereunto let me adde this. God made himself known to be our gracious and provident Father,Mat. 6 A Christi∣an is crow∣ned not only in his cradle with K. James, but be∣fore he is born, as Sapo∣res K. of Per∣sia was. For his father dy∣ing, left his mother with child, and the Persian Nobi∣lity set the crown on his mothers bel∣ly, acknow∣ledging there∣by her issue for their Prince. Heyl. Geog. p. 64 Mat. 6 . Psal. 23.3 before we could know our selves to be his children. He formed us in the womb, crudled us there like cheese, curiously wrought us in those lowermost parts of the earth, (as an Artificer, when he hath some speciall piece of work to do, retires into some pri∣vate room out of the sight of others) whilest we were there, he filled two bottles of milk for our entertainment into the world: whereinto we no sooner came, but he entred into covenant with us, to be our God and Father: hee signed and sealed this covenant by the Sacrament of Baptisme, the solemne seal of our adoption: And all this before ere we knew what was done unto us. And will hee now forget to do us good, when we know and acknowledge him, when we pray unto him, and by faith depend upon him? It is not possible. He feeds the fowls, and clothes the lillies, to whom he is no father: And will he not much more do so for you, Oh ye, mall faiths. A child whiles he hath his fathers favour cares for nothing; ne∣ver troubles himself to think where he shall have his next meal, or a new suit of clothes: let him but please his father, and those things shall be provided to his hand. Again, let a child walk in dark and dangerous places, so long as he hath hold of his father he fears not. Did we but stirre up our selves to take hold of God, wee should be secure, yea though we walked in the vale of the shadow of death, with David: we should never be heard to say, (as Heathens that have no interest in God) What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clo∣thed? so long as our heavenly Father knows that we need all these things, and will not fail to provide them in a competent measure. The men of Gods hand, it may be, shall have more then wee, because they have their portion here with the pro∣digall. But we need not envie them that: for it is but an estate for life, granted them in the utmost and most remote part of our inheritance.Psal. 17 Will a child think much a father should give a pension for life, out of this, or that, whiles he hath far greater things left him; yea the inheritance also of that, out of which an annuity is granted for a time to some other? Children ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents for their children, saith the Apostle. And, Oh how great things, saith the Prophet, hast thou laid up in store for them that fear thee! Now,2 Cor. 12.14 will he give us a crown, and deny us a crust? provide heaven for us, and with-hold earth from us? Ask onely and it shall be given you: the earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse there∣of. In your Fathers house is bread enough. Shall the prodigall call so confidently for his childs part? shall Esau go so roundly to his father for the blessing?Luk. 15.12 Gen. 27.34 And do we stand doubting whether we were best speak, or hold our tongues? and not fall down with Esther before Ahashuerosh, or with Achsah before her father Caleb, and beg the upper-springs of spirituall blessings, and the nether-springs of temporall comforts? which he with-holds, haply, for a time, with an unwilling willingnesse, that he may hear of us, and have our prayers: which, though never so poor and imperfect, yet he is much taken with, as a naturall parent is with the pratling, and stammering of his own, above all the plain speech of all the children in the Town besides. SECT. XIV. Comfort of Adoption: where are shewed the Priviledges of sonnes, privative, and positive. COmfort to all Gods faithfull servants: they are sonnes and daughters to the Almighty: and count you that a small matter? Is it nothing to be son-in-law to a king, saith David? What pains did Jacob take night and day to be but sonne-in-law to Laban, who changed his wages ten times, and ever for the worse: Jo∣seph and Daniel were for their good service highly advanced, but not adopted. But every servant of God is a sonne, and every sonne an heir. Great was the glory of our first Parents in Paradise, had they held it: and yet if they had, what had they gotten, more then a confirmation of their present estate, or at most, the re∣ward of their service, wages for their work? they could never have attained to
this honour,Joh. 1.12. . to be the sons of God. This St. Iohn in his gospell calls a dignity, an eminency, a royalty. And in his first epistle, he stands and wonders, as transported with an extasy of admiration at it 1 Ioh. 3.1. And well he might: For this (saith the psalmist) is to be set above the Kings of the earth, it interesteth and inrighteth a man to the inheritance of heaven and earth. The possession of the earth is as yet deteyned from God; children by the wicked for a time, as the pro∣mised land was from Israel by the Amorites: but they have great things mean∣while in reversion, even heaven with all its happines, whither they may com∣fortably look up and boast, on better ground then Nebuchadnezzar did of his Babel,1 Pet 1.4 Is not this mine inheritance? Am I not kept by the power of God to that salvation reserved for me in the heavens? Yea they may comfortably lift up their eye (as God bd Abraham, toward heaven, and tell the starrs if he were able) so they their glorious priviledges. This, Moses well understood, and therefore chose rather to suffer as a son,Heb. 11. then to scape as a bastard, he preferr'd the reproach of Christ before the honour of being the son of Pharaohs daughter, and the possi∣bility of being heir to two kings, as Iosephus relates it. He was faithfull in all Gods house as a servant:Joh. 8.35 but that was not all. For the servant abideth not in the house for ever, as the son doth. Moreover, the kings of the earth take tribute of their servants and subjects, but their children go free Mat. 17.26. Be∣hold, Gods children are all manumitted by Christ, and possessed of a twofold freedome. 1.Multò plures sunt gratiae pri∣vativae quam positivae. Gerson Privative from the dominion, and damnation of sin, from the rigour and irri∣tation of the law, from the captivity and cruelty of the devill, from the danger of death, and horrour of hell &c. This is a priviledge far beyond that of a citizen of Rome, which yet might neither be suffered to beg, nor be bound with thongs Act. 22.29.Rom. 8. And this is that the Apostle calls the glorious liberty of the sons of God, as elsewhere he couples Adoption with glory Rom. 9.4. includes it in glory Rom. 8.30. and puts it for glory Rom. 8.23. Freed Gods children are not (I confesse,) of crosses and corrections, for then were they bastards and not sons. He scourgeth every son whom he receiveth,Joh. 14.18 but he never leaveth them orphans, helpelesse, comfortlesse. In the midst of desertion (the sorest kinde of affliction) they may, nay they must call him Father, and ask him blessing. Esay 64.7, 8, 9. and he knowes not how to say them nay, coming unto him in that name, and under that notion. Should a parent see his sick childe pant and look pittifully, cry out (as once the Shunamites son to his father) O my head, my head! my heart is sick, my head is heavy. I am weary with paines: what shall I do? where shall I rest? &c. He could not turn his back upon him and neglect his moans: much lesse could he continue to strike him, lifting up his feeble hands for mercy, and looking up∣on him with watery eyes; but would rather set himself to seek out, and to do him all possible ease and comfort.Hic cum triste aliquid staruit fit tristis & ipsa. Cui{que} ferè poenam sumere poena fua est: Ovid. 2 de Pont eleg 2. To say, God hath cast you off, because he hath hid his face is a falla∣cy fetcht out of the Devils Topicks. And shall not the God of all mercy, and the Father of all consolation pity his poor children that are distressed, or diseased, and send deliverance? Will he not melt over his childe, and burn his rod (Will he not hold him up with one hand as he did Iacob, when he beats him down with the other? will he not look through the chinkers to see how we do, when he hath shut us up close prisoners? will he not deal by us as the mother deals by her little∣one, makes him beleeve she will cast him away to the puttock, or pitch him headlong into the pool, when yet she keeps fast hold on him? 2. Positive, and so he is made a free-denison of Jerusalem that is above, and possessed of all the priviledges of that supernall citty. See a brief extract of them in that 1 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours? A very large charter; All illu∣minations, inspirations, gifts and graces of the spirit, gifts of Gods ministers and the abler sort of Christians, all these are not more their own then yours to use; you have title to them, and interest in them, and may claime them for your own: Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, you are heirs of it together with faithfull Abraham: Or life, grace to spend it well, or death, to the wick∣ed a trap-dore to hell,Janua vita porta coeli Bern. but to the saints an inlet into eternall happines, or things present, all occurrences are sanctified to you, or things to come, heaven waits for you, hell hath nothing to do with you. Thus all is yours, as the Apostle there reiterates it, though not in possession (unlesse it be in our Head) yet in use, in
right or by way of reduction, as we say, the worst things are Gods childrens: they are heirs of the kingdome saith Iames, heads destinated to the diadem,Jam. 2.5 Serms non va∣let exprimere, experimento opus est. Chrys. Lati simus non securi, gaudentes in spiritu sancto, scd tamen caventes à recidivo. Bern. saith Tertullian. Their priviledges as sons, are fitter to be beleeved, then possible to be discoursed. And this should make them hold up their heads, but not too high, and be cheerfull, but not, withall, scornefull. CHAP. V. God will pity and pardon his people their wants and weaknesses. And I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serves him. HOw graciously God will deal with his dear children in respect of their pious performances, is here sweetly set forth by an exquisite simile,Shindler: Pen∣tag. miserebor, misericordia commovebor. Figuier. Cle∣mentiâutar. Trem. polan. In quo duplex est aemoris ratio &c. Figuier De Cartulone filio à patre Machaeo ob contemptum cruci affixo le∣ge Just. lib. 18. Heb. 13.18. from the dea∣ling of an indulgent father with his obsequious childe, I will spare them, saith he, nay that's not full enough; I will pardon and pity them, I will commiserate and compassionate them, as Pharaohs daughter once did the forlorne infant she found among the flags. I will use clemency and shew kindnesse unto them, And how? As a man doth to his own son that serves him. In which comfortable expression there is a double declaration (saith an Inter∣preter) of Gods fatherly affection: as thus. We cannot but shew love even to a stranger that observes us: As o' tother side, we dislike and detest even a son that slights us. But a son, and a serviceable son, what father can chuse but love and like well of? And shall God, the father of all the father-hoods in heaven and earth shew lesse love to his obedient children that are  willing at least to keep a good conscience, and are faithfull in weaknesse, though weak in faith? No: but he will kindly accept of what they are able, and remit the rest: He will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serves him. Than the which I know not what the good Lord could have spoken more ef∣fectually for the setting forth of his own fatherly compassion, or for the setting of our hearts in sound consolation. Take it thus, God will surely shew like mercy and mildenesse to his obedient children in  their faults and faculties, in their wants and weaknesses, as the kindest father would do to his dearest son that serves him. SECT. 1.2.3.4. Reasons from God, out of Micah. 7.18, 19. THis is no new doctrine for (besides that the Text is for us in so many words almost) the man whose eyes are open hath said it, He hath said,Num. 23.21 who heard the words of God, who saw the visions of the Almighty; God seeth no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel. See he doth ('tis true) for he is all eye,. 1 King. 1.6 and all things are naked and open before him. Yea he seeth enough in the best to provoke the eyes of his glory. For though the crow think her owne bird whitest, and some parents can see nothing amisse in their children, as David in his Adonijah:Jeb 4.18.21 25.5, 6. yet he charged his Angels with felly, and the starrs are not pure in his sight. How much less man that is a worme &c. He is neither so blinde as not to behold, nor so fond as not to mislike the least fault in his best childe. For he is of more pure eyes then
to behold evil in whomsoever,Habuc. 1.13. with approbation: he cannot look on iniquity, and not shew his displeasure. All which notwithstanding, the truth of this point is irre∣fragable, and the text alledged is no lesse firm then plain for us: God seeth no sin in his children. For, besides that, he will never throw them to hell, (which is the just hire of the least sin) it's often seen,Rom. 6.23. that he never so much as corrects them, no not with the rods of men, for innumerable faylings and infirmities. But winking at smal faults, as we say, nay passing by the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage, like as a father pittieth his children, (and pardoneth them their childishnesse) so the doth lord pitty them that fear him. Lo, he pittieth them, not punisheth them.Psal. 103.13 14. Or if he do proceed to correction (as he must other whiles, such is our frowardnesse) yet amidst all, he knoweth our frame, he remembreth we are but dust,Esay 2.22. a peace of earth neately made up, that we carry our souls as a light in a paper-lanthorne, that our breath in our nostrils, is every moment ready to puffe out, and that therefore if he should alwayes chide, the spirit would fail before him, we should soon faint, and swoon under his hands; wherefore he deals not with us after our sins, nor rewards us according to our iniquities. But as a man chasteneth his son (saith Moses, and he would have us wisely to consider of it too) so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee. Deut. 8.5. Break their stomackes he will, but not their bones: their hearts but not their heads. And albeit they, (such is their peevishnesse under the rod) give up all for lost, and make desperate con∣clusions upon their corrections,Judg 6.13. 2 Tim. 2. as Gideon did, yet the foundation of God remaineth sure, The Lord knoweth who are his, he knows their souls in adversity. I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight. Here was a poor prayer. And yet thou heardest the voyce of my prayer (poor though it were) when I cryed unto thee Psal. 31.22. So Zion (when under the lash) sud, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my God hath forgotten me.Esay 49.15.16 Can a woman forget her sucking childe, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, she may forget, and some Tigres∣ses have done it, yet I will not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands &c. Look how a natural mother turns her childe out of doors for dabbling himself, or some other shrewd turn, and with a thump on the back bids it be gone a begging, yet when the childe begins once to make a lip, whim∣per and set up his lure,Jer. 31.20. she takes him in again, and puts him in her bosom: the very like dealing we may read of in God with Ephraim, his dear son, his pleasant childe Hos. 13.1, 2, 3. &c. Ephraim of trembling and tender conscienced became a flagicious offendour, a desperate idolater. Ver. 1.2, And was not it high time then to take him in hand? therefore, they shall be as the morning cloud, as the early dew, as the chaffe before the whirl-winde, as the smoke out of the chimney. No lesse then utter desolation is threatened against them. But the Lord soon re∣pents him concerning his servants, witnesse the words following. Yet I am the Lord thy God, from the land of Egypt: I am thy sole saviour. Here's now mercy in the midst of judgement. Oh but they abuse mercy, forget their God and sin again: Ver. 6. Why therefore God threateneth them again with a more terrible judge∣ment, Vers. 7, 8. Behold I will be unto them as a Lion, and a leopard, as a bear be∣reft: I will rent the kell of their hearts, and devour them. Oh fearful condition! who would ever think of such, but as of deplored and desperate, yet see the sequel. O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. Ver. 9. Thou hast done thy utmost utterly to undoe thy self, but yet I have thought of a way for thy help, I will be thy king: where is any other that would save thee (as I do) in all thy cities? And albeit thou art an unwise son, yet I will binde up thine iniquity (as a cancelled bond) and hide thy sin Ver. 12. And although the travels of a sor∣rowful woman be upon thee, such is thy dulnesse in not coming off roundly with God work (with those lively Israelitish women, Exod. 1.19.) but staying too long in the birth, which might justly be thy death, as it was Racels, yet I will ran∣some thee from the power of the grave, I will redeem thee from death. Ver. 14. Ey but for how long? might they say: I shall be (likely) breaking out again, and then thou wilt undoe me, after thou hast done me good. No, saith God, repen∣tance shall be hid from mine eyes. He will not cast away a perfect man, saith Bil∣dad Iob 8.20. The Lord will not cast off for ever, saith Ieremy, but though he cause grief,Lam. 3.31, 32. yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude (or, the magnitude) of his mercies.
And this was that miracle that amused, so and amased the Prophet Micah, chap. 7.18. who is a God, saith he, like unto thee that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the trans∣gression of his heritage? He retaineth not his anger for ever. And will ye know a reason? That text supplies us with two, (for failing) and both from God. 1. He de∣lights in mercy. 2. He provides for his own glory; as occasioning hereby his pardoned people to praise him, for present, saying as here who is a God like unto thee &c. and to trust him for future. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us &c. Thou wilt perform thy truth to Iacob. &c. ver. 19.20. SECT. II. The reasons are of two sorts. First respecting God. FIrst, God will, father-like, pitty and pardon his poor people,Psal 19.4. Eccles. 7.25. Numb. 14.8. 2 Sam. 15.26. . Jam. 2.13. because he de∣lights in mercy. Now delight will do any thing as we say. If the sun delight to run his race, who shall stop him? If Salomon delight to search out the secrets of wisdom, what shall be hid from him? If Somson delight in Daliance, what will h not dare to do for it? if Ahashueroh delight in Esther, what may not she have of him? If the Lord delight in us saith Caleb, then be will bring us into this land of giants, and give it us. As, if he hath no delight in me, said David, behold here I am, let him do to me, as seemeth good to him. But now the Lord doth delight in every Da∣vid, and will shew him, yea, seal up unto him the sure mercies of day. He delights in mercy saith the Prophet: yea, such a mercy, saith the Apostle, he rejoyceth a∣gainst judgement, and glories over it, as over his adversary whom he hath subdu∣ed. Hence it was that he erected himself of old, not a judgment-seat, but a mer∣cy-seat in the midst of his people, as one that settled himself to shew them mercy. When the Judge sate him down in the gates of Israel, it was to do justice.Psal. 1.1.  Sept. When the scorner sits him down in the chair of pestilence, he will scoff to some purpose: so now that God sits in his mercy-seat, he will surely shew mercy with ease, yea a mul∣titude of mercies. When a man hath setled himself in his seat, it's supposed he is at ease, and a small matter shall not raise him. God is never more at ease, (as I may say) and better pleased, then when he is in his mercy-seat, in his throne of grace. Hence he is said to rise out of his place,Heb. 4.16. to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. Esay 26.21. and to do his work his strange work, when he is to do justice. Esay. 28.21. It is an act neither so proper to him, for it is his strange work, nor so pleasant to him, for he riseth out of his place to do it, which is a kinde of diseasement, and a pain, to him especially, from whom mercie flows as freely and as naturally as light from the sun, hony from the comb, water from the well-spring. He quits himself in it, as well apaid thereof, he rests in his love, and will seek no far∣ther Zeph. 3.17. This mercy-seat was the cover of the Ark, where the two tables of the Law lay: to note the blessednesse of those that receive mercy, their iniquity is for∣given, their sin is covered. Again from this mercy-seate,Psal. 32.1. scituate not between the Seraphim, (those flaming executioners of justice Isa. 6.) but between the Cheru∣bims, as ministers of mercy, the Lord shewed himself,Act. 7. and gave forth the live∣ly oracles, as St. Steven stiles them. Once he spake from the burning bush, or smoak∣ing mountain, so terrible that Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake; This was mount Sina in Arabia. But we are come to mount Sion &c.Heb. 12.21.22 and upon all the glory now there is a covering, or mercy-seat Isa. 4.5. The tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, Rev. 21.3. Jerusalem (which is from above) is now cal∣led the throne of the Lord, and all nations flock unto it, Jer. 3. God puts them among the children of his love, and saith to each of his, Thou shalt call me, my fa∣ther, and shalt not turn away from me.Jer. 17.19. Therefore are they before the throne of God (answerable to the ancient mercy-seat) serving him day and night in his temple. Rev. 7.15. Where the Angel of his presence Jesus Christ offers their services, powring in of his incense with the prayer of all Saints, upon the golden altar which is before the throne Rev. 8.3. And hence it is, that the good Lord pardoneth every one that pre∣pareth
his heart to seek God,2 Chr. 30.18, 19. though he be not clensed according to the purification of the Sanctuary: that he winks at small-faults, shall I say? and spares them as a man spares his own son that serves him? nay that he pardoneth iniquity, and pass∣eth by transgression or treason: he retaineth not his anger for ever (seem he ne∣ver so much displeased) and all because mercy pleaseth him: which puts the pro∣phet to his patheticall exclamation by way of wonderment. Who is a God like unto thee &c. SECT. III. ANd that is the rise of our second Reason from God, who therefore spares his people, as a father his childe, that they may 1. praise him for present, yea for ever:Cretae Jovis est imago auribus carens, ait Plu∣tarchus. Non enim convenit audiri ab eo quenquam, qui omnium domi∣nus sit, & prin∣ceps. Plut. Mor. Lucianus fingit cancellos in coelo, per quos Jupiter certo tempore homi∣nes respiciat: quo solummodo tempore peten∣tes exaudian∣tur. Psal. 48.10 Tollens iniqui∣tatem, peccatū & scelus: sic enim exprimi∣tur magnitudo clementiae, quod non levibus tantum delictis det veniam, sed graviss. quibus∣que sceleribus. Calvin.  1 Tim 1.14 that he may fill their mouths with laughter and their tongues with tri∣umph: that they may say among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them: that they may say among the saints, Their Rock is not as our Rock, our ene∣mies themselves being judges. Oh who is God like unto thee  The Gods of the Nations are idols. And we know that an idol is nothing, and that of nothing, no∣thing comes: of such dung-hill deities no mercy is to be expected, they cannot work beyond the sphere of their activity. But our God is in the heavens, and as the heavens are high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. He is a great God, and a great King above all Gods. And as himself is great, so is his mercy, and so also is his glory. For, according to thy name O Lord, so also is thy praise unto the ends of the earth. Now what is Gods name? Heare it from his own mouth. Iehovah, Iehovah, God, mercifull and gracious &c. for∣giving iniquity, transgression and sin, that is, all sorts of sins though never so hea∣vy, never so heinous: Naturall pollution, actuall transgression, stifneckt pre∣sumption; all sins, and blasphemies shall be forgiven to the sons of men, saith our Saviour: how much more the involuntary slips of the saints, their unavoidable infirmities, their sins of daily incusion, for which also there is provided a par∣don of course, it needs no more but suing out. It is the glory of a man to pass by a transgression, saith Solomon Prov. 19.11. And it makes no lesse for the glory of God, that he pardons the iniquity of his people, that he multiplyeth pardons, as they multiply sins Esay 55.7. that where grace aboundeth, then doth grace su∣perabound, or abounds to flowing over, as the word there signifieth: that they cannot commit more, then he will remit. Surely hereby the power of our Lord appears to be exceeding great, and, as true as he liveth, all the earth is there∣by filled with the glory of the Lord, as it is Num. 14.17, 19, 21. He maketh his wonderfull works to be remembred, saith the Psalmist, and that, in nothing more then this, that the Lord is gracious and full of compassion Psal. 111.4. This makes his people sing and shout Hallelujah, O praise the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. SECT. IIII. NExt, as they praise him for the present, so they trust him for the future (which is the greatest honour they can do him, as the thistle in Ionathans pa∣rable could tell Iudg. 9.15.) sith every former mercy is a pledge of a future, and every old mercy draws on a new (as the links do one another in a chain) if we break not off their course by our unbelief and diffidence.Psal. 36.10 O continue thy loving kindnesse, saith David. It is in the Hebrew, O draw out thy loving kindnesse to the full length. Gods mercies to his are a continued series, there is a concatenati∣on, a connexion between them.Eccles. 1.8 As a spring runneth after it hath run, so doth God spare his, after he hath spared them. The eye is not weary of seeing, nor the eare of hearing, no more is God of shewing mercy. Hence Gods servants have usually argued from what they have had, to what they should have: as David, Paul, and the church here in Micah. She had praised God for his
clemency in pardoning her sins, and there hence confidently concludeth for power against sin: If God will cover it, certainly he will cure it. The same mercy that moved him to pass by the transgression of his heritage, will make him turne againe, and have further compassion upon us (say they) in subduing our sins, and casting them all, as a stone into the mighty waters, so that we shall see them no more, any otherwise then the Israelites saw the Egyptians, dead on the shore. And all this he will do for his truth and mercies sake to Jacob and Abraham, for his promise and covenants sake to our fathers of old. Our fathers trusted in thee, they hoped in thee and were not confounded. Oh who is a God like unto thee &c? All nations will walk every one in the name of his God,Mic. 4.5 we also will trust in the name of the Lord our God for ever, and ever. And these are the reasons respect∣ing God. SECT. V. 6. Reasons respecting the Saints themselves, weo are 1. pure in heart. 2. perfect in Christ. A second rank of Reasons respect the Saints, who are 1. Pure in heart 2. Per∣fect in Christ, and therefore spared, as a man spares his own son that serves him. First, Gods people are pure in heart: they are washed, they are justified, 1 Cor. 6.11 Austin answe∣red roundly when one up∣braided him with the sins of his youth, Quae tu repre∣hendis ego damnavi. And when One twitted Beza with his youthly wan∣ton poems, he replied. Hic homo invidet mihi gratiam Christi. Iedidiah. 2 Sam. 12.25 they are sanctified by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God. Now: Yet God is good to Israel, to the pure in heart, Psal. 73.1. Yet for all the sorrow: Yet for all their faults and frailties: which, forasmuch as they disallow, and disclaim, bewail and out-grow, therefore they are not laid to their charge. Iob was a patient man, yea he is set forth as a pattern of patience, not∣withstanding all his frowardnesse, notwithstanding he made so many knots, and brake his thread so oft as he did, God accounts of him as if he had spun an even thread of patience all the time of his temptation. David had his faults as great as another; and yet because he was upright in the main, God testifieth of him, that he had followed him with all his heart, and done only that that was right in his sight. 1 King. 14.8. Solomon at Gibeon climbes those disallowed hills, the high-places, and yet loves the Lord, and is loved of him. God will not see weaknesses, where he seeth truth: so pleasing a thing to him is sincerity in his service. With one breath doth God report both these: The high-places were not removed (that was a great fault no doubt) neverthelesse Asa's heart was perfect all his dayes. Such is the mercy of our Gd to the pure in heart, to those that study purity, that he will not suffer our well-meant weaknesses to bereave us of his favour: he rather pittieth then plagueth his children for the infirmities of upright hearts.2 Chro. 15.17 A slender service, a small chare, though but bungled at by child, is much set by of the fa∣ther. And a bridegroom thinks nothing the worse of his bride, for a little dirt she hath got, being about some foul chare, it being such especially as she may wash off at pleasure.Zach. 13.1. 1 Ioh. 2.1 We have a fountain alwaies open where we may wash and be clean, and a dayly propitiation for dayly transgression, even Jesus Christ the Righteous: in whom SECT. VII. The Saints are perfect in Christ. SEcondly, our wants are covered, and our works perfected and refined from all the filth and flesh that cleaves unto them. For although the Saints are not so pure in heart, but that their sanctification is still spotted and imperfect, yet their justification by Christs righteousnes imputed, is absolute, and without blemish:
According to that, He hath made him to be sinne, or sinne-offering, for us who knew no sinne,2 Cor. 5.21 that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. Not that es∣sentiall righteousnesse of God (as Osiander vainly dreamt) but that perfect obedi∣ence both active and passive, of the Son of God, performed unto his Father: by whom he is made unto us wisdome,1 Cor. 1.30 Jer. 23.6 righteousnesse, &c. yea, Jehovah our righte∣ousnesse: Which one Name of his would answer all our doubts and objections, had we but skill to spell all the letters in it. This righteousnesse of Christ (made ours by imputation and acceptation) is that white raiment, Rev. 3.17. wherewith being clothed, the shame of our nakednesse doth not appear: for it is full broad, large, and wide enough to cover all our imperfections. This is that broydered work, and those bracelets wherewith the Church in Ezekiel being bedight and bedeckt became perfectly beautifull, even to admiration. These are those jewels of gold, with studs of silver, made us by the whole Trinity, Cant. 6.9. that best robe of the prodigall, that cloth of gold and needle-work-vesture of the royall daughter, Psal. 45.9. that fair mitre,Zach. 3.4, 5 and change of raiment of Jehoshuah the high-priest; when the Lord took away his filthy garments, and clothed him with better, although Satan, at the same time, stood at his right hand, had the upper hand of him, because (as some will have it) his accusation was as true as vehement. In short,. these are the righteousnesses of the Saints, Revel. 19.8. the pure Lamb of God having covered us with his own fleece, and, as it were exchanged suits with us: clothing himself with our nature, that he might again clothe us with the divine nature:Daniels Hist. of England. so that Christ puts on us, and we put on him, (as once Edmund Ironfide and Knute the Dane did by exchange of garments, sealing up thereby a sure peace) Christ becomes ours, and we become Christs, and both together make up but one mysticall Christ. For as the body is one, and hath many members: and all the members being many, are but one body: so also is Christ, that is, mysticall Christ, the Church.1 Cor. 12.12 Now to bring what hath been said home to the point in hand; Look how that King could remember no hostility in Themistocles, whiles he saw in his arms the smiling countenance of his own sonne and heir, whom he had taken up: And as David could discern no defect or deformity in lame Mephibosheth: whiles he beholds in him the feature of his friend Jonathan: so neither doth our hea∣venly Father regard our infirmities, whiles he looks upon us in the face of Christ, and finds us framed anew, according to the image of Christ, in whom he is abun∣dantly well-pleased. SECT. VIII. Let none suck poyson out of this sweet Point. FOr Application: Of this comfortable point, we may well say as the Prophet doth in another case, Esay 28.9. To whom shall we teach this Doctrine? who is fit to hear and receive it? This is meat for children, not off all for dogs, not draff for swine. Let it therefore be limited to Gods children that fail of infirmi∣ty, not laid hold on by his enemies, that go on in iniquity. And that they may not, let us bound the point, and mound it too, that no beast break thorow to this mountain of mercy, lest he be thrust thorow with a dart: that no oxe nor asse fal into this pit, by turning Gods grace into wantonnesse, lest at length he fall into the bottomlesse pit: that no spider suck poison out of this flower, lest he burst, and his bowels gush out with Judas,Acts 1.18 and so he go to his place. In a word, that none stumble at this good word of God, being disobedient thereunto, 1 Pet. 2.8. lest he stumble and fall, and never rise again, Hos. 14.9. Which to prevent, two things would be considered. First, that though all men have their spots, and there∣fore deserve not to be spared, yet as wicked mens spots are not the spots of Gods children, so neither is their speed. For their spots first, Hear what God saith of the one; They have corrupted themselves, their spots are not the spots of my children, they are a perverse generation:Deut. 32.5 Phil. 2.15 As of the other; They are, saith he, blamelesse and harmlesse, the sonnes of God, unspotted in the midst of a wicked and wayward
generation. Where it is easie to observe, a flat opposition, a palable difference. The naturall man is all overspread with the bright spot of sins-leprosie. Spots they are and blemishes (saith St. Peter) in the abstract,2 Pet. 2.19 sporting themselves with their own deceivings, having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sinne. Such an habit and even necessity of sinne they have, by long trading, contracted, that if the Ethiopian can change his skin, or the leopard his spots, then may they also do good that are inured to evil.Jer. 13 23 Sinne is in such no otherwise then spots are in a leopard, not by accident but by nature: such as no Art can cure, no water wash off: For why? they are not in the leopards skin, but in the flesh and bones, in the sinews, and inwards. And this (to say truth) is the case and condition of us all by nature. Whence also it is, that the just man slips seven times a day, and,Non datur ma∣lum punicum in quo nen inest granum putre, dixit Crates. 1 Joh. 3.9 . in ma∣ny things we offend all, saith St. James, Apostles and all: and that none can say, his heart is clean. Howbeit, though a godly man sin, yet he doth not commit sin, he doth not sinne sinningly, for his seed remaineth in him. The oil of Gods Spirit wherewith such a one is anointed, setteth the colours (which are of his own tem∣pering) so sure on, and maketh them cleave so fast together, that it is impossible he should return to his own hue. Christ also, that offereth himself without spot to God his Father, hath so purged their consciences from dead works, that they thenceforth serve the living God acceptably, lifting up their faces before him with∣out spot; yea they are stedfast, and need not fear, Job 11.5. Lo, this is the com∣fortable condition of the children of God. This is their spot on earth, and this is their speed in heaven. But now the ungodly are not so. Neither their spot nor their speed is as that of the Saints. For, first, the lepers lips should be covered ac∣cording to the law: their breath is infectious and offensive. To the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, &c. Psal. 50.16.Quia non indi∣gebat imn un∣dorum laude. Neque enim speciosa laus in ere peceata∣res. Theophyl. in Luc. 4. Psal.4.3 Psal. 6.6 In Graecorum sacris sacerdos exclamabat. ; quis hic? Respondebaut qui aderant,  Erason. . Act. 13.8 In fermento totajacet uxor. Plaut. Mic. 1.5. Tubulus qui∣dam paulò su∣pra Ciceronem praetor fuit: homorm pro∣jectè improbus, ut eju omen non horrinis sed vit esse videretur. Lips. antiq. lect. Our Saviour suffered not the devils to speak, because he needed not the service of such: high words befit not a fool, saith Solomon. Even David himself (till thoroughly pur∣ged from his two more grievous sinnes) was suspended from the comfort of the covenant, and disabled for holy duties, Psal. 51.15. For, know ye not, saith He, that the Lord hath set apart the godly man for himself. And thence inferres, the Lord will hear when (as such a One) I call unto him. But if I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. If I cast but a leering look toward some lust, or have but a moneths mind to it. If there be in me but an irresolution a∣gainst any evil, much more a deliberate purpose to run into it; God, that cannot see evil, will not hear the prayers, nor bear the manners of such a David. How much lesse of gracelesse and profane persons, whose whole lump is leavened, whose whole hide is spotted, whose whole frame is corrupted, being evil, onely evil, and evill continually. Who, lastly, are so transformed into sinne, that it is even predi∣cated of them: according to that of the Prophet; What is the transgression of Ia∣cob? is it not Samaria? And what are the high-places of Iudah? are they not Ie∣rusalem? God as he seeth no sinne in his children, so he seeth nothing else but sinne in others: Their morall vertues are with him but splendida peccata, glistering sinnes: their civil praises nothing set by, Jer. 8.8. Sinne in such is said to be the old man, as if sinne were alive, and the men dead: as if they were totally turn'd and transform'd into sinnes image. What marvel then though the Lord be farre from the wicked, when he heareth the prayer of the righteous, Prov. 15.29. They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offerings and eat it, but the Lord accepts it not. Now (even amidst their sacrifices) will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sinnes, Hos. 8.13. Where it is remarkable that in scorn He calleth their sa∣crifices flesh, ordinary flesh, such as they sell in the shambles. See the like, Jer. 7.21. And in a like sence, Hos. 9.4. Their bread for their soul shall not come into the house of the Lord, that is, the bread for their naturall sustenance. The Prophet speaks there of that meat-offering, Levit. 2.5. appointed for a spirituall use; yet called the bread for their life or livelyhood, because God esteemed it no other then common-meat. Semblably, such (now-adayes) as come in their sinnes to the Lords Supper, they receive the bare elements, and because no more, a curse with them. Obed-Edom was blessed for the Ark, the Philistines cursed:Panem Domi∣ni, non panem Dominum. wheresoever the Ark came amongst them, there came destruction. The ordinances, if they be not proper to men, are deadly. God saith of those that frequent them, as Solomon said of
Adonijah,1 Kin. 1.52. if he will shew himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickednesse shall be found in him, he shall dye. SECT. VIII. Reproof of such as censure hardly of God NExt here's ground of just and sharp reproof of sundry such, as being otherwise very honest and good people, are yet herein much to be blamed and censured that they censure so ill of God,Luk. 19.21.22 worse of themselves, and worst of all others For God first, they repute and report him an austere man, a strict and severe Lord, a hard and rigorous task-master, such as reaps where he sowed not, gathers where he scattered not, exacts more then he affords requires more then they are able to perform. Now if they were ungodly an irreligious men that thus quar∣relled their Lord, as once those murmurers in the wildernesse were, that esteemed Gods house a prison-house,Num. 14.3. of greater bondage and basenesse then Egypt it self, it were the lesse to be wondered at, and the better to be born withal. For such being out of Christ are yet under the rigor and coaction of the law, as it requires perfect obedience, and that by their own strength: which because it is im∣posible, as now,Gal. 5.3: Rom.6 they die without mercy. But for a childe of God that is no longer under the law but under grace, that hath Christ formed already in his heart, of whose fulnesse he hath received grace for grace, that hath the spirit of God for his guide,Neh. 8.10. Psal. 119.24. 2 Cor. 12.9. the joy of God for his strength, the word of God for his learned coun∣sel, and the grace if God to be sufficient for him; sufficient, I say, to supply that which is wanting, to forgive that which is committed, to impute Christs righteous∣nesse, to uphold him in his weaknesses, to raise and restore him in his lapses, and in all to spare him as a man spares his own son that serveth him, what reason is there that such a man should complain of a hard master, or cry out of an unreasonable task? in∣deed if God would accept of no service, but that which is perfect, bear with no fail∣ings, though never so involuntary, cast out every such thing as were not cleansed ac∣cording to the purification of the sanctuary, there were no dealing with him, no stand¦ing before him, no encouragement to come a near him, in his works and worships. If thou Lord shouldest mark iniquities, saith the Psalmist, O Lord, who should stand? But there is forgivenesse with thee, that thou mayest be feared, that is served (whic else thou wouldest not.) And upon this ground let Israel hope in the Lord, (not run away from him and repine against him as Cain did, for that were to add iniquity to their sin, as Samuel told the terrified people 1 Sam. 12.20, 21, for with the Lord there is mercy, (the most powerful attractive Rom. 12.1. to those that have not put off humanity: whence the cords of kindnesse are called the cords of a man Hos. 11.6. not to be drawn to God by them, is bestial) and with him is plenteous redemption, a cornu copia of comfort, a horn of salvation, enough and enough for us all, were we never so many of us. He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities, Psal. 130.3, 4, 7, 8. Be not ye therefore murmurers against God, as some of them also mur∣mured, and were destroyed of the destroyer: sith those thins were written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come. SECT. IX. Reproof of such saints as censure hardly of themselves, and their performances. SEcondly, such of Gods servants as are here censurable as censure over∣hardly of themselves,2 Cor. 10.10.11. as if no children, because not obedient in all things, as it were meet. These are those over much wicked Eccles. 7.17. (according to some)
that will needs condemn themselves to die before their time; think too vilely of their own persons and performances, denie, if not, belie the work of Gods grace in their hearts, not wisely distinguishing betwixt nullity of grace and imperfecti∣on, weaknesse and utter want of it, to their I know nor how great spiritual hurt and hinderance. These consider not that the law admits of a dispensation in the gospel, that the tenour of the new covenant requires no set measures of grace, and that if there be a willing minde. God accepts according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not; takes any thing in good worth where there is a desire of doing better, and for the rest spares us as a man spares his own son that serves him. Away then with that male-contented sowernesse seen in some saints also, Gods whinnels you may call them, for they are ever crying and puling, when they should rather sing at their work, and rejoyce in their priviledges: this would please their father best, as if a man have ever a little cricket among his chil∣dren that will be merry and make him merry, this is the fathers darling. Oh bles∣sed are those that dwell in thine house, saith David, they shall be alwayes praising thee. Psal. 84.4. And for nothing more, surely, then for this fatherly and gracious disposition towards thy poor servants that desire to fear thy name,Neh. 1. Heb, 12.18. are willing in all things to keep a good conscience pleasing God. Lo the very will to do well pleaseth God, if sincere, and seconded with strifes, and attended with grief for coming short of what we should do. Hearty humiliation under weak∣nesse in well-doing, is as true a signe of sanctification, and fruit of conversion as abilitie to do better. ow I demand, which of Gods children doth not thus much? and whether in doing hereof they cannot, or at least may not finde sweetest acceptance, and su∣rest recompence? Consider, is not Abraham said to have sacrificed his son,Heb. 11.11. be∣cause he would have done it? And for David, had not he for his bare purpose of building God an house, this promise made him, that God would build his house for ever? And albeit that very purpose of his was ignorantly and fondly taken up, as wanting warrant from God, 2 Sam. 7.7. yet the Lord both graciously ap∣proves it, for thou didst well, saith he, in that thou wast so minded 2 Chron. 6.8.1 Chron. 6.13 and bountifully rewards it, by fulfilling that with his hand, that he had promised with his mouth, as Solomon thankfuly acknowledgeth. God takes not advanta∣ges against his servants, as he might, but makes the best of every thing where the heart is upright. The good women that came with their spices to embalm our Saviours dead body, should have known that God would not suffer his holy one to see corrup∣tion,Psal. 16. tha his body could not have putrified: it was their ignorance, and yet they are commended for their good intentions. So afterwards,Luk. 24.1. when they came to look for the living among the dead, they deserved a chiding for not remembring what he had foretold them of his resurrection, but receive a comforting from the Angels. Math. 28.5. The preparations of the heart are of great price with God Esay. 55.1. Jer. 30.2. Hath he not promised to blesse our buds,Es. 44.2, 3, 4. so that we shall grow up as the willows by the water-courses, to be as the dew to his people, so that they shall grow as the lilly, and cast forth their roots as Lebanon. Hos. 14 4, 5. to open a door to such as have but a little strength, and such a door as none can shut?Rev. 3.8, 9 Phil. 4.19 to supply all our necessities out of the riches of his glory? Hath he said all this for our encouragement, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witnesse, and shall we not by faith subscribe & seal to it? Do we yet doubt and demur with Zachary? do we yet stagger at the promises with Sarah? do we question Gods either power or patience with Moses at Meribab? Oh take heed lest a promise,Luk. 1 nay a covenant (which is a whole bundle of promises, lie a cluster of the grapes of Canaan) a league of love being left us; any of us should seem to fall short through unbelief Heb. 4.1. Cer∣tain it is that God, that will bear much with his children in other cases, can least of all brook their unbelief. For this is as for a childe to question his fathers love, though he protest it never so deeply, which is an extream provocation. Hence his se∣verity to his best servants, for offending in this kinde. Zachary shall speak no more
words for nine moneths, because he beleeved not the Angels words that spake good unto him. Sarah is checkt for her laughing at the unlikely hood, though he overcame the doubt, judged him faithfull that had promised, and by her faith received power to conceive seed. Those two disciples going to Emaus heard,Heb. 11.11 O fooles and slow of heart &c. and the other eleven were reproved for their unbeleef. Mar. 16.14. Moses also and Aaron were denyed the comfort of an earthly Canaan, because they beleeved not God to sanctify him at the rock Rimmon.Deut. 32.52 1 Cor. 10.11 Now all these things hapned unto them for types to us, and are writ∣ten for our admonition &c. Be not ye therefore unbeleevers, but beleeve: turne not the back of the hand to the promise, that as a staffe should support you: spoile not your soules by a cruell modesty, by a false humility of the comfort God affords you: but having found hony,Colos. 2 Prov. 25.16 eate it: beleeve the prophets and ye shall prosper: see your names written in this and other precious promises: and if ye cannot out-reason the devill who seekes to unsettle you, yet out-will him, and say; I will not be blast∣ed out of my beliefe, I will not cast away my confidence, or be drawne from the hornes of the Altar Christ Jesus. If I must dye, I will dye at his feet who hath promised to spare me, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. SECT. X. Reproofe of such as uncharitably censure others. LAstly, such are here met with as superciliously censure others, for those things that God is content to passe by and pardon in them: that will needs be many masters,Jam. 3.1 as St. James hath it, and judge another mans servant: that step into Gods seat of judicature, and presume to passe hard sentence upon their fellow servants, because not so forwardly and forth-putting as themselves for∣sooth. Yea, there want not such unbridled spirits as stick not to forestall the an∣gels office of severing the elect from the reprobats, to condemne the race of the righteous, to excommunicate them for some srailties and infirmities out of their consciences and companies, yea to unchurch them and to unbrother them in a passion: despising Christs little ones, casting dirt on his Jewels, and estranging themselves from such in affection, in countenance, in society, for every small infirmity: as if they were akin to those hypocrits in Esay that cry, stand apart;Esay 65.5 Jude 19. or those wandring starres in St. Jude, that separate themselves, sensuall, having not the spirit, which yet they make great boasts of; or at least, to those inconsiderat sons of Zebedee, who would needs have fet fire from heaven straight, & were therefore told,Luk. 9.54 ye know not of what spirit ye be. Not of his spirit surely that came not to be served, but to serve, not to judge, but to save. For cure of this corrupt humour, Consider. 1. Is this to be followers of God as deare children, and to walk as we have him for an example? Or would you be content God should deale thus rigidly with you? I trow not. He seeth noe sin in his children, such is his love, and and shall we be juster then God? Christ will not quench but cherish the least spark of grace that is in any; and shall we be wiser then Christ? The holy ghost disdaines not to dwell in the darke and smoaky chambers of their hearts; And shall we be holier then he?Zach. 4.10 who is this that hath despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoyce &c. saith God to those Jewes that wept and slight∣ed the second temple. Hag. 2.3. 2. The Authour to the Hebrews bids us study one another, and take notice of such things only in our brethren,Heb. 10.24 as may whet on love, not that engender dislike, Pitch upon such things as are amiable, and passe by the rest. This is love, and this is to be like unto God who is love. There was nothing good in all Sarahs speech Gen. 18.12. but only this, that she calles her husband lord: and yet for this, God praiseth her, setting it as a pearle in a gold-ring to her eternall
commendation 1 Pet. 3.6. There was nothing almost but sin in Rahabs entertain∣ment of the spies, and in the midwives excuse to the King, and yet Rahab is re∣gistred among the ancient beleevers, and God builded the midwives houses, that is,Rivet in Exod. gave them children (as some interpret it) in lieu of their care for preser∣ving the Hebrew children. Nay for a patern of ingenuity and candour to us, he gives the very devills also their due, praising in them what is praise-worthy, when he stiles them principalities, powers, Rulers &c. who yet sin against him of malicious wickednes. And shall we unchristianly conceal, or but dissemble the better parts and practises of our weaker brethren, and fasten only upon that they may draw on dislike or disaffection? This is with the crow to light upon carrion, and prefer it before sweeter food. This is with the fly to fasten on the sore,Vultures ad male olentia feruntur. pass∣ing by the sounder places of the body. This is with the vultures, to hunt after dead carcasses, and with swine turn'd into a garden, to root in the muck-kill, if any such be there, not once taking notice of the fruits and sweets. Sure it is, that if a man should do nothing else but pore upon his own infirmities, he would, in short space, loath and abhorr himself with Iob: how much more if God should break up that sink of sin that is in us, as in Judas, should we never be able to abide the stench thereof. 3. Is it not sufficient that the wicked censure us for hypocrites, factionists, humourists &c. watch for our haltings, making a man an offendour for a word, and turning aside the just for a thing of nought Esay 29.21? barking and blasphe∣ming for every small matter, but that we must thus fall out amongst our selves, and thus fall foule upon one another? Is it not enough that the Pharisees quarrell Christs disciples for not fasting, but Iohns disciples must joyne with them,Res commise∣randa cum pij fratres &c. Cartw: in loc. and be first in the quarrell? Mar. 2.18. Mat. 9.14. should'st thou sit and speak against thine own mothers son? Psal. 50.20. 4. Consider lastly, the evill that redounds here-hence to our selves. For a censorious christian subjects himself to the judgment both of God Mat. 18.34.Scalig: de re poet: cap. 16. gives this proud and unmannerly censure. Gothi belluae: Scoti non minus: Angli perfidi, inflati, feri, contemptores, stolidi, amentes, inertes, inhospitales, immanes. One comes after and censures him thus: His bolt you see, is soon shot, and so you may happily guesse at the quality of the Archer. Iam. 3.4. and men, Mat. 7.1, 2. Luke 6.38. Good men will suspect such, bad men scorn them, and all shun them, and desire to be rid of them. Besides, it may be just in God to leave such to themselves, and to give them over to the power of the like temptation, or worse, Gal. 6.1. that they may learne to lend that mer∣cy too thers that now they are compell'd to borrow of others. SECT. XI. Exhortation to put our selves into Gods service. THirdly, this Doctrine may serve for justification: and first to those without, that are yet to chuse their master; let them learne to pitch upon God alone, and to put themselves, as soon as may be, into his service: sith he looketh upon every servant as a child, and useth them accordingly. Time was when the king∣dome of heaven suffered violence, and men throng'd into it. when the people were so forward to serve God with the best of their substance, that they brought more then enough for the works of the Tabernacle Exod. 36.6.Esay. 2.1 When men call∣ed upon themselves and one another, with Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord &c. In which voyage they passed from strength to strength,Psal. 84. went many a dearne mile, and many a weary step, till they came to see the face of God in Sion. And yet how did they see it otherwise then in the dark glass of the cere∣monies, and not with that evidence of vision and nearnesse of acquaintance that we now see and serve him? Time was when the people in Ioshua's dayes were set to serve God. And notwith standing he told them, Ye cannot serve the Lord:Iosh. 24.18. for he is a holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not forgive your transgression nor your
sin: which was enough in likelihood to have quailed and cooled them, yet they resolutely replyed, Nay, but we will serve the Lord, as not knowing how better to prefer themselves, or provide for their posterity. How is it then that we seek not after his service, that we hire not our selves into his house, sith his work is so fair, his wages so great? that we put not our necks under his yoke, sith it is so easy? that we bear not his burden, sith it is so light (no more burden to a man then wings are to a bird?)Esay 56.6 that we love not to be his servants, sith he rules with so much love and lenity? that we come off no more roundly with his businesse, as a free-hearted people,Psal. 110.2, 3 sith he is content to take up with so little? But we are ready rather to shift off that little as Ionas did his journey to Niniveh. Virtus nolen∣tium nulla est. He that does good with an ill will, does ill. God strains upon no man,Exod. 25.2 Exod. 25.2. neither likes he that service that is wrested from us, as Pha∣raoh's, or wrung out of us as verjuyce is out of a crab. He loves a cheerfull giver: and therefore when he calls for an offering, he wills that every man give it willing∣ly with his heart. And that none may pretend cause to hang off, see how low he stoops. Content he is to accept of a lamb or two for a sacrifice. And if that be too much, and a man want means for a lamb, let him bring a pair of turtles, or two small pigeons, and it shall be taken. Or if he cannot reach to that, a hand-full or two of flower, with a corn or two of salt shall suffice. Levit. 14.10, 21, 31, 32. An it is often repeated for the encouragement of weak ones. Looke, what a man is able, according to his ability, even what his hand is able to reach unto, and it shall be accepted. Now is not this motive sufficient to set in, and go on to lay the last stone of Gods spirituall building with joy? He rules not over his ser∣vants with rigour, as the Egyptians did over the Israelites: he puts them to no drudgery, as the Israelites did the Gibeonites: but measuring the deed by the de∣sire, and the desire by the sincerity, he takes all in good part that they do wil∣lingly, though never so weakly: And for what's wanting in their work, he spares them as a man spares his own son that serves him. To conclude this first Exhortation, He requires no more of us then he gives, and gives so much as shall suffice to his acceptation. How is it then that we stand here idle all day long, and do not lay our bones to work in his Vineyard? SECT. XII. Give God the glory of his fatherly goodnesse. NExt, we addresse this Exhortation to Gods faithfull children. And so this doctrine of his fatherly dealing with such as serve him in sincerity should in-force upon them a threefold duty. 1. of thankfulnesse to God. 2. of mercy to men, 3. comfortable enjoyment of themselves. Let God be praised, our brethren pittyed, and our selves acheared. For God first, how should we not only justify him from hard suspitions and aspersions of rigour; but also glorify him for his singular love to us herein, that he is content to take any thing well at our hands, that is but done with honest hearts. To quicken you hereunto consider 1. that he requires no more of us then he gives. 2. gives us to do what he requires. 3. makes the best of that little we do, and remits the rest. First, he requires no more then he gives, expects not the gain of ten talents, where he hath given but five, nor of five, where he hath bestowed but one: but that every man be doing something according to his modell, and measure of grace received. Cursed be that cozener, saith the Prophet, that hath in his flock a male, and sacrificeth to the Lord a corrupt thing.Mal. 1.14. But he is not accursed that brings no better, because he hath no better to bring. Of a little God is content to take a little; as in Jeroboams son, in whom there was found a little good, and God took him for it, and as in the Church of Philadelphia, who had but a little strength, and yet for that little is highly commended. and not blamed for any thing as the
rest were. Where no gold was to be had, goats-hair was as well accepted.Revel. 3.7 O  Naz. Quicquid vis & non potes, factum Deus reputat. Aug. The poor widdow went as farr with her two mites, as some other with two millions. And those beggars that never were able to deal an almes, shall yet hear, Come ye blessed &c. for ye fed me hungry, clothed me naked &c. that is, ye would have done it if it had laine in your power; and to what ye were able, ye were not backward. Secondly, he gives us to do that which he requires to be done: which made Au∣stin pray; Give Lord what thou commandest, and then command what thou wilt. I will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,Ezek. 36.27 saith God in the new-covenant. Christ will not break the bruised reed,Gal 2.9 Joh. 5. Mat. 12.20, 21 nor quench the smoak∣ing flax. Every man cannot be a strong pillar, as James and Cephas, or a flaming torch, a burning and a shining light in Gods house, as John Baptist. What though he be but a bruised reed? Christ will not break him. What though he be but a smoaking week of a candle? Christ will not quench him. A smoaking week is offensive to the smell, and is soon quenched, according to that, Esay 43.17. they are quenched as tow, which is a thing soon done. But Christ will not do it tho: but he will attemper himself to their infirmity, till he hath supplied them with light more full, and strength more solid: till he hath brought forth judgement to victory, that is, a smaller measure of grace to full perfection of conquest over what∣soever corruption. He will not reject the corn for the chaffe, the wine for the dregs, the gold for the drosse, but purging out all our drosse, and taking away all our tinne, Esay 1.25. he will correct and cure us of all wants and weaknesses, till we come to a perfection of purity, Ephes. 5.26. to the full measure of a man in Christ, Ephes. 4.13. Thirdly, he makes the best of that little we do, when he perceives it to proceed from great love: as in Mary that loved much, and out of her love anointed Christs head with that precious ointment. It is likely that she had no further intent then to shew her love in doing our Saviour that honour, usuall at feasts, and to refresh his spirits by the sweet scent of that ointment. But the Spirit of God directed that fact for a funerall-service: and Christ defends her against Judas and the rest, that she had done it against the day of his buriall, Joh. 12.7.Joh. 12.7 In the same Chap∣ter, at his triumphant riding into Jerusalem, the children sang, the disciples shout, Hosanna in the highest: the Pharisees fret at both, the Lord Christ defends both. The children he defendeth from Psal. 8.2. Out of the mouth of babes, &c. the disciples he defendeth from the necessity of their duty, wherein had they failed, the very stones would cry out, Luk. 19.36, 40. And yet the Disciples themselves (how much lesse the children?) understood not what they did at that time. Indeed, when Jesus was glorified, then that they had done these things unto him, Joh. 12.16. But that whether ignorance, or incogitancy was never laid to their charge, through Gods fatherly love, and indulgence to his, whom he spareth as a man spares his own sonne that serves him: and is therefore to be praised of them thoroughout all eternity. SECT. XIII. Bear with others weaknesses, and forbear harsh censures. SEcondly, Let Gods Saints be exhorted to look (as God doth) upon the in∣firmities of their brethren with a more favourable, and forbearing eye: not thinking it strength of grace to endure nothing in the weaker sort, but bearing with them, and beleeving all things, straining to a good opinion of them, where there is but the least probability to indure it, 1 Cor. 13.7. Take not up every evil report you hear of another from a tale-bearer, as you do wares from a pedler: but frown upon such, and be ready to make apology. In particular. 1. Judge no man by the outward appearance, or common-hearsay: for so you may beseem to condemn a dear child of God, and approve a detestable heretike, and incarnate de∣vil. St. Pauls companions, that were the very glory of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. were counted the sweepings of the world, and off-scouring of all things. The precious
sonnes of Sion, comparable to fine gold, were esteemed as earthen pitchers, Lam. 4.2.Corsetur Lu∣therus so esse Apostatam sed eatam & sancium, qui fidem diaol datam non ser∣vavit. Athanasius was impeached by the Arrians of adultery. Basil by his bre∣thren of heresie. Luther by the Papists of Apostacy. Austere John is said to have a devil. Sociable Christ to be a wine-bibber. And it was the worse because from Scribes and Pharisees, whose word must carry such credit with it, as alone to con∣demn Christ. We would not have brought him to thee, were he not worthy of death. And whose life must be a rule to others, Do any of the Pharisees beleeve in him? Take heed therefore what you hear, and to whom you give credit. But may I not beleeve mine own eyes?Oj. judge the tree by the fruits? Matth. 7. Not alwayes in matter of fact.Sol. Our Saviour speaks there of heretikes and se∣ducers; and bids judge of them by their fruits, that is, by their doctrines and opi∣nions that are corrupt and carnall. But for point of practise, the best tree doth not alwayes bear, or not alwayes alike: An apple-tree may have a fit of barrennesse as well as a crab tree: or the fruit may be nipt sometimes by a frost. God onely knows what sap is in the root, what truth is in the heart: and let him that knows it, judge of it. 2. Be favourable in sinnes strengthened by naturall inclination, or by long con∣tinued custome (which is not so easily broke off,) or by multitude of temptations and enticements. The best minds when troubled yeeld inconsiderate motions: as wa∣ter that is violently stirred sends up bubbles: and how often have carnall respects drawn weak goodnesse to disguise it self with sinne? 3. Judge no man by that he is in a passion, whether of grief, fear, or anger: for these are violent, and have made the holiest in their behaviour little esse then bestiall: witnesse David in his sear of Sauls fury, in his roaring over Absolom, and rage at Nabal. Passions like kine in a narrow passage ride one upon another; and like heavy bodies down steep hills, once in motion they know no ground but the bottom. Oh how subject are Gods best Saints to weak passions! and if they have the grace to ward an expected blow, how easily are they surprized with a sudden foil! Sometimes both grace and wit are asleep in the holiest and wariest brests: and the wisest are miscaried by their passions to their cost. What shiprack of his faith and patience had meek Moses well-nigh made against the Rock Rimmon. As, at another time how did he in a sudden indignation cast away the two-Tables, and abandon that which he would, in cold blood, have held faster then his life? But passion doth so bemist the cleerest judgement otherwhiles, that a man shall bee apt to think there is sense in sinning, and that he hath some reason to be mad. 4. Censure not any to be either better or worse for some particular action, but consider what his main bent is, and accordingly conceive of him. David that saith his sinnes were more then the hairs of his head, saith also, (in respect of his generall resolution, and full purpose of heart) I have not declined from thy sta∣tutes, neither is there any way of wickednesse in me. Saint Iohn looked upon the Lady,2 Joh, 1.4 and her children, as elect, because they walked in the truth, though not without some particular stumblings, and aberrations. And Saint Paul was confident of the Thessalonians election,1 Thes. 1.4 though so compassed with infirmities, that he doubted he had laboured in vain, and feared their Apostacy, 1 Thes. 3.5. Perswaded also he was better things of the Hebrews,Heb. 6.9 and such as accompany salva∣tion, though he found them slow of foot, and dull of hearing, and frights them with the terrour of the Lord upon Apostates. Who can promise himself free∣dome from grosse infirmities, when Aaron that went up into the mount comes down, and doth that in the valley which he heard forbidden in the hill? Gods best children may not onely be drenched in the waves of sinne, but lie in them for a time, and perhaps sink twice to the bottom, before they recover. Sudden indeliberate out-bursts, contrary to the generall bent and purpose, break not the league betwixt God and his people, as the robberies done by Pirates of either Nation do not betwixt King and King. A good man is ha∣bitually good when actually evil, and an evil man is habitually evil, when actually good. He that goes up a hill, may have many slips and falls, yet is still said to be going up the hill, because his face is toward the top. A sheep
may slip into a dich, as he is leaping over it, yea lye there some time till the shep∣heard finde it and help it out. Behold, I, even I will both search my lost sheep, and seek them out saith the Lord. I will seck that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will binde up that which was broken,Ezek. 34.11, 12.16. Rev 24. Psal. 119.176 and will strengthen that which was sick. I will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. Christ the good shepheard tiddleth his lambs, dyed for their ignorance Heb. 7.7. bare their infirmities Esay 53. breeds a first love in his little ones, and gives charge that none despise them, much lesse discard them, no, though they go astray as David did like a lost sheep. And mark his rea∣sons, God despiseth them not Math 18.10. but senthis son to seek them, and sets his Angels to tend and look to them; therefore let none set light by them. SECT. XIV. Take comfort and courage notwithstanding in∣firmities and failings in the manner. LAstly, this doctrine methinks might make the servants of God everlastingly merry: it should wonderfully clear up the countenances and cheer up the hearts of all Gods chosen: it should banish and bar out of their blessed souls all their unnecessary scruples, distrusts, dejections and discouragements arising from the sense of their manifold defects, distractions in duty, indisposition, ignorance, for∣getfulnesse, omissions, or failings in the manner. All which, so long as they are groned under, grieved at, and striven against,Peccata nobis non nocent si non placent. Augustin. God will never impute unto them: nay, he will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him. Now how that is they can well tell that are parents of to∣wardly and tractable children, that are good-natured, and well-conditioned. And yet they cannot neither, be they never so tender, and their children never so tracta∣ble: sith there is no more comparison betwixt their mercy and his, then is betwixt a molehill and a mountain, nay the least drop of a bucket, and the main Ocean. Yea, I dare be bold to say, that all the mercies of all the fathers, mo∣thers, husbands, wives, friends, allyes in the world, compared to his mercy, are mere cruelty. This makes the Prophet as having no other way to utter it, vent himself by an exclamation, Oh how excellent is thy loving kindnesse O God! The clouds may commend thy faithfulnesse, the mountaines thy righteousnesse, the great deep thy judgements, but who or what can set forth thy goodnesse? Psal. 36.5, 6, 7. It is beyond all that heart of man can conceive, or tongue of Angels expresse. Ha∣ving therefore such a mercy to make use of, such a father to do service unto, how is it that we are so dull and disconsolate? how is that we serve not the Lord, with gladnesse, and come before him with singing? Psalm 100.2. A son feeling the love of his father, creeps neerer under his wing, or elbow, and is welcom. So here. Yea, but I am so weak, and worthlesse, that I doubt much whether I am a childe or not. How weak? say thou be no stronger then a childe newly quickned in the womb,Sol. the very first-springings in the womb of grace are precious before God. Co. 2.13. And you hath he quickned, to assure the weak (saith One) that though they be but as the childe that lies in the womb, and have not so much as the strength of a babe new-born, they are accepted with God. Quickned I trust I am, saith another, and born anew to God: but its so little I know, and lesse that I can do; that I have no great joy of my self: for though God spareth some,, yet it is as a father spares his son that serveth him.
A childe,Heb. 5.11, 12 Fractu st or est  liber orum, sed injantra dulci∣or. Sence.  9. . Lun. 365. Pater libros non reijeit quod aegoi, claudi, debiles defor∣mes sint: sed chariores i∣bet & mollius tractat &c. Spin. de justi. christi. Ob. during his nonage is very infirm, ignorant, wayward: does few chars in the house, makes many. So is it also in Gods house, for he hath sons of all sizes. Such children in grace were the Disciples during the bridegrooms abode with them: such also were the contentious Corinthians 1 Epist. 3.1, 2, 3. the dull and droanish Hebrews, milk-sops and babies at first, who yet afterwards came to be his proper men, tall Christians. The greatest giant hath been in swadling-clouts: the learnedst Doctour hath been in his horn-book: and he that now doth God best service, time was when he did him little enough. But parents delight as much in their younger children that play about the house, as in those bigger that can earn their livings. If we can but call Abba father, or but name the name of the Lord in prayer, and so depart from evil 2 Tim. 2.19. he is much taken with it. His ears are open to their prayers, saith David, to their breathing, saith Jeremy, as a kinde mother watcheth and listeneth to the least whimping of her childe. Yea because the soul is sick, the service is twice wel∣come: as if a sick childe reach us any thing, we count it more then to send another on a laborious errand. Oh but I do not onely not serve my heavenly father, but disobey and displease him, and that often. Is any childe turned out of doors because dabbled?Sol. No, but if he be for a while, yet afterwards he is whipt, and taken in again. I am so vile and froward,Ob. I cannot take a whipping, but am ready to fret at it, or to faint under it. What father will abandon his childe because being weak,Sol. and wearyish, he is therfore thwart and waspish, and cryes himself out of breath (it may be) when corrected: especially if he have been otherwise a good-natured childe, and well-deeded. Ey,Ob. but I am none of those, I am such a childe, as no father would away with. Thy father is God and not man, and will do more then any earthly father or friend else will or can do.Sol. Jer. 3.1. And when my father and my mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up. Ey, but if the Lord should take me up, yet it would not be long ere he turned me out again for my naughtinesse.Ob. Not so, for he hates putting away. Besides, the servant abideth not in the house, but the son abideth. Joh.Sol. 8.35. The servant if he cannot do his masters work to his minde, is dismissed and packt away, as that young man of Egypt that was servant to an Amalekite, was cast off by his master, because three dayes afore he fell sick, and became unfit for service. But a son,1 Sam. 30.13. albeit he be not able to do any thing (to speak of) is retained and che∣rished, because a son. If I were so good a childe as some I know, and could do such service, as they, I should be very cheerful.Ob. 1. They that have more grace, have more to account for: that which thou hast is thy fathers allowance,Sol. be contented, Imploy and improve thy stock and thou shalt have more. 2.Omnis Chri∣stianus Cruci anus Luther. Thou knowest not their pressures and grievances whom thou so admirest: thou seest but the best of them: they have also enough to do with themselves, if you knew all: little do others know where their shooe wringeth them. Every Christian is a Crucian. 3. I told you before, that God requires no more then he gives, and yet gives also as much as shall suffice to his acceptation,In Eucharisti∣cis licebat of∣ferre panes fer∣mentatos ut osienderetur deum ferre nestram infir. mitatem. Al∣sted. Matth. 6.28. one may be a good servant, though he be not the best in the countrey. All the good grounds brought not forth a like quantity of fruit, some not the third part as others did, and yet that little they did was good and ripe fruit and themselves were grounds respected of God, and blessed by him. He calls our good works the fruit of the vine, and loves to taste of them though they relish stil of the old stock. The vine is the weakest plant, vet very fruitful The lilies spin not, and yet are gorgeously attired. God wil greatly glorify himself in the branch of his planting, in the
work of his hands, so that a little one shall be come a thousand, and a small one a strong nation. I the Lord will hasten it in his time Esay 60.21. 4. You have more cause of comfort in that little you have, then of discou∣ragement in that more that you want: sith it is a far greater work to beget grace where it is not, then to increase it where it is. Look therefore on others bitternesse for imitation and incitation, but not for slavish dejection and self-blinding. Disgrace not thine own graces because of o∣ther mens perfections and precedencies: but be thankfull if Christ be formed in thee to any degree, and that thou hast any thing to do about God. Only whatsoever thy hand sindeth to do, do it with all thy might. And then, he that followeth after righteousnes as a servant followeth his trade whereto he is bound apprentice (though he be far from being his trades-master) he shall have honour and life, honour in earth, and life in heaven. Prov. 21.21. Yea but displeasing service is double dishonour, because we displease God in that act, wherein he specially lookes to be pleased. I grant that a powerlesse performance of holy duties,Sol. proceeding from a spirit of sloth joyned with presumption, so highly provoketh God against his own dear children, that he hath much a doe to forbear killing them, as he had to for∣bear Moses when he met him in the Inne. Ready he is to have a blow at them, as he had at David when he brake his bones, and felt his fall to his dying-day.Psal. 51 But they that see and sigh under their wants and weaknesses with shame and sorrow need not be discomforted. Christ appeats for them in heaven with their names upon his bosom, and their services in his hand, which he not only presents but perfu∣meth; not only puts them up, but adds weight to them: nonsuting and casting out of the court all accusations, and allegations made against them either by sin or Satan: and drowning their noise by that blood of sprinkling,Heb. 12. that speaketh better things then the blood of Abel. This he doth for them in heaven: as on earth, he is touched with the feel∣ing of their infirmities, and hath taken order with their enimies for their se∣curity Joh. 18.8. and with their friends for their kinde acceptance, comman∣ding the stronger to receive them into their affections Rom. 14.1. and to restore them in their outstraies Gal. 6.1. promising also to give strength to him that fainteth, and to increase power to him that hath no strength. Even the youths (that trust to their own strength, or to any measure of grace acquir∣ed, which is but a creature, and to trust in it, is to trust in the arme of flesh; lo those youthes) shall faint and be weary: and the young men shall utterly fall. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk, and not faint. Esay 40.29, 30, 31. In regard of the Authours absence, and the mis∣placing of his Copy, the Reader is desired to referre this Exposition of the 18. ver. of the 3. Chapter to its proper place. Verse 18. Then shall ye returne] you wicked blasphemers that have flandred Gods hous-peeping, and brought up an evill report of his providence and justice; as if in managing the matters of the world, he were lesse equall, or lesse care∣full: You, I say, shall returne, not to your right minds by a through conver∣sion, by an entire change of the whole man, from evill to good (alasse for your misery, tis past time of day with you for any such good work:) But you shall alter your opinions, when your eyes are once uncealed by the extremity of your
suffering,Plin. Prov.  25 E. 4.30 Dan. 11.21 Vasallos Chri∣sti. Socrat. (as the Mole, eyes are said to be, when pangs of death are upon her) to see and acknowledge a sensible difference between the righteous (ever more excellent then his neighbour, let him dwell where he will: because sealed up to the day of redemption) and the wicked who is but a vile person, an  (let him be as great as Antiochus Epiphancs the great King of Syria) between him that serveth God, accounting it the highest honour to be his vassall, as Constantine, Theodosius and Valentinian their Emperours) called themselves: And him that serveth him not, but casteth off the yoke of his obedience, being a son of Beli∣al; and counteth it the only liberty to live as he lists, and not to be ruled by God. Then shall ye returne] Then when it it is too late, when the day of grace is past, the gales of grace gone over, the gate shut, the draw-bridge taken up. Then shall ye wretched lingerers and loytorers Epimetheusses, postmasters, after-wits, that come in at length with your fooles Had-I-wist, return, not as the Prodi∣gall did, who seasonably and savingly came to himself Luk. 15.17. having bin before utterly bestraught,1 King. 8.47 and quite beside himself, by the deceitfulnesse of sin, called foolishnesse of madnesse Eccles. 7.25. nor as those true converts mentioned in Solomons prayer, that bethink themselves and repent, and make supplication to their judge:Par. in Rev. 18.19. . Mat. 27.3 Fox Martyrol But as Iudas; who, whilst he plai'd alone, wan all, but haunted with the furies of a guilty conscience, which would needs make one with him, he repented after a sort, with a poenitentia sera Iscariotica. as Pareus calleth it, had some after-thoughts, but not to a transmentation; some inward wamblings, but they boyled not up to the full height of a godly sorrow, and therefore came to nothing. Or, as Iames Abbes, with his hideous All too late, All too late: So these wicked ones in the text, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdome of heaven, and themselves thrust out; Lazarus in Abrahams bosom, and their selves in the burning lake;Mat. 13.43 Christs poor despised fellow-sufferers shining forth as the Sun in the kingdome of their father, and themselves cast out into outer darknesse; then shall they change both their minde and their note: then shall their odious blasphemies be driven back again down their throats, and then made to say with Phara.Exod. 9.27 The Lord is righteous, and so are all his people, Esay 60.21. but I and mine associates are wicked, and therefore deservedly wretched. We once counted the proud happy, but now we see that of David verified which erst we beleeved not: Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed: for that they erred from thy commandements.Psal. 119.21 We looked upon the righteous as calamitous, as worms and no men: as the nullisicamen populi (Tertullians expression) fit to be set with the dogs of the flock,De resurrect. Iob 30.1. and as the off-scouring of all things. But now we can vote with that man of God and say, Happy art thou, O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people,Deut. 33 29 saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thine exency! and thine enemies are now found liars unto thee: for thou treadest upon their high places, when they are troden under foot as unsavoury salt. Woe unto  spoilers; for now we are spoiled &c.Isa. 33.1 Ier. 4.13 Isa. 33.14 Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who can abide with ever lasting burnings? Behold the day is come that burneth as an oven Mal. 4.1. and we are now as stubble fully dried that it may burn the better Nah. 1.10. We are put away (even all the wicked of the earth) like drosse Psal. 119.119, thrust away as thorns 2. Sam. 23.6. placed as vile things under Christs feet Psal.Iohn Careles. 110.1. When the righteous shine as bright as silver upon the celestiall shelf (as that martyr said) and surpass us as farr as the lily doth the thorns Cant. 2.2. or as the gold doth the coals in the goldsmiths shop: yea they are the throne of Christ Exod. 17.16. his Iewels Mal. 3.17. his ornament Ezek. 7.20. the beauty of his ornament, and that set in majesty ib. a royall diadem on the head of Je∣hovah. Esay 62.3. and so they shall one day appear to be, though now they do not, 1 Ioh. 3.2. it shall be no hard matter to discern them. Between the righteous and the wicked] Here they are together in the church mi∣litant, and ever have been. Sinners in Sion Isa. 33.14. sacrificing Sodomites Isa. 1.10. a devill in Christs family Ioh. 13.10. All men have not faith 2 Thess. 3.2. all the Lords people are not holy Num. 16.3. that any are, 'tis just won∣der. What is man that he should be clean, and he which is born of a woman that
he should be righteous? Iob 15.14. None are so but such as are arraied with that fine white linnen and shining, the righteousnesses of the saints Rev. 19.8. that twofold righteousnesse Imputed and Imparted, of Justification and of Sanctificati∣on. See both 1 Cor. 6.11. and seek after both by Christs Merit and Spirit, by his Value and Vertue. He is Iehovah our righteousnesse Ier. 23.5. and of his ful∣nesse we all receive Ioh. 1.16. He it is that makes us to differ from the wicked of the world, that have hearts full of hell, and are ever either hatching cockatrices eggs, or at best, weaving spiders webbs; vanity or villany is their whole practise. The best among them would serve god, and yet retain their lusts too; as Solomon thought he could follow sinfull pleasures, and yet keep his wisdome. And with such we must converse whiles in this world. Tares will be with the wheat, goats among the sheep, righteous and wicked together. God permits it so to be for the glory of his free grace, and for the triall and exercise of his people. Our care must be the greater: for evill men indanger good men, as weeds do the corn, as bad humours the blood, or an infected house the neighbourhood, We must re∣solve (as Ioshuah) to serve the Lord, howsoever: because a difference shall be one day, set between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. Where we see, that not serving of God, not sacrificing is a sinne, Eccles. 9 2. Not rob∣bing onely, but the not relieving of the poor was the rich mans ruin. Not glut∣tony onely, but overmuch abstinence may overthrow the body. Omission of diet breeds diseases; so doth omission of duties: and makes work for hell, or for the Physitian of our souls. Let us therefore have grace whereby we may serve God with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.27. Serve him as old Zachary in his Canticle saith we should do, Luke 1.74, 75. First out of sense of his dear love in our delive∣rance by Christ: whereinto the deeper we dive the sweeter.Servati sumus ut serviamus. This will make us love to be his servants, Esay 56.7. fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Rom. 12.12. Secondly, serve him without fear, slavish fear, serve him with an holy security, in full assurance of his gracious assistance and acceptance; yea though thorough infirmity we misse, or marre his work, yet he will spare us, Mal. 3.17. Third∣ly, serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse, in all parts and points of duty: shew your integrity both for subject and object: not picking or chusing' your work, nor sticking at any thing, but willing in all things to please God. He doth not Gods but his own will, that doth no more then himself will. Fourthly, serve him sincerely, in holinesse and righteousnesse (before him, or, as in his presence.) Set the Lord ever at your right hand; look him full in the face, approve your hearts and lives unto him, do him but eye-service, and it sufficeth. Fifthly, serve him constantly, all the dayes of your lives, hire your selves to him for terme of life: why should you desire to shift or fleet? where can you mend your selves, either for fairnesse of work, or fulnesse of wages? Can the son of Iesse give you vineyards &c. said Saul to his servants, so may God say, Can the world do for you, as I both can and will if you cleave to me with full purpose of heart? Sure it cannot &c. FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of all the Principall things contained in this whole WORK. A ABstinence Pag. 265 Admonition rejected p. 60, 61. the best need it p. 480. Rch. 1. ad∣monished by an Hermite p. 321 Adoption: the whole Doctrine of it p. 912, 913, 914, 915, 916, &c. Adultery goeth along with idolatry p. 69, 70, 71. punished p. 57, 664 Affliction is Gods thorn-hedge p. 27. 'tis usefull p. 26. humblth us p. 89. teach∣eth us 90. maketh us pray, ib. is Gods vocall instruction to us 377. Comforts under it 385. Difference of afflictions that befall saints and sinners 414, 421. Saints are thereby purged 591, 592, 661, 662. tried 593. gratified 593. How to live by faith in affliction 888, 889. Despondency under affliction re∣proved 890. Suffer it patiently 891, 892. though not presently delivered 893. Helps thereunto, ib. & 894. God a Fa∣ther to his afflicted. 928 Alchymy a pick-purse p. 420 Alexander M. meeting the high-priest p. 520 Ambition unsatisfiable p. 422 Amos, who p. 221 Amurath 3 stabbed to death p. 579 Angels readily serve the Saints p. 504, 537. and why 504. they are our Gar∣dians 512. heavenly spirits, &c. 537 Anger rash, the evil of it p. 326 Antiquity falsified by Papists p. 561 Apostasie p. 67. Apostates 74 it is very dangerous 178 Apparrell: pride in it condemned p. 448 Assurance: labour after it p. 153, 208. be not unsetled 618 Astrologie judiciary condemned p. 446 Atheists practicall p. 450 B BAal, who p. 30. Baalim what 37 B. Babingtons three-leaved book p. 686 Baptisme promised p. 583 Bastards reproached p. 652 Bath of Christs Blood p. 660 Beauty lovely p. 281. stained with evil manners 408 Be Best in worst times, and why 695, 696 697, 698, &c. Blasphemy punished p. 676, Blood-guiltinesse wofull p. 406 Borbonius anagrammatized p. 23 Bribery condemned p. 73, 354, 382 C CAlling of the Gentiles p. 623 Get a lawfull Calling p. 309 Calvins Institutions, when, and why written p. 273. Calvin belied by A Lapide p. 601 Cardinals pompous creation p. 25 Censure not others harshly p. 936, 937, 940 Chemarims who p. 446 Children soon corrupted p. 83. unnatu∣rall children 384. degenerate chil∣dren 642. a fathers huge love to his children 585. Sennacherib why slain by his own sons 399 Church described by her afflictions p. 594. restlesse here 504. is invincible 527, 576. is under persecution 594. she shall be delivered 887. onely she must pray for it 888. she is married to Christ 897 hath him for her Head 13 Christ his yoke is easie p. 152. he is a tho∣rough-Saviour 169. a dew to his 179. King of his Church 360. Abyssines em∣blem of his works 457. his Deity asser∣ted 485. he pacifieth the heart 488. be shall reigne 492. his intercession an∣swered 506. how he is sent of his Fa∣ther 513. how anointed 522. his dolo∣rous passion 523. his subjects have peace ib. why He is called the Branch
539. All prophecies are fulfilled in him 557. his poverty stumbled at ib. the Bath of his blood 583, 660. benefites thereby 682. he is Gods shepherd 589. the Sun of righteousnesse 683. the souls physitian 683. his Intercession 943. A false Christ p. 689 Clouds p. 560 Comfort: God comforteth the abject 503. comforts of the scripture, and of the creature 423. Company: evil is contagious p. 490 513 Conference: benefit of it p. 680, 700, 824. Satan hindereth it 680. it is an indis∣pensable duty 812. and why 813. bar∣rennesse in, and backwardnesse unto it re∣proved 818. be forward and free that way 820. means and helps thereunto 821, 822, 823, 824. Conscience: naturall stoopeth to the image of God p. 700 Consideration: its necessity, and utility p. 473. See thought, meditation Constantinople: covetousnesse was its ruine 403. 591. Conversion: turn to God, and how p. 197, 498, 600. because God is gracious 499. Cyprian converted by reaing Jnah 351. Covenant breach a great sin p. 643. dange∣rous 647. New covenant sweet p. 44. see 594 Covetousnesse restlesse p. 340, 341. unsatis∣fiable 405. accursed 428 Councell of Trent p. 16 Courage for Christ, get it p. 482. and how ib. Cruelty inhumane p. 223, 225, 226, 227. gloried in 429. Parisian Massacre 227 Curse of God lights heavy p. 626 D DEad digg'd up p. 228 Deliverance the times of it p. 885, 866, 527, 903. Church shall be deli∣vered 887, 888, 903. pray for it 888 Dependance upon God for all p. 925 Depopulation accursed p. 455 Desertion p. 89. what to do in it 836 Desolation fruit of sin p. 36 Desires: seconded with endeavours p. 483 Digressions when they are lawfull p. 441 Diligence in well-doing p. 891 Disgrace a great judgement p. 633. more feared then sin is ib. Devils first sin, what p. 899 Divorce for light matters not lawfull p. 654. 655 Doctrine like rain, and how p. 246 Drowsinesse spirituall p. 476 Drunkennesse: mischief of it p. 104. 'tis the mother of mary sinnes 426. 'tis a damning sin 432. gloried in by some 265. drunken-healthing 431. drunken sos 187 Duty: be much in it p. 834, 835, 891 shall be accepted 825. and why 827; 828, 829 E Earthquakes, terrible ones p. 597, 222, 394 Eclipses portentous p. 210, 211 Egypt fruitfull p. 604 converted, ib. Q. Elisabeths clemency p. 309. her prayer 436 Enemies of Gods people open and secret p. 214. their cruelty 215 Gods heavy hand upon them 601. set  against an∣other 602. Woe unto them 870, 871, 916. who they be 871. see persecutours, Church. England: our ancient mearenesse p. 165. our Reformation wonderfull 205. our destruction may be sudden 278. God war∣ned us by John Friths Book in a fishes∣belly 321 Englands Genge 395. 'tis a blessed Countrey 674, 675. Pererius his prophecy of our ruine 505 Enthusists slight the scriptures p. 129, 130. see 209 Exact walking required of saints p. 910, 911 Self-Examination p. 452. do it, or God will punish 453, 475 F FAith an hard work p. 43. wherein it consisteth 45. aopriate God by it 384. it quicketh other graces 425. founded upon the power of God 546. live by faith 426, 808, 889. it ma∣keth men couragious 602. do all in faith 662. beleeve the goodnesse of God 936 Famine: a sore plague p. 632, 245 Fasting: the exercise of it p. 197, 201, 202. fruit of it 204 Father: God is a Father to all his faithfull ones p. 911. whence, and how 91, 914 he is not a Father to the wicked 915. yet they claim kindred 916. his mercy
is more then fatherly 927, 928. Fear: it causeth hast p. 157. Panick, fears 412, 577, 602, 805 Fear of God p. 614. every true Christian feareth the Lord 708, 709. how, and why 707, 800, 801, &c causes, effects, companions, and opposites of this holy fear 800, 801, 802, 803. kinds of it 804, 627, 708. who they are that fear not God 804. or other things more then God 805. The best are defective in it 807. signes of Gods holy fear 807, 809. moives to it 810. means 810, 811 Few exalt God p. 154. few wise 182. few good 212, 377, 591 Scottish fire-crosse p. 217 Forgetting of God p. 121 Fortune how represented p. 237 Free-grace p. 179. all is of mercy 509. magnifie free-grace in our adoption 920 Friends are oft perfidious p. 383 Fruitfulnesse p. 180 G GAin of godlinesse p. 676, 849. many look onely at wages 77 Garments wherefore given p. 33 Geneva upheld by the hand of heaven p. 509, 50 Gentiles: your calling p. 623. disgusted by Jews ib. Gifts once abused, blasted p. 632 Glory: give all to God p. 422. in case of victory 612 Glory of saints here and hereafter p. 898 God: he is a great King p. 628. 629. his name is dreadfull 629. his patience a∣bused turns to fury 655, 656. his ha∣tred of sin 22. his omniscience 78. his liberality in rewarding 145. seek him ib. his patience 233, 238. his superabundant pardoning mercy 388, 389, 390. his subduing grace 390. he frowaeth the wicked to destruction 286. how he is a Rock 421. He seeth, therefore take heed 421, 652. how he hateth sinne 41. his faithfulnesse 425. We see but little of Him 438. He is with his, and for them 479. his anger against sinners 497. his jea∣lousie for his people 506, 507. he com∣forteth the abject 503. his tender mer∣cies 508, 513. he effecteth great mat∣ters by small means 529 he is im∣mutable 666, 667. how he is said to repent ib. wicked men have base and bald thoughts of him 855. He is Lord of Hosts 867, 869. what his hosts are, and why so called 867, 868. his truth 883. his goodnesse ib. his justice ib. he is not an hard Master 934. he ta∣keth small things in good part 935. let us beleeve his goodnesse 936. Gospels three-fold operation p. 486 Grace of God is the greatest blessing p. 621. get it rather then gold ib. seek it first 472. it is free p. 14, 179, 518. See free-grace. Grace hath unspeakable comfort p. 909 Great mens sins do much hurt p. 322. they must be told of them 348 Grief causing death p. 133 Grow in grace p. 684, 685 Gunpowder-treason p. 58 H HArdnesse of heart p. 544 Hear attentively p. 136. enhearing ear 501 Heavens rest and happinesse p. 889 Heavenly-mindednesse p. 605 Hell-fire terrible p. 591, 592, 681. tor∣ments thereof 601. not beleeved 681. History usefull p. 166 Holinesse is honourable p. 907. and there∣fore to be sought 907, 908 Honour God in 1 thought. 2 words. 3 works p. 921. see glory and praise Hope p. 40 The horrible Sophister p. 419 Hosea, when and how long he prophesied p. 1. how he took to wise an harlot 4 Humiliation must be hearty p. 678 Humility in holy duties threefold p. 376 Hypocrisie is an hatefull lye p 157. an odi∣ous vice 244, 626, 627, 628 Hypocrites are accursed p. 627, 114. their specious pretences 568. why they partake of Ordinances 569. they wran∣gle with God 677 I IDolatry and adultery together p. 4, 69, 70, 71. It is an abominable sinne 99, 115, 116, 584. a senselesse sinne 433, 434. a land-desolating sinne 561 Idolaters are over at uncertainties p. 368. they kisse their idols 168 Jehovah Gods memoriall 161. the import of it 666 Jewes: their calling 121. their land fer∣tile
tile 193. a disjected and despised peo∣ple 288. their sublime dotage 302. Satan stir'd up Herod to beautifie their Temple 487. of their conversion, and future flourish 515, 578, 592, 599, 602. their cruelty 548. how they are hated ib. they are a very numerous nation 564, cozened by a mock-Mo∣ses 565. their last dolefull desolation 571. they are discovenanted ib. sold 30 a penny 572, disjected 573. they are still vain-glorious 592. harsh hus∣bands 650. earthly-minded 685. their great respect to the Law 686, 687 they reject the Gospel ib. and Christi∣ans ib. they falsify the text 688. their sects and dissentions 689 Ignorance, bruitish 617, 57- affected 63, 64, 71. a blushful sin 436 Ignominy the reward of iniquity p. 634 Images in Churches p. 80 Impudence in sin p. 534 Incorrigible 26, 27, 53, 77, 78, 94, 100 Ingo King of Danes his respect to poor saints p. 908 Infities: what are p. 933. they deprive n of Gods favour 941. objections a∣bout them answered 942 Ingratitude how displeasing to God p. 29 a remedy against it ib. hatefulnesse of it 30, 109. it forfeiteth all 31,33,50 Joel who, and when he lived p. 185 Joy in wickeds downfall, limited p. 612 Joy of the wicked is short p. 34, 35. they joy in other mens misery 298 The just mans joy p. 207. in affliction 442 Judges, evil, a publike mischief 459. judge∣ment perverted 418 Judgement generall: it shall certainly be 431. terrible 658, 682. the sire of that last day 406. where Christ shall sit to judge p. 596, 213 Judgements of God in this life: Observe them 612. rejoyce in them ib. He smi∣teth not till needs must 632. and then is resolute ib. He loveth to retaliate 643. He punisheth slowly, but surely 663. K KNow God as a Father p. 918, and how 919. grow in knowledge 92. sinne not against knowledge p. 635. L LAnd-mark removed and how p. 85 Lawes excellency and use 686. the Law judiciall, ceremoniall, and mo∣rall 688 Licentionsnesse under Nero p. 470 Lye not p. 264. 'tis a great sin 55, 378, 159. brings deslation ib. Life a precious mercy p. 636. 'tis in Gods hand ibid. how and why mens lives are shortened 481. live apace 598 Lip-labour lost-labour p. 110 Lord, whence p. 525 Losses of saints made up p. 563 Love God, and how p. 923, 924. suffer for him out of love ib. Luk warmnesse condemned p. 701 Luter over-magnified p. 689 M MAccabees whence so called p. 558 Magistrates must countenance Mi∣nisters p. 470. Exactours are a publike pest 573. they must fear God 666. See Judges: Malachy, who p. 607, 608 Manner: do all aright p. 662. in faith ibid. Marriages with Idolaters dangerous p. 648 Meditation on God p. 850, 852, 857. mo∣tives to it 859. matter of meditati∣on 861. manner 862. measure 863. hinderances 864. helps ib. See Con∣sideration. Meck persons preyed on p. 230 Memory corrupt p. 373 Mercy and judgement to be kept p. 162. mercy abused p. 8. limited to the saints onely 10. let it melt us 151. God de∣lighteth in it 929 Merchandise usefull p. 448. but abused, and how 449 Merits p. 36 Ministers must bee unblameable p. 613. well maintained 622, 669. may not preach till called to it 625. must speak truth howsoever they speed 638, 639. shall convert souls 640. must be able and apt to teach ib. and plainly 641. alledging Scripture ib. they must bee made welcome ib. scandalous Mini∣sters 642. flatterers 645. they must
repeat the same points 47. use all means to win men 95. bee faithfull 239. Ministers are Saviours, and how 303. must be content with mean things 329. parasiticall preachers a plague 347, 351. The best have small successe 300. they must both say and do well 441, 442. take their best op∣portunities 469. must bee knowing men ib. cry aloud 51. Satans spite at them 516. may lose their abused gifts 574. their hard labour 587. burthen 606. Ministers must bee exact 613, 639. they are slighted, if poor 617. they are the worst men if wicked 621. thsoe that scant them are cursed 670. how they are begrutcht, and beguiled 672. they must preach home to the conscience 690. Mocking: goodnesse derided p. 521 Money monarch of this world p. 229 Moses praised p. 166 Mulitude not to be followed p. 704 go to heaven alone rather 707 Murther a foul sin p. 56, 58 Mutuall help p. 492, 552 N A Good Name gotten by holinesse p. 644 ignominy fruit of iniquity ib. and 634. be not over-tender of thy good name 328 Nationall sinnes bring nationall plagues p. 590 Nineveh a great city 305, 320. desolated 305, 306 Nullifidians p. 435 O OBedience, Jehu's partiall p. 6, 7. obey God rather then man 85, 86 Obstinate in sin p. 77, 78, 94, 100. bee not so 654. some love to thwart God 609 Occasions of sin: shun them p. 72 Offers of grace slighted p. 604 Old age kept unspotted p. 106 Omissions are dangerous sinnes p. 109 945 Oppressours are Cannibals p. 349. their evil-got goods prosper not 295. but are cursed 474. Shun their sinne 646 P PApists are idolaters p. 18. Pagans they are 599 Patience of God no quittance p 5 Patient, be in misery p. 892. and how 893, 894 Paul censured p. 706. and Marg: Peace and truth together p. 552 Perjury a great sin, and heavily punished p. 533, 664, 665 Persecutours plagued p. 209. they help to increase the Church p. 220. wo to such 900. God is against them, and why 902. See Enemies. Pleasure-mongers p. 224. a notorious one, p. 266 Plenty is from God p. 46 Polygamy unlawfull, and why p. 651, 652 Policy: reason of State p. 407 Pope not infallible p. 640. his insolency and usurpation 269. his soul-mur∣ther 401, his be witching superstition 408. he is over-magnified by his para∣sites 870 Poverty preyed on p. 277. despised 464. no prejudice before God 909,910 Power of God p. 867, 869. fear him therefore 872. trust in him 873. sub∣mit unto him 874, 875. comforts flow∣ing from it 878. See God. Practise: be doing p. 483, 684. saints practise 884 Praise God for his mercy p. 930 Prayer: pray and faint not p. 620. per∣son must first be accepted 62. The power of prayer 37, 211, 217, 270, 40, 876, 877. ask and have 559. pray carnestly 541. 'tis a necessary duty 177. Gods liberall answers 205. He hearth prayers 218, 388, 424. bold accesse to him 417. wicked cannot pray 620. nor be heard ib. how to know our prayers are heard 837 Preaching: what it is p. 84. twice a day, 493 Pride 79, 80. its picture 420. it precedes a fall 456 Prins stigmata Laudis p. 589 Processions, popish p. 165 Procrastination is greatest folly p. 471. punished 944 Prodigies in heaven p. 210 Priviledges of saints p. 896. price of a saint 902. honour such ib. 108. their glo∣ry at the Resurrection 904, 905. their priviledges privative and positive 925, 926.
Promises of God: they shall be perfor∣med p. 636, 637. they are a strong-hold 558. pray them over 848. mixt with menaces and why 566. Prophecy obscure p. 537 Prosperity: no sure signe of piety p. 163 it causeth pride 170, 420. slayeth the wicked 134, 71, 73, 74 Providence of God: Doubt not of it p. 424. see 882. He will preserve his and pro∣vide for them 878 Psalms: book of Psalms praised p. 442, 443 Publike, most to be minded p. 476 Punishment waiteth upon sinne p. 59, 217, 531, 535, 545, 670, 843 punishment in kind 63. in all sorts of sinners 76. punishment insensible 87. one mischief after another 260 R RAin, how taken in Scripture p. 603. it is from God 560, 673, 245. Do∣ctrine resembled to it 246. rain of blood 210 Reformation was ever opposed p. 630. what Magistrates and Ministers are to do in it 631 Relapse not p. 587. let the relapsed return to God, and how 28 Religion reproached as rebellion p. 272, 273. otherwise reproached 455. mix∣tures in it 446. It is the beauty and bulwark of a land 512 Remission of sinne a great comfort p. 519, Christs righteousnesse imputed ib. Repentance the parts of it p. 27. the ver∣tue of it 39. mercy leads to it 40. ne∣cessity of it 192. there is a naturall and morall repentance 321. Reforma∣tion is the best repentance 324. See Conversion. Resemble God, and wherein p. 922. Restitution is necessary p. 324 Resurrection: it is sure p. 319. and will be glorious 562, 904, 905. Retract errours and evil practises p. 586 Revenge p. 226 Reward of righteousnesse is liberall p. 673. God remembreth and requiteth all his 839. and why ib. and 840, 841. his service is very gainfull 842, 843, 849. See gain of godlinesse. Righteousnesse of Christ imputed to us p. 932 Romish Edomites p. 610, Romish cruelty 347. Romes filth 611. its pride and downfall 65. avarice 66. 'tis dege∣nerate 206. must be burnt ib. Romes ruine 609. S SAbbath profaned p. 128. must be our delight 276. benefit of it ib. Sacrifices spirituall to be offered to God p. 625. our selves especially ib. Sacrildge a great sinne p. 215. punished 668, 670 Saints are earthly Angels p. 608. their sinnes are most grievous 625. God will own them, and honour them 895, 896. despise them not for their outward meanenesse 906. their honour 907 Scandall to be shunned p. 239. scandalous Ministers 642. Professours 231 Scriptures commendation p. 120, 121. See Word. Seek God p. 146 Selah what it importeth p. 432 Seducers dangerous p. 584. they must be stigmatized 585. not tolerated 584. see 588. they are hardly ever recove∣red 587. Self-deniall to be studied p. 705, 801 Self-seekers p. 137. self-ascribers 423, 542 Sensuality p. 68, 224, 266 Septuagint translate amisse p. 629, 620, 628 Security fore-runneth ruine p. 263, 427 Serve God with the best p. 615. not with slubbering service ib. 676. serve him with soul and body too 625. love Gods service 276. me devotion 618. honour of Gods service 687. he high∣ly accepteth our performances 825, 826, 827, &c. He rejecteth the ser∣vices of the wicked, and why 829, 830. and that's their misery 831: let them therefore repent ib. Blesse God for acceptance of our services 834. get into Gods service 846. and serve him earnestly 846. God how to bee served 917. serve God, and why 937. He accepteth small ser∣vices 938, 939. how he is to be ser∣ved 945. Setlednesse to be laboured after p. 618 Sicknesse fruit of sinne p. 378, 379 Sight of sin is before sorrow p. 580 Silence in due season p. 257
Similies how to be used p. 164 Singing a Gospel-Ordinance p. 40 Sincerity accepted p. 98 Sinne a great burthen p. 606, 607. It maketh God to disown people 634. to destroy them 23. remember it not with delight 42. the filth of sinne 78, 518. hatefull to God 143. especially if ite∣rated 223. 'tis deceitfull 293. the greatest folly 317. hardly parted with 649. saints sinnes are most hai∣nous 236. difference of their sins from other 933. adde not sin to sin 549 Sir, whence p. 525 Slandering p. 85, 86. make-bates 417 Sorrow, godly p. 198. it follows upon sight of sin 580. 'tis deep 581. greatest of all sorrows 581, 582. 'tis secret ib. forts of sorrows ib. Souls have no sexes p. 373. the worth of a soul 429. it comes from God, and is like him 579. not propagated 653. precious ib. Spanish greatnesse p. 418 Spirits first work in the heart p. 852 Strength of a saint wherein p. 579 Stumbling at the word dangerous p. 642 Submission hath mercy p. 249 Suffer for God p. 144 Superstition pompous p. 70. prodigall 375 Supper: Come prepared to the Lords Sup∣per p. 616 Swearing a common sinne p. 532. dange∣rous 55 Sweating-sicknesse p. 247, 310 T TEars powerfull with God p. 161, 197, 650 Temporals are to be slighted p. 24, 25 saints oft have them 546 Temptation: resist Satan p. 517. with∣stand first motions 544 Tempt not God p. 672 Thankfulnesse how it must be qualified p. 177. Think upon God, and why p. 850, 852. See Meditation. Wicked think not on God 854 or not well 855, 857, 858 Thist corporall and spirituall p. 20, 21 Thought not free p. 342, 481, 551. evil thoughts argue an evil man 856. earthly thoughts when they are naught 863 Threats shall be accomplished p. 643. wee should tremble at them 236, 237. they are slighted 413. till felt 491 Time-servers p. 701 Tithings, whence p. 345 Tythes to be payed p. 669 Tythe and be rich p. 673, 674 Tongue: order it well p. 383. an ill tongue destructive 407 Treachery to be avoyded p 646 Trinity of persons known of old p. 484 Truth: little is to be found p. 53 'tis ill taken 255. hated 256, 274 Trust in God hath security p. 396 413. the triumph of Trust 420. Trust in Gods mercy 930 Tumults outragious p. 147 Turks Empire great p. 418. how they use their Asapi 420 Turn to God. See Conversion, and Re∣pentance. V Victory is of God, and a great blessing p. 686. especially that over corrupti∣on ib. Ʋnity seek it p. 646. study it 462. Christian union 690 Ʋnsetlednesse in judgement p. 618 Ʋnthankfulnesse a grave p. 608, 609. a great sinne 231. It exasperateth the Lord 572 Ʋnworthy Receivers p. 933 Vowes must be payed p. 318 W VVAit upon God p. 49, 50, 162, 425 Walk exactly p. 520. worthy of God 706 Wantonnesse: shun it p. 17 Warre: the wo of it p. 566, 595, 148, 153. desolation is by it 445. 'tis from God, and how 549 Watch in prayer and meditation p. 524. the heart is to be watched 654 Wealth oft betrayeth the owner p. 403. it sinketh the soul 427 Whale, a huge creature p. 313 Whoredome: mischief of it p. 35. whores 75. impudent 230 Wicked: grow worse and worse 675. above measure 131. wittily wicked 398. they shall be surely and severely pu∣nished 843. let them therefore repent and meet the Lord 844, 845. They
are Satans slaves, and perish with him ib. disavowed by God 899. specially at the Resurrection 900. they are vile persons 944 Widdows and Orphanes are Gods Clients p. 665 Wilfulnesse is destructive p. 358 Will-worship rejected p. 81, 261 Wisdome wherein it consists p. 183 Witches: seek not to them p. 664 Wives: why to be kindly dealt with p. 650, 652 Women wicked, boysterous p. 242 Word of God stumbled at p. 183, 642. why things are repeated in scrip∣ture 189. famine of the Word 279, caused by contempt 280, 477. Word wrested 291. word read converted Cyprian 351. A short bible 375. the word is is plain in necessaries 424. word and sword go together 470. It is of God 473. It is made operative by the spirit 478. Lay∣men must read it 481. It will lay hold upon the wicked 502 Words: look well to thy words p. 41, 383. idle and evil words condemned 813 Works of God must be regarded p. 186 they instruct us 253. Sea is commanded by God alone 394 World: its vanity p. 169. mutability 411 Worship of God: externall onely is little worth 374 Wrongs done to the righteous reach to God. Y Youth must be consecrated to God p. 381 Z ZEal of Gods people p. 699, 703, 706. FINIS.
The Contents of the Righteous Mans Recompence, Or, A True Christian characterized and encouraged: Out of Malachy, 3.16, 17, 18. CHAP. I. THe Text opened, and Analysed. Pag. 693 CHAP. II. Doct. 1. Saints must be Best in worst Times. p. 695 Sect. 1. The point Confirmed, by 1 Precept. 2 Practise. p. 695 Sect. 2. The point confirmed by Reasons from 1 God p. 697 2 Men. 1 Themselves p. 698 2 Others Good. p. 699 Bad. p. 700 Sect. 3. Ʋse 1 A sharp Reproof of Luke-warme Laodiceans p. 701 Timorous Temporizers p. 702 Sect. 4. Ʋse 2 A forcible Exhortation to courage for Christ, with 4 Helps thereunto. p. 703 CHAP. III. Doct. 2. Of the severall sorts of fear; and that every saithfull Christian fear∣eth the Lord. p. 708 Sect. 1. The Doctrine cleared, and confirmed by Scripture. p. 708 Sect. 2. The Doctrine further confirmed by Arguments drawne from 1 The Causes. 2 Consequents. 3 Companions. 4 Contraries to the true fear of God. p. 709, &c.
Sect. 3. Objections and Quaere's touching the Fear of God cleared; and answered. p. 804 Sect. 4. Ʋse 1. Information: They that fear not God, are not His: and who these are, by their Character out of Psalm 36.1, 2, 3, 4, &c. p. 804, 805, &c. Sect. 5. Ʋse. 2. Examination: where; Marks of the true Fear of God in respect of 1 Evil, both in Judgement, Practise. 2 Good, toward God, Men, Others Rich, Poor. Our selves in Prosperity, Adversity. p. 807, 808, 809 Sect. 6. Ʋse 3. Exhortation to get, and grow in this holy Fear, with 6 Motives, and 2 Means tending thereto: p. 809, 810, 811 CHAP. IV. Doct. 3. The Text expounded, and the Duty of Christian conference propounded, p. 812 Sect. 1. Christian Conference, and mutuall confirmation confirmed by Scripture, p. 812. 813. Sect. 2. Reasons of the point, 1 From God commanding, rewarding. 2 From Men: and 1 our selves shall be hereby sealed, secured. 2 Others: 1 Good men shall be 1 curbed from sinne. 2 quickened to duty. 2 Bad men shall be 1 confuted. 2. defeated, p. 813, 814, 815, 816 Sect. 3. Ʋse 1. Reproof of idle and evil speakers together. p. 817 Sect. 4. Ʋse 2. Complaint against the better sort, too too barren and backward to holy Conference, p. 818 Sect. 5. Ʋse 3. Exhortation to be forward and free to godly Discours, p. 820 Sect. 6. Helps to a holy dexterity this way; How to 1 get it. 2. Use it, p. 821, 822, 823, 824
CHAP. V. Doct. 4. The Text further expounded: and withall the Doctrine of Gods gra∣cious acceptance of our upright performances propounded, p. 825 Sect. 1. The Doctrine confirmed by Scripture, p. 825 Sect. 2. The Doctrine confirmed by reasons from God the Father, onne, holy Ghost. p. 827 Sect. 3. The Doctrine further confirmed by reasons from the Saints, p. 828 Sect. 4. Ʋse 1. It's otherwise with the wicked. Their persons are hated: their per∣formances rejected; and why, p. 829 Sect. 5. Ʋse 2. Admonition: Let the wicked break off their sins, that they lose not their services, p. 831 Sect. 6. Ʋse 3. Exhortation, to the best, to be humbled for their 1 not prizing their priviledge. 2 Not praising God for it. 3 Not improving it to the utmost, p. 833 Sect. 7. Ʋse 4. Exhortation to the saints, 1 To admire this mercy. Helps there∣unto, respecting God, and themselves, p. 834 Sect. 8. 2 To retain it, and if lost, to recover it, and how: with answer to some Quaeres and objections, made by a migiving heart, p 835 CHAP. VI. Doct. 5. God perfectly remembreth, and plentifully requiteth all our labours of love to him and His, p. 838 Sect. 1. This truth confirmed by Scripture, p. 839 Sect. 2. This truth confirmed by 6. Reasons p. 839 Sect. 3. Ʋse 1. Confutation of the contrary-minded, that say, or conceive at least, that it's in vain to serve the Lord, p. 84 Sect. 4. Ʋse 2. The wicked shall be surely and severely punished, p. 84
Sect. 5. Ʋse. 3. Let them therefore hasten out of the Devils danger, and get into Gods service. How that may be done, p. 844 Sect. 6. Ʋse 4. Exhortation to Saints to abide in Gods love, and to abound in his work: sith their labour of love is not in vain in the Lord, p. 847 Sect. 7. pag. 847 Sect. 8. pag. 848 CHAP. VII. Doct. 6. Such as fear the Lord will be thinking upon his Name. What it is to do so, p. 850 Sect. 1. The point proved by Scripture, p. 851 Sect. 2. The point proved and enforced by 5. Reasons, p. 851 Sect. 3. Ʋse 1. Those that habitually think not upon God, fear not God, p. 953 Sect. 4. Of those that think base and bald thoughts of God, p. 855 Sect. 5. Against thoughts of Atheisme, blasphemy, infidelity, and rebellion, p. 855 Sect. 6. Ʋse 2. Examination: where, Trialls of the goodnesse of our best thoughts by their 1 Causes. 2 Effects, p. 856 Sect. 7. Ʋse 3. Exhortation: Settle the soundnesse of your sanctification, by the good∣nesse of your thoughts. Motives thereto, p. 859 Sect. 8. Directions, for 1 the matter of good Meditations. p. 861 Sect. 9. Directions for 2 the manner of doing this duty well, both for substance, and circumstance, p. 862 Sect. 10. Directions about the measure of divine Meditation: where is shewed how men offend 5 wayes, in thinking on earthly things, p. 863 Sect. 11. Directions to the Means of fruitfull thinking on Gods holy Name. Where, 4 Hinderances to be avoyded, and 7 helps to be used, p. 864 Sect. 12. The Conclusion. p. 866
The Contents of the second Part of the Righteous Mans Recompence. CHAP. I. The Text divided, p. 866 Sect. 1. That God is Lord of Hosts. What these Hosts are: why called Hosts: what it is to be Lord of Hosts, 867 Sect. 2. The Pope will needs be Lord of Hosts, p. 869 Sect. 3. Wo to rebels against the Lord of Hosts, p. 870 Sect. 4. Tremble before this mighty Lord of Hosts, p. 872 Sect. 5. Trust in his power, for fulfilling his promises, p. 873 Sect. 6. Stoop to his power, and submit to his Soveraignty, p. 874 Sect. 7. Set his power awork by prayer: The power of prayer, p. 875 Sect. 8. Be comforted in the consideration of his Power, where divers objections of weaker Christians are answered, p. 877, 878, 879, 880 CHAP. II. The Lord will find a fit time to make up his jewels from the worlds misusages p. 881 Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. p. 882, 883 Reasons from Gods Providence, Power, Truth, Goodnesse, and Justice, ibid. Sect. 6. Reasons from the Saints themselves, p. 884 Sect. 7. When God will make up his jewels, p. 885 Sect. 8. Comfort under publike calamities, p. 887 Sect. 9. Comfort under personall crosses and grievances, p. 888 Sect. 10. Reproof of frowardnesse and faintheartednesse in affliction, p. 890 Sect. 11. Exhortation to diligence in duty, p. 891
Sect. 12. Exhortation to patience in misery, p. 892 Sect. 13. Helps to patient waiting upon God for deliverance, p. 893 CHAP. III. God will own and honour his Saints, p. 895 Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Reasons and grounds of this gracious dealing of his, p. 896, 897 Sect. 6. It shall be farre otherwise with the wicked, p. 899 Sect. 7. Terrour to those that set themselves against the saints, p. 900 Sect. 8, 9, 10. Exhortation to honour them that fear the Lord: and what great cause men have, and shall have so to do, p. 902, 903, 904, &c. Sect. 11, 12. Exhortation to practise holinesse, that hath so great honour put upon it: and why, p. 907, 908 Sect. 13. Let the saints fee their dignity, and be thankfull, p. 909 Sect. 14. Let the saints see their duty, and be carefull, p. 910 CHAP. IV. God is a Father to all his faithfull servants, p. 911 Sect. 1. Reasons hereof drawn from the causes, p. 912 Sect. 2, 3. Reasons taken from the effects of his Fatherhood, p. 913 Sect. 4. God no Father to the wicked, whatever they pretend to him, p. 914, 915 Sect. 5. Terrour to those that maligne, or misuse Gods children, p. 916 Sect. 6. Try your Title to God as a Father. Marks. p. 917 Sect. 7. Settle this, that ye are Gods children: and how, p. 918 Sect. 8. Let all Gods children know their Father: and how, p. 918
Sect. 9. Let them thankfully acknowledge his free grace in their adoption: and why, p. 919 Sect. 10. Let them honour their Father: and how, p. 920 Sect. 11. Let them resemble their Father: and wherein, p. 922 Sect. 12. Let them love their Father: and how to expresse their love, p. 923 Sect. 13. Let them depend upon their Father, both for prevention of evil, and provisi∣on of good, p. 924 Sect. 14. Comfort of Adoption: where are shewed the priviledges of sonnes, priva∣tive, and positive, p. 925, 926 CHAP. V. God will pity and pardon his people their wants and weaknesses, p. 927 Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. Reasons from God, out of Micah, 7.18, 19. p. 927 Sect. 5, 6. Reasons respecting the saints themselves, who are 1 pure in heart. 2 perfect in Christ, p. 931 Sect. 7. Let none suck poyon out of this sweet point, p. 932 Sect. 8. Reproof of such as censure hardly of God, p. 934 Sect. 9. Reproof of such saints as censure hardly of themselves, and their performati∣ces, p. 934 Sect. 10. Reproof of such as uncharitably censure others, p. 936 Sect. 11. Exhortation: to put your selves into Gods service, p. 937 Sect. 12. Give God the glory of his Fatherly goodnesse, p. 938 Sect. 13. Bear with others weaknesses, and forbear harsh censures, p. 939 Sect. 14. Take comfort, and courage, notwithstanding infirmities, and failings in the man∣ner, p. 941.
Errata. Faults escaped in the Commentary. PAge 2. line 30. read in the gall p. 7 l. 5. wall r valley. ib l. 7. Tent r. eal. p. 12 l. 32. spirituall r. spitefull. p. 15. l. 53. required r. reserved. p 18. l. 53. r. directly. p. 24. l 49. Collier r. Caloier. p. 35. l. 28. r. Non mea sunt. p. 38. l. 18. lack r. like. p. 41. l. 43. duties r. deities. p. 44. l. 15. sutable r. su∣able. p 55. l. 5. harts r. houses. p. 56. l. 55 Edomites r. Sodomites. p 60. l. 46. r. derided. p. 62. l. 9. r. blind) shall be darkned. p. 73. l. 11. And r. a pull. p. 77. l. 27. scribes r. stripes. p. 78. l. 13 r. world. p. 92. l. 43. r acquired. p. 95. l. 42. taking r. talking. p. 107. l. 1 r . p. 128. l 2. r. observing. ib. l. 4. priests. day r. devils-day. p. 137. l. 29. r. marred. p. 141. l. 35 r. Deaster. p 166. l. 38. r. Cyrils. p. 189. l. 56. r. quieted. p. 193. l. 39. r. mansit. p. 194. l. 29. r. relieve. p 242. l. 23 r. Zegedline. p 261. l. 38. r. heat∣lesse. p. 270. l. 29 r. others. p. 290. l. 18. r. Cabbalists. p. 291. l. 6. r. fat and. p. 295. l. 35. r. alive. p. 296. l. 51. r. Zopyrus & 55. Cyneas & l. 56. r. Pyrrhus p. 299. l 38. r. Pyrgopolynices. p. 310. l. 40. r. due. p. 314. l. 30. r. thin. p. 315. l. 48. r. promises. p 316. l. 2. r. right hand. p. 317. l. 3. r affatu. p. 321, l 32. r. excused. & l. 34. r. sum. & 35. r. conceived. p. 326 l. 23 r. becagna;. ib. l. 6. r. zeal. p. 331. l. 6. r. quartaa. p 334. l. 8. r. pour out. p. 365 l. 33. r. eat. p. 372. l. 7. r. theirs. ib. 32. dele sin. p 374 l. 53. r. dejected. p. 384. l 45. r. well. p. 400. l. 31. r. Poliorcetes. ib. l. 35. r. Dissipatores. p. 405. l. 6. r. Leb p. 420. l. 53. r. devoting. p. 429. l. 47. r. angle. p. 435. l. 6. r imposture p. 437. l. 34. r. that when. p 438. l. 18. r. speciall. p. 441. l. 29 r. grie∣vous. p. 455. l. 53. r. mawmets. p, 449. l. 54. r. nihil. p. 452. l 14. r. Gaius: p. 458. l. 26. r bare. p 459. l 35. r. premises. p. 465. l. 41. r. listlesnesse. p. 471 l. 9. r. mad. p 472 l. 19. r. certè non. p. 486. l. 6 r acclamation. p. 490. l. 40. r. e. rat. p. 513 l. 51. r. crattle. p. 527. l 33. r. unpassable ib. 58. r. somewhere. p. 548. r. mors est p. 550. l. 49 r. few, true, and ponderous. p 580. l. 43. r. can the waters flow p. 587 l 46. r. ministery therefore. p. 589. l. 58. r. scattered and shattered. p 610. l. 12. r. whilome, p. 614. l. 5. r. Of one not at all. ib. l. 16 r. glove p. 616 l. 48. r. they. p. 634. l. 47. r. pestilene. p. 635. l. 37. r. contrary to pre∣vent. p. 637. l. 8. r. falsifie. p. 642. l. 19. after father Asa, adde, Manasseh degenerateth into Ahaz. p. 648. l. 1 r. by Gods good laws. p 650. l. 35. r. fletu. p. 664 l 24. r. adulterium. ib. l. 52. r. light. p. 677. l. 24. r. a slurre. p. 684. l. 16. r. inferiour bodies. Faults escaped in the Righteous mans Recompence. Pag. 695 l. 57 r. caring. p. 708. l. 46. r. character. p. 810 l. 54. r. set and serious p 823. l. 3 . r. vice. p. 824 l. 31. r. trading. p 825. l. 33. r. he heard and took. p 843. l. 44. r. we cannot better convince p. 849 l. 36. r. mock, p. 851. l. 18. r. light. p. 852 l. 0 r. fat abrood. p. 854 l. 10. r. jog: ib. 50. r. conservation. p. 860 l. 10. r. teachers. p. 801. l. 16. r. creatures. p. 965. l. 12. r. extracting. p. 871. l. 21. r. with them. p. 876. l. 7. r. from the p. 879 l. 6. r. invisible. p. 883: l. 14 r. dicere. p. 890. l. 3. r. frowardnesse. p. 897. l. 38 dele and such. p. 899. l. 28. r. waxed. p. 900. l. 40. r. Doegs. p. 907. l. 39. r. coveting. p. 911. l. 33. r. good. p. 927. l 38. r. setling. ib. l. 41. r. frailties. p. 929. l. 24. r. David. ib. 25 r. as rejoyceth. ib. l. 41. r. quiets. p. 936. l. 15. r. baffled p. 938. l 43. r. exhortation. p. 939. l. 38. r. then remembred they that. ib. l. 52. r induce. p. 940. l. 47 r. flow of heart. p. 943. l. 6. r betternesse. ib. l. 53. r. slandered Gods house-keeping.
