W1875 09959984 44417
1679. GRATULAMINI MECUM: OR, A Congratulatory Essay upon His Majesties Most Happy Recovery. By ROBERT WHITEHALL, M. B. Oxon. —Augusto Caesare Salvo. Salvi omnes— THanks High and Mighty one by whom Kings raign, We now return unto our selves again: The Head affected could the Members all Lie otherwise than Apoplectical? So when a Spring-head has not Passage clear, The Brooks subside, and gasping Fish appear. WINDSOR, whose lofty top mounts to the Skie; WINDSOR, that Writers do so Magnifie? How had thy Name sneakt under ground, & fail'd, Had the Blood-thirsty Traytors PLOT prevaild? Or had so good a PRINCE by Nature dy'd, Nature & Thou (as guilty) had both been try'd. In Thee too long (for shame) without a Tomb, The Best of Kings lay after Martyrdom; Regardlesly full Thirty Years were spent, ('Twas well his Virtues stood his Monument;) Whence, let Contrivers do well or amiss, MAUSOLUS never had the like to His. His Sacred Urn disturb'd, who could have heard Without Convulsive-Fits what Good Men fear'd? The Perfume of whose Ashes clear'd the Air More than Arabian Spices could by far; So that the Paroxysme had Remedy, Not from dull Physick, but by Sympathy. Ask the Physician what an Ague means, He'l talk of Ebullition in the Veins, Ferment and Circulation stopt, and chat VVhat Baker knows, and Brewer from his Fat: Take him aside, and smile him in the face; Indeed quoth he, an AGUE'S our Disgrace. And so it had been, with a Witness, sure, Had Providence not found a Soveraign Cure; That Providence that slumbers not, nor sleeps, But his Anointed still in safety keeps; Vouchsafing Combinations to reveal, When the Foundation's laid as deep as Hell. VVhether the breathing of a Vein gave ease, And did the Praeternatural Heat appease In Royal Blood whose Spirits are so purely fine, They of themselves might to give ease incline, VVe argue not; but I dare promise it, 'Twas not the Iesuits Powder chekt the Fit. Summon Apothecaries, let them tell How often our Oaken Bark for it they sell, And This as well as That has prov'd a Spell. Sacred to JOVE, how could her Boughs do less Than yield a MONARCH Shelter in Distress? For which the Powers above we ever Bless. There lies our Fort, our Rock of firm Defence, 'Gainst Foreign and Domestick Violence; Those Signal Demonstrations have been given Of Preservation (maugre Spite) from Heaven; Prove CHARLES on Earth Immortal; whose Remove, May it be late, then let him Reign above. Breath of our Nostrils, who us Life dost give, Defender of our FAITH, And Us; long live, Lest those that practice Mischiefs on Us, say The Shepherd lost, the Sheep shall be our Prey: Rather let Day of Doom then that Day come, When Protestants shall truckle under ROME. Had Romulus not held a Wolf by th'Teat, That Seven-Hill'd City had ne'r been so great, Nor greedy; But now (by S. Peter's leave,) All Fish that comes to th'net they must receive Nay more, if they shou'd com (as once'twas done) With Money in their mouths, 'tis all their own. Welcom Great Sir, to Your Majestick Seat, To White-hall Royal, and Your Chair of State; From whence let Tamisis the Tidings send To Tyber, that our Fears are at an end: Then let the Consistory meet again, Fret, and lay Cap aside, to cool the Brain. LONDON, Printed by NAT. THOMPSON at the Cross Keys in Fetter-lane. MDCLXXIX.
