W2355 09440485 43116
His Majesties LETTER TO THE Lord Bishop OF LONDON, To be Communicated to the TWO PROVINCES OF Canterbury and York. DIEV·ET MON·DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Prin∣ters to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. MDCLXXXIX.
His MAIESTIES Letter to the Right Reverend Father in GOD Henry Lord Bi∣shop of London, to be Communicated to the Two Provinces of Canterbury and York. WILLIAM R. RIght Reverend Father in God, We Greet you well. Whereas the Advancement of the Honour and Service of Almighty God, and of the Protestant Religion, which by his wonderful Providence hath been Pre∣served and Established in these Kingdoms, ought to be the Chief Part of Our Royal Care: In Order to this, as We have often∣times Declared, That We would take the Church of England by Law Established, into Our particular Pro∣tection and Favour; So We take this Occasion to Renew these Assurances, being Resolved to do all We can for the Support and Strengthning of it; Preserving withal the Liberty of Con∣science to all Our other Protestant Subjects which by Our Laws they now Enjoy. And because the Welfare, Peace and Honour of this Church depends so much upon all Persons faithfully doing their Duties in their several Places and Functions, We therefore First of all Charge and Require you the Bishops of this Our Church, to apply your selves with all Diligence and Zeal to the Duties of your Episcopal Function, according to the Word of God, the Orders of this Church, and the Laws of this Our Realm. More especially as to Ordination of Ministers, We Require you to use all possible Care and Strictness, in Examining and En∣quiring into the Lives and Learning of such Persons as desire to be Admitted into Holy Orders, and herein constantly to observe theCan. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Canons relating thereunto, the Neglect whereof We shall strictly Enquire into, and take Care that it be Punished accord∣ing to Law. We also Charge and Require you to keep a strict Watch over all the Clergy in your respective Diocesses, to see that they be duly Resident upon their Livings according to the Laws in that Case Provided; and that there they be Constant and Diligent in their Duties, performing the Publick Offices of Worship Gravely and Devoutly, Preaching the Word of God Plainly and Practi∣cally, without running into needless Controversies, and Admini∣string the Holy Sacraments Frequently, with that Reverence which is due to the Institutions of Christ; Also Catechizing the Youth, Visiting the Sick and Distressed, and doing all such Things in their Stations as may tend to promote the Honour of God and True Religion, together with Peace and Charity a∣mong all their Neighbours; Themselves giving a good Example to their Flock, by walking before them in all holy Conversation and Godliness.
And the more effectually to prevent the Scandals that may a∣rise by any Disorders in the Lives of those who ought to be Ex∣amples to others, you shall Admonish them Religiously to ob∣serve theCan. 75. Canon Entitled, Sober Conversation required in Ministers. And you shall Severely and Impartially proceed by Ecclesiastical Censures, against all such of your Clergy as shall be found guilty of any Notorious Violation of this or any other Law or Canon relating to their Duty. And for the better Encouragement of Deserving Men, as We intend to make it a Rule to Our Self, so We also Require it of you, in Disposing of Church Preferments, to have a Special Re∣gard to such Persons as by their Piety, Learning, Diligence and Peaceableness, do most promote the Honour of God, and the Edification of his Church. And because, as Our Duty requires, We most earnestly de∣sire and shall endeavour a General Reformation of the Lives and Manners of all Our Subjects, as being that which must Establish Our Throne, and Secure to Our People their Religion, Happi∣ness and Peace; all which seem to be in great Danger at this time, by reason of that overflowing of Vice, which is too noto∣rious in this as well as other Neighbouring Nations. We there∣fore require you to Order all the Clergy to Preach frequently a∣gainst those particular Sins and Vices which are most prevailing in this Realm; And that on every of those Lords Days on which any such Sermon is to be Preach'd, they do also Read to their People such Statute-Law or Laws as are provided against that Vice or Sin, which is their Subject on that Day; as namely, a∣gainst21 Iac. Cap. 20. Blasphemy, Swearing and Cursing; Against5 Eliz. Cap. 9. Perjury; Against4 Iac. Cap. 5. 21 Iac. Cap. 7. Drunkenness; and against29 Car. 2. Cap. 7. Prophanation of the Lords Day: All which Statutes We have Ordered to be Printed toge∣ther with these Our Letters, that so they may be Transmitted by you to every Parish within this Our Realm. And whereas there is as yet no sufficient Provision by any Sta∣tute-Law for the Punishing of Adultery and Fornication, You shall therefore require all Church-Wardens in your Diocesses to Present impartially all those that are guilty of any such Crimes in their several Parishes; And upon such Presentments; We re∣quire you to proceed without delay, and upon sufficient proof to inflict those Censures which are appointed by Our Ecclesiasti∣cal Laws against such Offenders: In doing whereof, according to your Duty, you shall not want Our effectual Assistance and Support. And for the better Carrying on of so good a Work, We do in the last place, Charge and Require you to Preach frequently your selves, to Confer often with your Clergy, and to Enquire by all proper means into all Abuses and Corruptions in your Dio∣cesses, in order to a full and speedy Reformation. And all this, not only as you shall Answer it to Us, but also as considering the great Charge that God hath Committed to you, and the Ac∣count that you must give him for it at the Great Day. And so We bid you heartily Farewel. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 13th day of February, 1689/90. In the Second year of Our Reign. By His Majesties Command Shrewsbury.
