W3635 12680583 65643
A DECLARATION FROM YORK, BY Sir Francis Wortley, Knight and Baronet. In vindication of himself from di∣vers aspersions and rumours concerning the drawing of his sword, and other actions, wherein he desires to give the World satisfaction. LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Thomas Warren, 1642.
Rationi satisfacere possibile, voluntati vero malignitatis satisfacere nec spero, nec curo. I Stand accused of to errours, the first an errour of my judgment poysoned with disaffection to the honorable Houses of Parliament, the other a perverse errour of will, and a malignant disposition to disturbe the businesse wee had in hand, and to make a Schisme and Division amongst the Gentry. Crimes unbeseeming an honest or a wise man (un∣worthy of a Gentleman) I have therefore offered to the satisfaction of those, whom reason will satisfie, this Declaration strengthened with reason and pro∣testation, backed with an innocent and cleare con∣science from that false, and scandalous information given to the honourable Houses of Parliament, (which I will avow to be so sub poena capitis, and which is more sub poena disreputationis, and which is most sub poena laesae conscientiae) if you aske mee our reasons: First, why wee petitioned that the magazine at Hull might be staid, or why wee preferred it to his Majesty, not to the Honourable Houses of Parlia∣ment, and as is pretrended in opposition to their o∣bedience,
or why we petitioned in the name of the Gentry and Commons of the County, and not in our own onely, and why I presented it to his Maje∣sty and not another, there being others of my ranke and quality, as able and willing as my self to do his Majesty or the Country service. For the first, though the words were that the ma∣gazin at Hull, might be staid, when the return was delivered, I explained our sence and meaning, and petitioned that so much onely might bee staid as might concern his Majesty, the safety of his Princely issue, and the security of this Country, though I might well have added these sixe other Counties, which all depend upon the safety of the Magazin at Hull. Our apprehensions of dangers were grounded upon our own great charges for watching and war∣ding, and our Countries charge to buy powder, match and bullets, for the Foot appointed to be in readines by the Sheriffs and other Gentlemen upon their first assembly at York, and wee measured our danger by the proportion of our charge, vvhich vvas to rayse and arm 3000 Foot, and 300 Horse, and to mayntayn them three moneths at the Countries charge, vvhich after was made by the Sheriff and o∣thers, wherof Sir William Constable, Sir Mathew Baynton and Sir Iohn Bourchier were chief, though I dare say
as considerable men for Birth and Fortunes in the County disavow it; And as many I verily beleeve, as subscribed, yet wee will not brand them with the character of arrogancy as they doe us, Et turpe est do∣ctri cui culpa redarguit ipsum. Besides the booke dire∣cted to be printed and published by the honourable Houses of Parliament, called the Danes plot, subscri∣bed by the Clerke of the Parliament, dated Vicessimo die Martij 1641. and another to his Majesty of some intelligence from Holland, concerning the Danish intentions, his Majesty protesting against the know∣ledge of these, we cannot but give credit both to his Majesty, and to the intelligence, and consequently be sensible both of his Majesties, and our dangers: these I say, were just grounds, of and for our fears as wel of Forraigne, as domestique dangers; if they were true, how are thy lessened? if not why are they pretended and put upon us with such charge? besides, admit it be publick stocke, are we not sharers in the publick? and for placing of it at Hull, the honourable Houses of Parliament conceived it the fittest place to settle the Magazin in, both in respect of the place, and that the adjacent Counties might with most ease, least charge, and best accommodation be supplyed with Armes, and Amunition upon all occasions. For the second we made our humble addresses to
our deare and gracious Soveraigne, and not to the ho∣nourable Houses, for these reasons following; We being assembled about a Petition to the Parlia∣ment concerning other businesses, wee were credi∣bly advertised, that the whole Magazine was to bee carried away within two or three dayes, in which time we could not hope to addresse our selves to the Parliament, and to reape the benefit of an answer at such a distance from them, and that wee were assu∣red his Majesties interest in the danger would stirre him up, both to secure himselfe, and us, we did not prescribe the way to his Majesty, but left it to his Princely wisdome, we advised him not to goe to Hull, nor was this Petition so much as (causa) but per accidens of his Majestys going to Hull, as his Ma∣jesty knowes and hath declared. If you aske me why we petitioned in the name of the whole County, and not in our owne names? I answer, we considering our good intentions thought it would not have beene disavowed, and being most of us men (how ever branded with the name of inconsiderable and dis-affected men) of as good quality and consideration, and as well affected to re∣ligion, our Prince, and Countrey; as most of those who have protested against it, we presumed that the cause merited the generall assistance, I doe protest
for my selfe, and in christian charitie for the rest, our intentions were good, and had no spirit of contra∣diction in them, much lesse of opposition to the ho∣nourable Houses of Parliament. If you aske me why I delivered it, I must protest against all arrogancie in it. I was willing to doe my Prince and Countrey that good service (as I concei∣ved it) and being amongst others of my quality, the first in order of ranke, and his Majesties servant, I must acknowledge that I was well pleased with the service, my heart and conscience, excusing me from all malignant thoughts of contradiction or opposition. And for this last charge which as I conceive consists of three parts, viz. That I came up into the Deanery, where the Sheriffe and Commit∣tee (as they call it) were, and there questioned the Sheriffe and Committee, I appeale to the Sheriffe and the Gentry, whether I was ever with them, or had any discourse with them or no, at that time I was going, and hearing blowes above stayres, I would not embroyle my selfe in the businesse so much as to goe up. For the other that I should come down and draw my Sword and flourish it, and cryed for the King, I doe protest against it, and beleeve it was grounded upon some calling for the Sheriffe, upon which oc∣casion
others called for the King, insomuch as I de∣sired the Gentlemen for the honour of God to put up their Swords, and not to spoyle the Kings good cause and chid; some I knew better, for it, as divers now of good qualitie will, and have attested. For my calling to the Hall I mentioned it not, but se∣conded the motion in a civill way, neither did I con∣tenance, or move the schisme and division, but con∣sented to our addresse of unity, as all there present can testifie. I am onely sorry the Honourable houses of Parliament should bee abused with such malici∣ous and frivolous informations, and for my selfe, I am onely sensible of the mis-apprehensions of my good intentions, and protest my heart is loyall to God, my King, and Country, as any, and dare avow it as far, as who dare avow the contrary. If this Declaration iustifie me amongst the rationall and impartiall men, I shall thinke my selfe happy in their good opinion, if not, I shall sticke to the Motto of my house, which is, Amicitias volo, inimicitias sperno. FINIS.
