6281 99846482 11453
¶A Breife Narration of the possession, dispossession, and, repossession of William Sommers: and of some pro∣ceedings against Mr Iohn Dorrell preacher, with aunsweres to such obiections as are made to prove the pretended counterfeiting of the said Sommers. (∵) Together with certaine depositions taken at Nottingham concerning the said matter. Anno M.D.XCVIII.
THou shalt here receive (Gentle Reader) a short narration of a large matter, together with certaine de∣positions taken at Nottingham, tending to the mani∣festation of a marvelous work of God, latelie shewed among vs; written (as it seemeth) by some frend of this cause, and of the witnesses thereof: to staie if it maie be the malice of some, and rashnes of others, who will not be reclamed from impug∣ning, or baselie esteeming of this glorious work, a greatter then which, hath skarcelie bene heard of (saving performed in like cases) eyther in our dayes, or in the dayes of our fore fathers for manie yeares. Yf it were particularlie ād fullie discovered (as we wish it might be) howe strangelie this William Sommers came to be possessed by meanes of a witch in Worcester shire, who sent a wicked spirit into him, witch he called Lucie: ho∣we he was tormēted during his possession: howe the foule spi∣rit raged, and the Lord Iesus prevailed at his dispossession: howe he was subtillie tempted, ād estsoones repossessed: howe extraordinarelie he hath caried himselfe since his dispossession: howe the Devill hath busied himselfe against the servant of Christ Iesus, who was the chife meanes of the dispossession: and howe some persons trulie other wise fearing God, have bene incredulous, some vppon one fansie, and some vppon an other: speaking Iere. 23. 16. by vision out of their owne heart, ād not from the Lords mouth: or els giving credit to this work, and the witnesses thereof have not taken it to heart, much les vouchsafed to visit, comfort, and releive them, or to vse some la∣wefull meanes, and mediation to our godlie Magistrates, (as they should) in the behalfe of the men of God theyr brethren whom God hath honoured to suffer for the testimonie of this his holie truth: Yf (I saie) all these things were fullie disco∣vered, and well weighed, doubtles a man must needes be asto∣nished, and expect a rarer event of these things then can be yet conceived. By the waie the providēce of our mercifull and hea∣venlie father is to be wiselie observed, ād with greate humilitie to be reuerenced, that he hath suffered this matter to becalled in
question, and for so long time to be ventilated, and sifted into as it hath bene. Doubtles, as we haue experience of our dul∣nes in apprehending, and profitablie meditating vppon other maruelous acts of the Lord dailie shewed before our eies, so if this work had not bene mightilie impugned, we should also haue negligentlie slipped it ouer, and the residue of like nature of late performed, without yeelding such due honour to God, and to the powerfull exercises of prayer and fasting, as apper∣taineth. Albeit God thus turneth the rage of man to his glo∣rie, yet I would advise them who slaunder this work, ād perse∣cute the servāthes of God, without cause, to take hede least they be found evē fighters against God. For he that sitteth in the heaven sees their devises, and laughes them to skorne and they, and all theyr conspiracies, plots slaunderingh, and re∣velingh shall consume like a snaile that melteth but this migh¦tie work, seing it is of God, and was without question a deede done according to the witnes giuen vnto it, cannot be reversed or destroied but mager the malice, and subtiltie of the De∣vill though Mr Dorrell should be consumed to ashes the truth thereof shall breake forth as the light, and the glorie thereof as a burning lamp. God hath lighted a candle, not in a cor∣ner, but hath advanced it as it were on a candelstick in the heart, or center of our land that the beames thereof might shi∣ne forth, and give light to all the Realme. It is not in theyr power (though it hath bene given out by a greate man among them, that seeing they have taken it in hand they will have the credit of it) altogether to eclipse, or whollie to hide it vnder abus hell when they have had theyr swinge but a litle, they wilbe ashamed of theyr owne follie. Nowe till the time appointed be expired, let all faithfull hearted men beware, least they take Gods name in vaine by baselie esteeming of this mightie work or beare false witnes against theyr neighbours, in crediting lying rumours against those men of God who doe nowe, or hereafter shall suffer in this holie cause. I praie, consider with me a litle these circumstances, and procedings, and indiffe∣rentlie
judge wihth whom the right standeth. Mr Dorrell and Mr Moore who are nowe imprisoned for giving testimonie to this truth, have bene both of them for manie yeares aproved godlie ministers, just, and simple hearted men, fearing God, of good reputation among the best Christians, and painfull preachers where they lived. God hath marvelouslie blessed theyr joint labours in dispossessing seven persons together in Lamashire: which is so notorious, and free from challenge, as the enimies to this Action of Nottingham dare not once to call yt into question. The Papists take knowledge of the pos∣session, and dispossession in Lamashire: but they would fay∣ne have vs beleyve that theyr seminarie Preists were the one∣lie actors: Yea this phansie hath takē such impressiō in them, that some of them have not doubted to saie, if it can be proved that Mr Moore, and Mr Dorrell did performe that work, they would disclayme theyr religion, and imbrace ours. They that have accused, and prosecuted, against Mr Dorrell be men that have blasphemed the Scriptures, Popish persons, and knowen enimies to the preaching of the Gospell. The wrath of God is allreadie gone forth against one of Mr Dorrells gre∣attest enimies, namelie Mr Sale Officiall of Wesson whose child is latelie vexed whith an evill spirit: bycause (as his wife reporteth) he hath bene adversarie to Mr Dorrell. The pro∣cedings against him, and others have bene verie violent. He was put to silence by the Arch-Bishop of York whithout fufficient cause warranted by lawe: ād as if this had bene too litle to be deprived of the vse of his ministerie, and of his live∣lihode, having a wife, and five children: he was called before the Commissioners of Canterburie province: ād without hea∣ring, or examining his cause was sodainlie cōmitted. Brought before the seate of justice: they who at the same time gave gent∣le audience to Papists. Arrians, Atheists, and blasphemers, would not permit him to speake anie thing almost in his owne defense: but (as though he had bene the most dānable wretch in the world) before anie conviction exceedinglie reviled him.
Iudges became parties, pleaders, and accusers: Some stor∣med that anie should be present as witnesses to their doings: They would not suffer one of the depositions to be read before them: the Commissioners, and deponents, were contempt∣vouslie rejected: charge given that no copies of the depositiōs should be divulged. Committance was threatned to diverse, onely bycause they tooke acquaintance which Mr Moore. saying none ought to be countenanced, that was disgraced be∣fore them. Mr Dorrell having but one copie of the depositions, he delivered it vnto them for theyr satis-faction, and though they gave him promise that it should be returned, when his wife required it, they menaced her to Bridewell. There hath bene running to the court to forestall the Lords, and Ladies of honour, and to hinder the preferring of petitions in Mr Dor∣rels behalfe to the right honorable Lords of the privie Coun∣sell. And bycause Thomas Darling a boie of Burton vppon Trent of the age of 15. Yeares, or thereabouts had bene dispos∣sessed by prayer vppon advise taken from Mr Dorrell, (as ap∣peareth by a booke published some yeares agoe): in hatred of Mr Dorrell the bookes were called in, and the printer impri∣soned as if he had published a fined matter. Mr Bainbridge, a Gentleman of good reckoning in Darbie shire was requi∣red by the Bishop of London to shewe his opinion touching the sayd Darling, he answered it was the common voice of the countrie, which he beleyved to be true, that he was in deede possessed, and dispossessed: the Bishop told him in great an∣ger but that if he had not heard well of him, he would clap him in prison for so saying. Thus having delt whith the printer, and Mr Bainbridge, then he thought meete to examine the matter: belike to see whether he had done well or not, thus to determine, and then to heare. So he sent a Pursivant for the boye of Barton. The Pursivant having receyved 40.s. of the boyes frends: the boye was kept in the Bishop of Londons house: and committed to the tuition of Mr Harsenet who la∣telie had bene vomited out of Cambridge for his erroneous
opinions. None of the boies frends might be suffered to co∣me vnto him. He was allured by promises: terrified by thre∣atnings: as that he should be hanged as the Burgonion was whom they shewed vnto him, hāging at Londō, all a daie long for a murder: Also that he should be whipped, and laid in Newegate. He was close prisoner in a chamber two dayes, the boie of Nottingham appointed for his keeper, who with the prophane serving men were alwaies skorning at him be∣ing a straunger among them: letters were contrived in Mr Dorrells name vnto him willing him to acknowledge a coun∣terfeyt possession: and letters were returned by him whereyn he protested the truth, and would not in anie sort be removed from it. All this was practized to heape shame, if it might be vpon Mr Dorrell: but when they percived that the power of God in the boie was stronger then the malice of Satan, they let him goe: but I doe not heare that the 40. shillings was a∣gaine restored. Not finding anie help herein to prove Mr Dor∣rell a practitioner in conterfeyting whith this boye of Bur∣ton, a Commission was directed to five persons in Notting∣ham, (Satan could not have wished better): that is to the verie same men who have persecuted Mr Dorrell at Nottin∣gham, York, and London ever since this matter came in que∣stion. This was to encounter the former depositions taken by vertue of a Commission awarded from York as is set forth in this treatise. It fell out that Robert Cooper the Clerk of St Maries in Nottingham caused the 94. Psalme to be song before these Commissioners sate in Commission, which being done of purpose, or vnawares, (I knowe not) but sure it is, it so galled them, bycause it describeth the like practizes of old as they nowe had in hand, that the poore man was fetch vp to London for this heinous fact. These proper Commissio∣ners refused such as were willing to justifie the truth vppon theyr othes, they picked out whom they listed, and wrote what pleased them▪ When they were to examine Mr Aldridge, and his Curate they caused them to sweare that they would
not reveale vnto anie others the things whereof they should be deposed. What goodlie stuffe they have returned, time and malice will make knowne vnto vs. Yet all this being not suf∣ficient to obscure, and suppresse the work of God, if anie man about Nottingham doe saie that Sommers was possessed, and dispossessed, he is threatned to be bound to the good beha∣viour. Behold and wonder at the violence of these men. Doe ye thinck that if they had a good matter in hand▪ they would be halfe so zealous. O Lord, (if it be thy good will) open theyr eies, and turne theyr hearts that they maie see and comprehēd this great and wonderfull work wich thou hast done among vs, that the faith of vs all maie be strengthned, our loue to thee and thine Embassadours increased▪ Satan confounded, and our sinfull liues amended to the great praise of thy holie name and our everlastin comfort in Christ Iesus. Amen. G. CO.
A BREIFE NARRATION OF THE POSSESSION, dispossession, & repossession of w: Sommers, & of some procee∣dings against Mr IOHN. Dorrel preacher, together with an∣sweres to such obiections as are made to iustifie, or shew the preten∣ded counterfeiting of the said Sommers. WIlliam Sommers of Nottingham: of the age of 19. or. 20 yeares, about the beginning of October 1597. began to be strangelie tormen∣ted in bodie and so continued for diuerse weekx, to the great astonishment of the beholders, and trouble of his frends: and gaue great tokens that he was possessed by a wicked spirit, wherevppon the MAIOR and some of the Aldermen of Nott: vnderstanding that Mr Dorrell, a minister of Gods worde dwellingh in Ashbie de la zouche, had by praier and fasting restored 8. or 9. persons that in like sort had bene vexed, did instātlie sēd for the said Mr Dorrell to com to Not. to bestwe some paines about the faid sommers: wich he refused sundrie times to yeeld vnto: bycause he tooke vppon him no∣greatter power in such cases, then was incident to anie godlie minis∣ster, or other persōs; with onelie was to intreat the Lord in the name of Christ Iesus to disposesse the wicked spirit out of the possessed per¦son: yet by theyr importunate letters and messengers he condiscen∣ded to their desires. And came to Nott. the 5 of Nouember in the yeare aforesaid: hauing neuer before that time (to his knowledge) seene the said Sommers. The 7. daie of Nouember, being Mon∣daie, was appointed for the exercise of praier, and fasting, to the end the said Sommers might be dispossessed: which Allmightie God▪ onelie at the prayers of Mr Dorrell, and others to the nomber of 150. persons brought to passe. Hyereuppon Mr Dorrell was retai∣ned preacher in Nott: that populous towne, hauing had no setled preacher before this time since the beginning of her Maiesties rei∣gne. Sommers being dispossessed, he discouered certaine witches; whereof one was called Doll ffreeman, allied to one ffreeman an Aldermā of Nott: This ffreemā offēded that his kinswomā should be called in question, threatned Sommers that he was a which: lai∣ing to his charge some presumptions tending that waie. Sōmers was committed to prison, where the Deuil appeared vnto him in liknes of a mouse: threatning that if he would not let himThat the Deuil de¦streth to re∣enter is proved by mat. 12. 42. and are. 925. and by experience. and seem Thyaus de  4. capit. 1. sect. 6. 7. reenter, and would not saie that all that he had done touching his tormen∣ting during his possessiō was but counterfeyt, then he should be hangd: but if he would yeeld to him, he would save him. Thus a∣new stipulation being made betwene them, the Devill entred: And afterwards Som: still pretented that all which before he had done was onelie counterfeyt. Yet this notwithstanding, vppon his re∣possessiō he was as horriblie (spite of his face) tormented as befo∣re, as appeareth by diverse of the Deponents, if the time when the
things wich they deposed were done, be well observed. To search into the truth hereof a Commission was awarded from the highe Commissioners for the province of yorke, to certifie the matter, to 12. principall persone of account there abouth. Mr Dorrell had ta∣ken the names of threescore persons: who were readie to haue bene deposed touching the extraordinarie handeling of the said Som. 17. of them being sworne, examined, and theyr depositions takē Som was called before the Comissioners to be examined himself, whether he had counterfeited, or not. He told them, all that he did, was but counterfeit. The highe Sheriffe exhorted him in the name of God to tell the truth: then sodenlie Som. was violentlie cast into one of his fits before them all where he wallowed vp and downe the chamber where they sate, in a farefull maner. There were pius thrust deepe into his hand, and leg, to trie if he did counterfeyt: but he was senseles, and no bloud followed. At length being reed as out of sleepe: they asked what he had done. He said, he could not tell: whether he had not bene pricked with pins, he said, yes: they asked where, and he shewed the wrong hand: when he was exami∣ned, howe the hole came in his other hand wich had bene pricked he said it was there before: being demaunded, why he fell downe? he aunswered, a qualme came ouer his stomack. Then he was con∣veied awaie: and being absent he was worse tormented them befo∣re. They brought him back againe to knowe if he would confesse, who perswaded him to saie, he had counterfeited. As he should ha∣ue gone vp a paire of staires, through a gallerie, if he had not bene hindred, he had cast himselfe headlong ouer the gallerie, to haue bro∣ken his neck. When he was the second time brought before the Commissioners, he was more terriblie handled them before, in so much that the Commissioners, and all that were present were fullie satisfied, that he thē was corporallie possessed: ād surcessed to examie ani moe witnesses Mr Walton Archdeacō of derbie being presēt, ād a principall enime to Mr Dorrell acknowledged it was the finger of God vppon this rare accident. Then was generallie great re∣joicing in Nott: in somuch as it had pleased God thus to manifest the truth when it came to triall. After, the Commission was retur∣ned to Yorke, and Som. committed to the custodie of certain honest persons where he was still tormented as before; and in his fits delivered,One of the∣se is a great persecutor of Mr Dorrel and is sus∣pected to be a wich. how the Devill had appeared vnto him in prison in like∣nes of a mouse as afore sayd: and howe the Devill and also certay∣ne persons had advised him to saie, that he vvas but a counterfeyt, and vvhat promises they made vnto him. Also he told of things that hapned at that time elswhere whithout having knowledge from anie. Which things were taken in writing by some that heard him: and they are readie to be deposed thereof, if they might be suffered. And being come to himselfe he did confesse his possession; and gave himselfe bodie, and soule to the Devill, if he did counterfeyt. The Arch-Bishop of Yorke after the depositions came to his hands was satisfied that in deede Som: was possessed. Yet having receive
letters from some great personages / he tooke occasiō to silence Mr Dor: pretending this onelie cause, that Mr Dorrell should hold that the Devil might be dispossest by praier, & fasting. Which yet he told him was his private opinion, and that he would willinglie al∣ter it, if he might be better informed. But the A. B. neuer endevou∣red to informe him better: But after goodwords, as that he was an honest man, ecc sent him aware silenced. The matter thus ap∣prehended at york, the Commissioners of the province of Canter∣burie convented Mr Dorrell before them: he appeared a for the daie and being vsed with hard speeches, was sent to the Gatehouse. Som: was brought vp to London, and committed to a barber of East Smithfeild, a man of evill report. And afterward was takē into the Bisschop of London his house. The matter was so well handled that Som: persisted in saiing that he had bene a counter∣feyt: and at length seing this to be so plausible, grewe to be so im∣pudent, that he said Mr Dorrell had hired him to counterfeyt, and had bene acquained with him 4. yeares before, and caused him to practise his feats in Ashbie parck: and informed him after his com∣ming to Nott: howe he should demeane himselfe in time of his dis∣possession. All which Mr Dorrell vppon his othe denied, but Som: bare word (nowe growone to be a mam of great credit, though he had confessed himselfe, heretofore to haue bene a counterfeyt) was better beleiued then Mr Dorrell a godlie, and faithfull man, of ho∣nest conversation, long approved by the best Christians, and mi∣nisters where he lived. But Mr Dorrell for a weeke was herevp∣pon close prisoner. And at length againe he was convented at Lam∣bith. Where taken vp with hard speeches: as if all that Som: had said was true, he not being suffered to answer for himselfe, and the depositions wich might best shewe the matter being taken awaie, and deteined from him, was remanded to the prison: where he yet lieth, till it please God, his cause maie be heard. Nowe to the end that it maie appeare vpon what ground Mr Dorrel hath bene thus handled, and taken vp with speeches, as, the most impudent varlet that euer came before them: asse, heretick, a Deuil, one that had se∣uen Deuils: that he should be the Devils mrthyr, & either recant, at Pauls, crosse, or be burnt in Smithfeild, & such like: for this cause, and for the better clearing of the truth: I will deliuer such obiecti∣ons, as haue bene made against him, with evident aunsweres (as I hope) to everie of them. There haue bene manie counterfeits: therefore Som. did couterfeit This followeth not. for we maie with as good reason saie,Aus. 1. ma∣nie haue not counterfeyt: therefore Som: did not counterfeyt. 2. There could neuer anie man counterfeyt such things as som∣mers in truth hath done. Sommers himselfe said he did counterfeyt.2. obiectio 1. Sommers likewise said, he did not counterfeyt: yea gaue him∣self bodie and soule to the Devill:Aus. . if he ded counterfeyt: as wilbe de∣posed:
why should he not be beleiued aswell with an exetration deni∣ing, as barelie affirming he did counterfeit? 2. Somm. is not to be beleiued when he affirmeth an impossibilitie. for it appeares by the depositions that he did such things, as by hu∣mane power without the Deuill are not possible for him to doe 3. Somm: for feare he should be counted a witch said he did couter∣feit, as appeares in the narration, and nowe perceiuing that this is well pleasing to some great personages, he doth more īpudentlie stād in defence of it. 4. If Som. did counterfeit, he is to be burnt as a blasphemer for saiing that he was God, Christ, and that he made Baptisme. And if he be not punished, we must conclude he did not counterfeit. Els men will imagine that the reuerēd fathers would tollerate blasphe∣mie; hetherto he hath bene rather rewarded. Sommers owne confession is more to be credited,3. ob. then all the Depo¦nēts: he best knoweth what himselfe did: the depositions are not worth 2 D. the Commissioners simple men. 1 Sōmers being in his fits knewe not what himselfe did,Answer. or, said or was done vnto him, as hath bene confessed by himselfe, and is de∣posed, and further maie be. 2 There can no exception be taken against the witnesses: if it were in case of hie treasō, or in matters concerning anie mans life, or lāds in England: so manie, and such witnesses are sufficient in anie other court of justice in England. 6 of the Commissioners were in degree of Esquires, or better: the residue (saue the Maior of Nott: a verie simple man) were men of learning: they can not be noted of partia∣litie saue such of thē, as were enimies to Mr Dorrell. for the others if there be fault in them, let them be sent for, and punished. But it is not like that anie shalbe called till more indifferēcie be procured, but such onelie as will seeke rather to obscure then to reueale the truth of these proceedings Sommers can act all those things againe that are deposed.4. ob. 1 If he can act them all in such maner,Ans. and forme as is deposed, then he is, either still possessed, or more then a man: for no humane power can doe the like. 2 Let him be brought before some indifferēt persons, let the depo∣sitions be read, and let him act the same in such maner, and forme as is deposed, by naturall, or artificiall power, then Mr Dorrell will peeld that he did conterfeit. If he cannot, (as vndoubtedlie he can∣not,) then pleade no longer for the Deuill: but punish that imp. of Satā as a wicked lier, and blasphemer of the mightie work of God He saith he seemed to be stronger then,. ob. 4. or 5 men in his fits, by∣cause he looked rerriblie, & they were so afraid they durst not use their strength uppon him. It appeareth,Ans. by the depositions of Robert Aldridge, Ihon wood Ioane Pie, Ihon Slrellie, Richard Mee, and William Langford, that they, and others laboured wiht all their might, and strength so
as they sweat againe and could not rule him: he neither sweating, panting, nor changing colour. It was an easie matter for him to trouble 3.6. ob. or 4 persons, being caried alost uppon their shoulders: such strength he can shewe againe. It is deposed that being vppon his bed, and on the ground, and sit∣ting in a chaire he was so strong,Ans. he could not be mastered by 3. or 4. persons joining together their vnited forces; as appeares by the de∣positions.7. ob. Where some saie he had a swelling in his bodie, it was nothing but the windcollick. A strange collick that should run in a variable bignes betwene the flesh and skin vp,Ans. and downe his bodie, from leg to leg, thē to his toe, bellie, eare, roote cheeke, throat, tongue, and eie, changing the colour of the eie; and making the part in wich it was inflexible, and heauie as yron. Yet if Mr Dorrell should by praer, and fasting cure such a collick,8. ob. he ought rather to be reuerenced then reuiled. But Som: denieth that it ran vp & downe his bodie in that sort. It is deposed by eleuen witnesses:Ans. manie moe also wilbe readie to depose. But where finde you that in Scripture?9. ob. qd. My L: of London. Mr Dorrell affirmed,Ans. there were twelue things deposed cōcerning Som: his possession, wich he could not possiblie counterfeit: he was suffered to produce the running of this lump up and downe his bo∣die, for one of thē wich was directlie proued by manifold witnesses. When som that had seene the depositions knwe this to be most cer∣tenlie deposed, thy had nothing to obiect but: Where finde you that in Scripture. Wherby they shwe manifestlie, that some of thē doe fight against the light of their owne conscience. for themselues knowing that Som: could not counterfeit this, neither could Mr Dorrel pos∣siblie instruct him how to practise anie such feat, they had nothing in reason to answer but least by their silence they should seeme to be cō∣vinced and confounded, they obiect a matter nothing to the purpose, namelie that this is not found in Scripture. The weight of wich obiec∣tion is this. All impossibilities are found in Scripture: this is not found in Scip∣ture: therefore this is not an impossibilitie. Who feeleth not the grosnes of this argumēt. as if a mā mihht not name a 1000 things vnposible to be performed by W Som: wich yet are not to be found in Scrip: It is not possible for Som: to goe to Rome in an houre, yet this is not found in Scripture. It is not possible for Som: to touch the stars, yet this is not found in Scrip: no more surelie is it possible for Som: to counterfeit such a variable motion, as was eui∣dentlie seene, and felt vppon his bodie though it be not to be fonnd in Scrip. This one thing alone (if there were nothing els) is sufficient to conuince anie man whose heart is not hardned, that Som: did not conterfeit: much les coold Mr Dorrell be accessarie to him in such iniquitie.
2. All the signes mentioned in Scrip: might more easilie be deluded by this cōceit of counterfeyting▪ then this moveable swel∣ling net the Devill in those dayes was not so wittie as to afcribe all possessions vnto counterfeyting.Such swel∣ling is ob∣served in o∣thers as a∣signe of pos∣session, vide Thyr: de de∣moniaris part. 1. cap. 3 sect. 3. But seeing men in this matter are growen more incredulous then heretofore, it hath pleased God be∣side the signes of possessions mentioned in Scrip: to give other sig∣nes also, more free from cavill to make his glorious works most apparant, and certen. The kitlings that seemed to move vnder this coverlet,10. obje∣ction. where he laie, was but the motion of his owne hand: One put his hand vn∣der the coverlet, & caught Som: hand moving. 1. If this be true then he had five hands in bed with him for there seemed to be five kitlings some time,Ans. as is deposed by Rob. Aldridge. 2. It maie be after the time that he pretended to counterfeyt, some confederate of his might catch his hand vnder the coverlet to delude the former accidents. 3. This motion was, when Som: hands, and feete were held: deposed by Th. Graie. 4. Lastlie deposed; that the rising vp vnder the coverlet being felt, it yeelded like a bladder full of winde when it is pricked: and filled againe as with winde: and some times it patted, like the foote of a kitling. Those things wich he told in his fits to be sayd and done in his ab∣sence,11. ob. he vnderstoode by the people who were with him, that tal∣ked of such matters, supposing he heard them not. By the depositions it is playne,Ans. he spake of things done in his absence, at the instant when he spake them: as that of the examina∣tion of Millecent Horselere, and of Mr Dorrells, and Mr Abdred∣ges coming, vnknowen to anie there present. Where it is sayd,12. ob. he spake, his mouth open, not moving tongue, chaps, &c. he can doe so againe: for gaping he can saie, hang▪ hang. It is deposed by Richard Newto,Ans. he spake a continued speach. his mouth being wide open, his tongue drawne into his throate, vttering those words among others. Ego sum rex, ego sum Deus. He can foame as he did before by keeping soape in his mouth,13. ob. & working it with his tongue. Belike he brought this concert from the barbars shop.Ans. It is de∣posed by Mr Langford, that he continued his foaming the space of an houre, in such abundant maner, that the foame did hang dow∣ne from his mouth to his brest, notwithstanding it was continual∣lie wiped with clats, in such abundance, as is not able to be vttered by anie humane creature, not having receyved anie thing from 6 in the morning, till 5 at night to augment it.
When he threwe himselfe into the fire,14. ob. he knewe there vvere some present speedilie to relcue him. He was throwen with such violence against the chimneie as they that were present thought his neck had bene broken,Ans. he could not so∣denlie be takē out of the fier; for it is deposed, he was of such weight as is not possible to anie naturall bodie▪ so as there were 3. or 4. for∣ced to joine in taking him by: yet he had not his haire singed, nor was himselfe hurt. When he fel dovvne before the Commissioners,15. ob. it vvas done by the advise of the Maior, and some of the Aldermen at Nott: vvho per∣svvaded him to it; and should have given him a vvatchvvord, vvhen to risevp, but it vvas forgotten: vvhereby (alas) the poore boie vvas in great paines through the maiors forgetfulnes. 1. Then belike the maior,Ans. and Aldermen were complotters in this counterfeyting: me thincks they should aswell be punished as Mr Dorrell. 2. Could they by teaching, or he by practizing staie the issuing of bloud when he was deepelie pricked with a yin, both in his hād, and leg? howe came it to passe that he had forgotten which hand was pricked? why did he purpose to counterfeyt, and yet would tell them, that he fell downe bycause a qualme came over his stomack, howesoever it is an easie matter to delude such as were absent by words, yet the Commissioners being choise men of the countrie, both for learning, and authoritie could not be deceyved by such a paltrie companion. For the matter was so apparant vnto them, that they held it superfluous to proceede anie further to examina∣tion of witnesses: in so much as Mr Walton the Archdeacon con∣fessed it to be the finger of God: ād shrunck awaie ashamed, being convinced with the evidence, and demonstration of truth. He saith,16. ob. Mr Dorrell taught him to counterfeyt, & hovve to be∣have himselfe at the dispossession. 1. This relieth vppon the ariome and infallible principle wher∣vppon most of the objections are founded,Ans. namelie this whatsoe∣ver Wt. Som: saith is true, he saith Mr Dorrell instructed him to counterfeyt etc. let them prove the proposition: ād we will yeeld the Conclusion. As if a godlie minister were not better to be beleyved vppon his othe, then the bare affirmatiō of a lewd voie whom they saie was a counterfeyt. 2. If Mr Dorrell should saie, or sweare that Som: by his teaching can doe these things; he were not to be credited: for none can by reaching, or learning practise impossibilities. Therefore it is a mere vanitie to seeke to drawe Mr Dorrell into anie confede∣racie in this action, vnles they prove these witnesses to be all per∣jured persons. 3. Mr Dorrell never came to him but with companie finding also companie alwaies with him: he never (to his knowledge) did see him before the 5 of Novemb. 1597. us he hath deposed.
4 Why should Mr Dorrell teach him to conterfeit more then others, whom he hath dealt withall in like cases of dispossession? es∣peciallie the 7. in Lancashire? whereof 4 were vnder 12 yeares, troubled 2 yeares before he came to them; and 2 of them children to a gentleman of good credit; who was at 200 ll charges by occa∣sion of their possession? and could not expect anie aduantage by gi∣uing out that 6 in his familie were vexed by Sathan: the procurer of their trouble was indited and executed for coniuration: yet till this likewise be proued conterfeiting; a possession and dispossession must be held for granted. It is Poperie to holde there is anie possessiō since Christs time:17. Obje∣ction. and it is heresie to maintaine that the Deuill maie nowe be cast out by praier, & fasting. Miracles are nowe ceased: these are but deuices to maintaine your hypocritical fastings. To hold there are possessions,Answere. and maie be dispossessions by praier and fasting, is neither Poperie, nor heresie. If it be, why doe they not send for Mr. Ihon Ireton of Legworth a man knowne to be learned and sound in religion, as anie of them: who shamefullie con∣founded Archd: Walton in this question: and offered to maintaine the same in the Vniuersitie? there being in deede (as I am verilie persuaded) nothing in the Scripture, the Apologie, or articles of re∣religion proffessed in England, nor in the armonie of Confessions, nor in anie sound Protestant Diuine to the contrarie. In this, and in otherVr: Whether a Bishop, et Elder be all one in scrip. whether Christ suffe∣red in soule et questiōs it is fit to be knowē, wich mē learnd in the lawe do tel vs1 Eli∣zabeth. c. 1. that the Ecclesiasticall Commissioners ought not to de∣termine anie matter to be heresie, but onelie such as hath heretofore bene determined to be heresie by authorite of the Canonical Scriptu∣re; or by the first foure General Councels, or anie of them; or by anie other General Counsel, whereyn the same vvas declared to be heresie by the expresse, & plaine vvords of the Canonical Scripture; or such as hath heretofore bene judged heresie by the Parleamēt with the assent of the Clergie in the Convocation; as appeares by the statute made in the first yeare of her M.ties reigne and the first chapter. There have bene possessions before Christs tyme, wich ma∣ie be seene by these things which are recorded of theIoseph. de antiq: Exorcists a∣mong the Iewes,Mat. 12. 27 and of theLevit. 20 27. 1 Sa 28. 7. who had the Devil in thē. in theyr bellie: called also Pytho∣nists. Ad 16 16. 18. See hereof Orig lib. 7. cont Cels: Chrys. hom. 29. Oracles, Engastrimuthoj, and o∣thers among the Gentiles. Since Christs time there have bene in∣finite examples testied by theCyprian ad Deniet etc. de Idolor: Vanitate. Orig. hom. 244 in Ios. Iact. lib. 4. Ca. 27. Iustin. disp. cont. Fryph. Chrysost. hom. 4. Athanas: de incarnat. August. de temp. ser. 197. Cass. Coll. 7. c. 25. 27. Prosper de promiss. Gregor. didlog. lib. 1. r. 10. Zāch. de operi∣bus. l. 4. c. 10. Martyr in 1. reg. 8. Melanct. in Epist. Gualt. hom. in Luc. 8. Szeged. loc com. f. 400. Ches. Geuev. Giffard dialog. of with. monuments of all ages. A thing so vsuall in the times of Antiquitie, since Christ, and his Apostles, that I marvell anie men who would seeme to be learned, and doe professe great reading, should beware theyr ignorance in such a triviall matter. Hierome in vita Hilariom speakes of one Hilarion who dipossessed verie neare 200. persons. omitting others I will
onelie alledge tertulliā in his apologie, who made the like offer in his time, as was made of late vp Mr More a godlie Minister, to the Bish: of London touching W. Som: for wich he was com∣mitted to the prison of the Clinck. Let a man (sayth tertullian) that is vexed by a Devill be brought before your judgement seate: & ad the commandement of the meanest Christian, the spirite shal speake, & confesse himselfe to be an vncleane spirit. Let one of those folke be brought whom you thinck to be inspired of a God, &c. If he dare bie before a Christian, or if he confesse not himselfe to be a Devill, take the Christiā to be presumptuous, & let him die for it out of hand, &c. Nowe none wil speake his owne shame, but rather the which maye sound to his honour.Tertul in Apo∣log. Surelie they wil not tel you that Iesus is a decey∣ver, or of the common stamp of men: or that he was stolne out of his grave, as hath bene reported vnto you: but that he is the power the wisedome, & the word of God: that he sitteth in heaven, & that he shal come to judge us. And on the contrarie part that themselues be Devils, damned for theyr naughtines, & wayting for theyr dreadfull dome: and this bycause that beyng afrayde of Christ in God, & of God in Christ they yeeld to God & Christ, & to the servants of God, & Christ.nd Scap. cap. 3. And againe els where he saith, We doe not onelie despite the Devils, but also we binde them, & doe dailie traduce them, & ex∣pel them out of men, as it is wel knowen vnto verye manye. Of cor∣porall possessions also even in these dayes.Lirie & o∣thers. We doe reade in credible histories of the west Indies. But to seeke no further, there hath bene evident demonstration hereof in our owne land. Where the Symptomes, or signes of pos∣session mentioned in Scripture have bene apparant in the parties possessed, as namelieLuk. 8. 29. extraordinarie strengthLuk. 8. 28. knowledge,Act. 16. 16. & 19. 15. & tor∣menting of the bodies,Mar. 9. 20. Foaming, wallowing, beatting of themsel∣ves gnashing whith the teeth.Marc. 9. 22 casting into the fire, & such licke.Mote this ye Atheisis: When the signes of possession, and dispossession have bene delive∣red out of the Scripture, the verie same at the naming of them (the work corresponding with the word, sufficient to confound all Acthe∣ists) have at that instāt bene shewed in the persons affected, being themselves senseles, not remembring afterward what had hapned vnto them. When the godliemen have called vppon the Lord to dis∣possesse the wicked spirit out of the tormented creature, he hath ans∣wered, as it were from heaven, be it vnto you, as you have desired. Lastlie when Saran hath bene dispossessed, he hath (as the Scrip: sayte) walked in drye & barren places,Mat. 12. 43. seeking rest, but finding none: & returning back into the house frō whēce he came, he hath appeared in diverse shapes, perswading the parties by promises, and threat∣nings to let him reenter.Marc. 9. 25. Some have yeelded, as Iane Ashton in Lancashire, this Som: and others: and have bene greivouslie tormented as before without giving hope of recoverie: seeing ouwr Saviour sayth,Mat. 12. 45. that in such case, the spirit taking 7. worse dwelleth
there & of such is worse, then the beginning. Others haue repulsed him, and would not relent, either by this allurements or threath∣nings. Whereof he hath outwardlie in theyr bodie so pinched, ād tormēted them, that they could not goe without halting for a good time after. Yet he being still resisted in faith, hath after manie assaults surceased to trouble them anie further. The miracu∣lous curing of fevers, palsae, leprosies, and other diseases by Christ, and his Apostels gave credit to the Ghospell: Yet the like diseases remaine at this daye. Seing therefore there maie be possessions at this daye, as before (for what hath bene done, that maie not againe be done, the Devill being as malicious, and powerfull as in times past) What shall we doe (saith P.in 1 Reg. 8. Mar∣tyr) with them that be taken, and tormented with Devils, Shall we forsake them. Vndoubtedlie they must not be forsaken; yet we must not by adjurations commaund them to goe forth. Where∣fore (saith he) we will vse faithfull prayers for the recoverie of them.in Epist. Demonolo∣gie. The like is the opinon of Phillip. Melanthon, and the god∣lie learned King of Schoth: men more judicious, and better grounded in religiom, then these that speake at randome of Pope∣rie, and of heresie. To remove the Devill by prayer and fasting is no miracle:Mat. 17. 21. this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting. saith our Saviour. If God by prayer should heale the falling, sicknes, or phrensie, or should graunt raine, drought, victorie, or such like requests, where this a miracle? Christ, and his Apostels spake the word onelie (as the Centuriom saith) and it was done:Mat. 8. 8. Act. 16. 18. Mat. 10. they commaunded, and it came to passe. The Disciples had power giuen them against vncleane spirits, and to heale all diseases. This in deede was miraculous. But Mr Foxe, Mr Greenham, Mr Dor∣rel, Mr More nor others in these daies, neither challenge, nor have anie power onelie in an extraordinarie case, wherein the Phi∣sitions saie there is , somewhat divine, or supernaturall, not curable by anie humane ordinarie skill, they vse in extraordi∣narie, and supernaturall lawfull meane of cure, that is by long, and earnest intreatie to beseech Almightie God by mediation of Christ Iesus, to release the partie. This God hath done, and the∣se men for our good are witnesses hereof: and woe be to them who haue prevailed against Satan, and heard with theyr eares, and seene with theyr eies the great works of Allmightie God, if they should relinquish the truth of God, for the feare of man, Tou∣ching the ceasing of miracles there is no determination thereof in holie Scripture: neither is that article in this action to be con∣troversed. Sure ware that the Scripture, the deitie, and all reli∣gion is by some among vs as much called in question, as euer he∣retofore. The Ecclesiasticall Commissioners can witnes, howe manie Atheists and blasphemers haue bene brought before them, likewise there be some who call themselues Christians, and al∣so
Ministers of the Ghospell, who yet in theyr practized liue Atheists, and make a scorne at the exercises of religion, as name∣lie at preaching, praiing, fasting, sanctifiing the Saboth, reading the word of God, giving thanks at meate-vsing the phrases of the Scriptures and doe revile, and hate others bycause they refraine from swearing liing, filthie speaking, gaming, plaies, and such abhominations of this age where in we liue. It is to be doubted. that neither the word, nor miracles can prevaile with those men. when God shutteth no man can open: when Lazarus was raised from the dead, manie beleived: but some were hardned, & complai∣ned vppon our Saviour. Though some sawe Christ visiblie risē from the dead, yet they stil doubted. Therefore all is to litle to vnbeleivers. The greatter, and more noble the workes of God be, the more earnest is the De∣vill in obscuring them. If there were no other proofe hereof but this matter of Nottingham: it were sufficient to exemplifie vnto vs, the exceeding subtiltie, and malice of Sathan. For by dis∣gracing this wonderfull work of God, the powerfull preaching of the Gospell is hindred in Nottingham, where it hath bene a strannger for manie yeares: a number of people in that towne whose hearth were opened hereby to receive the Ghospell are left to the wolfe: the holie exercise of prayer, and fasting are shame∣fullie skorned: wicked and Popish persons are kindelie intertai∣ned: and highlie commended: the witnesses of Christ Iesus, and enimes of Satan are evill intreated: the Papists opinion who hold that Satan cannot possiblie by the Ministerie of anie Pro∣testant be dispossessed, is mightlie countenanced: the Atheists, and carnall Gospellers (who not knowing the power of god∣lines, and holie exercises doe attrebute all things to arte, chan∣ce, or nature) are exceedinglie hardned. It cannot be indured that those kinde of men which be ac∣counted the of scouring of the world should be thought to have such interest in CHrist IEsus, as that theyr (falselie termed) verball prayers, and hypocriticall fastings, he should, as it we∣re visiblie descend from heaven, and tread downe Satan vnder theyr feete: where as other men who account themselues more learned, excellent, and wise then they, doe not with all theyr Phisick, Rhethorick, pompe, and primacie accomplish the like. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world. to con∣found the wise, & the weake things of the world to confound the mightie.
THus much touching the objections which have bene made to prove the pretended counterfeiting of W. Som∣mers. But howe by counterfeyting he could speake a quarter of an houre together his mouth being shut: howe he should staye his temples, and pulses from ād beating: howe his eye, hands, ād face should be vnnaturallie black and turne by and by into theyr natu∣rall colour: howe there should be extraordinarie smells in the place where he laye: howe he should violentlie be with great force cast-against the yron bars, ād posts of the chimneies receyving no hart: howe he could be taller then the highest man in Nott: howe all his bodie should be as cold as ice, and heavie as yron: howe his face should be turned quite backward his neck throwen round about without hurt vnto him: howe he being naturallie weake should so oftentimes belabour so manie strong men, himselfe not panting, sweatting, or changing colour: howe he made his tongue to swell to the bignes of a Calves tongue, and his eies as great as beasts eies: howe he should forget continuallie what he did, or was done vnto him in his fits: howe his legs crooked with falls, should be inflexible as anie yron: howe the collick should run along all his bodie, in a variable quantitie: Howe such a collick should be cured by prayer, and fasting: howe in his fits he should vtter strange voi∣ces, which at other tymes he could not doe agayne, as is deposed: howe he did counterfeyt all these impossibilities, when the Saddu∣ces, Galenists, and Naturalists of our time have considered of the matter, we will expect some newe objections sutable in discretion to the former. In the meane season, Let him that is filthie, be filthie still: but doe Satan what he can, Wisedome shalbe justified of her children. Surelie the rage of man shall turne to thy prayse: Psalm. 76. 10.
Depositions taken at Nottingham the 20. of March. An. 1597. by vertue of a Commission granted from the right reverend father in God Ma∣thewe Archbisschop of Yorke, and others her Mties high Commis∣sioners before Iohn Therrald Esquier highe sheriffe of the Countie of Nott. sr Iohn Byron Knight, Iohn Stanhop, Robert Markham, Richard Par∣kins Esquires, Peter Clerk Maior of the towne of Nottingham. Miles Leigh Officiall of the Archdeaconrie of Nott. Iohn Ireton Parson of Legworth Iohn Browne parson of Loughborrowe, Robert Evington parson of Normanton vp∣pon Sore, and Thomas Bolton, Ministers, and preachers of Gods Word. Commissioners appointed for the taking of the same. 1 THomas Hais of Kirkbie in Ashfeild in the countie of Not.Thomas Hais. Clerk, and preacher of Gods word sworne, and exami∣ned, saith that being at Nott. vppon All Saints daie to attend vppon Sr Charles Candish, the said daie was in∣treated to come to the house where William Sommers was, by the said Som. mother:At the na∣me of Ie∣sus cast downe. and there found the said Som. wonderful∣lie tormented, and at the name of Iesus suddenlie oftentimes cast on the earth, the one leg being bended crooked towards this exa∣minant: not able to streighten the same. In which leg he saw some∣thing run,The leg bound. and so out of that leg into the other: thence forth with into his bellie greatlie swelling the same, in so much that the same was much bowned vpwards: and when the same departed thence, he sawe it plainlie in his throate,a running swelling. in his tongue, and in his cheeke ne∣are vnto his eare rooe, appearing there as at that time he concei∣ved the quantitie of the yelke of aneg and liing his hand vppon it, ann taking it betwene his fingers found the same in softnes, and quam trie to the yelke of an eg. And bein doubtfull what to thinck, or saie of such a strange sight this Examinant went thence to Mr Ar∣kinson of the same towne of Nott. with whom he had often bene, ād sent for such as were troubled with Melancholies, or temptations, to crie out some naturall cause, if he might. But after manie aun∣sweres of his touching convulsions, falling sicknesses, and such others, he could conceive none that might leade him to the fin∣ding of a naturall cause.No desea∣se, but the Devil. So he procured Mr Ebings, and Mr Aldredg the same daie to come to him, where in theyr prayers, and presences, he had diverse fits as before, giving out words, that it was no disease, but the Devill.
2.2. Robert Aldridg. Robert Aldridge Clerk vicar of Sanct Maries in Nott: sworne, and examined sayth, that first he comming to William Somm: vppon Thurs daie being the 3 of November (as he thin∣keth) he found him lying vppon a bed, no bed clothes lying vppon him,Running swelling. but onelie his owne hose: ād sawe a thing running vp his right leg to the quantitie of a mouse, and he calling vnto God by prayer, immediatelie it removed out of the right leg, into the left, and laying his hand therevppon immediatelie it removed into his bellie, where it did swell to a verie great quantitie, twise so big as his bodie as he thinketh, and from thence into his brest, and there it was the big∣nes of his fist, and from thence into his neck, and from thence vnder his eare, where it remayned in the bignes of a french wallnut, not changing his former colour, and so remayned there for the space of a quarter of an houre: and the sayd Sommers liing vppon his back, his hands were holden by two there standing by the whole time this examinant was there. And this examinant further sayth,A hollo∣wish voy∣ce. that he heard in a strange hollowish voyce, that he was his, and this examinant answering sayd that he lied, he was Gods: and that he had made a promise vnto God in Baptisme to be his,Blasphe∣mie. then the voyce answered that he was God, Christ, and a king; & that he made Baptisme, & that he made him his by a newe Covenant, for he had given him 3. pen: & that it was in the boyes sleiue, which beingh searched, there was noone such to be found, then it sayd agayne that it was in his glove. This Examinant also further sayth, that the sayd William Sommers: the xvij. of November last, from the houre of 7. off the clock, vnto 3. off the Clock in the afternoone off the same daye continued straungelie,Extrror∣dinarie strength. and diverselie vexed, and tormented: ād had such strength as five men had much a doe to keepe him downe du∣ring which time he exceded in swelling, stritching, roaring, and yelling verie fearefullie gnashinsh of his teeth, and foaming at his mouth. And also sayth that vppon the xviij. th of November betwixt 7, ād 8. of the clock in the morning, he went into the house of Robert Cooper, where William Som: laye to heare howe he had done the night before,knocking and he standing in the hall heard a great knocking in the Parlour where the boye laye, and suddenlie he rushed in, where he found the boye alone in his bed, lying with his face vpward in his fit, with his mouth drawne awrie, and his eyes staringh as though they would have started out of his head. And this Exami∣nant kneeling downe to prayer heard the knockingh agayne vnder his knees as he thought. And in the bed vnder the coverlet, he sawe the forme,5 kitlings and shape as it were of five kitlings in quantitie to the veiwe of his eye. And agayne this Examinant sawe the bed clothes at the feete to shake, move, and leape as the leaves of an Aspen tres shaken with the winde.
3. William Hyinde of the towne of Notthingham taylour sworne,3. w. Hin∣de. and examined sayth that at his comming vnto the sayd Sommers he found Mayster Aldridge there (being vppon Fry∣daie the fourth of November as this Examinant thinketh) and did see a swelling in his neck to the bignes off a great walnut,The run∣ning. swci¦ling. and from thence vnto the bone of the checke, and there was to the bignes of a great hasselnut: ād from thence it removed into his eye, ād the skin of his eye waxed black, and bycame this Examinant had heard before that he the sayd Sommers did counterfeyt,Eie skin-black. he did laye his hād vp∣pō the said swelling vppō the chekebone which swelling did tremble like an Aspen leaf in a calme winde, and was verie soft, but in that place did not change his naturall colour. 4. Thomas Westfeyld in the countye of Nottingham Clerke, and preacher of Gods word savorne,the run∣ning swel¦ling. and examined sayth, that vp∣pon Sondaye at night, being the 6. of November last passed (as he thincketh) being desirours to see the strange things which he had heard of the sayd Sommer: came thether with Maister Dorrell to see him,The ey changed colour 8. times. where he found him with a great swelling vnder the left eare, to the bignes of a wallnut, and from thence it removed into the eye, where it seemed not so greate, but caused a great blacknes in his eye, and vppon that this Examinant layd his hand where he felt a certen moving, and his eye changed into his naturall colour immediatelie: and so changed 8. times betwixt 3. and 6. a Clock in the morning. 5. William Aldred of Colwick in the countie of Nottingham Clerk, and preacher of Gods word sworne, and Examined saith, that vppon the 6. of November last being the Saboth, Mr Ihon Dorrell, and diverse other Ministers, whereof this Examinant, was one, together with the Major of Nottingham and others, be∣ing about 7. of the clock in the Evening came into the house where the said Sommers was. And after prayers made to GOd, the said Ihon Dorrell exhorted with manie words all such whose hearts GOd should touch with his feare, to prepare, and assemble themselves the next daie against 7 of the clock in the morning, and to consecrate that daie wholie vnto the Lord with fastings and praper,150. per∣sons pre∣sent and so departed from them at that time. And the Mi∣nisters withdrawing themselues, and conferring about the kee∣ping of the said excercise, it was thought good that this said Ex∣aminant should begin the next daye.Mouth distorted. There were assembled at the time appoynted about an hundred, and fiftie Persons: and this Examinant beginning with prayer preached against the sins of our time.Tongue doubled into his throte. The boie in the meane time being tormented by fits in his bodie wonderfullie, as by heaving vp his bodie by hailing his lips awrire, one towards the one eare, and thother towards thother eare: opening his mouth wide, as if it where foures∣quare, thrusting out his tongue, and putting it double againe
into his throat: with manie fearefull cries, and strikes and some∣times laie silent. This examinant having ended his sermon the ab∣ove named Ihon Dorrell began with prayer, at which tyme the torments in the boye seemed to be doubled: and after exhortation to the people ended, and the sayd Ihon Dorrell discoursing of the sig∣nes of possession as they bie in order in the 9. of Mark, the verie same signes there spoken of appeared most evidentlie in the sayd William Som:The sig∣nes ap∣peare ac∣cording to the vvord. in most terrible manner, for he striked, and roa∣red with a lowde voyce, he fomed abundantlie, he gnashed with his teeth his bodie distracted severall wayes, and the preacher com∣ming to these words: all things are possible to him that beleyveth, answere was made from the boye, thou liest, ād with terrible coun∣tenance staring with his eies, gaping with his mouth, stretched out his hands with bended fingers like Eagles pouns towards the preacher, as menacing him, with leaping vp with his bodie, and other threatning gestures, but that he was restrayned by his keepers. And thus he continued the whole discourse of fayth. But when he began to speake of the signes of dispossession, (as it follo∣weth in the same chapter) the sayde William Sommers was agai∣ne tortured with the former torments mone forceablie. And the said Ihon Dorrell dilating vppon this speach. He came out out of him, the sayd W. Som: made as though he would have vomited. And the sayd Iohn Dorrell besought God to glorifie his worde, and worke: then the whole congregation breaking theyr hitherto continued silence cried out all at once as it were with one voyce vnto the Lord, to releyve the distressed person: and with in a quarter of an houre, or thereabouts it pleased God to heare theyr prayers: for the bodie of the boie was taken, and throwen thwart the bed groveling, in which manner he laye as if he had bene dead for a sea∣son. The preacher then glorifying God, and willing the people to be thankfull (the which being accordinglie performed) the bote tur∣ned himselfe over, and vppon his knees rendred thanks vnto God for his deliverie By which time the sun being seth the exercise ended, and the boie went home with his master. 6. Ioane Pie wise of Robert Pie of the towne of Nott: baker sworne, and eaed deposeth, and sayth that about a weeke be∣fore M. Dorrell was sent for to come to W. Som: being the Sa∣turdaie before all Saintsdaie at night this Examināt comming to the house of Thomas Porter where the boie laie,His bodie doubled &c. and after a while he fell into a fit of laughing, ād then presentlie he was threwen sud∣denlie into the beds feete, his bodie doubled, and his head betweene his legs: ād then suddenlie he was plucked round vppon an heape, as though his bodie had leue like a greate browne loafe, of a strike: and so rolled in the bed, cast vp from the bed like a ball, 3. or 4. times together, about halfe a yard in height, the coverlet being so fast wrapped about him, as all that were present had much a doe to pull
the cloathes from him: and this Examinant tame manie times to the said Sommers, of purpose to see the accidents that did shewe his possession, wherein she desired to be satisfied. And this Exami∣nant also saith, that about Allhallowtide, and manie others times she hath seene the said Sommers handled with such violēce, as whē his fit had come, he could haue bene so strong as somtimes there ha∣ue bene 4.extraor∣dinarie strength or 5 women, and could not hold him liing flat vppon the ground: and that notwithstanding all their force he could haue bea∣tten his menbers one after an other, as his legs, armes, and head, as though he would haue beatten his head in peices, if he had done it in Gods name and that part, or members with the fit did possesse 3 or 4 could not hold it,leg massie inflex∣ible. or bowe it. This Examinant further saith that on Allhallowe euen at noone, or thereabouts, she with sundrie others, being with the said bote, he was sitting in a chaire about two yards from the fire side, and suddenlie was cast towards the fire, his head lighting vppon the yron that kept up the fire, ād one of his hands in the fire:Cast into the fire. and they being 3 or 4 taking him up to saue him from burning, they could not set him in the chaire againe: for his legs were so bowed as they could not not al streight them: and he so heauie,leg bowed as they could scarce lift him, and that neither his head heire, nor anie part of his bodie was hurt, or burned by the fire, ād she further saith,though so heave as hardlie by 3. or 4. taken out yet vn∣hurt. that there was a small line, wich tied up a painted cloth: wich was hung ouer the bed: to wich the said Somm: stret∣ched his hand, but could not reach it: ād then to theyr imaginatiō he seeming to exceede the stature of the tallest man in the towne sud∣denlie got his chin ouer the said line:extraordi∣narie sta∣ture. and so with his hands plucked the line so fast about his neck, as that they with stood by had much a doe to saue him from hanging. She further saith that the boie in one of his fiths (the night before Mr Dorrell came) said that Do∣rrell was comming,extraord: knowled∣ge. when neither she nor anie other to her know∣ledge had anie certen intelligence that Mr Dorrell would come. for the messengers wich went for him brought answere, that he pur∣posed not to come till the next weeke. And she also further saith, that the said Saturdaie wich Mr Dorrell came to the towne he was more extremelie handled then before:Speache without moving tongue, othps. and that he late manie times with his mouth extraordinarilie voide, and strangelie open, and that he spake these words vz I wil use W: S his tongue, and mēbers for 3 daies without mouing, or stirring his tongue, or lips in spea∣king anie of the said words. And that the speache was in the ordi∣narie voice of W: Somm: And this deponent further saith, that an houre and halfe before Mr Dorrells comming to the towne, the boie fell into an extreme fit in such manner as she,For dead. and those with were prefent iudged verilie he was dead: for he laie senceles, and speechles, his eies out of his head, like wallnuts: his face black in a strange manner,No remē∣brance. and all his members, and the parts of his bodie instanlie cold vppon the sudain by the space of an houre. And being asked when his fits were past, whether he remembred the extremlie
or anie part denied, that he remembred anie thing, and that during the tyme off his extremitie they manie tymes endevoured to recover him by giving him Aquavitae, and other comfortable things, but it wrought nothing in him to revive him. And Mr Dorrell being co∣me into the towne, the boye instantlie spake of it with these words: I have but a small tyme nowe to staye,Extraord. knovvledg. but I will shortlie returne: And that Mr Dorrell comming in at the backside of the house without knowledge off the boye (as she verilie thincketh) the boye fortol∣de off his comming,strange smels like brimsto¦ne. ād he also had foretold of Mr Aldridg his com∣ming at sundrie tymes. This Examinant sayth likewise that at diverse tymes when the boye was in his fits she hath felt smells li∣ke brimstone:Running svvelling. and also sayth that being in his fits she hath seene a swelling in his foote, which removed, from toe to toe, and so to his leg, and from thence in his bodye to the bignes off a 3. penie white leafe: and so to his throate to the bignes off a rat, ād vnder his eare to the bignes off a wallnut, and in his eye brees like a black clock, and so removed from place to place. which this Examinant, and others have sensiblie seene, and felt. And this deponent further saith that after the tyme of his dispossession, the hope discovered by speech certayne which he named to be witches, amongst the rest he named one Milicent Horselie, who dwelled at Bridgeford: which Maister Dorrel and Mr Aldred caried to Mr Parkins to be examined, and the boye about one of the clock in the same daye in his fits vttered these words.extraord. knovvledge. Nowe they have her, and are examining her: and she sayth she doth all by prayer, & nowe she is saying her prayer, and this was not knowne to this Examinant, or anie other then present to her knowledge. And she further deposeth, and sayth that at diverse tymes she hath heard a clapping in his bed, as though it had bene the clapping of 3. hands. and that she hath seene a motion in the bed,kitlings. as though it had bene the creeping off 3. kitlings, which she, and diverse others have endevoured to take hold of, but never could, for when they have attempted the same:knocking. It hath vanished: and his hands and feete never sturring to theyr sights and that at other ty∣mes, at his beds feete a knocking as though it were vnder the bed to theyr vnderstanding: and in some of those extreme fits, he would crie,Nec troend & mouth dravvne asi∣de immea∣surablie. Nowe she comes, nowe she comes, nowe she wil breake my neck, and therevppon his neck was throwen about▪ as though it had bene broken, with his mouth drawne of the one side vnmeasurablie, some tyme on thone side, and some tymes on the other. 7. Richard Newton of the towne of Nottingham glover, swor∣ne, and examined sayth that he heraing off the straungenes off this extremities of the sayd Sommer: came vnto him with a full deter∣mination to vnderstand whether his straunge actions were coun∣terfeyted, or not: and thought to satisfie himselfe with a full vn∣derstanding of the truth of the cause, and found he the sayd Som: in his fit: and heard him speake plainlie with a continued speech
with his mouth wide open,Speache vvith mouth open, his tongue dravvne in∣to his throa∣te, neither lips nor chaps mo∣ving. his tongue drawne into his throate, so that there could be seene nothing of it but the rootes in his throate, neither lips, nor chaps moving: ād vttered this speech amōg others Ego sum rex, Ego sum Deus, with some other speeches, which he (this Examinant) could not vnderstand well for that he is no good Latinest: and this was done in the sight of manie. 8. Henrie Nussie of the towne of Nott: locksmith, sworne, and examined, deposeth, and sayth, that he came vnto the sayd Som: to wake with him: and about 10. or 11. of the Clock in the night, he sawe him with his mouth wide opē: ād he spake certayne words vnto Ihon Wigan in Lattin: which this Examinant vnderstoode not,speach. vvit∣hout mo∣ving chaps. his chaps nor tongue moving, ād did so speake, ād this Exami∣nant sawe these things evidentlie: for he came verie neare him to be∣hold him. 9. William Langford of the towne of Nottingham Chirurgiam sworne, and examined deposeth, and sayth that it is true, that the same daie of his dispossessing being the 7. of November he did gnash, wallowe,Foaming exceding. and foame in such abundant manner, that the foame did hang downe from his mouth vnto his brest: notwithstāding it was wiped awaye continuallie with clothes: and that he continued for the space of an houre: and that it was in such abundance, that this Examinant did not thinck it possible to be vttered off anye humane creature, and so much the more he did marvell at it, for that the sayd Sommer had not taken anie thing from 6.Skriking hi∣deouslie. like a bul, & a beare & a small voyce vncounter∣feyt able of the Clock in the mor∣ning vntill 5. of the clock in the after noone to augmēt it anie waies: and that he did strike with 3. severall voyces so hideouslie, and so terriblie as they were not like anie humane creature, but rather tho∣ne of them was like vnto a bull, the other like vnto a beare, and the third a verie small voyce, and such as this Examinant thinketh can∣not be counterfeyted.extra ordina∣rie strength. Feb. 17. And this Examinant further sayth, that the sayd Sommer did shewe extraordinarie strength: and speciallie vp∣pon the 17. of Februarie last, when he this Examinant, a kisman of his,tem∣ples. pul∣ses. not bea∣ting. and one other servant to Mr Graie could not hold him: ād that then this Examinant felt his temples, and his pulses of his armes which had no motion: but was as he had bene senceles, and like a dead man: and that he was cold of all outward parts of his bodie: which he purposelie then did trie, for the strangenes thereof: neither did he extraordinarilie pant, or blowe, that this Examinant could perceyve. And this Examinant sayth that he hath heard him make rime of the Scriptures,a smal tune∣able voyce. and heard him sing so small a tuneable voi∣ce, as that out of his fit he could not sing the like, as this Exami∣nant made proofe of, of verie purpose: and hearing him sing manie times before in his perfect memori, he did never heare him sing with so smal a voice. And this examināt further saith that on the said 7. of Novē. last (with daie the said exercise for his dispossessiō was appoin¦ted) this Examinant came to the house of the said Thomas Porter,
where the saide W. Som. was, and there finding the said Som: vppon his knees praiing, and with him some companie in prayer, this deponent tolde secretlie some in the companie, that it was ap∣poynted that instantlie the said Som:Extraord. knovvledge. was to be cōveied to the place where the sayd exercise was to be vsed: and therevppon (without the vnderstanding of the said Som.5. or 6. vvith much a doe carie him. by audible speech) he was cast sodenlie thwart vppon the bed: and this deponent with 5. or 6. o∣thers had much trouble (though they vsed theyr whole strength) to carie him to the said place, where the said exercise was appointed, and kept: and that this examinant havivg onelie the guiding of his head could not continuallie keepe it by his strength: but sometime it was taken from him. He also saith, that vppon the saide 7. of No∣vember the said Som. being extremelie tormented, and toiled, and his buttons therewith opened he sawe a rising,the running svvelling. or swelling in the bottome of his bellie, wich to his knowledge moved the clothes: ād his brest, and stomack being hare he sawe visiblie the same rising, or swelling in bignes of a goose eg, or a halfe penie white loafe, ascend vp to his brest, and so to his throte, with wich he would haue offe∣red, as though he would haue vomited, and therein continued till the time of his dispossession as was generallie thought by all the standers by. for in a trice he was sodenlie throwen over, by what motion they wich were then present could not conceiue by anie hu∣mane experience, or practize. 10. Thomas Graie of Graies Langlie in the conntie of Lei∣cester Esquire, sworne, and examined saith that about the 3. daie of Decemb. last, he was in the house of one Cooper Clarke of St. Maries in Nott. wherein he sawe W. Som: liing vppon a bed, be∣ing hold by sandrie persons,Decemb. 3. at his feete, and also at his head: so that it seemed vnto this deponent thereby that he was in some fit but by the countenāce of his face it seemed to this Examinant, that he the said Somm: did but dissemble. whereuppō this Examināt considering the strange report wich he had heard by diuerse credible persons concerning matters in fact done by the said W. Sommers in the time of his possession, and dispossession desired of God in his heart that some manifest token might beshewed unto him this Ex∣aminant for his better vnderstanding of the truth in that behalfe. And immediatelie he sawe a mouing vnder the vppermost couering of the bed (not far distāt from the smal of the said W Som:the running svvelling. leg) wich laie in a round lump panting: wich this Examināt perceiuing poin∣ted at, ād said to the stāders by, what might this be: whereuppō one of them said it is his foote: then it was answered by those that satt vppon the beds feete, thus: We haue his feete here, and doe hold them. Then this deponent for the better vnderstanding thereof laid his hand vppon the said lump, and felt it moue, and clasping his hand together, he felt that it yeelded, as aire, or winde, and opening his hand againe it filled the same in verie full manner: And this Examinant taking awaie his hand, sawe the clothes settle verie
softlie downe, like as a bladder being blowne full of winde falleth together after it is pricked: and immediatelie the like moving was on the other side of the said W. Som: and this deponent seeing it saide (laiing his hand uppon the place, where before it was) here it was euen nowe:patting like the foote of a kicing. and at that verie instant this deponent (without moving of his hands) sensiblie felt something vnder the clothes part verie fast in the palme of his hand, like the foote of a kirtling, or such like thing. 11. Ihon Wood of Lenton in the countie of Nott: clerk, swor∣ne, and examined saith, that vppon Fridaie being the 17 of Februa. laste, he being crediblie informed that W. Som. was verie mise∣serablie tormented, and piteouslie vexed with most strange fits, was desirous to visit him: and to that end going with some other of his frends to the house of Robert Cooper clerk of St Maries in Nott∣aforesaid, where the said W. Som: then was at this comming thether.Extraord. strength. and this Examinant found him in a fit, wherein he per∣ceived that 3. or 4. men had inough to doe to hold him: and this Examinant thincking with himselfe that it was impossible that a boie of his age, and strength, should in such wise toile 3. or 4. lustie fellowes, being desirous to knowe whether his strength was such as they pretended, or not: in another of his fits wich lasted from be∣twene 9, and 10. of the clock, vntill it was past twelue, this Exa∣minant was desirous to deale with him himselfe for satisfaction of his own minde: and to the end he might haue the better advaun∣tage (as he thought) he stepped behinde him as he was sitting in a chaire, and got fast hold of the brawnes of his armes, as though he would haue pinioned him. But when this Examinant preceived that he could not hold him, but that he would slip from him, whe∣ther he would or not, he was inforced to let goe his holde there, and with his fingers fast locked one into another, so that he could not a∣nie waie slip frō him as before, by reasō both his armes ūder his ar∣mes were fast closed about his bodie,ext. strength he so held him: but the said S: so laboured this Examināt, that both his hat fell of from his head, and his cloake from his back with strugling with him. But when the standers by sawe that this deponēt was almost overcome with striving with him: two of them laide hold on him with him, the one, by the one leg, and the other by thother leg, and this Exami∣nant still at his bodie: who so belaboured them all for the space of an houre, or therabout, as that in the end they were all breathles, and constrained to giue place to others standing by. Wherevppon this Examinant presentlie stepping before him vppon purpose to see whether he either panted, or drewe his breath, short, or not, found him with his eies shat,no panting. and his mouth, ād lips fast closed: and so far from panting, as that this Examinant could not preceive him dra∣we his winde: and where as they all were verie hott, and this Ex∣aminant in a verie great sweet,nor rednes. he for his part neither swet, neither yet had so much as anie rednes in his cheekes. Afterwards this
Examinant hearing that it was noised abroade, that the said W. Som. had confessed that al that ever he had done was counterfeited and that he was delivered to Ihon Cooper, and Nicholas Shephe∣ard as his keepers: for triall of the truth, and learning also that the said W. Som, was with his said keepers. at Lentom: this Exa∣minant was desirous to talke with him to the end that he might make triall whether he counterfeited, or not: for he thought with himselfe, that if he did counterfeit he could remēber something that this Examinant did vnto him, considering that he never came at him but once. And to the end no exceptions might be taken against this Examinants words, he requested his neighbour Mr Forster a verie honest man, and one fearing God, to accompanie him thether telling him before hand the end of his going: who willinglie went with him. When this Examinant came vnto him, after they had gi∣ven ouer theyr worke, and all the workmen were departed: he asked leaue of his saide keepers that he might talke with him the sayd W. Sommers not secretlie, but openlie, which request being graunted, openlie before the said Mr Forster, and his said keepers this Examinant asked him first whether he did remember that he was ever with him in anie of his fits? he aunswered, he did: then this Examinant asked him if he could remember anie thing that he did vnto him: he aunswered, he could: beiing asked by this Examinant, what it was he did, he sayd, that he nipped him by the finger with his thumb naile,He remem∣brance. ād with that made a signe with his owne naile, vppon his owne finger, saiing you nepped my fingers thus, but this Examinant aunswering it was an vntruth that he spake, he willed him in the name of God to shame the Devill in speaking the truth: for said this deponent) everie lie is of the Devill. Whereto the sayd Sommers aunswered, that in deede he did not nip his finger: but (sayd he) you did bend my fin∣ger thus: and with that he buckled his finger with his owne hand: to the end sayde he you might trie whether I had anie sense, or feeling, or not. This Examinant likewise affirming that to be an vntruth alsoo: Exhorted him agayne in the feare of God to speake the truth: then after he had pawsed a pretie space, this Examinant asked him the third time what he did, and then he aunswered directlie, and said, if you did not so vnto me, I can∣not tell anie thing that you did. When this Examinant preceived he could not remember anie thing that he did, after a short exhorta∣tion vsed vnto him to serve, and feare God, he went awaie, with Mr Forster: and when they were gone as far as a man maye rove an arrowe, his sayd keeper Ihon Cooper called vnto this Examinant saying, Mr Wood, Mr Wood, the lad remembreth, nowe what you did. And this deponent asking him what it was, his sayd keeper answered that the lad said he read of a booke and praied ouer his sister lying on a trendle bed: but when he this Examinant had aun∣swered that to be an vntruth also: for (saide he) witnes all that
were in that house I touched no booke in that house that daye, he aunswered againe after a litle space, that allthough he read not o∣uer her, yet he prayed ouer her: wherevnto this Examinant aun∣swered, that he but gessed at that, (as he thought) bycause he might well knowe that no CHRIstian man seeyng them in such eytremi∣ties could forbeare to praie for them, and thus they left them. 12. Ihon Strellie of the countie of Nottingham Gentleman, sworne, and examined, deposeth, and sayth that he being desi∣rous to see William Sommers of whom he had heard strange re∣ports of being possessed with a Devill, and dispossessed, and as it was thought repossessed againe, came to the house in Nottingham where the sayd Somm: was kept about the 18 of Febrarie, where finding him in one of his fits in the presence of Ihon Dorrell,ext: strēgth, and W:4 vvith hol∣ding, abun∣dantlie the svveatting, he not breat¦hing. Aldred preachers of the word of God with others, the said Sō. amongst manie other strange things, did shewe himselfe of that great strēgth, that this Examinant with 3 others could scarce hold him: but that he made them all to sweat in great abundance, the said Som. neyther sweatting, nor breathing to theyr perseverance, and so for that time he left him. And comming vnto him on Mōdaie the 20.Feb. 20. of Februarie in the presence of the parties aboue named with o∣thers finding him verie well to theyr thinking, ād exhorting him out of the word of God,Cast against the poste of the Chimne∣ie. he was on the sundaine throwē from the place where he sate with his head in such violent manner knocked to the furthest post of the chimneie, as they thought his nec had bene bro∣ken: being of so great weight as they thought was impossible for anie naturall bodie:Exceeding massie. and being laid vppon a bed, and liing in his fit about halfe an houre, manie straunge things were seene, as his neck being doubled vnder him,neck doub∣led. being (as it seemed) tormented in his inward parts, with one of his legs being of a verie massie weight: a litle thing seene to move in divers parts of his bodie, swelling the bodie,one leg verie massie. and rising into severall parts of the face, to the bignes of a crab or wallnut, and after comming to himselfe againe, and con∣tinuing well a small time was on a sodaine cast into the fyer in the presence of them all:the running svvelling. and being sodenlie taken out without anie hurt to him,Cast into the fire. by the fyre being of weight as aforesaid, manie strāge things appeared in theyr presence, as foaming, wallowing, gnashing his teeth, striking, roaring, and seeming to be strāgelie tormented in his bodie with the same swelling through his bodie,speach his mouth vvid open. and face as before vttering in his trance diuerse strange speeches, his mouth wide open his tongue drawne into his throate, (but not speaking in that time) and other things which be nowe out of memorie. 13. Richard Mee of Nott. butcher, sworne, and examined depo∣seth ād saith, that on sondaie at night (being as he thinketh) the 6. of November, he came to the said Sō. to watch with him about 9. of the clock at night, and found with him Mr Westfeild, and others and betwene 3. and 6. a clock in the morning heard a voice saying
that he would have his right eye,blacknes in his eie. & then he vvould have his left: And immediatelie a great blacknes was in his left eie, the voice being (as he thinketh contrarie to his naturall voyce. And this Ex∣aminant further sayth that a daye or two before, and sundrie o∣ther tymes this Examinant did see a swelling in his armes,the running vvelling. and legs, (they being naked) to the bignes off a wallnut, and removing from place to place into his bodie, and that he felt it in his bellie to the bignes of a 6.Face turnd directlie, backvvards his bodie not mvoing eies great as beasts eis. pen: browne lofe, and that it was so hard that he could not presse it downe with his hand: which this Exa∣minant assayed to doe by putting his hand vnder the bed clothes. This deponent also sayth, that he hath seene him stand, and turn his face directlie backwards, not moving his bodie: and that his eyes were as great as beasts eyes, readie as he thincketh to start out of his head. And further sayth that he hath seene him fallē downe before them,leg crooked vvith fals. and that one of his legs would be crooked with his fall, and that this examinant hath assaied to pull his leg streygth out,Yet by no meanes to be streigted. mouth strā∣gelie draune aside. but could not by anie wayes move it. And that he hath seene him drawne his mouth verie strangelie to one side, so as he imagineth could not be done by anie naturall course for that he did never see anie doe the li∣ke. And that his tongue would be thrust out of his mouth to the big∣nes of a calves tongue.tongue big as a Calves. This Examinant further sayth, that he hath seene him laugh verie strangelie, and sodenlie strich like a swine when he is in sticking,Laughter strange & thē skiking. ād wallowe, gnash his teeth, foame at mouth verie strangelie, and be (as he thought) senseles, and these things were done before Mr Dorrells comming vnto him, ād that the sayd Som:Cast into the fire vn hurt. would be violentlie cast into the fier, standing from the fire, a yard, and halfe of: and none of his clothes burnt, or hayre singed. And further this Examinant sayth that the sayd Som: in manie off his fits,ext: strength 6 or mor scarelie able to hold him did shewe extraordinarie strength so as sometimes 3. sometimes 4. sometimes 6, sometimes moe could scarcelie hold him, and keepe him downe, and during his sayd fits he was not prceived to pant, or blowe more then if he had not streined his strength, or strugled at all.not panting and this Examinant further sayth, that from the sayd Sommer there came a big voyce,Blasphsmie. vttering these words, that there vvas no God, that he vvas God. that he vvas king & prince of darknes.exceeding svveete smels. And in saying of the Lords prayer, he could not be perswa∣ded to saye lead vs not into temptation, but lead vs into temptation. And also he sayth that he hath felt such exceeding sweete smells in the roome where the sayd Sommer was, that he, this Exami∣nant could not endure the same for the exceeding sweetnes thereof. 14.Dead to their see∣ming an houre & halfe. Elizabeth Milward of the towne of Nott: spinster, swor∣ne, and Examined, sayth that the Saturdaye in which Mr Dor∣rell came to the towne, the sayd William Som: was extremelie tormented,cold as Ice face & hāds blak. in such sorte as he laye for an houre, and halfe for cleane dead to theyr Iudgment being senseles, speechles, ād without breath to theyr sight, on which tyme presentlie he was as cold as Ice,
and hands black annaturallie, the rest of his bodie being coveres which they could not see. And though they gave him Aquavitae, and other confortable things to revive him, yeth they could not in all that tyme: and his bodie so heavie as that they could not heave it vp.Massie. And the first word he vttered was this Dorrell comes, Dorrell comes, he vvil have me out, but I vvil come agayne for Noottingham and Lenton are jollie tovvnes for me. And she further sayth, that the first tyme she called anie of theyr neyghbours in to help him, she heard a thumping, or knocking in his bed: and she putting her hand into his bed,a fearefull knocking. felt the sayd knocking (as she thought) at a hal∣lowe place aboue the chest of his bodie: which knocking she heard as she went downe the stayres being so fearefull as she durst not staye above with him. 15.15. Iohn Pare of Plumtree in the countie of Nottingham Clerk, sworne, and examined deposeth, and sayth that he came to the tow∣ne of Nottingham on the Mondaye which was the daye of the exer∣cise of fasting, and prayer for William Sommers, about 9. off the Clock the forenoone: and hearing the exercise in hand at the house of one Smale, went theither about 10. of the Clock to heare what was done, and found Mr Dorrell, and Mr Aldredge, and diverse other there, where they continued till the houre of 3. of the Clock in the afternoone in preaching, and prayer: and that the preasse was so great that he could not come to the sight of the boye till about the sayd houre of 3. of the Clock, and then he sawe the boye lie groveling vppon his face vppon the bed, and a certayne swelling or rising vn∣der his clothes to the bignes of a mouse:the running svvelling. which removed from place to place, to diverse parts off his bodie. and this Examinant also sayth that he heard a thumping, or knocking in the boyes bed in three severall places at once,a knocking in 3. severall places at on∣ce. and he putting his hand into the bed felt it sensiblie knock vnder his hand: and that he was perswaded it was not the boyes hands: bycause they could not reach so lowe. 16.16. Iohn Clerk off the towne off Nottingham Cordwinder, sworne, and examined deposeth, and sayth, that on Sondaye being the 6. th off November (as he remembreth) coming to wards the Church, of Sint Maries in Nottingham, and hearing the boye (meaning William Sommers) was in some torment went into the house off Thomas Porter, and found the sayd boye in a fit in which he vttered to one Edward Garland, these words, vz. Ed∣vvard Garland art thou there, hovve doe thy children, I vvill have one of them, even the youngest, to which the sayd Garland answered I defie the Devill: for he can have no power off me, nor my chil∣dren. And this Examinant sayth, that after a litle tyme, the boye came to his senses, and then being asked whether he would rise, he ans∣āswered,
he would: ād so the clothes being taken of this Examinant sawe in his brest being in his shurt a swelling,the running svvelling. or rising to the big∣nes off a rat: which this Examinant tooke hold off: and found it as soft to his feeling as a downe pillowe, and he thincking to hold it fast, it presentlie avoyded, and then the boye sayd it was gone downe into his leg. And this Examinant sayth, that he sawe him at sundrie tymes, when divers of his members, as his legs, armes, and others were inflexible, and exceeding heavie, above nature, as yron.Members  in flexible; and heavie. And this Examinant being asked to what purpose he came to see the boie, he said he came to be perswaded in his opinion hea∣ring such straunge things, and accidents. 17.17. W. Hunt of the towne of Nott: baker, sworne, and ex∣amined, deposeth, and sayth, that he did see W. Sommers in his fit liing for dead to his thincking in which fit he did heare a voice proceed from the sayd Sommers and his lips were close shutt,Speach, mouth shut. and did neyther move his lips or jawes to his vnderstanding, and he continued so speaking by the space of a quarter of an houre.the running svvelling. And this deponent further sayth that in the same fit he did see a thing to the bignes of a wallnut running in the flesh of the said W. Som∣mers about his face, forehead, and eies, and so run about his face to his eare. The severall aunsweres of W. Power, Ihon Pepper, Ihon Cooper, an Nicholas Shepheard vppon certaine questions pro∣pounded vnto them for the discoverie of the practizes with W. Som. for the causing him the said W. Som. to affirme his dissembling of possession. 1 William Powre of the towne of Nottingham Gentleman sworne, and examined saith, that Ihon Cooper being demaunded by this Examinant whether the sayd W. Som: was a counterfeyt, or no, did saie, that when Mr Dorrell did cast out the Devill, he had not appoynted him anie place to goe vnto: but we have sent him into a heard of zwine at the townesend: or words to that efect: which words were spoken about amonets past.
2. Ihon Pepper of the towne of Nott. taflour, sworne, and ex∣amined saith, that he did heare the said Ihon Cooper saye, that when Mr Dorrell had cast out the Devill, he had not appoynted him anie place to goe into: but nowe that I have cast him out. I have sent him into an heard of swine, and nowe he will com no mo∣re: or words to that effect. 3. Ihon Cooper of St Ihons in Nottingham and one of the keepers of the sayd Sommers sworne, and examined sayth that he did not knowe anie which perswaded the sayd Sommers to confes∣se himselfe to be a dissembler saving this Examināt himselfe threat∣ned to whip him: he also confesseth that one Wilkinson, and two others came to the house of St. Ihones about 8. or 9. of the clock at night: and he thincking it an vnlawfull houre would not suffer them to come to the boye: but saide he would indite him, if he came vppon the ground, for that he was not his frend. This Exami∣nant also saith, that he never knewe one Nicholas Aire to have ac∣cesse to the boye, to his knowledge. This Examinant further sayth, that it is true, there was an ointment brought to the said boie by Nicholas Shepheard one of his keepers, appoynted therevnto by William Gregorie the Maiors Clerck: with which the sayd Sommers was annoyted: bycause he might be the more nimble to shewe his tricks: but words of charme he heard not at the an∣noynting of the sayd boye. He also confesseth he said that Mr Dor∣rell hath cast out the Devill (as he sayth) but hath not assigned anie place to goe into: but he had sent him into Collwick hill. This Examinant also sayth that the sayd boye since his com∣ming to St Ihons had no fits, save at 3 times: one immediatelie after his comming: and the last when some of the wives came to the house, and then he fell downe: but after this Examinant had put the sayd wives out of the house, and given him some words of Correction, he presentlie arose. 4 Nicholas Shepheard of the towne of Nottingham fletcher, sworne, and examined sayth, that he never knewe of anie promises made, or other matter vsed to the sayd boye to make him to saye, that he counterfeyted: but that in one of the boyes fits: he himselfe treatned to have a paire of pincers to pinche him by the toes, if he vsed those tricks: but remembreth that Mr Iackson promised that if he would declare the truth, he would be good vnto him, and hel∣pe him to service in London. This Examinant also confesseth
that Mr Hurt, Mr Iackson, and Mr Freeman Aldermen, and William Gregorie the Maiors Clerck desiring to have the boye to vse some of his tricks aunswered, that his leg was so sore he could not shewe them: and the sayd Gregorie commaunded that some ointment might be giuen him: which this Examinant did, and the boie annointed his knee, and gaue some to his sister to annoint her finger which was streyned. (∵)
A BREIFE OF THE FORESAID DEPOSI∣tions, proving that William Sommers of Nottingham of the age of 20. yeares was possessed by Satan, & did not counterfeit as some pretend. 1 THere seemed to run along his leg, and thence into his toe. bellie throate, tongue, cheeke, eie, & other parts a lump sometimes les∣se, sometimes bigger then an eg: being soft, deposed by eleuē. 16. 17. 2 The lump being in his leg, it was heavie, & inflexible like yron by 4. the 6. 12. 14. 16. 3 He had such extraordinarie strength that sometimes 3. 4. 5. 6. or moe, were skarce able to rule him deposed by 6: the 2. 6. 9. 11. 12. 13th. 4 When 4. or 5. strugled with him so as they were wearied; he did not sweat pant, or chaunge colour. deposed by 3. the 9. 11. 13. 5 He wallowed, gnashed with his teeth, stared with his eies, & foa∣med at his mouth excessivelie: by 5. the 2. 5. 9. 12. 13. 6 There seemed to run vnder the coverlet where he laie as it were kitlings to the number of 4. or 5 deposed by 3. the 2. 6. 10. 7 His face, and mouth fearefullie distorted one lip toward one eare & the other toward thother deposed by 3. the 5. 6. 13. 8 His face turned directlie backward not moving his bodie at all, by 2. the 6. 13. 9 His neck doubled vnder him. by Richard Mee. the 13. 10 His bodie doubled, his head betwene his legs, sodenlie plucked round like a round browne loafe, cast vp like a ball from the bed 3. or 4. times together, halfe a yard highe. deposed by Ioane Pie. 6. 11 Being cast into the fyre against the wals, & yron bars of the chim∣neie with great violence, & there liing some time, he received no apparance of hurt at all, deposed by 3. the 6. 12. 13. 12 His boie seemed to be extented to the height of the tallest mā whē once he ondevoured to hang himselfe, deposed by Ioane Pie 6. 13 He told of diverse things done in his absence, without notice gi∣ven by anie person: deposed by 2. the 6. & 13. 14 Strange speeches vttered by him in his fits, in a strange voice, that he was his, that he was God, Christ, & a King, that he made Baptisme & I wil vse W: Som, tongue, & member for 3. daies; EGO SVM
REX, EGO SVM DEVS: that there vvas no God, that he vvas King & Prin-ce of darknes. Also before Mr Dor. had seene him he saide Dorrel comes; Dorrel comes he vvil haue me out, but I vvil com againe; for Nott. & Lenton are jollie tovvnes for me. de∣posed by the 2. 7. 13. 14. 15 Being recovered out of his fits, he knevve nor vvhat he had said, or done by the 6. 11. 16 In his fits, strange smels vvere in the place vvhere he laie, by the 6. & 13. 17 A strange knocking perceived about his bed in his fits, his both feete, & hands being field vnmoveable. by 4. the 2. 6. 14. 15. 18 He cried hideouslie sometimes like a bul, beare, svvine, & in a smal voice vnpossible to be counterfeyt, by 3. the 2. 9. 13. 19 His leg vvould be crooked vvith his fals, & remaine inflexible. by 2. the 1. 13. 20 He spake in a continued speeche, his mouth being vvide open, his tongue dravven into his throat, neyther lips, nor chaps moving, by 4. the 6. 7. 8. 12. 21 He spake a quatter of an houre together his mouth being close shut. by the 17. 22 In his fits, his temples, & pulses did not beat, he laie for dead, cold as Ice. deposed by the 9. 14. 23 His eie vvas black, & chaunged colour in his fits, by the 3. 4. 13. FINIS.
