C7488 C7497 11954056 51492
Culpeper's DIRECTORY FOR MID WIVES: OR, A Guide for Women. THE SECOND PART. Discovering, 1. The Diseases in the Privities of Women. 2. The Diseases of the Privie Part. 3. The Diseases of the Womb. 4. The Symptoms of the Womb. 5. The Symptoms in the Terms. 6. The Symptoms that befal all Virgins and Wo∣mē in their Wombs, after they are Ripe of Age. 7. The Symptoms which are in Conception. 8. The Government of Women with Child. 9. The Symptoms that happen in Childbearing. 10. The Government of Women in Child-bed, and the Diseases that come after Travel. 11. The Diseases of the Breasts. 12. The Symptoms of the Breasts. 13. The Diet and Government of Infants. 14. The Diseases and Symptoms in Children. Londn: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Book∣seller, at the Sign of the Printing-press in Corn∣hill, near the Royal Exchange. 1662.
Books Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole, Printers and Book-sellers of Lon∣don, at the Exchange. Mr. Burroughs WORKS viz. on Matth. 11. 1 Christs call to all those that are weary and heavy la∣den, to come to him for rest. 2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to him. 3 Christ the Humble Tea∣cher of those that come to him. 4 The onely easie way to Heaven. 5 The Excellency of ho∣ly Courage in evil times. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel-Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly Mindedness, and Walking with God. 11 Ex position of the Pro∣phesie of Hosea. 12 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin. 13 Of Precious Faith. 14 Of Hope. 15 Of Walking by Faith, and not by Sight. 16 The Christians living to Christ upon 2 Cor. 5. 15. 17 A Catechism. 18 Moses Choice. Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Col∣lected into two Volumes, Viz. 1 Scripture light, the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel. 3 A lifting up for the cast down. 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The great things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The great Gospel My∣stery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christs Priest∣ly Office.
11 Satans power to tempt and Christs Love to, and Cure of his People under Temptation. 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13 Grace for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Naturall Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, and In-being of Christ in all Be∣leevers. 17 The Woman of Ca∣naan. 18 The Saints Hiding place, &c. 19 Christ coming, &c. 20 A Vindication of Gos∣pel Ordinances. 21 Grace and Love be∣yond Gifts. New Books of Mr. Sy∣drach Sympson. VIZ. 1 Of Unbelief, or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by Christ. 2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation, is an ex∣ceeding great sin, yet pardo∣nable. 3 Of Faith, Or, That be∣lieving is receiving Christ; and receiving Christ, is be∣lieving. 4 Of Coveteousness. Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volumes: One in O∣ctavo, and two in Quarto. These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker made in New-England, are attest∣ed in an Epistle by Mr. Tho∣mas Goodwin and Mr. Philip Nye, to be written with the Authors own hand: None being written by himself be∣fore. One Volume being a Comment upon Christ's last Prayer, on the seventeenth of John. Wherein is shewed, 1 That the end why the Saints receive all Glorious Grace, is, That they may be one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loveth the Faithful, as he lo∣veth Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desi∣reth to have the Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the Happiness of our being in Heaven, is to see Christs Glory. 5 That there is much
wanting in the Knowledge of Gods Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily Direction, accor∣ding to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire and endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on him∣self, should be given to his faithful Servants. 8 That our Union and Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our hap∣piness in Heaven. Ten Books of Applicati∣on of Redemption by the ef∣fectual Work of the Word, and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God: By Thomas Hooker of New-England. Dr. Hills WORKS. The Kings Tryal at the High Court of Justice. The wise Virgin: Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, of New∣England. Mt. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian his Disease and Cure discovering the Leprosie of Sin and Self-love, with the Cure, viz. Self-denial and Faith. A Godly and fruitful Ex∣position, on the first Epistle of Peter: By Mr. John Ro∣gers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex. Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage. The wonders of the Load∣stone: By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch. An Exposition on the Gos∣pel of the Evangelist St. Ma∣thew: By Mr. Ward. The Discipline of the Church in New-England: By the Churches and Synod there. Mr. Brightman on the Re∣velation. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr. Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative and Speech. A Congregational Church is a Catholick visible Church By Samuel Stone in New-En∣gland. A Treatise of Politick Po∣wers. Dr. Sibbs on the Philip∣pians. Vox Pacifica, or a Perswa∣sive to Peace.
Dr. Prestons Saints submis∣sion, and Satans Overthrow. Pious Mans Practice in Parliament time. Barriffs Military Discipline The Immortality of Mans Soul. The Anatomist Anatomi∣zed. The Bishop of Canterburys Speech. Woodwards sacred Ballance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter. Abrahams offer, Gods Of∣fering: Being a Sermon by Mr. Herle, before the Lord Major of London. Mr. Spurstws Sermon, be∣ing a pattern of Repentance. Englands Deliverance from the Northern Presbitery: By Peter Sterry. The Way of God with his People in these Nations: By Peter Sterry. The true Way of uniting the People of God in these Nations: By Peter Sterry. Mr. Sympson's Sermon at Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. The best and worst Magi∣strate: By Obadiah Sedgwick. A Sermon. A Sacred Panegyrick: By Stephen Marshal. A Sermon. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries: By Matthew Newcomen of Dedham. A Sermon. Mr. Nyes Sermon of the use∣fulness of a powerful Mini∣stry to the Civil Governor. Dr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS. VIZ. 1 Of Christs Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity. 2 The high Priviledg of Believers, That they are the Sons of God. 3 Faith the means to feed on Christ. 4 Of Self-denial. 5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, &c. 6 The Mystery of Spiritu∣al Life. The Names of all the Physical Books that are printed by Peter Cole, are set at the End of this Book.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK OF PRACTICAL PHYSICK. Of Womens Diseases. THE FIRST PART. Of Diseases in the Privities of Women. THE FIRST SECTION. Of Diseases of the privie Part, and the Neck of the Womb. CHap. 1. Of the straitness and largeness of the Orifice. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of the Mentula or Yard in a Woman 3 Chap. 3. Of Atretae or Closures, and straitness of the Neck and Mouth of the Womb 4 Chap. 4. Of Pustles and Rough∣ness of the Privities 6
Chap. 5. Of Condyloma in the Neck of the Womb Page 7 Chap. 6. Of Warts in the Neck of the Privities and Womb 8 Chap. 7. Of the Haemorrhoids of the Womb. 9 Chap. 8. Of the Ulcers in the Neck of the Womb 11 Chap. 9. Of the Clefts in the Neck of the Womb 14 Chap. 10. Of Fistulae's in the Neck of the Womb 15 Chap. 11. Of a Cancer in the Womb 16 Chap. 12. Of a Gangrene and Sphacel in the Womb 18 THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Diseases of the Womb. CHap. 1. Of the Knowledg of the Temper of the Womb. 20
Chap. 2. Of the hot Distemper of the Womb Page 22 Chap. 3. Of the cold Distemper of the Womb 24 Chap. 4. Of the moist Distemper of the Womb 25 Chap. 5. Of the dry Distemper of the Womb 26 Chap. 6. Of Compound Distem∣pers, and first of cold and Chap. 7. Of the ill shape of  Womb, and irst of the  of it and its Vessels Chap. 8. Of the opening of t Vessels of the Womb besides N∣ture 3 Chap. 9. Of a double Womb, t wanting of a womb, and evil sha of the womb, and strange thing found in it 3 Chap. 10. Of the Magnitude o the Womb incresed, and first of te  of the womb 35
Chap. 11. Of the Dropsie of the Womb Page 38 Chap. 12. Of a Tumor in the Womb from Blood in its Veins 42 Chap. 13. Of Inflammation of the Womb ibid. Chap. 14. Of a Scirrhus and Cancer in the Womb 45 Chap. 15. Of the displacing of the Womb, and first of the Ascent of it 47 Chap. 16. Of Falling out of the Womb 49 Chap. 17. Of the Rupture of the Womb 54 Chap. 18. Of Wounds, and brea∣king of the Womb ibid. Chap. 19. Of Ulcers and rotten∣ness of the Womb 55 Chap. 20. Of the Diseases of the Stones, and Vessels of Procreati∣on in Women ibid
THE Contents OF THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND PART. Of the Symptomes in the Womb, and from the Womb. CHap. 1. Of Weakness of the Womb Page 57 Chap. 2. Of the Itch of the Womb 59 Chap. 3. Of pain in the Womb 60 Chap. 4. Of the Diseases of the Womb that come from sweet scents and stinks 63
THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Symptoms in the Terms, and other fluxes of the Womb. CHap. 1. Of the flux of the Terms Page 66 Chap. 2. Of the Terms flowing too soon 69 Chap. 3. Of want and stoppage of the Terms ibid. Chap. 4. Of fewness of the Terms 78 Chap. 5. Of Dropping of the Terms 79 Chap. 6. Of the over-flowing of the Terms 80 Chap. 7. Of the Terms flowing
with pain and Symptoms. 85 Chap. 8. Of evil discoloured Terms 86 Chap. 9. Of Terms coming be∣fore their time 87 Cap. 10. Of Terms that come after their usual time 88 Chap. 11. Of the Terms voided another way 90 Chp. 12. Of the Whites ib. Cap. 13. Of a Gonorrhaea. 94 Chap. 14. Of strange things voi∣ded by the Womb 95 THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK. TH THIRD SECT ON. Of the Symptoms that bef Virgins and Women in their Wo after they are rip o Age. CHap. 1. Of Virginity. 96 Chap. 2. Of the Green-sick∣ness, or white Feaver 100
Chap. 3. Of Symptoms from the Womb, and Mother-fits in Gene∣ral Page 106 Chap. 4. Of Suffocation of the Womb 108 Chap. 5. Of the Frenzie of the Womb. 115 Chap. 6. Of the Melancholy of Virgins and Widdows 118 Chap. 7. Of an Epilepsie from the Womb 120 Chap. 8. Of pain of the Head from the Womb 122 Chap. 9. Of the Diseases of the Heart, and beating of the Arte∣ries in the Back and Sides from the Womb 124 Chap. 10. Of the Diseases of the Spleen, and the Hypochondriack disease from the Womb 125 Chap. 11. Of the Distemper of the Liver from the Womb, and of a Beard growing by consent from the Womb. 127
Chap. 12. Of the Diseases of the Stomach that come from the Womb Page ibid THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK. THE FOURTH SECTION. Of he Symptoms which are in Conception. CHap. 1. Of the desire of Ve∣nery hurt 130 Chap. 2. Of Barrenness, and want of Conception. 131 Chap. 3. Of Barrenness for the time, and conceiving seldom. 139 Chap. 4. Of Conception, and for∣ming of the Child 141 Chap. 5. Of the Generation of Twins, and many Children. 142
Chap. 6. Of Sperfoetation. Page 144 Chap. 7. Of the ill Formation of the Child 145 Chap. 8. Of a Child turned into Stone 147 Chap. 9. Of a Mole 148 Chap. 10. Of Monsters 151 Chap. 11. Of false Conception, and Swelling 153 THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND PART. THE FIFTH SECION. Of the Government of Women with Child, and preternatural Di∣stempers in Women with Child. CHap. 1. Of the signs of Con∣ception 155
Chap. 2. Of the Government and Diet of Women with Ci. Page 156 Chap. 3. Of the Cure of Women with Child in general 158 Chap. 4. Of the Symptoms that befal Women with Child in the first months 162 Chap. 5. Of the Symptomes in Women with Child in the middle months 164 Chap. 6. Of the Symptoms that are in the last months 166 Chap. 7. Of Weakness of the Child 167 Chap. 8. Of Crying in the Womb 168
THE Contents OF THE FOURTH BOOK THE THIRD PART. THE SIXTH SECTION. Of Symptoms that happen in Childbearing. CHap. 1. Of Childbearing in General Page 170 Chap. 2. Of Abortion. 172 Chap. 3. Of the Signs of Natural Birth, and the manner and Government of such as bring forth 175 Chap. 5. Of Natural hard Tra∣vel 177
Chap. 6. Of a vitious disorderly Birth, or difficulty preternatural Page 179 Chap. 7. Of a slow Birth 180 Chap. 8. Of a Child dead in the Womb 181 Chap. 9. Of the Caesarean Birth 183 THE CONTENTS OF THE Fourth Book. THE Seventh Section. Of the Government of Women in Child-bed, of the Diseases that come after Travel. CHap. 1. Of the Government of Women in Child-bed. Page 186 Chap. 2. Of the Secundine or
After-birth, or a Mole that is left after Childbearing Page 187 Chap. 3. Of the Purgation after Childbearing diminished r de∣tained 189 Chap. 4. Of too great a Flux of blood after Childbearing 191 Chap. 5. Of the pains after Tra∣vel, and torments in the Belly 192 Chap. 6 Of the Tearing of the Vulva to the Arse, and coming forth of the Womb, Inflammati∣on, Ulcer, Suffocation, and Fal∣ling out of the Fundament. 193 Chap. 7. Of Watching, Doting, and Epilepsie of Women in Child∣bed 194 Chap. 8. Of the Swelling of the Womb, Belly and Feet after Child∣bearing 195 Chap. 9. Of Vomiting, Loosness, Blly bound, and not holding of ∣rin in Women in Child-bed ibid.
Chap. 10 Of the Wrinkles of the Belly after Childbearing, and mending of the largenss of the Privities Page 197 Chap. 11. Of Feavers and acute Diseases in Women in Child-bed 198 The CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. Of the Diseases of Womens Breasts. THE FIRST SECTION. Of Diseases of the Breasts. CHap. 1. Of the increased number of Breasts, and great∣ness extraordinary 203 Chap. 2. Of Swelling of the Breass with Milk 205
Chap. 3. Of Inflammation an Erisipelas of the Breasts Page 206 Chap. 4. Of the Oedema of th Breasts 20 Chap. 5. Of the Scirrhus of th Breasts 210 Chap. 6. Of the Glandles or Ker∣nels in the Breasts being swollen, or of the Scrofula and Struma in the Breast 211 Chap. 7. Of the Cancer of the Breasts 212 Chap. 8. Of Ulcers and Fistu∣laes of the Breasts 215 Chap. 9. Of straitness of the pas∣sages of the Breasts ibid. Chap. 10. Of strange things bred in the Breasts 216 Chap. 11. Of the Diseases of the Nipples ibid.
THE Contents OF THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Symptoms of the Breasts. CHap. 1. Of want of Milk, and not giving of suck. 218 Chap. 2. Of too much Milk 220 Chap. 3. Of Curdling, and other faults in the Milk 221 Chap. 4. Of Milk coming forth at wrong places 222 Chap. 5. Of strange things co∣ming forth of the Breasts 223 Chap. 6. Of the change of colour in the Nipples, and pain of the reasts.
A Tractate Of the Cure of Infants. THE FIRST PART. Of the Diet and Govern∣ment of Infants. CHap. 1. Of the choice of the Nurse 225 Chap. 2. Of the Conditi∣ons of good Milk 227 Chap. 3. Of curing the faults in Milk ibid. Chap. 4. Of the Diet and Go∣vernment of new-born Children 229
Chap. 5. Of the Diet of an In∣fant from breeding of Teeth, till it be weaned Page 230 Chap. 6. Of Weaning of Children ibid. Chap. 7. Of Childrens Diet af∣ter Weaning 231 THE Contents OF THE SECOND PART. Of Diseases and Symptoms of Children. CHap. 1. Of Infants Dis∣eases in General 232 Chap. 2. Of Feavers in
Children, Meazles, and small Pox Page 233 Chap. 3. Of the Milkey Scab, Achores, and Favi 235 Chap. 4. Of a scald Head 236 Chap. 5. Of Ptiriasis, or breed∣ing of Lice 239 Chap. 6. Of Hydrocephalus, or swelling of the Head 340 Chap. 7. Of Siriasis 241 Chap. 8. Of Frights in the sleep 242 Chap. 9. Of great Watching 243 Chap. 10. Of Epilepsie and Con∣vulsion 244 Chap. 11. Of Strabismus, or Squint-eyes 246 Chap. 12. Of pain in the Ears, Inflammation, Moisture, Ulcers, and Worms ibid. Chap. 13. Of the Thrush, Blad∣ders in the Gums, and Inflam∣mation of the Tonsils 247
Chap. 14. Of Breeding of Teeth Page 248 Chap. 15. Of Loosing of the Tongue, and of the Frog 249 Chap. 16. Of Catarrh, Cough, and difficult Breathing 250 Chap. 17. Of the Hicket 251 Chap. 18. Of Vomiting 252 Chap. 19. Of the Torments o pains of the Belly 253 Chap. 20. Of puffing up of the Belly and Hypochondria 255 Chap. 21. Of the Flux of the Belly ibid. Chap. 22. Of binding of the Belly 257 Chap. 23. Of the Worms 258 Chap. 24. Of the Rupture 261 Chap. 25. Of sticking out of the Navel 262 Chap. 26. Of Inflammation of the Navel 263 Chap. 27. Of Falling out of the Fundament ibid.
Chap. 28. Of the Sto in the Bladder Page 264 Chap. 29. Of Difficulty and stop∣page of Urin 265 Chap. 30. Of not holding the Urin 266 Chap. 31. Of chaing in the Hips, called Intertrigo 267 Chap. 32. Of Leanness and Fas∣cination ibid.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF PRACTICAL PHYSICK. Of Womens Diseases. THE FIRST PART. Of Diseases in the Pri∣vities of Women. THE FIRST SECTION. Of Diseases of the Privie Part, and the Neck of the Womb. Chap. 1. Of the straitness and largeness of the Orifice. THERE are three Diseases in this Part. The straitness, and the large∣ness, and the Yard of a woman. The straitness is, when the cleft is so narrow, that it wil not admit of
a man Yard, or with much difficulty, it hinders childbearing; and if it be from the first confor∣mation, it is hard to be cured by Physick, but i is enlarged, either by copulation, or by bringng forth of children. Somtimes it is from an lcer, or from astringent Medicines given unadvised∣ly, that they may appear to be Virgins, when they are not. Somtimes the cleft is shut up outwardly, and there is only passage for the urin and the terms; these women are called Atrete, that is shut up not bored, of which Chap. 3. Somtimes it is so close, that neither terms nor urine can com orth. The contrary to this, is largeness of the clet, or when there are more holes then Nature hath usually, by often copulation or childbearing. This laxity or largeness causeth barrenness and falling out of the womb, as Hippocraes shws in the Nature of Women. And this makes women unpleasant to men. This is cured by purging after childbearing, by Fomentations, Baths, Liniments of Allum wa∣ter, and the Decoction of astringent Plants. Take Comrey roots, Bole, Sanguis Draconis Pomegranate flowers, Allum, Mastich, Galls, each half a dram; make a Pouder, and with steeled Wa∣er make a Mixture, dip a Pessary therein. Or, Tak Oken leaves, Plantane, each half a handul; Com∣ry roots an ounce, omgranate pels and flowers, Sumach, each half an ounce; Allum an ounce, boy them in water, and oment the priviies. Somtimes in hard trvel, the space between the fundament and the pivie clet, ar brokn
into one hole. Ero shews the Cure o i. Som pu a long piee of Allm into the let. When ther are divers passages in a womans privties, it i from the first conformation, when by Natur error the passage from the straight gt goes to the womb. Chap. 2. Of the Mentula, or Yard in a Woman. THe Ale or wings in the privities of a w∣man are of soft spungy lesh, like a Cocks comb in shape and colour; the part at th top is hard and nervous, and swells like a Yrd in Venery, with much Spiit. This pat some∣times is big as a mans Yard, and such wome were thought to be turned into men. It is from too much nourishment of the part,The  from he loosness of it by oten handling. It is not safe to cut it off presently, but fist useThe  dryers and discussers, with things that a little a∣stringe, then gentle Causticks without causig pain, as burnt Allum, Aegyptiacum. Take Aegyptiacum, Oyl of Mastich, RosesWx, eah half an ounce. If these will not do, the t it off, or tie it with a ligature of Silk or Horse∣hair, till it mortisie. Aetius teacheth the way of amputation, he cls 10. it the Nympha or Citoris, between both the wings, but take heed you cause not pain r i∣lammation. After cutting, wah with Win, with Mrtles, Bays, Roses, Pomgranate flows oyled in it, and Cypress-nus and lay on an  Poder.
Some excrescences grow like a tail, and fill the privities: they differ from a Clitoris, for the de∣sire of Venery is increased in that, and the rub∣bing of the cloaths upon it cause lust, but in an excrescence of flesh, they cannot for pain endu copulation, but you may cut off this better then a Clitoris, because it is all superfluous. Chap. 3. Of Atretae or Clo∣sures, and straitness of the neck and mouth of the Womb. THey are threeold: it is either in the oriice, or the neck, or in the middle, it is alwaies huttful, either to copulation or the terms, or to conception and childbearing. I saw one that had the first: the oriice was very little, onely fit to purge the terms, and re∣ceive seed, she conceived, and the Midwives dis∣covered in time of childbearing, and the Chi∣rurgion opened it, and she was happily delive∣red, but how the seed was spent into it, is not to be understood. Lib de abd sana. & morb. cau. cp 78. Flesh or a membrane is from evil conformati∣on, or a wound, or ulcer, of which Benivenius,  and Hildanu. The let also may be closed by a wound o ulcer, as in a woman who with the French ox had all eaten off, and it grew together after, on∣ly there was a little passae for urin. This is, either when the sides grow togeth fm a ucer, or hen proud leh ops it u
hich is somtimes in the French pox. When it is in the privities, it is to be seen, butThe Signs hen in the neck or oriice of the womb, it is not nown, but when the terms are to low, or when hey copulate; and it is either broken by the orce of blood, or there is pain; and being vir∣ins, they are taken to be with child, for i it ast long the womb swells, and the whole body is lewish. These either hinder the term from the neck f the womb, or from the veins of it. If inlam∣ation or ulcer was before, this disease may be uspected to be; if there the closing be by the membrane the place is white, if by leh, it is red, nd it is known by the touch, for the membrane s arder then flesh. The inconveniences are great either in copu∣lation,The Pro∣gnostick. conception or child bearing especially, for the child cannot get forth without hazard of it self or mother. It is easier cured when it is from a membrane only, because it is easily cut or broken, that in he orifice of the womb is not to be cured, be∣cause the instruments cannot reach it. Take away that which stops the passage, aThe Cure. membrane that is outward is easily cut, but i it be in the neck of the womb or be flesh, it is hard, for if the cut be large there is pain and beding, and the wound is hard to be cured, because the nek of the bladder is easily hurt thereby. teacheth this operation in his Obser∣vations. And Hippocrates in his Book of Sterility shws how a membrane may be taken away with∣out cutting. I eh grow frm an ulr atr purging, use ders and discussers, to dimii it: ith Frnkincense,
Birthwort, Roses, Pomegranate flow∣es,  Myr, Aloes, &c. as in Chap. 2. Som think this disease may come from dri∣ss, but it is incredible. I it come stom a hard tun or, soften and dissolve it with Butter, Oyl of swee Almonds, Lillies, &c. Chap. 4. Of Pustles and Rough∣ness of the Privities. ROughnss and Itching come from Pustles in the nck of the womb and privities ith scurff and swellings which ich and pain. The Causes They are rom an adust humor malinant and sharp, which abounding evacuate themselves by thse looe and moist parts, and there stiking, exasperate the flesh, this is in the French pox. The Sign. They care it themselves. The P∣gnostick. It is stubborn, long, and inetious to men, and hard to be cured. The Cure. I the adust sharp humors come from the whol body, prepare with Borae, Fumitory, Succory, Endive and the lik, then evacuate tm wih Senna Epithymum, syrp of Apples, Viol, Roses, Catholicon, Consectio hmeh, ils of Fumitory, Tartar. Lt lood i there be ulness, first in the Arm, then in the Ankle, but if it be from the Frenh pox, first ue Guajacum and Sa and the like. Foment the at often with a hot decction o  Fiory, Hps Plliy, o ue this Oyntmnt. Take  and Rose  ch  nce; Sl gem, Nr, Allum, ach thr drms; Subi a  nd half, boy tm
o the third part, strain them, and add Verdigrease a ruple: then use gentler means two daies after till the Pustles fall off and new flesh appear, and then use the Oyntment again. Let the diet be to resist evil humors, of good uy, avoid salt sharp and our things. Chap. 5. Of Condyloma in the neck of the Womb. COndyloma is a tubercle or excrescens with heat and pain, for these parts are wrinkled, and when the wrinkles swell there is a Condy∣loma, somtimes it is without inflammation and st, or with inflammation and hard. It is usu∣al n the privities and fundament of such as have the French pox. They are from a sharp malignant humor,The Causes which is alwaies in the Pox, and somtimes they follow hard clefts or chaps. They are pain and burning, the skin is wrink∣led,The Signs. and when they are many, they are like a bunch of Grapes They are hard to be cured, if they are fromThe Pr∣gnostick. te Pox first cure that, and then they often va∣nish of themselves. Ater general evacuations proper against theThe Cure. Pox, use Topicks, first see if there be inflamma∣tion, and then abate pain As, Take oyl of Line∣seed and Ross, ach an ounce; oyl of Eggs half an ounce, mix hem in a Leaden mortar. Or, Take Plltor, Mallows, Althaea, each half a hand∣ful; Chamomil flowers two pugils, Lineseed and ae∣ugreek, each half an ounce, boyl them, to a pn dd oyl of Ross three unces, inect it wth a Sy∣ing.
If there be no inflammation, use driers and re∣pellers, as Vervain, Ivy, Acacia, Pomegranate peels and slowers, for Baths and Fomentations, and after add Discussers, as Chamomile and Thyme. If it be old and hard, first soften it with the same, and after thrice using them, se digesters and driers that are strong as a pouder, Take round Birthwort a dram, Savine, Hermodacts burnt ach two drams; burnt Allum two drams, red Lead a dram, Chalcitis half a dram, sprinkle it up∣on the loose flesh. Or, Take Aloes, Frankincense, Mirrh, each a dram; Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar a dram and half, Allum two drams, rea Lead two drams, Galls half a dram, Turpentine, Oyl of Tarar, each a dram; with Oyl of Roses and Wax, make an Oynt∣ment. This is very strong. Take Turpcmine an ounc, Oyl of Nutmegs two ounces, red Lead two drams, Allum, Vitriol, each a dram; Verdigreece, half  dram, Sublimate a scruple, with Wax make an Oynt∣ment, or of Balsom of Mercury. Tetrab. 4. rm. l. 3. If Medicines will not do, the Ancients advise burning, of which see Aetius. Chap. 6. Of Warts in the neck of the Privities and Womb. THey are from a gross seculent and malgnant humor sent to the skin, and turned to a node. The Signs. They are known by their shape: the ma∣lignant are known by their hardness, and heat, and blewness, filh and pain. The Pro∣gnsck. They are often hard to be cured, because the
pox is with them, and they are in a place to which Medicines are hard to be applied, and to continue. The Myrmeciae are not cut off, but they leave a great ulcer, the Thymi and Clavi grow again. Acrochordones once cut, leave no root. After Universals, and order of diet, either useThe Cure. Medicines, or cut or burn them to discuss, then use Sage dried with Figs, Organ, Rue burnt, dry Savin, Frankincense, with Wine and Vinegar, orTo be a skilful Physitian study my Snnertus, Platerus, Riverius, Bartholi∣nus, and Riolanus, of the last Editions. Snakes skins with Figs: these also dry. These corrode, eat and burn, as juyce of wild Cowcumbers, with Salt, Milk of Figgs, Sheeps dung, Goats gall, with Niter, Aqua fortis, Spirit of Vitriol, Sulphur, Butter of Antimony. Take heed that you hurt not the parts adjacent, but defend them with Bole, sealed Earth, Rosewater and Vinegar: if you put the Corrosives into Nut∣shells, change them twice or thrice in a day, and wash the part with a clensing Decoction, and then cut or burn. Chap. 7. Of the Haemorrhoids of the Womb. THe veins that end in the neck of the womb, often swel, like the Haemorrhoids: it is from gross blood that comes to these veins out of the time of the terms. Inordinate flux of terms may occasion it, whenThe Causes ty slow out of the usual time, they grow thick, and cannot get out of the veins, but swel them. They are to be touched, and with a SpeculumThe Signs. matricis to be seen. There is pain and bleeding without order: she is pale and lazy.
The Cure. Correct the blood, purge, and bleed in the arm to derive and revel, of which in the diseases of the womb. If pain be, abate it by sitting in a Decoction of Mallows, Althaea, Chamomil, Mlilot flowers, Moulin, Lineseed, Foenugreek; of which also make Fomentations and Oyntments, with But∣ter, Populeon, and Opium if there be pain. Take Populeon, Oyl of Roses, and sweet Almonds, fresh Butter, each half an ounce; Saffron a sple, with the yolk of an Egg, make an Oyntment. Or, Take Muilage of Quinces, Althaea, eah half an ounce; Oyl of Roses, and Hens grese, each a dram; the yolk of an Eg, and Saffron half a dram, mix them in a leaden Mortar. If pain be gone or abated, and they bleed not, use Dryers of Bole, Earth of Lemnos, Acacia, Ceruss, froath of Silver, Lead burnt and washed, long Birthwort, Allum, Verdigreece. If they swell with blood, evaporate it, or o∣ment with the Decoction of Mallows, Althaea, Pellitory, Chamomil flowers, Moulin Melilot, seeds of Line and Foenugrek. If they do not good, open them by Fig leaves rub'd upon them, or by Horsleeches, of which Chap. 2. If there be proud flesh, take it ot, as is shew∣ed. If they bleed gently, lt Nature alone to the work, for it is good, and rees from other disea∣ses. If the flux be geat, and abate the strength, open a vein in the arm divers times, and do as in over slowing of the terms.
Question. How do the Haemorrhoids differ from the Terms flowing or stopt? Mercurialis saith, That though a flux of terms be immodrate, yet it hath its periods, and is without pain, and makes not the body lean, but it is contrary in the Haemorrhoids. But this is not true, for the body is not made lean alwaies by the Haemorrhoids, nor do the courses keep their periods alwais. Besides the pain which is almost alwaies in the Haemorrhoids, they differ in that the terms flow from the veins of the womb and its neck, but the Haemorrhoids are when the blood flows too much to the veins that nourish the privities, and there either sticks or is evacuated. Chap. 8. Of Ulcers in the Neck of the Womb. THey are seldome cured in the body of the womb, and they are simple and clean, or or∣did and malignant. Are a flux of sharp humors that lasts long inThe Causes the Pox and Gonorrhaea. Corrupt afterbirths, and courses after childearing detained, inflam∣mations turned to imposthuies these are the internal. The external are sharp Medicines, hard tra∣vail a reat child taken out by orce, violent le∣hery, wounds, falls, strokes. Are pain and constant biting that increaseth,Th Signs. cially in coulation, or when Wine or Hy∣drmel is injected. You may also see it with a
Speculum: also there is matter gentle or ilthy: if the ulcer go towards the bladder, they piss hot and often: there is pain in the roots of the eyes to the hands and fingers fainting, and a little e∣ver somtimes. Lib. 1. de morb. mu∣lierum. The external Causes are to be related by the patient. If it be from the pox or Gonorrhaea, the signs of them will appear, of which Hippocrates. The Pro∣gnostick. They are hard to be cured, because they are in a part fit to receive humors, soft and moist, and that hath consent with many parts. Hence are divers Symptoms: the great, old, and foul are worst, when they corrode, and are hollow, they are seldome cured; they that may easily have Medicines applied to them, are easiet cu∣red. The Cure. First, stop the flux of humors to the part, if it be either from the whole body, or any part. And amend the distemper of the womb, that it may neither breed nor receive bad humors. If the French pox be with it, resist that first. If there be pain, first abate that, with Milk stee∣led, or with three whites of Eggs, and Mucilage of Fleabane, or an Emulsion of Poppy seeds. Or, Take Althaea roots an ounce, Dill seed two drams, Barley a pugil, Faenugreek and Lineseed, each an ounce; Fleabane and Poppy seed, each half an ounce; boyl them in Milk. Of which in pain of the womb. In a foul ulcer, first use Clensers, as Whey, Barley water, Honey, Wormwood, Smallage, Orobus, Orris, Birthwort, Mirrh, Turpentine, Allum. As, Take new Milk boyled a pint, Ho∣ney half a pint, Orris pouder half an ounce. Use it hot often every day. When that which was injected, is voided,
wash with the decoction of Mallows, and put up this Pessary. Take Eruum and Lentils in pouder and Orris, each two drams; with Honey. Or, Take Diapompholigos, with Frankincense, Ma∣stich, Mirrh, Aloes, as the ulcer requires. Or use Fumes. As, Take Frankincense, Ma∣stich, Mirrh, Storax Calamite, Gum of Juniper, Lab∣danum, each an ounce; make a Pouder, or Troches with Turpentine. If there be suspicion of the French pox, add a little Cinnabar. In a very foul ulcer, and Ae∣gyptiacum or Apostolorum, or a little Spirit of Wine. In a creeping corroding ulcer, with clen∣ers mix cold, drying and astringent Medicines. Allum water, Plantane and Rose-water, with Pomegranate flowers boyled, and Pomegranate peels, and Cypress-nuts is also good, and with Aloes. After clensing, fill it with flesh, and heal it up. As, Take Tutty washed half an ounce, Litharge, Ceruss, Sarcocol, each two drams; with Oyl of Roses and Wax make an Oyntment. Or smoak the privities with Mirrh, Frankin∣cense, Gum or Juniper, Labdanum two drams in pouder, with Turpentine make Troches. Or use Sulphur, or Allum Baths, and Plai∣sters. Inwardly give vulnerary Potions. As, Take Agrimony, Burnet, Plantane, Knotgrass, each two pugils; China three dram, Coriander seed half a dram, Currans half an ounce, boyl them in Hen∣brath, give it wice a day: or give Turpentine and Sar r a month, or a dram of Pills of . If the body consume, give Asses milk, with  of Roses for a month.
Chap. 9. Of Clefts in the Neck of the Womb. THese are long ulcers that are inal, like those in the hands and feet in Winter, they eat o the skin, and are somtimes deep, with hard lips, if old: somtimes they are dry, or somtimes bleed. The Cases They come from hard travel, when some pats in the neck of the womb are broken by a great child, or violent copulation, or flux of sharp hu∣mors that stick in the parts, and corrode. The Signs. If it be new, it is hidden somtimes and known in copulation, by pain and bleeding. The Pro∣gnostick. The new are easier cured, then when they are old and callous. The Cure. If they come from hard travel, make a Cly∣ster of the Decoction of Roses, Plantane, Birth∣wort, Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, or with the white of an Egg, a Pessary. If from sharp humors: after universal Eva∣cuations, use Topicks that bind without biting, (if the clefts be not callous) as Oyl of Linseed and Roses, with the yolk of an Egg, and jyce of Plantane mixed in a leaden Mortar. Or, Vng. stpol onij apud Gl. Take Oyl of Roses eight ounces, stir it in a leaden Mortar, till it is black and thick, then put in the pouders of Litharge of Silver and Cruss. If they are callous, make an Oyntment of oyl of Lillies, Marrow of a Deer, Turpentine and Wax: if they are malignant, cure them as ∣stula'es, of which in the Capter following. If there be itch or pain. Take Diapompoli∣g, Ppulon, ah an ounce; Sugr of Lead, amphire,
each a scruple; make an Oyntment. Let the diet be moist, of good juyce, Chic∣kens, Veal, Kid, rear Eggs, Mallows, Bugloss, Borage: abstain from sharp and salt meats. Chap. 10. Of Fistulae's in the Neck of the Womb. MAny times there are ulcers in these parts, because they are soft, and easily corroded, and re hard to be cured. Some of them are rait, others crooked; some  others hollow. If matter stay there, it corrodes and makesThe Causes burroughs, and divides the parts, and makes a Callus, and when the matter is voided, the parts divided cannot unite. It is known by the igure of the ulcer, there isThe Signs. a callous lip, and thin evil matter, when it is pres∣sed, flows out: there is no pain, except it reach a sensible part. Somtimes it reacheth the blad∣der, and then the urin comes forth at the fistula: somtimes the fundament, and then the dung ap∣pears in the Fistula. A new Fistula is easier cured then an old and aThe Pro∣gnostik. strait then a crooked: it is scarce to be cured in a cacochymical old body, and when it pierceth into the parts adjacent. First use Universals, and good diet, then seeThe Cure. if it may be cured by Medicines, or better left to Nature to evacuate excements thereby. I the last is best, use a palliative Cure, by often purging and sweating twice in a year, and inje∣ctions an strengtheners, and lay on a Plaier of .
If you hope for a Cure, after Universals, giv drying vulnerary Drinks, of male Fern roots, Centaury, Agrimony, Bettony, Ladies-mantle, &c. Then use Topicks; fist dilate the orisice (i it be strait) with a Spunge or Gentian oots, the consume the Callus, but first make it soft wi Oyl of Lillies, Deer's Marrow, Tupentine and Wax. Three things consume a Callus: Medicines, cutting and burning, there in a new strait Fistula, use Gentian, black Hllebore, Aegyptiacum, o Vigo's Pouder with a Pencil. Or, Take Subli∣mate half a scruple, Rose or Plantane water six oun∣ces, set it upon embers. If it be towards the womb, take heed of strong Medicines. If it be callous and oul, burn it either by a Caustick or hot iron. These are good in the ou∣ward part of the neck: then clense and heal. Chap. 11. Of a Cancer in the Womb. IT is seldom seen, and never cured: but here I shall speak of that in the neck of the womb, which is ulcerated, or not ulcerated. It is from terms burnt, and hot burnt humorsThe Causes that are black, that flow thither; it is after long irrhous tumors, that have been immoderately softned. It is first not ulcerated, and when the humors are more corrupt, it is ulcerated. The Signs. They are hard to be known at first, because it is a tumor without pain, and after there is a pric∣king in it, and a pain in the groyns, loyns, and bottom of the belly. The tumor is hard, blew,
with blew stinking lipps When it is ulcerated, the Syms are all worse, and there is a thin, blak, sinking mattr. Somtimes much blood tat is dangerous, a genle eaver, loathing, tuble of mind, th cheek are red, from the va∣pos that fli up from the womb. It is hard to be cured, because mild MedicineThe Pro∣gnostick. are no el, and strong exsprate; and the part maks it more hard, because it is neglected at the rt, and increath. the hysitian p eent ulceration; or if itThe Cue. b o hid the incrs of it, lt diet be against mlnhol: ppare and purge melncholy. Tis Pouder for many dies given is excel∣lt. Take Smrgd Sapirs, and Est zar∣stone, ech a dram; give every day three or four grains with Sabious or Carduus water. Let the Topicks not be biting at irst. But fo∣ent with Jaye of Plantane, Nightshade, Pur∣sne, or use Diapompholigos. Or, Tak jyc f Plantane, Nightshae, Purslan, eh two ounces; Muilage of Fleabane an une, Ol of Ros three ounces ti them in  leaden Morr. Or, Take Ol of Rss, of Eggs, ach anounce and half; Su∣gr of Lead a dam, tir them in a leaden Mortar, then add Litharge, Cerss, each three drams; Tutty a dram, Camphire a sruple. Or, Take jyce of Nightshde six ounces, Tutty and burnt Lead ech two drams; aphire half a dram, ir th long in a leadn Mortar, and add pouder of raysh. Injt a Decction of Crayfish: and i pin be grea,  with Mallos, Althaea, Watelil∣ies, Coinder, Dill, leabane eed, with Sas∣roa in Milk; or make a Cataplse of the ame.
Some use Antimony, Arsenick, &c. which are good in other parts. But this cannot bear them. A Noble woman had on the right side of her face an ulcerated cancer and when al the French, Italian, German, Spanish Phystians could no cure her, a Barber cured her only with Chikens sliced thin, and laid on often every day. Chap. 12. Of a Gangrene and Sphacel in the Womb. SOmetimes the whole womb is gangrenated, and it is from the privities that receive ma∣ny excrements apt to corrupt. he Causes It is from an inflammation and ulcer not well cured, because the part hath many excrements, which easily quench the natural heat, and then the part mortifies. The Signs. There is an usual heat in the neck of the womb, and a feaver with horror all over the bo∣dy, then the colour changeth in the part, it is black and blew, without pulse or sense: when i is cut or pricked, it stinks, and the strength de∣cayes, and the heart faints. The Pro∣gostick Aetius leth 1. c. 72. Nicol. Flo∣rent. ser. 6. tr. math. de grad. in 9. hsis c. de ei matri. It is very dangerous, and worse when it goes to the womb then outwards. Some have had the womb fall out, and have lived, which besides grave Histories. We saw at Avinion in an old Noble woman. Anno 1635. Stop the pureaction, take away that which is rotten, by sarifying if you can, then wash with the Dection of Wormwood. Lupins, and with Aegyptiacum, and apply this Cataplasm. Take Obus and Beanflower, ach two unes; Oym
a pint, boyl them, add Lupine, Wormwood,Aloes The Cure. and Mirrh. Cut off the dead flesh, strengthen the principal parts, the heart, lest the Spirits be infected with evil vapors that ie up by the arteries. Give Conserve of Borage, Bugloss, Gilliflo∣wers, Diamargariton rigid Electuary of Gems frigid, Confection of Hyacinths Syrup of Sor∣rel, omegranates, Borage; and appl Epithems to the heart, Vuierus cured a Noble woman aged twenty five, she had a pustle in her privities in the Dog-daies, from violent Lechery with her Hus∣band, and she used a Cataplasm from a sill Chi¦rurgion,In obserua∣tio. and in a few daies it rotted, grew black, and mortified, and went towards the fundament very fast.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Diseases of the Womb. Chap. 1. Of the Knowledg of the Temper of the Womb. Lib. uterus muliebris. MARK Anthony Vlmus Phy∣sitian of Bononia, shews the temper of the womb: he saith that a beard in women shews that they have a hot womb, and hot stones: it comes with the beginning of the terms, and when the breasts swell, and is hard to be seen. Aristotle saith, That some women have hairs inLib. 3. de lust. ani. c. 11. their chin, when their courses stop, and when they have a hot womb and stones. But there are more certain signs of heat.
1. When hard hair comes orth suddenly, thick, black, and long, and large about; if they come forth slow, thin, soft, yellowish, and but few not spreading the womb is cold. Also when the ters come forth at twelve years of age, it is a ign of a hot womb, and when they last long, the blood is red, hot, but not ve∣ry much. In an old constitution they come la∣ter, and the blood is cold and waterish, and they end sooner. If it be hot and moist, they flow plentifully, and last till after fifty. If it be hot and dry, the blood is yellow, thin and sharp, and pricks the privities. If it be cold and moist, the blood comes late forth, with difficulty, and it is whitish and thin. If it be cold and dry, the terms come forth very late, and with difficulty, and seldom continue till forty, and the blood is thick and little. The third sign is from Lechery, for they who have hot wombs desire copulation ooner and more vehemently, and are much delighted thr∣with. They who are cold, do the contrary. The hot and moist are not tired with much Venery. The hot and dry have great lust, and a Frenzie if they want it; but they are quickly ired, because there are but few Spirits. If it be cold and moist, they are not soon lecherous, and are asily satis∣fied; and if they miscarry often, the womb is made colder, and they delight not in the sport: but copulation doth them good, and makes them more youthful. If it be cold and dry, they desire not a man in a long time, and take no delight, because the Spirits are few. The fourth sign is from often conception, for the hot conceive often, and bring forth males or Viragoe's, if the seed of the man agree with it.
The cold doth the contrary. A hot and moist womb is very fruitful, if the man be wel tempered, and though he be old and weak, yet she will conceive by him: sometimes they have twins, or over do, and have a mole. Hot and dry are fruitful, but not so much as the former. Cold and moist, are hard to conceive, especi∣ally when they are in years; when they are yong, and the seed of the man is hot and dry, they con∣ceive males, but seldom wel shaped or healthful, and the woman while she is with child, is sickly. A cold and dry womb is commonly barren, and if they conceive, the mans seed is hot and moist, they bring forth emales; and if males, they are tall, and quickly look old. Chap. 2. Of the hot Distem∣per of the Womb. HEat of the womb is necessary for concepti∣on: but if it be too much, it nourisheth not the seed of the man, but disperseth its heat, and hinders the conception The Causes This preternatural heat is from the birth som∣times, and makes them barren; if afterwards, it is from hot causes, that bring the heat and the blood to the womb: from internal and external Medicines, too much hot meats, and drinks, and exercise. The Signs. They are prone to lut, have few courses, yel∣low, or black, or burnt, or sharp, they have hairs betimes upon their privities; they are subject to the headach, and there are signs of much cho∣ler, their lips are dry.
When this distemper is strong, they have fewThe Pr¦gnostick. terms, and out of order; they are ad and hard to flow, and in time they are Hpondriaks, and for the most part barren; and here is som∣times a Frenzie of the womb. Use Coolers: so that they offend not the ves∣sels,The Cure. that must be open for the flux of the terms. Therefore, Use inwardly Succory, Endive, Violets, Wa∣terlillies, Sorrel, Lettice, Sanders, and Syrups, and Conserves made thereof. As, Take Conserve of Succory, Violets, Waterlillies, Borage, each an ounce; Conserve of Roses half an ounce, Diamargariton frigid, Diatrionsantalon, each half a dram; with Syrup of Violes or juyce of Ci∣trons, make an Electuary. Outwardly use Oyntment of Galens Cooler, Oyntment of Roses Cerot of Sanders, Oyl of Roses, Violets, Waterlillies, Gourds, Venus na∣vel to the back and loyns; or make Cataplass of Barley meal, Roses poudered, Violets, Water∣lillies, Sanders, with juyce or water of Plantane, Waterlillies, Succory Lettice, Oyl of Roses, Vio∣lets, Waterlillies. Baths are good to sit in, and cooling omen∣tations, and after let her take some of the Coo∣lers mentioned. In great heat, use this cooling Pessary. Take Opium a sruple, Goose grease two scruples,Eros. de pss. mulie. c. 7. Wax and Honey, each four scruples; Oyl an ounce, whites of two Eggs. This was from an opinion the Ancients had, that Opium was cold, but take heed of the using it too much, least the narcotik quality hurt. Let the air be cool, her garments thin: let her meat be with Lettice, Endive, Succory, Barley:
give no hot meas nor strong Wine, except it be watish and thi; rest is good both in body and mind: she mst not coulate, but she may sleep much. Chap. 3. Of the cold Distem∣per of the Womb. THis causeth many evils, and barrenness. They are contrary to those of a hot di∣stemper;The Causes cold air, rest and idleness and cooling Medicines The Signs. It is known by their not desire of lehery, no receiving pleasure in the time of copulaion, when they spend their eed. The ters are fle∣matick, thik and im, and flow not righly there is wind in the womb the seed is crude, wa∣terish with a Gonorhaea. The Pro∣gnosick. It is the cause of obstructions and barrenness, and is hard to be cured. The Cure. Use things proper to heal the womb, as this Wte. Tke Galanga, Cinamon Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves each tw  Gingr, Cubeb, Zedoa∣ry, ardamos, ech n ounce; grains of Paradise, long Ppper, each half an ounce; beat them, and put them i six qurt of ine for eiht daies, then add Sae, Mins, Balm, Motherwrt, eac three handfls; lt them stand ight daies more, then pour ff the ine, and bet the herbs and the Spies, and thn pour on the Wine and distil them. Another. Take Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Clvs, Mace, Ginger Cubeb, Cardamoms grains of P∣radise, ach an oune and hal: Galnal six drams, long epper haf an oune, Zedoary five drams,
bruise them, and add six quarts of Wine, put them in a Cellar nine dais, daily stirring them; then add Mints two hnduls, then let them stand fourteen daies, pour off the Wine, and bruis them, and then pour on the Wine again and distil them. Quercean hath an Hsterick Exract, a reaterIn phar. doc. restit. cap. 25. and a less; use outwardly Fomentations, Baths Baggs, of hot Roots, as Birthwort, Lovage Va∣leian, Angelica, Burnet, Msterwort, Calamus, Mdder, Elicampane, Oris, and Herbs, as Mug∣wort, Balm, Motherwort, Savin, Pennyroyal, Calamints, Organ, Dittany, Majoram, Rue, Bettony, Rosemary, Lvender, Sage, Stoechas∣lowers, Seeds of Smallage. Parsley, Rue Car∣rots, Anise, Fennel, Cummin, Lovage Parsley. Anoint with Oyl o Lillie Rue Agelica, Bays, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mce, Nutmeg. Or, Take Labdam tw ounces, Frankincese Mastich, iquid Storax, ach half an oun; Oyl of Cloves, Numegs, each hal a scruple; Ol of Lillies, Rue, ach an ounce; with Wax make a Plaister. A Fme. Take Frnkincense, Mirrh, Mastich, ach a dram; Bayberries a dram and half, Labda∣um two drams Srax, Cloves eac a dram; Gum Arbick and Wine make Troches, or Pessaries of he same. Let the diet be warming, and the air, the meat f easie concotion, seasoned with Anise, Fen∣el, Thyme. Avoid Milk-meats, and raw fruits. Chap. 4. Of the moist Distem∣per of the Womb. THis is ommoly joned with a cod distem∣per, ad causeth brrenness, ad  the
same causes, as a cold distemper: for common∣ly cold things do moisten. It is commonly in women hat are idle. The Signs They that have moist wombs, abound in cour∣ses, but they are waterish and thin, the privities are wet, they have the Whites, and desire not co∣pulation much, and delight not in it, they retin not the seed; and if they conceive when the child is big, they aborte or miscarry. The Pro∣gnostick. If it last long, it is hard to be cured: if it be much, they conceive not. The Cure. It is by Dryers, and things that cure the cold distemper are good again the moist: because all Healers have a drying power. Use sulphur Baths and in Injections: beware of astingents, least the evil humors be stop, and the disease i∣creased. Chap. 5. Of the dry Distem∣per of the Womb. IN this the womb is hardened, of it self it is fleshy and soft, and moistned by blood fo conception. The Causes It is somtimes from the birth, or old age, when they are past childbearing: if it be from dring causes, they are barren before they are old. Diseases and Medicines dry the womb, as in∣flammations, feavers, and when blood flows no to it, nor goes to the bottom of it, by reason  the straitness of the veins, or obstructions, as i Viragoe's, and such as never conceived: and i they void any blood, it is fom the neck of th womb, and not from the bottom. The Signs. They void little eed, and are low in Venery
the terms are few the mouth of the womb is dry, and they are slender of a dry constitution, their lower lip is alwaies chapt, and blackish red. This disemper is hard to be cured in any part,The Pro∣gnosick. especially if it be old. Use moistners as Borage, Bugloss, Mercury,The Cure. Mallows, Althaea, Violets, sweet Almonds, Pi∣stchaes, Pine nuts, Jujubes, Dates, Figs, Rai∣sons. Of which are made Syrups, Conserves, Emul∣sions, Candies &c. Outward Remedies are made of the same, ad∣ding Time, Faenugreek seeds, Lillies, Branck∣urlin, Pellitory, &c. Fomentations are made with Milk, and after bathing anoynt the region of the womb and the belly to the privities with oyl of sweet Almonds, Lillis, Lineseed, Jesamin, fresh Butter, Hens and Goose grease. Let the Diet be moistning, the Air moist, the Met fatning, of much nourishment and small excement, let sleep be a little longer then usual; great labour, anger, sadness, fasting, do hurt. Chap. 6. Of compound distem∣pers, and first of cold and moist. THere is seldom a simple distemper in the prt, and commonly there is matter which eeds it it is usually cold and moist, which ga∣hes excements of that sort, either in the whol dy, or in the womb after the terms.
The Causes Are all things that breed cold and flegmatick humors in the whole body or the womb. The Signs. They conceive not, and are of an ill habit of body, the terms seldom flow right, and they have somtimes the whites. The Pro∣gnostick. It is harder to cue then a simple distemper. The Cure. The cold humor is in fault, therefore prepare it with syrup of Mugwort, Mints, Bettony, Hy∣sop, with a decoction proper. As, Take Fennel roots an ounce, Valerian, Eli∣campane, Masterwort, each half an ounce; Penny∣royal, Mugwort, Motherwort, Nep, Marjoram, each a handful; Rosemary and Sage flowers, each two pugils; Siler Montane, Fennel Aniseed, Pars∣nep seed, each a dram; boyl them: to ten ounces strained, add Sugar, syrup of Mugwort two or three ounces, Cinnamon water half an ounce, make a poti∣on for three doses. Then purge it with Agarick, Mechoacan, Turbith, and if other humots be mixed with flegm, add Senna and the like, or use Pills de tribus Aloephanginae, Mastich, of Hiera with A∣garick, Sine quibus. Or, Take Agarick a dram and half, Senna two drams, infuse them in Mug∣wort water, to three ounces strained, add Diaphae∣nicon or Diacarthaemum tw drams, strain and add syrup of Mugwort half an ounce, Cinnamon water half a dram. After universal evacuations, use Pessaries. As, Take Mercury, bruise it and put it in a bag of white Silk, anoynt it with Butter or Honey of Ro∣ses. Or, Take Benedicta laxativa three drams, Aga∣rick two drams, Gih seed a dram, Pease meal six drams, with juyce of Mercury make Pessaries in a Sarsnet Bag. Or, Take Hiera a dram, Agarick
alf a dram, dellium a dram, with Honey make a Pessary, or make it with pouder of Agarick and Troches of Coloquintida, or give sweats of Cuaja∣um, China and Sarsa, As, Take Guajacum a pound and eighteen ounces, in∣ae them in twelve pints of water twenty four hours, hen boyl them to the consumption of the third part, ive six or eight ounces ot in the morning, and le er sweat. Pour water to the reliques and boyl them to he consumption of the third part for an ordina∣y drink. You may use China and Sarsa the same way, nd because in a decoction some strength is lost, nd so great a quantity is tedious for womn, ou may distill them and give a less quantity ith things proper for the womb. As, Take Guajacum a pound, or Sarsa eight unces, Angelica, Elicampane, each an ounce; ugwort two handfuls, Ditany half a handful, ad x pints of water or wine, steep them two daies, then istill them, and give two ounces of the water. Let her meat be roasted birds, hens, capons, artridges, mutton, sweet Almonds, Raisons, t her abstain from alt and sharp things. If these sweats are unpleasant, give them in e third and fourth Chapter internal and exter∣al. As, Take conserve of Marjoram, Rosemary, ettony, each two ounces; of Balm an ounce, Dia∣oschu dulcis, Diamrgarion calid, each a dram; ndied Eryngus and Citrons, each half an ounce; ith srup of Mugwort make an Elctuary, and use aths to  in mentioned. Drying Spaw-waters are good to drink, or to  in. Let the diet be as in Chap. 3. and 4. give the
flesh of wild Mountain owl, Pigeons, Hens, Ca∣pons, Mutton, roasted and spiced and old wine, and let her exercise. Of the hot and dry distemper of the womb with Choler. Do as in Chap. 5. purge the Choler, whethe it be from the whole body, or from the Liver, with syrup of Roses, Manna, Tamarinds, Rhu∣barb, Senna, &c. Chap. 7. Of the ill shape of the womb, and first of the straitness of it and its vessels. THis is a disease of evil conformation from nature, when it can be stretched out no further, this makes an abortion in the fourth or fifth month. But it is wonderful in its natural shape when it wil stretch according to the proportion of the child, and after childbearing be as small as a first. Of straitness of the vessels of the Womb. This is usual, and hinders the flux of the terms and conception, it is in the vessels of the womb, and of the neck thereof. The Causes Are thick tough humors that stop the mouth of the veins and arteries, these are bred of gro or much nourishment, when the heat of th womb is so weak that it cannot attenuate the hu∣mors, these either low from the whole body o are gathered in the womb. Somtimes vessels are closed by inflammatio
or Sirrhus, o other tumor. 3. They are stopt by astringen Medicines. 4. By compression. 5. From a Scar or flesh, or a membrane that gows after a wound. Stoppage of the terms shews straitness whichThe Signs. hiders conception: and this stoppage is known by crudities abounding in the body, which are known by their signs. Sometimes thick flegm comes from the womb, if there was a wound be∣fore, or the Secundine was pulled out by force. Stoppage of terms from an old obstruction byThe Pro∣gnostick. humors, is hard to be cured; if it be from dis∣orderly use of astringents, it is more curable: if it be from a Scirrhus or other tumor that com∣presseth or closeth the vessels, that cannot be cu∣red, the disease is incurable. Obstructions are taken away by the meansThe Cure. mentioned in the cold and moist Distemper of the Womb: lem must be purged and she must be let blood, as in stoppage of the terms. After Universals; come to the obstruction with Medicines that move the terms: these take away the cause, as in the Chapter of the cold di∣stemper of the Womb. Or, Take Asparagus roots, Parsley roots, each an ounce; Madder roots half an ounce, red Pease half a handful, Pennyroyal, Calamints, each a handful; Wall-flowers, Dill flowers, each two pugils; boyl, strain and add syrup of Mugwort an ounce and half. Or, Take Birthwort and white Dittany roots, ach n ounce; Cosus, Cinnamon, Galangal, each half n ounce; Rosemary, Pnnyroyal, Calamints, Bt∣ony wers, each a handful; Anise and Fennel∣e, each a dram; Saffron half a dram, with ie. O use Topiks, as, Take Mugwort, Maroram,
Calamints, Mercury, Pennyroyal, each tw handuls; Sge, Rsemary, Bays, hamomil flo∣wers, eah a handl; boyl them in water, fomen the groyns and the bottom of th belly: or let her it in a Bath up to the navel; and then anoint a∣bout the groyns, with Oyl of Rue Lillies, Dill, &c. Or use Pessaries and Fumes mentioned. If straitness be from other diseases, cure them first. Chap. 8. Of the opening of the Vessels of the Womb besides Nature. THis is when there is great bleeding. The Causes The vessels are opened preternaturally three waies, by Anastomosis, Diaeresis, and by Diapedesis, as in the lungs. Anastomosis is from much blood which the liver doth produce, and send out by the womb, as in some by the nose. For the blood being thin, hot, cholerick and sharp, opens the mouths of the vessels, and cau∣seth a flux. Diaeresis is from much blood, when there is great motion, as when there is long copulation with a strong man that hath a great tool, or a hard travel, or abortion, a all or stroke; also when sharp humors corrode, or sharp pessaries. Diapedsis is from the thinness of the vessels, and loosness, and the thinness of the blood, or from much moisture, or use of Baths. The Signs. Mch blood is a ign the vessels are open, you shall know the causes that open them thus. In Anastomosis the blood drops, and is thn, and
there are signs of much blood, or sharp and thin. If there be a Diersis, the blood flows more, and there are cloddes and there were causes that broke the vessels, as sharp Suppositories. Diapedesis is known, when the woman is of a thin and loose habit of body, the blood thin, or she hath used uch bathing. If the vessels open from much blood in a soundThe Pr¦gnostick. body, there is less danger, and it is easier cured then in a Cacohymy. In an Aasiomosis give things that thickenThe Cure. without slime, as Roses, Mirtles, Medlars, Ser∣vices, Pomegranate peels and flwers, Sanders, o∣ral, Harts horn, Cypress-nus. In Diaeresis give things that thicken with slime' as Comfrey, Plantane, Gum Traganth, whites of Eggs, Troches of Amber, Bole, Starch, Rice Quin∣ces, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocol, and Izing glass. But because there are divers causes, and these disees are not cured but by taking them away  we shall speak of them in the Chapter of immo∣derate Terms. Chap. 9. Of a double Womb, the wanting of a Womb, and e∣vil shape of the Womb, and strange things found in it. Julius Obsequens sais that one woman had two wmbs, and  saith that a Maid had her womb in two parts, as in Bitches. Clmbus saith that one wanted a womb, butLib. 15. ao. e privities were as in other women, and part f the neck of it hung out.
Worms in the Womb. Lib. de morb. mul. Hippocrates writes that worms are found in the womb. And Gynaecea writes, it is a sign tha Nature is wanton, &c. And John de Tornamira writes, that he saw a Woman that had an intol∣lerable itching in her womb from the Ascarides, he gave a Womb clyster of the Decoction of Wormwood and Hiera, and she voided many small worms, and was cured. An Addition. * Wheresoever foul humors stop in any part, it is no wonder if it breed worms, if other things agree which are required for the breeding of thm. Fat and hair found in a Womb. Cent. obser. 5. obser. 49. William Fabricius mentions that in a dead wo∣man the womb was taken out, and it weighed eighty seven pounds, and was full of divers hu∣mors; in the middle there were hairs like yel∣low wool. An Addition. * This was by Magick, or a humor lay there fit to breed this strange matter, by preternatural heat. Stones bred in the Womb. Lib. 4. de morb. m∣lier. . 11. Mercurialis doubts of stones being bred in it but thinks it is clotted blood like stones. But it cannot be denied which many worthyLib. 5. pid. Authors write. First Hippcraes wits that a Woman of sixty, after noon alwaes was paind as one in travel, after she had eaten many leeks, she had one it worse then the rest, and she arose, and found somthing rough in the orifice of her
womb, and she fainted, and another woman tst in her hand, and took out a great stone, and the woman recovered. Eius also saith, Hard stones are bred in theTetrab. 4. ser. 4. c. 98. womb smtimes, &c. Niolas Floretine and Marlus Donatus say the same. Chap. 10. Of the magnitude of the Womb increased, and first of the inflation of the Womb. INlation is a stretching of the womb with wind, it called by some a windy Mole. SeeMah. de grad. in 9. Rhasis. Mathew de gradibus: And Thadeus Dun lib. mis∣el. c. 8. This wind is from a cold matter, either thickThe Causes or thin, contained in the veins of the womb, which overcoms the weak heat of the womb; it is gatherd there by cold meats and drinks, or flows from other parts. Cold air may be the cause also, if women that lie in, expose themselves to it. This wind is contained either in the cavity of the vessels of the womb, or between the tuni∣cl. There is a swelling in the region of the womb,The Signs. somtimes reaching to the navel, loyns and Dia∣phragma; & as wind increaseth or decreaseth, it aiseth or abateth, it is different from a Dropsie, because it is never ollen so high. And least a Phyitian be deceived, and take it for a conception, observe the signs of women with child, for if one sign be wanting, you may suspect an inlation; also in inlation the tumor inreaseth and decreaseth, but in conception it
still increaseth. Moreover if you strike upon  belly, there is a noise, but not in conception. It differs from a dropsie in the womb, for the is not such heaviness, they move more easily ar the belly is not so swelled, there were causes th bred wind, and things against wind do good. It differs from a mole, for there is in that  weight and hardness in the belly, and when the move from one side to aother, they feel a wei2. de morb. mulier. that moveth which is not in this, of which Hip∣pocrates. The feet and the face swells in the ho∣low parts, the olor is bad, the terms stopt, the is short wind, &c. If he wind is without the cavity of the womb there is more pain and larger, nor is there a noiThe Prog∣nostick. because the wind is in a straighter place. It is neither a lasting nor a deadly disease, i well lok after: if it be in the cavity of theThe Cure. womb, it is eaier discussed. Give Hiera, Diaphoenicon, with a little Ca∣stor sharp Clysters that also expel wind: if it b in travel, purge not till she be delivered. Bleed not, because it is from a cold matter: i it come after childbearing, and the terms were not sufficient after, and there is fulness of blood, open the Saphena. After these, give things mentioned in Tympa∣ny, that respect the womb. As, Take Conser of Bettony, Rosmary, each an ounce and half; can∣died Eryngus, Ctron pls candied, ch half  ouc; Diyminum, Diagalangal, ah a dm; Oyl o Aniseds six dps, with Syrup of Citrons, mae an Elcary. Or, Take Conserve of Rosmary, alm, each three ouns; candied Citons and Oranges, each an ounce; Diacyminum a dram with Syrup o Citr make an Elcury.
Or give the Womans Aqua vitae, or this Take Angelica roots two ounces, Masterwort, Elicampane, Orange peels, each six drams, Calamints, Pennyroy∣al, Re, Sage, Rosmary, each a handful; Cum∣min, Fennel, Aniseed, each half an ounce; Juniper berries a handful, Zedary, alangal, Cubebs, each half an ounce; with good wine distit them, give a spoonful or two. Apply outwardly a Cataplasm o Re Mugwort.  Dill, Calamints, Nip, Pennryal,  with Oyl of Rue Cheir, Cha∣moil, ad make Bahs of the same, and baggs of Milium, Slt Chamomil wers, Melilot, Bayber∣ris, Cumn, Fennel seed, or lay on a Plaister of Bayberries Let lsters to expel wind be put into the wom. As Take Calamints, Agnus castus, Rue, each hl a handful; Aniseeds, Costus, Cinnamon, each two drams; boyl them in wine for hlf a pin. Apply a Cupping-glass with much flame to the breast, and over against the womb. Use Sulphur-baths and Spaw-waters inward and outward, for they expel wind. If it come from cold after childbearing, and she is not well purged by her terms, heat the womb, and purge, and give strong wine Let the diet be hot, cutting and attenuating,The Diet. with things that expel wind, and little at a time. Question Whether the wind is in the cavity when there is ination of the Womb? It is so by experience, though some deny it, nor is there any cause why wind should not b bred in the womb, as well as in any other part; both by reason of the excrements that come thi∣ther, and the natural heat that turns them into
wind: these also stretch the womb (though it be thick) as in dropsies and conception; also the re∣tentive and altering faculty of the womb is never idl, so that when it receives diseased and un∣ruitful eed, it suffers it not to corrupt, but turnsLib. de n. pueri. it into wind. As Hippocrates writes, When the wb is strehed by wind from the belly, women thik they hav conceived. Chap. 11. Of the Dropsie of the Womb. THey are also deceived, and think they are with child: when there is water that swel the womb; this is a Dopsie of the womb. ThisVes. lib. 6. de corp. hum. Fab. Mar. Do. de hist. me. mira. l. 4. c. 21. water is either in the cavity o between the cots of th womb, o in its vessels. salius, Mar∣cellus Donatus shew that water is in the cavity, for it doth not preently by its plenty or quality, force its passage out, because the oriice is not al∣waies open, and Nature gathers it by degrees, and is used to it. Tetra. 6. 4. ser. 4 cp. 79. Atius aies, There are somtimes bladders of water in the womb. And Christopher Vega aith, that Leonora thought that she had gone six months, and then voided sixty bladders of wa∣ter, and seven pieces of lesh, like that of the sleen in membranes. Lib. 4. ob∣ser. ent. . obr. 5. There is sometimes a Dropsie of the womb wih conception, as Schenkis and William Fa∣briius aith of his own Wie. The  Ae gathering of water from moistness mixed with the trm, and from an evil sangifiation in the liver and leen, fom hir weakness, o fom errors in diet; or from weakness of the
womb, from hard travel, or often mischances, cold air or water, or whatsoever hurts the hea of the womb. Also stoppage of the terms doth cause gather∣ing of water, for the water useth to be evacuated with them. Many take this for the only cause. Somtimes the tunicles of the womb may be di∣vided in some place, and water may be gathered between them. Hippocrates saith, The terms are ewer, andThe Signs. 1. De morb. mulier. cease before the time; the bottom of the belly swells, and the papps are sot without milk, and she thinks she is with child: by these you may know it is a Dropsie. But because Doctors and Midwives are often deceived, you must distinguish this from other swellings. When a woman is sound, and useth a sound man, the womb by degrees swells, and the child moves in its time, but often there is a Dropsi with conception before or after; therefore in a Dropsie the tumor is equal, according to the largeness of the womb and elly, and no point∣ed as in a woman with child. Secondly, i the woman be in years, and hath not conceived before, and hath a good colour, it is a sign of a Dropsie rather then conception. If the tenth month be past, and the child moves not, nor the breasts swell, but are soft, say there is a Dopsie of the womb. Thirdly, in a true con∣ception, women are btter after some months, and the Symptoms abate, but in a Dropsie they increase still. It is distinguished from a mole by the weight in the bottom of the belly. From an inflation because the belly is stetched
in that, and sounds being striken, but is sot in a Dropsie. It differs from the Dropsie of the belly, be∣cause the face is pale or wane, in that from the distemper of the liver there is thirst, but in the won bdropsie she is of a good colour, except the liver be also bad. It differs from inflammation of the womb, for that is ith a constant feaver, and the Symptoms o it, and rom other tumors which are harder, but in a Dopsie of the womb, if the belly be pre∣ed it yild. You shal know whether it be from the fault in the wob rincipally, or om some other part, thus. I te woman be of a good colour, and there were onely some diseases and causes that might hurt the womb as abortion, hard travel, stoppage of terms, or too many of them, then the womb is chiefly affected; but if there be signs of a distemer in the whole body, or in the liver or spleen, ad the colour is bad, it is by consent from other parts. You shall knw whether the water be in blad∣des or in the cavity of the womb, thus: If you find the oriice o the womb closed, and there is little pain, it is in the cavity, but if the oriice be open, and there is great pain, it is in bladders or without the cavy. The . If the humor in the womb be not corrupt, this disease is of long continuance, but may be easily cured: it is eaier cured in the cavity, then when it is in bladders, and between the unicles. A woman after conception having a Dropsie of the womb, her child dith, and she is in danger. The Cu. When it is fro stppage of terms, and new, and the stength irm, open a vein in the legs, o∣therwise bleed not.
Purge according to the humor, with respect to the womb, as in Chap. 6. of a cold Distem∣per. Then purge Water. Take Angelica and Mad∣der roots, each half n ounce; Calamints Penny∣royal, Mugwort, Lovage, ech a handful; Savin a pugil, boyl them in wine, sweeten it with Sugar Or make Broaths with the same. Take Dianisum, Diagalangal, each half a dram; Oyl of Aniseeds, Cloves, each five drops; Sugar three ounces, make Rouls. Inject into the Womb as in Dropsies. Take Asarum roots tree drams, Pennyroyal, Calamints, eah hal a handful; Savin a pugil, Mechoacan a dam, Aniseed, Cummin, each half a dram; boyl, tae six ounces strained, Oyl of Elder and Orris, each an ounce; make a Clyster. Or use Pearies. Take Agarick a dram, Coloquintida half a dram, Gni∣ium ten grains, with Honey and Wool, make a Peary. Make Fomentations and Baths of Danewort, Me cury, Elder, Pennyroyal, Organ, Chamomil∣flowers, Baberries, wild Cowcumbers, Broom, Carrot, Rue seeds. And anoint after with Oyl of Elder, Danewort, Orris, with drops of Oyl of Anglica, Anise, Caraway. Slphur Baths are good, and those of Niter, o the Plaister of Bayberries, or Snails to the bot∣tm of the belly. Vomiting and neesing break the bladders. Give Clysters at the fundament as in Dropsies. Take Mercury leaves, Danewort, Soldanella, Mugwort Motherwort, each a handful; Chamomil, Elder, Broom flowrs, each a dram; boyl and to ten ounces strained, add juyce of Beets, Mer∣cury, Danewort, ea h six drams; Boys urine an ounce and half, Hiera six drams, Honey half an ounce, make a Clyster.
Let the Diet be drying, as in Chap. 5. Chap. 12. Of a Tumor in the Womb, from blood in its Veins. THis disease makes Women think they are with child also: for blood long detained in the vins about the womb, stretcheth them outwardly, and twisteth them, and the veins in the substance of the womb are ful and stretched, and make it larger; but when the terms flow, it falleth again, except there be a Cachexy or Dropsie. This is onely from stoppage of terms, and is cured by provoking them. Chap. 13. Of Inflammation of the Womb. IF the blood that comes to the womb, get out of the vessels into its substance, and grow hot and putresie, it causeth inflammation, either all over, or in pat, before or behind, above or be∣low, on the right or left side. The Causes Blood is the immediate Cause, which is pure or mixed; therefore the inflammation is either an Erysipelas, Oedema or Scirrhus, as flegm, me∣lancholy, or blood abound. Blood is either sent to, or drawn by the womb; by heat or pain it is sent to it, when it aboundeth, or is hot or thin, and when the blood is moved by hot air, exer∣cise, passions, as anger or hot diet. The Signs. There is a tumor with heat and pain in the r∣gion of the womb, with stretching and heaviness in the privities, and if you put in your inger,
you'l feel the heat, and the more pain; there is a feaver somtimes called Lipyria, when there is cold without, and heat within. The tongue is dry and blck, with watching, doting, toing to and fro, the breasts are pufft up and pained. There is headach to the roots of the eyes, and a pain in the groyns, hips, midrif, pleura and shoulders: short wind, and like a Pleurisie, with loathing, vomitin, hickets. The belly is bound, the pulse is small, and often and weak, but at first darting and quick. And Hippocrates aith, If the womb2. De mor. mulier. be inlamed, the terms are stopt, and the neck of it is li a Spider web with many small vein, &c. I it be inflamed before, the pain is about the bes, and the urin is stopt. If behind it is in the oyns, and the belly is bound. If it be infla∣med in the bottom, the pain is towards the na∣vel. If it be from pure blood, the Symptoms are less, if from choler stronger, the thist is more, the watching greater: if from melancholy, all are worse. If it be all over the womb, it is dangerous, andThe Pro∣gnostick. few escape it. An Erysipelas in a woman with child is deadly, because there is an abortion, and the Mother dies: the worse the Symptomes, the greater is the danger. And it is safer to discuss an inflammation then to ripen it: if it turn to a Schirrus, it is lasting, and makes  Dropsie. If it be not after abortion or a flux of blood, open a vein in the Arm, or cup and scarifie theThe Cure. sholders. Bleed nt in the foot, least you draw blood more to the womb; but afterwards to de¦rive, if it be from terms stopt, you may. GalenGal 2. ad glau. c. . aith, You may divert the blood by bleeding in the arm, or cupping the breasts, and you ma derive it by pening the ankle-vein, and cupping upon t e hips.
If there be choler purge it with Syrup of Ro∣ses, Manna, Rhubarb, Diacatholicon; and use not strong movers of the terms. Use Alteers and Coolers, as Juleps and E∣mulsions, and provoke sleep, and if there be do∣tage, give Narcoticks. Ater Univrsals use Repellers and Aodynes. As, Take Housleek, Purslane, Letti, Venus-na∣vel Vine leaves, each half a handful; boyl them in wine, add Barley meal two ounces, Pomegranae fio∣wers two drams, Bole a dram, with Oyl of Roses, ake a Pultis. Or, Take Diachylon simple tw unces, jyce of Venus-navel and Plantane, each haf an ounce; Oyl of Roses an ounce, Sugar of Lead a dram, make an Oyntment in a leaden Mortar. Make Injections of the same Herbs, or of Milk and Rosewater. Or, Take Plantane, Ven-na∣el, Lettice, each a hanful; re Rses two pil, boyl, and ad Oyl of Mirtles an ounce, Ros-vinegar half an ounce make an Inction. Make Clysters of the sme Plants in a small quantity, least they oppress the wob. Tke Alhaea roots an ounce, Mllows, Violets, Lettice, each a handful; Nightshade half a hand∣ful, Violets, Roses, each a pugil; sweet Prnes ten, Lin∣seed half a dram, boyl them in Barley watr, to six ounces, ad Oyl of Roses three ounces, make a Clyser. An anodyne Fomentation. Take roots of Al∣thaea, Mallows and Vilets, each a handful; red Roses, Melilot, Camomil flowers, each a pugil; boyl them for a Fomentation. Or use a Cataplasm of white Bread and Milk. I the progress disuss. As, Take pouder of Althea roots an ounce, Chamomil and Meliot o∣wers, eh two drams; Mugwrt half an ounce, Bar∣ley and Bean flour, ach an ounce; boyl them in sharp
wine, add Hogs grease, Oyl of Chamomil and Lil∣li, ch an unce; make a Caaplasm. If the inflammation turn to matter, ripen it. As, Take poder of Altha a rots, Chamomil flo∣rs, Mlilt Lineseed, Faeugreek each an ounce; Figgs eight, boyl them, add yolk of our Eggs, and ha a scruple of Saron, make a Pultis Aer it is ripe, break it by motion of the bo∣dy, coughing, nesing, cupping, or by Pearies. As, Take iggs an unce, Rue half a handul, boyl them  ad Honey and Leaven, each half an ounce; Pigeons dung, Orris roots, each half a dram; with wool make a Pessary. Ater it is broken, the pain abates, thn clese and heal the ulcer as in Sect. 1. c. 8. of an ulcer of the womb. If it break about the bladder give an Emulsion of cold Seeds, Whey, and Syrup of Violets. Let the diet be cool, with Barley water warm Abstain from Wine; to the delination of the disease, let the belly still  kept looe. Chap. 14. Of a Scirrhus and Cancer in the Womb. AN earthy matter left after an inflammation maks a hard tumo called a Scirrhus, and smtimes it is without an inflammation It is a poper Sirrhus when there is neither sense nor pn; it is impoper when there is a little sense. It is sotimes as big as a mans head; somtimesPaus l. 23. c. 36. the whole womb is a Sinhus, smtimes onely prt of it. The immediate Cause, is a thik earth hu∣or,The Cause as ntural melanoly whn a thik humor
is gathered in the womb, there is a Scir∣rhus without inflammation aforegoing; this i usual in melancholy women, and such as are no clensed by their terms, or have the Pica or green∣sickness, and are fifty years old. Other humors somtimes breed a Scirrhus afte inflammation, when cold astringents have been used disorderly, for then the humor is fixed to the part and hardned. The same may be from hot discussers, which send forth the thin matter in an inflammation, and fasten the thick. The Signs. The tumor is to be felt, it yields not, and is without pain, the terms flow not at first, or very little, & afterwards there is a great flux of blood. If an inflamation went before, and the part is hea∣vy and burdened, it is a sign of a Scirrhus. She is unweeldy, loathful; and you may know from what humor, it is by the signs of the humors pre∣dominating in the body, and the part pained will shew you in what place it is. The Pro∣gnostick. A Scirrhus easily turns to a Cancer. And when the terms are stopt, there is a Dropsie of the womb or belly. It is easier cured in the neck then in the womb it self. The Cure. Moisten and heat the cold and dry humor, with Borage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Succory, Epi∣thymum, Polypod. Then purge with Polypo∣dy, Senna, black Hellebore, and the like. As, Take roots of Althaea, Lillis, ech two ounces; Mal∣lows, Vilt, Alhaea, Brankursine, each a hand∣ul; Mugort, Calamints, Chamomil flowers, each half a handful; aegreek and Lined, each half an unce; bl them or a Fomentatin, or Bath, or to a Catapasm, with Linesee, Faenugreek, a h an unc; Fis six, Orris puder wo drams, Saron half a dram, Hen grease and Oyl of sweet Amonds as much as is it.
Or, Take Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, each as much as you please, beat them in a Mortar, with Oyl de Been and Lillies, add Mucilage of Fae∣nugreek, Lineseed, Figgs, make a Liniment, or with wax a Plaister. Or, Take Oyl of Capars, Lillies, sweet Almonds, Jesamine, each an ounce; fresh Butter, Hens grease, Goose grease, each half an ounce; Mucilage of Fae∣nugreek, Althaea and Oyntment of Althaea, eah six drams; Ammoniacum dissolved in wine an ounce, with wax make an Oyntment. Make Injections thus. Take Bdellium dissol∣ved in wine, Oyl of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Chamo∣mil, each two ounces; marrow of a Veal bone, Hens grease, each an ounce; with the yolk of an Eg. In a bastard Scirrhus, you may use healers and digesters better, and Ammoniacum, and hotter Fats. Internal Medicines, are steel &c. of which in obstruction of the Womb, and Scirrhus of the Spleen. As for diet, abstain from breeders of gross and slimy humors, and from hot dryers. Cancer of the Womb. What may be said of this, is said before, only a Cancer may seize upon the substance of the womb, but it is more usually in the neck of it. Chap. 15. Of the displacing of the Womb; and first of the Ascent of it. WHen the womb falls out of the privities, it is called Procidentia uteri: this is ordinary,
Eustach. rud. lib. 2. pract. c. 5. but the ascēt or going up of the womb is more unknown. Many grave Anatomists hold tha the womb doth ascend, if sweet things are appli∣ed to the nose; if to the privities, that it descend if stinking sents come, the womb flies from th and it is to be seen by breathing altered, and by some meats that the womb greedily desires, and catcheth up. Galen overthrows this opinion, and saith that6. De lo. aff. c. 5. the womb doth move after a sort, and ascend, but it is very little, and not to be demonstrated; nor can it arise to the stomach, it is tied with such strong ligaments to its place; and when it falls out the ligaments are extended by moisture, and falling of it down. And there is no reason why the ligaments though loose or wet, it should go up so speedily, and come down again; for falling down is by degrees, and it is not soon brought up again. And though it be enlarged in conception, it is by degrees and equally, not sud∣denly in one side. Nor are the ligaments made very loose in conception, and the bottom of the womb is not tied, the ligaments being onely on the sides. But this cannot be denied, which women af∣firm, that they feel a body or ball moving about the navel, and a Physitian or Midwife may feel it. Therefoe let us enquire what it is, if it be not a womb. That body which you may feel stir, is the stones, and that blind vessel which Fal∣lopius found out, which he compared to the great end of a Trumpet, called Fllopius his Trumpet. For the stones hang, and the body of the Tum∣pet is lke a pipe loose and moving, and when they are full and swell with corrupt seed and va∣pos, they move to and fro, and ascend as high
as the navel. And the stones with the Trumpet make this round tumor of the womb, which isAntropg. lib. . c. 34. felt in women, as Riolanus observes. Whatsoeve makes corrupt seed in the stonesThe Causes of a womā, and fils them th evil apors or wind, is the cause of which in suffocation of the womb; for the cause is alike in both, only in suffocation the Symptoms are worse because the evil vapors are then more freely carried by the veins arteries and nerves, and asilict the principal parts. The woman and others may feel a round bo∣dy,The Signs and she indeth a pain at her heart, and short breath, without sleeping or doting, or other sym∣ptoms, and there wee causes that disturbed the womb. It is not dangerous, yet not to be slighted, forThe Pr∣gnotick. it may turn to the strangling of the womb, when these evil vapors move to the noble parts. Let the aim be at the corrupt seed, and vaporsThe Cure. which must be dis ussed and evacuated, as in suf∣focation of the Womb. Chap. 16. Of falling out of the Womb. SOmtimes it falls to the middle of the thighs, o to the knes almost, or hangs a little out. The womb changeth its place, when theThe Causes igaments by which it is bound to the other parts re not in order. There are four, two above road and membranous that come from the Pe∣itonum. and two elow that are nervous, ound and hollow. ide, it is bound to the reat vesels by veins and atris, and to the ack by nerves.
Now the place is changed when it is down a∣nother way, or when the ligaments are loose, and it falls down by its own weight, it is draw on side, when the terms are stopt, and the vein and arteries re full, those namely which go to the womb: if it be a mole on the one side, th liver or spleen case it, by the liv veins on the rigt side, or the spleen on the left, as they are  more or less. I also falls down by the loosning of the par to which it is fastned, but how that can be, it is not clear. 1. 2. De morb. mlier. Hippocrates saith, It comes from external caus, as frm old of the ee or loyns from leaping or fear, cutting of wood or rning dwn a ill and the lik these make the ligents moist and loos. Also it may be from cold after childbearing, getting into the wom when the rms flow, tting up∣on a cold stone, and the like. Plateus. Others say it comes from the solution of th connxion of the sibrous neck, and the parts ad∣jent, and that is fro the weight of the wom descending: thi we deny not. But then the li∣gaments must be loose or broken. But women in a dope could not be said not to have the wo fll down, if it came only from loosness. B the ause in them, is the ltness of the water which dries more then it moistneth. The Signs. I there be  little tumor within or without the prvities like a skin stretched, or a weight elt a∣bout the pivities, it is onely a descent of the womb: but i there be a tumor like a Goose eg and a hole at the bottom, there is at first a gea pain in the parts to which the womb is astned as the loyns, the bottom of the blly, an the pr∣vitis, and te os scrum, om the strehing
breaking of the ligaments: but a little after the pain abateth, and there is an impediment in walking. Somtimes blood comes forth from the breach of the vessels, and the dung and urin are stopt, and a Faver and Convulsion. When it is new, it is easily cured, when old, itThe Pro∣gnostick. is had to be cured, but not deadly, onely it is troublesom and nasty. It hindes conception, and keeps terms fom flowing orderly. If it be with ain, Feaver or Convulsion, it is deadly, especi∣ally in women with child. That which comes from corrosion of the ligaments is dangerous. First put it up before the air aler it, or it beThe Cure. inamed or swollen. Therefore firt give a Cly∣ster to remove the excrements. Then lay her ∣pon her bak wit her lgs abroad, and thighs lif∣td up, her hed down, and take the tumor in your hands, and thrust it in without violence. I it be swollen by alteration and cold, soment it with the Dcoction of Mallows, Althaea, Lin Foenugreek seed, Chamomil flowers, Bayberries, and anoint i with oyl of Lillis, and Hs grease. If thre be an inflammation, put it not up yet. ItRoder.  caso. de morb. ml. 1. 2. c. 17. may be righted in, by shewing of a red hot iron, and actin as if you would burn it. First, sprinkle upon it the poder of Mastich, kincense, and the like. As, Take Frankin∣ns, Msth, each two drams; Sarccol steept in Milk  dram, Mummy, Pomegranate wers, San∣gi Draconi, each half a dam. Whn it is put up, let her lie with her leggs stretched, and one upon the other, for eight or ten dais, and mke a Pe like a Par of Cork o Spunge put into the womb, dipt in sarp ne o jyce of Acacia, with pouder o Saguis Dra∣conis, Bole, Mastih, or the Counteies Oyntent,
with Galbanum and Bdellium. Apply a Cupping-glass with great flame un∣der the navel or paps, or to both kidnies, and lay this Plaister to the back. Take Opopanax two ounces, Storax liquid half an ounce, Frankincense, Mastich, Pitch, Bole, each two drams; with wax mae a Plaister. Or, Take Labdanum a dram and half, Frankincense, Mstich, each half a dram; wood Aloes, Cloves, Spik, eah a dram; Ash coloured Ambergrece four gri Muk half  sruple, make two rund Plaister  be laid on eac side the Navel. Make a Fume of a Snail ski faltd, or of Garlik, and let it be taken in by a unnel. Use atringen omentations of ramble leaves, Platane, Horstail, Mirtles, each two handfuls; Wormwood two pugils, Pomegranate flowers half an ounce, bo l them in wine and water. Or inject this with a Syringe. Take Comsey roots an ounce, Snakeweed, Pomegranate flowers, each half an ounce; Ruprewort two drams, Yarrow, Mugwort, each half an ounce; boyl them in red Wine. Then use Sulphur Baths. To strengthen the Womb: Take Harts-born Bayes, ach a dram; Mirrh hal a dram, make a Budr for two doss, give it with sharp wine. Or, Take Zedoary, Prsnep seds, Crabs ees prepared, ach a dram; Nmg half a dram: give a dram in puder, but use astringents warily, lest you stop the courses, and cause worse mischief. I it fall out from il hmors that flow to the womb, and loosen the ligunents, purge the bo∣dy, and then se dryers, as the decoction of Chi∣na, Sarsa and Guajacum. To keep it in its place, make Roulers and li∣gatures, as for the Rupture, and use Pessaries into
the bottom of the womb, that may force it to remain: of which Franis Rousset hath writen atLib. de par∣ts caesar. sec. 6. cap. 3. & 4. large, and shews that they neither hinder con∣ception, nor bring any inconvenience, nay that they help conception, and retain it, and cure this disease perfectly. And Gaspar Bauinus con∣firms the same in his Appendix to Rousset. You may use Circles or Balls instead of Pes∣saries. As, Take roots of wild Vine, make round Circles or Balls of them greater or less, as the Neck of the womb is. Then, Take Virgin wax melted with white Rosin or Turpentine, dip the blls in till they are fit, put one into the neck of the womb, that will hold in being just fit: let it nt be tken out till it fall out, and then put in another, if she be not ∣red. If it gangrene and sphacelate, cut it quite off,Lib. de pae es. sec. 4. . 5. histo. 6. Ibid. sct. 4. . 5. if she fear cutting, take it off by ligature, of which Rousset who shews the way, and saies that it may be cut off without danger of life. He tells also of the place where you must cut, and in Sect. 4. de partu Caesareo, where the liga∣ture is to be made. Let the diet be drying, and astringent, and glewing, as Rice, Starch, Quinces, Pears, green Cheese. Avoid Summer fruits: let the Wine be astringent and red. The Cure of the inclining of the Womb. When it inclines to the side, after Universals, apply Cupping-glasses to the other side, and let her still lie on the other side; and let the Mid∣wife anoint her singer with Oyl of sweet Al∣monds, and draw it a little by degrees to the o∣ther side.
Chap. 17. Of the Rupture of the Womb. FEw Physitians have seen this, I never read of any, but once I saw it, of which in my insti∣tutions, lib. 2. prt. 1. cap. 9. Chap. 18. Of Wounds, and breaking of the Womb. IT is seldom woundd, by reason of the divers defences it th; but somtimes the hirur∣gions wound it in cutting out of the child: of which Hollerius, inter rara. no. 8. he speaks of a Woman with child in Paris, that her childs hand put forth at the nvel, and was so in travel fifteen daies, and both child and mother were safe. The Signs. It is evident, if it be made by the Chirurgion in cuing out of a child; and you may know i by the place, if it come otherwise. There is blood and matter that flows out at the neck of the womb. There is more pain when it is in the ne of the womb, then when it is in the bottom. The Pro∣gnostick. These wounds are cured, as appears by the Caesarean birth or cutting; but they are dange∣rous, by reaso of the strange Symptoms, and the consent of the parts. The Cure. Use Consolidaters or Heales; and if there be pain, Anodynes or Pessaries made of Wax can∣dles dipt in Wound-oyntments. Or, Take Wax, Turpenine, Goose grese, Buer, each a dram; Honey, Deer's marrow, Oyl o Rs, Bulls grease, each two drams. Or, Take Fra
kincense, Mastich, eruss, Galbaum, each half an ounce; mix them all with white ine, then d Po∣phlix an ounce, and wih Wax and Oyl of Rose, make an Oyntment. Make Ijctions or Clysters for the wob, of the Decoction of round Birthwort, Cyprss boy∣led in steeled Water and sharp Wie, with a lit∣tle Hydromel, Agrimony, Mugwot, Plantane, Roses, Shaenanth, Hoehound. Chap. 19. Of Ulcers and rot∣tenness of the Womb. THough the neck of the womb be only sb∣jct to ulcers, as we shewed; yet the sub∣stance of womb hath been ulcerated, and it hath been observed to rot, when it hath fallen ut, and to fall away. * As we said of a Woman at Ainion, that after lived some time. And the Examples of Rousset shew that it may be safely cut off. Also a hild dead in the womb may cause an ulcer, as divers Histories witness in Albucasis,Li d pare es chir c. 76. and Alexander Benedictus, Mauricis, Cordus, and many others. How thse ulcers and rottenness of the womb are cured, is said in Sect. 1. cap. 8. where we spke of Ulcers of the nek of the Womb, and Cap. 10. of Fiulaes of the Womb. Chap. 20. Of the Diseases of the Stones, and Vessels of Pro∣creation in Women. IT is apparnt by Hitories witten by grave and leaned Mn, that the stoes of women
and there seed-vessels are many times grievously distempered, when the womb joyned to them is not. Somtimes water is gathered about the stonesIn append. ad Rousse∣tum 2. de par. caesar. as Gaspar Bauhinus, John Schenkius write, and he hath another History Lib. Obser. 3 from John Heintz of a Maid, that desired a little before she died, that her body might be opened to testifie her innocency. In which besides other things re∣markabl, the stones were found swollen as big as a head of a young child; blewish and spun∣gie, much water came out of them, and that made her belly swel, and she taken to be with child: bu the truth appeared, and her chastity testified.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND PART. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and from the Womb. Chap. 1. Of weakness of the Womb. THERE are many Symptomes from the womb. Of those in the womb: the first is weakness, so that it cannot perform its acti∣ons. The action of the womb is two∣fold, private and publick. By its private action it akes it nourishment of blood that comes to it.
By its publick action, it serves for generation. If the private faculty be hurt, and the nourishmnt not well made, there is a superluous moisture, and then weakness without other fault of the or∣gan or unity divided. The first Cause is distemper, when the mani∣festThe Causes qualities are changed, or when the natural heat is suffocated or dispersed; or when the oc∣cult qualities are changed. Heat in the womb makes a hot distemper, if it be too much, by which the womb sucks more then it can concoct, this is not propely weakness: but that distemper i weakness, when the action is either not done, or weakly done. But cold rather makes weakness in the womb, by which it cannot make the suffi∣cient quantity of nourishment, hence excremens are heaped up, and it cnnot perform its actions. Also a moist distemper makes weakness, by which it can neither keep seed nor child; it is also weak from loosness. The Sis. Little desire of Venery, and no pleasure ther∣in, argue weakness of the womb, flux of seed, of∣ten abortion, pain in the loyns and pubes, when the terms are coming; arts from the womb, head∣ach,Part. 1. ect cap. 2. & 3. and the like. The signs of a cold and moist distemper with or without matter, are already declared. The Pro∣gnostick It is a great disease, by reason of the diver Symptoms in women that have conception hurt. It is worst when it comes from dispersing and ex∣tinguishing of the natural heat. The Cure. We have shewed how distempers of the womb are cured: but the dispersing of the Spirits and natural heat, is cured by things that hinder th
loss of Spirits, and strengthen the womb, as Spi∣ces, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, Diaca∣laminth, Aromaticum rostum, Diaxilaloes, ro∣sta Novella, Treacle, Mithridate. Outwardly by Oyl of Lillies, Nard, Lavender, and Astrin∣gents when the womb is loose. Things that help the womb in the whole sub∣sne, are in the Chapter of the cold and moist Diemper, as Aqua vitae for Women. Or this, Take Castor three ounces, Saffron two ounces, extract thm sigular, add to both Extract of Mugwort two onces, of Angelica a drm, Magistery of the mother of Pearl  dram, Oyl of Cloves a sruple, of Ange∣li, and of Amber, and of Nutmegs, each half a scruple. Let her ea meat of much nourishmnt, and drink good Wine. Chap. 2. Of the Itch of the Womb. THis is more in old then young wome and must be distinguished from the Frenzie of the womb: for here is only a desire to scrath the privities, so that they cannot sleep. Nor is it with desire of copulation, as in the fury of the womb. It is a salt humor that is serous and adust thatThe Causes causeth it, that is sent to the neck of the womb, and the privities. How it comes there, I shew∣d in Ulcers of the privities. It is known by her relation, and often putting her hand to the privities.
The Pro∣gnostick. The Cure. It is more troublesom then dangerous, becau it hinders sleep. First, purge the whole body, and if there a signs of plethory, and strength permits, bleed i the arm. Then qualifie the sharp alt h∣mors, with cold and moist means, and rmov them from the privities. Foment with a Dco∣ction of Lettice, Plantane, Willow, Dock roos, and then anoint with Galen Cooler. Or dip  Pessary in this Oyntment, and put it in. O, Tke Allum, Nitr, Sulphur, each six drams; Sphi∣sager an oune, with Rose-vinegar and fresh Butter, make a Linimens. If these wil not cure, use stronger, as the oynt∣ment of Elicampane with Quickilver. Or, Take black Soap, Staphisacre, ach a dram; quik Brim∣stone half an ounce, Quick silver two drams, wi Rose-vinegar and Hogs grease, make an Oyntment. Let the met be of good juye, coolin and moistng. Take heed of Spices, sharp and salt meats. Chap. 3. Of pain in the Womb. THere is pain in the body of the womb wit other diseases sometimes: as the Cock∣pains woven in the bottom of the belly, and in the loyns and hips; and is called the Pain of th Womb. It is often in women with child, as the inflammation of the womb; it is burning and beating, it binds the belly, and stops the urin. The Causes Solution of unity is the Cause of all pains, and this is from the stretching of the womb and its vessels, or corrosion. Stretching is from wind,
or clotted blood in the cavity o it, and when Nature cannot expel it by reason of the straitness of the pat, there is pain. Also pain is from stretching of the vessels be∣ore the terms flow, when they are close, and the blood thick, and this pain is increased by exter∣nal cold, especially after heat. Somtimes there is a gathering o humors about the womb, when the terms ow, and are oul, and they get into the membranes, and stretch them. The same may be from corrupt seed, that stretcheth the vessels. Or from sharpness and corrosion in the neck f the womb, when sharp humors flow through it, and twtch it. The pain is manifest, but let us look at theThe Signs. igns o he causes. If it be from clotted blood, there was a flux of the same, and the pain is fix∣ed about the oriice of the womb. If there were external causes, the patient will relate. If it be from seed, there is suffocation of the womb. The greater the cause is, and the more vehe∣mentThe Pr∣gnostick. it works, the more is the danger. If there be pain, and fear of fainting, look toThe Cur. that before the cause, with Anodynes and Nar∣coicks if need be. If it be from wind see inflation of the womb. If i be from clotted blood, diolve and eva∣uate it, with hot and attenuating Medicines, made into Fomentations, Baths and Oyntmens. It is good to apply Treacle to the region of the womb, or put it in with Rue and Honey. Or give a Clyster to the womb, of Ru, Foenugrek sed, and Oyl of Rue and Orris. Or give  and Cinnamon water. If the vessels of the womb are not open enough
for the terms. See in the stoppage of the terms. If there be wind, make a Clyster thus. Tak Merury, Mugwort, Calmints, Pennyroyal, eah  handul; Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each ha a handul;  an Lineeed, each an oune; boyl them, in a pint strained, dissolve Hiera, Bet∣dicta laxativa, each half an ounce; ae a Clr. Give Mugwort, Zedoary water, Essence of Car, Treacle, or omens Aqu vite, of whih before. Make a Clyster for the Womb, thus. Tak Mugwort, Calamints, Bettony, each hl a hand; Gith, Cummin, Carrot, Aniseed, eah a dram; Spie, Schoenanth, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, eh  dram; boyl them in Wine. Then fill an Ox bladder half full with Oyl of Lillies and Dill, and apply it to the belly. Or, Tke Oyl of Lillies, Orris, each an oune; distilled Oyl of Angelic a dram, Goose and Hes gese, each half an ounce; Mucig of Lin ad Faenugreek seed made with Muwrt wer, eah three drams; seeds of Cummin, Crrts, Carawa, each a dram; with Wx mke a soft Oyntment. O, Take Peitor two handuls, Mercury a handful, beat them, add Chamomil flowers, Cummin, Anise, Carrot seeds, each a dram; two yolks of Eggs and Oyl of Lillies, make a Cataplasm for the belly. Apply Plaisters to the Navel, and Cuppin∣glasses with great flame to the Region of te Womb; or dry Fomentations of Oates Miium, Anise, Cummin, Carrot seed in a Bag. Ad use Pessaries, as Take Harts marrow, Turpen∣tine, Wax, Goose grease, each hree drams; Saffon a dram, yols of Eggs seven, with Oyl of Lillies, mke Pessaries. If the humors and wind is malinant, mi Scorzonera, Bezoar seeds, and roots of Anelica,
wter of Zedoary, Trecle, Mithridate, and the like in Suffocation of the Womb. Chap. 4. Of the Diseases of Womb, that come from sweet scents and stinks. THere is a particular Symptom in the womb which beeds great admiration, that it de∣lihts n sweet scents, and is offended with stinks; and it is certain, for if Musk, Civet, or the like, be but put to the nose of a woman that is subject to is of the Mother, they grow sick, and if the sme be put to their privities, and stinks to the nos, the it of the Mother ceaseth. It is hard to give the reason of this, many wie Men have given their opinion but they disgree among themselves, and atisfie me not, neither do I pomise to satisie others. But it is proba∣ble to me that the womb is not delighted with scents, as scents, for the privities have no smel∣ling, and the sene of melling doth not reach so ar: but the quality by which it is well or ill, is occult, and not to be explained, and not to be parated from the odours. If any ask what that quality is. I answer, thee are many qualities in Nature that are hid rom our senses, and yet we cannot deny them, because we see their effects, as the quality in a Dogs nose, we cannot apprehend but the Dog perceives it. But how these qualities come to the womb, isQuomodo uerus ben olentia r∣cipit. by no other way but by the open way by the pi∣viies, by which Spirits get into the womb, and in the suoation of the womb weet thins p oit,
because they strengthen it by a peculiar qua∣lity to disperse the venemous air, and draw downQuomodo bene olentia hystericis noceant. the Spirits and humors. But if they be put to the nose the womb consents by the Sympathy of the organ of smelling, and the brain with it. This is by the nerves and arteries; for the heart is presently refreshed with a sweet scent, because it presently pierceth into it being piri∣tal, and there is a great consent of the womb with the brain and the smelling, as is seen by the tryal of barrenness, by a Fume from Hippo∣crates. 5. Aphor. But we must observe that sweet scents are ac∣ceptable to all wombs, and stinks are not, but the same Symptomes are not in all women from them; for they who have a womb of a good constitution with no evil humors in it, endue sweet things well, and delight in them, but they who are unclean, hate sweet things, and often  into its by them, because while the womb is de∣lighted with that sweet and hidden quality with which it hath a peculiar Sympathy, the evil hu∣mors that lie in the womb (especially if there be any corruption from seed) and the seed al∣so are stirred, and when the Spirits flie up, the take the bad humos with them, and send bad vapors to the heart which cause suffocation, and other Symptoms. But when the same scents ae put to the privities, the womb is refreshed with them, and the Spirits are quiet or move to the scents. And so the humors (if there be any) are still, or else move downward. But stinks on the contrary, by reason of their Antipathy with the womb, are voided by the Spirits, and so the humors move downwards, and oten thee is an abortion thereby.
What is spoken of sweet scents, may be under∣stood of all sweet things, and this our judgment in a matter so difficult.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Symptoms in the Terms, and other Fluxes of the Womb. Chap. 1. Of the Flux of the Terms. BY divine providence the blood which is voided every month is kept in when there is a child; for if it be its nature, it is not ill, but onely super∣fluous, till they conceive, nor is it more an excrement then seed and milk. The Terms commonly begin at fourteen, and then the hair appears on the privities, the breasts swell, and women begin to be lecherous▪ and the lood can no longer stay in the veins, but breaks ut at the veins of the womb.
In some they begin at twelve, and they are ery lustful commonly, and of shorter lives: they oninue till fifty; in some till sixty, and then op. In some they begin at sevnen or eigh∣en. And in some they stop  fifty, accor∣ing to the variety of Nature and diet. Nature doth not send ort evry  what is thered, but staes till the plenty onds, and oth only once in a month, otherwis it would  filthy and unpleasant, and hinde coepion.  do they flow at one time in all exctly, but  are twenty two daies, or at most thty be∣en the purgings. In some they last three daies, which was usual  the time of Hippocrates. In some four or five  more, as their Liver is reater, or their diet is  or lower. Hippocrates saith, They should bleed but a pint  half, or two pints: this is not alike in all,  differs in respect of age and diet. As for the quality, it must not be too thick no  thin, but of a middle substance, without sent a red colour, yellower in cholerick persons, in lancholick, black; in flegmatick, whiter, and ust flow without any great Symptom. The passages are the veins of the womb, being uble from the double branch on both sides it,  Spermatik and Hypogastrick, that they may  superfuiies from all parts. And from this Description of a natural flux,  may gather what is preternatural. Question 1. Whether can a Woman conceive, that never had her Terms? They are called by some Flowers, because
they go before conception, as flowers do befor fruit; but many have onceived that never  their flowers, being hotter by Nature, as the  dans that never have any flowers; and Vir goe's that use more exercise: but if these  no more blood then wil nourish their body, th are arren. I any thing abound, that is not required  nourhment of the parts, and it so much th Nature cannot endure it in the body, the wo draws it to it when it hath conceived, to ma up the child: of which hereater Question 2. Whether menstruous blood is o¦ly superfluos in quantity, or bad in respec quality? Writers disagree about this. Some say i bad in quantity and quality, and venemou the effects, as making Ivory obscure, and  Looking-glasses, corrupting Wine, by a  rom the body of a Woman that hath  flower. Others say they offend only in plenty:  it were venemous, it could not be a whole mo in the body, and it could not form the child,  would Nature make milk of it. Therefore menstrual blood onely offends quantity, and not in any maniet or hidden q∣lity. But it hath strange qualities when it is  with bad humors, or is kept too long in body to be corrupted, and cause great Sy∣toms; but this is when it is mix with bad mors, or is out of its vessels, and so corrupts
Question 3. Of the ext of Aristotle 7. de hist. Animalium, cp. and how it is to be understod? Aristotle writes thus, Constantly every month7. De histo. ani. c. 2. ome have their Terms: but most in the third, as f he should say, Few women have their courses very month, but many have them every third onth. This is against Galen, and against expe∣ience, for it is certain, that among six hundred women, scarce one hath them every third month. Therefore there is either an errour in the Greek Text, or in the Translation, or great Men do often  which is probable, and so did Arist tle in this of Physick. Therefore it is in vain to defend their rrour. Chap. 2. Of the Terms flow∣ing too soon. ORdinarily they begin at fourteen; but ma∣ny have had them sooner. A child of ele∣en daies old had a bloody humor flowing from  privities. Another of five years old had eve∣y month a moderate flux. Fernel reports thatHer. saxo∣ni vidit venetiis ser. 6. pr. 5. c. 16. Girl of eight years old had the Terms: but these  rare, and for the most part very lecherous,  short lived. Chap. 3. Of want and stopping of the Terms. SOme Women have them not till eighteen or twenty. Some before, and then they stop
for a time without, either giving suck, or being with child. Some have been without them three, five or seven months, and then they came agai This is an evil constitution, or suppression of th which it ought to flow, from the fault of the blood and stoppage of the passages. The Causes When Terms are wanting either blood is wan∣ting, o stopt. It is wanting, either beause it i not made, or dispersed or turned to other use, for nature being more sollicitos to preserve the individual person, then to propagate the specis, spends  in preserving of the person. Blood is not made from divers causes, as ae, cold constitution of iver, Heart, or a disease which distempers the wels. Or often bleeding from great vessels, or om having many issues, which take from the blood. It is spent other waies, as before ripe age, an when women are with child, or give suck, or i hot Natures, and fat women, in whom it is tu∣ned to fat. It is in vain to provoke Terms i these. There are other external evident causes of s∣ping of the Terms, as too great labour, trouble adness, fear; but these last do not only wast  blood, but cool and corrupt it, and cause obs∣ctions,6. Epid. s. 8. in ine. as Hippocrates speaks of Phatusa the  of Pytheus. The proper causes are, the straitness of  passages, or evil conformation of the  through which it should slow. Or the closin the womb, of which we spake, but I speak  of the vesels. The usual cause of obsuction, is thick  humors, fom the blood too thik, or mixed  melancholy which comes with it to the vei the womb, and stops them.
This thick blood comes from a cold distem∣per of the stomach, liver and spleen, from thick and gross food, and drinking cold water when the Terms flow. So thought Galen in his timeLid de ve∣nae sc al∣versus era∣sistrat. of the Roman women that drank Snow-water and had few or no courses Straitness is when the body of the womb is made thicker, either by Nature or other causes; as a cold and dry, or hot and dry disteper. Thirdly, straitness is from compression of the vessels, by a Scirrhus or hardness of the parts ad∣jacent, as the straight gut, or by the stone in the bladder, and the womb displaced. Fourthly, the flesh may grow together by a membrane that grows to the vessels, or a ar af∣ter a wound. Or after a mischance, when the veins annexed to the Secundine, grow so toge∣ther, that they cannot be opened: of which in the first Question. They are not the same in women and Virgins,The Signs. for blood stopt in Virgins, goes to and ro, chan∣geth the colour, and brings Feavers, especially the white Feaver or Green-sickness. But in women it goes more to the womb, and brings Symptomes, as loathing, vomiting, and Pica. Galen hath other signs, as heaviness, a lazy8. De lo∣aff. c. 5. pain in the loyns, neck, and behind in the head, that reacheth to the roots of the eyes, from the speading of the blood stopt through the whole body. This laziness is chiely in the thighs and leggs, by reason of the veins there consenting with the womb. And are of a green complexi∣on, and hairy, with a beard, and shrill voice. You may know women with child, from such a want their Terms, only by pper signs. First
the women with child keep their colour, but the other are pale and ill-cloured; they are merry, the other sad. 2. Their Symptoms daily grow milder, but in the other they daily grow worse. 3. You may feel the child move. 4. It is per∣ceived in a month. You shall know from what causes the Terms are stopt, thus. If the Liver be cold, there is no blood made that is superfluous, and there are signs of a old Liver, and you may know that blood is not sent to the womb, when there is no heaviness, pain, or tumor about the womb, the liver or spleen are stopt. If it be rom flegm or melancholy, which is o∣ten, there are signs of their abounding, as laz∣ness, paleness, seldom pulse, crude urin. Hippocrates saith, That if the Terms stop, therThe Pro∣gnostick. Hippo. morb. mu∣lier. Gal. 6. de lo. aff. c. 5. are diseases in the womb, tumors, imposthumes, ulcers and barrenness, and diseases in the whole body, Green∣sickness, Leucophlegmacy, Dropsie, Vomiting of blood, Heart-ach, Cough. And the longer they have been stopt, the hader they are to be open∣ed. If the blood stop go out at the nose, it is good. If it have great Symptomes, there is fear ofHippo. 5. apho. 23. death. You must not give Medicines to move the Terms, to extenuate lean persons, nor to such as want blood, and have a weak Liver, but they must be sed high. First see i blod abound, and then (ater a Leniive) open a vein and lt that blood whichCm. in 6. p. 3. . 9 is in the veins, be drawn to the womb. Gal took thee ints of blood at three times fom  len womn, and cured her of an old stopping  the Terms. You must open the ankle vein, the firt day
the right, the next the left, four or five daies be∣fore the time. Or you may cup and ariie the Leggs. And bind the parts below, and rub them after general evacuation, opening of the Haemorrhoids doth hurt, and so do Issues, because they draw from the womb. Hiera picra hal an ounce, or Pills de Tibus, o Hiera simple are good first. Then prepare, as; Take water of Mugwort,  Maidenhair, ah three uces; Syrup o he five Roots, and of Mugwort, each two ounces; mae it for two doses. Or, Take opning Roots half an ounce, Madder, Burn, eah three ounces; Mugwort, Bettony, Germandr, Calamints, ach a handful; red Pease half a handful flowers of Bu∣gloss, Dill, each a pugil: boyl and sweeten it with Sugar. For flegmatick Bodies, take the Decoction of Guajacum, Saaphras, Dittahy for fifteen des without sweating. Then evacuate with Agarick, Mechoacan, Turbith, Scammony, Coloquintida, blak Hel∣lebore. As, Take Agarick two drams, infuse it in Mugwort∣ter two ounces, Oymel an ounce, strain, and the Etract of Michoacan a sruple. Or, Take op∣nin Roots half an ounce, Mugwort, Bettony, ch  pugils; Senna l an unce, Agarik two dra  and Anid, each a rue;  ha a dram, Rsmary flowers  ugil, ine  the oun an af, d Srup of Senna n  a hal  hl a dram. Or if they dink Wie. Tke Tarth,  eah tw dams; Senna an  a ha, Maihair, alm, Rsmary, ea
two pugils; Cinnamon, Galangal, each a dram hang them in Wine, give six ounces with half an ounce of Manna. Or, Take Diaturbith with Rubarb half an ounce, Mechoacan two drams, Agarick a dram, Diarrhodon Cinnamon, each half a dram; Steel prepared a dram, with Raisons make an Electuary give as much as a Wall nut. Or give Pills of Agarick foetidae, and so con∣tinue purging and reparing, if the matter be stubborn. Or, Take Agarick two drams, Ma∣der a dram, with Syrup of Mugwort, make Pills. Or, Take Aloes three drams, de Tribus oe dram, with juyce of Savin make Pills If the stomach is soul, give a Vomit, let it g into the veins. Then give provokers of the Terms which arePar. 1. sec. 2. c. 2. hot and thin, about the time they used to flow: they are three degrees in strength, and many sot of Medicines are made of them. A Pouder. Take Cinnamon a dram, Ambr sruple, Saffron half a scruple. Or, Take Trochu of Mirrh, of Wallflowers, each a scruple; Saffron five grains. Or, Take Castor, Pennyroyal, each a scruple; with Wine or proper Waters. Physical Wine. Take Madder roots an ounc, Orrs half an ounce, Balm, Pennyroyal, Mugwort Rosemary, ech a handful; Wall-flowers half a p∣gil, Cinnamon an ounce, Galangal half an oun, with Wine: give four ounces. Or, Take the Dcction of red Pease. Or, Take Smallage, Fennel roots, each half an ounce; Mug∣wort, Bettny, Pennyroyal, Balm, each a handful; red Pee half an handful, Juniper-berries half a ounce,  all flowers a pugil, boyl and sweeten it. O Take en ounces of it with thr ounces of Mugw for three doses.
Quertan commends this. Take Gromwel∣seds, Anise, Mslet of the Oak, each three drams; Dittany a dram, Saffron a sruple, rui, and keep them twenty four hours in Wine then boylthem: give fr ounces for three dais together. Or make the Womans qua vie. Or, Take Balm, ttny, Pennyroyal, Mwort, Np, Mo∣thewort, Dittany, ach four handfuls; Wine thirty pints, distil them, add three handfuls of each hrbs, and distil them again, and ad Fennel seed, Calamus, Cinnamon, Cassia ligna, Cardamoms, each half an ounce: distil them again. Or give Syrup of Calamints Mugwort. Or, Take water of Pennyroyal, Savin, Calamints, each four ounces; Syrup of Mugwrt ur ounces, Cinna∣mon water an ounce: give it at fur times. Rouls. Take Extract of Savin a scruple, of An∣gelica half a sruple, of Elicampane six grains, Oyl of Cinnamon five drops, of Cloves two drops, with Sgar dissolved in Balm waer. Or make an E∣lectuary of Steel six ounces, Cassia lignea, Cinnamon, each two drams; Cloves a dram, Raisons two oun∣ces, with Sugar dissolved in Mgwort water. Or, Take Troches of Mirrh a dram, Extract of Gentian and Savin, each a scruple; astor half a ruple, make Pills: give two scruples, or give eve∣ry third day pills of Hier. Use outward Mediines, but povoke not sweat y them. Take Althaea and Lill rots, each two unces;  an une, Mllw, Mrury, Mgwort,  Mtherwort, Calamint, Pnnroyal, Mr∣ram, Bay ach t hadul; flowers of  nder, Cheir each a ndful; Faenu∣gre sd an ounc, Juniper an Bayberris, each alf a hanl: bl hm in Water,  wih pges.
And then anoint with this. Take Oyl of Lil∣lies an ounce, o Lavender seeds stilled hal a dram, Calamints and Gith pouder, each a dram; Storax calamint a scruple. To Virgins that must take no Pessaries, give Fumes, with the head defended; they wil pen the mouths of the vessels, and cut thick humors. As, Take Mirrh, Bdellium, Storax, each a dram; Benzoin two scruples, Gallia moshata, ivet, each half a scruple; with liquid Storax make Troches. Then use Clysters and Injections into the Womb with Purgers. As, Take Calamins, Pen∣nyroyal, each a handful; Gith seed, Turbih, each a dram; Coloquintida half a dram, boyl it in wine, inject it into the womb. If it be hot ater it, inject the Decoction of Mallows with Milk or Barley water. And be∣cause the neck of the womb lies upon the strait gut, give Clysters. Take Lilly roots an ounce, Or∣ris, Valerian, ach half an ounce; Mercury two handfuls, Mugwort, Savin, each a handful; Cha∣momil, Lavender flowers, each a pugil; Caraway, Gith seed, each a dram: boyl, add Hiera and Benedicta laxativa, each half an ounce; Oyl of Cheir two drams, Electuary of Bayberries half an ounce. If she be no Virgin, put Mercury bruised in a Bag for a Pessary, with Centaury flowers. Or Garlick beaten with Oyl of Spike. Begin still with the mildest, as Mugwort, Mer∣cury, Pennyroyal, Marjoram, Rue; and then add Mucilages and Juyces to loosen the womb let ot Pessaries lie long, least they cause a Fea∣ver. If it be from a tumor, provoke not the Terms, but lok to the tumor. Let diet be hot and attenuating of good juyce,
with Parsley, Savory, Rosemary, Cloves, Cina∣mon. Little sleep and much exercise. Question 1. Whether are the other Causes of stoppage of the Terms? Some say the blood going to other parts, is a cause, but it is rather contrary, and the suppres∣sion of Terms is cause of that; or the veins of the womb are large enough to evacuate blood. Others say the strength of the womb is a cause, which thikens the vessels, that they receive no blood. But the womb is made to receive it when it abounds. Others accuse the strength, which is to be de∣nied, but when it is so strong, that it is too hot or too dry, and will not receive the blood, and that is a sign of weakness. But there must be strength in the whole body, to cast out superflu∣ous blood, or there will be other mischiefs. Question 2. What Veins must be opened when the Terms are sopt? Authors disagree in this, as Aetius and Galen,L. de sang. miss. cap. 11. 18. 19. who alwaies speaks of the ankle veins: and most are of his mind, being it is rational. For a vein opened in the arm, doth rather revel from the womb, then draw the blood to it; but in the ankle, brings it to its place, and opens obstru∣ctions, and doth both lessen, and bring blood to the womb, and move that which is in the womb ixed. Open the ankle therefore twice or thrice, ra∣therLib. de sang. mis. adver. r∣sis. then the arm once. Therefore Galen com∣mends Hippocrates that he opened a vein in the
ankle in the Servant of Schimarg, though she had a Plthory But in other diseass of the womb, as inflam∣ation dropping, or too many Terms, it is good to open a vein in the arm. The Saphena is ope∣ned by putting the foot in warm water, before and after. Question 3. At what time must a Vein be o∣pened against the sppage of the Terms? Galen saith, It must e when Nature may be helped, be the blood moved: that is three or four daies before the usual time of their coming, as if she had them alwais in the ful of te Moon, and they have been stopt some months bleed three or four dies before the full, to pu nture in mind of her duty, and to make the blood run again. Chap. 4. Of fewness of the Terms. IT is when they flow less then they use or ought to low. It is either from the blood, or in the expulsiveThe Causes faculty in the passages. As if blood e little, the Terms are few and slow, if the retentive faculty is weak, and the expulsive strong, they come at due time, but in small quantity. If the Terms are slow, the fault is in the quality of the blood being too thick. Also straitness of the passages may be a cause, for if they be not wide enough, the blood cannot flow feely. The patient will tell the disease, but the caueThe Signs. of it is to be found in the Chapter aoregoing.
Few Terms from little blood is not dange∣rous,The Pr∣gnostick. if they be stopt from thick blood, there follow diseases: as Erysipelas, Scirrhus or Can∣cer. See the Chapter aforegoing for the Cure, andThe Cure. and if it be from thickness of blood, it is often cured by a general Purge for the whole body. Chap. 5. Of Dropping of the Terms. THis is a flux, and lasts long, and there is pain. The blood flows not conveniently at the due time and manner, and the privities are alwaies wet, as when the urin drops. Are from the blood and the passages of it, andThe Causes the retentive faculty; as when the blood is too thik and sharp, which stir up Nature to let it out, and because it stretcheth the membranes, thee is pain. Also the weakness of the reten∣tive faculty is a cause. The women declare it, but if it be from thickThe Signs. blood and sharp and strait passages, there is a setching pain about the womb. If it be from cudity of blood, and weakness of the retentive aculty, the blood flows without pain, and is not much elt. It is troublesom to women, and if it last long,The Pro∣gnostick. The Cure. auseth ulcers and inflammations. It is all in mending of the thick and sharp lood, and in opening the passages, which are he two chief causes of it, of which we spake at rge. If blood be superfluous, loose it not, nor open
the ankle-vein, lest you draw it more to the womb, but take away the Cacochymy. If it be from weakness of the retentive facul∣ty, strengthen the womb with dryers and ash in∣gents. Chap. 6. Of the overflowin of the Terms. IT is when it is too much or too long, and hurs any woman, and brings diseases, but a cer∣tain proportion of bleeding is not to be deined; but too much is lost when the actions are hurt. The immediate Cause is the opening of theThe Causes Gal. 3. de sympt. cau∣sis . 2. & 5. aph. com. 57. vessels, and the mediate cause is the blood in quantity or quality offending, or by its force or disorderly motion. Vessels are opened by Anastomosis, Diapede∣sis, Diaeresis or ruption, or by Diaurosis or co∣rosion. Anastomosis is from a moist distemper of the vessels which loosneth the orifices, or from external causes, as Baths, hot and moist: or us of Aloes. The flux is seldom too great from a Diapede∣sis, for it is but a sweating through. Ruption is from plethory, when the Terms have long been stopped, and then break out, and when the bloo is hot by air, baths, &c. The outward causes are falls, strokes, hard travel, great burdens lifted. Erosion is from sharp blood or humor, or from Medicines that corrode, as Pessaries long kept. For this great flux is chiefly from the veins in the bottom of the womb. The flux of blood is too great, when theThe Signs. strength abateth, and Cachexy ollows, with paleness,
swolln feet, and the blood that comes from the bottom of the womb, is blacker and lotted That from the neck is redder and thinner. The signs of the causes. If it be from mulr blood, there are signs of plethory, and it easily lotteth together. If the blood be sharp and cho∣lrick, it is putreied in the womb, you shal know waterish blood by its colour, and the signs of that humor abounding: and if you dip a clout in it, and dry it in the shade, you may see it. If the womb be too moist, such causes went before. If it be from breaking of veins, they will tell you of violence. If it be from corrosion, it is little and slow, somtimes pure, somtimes erous. It weanth the whole body, the liver and bo∣wels,The Pro∣gnostick. there is swounding, the Whites, and pale∣ness, and Dropsie somtimes: That which hath been long is hard to be cured, and causeth death, and in an old woman it is deadly. If there be fulness, abate the blood, and keepIndications it from flowing to the womb, revel it, rpl, cool and astringe it, that it may not flow so fa, and then amend the blood. If it is from plenty of blood, open the Liver∣veinThe Cure. in the right arm; bleed little and often be∣cause it makes better revulsion, and weakens not, open the Salvatella, if there be weakness, and cupGal. 5. aphor. com. 50. he Back and Breast aainst the Liver, beneath he papps, where are veins from the womb: cup ot beneath, but in the shoulders, or back and rms with scarification, but scaiie not under he breats. Bind and rub the as and shouldes, and tem∣er and thicken the sharp thin humors, with De∣ctins and Waters of Plantane, Purslane, Sorrel
Knotgrass, Shepherds-purse, Pomegranate-Syrup, and of dried Roses, Sorrel, Puslane, Co∣ral, Conserve of Roses, Bole, sealed Earth. If it be urgent, use Nacoticks, Syrup of Pop∣pies, Treacle, Philonium, Laudanum. If it still continue, it is fed with choler, there fore purge it with Syrup of Roses, Manna, Rhu∣barb, Senna. If it be fed with serous blood, help the eins that do not their duty, and the Liver, and sweat with China. You must not provoke urin, but use astringents.To Cure al diseases Read my Sennertus, Platerus, Riveris, Bartholi∣nus, and Riolnus, of the last Edition. As, Take the juyce of Ass-dung, Syrup of Mirls, each half an ounce; Plantane water an ounce. Give it her, and let her not know what it is. Decoctions. Take Comfrey roots, Tormenil, ach two drams; Purslune, Plantane, each a hand∣ful; boyl them add to six ounces Syrup of Curran, Quinces, Mirtles, each six drams: give it at twice. Or, Take Syrup of Purslane, juyce of Neles, each two ounces; Purslane water four ounces, Troches of Amber, of sealed Earth, each a dram Bloodstone half a dram: give two spoonfuls every day. A Water. Take eight pins of Waer, ih Starch, Barley meal, and Rise, dried Roses a hand∣ful, juyce of Yarrow, Plantane, each half a pin; Comfrey roots and all three ounces, Horsail, Blood∣wort, each half a handful; Pears, and Quinces, Pomegranate flowers, all Sanders, each half an ounce; Masich an ounce, distil them, and give tw ounces, with half an ounce of Syrup of Roses or Pur∣slane. Electuaies. Consrve of Ross two ounces Quin∣ces an ounce and half roches of burnt Ivory ar sealed Earth, each a dram; Crocus Martis, Ble red Coral prepared, Mastich, each half a dram; wi
Syrup of Mirles make an Electuary Poders. Take Mastich, red Coral prepared, ach a dram earl, Smarags prepared  a sruple; Bloodstone half a sruple, Ble hl - drm, make a Poder. Michael Paschal cured many with this Pouder.Lb. de rat. m. c. 55. Take two Egshll, burnt Frankincese, Mastich, ach half an ounce; Pearl, red Coral and Amber, ach two drams; Bloodstone, Smaragds prepare, h half a srple; Barley lour tw pugils, whites of four Eggs, with ield Water make Ckes. Give from half a dram to a drm in pouder, with Trot∣ter broath in the morning. Or give every day a dram of the pouder ofEx pr∣fores. to. Mulberry tree roots. Or, Take a plump Tur∣tle drawn and pluckt, wash it in Rosewater and red Wine, put an ounce of Mastich in the belly of it, stick it on, and roast it, and bast it with Vinegar of Roses. Then put it into a glass close luted, to be dried in an oven; then beat all of it to pouder. Give a spoonful with Plantane water, or an astringent Dcoction. Anoint the bottom of the belly, eins and groyns, with the dropping of it. Or make Rouls thus. Take Bole half a dram, Magistery of Coral a dram, Pearl prepared a scr∣ple, Sorrel and Plantane seed, each half a dram; A∣romaticum rosatum, Traganth, each half a dram; with Sugar dissolved in Plantane water, make Rouls. In the use of cold Asringents, take heed you sop not the veins, and the heat be cooled. If these help not, use Narcoticks, a Troches of sea∣led Eath, and Amber with Oim: these a∣stringe also. Ue no Pessaries, except the veins in the neck o the wob be open. As, Take Snkeweed,
Tormentil, each half an ounce; Pomegranate flo∣wers, Plantane seed, each two drams; Comfrey roots  Frankincense, Mastich, each a dram; Acci, Sanguis Draconis, each two scruples; Blood∣stone, Starch, each a dram and half; with the whie of an Eg, and Gum traganth dissolved in Rose water, make Pessaries with red Silk. Womb-clysters. Take juyce of Yarrow, Solo∣mons seal, each two unces; Mucilage of Gum A∣rabick made in Plantane water two ounces, make a Clyster. A Fume. Take Frankincense, Mastich, each two drams; Mirtles, Labdanum, each a dram; red Roses, Pomegranate flowers, each half a dram; with Gum traganth make Trohes to be burnt. Oyntments. Take Oyl of Mirtles, Quinces, each two ounces; juyce of Plantane, Solomons seal, Hor∣stail, each an ounce; boyl the juyces away, ad Bole, Plantane seed. Mirtle berries, Ceruss, each half an ounce; with Wax make an Oyntment. Or use the Countesses Oyntment to the loyns and pecen. Cataplasms. Take Quinces, Pears boyled in red Wine, add Bole, Mastich, Sanguis Draconis, Ac∣cia, make a Cataplasm or a Cerot. Or, Take Sorrl and Plantane seed, Purslane seed, Bole, Sanguis Dra∣conis each two drams; Frankincens, Mastich, Mirrh, each three drams; Turpentine an ounce, wih juyce of Plantane and Yarrow and Wax, make a Cerot af∣ter the juyces are boyled away. Fomentations are better then Baths, for they make the humors flow more. Let them be a∣stringent, and cool. Or wash the legs and hips in cold water. Lay Epithems to the Liver, Oyntments, Cerots, or Plaisters. If choler offend, give Rhubarb and Consrve of Roses to evacuate the Cacochymy.
If blood flow from a vein broken, use Coral, Bole, Mirtles, Comfrey, Acacia, Hypocistis: or apply a Pultis of whites of Eggs, and astringent Pouders. If it come from a vessel corroded, use stoppers and glutinaters that ae slimy, as Dropwort roots a dram, with a rear Eg. Let the diet be as the Physick is. In a flux from plethory, eat little, and that of little nourishment, and in other cases give things to close the vessels. Sleep long, and use little Venery, little or no ex∣ercise. Aner hurts, and other passions. Question. Whether Frictions or Ligatures in the Legs may be made for Reulsion? Hippocrates and Galen are misconstrued in his 8. Book of Blood-letting, and they are not to be used in the flux of the Terms. Chap. 7. Of the Terms flow∣ing with pain and Symptoms. THe Symptomes are pain in the loyns or thighs, head-ach, biting at the mouth of the stomach, pain in the belly and loyns, faint∣ing. They are as in suppression of Terms, but lessThe Causes vehement, and are in them that have not con∣ceived. There is obstruction, thick and gross blood, that stretcheth the vessels, and the blood flows not orderly. A little before the Terms, there is head-ach,The Sigs. biting at the stomach, pain in the loyns, and bot∣tom of the stomach, with beating at the heart,
and ainting. When the pain is from thick blood, it comes forth in lodds, and the pain is worse beore. If it be from wind, it is sudden, and sties not in a place, and there is rumbling in the belly. he  Take heed it tun not to the stoppage of terms, if it be neglected. It is greater in barren women and Virgins, then in those have had children. e Cure. Take away the cause; if they be thick hu∣mors, evacuate them after they are prepared: if sharp, temper them. These attenuate blood, wa∣ter of Grass roots, Maidenhair, Decoctions of the opening Roots, Syrup of Maidenhair, o the five Roots, Treacle, and the like in the stoppage of the Terms. Against pain, se the Fomentations and Oynt∣ments in the Chapter of pain of the Womb. Chap. 8. Of evil discoloured Terms. THis is called the Terms depraved by bad humos, and so they are voided. The Causs Blood is foul, either from evil diet, or evil hu∣mors, or stoppage of it. The humors are flegm, choler, or melancholy mixed with it, and then the Tems are either pale, blew, green, or black and stinking or white and flegmatick. They are so from a fault in the stomach. The pale and yel∣lo are ae from too great heat in the liver. The blak ar from the spleen disordered. Si. Tha blood which is natural is different fom the bd in colour and substance: it is like that f a new ain sheep, no thiker nor thinner, and he ad Terms come no esonably, but soon
or later of which Hippocrates. You may knowLib. de morb. mu∣lier. by the colour what humor predominates, and by the subtance. The flegmatick and melacholy are long in coming, and the cholerick waterish Terms come qicker. The more they dier from the natural sate,The Pro∣gnostick. the worse they are, black and stinking are worst. The mattey are wost of all. If these flow seven, eight or nine dies, she is cured: if they ulcerate the womb, she is barren. Hippocrates saith they must be purgd and pre∣paredThe Cure. 5. Aphor. 36. with proper things, as we shewed in the distempers of the Womb. But take heed that you move not the Terms when you attenuate, for that wil melt the erous humors, and fix them more in the vessels: use neither Vinegar no sharp things. After purging, consume the reliques by sweat; if choler be in fault that must not be sweated out, discuss it with warm Baths, and do so in me∣lancholy. Use Pessaries, Fomentations and Fumes to the womb. Give Treacle, Mithridate, or the Decoction of Anelica roots, if cold humors are the cause. Chap. 9. Of Terms coming before their time. THese shew an ill constitution. And it is a depraved excretion of the Terms that comes for the time often, fr somtimes they flw sooner, or twice in a month. The immediate Cause is hurt of the retentiveThe Causes and expulive faculty, so that the blood flows not or sooner or late, or oftner: the cause why they
come sooner, is in the blood that stirsup the ex∣pulsive faculty in the whole body, or in the womb: somtimes all causes meet, the blood is too much, or too sharp and hot; and if the re∣tentive faculty in the womb be weak, and the ex∣pulsive strong and of quick sense, it is sooner. A fall, stroke or passion are the evident Cau∣ses. The Signs. They will relate it: and the signs of the cau∣ses are these. If it be from much blood, there are the signs of plethory; heat, thinness, and sharp humors are known by the distemper of the whole. The weakness of the retentive faculty, and loosness of the vessels is known from a loose and moist habit of body. The Pro∣gnostick. It is not dangerous, but troublesom, and hin∣ders conception. The Cure. I they come too soon from hurt in the faculty provoked by too much plethory. Let blood, use a spare diet, and much exercise. If it be from sharp blood, temper it by good diet and Medi∣cines, as in the cholerik distemper of the womb. Use Baths of Iron-water, that corrects the di∣stempers of the bowels, then evacuate. If it come from the retentive faculty, and loos∣ness of the vessels, correct the cold and moist di∣stemer with gentle astringents. I it be from a stroke or fall, cue it as the ves∣sels opened are cured, of which before. Chap. 10. Of Terms that come after their usual time. VVHen they stay longer then ordinary, and return without order at no set
time: the causes are little and thick blood, strait∣ness of the passages, weakness of the expulsive faculty, and dulness. Either of these causes may stop the Terms, bu if all meet, the disease is worse For if blood be not bred in such a quantity, that it may prick Nature forward to expel it, the purging of it is diered, till there be enough to stir up Nature to expel it. If thik humors are in the blood, the passages stopt, and the faculty weak, the Terms mut needs be disordered, and the purging of them differed longer. If it be from want of blood, she hath either li∣vedThe Signs. poor in diet, or exercised too much, and she inds no inconvenience by the want of her Terms. If it be from gross slimy blood, there are signs of Cacochymy. The weakness of the faculty is known by the cold distemper of the womb. It is not so dangerous as stoppage of the terms,The Pro∣gnostick. but it is bad enough in a plethorick or cacochy∣mical body. If little blood be, use a uller diet, and exer∣ciseThe Cure. not. If blood be gross and foul, make it thin, and cut it, and after Preparatives, let the humors mixed therewith, be evacuated. It is good to purge presently after the Terms, and to use Calamints, and to purge often. Also four or five daies before the Terms, sca∣ie the ankles, and hold the feet in warm wa∣, ub the legs, apply Cuppng-glasses without Sification to the inside of the thighs, and use Fumes and Pessaries. Anoin the bottom of the belly with things to provoke the Terms. If there be a numness, use things against the Palsie.
Chap. 11. Of the Terms voi∣ded another way. SOmetimes they come out at the nose, or are vomited up, or flow out by the Haemorrhoid1. De morb. mul. 5. apho. 32. obser. me∣dic. c. 15. Lib. 1 de affect. mul∣c. 7. veins. Hence Hippocrates saith that a woman that vomits blood, is cured by having her trms, or by a bloody flux. Somtimes they are pissed orth. Dodoneus saies that they come out at the eyes like tears somtimes. Amaus Lusitanus saith they will come forth at the Teats of the breasts, and at the navel, at the little finger, or ring-in∣ger every month, as Mercats observed thrice. The Causes Are stoppage of the Terms from straitness of the vessels in the womb, or evil conformation of the womb. The Pro∣gnostick. It is more troublesom then dangerous, and hinders conception. It is best when they come out at the nose, for it is a part that Nature useth to disburden her self by. The Cure. First, bring the blood to the womb again, and abate it. Open the ankle-vein three daies before she begins to bleed. Or cup the thighs, or rub them. Or use Baths, Fomentations, Oyntments, Womb-clysters, Pessaries, and the like mentioned in Suppression of the Terms. Chap. 12. Of the Whites. IT is a oul excretion from the womb, white, and somtimes blew, or green, or reddish, no: at a set time, nor every month, but disorderly, longer or shorter. Before or after the Terms, and when they are stopt. Virgins seldom have this disease, and women with child have it somtimes.
It differs from the running of the reins; for it is in less quantity, whiter and thicker, and at a greater distance. It differs from night polluti∣on, which is onely in sleep with imagination of Venery. The immediate Cause is an excrementitiousThe Causes humor, flegm, choler or melancholy. Somtimes it is like waterish blood. It is gathered in the whole body, or in the stomach, liver or spleen. For they who have crudities in the stomach, are subject to this disease. Somtimes the womb a∣lone is distempered after often mischances, or when the womb is very cold and moist. This matter flows through the veins of the womb, or of the neck of it, which use to carry blood, and Nature abuseth them to carry excre∣ments, especially if they are bred in the womb. The remote causes are whatsoever doth breed ad humors; some have it after strong purges, or long bathing. Somtimes they are pale, somtimes blew, red,The Diffe∣rences. waterish and green: somtimes slimy, or cold, or sharp, or stinking. In young people it is red∣dish. The face is discoloured, the urin thick, thereThe Signs. is loathing and heartach. If the humor be sharp and corrupt, there is a Feaver. If it be flegma∣tick and much, the ligaments of the womb are loose, and it falls out, thus Hippocrates, and thereLib. de na∣tur. mulie∣rum. are saith he swelled eyes, evil colour, and short breathing. If it be not bred in the womb, the humor is from a Cacochymy. If it be from a fault in ano∣ther part, the signs of that wil appear If it come only from the womb, there will be but little: if from the whole body, there will be more.
The Pro∣gnostick. It is often, long with little inconvenience, b it must be looked to, lest it be worse, for it o brings ulcers, Cachexy, falling out of the wom, Consumption, Fainting, Convulsions, when the matter is sent to the brain or nerves. And the worse the humor is, the greater is the disease. The Cure. It must not be suddenly stopt, lest it go to th noble parts. First, see whether it be from the whole body, or any pat, or from the womb it self. If fro the whole body, which is often, make general e∣vacuation, and turn the humors from the womo, and keep a good diet, lest they come again. I allow not bleeding in the arm, if the Terms be stopt; for they cause a Cacochymy, which admits no bleeding. Moreover the mass of blood may be made oul by them; therefore find o whether it comes from Cacochymy or Plethory. And when it is most like to come from Cacochy∣my, bleed not. Therefore if flegm abound, which is mo u∣sual, after general purging, consume the relique with Guajacum and Sara, and a drying diet, and by provoking urin, of which hereafter. If sharp and cholerick humors abound, tem∣per them with gentle astringents, as Succory, Endive, Sorrel, to prepare, purge with Rhubat, Triphera Perica, aggregative Pills, and Pills  Rhubarb. If it be melancholy, do as in melan∣choly. If it be water, cure it as Galen did the Wife o Boeths c. 8. ib. de prognost. ad Psth. If it be in the stomach, liver, or the like, pre∣vent it from increase, and because it is most a∣bout the stomach, give a Vomit, but not too strong. Then strengthen the stomach with h
and dry Medicines. If choler abound, the di∣stemper is hot, and then cool it. If it come from the womb, do as I shewed, fom what cause soever it is: Baths are good to acuate and divert, and strengthen, and take a∣way a moist distemper, provided they are proper for the constitution. Use Dryers and Astringents. As, Take Con∣sre of red Roses four ounces, of Succory two ounces, rd Coral, Snakeweed, Tormentil roots, Ivory, each  drams with Syrup of Mirtles make an Ele∣uary. Or, Take red Coral, Bole, sealed Earth, each an unce; Pearl prepared a sruple, Mastich half a dram, Cypress roots two scruples, Mace half a scriple, with Sugar of Roses as much as all, make a Pouder. Or, Take Diarrodon a dram, Sander a crple, Cri'ander two drams, Mastich, Coral, each a dram; with Sugar make Troches. But use not these Astringents, till the body e purged, least the waterish humors be stopt, and the belly swel: but you may use hot Dryers safe∣y, as Treale, Mithridate, with Conerve of Ro∣es and Wormwood. As, Take Conserve of Rosemary flowers an ounce, Diacorus two drams, Diarrhodon, Aromaicum r∣aum, each a dram; red Coral prepared a dram and alf, Treacle two drams, with Syrup of Citron peels nal e an Electuary. And least the womb be hurt with evil humors, nject the Dcoction of Barley, Honey of Roses nd Whey, with Syrup of dried Roses. Or of ormwood, Mints, Motherwort, red Roses, Al∣m. And then use a Fue of Frakincense, bdanum, Mastich, Sanders, Nutmeg, red Roses.
Avoid crude and moist things, and fish, mil and all sweet meats, and alt. Forbear Suppe drink red Wine; sleep and wake moderately  not upon the back, least the loyns be heated, an the humors sent to the womb. Question Whether are Diureticks good in the Whites? Diureticks that provoke urin do also provok the terms; therefore the reliques of the humos would be carried by them to the womb, but these move the terms secondarily: but if the body be well purged, first they will not make the flux greater, but bring it out by urin. Chap. 13. Of a Gonorrhaea. THe running of the Reins may be in all wo∣men that are fit for a man, for it is the flux of natural seed. It is in men and women from the French pox, but when stinking humors do flow, it is not properly called a Gonorrhaea. The Causes The chief Cause is the weakness of the reten∣tive faculty, and the loosness and largeness of the seed-vessels: the causes of these are shewed in the Gonorrhaea of men. The Signs. The women will declare it, and the greatness and the colour; for if it be white and little and thick, and at distance, it is a true Gonorrhaea. The Pro∣gnostick. If it continue, it brings a Consumption and barrenness. The Cure. The Cure of Gonorrhaea and night pollution is Pact. 3. but I shall add this, if it come from plenty of seed. The Buds of the Salix o Willow,
called the Closing of the Womb.  famous Physitians and Anatomists say  is a Hymen, which is the sign of Virginity.  they say a membrane wrinkled with  like Mitleberries, like the bud of a Rose half  hence came the word I think with the Ancients, that  is some∣thing in these parts that distinguisn Virgins from women, which is violated in the fi copu∣ltion: many say they have it: and we may be∣lieve them. For it is certain that hre is an al∣teration at first in Vigins which causeth pain, and bleeding which is a sign of Virginity. But what this is, it is not yet known mai∣ly. Some say it is a nervous membrane, with small veins, which bleed at the first bout. Some say there are our Caruncles tied together with small membranes. Some have observed a fleshy Circle about the Nymphae with obscure little veins, which makes the membrane not to be ner∣vous but fleshy. To be short. I suppose it to be certain, that the part which receives the Yard, is not in them that have used a man, as in Virgins, nor is it a∣like in all; and this hath caused the diversity of opinions in Anatomists. Moreover this is not found in all Virgins, because some are very lust∣ful and when it itcheth, they put in their finger, o some other thing, and break the membrane: sotimes the Midwives break it. Question 2. Whether do all Virgins at the first bout, or Copulation, bleed? The Africans had a custom to shut the BrideEx Leone Africano. groom and the Bride up in a Chamber, after they
were married, till they prepared the Wedding∣dinner. And an old woman stood at the door, to receive a bloody sheet from the Bridegroom, that she might shew it in triumph to all the guess, and that then they might east with joy. And if there was no blood to be seen, the Bride was to be sent home o her friends with disgrace, and the guess went adly home without their Din∣ners. Some say from experience, that some honest Virgins have lost their Maiden-heads without bleeding, and that it is a certain sign of Virgini∣ty when they bleed, and when they do not, they ar not to be censured as unchast. I hold that young Virgins will bleed but when they are in years, by reason of the long continuance of the terms, the parts are harder and larger; and if the mans Yard be small, there is no necessity of bleeding. Or if the girl was wanton asore, and by long handling, hath dilated the part, or broke it, there is no blood after copulation. Therefore Deut. chap 22. the Law of Moses is taken for that which happeneth often, and for the most part. And there can be no more gahered fom hence, but bleeding is an undoubted sign of Vir∣ginity. The same may be said of the African cu∣stom. Question 3. Whether is the straitness of the pri∣viies a sign of Virginity? The privities are straiter in some according t age, habit of body, and other circumstances, and Virgins are straiter then women that have been at it. But I deny that straitness is a certain ar∣gument of Virginity. For after many acts of Ve∣nery, it may be made so strait by astringent Medicines
that Whores may be taken for Virgins; as we shewed concerning a Wench that was mar∣ried, and to appear a Virgin, she used a Bath of Comrey roots. Question 4 Whher is Mik i the breasts a sig o Virginity lost? Some say that there can be no milk in the beasts, til a woman hath conceived: and Vir∣gins have neither the cause nor the end why milk is made. And the terms stot do rather corupt then turn to milk. And though there be alwaies in the breasts a faculty to make milk, yet doth it not shew its power, but upon an object, and for some end. Some say that Virgins may have milk, and5. Apor. 39 Gal. in com. urge this Saying of Hipporaes, If any have milk whn she is neither with child nor breeding thir erms are stopt. Galen is of the same opinion, andLib. 3. anat c. 4  aphor ib. 5. 39 though it be seldom, et he saith it is possible And Alexander Benedictus and Christopher de Ve∣ga saw it. We shall not contradict Hippocrates and expe∣ience, but there is a twoold milk. The one of Virgins. The other of those that have brought forth or conceived. The first is made of blood, that cannot get out at the womb, but goes to the breasts; and this is nothing but a superfluous nourishment of the breasts, that turns milk by he faculty of the breasts, without the company f a man or concpion. Te other is only when here is a child: of this milk it is true what Hip∣ratesCit. lo. de mor. mu∣er. writes, It is a certain sign of a Mole, when rat blld women hae no milk in their breasts. nd true milk in the breasts is a sign of a live hild in the womb.
These milks differ in respect of the blood, and diversity of the veins that bring it to the breasts, and though both are white, yet that of Virgins is thinnest, no is it so much, nor so sweet; this1. De hist. ani. c. 12. may breed in the veins according to Aristotle, from the supersuous nourishment of the breasts: and if Virgins have it, they are not to be termed nchast. Chap. 2. Of the Green-sick∣ness, or white Feaver. THis is in Virgins fit for a man, it is calld the Virgins disease, and the white Feaver, not that there is alwaies a feaver, but because their face is like people in a feaver. It is thus defined. The Virgins diseae, is the changing of the natural colour into a pale and green with faint∣ness, heaviness of body, loathing of meat, palpi∣tation of heart, difficult breathing, sadness swel∣ling of the eet, eyelids and face, from depraved nourishment. The Causes The first Cause is stoppage of terms. The next is the gathering of bad humors; for when the way to the womb is stopt, the blood returns to the great vessels and bowels, and choaks thei heat, and stops the vessels, and spoils the making of blood, and then there are crudities, which be∣ing brought to the habit of the body, cannot b united perfectly to the parts and cause a Cach∣xy, which is the way to a Dropsie and Leuo∣phlegmac, and divers Symptoms. The caus of the ostructions of the vessels of the womb, are crude humors, and legmatick limy blood
from evil diet, and drinking o vinegar, or eat∣ing raw corn, chalk, ashes, lime, earth, lay, and the like. There is a pale and green colour, the face isThe Signs. sollen, and the eye-brows in the morning after sleep especially; the ankles swell, and the whole body is loose, and moist from much water: the lggs are lazy, the pulse is little and often, in the neck, temples and back. The heart beats, the breath is short when they go up stairs, they loath meat. Some have the Pica, or desire to eat ab∣surd things. The terms are stopt, the Hypocho∣dria are swollen; somtimes they vomit, if va∣pors ie to the head, there is thirst and headach; and if melancholy be mixed, the animal actions are hurt. These are not all in all people, but most are in most, and in some all. It is often turned to a Dropsie. Some afterThe Pro∣gnostick. death have had a Scirrhus, hard liver: some die suddenly, the heart being oppressed. If the sto∣mach be much afflicted, it is dangerous, and they loath meat much. If it come from the womb a∣lone, it is easier cured. It is best to begin in the Spring or Summer:The Cre. after a Clyster, open a vein the ankle. Then heat the thick cold humor, and make it thin; andbecause it is too much to be purged at once, prepare and purge often, and mix atte∣naters and cutters with your purges. When the humors are above the stomach and Mesentery, it is good to vomit those that can ea∣sily vomit, and to give liver-physick, or spleen, or womb-physick, even as in Leucophlegmacy, ee the Chapter of Terms stopt. But in this dis∣ease, alwaies consider the liver, spleen and Mesentry,
the obstructions of which are cued with things mentioned. At fir open the the obstructions of these pas wih om ew things that provoke terms, and ter ive more. Thus: Take opening Roots an ounce, Maddr,  Orris, Eampane, Citron pels dried, Sar h hlf an une; Mugwort, Agrimony, rmnder, each a handful; Savin two pugils, Crhams seeds an ounce, Senna two ounces, Me∣hoacan, Agarick, each half an ounce; Stchas  two pugils, Fennel, Aniseed, Galangal, each two drams; bl them to a pint and half, sweeten it, ad ad Cinnamon water three dram. Or infuse em all with Sea-wormwood half a handful, common mwood two pugils. Or, Take Agarick, pills of Ruba, eah a dram; Quercetn's Pills of Tartar and of Ammniacum each half a dram; Spike a sruple, Oyl of innamon thee drops, Ex∣tract of Wormwood half a scruple, make Pills: give a scruple an hour before meat. Or, Take juyce of Mrcury, clarified Honey or Sugar, each an ounce: add Gith seed, Senna, ah two drams; Mechoacan a dram, make a Mass: or give Conserve of Mari∣gold flowers. Stel is an excellent remedy after Preparatives, with proper Drinks or Ingredients. And i the vessels of the stomach are stopt, give a Vomit, and then gross pouder of Steel. If the Mesentery be stopt, Take Diarrhodon,Ho laudat Mercatus. Diacurcuma, Agarick, each a dram; Crthamus seeds two drams, red Dock roots, Crrot seed, each  dram and half; Cloves a dram, Steel prepared two ounces, with clarified Honey make an Elctuary: give two or four drams. If she vomit, stop it not. If the Livr be chiefly stot let the Stl be
inely poudere. And Take of it half a pound, add eight ounces of Wine in a glass, set it in the embers, stir it, and let it boyl twelve simmers, tl you see it roath, and grow a little thick; then pour the roath and all into another vessel: do thus four times, and then let it be gently boyled till it be thick as Honey. Then Take Parsley, Carrot seed, Diacurcuma, Diarrodon, each a dram and half; Cinnamon a dram, Steel so prepared six drams, with Honey make an Electuary: give three drams, or five after exerise. If the Spleen be stopt; Take Steel prepared a pound, wash it with Vinear, then strain it, and lay it on a clout, and add pouder of Cloves hlf an ounce. Let them stnd so a day and a night, then put them in a glassed vessel, ad ten ounces of white Wine Diarrhodon, Harts tongue, Senna, and Capar baks then stir them, then set them in the Sun for a day, or in an Oven: do this ten daies, til the Steel be melted in the Wine, and little or nothing at the bottom. Give two oun∣ces of this in the morning afer purging and ex∣ercise. Or, Take Steel prepared an ounce, Cinnamon, Aniseeds, each two drams; Diamoshu without musk a dram Sugar an ounce, make a Pouder, give a dram: drink white ine and Mugwort water af∣tr it. Steled Wine. Take Steel in poudr three oun∣ces, Cinnamon half an ounce, white Wine three pints: set them in a close glass eight dies in the Sun, stir them every day Give six or eight ounces four hours aore dinner, for fifteen or twenty dies, and walk after it. At first give a Steel-medicine to prpare. As, Take Steel filings four ounces, t i in an irn
ibl or Ladle, thn cast it into two pints of water of Hps, Grass, Mdder, Borage, or Spring-water: stin it, and do so ven tims. Then Take so ma∣ny ounces o w Steel, and cast it into water as be∣fre: strain and add Syrup of Violets, Borage, or  of Rses four ounces: give three ounces in the morning fter exrcise. Prepare thus three or four times and en use stronger. Ae Steel use Sorzonera stpt all night in Wine give  the morning. This hath cured ob∣structi Mercatus. Bezr one ith Mercatus opens obstructions in my exerience, and rehts venom; give six or seven gins. Steel is bet Spring and Fall, purge, and exer∣cise before and after it, that it may be better dis∣persed. Use Preparatives, Purges, and streng∣theners often, and for a long time, and change the forms, least the patient loath them. If water spread about the body, cool the bo∣dy, and make it heavy. Use Sweats, as Baths natural or artificial, of Mugwort, Calamints, Nep, Danewort, Sage, Bays, Rosemary, Mercu∣ry, Ivy, Briony roots, Orris, Elicampae. After puging and opening obstructions, all the Symptos wil vanish, if not, see for the Sym∣ptoms of the womb. The Diet. Let the air be temperately hot. The meat of good juye and easie digestion; pot-herbs and green fits must be avoided, fish, milk, lettice. Make Sue with Sage and Cinnamon. Drink Wine; lt bread e well leavened, with ennel∣sd drink no wat no Broaths, at first and in the delition of the disease, use exercise and Vnry. Let sleep be moderate.
Question 1. Whether may the woman in this Disease be allowed the absurd things they long for? They are Virgins or women with child that long for such things, Virgins must not be allow∣ed them, as chalk, &c. for they will increase the disease. Women with child must be pleased with fair wods to abstain from them; but if the appetite wil not be allayed, rather grant them, then suffer an abortion or mark upon the child. Question 2. Is motion and exercise good in the Green-sickness? They are better then idleness which heaps up crudities, they raise the languishing heat in the bowels, and help the nourishment to be distribu∣ted: therefore they are to be used before the dis∣ease be great, and in the declination they discuss the humors. But use moderation, least you weaken the bo∣dy, or choak them First therefore use Frictions, then watching, then more exercise after conve∣nient purging. Question 3. Whether is Venery good for Maids in the Green-sickness? It is probable, and agreeable to reason and experience that Venery is good HippocratesHippocr. lib. de morb virg. bids them presently marry, for if they conceive they are cured. John Langius aith this disease comes in the ripeness of age or presently after. Lib. 1. epist.
Venery heats the womb and the parts adjacent, opens and loosens the passages, so that the terms may better flow to the womb. But if there be a great Cacochymy, take that away before she be married, and then Venery may do more then Physick. But use it not in the vigor of the disease, nor in weakness. Question 4. Whether is Blood-letting good in this Disease? A Cachexy beginning with coldness of the whole body, seem to deny bleeding, and because the crude humors are in fault rather then blood.Lib. de morb. virg. But Hippocrates adviseth bleeding at the first. If it be a new disease, and comes from stopt terms, and blood abound that is stopt, and not turned into another humor, you may boldly bleed, provided the strength permit, and the pas∣sages be open. But in an old disease when crude flegm abounds, bleed not, for it will increase the disease. Chap. 3. Of Symptomes from the Womb, and Mother-fits in General. IT is not to be expressed what miserable disea∣ses women are subject to: both Virgins and others from the womb, and its consent with o∣ther parts. For when terms or blood are stopt, there are great Symptoms, and while they putre∣fie or get evil qualities▪ the Symptoms are grie∣vous, and almost unexpressible. One woman may have divers Symptoms from
the womb at the same time, when the seed and terms are mixed with other humors after they are corrupted, and there is more sometimes, and such noble substance as seed and terms being cor∣rupted, are like poyson. Gal. 6. de lo. aff. c. 5. The consent with other parts, is from likeness of parts, nearness, or connexion of vessels. And because the womb is membranous, it hath a great consent with the membranes and nerves. Also the parts adjacent are easily infected. And third∣ly, it hath consent with all the body by veins, ar∣teies and nerves. It consents with the brain by the nerves, and membranes of the back-marrow: it consnts with the heart by the areries, with the liver by the veins, which are great in the womb, and ther∣fore the blood and bad humors go back to the ver. It consents with the stomach by Anasto∣mosis in the veins of the Mesentery, and by the arteries through foul humors and vapors go from the womb to the Mesentery and stomach. It conents with the spleen by the arteries; therefore many women that had not their terms enough in their youth, and have hot blood, are fter Hypochondriack, and a Physitian can scarce distinguish these diseases of the womb and spleen nor cure them severally. It consents with the papps by veins and ner∣es, and the heart, Diaghragma, head, brain, and all the orgns of sense and motion; with the liver, spleen, stomach, belly, mesentery, bladder, strait ut, back, hips, arms and legs, and causeth sym∣toms. As Galen aith the mother or hystericalGal. de lo. aff. c. 5. ion is one name, but hath under it innume∣ble Symptoms.
Chap. 4. Of Suffocation of the Womb. IN this they seem to be strangled. And there are so many Symptoms at once, that it is im∣possible to define it by one. Sometimes there is only short breath, sometimes the animal actions are hurt, the whole body is cold from a malig∣nant vapor sent up from the womb. The Causes The immediate Cause, is a vapor malignant and venemous, sent up by the arteries, veins and nerves that hurt the actions of the parts it goes to. This vapor is like air or wind, thin and little but very strong, to get presently through the whole body; it chiely ascends to the gullet, and causeth choaking, as eating of Mushrooms, Hel∣lebore, and other poysons. There is often short difficult breathing, with heart-ach, vomiting, and loathing. If the vapor go first to the heart, the motion of it ceaseth, and there is swound∣ing, and she falls down. If it go to the brain, the animal actions are hurt. When eed and terms corrupt in the womb, with other bad humors, they breed this evil va∣por; because they are the best substance, and the beginning of generation, they are worst when corrupted, especially seed to hurt the wholeGal. cit. 1. body. Somtimes it is in women with child, when they have not their after puging, but evil humors ae let, and corrupt in the womb. The chief cause of this humor, is in the trum∣pet of the womb and stones, the body of which is hollow and loose, the stones being in bladders, and have hollowness full of water, which in hystrical
women is yellow and thicker then ordina∣ry.Vesal. de corp. huma. Fabr. lib. 5. c. 15. This trumpet and the stones are often taken for the womb it self when they are swollen with corrupt seed, and humors, and wind, and reach to the navel: of which in the Chapter of ascent of the Womb. This disease is breeding sooner or longer, as the matter is more or less, somtimes corrupt hu∣mos lie still, and if they be stirred, they send a venom or vapor to the whole body: now in wo∣men subject to this disease, sweet sents to the nose, or taken in, or anger will move these hu∣humors and vapors. They are according to the variety of the sym∣ptomsThe Diffe∣rences. and efficient cause, or venemous humors, for corrupt blood, especially seed, puts on ano∣ther Nature. That Suffocation is at hand, it appears by la∣ziness,The Signs. weakness of the legs, paleness, sad coun∣tenance, and the motion of somthing like a ball in the belly, with noise like Froggs, Snakes, or Crows, so that some think it devillish. There is also belching, yawning, yexing, short wind, heart∣beating, loathing, dulness, laughture at the com∣ing of the fit, rom the vapor gtting into the membrne of the breast, that tickle them: some cry, some both laugh and cry. These Symptoms increase when the fit comes and the jaws are closed, that she seems to be choaked, and sense and motion is gone or de∣praved. Some have Convulsions, some har what is done about them, but cannot speak, the ule i less, the whole body is cold, and the eyes  as if they were dead. When the it declines, humors sow from the rivis, the gus rumble, the eyes open, the
cheeks grow red, and the body warm, the ani∣mal actions return, and the patient sighs, and comes to her self. It is known to be from corrupt seed, if the terms are in order, and short breath, and low voice, Suffocation and Convulsions, and all Symptomes are then more vehement, and at the end of the fit there flows a humor like seed out of the privities. It is from the terms if they be stopt, or flow not orderly, and if there be a dis∣ase in the womb, it is neither from the seed no the terms. The Pro∣gnostick. 1. If there come swounding, or a great Con∣vulsion, or quenching of natural heat, it is dead∣ly. 2. Suffocation from corrupt seed, is more dan∣gerous then that which is from the terms mixt with melancholick humors. 3. The longer it lasts, and the worse the sym∣ptoms, the more is the danger. It ceaseth in yong women when they begin to bear children. 4. The oftner the fit comes, the more you may ear the quenching of the natural heat by weakning of the heart often, and if she foam at the mouth, she dies. The Cure of the Fit. In the fit you must discuss the malignant va∣pors that riseth from the womb, and turn it fom the principal parts, and you must evacuate the matter that breeds it, and prevent its return. Cal upon her loud, pluck the hairs of her privities and ears, make strong Ligatures and Frictions, cup the legs, and thighs, and goyns; hold stinks to the nose, as Partridg-feathers, burnt hairs, Lea∣ther, Horn, Castor, Assa foetida, Galbanum, oyl
of Amber, Rue, the warts on Horses legs dried, and the pouder upon coals burnt, makes a ume which if taken in the nose, suddenly raised them. Apply sweet Scens to the priviies, as Cive, Musk, Gallia, and Alpta moshata, or pouder of Cloves. To be a skilful Physitian study my Sennertus, Platerus, Riverius, Bartholi∣nus, and Riolanus, of the last Editions. Or, Take Storax calamita, Benzoin, each a dram; Gallia moschata half a sruple, make Trohes with Gum Trganth, and let the Fume be taken into the womb by a Funnel. A Liniment. Take Storax, Benzoin, each a dram; Gallia moschata half a scruple, Civet four grains, liquid Storax half a scruple, with Cotton put it into the womb. Clysters to discuss wind, draw down the mat∣ter. Take the Carminative Dcoction a pint, Ele∣ctuary of Hiera six drams, Benedicta laxativa an ce, Oyl of Rue and Bayberris, each a dram. Use Womb-clysters and Pessaries to women that have known man. Take Electuary of Hiera and Dia∣phaenicon, each two drams; Turpentine half an ounce, Honey of Mercury an unce, Castor hal a dram, th Wool make a Pessary. Oyl of Tin applied to the navel, doth remove the sit. Or Rue, Castor, and sneesing Pouders. As, Take white Hellebore hal a scruple, long Pepper nd Ginger, each half a dram: or put Oyl of Am∣ into the Nose and Ers. Apply to the Womb this. Take Oyl of Rue, as, each two ouns; Cummin seed, Cstr dissol∣ in Vingar, ech two drams; with Wax make a  Or use a lsr of lbnum, Ca∣or, and Aa foetida. A compound distilled Water. Take Zedoary, smp sds, Lovage ts, each two ouns; Mirrh,
Castor, each half an once; Piony roots four oun, Misteto of the Oak gathered in the wain of the Mon three ounces, ad water of Motherwort four pins an half, Spirit of Wine a pint and half, steep them eig daies, distil and give a spoonful with Tile-flower, or Mugwort water, or Oyl of Amber some drops. Or, Take Castor, Mirrh, Assa faetida, each a srupl Pepper half a scruple, with syrup of Mugwort ml Pills, give three. The Cure out of the Fit. First, prevent the eed from corrupting in the womb, and if it be corrupt, evacuate it preseny with Womb-clysters and Pessaries: then dispese the reliques, and strengthen the wom. But ir give a general Purge that is gentle often, and use things that prevent the breeding of seed. Strengthen with Plaisters and Oyntments to the region of the womb. As, Take liquid Sto∣rax two drams, Avens, Agnus castus seeds, An∣gelica, each half a dram; Alipta moschata a scru∣ple, Oyl of Nard, Lillies, and white Wax, make a Oyntment. Or, Take Seeds of Agnus castus  dram, all Sanders, each half a dram; whit Ros pouder a dram, Tacamahaca a scruple, Amber t scruples, Alipta moschata half an once, with Tur∣pentine, Labdanum and Wax, make a Plaister. I she be a Virgin, let her be married. If it be from terms stopt, see in the Chapt of that. This disease is neither from seed, nor blood nor humors, if they be not corrupted after a pe∣culiar manner. If it be from the womb diste∣pered, give the Inusion of an ounce of Brion root in white Wine one in a week, for a year  bed time: or this Hysteik Water.
Take Lovage roots, Piony, Angelica, Zedoa∣r, each an ounce; Miseto of the Oak gathered in the wane of the Moon two ounces, Mints, Balm, Ca∣lamints, Bettony, each a handful; Carrot, Parsnep sd, Castor, each half an ounce; distil them in white Wine and water of Motherwort after eight daies infu∣son. Or, Take Briony, Valerian, Spignel, An∣glica roots, each half an ounce; Balm, Caamints, Pennyroyal ettony, each half a handful; boyl them in Wine, add Syrup of Mugwort an ounce: give it a thrice. Vitriol of Iron one grain, with two grains of Sugar given in Wine some weeks, is excellent. Or, Take Cummin seed, wild Parsnep seed, each  dram; give a dram in pouder. Or Take Fae∣la Brioniae two drams, Cummin seed, Parsnep sed, ch a dram; Amber half a dram, Cloves two sru∣les, Cinnamon a scruple, make a Pouder. Pills. Take Castor a scruple, Assa faetida half  scruple, Mirrh, Galbanum, Sagapenum; each a cruple; with Honey of Mercury make ills: take  a sple or a scruple often. Or take Treace  hridate. Apply Plaisters or Linments to the region of  Womb, thus. Take old Treacle half an ounce, Agnu castus seeds a dram, Oyl of Angelica and ummin seeds, each two drams; with Plaister of yberris. r make Oyntments of the same. Quest 1. What preternaural diseases is the  of the Womb properly? me say it is a cold distemper in quality chan∣, they say right, but coldness is not the chief om. Others say it is respiration hurt, Syn∣ or Convulsion. But it canno be defined
by one Symptom. Fo somtimes the animal a∣ctions are hurt, and there is a Megrim, Delirium, Convulsion, and sense and motion are gone. Nor is it strange, that so small a vapor should bring such Symptomes, for it hath an occult ve∣nomGal. 6. de lo. aff. c. 5. in it which is strong, for it goes many waies, and to many parts. Question 2. What is the true Caus of the  of the Mother? I say it is the malignant vapors that flie up from the womb: for it doth not work by a ma∣nifest4. De lo. aff. c. . quality, but by a venom which Galen sait is like that of a Torpedo, or Phalanx, or Scor∣pion, which are little in bulk, but do great mi∣chief, being enemies to the vital spirits and hea by which there is a coldness all over, and so breath from the actions of the heart hurt. Fo when the heart is hurt, or the vital Spirits, eithe suffocated or corrupted, there are no good ani∣mal Spirits bred, and they not flowing to th nerves and muscles, hinder the motion of th breast. Also this malignant vapor is an enemy  the animal Spirits, and makes doting and Co∣vulsions when it gets to the brain. The Cause of these vapors are corrupt se and terms, for while they are in thir proper ve∣sels, they change not their nature. And the se is not alwaies pure but mixed with  hum and the seed-vessels are sometimes  a distempered. Moreover the corruption  the womb in a pculiar manner: for as Frr saith, The place from whence com life, is  the breeder of the most deadly poyson.
Question 3. Is it good to give Wine in a it of the Mother? Hippocrat and Avicen quarrel about this..  The fist allos wine because they are weak, and nothing sooner reresheth But Avicen is for wa∣ter, and forbids flesh, for they increase seed and lood. But in the time of the it wine is proper, and Avicen doth not speak of the it, but of the diet out of the it, when it comes from plenty of seed and blood; nor will a little wine in the time of e it get presently to the womb. Chap. 5. Of the Frenzie of the Womb. IT is a great and foul Symptome of the womb both in Virgins and Widdows, and such as ave known man. These are mad for lust, and in∣ie men, and lie down to them, and it differs rom Salacity, because in that there is no Deli∣ium. It is an immoderate desire of Venery that akes women almost mad, or a Delirium from n iminoderate desire of Venery: it is without a eve, and with heat, and tends to madness. here are degrees in it, for modest women have  but will not for shame declare it, and die of onsumptions. Others will not conceal it, but eak their thoughts bawdily, and follow men, nd olliie them shamelesly, as Hippocrates  in his Book of Virgins Diseases. The immediate Cause is plenty of hot and The Causes
sharp seed against Nature, but next unto that hich is natural; it is a little biting, swelling, and orcing Nature to let it out by lechey. The brain is only hurt by consent and the animal a∣ctions by an external error, or too vehement ob∣ject. The part first affected, is the womb in the Nympha, which grows hot, and swells, but the Nymphae are not properly the seat of Venery, but the Clitoris, which was called by the same name anciently. The heat and sharpness of seed, is from the heat of the womb that breeds it, from hot humo in the womb and hot blood. The outward Causes, are hot meats spiced strong wine, and the like, that heat the privities idleness, pleasure, and dancing and reading o bawdy Histories. The Signs. They find their lust to boy at first, and so shame will not declare it: they are sad and si∣lent, and their eyes turn to and fro with lust, an if any speak of Venety, they blush, and the puls changeth, when th brain consenteth, reason i perverted, and modesty is overcome, then the prate, are lustful, and angry; somtimes they cr or laugh without a cause: they follow men, an sollicite them for copulation. Some will lie wi any one they meet. The Pro∣gnostick. It is a ordid disease, curable at first, but if ne∣glected, it turns to madness. Th Cure. Let Virgins that have it, before reason is sub∣verted, be in company with chast Maidns, o h married. And be let blood to abate heat of blco and sharpness of seed very often, there is no bet∣ter remedy. Then temper and evacuate the humors, if the be adust, and there be madness use strong
Then have a Bath of Lettice, Willow, Water∣lillies, Vine-leaves, Purslane, Venus navel, red Roses, Violets, Waterlillies. Let her sit twice  day in it, and not sweat. To take away the sharpness of the seed, use Lettice, Violets, Waterlillies, and things that quenh seed by a secret quality, as Agnus castus eed, Leaves and Flowers of Champhyre here∣er. As Take leaves of Waterlillies, Agnus castus, Willow, each three handfuls; Lettice, Purslane, Ve∣ navel, each a handful; Lettice, Poppy sed, the  great cold Seeds, each half an ounce; Dill seed  drams, Waterlillies a handful, Violets half a ndful, beat them with juyce of Lemons, distil them er twenty four hour, add to every pint a dram of mphire, give an ounce. Or, Take Agnus ca∣ieaves, Rue, Willow, each two handfuls; Mints,  of Dill, each a handful and half; Waterlillies lf a handful. Agnus castus seeds, Hemp, Cori∣der, Lettice seed, each half an ounce: beat them, nd distil them with water, add a pint of juyce of Le∣ns, rectifi it to half. An Emulsion. Take Lettice, and white Poppy  and the four great cold Seeds, each half an ounce;  of Lettice, Waterlillies, Willow, each four oun∣s; Syrup of Violets two ounces, Magistery of Co∣  dram. An Electuary. Take Conserve of Waterlillies, lets, of Agnus catus top eh an ounce; of Ro∣ hlf an ounce, red Cral Smaragds, ech a dram;  and Lettice candied, each an ounce; with  of Violets and Waterlillies, make an Electuary. Or make Baths of the same. As, Take tops Anus castus, Lettice, Rue, Waterlillies, Dl  them, anoint with Oyl of Lillies, ngunt of
Rose, with Camphire afr that. Or lay a Plai∣ster of Mercury and Marsh-lentils to the breast and loyns. Ly a Plate of Lead to the Back, and give a Pessary of juyce of Plantane, P∣slane, Gourds. These that work by an occult quality, are fit∣test for numnesses that must not marry, but they that will marry must forbear them, because they cause barnness. Let diet be thin, and of little nourishment, no Eggs; Beef is good, and fresh fish. Also Lettice, Purslane, Succoy. Sleep little think not of Ve∣nery, labour, and avoid idleness. Question. Whether is Camphire cold or ht, or doth it quench Venery? It is hot because it burns, flames, is thin, pie∣ceth, is sharp and bitter. But it hath cold effects, as curing of burnes and inflammations, and h headaches: but this is from the likeness of th substance, because it draws hot vapors to it, an discusseth, as Linseed oyl that cures burnes. No hath it a double substance cold and hot, that ma be separated. Exercit. 104. s. 8. Scaliger denies it by experience to quench V∣nery, but if it be taken often, it doth: he tie it but once. Chap. 6. Of the Melancholy o Virgins and Widdows. IT is a Dliri with sadness, trouble and we ing, stimes lauging, without a Feav
It differs from others by the efficacy only of the efficient cause, for it hath divers pains besides dness, especially on the left side, near the heart in the pap this is by occasion at a distance. The Cause is a melancholick vapor from aThe Causes melancholick blood in the vessels near the heart, that infects the animal Spiits, hurts the Fancy, and so the reason. For melancholick blood a∣bounding in the vessels of the womb, comes back to the great arteries about the heart, by the arte∣ies of the womb, and infects both vital and ani∣mal Spirits and causeth trouble of heart and de∣ium, while this blood is quiet in the arteries, thee is no vapor that riseth; but when it is hea∣ed or sirred up by any cause, the arteries about the back and spleen beat more then ordinary, and the vapors arise and trouble the heart. They ae sad, and ull of thoughts, and trou∣bleThe Signs. at the heart, and cannot express their grief; all things are tedious to them, they weep and lugh without a cause, they sleep little, and with trouble and ear: they have a pain on the left side, and somtimes the left breast; their jaws are dy, al which are the effects of a melaucholick va∣por, and when that is discussed, all cease. If it be old, it turns to madness, and then they are  silent, then ptlers, and think they see Gos. At first it is easier cured, but if it last long, andThe Pro¦gnostick. e esist not imagination, and will not rejoyce ith her Gossips, it is dangerous. They often despair and desire death, or hang themselves, or down themslves. If the manners are chaned,  tus to madness. Observe what progress the disease hth made.The Cur. At first if blood be hot, oen a vin oten i e
arm, if the terms be not stopt: if they be, bleed in the ankle some daies before they use to flow. Let her be merry, and prepare and purge me∣lancholy, thus. Take Borage and Balm water, each three ounces; Syrup of the juyce of Borage and Bugloss, each an ounce and half. Mix them for two Doses, repeat them somtimes. Then purge Me∣lncholy. As, Take Senna six drams, Agarick a dram and half, Borage flowers and Violets, each a pgil; itron peels two drams, infuse them in Rhe∣nish wine for six hours, strain them, ad Syrup of Vio∣lets an ounce. Or, Take Scorzonera roots two oun∣ces. Borage n ounce, Balm a handful, Senna four ounces, Agarick half an ounce, Citron peels six drams, Zedoary two drams, Cordial stowers a hand∣ful, add half a pint of the juyce of sweet-scented Ap∣ples, and of Rorage and Bugloss steep them two daie, then strain them, ad Sugar and half an ounce of Ci∣namon, make a Syrup: give two or three ounces. Also give Cordials, Confection of Hyacinths, Species Exhilerants, and Confection Alkermes to such as can bear it. Cure it as Melancholy, only the matter comes from the womb; therefore still regard that it dry not the body too much, but use a moistning Diet. Chap. 7. Of an Epilepsie from the Womb. THis Falling-sickness is worst then from o∣ther causes, because there are greater sym∣ptoms, for that malignant vapor doth not onely fall into the nerves, but the veins and arteries. The Causes The same malignant vapor that causeth suffo∣cation, causeth this, for when it ascends by the
veins or arteries, it begets other diseases: but when it gets to the nerves, or to the fountain of them, it causeth the Epilepsie. In some the whole body hath a Convulsion; in others some part only, as the eyes, head, tongue hand or leg, and the outward senses are diversly taken. Some see not, some hear not, some see and cannot speak, some dote, and think they see strange things: some cry out, and know not why. All loose the sense o feeling. If the vapor be nt very malignant, they re∣un to their work after the fit, as if they had not een ill. It is known by what hath been said: for hereThe Signs.  not only a Convulsion as in other Epilepsies, t dives Symptomes as in Suffocation of the omb. They seldom oam at the mouth, because e brain is not so shaken as to cause oaming: or is the vapor so fixed in the roots of the ner∣es, but they often do hear. It is grievous, and hath grievous Symtoms,The Pr∣gnostick. ut it is not so bad as a true Epilepsie, and if you ve proper Medicines, it never returns. The Cure of the Fit. Use things as in Suffocation of the womb or ther-sits: as Rue and Castor are good against Also out of the sit, you must cure it as the Mo∣, using things that respect the womb and the  As Take Piony roots, Sorzonera, Misle∣ t Ok, each half an ounce; Polypdy of the  an oune. Rue, Pennyroyal, Calamint, each a  Seseli, Pion, Agnus castus seeds, each dram; Carthamus seds brised half an ounce,  of Rosemary, Sge, Saehas, Borage, ech two
pugils; boyl them to a pin and half, strain and ad juyce of Bettony, Yarrow, Mercury, Mugrt, Sn∣a five ounces, Agarick, Epithymum, each half an ounce; Rhubarb, Cloves, each two drams; Ani I nnel sed, each three drams: boyl, strain with S∣gar, and half an ounce of Cinnamon, make Syrup give two ounces. And these Pills twice in a week, a scruple o dram an hour afore Supper. Take Piony ro, Senna, each half an ounce; Mugwort, Botto Rue, Yarrow, each half a handful boyl them, cl∣rifie the Decoction, add juyce of Mercury an ounce. Aloes an ounce and half: let it settle, pour of the clea add Rhubarb sprinkled with Cinnamon water  drams, Agarick half an ounce, Mastich, Epilp pouder, each half a dram; with Syrup of Mugw make Pills. To strengthen the Head and the Womb, and to mend its Distemper: Take Fecula o Pim dram, of Briony, Amber, Misleto of the Oak, e half a dram; Bezoar stone, Mans sull, each a sr∣ple; make a pouder, give half a dram with Scorzon or Tile flower water, or with Sugar make Rouls. An lectuary. Take Conserve of Balm, Ti flwers, Rosemary Lilly covals, Scorzonera  anied, each an ounce; Diamosch dulce a dra pouder of Agnus castus seeds and Piony rots,  two drams; with Syrup of Sthas. Chap. 8. Of pain of the He from the Womb. MAny ins come from the Wom, bu  chief and greatest are in th Head, ∣ver, or on one side, o in the eyes.
Matter ascends to the membranes of the headThe Cause by the veins and arteries from the womb. It is a po or humor from blood and humors; som∣times bad blood that is thin goes from the womb vessels to the great vessels, and gets to the head, & t the membranes there, and causeth a stretching ulceated, or pricking, or beating pain, when it is carried through the arteries being ul of blood. They think their head will be torn and theThe Signs. membranes, and it is behind in the head, or when the terms flow, or ar disordered, from consent with the womb. If it be from a vapor, there is no hviness, and it ceaseth presently: if from a humo, there is heaviness. Thes pas are great, and cause waching. The Pro∣gnostick. We have spoken of the headach, but here it is om the womb; therefore consider what hu∣moThe Cure. offend in the womb, and let them be pur∣ged, and the distemper of the womb amended, as w shewed in the Distemper of the Womb. There is also a pain in the loyns, because bad hmors go from the veins of the womb and ar∣teies to the great vessels, and so are sent by the pill veins into the membranes, and stretch them, and cause pain: these humors must have per Purges. stion. In what part of the Head is the pain that comes by consent from the Womb? I i in the crown before and behind, but chief∣ly ehind, by reason of the joyning of the Back with the womb, for the womb is nervous, and osnts ith the membranes of the brain, by the membranes of the arrow of the ack, and so erves uff ith nrves, iher by communition
of matter or pain, and because the original of the nerves is in the hinder part of the head, women are more pained there then men, because of the Womb. Chap. 9. Of the Diseases of the Heart, and beating of the Arteries in the Back and sides from the Womb. THe heart beats, and the arteries also, as we shewed in the Green-sickness, and it is by il vpors snt by the teries to the heat from the womb, that aise from terms and evil hum gathered in the womb: and this is known by ∣ther Signs and Symptomes of a distempered womb. The Cure. To discuss the malignant vapors from the heart, give Cordials as in Chap. 3. of palpi∣tion of the Heart; as Aqua vitae, Cinnamen∣water, and Epithems, Baggs and Liniments. The arteries also beat with the heart, as i Widdows on the lef Hypochondrion and Bac, where there is a great artery, and the artery th beats in the Back, is part of the great artery: they which beat in the Hypochondrion are the lesse splenitik and mesenterick branches; therefoe the beating is moe in the Back then in the Hy∣pochondrion, but both pulstions come fro the same cause. The Cus The inflammation of the ateries is the Cause of this beating, when evil humors are sent fr the womb ito the great branches of the arte and there bt the heart being over-hot. Som∣times the motion of this artery is all the body o∣ver,
and from a hot humor, the hot humors go to the heart, and cause a feaver, but because there is little putrefaction, it vanisheth presently. If the heat of the humors go to the brain by the ar∣teies, there is madness. Some seek the cause in the vins, and say that the arteries suffer from the  in them. You my feel it wih your hand laid upon theThe Signs. Hypochondrion, and there are signs of a distem∣pered womb, and melancholy from the womb, if heat continue in the arteries, and go to the whole ody, it consumeth it. It is seemingly a small disease, but it is notThe Pro∣gnostick. ithout danger, because it comes from a bad cause, that weakens the bowels. It is cured as melancholy from the womb, andThe Cure. opping of the terms, and as Hypochondriack melancholy from the womb which follows. Chap. 10. Of the Diseases of the Spleen, and the Hypochon∣driack Disease from the Womb. SOmtimes the Spleen and the Hypochondria suffer from the womb, so that you may doubt hat disease it is. from the womb by the arteries, the wombThe Cause  one from the preparing arteries,  from the Hypogastrick atry. That from  goes almost to all parts of the  and  branches of the spleen: there∣ b blood is ed in the womb, and  pwad to the  g easy from thenc to the  d t the sleen, and the parts adjacent
in the abdomen; and the sooner  Nature useth to send bad humors to ign parts. These humors are gathered by supprei of terms, which though they seem to be onel  the veins, yet they get to the arteries by their A∣nastomosis. Therefore those women that av hot blood, and their terms flowed not orderly i their youth, are splenitick and Hypochondria in their age. The Signs. It is known by a pain in the left side and be to the throat, there is short breath, often  the belly is bound: they are sad and sol When thin blood grows hot, there is ina∣mation over all the body, and chiefly the ace which suddenly vanisheth, and there are othe signs of Hypochondriacks. These cannot endu sweet scents to their nose. The Pro∣gnostick. If it be not speedily cured, it turns to wor diseases, as the Scirrhus of the spleen. The Cure. The blood is commonly too hot, therefore o∣pen a vein, especially when it is from the terms stopt. You may also open the Haemorrhoids and then purge gently and often with Pills o Tartar by Quercetan, of Ammoniacum of  or Birthwort by Fernel; or give Steel and things as in the Hypochondriack diseases, lib. 3. par. 5. and in the Chapter of Terms stopt, and Melancholy from the Womb.
Chap. 11. Of the Distemper of the Liver from the Womb, and of a Bard growing by consnt from the Womb. THe womb hath many and great veins moe then other parts. If then there be too much bld in them, it easily goes back to the hollow ein, and choaks the heat of the Liver, and so the Liver is distempered according to the humor. It eeds crude and flgmatick blood, which snt o∣v the body, causeth a Cachexy: and what dis∣ses come by the Liver, are by consent fom the mb, as in stoppage of the Terms and Green∣kness. Hippocrates speaks of a womans Beard in Pha∣ua6. Epid. e. 8. aph. 45. the Wie of Pythius, for hais have their be∣inning and growth from the reliques of the  of the noble parts, that is from the ex∣mentitious part of the blood. And if terms be pt, and the vitious humors that use to be va∣uated with them, are sent over the body, they use divers diseases and Symptoms, and among he st the body of a woman is made hairy, and e hath a Berd, which is rare. Chap. 12. Of the Diseases of the Stomach that come from the Womb. Smetimes from consent with the womb, the apptite  lost, diminished, increased, or depraved,
or there is Hictets, or vomiting, belch∣ing, pain, or heart-ach. The Causes This is when malignant vapors, the way bei large, rise from the arteries of the womb, and g to the coliack artery, and through the Hypoga∣strick. And if they are hot, they cause thist;  cold, they hurt concoction, and many times ca strong Symptoms from their malignity and  qualities, whose causes are not known. Hence it is that women desire absurd things, as these v∣pors get into divers parts of the stomach. The Signs. You may know when the stomach is affected by consent from the womb, because the Symp∣toms abate and return again, when the vap comes to the stomach: there are also other signs of the womb distempered, and of the Spleen and Mesentery by the vessels, of which the matte is sent from the womb to the stomach. The Pro∣gnostick. The Symptomes are worse when they come from the womb, then when they come from the stomach first, nor are they curable, except the womb be first cured. The Cure. It is to be directed to the womb and stomach For if it come onely by consent, and there is n disease by propriety, when you have cured the womb, the stomach-disease vanisheth of it el, if you do but strengthen the stomach. If the stomach be first affcted, look onely to that Therfore first evacuate the humors that  in the stomach, as we shewed in its  with matter, or the humors will be infected  the malignant vapors. A Vomit is here p∣per. To elp the Womb, see for the  and Suocation, and for the Chapter of the D∣stemper of the Womb with matter, then strengthen
the Stomach, thus. Take Aromaticum  a dram, Extract of Angelica half a scruple, Ol of Cloves, Cinnamon, eah fiv drops; with Sugar two ounces, make Roules. Or give Pills of Aloes and Mastich often.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE FOURTH SECTION. Of the Symptoms which are in Conception. Chap. 1. Of the desire of V∣nery hurt. THERE are two Symptome in women about copulation. The first lchery lost, when  doth not willingly entertain  man, or cannot long endue him, or if she endures, she finds little or no pleasure, no more then if she were outwardly handled. The other is too great lust as in Fren∣zie of the womb, when they cannot be satis by many m. The Causes The defect of apetite in lust is fm  eed, or when it is cold, or there wants  the seed-vessels. The causes of want of eed  lib. 3. pr. 9. sct. 2. c. 1. Somtims it is
l conformation of the eed-vessels. Women discover this to their Husbands thatThe Si g to the Physitians for counsel. These women have not fruitful eed, and ther∣eThe Pr¦gnostick. are barren. For that see lib. 3. of Barrenness of men, where  Liniments and Oyntments for the loyns and pvities of women, but that e may take mre pleasure, let the man anoint the head of his yard ith Civet, or Hens gall, or the gall of a Pick∣d. Too much Lechery not of it self hinders con∣eption, but wandering lust that follows lechery doth. The Causes are the same with those of womb enzie, as plenty of seed, sharpness, and com∣motion, sharpness of seed from hot meat, and Medicines that provoke lust, and sharp humors in the womb and seed. Thus lust or lechery is abated by Medicines that extinguish the plenty of seed, and allay its srpness. Chap. 2. Of Barrenness, and want of Conception. MAn or woman may be lustful, and copulate, and yet there may be no conception, or  may concive too many, as Twins, or more,  have one onception after another, which is  Suerttion, or  conceives a Mole or Coneption is of fruitful seed spent by a man, nd mied with a womans sd to perection, for  making of a child by the retentive and altering
faculty of the womb; hence it is necessary that both seeds be fruitful that is hot, ul of Spi∣rits, and well tempered, and a fit subject for a Soul, and that both spend at a time, and there be mixed and retained together, to produce a child. Also the sucking of the womb is necessary, and that it should lay it up and embrace it, so that there be no space between the seed and the womb. Somtimes the womb greedily snatcheth and embaceth the seed, but doth not keep it, bu lets it come forth two or three daies after, or keeps it to no purpose, and brings it not to action, as in a false conception or mole. Moreover there must be blood in readiness to get the child, or be sprinkle it when it is first ormed, and to nourish it after. Therefore if tems be wanting as in girls, o be stopt, or gone as in old olk, expect no con∣ception. If they flow not by reason of labor and too much exercise, the conception is not hinde∣red, if there be but blood enough to form the child. Hence it is that women that are brought in bed, conceive again before they have their terms. If all these be right, there is conception, o∣therwise she is barren, which is an impotency of the womb, that keeps it from sucking in of the seed, or from retaining, or from nourishing i, and bringing it into act. The Causes The first is impotency in copulation, from the closing of the womb, of which before: or oth evil conformation of the privities, or and ule, or tumor in the nek of the womb. The secod is the breeding of unfruitful seed, from distep: of the vessels and stones, or too tender and delicate
a constitution. In men at eighteen, in wo∣men at fourteen, and men seldom get children fter sixty, and women seldom bear them after fty. As for evil conformation to breed seed, someFaelix Plate. lib. 1. obser. tit. de vi∣talis motu defect. have wanted seed-vessels, or they were not in their places. Some women are barren by the first Husband, and have children by the second, be∣cause there must be a certain proportion between both seeds: and if they be wanting, they are bar∣ren, which proportion is hard to be explained, and almost impossible; for we must not stay in the first qualities, for there are occult qualities in seed, by which they agree or disagree. The third cause, is when the womb suks not in the seed, nor receives it in a right manner, as when the attractive faculty is hurt, or hindered by divers distempers of the womb, or when a woman hates her Husband. Attraction is hindered by tumors or ulcers in the womb, or by its being displaced, as Hippo∣crate:5. Ap. 46. They who being too fat, and conceive not, the mouth of their womb is stopt up with the Cawl, and they conceive not till they are lean. But the more probable reason of not conceiving, is the matter of the seed turning into fat. The fourth cause, is the retention of the seed hurt by a moist distemper, then the womb is weak and the fibres are loose, so that it cannot con¦tract it self to retain; and the seed by reason of its sliminess, cannot stick there. Also if the wob be too thick, not fleshy and ot, and be not spin∣kled with blood, as it i in some by birth, whi makes them barren, and in some after they cese to conceive. If the orifice of the womb gape a
and abotion, by which the fibres are loosned and weakned, and the retention of the seed hur And if a woman after copulation cough, neese, cry out, dance, or be angry or frighted, the sam may be. The fifth cause of barrenness, is the hurt of the altering faculty, which brings in the form and act into seed; for if there be not a due propor∣tion between the womb and the seed, there is barrenness, as seeds are choaked in marsh ground, or die, or are burnt in dry and sand ground: so mans seed is suffocated in a moist5. Aphor. 52.  womb, and dried up in a hot. Hippocrates speaks o the  proportion of the womb, as is it to cherish this or tht seed, thus. Women that he thick and cold wombs conceive not, and they wh womb is too moist, r they quench the seed; nor they conceive that have dry and burning wombs, for the seed is corrupted in them for want of nourishmer, they who are of a mean temper between these are f∣full. The last cause of barrenness, is want of men∣strual blood, which is necessary for the first for∣mation of the child. Therefore Nurses that have much milk conceive, because the blood is carri∣ed to the breasts. Therefore all these causes are reduced either to impotency in copulation, or distemper of the stones and seed-vessels, or evil conformation, or  cold and moist distemper of the womb, which can∣not attract, detain, and alter the seed; somtimes  hot and dry distemper that cannot nourish the eed or from the enlarging of the orifice after childbeaing, or from humors, or being displa∣ced, or the straitness of the vessels, or want  term, or too many.
Hence we may gather, that barrenness is oft∣ from a fault in the women then the men, for i men there is nothing required but fruitful ed spent into a fruitful womb. But women be∣sides the meeting of their own seed, must receive, i, and nourish the mas; and afford mattr  the forming of the child  which divers ac∣cidents happen, and any of these will cause bar∣ness. Mark also in these kinds of causes, that some do not properly cause barrenness, but only hin∣nder conception for a time; as the closing of th womb, smalness of the privities, these do not ply cause barrenness. Some bring other external causes, as eatingIoa. Angli∣cus cpi de steril.  heart of a Deer, or if she wear Jet about her,  if Harts-tongue be hanged about her bed: if  walk over the terms of another, or tread up∣o them unawares, or anoint with them, or put  jaye of Mints into her womb. Some are born so, from a fault in the womb;The Diffe∣rences. ers are not simply ben, but in respect of the n, and when they have another Husband ar fuitful. Some are barren till the constitution of th womb be changed: some bring forth at first, and then by som fault go barren. H shll we know that a woman is barren? The Signs. ist, see if the fault be in the man or woman. Lib. 3. of Sterility in men. For women, see if y are apt to Vnery or not, or receive the yard ly. 2. Search if she hath good seed answer∣ to the man, or whether she hath used quen∣hes of seed. You may know that she spendeth  or no seed, if she hth litle or no pleasur  the ct. Unuitul seed is nown by a  in the womb, a cold and moist ist
the signs whereof are mentioned; a soul body shews the same, for good seed cannot be made of bad blood. It is hard to find whether the two seeds have the right proportion, or the womb agree with the mans seed. Yet temperate with temperate are very fruitful, because they are both of a good constitution. But intemperate couples are bar∣ren; but if one tempe be good, it may mend the other, and she may conceive. If it come from a Medicine that destroys the seed, she will tell. If inchantment be the cause, though they love, yet they cannot copulate, or whereas they loved each other, now they fal out without a cause. Ask the woman how her womb doth attract, retain, and cherish the seed: if it have a tumor, or have matter or not? Whether there be a na∣tural hereditary imperection? Enquire concer∣ning her family, if many were barren, whether she hath had hard travel or abortion? Whether the seed comes away presently after, or at a di∣stance, after some daies; if so, then the womans eed is unfruitful, or there is a distemper in the womb that keeps it from cherishing the seed. If the terms be wanting they are Viragoes, and have hair on their chins, or they are at, and seed turns into fat, or they are very lean because5. Aphor. 59. they want blood. Hippocrates proves Barrenness thus. Put  Fume (saith he) under the Coats of a woman, and lt her be close clothed about, and if the scnt com t the nose, she is not barren, and he bids you put Gar∣ck ensed into the womb, and if she smel of it at theThe Pro∣gstic.  he is fruitful. A natural bad disposition that causeth barrenness
is not curable; Hippocrates saith that bar∣renness2. Prognos. 3. from ulcers is hard to be cured. A wo∣man that conceives not from disagreement with her husbands constitution, by another husband, or in time may be cured, or some distemper that causeth sterility may be mended by Physick. Take away the causes, amend the distemper ofThe Cure. the womb, whether with matter or without mat∣ter is to be mended, which causeth either no seed or that which is unfruitful, or not convenient. See Part 1. Sect. 2. Chap. 1. The Medicines of an occult quality are best. As, Take Rocket seed, Silermontane, each half a dram; Ivory shavings, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, each a dram; Muk (in such as may) three grains, whie Sander three drams, make a Pouder: give a dram with Wine. Or, Take Species Diamoschu, Diambra, each a dram; the matrix of a Hare, a Bores stones, and the ard of a Stag, each half a dram; Nutmeg, Cinna∣ron, Cloves, Rocket seed, wild Parsnep seed, each a dram; Musk, Amber, each four grains; with Su∣gar as much as all, give two drams in Wine. A Confection. Take sweet Almonds, Pista∣ches, Pine-nts, Hazel-nus, each an ounce; Ci∣ron peels, Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon, each half a dram  Rocket seed two dram: give a spoonful at bed time. Or make this March-pane. Take sweet Almonds four ounces, Pine, Pistachaes, Hazel-nuts, each two unces; Diambra, Dianoschu, each  dram; I∣vory half a dram, Cinnamon half an ounce. An Electuary. Take Conserve of Rosemary six ounces, Dogs stones candid two ounces, Orbus, Shik rein, Bres stones, Sows wombs, Deers pri∣ie, Ivory, urnep seed, Fennel, Nettle seed, Rocket,
Clary, wild Mustard, each two drams; Pine∣nuts, weet Almonds, each half an ounce; Diamos∣ dulcis a dram, Oyl of Nutmeg by exprssion two drams, with Syrup of Betony make an Electuary. Or use Triphera without Opium. Or use Baths, Inessions, Fomentations, umes, and Baths after terms for five daes. Take Briony, Masterwort roots, Mercury, Mug∣wort, Pennyroyal, Mrjoram, Bays, Sage, Mother∣wort, Juniper-berries and tops, make a Bath. Or use Sulphur Baths of Allum, Niter, Bitu∣men, these do much good. A Fume. Take Labdanum, Storax calmie, Benzoin, ach two drams; wood Aloes a scruple, Musk six grains, with infusion of Traganth made in Rose-water, make Troches. Make Pessaries of green Mercury and Mother∣wort. Or, Take Mastich, Storax liquid, each half an ounce; Balm, Nep, Mercury, each a dram; Cloves, Nutmeg, each half a dram; Civet half a scrupe, with wax make a Pessary. After Baths and Fumes, anoint the Pecten and Navel with this. Take Oyl of Keir half an ounceoyl distiled of Mr∣jram a scruple, of Cloves half a scruple, of Nutmegs by exprssion a dram, Sora liquid two drams, Civ and Musk, each six grains; with wax make a Lini∣t. After bathing, let her have a Bag upon her belly of Balm, Calamints, Mints, Motherwort, and Wine. Let her wear Plaisters upon her loyns and Perinaeum, till the week before her Terms. As, Take th Plaister for the Mother an ounce, S∣rax liquid, Caranna, each two drams; Gallia m∣chata half a dram, Oyl of Cloves half a scruple, of Nutmegs by epression a dram, with Oyl of Keir mak a Plaister. If the Womb be too loose and slippery, use Clysters of juyce of Mecury, with
Honey Baths, Pessaries, Fumes, and other astrin∣gents Topicks that strengthen. If the mouth of the womb gape, make a De∣coction in Wine of Mirtles, Mastich, Wood∣Vines, Olives, Wormwood, Cypress roots, Com∣ey, Snakeweed, Cinquefoyl, red Rose, Pome∣granate flowers, foment the privities: or with pouder of Mastich, Frankincense, Allum, Wood∣Aloes, make a Fume. Other diseases are to be cured as before sew∣ed. Let it be to increase seed, of much good juyce.The Diet. In the time of copulation, avoid passions, anger, sadness, fear. Let love be invited, and if it burn, there wil many Spirits fli to the womb and pri∣vities. Chap. 3. Of Barrenness for the time, and conceiving seldom. SOme conceive the seventh, eighth, or ninth year after wedding: some presently, but not after the first any more, or not in many years after. If Vigins marry afre fourteen, they conceive  or if the constitution of the womb be bad,The Causes o the seed. Some conceive not from the disa∣greement of seeds, til their constitution be chan∣ged. They who want terms, or have them disorder∣, or are sickly, seldom or never conceive withThe Signs. ild, or have had hard travel, or a dead child. Sme are weakned, so that after the first child, they have no strength to conceive. All these will be related: whether she be married
too soon, or had hard travel, or aborted, or had a dead child, or a mole. If these were not,The Pro∣gnostick. the seed and womb have not a just proportion with the mans, but it may be altered by age. If the womb be much hurt after travel, or any thing turn in it, or broken, they seldom conceive a gain. And if a woman marry at a ripe age, and have no remarkable disease, and conceive not presently, she is not to be accounted barren, be∣cause some private indisposition hinders concp∣tion,The Cure. which after may be altered, and she may prove fruitful. A woman that mares too young, after she hath once conceived, and then ceaseth, must use Venery sparingly, til she grow older, that she may recover the strength she lost in her first travel. And if a woman marry at ripe years, and conceive not by reason of the driness of her womb, let he use Baths, Fomentations, and emollient Pessa∣ries. If she conceive not from weakness, streng∣then the womb, and let her not use Venery often. If Virgins be sick from seed retained or terms let them marry. But if there be a fault in the li∣ver or spleen, or the whole body, that may be in∣creased by Venery, it is better that they be cure before they be married. And if they cannot b cured, let them not be married. If the womb be distempered by birth or a dis∣ease, cure it as in diseases of the Womb: if it b from a Mole or flux of blood, cure it as it ha and shall be shewed. If it be from a dead child, first clense it wit juyce of Mercury, and then put Treacle or Mi∣thridate dissolved into the womb, or with a Pes∣sary, or give them outwardly.
Chap. 4. Of Conception, and forming of the Child. COnception is an action of the womb, after fruitful seed both male and female is recei∣ved, mixed and nourished, & its strength is stirred up to do its office. Seed and Coema differ, seed is that which comes from both male and female, but Coema is that which is mixed of both, and is called Conception which produceth a child. This Conception is presently when two seeds meet in the womb, in less then seven hours after they are spent, if the heat of the womb preserve them, for Nature is not idle a moment, but pre∣sently fals to conformation. Therfore HippocratesLib. de genit. aith that the beginning of Conception is to be reckoned from the day that the seed is retained, and if she conceives not from the weakness of the seeds or womb, the seed wil fal out in seven daies for Hippocrates aith, That Conception and aborti∣nLib. de sp∣tim. parti. are judged in the same time, as a disease, health, and death are judged. And Aristtle aith, f seed rmains within till the seventh day, there is certain3. De hist. ani. . 3. Concption. As for Formation, the Soul lying in the seed, nakes its own house, for all acknowledg a rm∣ing faculty, and you must then suppose there is a ubstance from whence this faculty flows. And hough Aristotle aith that seed is a living crea∣ure in power; not that there is not the eence f the Soul in the seed, and that it is not a living eature in respect of the first act, but because  not come to the second act, for wan of it  which being perfected, it hath the second
act and all its operations, which for defect of organs, it cannot produce. There are divers opinions of the time of For∣mation, they are best that say the membranes ae first made, which wrap the child with the navel vessels, by which it is joyned to the Mothes womb, and receives nourishment for the child. Then all other parts are made sooner or later, a the child requires for dignity or necessity. We intend here to speak of womens diseases. Therefore there are three things required for the Formation of a child. 1. Fruitful seed from both parents, in which the Soul remains that hath a orming quality to make its own habitation. 2. The Mothers blood is required to enlarge the child to perfection. 3. There is required a good constitution of the womb to nourish the seed, and stir the concealed force. If these three be right, there is a child that is ound and perfect, that will be born: but if any of these be wanting, there are Twins are more, and other faults of which in order. Chap. 5. Of the Generation of Twins, and many Children. NAture hath ordained that a woman shoul coneive but one child in these and oth Countris especially, and that every year; yet in many plce se hath more, one had five at e∣very birth, twenty at four lyings in. A Mar∣ret the Countess of Holstrne, in the time of th mperor Hnry the seventh, had three hunder sixty four at one labor. And another Count in the time of Fredri the eleventh, had iv
hundered and fourteen children at once, being Boys: these are so seldom, that they seem incredible. I speak nothing of the Causes of such mon∣stuousThe Causs productions, but of Twins, or Three, or Four. It is certain they are got at one time: and this differs from Superfoetation, which is at ma∣ny times. And you must not impute it to the di∣vers Cells of the womb, for women have no such Cells, but onely a Line that divides the let side from the right; but it comes from the division of the seed into divers parts, and the least forming force in the side is compleat, and makes a child of every part of it. And because the cavity of the womb cannot admit so many parts of seed, being no bigger then a Bean; and if it do admit them, how can the seed be divided at one copulation into so many parts? I suppose that such women have naturally a larger womb, so that much seed is divided. Ad as Twins are begot at the same time, so they have but one Placenta, or part tha receives the navel-vessels of both, but they have their several Coats. It is hard to know whether a woman have con∣ceivedThe Sig. Twins, onely thei belly is not even, but divided with seams and wrinkles; and the weight is commonly greater, and the motion is not one nor alike. If a woman have two children, ad be weak,The Pro∣gostic. e is in danger in her travel. Twins of one Sex e moe lively thn of both Sexes. And one is  expience weker and shorter lived then the
Chap. 6. Of Superfoetation. IT is seldom that a woman hath many children at divers copulations, but it is so sometimes, and is called Superfoetation, that is a new concep∣tion after a former. Though Hippocrates writes,5. Aphor. 15. That the mouth of the womb after Conception is so shut, that you cannot put in a Needles point, yet a woman with child may take such pleasure after, that she may a little open the womb to receive seed again, and draw it in, which may form ano∣ther child. The Causes Therefore the Cause is the pleasure the wo∣man hath, which opens the womb again to at∣tract seed. And it is necessary that the seed re∣ceived, be in its proper membrane, and peculiar receptacle. The Diffe∣rences. These come somtimes sooner, somtimes later, somtimes the same day or the following, some∣times longer after. Somtimes they have a third Superfoetation, so that they have two living chil∣dren, and one mischance. The Signs. It is known only by the motion of the infant, when it is conceived long after the first. The Pro∣gnostick. It is dangerous for the Mother, for fear of a∣bortion, and for loss of much blood by two births at no great distance of time. The Cure. It is best to leave the whole work to Nature, and women ought to take heed of Superfoetati∣on; therefore after they have conceived, let them meddle no more.
Chap. 7. Of the ill Formati∣on of the Child. IN the Formation of the child, there are divers Symptoms. 1. In the weakness of the child. 2. The parts are more or ewer, to which you may refer Hermaphrodites. 3. The parts are greater or less, as Dwarss or Gyants. 4. There is some part out of place or shape, as Histories ew abundantly. You must ind the Causes in the seeds, terms,The Causes womb, and error in Formation: the cause of these is the action hurt of the forming faculty. This is not alwaies from it self, but from the unfitness of the mater, and fault in the place which kees it from the intention: for actions of active things are not but in a disposed patient. Somtimes there is an extraordinary cause, as imagination, when the Mother is frighted, or imagineth strange things, or longeth vehemently for some mea which if she have not, the child hath a mark of the colour or shape of what she desired, of which there are many Examples. But I doubt whether all errors in Formation, depend together upon the imagination; for the Spirits and humors are troubled by the passions of the mind, and so slow oceable immdately to the womb or other part, and this disturbes theAuthor sentntia. rming faculty in its work. Also the forming culty being overcome with plenty of humos  wanting Spirits that are gone another way ay by hance make an ill shape; therefore the ssions of the mind are the first causes of rrou  Formation, and imagination lps by
up the appetite. These are the common errors of formation. Others are deteminate errors, not simply from the imagination by the pallions which have no determination to such a thing; but no other cause can be besides the imagination, but how she directs the forming faculty for the producing of such effects, it is hard to be understood, but there must be some imagination and the forming faculty, that it may impart the species sent from the external senses to the forming faculty. And this is the cause of the consent of the up∣per and lower faculties: for the oul is the same in the whole body; and every where itted with the same faculties, but it doth not exercise all in all parts, but by the proper determinate organs  instruments. And though the child hath its oul, yet while it is in the womb, it depends upon the oul of the mother, as the fruits partake of the life of the tree while they are upon it, therefore it is probable, that whatsoever moves the faculties of the oul in the mother may move the same in the child: Hence it is that while the forming o∣perateth in the seed and womb of the mother, if any species be sent to the imagination of the mo∣ther which she strongly receives, it may make an impression upon the child, yet every imaginati∣on cannot make this impression, but that which makes a great admiration or terrour in the mo∣ther when the forming faculty is at work, as when she beholds one with six fingers, she brings forth the like, or when sh produeth hair whe it should no be, or the leness of a beast in an limb, or when she eeth any thing cut or divided with a Cleaver, she brins orth a divided part o a Hare-lip.
Chap. 8. Of a Child turned in∣to Stone. JOhn Albosius Doctor at Senon, and Simon Pro∣vnchr of Lingo Physitian of Senon writ of of this in French and Latin. I shall give my opinion with others. Two things are to be observed in this won∣derful history, first why the Child in the time of traail being dead in the womb did not stink as is usual, or kill the mother suddenly, or was not ast out by degrees being rotten? secondly by what force the child was turn'd into Stone? For the first, The mother lived twenty eight years after she had this Child, therefore it is not credible that the womb was so cold that it might hinder putreaction, as some think. It seems more probable to me, that these questions expla∣nation depend upon one principle, for the cause that made the stones hardness, kept the child from putreaction, but what that is, it is obsure. Many fly to the efficieny of the fist qualities, others to driness, others to coldness, others to both. I acknowledg heat, cold and driness to be helping causes for beeding of Stones in mans body, but the chief cause is a Stone breeding juyce, or spirit, of which I have spoken at large. The principles of generation were weak in this child and impure, and this stone-breeding ce was mixed with the blood in the humors, hence it is that it was not born alive, as in a wole bred in the womb, which women have il they ae old and die with it, and yet it sis
no more then stones bred in most parts. But there is but this History of such a Birth. Chap. 9. Of a Mole. IT is lesh and a mass without bones or bowels, gotten of an imperfect conception instead of a child. The Latins cal it a Mole from the weight, because it is troublesom to women, as a Milstone in Latin called Lapis molaris. The Diffe∣rences. Somtimes it is unshapen flesh without bones, only ful of veins, with a skin over it, and nothing within, but like the Parenchyma of the bowels.Pet. Salius diu. in an∣not. in al∣timarum. Somtimes it is membranous and ibous, without shape. Somtimes it is long, round, or like a qua∣ry of glass, or like a brute beast Some have brought forth three Moles like mens yads. Some are like congealed blood, or the Placen∣ta of the womb, into which the navel-vessels are inserted; some grow and are nourished, and some have an obscure sense. Somtimes they are sent out alone, somtimes with or before the child, of which there are many Histories. Some bring orth Monsters for Moles. The Causes It is from the error of the forming aculty, but the Cause of that is obscure. I suppose it is from both seeds, when the forming faculty is weak, and the seed little and not good, and overcome by much blood, and can make onely veins and membranes, and not a whole child. Somtimes  is in Widdows onely from their own seed and blood. A Mole is sooner bred when the blood is im∣pue, and unfit to nourish, and is made when they copute in the flowing of the terms that are
unclean. It is either from heat nor cold prin∣cipally, but from the error of the forming facul∣ty. They are hard to be known before the fourthThe Signs. month, then they are known by such as can di∣stinguish between the motion of wind and a child . If a woman turn from side to side, it alls like a stone to that side she lies on, and is heavy. If it have any motion, it is trembling and beating, with constriction and dilatation like a Spunge. If after the time that the child should move, there be no motion, and the belly swells, and there is no sign of a Dropsie, it is a sign of a Mole. Thirdly, in women with child, there is milk a∣bout the fourth month, but in a Mole the breasts swel, but there is no true milk. 4. They are more pained and faint, and have more pain in their back and groyns. If it be with a quick child, it is hard to be known, but it is known by its weight in the womb, which she perceives when she gets up to walk or moves from side to side; some are then strong and well coloured. It hurts the womb and whole body; if it beThe Pro∣gnostick. divided, it is less dangerous: when it is soft, it is cast out the third or fourth month. Somtimes it ulcerates or tears the womb, and causeth great bleeding. Some have been cast out or drawn out Fabr. cent. 2. obs. 55. without danger: some grow old with them in, nd find no inconvenience but the weight. To prevent, take heed of Venery in the terms,The Cure. o before the terms, or when the body is foul or stucted, or the womb. When it is, take it away presently with thins t nd foth a dead child. Hipporates shew∣th1. De morb. mulier. the e in few wod First oment the whole
Therefore if she be plethorik, let blood large∣ly in the foot at divers times. Then purge often with strong Physick. Tak Althaea, Lilly roots, each half an ounce; Althaea, Mercury, Pellitory, Brankrsine, each a handful;To Con∣quer all Inirmities Study my Sennertus, Platerus, Riverius, Bartholi∣us and Riolanus, of the last Editions. Chamomil, Melilot flowers, each half a handful; F∣nugreek and Lineseed, ech six drams; boyl them in Broath to a pint, add sweet Butter, Oyl of sweet Al∣monds, Lillies, each an ounce; make a Clyster, re∣peat it often. Mke Baths, Liniments, Fomentations (then move the terms) with Dittany, Birthwort, Brio∣ny, &c. Take Briony, Birthwort, eah half an ounce, Asarum two drams, Rue, Savin, Mugwrt, Dittany, Pennyroyal, Motherwort, each a hndful; Elder and Chamomil flowers, ach half a handful; Line and Faenugreek seeds, each half an ounce; boyl them to a pint, ad Hiera an ounce and half, Troche of Alkandal a dram, Oyl of Ru and Keir, each an ounce and half; make a Clyster, of the residents mak a Cataplasm for the belly. Or this Pessary. Take Troches of Mirrh, Gl∣banum, Opopanax dissolved in wine, each two drams; Sowbread roots a dram, white Hellebore half a dram, with juyce of Rue. Fb. cent. 2. obs. 52. If these wil not do, let the Midwise take it out with her hand, if it be half rotten. Or leave it to Nature which doth it in time. To sop the flux of blood after a Mole is ta∣ken out, use things against overflowing of the Terms. As, Take Plantane, Shepheards-pus, Brambles, Oa leaves, rd Roses, ech a handul; boyl them in steeled Water, then take Brley bran to ounces, Pomegranate flowers, Cypress-nuts, Pme∣grant pels, red Ross, Comfrey roots in puder, eah an ounce; Frogs burnt, Bole Sanguis Draconi,
ach half an ounce; with the Decoction aforesaid, and a little Vinegar, make a Cataplasm for the Re∣gion of the womb. Take away pain with Anodynes mentioned in pain of the Womb: keep up the strength with meat of good juyce. Question. Whether a Mole may be without the company of a man, and without his seed? To speak freely of this which many doubt, I suppose that many are made of a weak mans seed mixed with the womans seed, and much blood. But Histories confirm that Widdows hae had them without mans seed, but not of the shape with the others. And being voided, they melted being in the air into water. I think Virgins cannot have them but from wantonness, or in sleep they may spend their seed; but because it is weak, and the blood ne∣cessary for formation, neither is drawn by the womb, nor flows to it of its own accord, as it doth in those that have had children, and the vessels of the womb in Virgins are straiter then in Wid∣dows, and others that have had children. There∣fore though the seed of Virgins flow into the womb, yet they cannot have a Mole for want of blood, which is necessary for the forming of the same. This is to be understood of Moles which are not vital, for vital Moles that have some life, cannot be got in Virgins or Widdows without the seed of a man. Chap. 10. Of Monsters. HIstories tell us of many Monsters brought forth by women. We spake of worms,
Sct. 2. Chap. 8. They are like Toads or Micear. 7. cap. 12. l ij. or Fi. Gordonius saith it is usual in Lumbardy. Lycosthones saith, and others also, that Serpents Dogs, and other Monsters with parts like brute beasts have een brought forth. In appen. Franc. Ros. de par. cesa. Gaspar auhin speaks of one Anne Troperim, which 1575. brought forth two Serpents with her child, in Harvest hot weather; she had duk water in a Brook in a Wood near Basil, whee she thought she drank the Spawn of a Serpent, for a little after that, her belly swelled, and three onths after she was big with child, and the Ser∣pents grew as the child did. Her belly was so big that she carried it in a swathing Band. She was delivered at last of a lean male child, and (be∣cause they suspect Worms or Snaks from the knawing and strange motion she felt that year) they put a bason of milk under her, and when they expected an afterbirth, out came a Serpen, which she saw, and perceived another coming forth, they were an ell long, and as thick as a childs arm. Thus Bahin and he speaks of others if you please to peruse him. A Monster is that which is either wholly or in part like a beast, or that which is ill shaped ex∣traordinary. The Causs Histories witness, that a Monster may be fom humane seed, and the seed of a beast: It is sel∣dom, for the forming faculty doth not erre of it¦self, but is seduced by the imagination, or fru∣strated of its ends, rom a fault of the Spirits, the heat or matter. Therefore imagination is the ause of Monsters. For Histories mention that wmen with child, by beholdin men in vizads, have brought forth Monstrs with horns, and eak, nd loven feet, The sme is when Spiris
or heat, seed or blood are weak or little. And though Doctors cannot cure Monsters, yet they are to admonish women with child not to look upon Monsters, and to strengthen their Spirits and heat, and to keep the seed and blood ight, and not to allow copulation in time of their terms, least any monstrous Birth should be fom much and impue blood. Chap. 11. Of false Concepti∣on, and Swelling. FAlse Conception or Gravidation is when the terms are stopt, and the belly swells, and there are signs like those of a true Conception: then they think themselves with child, and as Hippocrates saith, They believe not to the contrary till ten months are past. The causes, are wind in the womb, or water,Cse. p. 1.  2. c. 10.  matter, or thick egm. These are bred fom sickly seed retined, uon whih Nture works in vain: or from a fault in the terms tha orupts the seed, and breeds bad hmor. The like appears in Virgins when they begin to have thei terms, but it is discovered by pain. The terms flo not as in a true Conception,The Signs. but in this there is pain of the head, loyns, belly, nd groyns, of which Hippcrate aith thus;2. Prorrhe. They ha a false Coception withu terms  wit a  bell hae the headach, and thre  ill in their breasts, bu what is ke water, and  little. Moreove the belly swels sooner then  tue Concption; their colour changeth,  fac nd eet sell thy loath meat, ain
and have a depraved appetite. The surest sign is the time of childbearing being past. The Prog∣nostick. They are commonly barren, or have ulcers in their privities. The Cure. It is cured by evacuation of the matter in the womb with proper Medicines, as in the Chapte of the Distemper of the Womb with matter, and of inflation of the Womb and Dropie.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SECOND PART. THE FIFTH SECTION. Of the Government of Women with Child, and preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. Chap. 1. Of the signs of Con∣ception. IF she keeps the eed, it is a sign she hath conceived, and a man may know that the seed is kept. If he find in Copulation that his Yard is is sucked and drawn by the womb, and the privities are not moist. And if she pereives little or no eed o come forth again, and grow chill and quiver,  perceive a witching in hr womb, from the reat delight: and the mouth of the wob closeth, nd the  stop.
But they are deceived, when they count or reckon from the stoppage of the terms. For some have their terms twice or thrice after they have conceived, and some have them all along with∣out hurt. The chiefest sign of Cnception, is when there is at first loathing of meat, pewking Pica, or pre∣ternatural appetite and vomiting. And when they hate that they earnestly affected, or aint when they think of them. About the fourth month, the child moveth, which is not in a Mole the breasts after that swel with milk, and the last are the surest signs. From the face and urin there is no certainty. Aphor. 2. & ibi. 4. Hippocrates teacheth us to know whether it be a Male or Female; If she be with child of a Boy, sh is better coloured, but pale if of a Girle. And Boy lie on the right side, and Girls on the left in the womb. Chap. 2. Of the Government and Diet of Women with Child. THe Diet is, either for such as are sound, or as have diseases. Aphor. 12. As for the air, Hippocrates saith, If there be a wet warm winter with Southernly winds, a dry spring with Northern winds, they who conceive in the spring abort upon any small occasion. Or if they bring forth, their children are weak and sickly, o die. Let her avoid all evil sents, as of Rue, Penny∣royal, Mints, Castor, and Brimstone. Some ca∣not bear sweet scents, let them not-look upon ∣rible things, nor hear great noise of Guns. Let meat be easie of concoction; let her e
Quinces to strengthen the child, or sweet Al∣monds with Honey, sweet Apples, Grapes. Let her abstain from sharp meats, very bitter or salt, and things that can provoke terms, as Garlick, Onions, Olives, Mustard, Fennel, Pepper, and all Spices. In the last months, Cinnamon is good, Summer fruits are naught for her, and all Pulse. When the child is bigger, let her diet be more, for it is better for women with child to eat too much then too little, least the child should want nourishment. Let her drink moderately of clear Wine, not exercise too much, nor dan, nor ride in a Coah that shakes her; let her not lift any great weights in the first and last months. In the ninth month let her move a little more, to dilate the pats, and stir up natural eat. Let her abstain from Venery in the first months, least there be a Mole or Superfoetation, or the child be hurt, but she may use it moderately in the last. She may bathe in the last months, once in a week to loosen the privie parts. Let her avoid anger, sorrow, fear, and too much mirth. Let her sleep rather then to be watchful. Let the belly be kept loose in the first month, with Prunes, Raisons, or Manna in Broth. And let her use Medicines to strengthen the womb and the child. An Electuary. Take Conserve of Borage, Bu∣glss and red Roses, each two ounces; of Balm an ounce, Citron peels, and Chebs Myrobalans candi∣, each an ounce; Extract of Wood-aloes a sruple, Pearl prepared half a dram, red Coral, Ivory ach  dram; precious Stones, each a scruple; candied Nmes two drams, with Syrup of Apple and
Quinces, mae an Electuary. Rouls. Take Pearls prepared a dram, red Cor prepared and Ivory, each half a dram, precious ston eah a scruple; yellow Citron peels, Mace, Cinna∣mon, Cloves, each half a dram; Saffron a scruple, Wood-aloes alf a sruple, Ambergreece six drams, with six ounces of Sugar dissolved in Rose-waer, make Rous. Apply strengtheners to the navel: of Nutmegs, Clves, Mace, Mastich, Coral made up in bags, or a Toast in Malmsey sprinkled with pouder of Mints. Chap. 3. Of the Cure of Wo∣men with Child in General. THey have divers chronick and acute disea∣ses: as Feavers, Pleuriie Quinzies, or in∣flammation of the Bowels, of which Hippocrate5. Aphor. 31. (If a Woman with child have an acute disease, it is deadly) There is a double danger. 1. In res∣pect of the Feaver which Galen aith wil be con∣tinual. 2. In respect of the want of nourishmentValer. l. 1. obser. ol. com. ad lib. 5. ah. 30. for the child. For if a woman with child be fed, the Feaver increaseth. If he have an Apoplexy, Epilepie, Convulsion, Cramp, she cannot bea it out But acute diseases are not alwaies dead∣ly in women with child. They have sometimes intermitting Feavers, Coughs, from which they hardly are freed be∣ore they are delivered. Question. 1. Whether must Women with child use a sparing Diet? Gal. it. lo. I you give her a Diet at a long distance, the child will be starved. If you give her a ul diet,
and often the feaver will endanger both mother and child. Therefore be moderate, and add somthing to the diet which the mother loveth before the fea∣ver, for the childs sake, and for the feaver. Abate the diet in the first months let the diet be little in the middle and last months, let it be larger. Question. 2. Whether may a Woman with Child be let blood? Hippocrates aith, If a woman with child be let5. Aphor. 50. blod, she will miscarry, and if the child be older the sooner. This is to be understood of great bleed∣ing, which was pints in his time, but now we go by ounces. Therefore if bleeding be required in a feaver, or the like, and the woman with child be in strength, you may boldly let blood upon these onditions. 1. That you take not nourishment frō the child, let it be a little, and you wil tke more, do it the second time, least you weaken. 2. O∣pen not the foot nor the Basilica, but the Mdia∣na. 3. Before you bleed, strengthen the child by applications to the navel. And if they abortAmat. Lu∣sit. c. 5. cur. 27. rod. á cast. 3. de morb. mul. in a feaver, you must impute it rather to the vio∣ence of the feaver, then to the bleeding, and you ud the necessary help for preserving the mother. But it is safer in the first then in the last months, euse the child needs a further diet. You may also open a vein in a woman with hild, hat hath no disease to prevent abortion, hen there is much blood, in the fourth or fifth nh, especially if they have no feaver, and are rong. As Celsus aith, A strong Cild, and aLib. 2 c. 10.  old man, and a healthy woman with child, may
be sifely let blood. And Hippocrates forbids bee∣ding only, least the child should want nourish∣ment. Question 3. Whether my a Woman with Child be purged? You must not give strong Purges, least thei force which moveth the humors, should reach t the womb, and cast out the child. Therefore you must not purge women with child in all diseases, nor at all times, but only in the fourth month ti the seventh, and that sparingly. And if the mat∣ter4. Aphor. 1. swell and abound, as Hippocrates shews. Fo the danger from the turgent matter is easily a∣voided thereby: for it will be purged with more ease, then when it is fixed and quiet. 1. There∣fore onely purge in an acute disease. 2. From the beginning of the fourth onely to the end of the sith 3. Use no vehement Medicine, no very bitter, as Aloes which is an enemy to the child, and opens the mouths of the vessels; no Cooquintida, nor Scammony, nor Turbith, but use Cassia, Manna, Rhubarb, Agarick and Sen∣na: but Diacydonium purgans is best with a li∣tle of the Electuary of the juce of Roses. If there be a chronick diease, she may also be purged safely, especially if she be used to it, and strengtheners be applied to the navel. Question 4. Whether purging or bleeding is most dangerous for a Woman with Child? We swed in the last Question the necessity of purging and its danger by the great motion of humors, which if i reach to the womb, causeth abortion, because it causeth pain in the belly,
and provokes the tems. But bleedin diurbs the humors less, nor doth hurt any way, but by taking nourishment from the child And this you need not fear, if there be too much blood. There∣ore puging is more dangerous then bleeding. Question 5. Whther is it lawful to cause an Abortion to preserve the Mother? A Christian may not cause an abortion for a∣ny cause, for it is wicked and the Gentiles in Hippcrates his time never allowed it, they would not hinder Conception, much less would they destroy it when made. Nor must the moher be peserved by the loss of the child, For we must not do evil, that good may come thereby. But if to preserve the mother, the Physitian purge or bleed, and the abortion follow, the fault is not the Physitian that intended it not, but in the weakness of Nature and of the child, and is better to preserve the mother, then by neglecting the lawful means, let both die. Also the dead child must presently be thrown out. Question 6. Whether are Clysters, Diureticks and Sweas propr for a Woman with Child? Though women deny Clysters to them, yet if they have been used to them, they may be given in a  quantity, such as only molliie and sup∣le, no do thy more hurt thn Lenitives. Dieticks or things that provoke urine, are t safe, because they povoke the tms. You  not give gntle Sweats, for Nature will re∣ive strength by the castin off of her enemies. ou may use Alterers tht are proper, as this
Syrup. Take the juyce of unripe Grapes about the beginning of September three galons, add Pomi∣trons or Lemons bruised hal a pound: boyl them  they are soft, and strain them, and with half a pou of Sugar make a Syrup. Chap. 4. Of the Symptomes that befal Women with Child in in the first months. THey are loathing of meat, Pica, or evil ap∣petite, pewking, vomiting, belly-ach, flux of the belly, tooth and headach, giddiness. These all come from the stoppage of the terms, especially in a Cacochymy or evil juyce: for it goes to the stomach, and so to the head. Fist,5. Aphor. 45. ey loath meat, which Hippocrates aith is a sign of Conception. And this is when the child takes the purest blood, and leaves the impure, which gets into the mouth of the stomach, and insects it, and hence comes the loathing of some sorts o meats. Sometimes this ceaseth of it self; but if there be danger of a Consumption in the mother, le the child should be in danger for want of food, give a gentle Vomit or Stomach-pills, with thing that strengthen the Stomach. As, Take Coser of red Rose half an ounce, of Bettony an ounc, p∣served Quinces three dram, Aromaticum  half a dram, Pearl prepared half a scruple,  Syrup of green Ginger and Quines, make an E∣ctuary. Anoint the stomach with oyl of Mastich,  Quinces, Wormwood, Mirtles, &c. Give  and powerful things with  roasted rather then boyled.
Pica is when they desire strange and absurd things, as coals, ashes, &c. as she that longed for her husbands flesh, and though she loved him very well; she killed him, eat part, and pou∣dered up the rest. Of this disease we spake in the third Book. Juyce of yong Vine-eaves with syrup of Quin∣ces, is good against this, or the water that drops in May from the Vines. This keeps the child from suffering by the mothers appetite. Or this Spirit. Take Citron peels, Oranges, Pny roots as much as you please, add Malmsey, di∣ them some daies, then beat the roots and peels, ad more Malmsey, and distil them. The third is loathing and vomiting, from an evil vapor or humor in the stomach from blood retained. If vomiting gives her ease, stop it not, but leave it to Nature, it wil cease after a month or two. If it be with trouble, give a gentle Vo∣mit, or strengthen the stomach, or give a little Rhubarb. The fourth is pain of the belly, fom wind and humors about the womb that go to the guts, dis∣cuss them as in Chap. 3. of the Colick. Avoid moist Fomentations, give Cinnamon water, or spiced Wine. The fifth is a loosness which must be sudden∣ly stopt, least it cause an abortion. First, give aHippocr. 5. Apho 34. entle Clenser and strengthener, s Rhubarb with up of Roses solutive, then Quinces at the first course at meals; and Rice, Starch, Almonds, Con∣e of Rose, Quinces. Apply to the navel a Pul∣ of Quincs, Mastich, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves. The sixth is the toothach, from a shrp humor om retention of the terms that goes to the rot  some tooth, and hurts the membranes. It ceaseth
commonly of  self, yet if it be great, use a Plaister of Mastich and Tacamahacca to the tem∣ples, and hold in the mouth the Decoction of Fern root, Cinquefoyl, Snakeweed, Sage, Mul∣berry ba &c. The seventh is headach, when the vapors fom the terms stopt, ascend and twitch the membane of the brain, it must be repelled and abated with Lenitives, of which in Lib. 1. Part 3. Sect. 1. Cap 3. of Headach. The eighth of the Megrim, from the vapors di∣sturbing the Spirits that go to the head by the veins and arteries, or by the gullet. If it cease not, discuss vapors, and strengthen the brain in∣wardly and outwardly as in Vertigo. Chap. 5. Of the Symptoms in Women with Child in the mid∣dle months. THey are cough, heart-beating, fainting, watching, pain in the loyns and hips, and bleeding. 1. The cough is from a sharp vapor that comes to the jaws and rough artery from the ters, or from a thin part of that blood gotten into the eins of the breast, or falling from the head to the breast. This endangers abortion, and strength ails from watching; therefore purge the h∣mors that fll from the head to the breast, with Rhubarb, Agaril, and strengthen the head as in a Ctarrh, and giv eet Lenitives, as in  Cough. 2. Palpitation of het and fainting, is fm vapors that go to it by the rteries, or fom bl
that aboundeth, and cānot get out at the womb, but ascends and oppreleth the heart. Use Cor∣dials as in Syncope inwardly and outwardly. If it be from too much blood as in Plethory, open a vein. 3. Watching is from dry sharp vapors that trouble the animal Spirits. Then use Frictions, and wash the feet at bed-time, and give Syrup of Poppies, dried Roses, Emulsions of sweet Al∣monds, and white Poppy seeds. 4. There is pain in the loyns and hipps from the weight of the child, or from the terms stopt, or growth of the child that stretcheth the liga∣ments of the womb and parts adjacent; if there be Plethory, bleed. If it be from weight of the child, hold it up with swathing Bands about the neck. 5. There is flux of blood at the womb, nose, o Haemorrhoids from plenty, or from the weak∣ness of the child that takes it not in, or from evil humors in the blood, that stir up Nature to send it forth. Also the vessels of the womb may be broken or torn by motion, fall, cough, or trou∣ble of mind. This is dangerous, of which Hip∣pocrates5. Ap. 60. saith, The child cannot be well, if it be from blood only, there is less danger, so it lows by the veins of the neck of the womb for it takes aay Plethory, or take not nourishment from the child. If it be from the weakness of the child that draws it not, abortion often follows, or hard tra∣vel, or she goes beyond her time. If it slow by the inward veins of the womb, there is moe dan∣gr by the openness of the womb. If it come fom evil blood, the danger is alike from Caco∣chymy which is like to fall upon both. If thr
be Plethory, open a vein warily, and use astrin∣gents. As, Take Pearls prepared a scruple,  Coral two sruples, Mace, Nutmeg, eah a dram; Cinmon hal a dram, make a Poder, or with Su∣gar, Rus: or give this Pouder in Broath. Tk red Coral a dram, Pearl half a dram precious ston, eah half a scruple; red Sanders half a dram, Bo a dram, sealed Earth, Tormentil roots, ech two sru∣ples; with Sugar of Roses and Manus Christi,  Pearl six drams, make a Pouder. You may strengthen the child at the navel I there be Cacochymy alter the humos, and (if you may) evacuate. You may use Amulets in the hands, and about the neck. In flux of Hae∣morrhoids, beware of the pain. Let her dink hot Wine with a roasted Nutmeg. Chap. 6. Of the Symptomes that are in the last months. FIrst, the urin is stopt from suppression of th nek of the bladder. Let her then lie dwn and let bladder be fomented with a Bag of Pl∣litoy, Parley roots Mllows, Lineseed, and the like, o use the Ctheter. 2. The belly is bound from a hot & dry live when the child dws all the moisture to it,  the guts. Let her then use Moisters,  Butter, Mllows, Borage in Broaths; or take Cly∣sters in a small quantity. 3 The veins appear in the hips and leggs a varicns only, then keep them from walking and let thi eet be laid upon a stool. 4. The lggs swell from erous blood, but thi goes away with the aterbirth, and is the signs
a female child; but if she cannot walk, foment ith a Lye made of Vine branches and Wine, or with a Decoction of Organ, Pennroyal, Cha∣momil, Calamints. Or, Take Bean and Lupine flour, each tw unces; Tartar an ounce, Pigeons dung half an unce, with eeled water and juyce of Coleworts, make a Pultis. Rb and wash the feet with salt water in which Ch∣momi, Organ and Dill were boled. 5. The skin of the belly is clet with stretch∣ng after the fourth month; therefore use loos∣ning Limments to keep off deformity, as marrow of Veal, and Sheeps legs, Oyl of sweet Almonds, Hens grease. 6. The water gathered in time of being with hild, between the membranes that hold the hild, comes forth too soon, because the mem∣branes are broken by leaping or a conusion. This makes difficult birth, for that water was to moisten the parts, Therefore let her keep a good diet, and strengthen the hild inwardly and out∣wardly. Chap. 7. Of Weakness of the Child. THis is either from weak seed or little nou∣rishment or bad, and causeth many disea∣ses in the child. To hinder abortion and death of the child, know rightl the weakness, as Hippocrates saith,5. Apo. 53. They that will abort, have first breasts that al away, which i from want of nourishment in the com∣mon veis of the womb and breasts. Hippcrates5 Apr. 5. ath a seond sign which is this I a Wman
with Child hath much milk flowing from her breast, her Child is weak. 3. If the terms flow often, theHippocr. 5. aphr. 56. nourishment is taken from the child. 4. A mo∣ther often and long being sick, shews that her child is weak, because her blood is not good, and the bad humors with the blood go to nourish the child which makes him sick. 5. When the mother hath a flux of the belly, the child is weak. 6. Whē it begins to move, and is scarce felt, it is weak. If it be from these causes, take them away, and strengthen the child; first eed the mother high with meats of good juyce, and sweet Almonds steept in Honey, Raisons, Quinces, outwardly thus. Take Malmsey three pints, dissolve it in oyl f Nutmeg by exprssion half an ounce, add pouder of Cloves, Rue, each half an ounce; Rose, Sage, Maroram, Pennyoyal water, each a pint; Aqua vitae three ounces. Dip Spunges in it, and apply them under the let breast, to the arm-pits, hams, pulses, soles of the feet, and when they dry, wet them again. Chap. 8. Of Crying in the Womb. CHildren have somtimes cryed in the womb, as Fabricius saith in his Epistle to his Bro∣ther James Finel, and Winridik of Monsters, writes thus, In this City of Bressa a child was heard to cry in the womb three daies before the tra∣vel; when he was a man, he was misrable with po∣verty and disass, till he died. Andreas Libavi writes the same, and others. Some sa it portends evil to the Mother, or Child, or Countrey. Th auses It is a vice by the expulsion of the air thouh the ough artey, and some air may in the cvities
from vapors or Spirits, as in eggs when chic∣kens pip in them. And if the child have a rough artery, lungs and breasts which are the organs of breathing ound, and the child is strong, there is no hinderance but it may utter a voice. But som∣thing whatsoever it is, must stir it to make this noise.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. THE SIXTH SECTION. Of Symptoms that hap∣pen in Childbearing. Chap. 1. Of Child-bearing in General. WHEN the child can no longer be contained in so small a place, being grown, and re∣quiring moe nourishment, it kiks, and beaks the mem∣branes and Ligaments that hld it, and th womb by an expelling fculty, sends it forth with great strain∣ing and this is called ravel. It is either naturl or not natural, legitimae
or illigitimate. The natural is when the child omes with the head forward and heels upwards, with his hands and arms to his thighs, and so the other parts easily follow, then the Amnios is bro∣ken, and the water that was laid up in time of be∣ing with child flows forth, and moistens the pas∣saes, then the child with more force breaks the Acetabula, from which the Secundine is separa∣ted, and the other membranes are broken, and the blood flows into the cavity of the womb, and the child gets out by the expulsive faculty with such force, that it seems to fall rather then be expel∣led, and the bones of the privities must needs be divided. That which follows the birth is above humane capaity, namely the transmutation of the navel vessels, and lungs, and heart in the infant, and why Nature ordered it, of which Galen elegant∣l in the 15. Book of the Use of Parts, and 6. Chapter. There is also a legitimate birth, when it is ac∣coding to the Law of Nature, and an illegiti∣mate, when it is before or after the time. Hippocraes saith that a birth in the seventhLib. de sp∣tim. prcu. month is vital and legitimate. And it is sooner fom the strength of the faculty and matter it for formation, yet it is commonly weak, except the eventh month be compleat. Of the eighth month Hippocrates aith thus, None live that is born in the eighth month, because i cannot bear the two affliction to follow, but the reason of the Arithmeticians is better, that say an even month is imperect. The ninth and tenth month are the best, asLib. de na¦tura pueri. Lib. Sa∣pient. c. 8. Hipcrate aith; A child is born in ten months at te frthest, and so aies the wisest Salomon. Some
say that a child may e born in the eleventh month, and Peter Apponensis was so born; and some say they have been born in the fourteenth and fifteenth month: but rare things are not to be counted the Law of Nature. Generally Physitians agree with Hippocrates, though some dissent. Chap. 2. Of Abortion. IT is the exclusion of a child, not perfect nor li∣ving, before legitimate time. This time is de∣finedLib. de cr∣nib. by Hippocraes, Whosoever conceiveth, doth it within seven daies, but they are properly abortions that come before the seventh day; and though some are in the fifth and sixth month that have lived, yt that must not drogate from the common Law of Na∣ture. Some differences of Abortion are from the time and bigness of the child. For that which is cast out, is little and round, without distinction of members at first, like a Grape. Somtimes as long as a inger, and members may be distinguish∣ed. And somtimes the child is almost perfect. The Causes The immediate Cause, is the expulsive facul∣ty stired up, and that is done by three means from Galen, from the weight, bignes and pain.3. De na∣tur fc. ap. 12. There are more causes which we shal place in two Ranks. The first is of the manner of the causes that provoke the expulsive faculty. The other is that which indeth out these waies by all the causes. The expulsive fculty is first provoked by the child being weak, either from evil seed, or being dead. The child is weak for want of food, and from the mothers diseases, either in her whole
body, or in the womb, or parts adjacent that con∣sent, as Feavers, Inflammations, Fainting, Con∣vulsions, Pain, Vomiting, Neesing. Cough that move the Spirits and humors and shake the child and stir up Nature to expel it. Also straitness of the womb causeth Abortion, by which means it cannot contain a great child. Alo shortness of the navel-vessels, which Fabri∣cius first observed. The outward Causes, are cold air after hot and moist, which gets into the womb, and pro∣vokes it, and huts the child. The AstrologersCent 2. obs. 50. add the malignant aspects of the Stars: also too much or too little meat. Great watchings, pur∣ging, and flux of blood by the womb and Hae∣morrhoids. Also violent motion, as leaping, carrying of burdens, strokes on the belly or bak. Also passions, as anger, fear, sorrow. Also bleeding, purging, fasting, mel of brim∣sone or ashes, hoofs burnt, or stink of the snu of a candle. If the breasts be less, or much milk flow fromThe Signs. them, or she feel much and often pain about th belly or loyns, that go to the Pubes and Os sa∣cum, with a deire of thrusting forth in the womb. If the child change its place, and if it fl lower when it was in the middle of the belly, there is fear of miscarring. It is dangerous alwas, because it is with vio∣lence,The Pro∣nosik. there are also great Symptoms: they are in ls danger that have already brought forth a hild; refore the irst is most dangerus, and  mous of the vessels ar ton, and they com∣monl become barren. Abortion is mot dange∣os in the sixth, seventh and eighth month, be∣se th inant being eater, useth greater
pain, and breaks the Ligaments worse. To preserve from Abortion. Consider the constitution before she is with child, and prevent every cause. If it be like to come from Plethory before Conception, open a vein, and after Conception in the fourth or ith month, in the arm. I it be from Cacochymy, purge the whole bo∣dy, and purge the womb with Pessaries, and strenghen it, of which in the cold and moist di∣stemper of the Womb If she have conceived, open a vein before the time she used to abort; i there Cacochymy purge gently at times. If there be a cold distemper of body by flegm that hurts the womb, give the d∣coction of China or Sara, with strengtheners of the child Avoid the external Causes of Abortion, and if they have done hur, help it presently. Lt nt the belly be bound; if the child be weak, ∣move the causes of weakness, and strengthen i Use things that strengthen the womb and child, as Coral as Kermes-berries. Or, Take Magistery of Coral a dram, Pearl p∣pared half a dram, Ivory shaved a dram, Mai half a dram, grains of Kermes a dram, Manus ri∣sti with Pearl two drams, make a Pouder. I th Abortion be at hand, and the pains increase, give this Pouder with a rear Eg Or, Take Conr of red Roses two drams, red Coral a Maih, h a scruple; give i presently. Use the ountees Oytment outwardly to the Loyns, Rins, Pcn and Perinaeum. Or, Take Oyl of Roses, Mirtes, Maih, Qinces, ea two ounces; Oyl of Mints an ounce, Bdellium
in Vinegar, liquid Storax, each two ounces; Oyl of Nutmegs by expression a dram, with Wax make an Oyntment. Of the same with Pitch, Rosin, Co∣lophony, you may make Paisters. Let her hold a Loadstone in her hand, or tie it to her navel, or wear an Eagle stone under her arm-pits, or Co∣ral, Jaspar, Smaragds, Diamonds. If these will not keep the child up, you must give over A∣ringents, and use Leniives. Question. Whether the straitness of the Womb, is the Cause of Abortion? Hippocrates 1. de morb. saith, That the WombLib. de su∣per. lib. de steril. may cause Abortion, if they be windy, thic, great,  little: and he shews in another place that A∣bortion may be from the straitnss of the womb. And in another place he saith, I a woman in the De nat. ac. c. 2. third, ourth or fifth mnth miarry, often, a at the sme time, it is because the womb wil not stretch. And Galen confirms the same, and i stnds to reason, for natural birth is when the womb cannot con∣tain the child for its growth. Thrfor i it be eternaturally too little, it i the cause o Mor∣on. And though Nture hath made the womb o hold the child, yet i i be not made large e∣nough, it cannot ntain it; so the stomach i mtims so strait, that it cannot hold an indi∣fent quantity of met, as others can. Chap. 3. Of the Signs of Na∣tural Birth, and the manner and Government of such as bring orth. AT her tim of her bin t be delivred, lt er tak hd of stingns and thicns,
but let her eat meat of easie concoction, and o good juyce, and sit every fourth day in a ht Bath. Of Mallows, Foenugreek, Linseed, Mug∣wort and Chamomil flowers; and after let h back, loyns belly and privities be anointed wit the Mucilag of Althaea seed, and Oyl of Lillies and let th child b stengthened. But when e hath pains from the navel to the groyn, and in the back, then the ligaments a vessels are broken, by which the child grow  the womb. And because the womb violently strains to discharge it; the membranous ibes are extended, and commonly there are very great pains, and throws, or the child will not be born, and it is an evil sign when throw cease, because the expulsive faculty is weakend. And let not the Midwie provoke throws till the time. When the membranes are broken, the water flows out, that comes from the urin and sweat o the child, first little, then more, then wateish blood, and the oriice of the womb begins to o∣pen to let out the child And before this time, you must not provoke throws. Then let the Mid∣wie put her inger into the oriice of the womb, and she shall perceive somthing round and hard as an egg. Let her not lie on her back flat, but with her back up, that she may breathe more freely. After the child is born, you must press the blood in the navel-vessels towards the navel of the in∣ant, and take heed that you loose not muh blood in cutting off the vel-string, for it ha destroyed weak children, and you must lbo o  out the Sudine with the child: & i it b in the womb, anoint your hands with am oy, nd u them ito the womb, and etch i out.
Chap. 5. Of Natural hard Tra∣vel. THough Child-bearing since Eves sin is or∣dained to be painful as a punihment ther∣o, yet sometimes it is more painful then ordi∣nary. The first is from the mother, and the expul∣siveThe Causes faculty. 2. From the Child. 3. From the passage,. From the mother, as when the womb is weak, and the mother is not active to expell from weakness or diseases or want of spi∣its,5. Aphor. 55. of which Hippocrates. It is from the birth when there are twins or more, and both strive to go forth at a ime, or if the child stick to a Mole, or be so weak that it cannot break the membrane, or if it be too big all over, or in the head only, or if the Navil ves∣sels are twisted about his neck. It is from the passages when the membranes ae thick, the oriice too strait, and the neck of the womb is not open sufficiently, as in such asFabric. cent. 3. obs. 57. labour of the first child, or are very fat. The passages are pressed and straitned by tumors in the adjacent parts, or when the bones are too fim and wil not open, then the mother and child ae both in danger, or when the passages are not ippry, or when they are broken too soon by reason of the thin membranes, or the water flows th sooner then it ought. You may know had Travel by int throws,The Signs. that come at a great distance. And you must consider all things concerning the mother, womb d child.
The Pro∣gnostick. In hard Travel, the mother and child are in danger, and the Perinaeum sometimes breaks with the skin from the privities to the Arsehole. If a woman be four daies in travel, the child scarce escapes. The Cure. All things that move the terms are good to make easie delivery, As Myrrh, white Amber in white Wine or Lillywater, two scruples or a dram. Some give a drop of oyl o Amber in Vervain wa∣ter, or a scruple of mineral Borax, or half a dram, but begin with gentle things, as a spoonful of To Cure al diseases Read my Sennertus, Platerus, Riverius, Bartholi∣nus, and Riolanus, of the last Edition. Cinnamon water. Or, Take Cassia Lignea, Ditta∣ny, each a dram; Cinnamon hal a dram, Saffron a scruple, make a Pouder, give a dram. Or, Take Borax mineral a dram, Cassia Lignea a scruple, Saffron six grains, give it in Sack. Or, Take Cas∣sia Lignea a dram, Dittany, Amber, each half a dram Cinnamon, Borax, each a dram and half; Saffron a scruple, give half a dram. Or give some drops of oyl of Hazel in conve∣nient liquor, or two or three drops of oyl of Cin∣namon in Vervain water, some prepare the se∣cundine thus: Take the Navel string and dry i in an Oven. Take two drams of the pouder, Cinna∣mon a dram, Saffron half a scruple, with juyce of Savin make Troches, give two drams, or wash the Surdine in Wine, and bake it in a pot, then wash it in Endive water and Wine. Take half a dram of it, long Pepper, Galangal, each half a dram; Pian∣tne and Endie seed, each a dram and half, La∣ender seed four scruples, make a pouder. Or, Take Labdanum two drams, Storax caamie, ein, each half a dram; Musk and Amber∣grease each six grains; make a pouder, or Tros for a me, o use pessaries to provoke the bith. Tke Galbnu  in Vine an oun,
Myrrh two drams, Saffron a dram, with oyl of Orris make a Peary. An Oyntment for the Pecten and Navil. Take oyl of Keir two ounces, juyce of Savin an ounce, of Leeks and Mercury, eah half an ounce, boyl them to the consumption of the juyce, add Galbanum dissolved in vinegar half an ounce, Myrrh two drams, Storax liquid a dram, round Birthwor, Sowbread, Cinnamon, each half a dram; Saffron a scruple, with Wax make an oyntment. Also neesing provoke the birth and Amulets,5. Aphor. 35. As a Snakes skin about her middle, the Aegle∣stone bound to her thigh. If weakness be the cause, refresh her withLeui len. de oc. nat. mir. lib. 4. c. 12. Wine and sops to the nose, Consect. Alkernies, Diamose. Diamarg. If there e twins, let the Midwife order them with her hands, and help the foremost. If the passages be not slippery, use an emolli∣ent Fomentaton, and oyl of sweet Almonds, Hens or Ducks grease, &c. If the belly be bound give a Clyster or Suppository. When medicines wil not do it, break the mem∣braneAetius e∣tra. 4. cip. 23. with the ingers dipt in oyl, or cut them. When the Child is stil orn, let the Mdwife hew Spices and blow in its moth, or drop Aqua vitae in it, or anoynt it with Honey. Chap. 6. Of a vitious disor∣derly birth, or difficulty pre∣ternatural. IF the head come not forth first, and the hands and eet are upwards there is an ill birth. Th Causes Hippocrates reckons two causes, the largeness
Lib. de nat. pu. of the womb, and disorderly motion of the mo∣ther from pain, also the thickness of the mem∣brane, which when it cannot break with the head, it attempts to do with the feet and hands. The Signs. The midwife may perceive in what figure the child comes forth. The Pro∣gnostick. All disorderly coming forth is dangerous to mother and child, but there is least danger when both eet come forth, this is called by the Latins Partus Agrippins. The Cure. Let the Midwife reduce it into the cavity of the womb when it comes not forth right, and place it right. When the feet cannot be thrust upwards, let the Midwife fupple the parts with oyl, and take hold of the arm and help it, and give neesings. Let her alwaies labor to put the child in a right posture by moving it with her hand, or ta∣king the mother from the bed, and compose her in such a posture as may bring the child into a right posture, and that soon. Chap. 7. Of a slow Birth. THis is when the child is longer coming forth then ordinarily, f this Massa writes that a Venetian Matron conceived of a husbandpisl. to. 2 29. pis. of seventy years of age, and brought forth a child in the iteenth month blind and without hands which lived five months. Cardanns writesCsil. 85. ad chist.  that his father said he was born in the thiteenth month, and Mercurialis writes thus. That it was never seen or written that a woman had a live chid fur years in her belly, &c. but these are rare and miraculous.
The cause is the weakness of the seed, and want of heat in the womb, which makes the ex∣pulsive aculty weak. Chap. 8. Of a Child dead in the womb. WHen at the time of Child-birth, there is pain and breaking orth of water, which ceaseth presently without delivery, the child re∣maining in the womb, then the mother or the child dies, or both. When the travel is vehement from divers cau∣ses,The Causes they may also cause no birth, for either the more she may lose her strength and the child not come forth, or both may die. And if the child be weak and move little, or the mother may be weak and the child great, the travel is hard and both die, or if the child come not forth in a right posture. Or if the passages are ill proportioned, asFabri. cent. 1. obs. 64. & 67. when the bones of the Pubes do not give way, or when there is Schirrhus, or other tumor that straitneth the passages there is no delivery. Or the child dies by a disease for want of nou∣rishment, or a fall, stroak, or leap, or passion in the mother. Search if the child be living or dead, for if itThe Signs. be dead it wil hurt the mother by rotting, and if the mother die and child be alive, take it out before the mother be buried. A child is known to be dead if the mother and Midwie perceive no motion, nor is it raised by any strengtheners given, and when the mother moves from side to side, i moves like a stone, o
when the face and lipps of the mother are pale, and her extream parts livid: and the breasts that were plump, are fallen; her breath sttinks, wa∣ter and stinking matter flows from the womb; there is a Feaver, horror and fainting, or Con∣vulsion; or if the Secundine come forth before the child. The Pro∣gnostick. If a dead child be not presently taken out, the mother is in great danger: there are great Sym∣ptoms, and strange diseases, of which see Francis Rousset and others. The Cure. When the child comes not forth in time; and is alive, it must be taken out by the Midwife or Chirurgion by cutting the belly and womb, of which in the Chapter following. If it be dead, you must drive, or take it out before it stinks, ei∣ther by Medicines or Chirurgery. The Medicines are such as stir up the expul∣sive faculty, but they must be stronger then be∣fore, because the motion of the child ceaseth, as Take Savin, round Birthwort, Troches of Mirrh, Castor, each a dram; Cinnamon half an ounce, Saf∣fron a scruple: give a dram with Savin-water. Or, Take Borax, Savin, Dittany, each an ounce; Mirrh, Asarum rooes, Cinnamon, Saffron, each half a dram; make a Pouder, give a dram. Purge first, and put her in an emollient Bath, and anoint about the womb with Oyl of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Chamomil, Hens and Goose∣grease. Foment to get out the child with a Decoction of Mercury, Orris, wild Cowcumber, Staechas, Broom flowers. Then anoint the Privities and Loyns with Oyntment of Sowbread. Or, Take Colaquiwida, Agarick, Birthwort, each a dram; make a Pouder, ad Ammoniacum dissolved in Wine,
Ox gall, each two drams; with Oyl f Keir make an Oyntment. Or this Pessary. Take Birthwort, Orris, black Hellebre, Coloquintida, Mirrh, each a dram pou∣dered; add Ammoniacum dissolved in Wine, Ox gall, each two drams. Or make a Fume with Asses hoof burnt, or Galbanum or Castor, and let it be taken in with a Funnel. If these wil not do, use Chirurgery. It is doneLib. 6. c. 23. terab. serm. 4. cap. 23. with the hand only, or with instruments, of which Aegineta and Aetius. Charles Stephens shews how to use the hand without instruments. When you know the child is dead (saith he) place the woman in the best po∣sture, and tie her so very fast, &c. see the rest. John Bauhin takes the same course out ofLib. 5. cap. 2. de disect∣part. corp∣re huma. Schenks Observations. And because the strength aileth, refresh her, and abate pain, cherish the torn parts, and prevent Symptoms. To take away pain, and strengthen the parts, soment with the Decoction of Mugwort, Mallows, Rosemary, Wormwood, Mirtles, St. Johns-wort, each half an ounce; Sperma Ceti two drams, Deer's suet an ounce, with Wax make an Oyntment. Or, Take Wax four ounces, Sperma Ceti an ounce, melt them, dip Flax therein, and lay it all over the belly. In some Counies women will not permit these, but leave all to God. Chap. 9. Of the Caesarean Birth. THe belly and womb are cut sometimes to take out the child, and this is called the Caesarean Birth, and they that live are called Cae∣sars. It is done in three cases. 1. When the child is dead, and the woman liv. 2. Whn
the woman is dead, and the child alive. 3. When both mother and child are alive. This is seldom, because either Medicines do it, or it is taken out by other Chirurgery, or theEnchirid. consul. mo∣dic. pag. 188. work is left to Nature. Mathias Cornax hath a History of one that carried a dead child in her belly four years, it was taken out by cutting the womb and belly, and the mother lived, and con∣ceived with child after: she fainted not at the time, and the wound grew together without stitching; and her terms after came in good or∣der, and she had a lusty Boy till the 2. of June. The Surgeons that had cut her afore were sent for, and the old orisice was open, and the mother and the women present, would not yeild to the second cutting. Therefore her strength failed, and the Chirurgion took out a compleat child, but it was dead. There are more Histories of live children cutPlin. lib. 7. hist. nat. c. 90. out of their mothers bellies being dead. And Roderick a Castro saith that an infant cannot live in the mothers womb being dead, except it be ta∣kenRod. â ca∣stro. lib. 4. de morbis mul. c. 1. Agen. lib. 5. epit. 2. 11. out at the very time of her departure, or while there are vital Spirits, because when the motion and life of the mother cease, the life of the child also ceaseth: yet is his Argument of no force, because the child hath its proper Soul, and if it be wel, it may live a while in the womb with∣out beneit from the mother, as it doth when it is delivered. But take heed it be not suffocated in the womb, and keep the mothers mouth open, and let the Midwie never move her hand from the privities, till the Chirurgion have taken itLib. . de dis par. co. m. c 1. out: and you may know that the child is alive, when the mother is dead by its leaping. Charles Stepens shews the way of taking out a dead child.
When a live child is cut out of the belly of a live mother, it is done onely least the mother or child, or both should die. And this may be done, and both preserved a∣live, which is plainly demonstrated by Francis Rousset in his Book of this subject, so that there isIn . no doubt of it. For first he shews the necessity of the operation, and next the possibility of it, shewing that the muscles of the belly, the Peri∣tonaeum and womb may be cut without hazard of life. Thirdly, he confirms by History what he pro∣ved by reason, and shews that many wounds of the muscles in the lower belly, Peritonaeum and womb have been cured. Fourthly, he propounds many more dangerous cases then the Caesarean Section, which were not deadly in themselves. And then he shews the manner of the operation, and how it is to be done. Therefore have recourse to his works, if thou wilt learn it.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE SEVENTH SECTION. Of the Government of Women in Child-bed, of the Diseases that come after Travel. Chap. 1 Of the Government of Women in Child-bed. PRESENTLY after she is delivered, labor to make the Aftebirth follow, of which in the Chapter following, then compose her in bed, and give her good food. Let the air be temperate, rather hot then cold. Let her beware of cold that it get not into the womb, it will cause torments and inflammations.
If travel be hard, anoynt the belly and ides with oyl of sweet Almonds, Lillies, and warm Wine. Let her meat be of good juyce and easie con∣coction, Hen broath, and Chickens, and Ca∣pons, Kid, Mutton, Veal, let her drink thin wine i there be no feaver, or Cinnamon boyled in water, the first daies drunk warm: Let there be no noise about her, and let her not rise too soon, avoid passions least the humors be stirred and ll into some part. If sh cannot or wil not suckle her child, turn the milk from the breasts by repellers under the Arm-pits, as Unguent of Roses, Cerot of San∣des, dissolved in vinegar, and to the breasts ap∣ply a Cataplasm of Bean and Orobus flour with Oxymel, or foment the breasts with the decocti∣n of Mints, Dill, Smallage; or lay the leaves bruised upon them. Before she goes forth, let her bath with a decoction of Lilly roots, Elicampane, Mug∣ot, Agrimony, Borage, Rosemary, Chamo∣il flowers, Staechas, Faenugreek, Lineseed, Citron peels. Chap. 2. Of the Secundine or Afterbirth, or a Mole that is left after Child-bearing. THese stick in the bottom of the womb, or like a ball to another part, the mouth of he womb being open or closed. It is not safe to cut the Aerbirth from the The Causes
Navel till both be come forth, therefore draw i out without breaking of the Navel string, this i retained because it grows to the sides of the womb, or is swollen by hard travel, or because the Navel string is broken by the infants strain∣ing: or from cold air got in, or from a fright or from her not having throws fit to exclude it or because she is impatient and wil not continu in a due posture. The Signs. The Midwife wil declare it, and the purgation is not, the belly swels, there is a feaver, and hea∣viness, and pain in the belly; there is a stink an loathing from stinking vapors, difficult breath∣ing, Suffocation and Convulsion. The Pro∣gnostik. Many die from the retaining of it if it canno come forth, when matter flows from the womb there is hope that they wil rot and come away in sixty daies. The Cure. First let the Midwife draw it gently with he hand, and use sneesing, then burnt Partridge feathers to the nose, and Goats hoofs, as in th suffocation of the womb. Then use things that expel a dead child, Di∣tany, oyl of wood Hercleon after Preparatives. Or, Take Marjoram, Chervil, Pennyroyal, each a handful; Savin half a handful, Anise and Fen∣nel seed, each half a dram; Lovage and Parsley roots, each three drams; boyl them in water for thr draughts. Or, Take Dittany, troches of Myrrh, Borax, each half a dram; Saffron, Castor, each a scruple; make a Pouder. Or, Take round Birth∣wort, two scruples, Myrrh a scruple, make a Pouder give it in Wine. Make Pessaries of Mugwort, Mercury, Sage, Orris in pouder with oyl of Keir. Or, Take
round Birthwort, Savin, Briony, Ox gall and Ho∣ny, and make a Pessary. The stronger are of the Decoction of wild Cowcumber, Coloquintida, Staphisager, Helle∣bore, Honey, and gall of an Ox. Fumes are made of Cassia lignea, Nard, Mug∣wort, Savin, Pennyroyal, Dittany. Or, Take Mirrh, Castor, Galbaum, each half a dram; O∣popanax, Cinnamon, each a dram; with Honey make Troches for to be burnt. Then oment the Belly with the Decoction of those Plants. Or, Take Lupine meal an ounce, pouder of Wormwood half an ounce, Mirrh, Rue, ach three drams; with Ox gall and Honey make a Ctaplasm. If it come not forth, give a Womb-clyster of the Decoction of Sage, Mugwort, Mercury, Ca∣lamints, Pennyroyal. If all fail, inject things to suppurate into the womb, and let it be turned to matter, and come out by degrees, and inject strengtheners into the womb. Of the Mole lef after Childbearing. You may know it by the signs of a Mole men∣tioned, she hath no ease after travel, there is pain in the navel, back and groyns, and much clotted blood comes away, and yet she hath no ease the Cure is mentioned before in the Mole. Chap. 3. Of the Purgation af∣ter Childbearing diminished or detained. THis is not alike in all women, for in some women the blod is fresh: in others it is
waterish, cholerick, or melancholick. And som bleed more then others, according to the consti∣tution and Countrey. It is either not at all, o too much, or too little. The Causes When they are stopt or lessened, the vessels ar too strait, or the blood flows another way, or i is too thick, or the vessels of the womb are pres∣sed from its position: the blood is drawn away by passions, fear, or goes hastily to the breas. The Signs. The just quantity is not to be deined: when it is stopt, the belly swels, the pain is in the bt∣tom of the blly and groyns; there is chilness and a feaver after it, ainting, weak, swit, une∣qual pulse; there is oot in the urin. Somtimes the belly is inflamed, or she voids blew or black clodds of blood. The Pro∣gnostick. It is bad of it self to have any thing left after Childbearing, and worse if it staies long, andGal. 1. epid. com. 3. t 21. grows melancholick: therefore it is a cause of many diseases. First, endeavor to evaeuate the blood from theThe Cure womb by Frictions, Ligatures and Cupping; i they will not do, open a vein in the foot. Then open the passges with external and in∣ternal means anoint the Belly with loosning Oyls, or soment thus. Take Lilly roots, Birth∣worts, Briony, Angelca, each half an ounce; Mer∣cury, Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Savin, Calamints, each a handful; Tansey, Chamomil and Elder fl∣wers, each half a handful; Faenugreek and Linseed, each two drams; bruise them grosly, and put them in a bag, and boyl them in Water and Wine: lay it to the privities and bottom of the belly. Give emollient Clysters; and if some daies are pa, purge with Agarick, Rhubarb, Senna. Or, Take Lilly roots, Alhaea, each half an ounce;
Birthworts two drams, Pellitory, Mercury Althiea, each a handful; Calamints. Chamomil, Elder flo∣ers, each two pugils; Faenugreek and Lineseed, each two drams; boyl them, to ten ounces strained, dd Ol of Dill, Lillies, each an ounce, Hiera sim∣ple half an ounce, Oyntment of Sowbread three drams make a Clyster. Or give Pessaries that provoke the Terms. Give things to melt and attenuate the blood. As, Take opening Roots three drams, Bettony, Maidenhair, Endive, Schaenanth, each two pugils; Anise, Fennel seed, each a scruple; red Pease a spoonful: boyl them to a pint and half, add Cinna∣on water two drams, Syrup of the five Roots three nces: give four ounces. Chap. 4. Of too great a flux of blood after Childbearing. THat is too much which makes weak. It is blood abounding which ha beenThe Causes gthered nine months in the womb. It is thick, or spends the Spirits, and weakens.The Signs There is loathing of meat, pain the Hypochon∣dria, belly-ach, weak and often pulse, dark sight, noise in the ears, fainting and Convulsion. It is dangerous when long, and with faintingThe Pro∣gnostick. Hippoc. 5. aphor. 55. and Convulsion. Therefore observe the pulse, least she die suddenly. See what strength she hath, and stopt it not ddenly. I it be not very gat, order a diet ofThe Cure. oased Hens basted with red Wine, or Pomegra∣e, of Stach, Almonds, Rice, Quinces, Con∣ve of Roses, steeled Water, and make Revul∣ns: use gentle things, and strengthen the loose ges.
Anoint the belly with oyl of Roses, Mirtles, cup under he breasts and sides without scariication. Apply a Cataplasm of red Roses, Bole and Ros∣water to the Liver. Then use stronger, and give a higher diet o∣ten in small quantity, and give Syrups to stop blood. As, Take old Conserve of Roses two oun∣ces, of Tormentil an ounce, of Quinces without speci half an ounce, Bole, red Coral, each half a dram; with syrup of Currans and Coral, make an Electuay Anoint the belly with the Oyntment of the Countess, and other Astringents; or use astrin∣gent Fomentations: or let her take into the womb a Fume of Mastich, Frankincense, red Roses, &c. Then open a vein in the arm, and let blood by degrees. See Sect. 2. Chap. 6. of overflow∣ing of the Terms. Chap. 5. Of the Pains after Travel, and torments in the Belly. THese are not in the body, and bottome of the womb, but in the vessels and mem∣branes by which the womb hangs, and that goes to the sides and belly. The Causes They are from a constant labor in travel, when the bottom of the womb is pricked to send forth from cold air let into it, or clotted blood detain∣ed, or sharp blood sticking to the womb, and pricking it. The Signs. They are in the womb it self, you my know i they came from cold by what hath been done, & clotted blood will manifest it self. The Pro∣gnostick. They weken much, and are very troublsom, therefore they must be abated. The Cure. First, take away the cause, or abate the pain,
and make that which hurts the womb fit to be e∣vacuated by these Pills. Take Cinnamon a dram, Saffron a scruple, Dia∣ymini, Diagalangal, Zedoary, each half a dram; make a Pouder, give a dram in Pennyroyal or Cin∣namon water. Or, Take of Cummin seed steept in Spirit of wine and dried again a dram, Ameos seds and Ginger, each half a dram; Cinnamon a scruple, Castor half a scruple, make a Pouder. If she faint, ad Cordial Waters. As, Take Diacyminum a dram, Dia∣margariton frigid, Citron pels, Zedoary, each half  dram; make a Pouder. If she be cholerick, or the humor thin and sharp, cure it as a Colick from Choler. As, Take Syrup of Violets, Borage, each an ounce; Mucilage of Quince seeds made with Violet water half an ounce water of Borage, Scorzonera, each two ounces: give it at twice. Extenuate the humors, and loosen the passa∣ges outwardly. Take Bean flour, Faenugreek and Linseed, each an ounce; Chamomil flowers and Cum∣min seeds, each half an ounce; boyl them in Oyl of Lillies for a Cataplasm. You may sume the womb with Decoctions of Herbs. Chap. 6. Of the tearing of the Vulva to the Arse, and coming forth of the Womb, Inflamma∣tion, Ulcer, Suffocation, and fal∣ling out of the Fundament. THe tearing i in hard travel, when the mo∣thePar. secti 1. c. 1. is tende, and the child great, of which for
The womb comes forth from the violent ex∣tractionPar. 1. sect. 2. cap. 15. of the child or afterbirth, when the liga∣ments are streched. The Cure is mentioned, but you must not hinder the after flux by astringents, let her therefore rest, and lie one her back, with her eet drawn up, with Sweets to her nose, and stinks to the womb, so the womb will be retain∣ed, and the flux continued; after this is past, you may use Astringents. If there be inflammation from hard travel, hin∣der not the afer-flux of blood by Coolers. If it turn to an ulcer, let the after-flux flow, and then cure it. Suffocation after childbearing, is from the in∣king after-blood, which sends up stinking vapors which kill many. It is cured by Friction of the leggs, Ligatures and Cupping with Scarification, applying stinks to the nose, as Castor, Partridg∣eathers burnt, Rue. And applying Sweets to the privities. You must cure the alling out of the Funda∣ment from straining in Delivery, as formerly shewed. Chap. 7. Of Watching, Do∣ting, and Epilepsie of Women in Child-bed. THese are from the motion of the blood ad huors when the after-blood flows nt kind∣ly and there is a eaver, of which in e  Book. And from vapors sent from the  there is an Epilepsie, which is cured by Rv∣sion o vapors and humors downwad and fect
Evacuation of the ater-blood, which done, all these Symptoms cease. Chap. 8. Of the Swelling of the Womb, Belly, and Feet after Childbearing. IT is commonly from cold gottn into the womb, and the belly sometimes swells, as if there were another child. It is cured by hysterical or mother Fomenta∣tions, or with the skin of a new lain sheep, and hard wine, if in travel they keep a bad diet, or drink too much, the humors go into wind, and if they fall into the legs they swel, then take heed of much drink: and after the flux is past, make Evacuation with things that expel wind. As, Take Cleworts and Chamomil, each as you please: boyl them in Wine, and omet the parts. Or, Take Wormwd, Suthernwood, Bettony Calamints, Or∣gan, Chamomil flowers, Aniseds, Rue, Caraway, as much as will srve for a Fomentation for the feet. Chap. 9. Of Vomiting, Loos∣ness, Belly bound, and not hold∣ing of urin in women in Child∣bed. THey a up crude and idigsted meat som∣time, from weaks of the stomach by con∣sent from the womb, or from the humors thatHipp. 1. de nat. mulier.  to the mach, from the parts near the womb, when the after flux doth not low, they
somtimes vomit blood, or when it is disordered. For the blood not getting out, goes to the great veins and liver, and in its hollow part, by plen∣ty and sharp it opens the veins, and it gets into the stomach. Sometimes a vein is broken from hard travel. Hip. 1. It is bad, of what cause oever it comes: for de morb. mu∣lier. the strength will ail, and there will be no maer to make milk of if the food be vomited. If o∣ther humors, they may cause a feaver by their motion. If blood be vomited from a vein of the liver broken or opened, a Dropsie is to be fear∣ed; therefore stop it, whatsoever it be in this case. If it be of the meat, give that which will be easily digested, that oppress not the stomach which must be strengthened. If bad humors are vomited up, stop it not so soon, but lense with gentle Medicines, and pen the way by stool. In vomiting of blood make Revulsion to the lower parts by rubbing, cupping them, or bleed∣ing in the ham or ankle, and provoke the after∣flux. The flux of the belly is dangerous if it be great, for it weakneth, and threatneth to bring a Dy∣sentery, or Tenesmus or Needing. Nor is it safe to stop it presently, least you stop the after-flux with it. If it be from food not well concocted, let her keep a better diet, and let the stomach be strengthened outwardly. If this will not do, give internal remedies, so that they help the stomach and hurt not the womb, as the Decoction of Ba∣ley, Syrup and Honey of Roses. Give Clysters lso to temper the sharp humors and lene. Or give Syrup of Roses, Pulp f Tamainds, or Rhubab. And Aingents of Roses, Plntan,
Tormentl, Quinces, Coral, and the like. If they be wholly stopt, the belly must not be bound. But first give Rhubarb and Astringents outwardly, and provokers of Terms. Also the belly is bound in women in childbed, then give a Suppository of Soap or Honey, and after four or five daies, give emollient Clysters, and Manna or Caia. If they cannot hold their urin after hard tra∣vel, use a Bath of Bettony, Sage, Bayes, Rose∣mary Pennyroyal, Organ, Stoechas, and present∣ly after anoint with this. Take at Puppy-dogs oyled in Oyl of Worms, Lillies, and Foxes till the flesh fall from the bones, then take the Fat, and add Frankincense, Stora calamite, Benzoin, Opopanax, Mace, each a dram; Oyl of Nutmegs by expression alf a dram, with Goose grease and Wax make an Oyntment. Chap. 10. Of the Wrinkles of the Belly after Child-bearing, and mending of the largeness of the Privities. AFter the ourth month, Women prevent wrinkles by carrying a clout upon the bel∣ly dipt in Oyl of sweet Almonds, Jesamine, Oyl of Lillies, to loosen the skin, that it may stretch better without cles. If the belly be alreadly wrinkled. Take Sheeps  Goats et, Oyl of sweet Almonds, each an ounce; Sperma C two drams, with Wax make an Ont∣ment. After the flux is past add Ol of Trabi. 4 rm. 4. or Rss, or make Aetis his Cataplasm.
Chap. 11. Of Feavers and a∣cute diseases in Women in child∣bed. THey have oftē cōtinual Fevers. The st is th Feaver of milk about the fourth or third day from the motion of the blood from the womb to the breasts; it is not of many daies and con∣tinuance, and is not dangerous. But take heed you mistake not a putrid eaver for a milk-eaver, for labour and pain somtimes inflame the humors, and cause putraction, and though the Symptomes appear not the next day after delivery, yet there may be the beginning of putreaction from the heat of the humors in ra∣vel especially if the after-flux be stopt, from which time you must count the beginning of the diseases. For a feaver cannot be long concealed, nor the motion from travel last long: therefore it is probable the motion is ceased, and the ea∣ver comes of another cause, which I shal declae presently. The Causes They are the stopage of the after-flux, or the diminishing of it, or the oul humors that were gathered in the time of being with chld, and stir∣red n travel. Too great purging of the afe∣blood or Lochia signifies Cacochymy, or a Fea∣ver that will come long after travel. If the Lo∣chiaHipp. 1. epid. tex. 21. low not in due time, or be stopt, then the blood and oul humos go back to the great veins and liver, and make a putrid Feaver, or inflame those parts. The Signs. A Feaver from milk comes the fourth day, and tere is heaviness f back and shoulders, and the
Lochia flow wel, if not, there is the sign of a ∣ver. If the humors putriie in the womb there is oul stinking matter voided, the belly is swollen, and is pained when touch. If the feaver be not from milk, and the Lochia low, it comes from bad humors, especially if when she was big with child she kept not a good diet. A Feaver from milk is without danger, andThe Pro∣gnostick. ceaseth the eighth or tenth day: that which comes from suppression of the Lochia or after-flux, is dangerous and often deadly, except there follow a flux of the belly. If black stinking matter low from the womb, they escape If the feaver come from a Cacochymy before Delivery, it is worse, because it argues much humors, which Nature cannot discharge by the after-flux, and the strength is dejected by hard travel. A Feaver from milk, requires only good diet,The Cu and sweating must not be hindered, for it cures. That which is from stoppage or diminishing of the Lochia, must be cured by provoking the af∣ter-flux, or by another evacuatiō instead of it: as purging, bleeding in the oot to provoke the flux or by carifying of the thighs and legs, after cup∣ping, while the time is, that the after flux should e not afterwards. For if that time be past, if rength permit, open a vein in the arm, & bleed plentifully. For purging: some purge them in a Pleurisie after the seventh day, but beware by reason ofValer. lib. 5. obs. 10. merc. 4 de morb. ml c. 11. the weakness after travel, and because Purges may hinder the after flux, which is dangerous, it is good to evacuate onely by the womb; but if the flux of blood cease, and Nature would puge somthing from the womb, you may give a gentle Purge of Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna, Syrup of Ro∣ses, Senna.
Alterers are thus to be ordered. Avoid too cold and sharp things, let the evacuation by the womb should de diurbed by cold things. Let it be thin the first daies of lying in, thenT Diet. thicker, and so increasing, take heed of too much drink, especially of cold drink. Question. What Veins are to be opened in wo∣men that lie in, and have a Pleurisie? They have Symptomatical eavers; also from inammation of the Pleura, Jaws or Liver, be∣cause some of the oul humors are sent to some private part, and makes an inflamation to which the eaver is joyned, and the causes are as before mentioned. If there be a Pleuriie, she is in great danger. The question is whether she must bleed above or below, I say thus. First, this eaver is not pro∣perly Symptomatical, but primary, and hath the inflammation its associate, while Nature sends part of the matter to the Pleura or other part. Secondly note, that Nature is in an eror while she sends the vitious humors, which she should expel by the womb to the Pleura. Thirdly note, that the vitious moion of Na∣ture is not to be helped therefore, which should be done if you should presently open a vein in the arm; but the blood is to be voided by the womb, which is Natures way. Fourthly, i the Pleuriie be not abated by o∣ening a vein in the akle for revulsion, but the Sympoms continue or increase, you must not continue to open the veins beneath, because they evacuate not from the part affected, which is ne∣essry in such a dangerous disease. It is a sign
that the matter is fastned to the part, that it can∣not again be brought to the womb by revulsion. Therefore then you may open a vein in the arm on the same side, to evacuate and derive the blood from the part or there about, or she will be in danger of death. And fear not, that Nature will be taken from her ordinary motion towards the womb thereby, for the vein that was opened in the foot, preven∣ted that: and if you fear any danger, you may prevent it by Frictions and cupping of the leggs, while you let blood in the arm. And you may give Clysters, that may cause the humors moving upwards, to come down, and loosen the passages of the womb, that blood may flow out the better. As, Take Pellitory of the Wall, Mallows, Al∣thaea, red Coleworts, each a handful; Chamomil∣owers half a handful, Faenugreek and Linseed, each half an ounce; boyl them in Water, to a pint strain∣ed, add lenitive Electuary an ounce, Diacatholicon or Cassia half an ounce, Oyl of Violets two ounces, make a Clyster. If the Feaver abate, and the time of the flux of the Lochia be past, give a gentle Purge. Cure the rest as an ordinary Pleurisie, onely take heed that while the after-flux lasts, you give no binding Medicine. Also she may have a Quinzie while she lies in, while the vitious matter flows to the jaws. The ure of which bleeding is to be done as in the Pleurise, but the rest is to be done as in the Quinie. And if the Liver be inflamed by the motion of the humors to it, you must bleed as in the Pleurisie and Quinzie. Yet it is not so needful
in the arm as in the Pleuriie, by reason of the greater distance of the Liver from the arm, for the Pleura and the breast are nearer, and consent more with the arms, but the vein in the leg is near to the hollow vein, as the distribution of the upper veins to the arms. The rest of the Cure of the inflammation f the Liver, is in Lib. 3. onely observe that you must not use too great Coolers or Binders in women in Child-bed, but things that are of thin parts, least the flux called Lochia or after-blood, should be stopped.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. Of the Diseases of Wo∣mens Breasts. THE FIRST SECTION. Of Diseases of the Breasts. Chap. 1. Of the increased num∣ber of Breasts, and gratness extraordinary. THOUGH Nature hath ordainedCard. l. 8. c. 43. de r∣rum variet Cabrol. obs. 7. two in all women: yet some have Breasts like men: others have had two on each side that had milk. The figure of the Breasts is round
pointed at the nipple a little, it ought not to be soft nor hard, and of an indifferent bigness, and it is better they be indifferent, though thy hold not so much milk, least they be subject to Cn∣ers and inlammations, and when they are too big, they have not a temperate heat. The Causes of over-great Breasts, is much blood, and the ength of heat attracting and oncoting it; these are remote causes, but the immedite cause is the lageness of the passages and loosness, which is in the first conformation, and furthered by idlness, much sleep, and few terms, and often handling of the Breasts by whih the blood and the heat is drawn to the Breasts. It is easier to keep them from growing great,The Cure. then to abate them when too big: with good diet and Topicks that repel by cooling, and binding and drying. As, Take Mirtle leaves Horstayl, Plantane, Mints, red Roses, each a handful; Pome∣granate flowers two pugil: boyl them in red Wine and Vinegar, and with a Spunge apply it to the breasts and let it dry: or apply Hemlok bruis∣ed with Vinegar. Or, Take pouder of Comr∣roots two drams, Pomgranate flowers, red Rs, Frankincense, Mastich, each half an ounce; ∣ley our, red Oakre, each an ounce and half; with Rose-wat, the white of an E, and  little Vinegr make a Cataplasme. These may be laid to the Breasts, and under the arm-pis, to astringe the vessels, and hinder the blood from flowing to them. Hemlock, Henbane, and other Narcoticks are forbidden, because they weaken the natural heat and hinder the breeding of milk. Dryers and Discussers are good in women tat have great Breasts after weaning, to consume the
moisture. As, Take Bean and Orobus meal, each tw ounces and half; Comrey roots in pouder half an ounce, Mints three drams, Wormwood, Chamo∣mil flwers an Roses, eah two drams: boyl, and add two ounces of Oyl of Mastich, make a Cata∣lasme. The Breasts are too little, when the flux of blood to the Breasts, is hindered, diminished, in∣tercepted, revelled, or turned another way, or when the blood is not drawn by the Breasts, as in a dry Liver-famine, much labour, or in watch∣ings, feavers, and other diseases that consume the body. The same is when the radical moisture of the Breasts is conumed. You must remove the cause that breeds it, and ten friction wil attract blood, and foment with warm water, in which Emollients have been boy∣ld with white Wine, and then anoint with Oyl of sweet Almonds, or of Indian-nuts. Loosness of the Breasts is cured by astringents. Chap. 2. Of Swelling of the Breasts with Milk. VVHen the milk carrying veins are too full, the Breasts swell all over, or in a, and are pained by stretching and red Som∣es the milk congealth, and is a hard Tu∣. h cause is abundance of milk or blood that kes it, or the weakness of the child that can∣not uk, o because he is weaned. I otn seth without remedies. Somtimes  is an inmmation, or the milk hardens to a
You must hinder the breeding of much milk,The Cure. of which hereafter, and consume that which is bred; in women that give suck, the child will draw them, or a Puppy. Or use a Glass to suk with: they which wil not give suck, may use this. Take Barley meal of Lentils, Althaea roots, Cha∣momil flowers and Mints, each half an ounce; Ag∣nus castus seeds two sruples: boyl them in Wine, ad a little Vinegar, Oyl of Dill two ounces, make a Cataplasme. Chap. 3. Of Inflamation and Erysipelas of the Breasts. SOmtimes the tumor in the Breast is inflamed from blood, for though plenty of milk caue an inflammation, blood is the immediate cause, for milk as it corrupts and grows hot, increaseth pain, and so the blood staying in the fmal capil∣lar veins, being out of the vessels, is hot, putrid and inflamed. There are other causes, as strokes falls, straitness of cloaths, and other hurts of th Breasts. A hard and red swelling shews inflammationThe Signs. with beating pain, and a Feaver. These inflammations are commonly withouThe Pro∣gnostick. danger, but because the Breasts are so loose, and have many kernels, and little heat, they turn to Cancers and Scirrhus. If you fear a great flux of blood that will in∣creaseThe Cure. the inflammation, let blood in a pletho∣rick bdy. But if it come from stopping o th rms or after flux, first open the vein in th an∣kle, and sarifie the leggs, then (if need be) ∣pen the arm.
If bad humors coming to the Breasts, nou∣rish the inflammation, give a gentle Purge of Manna, Senna, and the like. If the blood be too hot, or mixt with hot humors that help the mo∣tion o the blood. Use Alterers, as Lettice, Endive, urslane, Plantane, Waterlillies, and the like. To be a skilful Physitian study my Snnertus, Platerus, Riverius, Bartholi∣nus, and Riolanus, of the last Editions. Use Repellers after these, but such as are weak and not too cold, as a clout dipt in Water and Honey, with Oyl of Roses applied to the breasts. Or Take Lettice, Purslane, each a handful; red Rss half a handful: boyl them in Water, add Vi∣gar two ounces, make an Epithem. Or Take Nightshde, Lettice, each a handful: byl them, stamp them, and ad Brley meal two oun∣s, pouder of Chamomil flowers half an ounce, Oxy∣ml, Oyl of Roses, each a dram; make a Cataplasm. When the beginning of the inflammation is past, ad Discussers with your Repellers. As, Take white Bread crums, Barley flour, each an ounce and hl; Bean and Foenugreek flower, each half an ounce; pouder of red Rose and Chamomil flowers, ch two drams: boyl them, add Rose-vinegar an unce, Oyl of Roses and of Chamomil, each an ounce; make a Cataplasm. At length use only Disussers. A Take Bean  and of Lupines, and of Faenugreek, and  and pouder of Chamomil flowers, each an ounce; mae a Cataplasm. If the matter grow hard, use Emollients and  As, Take Mallow a handful boyl  till they are soft, add pouder of Lineseed,  a Chamoil flowers, each an ounce boyl them  add Ol of Jsame n unce, mae a I it tend to Suppuration, lay a Plaister of  Or, Take Mallows and Althaea,
each half a handfl: boyl them till they are st, stamp them, and ad pouder of Althaea roots two oun∣ces, pouder of Line and Faenugreek seeds, each a ounce; Leaven half an ounce, ad Oyntment of A∣thaea two ounces, make a Cataplasm. When tere is matter, and the imposthumes breaks of its own accord, it is well, otherwise o∣pen it with a Lancet or some sharp Mediine, and let out the matter, and then clense it thus. Tke Turpentine, Honey of Roses, each an ounce; Mirrh a scruple. The ulcer will be hard to be cured, ex∣cept you dry up the milk in the other Breast, by reason of much blood that will flow thither to breed milk. Question. Whether the Inflammation of the Breasts be from blood alone, or from milk also The inflammation and swelling in women in Child-bed upon their Breasts, is from the alux of too much milk, and it is with redness and pain, and beating or pulsation: and it is not on∣ly from blood, for tumors (as in other parts) ae seldom pure or unmixed, but there are other hu∣mors with it. Therefore it is certain, that when blood is drawn by heat or pain, or comes of i self to the Breasts, and begins to corrupt, the milk also may be corrupted. Of the Erysipelas of the Breasts. This Erysipelas is from fright or angr, and i turns presently to a Phlegmon, and is cured as the inflammation of the Breast. Lay no cold astringent Repellers, or ft things but things that sweat, as Harts-horn, seald Earth, Carduus must be given with Eler water
to discuss the thin blood that causeth the inflam∣mation. Apply outwardly hot a Pledgt dipt in Elder-water. Chap. 4. Of the Ocdema of the Breasts. THis flegmatick tumor is in cachectick wo∣men that hav the white Feaver; it is cold and white, and pits, because the part is loose and spungie. Are a loose tumor, almost insensible of pain,The Signs. and the inger laid on, leaves a pit. It is larger when the terms are at hand, and abateth when they are past. If it come from a Cachexy, and a disease ofThe Pro∣gnostick. the womb, it is dangerous: but it commonly ends by resolution, or dissolved. The Cure is by dry and hot means; and if itThe Cure. is from a Cachexy or want of Terms, they must first be removed: then use Topicks that discuss, and solv, and strengthen, let them be but tem∣perately hot, least you discuss the thin, and leave the thick, which will cause a Scirrhus. Make therefore Fomentations of a Lixivium of Vine and Colewort ashes, and Sulphur, or a Decoction of Hysop, Sage, Organ, Chamomil∣flowers. Then anoint with Oyl of Chamomil, Lillies, Bayes. Or, Take Barley flour four oun∣, of Lineseeds, Faenugreek, Dill, Chamomil flo∣s, each half an ounce; Athaea root an ounce, with Oyl of Chamomil and Dill make a Cataplasm.
Chap. 5. Of the Scirrhus of the Breasts. IT is a hard tumor without pain, from meln∣choly gathered in the veins that flows to the Breast; or it is thick flegm dried. Sometimes both humors are mixed together, or more, which makes a bastard Scirrhus. And if burnt humors abound most, it turns to a Cancer: and if me∣lancholy be most, it is not a Scirrhus, but a Cancer. There are two signs of a true Scirrhus, hard∣nessThe Signs. and want of pain, if it be fixed. I is som∣times white, somtimes black or blew, as the hu∣mor is. If it be a bastard Scirrhus, there is heat and pain; and if they increase, it turns to a Can∣cer, and the veins grow blew about, and begin to swell. The bigger and the harder it is, the more hardThe Pro∣gnostick. it is to be cured. If hairs grow upon a Scirrhus, it is incurable, and it easily turns to a Cancer. After Universals, and the Cause is removedThe Cure. from the womb, or the whole body, let the con∣taining cause be softned, made thin, and discus∣sed. But beware of two things. First, that the thin parts be not discussed by too hot medicines, and the thick left, for so it will be incurable, and as hard as a stone. Secondly, that you erment not the matter by moistning Emollients, so that it turn to a Cancer. The Ancients either used none, or a dryng or a moistning Mediine only. You must either use Moistners and Emollients with Digesters by turns, or mixed. Insti l. 50. p. 1. c. 1. c. 6. oment with the Decoction of Mallws, Alth,
Foenugreek and Lineseed, Bank-ursine, and Chamomil lowers Then anoint with Oyl of sweet Almonds, Chamomil, Hens grease, Veal marrow, Oyntment of Altha. Or apply this Cataplasm. Take Althea, Mallows, Brank∣ursine, Fennel tops, each a handful; boyl them soft, stamp them, ad Barley and Bean flour, Linseed, pou∣der of Althaea roots, Chamomil flowers, each an ounce. Or lay on the great Diachylon Plaster, and that of rogs. Then sprinkle Wine upon a hot stone, and let the Fume be received. And apply a Pla∣ster of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar. If it be a bastard Scirrhus you may fear a Can∣cer. Then after Universas and bleeding, take away the disposition of the bowels that breeds black humors. If you fear a flux of humors, use oyl of Roses, and juyce of Plantane; and if there be heat, stir them first in a Leaden mortar, till they change their colour, then add Ceruss, Litharge, each three ounces, with Wax make an Oyntment. Chap. 6. Of the Glandles or Kernels in the Breasts being swollen, or of the Scrofula and Struma in the Breast. CElsus saith the Struma and Scrofula in the Breast, are rare. It is from a thick humo, flegm or melancho∣ly.The Causes Struma is with pain sometimes, and and is like a Cancer, or seems to turn to a Cancer, but continues many years at a sand But let the cause  at it will, it omes fom stoppage or disorder
of the terms, by reason of the great consen of the womb with the Breast. The Glandles or Kernels are to be felt, thoughThe Signs. not before, there is one great unmoveable tu∣umor, and the rest are small. It is hard to be cured for two causes: the ea∣thinessThe Pro∣gnostick. of the matter, and the deep lying of it. They which are near the skin, are easily dissol∣ved. After purging and bleeding, use EmollientsThe Cure. and Discussers that are strong, as in Scirrhus. Take Orris roots three ounces, boyl them in Oxyml, stamp them, add Turpentine, Oyntment of Althaea, each three ounces; Mucilage of Faenugreek seed an ounce. Or, Take roots of Althaea two ounces, Briony∣roots an ounce, Orris roots half an ounce: boyl them soft in white Wine, stamp them, add Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and Bdellium dissolved in Wine each an ounce; with Pitch and Wax make a Plaster. If it cannot be discussed, suppurate or cut it, but this is troublesom and dangerous. Chap. 7. Of the Cancer of the Breasts. HIppocrates saith, That an occult Cancer is bet∣ter6. Aphor. 38. not cured then cured  for if cured, they pr∣sently die, but if not, they live long. Many women have lived long with good order of diet having a 3. obs 87. Cancer, as if they had no disease, so saith Wlliam Fabricius, and that if the Cancer be not ulcera∣ted, they may live forty years without pain: and if you lay on Emolients and Suppuraters, they die in half a year.
The Breasts are spungy and loose, and there∣foreThe Causes Cancers breed often there, but the Cause is from the womb, when they are of a hot and dry constitution with burnt blood, and when the terms stp, and then the humors flie to the womb and and mke a Cancer, either with, or without a tuor asregomg. A Cancer that rseth of it self, is hard to beThe Signs. discerned at first: for it is like a little tubercle no bigger then a pease, and grows up by degrees, and spreads out roots with veins about it. And when the skin is eaten through, it is a stinking ulcer, and the lipps are hard, and the matter black. It is hard or never cured, because the black hu∣morThe Pro∣gnostick. that causeth it, is very troublesom, and hath a peculiar malignity, which is fermented, and made worse with Emollients and Suppuraters, which loosen the vessels, and dilate them, so that the humor flows easier to the part, and the cor∣rupt humors get easier to the parts adjacent, and infect them. A Cancer not ulcerated, is to be let alone, byThe Cure. the counsel of Hippocrates. But let blood, and purge melancholy often. But use no Topicks that may rot or provoke the part, but things that by experience take away pain; as Nightshade∣water, Snails boyled and Frogs in Oyl and with ashes of Frogs made into an Oyntment, or Me∣dicines of Lead. As, Take Oyl of Roses two ounces, juyce of Night∣shade berries an ounce and half, Ceruss washd, Su∣gar of Lead, each a dram; Pompholygos half an unce, mix them in a Leaden mortar, till they ae thick. Or use Craysih ashes, and the ashes of the inward
ward rind of an Ash-tree, or Herb Robert. Lib. 2. de cur. vul∣r. c. 3. Cent. 3. obs. 87. Arcaeus teacheth how to cut them out, and then burn the part, if they be deep and ulcera∣ted. But Fabriius shews that you must burn af∣ter to consume the reliques, and stop the blood: after it is lensed; Take Herb Robert, Verbas∣cum or Moulin, Scabious, Caprifolium, or Honey∣sucles, Di, Mans grease, each equal parts: burn them, take three ounces, and with six ounces of Night∣shad water in  Leaden mortar mix them. After cutting out the root, purge melancholy often, and provoke terms or Haemorrhoids, least it return. Give Treacle, Mithridate with juyce of Bo∣age, Sorrel, Craysish broath, and Asses milk. This Water is good against all Cancers. Take Moulin roots, Clowns all-al, each two ounces;Ant. Cha∣maetus. Dropwort, Ceterach, Herb Robert, Agrimony, Tor∣mentil, Scabious, Avens, Flxweed, each a hand∣ful; Nettle seed three drams, Elder and Rosemary∣flowers, each a pgil; boyl and sweeten it with Su∣gar. Foment, and wah the Cancer with one part of it, and let the dreggs be applied as a Pultis. Fuchsius his blessed Pouder. Take white Arse∣nick that shineth not like glass an ounce, poudr it; pour Aqua viae upon it, and pour it off, add fresh Aqua vitae every third day for fifteen daies. Then Take roots of great Dragons gathered in July or August, sliced and dried in the wind, two ounces. Thirdly, ake bright clear Soote of the Chimney three drams, make a Pouder. Keep it close opt in a glass, the older the better, use it not till after a year. For a palliative Cure, keep it from increasing, and take away pain with this Wate Take Scr∣phularia roots and Herb Robert, each a handful;
Lambs-tongue, Nightshade, Bugloss, Borage Pur∣ane, Eebright, ttony, each half a handful; a Fog, and two whites of Eggs, with Quince seeds and Faenugreek each an ounce; Rose and Eyebright∣ater, each a pint; distil them in a Leaden still. Use not Cancers as other ulcers, for Emolli∣nt,Lib. 6. c. 30. Healers and Drawers exasperte and kill wi gret pain. Chap. 8. Of Ulcers and Fistu∣laes of the Breasts. AFter Universals, dry up the milk, and if the Breasts hang down, bind them up, that the humors flow not down, and move not the arm on that side. Then clense it with the Docoction of Rhapontick, Zedoary and Agimony. Heal thus: Take strong We six quarts, Rhois Obsonio∣rm, Cypress-nuts, each four ounces; green Galls two ounces: boyl them to the consistene of Honey. If you fear a Fitula, enlarge the orisice, and take a∣way the Callus, and heal it as an ordinary ulcer. Chap. 9. Of straitness of the passages of the Breasts. VVHen the veins and arteries are not wide enough to contain blood to be turned, there is no milk. They are stopt by thick humors, as the vesselsThe Causes of the womb are, the cause is the stoppage of the terms, or hard tumors in the Breasts that stop or press. When the niple hath no hole for the child to
suck, it is from the birth, or a wound or ar af∣ter an ulcer. The Signs. There is little milk, and the Breasts pine. If the Breasts swell, and milk cannot be suckt out, the fault is in the papps, or the veins of milk. The Prog∣nostick. An obstruction from gross humors may be cu∣red. If it be from a Scirrhus or Scar after an ul∣cer, it is incurable, and so is the nipple born with∣out a hole. The Cure. If it be from thick  or blood, attenate it with proper things, as Fennel, Dill, Prsley, Aniseeds, Pease, Rocke feed, or Earth-worms made into Cataplasms o Fomentations. Often rubbing of the Breasts, opens the milk-ves. Chap. 10. Of strange things bred in the Breasts. HAirs, stones and worms have been found in the Breasts. A worm breeds from putid blood, and is like a hair; the same may be in theald. Ron∣seus miscel  10. Lib. de oc∣cult. na. mira. c. 12. back and navel, as I shewed. And a good Au∣thor writes that a woman pained in her breasts, could not e eed till imosthunes broke, and wors cme forth. Levinus Lemnius w stones that grew in the Breast. Chap. 11. Of the Diseases of the Nipples. THey are either wanin, or lie hid one or both which hinders giving suck. If it be from the birth, it is searce cured; as also when the Nipple is eaten off by an ulcer.
When they come forth first, use a sucking in∣strument,Amatus Lusit. cur∣med. cens. 5. cur. 31. and then apply Puppy-dogs to suck. If there be no hole from birth, or ulcer heal∣ed, it is incurable: i it be a little, often sucking will enlarge it. The clets in the Nipples is an usual evil, and causeth great pain in Nurses; and if it continue long, it turns to foul ulcers, and they cannot give ck. To prevent this evil, in the two last months of being with child, wear two cups of wax over the Nipples with a little Rosin. They are cured thus with Oyl of Wax, Mir∣les, Oyntment of Lead, Tutty. Or, Take Tut∣y prepare a scruple, Allum alf a dram, Campire six grains, with Capons grease and Oyntment of R∣s, make an Oyntment. Or, Take Pomatum an ounce and half, Mastich a uple, pouder of Gum rganth and red Roses, ch half a scruple. Or, Take Oyntment of Lead, Pomatum, each half an nce; Frankincense, Bole, each half a scruple: mix them. When the inant is to suck, wash the Breasts rst with whit Wine and Rose-water. That the child may suck without pain to the oman, let her have a Tin or lver Nipple, and ver it with the pap of a new killed Cow, and let the child suck that.
THE FOURTH BOOK. THE THIRD PART. THE SECOND SECTION. Of the Symptoms of the Breasts. Chap. 1. Of want of Milk, and not giving of suck. THERE are many Cuses of want of milk, either there is little blood to breed it, or the milk ma∣king faculty in the breast that makes milk, is not right, or the instruments for blood-making are di∣stempered.
Somtimes the matter is consumed by a saver or fasting, when they loath meat, or from care or labour, evacuations, sweats, or loose belly. Or from weakness of the infant that cannot draw hard. Also sadness, fear, and the like, may hin∣der blood from flowing to the breasts. Milk is wanting when the breasts are flaggie,The Signs. and swell not, and little milk is sucked out. The signs of the causes, thus If it be from the liver, there will be signs of its distemper: if from great evauation, that is known: the fault is known to be in the breasts, if as oft as they lie in, they have no milk and the breasts are al and wrin∣kled; or if Medicines to keep down the breasts, have been applied, she will tell you: or if it be from weakness of the child or passions of mind. The inconvenience is little to the Nurse, butThe Pr∣gnostick. geat to the child; therefore get another Nurse, or ure her. To breed milk, give tngs that breed muchThe Cure. and good blood, of easie concoction. Medicines to beed milk, are Fennel roots and all green, and thins that heat, and are not very dry, which ae few, but ininite are they that hinder milk, as things hot and dry, and cold things. These increase milk, roots of Smallage, seeds of Parsly, Dill, Basil, Anise, Rocket, Earth-worms washt in juyce of Fennel and died, or burnt in aAns. Boe∣tius delap. & gem. l. 2. c. 229. pot a dram, or two fasting for some mornings, or Crstl or Milk-stone a dram. Compounds are: Take green Fennel, Parsley, each a handful; Barley two pugils, red Pease half an ounce: boyl them, and with Sugar sweeen them, or in Chiken broath. Or,
Take green Fennel six drams, Barley two pugils, boyl them in broath, and strain them. Or, Take Fennel seed six drams, Anise a dram and half, Roc∣ket seed half a dram: give a dram or two in Broath. Or, Take Cows Udder sliced, dry it in an Oven, and pouder it. Take half a pound of it, Anise, Fen∣nel seed, each an ounce; Cummin seed two ounces, Sugar four ounces, make a Pouder. Hot Fomentations open the breast, and attract blood, as the Decoction of Fennel, Smallage, or stampt Mints applied. Or, Take Fennel and Par∣sley green, each a handful; boyl and stamp them, a arley meal half an ounce, Gith seed a dram, Storax calamite two drams, Oyl of Lillies two ounces, make a Pultis. A Dropax and Synapisme, or Plaister of Mu∣stard, are good if often changed. Chap. 2. Of too much Milk. THis is when much blood flows to the breasts, and the mother will not give suck, or weans the child, for the infant cannot suck it as fast as it breeds, when there is much blood, and good breasts that can make Milk. If Milk be kept, and cannot be suked out byThe Pro∣gnostick. the child, there are swellings, inflammations,Arist. 7. de hist. ani. c. 12. pains, curdlings, and corruption. Children that suck much, if they be full bodied, have a Con∣vulsion. The fist coming of Milk is not to be stopt,The Cure. but when there is more then the child can suck, it is abated with a slender diet of little nourish∣ment, as Barley, Pot-herbs water. By letting
blood, or cupping, or by Repellers to the veins under the arms, above the breasts. Mints, Calamints, Smallage, Agnus castus, Coriander, Hemlock: to abate Milk, Mints and Smallage are doubted. Compounds. Take Smallage, Mints, Mal∣lows,Mercur. Plat. Dios∣cor. dissen∣tiunt. each a handful; Faenugrek, Cummin seed, each half an ounce; Chamoil, Melilot flowers, each a pugil; boyl them, and foment, add a little Wine, or make a Pultis of them with Bean flour and Oxy∣el. Or, Take Cummin seed, boyl i in Vinegar, and with a Spunge foment. They which will not give suck, let them fo∣ment with this Decoction. Take Mallow, ays, Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Mints, each half a hand∣ful; anoint after with Oyl Omphaine. Then Take Turpentine washed with Wine and Rose-water three unces, Eggs two or three, Saffron a scruple, with Wax make a Plaister, with a hole in the middle, repeat it alwaies before Supper. If you fear inflammation by too great a flux of Milk, repel with a Cataplasin of Lettice, Wa∣elillies, Poppies, Houslk. Or, Take Tur∣pentine washt with Mint water three ounces, Cum∣min seed, Orris, Mints, each half an ounce; Saffron srple, with Wax make a Cerot. Chap. 3. Of Curdling, and o∣ther faults in the Milk. IF it stay long in the breasts, the thin evapo∣tes, and the thick remains, and hardens the kenels; hene are hard ors, because the eesie part of the Mik is apt to harden. Som∣times Milk is too thik or too thin, sharp, alt, he
The tumor from Milk curdled, is known byThe Signs. the plenty of Milk retained that make clefts, and pain, and little tumors. If curdled Milk be long in the breasts, it easi∣lyThe Pro∣gnostick. turns to an imposhume and inflammation. To hinder curdling. Take pouder of Mints,The Cure. Coriander seed, each two ounces; Oyl of Dill an ounce, with Wax make a Liniment. Or, Take Oyl of Mints, Chamomil, Dill, Rue, each an ounce. To dissolve curdled Milk; Take Fennel root, Eryngus, each an ounce; Mints a handful, green Fennel half a handful, Aniseed a dram: boyl them to a pint, add Syrup of the two Roots and Oxyml, each two ounces. Foment with the Decoction of Fennel, Dill, Southernwood, Chamomil, Melilot flowers, Fe∣nugreek, Lineseed, Parsley seed, Smallage, or stamp them, or Mints with Butter, and apply it. If it be hard, Take Mints, Coleworts, Bran, each a handful: boyl them in Vinegar, and apply them. Or, Take juyce of Smallage, Dill, Coleworts, each a handful: boyl the soft, and bruise them, ad pouder of Mirrh, Orris, each two drams; Saffron a dram, Oyl of Rue an ounce, Vinegar an ounce and half, make a Pulis. Chap. 4. Of Milk coming forth at wrong places. MIlk hath been known to come forth with obser  apellae.  Lr.  l. 7. 11. the urin, or by the womb, by which pas∣sage is the doubt; the short way is from th breast veins to the Epigastrick veins, from the Epigastrick to the Hypogastrick, and so to th womb, rather then from the Pap-veins to the
breast-veins, and so to the Hypogastrick, and so to the Womb. Chap. 5. Of strange thing co∣ming forth of the Breasts. SOmtimes matter comes forth of the NipplesSchenkius lib. 2. ex obsrva. Bauhini. Amat. Lu∣sit. ent. 2. cur. 21. when they have long ulcers, and ater the ul∣cer is healed, it ceaseth. Somtimes the terms have come forth of the breasts at set Periods, of which Hippocrates; When blood comes forth at the Nipples, there is mad∣ness. Amatus Lusitanus knew two Noble wo∣men that were so, and not mad. And Hippo∣crates doth not speak of the Terms, but of othr blood that is hot, and flies to the hot, and cau∣seth madness, and part of it goes to the breast, and causeth pain and inflammation, whih shews madness at hand. It is cured by opening the Saphena in the footThe Cure. to evel the blood. Chap. 6. Of the change of co∣lour inthe Nipples, and pain of the Breasts. THe change of colour in the Nipples, is not a sgn of the loss of Viginity, for they are blew in them that give suck; bla in old women; and in them that have kown Venery, it is na∣tural, and red a a Strawberry. Now because ther i a great consnt btween the womb and breass, if the womb  iempred, the ipples a
The pain in the breasts, is from stretching by much milk, and inflammation: or from corro∣sion and twitching, from sharp matter, as in the Cancer and other Ulcers. The cause of the pain is known from the di∣stemper. If it be from much milk, it is a gentle pain. If from inflammation, it is stronger. If from a Cancer, it is very great. How these pains are cured, is shewed in thei Chapters.
A TRACTATE Of the Cure of Infants. THE FIRST PART. Of the Diet and Govern∣ment of Infants. Chap. 1. Of the choice of the Nurse. THE blood that nourished the child in the womb, is turned into milk to nourish him after he is born, because he can eat no solid meats. And be∣caue from weaknss or a disease,
the mother somtimes cānot suckle her child, she must have a Nurse of good habit of body, and red complexion, which is the sign of the best tem∣per; and let her not differ much from the tem∣per of the mother, unless it be for the better: let her be between twenty and thity, well bed, and peaceable, not angry, melancholy, or soolish, not lecherous, nor a drunkard. Let it not be after her first child, and let not her milk be too old or too new o ten months old at the most. Let her breasts be well fashioned with god Nipples, that the child may take them with pleasure. Let her keep a good diet, and abstain srō hard wine and copulation, and passions: these chiefly trouble the milk, and bring diseases upon the child. If there be a bad humor from high eed∣ing in the Nurse, let her take a gentle Purge when she gives not suck, except the child be to be purged by the same. Question. Whether is an Infant better nourish∣ed by the Mother or by a Nurse? Some say by a Nurse: others say the Mothers milk is more like the nourshment it had in the womb, which is best, except she have a disease. For he that gave her strength to conceive, travel, and bring forth, wil give her strength to play the Nurse, though she be weak. And honest women will be very obedient to directions, for the goodLib. 12. c. 1. of the child they love so dealy: of which Pa∣rinus.
Chap. 2. Of the Conditions of good Milk. IT must be neither too thick nor too thin, for too thick cannot be concocted, and the thin argues crudities. If it be dropt upon the nail, or a glass, and falls not esily off as water; if it stik too fast, it is too thik. Let the colour be whie, the more it differs from that, the worse it is. Let it be sweet, not four, alt, or bitter, or  Let i neither smel burnt or so, for then it will easily corrupt in the stomach of the child. Chap. 3. Of curing the faults in Milk. THe usual fault, is when it i too thi by ra∣son of plenty of Srum in the blood this nouisheth little: and maks lean hildn that sall into a Diarrhaea or Belly flux. If it be too sharp, thy are scabby. Give hot and dry things, let bread be wel ba∣kedThe Cure. with Anise and Fennel seed, roast the meat, and give Rice and sweet Almonds: avoid Fish, Sallets, Summer-fruits, much Broh, use ofen xercise, and purge Serum or Whey, with Sy∣p of Roses, and Mechoacan, or Rubarb, if i  hot or cholerick. If ros humors come from the distmper of the Liver, amend that, and let cold and mo  be amnded with things hot and dy.
Of thick Milk. It is from gross diet and drink, or from a hot and dry distemper in the breasts, that burns up the thin blood. Give flesh of good juyce, and easie concocti∣on,The Cure. as Chickens, Kid, Veal, abstain from gross food; use moistners and attenuaters, and if there be thick humors with the blood, let them be e∣vacuated. Of the sharpness, ill tast, scent and colour of the Milk. There are divers tasts, scents and colours in milk from variety of diet. Therefore let a Nurse take heed of fryed Onions, and all four, salt and spiced meats: and let her eat Sallets and Rha∣dishes, and the like. Let her not be passionate. Milk also is somtimes falt, sharp, cholerick, and mlancholick. This breeds dangerous diseases, as wringing in the belly, flux, watching, leanness, trush, and falling-sikness. Correct the blood, and keep a good diet, be∣wareThe Cure. of things that corrupt the milk, as sharp, alt things: avoid anger, and other passions, and Venery. Good Wine moderately, taken by such as have used it, takes away the ill scent from milk. If these will not do, purge the Cacochymy or evil uyces, with Medicines proper for the hu∣mors offending.
Chap. 4. Of the Diet and Go∣vernment of new-born Chil∣dren. THe best colour in a new-born child, is red∣ness all over the body, that changeth by de∣grees to a Rose-colour; they who are white, are skly, and short lived. It must cry clear and loud, which shews the strength of the breast. Ob∣serve all the parts, and igure, and passages dili∣gently: let the Midwise handle it gently. Roul it up with soft cloaths, and lay it in a cradle, and wash it first with warm wine; give it a little ho∣ney before it sucks, or a little Oyl of sweet Al∣monds newly drawn, that if there be any filth contracted in the stomach from the womb it may be clensed, for there is a black matter yellowish in the guts, which if not voided, will cause an Epilepsie. Keep it from cold air, and not too hot; nor in too great light, set not a candle behind it at the head, nor let it see the Sun least it be squint∣ey'd. Let it not be frighted, nor left alone sleep∣ing or waking, least it receive hurt. Let it sleep long, carried in the arms often, and give it the dug, but ill not too much his stomach with milk. After four months, oosn the arms, but not the belly, and breast, and eet, but keep them rouled from cold above a year. Let it be often clensed from the excrements of the belly and bladder, least they cause itching, o pain, or excoriation. A little crying empties the brain, and  the lungs, and stis up naturl
it not cry too much, for to prevent Catarrhs and Ruptures but it doh least hurt befoe sucking, and ate oncotion. Th ist months, let it only suck as often as it will, o the stomach be not over harged. Give it change of breasts, somtimes the right somtimes the let. Afterwards make Pap of Barley bread ept in water, and boyled in Milk. Let strong children have it btimes, and not suck an hou after, thus it must be nourisht til it breeds teeth. Chap. 5. Of the Diet of an In∣fant from breeding of Teeth, til it be weaned. WHen the teeth come forth, by degrees give it more solid food, and deny it ot milk, such as are easily chewed. When it is ston∣ger, let it not stand too soon, but be held by the Nurse, or put into a go-chair, that it may thrust foward it self, and not fall. In plaes where bathing of children is used,  it be washd twice a week, fom the seventh nth, till it be wened. Chap. 6. Of Weaning of Chil∣dren. Wn it nt till the teeth are bred, lt when  th, it use feavers, and  nd ther Symptoms. The  chld n mut be sooner weand  som in the twelh, some in the  I is good to ean them a a
year and half, or two years old, but give it not suddenly strange food, but bring it to it by de∣grees while it sucks. It is best to wean in the Spring or Fall, in the increase of the Moon, and give but very little Wine. Chap. 7. Of Childrens Diet after Weaning. FOr seven years the diet must be such as nou∣risheth and causeth growth, for Hippocrates1. Aphor. 13. aith, They cannot endure to fast, especially if they be witty. Keep them from passions, sorrow, and fear, and cocker them not, but keep them to rea∣son. Let them play to temper the affection, but so as not to hurt the body.
THE SECOND PART. Of Diseases and Sym∣ptoms of Children. Chap. 1. Of Infants Diseases in General. HIPPOCRATES divides their3. Aphor. 24. diseases according to their age; In new born children there are al∣cers in the mouth, vomiting, coughs, watchings, fears, inflammation of the navel, oistness of ears. AtApho. 25. breeding of teeth the gums itch, and there are Fea∣vers and Convulsions, and a loose belly when theyApho. 26. breed the eye-teeth. When they are older, the Ton∣s art inflamed, the Vertebe in the neck are lua∣ed inwardly: they breath short, they have the stone, or round worms, or Asarides, Warts, Satyrism or tanding Yards, Strangury, Struma's, and other Swllings. They have other diseases at other times, as Meales, small Pox, the ligament of the ongue s tooshort, hasing.
In the Cure, use not strong Remedies, nor bleeding, not purging, but Suppositories and Clysters As, Take Violet leaves, Mallows, each a handful; flowers of Chamomil and Violets each a pugil: boyl them, to four or five ounces strained, ad Syrup of Roses half an ounce, or six drams, Oyl of Violets half an ounce, make a Clyster. If it need other Physick, give it to the Nurse, for the purging orce is sent to the milk, as Hip∣pocrates6. Epid. c. 6. aith, If a Woman take Elaterium or wild Cowcumbers, the Child is purged; but you must not give these to the Nurse, but gentle things will purge the inant, if the Nurse take them. Chap. 2. Of Feavers in Chil∣dren, Meazles, and small Pox. THey ae subject to all sorts of Feavers, but they have chiefly a Feaver from milk which putriies, and turns to choler, and inflames the humors. And when the teeth break forth, the gums are inflamed, they have watching and itch∣ing pin in the mouth, and then feavers. When feavers come from corrupt milk, theyThe Signs. expel no teeth, and there are signs of corrupt milk bellyach, many stools yellow and green. A eaver from breeding of teeth, hath its proper sigs. These feavers cease when the cause is remo∣ved,The Pro∣gnostick. but if corrupt milk last long, it is dange∣rous. A eaver from corrupt milk is commonly fromThe Cure. choler; therefore give cold moist things to the Nurse, as Lettice, Endive, Emulsions of the four geat cold Seeds, Barley cream. Give no Wine
while the child is in a feaver. Purge the Nurse gently, with Manna, Cassia, Lenitive Electuary, and Syrup of Roses. Give Alterers to the insant, as Syrup of Vio∣lts, Sorrel, Citrons, Succory, Endive water, and of Volet with Sugar. Anoint the Back-bone with Mucilage of Quin∣s, leabane, with Oyl of Violets and a little Wax, lay Astringents to the Stomach. As, Take Oyl of Roses, Mastich, each half an ounce; red San∣der, Coral, each a scruple; with Wax mix it. If the feaver come from breeding of it, abate the pain, and give the Alterers, of which Chap. 14. of Bleeding of Teeth. Of Meazles and small Pox. There are Epidemical feavers at certain timesLib. 4 de ebr. c. 12. that cast out Meazles and small Pox, of whic before. The cause is not only from the impuri∣ty of the terms, but from the malignity of the air, for they are more or less, as the air is purer or impurer. Somtimes it is infectious, and the humors are so corupt, that worms breed under the scabs and corrode the bones and internal parts, as hath been seen in bodies opened, dead of this dis∣ease. If the disease be very infectious, before there is a eaver, it is good to preserve by change of air and Antidotes, when many die of it, but when few die, it is not amiss to let them alone, lea they have it in a more dangerous time, for most will have it: only give a gentle Purge, and or∣tifie Nature, that she may better expel them. If there be a eaver, use no more Preserva∣tives, ut labour to get them forth by Medicines
mentioned, and defend the eyes and throat, and event deformity, of which before. Chap. 3. Of the Milkey Scab, Achores, and Favi. THe milkey Scab is at the first sucking, the Achoes are after. The Achores are scabs not white, and the white scab is not only in the face, but all over the body. The Achores are on∣ly in the head, but they are cured alike. They are all ulcers chiefly in the head, with hols that run with matter constantly. They come from excrementitious humors, wa∣terishThe Causes and sharp, mixed of thick and thin, very1. De com. po. med. sec. lo. c. 8. alt. Therefore they are sometimes yellow, or white, or red, or black, but alwaies salt, and bi∣ing and itching, that makes them scratch. They are gthered in the womb, and from corruption of the milk. The Vulgar think they are healthful, whenThe Pro∣gnostick. they run, because Nature sends them forth, and if they strike in, they cause diseases and Epilep∣ies.Hipp. lib. de sacro morbo. They cure in time f themselves, but if the matter be very bad, it pierceth the skull. Dry these not rashly, so they disfigure not theThe Cure. c, nor hurt the eyes. But drive them forth with abious Crduus water and Cordials. Use no Coolers nor Astringents, least the matter be stroke in. Let the Nurse forbear salt and sharp, nd spiced things, and strong Wine. Pepare the humors with Borage, Sory, Buglos, Fumi∣ty, Hops, Polypody and Dock roots. Then purge with Senna, Polypody, Epithymum, Rhu∣b, and strengthen th Bowels. As, Take
Conserve of Borage, Bugloss, Violets, Fumitry, Succory, each an ounce; Succory roots, and Citrons candied, each half an ounce; Diarrhodon, Diamar∣gartion rigid, Harts-horn, each a sruple; with  o Gi-ors mak an Electuary. Let the Nurse take every day two drams. Or, TakeTo Con∣quer all Infirmities Study my Sennertus, Platerus, Riverius, Bartholi∣nus and Rolanus, of the last Editions. Harts-horn prepared two drams, Magstery of Co∣ral a dram, Diamargariton frigid half a dram: give half a dram, or a dram of this Pouder. Let the child be purged with Manna or Raisons laxative. If you fear great putrefaction under the scabs, and that wil turn to a scald head, or eat the skul; wash the head with Decoction of Mallows, Bar∣ley, Celandine, Wormwood, or with Althaea∣roots boyled in Boyes urine, and Barley water. And then anoint with Oyl of Roses, bitter Al∣monds, and a little Litharge. Or, Take ashes of Mirtles and Nut shells, each a dram; Tutty a dram and half, Butter washed with Rose-water an ounce. Or, Take juyce of Beets, Ce∣landine, each an ounce; Hogs grease two ounces, Sulphur a dram. Or, Take Cerss, Litharge, each two drams; Pomegranate flowers and Agarick, ech a dram; with Oyl of Roses and Vinegar, make an Oyntment: or wash with Soap, and then with the Decoction. When the skull is bare, use Honey of Roses and Spirit of Wine, and after round Birthwort, and Balsom of Peru, and Turpentine with Tobacco water. Chap. 4. Of a scald Head. IF Achores or Favi last long, or are ill cured. They turn to a Scald, which is a scabby ulcer that corrodes the skin, and stinks; it is called Tina or Moth which eats garments as this doth
the flesh, Achores are moist ulcers in the head and body, Tinea is a dry ulcer in the head only. The immediate cause is a salt and sharp hu∣mor,The Causes melancholick from the mothers blood, or bad milk, it infecteth others, by the clouts or caps. Some are like a bran or scurfe with scales,The Diffe∣rences. some are slimy, and when the scab is off, there appears red quick nobs of flesh, like the insides of sigs, some are malignant, some not, some new, some old. There are dry scabs in the head, yellow or ashThe Signs. coloured, that run little, and that which is void∣ed stinketh. It is hard to be cured. If it be new, or theThe Pro∣gnostick. matter yellow, or the like it is easier. An old Scald ash-coloured and black is stubborn: atr cure the hair will scarce grow there again, be∣cause the skin is so hard; if it will not grow red after rubbing, there is no hopes of hair coming again. First take off the Scab with lensers a littleThe Cure. sharp, and because the humors make the skin dry and thick, moisten with Hogs grease upon Beet or Colewort leaves. Or, Take juyce of Fumito∣ry, Coleworts, Docks, Elicampne, each an unce and half; Litharge half an ounce, with Hogs grease, oyl of Rue, and Wax, make a sof Oym∣ment. When the Child is of age and strong, make first universal evuation with Senna, Rhubarb, Agarick, then take off the Scab with Sulphur two drams, Mustard half a drain, Stavisacre, Bri∣ony roots, each a dram; Vinegar an ounce, Tur∣pentine half an ounce, and Bears grease. Or
beat Watercresses with Hogs gease and apply it, the scab wil fall off in twenty four hours, con∣tinue it. After the scab is off, pull the hair out by the roots, with instruments or medicines; common∣ly they use a pitched cap, and pull it off violent∣ly which brings away the hair. Or, Take Starch or Wheat flour two ounces, Rosin half an ounce, boyl it in water for a Pultis, lay it upon the several Sald and let it stick some daies, then pluck it off suddenly. Then use Emollients that correct the dry di∣stemper. Also use things to take the excrements out that lie deep in the skin. As, Take roots of Al∣thaea, Docks, Lillies, each an ounce; Mallows, Fu∣mitory, Sage, each two handful; boyl them in Li, add Vinegar, wash the head with it every day Then Take Ostratium, Sulphur, each half an ounce; oyl of Eggs an ounce with Hogs grease. After that Take Briony and Dock roots, and Elicampan roots, each an ounce; Fumitory, Celandine, Scabi∣ous, each two handful; Chamomil and Balm, each a handful; boyl them in Lie and wash the head twice a day therewith or foment it, then rub the head with a course cloth, or with oyl of Staphesacre, or of Raddish till it grow red: to draw out the bad hu∣mors that lie deep. Then use Tarr and Wax for a Cerot. Or Take Sal-pter an ounce, Oxymel an ounce and half. Or, Take quick Brimstone an ounce, whi Hllebore, Staphisacre, each two drams, with Hogs grease. It is not safe to use Arsenick, or Opiment, or Mercury, or other poysns that corroe because it is so neer the brain.
Chap. 5. Of Ptiriasis or breed∣ing of Lice. LIce are creatures which breed in clothes that are constantly worn, but they are chiefly in children from the excrements of the head. All say, that filth and nastiness alone is the cause of lice, but I think not so, for filth alone cannot do it without heat, for besides the first qualities there is a hidden force in the matter by which it is disposed to produce a particular spe∣cies; for fleas and worms wil not breed of that matter which breeds lice, so it is in Plants. Heat is the helping cause which raiseth the se∣minal force, and brings it into act, and though the matter be putrid it doth not wok upon it, but as it is somwhat natural. Excrements are not presently putrid, but there is in them a heat that can raise forming force, and though there is some putrefaction, yet is it not so great as to hinder the action, hence it is that children and women that are hot and moist have many excrements that are fit to breed lice. Some meats breed lice, as Figs by their fatGal oriba. Ausc. juyce which doth naturally tend to the skin, and varieties of meats, and not clensing nor combe∣ing The plce where lice breed in children is the skin of the head, where they stick fast with the hair, especially if there be scabs. The Signs are needless, they are manifest. The Signs. It is a filthy troublesom disease, many haveThe Pro¦gnostick. them reed all over the body, and some have di∣ed by them. Somtimes the lice leave them when they are about to die.
To prevent breeding lice, let children eat no food of evil juyce, especially Figs, let the head be often combed and washed, and the matter purged that breeds them, with hot dry thin me∣dicines, that draw the matter out and consume superfluous moisture. The Cure. Take heed of Mercury and Arsnick in children but make this Lotion Take round Birthwort, Lupines, Pine and Cypress leaves, each equal parts; boyl them. Or, Take Elicampane roots two oun∣ces, Briony half an ounce, Beets, Mercury, Soap∣wort, each a handful; Lupines a dram, Niter half an ounce, boyl them for a Lotion. then use this oyntment. Take pouder of Staphisacre three drams, of Lupins half an ounce, Agarick two drams, quick Slphur a dram and half, Ox gall half an ounce with yl of Wormwood: there are stronger, as white Hellebore and Mecrury, which are not safe. Chap. 6. Of Hydrocephalus or swelling of the Head. WE spake of this in the water wihout the Skull: but Hydrocephalus is from wa∣tr gathered within the skull or in the ventricle of the brain, as when the childs head in the womb hangs down, or when the brain is ver moist. The Signs. A tumor from water contained in the brain is less and harder then when it is out of the skull. The Pro∣gnostick. It is harder to be cured then when it is gathe∣red without the skull, and is often deadly. The Cure. There are many medicines mentioned that are good here, to be used outwardly, and to the
nose and ears. As, Take Snails in their shells thirty, Marjoram, Mugwrt, each a handful; stamp, add Camphire a scruple, Saffron half a dram, with Oyl of Chamomil make a Pultis. Snuff this Wa∣ter often. Take Nutmeg, Cloves, Cbebs, each  sruple; Calamus, Frankincense bark, each half  dram; Marjoram water three ounces, drop hot Oyls into the ear. If in twenty daies the water be not gone, open the skull, and let out the water by degrees, and take heed of cold. The tumor of wind in the skin of the head or membranes of the brain, is seldom without wa∣ter which breeds wind. Use Discussers that make thin, as Chamomil, Rue, Organ, &c. Chap. 7. Of Siriasis. IT is from Aetius, a diease with a eaver, or anTetra. . serm. 4. c. 13. inflammation of the membrane and the brain, so that there is a hollowness of the eyes and for∣head. It is from flegmatick blood that grows hot byThe Causes putrefaction, and so becomes like choler. The remote causes are hot weather, and milk full of wind, from the evil diet of the Nurse. Such milk will make the child drunk, and cause this infla∣mation. Heat of the forehead, and hollowness there,The Signs. redness of face, a eaver, driness, no appetite, watching. The hollowness in the ore-part of the head, is where the Sagital and Coronal u∣tures meet, for there the bones are membranous, and grow at last hard. It is dangerous, and counted deadly amongThe Pro∣gnostick. women, and as often as this bone o membrane
als, there is a pit, and the brain fals down, they commonly die in three daies. The Cure. First, give a Clyster, of syrup of Roses or Vio∣lets, then Coolers, of the juyce and water of Let∣tice, Gourds, Melons; or apply a Pumpion split in two. But cool not the brain too much, anoint with Oyl of Roses. Or, Take Oyl of Roses half an ounce, Populeon an ounce, the white of an Eg, and of the Emulsion of cold Seeds drawn with Rose water two drams. After the flux is stopt, and the inflammation abated, use Discussers. As, Take Oyl of Chamo∣mil an ounce and half, of Dill half an ounce, with the yolk of an Eg. Let the Nurses diet be cooling, or the milk be changed: let it not be vexed. Chap. 8. Of Frights in the Sleep. 3. Aphor. 24. HIppocrates saith this is often; the cause is unclean vapors mixed with the animal spi∣rits that disturbe them, and present horrible ob∣jects to the fancy. They arise from the depraved concoction of the stomach, in full feeding chil∣dren, that eat more then they can digest. These vapors ascend not onely by the weaand, but by the veins to the head. It comes often from wors also, or corrupt humors that knaw the mouth o the stomach. Te Signs. They groan in their sleep and twitch, and b¦ing frighted out of sleep, they cry, their breath is hot, and often sinking. Te  ure it presenly, for i is the ore-runer of an Epilep.
Give good Milk and les, tht the stomach beThe Cure. not over charged. Let it not sleep presently af∣ter food, but carry it about, till it is in the bot∣tom of the stomach. Use Oyl of sweet Almonds or Honey of Roses two spoonfuls to clense the stomach. Then strengthen it with Magistery of Coral, or Conection of Hyacinths with Milk. Or, Take Magistery of Coral a dram, Diapleres a scruple, with Sugar dissolved in Rose water an ounce mke Rous. Anoint the stomach with Oyl of Nard, Worm∣wood, Mints, Mastich, Ntmegs. If it be from a feaver, look to that. If from woms, I shal af∣ter speak of it. Some hang Coral and Wolves teeth about the childs neck. Chap. 9. Of great Wathing. A Child new born sleeps more then he wakes, because his brain is very moist, and he u∣sed to sleep in the womb. If you cannot make him sleep by singing nor rocking, no the like, it is a disease. Are dives in mn and children: in these it isThe Causes from milk corrupt in the stomach, from which sharp humors arise, and disturbe the animal Spi∣rits, and infect them; and if there be sad fancies, frights ollow, of which before. If it cries alwaies, and cannot by any art beThe Signs. made to sleep, it is a sign of a diseae of watching which is dangerous, because children use to sleep much. And hence come Catarhs, Convulsi∣ons, Driness and Feavers. The bad milk mus be amended, and the cor∣uptThe Cure. meat prevented. If it be from a feaver or pain, emove them. Galen adviseth you ofen to 1. De tun. c. 8.
change the bed and place. Sleeping Medi∣cines are not safe, but hurt, but are rather to be given the Nurse moderately, as sweet Almonds, Lettice, Poppy seeds. Wash the feet with Decoction of Dill tops, Chamomil flowers, Sage, Oiers, Vie leaves, Poppy heads. Cool not the head too much, nor use Narcoticks. These are sae, Oyl of Dill to the temples, Oyl of Roses, with Oyl of Nut∣megs, with Poppy seed, Breast-milk, Rose or Nightshade water with Saffron. In great driness of the brain, let the coveing of the cradeles head e wet. Chap. 10. Of Epilepsie and Convulsion. IT is either by consent from parts below, when the milk corrupts in the stomach, or from an ill quality in it from the Nurses bad diet, or from worms in the guts, or from vapors, from bad hu∣mors that twitch the membranes of the brain, as in the Meazles and mall Pox. It is somtimes from the brain first, as when the humors are bred in the brain that cause it, either from the parents, or from distemper, or bad diet. It may come from toothach also, when the brain consents, and from a sudden fright. The Signs. It is manifest. You shall know by the signs of the diseases, whether it comes from bad milk, worms or teeth. If from a fright, the people wil tell you. If these all are absent, it is certain that the brain is first affected. The Pro∣gnostick. It is a great disease, and kills for the most part
young children. But when in older, and it comesHipp. 58. apho. 7. at a distance, it vanisheth by age. If it come with Pox or Meazles, it ceaseth when they come forth if Nature be strong enough. Give this Pouder to prevent it, to a child asThe Cure. soon a it is born. Take male Piony roots gathe∣red in the decrease of the Moon a scruple, Magistery of Coral half a scruple, with Leaf-gold make a Pou∣der. Or, Take Piony roots a dram, Piony seeds, Miseto of the Ok, Ekes hoof, Mans skull, Am∣ber, each a scruple; Musk two grains, make a Pouder. The Florentines burn behind in the head toLib 3. 6. 25. dry the brain, and Celsus saith it is the last Re∣medy. Aegineta saith that children cannot en∣dure1. 3. c. 13. such cruelty, for the pain and watchingSylvatic. contro. 87. would kill them. See Sylvaticu. The best part of the cure is in the Nurses diet which must not be disordered. If it be from co∣rupt milk, provoke vomit, thus; hold down the tongue, and put a quill dipt in sweet Almonds down the throat. If it come from worms, give things that kill worms, with Piony roots, and the like. If there be a feaver, respect that also. Give Coral, Sma∣radgs, and Elkes hoof. In the it give Epileptick water, as Lavender∣water, and rub with the Oyl of Amber, or hang a Piony root, Elkes hoof, or Smaragd about the nek. Of a Convulsion. This is when the brain labos to cast out what troubles it. The matter is in the marrow of the ack, and fountain of the nerves. It is a b∣born disease, and often kills. In the it wash the body, especially the backbone
with decoction of Althaea, Lilly roots, Pio∣ny, Chamomil flowers. And anoint with Mans and Goose grease, Oyl of Worms, Orris, Lillies, Foxes, Turpentine, Mastich, Storax calamite.Ex Paulo Aeginea. The Sun flower is good boyled in water, for to wash the Child. Chap. 11. Of Strabismus, or Squint-eyes. THis is when they lie in the cradle with their head from the light, or on one side, and they still look towards the light, which cau∣seth distortion of the eyes: or it may come from the Epilepsie, or by birth. The Pro∣gnostick. If by birth, it is not curable, nor if it come from an Epilepsie. If it come from custom, and be new, it is curable. The Cure. Lib. 1. par. 3. c. 43. You must put a candle on the contrary side, or a picture, so long till the eyes come to be right. Chap. 12. Of pain in the Ears, Inflammation, Moisture, Ul∣cers, and Worms. OF these in the first Book. But here we shal speak of inants the brain in them is ve∣ry moist, and hath many excrements which Na∣ture cannot send out at its proper pssages; these get often to the ears, and cause pain, and flux of blood, with inflammation and matter with ain. The Signs. In children pain and inflammation are hard to be kown, they cannot relate it, only it is kown
by constant crying, and feeling their ears, and will not let others touch them; sometimes the parts about the ears are red. It is dangerous, because it brings watching,The Pro∣gnostick. Hipp. 1. prog. . 16. and Epilepsie: the moisture breeds worms there, and fouls the spungy bones, and at length deaf∣ness incuable. Presently allay the pain, but children must notThe Cure. have strong remedies. Only use warm milk a∣bout the ears, Oyl of Violets, or the Decoction of Poppy tops. To take away moisture, use Ho∣ney of Roses, and Aqua Mellis, to be dropt into the ears. Or, Take Virgins Honey half an ounce, red Wine two ounces, Allum, Saffron, Salt-peter, each a dram; mix them at the fire. Or drop in Hemp seed Oyl, with a little Wine. Chap. 13. Of the Thrush, Blad∣ders in the Gums, and Inflam∣mation of the Tonsils. THese are from bad milk, or from oul hu∣mors in the stomach, for the mouth is ten∣der, and connot endure the sharp milk, nor the vapors from the stomach, because the coat is the same as in Lib. 2. Part. 1. Cap. 18. The bladders in the gums are thus cured. Take Lentils busked, pouder them, lay it upon the gum. Or, Take Milium in flour half an ounce with Ol of Ross make a Linimem. The inflammation of the Tonsils is more from eleven to thirteen, for then the parts ae harder, and hold the humors longer, and they cannot sweat out. For Cure, keep the belly  b   26.
the like; use Repellers at first, then Resolvers with Repellers, and at last Resolvers alone, but not too hot; in age Gargles are best: in infants anoint with Honey of Roses, Mirtles, Pome∣granates, Diamoron inwardly. Outwardly use Oyl of sweet Almonds, Chamomil, St. Johns∣wort,Lib. 2. par. 1. cap. 22. &c. Chap. 14. Of Breeding of Teeth. THis is a necessary evil in all children, and very great by reason of the variety of sym∣ptoms joyned with it. It is about the seventh month, first the fore-teeth, then the eye-teeth, and last of all the grinders First they feel an itch∣ing in their gums, then they are pierced as with a needle, and pricked by the sharp bones, whence is great pain, watching and inflamation of gums, feaver, loosness and convulsions, especially when they breed their eye-teeth. First, it is known by the usual time, as the e∣ginningThe Signs. of the seventh month. Also they put their ingers in their mouths to allay pain. 3. They hold the nipple faster then before. 4. The gum is white where the tooth begins to come, and there are divers Symptomes mentioned before. The feaver that follows breeding of teeth, comes from cholerick humors inflamed by watching, pain and heat. The longer teeth are breeding the greater theThe Pro∣nostick. danger, so that many die of feavers or convulsi∣ons. They are best that have their belly loose:Hipp lib. e demitio. These have no convuision, & a feaver consumes the humos.
Hard breeding of teeth is from thickness of theThe Cure. gums; therefore molliie and loosen them, rub them with the finger dipt in Butter and Honey, or a Virgin Wax Candle is to be chewed u∣pon. Or anoint with ucilage of Quinces made with Mallow water, or with the brains of a Hare. Foment the cheek with the Decoction of Althaea and Chamomil flowers, and Dill, or with juyce of Mallows, and fesh Butter. If the gus are inflamed, add juyce of Night∣shade and Lettice. Let the Nurse keep a tempe∣rate diet inclining to cold, as Barley broaths, or Watergrewel, rear Eggs, Prunes, Lettice, Endive. Avoid sal, sharp, biting and peppered meats, and Wine. Chap. 15. Of Loosing of the Tongue, and of the Frog. WHen the tongue is tied, they cannot freely suck. This must be done by skil∣ful Artists; or use this Liniment. Take clarified Honey, and boyl it gently till it may be pou∣dered. Then Take yolks of hard Eggs dried in a glass in an Oven, till they may be poudered, a dram, rankincense and Mastich, each a scruple; burnt Allum six grains, with Honey of Roses make a Li∣niment. The Frog is when the veins under the tongue, are filled with bad blood; and if flegm sweat out, and stick in the passages, there is a tumor like Mushrooms which causeth stamering. It is cu∣red thus: Take Cuttlebone, Sal gem, Pepper, each a dram; burnt Spunge three drams, make a Pouder, or with Honey a Liniment: rub under the tongue.
Lay under the chin a Plaister of goose dung and Honey boyled in Wine, till the Wine be con∣sumed. Chap. 16. Of Catarrh, Cough and difficult Breathing. WEE have spoken of these before, butLib. 1. par. 2. c. 34. because Hippocrates reckons them in Childrens diseases, I shall touch up∣on them. The general Cause of a Catarrh in a child, isThe Causes a moist brain, and much milk that burdens the stomach, from whence many vapors fil the brain; and if the brain be full of excrements, it is easily dissolved or melted, either by heat or cold, and goes to the nose, ws or lungs, which cause a cough or Asthma. Moreover much food makes crudities in the first passages, and flegmatick blood is bred of crudity and thick chyle in the li∣ver. This is sent by the arerial vein into the lungs, and prssing the Bronchia or pipes of the lungs, causeth difficult breathing and Asthma. It is known to be from a hot humor, if it beThe Signs. thin, they often neese, the face is red, and the jaws; the breath is short, and the Nurse inds it in her nipples. If difficulty of breathing come from the head, there will be a cough and snort∣ing in breathing, and a noise in the lungs, when the air passeth not freely through them. If it come from the parts below, there is neither C∣tarrh nor cough, but hardness about the Liver, and a tumor. In children a great Catarrh with short breathThe Pro∣gnostick. is hard to be cured, because they cannot take Physick.
First, let it and the Nurse keep a good diet, filThe Cure. not the stomach with milk nor other diet; but let the Nurse forbear sharp, salt, peppered, our things, and things that fill the head with vapors. And give her a Pectoral Decoction: Take Figs, ujubes, each ten; Sebestens thirty, Raisons stoned en drams, Liquorish two drams, Maidenhair, Hy∣sop, Violets, each half an ounce: boyl them in three pints of Water, to the consumption of the third part. Let her take six ounces every morning. Keep the belly open with Syrup of Roses, or Cassia, or a Clyster; with oyl of sweet Almonds with Sugar candy, or juyce of Fennel, with Milk, or hold down the tongue, and provoke Vomi∣ting. Give Syrup of Jujubes, Maidenhair. If the matter be thick, give Syrup of Hysop, or Hore∣hound, or an Emulsion of oyl of sweet Almonds, Pine-nuts, Scabious water. Or give a Lohoch of Diaireos, Diatragacanth frigid, Peidies, with Syrup of Jujubes. If it be hot give Emulsions of the our great cold Seeds, with Mallows, Pellitory, with Dia∣tragacanth frigid. To dry up the matter, lay outwardly a stuph of Hemp hot, and sprinkled with pouder of red Roses and Frankincense. Apply Basil and Mar∣joram to the nose, to make it sneese. Chap. 17. Of the Hickets. IT comes from corruption of the food in the stomach, or from milk illing it, or from cold  these hurt the expulsive faculty, and it is rred up to expel what is hurtful. If i come from reletion of milk, the belly The Sign
swells, and there is vomiting after. If from cor∣ruption of milk, the Nurse hath bad milk: the child cries, and is pained, and the excrements snl of stinking milk. Hikets is commonly not dangerous in child∣ren,The Pro∣gnostick. and cease when the cause is taken away. I it be from a vehement cause, and goes to the nerves, there follows a Convulsion, or Epilepsie, and death. That from corruption of nourishment is cu∣redThe Cre. by vomit, with a feather dipt in Oyl, to tic∣kle the throat; then strengthen the stomach with hot things. As Syrup of Mints, Bettony, and so∣ment it with Decoction of Mints, Organ, Wom∣wood; then anoint with Oyl of Mints, Mastich, Dill. Or, Take Mastich an ounce, Frankincense, Dill seed, each two drams; Cummin seed a dram, with juyce of Mints and Flax apply them to the stomach. There is a disease like the Hikets in children from anger or grief, when the Spirits are much stired, and run from the heart to the Diaphrag∣ma forceably, and hinder or stop the breath Som∣times they have a shril voice, the Spirits sudden∣ly breaking forth, but when the passion ceaseth, this Symptom ceaseth. Chap. 18. Of Vomiting. IT is from too much milk or bad milk, or fom flgm that fals from the head to the stomach, but this is seldom in children. It is ofen from a moist loose stomach, for as driness retains, so loosness lets go. If it be from much milk, they are better afterThe Signs. vomiting. If it be from corruption of milk, that which is vomited is yellow, green, or otherwise
ill coloured, and stinking: worms are known by their signs. It is for the most part without danger in chil∣dren,The Pro∣gnostick. and they that vomit from their birth, are the lustiest, for the stomach being not used to meat, and milk being taken too much, often∣times crudities are easily bred, or the milk is cor∣rupted, and it is better to vomit these up, then keep them in. If Vomiting last long, it causeth Arophy. When it is from too much milk give it less:The Cure. if it be from corrupt milk, amend it, as I shewed. Clense the child with Honey of Roses; and strengthen the stomach with Syrup of Mints, Quinces. Or, Take Wood-aloes, Coral, Mastich, each half a dram; Galangal half a scruple, with Sy∣rup of Quinces make a Lincus. If the humor be sharp and hot, give Syrup of Pomegranates, Currans, Coral. Apply to the belly the Plaister of Bread, the Stomach-cerot, or Bread dipt in Wine hot. Or, Take Oyl of Mastich, Quinces, Mints, Wormwood, each half an ounce; of Nutmegs by expression half a dram, Chymical Oyl of Mints three drops. Co∣ral hath an occult propriety, therefore it is hung about their necks. Chap. 19. Of the torments or pains of the Belly. IT is often with the flux of the belly, and from milk alone that breeds wind and sharp hu∣mors. When it is corrupted, it gets to the guts, and causeth a gnawing pain: worms staying in the guts, do the same.
They cry continually, hate the breast, and tossThe Signs. to and fro. If it be from wind, it ceaseth, som∣times the belly swells, and they break wind. If it be from humors, it is constant: if it be tough flegm, the belly is bound, and the dung is slimy. If it be sharp, there is a flux yellow and green. If from worms, there are signs of them, and of cru∣dities and wind. If this pain lasts long, they are weak, or haveThe Pro∣gnostick. Convulsions or Epilepsie, it is worse when rom corrupt milk and worms, and is dangerous. If it be from crude humors and wind, give aThe Cure. Clyster. Take Pellitory, Chamomil flowers, each a handful; boyl them in Chicken broath, to three or four ounces, add Honey of Roses an ounce, with the yolk of an Eg make a Clyster. This may be given safely to a child of two month old. Or give oyl of sweet Almonds, with Sugar candy, and a scruple of Aniseeds; it purgeth new born Babes fromHeur meth. ad prax. l. 2. c. 26. green choler and stinking flegm. If it be given with Sugar Pap, it allays the crying pains of the belly. Anoint the belly with Oyl of Dill, or lay Pel∣litory stampt with Ol of Chamomil to the belly. Or, Take Chamomil flowers, Dill tops, each a hand∣ful; Faenugreek and Lineseed, each half an ounce; boyl them in Wine, foment the belly twice a day be∣fore meat. If pain be from corrupt milk hat is sharp, give Syrup of Roses, or Honey of Roses, or Syrup of Succory, with Rhubarb, or a Clyster of the De∣coction of Bran, Pellitory, with Srup of Roses. And use outwardly Oyl of Roses, Dill and Cha∣momil.
Chap. 20. Of puffing up of the Belly and Hypochondria. WHen they suck too much, the belly is swel∣led under the ribs, for want of concocti∣on, and there are crudities in the stomach and wind, and also in the parts adjacent. The Hypochondria are hard, and pussed up,The Signs. and there is straitness in the mouth of the sto∣mach, and short breath. It is easily cured with good diet. The Pr∣gnostick. Give a thinner diet, that the crudities may be cococted. Give no fresh nourishment til th firstThe re. be digested, then give Honey of Roses to purge. Or the Decoction of Cardiaca, which is good for the heart and mouth of the stomach: it opens obstructions, and clenseth flegm. Or pouder of Piony roots, Cummin seed, Jesamine; or make it up with Honey, Oyl of sweet Almonds, or Su∣gar for a Liniment. Foment the sides with the Decoction of Cardiaca, Chamomil flowers, and Cununin seed. Chap. 21. Of the Flux of the Belly. IT is 1. From breeding of teeth, with a feave commonly, and the concoction is hindered, and the nourishment corrupted. 2. From much watching. 3. From pain 4. From stirring of the humors by a feaver. 5. When they suck or drink too much in a feaver. Somtimes they have a flux without breeding of teeth, from outward cold in
the guts or stomach, that hinders concoction. If it be from teeth, it is known by the signs inTe Signs. breeding of teeth: if from external cold, there are signs of no other causes. If from a humor flowing from the head, there are signs of a C∣tarrh, and the excrements are roathy. If crude humors are voided, there is wind, belching, and flegmatick excrements. If they be yellow, green and stink, the ux is from a hot and sharp hu∣mor. It is best in breeding of teeth, when the bellyThe Pro∣gnostick. Hipp. lib. de dentitio. is loose; but if it be too great and you fear A∣trophy, it must be stopt: if black excrements are voided with a feaver, it is bad. A sucking child needs not cure so much as theThe Cure. Nurse, you must chiefly observe the condition of the milk and mend it, if not, change the Nurse, & let her not eat green fruit, and things of hard co∣coction. If the child suck not, take away the cau∣ses of the flux, with purges that bind after: as Sy∣rup or Honey of Roses, or a Clyster. Take the decoction of Milium, My robalans, each two or three ounces; with an ounce or two of Syrup of Roses make a Clyster. After clensing, if the cause be hot, give Syrup of dried Roses, Quinces, Mirtles, Coral, Currns, or the pouder of Diamarariton, Co∣ral, Mastich, Harts-horn, red Roses, or pouder of Mitles, with a little Sanguis Draconis. Anoint with Oyl of Roses, Mirtles, Masich. Or, Take red Roses an ounce, Mirtles, Masich, each two drams; with Oyl of Mirtles and Wax make an Oyntment. Or Take red Roses, Moulin, each a handful; Cypress roots two drams, make a Bag, boyl it in red Wine, apply it to the belly: or use the Plaister of Bread or Stomach oyntment. If the cause be cold, and excrements white,
give Syrup of Mastich and Quinces, with Mint∣water. Use outwardly Mints, Mastich, Cummin. As, Take Rose seeds an ounce, Cummin Aniseeds, eachLib. 3. par. 2. cap. 5. & 6. two drams; with Oyl of Mastich Wormmood and Wax make an Oynmen. Chap. 22. Of binding of the Belly. IT is from a cold and dry distemper of the guts, from birth in some. 2. From slimy flegm that wraps the dung, which sticks in the guts. This is from bad milk, when the Nurse eats gross food, slimy and astringent, or drinks little. 3. It is from a hot distemper of the kidnies or liver, that dries the excrements. 4. It is when choler doth not stir up the guts to expel. If it be from a dry distemper of the guts, it isThe Signs. hard to be cured: if it be from slimy flegm, the dung is wrapt in it. If choler comes not to the guts to provoke them to stool, the dung is white, and the body yellow. It is best in children to have a loose belly, andThe Pro∣gnostick. Hipp. 2. aph. 53. they are more healthful; for if it be bound, the belly is pained, and there is headach. First, take away the cause: if it be from a hot distemper of any bowel, or dry, wash the childThe Cure. often, to moisten and cool it in a Bath of Succo∣ry and Leice boyled. In a cold distemper use hot for the stomach, and in a dry use moist things, as Oyl of Lillies, Dialthaea, Hens grease, Butter. Let the Nurse avoid astringent mets, as Qin∣es, Medlars, Beans, and use Emollients. If the chid be big, give juyce or Decoction of red Colwots,
worts, with a little Salt and Honey. If it be from slimy flegm, give Honey or Syrup of Roses. Cor∣rect the hot distemper of the Liver and Reins, with Syrup of Violets, and Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds. If choler come not from the Gall to the Guts, give the Decoction of Grass∣roots, Fennel, Sparagus, Maidenhair. Give Clysters to cut and clense tough flegm. As, Take Alhaea roots, Mallows, Pellitory, each half a handful; Faenugreek and Lineseed, each a dram; Chamomil flowers a pugil: boyl, and to three or six ounces, ad three drams of Cassia, Oyl an ounce, and the yolk of an Eg. To the Navel, apply Hens grease, and Ox gal. Or, Take Aloes two drams, Ox gall a dram, Sca∣mony a scruple, with Buttr make an Oyntment. Fill a Walnut shell with it, and apply it to the Navel. Anoint the belly with Emoillients. Take fresh Butter, Goose and Hens grease, each half an ounce; Oyl of sweet Almonds, and Lineseed, each two drams; Veal marrow, Dialthaea, each two drams; with Wax make an Oyntment: Bran and juyce of Danewort make a loosning Cataplasm for the belly. Only keep it from the stomach, as you must do other Cataplasms. Chap. 23. Of the Worms. IT is observed that children have had worms inEx authore lib. 4. de morb. their mothers belly, and voided them after they were born. But they are chiefly bred by mixing milk with other meats in a hot and moist constitution, and from sweet meats which woms love; and Summer-fruits: they are round and long, or broad and little. Besides what is said in Lib. 3. Part 2. Sect. 2. The Signs.
Cap. 5. Worms are known to be in a body, when there is much spittle, and a stinking breath, troublesom sleep, gnashing of teeth, crying and bawling; a dry cough, loathing, vomiting, hic∣kets, want of appetite, or too much, thirst, a bel∣ly swelled, or bound, or too loose, thick white urin with pain, when the belly is empty, and the worms want food. There is a cold sweat over the face, and a high colour, with sudden pale∣ness; sometimes a feaver and convulsion which ceaseth presently. These are the signs of round worms rather then of the flat. Infants are often long troubled with wormsThe Pro∣gnostick. without any great inconvenience, sometimes there are great Symptomes. The long round worms are worst, and have eaten sometimes the guts and belly through, with a feaver they are more dangerous: few are better then many, and small then great, white are better then those of other colours. The other Prognosticks are men∣tioned in other places. Preservation. It is better to prevent the breeding of worms then to expel them, by eating of meats of good juyce, with Oranges and Pomegranates, and a∣voiding sweet, fat and slimy meats, fish, milk, and Summer-fruits, and figs. Drink thin Wine, and Grass and Sorrel water with it, and with pouder of Harts horn. Let the belly be kept loose, with Clysters fo children: or give the Decoction of Sebestens be∣fore meat, or of Wormwood and Scordium, but children will not take bitter things; therefore give Grass water, and juyce of Lemons or Ci∣tons, or a drop or two of Spirit of Vitriol. When you know by the signs, that there are The Cur.
worms, kill and expel them with pouder of Co∣ralline, Wormseed. Harts horn, or eight grains of Mercurius dulcis. Infuse them a night in gass water, and cast away the substance o the Mer∣cury, and give the Water. Or, Take Womseed two drams, Coralline, Harts horn prepared, each a dram; roots of Piony, Dittany, Magistery of Co∣ral, each a scruple; make a Pouder: or give the Es∣sence of Peach flowers, or the Decoction, of Fern∣water half an ounce, or an ounce. If there be a fea∣ver, use colder, as juyce of Lemons, Pomegra∣nates, Oranges, Vinegar, Harts horn, Bezoar, Confection of Hyacinth, or this Potion. Take Grass water four ounces, Syrup of juyce of Citrons an ounce, of Violets half an ounce, Spirit of Vitriol two drops, give two spoonfuls. Give bitter things at the mouth, and sweet at the fundament, as a Clyster of Milk. Or, Take Raisons ten, Figs seven, boyl them in water, take of it four ounces, add Sugar an ounce and half, make a Clyster. Use varieties that the worms may not be too familiar with one. Apply Peach leaves to the Navel bruised, or a Cataplasm of Ox gall, Wormwood and St. Johns∣wort. Or, Take pouder of Wormwood, Gith, Cen∣taury, Wormseed, Lupines, each half an ounce; with Oyl of Wormwood, and Wax half an ounce, make an Oyntment. Or, Take Treacle half an ounce, with juyce of Wormwood apply it to the navel: or make a Bath of Peach leaves and Wormwood, put the child into it up to the navel. If there be a Fea∣ver, use colder things mentioned.
Chap. 24. Of the Rupture. IT is from the Peritonaeum loose or broken, when the sall guts fall into the cods, from crying, cough, strainin at stool and from vehe∣ment motion, or a fall. Sometimes the Perito∣naeum is well, and a water falls from the belly into the cods. The tumor is visible: if it be from a gut, it isThe Signs. in one part only, as the right or left, and it may be felt, and the hole also hrough which it fel. If from water, it is even all over, and there was no cause of other Rupture. It is easier cured in infants then in elder per∣sons,The Pro∣gnostick. for it is safer, but worse then that of water which goes away of it self when the water is con∣sumed. Let the belly be kept open, let not the childThe Cure. cry. Avoid vehement motion, lay him upon his back, and thrust it up gently, and apply this Plaister. Take Lambs tongue, Sanicle, each half an ounce; Lentils, and Lupines, and red Roses in pouder, each two drams; Frankincense a dram, Al∣lum half a dram, with the white of an Eg. Or, Take Frankincense, Cypress nuts, Alos, Acacia, each two drams; Mirrh a dram, with Izinglass make a Pla∣ster. Or apply Gum Elemni steept in Vinegar, till there be a Cream at the top, and with oyl of Eggs make a Cerot. Inwardly, Take Sanicle, Lambs tongue, each half a handful; Agrimony a handful, Comfrey the greater half an ounce, boyl them, to a pint strained, ad Sugar, give it often. Or give pouder of Mousear or Moonwort with Wine. If it be from water, anoint with Oyl of Elder,
Bayes, Rue; or apply a Cataplasm of pouder of Beans, oenugreek, Lineseed, Chanmil flow∣ers, Cummin seeds, with these Oyls. Chap. 25. Of sticking out of the Navel. IT is without inflammation. 1. When it was not well tied, and too much left that sticks out. 2. When the Peritonaeum is loose, and hath water or wind in it, from crying or cough∣ing. 3. When the navel is ulcerated, and the guts fall into it: this is called properly Exom∣phalon. The navel yeilds to the touch, but in an infla∣mation,The Signs. it is hard; there is neither heat nor red∣ness and it lasts longer then an inflammation. If the navel was not wel cu, there wil be too great a quantity, if the Peritonaeum be not bro∣ken, but loose, the navel starts not much out, and is not greater by crying; if it be broken, the tu∣or scarce appears when he lies upon his back, but it increaseth by crying or walking. If the Midwie did not cut the navel wel, it isThe Pro∣gnostick. more troublesom then dangerous. If it be too large or ulcerated, at first it is easily cured, but afterwards it may cause a deadly iliak passion, when the guts that fall in, are inflamed. When the Peritonaeum is loose, wind stretch∣ethThe Cure. the navel; then use a Cataplasm of Cum∣min, Bayberries, and Lupines poudered in ed Wine, or a Bag of Cummin and Spike boyled i red Wine. Then lay on an astringent, and roul it. If the Peritonaeum be broken, first put in the gut, then bind it close, after you have laid on astringent
Pouders. Or, Take pouder of ypress∣nuts, Frankincens, Mil, Mastich, Sarcocol, Al∣lm, inglass, each a drm; with the whites of Egs make a Pultis, and give Mediines against Rup∣tures. Chap. 26. Of Inflammation of the Navel. IT is from pain, when it is hot well tied, that draws blood to it. There is redness, hard∣ness, heat, and beating. If it turns to an impotum, and breaks, theThe Pro∣gnostick. gus come forth, and the child usually dies. First abate pain. Take Maows boyled and stamptThe Cure. two ounces, Barley meal half an ounce, Lupines, Fe∣ngree eah two dram with Oyl o Rose ke a Cataplasm. To repel Blood; Tak Frakincense a dram, Acacia, Fleaban seed, ech half a dram; with the white of an Eg mak a Cataplasm.  Suppuration as much as may be: but i it doth suppurate, Take Turpentie half an ounce, the yol of an Eg and Oyl of Roses two ounces. Chap. 27. Of Falling out of the Fundament. VVHen the muscle tha huts the Ars-hol is loose, the fundament comes frth the cause is moisture of the muscles afte a flux, or straining at stool, in Tenesmus or Need∣ing, or when the belly is bound. The eople will tell you the causes, and youThe Signs may see it.
It is easily cured, when it is from straning atThe Pro∣gnostick. stool, if it have not been long out. If it be from great store of moisture, it is hard to be cured, es∣pecially if there be a loosness of the belly, for then Medicines cannot lie on. First, put it up, if it be swollen foment it withThe Cure. the decoction of Mallows and Althaea, or anoint with Oyl of Lillies then keep it in with astrin∣gents. As, Take d Roses, Pomegranae peels and flowers, Cypress nuts, each half an ounce; Sumach, Frankincense, Mastich, each two drams boyl them in red Wine, foment with a Spunge, then sprinkle on this Pouder. Take red Roses and Pomegranae flowers, each half a dram; Frankincense, Mastich, each a dram; lay it upon a clout, and put it to the Fundament See Lib. 3. Part 2. Sect. 1. c. 6. Chap. 28. Of the Stone in the Bladder. THe stone in the bladder is usual in infants, as that of the kidnies is in elder people. How it is cured, we shewed before In in∣fantsLib. 3. par. 3. sec. 1. c. 6. & par. 8 sec. 1. c. 1. it is from gross unclean milk made of tough meats, this too much taken in, causeth cru∣dities sit to breed the stone, r pap of Barley meal and milk may cause it. There is alo a weaknes in the liver and stomach, when they do not sepa∣rate unprofitable food, but much earthy juyce re∣mains in the chyle that breeds stones. Also a ho distemper in the reins, by which the chyle is drawn to the bladder, and if there be a native hereditary disposition to breed the stone, an ear∣thy part is in the humor, which makes the urine thick this is in bigger Boys more then in infants They piss by drops, with itching and pain, the he Signs.
Urin is stopt often, and tha which is pissed is like cleer waer white, or like milk or whey, somtimes blood is pissed, and the yard often stands. It increaseth dayly i it be not opposed, andThe Pro∣gnostick. cannot be cured without cutting, which is dan∣gerous for yong or old. Prevent the breeding of it when you see theThe Cure. least disposition to it. Let the belly be alwaies kept loose, and the Nurse eat no gross slimy food: make a bath of the decoction of Althaea. Mallows, Pellitory, Parsley, Dill, Faenugreek, Lineseed. then anoint the bladder with Althaea, oyl of Lillies and Scorpions, and apply a Cata∣plasm o Pellitory, boyled with oyl of Lillies. A Pouder. Take Magistery of Crabs eyes, white Amber, Goats blood prepared, each a scruple;Lib. 3. pra. decal. ves. with Parsley water, give it often. Or give two drops of spirit o Vitriol with half a dram of Cypress Turpentine. Chap. 29. Of Difficulty and Stoppage of Urin. THere are many causes in ripe age that are mentioned, but in Infants they are chief∣ly two causes: the thick humor that breeds the stone, that makes a strangury and dysury; and the Stone that stops the bladder. It is voided by drops, and the child cries, andThe Signs. the urin is thick, you may try with the Catheter if there be a Stone. If it be not presently cured, it turns to theThe Pro∣gnostick. Stone: and all natural evacuation in Children being stopt is dangerous.
It is as in the Stone, you must evacuate hu∣morsThe Cure. from the first passages with Hony of Roses, Cassia, Turpentine, foment and anoint as before with Grass water, Restharrow, Dropwort watter, and decoction of red Pease. Or, Take the blood of an Hare an ounce, Saxige roots six drams, cal∣ine them, give from  scruple to half a dram, with white Wine or Saxiage water. Chap. 30. Of not holding the Urin. SOmpiss no oy in their sleep, but alwaies, because the muscle that should close the o∣rifice of the bladder is weak, and when much water pricks it, it suffers it to come forth, some∣times a Stone in the bladder hurts the Sphincter, so that it cannot do its duty. The cause of weakness is a cold humor and moist, from gross ough meats, from gluttony and the like. It cannot b known i Infants, but i may inThe Signs. elder children, that now they ought not piss abed. If it come by custome, it turns to an habit,The Pro∣gnostick. or a disease, and is hard to be cured in ripe years: if it be from distemper it is easie to be cured. Alter the cold and moist distemper, dry andThe Cure. consume the flegm, let the Nurse have a hot dry∣ing diet with Sage, Hysop, Marjoram, let not the child drink much, keep the belly. Outwardly aot the region of the bladder with oyl of Costus, Orris, and other driers: make a bath o Sulphur, Allum, and Oak leaves, oluse Sulphur or Allm baths: give this pouder.
Take Hogs bladders burnt, roasted stones of a Hare, Cocks throats roasted each half a dram; Acrons two scruples, Nip, Mace, each a scruple; give half a dram with Oak leaves water. see Lib. 3. Part 8. Sect. 2. c. 6. Chap. 31. Of chaing in the Hips, called Intertrigo. IT is th separation of the scarf-skin from the true in the Hips, that causeth pain and un∣quetness. It is from sharp piss, when the clouts are notThe Causes changed often: in such as are fat, to whom filth sticks easily. The Skin is off and it looks red. The Signs. It is troublesom by reason of the pain, andThe Pro∣gnostick. causeth want of sleep, and ulcrateth if it be not cured. Change the clouts often, wash and clense theThe Cure. child often, sprinkle on his fine pouder. Of Litharge of Silver, seeds and leaves of Roses, burnt Allum and Frankincens, or anoint with white oyntment and Diapompholigos. Chap. 32. Of Leanness and Fas∣cination. SOmtimes children and men grow lean; the elder from Feavers, Consumptions, and o∣ther diseases; but children pine away, and the cause is not known, and though they eat and perform other actions, they are not nourished no grow.
The causes of Consumption in Infants are,The Causes little or bad milk by which no blood is bred fit to nourish the body, so that they thrive not till they change the Nurse. The second is worms that suck away the nou∣rishment. The third is worms about the body without, s in th Back, Aims r Leg and all parts, these are very small ad bred in ufculous parts, and stick in the skin, and never come wholly out, but after rubbing in baths, thy put forth their heads like black hairs, and run in when they feel the cold air: they breed of imy matter shut up in the capillar veins, which turns to worms from transpiration hindered. The fourth cause in the opinion of people is fascination or witchcraft, either from the eyes of Witches, or by vapors, or by touch, or by words from a Witch; these are alleadged by many Authors. I neither allow nor plainly de∣ny all these waies of fascination, though it is not credible that a child should suffer by words or looks only. I deny not but diseases may be sent from sick bodies to others, as the Leprosie, the French Pox, Consumption, and the like, and may infect Infants. And I believe that they may be hurt by Witches and malicious persons by the help of the Devil and Gods permissio, as Basil the great writeth: for wicked people makeBsin ho∣e invidia. a league with the Devil that they may hurt such as they look enviously and angerly upon. And I add one thing, a habit of body that is grown very excellent is in most danger, as Hippocras aith, when children come to be very healthfull and fair, they fall suddenly into a disease, and the vulgar not knowing the cause of it, impue it to Witchcraft.
The signs of the causes, if they be lean from aThe Sign feaver or other disease, it is easily known. If these causes be not, view the Nurses milk whe∣ther little, or her breasts lag without milk, and that is the cause of leanness in the child; if she have milk, see if it be not hot and dry, and cho∣lerick. And consider her constitution. If the milk be blameless, see if it be not from worms ei∣ther in the Guts or in the skin; the woms in the skin are known by putting the child into a bath and rubbing it, especially on the back with the hands, and with Honey and Bread, and then you shall see little ash coloured or black hairs come out of the skin. If there be no outward nor inward cause, you may mistrust a venemous vapor or witchcraft. If it be for want of milk, change the Nurse.The Pr∣gnostic If it be from worms in the skin, it is not hard to be cured; if it be from an occult quality, or from Witchcraf, it is hard to be cured, because we know not the nature of the malignity. If the Nurse have any Disease, or be contraryThe Cure. to the constitution of the child, change her, kill and cast out the worms. If it be from worms in the back, rub it and anoint it with Honey andTo Cure al diseases Read my Sennertus, Platerus, Riveus, Bartholi∣nus, and Rilanus, of the last Edition. Wheat bread, and when their heads come forth kil them with a Razor or crust of bread do this often. There are many superstitious things carried about against witchcraft, some hang Amber and Coral about the childs neck, nor is it impossible that plants and Gemms should have power a∣gainst witchcraft, As, Briony root, and Elks hoof are ood against the Epilepsie, also there are Amulets against other diseases f leanness be from a dry distmper of the
whole body there is no better Remedy the of∣ten bathing in a decoction of Mallows. Althaea, Branckursine, Sheeps heads, and the like, and a∣noint after with the oyl of sweet Almonds. If he be hot and dry, add to the bath Lettice, Endive, Violets, Poppy heads, and anoint after with oyl of Roses and Violets. FINIS. Several Physick Books of Nich. Culpeper, Physitian and Astrologer, and Abdiah Cole Doctor of Phy∣sick, commonly called, The Physitian's Library, containing all the Works in English of Riverius, Sennertus, Platerus, Riolanus, Bartholinus. Viz. 1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physick: after a new, easie and plain Method of know∣ing, foretelling, preventing, and curing all Diseases inci∣dent to the body of Man. Ful of proper Observations and Remedies, both of Ancient and Modern Physitians. Be∣ing the fruit of one and thir∣y years Travel, and fifty ears Practice of Physick. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich. Culpeper. 2. Bartholinus Anatomy, with very many larger Brass Figures, than any other Ana∣tomy in English. 3. Sennertus thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy: O the Nature of all things in the world. 4. Sennertus Practical Phy∣ck; the first Book in three
Parts. 1. Of the Head. 2. Of the Hurt of the internal n∣ses. 3. Of the external Senses, in five Sections. 5. Sennertus Practical Phy∣sick; the second Book, in four Parts. 1. Of the Jas and Moth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart. 6. Sennertus Third Book of Practical Physick in four∣teen Parts, treating, 1. Of the Stomach and Gullet. 2. Of the Gu. 3. Of the Me∣sentery, Sweetbread and Omen∣tum. 4. Of the Sple. 5. Of the Side. 6. Of the Survey. 7 and 8. Of the Liver. 9 Of the Ureters. 10. Of the Kid∣nies. 11. and 12. Of the Bladder. 13. and 14. Of the Privities and Generation in men. 7. nnrt ourth Book of Practical Physick in three Parts. Par . Of the Dis∣eases in the Privities of wo∣men. The first Section. Of Diseases of the Privie Part, and the Neck of the Womb. The second Section. Of the Diseases of the Womb. Part 2. Of the Smptoms in the Womb, and om the Womb. The second Section. Of the Symptoms in the Te n other Flues of the Wo The third Section. Of t Symptoms that bl al Vi∣gins and Women in their Wombs, after they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of the Symptoms which ae in Conception. The fi Section. Of the Governme of Women with Child, and preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. The sixth Section. Of Symp that happen in Childbear The seventh Section. Of the Government of Women i Child-bed, and of the Dis∣eases that come after Trvl. The first Section. Of Dis∣eases of the Breas. The ∣cond Sction. Of th Sym∣ptoms of the Breasts. To which is added a Tra∣ctate of the Cure of Inan. Part 1. Of the Diet and Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases and Symptoms in Children. 8. Sennertus fifh Book of Practical Physick, Or th Art of Chyrurgery in six Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers 3. Of the Skin, Hair
nd Nails. 4. Of Wounds, ith an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of Luxations. 9. Sennrus two Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2. Of the Gout. 10. Idea of Practical Phy∣sick in twelve Books. 11. Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physick, being the Works of that Learned nd Renowned Doctor La∣rus Riverius, Physitian and Counsellor to the late King, &c. 12. Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man. 13. A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the Colledg of Physitians of London, in Folio and in O∣avo. Whereunto is added, The Key of Galen's Method of Physick. 14. A Directory for Mid∣ives, or a guide for women 15. Galns Art of Physick. 16. A new Method both of studying and practising Phy∣sick. 17. A Treatise of the Ric∣kets. 1. Medicaments for the Poor: Or, Physick for the Common People. 19. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physick 20. One thousand New, Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and Octavo. 21. A Treatise of Pulses and Urins. 22. A Teatise of Blood∣letting, and Cures perfor∣med thereby. 23. A Treatise of Scarifi∣cation, and Cures perfor∣med thereby. 24. Riolanus Anatomy. 25. The English Physi∣tian enlarged. The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a great Caracter in Latin. Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole. All Mr. Bridge's Works. All Mr. Hooker's Works. And Seventeen several Books of Mr. Jeremiah Bur∣roughs's. FINIS.
