18413.7 99898838 152090
A TREATISE OF BLAZING STARRES IN Generall. As well supernaturall as naturall: To what Countries or people soeuer they appeare in the spacious World. shooting star SOVTH. WEST. NORTH. EAST. LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold by Edward Wright at his shoppe neere Christ Church gate. 1618:
A Prognostication of Blazing Starres, according to the opinion of the Poet Pontanus. OF stirring winds, with blustering blasts which blow, Of bloody broyles, by force in fatall fight: Of peoples pompe, the pitious ouerthrow. Of Potentates the death, in wofull plight: The Blazing Starres aloft like lampes of light In th'Est or West of azure coloured skies, Forewarnings and signes when they arise. If still they stand, and offer not to change The place, where first in sight they cast their beames, Then shall insue much mischiefe rare and strange: As gaping wounds, and sluzing bloody streames, In foughten field, twixt nigh adioyning Realmes. Such ciuill stormes shall ouerrunne the land, That some shall bath in kindreds blood their hand. And if they take their course vnto the East, A signe it is that forreigne foes with force Prepare apace, to spoyle both most and least: With edge of sword sweet life still to diuorce From panting heart, deuoyde of all remorse. Thus East or West in sight, they haue their dome, And signes they are of things in time to come.
Why, and whereupon Blazing Starres haue theyr Names, CHAP. I. FOrsomuch as a man furnished with all kind of knowledge and learning, should so search after the vnderstanding of great and high matters,A reason for vnderstanding of blazing stars. that he haue not meaner things in contempt and disdaine, by whose benefite (as experience teacheth) the greater are attained, because they minister certain helps and aides to aspire and reach vnto them. Hereupon it followeth, that lesser things are not to bee neglected, without the which there is no passage to the greater, nor any possibilitie to pearce to the perfect proofe of them, except by the forerunning of them preparation be made for vs to ascend. and climbe vp to the hidden knowledge of the other. Therefore, lest this our la∣bour lent and layde out for common vtility and profite should be subiect to the biting blowes of furious enuie, and lest such as de∣sire perfection in profession, as also certainety in deliuering Do∣ctrine, should complaine, that wee sell shadowes for substances, phantasies for verities, and imaginations for demonstrations: we will say somewhat in the entrance of this worke, touching the name of a Comete or Blazing starre, and so passe orderly to our purpose. The starre which the Grecians call Cometa,A Blazing star is named after the forme and figure which it beareth. the Latines Stella crinita, we Englishmen a Blazing sttarre, hath his deno∣mination (as well by the assertion of the one, as the other from the form and figure which it beareth, at such time as it appeareth in the ayre: because this kind of starre seemeth (in our opinion and iudgement) to shoote out long strakes of fire in the E∣lement, or bright and lightsom sparckles continued in length like
vnto the hayre, which the Grecians call Coma, and thereupon Cometa, and the Latines Crinis, whereof it is named Stella cri∣nita:The names of Blazing stars. so that the resemblance or representation which this Starre giueth, is the occasion that it is called a Comet, or Blazing star, As Augustus Caesar called that starre, which appeared at such time as he published Pageants of pleasure: and shewes of Tri∣umph, by the name of a Comete: and which Suetonius Tran∣quillus called Sidus crinitum, and diuers others haue semblably termed, Neyther was the Imposition of this name absurde, or against reason:The likenes of blazing stars as somtimes they appeare. for whosoeuer shall iudiciously behold those kinde of Starres, he shall perceyue, though not most perfectly, yet not very darkly) how it shooteth out long and slender lines of spark∣ling fire, this way and that way, insomuch, as a man would thinke and suppose the same not much vnlike vnto scattred hayre to a broome or a rodde of Byrch, to the tayle of a Peacocke, to the bearde of a man, &c. as we are taught by demonstration. That Blazing Stars are sundry and diuers. CHAP. II. BLazing Starres are not onely very many in number, but also diuers in appearance. The Sect of the Stoykes sayde, that they are beyond two and thirty,The Stoyckes opinion of Blazing stars. of whose sundry names and se∣uerall effects, Abienus not vnwisely hath written. Concerning their number and names, we are héere to be not curious: wherefore we will come to their colours and likenesses wherein there is not an vniformity and generall agréement, but a difference, For some blazing-Starres seeme bloud redde, hor∣rible to behold,Blazing stars differ in colour and (as it were) crisped and curled in the Crowne or vpper part, tending towards the Skies: where∣upon they are commonly called Comets. of which the Poet hath this saying: Like as in moyst and dewie night, When Comets red as bloud, Appeare aloft: the spectacle, and signe is little good.
This Figure haue they, when they are thicke on the one side, and stretched out in length on the other side. Some Blazing Starres there be,Blazing stars vary in figure. Trailed stars. which haue a certayne han∣ging downeward at their lower part, in the likenesse of a long beard, or the mawne of a horse: which happeneth by reason of the thin matter and substance which is in the other parts, which kind of stars are called Pogonii. Other some there are, which appeare in the likenesse of a speare or Iauelin, and they are called Acontij:Speare stars. or such a one as testifieth Plinie, did Tiberius Caesar, in his Consulship, penne passing and excellent Poems, or Verses of notable inuention and singular conueyance. Other some there are, shorter somewhat then the former,Sword starres. and they be shapt towards the top like a sword, whereupon they are called Piphij, resembling in colour gold after a sort, but yet so not∣withstanding, that (of all other) they are most pale, wanting beames, blazes, or strakes: hauing neuerthelesse a cereain bright∣nesse in them, like the glittering of a sword. Other some there are which are called Phitites,Tun starres. in forme and fa∣shion like a Tunne, hauing in the hollow part of them the shew of a smoaky and smothering flame, much like vnto the Blacke-Smiihs Forge, or vessels daubed and sméered with pitch, set on fire, which cast a darke and mistie light, and men haue sometimes vsed for the preseruing and fresh kéeping of their drinke. There are besides them that we haue reckoned Comets called Certarij,Horne starres. because they appeare to our sight in the similitude and likenes of a Horn: Such a one was séene, when the Grecians en∣camped at Salamina. Othersome also there are, which be called Lampades,Lampe stars. because they cast a shew of a burning torch, or flaming Lampe of which sort sundry haue béene, and that not very seldome. Furthermore, some there are which be called Hippci,Mawne stars. because they séeme to haue about them (as it were) a Horse Mawne, go∣ing round about them in circle wise, with strange mouing and swiftenesse. To bée short, some Blazing Starres are séene in the Ayre, glistering with strakes and streames like bright siluer, that it passeth the ability of mans eye to looke and behold them, where∣in
(as in a cleare glasse) God is represented, in the likenesse and shape of a man. And such a one (as some do hold opinion) was that which appeared to the Wisemen in the East,A Blazing star reprpsenting as it were in a glasse, the I∣mage of God. and conducted them to the place where Christ was borne: concerning the ap∣pearing whereof, thus sayde he to the Hierosolomite. Wee haue seene his starre in the East, and are come to doe him wor∣shippe. But touching this, we purpose (peraduenture) to say somwhat in the winding vp of this worke. We know not that besides these which we haue rehearsed, there be many more formes and figures of Comets or blazing starres, and many more sorts, of which particularly to discourse, is not our meaning or ontent, nor yet a matter of such weight and importance, that it should require present and perfect handling: we will therefore to that which is more necessary. In what part of Heauen blazing starres appeare most com∣monly. CHAP. III, THey that haue written things notable, and profitable of A∣strologie, and haue discoursed things concerning the influ∣ences and gouernments of Starres, in such sort and order, that the knowledge issuing from their trauels, offereth fruit not de∣seruing repentance:In what part of heauen Bla∣zing stars are seene. They (I say) haue affirmed, that Blazing Starres neuer appeare in the West part of Heauen: but either vnder the North, in some one part or other, but vncertaine: how∣beit, most commonly in that bright and cleare part, which is cal∣led the Milkie Circle: or else (which is seldome séene come to passe) they appeare in the South Pole, but yet without any blazce, in the seasons of Winter especially: yet it is recorded, that a Co∣me appeared to the Aethopians, and to the Aegyptians, and that the King of those people, gaue that Blazing Starre a name, cal∣ling it Typon, because it had in it a double resemblance, namely of a round ball, and of a fire, in so much, that according to the iudg∣ment of sense, it might not so aptly be called a Comet or Blazing Starre, as a fiery or flaming ball, or a round compassed and bur∣ning knot.
At what time of the yeare blazing starres appeare, and how long they continue. CHAP. IIII. ALthough Damascene (an Authour in my iudgement wor∣thy reuerence (is of opinion that a Blazing starre, is a star newly made and created for the time present, which vanisheth out of sight, and ceaseth to appeare, when the thing whereof it is a signification is accomplished, and come to passe: yet notwith∣standing, experience (whom writers name, the Mistresse of ma∣ny mysteries) informeth and teacheth vs, that a Blazing Starre may appeare at any season of the yeare: but more often in summer and then specially, when the starre called Canicula ariseth, and ruleth the weather and time of the yeare, according to the pro∣portion of the influence, and that they continue seuen dayes at the least, and not aboue fourescore at the most, the authoritie of Plinie, giuing countenance to this opinion. Howbeit, this assertion, together with the testimony of Plinie may be improued by examples: For (as it is vniuersally knowne) a Comet, which appeared before the ouerthrow of Hierusalem, was seene blazing in the Element, to the wonderfull astonish∣ment of the people, by the space of a whole yeare, as Eusebius and Iosephus verified. But we must note, that this Comet, and the appearance of the same, which was full of horror, is not to be ascribed vnto Na∣ture, but to be attributed immediatly vnto God,The opinion of the Pytha∣gorists touch∣ing Blazing starres. the Father and founder of Nature, although the sect of the Pythagorists thought, that all Blazing stars were to be referred vnto Nature who hath prouided that their appearing should be at certaine definite, and appointed times of the yeare. Touching these Blazing Stars also, of the same sect there was some, who supposed they were perpetuall stars, and not tempo∣rall, and that they had an ordinary course to run, as other starres haue their reuolution and circular motion, and that their appea∣ring procéeded from none other cause, then when they were, for∣saken and left of the Sun, whose brightnes and néerenesse is the occasion as they thinke, that Blazing stars do not appeare.
Whereof Blazing starres are engendered (according to the iudge∣ment of Diuines) and what they are indeede. CHAP. V. THe Religious Diuines, like very well of this plausible and true opinion, that Blazing starres come of no other cause, then from the holy Counsell and Prouidence of God; that there is no matter of their generation,Originall of Blazing stars. as Phylosophers imagine, but that God maketh them immediate messengers and Ministers of his will, according to the time and place, as it best pleaseth his hie and eternall Maiestie: (that by them) he might giue vs aduertise∣ments of afterclaps, to prepare our selues onward to méete his fatherly mercy, or to suffer the bitternes of his sharpe iudgement. Wherevpon they inferre this consequent, that Blazing Stars are supernaturall, and méere worlds wonder. To whose Sentence I agree, and most willingly assent, being thereto moued by arguments of forcible perswasion, and in num∣ber infinite. Principally, because it is a Christians duety, to as∣cribe more to Gods prouidence, then to the force of Nature, whō God hath not onely Created, but also doth dispose and gouerne. Some Blazing starres natural, othersome su∣pernaturall.Yet for all that, I may not vtterly deny, that they are natural, for so much as I am not (or at least ought not to be) ignorant, that Nature causeth blazing starres; howbeit so, that God is the Originall and principall worker of such wonders and that their ground and causes are naturall, and not so secret and doubtfull: but that otherwhile the capacity and reason of man may conceiue and compasse them. And yet contrarywise, I stand not in deny∣all, that those blazing starres are supernaturall, which the most mightie Monarch of the heauens, Creator of all creatures, and Maker of all Starres and Spirits, raiseth of nothing to some∣thing, vpon a sudden, in a moment and pricke of time, to the ad∣miration of all men, and to the reuealng of his Omnipotency. All things are possible to God.Expedient and necessary it is to beleeue, that with God all things are in ability, and that whatsoeuer is done eyther by day, or by night, naturally or supernaturally, it commeth to passe by his appointment, and that it pleaseth him otherwhiles to create something of something, and otherwiles againe, something of
nothing. To that which neuer had matter, can he giue fashion and figure, and beautifie that with forme and comelines, which neuer had Foundation nor beeing. It consisteth in his might to moysten the earth with showres distilling from the cleare skies, without the meanes of lowring and dropping cloudes. He can worke both wayes, to whom nothing is impossible: Now gathe∣ring the cloudes together in an heape, from the vttermost cor∣ners and coasts of the world, now turning againe lightning in∣to raine, which couering the heauens with cloudes, and prepa∣ring raine for the land: For, Great is the Lord, mighty is his power, and of his wisdome there is no number or end: And therefore I am easily drawne to belieue, that Blazing Starres may immediately appeare from God, and be supernatural, when it pleaseth God, vpon (some singular cause) to giue them begin∣ning, matter, and substance of nothing. Such a Blazing Starre (no doubt) was that Piller of the cloude,The piller of the cloud, and the plller of fire were Bla∣zing stars su∣pernaturall. The Blazing starre which appeared in Ierusalem, was supernaturall. whereby the Lord (in olde time) most miraculously went before the Israelites his people out of the Aegyptian Soile into the Land of Promise in the day time: and that Piller of fire, which neuer left the face of Gods chosen in the night. Not vnlike to this was that Blazing starre (as I suppose) which threatning destruction to Ierusalem, was of no lesse con∣tinuance then terrour, enduring the space of a whole yeare, which is not proper to naturall Blazing stars. To conclude, as well Diuines as Philosophers and Astrono∣mers affirme thus much in this case, that alwayes, in a maner, Blazing stars doe arise of cases naturall, albeit the Lord God is the prncipall author and worker of them, as in the Chapter following it is euident. Whereof Blazing starres do engender; according to the rules of Philosophers; and the Canons of Astronomers, and what they are in deed. CHAP. VI. COncerning Blazing starres I finde some disagreement be∣tweene Philosophers and Astronomers. Anaxagoras and
Democritus sayde, That a Blazing starre was nothing else but a certaine bright shining in the Element procured by the coniun∣ction of two starres: To which opinion, I my selfe of late did somewhat encline and leane. Othersome also there were, which supposed a Blazing starre to be but a certaine dimme and darke light compassed, and (as it were) closed vp in a cloud. Other some sayd, that it was a cloud purged, and purified from earthly matter and grossenesse, which receiuing light from the other Stars, casteth abroad clear strakes of brightnesse, smal and slender, like vnto hayre, or fine wrought flaxe, Othersome againe, thought a Blazing starre to be but a cer∣taine cloude,Aristotle his opinion of Blazing stars, and their ge∣neration. kindled and set on fire with a hote flaming clearnes whose opinion Aristotle séemeth to haue fauoured, who supposed that a Blazing starre did consist of a drye vapour, which béeing drawne vpward into the highest ayre, is there set on fire: and that this blazing starre taketh substance of earthly exhalations, very hote, dry, fat and clammy: which béeing carryed into the vp∣per region of the ayre, is there kindled and burneth: to whom all Philosophers (in a manner) of this our age haue subscribed, and some Astronomers also, who with Aristotle thinke no lesse, then a blazing star to be but an earthly vapour, somewhat thicke, fast and fat in substance, like oyle or birdlime which being drawne vpward, me to the Spheare of the fiery Element, and touching the hollownes of the Orbe or circle, is therby heat rarified, made thin and set in a flame: so that by the consent and mutuall agree∣ment of these two sects (although some doe vary) it is concluded that a Blazing star is engendred and made of Ayre, set on fire, by reason of the neerenesse of the Element of Fire, that Ayre con∣tayneth in the matter and stuffe of a blazing starre, and that the Ayre next adioyning, and being by the element of fire, is called a Blazing starre, and is no lesse indeed then it is named. Which representeth the colour of fire to our eyes, because the drie vapour in it is kindled, burneth, and lasteth with the light of the flame, which is moued to and fro, by the vnder ayre: where vapours of like nature, quality and substance arising, giue continuance and length thereunto, whereby it purchaseth the name, after which it is vsually called.
Vpon this agrée our late Phylosophers, in a manner all, coun∣ting the doctrine of Aristotle, worthy credite and subscription: al∣though as well the sect Stoicall vary therefro,The opinion of the Stoicks touching Bla∣zing starres. affirming Blazing starres to be but ordinarie Starres, not differing from other Starres which appeare in the Ayre, and to ee aboue thirty and two in number, not as also they, which hold this for a veritie, blazing Starres to be perpetuall Starres, and to kéepe a limited course or compasse, but neuer to blaze and glister in the Ayre: saue when they are left and forsaken of the Sunne, whose clearenesse dimmeth and dampeth vp their brightnesse, that it can neither ap∣peare nor be perceiued. And they in like sort, which leane to this opinion, that blazing starres, be Starres, hauing their certaine ap∣poynted times of appearance. Now, as I dissent not from the first, those I meane, whose o∣pinion draweth néerest to reason and trueth, so I varie not alto∣gether from them, who hold opinion that a blazing starre may bée supernaturall, and also naturall, and that the same taketh gene∣ration of a fat human, and of fiery force, whereby it is dissolued, and at the length consumeth. Whereupon this consequent is to be inferred, that we cannot call a Blazing Starre properly a Starre, but Catachrestically, as we may so terme them, I meane (vsing in our phrase of spéech) a certaine abuse: although Augustus Caesar (whereof we haue giuen a  in the beginning of this our Treatise) called that Bla∣zing Starre, which appeared at such a time as he published his Pageants of Triumph, by the name of a Star: and which vsur∣ped name also Suctonius applyeth to the self same thing: they both adding vnto it this word Crinitus, which we also, with no lesse abuse then they call Blazing. This Blazing Starre aforesayd, which appeared in the time of Augustus Caesar, and shined so gloriously, some imagine,An erronious opinion mis∣liked and im∣proueds and sup∣pose, to be the selfe same starre which directed the Wisemen to the place where Christ was borne. But I cannot allow of this opinion, and why I do so much mislike thereof, the reasons in the next Chapter following, do declare. In the meane season, I would not wade into wonders aboue my capacitie, lest I wan∣der in wildernesses of doubts, but I desire rather to be wise with sobernesse.
Whether the starre which conducted the Wisemen to the place where Christ was borne, were the Blazing starre, whereof the Emperour Augustus did speake, calling it by the name of a starre. CHAP. VII. CHristian duty admonisheth me, in few words to make men∣on, what maner of miraculous and strange Starre that was, which (after a rare and wonderfull fashion) lead the Wise∣men vnto Christ being in his infancie. Which same men (verie rashly, and with want of aduisement) coniecture to be the Bla∣zing starre, which appeared, and cast a great light at the same time, that Augustus Caesar made shew as of great pampe and so∣lemnitie, whose arising was in the North part of heauen, about the eleuenth houre of the day, and continued (as Plinie playnely testifieth) seuen dayes space full and complete. Of which thing, although Picus Mirandula hath not godly and grauely discoursed: yet thinke I, that it is my duety, compen∣diously to reason, what in this point may be mainteined, without hurt or preiudice. And so much the rather, because I would not seeme in this matter, to fauour the Astrologians, for so much as they swarne as farre from trueth, as the world is made, and the heauen is high. Concerning the Starre, I mean that which appeared at Christ his natiuity, the Euangelist, whose euidence is yed with the touchstone of trueth, writeth in this wise.  garten Astera auton en e anatole.For we haue seene his starre in the East. Among all which word of this clause, penned, by the finger of the Euangelist, the Latine interpreter turneth this word con Astera, Scotland  (no doubt) and  The Euangelist yet againe saith thus And behold, the starre which they saw in the East, went before them, vntill by approch∣ing, it stood ouer the place, where the  was.
By these testimonies, it is apparant and manifest, that neither After, nor Aion, doe signifie Blazing starre. Whereby the errours of Phlenon and Harpocrates, are conuinced,They appea∣red in contre∣ry regions & at sundry times of great dis∣tance: ergo they were dif∣ferent starres. who also déemed that the Starre which shewed and shined in the East, and was the Wilemens direction to Iudaea, was the selfsame Blazing Starre, which in the time of Augustus Caesar (as is aforesayde,) so gloriously glistered: when it is as euident (as the Sunneshine at nooneday) how that Blazing-Starre appeared many yeares be∣fore the Natiuitie of Christ, and arose in the North part of hea∣uen: whereas the Starre (which was the wisemens guide into Bethlehem (appeared in the East. Furthermore, what man would so seene be allured to belieue that a Blazing Starre would be thought of the Wise men, a thing of such certaine and infallible Prognostication, that the arising and procéeding thereof, should embolden them to commence such tedious iourneyes, and to attempt so many weary labors: wher∣in they might bee of this opinion and iudgement as well, that the Blazing starre gaue foreknowledge of something else, besides the Natiuitie and byrth of the King of the Iewes. Wherefore it is more credible, that those Wise men followed the Starre which then appeared, eyther vppon perswasion of the booke which Seth compiled: or else by the motion of Balaams pro∣phecie: for that they were of the Kindred and affinitie of him, as some hold opinion: Or else by the ministery of Angels, or by Hea∣uenly inspiration, or else by admonition & warning giuen in , which might (why not?) giue them vnderstanding as wel of this, as it gaue them knowledge (afterwards) to auoyd the presence of Hreod, and to returne another way into their countrey, and not the same by which they came. No man is able sufficiently to declare the enenicus opinion of Iulianus, that irreligious reuolter,Iulianus the Apostata his opinion, as re∣pugnant to reason & veri∣tie refuted. who affirmeth this Starre (which hée calleth by the name of Asaph, according to the opi∣nion of the Aegyptians) of custome and went, to appeare euery foure hundreth yeares, and that it betokeneth many things both maruellous and mortall. But tell me (if thou canst) thou false Prophet and per∣uerse Apostata, if thou wilt haue thine opinion, carry away,
countenance of credite: How commeth it to passe, that those Wisemen neuer attained to the vnderstanding of that Starre, and the determinate arising of the same,A question to good purpose. at a definite and appoin∣ted time, but that they then came to the intelligence therof, when it was within the contemplation and view of their eyes? How commeth it to passe that the appearance thereof was so far from horror and mortalitie, and that it gaue presignification of ioy, that to them was borne the King of the Iewes? And if it be ef∣fectuall to worke wonders, and to compasse strange and prodigi∣ous euents, why then did it not euery foure hundred yeares (by succession, season and degrees of times) prognosticate some sem∣blable thing, like vnto that which was cōmunicated to the know¦ledge of the Wisemen? why did it not, after a thousand, fiue hun∣dred and thirty yeares, or within the compasse and reuolution of that time, bring forth a new King to the world, or som other rare and wonderfull effect, to kindle in the hearts of men, manifest admiration? or else if it suffered an Eclipse or depriuation of that singular qualitie, and so become drye, barren, and vnfruitfull: why did it not appeare still, though weakened in working, but lest vtterly and for euer appearance in the Heauens. Thou swauest therefore, and wandrest farre and wide from the sincere truth, and giuest a witnesse of thy pertinacy to all people, and of thy soule impiety towards God, in that thine owne opinion, which is meere erronious, seemeth vnto thée pas∣sing plausible: thou (in the meane season) derogating from chri∣stian Religions due reuerence, and strugling with tooth & nayle to make it contemptible. But all in vaine, thou wrestles with the waues, which in the end will ouerwhelme thee in thy wil∣fulnesse. For, the truth giueth in a contrary verdict against thee, with the which whosoeuer haue armed themselues to encounter successe hath not beene prosperous, because they attempted com∣bat with a mightier then themselues, and béeing ouermatched, were carried into captiuity,The Authors iudgement in the winding vp of the con∣trouersie. and cast into confusion. This Starre therefore which the Wisemen saw, was no Comet or Blazing-Star, as diuers haue dreamed, but som new star which of purpose was appointed to expresse the prouidence of God, as in the gos∣pell it is apparant: not being of the number & host of them, wher∣with God garnished the firmamēt in the creation: but differing
all Starres both Fixed, Wandering and Blazing, which to bee this testimonie affoordeth authoritie; For that there bee some which are of this iudgement, and holds it for a veritie: That in this stare (as in a glasse) was included the likenes of a Childe: vn∣to which Opinion they might (peraduenture) be induced, by the words of the Wise-men saying: Beholde, wee haue seene his starre in the East. It could not choose then, but be a newe Starre, and a Starre importing a myracle: For so much as neyther the selfe same, nor any like vnto it, euer appeared in the former ages, nor at any time shined in the skies for the space of a thousand fiue hundred and thirty years, after the Natiuity of our comfortable Sauior, Be∣ing I say, a starre by the grace of God created, for the execution of his message, whose pleasure being accomplished it consumed, vanished, and was no longer obiect to the eye-fight of men being causall and temporall, not naturall and continuall. But of this Discourse sufficient is sayde, as well for the im∣prouing of vnsauoury opinions, as also for the discouering of the infallible truth requirable in this present purpose. Now will I make a retrogradation, and returne to mine arguments, concer∣ning Comets or Blazing stars, hauing thought my pen not vn∣fruitfully occupyed in this last particular. Whether Blazing starres proport and foreshew some strange & wonderfull thing to follow. CHAP. VIII. IT is called in controuersie, whether Cometes commonly ter∣med Blazing-starres proport any prodigious thing and worlds wonder. Some in this behalfe seeme to bee resolued,Blazing stars are signes of some strange thing to come and make their answere in this sort: That as Blazing starres are rare & seldome. so they signifie some thing that is rare and very strange, vnto which opinion they cleaue, being thereunto drawn partly by dayly experience, and partly also lead by the causes from the which they set their originall. And to say the plaine truth, when haue Blazing stars cast their glimmering beames, and lightned the ayre with their gli∣stering brightnesse: but something hath followed, contrary to
common course, and farre otherwise then by vsuall and accusto∣med order is receyued? Why then should not Blazing stars as they are rare, so inferre and draw with them rare effects? And why should we otherwise thinke, then that by their generation also, some strange thing is signified: séeing that other Starres shining in the firmament, are thought not onely to haue béene created for the seruice of men: but also for the distinguishing of times and seasons, of dayes, monethes and yeares, and for o∣ther ends also, which are priuy onely to Gods secret counsell? spe∣cially for that our Lord Iesus, iudged not the superstitious Pha∣rises (notwithstanding his sore denuntiations of woes against them) altogether deseruing reprehension: nor vtterly blamed the Sadduces for their diligent obseruation of the Weather,The Pharisies & Saduces not altogether con¦demned for their due and precise obser∣uation of the weather. & marking the face of the Firmament giuing iudgement: that if the coulles of Heauen were such and such, then semblable to bee the succes of the seasons, As, if it were couered with red clouds in the euening, that then men should be in expectation of the next dayes bright clearenes. Which ceremony of theirs purchased in processe of time such credite and beleefe, that it grew into a com∣mon and familiar Prouerbe: What man can say of certainety. The Euening this doth signifie. CHAP. IX. The good and euill which Blazing stars doe prognosticate, and betoken. AS it is receyued for an vndoubted truth, that Comets carry with them a Prognostication of some strange wonder: so on the other side, it hath beene precisely noted, and by due obser∣uation confirmed, that they threaten some eminent euill & mis∣chiefe: for which consideration a Blazing starre was called, a signe of Heauen, A Token of great feare, by which name ex∣cellent men, Authors (I meane) or Writers of singular lear∣ning and iudgement haue tearmed it. Not that the Blazing star is to be feared, as if it could doe harme vnto man, but because the omnipotent God, and guide of the heauenly hoast, by the same (as by a burning beacō) giueth vs warnings & watchwords
of afterclaps and punishments: and to assure vs, that he it is, and none besides him, that is vniuersally to be feared, not with a ser∣uile, but with a filiall feare. Considering, that he hath peremp∣tory power ouer the whole man, body and soule, vpon which parts he consisteth: and is of ability to iudge vs to temporall chasticement for our amendment, or else to condemne vs to eter∣nall destruction, as instruments of reprobation. But to returns to the Prognostrations of Comets or Blazing Stars, it is found by authority, that in the time of Charles the Emperour, surnamed, the Great, a Blazing Starre appeared, in the contemplation whereof, the Emperour hauing his eyes earnestly bent, and considering profoundly thereupon, at length he was rapt into a great astonishment, touching the signi∣fication of the same. And sending for a Phylosopher, named Eginard; conferred and reasoned to and for with him about this Starre, saying in conclusion, that the appearing thereof did threaten vnto him some miserable calamity. Which the Phy∣losopher hearing, to the entent that the Emperour should not be more amazed then néede required, hee rehearsed the saying of the Prophet in these words: A Signis coelum nolate metuere, Feare yee not the signes of Heauen, and let not the visions of the firma∣ment strike terrors into your hearts. Which sentence the Empe∣rour not mistiking, gaue him thanks for that comfortable coun∣sell, saying: That he remembred the duety of a Christian man to bée this namely, to stand in feare of nothing, but onely of him, who both created vs, and also this Starre. Which notable spéech of so famous an Emperour, giueth a sensible instruction, why a Blazing starre may be called a token of terrour or a signe of hor∣rible feare. Plinie also (many yeers past) affirmed, a Comet to bee a terrible Starre, and so inclined to destruction, that it deserued to be called mortall: as in the ciuill commotion, which was in the time of Octauius his Consulship,A blazing star threatneth destruction. and also in the warres be∣tweene Pompeius and Caesar, many probabilities are to bée ga∣thered, or rather, many verities to bee auouched. To the words of which, Plinie, Virgill (the Prince of all Poets and Plinies Prede∣cessor) alludeth in this wise: More flashing flames of lightnings cleare. From cloudes shine not below:
Nor Blazing stars, whose burning beames, Some fatall fall doth shew, &c. And the same Poet in another place, inserteth these wordes. Strange starres did shine from skies in darkesome night, And flakes of fire did fill the Ayre with light: A Blazing starre with siluered strakes did shine, And made mens hearts for feare away to pine. Whom the Poet Lucane imitating, and setting before him, as a president, for the obseruation of order, vseth these tearms and Phrases of spéech in his Poems. Not Blazing starre with glimmering strakes of light, And lengthned haires of colour red and white, Which brings to men (as many make report) Destruction dire in lamentable sort. Whereby it is to be gathered, that those kinde of Writers were not ignorant, that a Comet or Blazing Starre, did most commonly presignifie and foreshew some imminent mischiefe, which in tract of time came to passe, and thereupon grew in vse to be called, A terrible or fearefull starre. The mischiefes which Blazing starres forewarne to ensue. CHAP. X. FOrsomuch as it is declared already, that Blazing Starres al∣wayes signifie nothing else, then the approaching of some pernitious and mischieuous thing, likely after to ensue: it re∣mayneth, that this question be demaunded. What manner of euils they be, where Blazing Starres are premonstrations, and foretokens? Whereunto I make this answere: That as Blazing Starres are diuers, so are their effect and euils which they signifie not all one, but sundry and differing. And forso∣much as the variety or diuersitie of them is to bée considered: ther∣fore it is necessary, that the effects which follow such causes, bée
accordingly coniectured. Some holde opinion, that it is to be marked, which way Blazing starres shoote their light,The obser∣uation vsed of some at the ap∣pearing of Blazing stars. because (say they) that part of the earth seemeth to bee threatned, towardes which the Comet casteth his beames thickest and most directly. Againe, it is to be noted, from what starre they receyue theyr force, and whence pro∣céedeth their influence, what things they resemble, and represent in likenes, and in what places they appeare. Furthermore, to touch the effects of Blazing starres, experi∣ences manifold and innumerable haue sealed this for a trueth,The effects which haue followed Bla∣zing stars proued true by experience. that sometimes they signifie barrennesse of the earth, sometimes the sicknesse of the plague and pestilence, somtimes dearth, and scarsitie of victuals, sometimes great windes and tempests, some∣times extreame heate, sometimes Earthquakes, sometimes the flowing of waters beyond their bounds and banks, to the drow∣ning and losse of the land, sometimes seditions, insurrections, cruell commotions, tumults and battels, sometimes chaunge of Kings and Kingdoms, alterations of common wealthes, and such slaughters as seldome are séene: with many more cala∣mities infinite and innumerable: insomuch that Lucane the Poet thought it no matter of doubt, but of assured certainety, to call a Blazing starre, such a Starre as changed the state of Em∣pires, and wrought the alteration of principalities. His ver∣ses follow in this order. Strange Starres were seene in darkesome nights, The Heauen was on a flame: And flakes of fire like burning brands, Sore sights in skies did frame. The fearefull Starre which blazeth bright, And spreades his beames abroad, And changeth Kingdomes in the World, In th'ayre aboue abode.
Sundry examples and testimonies, declaring the diuers and ma∣nifold mischiefes, which haue followed the appearing of Blazing starres. CHAP. XI, LEast any man should thinke this méere fabulous, and a ve∣ry forgery, because I haue sayde thus much, and that vyon the opinion and authority of other Writers, that diuers Bla∣zing stars presignifie and giue a forewarning of diuers mischiefs and euils like to come, it seemeth vnto me an enterprise worth my labour, to set downe in a few words, and the selfe same agréeing with the true reports of Histories, the assertion aboue mentio∣ned not to be imaginacions or faigned. Wherein it shall not séeme a matter depending vpon necessity, to runne through all particular examples, and to make an vniuersall repetition of te∣stimonies from the Worlds Creation, (which passeth the capa∣city of my wit to comprehend, because they excéede in multitude) But it shall rather be sufficient, and much more profitable, out of many to gather a fewe, and such indeede, as Authors (most worthy of credite) haue set downe in their Works and Trea∣tizes. And first of all to beginne with the noblest Writers, and best approued:A short enu∣meration or rehearsall of mischiefes which followed vpon the ap∣pearing of Bla∣zing starres. Who is ignorant, that after the appearance of a Comet in the time of Iulius Caesar, not onely ciuill warres fol∣lowed, in manner most lamentable, but also the death and mur∣thering of Iulius Caesar his owne person, which was most mise∣rable? who being 56. yeares of age, was assalted, and set vpon in a conspiracie. of 60. Princes and more, among whome were C. Cassius, Marcus, and D. Brutus, and being gored through and flasht with 23. wounds, in the Court of Pompeius despitefully perished, whereof P. Virgilius, Lucanus Plinie, Suetonius, Ap∣pianus, Plutarchus, and diuers other Writers of great authority are witnesses. What should I linger long in the repetition of those strange tempests, of snowes, haples, inundations of waters, and other like calamities, that followed the appearing of the same Bla∣zing
Starre: Which F. Horatius doth not nakedly describe, but singularly set downe with a kinde complaynt. Who knoweth not, what an vnspeakeable desolation, and wonderful ouerthrow of Hierusalems City, followed after the ap∣pearing of a certaine Blazing Star, which was séene in the ayre, (Iosephus and Eusebius faithfully affirming no lesse) by the space of a whole yeare, burning with flames of lamentable destruc∣tion? The selfe same miserable massacre and desolation followed shortly after this Blazing Starre, which the Lord himselfe, the Father of all mercy, and Iudge of all reuengement, did not one∣ly foretell many yeares, ere it came to passe: but also wept for very sorrow of heart, as he was prophesying to Ierusalem, her sharpe Visitation. For our Sauiour Christ (as the Euangelists testifie) beholding the City, wept ouer her, and sounded as it were, in her eares this sorrowfall sentence: If thou haddest known (saith he) in that thy day, those things which belonged to thy peace, and now are hidden from thine eyes, &c. Did not the death of that most godly and religious Emperour Constantine, follow and issue the appearing of a Blazing Starre,A Blazing starre appea∣red before the Emperour Constantine. which was séene Ann. Dom. 304. being of an vnaccustomed big∣nes, & of no lesse horror to behold? And did not therupon likewise follow an excéeding dangerous insurrection in the Empire, wher∣in (among many murthers) the Emperor Constantius was spoy∣led of his life in the Castle of Helena. not farre from Spaine. In the yeare 444. a Blazing starre was séene, which as it gaue prefigurations & foretokens of afterclaps, so did there ensue most miserable slauters & calamityes, specially in France, and not long after Collen (being assalted & besieged of the Hunnes) was ransackt, spoiled, and made euen in a maner with the ground: and the most Catholicke Emperour Martian, was in a conspiracy of his own subiects (contrary to the religious oath of alleagiaunce) murthered and made away at Constantinople. After the appearing of a Starre, in the yeare of our Lord, 584 there followed such an inundation of waters, in euery place of the land, that it was auerred and beléeued, a second deluge or v∣niuersall floud, to haue béene prepared for the drowning of the whole World. After that ensued in Italie, so hote a pesti∣lence,
that within the compasse of a little time, many thousands dyed in manner most lamentable. Not long after that, Rome tasted of the whippe:A maruellous inundation of waters, with o∣ther notable calamities for warned by a Blazing starre. for the Lombards laying siege against it, made hauocke thereof out of measure. Vpon the tayle of which sharpe punishment, there followed a worse: for the Sarazens rose vp with sterne lookes and bending browes, compelling the third part (almost) of the World which professed Christianity, to fall to Apostasie, and to take part with them in their damnable sect of diuelish Idolatry, and detestable vngodlinesse. In the yeare of our Lord eight hundred and thirtéene, there was a Blazing star séene most strange and terrible, whereupon insued the death of that most Christian Emperour Carolus Magnus.A Blazing star appeared before the death of Caro∣lus Magnus. The Sarazens assaulted Italy, and with violence of sword and warlike Engines, ouercame and preuayled: not without the ruine of many a beautifull building, and shedding of much bloud. In the yeare of our Lord, 184. there appeared a Blazing starre, which did portend a manifest shew of much mischiefe and misery:Bloudy bat∣tels which fel∣lowed after the appearing of a Blazing flame. for in the yeare of our Lord, 1302. next ensuing, that memorable and bloudy battell of Flanders was fought, which to the Frenchmen principally ministred occasion of many a lamen∣table Alas: for in that battell, the floure of the French Armie, I meane the chiefest in place and countenance, and the gemme of all their glory, went to wracke, suffering death no lesse igno∣miniously then tyrannically. And after that, Rodulph the Em∣perour, making siege against Verona, sustained great losse of his best appointed Souldiers, the Switzers, whose bloud embrued the blades of their enemies, their bodyes lying vpon the ground groueling and senselesse: and the Emperour himselfe fighting against Albert D. of Austria, was flain, only Emperour elected but not crowned. Now, what manifolde miseries and mis∣chiefes,A Blazing star shooting vpwards, what afterwards ensued. a Blazing starre which shooteth vpward, the head hang∣ing downeward, doth betoken, may soone be perceyued, & known by the experience of a Blazing starre, which appeared in the West, and tooke his course towards the North, which Starre was séene in the yeare of our Lord, 1363. The woes whereof this Starre gaue foreknowledge, fell vpon the Frenchmen, to their no smallsmart, and lamentable vnlukinesse.
For in a foughten field against the Turkes, howbeit, out of the compasse of the French dominion, they were discomfited and o∣uerthrowne, a hundred thousand of them slaine with the sword, among which number was the Duke of Burgundy, who with the rest, lost his life without recouery. Not long after which infortunate conflict, namely, in the yeare of our Lord, 1406. Lodouicke Duke of Clarence, and brother to the French King, was murthered at Paris most trayterously, and frandulently: the losse of whose life was death and destruction to a great number. And (that I may grow to an end) who doth not remember, what grieuous calamities did follow the appearing of a Bla∣zing starre, in the yeare of our Lord, a thousand foure hundred threescore and twelue, in the Moneth of Ianuary, ouer Colen Eastward, to the terrour of the Beholders, and astonishment of the bearers? There followed hereupon, in the Summer next, and immediately ensuing, a maruellous heate, engendred euery where in the earth, which was of such strength and vehe∣mencie, that in some places, the first burst out, and cast vp with it, euen the very sand and grauell. Hereupon followed, not here and there, but euery where battels and murthers, mortall maladies, loathsome sicknesses, most noysome and infectious: yea, so horrible, that I want witte, eyther in writing to leaue them witnessed or by vtterance to make them manifest. At which time also, the right renowmed Charles Duke of Burgun∣die, passed many warrelike aduentures, and atchieued many a Martiall exployte, to his no small commendation, and encrease of deserued prayse, notwithstanding the successe of battel is doubt∣full and dangerous. In the yeare of our Lord, 1408.Further mis∣chiefes which haue followed after Blazing starres. there appeared a Blazing starre, which as in fight it was wonderfull and terrible, so it betokened mischiefe no lesse innumerable, then either to heare, sée, or recount is most lamentable: For not many dayes after, Luycke fell, and certayne men to the number of 40. were cru∣elly flaine. About that time also, (the Prussians entring battell against the King of Poland, were foyled, & a slaughter, the like not heard of) made of them in the conflict. At the same time also, was the Councel at Pisa dissolued by a schisme most dānable, the
their conuocation and méeting, being for the making and confir∣ming of vnitie. Thereabout also began the Church to be yll appayde, and so stand in hazard of hauocke: whose present assistent Sigismund the King of Hungarie shewed himselfe to be, in such sort with va∣liancie of spirit, that he might meritoriously halenge to be sirna∣med, The most Christian King. Thus farre touching the e∣uils, yea the heapes of euils which blazing starres haue protended obserued by experience and tryall to be true, by the euent & falling out of many misfortunes,The conclusi∣on of this Chapter. which both long agoe, and also of late haue happened. It remaineth that we know, whether they bée not foretokens also of some good, which although many vtterly deny, yet neuerthelesse reade our further iudgement. Whether Blazing Starres, doe not as well betoken good, as ill. CHAP. XII. HAuing before declared, by reasons not a few, and proued also by examples of veritie and trueth, that blazing starres (for most part) are prefignificant shewes and tokens of some mischiefe and euill:Blazing stars supernaturall signes sent from God. me thinkes I heare one asking me this que∣stion. Whether Blazing starres are not tokens of good, as they are signes of euill? To whom I make this resolution. First, so farre foorth as blazing starres be supernaturall, there seemeth in this matter to rest no doubt: because Almighty God, in the vn∣searchable profunditie of his wisedome, is wont by the appearing of Stars, to giue signes to his beloued seruants (whom no doubt he hath fore elected to saluation) as wel of ioyful newes as also of heauy tidings. The Rainbow a perpetuall assurance of Gods faithfull promise.For, hath he not by the rising of the Rainebow. in the clouds of heauen, sealed security and want of feare to the world, from being drownd, as somtimes it was in the dayes of our great Ancients? Did he not by the retrocession and backeward going of the Sun (contrary to the order of his course) signifie vnto Ezechias, that his life shold be prolonged, and the number of his dayes were augmented? Did he not also signifie vnto all nations, that the
light was come into the World, which should shine in darknesse, namely, Iesus Christ to bee borne for the saluation of all people: which thing hée would haue testified by the appearing of a new Orientall Starre, visible to the eyes of the Wisemen, and glory∣ously glistering? Euen so doubtlesse, there is no cause, why the fight of a Blazing Starre should not bréede in vs,Blazing stars naturall may betoken some good. as well hope of some good, as feare of some ill, according to the place and time, where & when it appeareth, since it is sayde, Feare not the signes of heauen which the Gentiles feare; because the lawes of the peo∣ple are vaine. Why then should we stand in feare of those things, which haue not in them power, eyther to do good or harm? Again so far forth as Blasing Stars are naturall, it is not to be doubted, but that the appearing of them may portend, and foreshew some good: which is no hard or intricate matter to declare, as well by reason, as also by example. For insomuch as blazing-Starres are made of fiue Planets, as Abienus affirmeth, namely, of Venus, Iupiter, Mars, Saturne, & Mercurie: and that those blazing starres which are made of Ve∣nus and Iupiter, are principally the best and luckyest, it cannot o∣therwise be, but that blazing stars, those specially which haue their influence from Venus and Iupiter, should sometimes beto∣ken good, and not euermore euill. An example of good credit may that Blazing star be, which when it appeared, was iudged so happy and fortunate to the Emperour Caesar Augustus, that then it was begun to be worshipped in the Temple of Rome, and no where also throughout the whole world: because the Emperour beginning those shewes & Pageants triumphant: was by the ap∣pearing of that star seuen dayes continuance in the Region of heauen, put in hope and expectation afore hand, of excéeding great felicity and happinesse to ensue: which vndoubtedly hée obtained in such sort and manner, that none in regiment was counted happier then happy Augustus, as none was named better then the good Traianus. Moreouer, vpon the appearing of that star, there bredde in the minds of the Commonalty an opinion of great reuerence, to wit that by the blazing star was signified, the soule of Caesar. to bee receyued to immortality, and to enioy among the Gods aboun∣dance of blessednes: then which signification, they beléeued no∣thing
more ioyfull or comfortable. So that we sée both by reason and example, that their coniecture and opinion doth not alwayes deserue beléefe, which say: that blazing Starres neuer appeare, but thereafter followeth some mischiefe and ill. Touching which mat∣ter, more might be sayd to the increase of comfort, and the driuing away of despayre from the hearts of the people, then we are di∣sposed at this time to call to memory. To what Countries, and to what persons blazing starres doe principally betoken ill. CHAP. XIII. THe question is asked, To what Countries, and to what peo∣ple specially, blazing starres threaten mischiefe. Vnto which demand doubtlesse, I might think no certain answer can be made: because all blazing starres are not alike, neyther haue their gene∣ration from one and the selfe same cause: but some of them are na∣turall, other supernaturall, and procéeding from God in the height of the heauens. Againe, they are without difference, so doubtfull in their signi∣fications, that Lucanus supposeth their influence to be so general, that the beholders of them, eyther on Sea or Land, cannot assure themselues of safety: and therefore they are vniversally to bée feared.Blazing stars are vniuersally to bee feared both on sea and land. Vnto whose opinion I willingly assent, when blazing starres (supernaturall, and procéeding from God) do appeare. For this is of a certainty, that it is Gods wil, by them to betoken and threa∣ten some yll, to all persons in generall, which hauing offended and done wickedly against the prescript of his holy Law; withdraw not themselues from that puddie of pollution and filthines, wher∣in they wallow: but continue a life laden and ouercharged with al manner of mischiefe: whom he of his singular compassion and clemencie, would reuoke from their sinfulnesse, by the vision and sight of blazing starres, as it were by horrible threatnings and re∣vokements, that by reforming their abominable liues, they might frame their conuersation acceptable in his sight, according to his vnspeakeable bountifulnesse, long suffering, and patience, who still looketh for repentance before he taketh vengeance. As may manifestly be gathered, by his dealing with the Hierosolimites,
whom he admonisheth of their wickednesse, by a most horrible Blazing Starre, of a whole yeares appearing, dayly looking when they would be warued, and well appoynted with pretence, to preuent Gods sharpe punishment. But touching naturall Blasing Stars, Phylosophers and Astro∣nomers haue otherwise iudged, howbeit,Blazing starres nataurall ap∣peare at Gods appointment. neither they shall at any time arpeare without the singular sufferance of God, or some no∣table cause worthy remembrance. For my selfe, thus I say, that as I am not of beléefe, that they betoken and proue in working as the Astrologians dreame: So I do not vtterly condemne such as hold it much materiall, & greatly to be regarded: toward what part of the world they shoot and cast their beams, from what stars they draw their influencies and force: in what similitude and like∣nesse they appeare, what colour they carry, at what season of the yeare they show, in what place, vnder what ecclestiall signes, and vnder what Planets aspect. For some there are, which hold this opinion (though grounded vpon no kind of reason) that a blazing starre, bearing the likenesse of a Lute, Harpe, or semblable instru∣ment, betokeneth somewhat to Musicks and Minstrelsie, and to the followers of such vanities. So likewise when they carry this representation or that, to haue in their likenesses semblant signi∣fications. Againe, other are of this iudgement, that such Blazing-Starres as appeare vnder Saturne, are of a leaden colour:The colour of Blazing starrs appearing vn∣der Planets. vnder Iupiter white: vnder Mars, red: vnder Sol, Golden: vnder Mercurie, light azur: whereupon it is thought no hard matter, to tell what they signifie in nature generally. Howbeit, to persons placed in digni∣ty, as to Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Emperors, Kigns, Lukes and such like as are of place and countenance in the Common-wealth, they foreshew some euill: wherein as I hold it reuerence to be silent: so were it ouermuch boldnes and presumption to be medling. What therefore may be sayd in this point, let Astrono∣mers shew their cunning. How and what way Blazing starres are forewarning of som∣what to come, and of force so to doe. CHAP. XIV. ALthough it may séeme diuersely and many wayes probable, that blazing-Starres foreshew somewhat to insue: yet not
withstanding it is not necessary, that we should beléeue (as the Astrologians rashly hold opinion) that they can be signes or to∣kens of that thing, whereof they are no cause. For a blazing star cannot be eyther the cause, or the effect of warre or death: albeit, it prognosticate and foreshew (as a signe from a naturall cause) both the one and the other. It may be (I will not deny) the cause after a sort: as if that which is the cause of warre and pestilence, we suppose also to bée the cause of the blazing starre. Blazing stars are after a sort the cause of warre, pesti∣lence. &c.As when aboundance of vapours are drawne vp into the aire, which being kindled and set on fire, there followeth and ensueth the generation of a blazing starre, and infection of the aire, which breedeth plague and pestilence, mouing mens minds to muti∣nies, through the increase and plenty of choller stirred vp in them: whereby they runne with maine force to harnesse and weapon, and so to battel and bloudshed, not féeling in them any rule of rea∣son, restrayning them in this their rashnes. Hereupon (as it is not vnlike) spring commotions in kingdomes, and mutations of Commonwealths, then destructions: for, A realme diuided within it self, being vnable long to last, must needs come to losse. Blazing stars foretokens of barrennesse.Furthermore, seeing that the generation of a naturall Blazing Starre, importeth that in some place hath béene great heate and drought, (for otherwise such store of matter as is required to∣wards the ingendring thereof, could not be drawne vp:) it is wont to come to passe, that blazing starres doe commonly threa∣ten barrennesse to Sandie, and not to Fenny Countries. Now, because it is likewise knowne, that by force of Starres, many enuenomed and infectious vapours ascend,Blazing stars foretokens of pestilence and mortalitie. it séemeth cre∣dible that a blazing starre is a forewarning of a following pesti∣lence, ingendred through the ayre, béeing choked and poysoned by vapours of such quality. By which means in like maner, drought setteth mens hearts on fire, and driueth them forward to fall at strife, bralling, battell, and bloodshed: it troubleth the brain, estran∣geth the seases, and thus ariseth seditions. To conclude with the purpose, it is not greatly necessary in this declaration, to vse lon∣ger delay, since I am of this beléefe, that God (of the aboundance of his loue towards vs, which is vnmeasurable) by nature, as a meane or méete instrument, causeth such and such blazing starres
to appeare: to the intent, that he might by them (as by premonish∣ments and fore warnings) put vs in mend to remember, that it is time to start from sinne, and to prepare our hearts with repen∣tance, for preuenting of those sharp and smarting whips of Gods vengeance, which by such Blazing Starres, at Gods commande∣ment, are threatned. For he neuer or very seldome, since the crea∣on of the world plagued any people: but he sent among them some signe thereof, for their preparation to penitence, as in holy Scrip∣tures it is at large declared. Why Blazing Starres do specially betoken ill to Peeres, Po∣tentates, Rulers of Realmes and Commonwealthes, &c. CHAP. XV. IT is the opinion of some, though erronious, that blazing stars do specially betoken ill to Princes and great men, and to their Kingdomes also and Realmes threaten some mischiefe: in such wise, that it hath béene obserued and marked, that no blazing star almost hath appeared, but either death, or else some ill hath hap∣ned after, to some noble personage in the land; as by our former examples it is left verified: which made Lucan the Poet to write of them, in this wise: A Blazing Starre in sight most strange, The state of kingdomes, which doth change. But it is here demanded, what the cause should be, that Bla∣zing Starres do specially betoken ill to Emperours, Kings, and such like noble personages? I answer, that there is none other cause, as they suppose,Why Blazing stars betoken ill to Peeres and Poten∣tates: &c. so farre forth as Blazing Starres be na∣turall, then because such great estates and Péeres of Realmes, li∣uing more delicately and vntemperately then other: are sooner subiect and surprised with corrupt and empoysoned ayre: and so they carrying close within them, and secretly nourishing the cause of ill in themselues, being vnpatient and not able to indure the working of medicinable receipts, quickely perish and mis∣carrie.
But so farre forth as Blazing-Starres are supernaturall, and as they haue their procéeding and béeing from the omnipotent God, it is thought this to be the cause: namely, that God is pre∣paring a plague against them, that the blacke tents of his indig∣nation are pitching, that the weapons of his vengeance are whet∣ted against them, whereof he giueth forewarnings, like a most mercifull Father: to the end they might vnderstand, that the cause of this Gods iust dealing, (being sinne and wickednes,) is either in Princes themselues, or else in the people vnder their vngratious gouernment: in consideration whereof, as well prince as people might sée the horrour and abhomination of their owne sinfull liues, and flye to repentance, whereunto God so fatherly would win them by forewarnings.The wicked∣nesse of the people is im∣puted to the prince. That according to the exam∣ple of that holy King, they may lift vp both hearts and hands to heauen, saying: Enough now Lord, stay thy hand, It is I that haue offended: it is I that haue done wickedly: as for these innocent sheepe, what harme haue they done? Furthermore, to whom doth a Blazing Star betoken somewhat to follow, if not to the King? For in that it signifieth somewhat to the Realme, it must extend euen to the person of the King, who hath the rule and gouernment of that Realme: because he is a King by his Kingdome, and be∣cause the wickednes of the kingdome, is reputed the wickednesse of the King, who either by his ensample giueth occasion of wick∣ednesse:A heauy rec∣koning for such as are in authoritie and office. or else hauing power and authority to suppresse sinne in the people, neglecteth notwithstanding the due execution and ad∣ministration of iustice: so that the saying of the Apostle is most certaine and vndoubted: that, All those whom God hath placed in authority, giuen preheminence vnto, are tyed to the necessity of this heauy reckning, not only to stand accountable to almighty God for their owne, but also for the soules of all such ouer whom they haue charge. And therefore right aptly spake that most wise and worthy King Dauid to all Kings, (and vnder their title, to all such as excell other in office & dignitie:) And now ye kings (saith he) vnderstand, be ye learned which iudge the earth, serue the Lord with feare, &c. And thus farre touching this matter, which though it be but bluntly and and shortly deliuered, yet is it to be marked.
Of a certaine Blazing starre which appeared in the yeare, 1531. the 19. of Sept. at Mentz, a City in Germany, and was sensi∣bly seeene likewise in other places. CHAP. XVI. A Question is asked, what that Blazing starre which was seene in the yeare 1531. might signifie, and to whom it is a foretoken of some euill to ensue. In answering whereunto, I would to God, I might not tell the truth so directly, as I did of an Earthquake 3, years past, the effects whereof, the City of Mentz, not without trembling tasted. The Blazing starre which appeared, 1531. betokens a heauie burthen of vengeance, not onely to the state temporall, but also ecclesiasticall: yea it threat∣neth a plague to the whole world. The fashion and likenes ther∣of signifieth no lesse, for it was to sée to, in forme of a broome, or a bundell of rods: which figure of a rod we doubt, forwarneth vs of that rod, wherof the Lord speaketh by the Prophet: I will vi∣site their iniquities with the rod, and their sins with stripes. For Almighty God vseth for more certainety of forewarning, to giue vnto signes and tokens, the likenesses of things signified, and betokened. As for example. At what time his will was to forewarne the Iewes of the Ba∣bylonian captiuity, he spake thus to Ieremie the Prophet: Make thee fetters and chaines, and put them about thy necke, &c. Ther∣by to signifie their captiuity. So the same God, gaue a sign in the ayre of Titus and Vespasian; his huge hoast against Ierusalem, to lay it waste: armed men with speares and lances, running to and fro in warlike wise, which though they saw manifestly, yet ceast they not to liue as they were wont, most wickedly, the vengeance of God falling vpon them, which by those forewarnings was prophesied. In the yeare, 1500, there was séene falling from heauen vpon mens garments, Crosses, and there appeared in sensible manner,A strange sight and wonderful forewarning of a bloudie battell. as certaine signes what should after come to passe: namely, that bloudy battell betwéene the two worthy Princes Rupert the 3. son of Philip, Palsegraue of Rhene, and Prince Elector, and the noble Prince Albert, Duke of Bauaria: the ensignes of the one hauing blacke crosses, & the other red: so that in the yeare 1504. was fulfilled that which in the yeare 1500. was foretolde
Wherefore it is to bee feared, lest the Blazing starre which was séene in the likenesse of a rodde, threaten vnto vs that rodde which the Prophet spake of, wherewith God is purposed in iu∣stice to visite the wickednesse of the people. For if this Blazing starre bée naturall, wée shall perceyue nothing in it, which betoke∣neth not some great euill.All mischiefe commeth from the North. First, because it blazed so euen from the West to the North, from whence (as witnesseth the Pro∣phet) all mischiefe doth procéede, hauing neuerthelesse an as∣pect into other quarters of the world, terrible & thretning enough. It was variable in colour, sometimetimes pale, that is, Leaden and Saturnine, sometimes Red and Martiall. More∣ouer, in so much as it continued (by the auerment of Astrono∣mers) vnder Saturne and Mars, Planets and Signes of vn∣luckie influence: it seemeth to betoken not onely vnto one, or two Countries, but to the whole World, famine, warre, and pestilence: for it blazed most terribly into all parts of the world. Furthermore, if the same Blazing starre were supernatural, and immediate from God, contrary to the course and order of Nature, it might not otherwise be thought, but that it betoke∣ned to the world much misery and woe: for God thereby signi∣fied, that his vengeance was to come vpon all wicked world∣lings, and vpon all such persons, as (to their impenitence) ioyne continuance in sinne. Now, who hath the face to say against this, that the Worlde hath taken such a surfet in iniquitie, and is become so drunken in all abomination, that Gods mercy is changed into iudgement, & his patience into punishment, his loue into wrath, and his kind∣nesse into fury: in such wise that it may be supposed, God to speake vnto vs by this Blazing starre, as it were out of a cloude, in this manner: The end of all flesh is before me. The whole earth is filled full of their iniquity, and I will sweepe them away from the face of the earth, For they haue all played the start backs, they haue walked in the by-wayes of wickednes,A supposed speech of God expressing his wrath concei∣ued for ini∣quity. and are becom vnprofitable: insomuch that there is none that doth good, no not one. Which as none can deny, so I thinke none dares but thus confesse, that the Blazing star séene in our Horizon, betokeneth a common calamity, considering how iniquity doth abound in a places, and that sinne is growne to a perfect maturity and ripe∣nesse
which God of his mercy giue vs grace to amend, that wee féele not the heate of his consuming anger, whereof hee hath sent vs a forewarning. Whether such euils as Blazing stars betoken, may by any meanes eyther be preuented or auoyded. CHAP. XVII. IT remayneth (most puissant Emperour) the premisses conside∣red, that your Maiesty taking the King of Niniuie for an exam∣ple, rise vp from your seate of Royalty, and putting on sackcloath together with vs your people, lift vp our hands and hearts to hea∣uen, praying to God most heartily, like humble suters. Now who is so blunt of iudgement, and dul of vnderstanding that séeth not that the confession of offences, the repentance and contrition of heart, the humbling and submitting our selues both in soule and body vnder the mighty hand of the omnipotent God, will pacifie and asswage the fiercenesse of his fury, and so spare vs in compassion, through vnfained repentance, that wee perish not as outcasts from his fauour. Why should we not haue this hope and confidence in God,God doth not exclude the penitent from the throne of grace, but re∣ceiueth them to his mercy. considering that to the penitent Niniuites he did not shutte the gates of his compassion, but séeing their conuersion and forsa∣king of sinne, with the denyall of themselues, and all goodnes in them, he receyued them againe to mercy, from which by their sinnes they were before excluded. Furthermore, it is not needeful that we stand in feare of the celestiall Signes, because without God they haue no power at al to preuayle against any people; but being his seruants, are at his commaundement, from whom all stars and all creatures haue their office and ministery. To conceyue terror and feare therefore at the appearing of a Blazing star, as betokening some euill like to follow, it is extreame madnesse: let vs rather tremble at his al∣mightines, and feare the consuming flames of his iustice, who is the Creator and maker, not onely of Blazing stars, but also of the Sunne, Moone, and Planets, yea of reasonable man. And let vs not thinke, but that God, who framed the
whole world, the heauen aboue, and the earth below, is able (as he made them) so to rule them: for at his commandement are all things within the compasse of the Heauen, be they Starres, or whatsoeuer else: so that he can; according to the greatnesse of his power, which filleth all places, chaunge and dispose them, af∣ter his owne pleasure: yea the threatning tokens of his iudge∣ment and vengeance, will he turn into forbearance and forgiue∣nesse, if we penitently neglect not (as did the Iewes) the time of our Visitation: For they being warned by many wonders, and among others, by a Blazing starre, of no lesse horrour then con∣tinuance: lay slugging in the Couch of security and carelesnesse, and not regarding the threats of God for sinne, eyther of wilfull blindnesse, or stout stubbornnesse, counted those tokens of Gods vnsufferable wrath, elementarie apparitions, and toyes méerely contemptible. But let vs not suffer our selues to bée lulled asléepe in the cra∣dle of sensuality:It is good to be warned by the example of others. Let vs not bée drunken with the dregs of their abomination: Let not the vanities of our owne hearts so be∣witch vs, that we fall into a selfe loue and liking of our owne selues, neglecting the preffered time of grace and louing kindnes lest God deliuering vs ouer to reprobation in his vnappeaseable displeasure, plague vs with the same rod of reuengement for our vngraciousnes, wherewith hee tooks vengeance vpon them for their wilfull stubbornenesse. Which that it may not come to passe, let vs in time turne to the Lord, and in due season take his fatherly admonitions, as ready meanes to lead vs to repentance and the auoyding of the scourge of destruction, wherewith he pu∣nisheth the impenitent. From the which deliuer vs O Lord God. To the Almighty, Euerlasting. Inuisible, and onely wise God, bee All, aboue All, and in All, all Laude, Honour, Glo∣rie, Dominion and Maiesty for euer and euer, Amen, FINIS.
