a3542 e1013_18 99867090 119380
AN APOLOGIE AND VINDICATION Of the Major part of the Members of PARLIAMENT Excluded from sitting and speaking for themselves and the COMMON-WEALTH. Isa. 59.6. Their webs shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works. Their works are the works of Iniquity, and the act of vio∣lence is in their hands. Quint. Curt. lib. 4. Nulla quaesita scelere potentia diuturna est. January 24. 1659. LONDON, Printed, by Tho. Ratcliffe, 1659.
AN APOLOGIE And VINDICATION of the Members of PARLIAMENT excluded, &c. THe Members of this present Parliament, who have been eleven years kept out by a variety of force from sitting and discharging the publick Trust, to which they were elected: having observed that by Gods good providence the Officers and Souldiers of the Army, who have hitherto, as it were giver▪ Laws to all ci∣vil Authority, had declared a submission thereunto, be∣ing reduced to their duty by the affection and conjunction of the good people, with several declarations and endea∣vours of General Monk; whilest they supposed that the freedome of Parliament was thereby to be asserted, and re∣stored; and that a general expectation and desire in all places hath been expresse, that all the Members should return to Vote in Parliament, according to the due Liber∣ty and prividedges thereof: did many of them go to the Parliament House, where their entrance was denyed by
Officers of the Army, and others appointed thereunto. And since they and the people having expected a Vindi∣cation from those Members now sitting, and a Declara∣tion against all future force.  There hath appeared only a printed Vote discharging all absent Members from sit∣ting in Parliament, &c. And, because this looks like a judgement in Parliament, which hath been accounted a decree of the highest nature, and may seeme to be a sen∣tence against them as evil Doers; whilest they are, and have been violently and illegally excluded from answer∣ing for themselves in their own places, according to the right of Parliaments; there are no means left for the vin∣dication and satisfaction of them, and those concern'd with them, but to state the whole matter of fact (as far as it can be traced in the dark) and to reflect soberly and impartially upon the grounds, and the proceedings, by which so unheard of, and so dangerous a President against all future Parliaments and Authorities is carried on and would be setled, That it may appear that no offence hath or can be reasonably or formally charg'd upon the Mem∣bers excluded, but that they did freely and resolvedly, according to their Trust, and Duty, and the course and practice of Parliaments give their Votes in Parliament; the Major part of the House upon full and mature debate at the same time consenting in the same Vote and Judge∣ment. The Parliament in 1648. well weighing the state of Affaires, after they had about six years contended by a War for publick Liberty; and duly considering that the end of War is Peace; did betake it self to wayes tending thereunto, after mature deliberation▪ and the most solemn Debates the House of Commons did passe a Vote, without division upon the Question, in order to a settlement of
future Peace, which disagreeing with the depraved Interests of some, who conducted the Army, they drew up a De∣claration (fill'd with invectives against the Parliament and new and dangerous subtilties against Government) and having seduc'd the Army to their Councells,  they did on the 6. and 7. of December 1648. contrary to the Orders and Com∣mands of Parliament bring it up from the more distant Quarters and by a Guard set upon the House, did shut out at that time more then a hundred Members, and imprison'd one and fourty. Those sitting in the House understanding some disorder without doores, and that divers of their Mem∣bers were detain'd there by Souldiers, did send their Ser∣jeant to require their attendance on the House; but the Officers would not permit it.  The same day Colonel Whal∣ley and other Officers at the Bar of the House delivered some Papers, propounding and demanding several things, among others, That the Members secluded should not be re-admitted untill they should acquit themselves particularly of the said Vote, and give cleare satisfaction to the judgments, of those who then sate in the House and had dissented, and the grounds of such satisfaction be published to the King∣dom. The House yet tender of the Interests of Parliament ap∣point Mr. Pierpoint and others to confer with the Generall Officers of the Army, for discharging their Members; upon conference had with them, the Result was, that they re∣fer'd to their former Papers. And though the House did no∣thing thereupon: Yet some persons earnestly insid divers dayes, that according to the practise and priviledge of Parlia∣ments, no debate might be entertain'd until the Priviledge of the Parliament and Members were vindicated. And finding no redress they have ever since with-drawn themselves from sit∣ing in the House.
Decemb. 14. There was a printed Paper▪ scattered abroad in the behalf it seems of the secluded Members, protesting a∣gainst whatsoever should be done in Parliament in their absence: which both Houses (there being about three or four Lords, a propor∣tionable number to the Commons, then remaining in that House) did fix upon the Members excluded; and then condemning the Papers as false, and scandalous; and declaring no Member to be capable to sit in either House untill they should disclaim it. Which Paper, was neither subscribed nor owned by any of these Members, nor they heard, nor any thing like a legal or rational proceeding had therein: But this was in it self so sleight a judg∣ment, upon grounds so unjust, and unparliamentary, that even themselves took no notice of it afterward; nor doth it appear in any Entry upon the Books, that any of those Members were put to disclaim it, who were afterwards readmitted. On the 20. of December It was carried upon division of the House that the message to the General and Councel of Officers for discharge of the Members should be renewed. Upon the Question the Negatives were 19. and the Affirmatives 32. Nevertheless on the 11. of January following, The House having by several Votes, and Preparatives, and secret consulta∣tions alter'd their humours, (they without receiving any answer to their renewed message, the Army insisting, and they complying) did approve the former answer of the Councill of Officers and the Papers of December. 6. brought from Colonel Whalley to the House. And now having declared a Union with the Councels of the Army, it was ordered, Feb. 1. That such as shall dissentor disapprove the Vote of December the 5. shall repair to a Com∣mittee appointed thereunto by the first of March; or be sus∣pended voting, or sitting, till they dissent or disapprove, and give satisfaction of their Delay, and be restored by particular order of the House.
And the 9. of June following, a final Judgement was given: It being then ordered that none should be capable to sit that should not give satisfaction to the Committee by the 30. of June, but that then, the House should proceed to the Elections of new Members in their Places. After five years reign by themselves, and no Restauration, nor new Election; the House was interrupted and discontinued untill May 7. 1659. when the Souldiers againe opening the doores the Secluded members attempted to goe into the House, but were kept back by Gaurds, and afterward by a Vote, that such Persons heretofore Members of this Parliament, as have not taken the Engagement now upon the Roll in this House shall not sit till farther Order. The Parliament seeming again to be restored from another vi∣olence of the Army, made upon them in October: Divers se∣cluded Members endeavoured again to go into the house, but were hindered by Officers of the Army, and others. And on the 5. of January following, the doors were as it were sealed up by the last, and most peremptory Vote, viz. That upon the whole mat∣ter of the Report touching the absent Members, the Parliament doth adjudge and declare, that the Members who stand discharg∣ed from voting or sitting as Members of this House in the years 1648. and 1649. do stand duly discharged by Judgement of Parliament. By these several Briefs of those Orders, and proceedings which are most material in this case, it easily appears, That nothing doth arise out of any Vote or Judgment, which shews that there hath been any judicial hearing either according to Law, President, or Parliamentary proceeding: nor that any matter of conviction is to be found in the most artificial suggestions and pretences against these Members. Nor that any Crimes, but the being the Major part of the Parliament, and the adhearing to their duty
and Judgement in Parliament have been the ground or Argument of the several Votes or attempts against them. So that the sum of All on both sides amounts only to this, That the House Votes, that because They stand discharged, therefore they stand duly discharged; and the Vote of the people is in the Negative, who ge∣nerally in the streets, and Market places, and publick Assemblies (which are the ordinary Courts of the people) do cry out, That their Members stand not discharged, be∣cause they are not duly discharged. So that upon the whole matter, The Result of the fact shews it self to be plainly thus, that some principal persons in the Army, unhappily intrusted with too much power, in 1648. designing Empire to themselves, and confusion to all the parts of the opposing Government, secretly conspired against that peace, which the Parliament was then providing for, and winding up, being brought on thereunto by all the Reason, and Arguments, that Re∣ligion and Prudence could suggest. And because no Councels, but the most desperate, could effect things so stupendious as were plotted; the Parliament (as the chief Bulwark of the Common-wealth) was by them, and by their influence, assaulted with the utmost Indignity, Treachery and Violence; and about two parts of three of them (the number of Members being a chief part of the constitution of Parliaments) forc'd from their Seats, and many of them imprison'd; whilest a permission was left to some to remain in that house; on condition that they should disavow their own Foundation, and Priviledges, and Votes, and Members, and joyn themselves to those new and hated Principles (which had been publickly in the presence of men and Angels by the Parliament, and the whole people vowed, declared and protested against) and
which were now invented and contrived in the dark: for the ruine and the blowing up of that publick liberty, which had conserv'd this People in most eminent felicity so many Ages; although it sometimes required the extra∣ordinary applications of Parliaments to redresse some evils which time and full prosperity, and the corruption of Ministers of state, do oft-times draw upon the best framed Governments. The Members thus selected, and set apart, betake them∣selves to the promoting of the Armies interests, as if they were now become their Representatives onely, and con∣tract all the several Authorities of these Nations into them∣selves, and having vested themselves with Soveraignty, and cut off whatsoever grew in their way, they by the Votes, Orders and Artifice above mentioned, pretending a for∣mal proceeding against the Major part of the Members, and an intention to elect others in their places, do seal up the House to their own private use, whilest they in scorne, and a resolution not to be satisfied, call for a Satisfaction, and a Retraction of the Vote which themselves ought on∣ly to have acquiessed in, as bound up by it; but to have made it good, as the Right of Parliament, against all con∣tradiction or opposition whatsoever. By these grounds, and beginnings, the Common-wealth of England hath been thus long interrupted, and the sha∣dow and name of Common-wealth (all the essential parts of it being condemn'd and vanished) hath been set up in∣stead thereof; which by necessary and unavoidable con∣sequence, easie to be foreseen, hath induced as great a va∣rietie of successive Evils as any State ever saw and felt in so few years; for in this Interval the Ambition of him that first formed, and forced this change, did declare and shew it self, and revenged the People in some measure,
upon those who wholly against their will had en∣grossed their Liberties, and assum'd the Supream Authori∣ty on the behalf only of such as should desert all former Obligations, to adhere to the new, uncertain, impossible things which they pretended to.  For He, now explaining to what purpose He, and his Army had lent the Members his Power, did with doubted contempt, and contumely upon the Persons of divers of them, as it were sweep the House, by turning them also out of it, and as far as in him lay, dissolv'd so much of the Parliament as his former violence had reserv'd until his own aspirings, and the dissatisfactions of the Nation might render it more willing to accept his single, arbitrary and tyrannical Government, then what they had endured five years before. So that, at that instant, even themselves, who before had thought fit to Vote force to be a good, and a Legittimate Expedient for the admitting their own Regency, understood now bet∣ter the hardship and the iniquity of such proceedings, and had remained like rubbish buried in the ruines of that Government, whose pillars they had pull'd down, if the good Providence and better Councels of the Almighty had not intangled the new Monarch in his own Policies, and cut him off in the finishings of his Grandeur; and afterwards given up his more innocent Successor and his Family to be levelled and devoured by that Army, and almost by those individual Persons, whose equivocal principles, and various Apostacies, and breaches of Faith himself had taught them, and exercised them first to violate, then to annihilate that Authority, to which they had vowed, and were obliged by all the most solemn Tyes Divine and Humane. And notwithstanding the full experience those few ex∣pulsed and restored Members had of the tumultuary and unsteady Genius of that Army, who in May last had againe
conspired against a Parliament, and invaded the Govern∣ment of their own framing; and were apparantly con∣strained, for their own safety, and by their own incapa∣city and distraction, suddenly to erect, or own some other kinde of Authority, which should depend only upon theirs; and groaping, like blind men for the wall, they did as it were by chance light upon the recalling their Members; whom they had formerly selected, and made use of.  Yet these men again accepted a readmission by themselves, still shutting out their fellow-Members: but the same Masters, ha∣ving a few months more tried their compliance, and finding them not wholly, or sufficiently fitted to the purposes to which they were again designed. This Army once more affronts this remainder of Autho∣rity, which more solemnly then before themselves had own'd, and bowed to, and having in their own fancy (ac∣cording to the expression of one of their Grandees) melted down all the several Powers, Authorities, and Persons into a narrower Interest, and closer bodie, and projected a more refined and more exalted tyranny, that might better assure the Military Dominion, and the Reign of those few to whom they had adjudg'd the Government of the Earth as a Right and Inheritance; they did awaken by so lowd a violence, and pretence, a General, who had happily hitherto been disengaged from their Councels and their guilt, and had been long an object of their envy, who being at a secure and proper distance for this purpose gave the Alarm to the three Nations, and an invitation to betake themselves to their several strengths and defences; and himself drew out a well-form'd Army, capable of ballancing the Power, that without pretence of Commissions, had renewed their former out-rages of expelling and making War upon the Parliament: The whole people abhorring the continu∣ation
and encrease of Force, did (as many as had remain∣ed capable thereof) every where declare, or joyn together against the Army, and were so successeful through the acti∣vity of the English interests (which now united themselves as against a common enemy) that without any other blood∣shed, then some few Murthers in the City, intending there∣by to terrifie and suppresse their courage) this Army, but even now defying even the name Parliament, and decree∣ing it to be eradicated, was by a dejection in their own spi∣rits and consciences; accusing and amasing them; and a confusion arising out of the folly and impiety of their Coun∣cels, driven to consult how they might preserve themselves by a Parliament (as the last English refuge for all Parties, and in all extreamities) and having vainly endeavoured by their own Power, and their great Seal, to qualifie and sum∣mon one; they fainted in the attempt, and by a weak and general desertion and falling back from one another, Li∣berty seemed to be restored to the Parliament: and it was become the general hope and expectation, that no violence should be continued upon it; But that, as the Force in 1648. and 1653. and 1659. is of the same onely, and rebellious nature; So all men that can consider things as they are, and what they tend to, should equally abhorre it; whither as moral men, it being treachery and breach of Faith; or as Christians, it being perjury, and against many Vowes to the high God; or as English men only, it being the establisher of Tyranny & of Arbitrary Government; or as such as are Lo∣vers of themselves, it bringing destruction upon such persons or Confederacies as suport themselves by it against a whole people, that know not how to wear the yoak of the basest servitude. And surely whosoever shall take an account from Time (the best Informer) and ask the eleven years (in which Force hath reigned absolutely by it selfe, and by
its own Laws only) what they have produc'd, they shall be answered. That the expulsion of many by a few, gave oportunity, and means, and encouragement to one to Vsurp, that such usurpation begat emulation in those that had been his equals: That from thence did spring new Turns of State: that amidst all these revolutions, the people have been commanded to believe that they were under a Com∣mon-wealth, and that they enjoyed freedom, and publick advantages proportionable to what they have suffered and payed for, whilest only the name and shadow of Liberty hath appeared abroad; and the interests of the Nations were suspended, or pursued by contraries; and infinite Treasure hath been spent to purchase Poverty, and Dis∣grace, the only Remainders of more then twenty Mil∣lions. Whilest above fifteen hundred Sail of Shipping, and the wealth and the intrinsick value of them, have been the prey of our Enemies: the publick Fleet having had enough to defend the several intruding Governments against the pretences of others, and the discontents of the unsatisfied People. Whilest Trade it self Forraigne and Domestick, Manufactures and Traffick, is insensibly stollen from this Common-wealth; being subtilly invited, and ingrossed by our neighbours. Whilest every Countie, City and Bur∣rough (not under awe and force) every degree and socie∣ty of men, the whole Nobilitie, the body of the Gentry, and the Commons, and indeed almost all such as were inga∣ged in the War upon the Parliaments account before 1648. do with one voice and consent as far as they dare, being kept under by an iron hand, presse and sollicite the Re∣stauration of a full Freedom to the Parliament, whereby all Interests may be considered and provided for: and such courses be prosecuted by common consent, as may raise mony to satisfie the souldery, even with satisfaction to those
who will be then as ready to give, as others are now to levie it by Force; and those moderate, and equal, and healing Councels may (by the good blessing of God) be so happily applyed to, that Faction may be extinguished; or at least rendred more uncapable of disturbing that settle∣ment, which upon free Debates shall appear to be most proper and necessary for these distracted Nations. This being the State of the whole matter, as it appears out of the Records and the observations of this last eleven years, and the present resentments of the people as they relate to the secluded Mmbers, and the Force still continued. It is not to be doubted, but some Countrys, or some Numbers of Men (not obnoxious) will suddenly testifie against them, if they have unfaithfully represented any thing herein: But it ought no way to discourage them from insisting upon their Right to sit in Parliament; whilest these only shall suppresse their Claime, and oppose their Admission, whose particular duty it is to endeavour it, and who may bee driving on such designes, as neither will indure free and equall debates; nor comply with the Sence of those they would seem to represent. And although some are arrived now to such a height of Confidence that the word Free-Parliament sounds as dangerously to their Eares, as heretofore to the greatest Enemies of it, and is countenanced accordingly; yet surely such sober Consi∣derations as are herein offered in behalf thereof, will make some impressions for good upon the severall Interests concerned in it; especially upon every Person of Honour and Trust to whom God hath given an opportunity to vindi∣cate publick Liberty, that he may not draw back his hand, and by doing it partially and imperfectly be guilty of lea∣ving the same kinde, though not the same measure of vi∣olence upon the Parliament and the people. For what person soever intrusted, and enabled to deliver, and de∣fend
a people; shall apply himselfe only so far to their relief and redress, as his own private conceit, or Inter∣est doth lead him; and doth it not according to common Right, and the cry and generall desire of his oppressed Countrymen (especially whilest they ask nothing but what their known Laws and Liberties doe allow and enjoyne) doth but use the peoples sword against them; and doth, at best, no more then correct some extravagancies in a facti∣on, whose inconsistencie with reason and humane society might in a short time have disolv'd it, or made it mold∣er into nothing, whilest the forming and assisting those looser parts, and the giving some method and reputation to those wild proceedings, doth tend only to the strength∣ning thereof, and as much as in him lyes, to the fitting and fastning those fetters which even of themselves were falling off. And surely it may become even those who have laid hold on the Helm, and willfully carryed us to sea, far off among Rocks and quick-sands, upon Coasts strange, and unknown; in time to Consult their better Reason, and remember that themselves also are but Passengers and must be lost and swallowed up at last, by the same shipwrack with the publick. For whatsoever Power or Councill wants Common consent, and Reverences and Authority, and Principles, and Union, and well or∣dered Armies, and Treasure, and Alleys; and in brief all those requisites which tend to the support of a po∣litick Body, and great domminions; may for some time vexe the people, and keep them under, but can never subsist in a condition of Honour and Security. And that warme desire of Liberty, which is now said to bee mad∣ness in those that affect it, and a thing noxious and un∣seasonable and unfit for this generation; will (it may be
well feared) ere long flame into furie, and make them rather chuse to fall Sacrifices to the Publick, in at∣tempting its Deliverance, then to endure tamely farther Es∣sayes of inforced Government, and submit their necks to every yoake that the Lust, and wantonnesse, and splene of a few of their equals (the best they can pretend to) shall think fit to put upon them and become thereby lyable to every mischief and inconveniene that must, and shall ne∣cessarily arise, and continue from Councels so founded and deposed. For whatsoever Evill hath been acted, and appeared since, 1648. must as certainly returne upon us, in as many, or more or worse Revolutions, as that the same Causes do naturally produce the same effects. FINIS.
