A4315AB E451_31 99864697 116929
A LETTER Sent to the Earl of WARWICK, From the Captain, Officers, and Company of His Majesties Ship called the LYON, Declaring their Resolution for the service OF THE PARLIAMENT, WITH The Earl of WARWICKS Answer thereunto. 7 Julii, 1648. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter from Sir George Ayscue, and the Lord Admirals Answer to it, be forthwith Printed. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Ho∣norable House of Commons, July 8. 1648.
To the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of VVarwick, Lord High Admiral of England: May it please your Honor, ACcording to your Lord∣ships command, I am re∣turned from Milford with the Lyon to Portsmouth, where I shall wait your farther pleasure; and understanding there the pre∣sent condition of Affairs, and how that many Sea-men having been seduced by the subtilty of those that have been always professed
Enemies to the Parliament and Kingdoms happiness: VVhich being rightly understood by the Officers of this Ship, as also by the common men, they have there∣upon unanimously joyned with me, Humbly to beg leave of your Lordship, to make this our profes∣sion to your Honor, as being our hearty and zealous Resolutions, That as it is a great grief to us, that any of our calling, who hath been famous formerly for their faithful Service to the Parliament, should now be cheated into disobedience, of which we hear that divers of them do already repent: And we doubt not of your Lordships fa∣vor
to such poor misled people: So we shall desire your Lordship, That wee vvho do abhor the thoughts of any unfaithfulness to the Service of the Parliament, and who are ready to the last drop of our blood, according to the Cove∣nant which we have taken, to be obedient and serviceable to their commands, In giving all possible assistance towards the reducing of all Revolters and Refractory per∣sons to their due obedience: So we hope that the scandal and foulness of this Revolt in others, shall not be on us a stain in the Parliament and your Lordships opinions: which if your Lordship please to
testifie to us your assurance of, you vvill give us a great incourage∣ment, and lay a perpetual oblige∣ment on us, vvhose Names are hereunder written, and who assu∣redly are the Parliaments and your Lordships most humble faithful Servants, George Ayscue Capt. Tho: Penrose Lieut. Michael Iles Minister Iohn Rochester. Io: Lathbury Gunner Iohn Pack Carpent. James Johnson Boats. Wil: Hinney Purser. Jo: Haselock chirurg. George Evered Ma∣sters mate. Richard-Inon Masters mate. George Fen corporal. Vincen Cocket Cook.
To my very loving Friends, The Captain, and Officers and Company of His Majesties Ship, The Lyon. After my hearty commendations, I Received your Letter, and thereby very great satisfaction, touching the integrity of your affections to the Parliaments Service, having made so eminent a Declaration thereof, as a∣mounts to the honor of your persons and professions: I am very glad that you have conceived so true an apprehension of the nature and rise of the revolt of those Ships that have deserted their duty, it proceeding from false and lying sug∣gestions, and tending as to the dishonor of the Nation, so to the just shame and ruine of those who persist in such a diso∣bedience: That you do abhor the act, I am fully satisfied from your own ex∣pressions; which as they hold forth much respect to the Parliaments com∣mands,
so you may be confident, they will be returned in all ways of incou∣ragement; and believe it, you'l finde by experience, that the faithful adherence to to the Parliament, will appear the great∣est advantage to the happy settlement of the differences betwixt the King and the Kingdom, and that those who with∣draw from their service, are the greatest obstructers of that Peace which they pretend too: For my own particular, you shall never want that respect from me, which may approve me a faithful servant to my trust, and to your selves; London, 30 June, 1648. A very loving friend, WARVVICK. FINIS.
