B2089 45504296 171602
THE French King's DREAM, WHICH He had in His COACH Going to MARLY; Together with its EXPLICATION. By the Sieur Van Beuninghen, late Ambassadour from the States General here in England. LICENS'D November 22. 1689. J. F. LONDON, Printed for R. B. and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, in the Old Baily, MDCLXXXIX.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER. AMong others, who have entertained Ʋs with their Reveries upon a late Dream of the French Kings, Monsieur van Beuninghen has been very lately pleas'd to publish at the Hague, his performances upon the same Subject both in French and Dutch. To gratifie the cu∣rious of our Nation, they are also now put into English, and the rather, seeing He is a Man so eminent thro' the World, on the account of his several Negotiations and long Ministry of Publick Affairs, and more especially at the Court of Great Britain, where he was Ambassador for many Years: Tho' possibly this States-mans Friends will be sorry to find he has so far out-liv'd himself, That from Secrets he is come to Revelations.
An Interpretation Of The DREAM WHICH The French KING had in His Coach, going to Marly. PARIS, November the 11th. The KING being in his Coach at Marly, Dreamt He saw the Heavens on a Flame; and that a very thich Smoak issued out of the Earth, of which was formed a very Numerous Army of Men like to Black-Smiths. And that the Person who Com∣manded them in chief was mounted upon a Horse half gray, half green, and that He was clad in a Coat half Gold, half Iron, wearing a Breast-plate of Lead, and Brass Boots, and having a Wooden-Sword, He fell a Crying, Now must Men Fight, for the hour is come that they who will not Fight, must Perish. That then the KING heard two lamentable Screams, and that
He afterwards perceived that the Earth trembled, and that all that Multitude of Smiths was swal∣lowed up. That in a little time after there appeared a fair Forest full of Stags, and other Animals for Chace, and that He call'd out to the Hunters who were surround∣ing it, Kill, Kill, for the Game is good. Whereupon he awak'd, and told His Dream to the whole Court, and added, that He would give Twenty Thousand Golden Louises to know its Interpretation, and then became very Pensive. If this Article of the Gazettier be true, as it is likely: it first seems to me very remarkable, that the French King (who may be look'd upon as the Nebuchadonosor of our Time in Christendom) has had a Dream, or rather a Vision in Dreaming, which He has taken so much to heart, as to have declared He would pay so dear for its Interpretation: And that the Great Assyrian Monarch had the same fondness, but with so much the more Passion, as that He had lost the remembrance of his Vision, and that He stood in need of a new Manifestation, which to know, could only come from God; whereas that to satisfie His
Majesty, there needs no more than a Man who understands the Inter∣pretation of the Prophecies to which His Vision does relate. I believe that the Great and Good God has endued me with this Grace, and that I shall not swerve from the Truth in affirming, That the King's said Dream is come from Heaven, to let His Majesty know, that the last hour is come of the Accomplishment of the Pro∣phecies, grounded upon the Appari∣tion of Nebuchadonosor's Image or Statue, and of the second coming of our Saviour the Lord Jesus Christ, and of that Stone cut out without hand, which will break to pieces and abolish all other Kingdoms, by Establishing this of God, and of the Saints here upon Earth, will suddenly become ma∣nifest, to give the final Conclusion to all the Prophecies. I shall presuppose that they who shall read this, have already taken, or would be willing to take the pains of reading my Remarks and Annotations on St. John's Re∣velation, and what is writ in my first Letter to David Pina, con∣cerning the true sence of the Pro∣phecies of Daniel, in the 2d. and 7th Chapters, so far as they are applicable to the Promise of the
Reign of God and of the Saints upon Earth. I moreover entreat them to read with attention the said 2d. and 7th Chapters of Daniel, the last verse of the 8th, all the 9th, and the 11 last verses of the 16th, and the 13th, and 14th of the 11th Chapter, and the 16th verse of the 17th of the Revela∣tions. And then most maturely to consider, whether the Heaven on a Fire does not evidently signify the just Anger of God, denoted in the Revelations made by our Sa∣viour to St. John, by the Seven Angels which should inflict the last Plagues, and of whom the three last (which the King's Dream levels at) are to be the most fa∣tal; as is very clearly said in the said last verse of the 8th Chapter. The thick Smoak issuing from the Earth, is doubtless that which the Gulph of the Bot∣tomless Pit vomits out of its Fla∣ming Furnace, and which darkens the Sun, and produces the strangely Monstrous and most pernicious Lo∣custs, or the most infamous and black Corrupters of Christian Mo∣rality, and of true Felicity; and the most dangerous Disturbers of the Publick Peace that have been
in any time since there has been Men: And who, as my said An∣notations and Remarks do make appear, by Diabolical Artifices, and the inconceiveable Blindness of those they have deluded, have occasioned all the Wars and Inhu∣manities that have afflicted Chri∣stendom for above these 160 Years, through the mad Disputes and Differences in Matters of Religion. And so much the more Credence is to be given to this my Inter∣pretation, for that, not only seve∣ral of the Calvinist Writers have taken the Jesuits, and such like Religious and Political Monks for the said Locusts: but, more e∣specially, because that my said Annotations have been communi∣cated to those they so grievously accuse, without any one having un∣dertaken to Refute me, among all the Prelates, Professours, Doctors, and Preachers of the Three Sects now Ruling: Namely, of the Pa∣pal, Lutheran, and Calvinian Heresies, to whom this horrible Crime is more especially imputed, than to all other Heretical As∣semblies that have swerv'd from the Ʋnion, which is not to be found or procur'd, save by Preach∣ing the Gospel all alone without Explication and humane Doctrines,
as was done in the Primitive Church, and by taking care that Charity (which is the true Cha∣racter of Christianity) be Chri∣stianly observed with all the other Duties imposed upon us by the Precepts of the Gospel, for the being Temporally and Eternally happy. And as the said Locusts were changed into Froggs, in the Re∣velations, to make up the Scene of the impure and diabolical Spirits that have excited the present Wars, or the War of that great Day of the Almighty God, as is seen in the 14th. and 15th. Verses of the said 16th. Chapter of the Re∣velations. It is in no wise strange, that those same Children of Dark∣ness have appeared to the King under the Image of Darkness, that so their blackness might denote this Original; but more especially, be∣cause that the great Slaughter in the present Wars, is to be made according to the Prophecies, by Fire, and by Smoak, and by Sul∣phur, and that the Smiths Trade is carried on by the Ministry of the Fire. The General of this most nume∣rous, black, and infernal Army which the King has seen, is evident∣ly
the same, who in the 11th. verse of the said 9th. Chapter, is cal∣led the King. The said Locusts and the Angel of the bottomless Pit, who in the Hebrew Tongue is called Abaddon, and in the Greek hath his Name Apollyon or De∣stroyer. The strange variety of Colours of his Horse denotes, That these Calamities proceed from the Spirit of the Monks, and from that of false Christians who resemble them, herein represented by the Grey, and for one part by the Secular Spirit, which is the most shining, is denoted by the Green. The Divinity and capricious mixture of the Metals, does doubt∣less signify, that this Vision does refer to Nebuchadonosor's Statue; and tho we do not here find the Potters Clay, and that the Gold which made the Head of the said Statue is here join'd to Iron, whereas the Iron was join'd to the Potters Clay in the Feet of the said Statue: And further, that the Gold is here combined to the Iron in the Coat and not in the Feet. Methinks that this transplacing is not without Mystery, by reason that what was far off, or at the further end of the Body, or at the  Nebuchadonosor's time,
does now surround and wound us at present, as wou'd do a very hea∣vy, rugged, and insupportable Coat of Gold and Iron. In all the rest there is no nota∣ble Diversity, if the King saw Sil∣ver instead of Lead, if the afore∣said Advice says true. But this seems to me more especially note-worthy, That in the Kings Vision, the Gold which form'd the Head of the said Statue of Nebuchadonosor is mingled with Iron, or rather is join'd to the I∣ron instead of Clay, not only because that Gold can no more be confound∣ed or incorporated with Iron than with Clay. But above all, because the present Ecclesiastical State, and specially in the Church of Rome, is become very rich, prin∣cipally because the diobolical Pride of the Bishop of Rome, who has rais'd himself above all that is cal∣led God, and is seated in the Temple of God as God, does very energically betoken the Assyrian Monarchy, which was the greatest, the most pompous, and the most superb of all. Besides, that the Image or Statue of Nebuchadonosor which seems extreme high, fair and terrible in the Description of the four Mo∣narchies, signified the Mammon,
or the World perverted, which wrongfully, seems to us so great, so fine, and in its turn so terrible in this short, silly and wretched Life of worldly Men: And that the Gold is at the long run de∣generated into Iron and Clay, gives to understand the deterioration or growing worse of Ages, the Ages of the World, which the Christian Religion, all divine, and all reason∣able, and all beautifying, as it is, has not been able to hinder, by rea∣son of the deceit and fraud of the Devil, and his Doctrine preach∣ed among Christians. I am not the first that has shewn, That Iron join'd with Clay to form a Member compos'd of those two unsociable Materials, signifies, the discording Concord of the Secular and Ecclesiastical Powers, which compose one and the same Civil Society. And methinks there is nothing that ought to appear more strange, and serve more to confirm this Exalta∣tion, than the incredible things that is found by observing, That in the time of Nebuchadnosor, an Assy∣rian Monarch could put all those soothsayers to Death by one single Command. And that the Bishops of Rome in a Religion which teach∣es the respecting and obeying of Soveraign and Secular Powers, have
been able to misuse Emperors, Kings, Princes and States, in such man∣ner as is well known. The Wooden Sword must de∣note, That the Ecclesiasticks, who are the principal Actors in this Tragedy, have only a Staff of Command to put in action the Iron of those that wear it. But in all that the King has seen and heard, there is nothing more notable than the cry of the said infernal General, that Men must fight or perish. To express that the three ruling Sects at this day do banish out of civil Society, & very often persecute, and horribly misuse them that will not side with them, and become as many Anti∣christians and Hereticks as they are, and partake at least by ap∣plause in the Tyrannies, Inhuma∣nities, and Wars they set on foot and foment. I have shewn in my Annotati∣ons upon the Revelations, that the Calamities occasioned by the fifth Angel are over, and that we live under the Plagues of the sixth, of which the present War with the Turks and amongst Christi∣ans
is the first part, and that they are to be followed or in∣terrupted suddenly, in my Opini∣on, by the Earthquake, whereof mention is made in the 13th. verse of the 11th. Chapter of the Revelations; but the swallowing up of all the Multitude, seen by the King, is more terrible than in the said 13th verse. But what is still more remarka∣ble than all that has been yet said, is, that the King heard two la∣mentable Cries, and immediately after saw the said Earthquake, is, that We are still to undergo part of the Calamities of the sixth, and all the great Calamities of the se∣venth, which are to come very suddenly. The fair Forest afterwards seen by the King, seems to denote the Face of Christendom after the said Earthquake shall have ceased, in those that shall survive it; the Repentance whereof mention is made in the said 13th. verse of the said 11th. Chapter. And me∣thinks, that the Orders which his Majesty has given for the filling the Wild-beasts, give to under∣stand the fulfilling of the Prophe∣cy, which says, That the ten Kings or secular Powers, shall be at the long run undeceived, shall revenge themselves for the deceit and delu∣sion
of the Infernal Doctors, who have so villaniously seduced them to the committing such fatal Fol∣lies through the zeal of a Religion, which is as contrary to all that is foolish, fatal, as it is the sincere, good and charitable Doctrine of the Gospel; The said avenging Prophe∣cy being describ'd in the said 16th. verse of the said Chapter, with these most memorable words, and the ten Horns which thou saw∣est upon the Beast, namely the ten Kings before mentioned, they shall hate the Whore and make her desolate and naked. Would to God that neither the Ecclesiasticks nor the Seculars had bad the boldness to regulate Re∣ligion, and that they had taken more care to observe its Precepts, that so we might not have had occasion for such lamentable Re∣medies. God grant Mercy to the King, and to all such as invoak him in Spirit and Truth: This the Au∣thor wishes with all his Soul. Hague, Nov. 19. 1689.
EXPLICATION DƲ SONGE Que le Roy de France a eu en son Carosse allant à Marly. DE Paris le 11. Novem∣bre: Le Roy étant à Marli en Carosse son∣gea qu'il voyoit le Ciel en feu; & qu'une fumée trés-épaisse, sortoit de la Terre dont il forma une trés-nom∣breuse armée d'hommes sembla∣bles à des forgerons. Et que le Chef qui les com∣mandoit étoit monté sur un che∣val moitié gris, moitié vert, & qu'il étoit vêtu d'une casaque moitié or, moitié fer, portant une cuirasse de plomb, & des bottes d'airain, & ayant une épée de bois, il se mit à crier, il faut se battre presentement, car l'heure est venuë, que ceux qui ne se battront pas periront. Que le Roy entendit ensuite deux lamentables cris, & qu'il
vit aprés que la terre trembla, & que toute cette multitude de forgerons fut engloutie. Que peu de temps aprés il parut une belle forest pleine de cerfs & d'autres bestes de chasse, & qu'il cria aux Chasseurs qui l'entouroient, tuë, tuë, car la chasse est bonne. Il s'éveilla là-dessus, & conta son songe à toute la Cour, & ajoûta qu'il donneroit vint mille Louïs d'or pour savoir son in∣terpretation, il a paru ensuite tout reveur. Si l'avis de ce Gazettier est veritable, comme il y a quelque apparence: il me paroît d'abord trés-remarquable, que le Roy de France, que l'on peut considerer comme le Nebucadonosor de nô∣tre temps dans la Chrêtienté, a eu un songe ou plûtôt une vision en songeant, qu'il a pris si fort à coeur, que d'avoir témoigné de vouloir acheter si cherement son interpretation; & que le grand Monarque Assyrien ait eu le même empressement, mais avec d'autant plus de passion, qu'il avoit perdu le souvenir de sa vision, & qu'il avoit besoin d'un nouvelle manifestation, qui devoit venir de Dieu, pour le
savoir, au lieu que pour satis∣faire à sa Majesté il ne faut qu'un homme qui sache l'inter∣pretation des Propheties aus∣quelles sa vision se rapporte. Je crois que le grand & bon Dieu m'a fait cette grace, & que je ne m'éloignera pas de la verité, en disant, que ledit songe du Roy est venu du Ciel, pour saire savoir à sa Majesté que l'heure derniere est venuë de l'accomplissement des Prophe∣ties, fondées sur l'apparition de la statuë de Nebucadonosor & de la seconde venuë de nôtre Seigneur Jesus-Christ nôtre Sau∣veur, & de cette pierre faite sans main, qui brisera & abo∣lira tous les autres Royaumes, en établissant celui de Dieu, & des Saints sur la terre, éclatera bien-tôt, pour donner la finale conclusion à toutes les Prophe∣ties. Je présupposera y que ceux qui liront ceci ont déja pris, ou vou∣dront bien prendre la peine de lire mes remarques, & mes annotations sur l'Apocalypse, & ce que l'on trouve dans ma pre∣miere lettre à David Pina, tou∣chant le veritable sens des Pro∣pheties de Daniel au Chapitre 2. & 7. entant qu'elles sont appli∣cables à la promesse du Regne
de Dieu & des Saints sur la terre. Je les prie de plus, de lire avec attention lesdits 2. & 7. Chapi∣tres de Daniel, le dernier verset du VIII. tout le 9. & les 11. derniers versets du XVI. & les 13. & 14. du Chapitre XI. & le 16. vers. du XVII. de l'Apo∣calypse. Et de considerer ensuite trés∣meurement, si le Ciel en feu ne si∣gnifie pas evidemment la juste colere de Dieu, dénotée, dans les revelations faites par nôtre Sauveur à St. Jean, par les 7. Anges qui infligeroient les der∣nieres playes, & dont les 3. der∣niers, (ausquels le songe du Roy vise) doivent estre les plus funestes, comme est dit trés∣clairement audit dernier verset du 8. Chap. La fumée trés-épaisse sortie de la terre, est sans doute celle que le Puis de l'Abysme vomit de sa fournaise ardente, & qui obscur∣cit le Soleil, & produisit les étrangemens monstreuses, & en∣tierement pernicieuses Sauterel∣les, ou les plus infames & noirs Corrupteurs de la morale Chiê∣tienne, & de la vraye felicité, & les plus dangereux Perturbateurs de la paix publique qui ayent été
en aucun tems, depuis qu'il y a des hommes: Et qui, comme mesdites annotations & remar∣ques, le font voir par des artifi∣ces diaboliques, & par l'incon∣cevable aveuglement de ceux qu'ils ont trompés, ont causé toutes les guerres & inhumani∣tez qui ont affligé la Chrêtienté depuis plus de 160▪ ans, par des differens insensés sur la Religion. Et l'on doit adjoûter d'autant plus de foy à cette mienne inter∣pretation, non-seulement, par∣ce que plusieurs d'entre les Ecri∣vains Calvinistes ont pris les Je∣suites, & semblables Religieux & Moines politiques, pour lesdi∣tes Sauterelles: mais sur tout parce que mesdites annotations ont été communiquês à ceux qu'elles accusent si grievement, sans que personne ait entrepris de me refuter d'entre tous les Prelats, Professeurs, Docteurs, & Predicateurs des trois Sectes au∣jourdhui dominantes: à savoir de l'heresie Papale. Lutherien∣ne, & Calvinienne, ausquelles cet horrible crime est plus speciale∣ment imputé qu'à toutes les au∣tres assemblées heretiques, qui se sont éloignées de l'union, que l'on ne peut trouver ni conserver qu'en faisant prêcher l'Evangile
tout seul sans explication, & do∣ctrines humaines, comme on fai∣soit dans la Primitive Eglise, & en prennant soin que la charité, qui est le vray charactere du Christianisme, fût Chrêtienne∣ment observée avec tous les au∣tres devoirs que les preceptes de l'Evangile nous imposent, pour être temporellement & eternel∣lement heureux. Et comme les sudites Sauterel∣les ont été changées en Grenoüil∣les dans l'Apocalypse, pour faire la scene des Esprits impurs & diaboliques, qui ont excité les presentes guerres, ou la Guerre de ce grand jour-là du Dieu Tout∣puissant, comme cela se voit au 13 & 15 verset dudit XVI. Chap. de l'Apoc. Il n'est nullement é∣trange que ces mêmes Enfans des tenebres, ayent paru au Roy sous l'image des Forgerons, afin que leur noirceur marquât leur origi∣ne; mais sur tout parce que la grande tuerie dans les guerres d'aujourdhui se doit faire selon les Propheties Par le feu, & par la fumée, & par le souphre, & que la forgerie se fait par le mini∣stére du feu. Le General de cette trés-nom∣breuse armée noire, infernale que le Roy a vû, est évidemment le même quidans l'XI. v. dudit IX.
Chap. est nommé le Roy. Lesdites Sauterelles & L'ANGE DE L'ABIME, qui a nom en He∣breu Abaddon, & duquel le nom est en Grec Appollyon ou destru∣cteur. L'Etrange bigarrure des cou∣leurs de son cheval marque que ces malheurs viennent de l'Esprit des Moines, & de celuy des faux Chrêtiens qui leur ressemblent, marqué ici par le Gris, & pour une partie par l'esprit seculier, qui comme plus brillant, est deno∣té par le Vert. La diversité, & le bizarre mé∣lange des metaux signifient indu∣bitablement que cette vision se rapporte à la statuë de Nebuca∣donosor; & quoy que l'on ne trouve pas ici l'argille, & que l'or qui faisoit la tête de ladite sta∣tuë est joint ici au fer, au lieu que le fer étoit à l'Argille aux pieds: & de plus que l'or est ici combiné au fer dans la casaque, & non aux pieds. Il me semble que ce transplace∣ment n'est point sans mystere à cause que ce qui étoit loin, & dans l'extremité du corps, ou aux pieds tu temps de Nebucadono∣sor,
nous environne & nousblesse presentement comme feroit une tres pesante, & tres dure, & insup∣portable casaque d'or & de fer. Dans tout le reste il n'y a point de diversité notable, si le Roi a veu de l'argent au lieu du plomb, si le sudit avis dit vray. Mais il me paroît sur tout fort notable que dans la vision du Roy, l'or qui formoit la tête de ladite statuë de Nebucadonosor est mêlé avec le fer, ou plûtôt se joint au fer au lieu d'argille, non seulement parce que l'or ne se peut point confondre ni incor∣porer avec le fer non plus que l'argille. Mais sur tout parce que l'Etat Ecclesiastique d'aujour∣d'hui, & specialement dans l'E∣glise Romaine, est devenu fort riche, principalement par ce que le Diabolique orgueil de l'E∣véque de Rome, qui s'est élevé dessus tout ce qui s'appelle Dieu, & est assis dans le Temple de Dieu comme Dieu, marque fort energiquement la Monarchie Assyrienne la plus grande, & la plus pompeuse & la plus superbe de toutes. Outre que la statuë de Nebu∣cadonosor qui parût extréme∣ment haute, belle, & terrible dans la description des quatre Monarchies, a signifié le Mam∣mon
ou le monde perverti, qui nous paroît a tort si grand, & si beau, & a son tour si terrible dans cette courte, sotte, & mise∣rable vie des hommes mondains: & que l'Or est degeneré à la fin en fer & argille, fait enten∣dre la deterioration des âges du monde, que la Religion Chrêti∣enne toute divine, & toute rai∣sonnable, & toute beatifiante qu'elle est, n'a pas pû empêcher, a cause de la fraude du Diable, & de sa doctrine prêchée parmi les Chrêtiens. Je ne suis pas le premier, qui a fait voir, que le fer joint à l'ar∣gille pour former un membre composé de ces deux materiaux insociables, signifie la concorde discordante de la puissance Secu∣liere, & Ecclesiastique qui for∣me une même societé civile. Et il me semble, qu'il n'y a rien qui doive paroître plus é∣trange, & qui serve plus à con∣firmer cette exaltation, que l'in∣croyable changement que l'on trouve en observant, que du temps de Nebucadonosor un monarque d'Assyrie pouvoit faire tuer par un seul commen∣dement tous ces Devins. Et que les Evêques de Rome, dans une Religion qui enseigne de re∣specter
& d'obeir aux Puissances souveraines, & seculieres ont pû mal-traitter les plus grands Em∣pereurs, Rois, Princes, & Etats de la maniere qu'il est connu. L'Epée de bois, doit denoter que les Ecclesiastiques, qui sont les principaux acteurs en cette tragoedie, n'ont qu'un bâton de commandement de bois pour faire agir le fer de ceux qui le portent. Mais dans tout ce que le Roi a veu; & entendu il n'y a rien de plus notable que le cri dudit General infernal, il faut se battre, ou perir. Pour expri∣mer que les trois Sectes domi∣nantes d'aujourdhui bannissent de la societé civile, & bien sou∣vent persecutent, & maltrait∣tent horriblement ceux qui ne veulent par prendre party, & devenir autant Antichrêtiens & heretiques qu'ils sont, & parti∣ciper au moins par l'applau∣dissement dans les tyrannies, inhumanitez, & guerres qu'elles exercent. J'ay montré dans mes anno∣tations sur l'Apocalypse que les malheurs causés par le 5 Ange sont passez, & que nous vivons sous les playes du 6, dont la presente guerre avec les Turcs, & entre les Chrêtiens est la pre∣miere
partie, & qu'elles doivent être suivies ou interrompues bientôt, selon mon opinion, par le tremblement de terre dont il est parlé au 13. verset du XI. Chapitre de l'Apoc. mais l'En∣glourissement de toute la multi∣tude que le Roy a veu, se fait plus terrible que le dit 13 verset. Mais ce qui est de plus nota∣ble, que tout ce qui vient d'être dit, c'est que le Roi entendit deux lamentables cris, & vit incontinent aprés le dit trem∣blement, est que l'on ait encore a essuyer une partie des mal∣heurs du septiéme Ange qui seront fort subits. La belle forêt, que le Roy vit en suite, semble marquer la face de la Chrêtienté aprés que le dit tremblement de terre aura causé, dans ceux qui la survivront; la repentance de laquelle il est parlé au dit 13. vers, du dit XI. Chap. Et il me semble que les ordres que Sa Majesté a donné pour tuer des bêtes feroces, font entendre l'accomplissement de la prophe∣tie qui dit que les dix Rois ou les Puissances seculieres seront à la fin détrompez, & se ven∣geront de la fourberie des
docteurs infernaux qui les ont si vilainement seduits pour faire des sortises si funestes par le zele d'une Religion qui est si contraire à tout ce qui est sot, & funeste, comme c'est la sin∣cere, bonne, & charitable doctrine de l'Evangile, cette Prophetie vengeresse étant d'écritte au dit 16. verset avec ces paroles trés-memorables, & les dix cornes que tu as veuës à la Beste; à savoir les dix Rois, dont il avoit parlé auparavant, sont ceux qui hairont la Paillarde & la rendrout desolée & nuë. Pleût à Dieu que ni les Ec∣clesiastiques ni les Seculiers n'eussent pas eul'audace de regler la Religion, & qu'ils eussent pris plus de soin a en observer les preceptes, & que l'on n'eut pas eu besoin de si lamentables remedes. Dieu fasse misericorde au Roy, & à tous ceux qui l'in∣voquent en esprit & verite; c'est ce qu'il souhaitte de toute son Ame. A la Haye ce 19. Nov. 1689. FINIS.
