C156 E393_13 99862095 114244
THE Intentions of the Army Discovered in a LETTER From a Gentleman residing there, to a Friend of his in LONDON: Made publike for the better Satisfa∣ction of those who desire to be truely informed of their proceedings, tendred to the view of all impartiall Readers. Written at the head Quarters, Iunii. 21. 1647. LONDON, Printed. 1647.
The Intentions of the Army discovered in a Letter from a Gentleman re∣siding there to a friend of his in LONDON. DEAR FRIEND, I Much wonder at the Rage of some men, all people Ratio∣nal may understand that our Intentions are Cordial: it is not the Advancement of our selvs that we seek after, but the peace & welfare of this bleeding Kingdom, which groans un¦der injustice and oppression: far be any thing from our thoughts, which is or may be re∣pugnant to truth and peace: we are not Ig∣norant how Contemptible we are in the eyes of some of your City, but blessed be God, otherwise thought of by the more pru∣dent,
both in City and Country: We have not so deported our selves as Justly to Incur the Rage of any men (our enemies them∣selves being Judges) though we sooner feel the sting of some, then taste their Honney: there is no great reason why I should greatly wonder, either at the Rage of men, or the Mutabillity of the times, since there is a di∣vine hand of providence in all things, which so orders all actions, as in the end they may be conducible to his Glory & our peace: but how many are there intirely Ignorant of these things which is the grand au why men drive at their own designs without respect to the Kingdoms peace: had the army driven at this design they had not been so odous in the eyes of some men as now they are: but as our thoughts are not finister, so our actions are not irregular, though so adjudged by censorious persons: we have sufficiently declared to the world that we neither intend to pul down Presbytery nor erect Independency, but attempt to implore the Parliament to  a lasting peace and civil liberty of the Kingdom, which in the pursuit whereof we
doubt not but the Lord wil so direct us as to , not upon any thing but what is really just: wonder not greatly either to see or hear of the Malignity of the spirits of men, but rather bless God who hath in so great a proportion powred forth his spirit upon a handful of men, to see Peace and truth established, Justice executed. I make no doubt but we undergo many hard censures, but since we have so glorious a pattern (the Lord Iesus) who preceded us, we shal not much value them; he was ill spoken of by the righteous Pharisee; Hemlock where ever planted wil grow pestilent, that is truth; and it is as true that the serpent with the brightest scales shrouds the most fatal ve∣nome; I wish it might not be said that men underpretence of doing justice did not tyran∣nize and oppress: I beseech the Lord so to direct the great Councel of the Kingdom, as speedily to settle the quiet thereof, that we might not so jar against each other as to ren∣der our selves unwise to present, future gene∣ations both forreign and domestick: this
poor Kingdom seems to the eye of reason to paralel a man who is dangerously wounded incurable by any but the best of Physitians, who wil not heal the wound though he sees it in a capacity of being closed before he sear∣cheth to the bottom; the State of this King∣dom is deplorable, the poor Country crie out of being opprest, and demand Justice; it would much satisfie the people if a course were taken whereby Justice were executed with truth and righteousness: the Lord so order all our affairs as that our Jarrs may procure the firmer peace; no medicinal plai∣ster can heal a wound if there be any Iron sticking in it: as the aire by the great showers and storms of rain is cleansed, so I doubt not but that all our differences will be soon appeased and truth advanced: I dare be bold to affirm that the only Aym of the body of the Army is very cordial: Dear friend I pray do me the favor as to let me understand how the wise, godly, both of the Presbytery and Independency stand affected to our proceedings, we care not ought for what
the rest of the world speak of us: So having not else, I commit you to the safe protecti∣on of him who is Universally present; re∣maining in great hast Your affectionate friend to serve you. W.C. S. ALBANS Junii 21. 1647. FINIS.
