C2747A 45789219 172531
THE KINGS MAIESTIES RESOLVTION CONCERNING, ROBERT Earl of Warwicke, Lord Admirall of His Majesties Navie Royall, Wherein is Declared the Kings full Resolution and Intention concerning his Navie, now lying upon the Downs. With the Earl of Warwicks Declaration to both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and the Oath taken by all his Captains, Lieutenants, and other Inferiour Officers, under his Command, belonging to the fleet. Also the Proceedings of the Earl of Warwicke and Sir Iohn Pennington, lying neer to the said Earl with a great Number of Cavaleers near the Downs. Ordered, that this be forthwith published in Print, JOHN BROWN, Cler. Parl, Wherunto is annexed, exceeding joyfull Newes from Ireland, being the Copy of a Letter read in the House of Commons on Saturday last, Iuly the 8. Ordered that this be Printed and published, Hen. Eising. Cler. Parl. Com. D. Printed for J. SMITH July. 12 1642.
THE KINGS MAIESTIES RESOLUTION Concerning the Earle of WARWICK. THe differences be∣twixt His Royall Majestie and the high Court of Parliament, are apparently known and made manifest; insomuch, that the Subject is so vehemently distracted, that the differences betwixt the Head and the Body, are not, nor will not be suddainly brought to an end, or full period; His Majestie standeth for his Prerogative, and the Parliament for their priviledges, two great matters now in dissent between
His Majesty and the Parliament, busines∣ses of no little Consequence: yet this is not all the Concroversie which is betwixt the King and Parliament, but the Lawes and Liberties of the Subject is in great dissent betwixt His Royall Majesty and the Honourable Court of Parliament, and the subject is in a great perplexity, by rea∣son of the differences now in contention, not knowing how to obey the Preroga∣tive nor priviledges, the prerogative stan∣ding for the Honour and Dignity of His Royall person, the priviledge for the Li∣berty and Freedom of the Subject. But the placing of Officers by the Ho∣nourable Court of Parliament, without the consent of His Majesty, hath been the Cause of many Distempers arising from his Majesties Royall Breast, all which be∣ing for the good and safety of the whole Kingdome, by reason of the great danger this Kingdom were in, and the great haz∣zard of ruine that were like to befall this Nation, had not they out of their judici∣ous care took into consideration the dan∣ger
that were like to insue, happy are we to escape such a design. His Majesty taking into consideration, the Government of his Navie Royall, his will and pleasure was, That Sir John Pen∣nington should have the place of Admiral ship resigned unto him, being against his Majesties will and pleasure, that the Earl of Warwicke should enjoy that place any longer, and to that end and purpose did send a Message to the Earl of Warwicke to give up his place, and that he should o∣bey his speciall Command, which was, that he should resign his place to S. John Pennington, the said Sir John being neer unto him, expecting the Receit therof. His Majesty were likewise Resolved, that he should not enjoy that place any longer, but that He should obey his Com∣mand therin. The Earl of Warwicke having received this Message and Command from his Ma∣jesty, wherin was specified his full Reso∣lution and intention, being much per∣plexed, thinking and conceiving it a
matter of no small consequence, which he was entrusted with, being for the de∣fence of HIs Majesties Royall Person, and the safeguard of the whole Kingdom, knowing the integrity of his own heart both to His Majestie and the Parliament, he resolved not to desert that charge committed to his trust, wherein God since his beginning hath prospered him with such happy and fortunate successe; and therefore he set down his full Reso∣lution, that he would not resigne that place, but to continue it; untill he should be revoked by that Authoritie which hath entrusted him with it. Which Resolution he declared like∣wise to all His Majesties Captains, at a meeting which he had appointed for that purpose; and at the same time, they unanimously and cheerfully took the same Resolution; taking many solemn Vowes and Protestations, to continue the same as long as breath remained in their bodies, and that they would for the per∣formance thereof, seale it with their
dearest blood; being a token and wit∣nesse of their fervent love and affection, which they beare both to their King and Country, vowing to maintain the same to the utmost of their power. And that His Person which the Ho∣nourable House of Peeres and Commons, had set over them to be their Governour, meaning the Right Honourable the Earl of WARWICK, should never take the least blemish, so long as they were able to performe any service to his Lordship, the Resolution of them being so constant and true, that such men of spirits were never known, which we must all attribute to the great God of Heaven and Earth only. So I beseech the Lord of Heaven to con∣tinue them in the same Minds and Re∣solutions, which they have most faithful∣ly and unanimously expressed to the vast world, ingenerall, All Nations admiring at the Courage of those men, thinking it to be the won∣derfull work of God, that such courage and truth should ever into the heart of
man, but we must think and conceive with our selves, that it was the Lords will and pleasure, to endue those Chri∣stian hearts with such gracious and om∣nipotent gifts. Thus may we all see, the miraculous Actions and Proceedings which the Lord entrusteth with his servants. The Proceedings in Yorkshire and Lan∣cashire the last week, were very tumultuous, there appearing divers in a warlike man∣mer in those Counties. But praised be God, although wee have but little comfort here in England, yet we have most happy and ioyfull News from Ireland, the Earl of Ormond ha∣ving fought a great Battell with the Rebels, putting above 2000. to the sword, with little losse, the which Letter was read in the House of Commons on Saturday last, and Ordered to be forthwith Printed. Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com. Ordered that this be printed and pu blished. John Brown Cler. Par.
