C3600 E451_13 99864670 161929
THE RESOLUTION OF HIS HIGHNESSE, The Prince of Wales, CONCERNING His coming into England, to assist his Royall Father the KING. And his Declaration touching a Personall Treaty betwixt the Kings Majesty and both Houses of Parliament. LIKEWISE,  Declaration, concerning the proceedings of the Right Honourable the Lord Cravn, touching his coming into England to assist his Royall Soveraign. nd the proceedings of the Royalists in Sussex, concer∣ning their seizing upon severall Castles for His Maj and the Resolution of the Trained Bands thereupon. Also exceeding strange newes from the Couny of Kent, and Hounsley-Heath. ICH DIEN printer's or publisher's device LONDON▪ Printed for
A Declaration of the Royalists of Kent, touching their present proceedings against Col∣lonel Rich, and his Forces. SIR, THe three Castles yet hold out, but Col. Rich useth his utmost indeavours to reduce them, and a better account might have been given of the proceedings here, but that for want of an In∣genier, the Morterpece could not be used, but now an Ingenier is come, and works ae rased, and all preparations for battery are in a reaiesse, we have but a few men, but those are resolute, and watch and work couragiously; upon the Sout side of Walmor Castle, we have raised a battery from whence we can do good execution, and very probably the Castle will be regained before this come to your hands, which being done, a good account will quickly be given of the other; some light skirmishes have hap∣pened
between us and the enemy, but nothing yet remarkable, thy are 150. within the Castle, and we but 200. in the Works, our foot in this County are not above 500. 200 of which are at Poyer, and ano∣ther part at Sandwich, where they have imployment enought to keepe all quiet there, the people here are extreamly disaffected to us; more then in any other place, neither will they afford us any provision, no not for our money, except we take it by force or vio∣lence, we hear that the Prince is suddenly expected at Caelice, if not already there, much debate hath been whether Prince Rupert or the Earl of Newcastle, shall be Generall of the English Forces, who with the Prince and all the Gallants of Court are to passe from Callis to Dunkerk, and so to Barwick to joyne with Langdale, it is not yet resolved, whether the Duke of York, or the Lord German shall be Admirall, but for Vic-Admirall, the Lord Willoughby of Par∣ham is appoined. The 11. Revoled Ships are Victu∣alling in Holland for 6. months, and are there to be furnished with all necessaries, with an addition of 14. Sayle of Dutch. Also 4. Regiments of low Coun∣trey Souldiers, with some Dutch are to come over in those Revolted Ships; but to return to our own busi∣nesse, we have finished two batteries against Walmor Castle, and a runing trench mae from Sea to Sea, part of it not being Pistoll shot from the Castle, ne∣verthelesse, if they continue obstinate, and will not yead upon any conditions, but within 24. houres, we doub not but to have it in our pssession, Deale Castle is relieed with supply from France, which makes them so high, that it is thought they will▪ not
accept of quarter and if supplyes be all laid, they wil prove the more trouble to reduce. From the Leagure before Sandwich Iuly 4. 1648. The Demonstration of the free born people within the County of Sussex, touching their present procee∣dings for the Kings Majesty, &c. SIR. WEE feare we shall be imbroyled in blood in this County which now is the condition of many parts of England, for a party is risen in divers parts of this County, but espcially at Hors and Bulorouh they yet are most Count men, none of any great quality assists th, some of the Trained Ban take part wi them, and the Countrey men  chosen em leaders of the best their Company affords, and exrcise continually, at Horsham they be∣gan first to rise, occasioned thus. The Magzie at Horsham, for the more security was by some thought good to be removed to Arundell, but the Towns∣men and Countrey would not consent but by parties watch it day and night; but at the last they reolved to Arme themselves and as they said, fight for King Charles, upon which cōmotion, 300. presently Armed themselves, and in 24. houres space, 600. were ga∣thered together, and increase hourely, and upon no∣tice of this Rising at Horsham, they likewise rose
at Pulborough, and all that part of the County ad∣joyning to Hampshire, and those about Pulborough, all those parts are drawn up towards Chichester, with an intent if possible, to seize and make good either that Citie or Arundel Castle, parties are likewise coming unto them from Brighthelmston, Shoram, Steining, and those parts, so that now I blieve there will be never 800 in that part of the Countie, and if they can possess the Holds▪ they intend to make good Bramley Castle, and Beeding Bridge, and so make good all on that side the water, we understand that those at Horsham are speedily to joyn with them, if not prevented, and so to keepe together in a body, the better to make good them∣selves against oppsition; But we heere that Forces re comming from the Parliament to suprise them; whi will procure a good cource, and so to take them of in th Bud or else they, I prove very trou∣blesome to suppress,  this is a very Malignant County and they will soone be  strong party, and I heare if once they should get the strength of the County into their hands that the Trained Bands wovld take part with them, the Garison at Shoram and Brighthelmston, swar to assist them what may be, and that they should want neither Ordinance nor nothing else that they can supply them with, and they say that if a party come they will assist them in maintaining good of the Town, the well affected ga∣ther together about Lewes, whither is gone Captain Shepheard, Captain Freeman, and others, and I believe those Eastern parts of the County will be forward to assist against the Malignant party, and as soone as
any forces come, or any action hath past between them, I will give you a full Relation, but for the present this is all from▪ Steining Iuly the 5. 1648. Your loving Friend, S. G. A Declaration of the Prince of Wales, and the proceedings of the LordCraven, touching the KINGS MAIESTY. Right Honoured, SInce my last dated the 23. of June, new stile, we have received intelligence, that his Highnesse the Prince of Wales, (for some reasons objected) hath changed his Resolution for England, and is not resol∣ved to engage with the Maqusse of Newcastle, to joyn with Sir Marmaduke Landale, against the Ar∣my of England commanded by the Lord Fairfax, but hath declared, Tht h will not engage for a new Le∣vy, (in Relation to Martiall Discipline) against his Native Countrey▪ untill such time, that he hth re∣ceived full intimation touching te present procee∣dings betwixt his Royall Father, and the Prlament of England, concerning their agement for a prso∣nall Treaty, And it is further reported, That upon information of the proceeding of Si Marmaduke Langdale, touching his insuing out of Warrants, in
the name of his Highness the P. of Wales, his High∣nesse hath declared, That he never (as yet) counte∣nanced their Dsign for the levying of another new War within the Bowels of England, but utterly de∣sisted against the same, saying; that the purple Chan∣nel of England had been too much dyed with the blood of Loyalty, and that he desired a generall Act of Oblvian, that so the Sword might be sheathed, all differences composed, and the pesent Commoti∣ons within his Fathers bleeding Kingdoms immedi∣ately setled. Yesterday, there was a great Rumour throughout this City, That the Lord Craven had a Design for England, to engage for the King, against the Parliament, but this Rumour were blasted in the bud efore it came to ripenesse; our maturity for it doth evidently appear that there was no such Design ever incended by his Lordship; but upon the Treaty and Articles of agreement, between the King of Spain and the States of Holland, his Lordship did de∣clare at the hed of his Regment to the Officers and Souldiery. That if they had a desire to engage against any Enmy whatsoever, that were opposie to the true faith of Christianity, he would sacrifice his life with them; but to engage against England, he was re∣solved; to the contrary. As for the Revolted Ships, there is littl newes of them; but by the next you shal heare further from Your most assured friend, William Vandere. Delph in Holland Iuly 2. 1648. This day there was a great rumour in the City of London concerning a party of horse randvouzing at Hounslow-heath for the King, as also another party in Kent, the particulars whereof I shall wave for the present. July 5. 1648. FINIS.
