C4064B 45789232 172542
ARTICLES CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical; To be Enquired of within the DIOCESE OF LINCOLN, AT THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God JAMES Lord Bishop of that Diocese. Anno Domini 1697. LONDON, Printed for John Everingham Bookseller, at the Star in Ludgate-street. 1697.
The Form of the Oath to be Ad∣ministred to the Church-VVar∣dens & Side-men of every Parish. YOU shall Swear to make True Presentment, according to the Book of Articles given You in Charge, as far as You know, and by Law You are Bound, without Fear or Favour of any Person. So help You God.
ARTICLES CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical, &c. IN The Diocese of LINCOLN. TIT. I. Concerning Churches, and Chappels, and the Furniture belonging to them. 1. IS your Parish-Church or Chappel well and suffi∣ciently repaired, the Windows glazed,1. Canon 8 not stopped up, the Floor evenly paved, and the Seats conve∣nient for Kneeling and Sitting, and the whole Church clean and Decent? 2. Is there in the Church or Chappel a Font of Stone with a Cover to it, standing in the usual Place?2. Canon 81, 82. Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel, covered in time of Divine-Service, with a Carpet of Silk or Stuff, and, at the time of Administring the Holy Com∣munion, with a fair Linnen Cloath? have you a Patin for the Bread, and a Chalice for the Wine with a Cover,
and one or more Flaggons preserved and kept for this Use, and not imployed for any other? 3 Have you a decent Surplice for the Minister to use at the time of Divine Service,3. Canon 58. provided and duly washed at the charge of the Parish? 4.4. Canon 83, 80. Have you in the Church or Chappel a convenient Seat or Pew for the Reading of Divine Service; a Pul∣pit with a Cloath or Cushion; a Large Bible of the last Translation; Two Books of Common-prayer for the Minister and Clerk, well Bound; The Book of Homi∣lies set forth by Authority; The Book of Canons; A Printed lable of the Degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited? 5.5. Canon 70. Have you a Register-Book of Parchment of the Day and Year of all Christenings, Weddings and Burials in your Parish; Also a Book for the Church-wardens Accounts, and a strong Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep all the said Books, and the forementioned Furniture? TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, Houses, Glebe, Tithes and Possessions belonging to the Church. 1.1. Canon 85. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced, and care∣fully kept with Walls, Pales, or Rails, as has been accustomed? are the Trees therein preserved? has any part of it been separated from it, or any Door made into it? 2.2. Lindwood de Eccles. Aediffi. Is the House of the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, with all the Out-houses thereunto belonging, kept in good and sufficient Repair? Have any of the said Houses been
defaced or pulled down without Licence, and by whom? Have any Incroachments been made upon the same, and by whom? 3. Have you a true Terrier of all the Gleab-lands, Mea∣dows,3. Canon 87. Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cottages be∣longing to the Parsonage or Vicarage? Have you a par∣ticular of the Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portion of Tithes, either within or without your Parish, and other yearly Profits belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? Have any inclosures been made in your Parish to the De∣triment of the Church, by the decay of Tillage; and converting Arable Land into Pasture? Is your Terrier entred in the Bishops Registry? TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. 1. IS your Minister Episcopally ordained,1. Canon 36. and Licensed by the Bishop himself? Hath he been legally in∣ducted? and hath he Read the thirty nine Articles within the Time by Law appointed, and declared his Assent thereunto? 2. Is your Minister suspected to have obtained his Benefice by any Simoniacal Contract?2. Canon 40. 3. Is your Minister constantly resident in the Parish?3 Canon 45, 47. does he Preach every Lords Day, unless hindred by sick∣ness, or reasonable absence? How long in any one year hath he been absent from his Cure? Hath he a Licensed Curate to assist him in his absence or presence? and what Yearly Stipend doth he allow him? Doth he supply any other Cure besides, or hath he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? 4. Doth your Parson, Vicar or Curate,4. Act of Uni∣formity. in reading the
Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the Ho∣ly Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women, Burial of the Dead, and Pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use the form and words prescribed in the Book of Common-Prayer? doth he observe all such Rites and Ceremonies as are appoint∣ed in that Book, so far as you know? 5.5. Canon 53. Act of Uni∣formity. Doth your Minister at the Reading and Celebrating Divine Offices, wear the Surplice, together with the Ha∣bit suitable to his Degree? And doth he read the Service with an audible and distinct Voice? 6.6. Canon 21, 26. Doth he frequently administer the Sacrament of the Lords-Supper, so often, as that every Parishioner may re∣ceive it thrice at the least in every year? And doth he keep back such as ought not to be admitted, giving an account of them to the Bishop? 7.7. Canon 57, 61. Doth he diligently instruct the Youth of the Parish in the Church Catechism; and when they are instructed, doth he, as there is opportunity, present them to be con∣firmed by the Bishop? 8.8. Canon 67, 68, 69. Ru∣bric. of Pri∣vate Baptism. Doth he neglect or refuse to Visit Sick Persons? Doth he delay to Baptize Infants that are in danger of Death? Or being so Baptized and recovering afterwards, does he take care that they be brought into the Church with Godfathers and Godmothers; that the Congrega∣tion may be satisfied of the Baptizing thereof? Is there any Child past Infancy, or other Persons grown up, who, through your Ministers default, remains yet Un∣baptized in your Parish? 9.9. Canon 62, 63. Injunct. Hath your Minister Married any Persons in pri∣vate Houses? Or such as being under Age, have not the consent of Parents or Guardians? or without the publi∣cation of Banns, unless by a License duly obtained? Or at any other hours than between eight and twelve a
Clock in the Forenoon? Or, at any hour, any Persons that are prohibited to Marry according to the Table of Marriage? Or such as neither of them dwell in the Parish? 10. Doth your Minister publish the Holy days and Fasting days,10. Canon 64.3. Jac. 1. c. 1.6. & 7. Gul. 3. and doth he read Divine Service appointed to be read those days? Doth he on the fifth of November yearly, after Morning Prayer or Sermon, read the Act for Publick Thanksgiving on that day? And doth he read the Act for the more effectual suppressing Prophane Cur∣sing and Swearing, four several times in the year, on the four several Sundays appointed in that Act? 11. Is your Minister Sober, Grave and Peaceable in his Behaviour? Is he decent in his Apparel?11. Canon 74, 75. Is he a fre∣quenter of Taverns or Ale-Houses, a Common Gamester, a Swearer, Railer or Quarreller? Is he vehemently sus∣pected of Incontinency with any Person either within the Parish or without? 12. Have you a Lecturer in your Church or Chappel? Is he Licensed according to the Act of Uniformity?12. Act of Uniformity. Doth he, upon the first Lords day in every Month, read Divine Service, and Perform what the said Act requires? Hath he a Benefice with Cure of Souls elsewhere? if he have, where and at what distance? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. 1. DO the Parishioners when they come to Church or Chappel, behave themselves reverently du∣ring the time of Divine Service and Preaching?1. Canon 18. Act of Uni- do they Kneel at the Prayers and Sacrament, and Stand up, when the Creeds and Gospel are read? Do they repeat the Confession, Lords-Prayer and Creeds with the Minister, and make such other Answers as are ap∣pointed
in the Book of Common-Prayer, and say Amen aubl at the onclsion of every Collect? 2 I there y Persn in your Parish,2. Can. 109. who lieth un∣dr a common Fame or Suspicion of Aultery, Fonicati∣on or Icest?  there any common Drunkards, Swear∣ers or Blasphemer of Gods Name? O any that are no∣ted to be filthy Talkes, Railers, Sowers of Sedition, Faction and Dscod among their Neighbours? 3.3.5. and 6. Ed. 6.4. & 5. Gul. & Mar. Are there any of your Parish, who, upon Sundays keep their Shops open, or follow their bodily and ordina∣ry Labour, or permit their Servants so to do? Or do any Vintners, Innkeepers or other Victuallers, and Sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any Person, to tipple or game in their Houses on that day? 4.4. Rubr. after the Com∣munion. Canon 85. Are there any of your Parish that neglect or refuse to pay thier Easter Offering;; or to pay the Rates sett for the Repairs of the Church or Chappel, or any thing thereunto belonging? 5.5. Canon 99. Are there any in your Parish who live as Man and Wife, that are known, or suspected not to be Married, or any Living as Man and Wife, who are within the de∣grees prohibited? 6 Have any Legacies been left to your Church or Chappel, or to the Minister, or to the Poor, or for any other Pi ous or Charitable use, that have been unpaid, mis-spent, or embezzelled? 7.7. Canon 19. Act for ex∣empt. Prot. Dissent. Are there any that Loiter in the Church-yard or near the Church, in time of Divine Service or Sermon? Or any that wholly neglect all Publick Worship of God, nei∣ther going to Church, nor to any Assembly pretending to Worship God elsewhere, in Places licensed according to a late Act for exempting his Majesties Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penal∣ties of certain Laws?
8. Have you any such Assembly of Dissenters in your Parish? Do they, so far as you know, observe the Di∣rections and Limitations of the aforesaid Act? 9.9. Can. 112. Are there any who profess to live in the Communi∣on of the Church of England, who neglect to come to the Sacrament of the Lords-Supper, being of Age fit to receive it? 10. Do you know, or have you heard of any in your Parish, who having a Presentation of an Ecclesiastical Li∣ving, hath made any Simoniacal Compact or Gain thereby, either in Moneys, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes or Glebe belonging to the Benefice? 11. Have any Pews, Galleries or Seats been erected in your Church or Chappel, without License from the Or∣dinary? Is there any Strife or Contention about Seats in your Church? or any Seats broken and unrepaired? TIT. V. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers, 1.1. Can. 127. HAve any Ordinaries or Ecclesiastical Judges ap∣pointed Surrogates or Registrars, that are Pro∣moters or Assisters of Clandestine Marriages, or have ta∣ken Rewards or Gifts for perverting Justice, or are noted for Intemperance, Incontinence, or other Scandalous Vice? 2. Do any Ecclesiastical Judges, Officials or Surrogates,2. Can. 37. grant Licenses to any Minister coming to reside in this Diocese to Preach, Read, Catechize, or Administer the Sacraments, or to exercise any other Ecclesiastical Functi∣on, unless he first consent, and subscribe to the three Ar∣ticles in Can. 36. in the Presence of the Bishop? 3. Do the said Ecclesiastical Officers, when a Benefice
is vacant, commit Sequestrations to honest and sufficient Men, that do answer and account truly for the Profits during the Vacancy? Are the Parishes provided with able Ministers during the Vacancy? 4.4. Can. 123. Do any Ecclesiastical Judges, speed any Judicial Act, without the Registrar of the Court, or his lawful Deputy, or in their absence, without such Persons as are allowed in that behalf? 5.5. Can. 126. Do the Officers in Peculiar Jurisdictions and Inferi∣our Courts, exhibit the Original Copies of Wills into the Principal Register-Office? 6.6. Canon. An. 1571. Hath any Ecclesiastical Officer commuted' the Pe∣nance of any Delinquent convicted? How has the Money been disposed of? 7.7. Can. 135. Hath any Ecclesiastical Officer demanded and taken any unlawful Fees that you know of? TIT. VI. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons. 1.1. Canon 91. HAve you a Parish Clerk aged 21 years at least? Is he of an honest Life and Conversation? Is he sufficiently qualified to perform his Duty in Reading and Singing? Is he chosen by your Minister? Doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services in the Church? Are his Wages duly paid him? Or who with holds the same from him? 2. Doth your Sexton perform his Duty diligently, in keeping the Church and Chancel clean and decent, and Tolling and Ringing he Bells, at due times before Divine Service, as well upon other days, as upon Sundays?
TIT. VII. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School-Masters, &c. 1. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almshouse,1. Canon 77, 78, 79. or Free-School? who was the Founder, and is now the Patron thereof? Are the Revenues thereof rightly Employed, according to the Intention of the Founder, and the Statutes and Orders made concerning the same? 2. Doth any Man keep School in your Parish who is not Licensed thereunto by the Bishop? Is your School∣master a Diligent and Sober Man? Does he teach his Scholars the Church Catechism? Does he cause them to repair to the Church or Chappel on Sundays, and other Days, when there is Divine Service, and see that they behave themselves quietly and reverently? 3.3. 3 Hen. 8.11. Doth any Man in your Parish practise Physick or Chirurgery, or any Woman exercise the Office of a Midwife without License from the Ordinary? TIT. VIII. Concerning Church-Wardens and Side-Men. 1.1. Canon 8. ARE the Church-Wardens yearly and duly chosen by the joint consent of your Minister and Pari∣shioners, or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? 2.2. Ibid. Have the former and last Church Wardens given a true Account of the Moneys they have received, and laid out for the use of the Church? And have they de∣livered up the Moneys remaining in their hands, (if any
be) to the succeeding Church-Wardens, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? 3.3. Canon 18. Do they sufler no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by Men or Women, Servants or Children, by walk∣ing or talking, or any other way, in your Church or Chappel? 4 Do the Minister and Church-Wardens provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread,4. Canon 20. Rubr. after the Commu∣nion. and good Wine, according to the number of Communicants, at the Charge of the Parish? 5.5. Rubr. after the Commu∣nion. Is the Money given at the Offertory, disposed of to Pious and Charitable Uses, as the Minister and Church∣Wardens think fit? FINIS.
