C6910 E693_10 99866120 166503
THE CRYES OF ENGLAND to the PARLIAMENT, For the CONTINUANCE of GOOD ENTERTAINMENT To the LORD JESUS his EMBASSADORS: Collected as they came up from the severall Counties. Wherein you have, 1. The Calling, Benefit, and Maintenance of the Godly Mi∣nistry of England attested. 2. The endeavors of the wicked one to root it out, (though but by withdrawing its Maintenance) abominated. 3. And the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, own'd and encouraged. London, Printed for Tho. Ʋnderhill, at the Sign of the Blue Anchor in S. Pauls Church-Yard, 1653.
To the Honourable, the Parliament of the Common∣wealth of England. The humble Petition of us Gentlemen, Free holders, and other Inhabitants in the County of WILTS. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners having to their unspeakable grief ob∣served the workings of Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of light, tending to the undermining of holiness and Christian Religion, by a generation of men who cry down Learning, Ministry, Ordinances, and almost whatever belongs to us as Christians or Civill men. And having observed the en∣deavours of some, by so many waies to disturb and remove the so long setled way for the maintenance of Ministers, established by the same Lawes by which any property is injoyed in this Na∣tion, without any regard to the setling of a sure and full mainte∣nance in stead of it, Conceive themselves bound in Conscience both of Duty to God and to the Commonwealth, to give in their testimony against them in their practices. We dare not be silent, when in the Language and the workings of many amongst our selves, the Ministry and Ordinances of Jesus Christ are so ma∣nifestly exposed, not only to the insultings of men openly and professedly profane; but (which is more to be lamented) to the scorn and contempt of such as pretend to great lights in Reli∣gion, which do so manifestly tend not only to the utter subversi∣on of all Religion, but, as a necessary consequence of it, to the destruction and dissolution of all bonds of Civil Government. To whom under heaven should we make our moan, and before whom should we spread our complaints, but before your Ho∣nors? to whom we cannot but with all thankfulness acknowledg the goodness of God toward this Nation, in governing and dis∣posing your Honors hearts at such a time as this, when there are
so many desperate suggestions and attempts against Universities, Ordinances, Ministry, and their necessary Maintenance, to declare your selves, as you have done, real countenancers and supporters of them all; which gives the godly of this Nation ground of hope the Lord will further honour you to be instruments for e∣stablishing and countenancing of all these, for the glory of his great Name, and for the setling of the Gospel in purity and pow∣er, to be a blessed inheritance to succeeding generations; and to whom we thought it our duty in our places to declare that your Petitioners, in consent (as we humbly conceive) with the people of God generally in this Land (whatsoever some suggest to the contrary) do greatly rejoice in those your Christian act∣ings, that so your hands may be strengthned in the work of God; and therefore are farther encouraged to make their humble ad∣dresses to this Honourable Assembly, with these (as we con∣ceive) necessary requests. 1. That by your wisdom and care, the Ordinances of Jesus Christ may be countenanced and preserved from the scorn, contempt, and profane neglect, to which they are exposed, both by some Ministers themselves, who give too much occasion thereof by their ignorance and scandalous living, old empty formalities still continued, and also by many others both profane and humorous persons. 2. That Pastours and Teachers for the work of the Ministry, and edifying of the body of Christ, may with the like wisdom and care be countenanced, your Petitioners being well assured that it will be a very acceptable service to Jesus Christ, your Lord and ours, to own and encourage those Embassadors of his, to whom he hath committed the word of Reconciliation, and with whom he hath promised to be to the end of the world, and in whom we have found (by sweet expe∣rience) upon our souls, the power and the sense of Jesus Christ accord∣ing to his promises. 3. That as the Lord of old setled the Schools of the Prophets a∣mongst his peculiar people, and hath blessed our Ʋniversities and Schools of Learning, for the breeding up and sending forth many choice instruments of his glory, both in Church and Commonwealth; so you would be pleased to continue our Ʋniversities, and other Schools of Learning under your special care and protection. 4. That for preserving the Ministry from contempt, freeing them
from the temptation of men-pleasing and humane dependencies, from distracting diversions in the work of the Lord, enabling them to works of mercy, and for supplying them with necessary provisions for their Studies and Families, that so they which preach the Gospel, may live of the Gospel; Your Honours would be pleased to continue their maintenance, with necessary enlargement in those places where means are wanting. These things we humbly and earnestly request of your Honors; and who knows whether God hath not raised you up for such a time as this is? in the performance whereof, you shall the more engage the Lord Jesus to defend both you and us, who hath so eminently appeared hitherto in our preservation, and will be the surest defence of those that act for him: and you shall also make glad the hearts of the godly in this Land, stop the mouths of those who are so ready to speak evil of you, and also prevent the designs of those who are contrary mind∣ed, and further oblige us to pray. The Gentlemen of the County being called in, had thanks, and a good Answer: but for its not being affix'd verbatim, they may thank themselves, because they did not commit it to the care of a Stationer.
To the Supreme Authoritie of the Nation, the Parlia∣ment of the Commonwealth of England. The Humble Petition of the County of South-Hampton, Subscri∣bed at the late Assizes held at Winton, by the Grand Jury and neer 8000 of the Gentry, Free-holders, and other Inhabitants of the said County. Humbly sheweth, THat your Petitioners (informed by the Word of God) are very sensible, that the enjoyment of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ (by fit men set apart to that sacred work) is to be esteemed the choicest mercy wherein any people are blessed of God; and the removal thereof after such enjoy∣ment, the greatest judgment threatned or inflicted on any Nation. With much thankfulnesse we acknowledg the goodnesse of God blessing this Nation of ours, even above others our Neigh∣bours, with this rich Priviledg; and which (notwithstanding our own unworthinesse, and all the oppositions of Satan and his Instruments) he hath been pleased for many years past, and un∣to this present, to continue among us. What a Blessing this Nation hath enjoyed in a learned and godly Ministry, honoured by the Reformed Churches abroad; what a testimony it hath had from heaven, in the conversion of Multitudes from the power of Satan unto God; what their la∣bours and sufferings have been, contending for the Faith, against Popish, Arminian, and other Adversaries; (wherein we are in these present times more sensible then ever of the need of their labours) are things so clear, that there are very few but will ac∣knowledg. That this mercy hath been continued amidst those great op∣positions which godly Ministers have met withall, next to the goodnesse of God, we cannot but thankfully acknowledg and a∣scribe it unto your many Acts and Declarations, both for a set∣led Maintenance and continuance thereof, with liberal Aug∣mentations allowed by you, to the great incouragement of those who are imployed in that sacred Work. Neverthelesse we have with much sadnesse observed the act∣ings
of many, in sundry places of the Nation, who by their pro∣fess'd opposition to their Office and Maintenance, have and stil do busily endeavour the discouragement and destruction of the godly Ministry of the Nation. And this so boldly attempted, even during the sitting of this Parliament (which hath so emi∣nently declared and appeared to the contrary) fils the hearts of many of the godly with jealousies, fearing lest by such attempts they be at length deprived of this Mercy; and with it, of all the visible profession of Religion. For should such endeavours prosper (which the Lord in mercy prevent, by making your Ho∣nours continued instruments to stand in the gap) we sadly ap∣prehend how great the triumphs would be of Jesuits, and all o∣ther profess'd adversaries of the Truth: The advantage Satan hath already made of the present contempt of the Ministry, suf∣ficiently discovering how sad the consequence would be of their utter removall. Therefore out of a due respect to the glory of God, the good of souls, the peace of the Church, the preservation and purity of Religi∣on, the welfare of the Nation, and faithfully to discharge our own duty, for the countenance of Learning, the preservation and encouragement of those that labour in the Lords work; We do earnestly desire, that laying to heart the Interest of Christ, (who will shortly be your Judg and ours) your Honours would seriously consider these our humble Requests and Proposals. 1. That the Universities, with other Schools and Nurseries of Religion and Learning, may be continued, and enjoy what God hath given them by Benefactors. 2. That you would continue to speak comfortably to those who teach the knowledg of God; that their hands may be strengthened in the work of the Ministry, the disturbers of them repressed, all due encouragement afforded; particularly, that Tythes, and other their present setled Maintenance may be con∣tinued unto them, untill some other as full and certain a way thereof may be found out and confirmed upon them. 3. That unsavoury Salt may be cast out: and such as know not the worth of Souls, and are onely skilful to destroy them, may be removed.
Lastly, That there be a setled Order established according to the Word of God, for admitting of persons Orthodox, and fitly qualified, into that work of the Ministry: And your Petitioners shall alwayes pray, &c. Friday 8. of April, 1653. THE House being informed that divers Ham-Shire Gentle∣men were at the Door, they were called in, and being come to the Bar, Major Hooker informed the Parliament, that he, with Cap. Terrye and Cap. Chase, were desired by the Justices of the Bench, Grand Jury, and Gentlemen of the County of South-hampton, Free-holders, & Inhabitants of the said Coun∣ty, to present their Petition to the Parliament; and did thereupon present a Petition to the House, which after the Petitioners were withdrawn, was read, and was Intituled, The Petition of the County of South-hampton, subscribed at the late Assizes by the Grand Jury and neer Eight thousand of the Gentry, Free-hol∣ders, and other Inhabitants of the said County. Resolved, That the Petitioners be called in, and that Mr. Speaker do give them the thanks of the Parliament; and let them know, that some of the matters contained in the Petition are already, under consideration, and that the rest shall be taken into consi∣deration in due time. The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by com∣mand of the House, gave them this answer: Gentlemen, The House hath read your Petition, and consider∣ed seriously of it, and hath commanded me to give you thanks. And in their name I do give you thanks. And I am further to let you know, that the Parliament have many of the matters contained in the Petition under consideration, and that they will take the rest into consideration in due time. Hen. Scobell Cleric. Parliament'. FINIS. London, Printed for Th. Ʋnderhill, at the Sign of the Blue Anchor in Paul's Church-Yard, 1653.
