d1707 e107_11 50290044 155991
JULY, 18. A DIURNALL out of the NORTH: OR, The daily Occurrences of this Weeke, with every particular Passage at YORKE and BEVERLEY, unto this present 16. of Iuly. 1642. THis day the King desired to see his Army knit in a Posture, and rode tho∣rough and about them three or foure times very gallantly mounted and Armed, the entire Body still faced which way so∣ever he rode, or passed by them, and stooping all their Colours together▪
made a shoute of an houre long to Congratulate his Person; the number and men (both Comman∣ders and private Soldiers) very considerable (how∣ever talkt on and slighted) especially in their ala∣crity and forwardnesse to obey his Majestie, though the middle sort of the Country at first seem'd to stand in a pause or cogitation what to resolve, but now, every day more and more come and send in supply of Men, Horses, money, and provision, the King hath wonne upon them so by his Protestati∣ons and disposition towards the Country. There was certaine Carts of Provision inten∣ded out of Lincolnshire to Hull, interposed others thinke, rather betrayed willingly by those that had the Conduct to this side, and the suggestion is not unlikely because the men are are thankt; and is very credible the Common people of that Coun∣try, doe begin to deny what they were lately, and breake forth into murmures. But the wisdome of our Parliament having plac'd such faithfull and a∣ble men there, who are of sufficient power and eminencie in the Countrey, discharge their Im∣ployment with a great deale of discretion and safety. And if their wisdomes doe not suddenly con∣trive some supply for Hull, it may fall into an un∣expected strait, for the Towne begins to fall into parties and combustion amongst themselves, and Sir Iohn finds it a hard taske to make his Com¦mands be obeyed, pray God direct all things for the best.
There is privately come over divers Comman∣s for Horse, and some supply of money, as ap∣peared by a Moneths pay to the Souldery, but how from whom is not knowne, nor doe the Souldiers make it their enquiry, suffices that they find it in their pockets, the Prince, whome the Cavaleers stile Captaine Stewart, Commands as brave a Troope as ever came into Field, and some two dayes before the remove to Beverley, exercised them a the Head himselfe, and with a countenance & beha∣viour so full of reservednesse and manhood, that (without flattery) it much amazed the beholders, and one might read their admiration in their looks. The Knights and Gentry of his Troope, present∣ed him at his comming into the Field, and as he lest his Caroach, by him that had the right hand of the Troope, with a very goodly white Horse, trapped most richly to the ground with Velvet all studded with burning waves of Gold, and a rich Tent for that dayes purpose, he put on a very curi∣ous guilt Armor, and straight way mounted his gal∣lant Present, with generall acclamations through the Field, for though his Troope compleately con∣sists but of Two Hundred Horse, yet there was to wae upon him, an infinite number of young Spi∣rits martially habited, and bravely hors't, and of all sorts at least 40000. who followed him to the Towne with continuall shouts. There had like to have bene the next day, (though the occasion fell out that morne about some terme of comparison) a dangerous falling out, between
one Colonell Vavasor, (a very goodly Gentle∣man, and gratious with his Majesty,) and a Knight of the Princes Troope, but his Majesty had time∣ly notice of it, sent for them, and made a timely reconcilement, and that which gave another faire interpretation of his disposition, was concerning some Citizens or Tradesmen, who it seemes com∣peld by distresse of Trade, to leave London to see Yorke, and having taken a Shop or two, the Townes∣men not▪ onely grudg'd their long being there, but one Evening sell upon them, threw their wares a∣bout the Street, and beate them saying, Those that drove the King from LONDON, should not drive him from YORKE. This grew to such a strife, that the Lord Major told it to his Majesty, who was heard to say, The meanest Subject or Citizen was as deare to him in their true affection, as the greatest, and that no good Subject should want his protection. The Arch-Bishop doth feast his Majesty very sumptuously, and keeps a little Court for the com∣manders and Souldiers, the Earle of Lindsey is to have Ships to stop all provision for Hull by Sea, and the mouth of Humber will be strongly guarded, the Earle of Newcastle is very strange in the City, and twas whispered that Mr. Iermyn, the Lord Digby, the Lord Foredich, and some others were there privately, but there was no such thing, and those lying papers doe but abuse men, indeed in∣fect them, and reflects upon the Iustice of the times but certaine it is, there is a great expectation, from beyond Sea, and strong working for it.
Upon Tuesday morning by foure of the clocke, his Majesty received a Packet from London, and in∣formation of the Lord Majors commitment and the cause, and at Dinner was very merry in his dis∣course of it to the Lords, and they as free in deli∣vering their opinions, and however hee conceives it be seemes to beare a great mastery and temper over all passages and debatements. Amongst o∣ther discourse it was told him of some Observati∣ons upon his Declarations, and the Booke showed him by the Lord Keeper, with a very blacke Cha∣racter both of it and the Author being named, a Lawyer of Grayes-Inne. In the Afternoone the Lords had a Consultation about him, and a Relati∣on of one C. Babbam, for writing foolish and sedi∣tious Papers, and felling them to the Presse to live by them, and there was a Message ordered from His Majesty to both Houses of PARLIAMENT for Commitment, if to bee found, and punish∣ment. Sir Francis Wortley and our new made Knight Duncombe, are designed a thousand Men, eight hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse, but whi∣ther they are to march or which way is not yet knowne, but it is possible towards Mr. Hastings who sent a private Packet to the King, who makes his party very strong, and is like to doe much dam∣mage to Leicesteshire. And the Lord Strange is as active in his way and puts Manchester to a muse, but yet they hold him to it.
It is thought▪ there is a black cloud teeming in Kent, which may fall fatally if a North winde take it, the Souldiers talke loly as if the time were come they were to be made for ever, and the Parliament, had provided all the Plate, and money solely for them. That night the King came to Beverly about the shutting up of the day, there was sent in Fifty great Horses all of a darke Bay, handsomely set out with ash-colour'd Ribbins, every man very gentilely ac∣coutred, and armed, they were presented to His Majesty, but it is not knowne from whom certain∣ly, but supposed from the Earle of Newcastle, by the bravery of their accoutrements. His Majesty next morning went to the great Church, heard Service and a Sermon, by one of the Arch bishops Chaplaines, his text was Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good workes, and held the ballance of his text both equally and excellently, though peradven∣ture the Cavaleers did not carry much of it home. Colonell Lunsford came the next day about two of the clocke in the Afternoone to Beverley, had private speech for an houre with the King, and re∣turned by Post immediately to the Earle of Ri∣vers, who hath a Thousand men at command into the field, and begins great things as is said, and within an houre after another Post came from the Lord Strange, and returned presently with a War∣rant, Signed for the putting out certaine Justices that opposes or are cold to his Commands.
As the King was Bowling, there was scatter'd a paper with Verses, very scandalous against Mr. PYM, and shewed the King, who having read them, tore them in pieces, and with a sad looke said, such libellous Rascals hath broke the peace of the Kingdom, and if Iustice did but lay hold of them, peoples minds would be quickly calm'd, he that showed them very likely looked for better thankes. The Lords here sit as close, as the Houses of Parliament doe at London, let every good heart pray their consultations may meet in the Glory of God and this Kingdome. FINIS. LONDON. Printed by T. FAWCET, for D. C. July 18. 1642.
