E2152 E55_2 99871825 155251
THE PARLIAMENTS VINDICATION OF IOHN PYM Esquire From his Majesties excepti∣on against Him. Occasioned from his Speech delivered at a Conference with both Houses, Jan. 25. 1641 concerning Licences granted by his Majesties immediate Warrant, to many of the chiefe Commanders now in the head of the Rebells in Ireland, for their transporting thither, since the Ports were stopt by both Houses of Parliament, against all IRISH Papists. In which Vindication are, 1. Mr. Pym his Speech. 2. His Majesties Message concerning his Speech. 3. The Commons Answer to the Message. 4. His Majesties Reply to the Commons Answer. 5. The Commons Answer to the Reply. 6. His Majesties second Reply. Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that Mr. Pym his Speech, His Majesties Message concerning his Speech, The Com∣mons answer to the Message, His Majesties Reply to the Commons Answer, The Commons answer to that Reply, And His Majesties second Reply, be forthwith Printed together and Published. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON Printed for John Bull, 1643.
January 25. 1641. At a Conference betwixt both HOUSES, concerning divers Petitions presented to the House of Commons; Mr. PYM appointed to manage that Conference. My Lords, I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burges∣ses assembled for the Commons in Parliament, to present to your Lordships divers Petitions, which they have re∣ceived from severall parts, concerning the state of the Kingdome: whereunto they are chiefly moved by that constant affection, which they have alwayes exprest, of maintaining a firm union and good correspondence with your Lordships; wherein they have ever found much advantage and contentment; but never held it more important and necessary, then at this time, vvherein the wisdome and resolution of Parliament have as many great dangers and difficulties to passe through, as ever heretofore. We are united in the publique trust, vvhich is derived from the Common-wealth, in the common dutie and obligation, vvhereby God doth bind us to the discharge of that trust: and the Commons de∣sire to impart to your Lordships vvhatsoever Information or In∣telligence, vvhatsoever Incouragement or Assistance they have re∣ceived from those severall Countries, vvhich they represent, that so likewise vve may be united in the same intentions and endeavours of improving all to the service of his Majesty, and the common good of the Kingdome. The Petitions vvhich I am directed to communicate to your Lordships, are foure: from London, Middlesex, Essex, and Hertfordshire. We have received many more, but it vvould take up too much time, and be too great a trouble to peruse all; and, in these foure you may perceive the effect and sense of all: First I am to desire your Lordships to heare them read, and then I shall persue my Instructi∣ons in propounding some Observations out of them.
The Petitions being read by foure Members of the House, Mr. Pym resumed his discourse. My Lords, IN these foure Petitions you may heare the voice, or rather the cry, of all England; and you cannot wonder if the urgencie, the extremitie of the condition wherin we are, do produce some earnestnesse and vehemencie of expression more then ordinarie; the agonie, terror and perplexitie in which the Kingdome labours, is universall, all parts are affcted with it; and therefore in these you may observe the groanes and miserable complaints of all. Divers reasons may be given why those diseases which are Epidemi∣call are more dangerous then others: 1. The Cause of such diseases is universall and supernall, not from an evill constitution, or evill diet, or any other accident: and such causes work with more vigour and efficacie, then those which are particular and inferiour. 2. In such diseases there is a communicative qualitie, whereby the malignitie of them is multi∣plied and enforced. 3. They have a converting, transforming power that turns other diseases and evill affections of mens bodies into their owne nature. The common and Epidemicall disease wherein this Common-wealth lies now gasping, hath a superior and universall cause from the evill Counsells and designes of those, who under his Majestie bear the greatest sway in Government. 2. It hath a contagious and infectious qualitie, whereby it is diffused and dispersed through all parts of the Kingdome. 3. It is apt to take in the discontents, evill affections, and designes of particular persons to increase and fortifie it selfe. I shall take occsion from severall branches of those Petitions which your Lordships have heard, to observe: 1. The varietie of Dangers to which this Kingdome is now subject. 2. The manifold distempers which is the cause of those dangers. 3 The Multiplicitie of those evill Influences, which are the Causes of that distemper. The first Danger is from enemies abroad, this may seem a causelesse and impertinent observation at this time seeing we are in peace with all Nations about us: But (my Lords) you may be pleased to consider that the safetie of the Kingdome ought not to depend upon the will and dis∣position
of our Neighbours, but upon our own strength and Provision; Betwixt States there are often sudden changes, from peace to warre, according to occasion and advantage. All the States of Christendome are now Armd, and we have no reason to believe but that those of great∣est power have an evill eye upon us in respect of our Religion: and if their private Differences should be composed, how dangerously, how speedily might those great armies and other preparations now ready, be applyed to some enterprise and attempt against us? if there were no other cause, this were sufficient to make us stand upon our Guard; but there are di∣vers more especiall symptomes of dangers of this kind. We may perceive by severall Advertisements from abroad, that they did foresee our Dangers many Moneths before they broke out; they could foretell the Time and Manner of them, which is a cleare evidence they held intelligence with those which were the contrivers and work∣ers of the present troubles. We may have dangerous Traitors and Fugitives now in other parts, who can discover the weaknesse and distemper of the Kingdome; who hold Intelligence with the ill affected party here, and by all cunning and subtle practices endeavour to incite and provoke other Princes against us. Some of the Ministers of our neighbour Princes may be justly suspe∣cted to have had a more immediate hand and operation in the Insurre∣ction and Rebellion of Ireland, many of the Commanders, and most of the Souldiers levied for the service of Spain, are now joyned with the Rebels there; and those Irish Friars, which were imployed by the Spanish Ambassadour for the making of those Levies, are known to have been chief Incendiaries to this Rebellion, and are still very active in the prose∣cution and incouragement of it. The Rebels have a ready and speedy supply from some of our Neigh∣bours. Two Convoyes of Munition and Armes we are certainly infor∣med of: one from Dunkirke; the other from Nantes in Britanie: and cer∣tainly those that are so forward to enable others to hurt us, will not for∣beare to hurt us themselves, assoon as they shall have meanes and oppor∣tunity to doe it. Another Danger is from the Papists and ill-affected parties at home. The Papists here are acted by the same principles, with those in Ireland; many of the most active of them have lately been there, which argues an intercourse and Communication of Counsels, They have still store of
Armes and Munition at their disposing, notwithstanding all our endeavours to disarme them; they have a free resort to the City, and to the Court; they want no opportunities to consult together; they have the same or greater In∣couragements from above, and from about them then ever, in respect of the example and successe of the Rebels in Ireland, and the great confusions and di∣visions which by their cunning and subtile practises are raised and fomented amongst our selves at home. 3. A third danger is of Tumults and Insurrections of the meaner sort of people: by reason of their ill vent of cloth, and other Manufactures, whereby great multitudes are set on work, who live for the most part by their daily get∣tings, and will in a short time be brought to great extremitie, if not imployed; Nothing is more sharp and pressing then necessity and want; what they can∣not buy they will take, and from them the like necessitie will quickly be de∣rived, to the Farmours and Husbandmen; and so, grow higher, and involve all in an equalitie of misery and distresse, if it be not pevented. And at this time such tumults will be dangerous, because the Kingdom is full of disbanded Souldiers and Officers, which will be ready to head and to animate the Multi∣tude to commit Violence with more strength and advantage: and if they once grow into a body, it will be much more difficult to reduce them into Order againe, because necessity and want, which are the causes of this disturbance will still increase as the effects doe increase. A fourth danger is from the Rebells in Ireland, not onely in respect of that Kingdome, but in respect of this: They have seazed upon the Body of that Kingdome already, they abound in men of very able bodies, they increase in Armes and Munition, they have great hopes of supplies from abroad, of in∣couragement here, and are sure of good entertainment from the Popish Party, so that they begin to speak already of the transporting themselves hither, and making this Kingdome the seat of the Warre. The Distemper which hath produced these Dangers is various and exceed∣ing violent. Whensoever nature is hindered in her proper operations and fa∣culties, distempers will necessarily follow. The obstructions which have brought us into this distemper, are very ma∣ny, so that we cannot wonder at the strength and malignity of it. Some of the chiefest of these obstructions. I shall endeavour to remember. 1. The obstruction of Reformation in matters of Religion: no Grievances are sharper than those that presse upon the tender consciences of men; and there was never Church or State afflicted with more Grievances of this kind, then we have been. And though they are by the wisedome of this Parliament partly eased and diminished, yet many still remaine: and as long as the Bishops and the corrupt part of the Clergy continue in their Power there will be little hope of Freedome either from the sence of those which continue or the feare of those which are removed. And of this obstruction, (my Lords) I must cleare the Commons, we are in no part guilty of it▪ some good Bills have past us, and o∣thers are in preparation, which might have been past before this, if we had not
found such ill successe in the other. Whatsoever mischiefe this obstruction shall produce, we are free from it: we may have our part of the Misery, wee can have no part in the guilt or dishonour. 2. The obstruction in Trade, it is the Trade that brings food and nourish∣ment to the Kingdome, It is that which preserves and increaseth the stock of the whole, and distributes a convenient Portion of maintenance to every part of it: therefore such an obstruction as this must needs be dangerous; the Free∣dome of Trade being so necessary, the benefit so important, as that it gives life, strength, and beauty to the whole body of the Common-wealth: but I must protest the House of Commons hath given no cause to this Obstruction; wee have eas'd Trade of many Burdens, and heavie Taxes, which are taken off; we have freed it from many hard restraints by Pattents and Monopolies; wee have been willing to part with our owne Priviledges, to give it Incouragement; we have sought to put the Merchants into Security, and confidence in respect of the Tower of London, that so they might be invited to bring in their Bulli∣on to the Mint, as heretofore they have done: and we are no way guilty of the troubles, the feares, and publique dangers which make men withdraw their Stocks, and to keep their Money by them to be ready for such sodain Exigents, as in these great distractions we have too much cause to expect. 3. The obstruction in the reliefe of Ireland. It must needs bee accompted a great shame and dishonour to this Kingdome, that our neighbours have shewed themselves more forward to supply the Rebells, then we have bin to relieve our distressed brethren, and fellow Subjects. But I must declare that the House of Commons is altogether innocent of any neglect herein. As soon as the first newes of the Rebellion came over, we undertooke the Warre, not by way of Supply and aide, as in former Rebellions the Subjects have used to doe, but we undertooke the whole charge of it, and wee suffered not 24. houres to passe, before we agreed to a great Levie of Money and Men, to bee imployed against the Rebells, even in a larger proportion then the Lord Justices and Councell there did desire: and from time to time we have done all for the furtherance thereof though in the midst of many distractions and di∣versions, but the want of Commissions for levying Men, for issuing Armes, and divers other Impediments, have been the causes of that obstruction; and I wish we had not onely found impediments to our selves but also incourage∣ments to them. Many of the chiefe Commanders, now in the Head of the Rebells, after we had with your Lordships concurrence stopt the Ports against all Irish Papists, have been suffered to passe by his Majesties immediate War∣rant, much to the discouragement of the Lord Justices and the Counsell there: and this procured, as we beleive, by some evill Instruments, too neere his Re∣gall person, without his Majesties knowledge and intention. 4 The obstruction in prosecution of Delinquents: many we have already brought up to your Lordships: divers others wee have been discouraged to transmit; such difficult proceedings have we met withall; such terrours and discountenance have been cast upon our selves and our witnesses, those who
have shewed themselves, their friends and Patrons, have found it the most rea∣dy way to preferment; yea his Majesties owne hand hath been obtained, his Majesties Ships imployed for the transporting of divers of those who have fled from the Justice of the Parliament. 5. A generall obstruction and interruption of the proceedings of Parliament, by those manifold designes of violence (which through Gods mercy we have escaped;) by the great and frequent breaches of Priviledge; by the subtile en∣deavours to raise parties in our House, and jealousies betwixt the two Houses. 6. The obstruction in providing for the defence of the Kingdome, that wee might be enabled to resist a forraigne Enemy, to suppresse all civill Insurrecti∣ons; and what a pressing necessity there is of this, the exceeding great decaies in the Navie, in the Forts, the manifold defects in the power of ordering the Militia of the Kingdome, and meanes of furnishing them with Munition, are sufficient evidences known to none better then to your Lordships, and what endeavour we have used to remove them (but hitherto without that successe and concurrence which we expected) and where the stop hath been, and upon what good grounds we may claime our own innocencie and faithfulnesse in this, we desire no other Witnesses but your selves. Lastly, I come to the evill influences which have caused this distemper, and I shall content my selfe to mention some few of those which are most appa∣rant and Important. 1. In the first place, I shall remember the evill Counsels about the King, whereof we have often complained. Diseases of the brain are most dangerous, because from thence Sense and Motion are derived to the whole body. The malignity of evill Counsels will quickly be infused into all parts of the State. None can doubt but we have exceedingly laboured under most dangerous and mischievous Counsels. This evill influence hath been the cause of the prepara∣tion of Warre with Scotland, of the procuring a Rebellion in Ireland, of corrup∣ting Religion, suppressing the Liberty of this Kingdome, and of many fear∣full and horrid attempts, to the subverting the very being of Parliament, which was the onely hopefull meanes of opposing and preventing all the rest: And this doth still appeare to be the most predominant evill of the time; whereat wee need not wonder, when wee consider how Counsellours have been pre∣ferred and prepared. And herein I appeale to your Lordships own consciences, whether the giving and the countenancing of evill Counsell, hath not been almost the onely way to favour and advancement. 2. The discouragement of good Counsell: divers honest and approved Counsellors have been put from their places: others so discountenanced, as that the way of favour hath been shut against them, and that of danger and de∣struction onely open to them, 3. The great power that an interessed and factious Party hath in the Parlia∣ment, by the continuance of the Votes of the Bishops and Popish Lords in your Lordships House: and the taking in of others both out of the House of Commons, and otherwise, to increase their strength. 4. The somenting and cherishing of a Malignant party throughout the whole Kingome
5. The manifold jealousies betwixt the King, his Parliament, and good Sub∣jects, whereby his protection and favour hath in a great measure been with∣held from them: their inclination and resolution to serve, and assist him, hath been very much hindered and interrupted: we have often suffered under the mis-interpretation of good Actions, and false imputation of evill, which we never intended. So that we may justly purge our selves from all guilt of be∣ing Authors of this jealousie and mis-understanding: We have been, and are still ready to serve his Majesty with our lives and fortunes, with as much cheerefulnesse and earnestnesse of affection, as ever any Subjects were; & we doubt not but our proceedings will so manifest this, that we shall be as clear in the apprehension of the World, as wee are in the Testimony of our owne Consciences. I am now come to a conclusion, and I have nothing to propound to your Lordships by way of request or desire from the House of Commons; I doubt not but your judgements will tell you, what is to be done; your consciences, your Honours, your interests will call upon you for the doing of it; The Commons will be glad to have your help and concurrence in saving of the Kingdome; but if they should faile of it, it shall not discourage them in do∣ing their duty. And whether the Kingdome bee lost or saved (as through Gods blessing I hope it will be) they shall be sorry that the story of this pre∣sent Parliament should tell Posterity, that in so great danger and extremitie, the House of Commons should bee inforced alone to undertake those courses which are necessary for the saving of it, and that the House of Peeres should have no part in the honour of those indeavours, your great Estates, and high degrees of Nobility, giving you so large an Interrest in the good successe of them. My Lords, consider what the present necessities and dangers of the Com∣mon-wealth require, what the Commons have reason to expect, to what en∣deavours and Counsells the concurrent desires of all the people doe invite you: so that applying your selves to the preservation of the King and Kingdome, I may bee bold to assure you in the name of all the Commons of England; that you shall be bravely seconded. His Majesties Message sent to the House of Commons, concerning Licences granted by his Majesty, to severall persons to passe into IRELAND. HIS Majesty taking notice of a Speech, pretending in the Title, to have been deliveed by M. Pym in a Conference, and prin∣ted by Order of the House of Commons, in which it is affirmed, That since the stop upon the Ports against all Irish Papists by both Houses, many of the chiefe Commanders, now in the head of the Rebells, have been suffered to passe by his Majesties immediate
Warrant; and being very certaine of having used extreme Caution in the granting of Passeports into Ireland; So that He conceives, ei∣ther this Paper not to have been so delivered and printed, as it pre∣tends, or this House to have received some mis-information; His Majesty would be resolved, whether this Speech were so de∣livered and Printed; and if it were, would have this House to re∣view upon what Informations that particular was grounded, that either that may be found upon re-examination to have been false, and both this House and his Majesty injured by it, or that his Ma∣jesty may know by what meanes, and by whose fault, His Autho∣rity hath been so highly abused, as to be made to conduce to the as∣sistance of that Rebellion, which hee so much detests and abhors, and that He may see himselfe fully vindicated from all reflections of the least suspition of that kinde. The Answer of the House of Commons. YOur Majesties most loyall and faithfull Subjects, the Com∣mons now assembled in Parliament, have taken into their serious consideration the Message received from your Majesty, the se∣venth of this instant February; and doe acknowledge that the Speech therein mentioned to be delivered by Master Pym in a Conference, was Printed by their Order, and that what was therein delive∣red, was agreeable to the sense of the House. And touching that passage wherein it is affirmed, that since the stop upon the Ports against all Irish Papists by both Houses, many of the chiefe Commanders now in the head of the Rebels, have been suffered to passe by your Majesties immediate Warrant, They present your Maiesty with this their humble Answer. That they have received divers advertisements, concerning the severall persons, Irish Papists and others, which have obtained your Majesties immediate Warrants for their passing into Ireland since the Order of Restraint of both Houses; some of which (as they have been informed) since their comming into Ireland, have joyned with the Rebells, and been Commanders amongst them, & some others have been staid, and are yet in safe Custody, particular∣ly the Lord Delvin, and foure other persons in his company, where∣of one is thought to be a Priest: One Colonell Butler Brother to the Lord Minyart now in Rebellion, and Sir George Hamilton, all which are Papists: And one other (as is reported) being Son of the Lord Mettersfield, whose Father and Brother are both in Reblli∣on.
The particular names of others wee have not yet received, but doubt not but upon examination they may be discovered. And your Majesties most faithfull Subjects are very sorry, that the extreame caution which your Majestie hath used, hath been so ill seconded, with the dilligence and faithfulnesse of your Mini∣nisters; and that your Royall Authority should be so highly abu∣sed; Although, as it was expressed in that Speech by Master Pym, we believe it was by the procurement of some evill Instruments too, neer your Royall Person, without your Majesties knowledge and intention. And wee beseech your Majestie to take such course, That not onely your Honour may be vindicated for the time pas∣sed, but your Kingdome may be secured from the like mischiefe for the time to come. His Majesties Reply to the House of Commons Answer, Concerning Licences granted by the King to persons to goe into IRELAND. AS His Majesty hath expressed a great desire to give His House of Commons all possible satisfaction to all their just Requests, and a readinesse to rectifie or retract any thing done by Himselfe, which might seem to trench upon their Priviledges by any mi∣stake of His, so he doubts not they will be ready upon all occasi∣ons to manifest an equall tendernes and regard of His Majesties Honour and Reputation with His good Subjects: and therefore His Majestie expects they should review His Message of the se∣venth of this Moneth, concerning a passage in Mastes Pyms Speech, and their Answer sent to his Majestie by some of their Members on the tenth of the same, with which His Maiestie can by no meanes rest satisfied. His Maiesties Exception in that Message was, That it was af∣firmed in that Speech, That since the stop upon the Ports against all Irish Papists, by both Houses, many of the chiefe Comman∣ders now in the head of the Rebells, have been suffered to passe by His Maiesties immediate Warrant. To this the Answer is: THat the Speech mentioned in that Message to be delivered by master Pym, was printed by their Order, and that what was therein delivered was agreeable to the sense of the House: that they have received divers Advertisements concerning severall per∣sons
Irish Papists and others, who have obtained His Majesties im∣mediate Warrant for their passing into Ireland, since the Order of Re∣straint of both Houses, some of which, they have been informed, since their comming into Ireland, have joyned with the Rebels, and been Commanders amongst them. His Majesty is most assured, no such person hath passed by His Warrant or Privity, and then he desires His House of Com∣mons to consider, whether such a generall Information and Adver∣tisement (in which there is not so much as the name of any parti∣cular person mentioned) be ground enough for such a direct and positive Affirmation, as is made in that Speech, which in respect of the place and Person, and being now acknowledged to be agree∣able to the sense of the House, is of that authority, that his Majesty may suffer in the affections of many of His good Subjects, and fall under a possible construction (considering many scandalous pam∣phlets to such a purpose) of not being sensible enough of that Re∣bellion, so horrid and odious to all Christians, by which in this di∣straction, such a danger might possibly ensue to His Majesties Per∣son and Estate, as he is well assured His House of Commons will use their utmost endeavours to prevent. And therefore His Maje∣sty thinks it very necessary, and expects that they name those persons who by His Majesties Licence have passed into Ireland, and are now there in the head of the Rebels; Or that if upon their re-examina∣tion they doe not finde particular Evidence to prove that Assertion (as His Majesty is confident they never can) as this Affirmation which may reflect upon His Majesty, is very publike, so they will publish such a Declaration whereby that mistake may be discove∣red, His Majesty being the more tender in that particular, which hath reference to Ireland, as being most assured that He hath been, and is, from His Soule, resolved to discharge His Duty (which God will require at His hands) for the reliefe of His poore Protestant Subjects there and the utter rooting out that Rebellion; So that Service hath not suffered any, but necessary delayes by any act of His Majesties, for the want of any thing proposed to His Majesty, or within His Majesties power to doe. For the persons named in the Answer, His Majesty saith, that Colonell Butler, and the son of the Lord Nettersfield, obtained His Warrants for their passage into Ireland, at His Majesties being in Scotland, which was long (as His Majesty thinks) before the Order of both Houses: His Majesty knowing the former of them to be
one who hath alwayes made Professions to His Service, and to be Uncle to the Earle of Ormond, of whose affection to the Protestant Religion, and His Majesties Service, His Majesty hath great cause to be assured: And the latter being a person of whom, at that time, there was no suspicion to His Majesties knowledge. For the other, it may be they have obtained Warrants from his Majesty since the said Order, but his Majesty assures the Parliament that he had no intimati∣on of such an Order, till after stay made of Sir George Hamilton, who was the last that had any Licence from his Matie to passe for Ireland. And His Majesty having since this Answer from the House of Commons used all possible means, by the examining His own Me∣mory, and the Notes of His Secretaries, to finde what Warrants have beene granted by Him, and to what persons, doth not finde, That He hath granted any to any Irish, but those who are named by the House of Commons, and in December last to the Earle of Saint Albans, and to two of his servants and to one Walter Terrel a poore man, they being such as His Majesty is assured are not with the Rebels, and much lesse chiefe Commanders over them. And though it may be, the Persons named by the House of Commons are Papists, yet His Majesty at that time thought it not fit in respect of their Alliance in that Kingdome to such Persons of great power, of whom His Majesty hoped well, to discover any suspition of them, the Lords Justices having declared by their Letters (which Letters were not disapproved of by the Parliament here) that they were so far from owning a publike jealousie of all Papists there, that they had thought fit to put Armes into the hands of divers Noble men of the Pale of that Religion who made Professions to His Ma∣jesties Service and desired the same. And since so great a trust repo∣sed in some of the Lords of that Religion was not disapproved by the Parliament here, His Majesty could not imagine it unsafe or unfit for Him to give Licences to some few to passe into that King∣dome, who, though Papists, professed due Allegiance and Loyalty to His Majesty. And therefore unlesse the first Affirmation of the House of Commons can be made good by some particulars, His Majesty doth not know that His Ministers have failed in their diligence and faithfulnesse to His Majesty in this point, or that His honour hath suffered so much by any Act of His owne, as that it needs be vindicated for the time past by any other way then such a Declara∣tion which He expects from this House, as in Duty and Justice due to His Majesty.
The Answer of both Houses of Parliament to the Kings Message. Sent to his most excellent Majesty, March 16. 1641. May it please your Majesty. YOur Majesties most humble and faithfull Subjects, the Knights, Citi∣zens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, having con∣sidered Your Majesties Reply to their Answer, touching such Persons as have been licensed by your Majesty to passe into Ireland, doe most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, that they shall alwayes with thankfulnesse and joy receive from your Majesty any satisfactory Answer to their just re∣quests: And, as they hope, they shall finde in your Majesty a readinesse to re∣ctifie those things which have been done to their prejudice, so will they bee carefull to remove all apprehensions of their actions or speeches, which may seeme to cast any dishonour upon your Majesty. For your Majesties better satisfaction concerning the positive affirmation, that many of the chiefe Commanders now in the head of the Rebells (after the Ports were stopped by order of both Houses) have been suffered to passe by your Majesties immediate Warrant. May it please your Majesty to consider that herein they have affirmed nothing but what they had cause to believe was true, the grounds whereof they most humbly present to your Majesty. The first ground is this, that both Houses of Parliament, (having upon your Majesties commendation taken into their care the suppression of the Rebellion of Ireland) had reason to be especially watchfull over the Ports, because the Rebells abounding in numbers of men, for the most part ignorant of the use of their Armes, could by no meanes become dangerous or formidable to this Kingdome, but by the accesse of Souldiers and Commanders, wherewith they were like to be furnished either out of France, or Flanders, from both which places the passage into Ireland is speedy and easie through this Kingdome, and thereof they could not choose but bee very sensible of whatsoever gave liberty or opportunity to such a passage as of a very hurtfull and dangerous grievance, for prevention whereof they did upon the 7. of Novembeer agree upon an Or∣der, and restraine all passage into Ireland, but upon due and strict examinati∣on by such persons as were trusted to make those Licences. A second ground, that the other Licence granted to the Lord Delvin, and then acknowledged by your Majesties Answer, were such, both in (regard of the persons to whom they were granted, and the extent of the words in which they were granted,) as were apt to produce such an effect as is mentioned in that positive affirmation, that is to open a way for the passage of Papists and o∣ther dangerous persons to joyne with the Rebells, and to bee Heads and Com∣manders amongst them, which is thus proved. The Waarrant granted to Colonell Butler, (since the order of restraint by both Houses of Parliament) did extend to all Ports of England and Scotland, and did give free passage to himselfe and to his Company, without any qualifica∣tion of persons, or limitation of number, and this Colonell was himselfe a Papist, had a brother in Rebellion, and Generall of the Rebells in Mster, was expected and very much desired by those Rebells, who for a long time kept
a Regiment to be commanded by him, as we have been credibly informed. The second was granted to a sonne of the Lord Nettersfield, which Lord had foure sonnes in England since the Rebellion, one of which is setled in Eng∣land, three others intended to passe into Ireland, and were all dangerous per∣sons being Papists, bred in the warres, in the service of the King of Spayne, and one of them lately become a Jesuite. The third to the Lord Delvin extends to himselfe, and foure persons more unnamed, that one of those who should have past with him is taken to be a Jesuit, and another who calls himselfe Ploncket, seems to bee a man of some breeding and quality, and like to have been serviceable to the Rebells, and to have done mischiefe, if he had gone over. The fourth to Sir George Hamelton, and three others unnamed: this Gentle∣man is likewise a profest Papist, and may be doubted to be of the party of the Rebells, one of that name being mentioned in the instructions of Sempill the Jesuit, amongst divers other dangerous persons of the Popish party in Scotland, and Ireland, which instructions were found in a ship stayed in Cornwall, which was going into Ireland, with divers Jesuits, Souldiers and others, for the incou∣ragement of the Rebells. A third ground is this, That by vertue and authority of these Licences seve∣rall persons have passed over, which are now in actuall rebellion, and joyned with the Rebells, and some have commanded amongst them, which is thus proved: One Captain Sutton, did by vertue and authority of your Majesties Licence imbarque at White-haven, in the Company of Colonell Butler, and was dri∣ven back by foule weather; whereupon the Colonell stayed and went to Che∣ster; but that Captain reimbarqued himselfe in the same Bottome, and passed into Ireland, where he went into Rebellion with the Lord Dunsany, and hath since obtained the place of a Colonell amongst the Rebells, as we are very cre∣dibly informed. Two of the sonnes of the Lord Nettersfield, one a Jesuite, and the other a Soul∣dier, passed into Ireland in December last, both of them by vertue of your Maje∣sties warrant, as we have cause to beleive, for that they went both together in one ship, and the Licence acknowledged to be granted by your warrant, must needs be granted to one of them, seeing the other brother, who lately endea∣voured to passe over, did produce no Licence, and upon his examination doth absolutely deny that he had any. A fourth ground (which we humbly offer to your Majesty) is this. That your Majesty cannot be assured that no other did passe upon your Licence, as your Majesty doth conceive, and are pleased to expresse in your Answer, & that we had great cause to believe that divers other had passed over by your Warrant, besides the persons afore-mentioned, and that for these reasons: 1. Because we received such a generall information, that divers now in the head of the Rebells were passed by your Majesties Licence, which being true in part, and easie to be effected, in regard of the nature and extent of the War∣rants▪ and probable to be attempted, in regard of the subtilty and vigilancy of that party, to make use of all advantages, seemed to deserve credit, which we should not have given to it, if it had been a naked information without such circumstances.
2. Because we had concurring advertisements from Ireland and Chester, that divers Priests, Jesuites, and Popish Commanders had passed over, & were landed there and particularly some of Colonell Butlers Company and that the Officers of the Ports had kept no entry of the names of these persons, or of the VVarrants by which they were transported. These we hope will be sufficient to perswade your Majesty to believe, that as we had some cause to give credit to the said informations, so we had no inten∣tion to make any ill use of them to your Majesties dishonour, but did impute the blame to your Ministers, who might have been more carefull to have in∣formed your Majesty of the Quality of those persons named in your Licences, and so to have limited them, that they might not have extended to others, as they did how many and dangerous soever. And they pray your Majesty to rest assured, that they shall alwayes be tender of your Honour and reputation with your good Subjects, and for this cause have made this true Declaration of the full state of this matter, that they may thinke no otherwise of it, then the truth, and in all things shall labour to esta∣blish a good understanding and confidence, betwixt your Majesty, and your people, which they heartily desire and pray for, as the chiefest means of preser∣ving the Honour, safety, and prosperity of your Majesty, and your Kingdom. His Majesties Answer to a Message sent to Him by the House of Commons, concerning Licences granted by Him to persons to goe into IRELAND. HIs Majesty hath seen and considered the Message presented to him by the Lord Compton, and Mr. Baynton, the 19. of March 1641. at York; Touching such persons as have been licenced by his Majesty to passe into Ireland. Though he will not insist upon what little reason they had to suspect that some il-affected persons had passed into Ireland, under colour of his Majesties Li∣cence (Inferences being slender proofs to ground beliefe upon) yet hee must needs avow, that for any thing that is yet Declared, He cannot see any ground why Mr. Pym should so boldly affirme before both Houses of Parliament, That since the stop upon the Ports by both Houses against all Irish Papists, many of the chiefe Commanders now in the head of the Rebells have been suffered to passe by His Majesties immediate Warrant; For as yet there is not any particular person named that is now so much as in Rebellion (much lesse in the Head of the Rebells) to whom His Majesty hath given Licence; And therefore according to his Majesties Reply upon that Subject, His Majesty expects, That his House of Commons publish such a Declaration, whereby this mistaking may be cleared. That so all the VVorld may see his Majesties Cau∣tion in giving of Passes; and likewise, that his Ministers have not abused His Majesties Trust, by any surreptitious VVarrants. And lastly, His Majesty expects. That henceforth there be more Warinesse used, before such publike Aspersions be laid, unlesse the Grounds bee before∣hand better warranted by sufficient Proofes. FINIS
