F23 E296_35 99861023 130529
A true and exact RELATION Of the severall Informations, Examinations, and Confessions of the late Witches, arraigned and exe∣cuted in the County of Essex. Who were arraigned and condem∣ned at the late Sessions, holden at Chelmesford before the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earle of Warwicke, and severall of his Ma∣jesties Justices of Peace, the 29 of July, 1645. Wherein the severall murthers, and devillish Witchcrafts, committed on the bodies of men, women, and children, and divers cattell, are fully discovered. Published by Authoritie. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and Benj. Allen, and are to be sold at their Shops in Popes-head Alley. 1645.
THE PREFACE. INGENUOUS READER; THou hast here presented to thee a sad Emblem of the strange sleights and cunning subtilties, whereby Satan la∣bours daily to insnare soules, and at last to bring them to utter ruine; who being that grand impostor, soone began this worke, even in the morning of the Creation, in the body of a Serpent miraculously, to reason, dispute, speake, and conferre with Evah; and never ceased till he had laid the honour of those glorious creatures in the dust: and therefore is called that old Serpent, that decei∣veth all the world, by whose deceitfull promises and subtill devices (for his own end, and desire of their destruction,) hath insnared and drawne these poore silly creatures, into these horrid and detestable practises, of renouncing God and Christ, and entring into a solemne league and contract with the Devill As one them witne¦sed in open Court, Re∣becca VVest; the thought whereof is sufficient to cause a man to be filled with horror and astonishment. The Law and ex∣presse command of God doth allow of no familiarity or in∣quiry of any other spirit, but from himselfe; as Isa. 8.19. And when they shall say unto you, seeke unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto Wizards, that peep and that mutter, should not a people seeke unto their God, &c. Vnder this interrogative is understood this af∣firmative,
A people should inquire of no other spirit, but of their God onely. By which also it is evident, that all spirits that doe suffer themselves to be inquired at, are evill spirits, and therefore Angeli boni non possunt peccare confir∣matiper grati∣am, Angeli mali per mali∣tiam obstinati non possunt benè velle. Devills. And though these devillish pra∣ctises were frequent and common amongst heathens and in∣fidells, who usually held familiarity with these spirits, and many inquired of them in their Oracles; and therefore cal∣led those spirits that gave answer by them, Daemons q d.  peri∣tus ex  disco scio, di∣vido. Vide Lexic. Paso∣ris, 157. of their skill and knowledge in soretelling things to come: yet now when the light of the Gospel shineth so gloriously, that such a generation of poore deluded soules (and to such a num∣ber as hath of late been discovered) should be found amongst us, is much more matter of admiration and astonishment See Deut. 8.14, 15.. I doubt not but these things may seeme as incredible unto some, as they are matter of admiration unto others. Nolle nimis sapere, saith the Poet, It is true wisdome not to be too wise; that is, not to know nor desire to know more then is al∣lowed or needfull; needfull not in our desires, but in Gods decree: Here then let reasonable men be perswaded not too much (as is usuall) to swell with indignation, or to be puf∣fed with impatience, where God doth not apertly reveale and plainly (as they desire and thinke needfull) the subtile Engines and mysticall craft of the Devill in the machina∣tions of Witches and Sorcerers; but soberly, modestly, and discreetly, so far forth-be contented to pursue the triall and just way of their discoverie, as with sense, with reason, with Religion, is just and righteous; knowing, that what∣soever is beyond these lists, is reasonlesse, senslesse and impi∣ous. The greatest doubt and question will be, whether it be in the power of the Devill to perform such asportation and locall translation of the bodies of Witches; it seemeth in reason a thing whereunto the Devill is unable: And whe∣ther these supernaturall works, which are above the power of
man to do, and proper only to Spirits, whether they are reall, or only imaginary and fained. In answer to which, it is ve∣ry probable that the Devill hath power to dispose and trans∣port the bodies of men and women, where God himself doth not countermand or prohibit: as instance, when hee took the body of our Saviour and set it upon a pinacle of the Temple; and these supernaturall acts may appear to the outward sense, as Histories; and many other true reports and Records of other wonderfull works and supernaturall feats, all alike of∣fered to the outward sense. It is true, that a Spirit, and a spirituall work simply in it self, in the own nature and substance cannot be seen by any bodily eye, or be deprehended by any outward sense, notwithstanding, as they do mix them∣selves with bodily substances, are certainly tried and subject to the sense: For illustration hereof, instance may be given in holy Scripture, as the Sorcerers of Egypt, where water was turned into blood, the rod into a Serpent, &c. By a spi∣rituall power their eyes did manisestly see the water, and as apparently after see the blood, and the rod turned into a Serpent, the eye being a true and undeceived witnesse of both: Things imagined and fancied, are easily discerned from those things that are reall and true objects. But it may be demanded, whether a Spirit or Devill can cause such a transmutation of the bodies of Witches into those severall shapes and forms of Cats, Dogges, Birds, and other creatures, as is often reported, where Witches and Sorcerers have lived. The answer is, that it is impos∣sible in nature, and in the ordinary unchangeable course of all things created by God, that one individuall and conti∣nued substance or entire thing should be wholly divided from it self, and yet be it self; Diabolus Dei∣aemulus, quo se fallaci simili∣tudine insinuet in animos sim∣picium: Calv. lib. 1. Instit. cap. 8. Sect. 2. for there can be no reall or true transmutation of one substance, or nature into another, but either by creation or generation. Now creation is the
worke of in infinite power, and therefore of God alone. The Devill then cannot create, neither can he do it by any course of true generation, Naturaest or∣dinaria Dei potestas. because a true and reall generation hath many precedent alterations, and by little and little, in space of time Generatio non est nisi in tempore id{que} apparata ma∣teria per ante∣cessionem mu∣tationis, &c. Scal. de subt. exercit. Sect. 6 growes unto the perjection of that kind unto which it doth tend, or is begotten; therefore they are but seeming and jugling transmutations of the Devill: And here that saying of Augustine may be alledged, De civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 18. (Nec sane Daemones natu∣ras creant, sed specie tenus, quae à Deo creata sunt commutant, ut videantur esse quae non sunt) that is, Devils cannot create any nature or substance, but in jug∣gling shew, or seemingly only, whereby with false shadowes covering those things which are created of God to cause them to seem that which they are not indeed. Take one in∣stance of the jugglings and illusions ef the Devill above all the rest, which doth most palpably detect him herein, is a History related by Johannes Baptista Porta, in his se∣cond book, de Magia naturali; hee there witnesseth, that upon the Devils suggestion, a Witch believed firmly and perswaded her self, that all the night shee had rid in the aire, over divers great mountaines, and met in conven∣ticles with other Witches, when the same night, the men∣tioned Author himself, with others that watched her and saw her all that imagined time of her transvection in the aire, to be within her chamber profoundly sleeping; yea, had smitten her, made her flesh blew with strokes, and could not awake her, nor perswade her afterward when she was awa∣ked that they had so used her, or at all had seene or be∣held her; thus prevalent was the juggling power of the Devill. Many other like instances of like nature might be added, only what here is published and communicated unto the
world, may sufficiently discover those strong delusions which these poor soules were given up unto, who now according to their demerits, and according to the Lawes of God and this kingdome established, have received their just reward. H. F.
THE INFORMATION of John Rivet of Mannintree, Tay∣ler, taken before Sir Harbottell Grimston, Knight and Baronet, one of the Members of the Honourable House of Commons: And Sir Thomas Bowes, Knight, another of his Majesties Justices of Peace for this County, the 21th of March. 1645. THis Informant saith, That about Christmas last, his wife was taken sicke, and lame, with such violent fits, that this Informant verily conceived her sicknesse was some∣thing more then meerly naturall: Where∣upon this Informant about a fortnight since went to a Cunning Woman, the wife of one Hovye at Hadleigh in Suffolke, who told this Informant, that his wife was cursed by two women who were neere neighbours to this Informant, the one dwelling a little above his house, and the other beneath his house, this Informants house standing on the side of an Hill: Whereupon he beleeved his said wife was bewitched by one Elizabeth Clarke, alias Bedingfield, that dwelt above this Informants house, for that the said Eliza∣beths mother and some other of her kinsfolke did suffer death for Witchcraft and murther.
The Information of Matthew Honkins, of Mannintree, Gent. taken upon Oath before us the 25th day of March. 1645. THis Informant saith, That the said Elizabeth Clarke (suspected for a Witch as aforesaid) being by the appointment of the said Justices watched certaine nights, for the better discovery of her wicked Practises, this Informant came into the roome where the said Elizabeth was watched; as aforesaid, the last night, being the 24th of this instant March, but intended not to have stayed long there. But the said Elizabeth forth with told this Informant and one Master Sterne there present, if they would stay and do the said Elizabeth no hurt, shee would call one of her white Impes, and play with it in her lap; but this Informant told her, they would not allow of it; And that staying there a while longer, the said Elizabeth confessed shee had had carnall copulation with the Devill six or seven yeares; and that he would appeare to her three or foure times in a weeke at her bed side, and goe to bed to her, and lye with her halfe a night together in the shape of a proper Gen∣tleman, with a laced band, having the whole proportion of a man, and would say to her, Besse Imust lye with you, and shee did never deny him: And within a quarter of an houre after there appeared an Impe like to a Dog, which was white, with some sandy spots, and seemed to be very fat and plumpe; with very short legges, who forthwith vanished away: And the said Elizabeth said the name of that Impe was, Jarmara: And immediately there appeared ano∣ther Impe, which shee called Vinegar Tom, in the shape of a Grey∣hound with long legges: And the said Elizabeth then said that the next Impe should be a black Impe, and should come for the said Master Sterne, which appeared, but presently vanished: And the last that appeared was in the shape of a Polcat, but the head some∣what bigger. And the said Elizabeth then told this Informant that shee had five Impes of her owne, and two of the Impes of the old Beldam Weste (meaning one Anne Weste, widow) who is now al∣so suspected to be guilty of Witchcraft: And said sometimes the Impes of the old Beldam sucked on the said Elizabeth, and some∣times her Impes sucked on the old Beldam Weste. And the said Elizabeth further told this Informant, that Satan would never let
her rest, or be quiet, untill shee did consent to the killing of the Hogges of one Mr Edwards of Mannintree aforesaid, and the Horse of one Robert Tayler of the same Towne: And this Informant fur∣ther saith, That going from the House of the said Mr Edwards to his own House about nine or ten of the Clock that night, with his Greyhound with him, he saw the Greyhound suddenly give a jumpe, and ran as shee had been in a full course after an Hare; And that when this Informant made haste to see what his Grey∣hound so eagerly pursued; He espied a white thing about the big∣nesse of a Kitlyn, and the Greyhound standing aloose from it; and that by and by the said white Impe or Kitlyn daunced about the said Greyhound, and by all likelihood bit off a piece of the flesh of the shoulder of the Greyhound; for the Greyhound came shrieking and crying to this Informant with a piece of flesh torne from her shoulder. And this Informant further saith, That com∣ming into his own Yard that night, he espied a black thing, pro∣portioned like a Cat, onely it was thrice as big, sitting on a straw∣berry-bed, and fixing the eyes on this Informant; and when he went towards it, it leaped over the pale towards this Informant, as he thought, but ran quite through the Yard, with his Grey∣hound after it to a great Gate, which was underset with a paire of Tumbrell Strings, and did throw the said Gate wide open, and then vanished; And the said Greyhound returned againe to this Informant, shaking and trembling exceedingly. The Information of John Sterne, Gent. taken upon Oath before us the 25th day of March. 1645. THis Informant saith, That watching with Elizabeth Clarke, (suspected for Witchcraft, as aforesaid) shee confessed that the Devill had had carnall copulation with her in the likenesse of a man; and that the said Elizabeth desired this Informant, and the rest that were in the roome with her to sit downe, and said, shee would shew this Informant and the rest some of her Impes: And within halfe an houre there appeared a white thing in the likeness of a Cat, but not altogether so big: And being asked if she would not be afraid of her Impes; the said Elizabeth answered; What
doe yee thinke I am afraid of my children? And that shee called the name of that white Impe, Hoult. And this Informant further saith, That presently after there appeared another white Impe, with red spots, as big as a small dog, which shee then called Jarmara: And that immediately after, there appeared at the threshold of the doore another Impe about the bignesse of the first, but did present∣ly vanish away. And then the said Elizabeth being asked if any more Impes would come; shee answered, That Vinegar Tom would come by and by. And forthwith there appeared another in the like∣nesse of a dumb Dogge, somewhat bigger then any of the former: And the said Elizabeth also told this Informant, That shee had three Impes from her mother, which were of a browne colour, and two from the old Beldam Weste: And that there had five Impes appeared; But shee had one more called Sack and Sugar, which had been hard at worke, and it would be long before it came, but it should teare this Informant. And a while after the said Elizabeth said, That it was well for this Informant he was so quick, otherwise the said Impe had soone skipped upon his face, and perchance had got into his throate, and then there would have been a feast of Toades in this Informants belly. And the said Elizabeth further confessed to this Informant, that shee had one Impe for which shee would fight up to the knees in bloud, before shee would lose it. And that her Impes did commonly suck on the old Beldam Weste; and that the said old Beldams Impes, did suck on her the said Elizabeth likewise. The Information of Frances Milles, Grace Norman, Mary Phillips, and Mary Parsley, taken upon oath before the said Justices the 25th of March. An. Dom. 1645. THese Informants say joyntly, That watching with the said Elizabeth Clarke, suspected as aforesaid, about twelve of the Clock last night, the said Elizabeth smacked with her mouth, and beckned with her hand, and instantly there appeared a white thing about the bignesse of a Cat; and that these Informants saw five Impes more, which the said Elizabeth named as aforesaid. And that the said Elizabeth told these Informants, That the old
Beldam (meaning the said Anne Weste) did by Witchcraft kill the wife of one Robert Oakes of Lawford in the County aforesaid; and was the death of a Clothiers childe of Dedham in the said Coun∣ty of Essex: both which dyed as these Informants very well know about a weeke since. And the said Elizabeth told these Informants, that the said old Beldam Weste had the wife of one William Cole of Mannintree aforesaid in handling, who dyed not long since of a pining and languishing disease. The Information of George Turner taken upon oath the 25th day of March. 1645. before the said Justices. THis Informant saith, That going to the said Elizabeth Clarke, alias Bedingfeild, after shee was apprehended, and asking her whether shee had any hand in the drowning of one Thomas Turner, this Informants Brother, who was cast away at Sea about thirty moneths since; the said Elizabeth answered, That the old Bel∣dam Weste raised that winde that sunke his Hoy: And that she the said Elizabeth had no hand in that businesse. The Information of John Bankes of Mannintree taken upon oath before the said Justices the 25th of March. 1645. THis Informant saith, That watching with the said Elizabeth, he doth informe and confirme all the particulars expressed and set downe in the Information of the said Mr Sterne. The Information of Edward Parsley of Mannintree, taken upon oath before the said Justices the 25th of March. 1645. THis Informant saith, That watching with the said Elizabeth Clarke, alias Bedingfeild, the last night, he asked the said Eliza∣beth if he should continue still in the roome with her; And the said Elizabeth desired he should, if he would fight for her with the De∣vills, for they would come this night, and that which shee called
Hoult would come first, and then that which shee called Jarmara; which did appeare in the likenesse of a white Dogge, with red spots; and presently after there appeared that Impe which shee called Vinegar Tom; and then that which shee called Sack and Su∣gar: And the said Elizabeth then told this Informant, that the Devill had had possession of her six or seven yeares. And that he had oftentimes knocked at her dore in the night time; and that shee did arise, open the dore and let him in; and that he went to bed to her three or foure times in a weeke, and had the carnall knowledge of her as a man. The Examination of the said Elizabeth Clarke, alias Bedingfeild, taken before the said Justices the 25th of March. 1645. THis Examinant saith, Executed at Chelmesford. That about six moneths since shee met with the said Anne Weste, widow, (who is now likewise ap∣prehended) in a field neere the house of the said Elizabeth, where the said Elizabeth was picking up a few sticks; The said Anne Weste seemed much to pitie this Examinant for her lamenesse (ha∣ving but one leg) and her poverty; And said to this Examinant, That there was wayes and meanes for her to live much better then now shee did: And said, that shee would send to this Examinant a thing like a little Kitlyn, which would fetch home some victu∣alls for this Examinant; and that it should doe her no hurt. And this Examinant saith, that within two or three nights after there came a white thing to her in the night, and the night after a gray one, which spake to this Examinant, and told her they would doe her no hurt, but would helpe her to an Husband, who should maintaine her ever after: And that these two things came into this Examinants bed every night, or every other night, and sucked upon the lower parts of her body. The Information of Robert Tayler of Mannintree, taken upon oath before the said Justices the 23th day of Aprill. 1645. THis Informant saith, That about nine weekes since, Elizabeth, the wife of Edward Gooding (who is accused by the said Eliza∣beth Clarke to be a confederate with her) came to the Shop of this
Informant, and desired to be trusted for half a pound of Cheese, which being denyed, shee went away, muttering and mumbling to her self, and within a few houres came again with money, and bought a pound of Cheese of this Informant, and the same night this Informant having an Horse standing in his stable, the said Horse was taken in a strange manner sick and lame; whereupon this Informant sent for four Farriers to have their best advice, who could not discover the cause of the disease; but the said Horse about four dayes after died: And this Informant also saith, that it was observed by himself, and divers others, who often went to see the said Horse, that still upon their coming into the stable, he lay quiet, and looked cheerfully, but as soon as the door was shut, and the Horse alone, hee did violently beat himself, and that the belly of the said Horse would rumble and make a noyse, as a foule chimney set on fire: And this Informant further saith, that hee is induced to believe, that the said Elizabeth Gooding was the cause of the death of his said Horse; for that this Informant hath heard, that Elizabeth Clark, and Anne Leech widow, (who stand both accused for Witchcraft, and have confessed themselves guilty) have impeached the said Elizabeth Gooding for killing of this said Horse, and that the said Elizabeth Gooding is a lewd woman, and to this Informants knowledge, hath kept company with the said Eliza∣beth Clark, Anne Leech, and Anne West, which Anne West hath been suspected for a Witch many yeers since, and suffered impri∣sonment for the same. The Examination of Elizabeth Gooding, taken before the said Justices the 11th. of April, 1645. THis Examinant saith, Executed at Chelmesford. that shee is not guilty of any one parti∣cular charged upon her in the Information of the said Robert Tailer. The Information of Richard Edwards of Mannintree aforesaid, taken before the said Justices the 23. day of April, 1645. THis Informant saith, That about twelve moneths since, upon a Sabbath day, after the afternoon Sermon, driving his
Cowes home by the house of Anne Leech of Misley widow, about forty yards from her said house, a black Cowe of this Infor∣mants, (being very well to his thinking) fell down, and within two dayes after died. And the very next day driving his Cowes from the same pasture, this Informant had a white Cowe that fell down within a Rod of the same place, where the other Cowe fell, (being also, as this Informant conceived, sound and well) and within a weak after dyed; and hee further saith, that hee caused both the said Cowes to be opened, and that there could be no dis∣ease discovered, which might occasion their death: And this In∣formant likewise saith, that about August last, hee had a childe nursed by one Goodwife Wyles, dwelling neer the houses of the said Elizabeth Clark and Elizabeth Gooding, and that his said childe was taken sick, and had very strange fits, extending the limbs, and rowling the eyes, and within two dayes after dyed: And this Informant doth verily believe, that Anne Leech, and the said Eli∣zabeth Gooding, were the death of his said child, as is confessed by the said Anne Leech in her own Confession and Examination. The Examination of Anne Leech of Misley in the County aforesaid, widow, taken before the said Justices, April 14. 1645. THis Examinant saith, Executed at Chelmesford. That she had a grey Impesent to her, and that this Examinant, together with the said Elizabeth Clark, and Elizabeth, the wife of Edward Gooding, did about a yeer since, send their Imps to kill a black Cowe and a white Cowe of Mr. Edwards, which was done accordingly: And this Examinant saith, that she sent her gray Imp, Elizabeth Clark a black Imp, and Eli∣beth Gooding a white Imp: And this Examinant saith, that about thirty yeeres since, shee sent a gray Imp to kill two Horses of one Mr. Bragge of Misley, which were killed accordingly; and that the occasion of her malice was, because Mistresse Bragge had told this Examinant, that shee suspected her to be a naughty woman; and this Examinant confesseth, that she and the said Eliz. Gooding, sent either of them an Imp to destroy the childe of the said Mr. Edwards; this Examinants Imp being then a white one, and Eli∣zabeth Goodings a black Imp; and that about thirty yeers since,
this Examinant had the said white Imp, and two others, a gray, and a black Imp of one Anne, the wife of Robert Pearce of Stoak in Suffolk, being her brother; and that these Imps went com∣monly from one to another, and did mischief where ever they went; and that when this Examinant did not send and imploy them abroad to do mischief, she had not her health, but when they were imployed, she was healthfull and well, and that these Imps did usually suck those teats which were found about the pri∣vie parts of her body; and that the said Imps did often speak to this Examinant, and told her, she should never feele hell torments, and that they spake to her in an hollow voyce, which she plainly understood: And this Examinant also confes∣seth, that she sent her gray Imp to Elizabeth, the daughter of Ro∣bert Kirk of Mannyntree, about three yeers since, to destroy her; and upon the sending of the said Imp, the said Elizabeth languish∣ed by the space of one whole yeer, untill shee dyed, and that the occasion of offence this Examinant took against her the said Eli∣zabeth was, for that she had asked a Coife of the said Elizabeth, which shee refused to give to this Examinant. And further, this Examinant saith, that long since, but the exact time she cannot remember, she sent her gray Imp to kill the daughter of the widow Rawlyns of Misley aforesaid; and the reason was, because this Ex∣aminant was put out of her Farm, and the said widow Rawlyns put in, where shee dwelleth at this present. And moreover, this Examinant confesseth, that she was acquainted with the sending of an Imp by the aforesaid Elizabeth Gooding, to vex and torment Mary the wife of John Tayler of Mannyntree aforesaid about three yeers since; and this Examinant being asked why she did not dis∣cover it to the said Mary, she sald, the Devill would not suffer her, and that the cause of the said Elizabeth Goodings malice against the said Mary was, because the said Mary refused to give to the said Elizabeth some Beeregood. And lastly, this Examinant saith, that about eight weeks since, this Examinant, the said Elizabeth Gooding, and one Anne West of Lawford widow, met together at the house of the said Elizabeth Clark, where there was a book read, wherein shee thinks there was no goodnesse.
The Information of Grace the wife of Richard Glascock of Mannyntree, taken upon oath before the said Justices, the 11th day of April, 1645. THis Informant saith, that there being some falling out between Mary the wife of Edward Parsley of Mannyntree, and one Hel∣len Clark, the wife of Thomas Clark (which said Hellen is the daughter of the said Anne Leech, whose confession doth imme∣diately precede) this Informant heard the said Hellen to say, as the said Hellen passed by this Informants door in the street, that Mary the daughter of the said Edward and Mary Parsley should rue for all, whereupon, presently the said Mary the daughter, fell sick, and died within six weeks after. The Information of Edward Parsley of Mannyntree, taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 11. 1645. THis Informant saith, that his said daughter sickned very sud∣denly, as the said Grace Glascock hath before informed, and died about six weeks since; and this Informant doth verily believe, the said Hellen Clark was the death of his said daughter. The Examination of Hellen Clark, taken before the said Justices the 11th of April, 1645. THis Examinant confesseth, Executed at Mannyntree. that about six weeks since, the De∣vill appeared to her in her house, in the likenesse of a white Dog, and that she calleth that Familiar Elimanzer; and that this Examinant hath often fed him with milk-pottage; and that the said Familiar spake to this Examinant audibly, and bade her deny Christ, and shee should never want, which shee did then assent unto, but doth altogether deny the killing of the daugh∣ter of the said Edward Parsley.
The Information of Prudence Hart, the wife of Thomas Hart of Lawford, taken upon oath before us the 23. of Aprill, 1645. THis Informant saith, that about eight week since, being at her Parish Church, on the Sabbath day, half a mile distant from her house, and being about twenty weeks gone with childe, and to her thinking, very well and healthfull, upon the sudden shee was taken with great pains, and miscarried before shee could be got home; and this Examinant saith, that about two moneths since, being in her bed, in the night, something fell down upon her right side, but being dark, she cannot tell in what shape it was: And that presently shee was taken lame on that side, with extraor∣dinary pains and burning, but recovered again within a few dayes after: And this Informant further saith, that she verily believeth, that Rebecca West, and Anne West her mother, were the cause of her pains; for that the said Rebecca hath in part of her Confes∣sion expressed, that shee had much maliced this Informant, be∣cause the said Rebecca West ever thought this Informant to be her greatest enemy. The Information of John Edes, Clerke, taken upon oath before the said Justices the 28th day of Aprill. 1645. THis Informant saith, That Rebecca Weste confessed unto him, that about seven yeares since, shee began to have familiaritie with the Devill, by the instigation of her mother Anne Weste; who hath appeared unto the said Rebecca at severall times, in di∣verse shapes: At one time in the likenesse of a proper young man, who desired of her, that he might have the same familiaritie with her, that others that appeared unto her before had had: Promi∣sing that if shee would, he would then doe for the said Rebecca what she desired, and avenge her on her enemies; but required further; that shee would deny God, and relie upon him. Now there was one Thomas Hart of Lawford, where the said Rebecca
lived with her said mother, Anne West, and the said Rebecca told this Informant, that shee required of him, that hee would avenge her on the said. Hart by killing his son, who not long after was taken sick, and dyed, whereupon the said. Rebecca told this Infor∣mant, that shee conceived hee could do as God; after which time shee gave entertainment to him, who lay with her as a man; and the said Rebecca further confessed to this Informant, that whilest she lived at Rivenall in the said. County of Essex, the said Anne her mother, came to the said Rebecca, and told her the Barley corn was picked up (meaning one George Frances (the only son of one George Frances, one of the chief Inhabitants of that town, where the said Anne West dwelt) and that his father thought the said George his son was bewitched to death; and the said Anne then said unto the said Rebecca, Be it unto him according to his faith. The Confession of Rebecca West, Found by the grand Jury, but acquitted by the Jury of life and death. taken before the said Justices at Mannyntree, the 21. of March, 1645. THis Examinant saith, that about a moneth since, the aforesaid Anne Leech, Elizabeth Gooding, Hellen Clark, Anne West, and this Examinant, met all together at the house of the aforesaid Eli∣zabeth Clark in Mannyntree, where they together spent some time in praying unto their Familiars, and every one in order went to prayers; afterwards some of them read in a book, the book being Elizabeth Clarks; and this Examinant saith, that forthwith their Familiars appeared, and every one of them made their severall Propositions to those Familiars, what every one of them desired to have effected: And this Examinant saith, that first of all the said Elizabeth Clark desired of her Spirit, that Mr. Edwards might be met withall about the middle bridge, as hee should come riding from Eastberyhoult in Suffolk; that his Horse might be scared, and he thrown down, and never rise again: And this Examinant saith, that the said Elizabeth Gooding desired of her Spirit, that shee might be avenged on Robert Taylers Horse, for that the said Robert suspected the said Elizabeth Gooding for the killing of an Horse of the said Robert formerly: And this examinant saith, that the said Hellen Clark desired of her Spirit, that shee might be reven∣ged
on two Hogs in Misley street, (being the place where the said Hellen lived) one of the Hogs to die presently, and the other to be taken lame; and this Examinant further saith, that Anne Leeeb desired of her Spirit, that a Cowe might be taken lame of a mans living in Mannyntree, but the name of the man this Exami∣nant cannot remember: And this examinant further saith, that the said Anne West, this Examinants mother, This Anne West was exe∣cuted at Man∣nyntree the first of Au∣gust. 1645. desired of her Spi∣rit, that shee might be freed from all her enemies, and have no trouble: And this Examinant saith, that shee desired of her Spi∣rit, that shee might be revenged on Prudence the wife of Thomas Hart, and that the said Prudence might be taken lame on her right side. And lastly this Examinant saith, that having thus done, this Examinant, and the other five, did appoint the next meeting to be at the said Elizabeth Goodings house, and so depar∣ted all to their owne houses. The Information of Richard Edwards of Mannintree, Gent. taken upon oath before the said Justices the 23th of Aprill. 1645. THis Informant saith, That not long since, about three moneths to his best remembrance, as he was coming from Eastberyholt in Suffolke, halfe an houre within evening; within ten score of the middle bridge (according to the desire of the said Elizabeth Clarke, as is declared in the confession of the said Rebecca Weste) this In∣formants horse started with him, and greatly endangered him; and he heard something about his horse cry, Ah, ah; much like the shrieke of a Polcat. And this Informant saith, That with much difficulty he saved himselfe from being thrown off his horse. All which, this Informant reported to his wife and neighbours as soone as he came home. The Information of Matthew Hopkins, Gent. taken upon oath before the said Justices the 18th of Aprill. 1645. THis Informant saith, That being lately at Colchester, he went to the Castle, where the said Rebecca Weste, with the other five,
are secured untill the next Gaole delivery: And this Informant going to Rebeeca Weste, and asking her how shee came first to be a Witch, the said Rebecca told this Informant, that about a yeare fince, or thereabouts, halfe an houre before Sun-set, the said Anne Weste (her mother) carried the said Rebecca Weste towards Man∣nintree, (which is about a small mile from the place where the said Anne dwelt) and the said Rebecca told this Informant, that as her mother and shee walked together, the said Anne told the said Re∣becca, shee must keepe secret whatsoever shee saw, whither they were then going; and the said Rebecca promised so to doe; And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that her mother and shee went to the house of the aforesaid Elizabeth Clarke, where at their comming in they found the aforesaid Anne Leech, widow, Eliza∣beth Gooding, Hellen Clarke, and the house-keeper Elizabeth Clarke, and that forthwith the Devill appeared to them in the shape of a dogge; afterwards in the shape of two Kitlyns; then in the shape of two dogges; and that the said familiars did doe homage in the first place to the said Elizabeth Clarke, and skipped up into her lap, and kissed her; and then went and kissed all that were in the roome, except the said Rebecca: And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that immediately one of their company asked the said Anne her mother, if shee had acquainted her daughter (the said Rebecca) with the businesse; and her mother answered shee had, and told them all, they need not feare her the said Rebecca for re∣vealing any thing: And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that forthwith the said Anne Leech pulled out a booke, and swore the said Rebecca never to reveale any thing shee saw or heard; and if shee should discover any thing, they all told the said Rebecca, shee should endure more torments on earth, then could be in hell: And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that shee promised to keepe all their secrets; And moreover, they all told her, that shee must never confesse any thing, although the Rope were about her necke, and shee ready to be hanged: And that after shee had con∣sented to all these things, the Devill came into her lap, and kissed her, and promised to doe for her what shee could desire; and that within halfe a yeare after the Devill appeared to her the said Rebecca, as shee was going to bed, and told her, he would marry her, and that shee could not deny him; shee said he kissed her,
but was as cold as clay, and married her that night, in this man∣ner; He tooke her by the hand and lead her about the Chamber, and promised to be her loving husband till death, and to avenge her of her enemies; And that then shee promised him to be his obedient wife till death, and to deny God and Christ Jesus; And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that shee sent the De∣vill to kill the sonne of the said Thomas Hart, which he did within one fortnight; and that after that shee tooke him for her God, and thought he could doe as God. The Information of Susan Sparrow, taken upon oath before the said Justices the 25th day of Aprill. An. Dom. 1645. at Little Bentley. THis Informant saith, That about thirty yeares since, living un∣der the same roofe with Mary Greenleif of Alresford, either of them had a Daughter of about thirteen or fourteen yeares of age, and being one night in bed with their children, this Informant heard the childe of the said Mary Greenleif to cry out in a fearefull manner; Oh Mother, now it comes, it comes, oh helpe mother, it hurts me, it hurts me: Whereupon this Informant called to the said Mary, and said, Good-wife Greenleife, Good-wife Greenleife, if your childe be asleepe, awaken it, for if any body comes by, and heare it make such moane (you having an ill name already) they will say, You are suckling your Impes upon it: Whereupon the said Mary replyed; I doe so indeed, and I will fee with them (meaning her said Impes,) that they shall suck my daughter one night, and thine another: And this Informant saith, that the very next night, her childe cryed out in the same manner, and clasped her armes about this Informants necke, being much affrighted, sweating, and shrieking in a terrible manner, complaining that shee was nipped and pinched on her thigh; and that the next morn∣ing searching what the cause should be, shee found above the right knee of her childe, a black and blew spot, as broad and long as her hand: And this Informant saith, that her childe did complaine on that leg, at least a moneth after. And this Informant saith, that the house where this Informant and the said Mary did dwell
together, was haunted with a Leveret, which did usually fit before the dore: And this Informant knowing that one Anthony Shar∣lock had an excellent Greyhound that had killed many Hares; and having heard that a childe of the said Anthony was much haunted and troubled, and that the mother of the childe suspected the said Mary to be the cause of it: This Informant went to the said Anthony Sharlock and acquainted him, that a Leveret did usu∣ally come and sit before the dore, where this Informant and the said Mary Greenleife lived, and desired the said Anthony to bring downe his Greyhond to see if he could kill the said Leveret; and the next day the said Anthony did accordingly bring his Grey∣hound, and coursed it, but whether the dog killed it this Infor∣mant knows not; But being a little before coursed by Good-man Merrills dog, the dog ran at it, but the Leveret never stirred, and just when the dog came at it, he skipped over it, and turned about and stood still, and looked on it, and shortly after that dog lan∣guished and dyed. But whether this was an Impe in the shape of a Leveret, or had any relation to the said Mary, this Informant knows not, but does confesse shee wondered very much to see a Leveret, wilde by nature, to come so frequently and sit openly be∣fore the dore in such a familiar way. The Information of Elizabeth Hunt and Priscilla Brigs, taken upon oath before the said Justices the 25th day of Aprill. 1645. THese Informants say, That being by the said Justices imploy∣ed to search the said Mary Greenleife, upon suspect for being a Witch, these Informants found that the said Mary had bigges or teates in her secret parts, not like Emerods, nor in those places where women use to be troubled with them; and that they verily beleeve, these teates are sucked by her Impes; for that these Infor∣mants have been formerly imployed to search other women suspe∣cted for Witchcraft, who have had the like bigges, and have after∣wards confessed themselves to be Witches.
The Examination of Mary Greenleife taken before the said Justices, April 25. 1645. THis Examinant being asked how she came by those teats which were discovered in her secret parts, She saith she knows not unlesse she were born with them; but she neven knew she had any such untill this time, they were found in those parts upon the said search; And she does deny that ever she had any Impe sucked on these teats: But she does confesse she hath seen a Leveret once sitting before her doore within a yard of the threshold; and that she wondered much at it, being about noon time as she remembreth. And further saith, she is not guilty of any accusation charged upon her this Examinant. The Information of Elizabeth Otley of Wyvenhoe taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 25. 1645. THis Informant saith, that Alice Dixon (who now stands committed for a suspected Witch) did in the presence of Mary Johnson of the same Town, charge and accuse the said Mary Johnson to be the death of his Informants child, saying, that the said Mary Johnson did carry an Impe in her pocket to this Informants house, and put the said Impe into the house, at an hole in the doore, bidding it go rock the Cradle, and do the businesse she sent it about, and return to her again: And this Informant saith, that upon a Munday before Michaelmas last, the said Mary Johnson came to the house of this Informant, and gave her child an apple, and kissed it; And within a short time after the said child sickned and died: And the said Alice Dixon did also affirm, that the Impe which the said Mary Johnson sent to this Informants house, was in shape somewhat like a Rat, but without tayl and eares. And this Informant saith, that the said Mary Johnsons answer was, that if she did it, she did it, she could but receive punishment for it. And at the same time the said Mary Johnson said, the said Alice Dixon did the mischief to this Informants child her self. And this Informant further
saith, that after the said Alice Dixon had made this discovery, she, this Informant, was taken with extreme pains in her body, and that during the time of her extremity, the said Mary John∣son did many times come to this Informants house, perswading her, that she was not the death of this Informants child: But this Informant could not be satisfied untill she had gotten the blood of the said Mary Johnson; And meeting with her after long scuffling, this Informant made the said Mary Johnsons teeth to bleed, and immediately after, this Informants extra∣ordinary pains left her, and her stomack came to her, having eat little or nothing a fortnight before, and slept very well the night following, having been restlesse by reason of her ex∣treme pains all the time aforesaid. And this Informant fur∣ther saith, that the next day after the said Mary Johnson had given this Informants child the Apple, the child was taken with very violent fits, and in the fits (although the Child was but two yeers old) yet this Informant could very hardly with all her strength hold it down in the Cradle, and so continued untill it died. The Examination of Mary Johnson taken before the said Justices the 25. of April, 1645. THis Examinant saith, that she is not guilty of any one par∣ticular charged upon her in the Information of the said Elizabeth Otley touching the killing of the child of the said Eli∣zabeth. The Information of Ioseph Long Minister of Clacton in the County of Essex, taken before the said Just: April 29. 1645. THis Informant saith, Executed at Mannintree the  of August. that Anne the wife of John Cooper of Clacton aforesaid, being accused for a Witch: Confessed unto this Informant, that she the said Anne was guilty of the sin of Witchcraft; and that she hath had three black Impes suckled on the lower parts of her body: called by the names of
Wynowe, Jeso, and Panu: And this Informant saith, that the said Anne told him, that once she cursed a Colt of one William Cottingams of Clacton aforesaid, and the said Colt broke his neck presently after going out of a gate: And the said Anne fur∣ther confessed unto this Informant, that she the said Anne offer∣ed to give unto her daughter Sarah Cooper an Impe in the likenes of a gray Kite, to suck on the said Sarah: which Impes name the said Anne called Tom boy: and told the said Sarah, there was a Cat for her; And this Informant saith, that the said Anne confessed unto him, that she the said Anne about ten yeers fince falling out with Johan the wife of Gregory Rous of Clacton a fore∣said; the said Anne Cooper sent one of her Impes to kill the daughter of the said Gregory and Johan named Mary: And this Informant saith, that to his own knowledge about the same time the said child was strangely taken fick, and languishing, within a short time died. The Information of Roger Hempson taken upon oath be∣fore the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THis Informant doth confirm the Information of the said Joseph Longe, and concurs in every particular. The Information of Roger Hempson taken upon oath be∣fore the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THis Informant saith, that Mr. Longe telling Elizabeth Hare, Condemned, but reprieved. that she was accused by one Mary Smith, for giving of her the said Mary two Impes: And that the said Elizabeth Hare, praying to God with her hands upward, that if she were guilty of any such thing, He would shew some example upon her: And this Informant saith, that presently after she shaked and quivered, and fell down to the ground backward, and tum∣bled up and down upon the ground, and hath continued sick ever fince.
The Information of Anaball the wife of George Durrant taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THis Informant saith, that about ten moneths fince, going from Wivenhoe towards Fingeringhoe, in the County of Essex, by the way Mary Johnson the wife of Nicholas Johnson met with this Informant, whom this Informant never saw before to her knowledge; And this Informant leading her Child up∣on her hand, being about two yeers old, and perfectly well: the said Mary Johnson took occasion of her own accord to com∣mend the said Child, saying, it was a pretty child; and stroa∣ked it upon the face, and gave it a peece of bread and butter, and so left this Informant. And this Informants child did eat a peece of the said bread and butter: and within half a quarter of an houre after, her said child shricked and dried out it was lame; And this Informant carried her child home, and had the advice of one Mr. Dawber a Chirurgeon, who could find no na∣turall cause of its lamenesse; and so the said child continued for the space of eight dayes shricking and tearing it self, and then died. And further, this Informant saith, that immediately after the death of her child, she was taken with extremepains in her body, sometimes every day or at least every third day, for the space of seven or eight moneths together as if she had been to be delivered of a child, but was not with child; And this In∣formant saith, that setting up of broome in an out-house pre∣sently after her child was dead, she had the perfect representa∣tion of a shape, to her thinking, like the said Mary Johnson, and was struck with a lamenesse in her Arms, and such a stiffnesse that three or foure that came to help her, were not able to bow her Arms: and this Informant continued speechlosse all that day and the night following, and had such a weaknesse in the rest of her limbes, that she was carried into her house by some of her friends, and continued by the space of a fortnight, being before untill this present (as she conceived) in perfect health and strength: And further this Informant saith, that she being
charged by the Constable by vertue of a Warrant to give this her Information before the said Justices against the said Mary Johnson this day: this Informants husband called her up in the morning, wishing her to make her ready to go before the said Justices; And presently after he gave a great shrick, and said the said Mary Johnson would be his death, and had a great swelling risen up in his breast, and now lies sweating, and in great extremity. And at this very instant a noise was heard in the Roome where her husband lay like an Hornet, and there∣upon her husband cried out, It comes, it comes, Now good wife Johnsons Impe is come, Now she hath my life; And forthwith a great part of the wall in the said roome fell down. And this In∣formant saith, that she doth verily beleeve the said Mary John∣son was the cause of her childs death: And that she is now the cause of her husbands extremity. The Information of Ric. Carter and Heary-Cornwall of Thorp, taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THese Informants say, that being appointed to watch Mar∣garet Moone, after she was accused and apprehended for a Witch, the said Margaret going about the Roome, these In∣formants did see a thing drop from under her coats (as they thought) in the likenesse of a Rat for bignesse and shape, but of a greyer colour; And presently there was such an extreame offen five stink in the Roome, that these Informants were scarce able to endure to stay in it; And these Informants asking the said Margaret what it was that dropped from her, she bids them coop it up and catch it if they could. And this Informant Henry Cornwall saith, that the said Margaret did confesse to him that she had twelve Impes, and called them by their names; of which he remembers onely these following: Jesus, Jockey, Sandy, Mris. Elizabeth, and Collyn.
The Information of Will. Dammon, Hen. Cornwall, Bevis Vincent, and Tho. Burles, taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THese Informants say, that upon the 21. day of April last past, they heard Margaret Moone confesse, that she was a Witch, and that she had twelve Impes, that she had killed a Cow of Stephen Cookers, and had two Cowes more of the said Stephen in handling; that she had killed a Cow and a Sow of Henry Robertsons. That she was partner with the aforesaid Eliz: Clark of Mannintree, in killing of a Child of one Mr. Edwards of Mannintree aforesaid, and spoiling of 3 Brewings of beere of the said Mr. Edwards. That she the said Margaret Moon spoiled a batch of bread of one Philip Berrimans; that she was the cause that one Philip Daniels horse broke his neck going down an hill in his Waggon. And the said Informant saith, that the said M: Moone did freely and voluntarily confesse unto him, without any question being asked, that she was the cause of the death of Johan Cornwall this Informants daughter. And this Infor∣mant saith, that the said Margaret Moone before his child fell sick, sent for this Informant to do some work for her, and then she desired to buy an Hooke which he carried with him in his hand; And they agreed she should have the said Hooke for half a peck of Apples: And as this Informant went home he did eat one of the said Apples, and was presently taken sick with an extreme shaking and pain in all parts of his body; And his Informants wife knowing the said Margaret Moone to be a woman of a very bad fame and suspected for a Witch, and had formerly been questioned at an Assize for the same, she flung away the Aples. And this Informant saith, that he continued in great extremity for the space of twelve weeks, and most part of tha; time deprived of his senses. And at the same time his wife was taken in the same manner, and is not yet perfectly re∣covered. And lastly this Informant saith, that the next day after he had been at the said Margarets house as aforesaid, that his child (which the said Margaret confessed she was the death of) was taken sick with strange fits, and shrickings out, and so continued languishing for a moneth, and died.
The Information of Richard Caley of Thorpe taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THis Informant saith, that being called into the house where Bevis Vincent, and Henry Cornwall were appointed by the neighbours of Thorpe aforesaid to watch Marga∣ret Moone, the said Margaret did confesse before this Informant, that she had by Witchcraft killed a Cow and a Sow of one Henry Robinsons. And that one Henry Dorr being then called to write what she should confesse, the said Margaret refused to make any further discovery, before this Informant; but fell upon other discourse, saying, that she had been told fourty times, that this Informant thought in his conscience she was no Witch: And that this Informant knew that one William Ca∣ley his brother let the said Margaret an House about twenty yeers since, and afterwards warned her out of the said house; and that then she went into an house that was built for her by one Thomas Turner, and being also turned out of Turners house, that one Rawbood and his wife gave ten shillings more for the said house, then the said Margaret, and came and dwelt in the said house: But the said Margaret said, they (meaning the said Rawbood and his wife) had as good they had not medled with the house, for they did never thrive after. And this Informant saith, that after the said Rawbood had taken the said house, he and his wife were alwayes lame or sick untill they died: and that the wife of the said Rawbood being a very tydy and clean∣ly woman, sitting upon a block after dinner with another Neighbour a little before it was time to go to Church (and as he remembers) upon an Easter day, the said Rawboods wife was on the sudden so filled with Lice, that they might have been swept off her cloaths with a stick; And this Informant saith he did see them, and that they were long, and lean, and not like other Lice. And this Informant being asked, whether the said Margaret were at this time sensible, he saith that she spake very plainly and very intelligently, discoursing of some things done long before, her memory serving her very exactly.
The Information of Francis Milles taken upon oath be∣fore the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THis Informant saith, that being imployed by the Neigh∣bours of Thorpe aforesaid, to search Margaret Moone, who was suspected for a Witch, she found three long teats or bigges in her secret parts, which seemed to have been lately sucked; and that they were not like Pyles, for this Informant knows well what they are, having been troubled with them her self. And this Informant saith, that she asking the said Mar∣garet for her Impes, which sucked those teats: she said, if she might have some bread and beere, she would call her said Impes; which being given unto her, she put the bread into the beere, and set it against an hole in the wall, and made a circle round about the pot, and then cried, Come Christ, come Christ, come Mounsier, come Mounsier: And no Impe appearing, she cried out and said, she had Devillish Daughters which had car∣ried her Impes away in a white bagge, and wished they might be searched, for they were naught: And upon the searching of her Daughters, this Informant found that two of them had biggs in their privy parts as the said Margaret their mother had. The Information of Mary Philips, Elizabeth Harris, wi∣dow, Susan Burles, and Philip Tumnor taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 29. 1645. THese Informants do all and every of them concur with Frances Milles in her said Information, in that particular concerning the teats of the said Margaret Moone, and her two daughters; And the said Mary Philips doth also confirm and concur with that part of the Information of the said Fran∣ces Milles, touching the pot, the circle, and the calling of the Impes by the said Margaret Moone. And this Informant Mary Philips doth also say, that being sent for to search the said Margaret Moone, as she was coming
towards Thorp aforesaid, and going over a broad foot Bridge, this Informant sensibly felt a great blow on her head, which strook her into a ditch up to the neck. And this Informant and the said Fran∣cis Mylles, doe both of them say, That as soon as they came into the room where the said Margaret Moon was, she called these two Informants, Mannintree Rogues (they both dwelling at a Town so called,) and said, Who a Devill sent for you? But I hope I have met with some of you. The Examination of Margaret Moon, Condemned and dyed by the way to execution. taken before the said Justices, the 29. day of May, 1645. THis Examinant being examined to all the particulars charged upon her, in all the aforesaid severall informations, denies eve∣ry particular. The Examination of Judith Moone, daughter of the said Margaret Moone, taken before the said Justices the 29th day of Aprill. 1645. THis Examinant (being a single woman and having such marks of a Witch, as aforesaid) saith, that about a fortnight before her Mother was apprehended for a Witch, the said Margaret bid this Examinant goe and fetch a bundle of wood, and this Exami∣nant told her mother shee would not fetch any wood: Whereup∣on the said Margaret threatned this Examinant, and told her shee had as good have gone for some wood; And that the next night as this Examinant lay in her bed, she felt something come into the bed, about her legges, being at that time broad awake, and that shee searched to see what it should be, but could not finde any thing.
The Information of Bridget Reynolds, the wife of Ed∣mond Reynolds of amsey in the said County of Essex, taken upon oath before the said Justices the  of May. 1645. THis Informant saith, That she with some other women, were  Sarah Hiting, the wife of William Hing, Elizabeth Harvy, widow, and marian Hocket, widow, who are all suspected for witchcraft, and upon her said search (being a Mid∣wife) found such Marks, or Bigges in their privy parts, that she never saw in other women: for Sarah Hating had foure Teats, or Bigges in those parts, almost an inch long, and as bigge as this In∣formants little finger: That the said Elizabeth Harvy had three such Bigges, and about the said scantling: And that the said Mari∣an Hocke had no such bigges; but was found in the same parts not like other honest women. And this Informant further saith. That the said Elizabeth Harvy said (since she was found with the said sus∣pitious marks) unto this Informant, That if she were a Witch, she was so made by the said Marian Hocket; for that the said Marian brought unto her the said Elizabeth Harrvy, three things about the bignesse of Mouses, and willed the said Elizabeth to make much of them, for they were pretty things; which the said Elizabeth recei∣ved: And the said Elizabeth told this Informant, that ever since she received those three things which the said Marian delivered unto her, he hath been much torn and troubled in her privy parts, where the said Bigges were found. And that the said three things were delivered to her the said Elizabeth about six or seven years since. The Information of Elizabeth Durden, the wife of Edw  Mary Philips, taken upon oath before the said Justices the  day of May 1645. THese Informants do concurre in every particular with the said Briget Reynolds in her Information touching the search of the said Sarah Haring, Elizabeth Harvie, and Marian Hocket: And this Informant Elizabeth Durden further saith, that the said Elizabeth Harvie told her, that if shee were a Witch, shee was so made by the said Marian Hocket.
The Information of Francis Stock and John Batilly, taken upon oath, before the said Justices, May 3. 1645. THese Informants say, that the said Elizabeth Harvie confessed to them with many teares, that shee had three marks, two be∣fore and one behinder (as is already informed by Bridget Reynolds and others,) And that the said Marian Hocket made her have the said marks or bigs, by bringing of three things to her the said Elizabeth, and telling her, if shee would receive them, shee should never in no so long as she liveth, which three things have since made the said marks in her privie parts, and the said Elizabeth told these Informants, that the said three things were of a reddish color, and that since, the said Marian, and the said Elizabeth falling out, she the said Elizabeth would have put away & sent home the three things which the said Marian brought to her, and that ever since the said things have tormented her in her bed, in the places afore∣said, as if they had pulled her in pieces. The second Information of Francis Stock, taken be∣fore the said Justices upon oath, May 3. 1645. THis Informant saith, that about five yeers since, being one of the Constables of Ramsey aforesaid, hee impressed William Hiting, husband to the aforesaid Sarah Hating for a souldier, whereupon the said William threatened this Informant very much, and not long after, this Informants wife told him, shee espied a Snake lying upon a shelf in this Informants house, about three yards high from the ground, which falling down into the house, shee endeavoured to kill with a spade; and striking at it, the Snake suddenly vanished away, and could no where be found: And this Informant saith, that presently after his said wife was taken sick with extraordinary fits, pains and burnings all over her body, and within one week dyed: And further this Informant saith, that within two or three dayes, after the death of his said wife, hee had a daughter taken sick after a very strange manner, who in all the time of her sicknesse, cryed out much on the said
Sarah, the wife of the said William Hating, saying, that the said Sarah was the cause of her death, and dyed presently after; and that within two or three dayes after the death of his said childe, this Informant had another childe taken sick in the same manner, and within a few dayes dyed also: And lastly, this Informant saith, that about three quarters of a yeer after, he had a man-ser∣vant, that for some ill language given to him by John Hating, one of the sons of the said William and Sarah Hating, his said ser∣vant did beat the said John, and the very next day hee was taken sick, and so continued in a pining and languishing condition, cry∣ing out often of the said Sarah, that she had bewitched him, and was the cause of his death, which soon after ensued. The Information of Francis Stock, and John Felgate, taken upon oath before the said Justices, May 3. 1645. THis Informant John Felgate saith, that speaking with one Sarah Barton, the sister of the said Marian Hocket (which said Sarah is now imprisoned in the Gaole at Harwich upon suspi∣tion of Witchcraft) who told this Informant, that the said Marian had cut off her bigs, whereby she might have been the more suspe∣cted to have been a Witch, and laid plaisters to those places: And the said Francis and John say, that the said Sarah Barton, told them, that the said Marian had given and delivered unto her the said Sarah three Imps, and that the said Marian called them by the names of Littleman, Pretty-man, and Dainty. The Examination of Marian Hocket, Sarah Hating, and Elizabeth Harvie of Ramsey within the County aforesaid, taken before the said Justices, May 3. 1645. THis Examinant, Executed at Mannyutree, Aug. 1. 1645. Marian Hocket saith, that shee is not guilty of any of the particulars charged upon her, touching Witch∣craft, notwitstanding the severall accusations against her.
THis Examinant, Sarah Hating saith, Executed at Chelmesford. that shee is not guilty of any particular wherewith shee stands charged in the Informa∣tion of Francis Stock and others. THis Examinant, Elizabeth Harvie saith, Executed at Chelmesford. that about halfe a yeer since, the said Marian Hocket brought three things to her house, two of them being smaller then Mouses, and the other somewhat bigger and longer; and that the said Marian told this examinant they were pretty things, and would do her and this Examinant good, if shee this Examinant would keep them; and that after∣wards shee was very much pained in those parts of her body where the said tears or bigs were discovered by the said searchers, as aforesaid. The Information of Robert Turner of St. Osith Car∣penter, taken upon oath before the said Justices, May 6. 1465. THis Informant saith, that about eight dayes since, his servant was taken sick, shaking and shricking, and crying out of Rose Hallybread, that shee had bewitched him: And this Informant saith, that sometimes his said servant, since hee was taken sick, as aforesaid, hath crowed perfectly as a Cock; sometimes barked like a Dog; sometimes violently groaned beyond the ordinary course of nature; and strugling with such strength (being but a youth) that four or five strong men were not able to hold him down in his bed; and sometimes sung divers and sundry perfect tunes: And that this Informant could not perceive his mouth to open, or so much as his lips to stir all the time of his singing. The Examination of Rose Hallybread, Died in the Gaole. taken before the said Justices, the 6th of May, 1645. THis Examinant saith, that about fifteen or sixteen yeers since, there was an Imp brought to her house by one Goodwise Hag∣tree, which Imp this Examinant entertained, fed it with oatmeale,
and suckled it on her body, for the space of a yeer and a halfe, or thereabouts, and then lost it: And this Examinant further saith, that about half a yeer since, one Joyce Boanes (who is now also ac∣cused for Witchcraft) brought to this Examinants house another Imp, in the likenesse of a small Gray bird, which this Examinant received, and carryed it to the house of one Thomas Toakley of St. Osyth, and put the said Imp into a cranny of the doore of the said Toakely's house, after which time the son of the said Thomas languished, and dyed, crying out of this Examinant, that shee was his death: And this Examinant further saith, that about eight dayes since, Susan Cock, Margaret Landish, and Joyce Boands, (all which stand now suspected for Witchcraft) brought to his Exami∣nants house each of them an Imp, (in all three) to which this Ex∣aminant added one of her own Imps; and then the said Joyce Boanes carryed the said four Imps to the house of one Robert Tur∣ner, to torment his servant, because hee had refused to give unto her this Examinant, the said Susan Cocks, Margaret Landish and Joyce Boanes a few chips: And this Examinant further saith, that the said Robert Turners servant forthwith fell sick, and oftentimes barked like a Dog: And this Examinant saith, that shee believeth that the said four Imps were the cause of his barking and sicknesse. The Examination of Joyce the wife of William Boanes, Executed at Chelmesford. taken before the said Justices, May 6. 1645. THis Examinant saith, that about thirteen yeers since, shee had two Imps which came into the bed to her in the likenesse of Mouses, and that they sucked on this Examinants body; and that afterwards this Examinant employed and sent the said Imps to a Farm house in St. Osyth, called Cocket-wick, where one Richard Welth then lived, where the said Imps killed ten or twelve Lambs of the said Richards: And this Examinant saith further, that a little while after, shee sent her said two Imps to the house of one Thomas Clynch, where they killed a Calf, a Sheep and a Lamb: And this Examinant also saith, that shee carried one of her said Imps, called Rug, to the house of the said Rose Hallybread; and that her said Imp Rug, with three Imps of the said Rose Hallybread,
Susen Cock, and Margaret Landish, each of them sending out, were carried by this Examinant from the house of the said Rose Hallybread, to the house of the said Robert Turner to kill the ser∣vant of the said Robert; whereupon his said servant hath often∣times crowed like a Cock, barked like a Dogge, sung tunes, and groaned: And this Examinant saith, that her said Imp made the said servant to barke like a Dog; the Imp of the said Rose Hally∣bread inforced him to sing sundry tunes in his great extremity of paines; the Imp of the said Susin Cock, compelled him to crow like a Cock; and the Imp of Margaret Landish made him groan in such an extraordinary manner. The Examination of Susan Cock, Executed at Chelmesford. taken before the said Justices the 6. day of May, 1645. THis Examinant saith, that about three or four yeeres since, one Margery Stoakes, this Examinants mother, lying upon her death-bed, and this Examinant comming to visit her, shee the said Margery desired this Examinant privately, to give entertainment to two of her Imps, and withall told this Examinant, they would do this Examinant good: And this Examinant saith, that the same night her said mother dyed, the said two Imps came to her accordingly, and sucked on he body: And this Examinant saith, that one of the said Imps was like a mouse, and the name of that was Susan; that the other was of a yellow colour, about the big∣nesse of a Cat; and that the name of that Imp was Besse: And this Examinant saith, that she employed her said Imp called Besse, together with the Imps of the said Rose Hallybread, Joyce Boanes, and Margaret Landish, each of them one, to the house of one John Spall, where the said Imps killed ten or twelve Sheep of the said John Spalls; and that the cause of this Examinants malice was, because she being with childe, desired to have some curds of the said Spalls wife, which she refused, either to give or sell to this Ex∣aminant: And further, this Examinant saith, that about a week since, she, together with Joyce Boanes, Rose Hallbread, and Mar∣garet Landish sent four Imps to the house of one Robert Tuener (by the said Joyce Bones) to torment his servant, for that the said
servant of the said Robert Turner refused to give to this Examinant a sack full of chips: And this Examinant further saith, that she, to∣gether with the said Margaret Landish, sent her Impe to the house of one Thomas Mannock in St Osyth aforesaid, where their said Impes killed six or seven shoots or hogges of the said Mr Mannock; and that the occasion of offence was, because the wife of the said Mr Mannock refused to give to this Examinant such reliefe as shee de∣sired, telling this Examinant, that shee was a young woman, and able to worke for her living. The Examination of Margaret Landishe, Executed at Chelmesford. taken before the said Justices the 6th day of May. 1645. THis Examinant saith, That about eight or nine weekes since lying sicke by the fire side in her owne house, something came up to her body, and sucked on her privie parts, and much pained and tormented her: And this Examinant saith, that if it were an Impe that came and sucked her as aforesaid, that the said Susan Cock sent it to her: And this Examinant denieth, that ever shee joyned with the said Joyce Boanes, Rose Hallibread, and Susan Cock, in the tormenting of the servant of the said Robert Turner, & doth utterly deny the sending of any Impe to destroy or kill the hogges of the said Mr Mannock, as the said Susan Cock hath charged her withall in the Examination of the said Susan. The Examination of Rebecca Jones of St Osyth, Executed at Chelmesford, and the first that was ar∣raigned. taken before the said Justices the 9th of May. 1645. THis Examinant saith, That about 24. or 25 yeares since, dwel∣ling with one John Bishop, of Much-Clacton in the County of Essex as his servant, there came one morning one to the doore of the said John Bishop and knocked, and that this Examinant go∣ing to the dore, shee saw there a very handsome young man (as shee then thought) but now shee thinkes it was the Devill; who asked this Examinant how shee did, and desired to see her left Wrist, which shee shewed unto him: and that he then tooke a pin
from this Examinants owne sleeve, and pricked her wrist twice, and there came out a drop of bloud, which he took off with the top of his finger, and so departed. And this Examinant saith, that about a quarter of a yeare after, as shee was going to St Osyth, (where this Examinant doth now dwell) to sell her said Masters butter, a man met with her, being in a ragged sute, and having such great eyes, that this Examinant was much afraid of him; who came to this Examinant, and gave her three things like to Mouses, having foure feete apiece, but without tayles, and of a blacke colour, and bid this Examinant nurse the said three things, untill he did desire them againe; And this Examinant asked the said man, what she should give them to eate, and he told this Exa∣minant milke, and that they would not hurt her, and wished her not to be afraid of them; And the said man told this Examinant, that those three things which he gave her, would avenge her on her enemies, and bid her murther some, but not too many, and he would forgive her; and then went away from this Examinant: And this Examinant saith, that the first time shee imployed any of the said things, shee sent one of them to kill a Sowe of one Benja∣min Howes of Little-Clacton in the County aforesaid; and the said Sowe was killed by the said Impe accordingly: And this Exami∣nant saith, that the names of her three Impes were Margaret, A∣mie, and Susan: And that a while after, this Examinant and one Joyce Boanes (now in prison) did send each of them an Impe to kill one Thomas Bumstead of St Osyth aforesaid, who died about three weekes after. And this Examinant saith, that shee beleeveth that the said two Impes did kill the said Thomas Bumstead; and the Impes name which this Examinant sent to destroy the said Bum∣stead was Margaret: And that the Impe which the said Joyce Boanes sent was a dund one like unto a Mouse. And this Examinant saith, that shee did send another of her Impes called Amie, to the said Bumsteads house, which did kill the wife of the said Bumstead with∣in a short time after: And this Examinant confesseth, that the cause of offence shee tooke so to destroy and kill the said Bumstead and his wife, was because the said Thomas Bumstead did beate the sonne of this Examinant for eating up of some honey which he found about the house of the said Thomas Bumstead. And this Exa∣minant further confesseth, that shee did send her other third Impe
called Susan, to afflict the childe of one Mistris Darcy of St Osyth a∣foresaid: But did withall bid the said Impe it should not hurt the said child too much, and come away againe: And this Examinant saith, that the said Imp is come againe from the said Mistris Dar∣cies childe. The Examination of Johan Cooper, widow, taken before the said Justices, May 9. 1645. THis Examinant saith, Died in the Gaole. that she hath been a witch about twenty yeers, and hath three Familiars, two like Mouses, and the third like a Frog: The names of the two like Mouses, are Jack, and the other Prickeare, and the name of the third like a Frog, is Frog: And this Examinant saith, that she sent one of her said Imps to kill a child of one Thomas Woodward, which her said Imp did kill within a fortnight after: And this Examinant saith, that shee did send her said Imp called Frog, to kill two of John Cartwrights chil∣dren, of Much-Holland in the County of Essex aforesaid, which said Imp did kill the said two children within a fortnight or three weeks after: And this Examinant saith further, that at another time shee sent her said Imp Frog, to destroy the wife of one George Parby of Much-Holland aforesaid, which did kill her within three dayes after. The Examination of Anne Cate, alias Maidenhead, of Much-Holland, in the County aforesaid, taken before the said Justices the 9th day of May, 1645. THis Examinant saith, Executed at Chelmesford. that she hath four Familiars, which shee had from her mother, about two and twenty yeeres since; and that the names of the said Imps are James, Prickeare, Robyn, and Sparrow: and that three of these Imps are like Mouses, and the fourth like a Sparrow, which she called Sparrow: And this Exami∣nant saith, that to whomsoever shee sent the said Imp called Spar∣row, it killed them presently; and that first of all shee sent one of her three Imps like mouses, to nip the knee of one Robert Freeman,
of Little-Clacton, in the County of Essex aforesaid, whom the said Imp did so lame, that the said Robert dyed on that lamenesse within half a yeere after: And this Examinant saith, that she sent her said Imp Prickeare to kill the daughter of John Rawlins of Much-Holland aforesaid, which died accordingly within a short time after; and that shee sent her said Imp Prickeare to the house of one John Tillet, which did suddenly kill the said Tillet: And this Examinant saith, that shee sent her said Imp Sparrow, to kill the childe of one George Parby of Much-Holland aforesaid, which child the said Imp did presently kill; and that the offence this Exami∣nant took against the said George Parby to kill his said childe, was, because the wife of the said Parby denyed to give this Examinant a pint of Milke: And this Examinant further saith, that shee sent her said Imp Sparrow to the house of Samuel Ray, which in a very short time did kill the wife of the said Samuel; and that the cause of this Examinants malice against the said woman was, because shee refused to pay to this Exami∣nant two pence which she challenged to be due to her; And that afterwards her said Imp Sparrow killed the said childe of the said Samuel Ray: And this Examinant confesseth, that as soon as shee had received the said four Imps from her said mo∣ther, the said Imps spake to this Examinant, and told her, shee must deny God and Christ, which this Examinant did then assent unto. The testimony of Sir Thomas Bowes, Knight, which he spake upon the Bench, concerning the aforesaid Anne West, shee being then at the Barre upon her tryall. THat a very honest man of Mannintree, One Goff of Mannintree, a Glover. whom he knew would not speake an untruth, affirmed unto him, that very early one morning as he passed by the said Anne Wests dore, about foure a clock, it being a moon-light night, and perceiving her dore to be open so early in the morning, looked into the house, and present∣ly there came three or foure little things in the shape of black rab∣bits, leaping and skipping about him, who having a good stick in his hand, struck at them, thinking to kill them, but could not, but
at last caught one of them in his hand, and holding it by the body, of it, he beat the head of it against his stick, intending to beat out the braines of it; but when he could not kill it that way, he tooke the body of it in one hand, and the head of it in another, and in∣deavoured to wring off the head; and as he wrung and stretched the neck of it, it came out between his hands like a lock of wooll; yet he would not give over his intended purpose, but knowing of a Spring not farre off, he went to drowne it; but still as he went he fell downe, and could not goe but downe he fell againe, so that he at last crept upon his hands and knees till he came at the water, and holding it fast in his hand, he put his hand downe into the water up to his elbow, and held it under water a good, space, till he conceived it was drowned, and then letting goe his hand, it sprung out of the water up into the aire, and so vanished away: and then comming backe to the said Anne Wests dore, he saw her standing there in her smock, and asked her why shee did set her Impes to molest and trouble him? to whom shee made an∣swer, that they were not sent to trouble him, but were sent out as Scouts upon another designe. FINIS.
