G2011 E1081_6 R207929 99866946 119235
Christian Concord: OR, S. Pauls Parallel BETWEEN The Body NATƲRAL and MYSTICAL. EXEMPLIFIED IN A SERMON Preacht in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, On Sunday the 13th. of January 1660. By MATTHEVV GRIFFITH D. D. Phil. 2.-5. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ if any comfort of love, if any fel∣lowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, &c. John 18.37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth: every one that is of the truth, hears my voice. London, Printed by W.G. for T. Firby at Grayes-In-gate in Holborn. 1661.
TO Sr. EDWARD NICHOLAS Knight, Principal Secretary of State to His MAIESTIE, And one of His MAIESTIE'S Most Honourable Privy-Councel. Honoured SIR, I Have hitherto had so small Encouragement for pub∣lishing my good Affections both to Church and State; that upon just Grounds I had resolved to adven∣ture no more on the Press: For though I never gave way to the Printing of more Sermons then two, the former out of a
sincere desire to have prevented the late Commotions; and the latter to promote His MAIESTIES just Restitution) Yet all the thankes I reaped (such was then the ini∣quitie of the Times) was, to be committed to Newgate for both; and this unequal Re∣tribution for so pious intentions and peace∣able endeavours, had rendred me very un∣willing to appear again in Print. Yet be∣ing lately appointed by my Lord Mayor (whose courage, and vigilancie make him fit for, and worthy of the grat trust which he now so faithfully dischargeth) to preach this Sermon; I have been in some sort enforced to publish it, partly to satisfie the incessant and unavoydable importunitie of many noble Friends, and well-affected Hearers; and partly to prevent being mis∣represented by such short-Writers, as hav∣ing taken my Notes, told me plainly, that if I would not print this Sermon, they would, in order to the publick good; so that I must needs say it is not entreated, but extorted; and yet I shall make this Vertue of that Necessity, to let the World
see in this poor Dedication, not onely how grateful I desire to approve my self to your Honour, For your daily repeated Favours; but also that your Prudence and Integritie Candour and Charitie, are such a Muni∣ment, and Ornament to the Court, that they alone are sufficient both to defend it from Conspiracie, and to denominate it truely Christian. Your Honour hath by many and many Acts acquired such an habit of doing what is just, and Right, that (as it was said of Cato) you cannot do otherwise. You dispatch State-affairs with so much inge∣nuitie, and dexteritie, that what other Po∣liticians Languished under as too hard a labour, is but your ordinarie Recreation; who have not onely learn't, (with The∣mistocles) but are able to teach the rea∣die way how to make a small Common-wealth great, and of a sick Bodie poli∣tick, a sound one: and your singular abilities will now as spectably appear in repairing our breaches, and healing our distempers, as the best Pilot's skill doth
in a Storm, and the Gallantry of a Com∣mander in a Battle; though being a Star of the first Magnitude, the Greater you are, the less you seeme, by reason of the distance between you and us. All that know you, must acknowledge that no Prince ever had a more deserving, and obliging Servant, who preferres his Great Lord and Masters Honour, before his own Interest; and in these cloudie times to give him light, con∣sumes himself. In your single person his Sacred MAIESTY hath all the ad∣vantages of a Full and Faithful Councel. All your Oracles are so sweetly, and evenly tempered of Policie and Pietie, (your Honour being wise as a Serpent, Innocent as a Dove) that Josephs Character, in the 23. of Saint Luke, at the 50. is not onely proper to you but in some sence, peculiar, Viz. An honourable Counsellour, a good man and a just; one that consen∣ted not to the councell and deed of them, waiting for the Kingdome of God. Your own Laudable Actions commend you far beyond my invention, and expres∣sions;
yet Gratitude prompts me to have added my Mite, to your gracious Trea∣surie, but that I have constantly observed that you had rather be, and do things, worthy of praise, then hear of either: And so not doubting that your Honour will as chearfully accept of this small pre∣sent, as you have been ever accustomed to do things great, and glorious; I humbly crave both your patronage and pardon for this pre∣sumption; and rest, Yourr Honours most humble Servant, MATTHEW GRIFFITH.
ROM. 12.4, 5. For as we have many Members in one Body; and all the Members have not the same Office: So we, being many, are one Body in Christ; and each of us Members one of another. OUR Blessed Lord and Saviour (in the 12. Chapter of St. Luke, at the 42. Verse) styles him a faithful and wise Steward, that gives his Houshold their portion of meat in due season. The ordinary Dispensers of the Word and Sacraments, are called his Stewards (in the 4. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,) The great Congregation in the beauty of Holyness, is his Houshold: Such select Scriptures as holy Church hath appointed for the proper Lessons, the Epistles and the Gospels to be read on the several Sundayes and Festivals throughout the year, are the portion of meat: And the Orthodoxe explication and application of them to all emergencies of time and occasions, is to do Opus Diei in die suo, to speak a word in season. And according to this Catholick sense, I hope I shall now set before your Lordship, and the rest Dearly beloved, such a portion of holy Writ as will appear upon a full and favourable hearing to be both seasoned and seasonable: For
my text is a principal part of the Epistle for this very day, and so it is seasonable; and the cheif Scope of this Scrip∣ture is to comend unto us Christian Unity and Unanimity, who (the greater is our Sin and Shame) have been of late, and still are, too too much distracted, and divided among our selves; and in this regard my Text (whether it be looked upon either as a cordial, or a corasive) must be confessed to be well seasoned: and therefore I shall need to make no other apology for my choice of this Text at this time, then one of the Antient Fathers did upon the like occasion, Deus tam faciat Scripturam commodam quam est accommoda; The Lord by his Spirit of grace make this Scripture as profitable to you, as ere I have fini∣shed my Discourse, it will appear at this time to be proper for you. And so I fall close to the words of my Text. MY Text begins with a Nam, for; and a Sicut, as: For as; this For, is connective; and this As is comparative. By this For, our Apostle would prove that which he had asserted in the Verse before, viz. That we must not be over-wise but sober-wise; or wise to Sobriety. In which his mind and meaning is to bring all men to be contented with such parts of Na∣ture, and gifts of grace, as God hath been pleased to give them; and he would have them to use and im∣prove these Talents, with all possible humility and charity, to the edification of their Christian brethren; and not for any oblique respects whatsoever, to make a Schism in the Church, as some self-conceited per∣sons then had done, to the losse of peace and truth on Earth and of Glory in the Heavens.
And this our Apostle here both amplifies, and il∣lustrates by a pithy and pertinent comparison, bor∣rowed from the natural body, and applied to Christs body mystical. And as this For is a Conjunction cau∣sal, so St. Paul intends thereby to shew cause why we should all be sober-minded; and the cause is implied in this Sicut [As] with which it is coupled: Conceive then our Apostle making his transition, by this For; and both proving and clearing his former doctrine, by this Sicut, As; which is an Adverb of Likenesse, and a Note of Similitude.
And some of the Ancients have observed to my hand, that comparisons in Scripture are of excellent use, and serve both to explain and adorn such truths, as being intellectual and abstruse, are not in and of themselves obvious to men of ordinary capacity. Both the Prophets and Apostles are full of them; Yea our blessed Lord himself is in nothing so frequent, as in these Similies and Sicuts; and so are all the Fathers: Similitudinem vobis adhibeam, saith St. Augustine de verbis Domini, Let me use a Similitude unto you, that what you do not so clearly understand, may be made easie by a familiar instance. And St Chrysostome did so superabound in this kind, that some Neoteriques have made it their work, to collect, and reduce all his allusions to proper heads, by way of Common places; for the better imbellishing of such mens discourses, as are jejune, and barren of Invention: and as you shall meet with many other parables, and similitudes; so with none more apt, and elegant, then this of the Body and the Members: and what energie there is in this comparison, may be gathered from the wholsom effect it took among the Commons of Rome, to whom Menennius Agrippa propounded only this Similitude; and therewith pacified the tumultuous rabble; as Livie in the Second of his Decads, relates it on this wise. Upon a time (saith he) the Members complained of the Stomach or Belly; that they devoured all, yet did no work and because they seemed not to labour like the rest of the parts, the Members conspired among themselves to feed them no longer; and the Stomach not taking in due suste∣nance, the Eyes ere long waxed dimme; the Ears deaf, the Hands and Arms grew weak and feeble; the Legs were scarce able to stand, or the feet to stirre; briefly all the Members became Epileptick, and the whole body consumed for want of nourishment: and the Members being sensible of this Atrophie, they soon recanted their Errour and fell close to feeding the Stomach again, as being convinced by sad experience, that howere the Stomach seems not to take pains, and to labour like the other parts, yet when it is duely fed and faustered, the whole body fares the better for it, because it feeds not only for it self, but what it takes in it digests, and so sends forth nourishment unto the rest of the Members; and by this seasonable Apologue the mutinous multitude was appeased, and fairly reduced to their former subjection and obedience. And what the Oratour there applied to that Senate of Rome, which he looked upon as the Stomach of the Body politique: Our Apostle here adapts to Christs Body mystical; and under this comparison, he infers two things for the better confirming of what he had before delivered. The one is, that every man hath his measure of gifts in the Church; seeing that each man is but as it were a particular Member of the Body mystical: and
therefore as the hand is not capable of seeing, neither the foot of hearing; so, Non omnia possumus omnes: For Almighty God, who is a most free Agent, hath al∣lotted each man both his measure, and his stint: some have more (as in the Parable of the Talents) con∣credited unto them, some fewer; every one hath some, but none hath all; as in the Proverb, Unus Ber∣nardus non vidit omnia. The other is, That every man must be sober-mind∣ed, and modestly conceited of his own parts, and abi∣lities; seeing that what ere his gifts be, yet in one kind or other, he hath as much need of others as they can have of him; though perhaps they be not so highly pearch'd and prefer'd; yet they may be altogether as needful, and useful in their way, as himself. And therefore as all the members of the body doe sweetly accord together in their distinct Functions, each standing in need of the others help: so in the Church each true member thereof should tend to the good of all the rest; without either envying their Dig∣nity, or incroaching upon their Office. Thus no less piously, then prudently, doth our Apostle take order to prevent both emulation, and usurpation, when he saith in the Text; For as we have many members in one body, & all the members have not the same office, so we &c. In which words, let me commend to your Chaistian attention and intention two principal parts, viz.  a Proposition; Et , and a Reddition, or the Pat∣tern; and the parallel: and in each of them we have three things considerable; For, In the former main part, which I call the Proposi∣tion, our Apostle by way of comparison set's down the excellent state of man's body in three respects; viz.
First, in regard of it's unity; for, the body is but one. Secondly, in regard of plurality of parts; for, it hath many members. Thirdly, In regard of diversity of Functions; for, all the members have not the same Office. And in the latter main part, which I call the Reddi∣tion; Our Apostle delivers three things proportiona∣nable to those that I have already hinted: for, First, as there he shewed that the natural body is one; so here, applying it to the Church, he shewes that the body mystical is but one. Secondly, As there he saith that this one natural bo∣dy hath many members; so here he saith, that we are many in Christs body mystical. Lastly, As there he assumes that the divers members of the natural body have not the same Office: so here he applies it by demonstrating that We are members one of another in Christ's body mystical; and consequently by the Law of the body, and the members of the same, we are all strictly bound to be mutually helpful each to other, in the faithful discharge of all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual duties. These are the six wings of this Seraphim, which are now spread over you; or rather these six be the com∣fortable branches of this Tree of Life; whose fruit (by Gods assistance) I come now to shake off, and you are to gather up as they fall: and I begin with the first particular of the first main part, Viz. The Unity of the body natural; for so saith our Apostle here, Sicut, &c. As the body is one, &c. And though Saint Paul speakes here with a Sicut, and by way of comparison; yet elsewhere he delivers
this as a positive Truth, viz. That the body is but one; as in the 12. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corin∣thians, at the 26. verse; and in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians, at the 4. verse, There is on body, &c. And I presume this will be easily granted: and yet how, and in what sence the body is one, seeing it consists of so ma∣ny members, I find it among the Schoolmen very much disputed; who observe that things may be said to be one divers wayes: For, First, There is an Unitie which is made by collecti∣on; thus many stones laid together make one heap. Secondly, There is an Unity which is made by con∣junction; Thus Man and Wife make but one person in Law; and are but one flesh in the Gospel; for our Saviour saith, in the 19. of Matthew at the 6. verse, that they remain no longer two, but one flesh. Thirdly, There is an Unity in numeration; Thus God is stiled One, in the 6. Chaper of Deuteronomy, at the 4. verse, The Lord our God is one Lord. He is one and onely one. And as in Arithmetick all numbers flow from Unity: so in Theologie all creatures do from God, and in him they terminate, that He may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Fourthly, There is an Unity which results from con∣stancy; which makes men in all estates and conditions, still one and the same; thence grew the Motto, sem∣per idem. Fifthly, There is an Unity which is made by consent in matters of Religion; Thus in the 4. chapter of the Acts, at the 32. verse; The multitude of them that be∣lieved were of one heart, and one soul, &c. Sixthly, There is an Unity which is made by De∣votion; thus our Apostle (speaking of such an one as
sincerely cleaves to God in Christ) saith that he is one spirit with him. Seventhly, There is an Unity which is made by vouchsafing; as in the first chapter of Saint John at the 14. verse, when the Word was made flesh, he was truely stiled Emanuel, God with us; God and Man in the Uni∣ty of his Person. Eighthly, There is an Unity which is spoken either in∣definitely, as the 22. of Saint Luke; and one of them smote the servant, &c. Or by way of excellency; for our Saviour told the Jewes, There is one that accuseth you, &c. Thus Unus homo nobis, &c. saith the Lyrique Poet, meaning Fabius, who cunctando restituit rem. Or by way of reproach: Thus Judas the Traytour is call'd One of the twelve, in the 14. chapter of Saint Mark, at the 10. verse: Unus, saith Saint Hierome, numero non merito. Lastly, there is an unity which springs both from com∣position, and integrality, thus both the body natural is one, though it consists of diverse parts; and the Church is also one, though compacted of never so many members; and so you see what kind of Unity this is in the Text; and herein you may withal observe. First, The never enough admired Wisedome of God, who of two so dissimilar parts as are the body and the soul, the flesh and the spirit, did at first frame so ex∣cellent a piece as man; and by cementing together two so contrary parts, could make such a compositum, as is but a clod of clay quickned with the breath of Life; a dead cole kindled by a Divine spark, and a lump of flesh animated by the spirit of God. And this was in truth so rare a composition, that the Anthropomorphites thought God himself to be for form
like to Man: and Aristotle himself call's man a Micro∣cosme, or little world; and he that studiously travels o∣ver the Isle of Man, shall therein find as many wonders, as there be in the Macrocosme; and Saint Augustine saith more, Omni miraculo quod sit per hominem, majus mira∣raculum est ipse homo. Run through all the Miracles that ever were wrought by Man, and you will meet with none to be compared with Man himself. Secondly, This transcendent excellency of our cre∣ation should stir us up to magnifie our Maker: It is a kind of bruitishness in us to take no notice of our Ori∣ginal Dignity; yea he that is not highly affected with the rumination hereof, deserves not indeed to be ac∣counted a man; who should lift up his heart to heaven, as well as his head is lifted up; as Saint Cyprian counsels us, Cum statu oris, & corporis animum, Let thy bodily state teach thee to erect thy soul; and that thou mayest know God the better, study thy self. Gae∣lo descendit, . Thirdly, this very consideration that the body is one, should teach us christian Unity and concord. It was A∣brahams apology to Lot in the 13. chapter of Genesis, at the 8. verse, Let there be no strife between me and thee, for we are brethren; and how much more ought all we that are christians to live in Unity and godly love, seeing we are not onely brethren of the same Parents, God and his Church, but so many members of the same body? But of this more anon when I come to handle the Red∣dition; for the present I hasten from the bodies Unity, to speak somewhat of the plurality of members, which is the next thing considerable. It was the infinite sapience of the Creatour to fur∣nish the body of Man with variety of members.
First, because variety of parts proportionably con∣joy'nd procure beauty. Secondly, for Necessities sake, because no one member, though never so excellent in the kind, is able to perform so many several offices as the body stands in need of. Thirdly, for strength, for look how many distinct parts there be in the body, so much the more ability there is, and sufficiency in time of need: which may be one principal reason why God hath given us two eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet, &c. That so if any one should chance to fail of doing its Office, the other might happily supply the defect thereof. To which let me add that in the Original our Apo∣stle saith not , but  viz. That the mem∣bers of the body are not onely many in number, but of divers natures, and sundry fashions; that so each of them might be fit to discharge its proper Function. Consider (saith Tertullian de carne Christi) in the body of man, in some sort like to the body of the earth, mus∣culos ut glebas, ossa ut saxa, aspice nervorum tenaces con∣nexus, ut traduces radicum; ac venarum ramosos discur∣sus,, ut ambages rivorum, & lanugines, ut muscos; & carnem, ut cespitem, & ipsos medullarum in abdito the sau∣ros, ut metalla carnis, &c. But leaving his nice speculations, the body is usually in Scripture described by two general notions, viz. of flesh and bones; as in the second chapter of Genesis at at the 23. verse, where Adam speaking of his wife, saith This now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. And our Saviour after his Resurrection from the dead, willing to convince his Disciples, that he had no phantasti∣call, but a reall, Naturall body, bids them to handle
him, and see; for a Spirit (saith he) hath not flesh and bone, &c. Now God hath in the frame of our bodies fitted flesh and bones together, that so we may have both strength and motion: and besides that, our bones teach us, First, to confess our sins, and to cry to God for mer∣cy; for while I held my tongue, my bones consumed away, saith that lively pattern of Repentance, in the 32. Psalm at the 3. verse. Secondly, To trust in God alone, as the same Princely Prophet speaks in the 34. Psalm, at the 20. verse, for God keeps all our bones so that not one of them is broken. Thirdly, To praise God, as the 35. Psalm at the 10 verse, All my bones shall say unto thee, O Lord, who is like unto thee? and some of the Rabbins have well ob∣served, that there be just as many precepts in the Law of God, as Anatomists say there be bones greater and smaller in the body of man. And when we look upon our flesh, we are thereby put in mind, First of our natural frailty, for all flesh is grasse, saith the Prophet Isaiah in his 40. chapter, at the 6. verse; so that in a qualified sence, we are but so many Gras∣hoppers, especially when we idle away our time in truthlesse vanitie. Secondly, Our flesh may teach us humanity each to other, since we are all so near akinn: This argu∣ment Abimelech used to the Sichemites, in the 9. chap∣ter of Judges, at the 2. verse, I am flesh of your flesh, and in the 11. Chapter of the first book of Chronicles, all Israel said to King David, behold thou art flesh of our flesh.
Thirdly, Our flesh may be our remembrancer of charity to the poor, as the Prophet Isaiah enforces the motive; when thou seest the naked cover him, and hide not thy face from thine own flesh, poverty cuts not off connaturality, And (if in the next place) we descend to a more distinct consideration of the bodily members, we cannot but observe therein. First the Majesty of some parts, for most creatures stand in awe of Mans very look; and as Saint Ambros notes, they serve Man, and by humane institution they are brought by degrees to put off their own nature: Obliviscuntur quod nata sunt, induunt quod jubentur. Some that are criticks in the holy Tongue, observe that the Hebrew word for an Eye, comes of a root which signifies a Well, because it is both the bodies Looking-glasse, and sends forth water. The Philosopher calls the Eare, the sense of understand∣ing; and Job saith, that it tastes words: It is the pallate of the soul. It is curiously framed, that by the reper∣cussion of the sound we may hear others speak, and that the sound may last the longer, it hath many meanders and concavities. The lips, teeth, and tongue, are instruments of Speech, by which we communicate our Notions each to other, as the Angels do only by intuition. Not to insist upon particulars: we have some mem∣bers common to us with the bruits, and they have all the sences too; and in the acutenesse of each, some of them excell us; Nos aper auditu pracellit, aranea tactu, valour odoratu, linu visu, simia gustu. But in two things men do very much exceed and excel all sublunary crea∣tures; viz. By reason in the soul, and the hand in the
body: yea Anaxagorus upon a diligent inquiry into, and survey of the properties and motions in the hand, as it were in an extasie of admiration, concluded Man to be the wisest creature, because he hath hands; as if they were the Well-head of all intellectual and artificial Elegancies. And to the same effect Galen argues, that because Man is the wisest of the bodily creatures, therefore he hath hands given him, that as he is the most intelligent, so he might have fit Organs to express and explane his skill and knowledge: With these man tames fierce Li∣ons, sturdy Steeds, wilde Bears, subtle Foxes, &c. Docentur ut parvuli, serviunt ut infirmi, verberantur ut timidi, corriguntur ut subditi, denique in mores transeunt nostros. And this excellency of our several members should make us both the more careful over them, and the more fearful to turn them into so many instruments of unrighteousnesse. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, saith the Psalmist, and that my soul knowes right well. And the more we know the excellency of our bodily mem∣bers, the lesse should we abuse them: for God did not put such beauty on thy body, that thou shouldst wallow like a Sow, in the myre of uncleanesse: He gave thee not so clear, quick and sharp eye-sight, to lust in look∣ing upon an Harlot: He gave thee not such tender and purged ears, to listen to evil communicatious which corrupt good manners: He gave thee not such a volu∣luble and perswasive Tongue, to ly, and flatter, and swear and curse, and blaspheme with: He gave thee not such dexterous hands to be the instruments of Bribery and Sacriledge, Oppression and Extortion, Rapine and blood-shed: In a word, considering, saith
Saint Cyprian, that our bodies are Temples of the holy Ghost: O let us take good heed how we prophane and pollute them; and he gives this Reason, Eorum nos Tem∣plorum cultores, & antistites sumus; serviamus illi, cujus esse jam caepimus. Here then two sorts are peccant, and so to be re∣proved. The one is of such persons as abuse their members, by seeking to find out new and strange wayes to add more beauty to them, then God thought fit to put up∣on them; I mean all such as patch and paint their Fa∣ces, frizle, colour and powder their hair, &c. They transgresse Gods Ordinance, when they thus transform that which he formed otherwise; and they turn his Image (saith our Apostle) into the image of an Harlot; they are seldome better that use the Cyprian Arts: and they have just cause to fear that at the Day of judgement God will not know them, at least not ac∣knowledge such mutuatitious Forms to be his Work∣manship. The other sort to be reproved, are all such as defile their bodies, and deform themselves by any vitious qualities; as by luxury, which our Apostle calls sin∣ing against our own body; or by lazinesse, which the wise man call'd A living mans Sepulture; or by surfeiting, which hath destroyed more then Sword, Pestilence and Famine; or by Envy; For an envious Man counts an∣others good his hurt: parum est si ipse sit foelix, nisi al∣ter sit infoelix. And therefore Bonaventure in his Diet of Health, wittily compares each envious wretch to Cain, who said of himself in the 4. of Gen. Whosoever findes ma, shall slay me: For in all that he meets with he either sees that which is good, and then he repines;
or that which is evil, and then he rejoyces; and both these slay the envious: Or by anger, in which his hair stands on end, to shew the obdurate inflexiblenesse of his mind, his eyes stare and kindle, as if with the Cockatrice or Basilisk, he would kill with a look, he grates and gnashes his teeth, as if he would grind all to powder; his Face is now red and anone ale, as if it either blush'd for shame of the minds Folly, or envied others Good, his Tongue fumbles and faulters, as not being able to expresse the rage of his heart, his blood boyles ready to burst through the veins, as if it were afraid to make longer stay in so furious a body; his brest swells, as if it were not large enough to contain the passion; his hands and feet tremble and beat each against other, as if the little world were in an Earth∣quake, which threatens nothing but desolation and de∣struction. Our Apostle in the 15 ch. of the 1. Epistle to the Corinthians, saith that he had fought with Beasts, after the manner of men which Saint Chrysostome expounds of brutish Men, such as kick backward like Asses, raven like Wolves, roame like Boares, grin like Dogs, neigh like Horses, &c. Men in shape, these and such like Beasts in conditions. Beasts, did I say! Saint Ambrose saith, that they are worse then beasts, Nam omni Be∣stia bestialior est Homo, rationem habens, & non secun∣dum rationem vivens. And thus I have shewed both that the body is one, and also that in the Unity of the body there is a plurality of members: It now onely remains that I touch in a word, that those many members in this one body have not the same Office: which is the last thing considerable in the first main part. The eye to see, and the eare to hear saith Solomon in the
20. Chapter of the Proverbs at the 12. verse, One God is the maker of them both. As if he had said, God hath imprinted in each member his proper Faculty, and ap∣pointed it his office, as our Apostle demonstrates at large in the 12. chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where we read that the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head to the foot, I have no need of thee; neither doth any one member in the body, encroach upon the office of an other: and thence flowes that sweet Harmony in the body; in which as in a perfect consort, every instrument being exactly tuned, con∣curs to make up the consent of the whole. Thus the eye (which our Saviour calls the light of the body) sees for the feet; and the feet walk for the hands, and the hands work for the mouth, and the mouth feeds for the stomach, and the stomach disgests for the belly, and the belly is the draught or sinck to carry away the Excrements of the whole body. Which teacheth us, First, to be modest, and like the bodily members not to usurp anothers office. It is a foul fault in these dayes that some will not onely be judging and censuring o∣thers in such things as they doe little understand, or grant they did, yet they do not at all concern them; but also that they will be intermedling in other mens matters, and they will enterfere in other mens callings, they will, as the Proverb is, be busie Bishops in other mens Diocesse; and think nothing well done, unlesse they have an hand in doing it: but this fault would soon be amended, would they but considerately observe the carriage of their own bodily members; among which they cannot but take notice, that the eye doth not controwle the eare, nor the feet the hands, but each
doth its proper duty according to its place: and this tacitely implyes, that if thou be an hearer, 'tis presump∣tion to speak in the Congregation; and if thou be a Subject, thou maist not prescribe Lawes: Quis te constituit Judicem? said the Sodomites to Lot. Lastly, we are taught hence both to praise God for the sound members of our own bodies, and also for the whol∣some members of the body politick, as it takes in both Church and State, which have long languished under a deep & dangerous distemper and disorder (as the crip∣ple did at the pool of Bethesda) for want of a Man: but now God be thanked we have a Man like David ac∣cording to Gods own heart, he hath restored our Graci∣ous Soveraign unto us; and together with and under him, such Magistrates and Ministers, as like so many conduict-pipes may conveigh unto us our old good Lawes and Religion, and establish us in our just Liber∣ties and Properties? The Heathen Oratour notes, that it is no small com∣fort to any man, when he hath all his sences sound and vigorous; Mentem sanam in corpore sano. Then much more comfort must it needs be to us, to see all the members of the body politick now apt and able to do their respective duties: wherefore let us who are in the state of Grace; observe and imitate the bodily members in the state of Nature: I say let the natural body thus far teach the body mysticall: For this I take to be the chief scope, and drift of our Apostle in his Reddition: So we being many, are one body in Christ, and each of us members one of another; which words contain the second main part of my Text. And the first thing in this  that offers it self to our consideration, Is the Unity of Christs body mysti∣cal,
in some sort proportionable to that of the body na∣tural; For that in the former verse is but One body, and We are one body in Christ, saith the Apostle here; and herein he shewes both the Unity of the Church; in that he calls it one body; and also the Author of the same; viz. Christ, we are one body in Christ. I begin with the former, viz. the Churches Unity im∣plyed here, when our Apostle calls it, one body. Now that all the Faithful make but one Church, as all the Members do but one body, may be evinc'd out of the sixt Chapter of the Canticles, at the 8. Verse; where though we find mention made of threescore Queens and Virgins without number, (Christs mystical members being com∣pared to Queens for Majesty, and for Purity to Vir∣gins) yet the Church it self, (which the Spouse there styles his Dove, his undefiled) is but one; yea, she is the onely one of her Mother, the choice one of her that bare her: Or as Saint Bernard renders it, Ecclesia non solum una, sed & unica; vel, si ità loqui liceat, unissima: For so she is in divers respects, viz. First in regard of one and the same Original; for one and the same God, hath both call'd and chosen his Church, Who is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, as our Apostle speaks. Secondly, in regard of one and the same end, Salva∣tion; which is alike common to all the members of the true Church; For so saith Saint Peter in the first Chapter of his first Epistle General, at the ninth verse, Receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your Soules. Thirdly, in regard the means are the same to bring them all to this one end; for the same Word and Sa∣craments; the same Faith and Obedience; the same
Regeneration, and Repentance, are propounded to all alike. Fourthly, in regard of the same Spirit; for by one Spirit (which Tertullian fitly styles, Vicarium Christi, Christs Vicar generall upon Earth) his Church is animated, ordered and governed all the World over. Fifthly, in regard of one head; For all true believers receive the same influence of Grace, from Christ their Head; whence it distils upon all and every of his mysti∣cal members, as the Oyle that was powred on the head of Aaron, ran down to the very skirts of his cloathing, in the 133. Psalm, at the 2. verse. Sixthly, in regard of the strict connexion between this one head, and all the members; for by one and the same bond of peace, and Christian love, the faithful are tied each to other; all to Christ. Here then you see, First what an happy and blessed thing it is for all Christians to live in Unity and godly Love; which the sweet singer of Israel displayes with an En & eccè &c. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in Unity? And therein he insinuates, that it contains in it all kinds of good; as being both honest, and pleasant, and profitable: And upon this ground Saint Augustine cries out, Unum cogitate fratres, & videte in ipsa multitudine si delectat nisi unum? Ecce Deo propitio, quam multi estis! Quis vos ferret nisi unum saperetis! Unde in multis ista quies? Da unum populus est, tolle unum, turba est: quid enim est turba, nisi multitudo turbata? And in the next place, this Unity of the body naturall, applyed to the Church, which is Christs Body mystical,
should teach us especially to avoid three things, as threatning danger, if not destruction. The first whereof is Curiosity; for as in the body when one member busies it self in the Office of another: so in the Church, when men will needs be intermed∣ling in matters that they have nothing to do with; it must needs disturb the welfare of the whole. It is not for Mechaniques to enterfare on the Magistrates or Mi∣nisters duty nor may they think themselves, fit, able and worthy, to discharge their places. They shall do well to call to mind how dear it cost Cora, Dathan, Abi∣ram, Uzzah and others, for taking too much upon them in this kind. I would have one that is thus over-wise to tell me; if a Mote should chance to fall into the eye, and the foot should strive to prevent the hand in un∣dertaking to take it out, whether that would not be a rude part, and perform'd with as ill successe? And if he cannot rationally deny that, then he must needs grant me this; that every one ought to keep himself within the lists and precincts of his proper Calling; least if they stand to justifie such usurpation and intrusion; they turn Sion into Babylon; and both Church and State into a Chaos of confusion. The second is Arrogancy; for as one member of the bo∣dy doth not insult over an other: so if thou be prefer'd in the Church, thou must not look like a son of Anak upon others as so many Grashoppers. While fools admire thy promotion, all wisemen examine thy per∣son and thy parts too, they seldome honour any thing, but merit. Mardocai did not buckle to Ha∣man himself in the ruffe of his pride; because though he was the Courts Favourite, yet he was the Churches Enemy: neither could Haman more undervalue Mar∣docai's
outward meanness, then Mardocai did Hamans inward emptinesse. Then let no man look and speak bigg; for the feet that dayly trudge through thick and thinn; are as needful as the head that is so lofty; and were it not for the legs and feet that support it, the head must needs tumble in the dirt. All the members of the body are quickned alike with the same soul: Of∣ficia diversa (saith Saint Augustine) vita communis. And thus it is in the Church of Christ; in which whilest e∣very man keeps his own station, and acts his own part; the benefit redounds to the common good. Then over-ween not thy self, undervalue not others; for take away Peasants, and what will become of Potentates? Who sees not that the rich stands in as much need of the poor mans service, as the poorest wretch alive doth of the rich mans salary? Thirdly, This Doctrine of Unity in the Church con∣demns the monstrous sin of Schisme: Christ will have his mystical body One; and wilt thou needs divide it into parts? The common Souldiers, though barbarous, would not divide Christ's Coat because it was seamlesse; and darest thou divide his Church, which is One and on∣ly One? It must needs be a misgrounded and misguided zeal (though varnish'd with the pretence of Religion and Reformation) which stirs thee up, and pricks thee on to do that which ordinary reaso would not permit the Souldiers themselves to do; viz. to divide that which is seamlesse; and by cutting it into parts to de∣stroy the whole. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. This Schisme is spawn'd by the Devil himself: (whom our Saviour styles the envious man; Saint Chrysostome calls him , a counselling enemy; and St. John names him , A destroyer, he begets Schism
between pride and hatred: Schisme commonly begins in pride; for by pride alone Man makes contention, saith Solomon in the 13. Chapter of the Pr verbs, at the 10. verse: and the Scismatiques pride is the worst in the kind, viz. Spiritual pride, Luciferian pride; I will be like the most High, said Lucifer in the 14. Chapter of Isaiah; and thereby he did what he could to make a Schisme in Heaven, and it is generally true of Scisma∣tiques on Earth, what Saint Ambrose reports of Novatus the Heretick; viz. That Episcopatus amissi dolore suc∣census Schisma composuit; he affecting a Bishoprick, and seeing a worthier then himself prefer'd unto it, caused a Schisme in the Church. And we have had some am∣bitious and turbulent spirits, who when for want of a∣bilities, they could not become equal to the Bishops in Ecclesiastical Dignity, they made it their work (as Aerius did) to pull down the Bishops, and to level the Church, by an Anabaptistical party. They cried down Prelacy, and Lording it over the Flock; but pretend∣ing equality, they sought Dominion. Thus we now plainly discover that the late Schisme took the first rise from pride and avarice; and it will end, as it hath hitherto gone on, in envy, hatred, malice, and all un∣charitablenesse. And as the members of the body natural cannot endure a Schisme among emselves: so neither doe they se∣parate each from other: which Saint Augustine (speak∣ing of himself, and all other members of Christs Church) applies and illustrates thus; Neque enim, &c. Neither for the Tares doe we leave God's Field; nor for the Chaffe, his Floor; nor for the Goats, doe we leave his Fold; nor for the Vessels of dishonour do we forsake his house, the Church; which our Apostle calls the Pil∣lar
and Ground of Truth, And Saint Bernard upon the parable of the Virgins (in the 25. chapter of Saint Matthew) well and wittily observes that all men what∣soever are denoted and comprehended in and under those ten Virgins, as being either wise or foolish: and if they be foolish, they stand in need of the wise; but if they be wise, then the foolish stand in need of them so that whether they be wise or foolish, yet they may not separate themselves: This Doctrine we learn from the members of the body; for if the head ake, doth the foot therefore refuse to bear it? Or if the eye be blemi'sht do the other members forsake it? Nay rather do not all the rest do their best endeavour to cherish it? what then doe all Separatists get by their gathering of Churches, or creeping into corners, and crumbling in∣to peculiar Congregations; but onely to cut off them∣selves from all hope and expectation of life and com∣fort from Christ, who is the Head of the Church? Saint Augustine enforceth it thus, Sicut enim, &c. For as a member that is rent from a living body, cannot possibly retain life in it: so whosoever departs from the Unity of the Church, he cannot participate of the Spirit of Life and Grace, which animates and regulates the same. But the Popes Janizaries, the Jesuits, (who have been active in our late troubles) lay the same imputa∣tion upon us, who are the profest members of the Church of England; which we doe upon our brethren (that we justly call Separatists) for they call us Schis∣matiques, because we are fallen from the Church of Rome, which had formerly been our Mother? and which (say they) is the Mother Church and the true Vine? and they hold that it is at this day De necessitate salutis, to be Subject to the Pope? and they add withal that all
our late distortions and distractions, are Gods just judge∣ment upon us for our former Schisme and separation from them? The charge I confesse is heavy; but the comfort is our answer is easie and ready: For first we say, and are able to prove that it is not we that have departed from the Unity both of Verity and Charity, but they: for they have long since for∣saken the holy ancient Doctrine; and set abroach ma∣ny new points of Religion, which in the Tridentine Council are made so many Articles of Faith; some of which were scarce heard of, much lesse universally re∣cieved in the Primitive Church; not many hundred years after. Secondly, We wholly deny that there is any abso∣lute necessity, that all Christians should be subject to the Pope: we know that the Greek Church never was, and they must acknowledge that a great part of Chri∣stendome at this day is not; and in plain English may not keep communion with the Papacy; which not a few of the most Orthodox Divines have from time to time held to be mystical Babylon. Thirdly, We are ready to prove that we have not forsaken the ancient Church of Rome; (many of whose Bishops lived and died Professors, Confessors and Mar∣tyrs for the cause of Christ) but onely the new fangled Court of Rome; the Roman pride, the Roman supersti∣tion, the Roman errours and absurdities, I had almost said the Romish Antichrist; with whom we have no∣thing, and may have no more to do; save to justfie our separation, we being in very deed no farther departed from her, then she is from her self. And therefore we are confident (that God who in
mercy did at first open our eyes to see, and our hearts to loath the Romish impostures, and abominations) hath not laid upon us these divisions among our selves, as his judgement for our defection from the See of Rome; but rather for our great unthankfulnesse to him, who call'd us out of so grosse darknesse, into this mar∣vellous light; and for our unworthinesse of the preci∣ous means of Grace, Peace and Truth, which above all the neighbouring Nations, we so long and happily enjoyed, and yet so horribly abused by our late inno∣vations and wilful rising up against all that is called God among us; and have not yet soundly repented for the same. And thus having shewed that the body of the Church is but one; I hasten now to speak somewhat of the Au∣thor of this Unity, viz. Christ; for as the Church is one body, so it is one body in Christ, saith our Apostle; which is the second particular in the first part of the Reddi∣tion. As the Church is one body, so it must be the Church christian, or it cannot be one body in Christ; for Christ is the Head of it, and it is coupled together in, by, and under him. This body of the Church Chri∣stian) began in the twelve Apostles, who were cal∣led and chosen immediately by Christ himself; and he gave them a speciall Commission to preach the Gospel to all Nations, in the 28. chapter of Saint Matthew and by their Ministry the Church was propagated, and dispersed over the face of the Earth: but wheresoever the members were planted, yet still they made up but one body in Christ, all the lines of the Churches circum∣ference still terminated in him alone as their centre; as our Apostle demonstrates (in the 4. chapter to the
Ephesians, at the 15. verse) how all the members of the Church are coupled together in Christ, who is the Head from whence the whole body, being knit toge∣ther, as with so many joynts, receives all it's in∣fluence. Then the Church is neither without an Head; as the Anabaptists fancy a Church like a Spider, or Plinies Acephali, all body and no head: Neither is it all head and no body, as the Papists have framed a Church like a Toad-stool, For Harveus makes the Catholick Church to be nothing but the present Roman Church; and most of that perswasion hold the Roman Church to be nothing but the Pope; who (say they) is virtually the whole Church; Admiranda canant, sed non cre∣denda. For if Cardinals and Jesuites be justly reputed Mon∣sters, as being men of all Professions, Orders, Degrees, Offices and Benefices: then I leave them to judge what a Monster of Monsters the Pope must needs be, seeing they believe him to be all these; and yet they must confesse that none of these can be both the head and the bodie too. Neither is the Church double-headed; Christ one Head, and the Pope another as Hart the Jesuite (out of his Master Stapleton) nicely distinguishes them thus: The Church hath one Head, viz. Christ who is properly the Head of the Church, principal, invisible, and quick∣ning, and the Pope (saith he) is the other Head, impro∣perly, visibly and Ministerially; not to enliven, but to direct the body. But he must know and acknowledge, that the Office of Direction is only proper to the Head that quickens; and that is Christ alone, who as the Head of the Church,
hath promised to be with it for Direction to the end of the world: That so as one body sanctified by one Spirit, through the Sacrament of one Baptisme, knit to Christ in one Faith, and to each other in one Bond of Love, it should serve one Lord, under one hope of Eternal Life. So that Christ alone is the adequate Head of this body, He holds good proportion with the whole body, which the Pope cannot possibly do. And should we admit, what the Romish sticklers so eagerly contend for, viz. that the Pope is Head of the Church; then they cannot deny but sometimes the Church hath had a She-head, as Pope Joane; and that the Church hath sometimes had no Head at all, for af∣ter the death of Euaristus there was no Pope for thirty eight years, eight moneths, and some odd dayes, as their own Chronicles record; and that there were a while three Popes at once; and Bellarmine himself in∣geniously confesseth, that no man could certainly de∣termine, which of the three was the right Pope: seeing that each of them had many learned men to defend him; during all which time the Church of Rome was like Cerberus a Monster of three heads: whereas the Church Catholick as it is one body in the Text, so is it one bo∣dy in Christ, saith our Apostle: so that in truth no more have Christ for their Head, then onely they that are sound and living members of this one body in the Text. The Lord Christ (saith Saint Bernard) is a Moun∣tain of coelestial Spices, and a Fountain of spiritual Graces, both to the whole body of his Church, and also to every living member of the same. And therefore as the Princely pro∣phet David chears himself in the 23. Psalm, that the Lord is his Shepheard, and therefore he can lack nothing: so much more may all the true members of this mystical
body comfort themselves with this consideration, that the Lord Christ is their Head, and therefore they can lack nothing: And since he is our Head, who in the 14 chapter of Saint John at the 6. verse) Is the way, and the Truth, and the Life; We that are his mystical members, may be in some good measure assured, that he condu∣cting us we cannot possibly wander out of the way; totally fall from the Truth, and finally fail of Life e∣verlasting. And thus you have seen the parallel of the first main part of this comparison, in which I have done my endeavour to prove and clear two things, viz. both that the whole Church is but one body; and also that it is one Body in Christ; He is the onely Head of it. The next thing remarkable in this Reddition here, is that this one body of the Church hath many members: for so stands the words, So we being many, are one body, &c. Though the body of Christs Church be one, yet are the members thereof many: for our Saviour saith, in the 20. chapter of Saint Matthew at the 16. verse, Many are called, but few are chosen: and look how many are called, so many be the members of the visible Church; for out∣ward calling and profession, make men members of the Church. And in the 10. chapter to the Romans at the 18. verse, Our Apostle (speaking of the Apostles and Disciples sent to preach the Gospel) saith Their sound is gone out into all the world: That sound was the signal to call them; and when the sound is so universally diffus'd, as throughout the Universe, the persons call'd must needs be many. And though our Saviour saith there, That but few are chosen; He doth not mean that the Elect are but few in themselves, but that they are few in compari∣son of them that are call'd; as you may see in divers
Learned and Laborious men, who have professedly handled the argument of Christianographie; in which they have made a clear Discovery, that Christianity is now planted and propagated in most parts of the habi∣table world. So that if we seriously consider the Church in it self, it must be acknowledged to be a Body collected and compacted of all Nations; and consequently the mem∣bers thereof must needs be exceeding many; and upon this ground we professe in the Apostles Creed, That we believe the holy Catholick Church. And let me tell you that it is both the Churches Beauty, Strength and Glory, that in her members she is dispersed far and wide over the face of the Earth; in which regard the Church in Greek is stil'd Catholick; that is, Universal; and so she is no lesse truly, then properly stil'd in many respects, viz. First, in respect of place; for the Church Christian is not confin'd to one Nation as was that of the Jewes; but it extends to all Nations. I say it is not restring d either to Africk, or Rome, Amsterdam, Geneva, or New-England, much lesse to any gathered Church, peculiar Congregation, or corner-creeping Conventicle. But it is extended to all places; For God saith to Christ in the 2. Psalm at the 8. verse, I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession. And Saint John in the 7. chapter of the Revelation at the 9. verse, saith, And I beheld, and loe, a great multitude which no man could number of all Nations and Kindreds, and People, and Languages stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, cloath'd with white Robes, and with Palmes in their hands▪ Those white Robes, signified their Purity; those
Palmes, their Victory; and their standing before the Lamb, their Glory; which among other considerations, moved Bellarmine to write that no lesse comfortable, then admirable Treatise, De amplitudine regni coelestis. But the Church triumphant could not be of that ampli∣tude he speaks of, were not the members of the Church militant exceeding many as Saint Chrysostome insinuates when he saith, Ecclesia expassis sinibus, &c. The Bo∣some and Armes of the Church are open to embrace all Nations. And Saint Augustine saith, Ecclesia dicitur Catholica, &c. The Church is called Catholick, because it is diffused throughout the world. Thus Catholick is the Church in regard of place, and consequently the members thereof are many. Secondly, the Church is called Catholick in regard it takes in men of all qualities and conditions; genera sin∣gulorum (as the School speaks) though not singula gene∣rum. Gods Church is made up of all sorts of people, high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, wise and simple, learned and ignorant, noble, and ignoble, one with an∣other. For God would have all men to be saved, in the second chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy at the 4. verse. And for this cause at the first verse, of the same Chapter, our Apostle exhorts that pray∣ers, and supplications, and Intercessions be made for all men in general, and especially for Kings, &c. And we have in Scripture examples of all sorts, as of Abraham among the Canaanites, Joseph among the Aegyptians, Iob a∣mong the Idumaans, Daniel, among the Idolaters, Mat∣tathias among the Apostata's, Nicodemus among the Pha∣risees, Joseph of Arimathea among the Jewes, and Cor∣nelius among the Gentiles. Thus (as the Apostle speaks in the 10. chapter of the Acts at the 34. verse) you may
perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but in every Nation he that fears God and works righteousnsse, is accepted of him: and Saint Augustine adds, Qui seipsum excipit, seipsum decipit: He that excepts himself, de∣ceives himself; he hat doth his duty may expect Gods blessing; as God himself inculcated to Cain in the 4. chap. of Gen. If thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted? &c. It was therefore a presumptuous errour in the Iewes to plead (as they did in the 3. chapter of Saint Matthew) We have Abraham to our Father; as if the grace of God had been intail'd upon them for ever; For our Apostle proves that intayl to be cut off long agoe, and the par∣tition wall to be broken down, and that in the body of Christs Church the former nice differences of Iew and Gentile, bond and free, male and female are taken away, and Saint Peter in his vision of a sheet let down from Heaven (in which all sorts of creatures were promis∣cuously exposed both to his eye and his appetite) was tacitely taught that what God hath sanctified, no man should dare to think, or call common and unclean: and consequently the members of the Church are many, in respect it takes in some of all sorts and conditions. Thirdly the Church is Catholick, in regard it extends to all parts of time; viz. past, present and future; for it began with the beginning of time, and shall continue till time shall be no more. For as Christ, who is the Head of the Church, is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; so is his mystical body the Church too: when this fails the world cannot stand; For the members thereof are the props and pillars of it; as the Prophet Elizeus cried out to Elias at his translation, My Father, my Father, the chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen of the same? The strength of Israel consists in these: No
chariots and horsemen can so safe guard any place, as the Saints do their persons among whom they live. In plagues, in dearths and other calamities, it lies no doubt in the powerful prayers of some few the Friends and Favourites of God to avert the judgement, and to make an attonement for the wicked among whom they live, as the Scripture shewes in Moses and Aaron, Noah, Lot, Iob, Daniel, and others. The Church Militant is the Nursery to the Church Triumphant; and it is true in this, which is observed in all other Nurseries; still some embrio's in the Faith, as so many tender plants are inserted, inoculated and ingrafted into the mystical Vine, as others are dayly transplanted thence from Grace to Glory. And conse∣quently the members thereof are many. Fourthly, the Church is also Catholick in regard of Doctrine, for the Faith is one and the same among all Nations; as St. Cyprian speaks, Omnium credentium Fi∣des una. All the sincere members of Christs Church cor∣dially embrace, and orally professe the whole and sole Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, upon whom they are built, Christ himself being the chief corner stone. There may be some difference in Ceremonies, (and it is wished there were lesse among us, who can neither have fewer, unlesse we would have the body of the Church stark naked; nor yet more innocent and inoffen∣sive then those which are retain'd in the Church of Eng∣land, whose Piety and Prudence it was in the Infancy of Reformation, to keep the golden mean between Popish Superstition, and Phanatical profanenesse; and therefore it is sin and pity, that some out of Pride, prejudice or Interest, wilfully break the Churches U∣nity, rather then meekly submit to the Supream Au∣thority
by which they are establish'd) but sure I am the substantial part is ever the same: For the Articles of Faith can neither encrease, notwithstanding the super-institution of the Tridentive Council; nor yet decrease, notwithstanding the late brain-sick fury of some Zelots pretending to Reformation, which for the time rejected the three Creeds, which have been ever receiv'd by the whole Christian Church: Neither doe the Articles change or alter in any Fundamentals, against which we have a sure promise, That the gates of Hell it self shall never prevail. And this serves for the just conviction both of Papists and Phanaticks. First, I say it discovers the absurdity, and so stops the mouths of all such as usually stile themselves Roman-Caholicks: I have shewed already that the Church of Christ is call'd Catholick, because it extends to all places, times, &c. but the present Roman Church is but of ye∣sterday in comparison; and at most but a National Church, and that none of the best neither; but grant it were better then in truth it is, yet (as Saint Hierome speaks) Orbis major esturbe. And that onely is Catholick, saith Vincentius Lyrinensis, not which some few (sed quod omnes pariter uno; eodemque consensu, aperte, frequenter, & perseveranter tenuerunt) but which all alike have with one and the same consent, publickly, frequently and perseveringly held; and this no more agrees to Popery, then to Judaisme; for the Trent Faith was not known many hundred years after Christ. And it also convinces all Phanaticks, whose Faith and Churches are particular; whereas the Apostle as∣sert's, that no Scripture is of private Interpretation; and the ring-leaders of these peculiar Congregations, either through ignorance, or affectation, falling short of the
Catholick sence and interpretation of the holy Scrip∣tures, can never approve themselves and their follow∣ers, so many sound members of the holy Catholick Church. And therefore what Tertullian speaks of the Mar¦cionites, I may apply to all other Hereticks and Schis∣maticks; faciunt favos & vespae, faciunt Ecclesias & Mar∣cionitae. These make Churches, as the Wasps doe make combes; For as Wasps have no good Hony in their Combes, but live onely upon robbing of the Bee∣hives: so all Separatists have little or none of the Scripture Truth among them, which the Psalmist saith is sweeter then Hony and the Hony-comb: but they live and thrive by the sacrilegious ruines of the Church: and as the same Tertullian speaks, Nostra suffodiunt, ut sua aedificent. They build up their Babels with the ru∣ines of Sion; and with Micah their good Master, they care not how much they rend and tear the Churches Garments, so their own may be whole. Secondly, As this Doctrine sets forth both the beauty and comelynesse of Christs mystical body; that the members thereof are many: so doth it exceedingly commend the incomprehensible wisedome and good∣nesse of God, in ordering his Church so sweetly; that men born, and living never so far asunder, and differing very much each from other in customes, manners and languages; yet agree so well together in the verity of Christian Religion, and unity of the Catholick Faith. And for this among other Reasons, I conceive that Christs Church in the 6. chapter of the Canticles at the 4. ver. is compared to an Army with Banners. For as it is observable in an army, that some carry these colours, others those; some march under this Chieftain, others under that; some are Horse-men, others Foot-men, &c.
yet all concur to make up the beauty and strength of the whole Army, which hath but one and the same dis∣cipline, under one General or Commander in chief: Even so it is in the Church; For Almighty God hath one Regiment among us, another in Holland, a third in France, a fourth in Germany, &c. For our Apostle saith in his Reddition here, that we are many Members: and yet admit them to be nere so many, it is note-worthy in the Text, that all these taken collectively, make but one body in Christ: and so should all live under one Discipline. Thirdly, this should improve our Charity and Hos∣pitality towards exiles and strangers; seeing that they professing Christianity, be members with us of one and the same mystical body, Souldiers of the same Army, Trees of the same Orchard, Branches of the same Vine, Corn of the same Field, Sheep of the same Fold, &c. Let us not then be envious and malicious, but harbo∣rous and helpful each to other: Let not any difference in Opinions cause distance in our affections; but let us joyntly and severally pray for the peace of Jerusalem; and let us all make a conscience of practising what we pretend to pray for by endeavouring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of peace. And since the evil an∣gels conspire together for the propagating and per∣fecting of Sathans kingdome: Oh let not any of us either by open schisme, or private separation discerp and tear in pieces the Church which is Christs Kingdome; and though we be many in number, yet let us be as one man in judgement; at least let us not highten our differences to the losse of Christian concord; but ra∣ther let us agree like Brethren; and which is yet nearer like members of the same body for the compleating
of the beauty and safety of the whole. Fourthly, Though the Church militant be not alto∣gether so vast as the Church malignant, yet let not this paucity discourage any man from being one of Christ's little flock, as it did Rutholdus Duke of Fridland, who when he had one foot in the water ready to be Bap∣tiz'd, demanded of the Priest who was to Officiate, An plures, &c. Whether he thought that more of his progenitours were saved or damned? as having lived and dyed out of the communion of the Church; and the Priest replying, that extra Ecclesiam non est salus: the Duke thereupon pluck'd back his foot, saying, It is bet∣ter to follow many then few. So argued Jovinian against St. Hierome, Pauci pro vobis? You have but a few on your side: To whom he modestly answered, pauci steterunt pro Christo. They were but a few that stuck to Christ himself. And Saint Paul professeth that no man stood to him. And Liberius a Bishop of Rome, being importun'd to turn Arrian upon this motive, Pene Omnes jam con∣senserunt. All in effect have now subscribed to Aria∣nisme: Confidently answered Veritas, solitudine non mi∣nuitur: Truth is not weakned by paucitie of Professors. Elias stood up alone in the cause of God, and carried it against all the prophets of Baal, and the Grove: so did Athanasius prevail at last against all the Arrian Bi∣shops. And when Philip Melancthon with some few more of the Reformers (as Sleidan reports) entreated Frederick Duke of Saxony to abolish the private Masse, for divers good reasons then alledg'd, and urg'd; and the Duke replied, Pauci pro vobis? They stopt his mouth with this rejoynder; Semper major pars homi∣num, &c. The greatest part have ever resisted the truth.
But what though in all places and ages, the greater part of the world hath resisted the truth, as Iannes and Iambers withstood Moses? yet the Church of Christ hath alwayes had many members; as our Lord himself tels that Sceptick in the 13. chapter of Saint Luke, at the 29. verse, where to shew that his members are many in themselves, though but few in comparison of the Church malignant, he saith, That many shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Ja∣cob, in the Kingdome of God. And thus having proved both that the body of Christs Church is but one; and yet that in this one body there be many members; It now onely remains that I shew how that be they nere so many, yet they are all members of one another; which is the last thing consi∣derable in our Apostles Reddition, and come now to be handled. As all the members of the body natural have not the same Office; but each of them having somewhat that the other lacks, it freely communicates to all the rest what it hath, and they stand in need of: so in the Church we are all members one of another; and there∣fore the Priest must study for the people, and the people must labour for the Priest: The civil Magi∣strate is to rule, and the Subjects are to obey: briefly, all must serve God in their several stations, and so contribute towards the welfare of the body mystical. And therefore as in a Quire, some sing the Treble, others the Mean, others the counter-Tenor, others the Tenor, others the Base; and so, while they keep them∣selves exactly to their own parts, the Musick is sweet, and the Harmony complete: so in the Church, while
every one dischargeth his own duty, and conscientiously performs his own part; the whole Church flourisheth to the glory of God, and the general good. Here's all the difference, that the several members of the body natural so well agree, flowes from the Law of Na∣ture: but that all the members of Christ's body mystical so sweetly correspond, comes merely from the gift of Gods grace; and if any of these members agree not with the rest, as they should and ought, it is onely for want of Grace: and a foul sin and shame it must needs be unto us that are Christians, if the members of the body natural be more peaceable among themselves, and so more perfect then are the members of Christ's body mystical. And since it hath pleased the Holy Ghost here to make use of this comparison; and to bring in the body thus to teach the soul; it is our bounden duty, and should be our diligence, at least to observe and imitate, if not to exceed and excel the bodily members in our Chri∣stian relations, and Spiritual performances each to other. First then as in the body natural, if the Head be in danger, the armes and hands will offer and expose themselves for to defend it: So in the body politick (which consists of Church and State:) The King is under God The supream Head in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil; and as Davids Worthies truly said to him, Worth ten thousand of us; He is the Light of our eyes, the Breath of our nostrils, and the Ioy of our hearts, and there∣fore should his sacred Majesty be in the least danger; He deserves not the name of a true Britan, (who have ever been justly honoured for their Courage and Loy∣alty) and much lesse of a true Christian, who would not be prodigal of his blood in such an exigent, and
willingly ransome his Gracious Soveraigns Life, with the losse of his own. Secondly, As in the body natural the inferiour mem∣bers envy not the the more Honourable neither do the Superiour members disdain their underlings: so in the Church, such as are sordidly ignorant should not ma∣lign them that are eminently Learned: neither should the Learned despise those that are Ignorant. As our knowledge should not puffe us up, so our Charity should edifie others. The poor must not pine at the rich mans prosperity, neither should the rich insult o∣ver the poor in their necessity, For as one God made them both, so he made the one for the other, saith Solomon. And the greatest Potentate on Earth may sometimes stand in need of the meanest Peasant; as in the Fable, The Mouse delivered the Lion, by gnawing the snare a∣sunder. Thirdly, As in the body natural, if any one member be in pain, all the rest grieve and groan for company; for let but the Foot be prick'd, & straight the Eyes weep; the Ears listen, the Head consults; the Tongue complains, the Heart akes; and the Hand, doth what it can to pick out the thorn: So should we all stand affected in the body mystical; we must sympathize in each others miseries. Who is afflicted saith our Apostle, and I burn not. And if he were so sensible of a single mans affliction, then how should we be wounded with the pressures and persecutions of the whole Church? If when only Saint Peter was imprison'd in the 12. chapter of the Acts, then prayers were made by the Church for him? Then how much more must the true members be pang'd, when the whole Church is either vexed by Tyranny, or rent in pieces by Schisme? Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? The Lord Christ was in his natu∣ral body Triumphant in Heaven when he thus accosted Saul, and yet to shew how extremely sensible he was, of the injuries and indignities offered to his mystical bo∣dy then on the Earth; he cryed out, why persecutest thou me? as if he still languished in all our troubles and bled at all our wounds. Fourthly, As in the body natural, if there be any ex∣traordinary Vertue in, or Honour done to any one mem∣ber, all the rest are equal sharers in it: If the Head be more politick, or the Tongue more perswasive, or the Hand more active and cunning in any kind them usual, then doth not the Heart rejoyce to think of it, and the Eare to hear of it? Yea, doth not the whole man shout, and stand on tiptoe for joy that he hath such a glitter∣ing Head, such an eloquent Tongue, such a dexterous Hand? &c. In like manner we should chearfully impart all our gifts of grace to the benefit of our fellow members in the Church. In this kind, like the primitive Christians, we should have all in common; and as the Apostle speaks; No man should seek his own things, but every one should study to promote the cause of Christ. Saint Augustine taxes it as a fault in Acesius, one of the Ring-leaders of the Donatists, that he having found out, as he gloried, a nearer and shorter cut to Heaven, then any of the ancient Fathers ever heard of; when he was got up himself, he pluck'd away the Ladder, least any more should follow him. Et ab uno disce omnes, in him you see the nature of all Seperatists, who envy Heaven it self to all but their own Faction; and you may remem∣ber that some of the late Phanaticks that were execu∣ted, died with imprecations in their mouthes, by which you may see of what Spirit they all are: But though
Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah sin, and what is reported in the Mythologie, that a blinde man and a lame Covenanted to live together; that so between the eyes of the one, and the Legs of the other, their personal de∣fects might be mutually supplied, we that are true Chri∣stians, should in our several places labour to make good: we must (as Job speaks of himself) become Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the lame, and (as our Apostle did) all unto all: that so the body mystical may not lack what any particular member thereof hath; seeing that what ere we have, God hath given it us for the good of o∣thers, as well as for our selves. Fifthly, As in the body natural, should the members fall out among themselves, so that the Hands should either strike the Head, scratch the Face, pluck out the Eyes, or tear off the Hair; or if the Teeth should either bite out the Tongue, or bite the flesh of the Armes, &c. would not all that saw or heard it judge the man to be stark mad, and pack him away to Bedlam? So in the body mystical of which we are all members, should there be any person or faction of so desperate principles, and so damnable in their practice, as to plot how to lay vio∣lent hands upon the Lords Anointed, whom God (as an inestimable blessing) hath made our Head and Governour; or to extirpate Episcopacy root and branch, which is all one as to pluck out the eyes of the Church, for the Holy Ghost hath made them our over-seers: or to abolish the publick Liturgy of the Church: with all its Ceremonies, Vestiments, and Ornaments, which is all one as to scratch the face, and tear off the haire of our Religion established: Or to silence and sequester the Loyall Orthodoxe Clergie, which is in effect as bad as biting out their tongues; or to bite off the flesh of
their armes, by discoulouring and dispoyling the Loyal Gentry, and others that Ventured their lives, and fortunes, in the late just undertaking against Phana∣ticks, and all others that no less insolently then cause∣lesly rose up against lawful authority, &c. We can con∣clude all such to be no better then persons distracted; sure they were mad for the time, and some of them still stand in need of Physick, as well as both our pity and prayers, that God would bring them to their wits again; and that he would abate their pride, asswage their malice, and confound their designes and devices, that so there may be no more carrying into captivity at home, or abroad, and no more complaining in our streets. Sixthly, As in the body natural should any of the members go about to bring in new waies of discharging their several offices, as some will stand on their heads, and walk on their hands, &c. The attempt must needs be look'd upon by all sober men as monstrous, be∣cause it inverts the order of nature, and the endeav∣our, though never so well perform'd, would be cen∣surd by the graver-sort to be very Ridiculous: So God is the God of order; and our Apostle wills that all things bee done decently and in Order: And therefore all such innovators, as either out of affectation, or pre∣judice, faction or interest, do despise the old, and labour to introduce new forms of administration in Gods pub∣lick worship and service, preferring their own brain-sick inventions before the long experienc'd good wayes and rules of the Church of God; as they are both monstrous and ridiculous in themselves so they cannot chuse but be both odious, and abbominable in the sight of God, and all that are good. Seventhly As in the body natural, if one of the mem∣bers
corrupt, and putrifie, the skillful and faithful Chy∣rurgian is forced to cut it off without delay, least by a gangrene it destroy the whole: Ense rescindendum est, ne pars syncera trahatur. So in the Church if any go about by Heresie, Schism, and Sedition to infect, wire∣draw, and withdraw their fellow-members from Obedi∣ence to God, and Allegiance to his Anointed (as too many Phanaticks have done of late.) They must not only be rebuked, and shamefully discountenanc'd and discarded by Excommunications, Suspensions, Degradations, Deprivations, giving over unto Sathan, and such other Ecclesiastical censures as properly fall under the power of the Keyes which our Savior cōmitted to his Church, (as knowing well that if the Church have no jurisdiction, no coertion in its power, there will be no conscience in the Peoples practice) but also if Schismatical and seditious Ring-leaders continue contumacious, and become in∣corigible, then they must be timely cut off by such cor∣poral punishments, as by the law of God, and this Land, the Civil Magistrate is impowred to inflict upon such Capital Offenders; as in the 7. chapter of Ezra at the 26. verse, Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of thy King, let judgement be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. And Saint Ber∣nard justifies that Sentence upon this ground, Melius est ut pereat unus, quam unitas. It is better one perish, then Unity. And we cannot but be sensible now that Impuni∣tas ad deteriora: as wise Solomon hath it in his Ecclesi∣stes, Because judgement is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of man is set to do evil, &c. Some men who are bad enough by nature, have been so poysoned in their
their Principles, by the iniquity and indulgence of these Times, that they neither will nor can live under any Law, but what their own licentiousness propounds to it self in their clandestine meetings, in which their preach∣ing is but plotting how to blow up both Church and State like the men of the Gunpowder Gospel, which made choice of a Vault. In their Declaration they cry up King Jesus, when they would pluck down his Christ, I mean his Anointed; and they call their Rebellion Reli∣gion; and their Conspiracy, Conscience. They know that as silly as some of the cōmon people are, yet they will not easily be induced to swallow the hook of such Villany, unlesse it be speciously baited with the shew of Gods Cause, and Christ's Call: though the Devil begets the Brat, yet they will have God himseif to father it. The Civil Magistrates mercy fleshes these to do more mis∣chief, who like so many mad Oxen, kill him that is next, and destroy without distinction: and if they be not prevented will set all on fire, though they are sure to be consumed in the flame. There is no dallying with such Desperado's as these Jesuited Phanaticks: you have too long cherished these Serpents in your bosomes, which now not only hisse, but spit the poyson of defi∣ance in your faces. Forget not the Proverb, Pitie spoiles a Citie: then take these brats of Babel, and pay them in their own Coin: Nec Lex est justior ulla, quam, &c. The speedy execution of justice is the most convincing, and only unanswerable argument to be used and urged against such Traytors, as like Medlers will never be good till they be rotten; they may miscal themselves Mar∣tyrs, but they act, & suffer as the worst of Malefactours. Eighthly, As in the body natural, the members abhor nothing more then to be rent and torn piece-mele each
from other, as we read in Ecclesiastical History, that during the ten Persecutions, some Christians were cast to hunger-starv'd Lyons; and others were tied by the arms and legs to the tails of wild horses, that so they might be torn in pieces: In like manner in the Church no∣thing can be more dreadful then to observe how many poor members of Christs body mystical have been violently distorted, and drawn as it were a pie∣ces, each from other, all of them from Christ, by such wilful Schismes, and wicked Separations as have within some few years been made amongst us. The Ro∣man Historians report of a Gulph which happened in Rome, and could not be closed till some noble Roman in love to his Country did cast himself into it▪ whereupon Quintus Curtius having armed himself Cap-a-pee, did ride full speed, and threw himself in; and the Roman La∣dies threw their Gold Chains into it after him, thereby worthily crowning so renowned a Fact: But now alass, the Times are so changed for the worse, that it is the chief work and glory of many to make gaps of separa∣tion, and gulphs of division in the Church, which be∣fore was like Ierusalem at unity within it self; and some both of our City and Country Ladies, by their leave, will have none to be their Chaplains, but onely such noted Sectaries, and notorious Schismaticks as shall not sit down with them at table, till they have in a long∣winded Grace given God thanks for the numerous in∣crease of the Brethren and Sisters of the pure and Holy Separation. And though our Apostle (in the 16. Chapter to the Romans, at the 17. Verse) gives this special Caveat, observe them who cause division among you, and avoyd them: Yet now who sees not that too many observe
the Sowers of discord and division, that they may the better side with them; because they see with no smal content some that have been forward Seedsmen in that kind, now not only pardon'd but preferr'd: and when Schisme and Sedition prove the high way to promotion, sure, that new-found-road will never want store of Travellers, which in time will prove troublers both of Church and State, and I could tell you how malapert some of them are grown already in the Pul∣pit, but that for travailing too near the heels of truth, some have had their Teeth beaten out. There be Six things (saith Solomon in the 6. Chap. of the Proverbs) which God hates, and his Soul ab∣hors the Seventh; and that is he which sowes discord a∣mong brethren: and there is a great deal of reason why God and men should abhor him: for, First, This soweing of discord is a vice opposite to Charity, which our Apostle (in the 13. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians) prefers not only be∣fore moral vertues, but the Teological graces. Secondly, Hereby is bred not only the hatred of some one, but even of Unity it self. Thirdly, This Sin, like the plague of Pestilence, insects all that come but near it. Fourthly, it is contrary to peace, which is the cheif earthly good; and therefore the Jews when they wish'd well to each other, used this both for their Salutation, and Valediction, Peace be to you. Fifthly, It divides such as are join'd together nearer then man and wife, even the Members of the same body mystical; then which as nothing can be more painful, so of all other miseries and mischeifs; it is the most dreadful: and upon these grounds St. Augustine first
mourn'd in secret for such unchristian, and indeed An∣tichristian divisions; and then censur'd the authors thereof to be worse then the very Tormentors of Christ himself upon the Crosse: Venit Persecutor (saith he) & non fregit Crura Christi, &c. The Persecutor came and did not break Christs Legs hanging on the Crosse; but Donatus came (he speaks of the Schismatick) and rent his Church in peices; the natural body of Christ was whole in the hands of his Tormentors, and yet his body mystical (which he loved much more then his natural, for he gave this to save that) is not whole among us who professe our selves christians. Lastly, as in the body natural, nothing is more useful and graceful then the right and proper placing of every Member; so is it also in the body mystical; in which God hath appointed every man his proper cal∣ling, and particular function, in which he is to abide, and to which he is wholly to apply himself, as Gods sanction; and which he that transgresseth, sins with an high hand against Gods expresse Ordinance, and paves the way to anarchy and confusion. Then to wind up all, let us humbly and heartily be∣seech the Lord to give unto all the Members of his Church, comelinesse, quietnesse, and order; that so Evangelical purity, which was both the beauty, and glory of our first Reformation, may not ere long de∣generate into profanesse, our Churches into conven∣ticles, and our spiritual Union into civil dissention; from which, Good Lord deliver us: and give us all Grace in our distinct callings (as the most propable means to prevent these imminent mischeifs) to imi∣tate the bodily members; in the faithful and peaceable
discharge of our duties; and so to deal with all other Christians in our respective places, as if they were as near and dear unto us, as are our own natural Mem∣bers. Now to God the Father, &c. FINIS.
