H3526 669.f.6[37] 99871001 160898
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF The Knights, Esquires, Gentry Freeholders, and inhabitants of the County of SOMMERSET Presented to the Honourable Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now Assembled in Parliament, June 15. 1642. Humbly Pray, THat the Liturgie, and the Church Governement be continued vntill otherwise some alterations may be for a free, and well chosen SINOD, and that in the meane time the disturbers thereof may be discountenanced, and that you endeavour to remoue all Jealousies and misunderstandings between his MAJESTY and PARLIAMENT, the discontents within being the greatest evills that can happen unto us, and which We most feare; and to take into your consideration his MAJESTIES Message of 20. JANUARY, as the means proposed for an accommodation, and that you will provide for his Majesties security by declaring against Tumults, and unlawfull assemblyes, and that you will take Order to suppresse Seditious Sermons, and Pamphlets, which his Majesty declares He expects, as the meanes to come neere His PARLIAMENT. 2. That seeing his Majesty and Parliament do not agree in a new way, for setling the MILITIA: it is humbly desired that the Trained Bands may be set into such a Posture & Government as in the time of QUEENE ELIZABETH, untill a law be made, and that the dis∣pute about the manner of doing it may not actuate devision in the meane time. 3. That the Subject may have the benefit of the Petition of right both for his Person and estate in all cases, and in all Courts, and that the lawes of our Kingdome may be the only rule of Government and obedience. 4. That whereas great sumes of Mony have been levyed by Act of Parliament, and great are now required; we beseech you to take notice that the Country is much impove∣rished, and will unwillingly beare any burthen of this kind, but such as shal be imployed for the generall service of this Kingdom, and Bleeding Kingdome of JRELAND. And therefore we humbly pray that it may be made knowne how those former Colecti∣ons have been disposed, which wil be a great incouragement for the ready payment of the present. 5. Lastly, whereas and seeing his Majesty hath often with sundry Protestations de∣clared to his Parliament and People, that he will ever maintaine the true Protestant Re∣ligion established, the Lawes of the Kingdom and the Liberty of the Subject; which we do confidently beleeve. We further humbly beseech you, that the dispute about Prerogative and the feare of the Malignant party or other Jealousies, may not imbroile you in the greatest of evils, as are those of civill discention and ingagement, and that you do your utmost to alay distem∣pers, and heedfully watch over the Peace and safety of this Kingdome; In which we will joyne with you our earnest Prayers, and willingly adventure our selves and fortunes. London, Printed for W. D. 1642.
