H3780 669.f.15[60] 99870695 163134
THE DECLARATION and Engagement of the Marquesse of Huntley, the Earle of Atholl, Generall Midletou, and many of the Nobility of Scotland that have lately taken up Arms for the defence of his MAIESTIE Person and just Authority. VVE Vnder scribers, being touched with a deep sence of the sad condition this our Native Kingdome of Scotland is in, by a prevailing Army of Sectaries, who having murthered our Soveraign the late KING, and overturned Religion, and Government in our Neighbour Kingdomes of England and Ireland, have invaded this Kingdome, and are in a way (having so considerable a part thereof under Foot) to reduce the whole to a Province, except the Lord in his mercy pre∣vent it, by joyning his MAIESTIES Subjects in the Band of Vnity, which is the onely means (in our judgement) to preserve Religion, King and King∣dome; but to the grief of our hearts we find in the place of Vnion the breach proving Wider, and that not only in Church and Estate, but likewise in the remnant of our Army: Our Resolutions therefore are, firmly and faithfully to joyn our selves together, and neither for fear, threatning, allurement, nor advantage to relinquish so good a Cause, or lay down Armes without Gene∣rall Consent; And what shall be done to the least of us in prosecuting of the said Vnion, shall be taken as done to all. And seeing the best undertakings are under the mercy and favour of malice, we cannot but apprehend our selfes to be subject to that lawlesse Inquisition; Therefore, and for the sa∣tisfaction of all who are satisfiable, We do promise and swear, that we shall maintain the true Religion as it is established in Scotland, the Covenant, League and Covenant, the Kings MAIESTIES Person, power, Greatnesse, and Authority, the Priviledges of Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject. So help us God. This Declaration and Engagement was Signed by the above nam'd Persons the 20. of October 1650. And was brought over by a Person of Reputation that came out of Scotland upon the 25. who assures that it was resolved His MAIESTIES Coronation should be a St. Johnstons the 30. following; and the Parliament at that time to begin and sit there also. HAGAE, Printed by SAMUELL BROUN English Bookseller, 1650.
