L1365A R42519 36282215 150111
A LETTER FROM A BISHOP TO A LORD OF HIS FRIENDS THe present posture of our affaires is so strange, and the dan∣ger which threatens the King's faithfull servants so con¦siderable, that I should hardly have prevayld with my self to answer your letter, if I were not perswaded, that you ask my advice only to profit by it, and had not besides some reason to fear, you might interpret my silence for a tacit approba∣tion of what these last two months was done against the King, the Church, and the State. Peradventure it were but justice to attribute mine, as well as the silence of divers of my bret∣hren, to a prudence allowable in such an occasion. But some perhaps would think otherwise, and not without reason bla∣me a man, who all his life has preacht obedience to soverai∣gns, and been brought up at Oxford, under men equally fa∣mous for learning and piety, if I did not follow their exam∣ple. For in the time of a rebellion worse than this, they did not only testimony to the truth, when they were requested: but had the courage to defend it before the Usurpers of the Royall authority; and reproach their crime with a zeal worthy of our profession, and the inviolable fidelity, which has been alwais signall in the Clergy of the Church of England till now. But now wee see Bishops suffer themselves to bee drawn into the ways of the ungodly and sit in the seat of the scornfull I mean, who have joined with that wretched Convention, in attempting upon the person and dignity of the Lord's anno∣inted, I should believe my self unworthy of the place which I fill in our Church, and even of the name of a Christian, if I refused to open my self plainly to those who ask mee an ac∣count of my opinion, which, according to the rule of S. Pe∣ter, wee ought bee ready to do as ften as wee are call'd upon. To begin my answer then, I shall tell you, My Lord, that you could not do better, than to refuse going to the Convention, and that your resolution has been an infinite joy both to mee, and all those of my brethren who truly love the honour of the Church of England. And you have the satisfac∣tion to have kept your conscience cleer from a crime so great as rebellion. I confess, My Lord I am not able to understand which way the Gentlemen of the Convention can so much as pretend to wipe off that crime For you know that our Church has always taught obedience to lawfull soveraigns as an essen∣tiall duty of Christianity, establisht by the holy scripture, the doctrine of all antiquity, & particularly of the Church of England. Our 37. Article declares thus Regiae Maestas in ho Angliae regno ac caeteris ejus dominiis summam habet potestatem, ad quam omnium statuum hujus regni, sie illi Ecclesiastici sint, sive Ci∣es, in omnius causis surema gubernatio pertinet, & nulli exter¦rae jurisdictoni est subecta, nec esse deber. There is not a Bis∣hop, or Clergyman of this Kingdom who has not sworn to this doctrine; which is yet more full in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, taken by all the Lords and Commons, when the King cme first to the Crown, and as often besides, as they got or changed employments. They have sworn that our souveraign lord King Jmes is lawfull and rightfull King of the Realm: That the Pope, neither of himself, no by any authority of the Church or see of Rome, has any power to depose him; and that the Pope, nor any other, has no power to abolve of this Oath. In the Oath of Supremacy it is declared that the Kng is the only supreme Governour of this Realme as well in all spirital or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporall. And that no forreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have any juridiction, power, superiority, preeminence o authority Ecclesiasticall, or spirituall in this Realm: and so they renoun∣ce and forsake all foreign jurisdictions, powers, superiority, or autho∣rity whatsoever, and do promise from henceforth to hear faith and true alegiance and fidelity to the King, his heirs and lawfull suc¦ssors, and to their power assist and defend all jurisictions, praeeminences &c. There is not peradventure a single man in the Convention, ho has not taken these Oaths, at one time or other, and the∣e is not a single man who has not broken them. If they be∣ve that these Oaths oblige them to any thing, it certainly was, ot to do any thing of what their assembly has done, but to ntinue faithfull to the King. If they believe the Oaths ob∣ed them to nothing, they make a strange laughing stock  their King, their faith, and God himself, whom they so∣nly took witnes of the promise which they made of fide∣y to the King. Neither according to the plaine and common se of the same words is there any shifting it off with fri∣lous interpretations For hee who takes the Oaths, swears  a speciall clause that hee understands the words according  the plaine and common sense of the same words, without y equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation what ver: which naturall sense unexcusably involves all those o have approved the proceedings made against the King,  the guilt of periury, and such a perjury as is not only cri∣all before God, but destroys all mutuall commerce among men. For what assurance of fidelity can soveraigns ever re∣ceive from their Protestant subjects, if Oaths bee no security, where God is called to witnes, and the Gospels kist. You see My Lord, that this, of necessity brings on a just distrust, and obliges Princes to make themselves sure of their fidelity by other ways, and leaving them as little liberty as they can. The Papists themselves are less reprochable in this point, as contrary as a doctrine among them is to the security of Prin∣ces, for you know they do not all follow it, as appears by the approbation of the Oath of Allegiance given by eight & fif∣ty Doctors of the Faculty of Paris in 1680, and other pieces printed by Peter Walsh in his Causa Valesi na. And those who possest with Bellarmin's, maximes refuse to take it, make it suffi∣ciently appear that their refusall proceds not only from the fear of disobeying the Pope Paul V. Brieves, but from a perswa∣sion likewise that if they had taken it, they were obliged to keep it. Equivocations then, and mentall reservations are no lon∣ger to bee layd at the dore of the Papists, but of the Zea∣lots of the Convention, who can no way wash off the stain of perjury, but by declaring that they swore conditionally, that is, engaged to bee faithfull no longer, than the King should bee faithfull to them, by performing an imaginary con∣tract betwixt Kings and the people; no longer than hee should bee a Protestant; or, to say better, no longer than they plea∣sed themselves. If such distinctions and clauses were new, they should yet have been propounded to the King, when the whole King∣dom promised him fidelity, at his coming to the Crown, and hee made acquainted with the conditions of the Oaths taken to him. For no body was then ignorant that hee profest the Romish religion. But all England believed then, that this was no justification of refusing to pay him the obedience due to him. All the Citys and Burroughs declared as much by their Addresses, when the memory was yet fresh of the endea∣vours used by seditious men in the Parliaments of Westminster and Oxford, to exclude him from the succession, upon pre∣text of Religion. The whole Kingdom then abhorred the ma∣ximes which the Convention has made foundation of their proceedings. They publikly detested the Association-pro∣je drawn up by My Lord Shaftsbury, and his complices, thô it were less pernicious, than the Votes of the Convention. In fi∣ne all the reasons, pretended to justify that Association, were condemned in 1683. by the famous Censure of the University of Oxford. No body then appeared in defense of the dange∣rous maximes of the conspirators: every body condemned them as contrary to the word of God, the security of sacred per∣sons, the good of the State; and as directly opposite to the doctrine of the Church of England. Which way then could it come to pass, that what was abhominable in 1683. should bee agreable to the laws of God and of the Land in 1689. but that the Convention has taken up other principles; equally sub∣verted the laws of the Church and State; and after having so much declamed against arbitrary power, endeavours to set up one incomparably greater: for it would force us to break our oaths, and receive a forreigner whom in conscience wee can∣not obey. These principles of the Convention cannot bee said to bee new, and so to furnish those with an excuse, who suffered themselves to bee surprised by them. All are reduced to one principall head, the originall contract betwixt the King and his subjects, to which they piece two members; I. That as often as the King fails on his side, they are no longer bound by their oaths to obey him: II. That if a lawfull power change into tiranny, or bee not exercised according to divine and human laws, it may bee abrogated. And these are just the 2. and 3 of those propositions which were solemnly conde∣ned by the University of Oxford 3. July 1683. They were never taught, but by Buchanan, Knox, Dolman, Milton, Goodwin, and such seditious men, and have alwais been condemned by the Church of England, as hereticall, seditious, tending to Anarchy, and the subversion of lawfull powers, whereof none can bee safe, if 15. or 20. Fanatics take a fancy that the origi∣nall contract is broken▪ and Magistrates act not according to the law of God. These maximes are but too much known, and the Nation has seen by a fatall experience what the conse∣quences are. For these hurried on our furious rebels into an execrable Parricide, which wee cannot detest enough, and which the Church of England every year bewail by a solemn office. It is therefore unconceivable which way they can bee alledged in justification of an enterprise, in the eye of our law, very little inferior to the former, for so it is, to pluck off that lawfull authority from the King, which the right of succession has vested in him. Whether these maximes bee reconciliable to Christian morality, is not now to bee examined. The Church of En∣gland
has alwais been of a contrary judgment, not only while shee enjoyed her liberty, but even while she groaned under the oppression of her greatest enemys. D. Hammond, D. Heylin and severall others writ in the time of the long rebellion, and their books are in the hands of every body. She has since divers times explained her self without, and beyond contest, among the rest, in the History of the late troubles, and of the Treaty at Uxbridge, to say nothing of the Censure in 1683. a little af∣ter the discovery of the Newmarket conspiracy. None of these public declarations met with any check in behalf of those who are now leading men in the Convention. All approved them, and there are few whose hand was not to some of these Addresses of fidelity which flowd in upon the King from Shires, Towns and Corporations. Wherefore there is no excusing them from an hipocrisy abhominable before God and men, if believing then, as they do now, they declared the contrary: or from manifest rebellion. In following those maximes at this time, which they formerly dete∣sted. But, tis not hard to unriddle this different carriage so generall of theirs. For if they had owned those damnable maximes, before the laws have been suspended by the generall revolt of the kingdome, those laws would doubtles have punisht them for traitors. They we∣re stopt then, by the fear, not of God, but of punishment, which fear nevertheles ought not have swaid with them, if the doctrine, which they are now setting up, bee a part of their religion. All danger ought have been despised, to draw us out of the error, in which wee were, and still are, if it bee one to believe our selves oblig'd by the law of God to obey those Kings and Princes, to whose authority hee was pleas'd our birth should subject us. But that prodigious dis∣simulation, which alwais kept the venom of their doctrine close co¦red, only to spread it abroad when lawfull authority was opprest, will not suffer us ever to trust those unhappy Fanatiks more. None were more eager than they to preach up obedience to soveraigns when time served: what invective was spared to reproach the Pa¦pists in a hundred occasions with their Italian deposing doctrins? vhat zeal appeared in the conspiracy discovered by Oats, and Bed∣loe: which by the way, after judgment given against the principal actors in that bloudy Tragedy, I rather believe feigned than true. But after all what was this zeal? why, now wee see. All took alarme at fancyes, and chimeras, and the danger threatning England from the whimsy'd invasion of a forreign army commissioned by the Pope. But when with their own eys they saw a forreigner, who has yet no more right than the Pope, come armed into the King∣dom; declare against the King; actually seize his person, and re∣venue; and do all the acts of a soveraign without any lawfull au∣thority: they forgot the old doctrine of their mother the Church of England, and failing in all the dutys which shee enjoyns, fa∣vour'd the attempt of an usurper by their silence, and by that favour made it succesfull. And I speak of those who are the most innocent, those who had no hand, save indirectly, in the doings of the Prince of Orange. They can no longer make this pass for a chimericall entreprise, as the Papists said of Oates's plot, and have at last brought the most sensible part of the Nation to be∣lieve. This last is found but too reall. They approv'd it, then in their hearts, and believed it lawfull, and agreable to the word of God, and consequently betrayd the truth, and acted against their conscience, when by solemn Oaths they assured his Majesty that they acknowledged no authority on earth superior to his, and one way or other fell in to execrable perjury. All divines, both Protestant and Papist, agree, that the only case, in which it is not only lawfull not to obey Princes, but un∣lawfull to obey them, is when they command a thing contrary to the law of God. By this principle the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the six Bishops, who by his exemple, refused to publish the King's declaration in their Dioceses, justifyed themselves, decla∣ring they could not obey in conscience. I will not take upon mee either to condem or quit them, that busines seeming to mee very disputable. For since the Church of England lodges the su∣preme power of governing this Church in the King, subject to none but God, I do not see that the right is altogether so cleer on their side as some pretend. For the question was not of ad∣mitting sectarys into Communion, whom the Church of England had formerly excluded, but only of publishing a declaration of their Prince, by which the rigour of the laws was suspended with respect to Dissenters, which is a matter purely temporall, and in which by consequence the Bishops have no more authority than the temporal Lords, that is, to propose in Parliament what they judge most for the public good. Nevertheless I willingly yeld them the glory of having done the part of good Pastors, by hazar∣ding themselves for their flocks, a glory with which some flatter I fear, more pleasingly, than sincerely. The inward persuasion of their conscience may justify their intention, and, I have wond∣red a hundred times how the King could bee brought to meddle with that busines. But yet mee thinks that good conscience of theirs might have oblidged them to explain themselves cleerly when they were examined before the Council, or try'd at Westminster-hall for a seditious libel. Had their petition, which was the ground of all, mentioned the Originall contract between the King and his people; the inconsistence of Popery with a King of En∣gland, or a counterfait Prince of Wales: had it declared, that it is lawfull to take up arms against their Prince, in defence of Re∣ligion; that a parcel of men meeting without authority, has po∣wer to dispose of the Crown, voyd the old, and make new laws; and such things as are now abetted by some of them: do you, My Lord, believe they would have been so easily acquitted by the Jury? Certainly no. As the Law is express, they would have been condemned for Traitors, and no body in a condition to help them. Here they ought freely to have brought forth those preten∣ded truths, wich they concealed in their hearts, (those who did conceal them) and have preacht upon the house tops, what they whispered in one anothers ear, and not deceive the King and the world with perjurys, and feigned protestations of inviolable fideli∣ty to his service▪ and their adhering to the doctrine of the Church of England. Let not those men, then, banter us longer with their pretended zeal, but think of asking God, and the King, pardon for the most detestable perfidiousnes which ever blackned the reputation of our Clergy. I had reason to tell you that the maximes of the Convention, and of those Bishops, who sit with them, are not new. They began to spread in this Kingdom under Queen Elisabeth. The Divines whom the persecution of Q. Mary drove out of England, fled for the most part, to Geneva, Suitzerland, and the Palatinate. From thence they brought us back this unfortunate doctrine, wih which some Clergymen has already done so much mischief in the three Kingdoms, and began to corrupt our two Universitys. For it is certain that Calvin and his disciples never approved our reforma∣tion absolutely. They were not pleas'd with our Liturgy and Disci∣pline, and he found in it, divers tolerable follysIn liturgia Anglicanae qualem mihi describitis multas vid tolerabiles ineptias. His disciples endea∣voured to make a kind of schism in the English Church, upon oc∣casion of the Ceremonys which have been retained. To these men vee ow all the mischiefs which have since fallen upon her for neare 120. years, as D. Heylin cleerly shews in his History of the Refor∣mation, and of the Presbyterians. If they did less harm in the reigns of Ed: 6. and Q. Mary, the reason was, because they had not time in the first: and in the second, feared to expose them∣selves to the danger, which then hung over the heads of all, who publicly ownd the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom. Queen Eli∣sbeth hindred them from corrupting the hearts of her subjects not only by severall wholesom laws, made for uniformity in Reli∣gion and outward worship, but, which was more, by executing them severely. They never thought our religion in England could bee secure, but by punctually executing them, which has made them so very odious to the Presbyterians. And therefore t'is no wonder that one of the first cares of the Convention, was to pluck this thorn out of their sides. In the works of King James I. about the beginning of this age, wee find abundant evidence of what hee suffered from the same Presbyterians. They began the trou∣bles which lasted to the reign of Charles I and ended in the rui∣ne of Monarchy, and an execrable parricide upon his person. All the world knows that those rebels, who, like our modern gent∣lemen, covered their treachery under the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, publisht then without reserve what they had at their hearts, whereas they approved the doctrine of the Church of En∣gland only with their lips: which is just what the Zealots of our time do. They cannot say that the Church of England approved at that time what they brought upon the stage, of an originall contract between the King and his people, and authority in the people to reform the State; no more than the following positions faithfully collected by the University of Oxford: That people may give the governement to whom they please: depose bad Princes, resist, and take arms against them: and are discharged from all oa hs of fidelity, when Princes act against God and the truth. No body is ignorant that the Church of England, opprest by rebels, could not at that time make any authentik and solemn declaration ag∣ainst these damnable maximes. But her honour was supported by severall great men who opposed them openly. D. Hammond, not content to have refuted them, writ about this matter to Fairfax himself, and his letter printed in the collection of his works, will serve to inform posterity of the true sense of our Clergy. D. Heylin appeared against them with the same zeal, as well as divers other faithfull servants of the King, to whose works you are no stranger. Our Church which found zealous defenders of her doctrine even at that time, declared her self more vigorously, when shee had recovered her liberty by the Kings restoration. There was hardly a particular Church, which by Addresses, or other public Acts, did not declare their abhorrence of these Presbyterian maximes. The first Parliament held after the return of his late Majesty con∣demned the Covenant, and all the Acts made in pursuance of it we∣re abolisht by the last Act of Uniformity in 1662. and those which had been past to that purpose, under the reigns of Elizabeth, Ja∣mes and Charles I confirmed, and revived. All attempts against the person of the King, his heirs, and lawfull successors were declared Treason: and the same Act severely forbids preaching, teaching, writing, saying, or any way declaring that the Parliament begun in 1640 had any authority; that the oaths then taken obliged any body; and above all that either, or both Houses of Parliament have any legislative power without the King. Thô our laws have this advantage above those of other nations, that none is, or can bee made, without the consent of the people: yet this may bee said to have a particular stamp of liberty upon it and the au∣thority wherof ought bee greater to all true Englishmen. For it was one of the first acts past after the happy restoration of his late Majesty and of all which ever the nation did, the action the most free, since nothing prevayled with them to acknowledge their lawfull soveraign, and shake of the yoke of a tiranny, a hundred times more grievous than the reign of any of his predecessors, a specious a cover as it had of Protection, but reason, and con∣ence
and the true interest of the Nation. And this wee, or those who come after us will see again, thô I cannot answer they shall nd it altogether so easy, to throw off the fetters, with which they ave loaded themselves to avoid an imaginary danger of losing our unvaluable liberty, so unthinkingly now deposited in very angerous hands. There is another very undeniable proof of the horrour which he whole Nation had for those pernicious maximes, upon which he Convention proceeds, and alledges for reasons sufficient to siy the turning all our laws topsy turvy. Is the Tryall of the Regicides in 1660. By the procedings very particularly drawn up, t appears that those abhominable Parricides went upon principles much what the same with our originall contract, and supreme au∣thority of the people. They pleaded that acting under the autho∣rity of Parliament, they acted by an authority which ought to ear them out: and that the Parliament of 1640. was a lawfull Parliament, as being a Convention or Assembly of the people. This was the plea of Scot, and his fellows. The Judges overruled t with reasons past reply, grounded on the laws, and uncontrover∣sible presidents. Sir Orlando Bridgeman then Lord Chief Baron in his charge to the grand Jury instructed them to proceed upon this unquestionable maxime, the result, or rather ground of all our laws; That no authority, no single person, community of persons, t the people, collectively or representatively, have any, coercive power over the King of England: A maxime which intirely over∣throwes all the principles, and by consequence all the proceedings of the Convention. This was not all: The Judges declared to the prisoners, who had a mind to enlarge upon this matter, and with their chimericall reasons justify the soveraign authority of the Commons, that the Court could not hear them, and that this very defence was a new Treason. All England was acquain∣ted with, and approved these proceedings▪ nor has there appea∣red a single man since who had the confidence to bespatter those Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer with the condemnation of innocent men, or proceeding on false maximes contrary to law and justice. Now would I know of the Gentlemen of the Conven∣tion, how they can pretend to thrust in to solemn acts, and take for a ground of new laws, what the Judges could not endure in the mouth of prisoners at their tryall; when they have liberty to say all they can for their defense, save what tends to Treason: as even Members of Parliament, notwithstanding freedom of speech in the House, may bee called to account if they pu∣blickly maintain such positions. To these proofs, taken from Acts of Parliament, and Tryals upon record, it seems useles to add matter less important, only to make it appear that the whole Nation has condemn'd the pernicious doc∣trine, which is now, not only brought into play, but topt upon us for the Common law of all nations, and ours in particular: es∣pecially since without so much as examining them, which they cannot do neither without treason, our Convention upon these sinking foundations, builds laws tending to the destruction both of Church and State. And yet there remains evidence enough besides that the Church of England was under no constraint, when she explain'd her self cleerly against this infamous Presby∣terian doctrine, which shee has alwais lookt upon as the root of all our miserys. At that very time came out several pieces of D. Heylin, approved by Bishops, and esteem'd and prais'd by every, thô hee was very smart upon the Presbyterians in making out that they had stirrd up broyls, and civil wars every where. Divers ot∣hers work of the same nature were likewise publisht of which the Church of England was so far from shewing any dislike, that on the contrary, the solemn approbations of those books, shewd she equally esteemed the Authors and their doctrine. About that ti∣me came out a pamphlet called Philanax Anglicus, wherof the au∣thor had a mind to pass for a Protestant. Hee strove to prove, that the doctrine of the greatest part of the reformed Churches was contrary to the obedience due to lawfull soveraigns. D. Peter du Moulin Canon of Christ's Church at Canterbury, confuted this pamphlet, in an Apology for the doctrine of Protestants in this matter: and concludes with defying his adversary to subscri∣be severall propositions, which hee had alledged as conformable to the doctrine of good English Protestants; the last of which is this: The Peers and Commons of England have no power to judge thir King, much less to depose him, or put him to death, or to choose another King or to alter th government of the State. Hee is not li∣ke to have the thanks of the House, who should move the Con∣vention to sign such an Article now. And yet this was then the doctrine of the whole Kingdom: and the Nonconformists, particu¦larly the Quakers were smartly handled, for not conforming to it, and not taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. Not that these sectarys were bad subjects, the greatest part of them. They were more set upon their whimsys, than malicious. One cannot say so much of the Presbyterians, who have alwais struggled all they could to get those Oaths abolisht, and when they could not prevayl, took them against their conscience; as the French Mini∣sters who fled hither, as great enemys as they are to the Hierarchy and Episcopacy not being able to take these Oaths consequently to the principles of their doctrine, yet surmounted all scruples, which stood in their way to English benefices. But the Bishops, who made so many others taKe those Oaths, and let the law loose upon refusers whether Papist or Protestant, could they believe tho∣se oaths obliged to nothing. In kindnes to them, wee will think they did not: And then they unavoydably did, or seemd to be∣lieve, according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, that the Oaths obliged them to bee faithfull to the King, and ack∣nowledge no authority above him, neither in spirituals, nor tem∣porals. How then could they shake of the obligation contracted by those Oaths, taken by themselves, and by them exacted from others? and by what authority take them quite away, and sub∣stitute new in their room? Alas! their sin is manifest, and manifold: against God, whose name they have taken in vain in oaths so shamefully broken; a∣gainst our laws which they have abolisht; and against the whole na∣tion, on which they take upon them to impose new ones. Tis a certain principle, and agreed by all Christians, that every man is oblig'd to conform himself to the laws of his country, his part being to obey, not to reform them. Our Conventioners then, and particularly the Bishops, were obliged to lay for the ground of their proceedings, the laws of the Kingdom, for the governement both of Church and State. The oath by which they acknowledged the King supreme Governor of the English Church, engag'd them to submit to all Ecclesiasticall laws, of which in that capacity hee is the sole executor, and dispenser. For there is no other Eccle∣siasticall authority, but that which proceeds from the King, nor have Parliaments ever pretended to share it with him. When the Bishops then consented to the repeal of the old oaths, and other things concerning Ecclesiasticall matters, they admitted a kind of Supremacy above the Kings, which has alvais past for High Treason, before the Judges, and before God for abhominable perjury. For a King of England must be deposed from his Crown, before he can be deposed from his Supremacy. Now as our laws never settled any superior authority to deprive Kings of the po∣wer, which they receive from God by a lawfull succession, the crime of our Conventioners is still the greater, because having sworn obedience to the King according to those very laws, as Englishmen and as Christians, they ought not have done any thing, which was not conformable to the laws recorded among us, and according to which Justice is administred in all Courts. There is not one president which allows the force of law to the violent proceedings of seditious men, who have risen at severall, and particularly the later times, nor, till the goverment bee entirely changed, can attempts of this nature pass for any thing, but High Treason. Nay even supposing, what cannot bee, that there were a dor∣mant authority superior to the Kings, the law still ought direct the manner of exercising that latent authority, as it does all other proceedings, whether against Peers, or Commons. The Con∣ventioners themselves, I suppose, will agree, that there is no glimps of any such matter in our law books; for whichs reason the Par∣liamentary Regicides were fain to contrive a method of their own heads. A method wich the Convention must needs disliKe, since they thought not fit to taKe it themselves, whether that it was thought too palpably naught, or too provokingly odious, and therefore likely to open the eyes of those, who had any fear of God left, or any respect for the law. For the Peers were no part of their Hight Court of Justice, the Upper House was dissolved, and the whole authority of the Nation lodg'd in the Commons; the grea∣test part of whose members too, were thrust out of the House, so that of 500. and more which ought bee there, one could some times har∣dly count 50. But the Convention has preserv'd the prerogative of the Peers, and distinction of the Houses; and so the forme at least is regular, and wants nothing but lawfull authority for their mee∣ting, and that fails them. For they met of themselves, without other authority than of bare circular letters from the Prince of O∣range, who has no more himself, than private men, who have none at all. A generall assembly of the Nation to have any authority, must bee a Parliamnt: and there can bee no Parliament, unles it bee convened by the King Prinipium, caput & finis Parlia∣menti. All the world knows that the right of calling a Parliament resides only in the Kings person, which, thô it were not other∣wise notorious, is evident in the very Writs of summons. Tho∣se which issue out to the Peers, call them (Consilium impensuri And the Commons in the writs directed to the Sherifs &c. d faciendum & consentiendum. Evidently therefore neither the one, nor the other are called to judge the King: but the Peers to counsel him, and the Commons to consent to, or dissent from the motions made there, as they judge expedient for the good of the Nation. No record mentions any writ which gi∣ves either or both Houses any authority beyond this. They come to assist the King with their counsels: but t'is not to bee found they ever came to taKe information of his actions, and pass sen∣tence against him, as the Convention has done, or to declare the throne vacant, and the Crown forfeited. Had our law furnisht us with any presidents of such irregular proceedings, to bee sure they had never scap't the prying diligence of the long Parliament which yet could never fish out any one. Besides it is an undeniable maxime in our law that the King can do no wong. None of his subjects therefore can complain of him much less impeach and judge him. But they may by law demand justice of him against those who have abus'd his authority in their severall stations. This is what our Lawyers have alvais delivered for Law without any contradiction, and which ought therefore have been a rule to the Peers and Commons in their proceedings, since neither their number, nor the face of their assembly exempts them from submission to the laws, to which every man is subject Had they followed this rule, they might have represented their grie∣vances modestly to the King, and demanded justice: in which their failing is the more inexcusable, because his Majesty had himself
actually summoned a Parliament, where they might have freely dra¦wn up any bill of complaint; prayd execution of the laws whether upon Papists, or evil counsellors; and by unblamable ways obtained whatever they could reasonably pretend. This way had secured them from those misfortunes, into which they have now of set purpose cast themselves headlong, and which in all appearance will have very troublesome consequences. For they have thrown their liberty into the greatest hazard it has run these many ages, by chusing a master who by ways, sweet in appearance, but full of violence and cruelty, has already robbed one people of their li¦berty, which got it by a long war, with the expence of infinite treasure, and more bloud than money. They have put our Religion in to the hands of a Presbyterian, who has already given it a fa∣tall blow, by removing the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and is about burying it, in the abolition of penal laws against Pro∣testant Dissenters, in altering the Book of Common-prayer and in a comprehension, to which, whatever arts have been used Parliaments hitherto would never yeeld. They have left our laws at the mercy of an Usurper, who has a strong interest in their ruine, since, if they stand, hee cannot avoyd his own. Succes¦sion by right of inheritance, firmly establisht without interruption for so many ages, barred the gate at the very first to his entrance in to this Kingdom, and much more strongly since the birth of an heir apparent. And so hee was fain to begin with breaking this law and oblidge a Convention at his beck, to declare him King: in which too hee has betrayd the rights of his Wife and sister in law, and sacrificed both to his ambition. Hee is altogether as careless of the general interest of the Nation, which if hee dye without issue, as yet hee has none, is like to fall in to confusion, and some body as ambitious as himself set up for King, with a declaration of the Commons, and some Lords gained by promises or frighted by threats. No precaution can secure our quiet, now oa∣ths oblige us to nothing, and wee make and unmake them at plea∣sure, as the fancy taKes us. The Church of England was a little gra∣ting, with her doctrine contrary to Rebellion. And so hee begins early to pull her doun, by pulling doun her props, all laws which are not favourable to his dear Presbyterians. The Nation was suspec¦ted for its naturall ficklenes, and above all its jealousy, which so often sets us at odds with ours lawfull soveraigns. And hee has taken good order, by bringing over forreign soldiers enough to hold our noses to the grindstone. The too great liberty of every private man stood not with his design of setting up arbitrary power here, as hee has in Holland, by imprisoning men, right or wrong, by denying justice; and the like legall proceedings. And his rhe∣torik has persuaded his creatures that the publick good requires our too great liberty should bee restrained, and for his saxe to suspend a law, as dear to us as the apple of our eye. I say no∣thing but what is publicly known, neither is any body ignorant, that the pretexts, upon which wee revolted from the King, are so very frivolous in comparison of the infractions of the Usurper, that the history will hardly find belief with posterity. For it is very apparent that all which has been objected to the King, and taken by the Convention for a sufficient ground to vote the Throne vacant, is nothing to the tenth part of what the P. of Oran∣ge has already done. The King, they say, has been ruled by evil counsellors; hee has endeavoured to subvert the fundamentall laws, hee has dispens't with oaths enacted by Parliament; hee has attempted upon the liberty of the subject by extraordinary pro∣ceedings; hee has dispensed with the laws; hee has design'd a∣gainst the religion establish't by law; hee has exercised an arbitra∣ry power. Why, tho all this were true, wherof half can never bee made out, his M. had done nothing which is not done by the Prince of Orange every day. Hee has subverted funda∣mentall laws, and one or other I dare say made bold with a hundred; hee has layd by oaths enacted by the authoriy, of King and Parliament; hee imposes others: hee is ruining Re∣ligion: hee makes Fidelity, Treason, he imprisons us against the Law; hee refuses us what the law allows: hee overwhelms: us with taxes: hee is engaging us in a cruell, and infinitely char∣geable war; and all this while our Gentlemen of the Con∣vention are well content: do his drudgery for him, and has take it upon themselves when they have done. The King has done, nothing of all this: hee has only dispens't with what they have taken quite away, the laws which enjoynd the taking of the Oaths and very lately the Test; and this is enough to va∣cate the Throne, and break the order of succession. The King had only a bare design upon those laws, which hee would not execute neither, but in a legall way, by exorting the members of the approaching Parliament to consent to a repeal of the Test; and liberty of conscience. The Conventioners too had their de∣sign to remove them, for the sake of Presbyterian Dissenters. And this design they have executed, and by so doing vio∣lated all our laws. For they met without authority; they attem∣pted upon the prerogative, the liberty, and safety of the per∣son of the King; they took up arms against him and joyned with his enemys; they broke their Oaths of fidelity; they brought in forreign forces in to the Kingdom: They have made a great seal; they have leavyed mony upon the people; they have im∣prisoned free born Englishmen, over whom they had no man∣ner of power. Let our law books bee consulted and it will bee found, that every one of these acts is High Treason; and that no law admits soveraign authority any where but in the King, nor allows subjects to redress all pretended abuses and grievances of the Nation, by way of fact, or aspertè, as the spencers called it; but grants them the bare way of remonstrance. Thô wee should then suppose, what never came in to the heads of our Ancestors, that the King our master were to give an account of his actions to his people, and that the proceedings of the Con¦ventioners could bear some shadow of justice, I would ask those graceles lawyers, who like Herode and Pilate took upon them to judge the annointed of the Lord, how they would regulate the form of proceeding. The truth is I cannot make the supposition wit∣hout tears, when I remember what I sawe with my young eys, our blessed King Charles the Martyr hurryed before those udges of iniquity, those infernal souls, who condemned him to death with the most execrable villany, of which a Nation was ever guil∣ty, and which will disgrace us with eternall infmy. Alas who can hope that our wretched Conventioners would not have used the son, as those traytors used the Father, now wee see that no respect of human, or divine laws is able to stop them: and who can chuse but thank God with all his heart, for infusing in to his Majesty the resolution of withdrawing out of the Kingdom in ti∣me? But to return to my purpose, suppose * who if they had had their due, would long since have had a halter, had, with their double portion of Bradshaw's spirit, drawn up articles of impeachement against the King, and the Convention would try him, and his Majesty would submit to make his defence: stil hee must bee allowd what cannot bee refused to the meanest man in the nation, to bee tryed By God and his countrey. To bee try'd by God signifys that the Judges, the Jury, and Witnesses shall have God before their eys and do nothing but according to their conscience, and the duty of a Christian. For I do not think the Conventioners mad enough to understand those words in the sense of that desperat regicide Harrison, who would bee try'd by the word of God, interpreted, that is, by a FanaticK. The whole assistance houted, when those words came out of his mouth; and yet they were not so ridiculous, according to the principles of the Convention. For if tryed by God do not signify, the im∣pious interpretation by which the word of God is corrupted; the litterall sense of the word of God as it has been alwais understood by the Church of England, plainly is that wee are subject to Prin∣ces not only for fear of what may befall us from their anger, but for conscience of our duty: and that wee ought to look upon their power as received from God, and establisht by him whom they that resist, resist God. so that, bare Fanaticism, a tryall between the King and his subjects will soon bee ended. Tis but to act accor∣ding to the word of God, and the rules of conscience, which obli∣ge us to keep the faith which wee have plighted, and our Oaths, in the naturall usuall sense of the words, without the conditionall equivocations and restrictions, which are propt in, from conse∣quences served out, of a pretended originall contract never main∣taind by any but rebels. The Oaths wee have sworn to the King are absolute not conditionall. And so by the first clause by God, and likewise by the second by my countrey, which can signify nothing but by the laws of my country, all these pretended judges, who have declared the throne vacant, being the Kings liege men, ha∣ving sworn obedience to him, and being in all things subject to his soveraign power yet bounded by the laws, cannot bee his Judges. Ask the laws, and they will tell you that the King has his po∣wer by a naturall right, vested in him by birth, God, nature, and the law: that this power cannot bee separated from his person, in which the body naturall and politic, make but one body: that hee is the only supreme governor, and no person has any authori∣ty but by patent, or commission from him: that hee has absolute authority to make peace and war, leagues and alliances; to ap∣point all officers civil, and military, to pardon all offences against the law: and full authority in matters Ecclesiasticall. This is what our laws teach of the King 's power without any contradiction, according to which it is easy to perceive that even the collective body of the Nation, whatever power it may have otherwise, has none over the person of the King. Omnis sub rege, & ipse sub nullo nisi tantum Deo: non est inferior sibi subjectis, non parem habet in regno suo. Rex non habet superiorem nisi Deum: satis habet ad poenam quod Deum expectat ultorem. These are the words of Bracton, one of the greatest Lawyers which England ever had, which no body yet ever contradicted, and wherof the truth is very evident. For if the King could in any case whatsoever, bee subject to his subjects some law must needs bee producible in the point for the Conven∣tion to alledge. But where should this law bee, of which no body ever heard a word, save from some criminals, who having unsuc∣cesfully endeavoured to enact it by the sword, ownd it likewise at the gallows, like men without honesty, or fear of God, as they were. No mortall man can shew us a law, which makes the escape of a King, forced by rebellion and violence upon his person, to provide by that only means for his safety, a forfeit of his right to the Crown. No mortall man can fur∣nish us so much as with one president, which authorises that disloyal maxime. And much less is the law discoverable, which deposes a King who has harkned to bad counsel, or whose ministers have done things worthy of punishement. But that, which is in truth the great principle, and funda∣mentall maxime of the Commons, the incompatibility of Po∣pish religion with the quality of King of England, is yet more extraordinary. Strangers, who know nothing of our Law can do no less than imagin, by their trayterous and abhomi∣nable Vote, that in that plenty of laws made since the reign of Henry VIII. some one excludes Papists from succeeding to the Crown. And yet there is not one. The most famous in all
our history, and the only one, is that, which authorised Henry VIII to dispose of the succession. And hee ordered the Crown should descend first to his son Edward VI. next in default of Heirs from him, to Mary his eldest daughter, thô born of a marriage declared by himself incestuous and null: In default of issue by her, to Elizabeth born of Anne Bullen: and then to his own right heirs, that is, the children or descendents of Margarite Queen of Scotland. Here is no exclusion of Papists, nor so much as mention of Religion; which the truth is was not altogether changed at that time; Hee had only broken with Pope and see of Rome. According to this disposition, Mary succeeded her brother Edward. Opposition was made upon pretence of a will suggested to him by which hee conve∣yed the crown to Jane Gray, and confirmed by an Act of Counci under the great seal, set to it by order from the King: To all which so little regard was had, that those who had signed the act of Counci, and in pursuance of it proclaim'd Queen Jane, were prosecuted for High Treason. And so all England acknowlegd, that notwithstanding all the Acts of Henry VIII. for withdrawing obedience from the see of Rome, and those of Edward VI. for setling the Reformation, they could not exclude Mary on the score of religion. Jane Gray, the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquis of Northampton, and seve∣rall others, who had signed the order of Council, for the exclusion of Mary upon account of her religion, were im∣peach't and condemn'd of High Treason, for having leavy'd War against the Queen, and conspired to set up another in her place. The Parliament in 1554. confirmed this sentence, and so it is palpably law, by which they may bee prosecuted in the same manner, who pretend to exclude a Popish Prince or Princesse from succee∣ding to the Crown For being never repealed, it is still in force. Queen Elizabeth might likewise have met with opposition from Protestants. For during the reign of her sister Mary, shee went to mass, and was outwardly a papistBurnet. Hist. of the Reformation. l. 2. p. 2. Shee would bee crowned according to the Roman Pontificall by Owen Ogle∣thorpe, the Popish Bishop of Carlisle: shee made Sir Edward Karne her agent at Rome give Paul IV an account of her coming to the crown: shee had a solemn exequy performed for her sister, and for Charles V with all the ceremonys of the Romish Church, and whatever shee had in her heart, did enough outwardly to exclude her self, if the Law had excluded a lawfull heir for difference in religion. But t'is plain there was no such lavv, and t'is very certain there has none been made since. When the Parliament in 1566 prest her to declare her presumtif heir and successor, shee refus'd it, and would not have this matter toucht, which belonged not to the Parliament. Af∣ter her death the nation obliged themselves by oath to James I. and his posterity, in vertue of whose right the succeeding Kings have reigned, and the oath taken to the head of the family by our ancestors, obliges us to obey his posterity. Nor is there any glimps of any thing in our law, which shocks their right, save the proceedings of the long Parliament, which attempted to take the monarchy quite away; but which can no more bee drawn in to example, than the Vo∣tes of the Commons in the Parliaments of Westminster and Oxford, when they strove to obtain the consent of his late Mty. to the exclusion of the Duke of York. No body is so little a lawyer not to know that the Votes of one, or both Houses are not law, nor more than body without soul, till they get life by the Royall assent. There is no force, nor life, nor form in all that was done at that time, no more than in divers attempts of that nature heretofore, which never exemp∣ted those from the rigour of the laws, who broke them: neither do they serve for any thing, but only to shew that the Convention is animated by the same fanatik spirit of re∣bellion, which has alwais been the character of Presbyterians, of whom the Lower House is full. But King Charles II remai∣ned firm against the Addresses of the Commons in this busi∣es, and suddenly dissolved the Oxford Parliament, and so all they may have done, was intirely null. The Commons them∣selves were far from being unanimous in this point. My Lord Dartmouth then no Peer, nor rebell, and divers others made iff opposition: and Sir Leoline Ienkins, à man never suspec∣ed of betraying the interest of the Nation, who under∣ood the law as well, as any other in the whole Kingdo∣e, delivered himself to this sense. No Bill was ever offred a Parliament of the like nature, so much against the justice of the Nation. It condemns a man never heard and then t'is a Law made  post facto. Very extraordinary! Against the fundamentall justice f the Nation, and will introduce a change of the Governement. f the Duke will try to cut this Law with his sword, if he over∣me, he will have the same power to set a side all Laws both  Religion, and property: the power will be in the hands of the Conqueror, and certainly, he will change the governement. 'Tis gainst the Religion of the Nation, which teaches us to pay obe∣nce to our Governours whether good or bad, never so faulty or minall. In primitive Christianity obedience vas paid to Heathen rinces in licitis & honestis, and we are not to do evil, that good y come of it, nor on the prospect of any good. I shall say one word re, 'tis against the Oaths of the Nation, of Allegiance and Supremacy.  Duke is the Kings lawfull heir, if he have no son, and in the eyeHeylin p. 98. 102. 105. 106. of the Law I am sworn to him, and every oath is in the sense of the Lawgiver. If this desinherison pass now▪ into a new Law, who dispenses me from that oath to the King? This was the judg∣ment of that great man, and which stopt the mouth of the other party to all, but fopperys. They are to bee seen in the Deba∣tes of the House, which whoever will read, without prejudice, I am certain will find that never were things said more impertinent, nor more contrary to all our laws, to our religion, and common sense. For those Parliaments, keeping some measures, the thought wherof troubles not the heads of our Conventioners, were not able to ground their motions upon any firm principle, because in reality there is no fundamentall maxime, which has the force of Law, to abet the exclusion of a lawfull heir. They were for it then to talk in the air of the preservation of Protestant Religion, as a sufficient answer to all that had been alledged, and this they turned a hundred ridiculous ways. But said not a word of the obligation of their Oaths; the laws of the Land; the doctrine of our Church; and the in∣conveniences of their project, which was found so ridiculous at last, that, as Sir H. Coventry put them in mind, while they excluded the Duke for his Religion, the Bill was so worded, that if the Duke should turn Protestant, he will be excluded, and if the Princesse of Orange turn Papist she will be not excluded. You may remember, my Lord, that divers such reflexions were at that time made upon that monstruous bill and among the rest, that all went upon the preservation of Protestant Reli∣gion, which they pretended could not bee secure with a Po∣pish successor: as if God, and the Laws allow all that is done upon pretext of maintaining Religion. But the Presbyterian Religion has privileges which others have not, and lights which wee blind good men want, who hardly stirring out of our Universitys and Churches, have no insight in the affairs of the world. And yet wee can see that the ancient Christians believed they ought to pray for the lives of even infidel Prin∣ces: and that the Presbyterian Ministers, with their pure word of God, prayd in Queen Marys time that God at his choyce, would either take idolatry out of her, or her out of the world This was the zeal of those furys, who flying out of England, scandalised good Protestants, almost every whe∣re, so that they were banisht from severall places, at the re∣quest of their Conformist countrymen, for making open schisms, and following a doctrine and discipline, directy contrary to our Church. Melancton is a witnes that some called them the Devil's martyrs. Vociferantur quidam Martyres Anglos esse martyres diaboli. But our modern Presbyterians must, to their confusion, look upon themselves as very short of the zeal of the first. For they at least suffered for Protestant Religion: ours are all for troubling the peace of our Church, and, since the beginning of this age, for making others suffer. No suffering themselves, they thank you, nor any thing which may lead lo martyrdom. They have destroyed more good Protestants these last 50. years, than the most cruel persecutors of the Reformation have cut off in more than hundred, and vee find few in whom there is any disposition to suffer for religion. Tis true, that as one of their articles of faith is rebellion, and resistance of lawfull powers, many have suffered death upon that account, and they are the martyrs of the party, whose good name I expect will bee restored by the Convention, thô to their own eternall infamy. I expect the mourning anniversary which wee keep with too much reason the 30 of January for the mur∣ther of King Charles I. should bee supprest, and another ap∣pointed in it 's place, to deplore the innocent bloud of the Duke of Monmouth, Earl of Argyle, My lord Russel, and the like mar∣tyrs, who dying impenitent in a manifest rebellion, have a fair title to martyrs of the Devil, the father of lyes, and perjury, and a homicide from the beginning, who alone could inspire men with those abhominables maximes of rebellion, which have overflowed England with bloud, armed brother against brother, and severall years maintained tirants in the thrones of their lawfull soveraings. But I hope that God at last will let his justice loose, ho∣wever the succesfull beginnings of their rebellion flatter them, which by a horrid blasphemy they attribute to a speciall bles∣sing. They are not content to publish their pretended miracles of delivrance from the bondage of Popery and Arbitrary power at home, but have their trompets abroad to sound them be∣yond sea, and heighten them by reflexions in which the spi∣rit of sedition and anarchy is visible, but not the smallest spark of charity. The most signal of them all is that extrava∣gant Commentator upon the Apocalipse, that millenary Here∣tic, who makes such a din in Holland, where hee is admired, because hee finds fanatiks and fools like himself, and where, since the Prince of Orange raign there, one must preach rebellion to bee endured. Nothing is more pleasant then to see how this man of visions heaps up miracles for us to take notice of the success of an Usurper, and to prove that wee ought to look upon him as our deliverer, and obey him as our law∣full King. But this is just Presbyterian conscience. What has not this extravagant man said and written to prove against the reproaches of the Papists, that the Reformed in France have alwais taught, and alwais practised obedience to lawfull Kings and Princes? How often has hee tired the patience of his readers with his tedious amplifications upon the praise of those of his
sect for fidelity. And yet this is the very man who is now becom the panegyriste of Rebellion, the man who teaches that subjects may take up arms against their Prince, upon pretext of eligion; hee who in the marks hee gives of the certain character of Antichrist, which hee will needs find in the Pope, assigns and particularly reflects upon the authority, which the Italians attribute to him, of absolving subjects from their oaths of fidelity to their Princes. Another would have reflected that this bids fair to expose the Protestants in France to the utmost rigour, in a Kingdom where the power is very absolute. But what others suffer, never troubles these mer∣cenary Pastors, provided they bee safe themselves. Hee has pre∣acht obedience to the Protestants of France; hee has bragged of the obedience of those in England, as long as the King reigned peaceably: now an usurper has seized the crown, the note is changed, and hee preaches the direct contrary: and if the usurpation, which God forbid, should stand, hee will see new visions, and dream new dreams, to prove, that wee ow more to a Tirant, than our lawfull Kings ever pretended from us. When the Hollanders shall at last becom sensible that they are wholy opprest, by this public enemy of liberty, who has already, reduct theirs to a worse slavery, than that could bee wherof they shook off the yoke, he will have his visio¦nary reasons ready cut and dry'd, to convince them, that resisting the Prince of Orange, is resisting God. But the scrip∣ture loads those with curses who go different ways, as our Conventioners, and this Fanatik, who are provided wherewith to content Princes, and wherewith to justify Usurpers, and Ti¦rants. T'is but what they learnt from Calvin, and his fellow reformers of Geneva, whose doctrine has alwais been like the two basKets of figs, the one good, the other naught & disrelishing, which according to the application of Dr Hey¦lin, God shew'd the Prophet Jeremy.Heylin Stumbling-blok. c. 1. For, as hee well ob∣servs none ever establisht the doctrine of obedience to Kings & Princes, and the unlawfulnes of taking up arms against souveraigns, more positively, and expresly than Calvin; and at the same time none opens a gate to disobedience and re∣bellion more dangerously. But truth is one, & unchangea∣ble, particularly when it has relation to the public safety And if it bee ill to disguise it, tis unpardonnably criminall to betray it, and cover the dissembling of it by false oaths, as the Huguenots in France, and Convention-Presbyterians in this Kingdom have done. Those, who will, may abuse the name of God, by attributing with intolerable sacriledge, the success of the most damnable attempt that has been heard of this long time; to his blessing; according to which false ma∣xime, which the Parliament rebels of 1640. likewise inhan∣ced, Mahumetism is to bee said more precious to God than Christianism, and so many martyrs, who shed their bloud in the primitive Church, were men abandon'd by God, and the persecutors his favourites. Who does not know that God makes use of the wicked, and reprobates to chastise his children? And who can chuse but acknowledge that his almighty hand is become heavy upon this nation, which has deserved new chastisements by new rebellions? But good Christians will not for this lose the confidence they ought to have in his mercy, but hope the ungodly man who is now exalted like the Cedars of Libanus, will disapear, without leaving any trace behind him; that the chastising rod will bee cast into the fire; and that the peaceable man our good King whose retiring spared a great deal of his subjects bloud, will yet find fidelity enough to pay him the obedience due to him, and reseat him upon the throne of his Ancestors. This seemingly head of Gold, is not yet so strongly cemented to it's feet of mingled iron and clay, that it may not fall in a moment. I know not what will come of all this, but without pretending to the prophet, I dare venture to assure you, that this new rebellion will draw new misfortunes upon the Nation, of which wee of the Clergy are like to have the first sad experience. But whatever hap∣pen, being strongly perswaded of all I vrite, and not finding my conscience dispos'd to allow mee to change my mind, and acknowledge an usurper, I am preparing for what may follow, and have already taken order for my little concerns, to bee ready, as soon as our new oaths come to choak us, to retire, and perhaps without expecting that extremity, to slip out of the Kingdom, if I find oportunity. I hope you will favour mee with your good advice on this occasion, and bee pleas'd, if I should bee forced to dislodge suddenly, to find mee out a secure retreat somewhere for a few days. At least I beseech you to believe that I vrite nothing but what my conscience dictates, and which I am ready to maintain, even before the Convention, at the hazard of martyrdom. J am pur∣posed according the words of the psalmPsalm. 17., that my mouth shall not transgresse my oaths: and concerning the works of men hope I shall stick close to the word of God, and keep me by the word of his lips, from the ways of the destroyer of royall authority. If you my Lord bee of opinion that this letter which my zeal and affliction has lengthned beyond my intention, may bee usefull towards keeping or confirming any of our friends in their duty, you may shew it to whom you please: but I beseech you name mee not, but to my Lords *** and *** and to Sir *** I am. From my house of *** 30 March 1689.
