L402 E307_15 99861148 158813
Major Generall Laughorn's LETTER TO THE Honourable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. VVherein is truly related the taking of Carmarthen Town and Castle, and the Reducing of that County to obedience of Parliament. Together with the severall Articles, Declarations and Agreements BETWEEN The Major and Gentry of that County. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter, Articles, Directions, and Agreements, be forthwith Printed and Published. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Hono∣rable House of Commons, Octob. 28. 1645.
To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. Mr. Speaker, Sce the taking of Picton Castle, and freeing the whole County of Pembroke from the power of the Enemy: The first action worthy your knowledge, God vouchsafed I should effect, was the taking of Carmarthen Town and Castle; it was performed this day; at nine of the clock in the morning, Fifteen hundred Clubmen of the Coun∣ty marched out at one Gate, and I entred at the other, the strength of the Club-men in all the adjacent Counties since their last Association; my endeavouring for Recruit in the best measure I could, and the unsetlednesse of the Commissioners of Array, and other of the Gentry of Carmarthenshire, in their Treaty for Peace with us lost me some time, might have been more usefull in Action: Their solicitations received birth before the taking of Carew Castle; but after their losse of Picton I discer∣ned more frequency and importunity in the prosecution: It were imperti∣nent to rehearse all particular passages, the Copies of the Letters and conditions between us, with my Declaration sent herewith (observing the order of them) will manifest the effect of what I would signifie: their first Letter to me and the Committee, they sent to receive the Kings approbation before they conveyed it to us, and all they did passed (though privatly) by allowance of Major Generall Stradling, and Lovelace Governour of Car∣marthen, that breeds my doubt they have yet rotten coares, and I shall try before I overmuch trust them: On Friday the Commissioners drew Fifteen hundred Clubmen into Town, and with the Townsmen undertook the defence, dismissing the Governour and his Souldiers: Our Forces ly∣ing then at Saint Cleers, six miles short of Carmarthen, staying for some Carriages that were not come up; the next day we appeared in severall bodies, Six hundred Horse and Dragoons and Two thousand Foot before the Town, and spent the evening in interchange of Parlyes, at eleven at night we concluded, and this morning put it in execution, some of the ma∣nifestly criminous deserted the Town, and fled with the Enemy, some Troopers and Captains daily fall in to us, and the Club-men in Cardigan∣shire resift the Enemy, detain their Contributions, and (in compliance with Colonell Lewes, who neglecteth no means to win them) as I here de∣clare for King and Parliament. Our Horse shall advance to morrow to
assist them, and in few dayes, I hope to give a very good accompt of be two Counties: Glamorganshire Gentlemen I desired (and I heard were ready) to appear upon the borders, to wait my actions against Carmar∣then, if the surrender had not prevented them: The Town very spacious, but strongly Fortified, requiring no lesse then a thousand men in Garrison: If we could give pay we should not want men, and those we have with little encouragement, would deem no enterprize too hard: If it would please the State to afford some supply for money and clothing, I doubt not they should speedily reap the fruit of them. I restrain Plunder, and use the Country withall lenity; I shall not, I hope, repent it, or forget that I am, Sir Carmarthen 12. Octob. 1645. Your most humble Servant, ROVVLAND LAUGHORNE. The Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners, and Gentry of the County of Carmarthen, to the Generall and Committee in Pembrokeshire. GEntlemen, We taking into consideration the unhappy effects that War (being continued) may produce between the county of Pembroke, and these neighbouring counties of Carmarthen and Cardigan and others; the unity whereof is requisite under many Relations, to the preservation of which you and we equally pretend, namely our Religion, Loyalty, and Laws, though we have been hitherto so unhappy, as to endeavour the pre∣serving of these by destroying one another. To prevent therefore the continuance of these miseries we have for∣merly felt, and the fears of worse that may ensue (if possibly it may be) and that we may move towards these ends, we severally professe to be the same, with better assurance of obtaining them, and more piety towards our selves; We conceive (that if your concurrence be had therein) that a Treaty between a certain number Commissioned out of these two Counties and yours, may produce a better effect to every of us, then the Hostility between us hath hitherto done, or (if continued) is like to do. In order to this (if you approve thereof) you may name your number of persons, with the time and place where to give meeting, sending like∣wise your safe conduct for the proportionable number Commissioned out of these Counties, and the like shall be sent to you from this: Thus desiring your speedy Answer, we remain Septemb. 5. 1645. Your Servants, Ed: Vauhgan. Jo: Vaughan. Rowland Gwyn. Robert Birt. Francis Lloyde. John Vaughan. Iohn Vaughan. George Gwyn. John Harr. Carbery. Rice Rudde. Henry Middleton. Iohn Lewes. Thomas Lloyde.
The Copy of the Answer from the Major Generall Laughorne and the Com∣mittee to the Commissioners and Gentry of the severall Counties of Car∣marthen and Cardigan. GEntlemen, Your Letter of the 5. of Sept. we received this 25. of the same, if your desires be answerable to your expressions for Peace, we shall upon what termes may be warrantable admit a Treaty, conditioned you make full Declaration of your obedience to the Authority of King and Parliament, and testifie your resolution therein, by present seizing, deli∣vering to us, or deteining in your own power those scattered Horse of the Enemy yet in your Countrey, with these limitations, we hereby engage for the safety of any four gentlemen among you, (so they consist not of any Mem∣bers that deserted the Parliament) to repair to this Town within the next three daies, & to return with their necessary Attendants, & we shal be ready, upon your compliance, to protect the Common people, & such of the Gentry as we shall finde Capable of protection, and refer the exempted to supe∣riour Iudicatures, In the interim, in suspence of our expectation; we are Haverfordwest, 25. Sept. 1645. Your Servants Rowland Laughorne, Tho: Bowen, Lewis Barlowe, Iohn Lort, Sampson Lorr. Tho: Iones. The Copie of a Letter from the Commissioners of Carmarthenshire, to Ma∣jor Generall Laughorne, and the Committee. GEntlemen, expecting this day to have understood the full sence of the Inhabitants of this County, that thereby we might have been Armed with power to have treated as was in your Letter mentioned; you may understand the Country met not (as we expected) therefore we con∣ceive our selves not in condition to send unto you according to our under∣takings: This we thought fit to write unto you who are October 2. 1645. Your humble Servants, Rice Rudde. Iohn Vaughan. Ed: Vaughan. Iohn Vaughan. Henry Middleton. George Gwynne. SIr, we heare you are advanced into this County, which makes us send this bearer to receive your command which shall be performed by us, who professe and declare our selves to be for the King and Parliament, and will with the best assistance we can, aid you with our lives and for∣tunes, in any thing that may conduce to the Parliaments service, Llangendyscen, Octob. 10. 1645. Sir, we are your humble Servants, Edward Vaughan. Iohn Vaughan. Henry Middleton. Iohn Vaughan. For our Honoured friend Major Gen: Laughorn these.
GEntlemen, in Answer to your Letter, I rest satisfied of your good inten∣tions, And for the better and sooner expediting the service intended, I wish two of you would give me the meeting at St. Cleers this night, where I am advanced with my whole Army, and shall be ready upon warrantable grounds, to doe you service, St. Cleeres October 10. 1645. I am Gentlemen your servant, Rowland Laughorne. For his worthy friends, Edward Vaughan Knight, Iohn Vaughan, Henry Middleton, and Iohn Vaughan, Esq these. A Declaration to the Commissioners, Gentrie, and Inhabitants of Carmar∣thenshire, set forth by Major Generall Laughorne, at St. Cleeres the 10. day of October, 1645. GEntlemen, although your credulity (to the greatest Instruments of your Ruine,) heretofore (to your deare experience) possessed you with an opinion, the King and Parliaments forces designed nothing lesse, then reducing you to obedience and settlement of your Peace, and I (with compunction) confesse at my last advance into these parts of your Coun∣ty, the licentiousnesse of my unpaid Souldiers, might adde some set∣lednes to that injurious conceit; I praise God and the Parliaments pro∣vidence, my men upon the present advance, rest well satisfied with the pay they received, and are become liable to Discipline, of that I shall not forbeare the strictest execution upon apparant offenders. My earnest wishes are, you will now at length be undeceived, and pretend not rescue of your Estates, to colour obstinate resistance of the Authority whereto you owe all you call yours, but make present submission to the power of King and Parliament, and joyne (against the common Enemy) with the Forces by their Commission under my conduct, whose principall endeavour it is, to assert your Religion, your Laws, your Liberties. You so doing, in exchange of your imaginary feares, I tender my Re∣putation in the presence of Heaven and Earth (for gaining your confi∣dence,) I will not dread to engage my life with my power and fortunes, in protection of your persons and Estates, as well against those of mine owne Command, as the notorious adversaries of our Religion, Liberties, Peace, and Prosperitie, Rowland Laughorne. SIr, we received your Letter, and rest your servants for the affection you expresse: Our late comming into Towne, prevents our waiting on you this night, we are 1500. men in Town, which are resolved for King and Parliament, to morrow four of us will not fail to wait on you, we desire you
not to march till then. The Castle we have not as yet, but it is promised us to morrow; which with the hazard of our lives, we will defend and keep for the Parliament service; Your Declaration shalbe published to the people, and if they declare not as we do, their forced obedience shall make them rue their obstinacie: The particulars of our proceedings we re∣ferre to this bearers Relation, and Rest Carmarthen, 10 Octobr. 1645. Your Servants, Edward Vaughan. John Vaughan. John Vaughan. Charles Gwyn. Henry Midleton. For our honoured Friend, Major Gen. Laughorne. IT is agreed by the Town and County of Carmarthen, and Major Gen. Laughorne, That the workes and all fortification about the Towne and Castle, be utterly demolished, and all other Garrisons within the said County. It is likewise agreed, that no free quarter be imposed upon the Inhabi∣tants of the said Towne and County, except one night upon a march, And that the Army may not march through the Towne. It is desired and agreed, that all other matters and businesse of conse∣quence, may be referred to King and Parliament at Westminster, And that all the Ammunition and Arms, within the said Towne and County, may be left for their own defence and safety. It is likewise agreed, that the Army march out of this County, within the space of two dayes and two nights, next ensuing. These Articles being granted, the whole Inhabitants of the Towne and County, do declare themselves for King and Parliament. It is agreed, that no prest men be required from the said Towne and County, untill there be a generall presse within all the Associated Coun∣ties adjacent. It is also agreed, that the Covenant be not prest on the Inhabitants of neither Towne nor County. This was brought without subscriptions, and delivered Saturday evening, 11 Octob. By Sir Edward Vaughan. Iohn Vanghan of Llanelly. Thomas Williams. And Robert Toy, And George Joanes Of the Towne. In Answer to the six particulars, desired of me by the Towne and County of Carmarthen, to obtaine their Declaration for King and Parliament. FOr the first, I should agree to the demolishing of all the Garrisons in the County, so there might be other means for securing the Countrey
and places of retreat upon necessary occasions ascertained. To the second, Souldiers cannot be maintained without free quarter, or Contributions for pay, and without men the Countrey cannot be defended. To the third, by the rearm (King) it is not evident, whether the Kings per∣sonall residence at Westminster be intended, and other matters of conse∣quence must be all the difference, for here nothing of moment is offered, and by circuit, we are where we begun. To the fourth, the marching of the Army out of the County, and no other power seted, for its preservation is inconsistent with my trust. To the fifth, the speciall emergent occasions may require prest men here, when other places may be void of danger, and not positively to be granted. To the sixth, A profession against the Covenant or willing declining of it, is an open profession of enmity to King and Parliament, and the desire of exemption manifesteth the Treaty on that part to be illusory, and super∣ficiall. If upon my Declaration the Gates be opened, and the Towne de∣livered, I shall make good what I have undertaken; otherwise I shall leave the wealth of it, to the dispose of the Souldier, and not make contracts for the price of their blood. VVEE whose names are subscribed, in the name of our selves, and all the Inhabitants of this Towne and County, do absolutely declare for King and Parliament, and will with our lives and fortunes, as∣sist the forces raised by the Parliament against any other whatsoever as shall seek to invade these Countries, and do desire to be received into King and Parliaments protection, according to the Declaration of Major Gen. Laughorne, and for Contribution we willingly submit proportionably to out Neighbouring Counties, 11 October, 1645. Tho. Griffith Mayor, David Bevan. Robert Lewes. Thomas Woodford. Robert Ioy. vic. Com Iohn David. vic. Com. Iohn David. Robert Brand. Robert Griffith. Richard Thomas. Edward Iones. Iohn Hughes. Walter Chapman. Edward Vaughan Iohn Vaughan. Henry Vaughan. Henry Midleton. George Gwyn. Iohn Vaughan. Iohn Harrys. Thomas Williams. Francis Howell. Henry Vaughan. Samuel Hughes. Thomas Howell. Iohn Auberry. Anthony Morgan. Iohn Gwyn. Iohn Lloyd. Edward Vaughan. William Lloyd. Iohn Newskay. FINIS.
