m1033 e452_20 99864319 161966
THE DECLARATION Of Major Generall MASSEY Concerning comming into England to assist His Dread Soveraign Lord the KING: AND To be Lieutenant-Generall under His Highnesse the Prince of WALES. With his Message to the Queen of England, and the Prince concerning the same. Also, a Relation of the relieving of Colchester, and a List of the Duke of YORK his Navie, concerning their procee∣dings, and their sayling towards England. Likewise, joyfull Propositions from the House of Peeres, concerning a Personall Treaty with the Kings Majesty, to compose all differences between the King and His People, and to settle the Kingdome in Peace and Unity, to the great joy and comfort of all true-hearted Subjects. July 13 Printed for generall satisfaction of all that desires Peace.
THE DECLARATION Of Major Generall MASSEY Concerning His comming into England, to assist the King Majesty, and to be Lieutenant Generall under His High∣nesse the Prince of Wales. SIR, BY an Expresse from Hamborough it is certified, that Major Gen Massey  a∣mongst the Swiers, and is made Le Gen. of the Swedish Forces who are designed to joyn with the Venetians.
But it is said that he hath received several invitations from the Queen of England, and the Prince of Wales to engage for England, and to receive commission un∣der His Highnesse, as Lieut. Generall, to assist His Roy∣all Father, and to restore Him to His just Rights and Priviledges. But he returned this Answer, and Decla∣red, That seeing her Majesty, and his Highnesse, were so graciously pleased, as to honour his person with such a no∣ble and Military Title, he would endeavour to make the world an object to behold his loyalty, protesting to sacrifice his life against any forraign enemy, who should endeavour the inringment of the least tittle of the Ryall Preroga∣tive; but to engage against his Native Country, he were resolved to the contrary, saying, he would never draw his sword more to involve England in bloud. Here is great preparations for the entertainment of the Prince of Wales, who is said to be comming from Callice attended by divers Lords and Gentlemen, but their design is not yet known. Divers old Souldiers and Commanders are come out of France and other parts, to this City. They give out, an if they had a Design for England, and wee are the rather conduced to believe the same, by reason of the Revolted ships still lying in Gorith Haven, who it is supposed are to transport the said Officers and Soul∣diers into England. The Duke of York hath declared his great unwil∣lingnesse to engage in the said ships, untill such time that He can be accommodated with money, armes, and other Furniture belonging to War. From the Hague in Holland, July 12. 1648.
Postscript. SIR, SInce the close of this Letter, here arrived a Post from Gorith, who saith, That just upon his comming away, the revolted ships were weighing anchor, and intends to be in the Downs very suddenly, and to put in for a per∣sonall Treaty. We hear, that they have set forth a Declaration, decla∣ring the grounds and reasons of this their Ingagement, & their resolution to maintain the Antient Government & known laws of the Kingdome of England, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesties Royall Person, and to en∣deavour the re-inthroning of him in his Royall Palace at White Hall, I have sent you here inclosed a perfect List of the Ships now intended for the Downs, and the number of their Ordnance. A perfect List of His Majesties ships, that lately revol∣ted from the Parliament.   Ordnance. 1. The Constant Re∣formation. 56 2. The Convertine 46 3. The Swallow 40 4. The An elope 40 5. The Satisfaction 38 6. The Hynd 36 7. The Roe-buck 40 8. The Crescent 40 9. The Pellican 40 10. The Rainbow 40 11. The Garland 40 12. The Revenge 32 By letters from the North it is advertized as follow∣eth, That M. Gen. Lambert hath received a Letter from D. Hamilton, intimating, that the Parl. of England had not given satisfaction to the Parl. of Scotland in their de∣sires
sent unto them, for the ing whereof he was to come with an Army into the Kingdom of England, in which en∣terpize he expected no opposition from him, Gen Lam∣bert returned him answer, That as to non satisfaction om the Pal of England; he had not to say; but as to his comming to an hostile way into England he had authori∣ty from Parl. to resist any power not raised by them, and therefore declared that he and his Army would oppose, and fight with them as traytors and enemies to the Kingdome of England, & that this great breach of Covenant between the two Nations, he doubted not but would be revenged up∣on them to their utter ruine, &c. This Letter together with the Answer was read in the House of Commons, July 12 and the Commons voted that they approve what May Gen Lambert had sent in answer to the said Letter of D. Hamiltons. The House of Commons at a Conference gave seve∣rall Resons for a Treaty with his Majesty he being at liberty before any Acts be agreed upon. First, Its the desire of the Kingdome or Parliament of Scotland. Secondly, The Agreement will be more Authen∣ticke. Thirdly, Its probable, having no Army in being, he will condiscend to that which at Uxbridge and Oxford he refused▪ Fourthly, Its not the way of Treaties to confirme any before all is agreed, especially those of most concern∣ment; And that which chiefly will be insisted vpon or to this effect the Commons concurrence was desired God grant a good uniting.
A Fight in Worcester-shire. SIR, IT cannot be imagined with what skil & policy, the Cavalier party have acted in severall parts of the Kingdom, for raising of forces to renew the first quar∣rel, & put it into a new combustion, for which pur∣pose many Agents have bin employed, not only in this cunty, but also in Herefordshire. Wrwickshere, &. other parts of the Kingdom; & although they have bin very private in their meetings, and listing of men, yet we blesse God they are discovered and some of those which were principall actours herein apprehen∣ded their persons secured, which may much couce to the peace and quiet of these parts, especially  our neighbour Counties do the like, one of the chief in this County wich is suspected to have a hand in this busi∣nesse, is the Lord Dudleys sonne, there be also five more apprehended but they shall be namelesse, till a fuller discovery, be made of this businesse, some of them ha∣having already confessed that there was a generall de∣signe to have raised forces, in all the Counties of the Kingdome, these Gent. had many private meetings as Bromsgrave & Kittermaster, and had gotten some for∣ces in a readinesse, but the whole plot being now made manifest, the well-affected in these parts declare them∣selves against their proceedings, and doe utterly abhor their actions, and say their actions are destructive to the setled Government of this Kingdom.
One of their Actors being apprehended, confessed that they had a design to secure Hereford, Kiddermin∣ster, and other places, for the King, relating the day, time, and place of their Randevouz; whereupon a party of Horse were drawn out, and sent to the said place ap∣pointed for meeting, who came thither undiscovered and upon the approach of the Royalists, they fell upon them, killed four, and took divers prisoners, amongst whom was Col. Dudley, and divers other eminent com∣manders. This Plot was discovered accidentally by Captaine Juets Dragoons, who found in a Corn field twelve Br∣rels of Powder, great store of Match, and other neces∣saries for War. Worcester July 12. 1648. July 13. A great rumour was eccho'd amongst di∣vers persons of the relieving of Colchester, by 3 ships from Holland who landed 2000 men; but no credence can be given to this: therefore, I give it you as a report rather of them that would have it so, then of any cer∣tainty that it is so, &c. FINIS.
