M1564 E715_23 99863038 115220
THE COMBAT OF Love and Friendship, A Comedy, As it hath formerly been presented by the Gentlemen of Ch. Ch. in OXFORD. By ROBERT MEAD, sometimes of the same Colledge. LONDON, Printed for M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple Gate, Fleetstreet. 1654.
The Stationer to the Reader. THe Scene is vanish'd, and with it, all encouragement to this musical part of humane Learning. I mur∣mur not against any that sit at the helm, though Policy of State have formerly allow'd the exercise of these Recreations in time of Troubles, as a means to divert Tumultuary and Turbulent spirits, whose otherwise uncorrected heat would be employ'd to the distraction of the most considerable Affaires, and Persons of the Common Wealth. My businesse is not to vindicate the Stage, but to present thee Reader with a Play, without swelling thy expectation, for it comes forth usher'd onely with the name of the Author in the Title Page, in which, it hath more ornament, then all the Silken Fillets of our Time can bestow upon it, he having been a Person, whose eminent and general Abilities have left him a character, pretious and honourable to our Nation. Look not therefore upon this composition, but as at a stoop, when his youth was willing to descend from his then higher Contemplations. I could say more in his honor, but he was so great a Lover of Humility in his life, that I almost fear, being dead, he may be displeased to hear his own worth remembred. I have done; Reader, peruse at thy opportunity, this pasthume, and know, as the Authour would disdain to be angry with thy dislike if he were alive, so he would not stain his ingenuity to Court thee into his praise; The Publisher onely hath an ambition it may delight thee, whose design thou maist easily pardon. Farewell.
The Actors Names. LYsander servant to Artemone. Theocles his friend her brother, servant to Ethusa. Philonax servant to Artemone, an admirer of himself. Melesippus Father to Artemone, Diarchus his brother. Pisistratus a foolish Captain. Lamprias a small Poet rivals, in love with Ethusa. Miserotos an Enemy of Love. Artemone a Lady first in love with Lysander, after with Philonax. Panareta a Lady in love with Lysander. Ethusa her sister a scornful Lady. Hyperia woman to Artemone. Eudora woman to Ethusa. Theocles his Page. Attendants.
THE COMBATE OF Love and Friendship. ACT. 1. SCEN. 1. Lysander. INstruct me some kinde Power, To which I may most Lawfully prove false; My friend, or Mistress. But what talk I of Law? as if that faith Could ere be broke with Justice! Rather, which Can my heart suffer to be torn away, And snatch'd from its own sinews? Which of them can my soul part with upon easiest tearms? For thus stands my ambiguous fate, that one Side of my heart must needs be ript from t'other, For so these two had fill'd it; one side each: My share was almost nothing; onely that
Which knit the other two, I cal'd my own. Friendship, thou art a name, and nothing real, A meer and empty word, and Here I quit thee, Ile not be fetter'd in fantastick chains, To court Ideas, nothings, and adore A strange Platonick Cupid. Give me Love, That has some Life and vigor in it: Love That shall delight our bloods as well as Fancies.— But stay: Is this Lysander? No, some Feind, Some false malicious spirit crept within me, To poyson all my Faith. Methinks I am too earthy; and I feel my clogg'd thoughts groveling To baseness. O my Theocles! Pardon me friend; when I forget that name, May I be-miserable; nay I need not wish it, for 'Tis imply'd in that, and I may well Now save my curse. To him a Servant Ser. Sir, here's a Messenger With commendations from Artemone. Lys. That Name again confounds me, Startles all my Loyal thoughts, And shakes my yielding Vertue To a weak coldnesse. Can I part with thee My Artemone? No; thee Theocles? O my distracted heart! methinks I feel The Nerves by several Engines, rack't two wayes, And almost torn to—— Ser. —Pray Sir, What answer shall I return? Lys. I had forgot thy business: say I come,— Ex. Ser. Yet sure there might be found a middle path, Wherein I might observe an equal pace, Of faith to both. Ile think on't——— Ex. Lysan.
SCEN. II. Artemone, Hyperia. Art. O Wench, ne're trust 'em, th'are th'unconstans't Things in all the world, They still exclaim on us; tell us We are more wavering then our feathers, And that we change more often then the Moon, With such like sickly Fancies. But if 'Twere so, in them the cause is; Had but men a care, still to observe, And please us as at first, we Still should be the same; our fancies never change; But the object alters, and then we Out of our Constancy, are forc't to chuse Another, which may please as that did first. Hyp. But Madam, I do hope you finde no reason to apply Ought of this to your Lysander. Art. No? what think you then Of his long absence? Hyp. What some two dayes? I promise you I know some Lovers, and those of the best file too, That do presume more on their Mistress favours: As there's your stalking Signior, he that comes Hither a wooing still in state, that tells Long stories of his Pedigrees, and Honours, In stead of Amorous Passions. Art. Who, Philonax? Hyp. Yes, he that scorns to wooe the common way, But keeps his distance still, and courts by the Rule: So much a day: observes a kinde of dyet In all his wooing: Sooth wer't to me, I'de make His stately hams to cringe before I had him, And afterward let me alone. Art. I prethee tell, how has Lysander brib'd thee
That thou shouldst thus exclaim on Philonax? Hyp. True Madam, I'ue been brib'd; but by his vertues, His fair Respects to you▪ and noble Carriage. Art. Ha, ha, ha.— Hyp. Indeed I do confesse, it is not usual Amongst us Chamber-Creatures to be brib'd With such uncoyned mettal. Art. I believe thee; But prithee tell me true, does he not use To charme thy Tongue by some more powerful motive, And chaine it to himself in golden Links? Come, come, I know he still does use thee kindly, Cause Thou belong'st to me. Hyp. Madam, I hope You are not Jealous of me, yet Ile tell you All that I know, though not as to Create A good Opinion in you, but confirm That which you do conceive already of Him. He's truly Generous, but far from Bribing: For sure, I think, he cannot be so unjust To his own Merits, as distrust 'em so To think they want a mercenary Advocate. Art. Nay, but, I prethee, haste to his Opinion Concerning me. Hyp. He thinkes, as all do else, You are Perfections Store-house, and does love One onely in the world as well as you. Art. O Hyperia! And canst Thou call him faithful which dos pledge His faith to more then one? That, That is it Which I have▪ still suspected, and it cuts My very heart strings. Hyp. But Madam here he comes, I hope will Cure 'em strait.
SCEN. 3. To them Lysander. Lys. MAdam you might have spar'd your messenger, My own distressed thoughts did prompt me to you, As to my Tutelar Goddesse. Art. So perhaps You use to Court your other Mistresse too. Lys. How Lady? what strange Language do I hear! Yo'ue strooke a damp into my soul, which but So soon exhald by those quick beauteous rayes, Had stifled all my Spirits. Let that tongue Be blasted, that hath so infected yours. Art. The witnesse is not far from hence, My woman, Who can confirm from your own mouth so much. Lys. My own mouth be accurst then▪ speake Thou monster, Confesse the truth, for that is it must clear me. Hyp. That is, I know the Party, whom you love As dear as this my mistresse, and can prove it, Out of your own confession. Lys. O the Malice Of faith-betraying Chambermaids! Nay sure I cannot dare t' outlive that cursed minute Which gives my faith suspected to my Mistresse;— drawes Lady, unlock my Breast, and you shall find A heart as undefild, as is your beauty, Or if you will not, I can do't my self. Hyp. Hold Sir▪ tis Theocles, her Brother. Lys. See I pray the grounds Of your strong Jealousie. Thy Pardon Virgin: Yet thou didst ill in holding us so long In such a strange suspence. Art. Beshrew Thee wench For putting me to such a fright: yet still,— aside Pray heaven it be none other: I suspect The sword unsheath'd made her conceale the Truth.
Lys. But Madam I shall shake your faith I fear, In craving but one favour at your hands. Art. What ere it be I'le think th' occasion happy That may the more oblige you to me, speak it. Lys. With much reluctancy and fear t' offend you, I'm forc't to aske it, and desire you would Incompasse round your heart with a strong faith That I can never really forsake you. 'Tis that I may go court Another Mistresse. Art. Is this my Brother? Come you need not hide it, What should you fear my anger, or Offence? The thing you aske doth free you from all Love, And consequently fear of me: why should you Care how I take it, having thus forsaken me? Lys. O you are much mistaken Madam; Love, Excessive love of you, doth force me to it; Your Bother (in whose blisse I know lyes yours) Is deep in love with fair Ethusa, who Stoutly rejects all Entertainment of His true affection, till her Sister shall (To whose disposal she hath given her self) Freely consent, and wish her to it: now She, more then I desire, affecting me; Denyes all help to Theocles, unlesse He also use the self same power on me, And by that power with me conform me to her; Could you but now dispence with me a while, (Without your leave I dare not) I could soon Effect what he desires, and then return With as much joy to you, as he that having Forsaken for a while his native Countrie, Friends, and his safty too; being come home Kisses the Soile he left, and counts himself For all his many dangers and more fears Happie at least in this, that now he knows To set a higher rate on the kind favour Which Heaven at first bestow'd. Art. Nay Sir you may
Without all forc't pretences do your pleasure, I am not, I thank Heaven, so fond to sue, Or broke for Servants. Lys. Thinke not, fairest Mistresse, That I can ever truly Love but you, I can in any shape adore your Vertues, And still reserving in my Constant heart Your fair Idea, ▪Court another Beauty With Amorous devotion; but such As still must rest and point it self in you. Art. Sir, that Devotion which adores the Image May chance perswade It self, that through that Image It worships the true Deity: but yet Must Excuse others that do still suspect it As very like Idolatrie, if not It. Lys. Madam that strength of Light, that does incircle The Pow'rs above, Admits no mortal gaze: Yet by Reflexion perhaps we may Gather a glance, or so: As through a glasse We can outface the Sun, and by those weak Nerves of our Sense collect those Scatter'd beams, As they do guild some Wall or Turret, which By an immediate view beheld, would dart Flames in our Eyes to punish our Presumption. So that sometime a Reverence may as well Keep us from that we love, as Love invite us. Art. But Sir, take heed least your Idolatrous love, Passe not so truly through the fictitious object, As still remain there: sure the jealous gods Accept immediate worship, rather then What's done through th' Image, and comes not to them But by a Proxie: howso'ere the cause Which you pretend, with your large promises, May keep me still the same unto your love, So that your frequent visits strengthen me In my much shaken faith. Lys. Madam, I leave My heart with you in pawn, that you may know,
What speech so'ere I use to any other, That still remains your own.———— Ex. Lysan. Art. Hyperia, I did not think th' hadst lov'd me, or the truth So faintly, as for any threatning, to Conceal ought, prejudicial unto either. Come, come, I know, for all the cunning carriage, Ther's more in't then so; your first expressions Could not well suit with any friend, but Mistress, Till fear apply'd e'm: but it may be now, That being over, thou'lt reveal the truth. I do conjure thee here, by all my favours, (Which I shall much repent, if thou confess not) Tell me sincerely, what at first you meant. Hyp. Madam, if all the carriage of my life Have gain'd you this faith of me, That I can speak any truth at all: believe me now; If I or know, or think, but that Lysander Among all women living, loves you onelie, May I ne'r find your mercy, no nor heavens. Art. I cannot yet be confident, I much want Some forcive Argument to re-establish My doubtful thoughts. To them Diarchus. Hyp. And here comes one, I'm sure Will bring you none, your uncle Madam; this Is he quite poysons all; Lysanders enemie: Yet hath no reason for't, but that he is His fathers son. Diar. I met Lysander here, Now comming from you; Neece, I wonder much You will give entertainment to a man You know descended from the ancient enemie To all our familie. Art. Pardon me uncle, If that I be not yet of that opinion; To think that hate must be successive, or Malice hereditarie. Diar. Yet believe me,
Though't runs not in a blood, I see no reason Why the son ought not take the fathers part. Come Neece, be wise; ther's the Noble Count That loves you well I'm sure: In him you may Bring honour to your self, and you well know He has your Fathers free consent. Art. But Sir, I hope I have a suffrage in this Bus'nesse, My voice too would be ask'd. Diar. See, here they come For the same purpose too, I think. SCEN. 4. To them Melesippus. Philonax. Attendants. MEl. Daughter, Though in this matter here of weight I would not Force you to any thing; yet I could wish Your liking would concur with mine. I here Present unto you him, who, in my esteem, Deserves your love best, and I hope will find it. Diar. For all that Sir, I think it very fit, That children should be rul'd. Mel. Nay I esteem it No Marriage; but a well nam'd Rape, where friends Force Love upon their Children; where the Virgin Is not so truly given, as betraid. I would not have Betrothed people (for I can by no means call e'm Lovers) do Such Pennance in their marriage sheets, and make The Rites no Wedlock, but a Sacrifice. Where like an Innocent Lamb, the passive Virgins Heart is Torn from her Entrailes, not Entic'd: Being condemn'd, not wedded to her Husband: Wherefore I will not practise what I may, But hope nerth'lesse to find my will perform'd.
Art. Sir, the continual carriage of my Life Hath been one Act of Dutie and Obedience; And that in this I may not stain the rest, But steer my Thoughts by yours; I do desire Some time of respite. Mel. Take't, but have a care, Your hoodwink't vent'rous Passion oversway not Your Reason: Think whom here I have commended. Art. I shall, Sir. Mel. Now to you, thus having made Your way, I wish successe. Diar. And Sir, I think After your Merits have display'd themselves, It may be our Presumption, not our Prayer.— Exe. Mele. Diar. Phi. My thanks to both. Madam I make no question But that you easily believe these friends, And partly from your own experience know How well I have deserv'd you; otherwise I should relate my self, how much you are Oblig'd for this observance which I shew you, By condescending thus to court a Ladie That sued not first to me. Art. Sir, though I think Most might be proud of such a favour from you, And prize it high.—— Phi. Nay faith, I must confesse My threshold groans under the daily Clients, And little Legs that come from Ladies to me: And I receive so many Tickets from 'em, That I am fain to hang e'm upon wires, As ▪Pothecaries do their Physick Bills, And serve e'm out as the bragging Captain did His Challenges, so many to a day, Each in his turn: I've disappointed three now. Art. —Yet, as I was about to tell you Sir, I am not of that fancie as to sue To any man, that does not first appear A Client unto me.
Phi. It seems so Ladie: And yet I am not of that general Tenet That does admit no female wooers, surely Your sex is not deny'd that Libertie of soul To like what ere you apprehend as good. Who does forbid the enamour'd wedge of Iron To steal unto the Loadstone, and to knit It self unto it in an amorous kisse, Not but by violence to be disjoyn'd? who e're Censur'd the uxorious Ivie, that it Courts The stout tall Oak, and twines it self about Like to some passionate Lover? as if willing To shrowd the exposed bulk from threatning dangers, And tell the hostile wind, or envious hand, That heaves an Axe against it, you must passe Through me to injure this, hoping to see Furie at last appeas'd by the soft object; Yet howsoere, till death, does not forsake him, But falls in an Embrace, as if desiring To be intomb'd together, and made one Pile. Art. Sure were those dregs of Pride drain'd from his soul— aside. He would appear of most refined thoughts. But Sir, what Nature may excuse in them, Reason corrects in us. Phi. Nay but the rather, Knowing your soules indu'd with such a treasure That can direct and guide your Passions, should you Pursue the Object when by it approv'd. Art. True Sir, if Reason did commend it to us, Likely we should consent. Phi. Believe't in this Your Reason and your Will are much the same, You can desire nothing but what that does (First having weigh'd and ponder'd well each scruple, That may object it self) commend as good; For whatsoere bounds our affection, Must first appear unto our Judgment lovely,
It standing Sentinel, questioning all That passe unto the Closet of the will. Art. Nay I shall easily grant that we can love, And love with reason too, but still am Heretick To your Position, that we ought to court The object so belov'd. Phi. See Madam now, Your thoughts are not deny'd to be as willing And ready too, as ours, but the expression You think unfit, and so will needs set up A kind of Just Hypocrisie, nay Vertuous, Whilest that which you stile modestie, is onely A more allowable and fair dissembling. For so 'tis in effect: you must appear Unwilling when desiring nothing more: You must seem backward, and be much intreated, Nay sometimes scarce entreated unto that Which should you misse of, you would curse your vertues, And count your Modestie injurious: But Madam, what onely I discourse to you, I practise among other Ladies: here You see I break my use, and therefore will not Ask what adventure I shall undertake To gain your love; I think you will conceive That the first act of wooing was a merit: And that I mov'd my suit, deserv'd it. Art. Nay, 'Tis not enough to manifest a Love In bare appearances; Each man perhaps When ere his Blood runs high, can court a Mistresse With eager zeal and fervour; but 'tis he Alone, whose Soul prompts him to purer Love, Deserves reciprocal Affection. Phi. As for my soul you may know that hereafter; And for my Blood, you know, I've told you often 'Tis o'th' noblest strain, deriv'd from such Who were the glorie of the Roman State:
And all I'm sure that ever heard me speak, Know by Report it is not stain'd in me. I have maintained still the Credit of Our Familie, and as I can remember Never descended yet so low as now, Which I trust you'l consider. Art. Sir I know You would esteem it but a Lightnesse in me To give away my heart almost at th' first Demand, and having had so small experience. I have some thoughts that disaffect me now, And hinder all Deliberation Of Love: hereafter you may hear more from me. Phi. Madam I wait upon you.—— Exe. Philo. Arte. Hyp. Pray Heav'n that all these storms thus coming on, Like wave and waves one on anothers back, Shake not her promis'd faith unto Lysander, And ruin't quite: The Gods I think take part Thus to disjoynt their loves. Her Jealousie First back'd with those appearing Reasons may Be strengthned by these Motives, ne're decay. The end of the first Act. ACT. 2. SCEN. 1. Miserotos laughing. HA, ha, ha, I have ee'n burst my self yonder with laughing▪ and am now forc't to retire for fear of my ribs; The most prodigious Contention about a Mistresse that e're I beheld: A Ballad-singer and a vext Constable I should take e'm for; but that I know the one to be a boysterously valiant Captain, and t'other a Gentleman abus'd into a Poet by his Mistresse: who, having for a long time courted her with verses only and Sonnets, is now injoyn'd by Her to speak nothing but Rime. The Cap∣tain being his Rival hath now provok't the Quarrel, he hath drawn his Faulchion, and wheeling about, lies at his Guard
most fiercely, whiles my Riming Gentleman makes at him with a pair of Heroick Verses, which he again puts by with a warlike Oath or two: Such strange Passadoes there are between e'm, such Hermaphroditical Play; short sword and long verse, as I ne're saw the like. But here they come. To him Pisistratus. Lamprias. Pis. I say I'le fight what e're comes on't. Lam. Why then have at you Sir; nay I'le assure ye, There is no Poet but he hath his Furie. Mis. Nay good Captain be pacified; indeed it is not manly to challenge or beat another whom you know resolv'd not to fight agen: why you see he refuses your weapon: Alas he com∣bates in another way; if you will make Amorous Sonnets with him, I know he will enter the Lists. Pis. No! my Sword shall be my Pen, and I will print a bloo∣die Tragick Poem upon his flesh—————By this good steel I will. Lam. By these good Verses thou shalt have thy fill. Nay, though with sword I fight not, yet will I Hang thee in strong lines; make thee living die. Pis. Strong lines? strong halters: I'le beat this riming spirit out of you, and make you howl in pitiful prose. If ever I hear you pelting verses at my Mistresse window any more, I'le beat that inspired Pate: I will Sirrah, so that the discharg'd Cham∣ber-pot shall be a work of Charitie, the urine being med'ci∣nal. Lam. I do defie thee and thy threats, thou fellow, That look'st so like a foaming angrie Billow; Crown'd with my twig of Lawrel I fear not Thunder of rotten Eggs or Chamberpot. Pis. Get you a Sword Changeling, and a good one too, or I'le crown your Cockscomb with a hollie twig as big as my arm, Ile make your brains so fluent, they shall be ready to flie out upon all occasions. Lam. My Bodie shall with Poetrie be charm'd, Thus to be naked is to be best arm'd.
Pis. Ile ee'ne try what Armour of proof you have. offers to beat him. Mis. Hold, hold, shall I now tell you what you two are? Pis. Yes, Mars, and Apollo. Mis. A ridiculous pair of Cockscombs you are to quarrel, and violate all bonds of friendship: thus for a white face, a coy, disdainful woman, who for ought you know when you have done your best, will onely laugh at your follie: I would not have you expect to be so Generously miserable as to deserve Pitie. Pis. Come, come, you onely speak this out of your own Aversenesse to all Love: she hath most affectionately ingag'd her self by several promises to one of us two; but finding us both, so equally deserving, cannot as yet finallie determine the partie. Lam. Nay that's for certain none can husband bee▪ To fair Ethusa, unlesse I or Hee. Pis. Here's nothing to be done with my Sword, and I scorn to kill him as he is, unarm'd. Prithee Miserotos we should be much bound to the discoverie of thy Justice, if thou couldst chalk us out a fair way of Decision. Mis. Faith I can imagine none, you are so disproportiona∣bly qualified; unlesse putting it to the hazard of Lots. For you standing on tearms of Chivalrie, He of Poetrie; you for the point of your Sword, he of his pen, can never meet in fair Duel. Pis. Why then Ile stand to Lots. Lam. And shall I too? No; for I much do fear To venture such fair hopes as now appear. Pis. Nay then let her decide it; I know her judgement must prefer me, therefore I'le stand to no other Lotterie but her li∣king. Lam. 'Tis then agreed.——— Exe. Lamp. Pis. Mis. Did ever men run thus out of their wits with love? nay and for one that gives e'm no Encouragement at all, the most contemptful abusive woman that ere was sued to. She appoints e'm their daies of visits, and then sits in state like some great Princess about to decide grave matters concerning the Common∣wealth:
They usually walk without ith' Hall, and converse with the Serving-men, till summon'd by her Gentlewoman, who being the Clark of the Court, presents their Petitions, their Amorous Papers of Verses, and takes their several Enditements 'gainst the next appearing. Well, give me Libertie of soul, who's will take Beautie. Ex. Mis. SCEN. 2. Panareta. Ethusa, at one door. Lysander, at the other. Lys. SAve you fairest Ladies: I wish health And your own wishes upon both. Pan. But sure He does not know how much h'has giv'n away In that one word. If I had my own wish, He should bestow himself. Eth. If that be all, We thank you Sir. Lys. But Ladie I have bus'nesse Beyond a bare salute, and 'tis of Theocles, His Service to you Ladie. Eth. Well! proceed; Lys. Hee's one, if faith can bear the stamp of Merit, Deserves your love; he spends the day in tears, And by his Sighes, with which he counts his houres, He makes void Minutes. Thus he pines away, And in a Sullen grief hath lost himself Onely for love of you. Pan. How well that tongue Hath learnt to wooe! He need not fear repulse, If he could spend a Suite in his own Name, Smooth'd with such language to my tender eares. Eth. Alas I pitie the poor Gentleman; Bid him rise early, use good Companie,
And know no other moisture but of wine, 'Twill cure his Melancholie. Lys. If you return But this slight Answer, know you then will draw A new disease upon him, and your Cure Will onely thus grow to a deeper wound, Whil'st he shall die with Physick. Pan. Still he moves Like one that knew the Conquering Art to plead For any but himself, Eth. Indeed you urge His suit so full, as if he had bequeath'd His soul into your bosom; But I pray you Discourse it coolely; should I give my self To ev'ry one that this way would deserve me I should be married to a Troop of Men, And grow a Lawful Strumpet; For my Face Is not of that poore Clay, as to be courted With one Flame onely, there are more desires Chain'd to my eyes then his. Lys. There may be so, And that Face doth deserve it▪ Pan. Pray heav'n himself Do not increase the Number. Lys. But in all That heap of Suitors, there are few can boast A Flame so vigorous, as Theocles's; All do not testifie their rude Affections With that best Complement of Gaudie Presents, Nor wooe ith' costly language of rich guifts: This is the stile of Theocles firm love Printed in Gold. Eth. I grant indeed he sent▪ Full choice of Presents, and the finest toyes As I could wish: But I return'd my thanks, And paid him still in a Civilitie: If he expect more, I recall that too:
Else, call it what he will, he sends but wares, And cheats my Cabinet with Merchandise, Which I forsooth must think fill'd with his love, And in Reward, bestow my self: alas I have no price set on me, nor am sold At the cheap rate of Jewels: Ile not passe My self away by bargain. Lys. Ladie he scorns To chaffer for affection: He desires That you should recompence his Faith with yours, And not his Guifts: when e're he sends a Jewel Carv'd out into a heart, 'tis his own heart Wounded and cut by your Disdain; each present Carries a part of him that sent it too. His Love is weav'd through all his Guifts: Did he Know that base Art how to send any thing And leave himself out, you might easily then Slight the poor single offer. Nor is he arm'd Onely with Guifts, he dare even challenge dangers And provoke death, if he might thus avoid The fate which he more fears of your Displeasure. He dares fight for you and maintain your Beautie, Whil'st he shall lose his own, and paint your face Fresh with his blood. Eth. I, here's a way indeed, A fine device thus to defend my beautie That he might ruine it. That Ladies name Whose worth must be decided by the Sword, Suffers though in a Conquest; 'tis a stain To honour, whil'st it wants another force Then its own Innocence to guard it. Lys. Ladie, Y'are too severe thus to despise all waies That render Suitors lovely: if you doubt His Constancie, invent your self a Trial; Impose some harder task, whose cruel weight Might shake a faith which was as firm as Rock, Though more relenting. If guifts fraught with love
Cannot prevail, nor th' Judgment of a Duel, Then find out something heavier then war, Injoyn his absence, and impose some years Of tedious Pilgrimage, which onely thu Shall grow a Sport and Recreation, 'Cause your Command. Eth. Sister y'are too heavie, Come, be more cheerful. Lys. This is a Contempt Worse then the rest, will she not give an Answer?— aside. O the proud Insolence of a coy Ladie! But if that be the way, I can follow, And shape my self to any thing to produce A Comfort for my friend: Panareta Let me intreat your help. Pan. O do not wrong The power you have in me to intreat any thing, Bee't a command, and 'tis already done. Lys. What sweetnesse dwells in all her Answers? now aside. I could forget my friend, and almost urge A suit might blesse my self; But I must through't: My request is, that you would win your Sister To glance some favours upon Theocles. She is all stone yet, but that she will not Be won upon by tears; No softnesse can Supple her harder Bosome. Eth. A good Character. Pan. Ah Lysander! I did hope you would Have urg'd a glad Suit of Another strain When I did yeild so far: I did believe (How Credulous Love is) 'twas me you aim'd at. Lys. Did I forsake one shelve to split my hopes Upon a New? I must still try Ethusa, Since you are cruel too. Pan. How should I plead? Tell me what words will soonest win her love, For sure you know the way to conquer hearts.
Eth. How gravely they consult together! onely, After more Policie to be deny'd still.—— aside. Lys. Tell her how great his Love is: let her know She sits within his heart next to the Gods. Pan. Sure that cannot win her, for even thus I love You with a faith as great, as he does her. You sit within my heart next to the Gods, Pardon the Blasphemy, and are even plac't Above e'm too, and yet I am neglected. Eth. I am glad I am releas'd, since I can now Gather more Breath, strong for a new repulse. aside. Lys. If you love me, then shew it in this grant. SCEN. 3. To them, Theocles. Pan. SEe he is come himself: let him now move His own desires; for sure 'tis an Advantage To any one, but me, to woo in Person. The. Friend and Lady, pardon my hasty rudenesse, Which scarce permits this short salute: I see a Beauty that can draw my Soul Out through my Eyes, by whose exhaling vertue I am dead every where, but in those parts Which survive onely that they may view her. Eth. Now I must even become a Prodigie To please his fancie; his strange Expressions Seem not so much to court as fright a Lady. And I applaud the strength of my conceit, That I'm not startled yet: pray Sir tell me What Shew d'ee please to make Me? Am I turn'd Into some Blazing Comet? Sure my haires Do all lie right, and they are still themselves, They do not hisse nor spit out fire.
The. Ladie, You have the Beautie and the Majestie Of any Star, you shine as bright as they, But not so monstrous▪ and yet pray heaven that you Do not portend a Death too. But since You will not conceive the meaning of a Distance, I will grow nearer to you, and addresse My suit in th'approach of a plain language, My bus'nesse then is humbly to implore The Influence of your love. Eth. Then you have perform'd Your Bus'nesse, y'ave implor'd it: Fare you well Sir. Lys. Nay Ladie bee'nt thus cruel to undo A man whose onely fault is too much Love: His wish is not to beg, but to obtain. Pan. And yet the whole reward of my Desire Is but to beg, though I could wish t'obtain▪ Eth. I must confesse he still hath shewn himself A careful wary Suitor. I've receiv'd Presents enough to tire my hand ith' taking, To which I onely can return my thanks. But he must pardon me if I withhold My Love: H'hath bin a frequent Visitant, And oft hath sent his Page to know how well I took my Rest; nay, even how I dream't: H'hath been as Scrupulous as a Physitian, And knowes my sleeps as perfect as my woman: And yet for all this Care I can bestow Onely the Charitie of thanks, and wish That hee'd new place his love upon some Subject That knew more how to yeeld. Lys. See, Sh'hath giv'n An answer suckt out of my breast; I grant Y'ave shewn Affection great as are your merits, For which I can but thank you, and intreat That you would place your love upon some other, Soft as your own Desires.
The. Your Answer, Ladie, Hath onely kill'd with Pity, all the relief Which I can draw from so misplac'd a kindnesse, Is but to die. Eth. Then I perhaps may shed One tear upon your Funeral, and wish That you had been more wise. Pan. I was transported With your unwelcome Answer, that I knew not How to replie, had not the Charitie Of your friend helpt, and taught me to confesse That all your pitie onely bids me die. The. Recal your harsher sentence; Let me live Onely ith' Comfort of one Smile. Lys. Do not thus Betray a man to sadnesse, who can joy Onely ith' Services he does—for you. Pan. You plead well, if your self did not betray A maid to sadnesse and the wild Company Of her own tears, for want of the relief Which you might pour out in one Smile. Lys. Alas, I should but counterfeit. The. 'Twould appear Some comfort yet if you would fain a Mirth. Lys. Remit some of your hardnesse, and infuse A soul into him quicker then his own. Eth. I cannot blame the weight of his desires, But wonder Sir at yours: I cannot see With what hope you might urge his Suit, whil'st thus A Ladie droops and pines for love of you, One that deserves a Nobler Mate, if thus She had not first betraid her own desires: Expect no other usage to your Theocles (For Ile not call him mine) then what you cast Upon Panareta. Lys. If't be onely this
That keeps your love in, and drives back your smiles, My friend may yet discern some shew of hope, And I'm content that you should pattern out Your entertainment unto Theocles From mine to your Panareta; (for as yet I cann't oth' suddain call her mine.) Eth. I am content too, what thinks this sadder pair? The. I bow to any thing you please to name. Pan. And I to what Lysander doth agree. Eth. Bee't then concluded; you are firm Lysander? You'l not flie off? Lys. I vow my faith t'observe it. The. I see this comfort yet, that if I die, 'Tmust be a friend that kills me. Pan. And I am glad My life's inclos'd within a Sisters Breath. Eth. Enough, 'tis all agreed, hereafter we Shall either know your Faith or Perjurie,— Exe. Lys. The. Nay Sister we expect some other Courtship, I've appointed My two other servants this day of Visit. Pan. Is it a day of hearing then? Eth. Yes; in troth this serious Courtship of Theocles had almost wrought a distemper upon me (for such I count all sad∣ness) I hold him somewhat too worthy to be listed with that ridi∣culous Companie, else I had thought upon some humour for him too: But Ile lay no other punishment upon him besides a con∣stant absence, till he hear my pleasure. Pan. O Sister, as thou regard'st my Comfort, prithee let no∣thing passe from thee that may be at all distastful to him. Eth. Well Sister, for your sake Ile studie a Carriage. To them Eudora. Eud. O Madam, yonder's your Brace of humours, as you call e'm, in the midst of the street quarrelling, but hither I imagine their course is bent. Eth. When they come bring e'm in hither. Sister pray take your place, and learn by me how to entertain Suitors. It is not
fit that these Men should call us Mistresses, and so confidently proffer their Services for nothing. I would not have e'm so hypocritical. SCEN. 4. To them, Pisis. Lamp. Quarrelling at the door. Pis. SLave, Rascal, I'le beat thy Brains out with the hilt of my Sword. Lam. Sir I suppose it is my Mistresse pleasure, That I should first appear, you stay her Leisure. Eth. How now? what Sawcie companions raise this tumult so nigh me? what you two? I did not think you had stood in so little awe. Lam. Most fairest Ladie, indeed and forsooth He rudely hath almost beat out my tooth. Pis. And Ladie I suppose he did deserve it, in offering to compare himself with me; nay, and what's more, he did prefer his Poetry before my valour. Eth. Y'are both rude Fellowes, get you to the door agen, let me see whether you can come in more civilly. Go I say. They walk to the Door, then return hand in hand: Why this is well, now let me hear what you can say for your selves. Lam. Fairest of Ladies, hither I am come, Out of my store of wit to shew you some: And if you please on this my Present Smile, Presents a Paper. My self the happiest of Men I'le stile. Eth. What have we here, a Paper of Verses? Read e'm. Lam. reads Madam, th'Ʋnwritten Paper I had brought Fair as t'was ith' native hew, Because it was a thing unfit I thought, To give ought Blotted unlike you.
My weeping Pen with grief began to swell, Sad that It should nothing send; Whose Tears by chance to these few verses fell, Doubtful lest they might offend. Thus every thing fair Lady I enjoy, Doth court your Presence, mourns to find you coy. Eth. And now, 'faith what Poet has hir'd you to put off his verses? you bring nothing of your own besides the Tune, you'd make an incomparable fellow, if you had but a Raw arm, and a Partner, the structure of whose Body were built upon a woodden leg, to bellow it out by turnes in a most pitiful unsanctified Note. Come, I know 'tis some Penny-Rimer or other hath sold you a stock to set up with, to save the delayes of Printing: Take you out of this common way, and I know you have no more Rime in you then a dying Swan, though lesse melody. Lam. No, Madam? if for verses you thirst ever, My Pen shall run, I say, as doth a River. Pis. Pox of all his Canting; This foolish thing call'd verse is a language as bad as Barbarisme to me: I can as soon turn honest as Rimer.—Divinest Lady; I fear me you'l grow sick of this bad Poet; give me but leave to silence him, I'le talk him dead. Speak nothing but Swords and bullets: Or dart a fire from my Basilisks Eyes shall sindge and stifle all his Poetry: I will do this or any thing, be it beyond the reach of Man or Thought, to do you service. Eth. Has your Sawcinesse done yet? or do you want breath to conjure any further? Sure you forgat your Circle, else we should have seen some darksome Feind rais'd by your Charmes, or heard a ratling Tempest lowder then the tongue that made it: know Sir, a Silence would better become those Swelling lips, till you had known my pleasure. What if I like his Poetry and pre∣fer it 'bove all the Thunders of your puft up valour? 'Tis no new thing to wooe in Rime. Pis. Lady, since 'tis your will, I'le be as silent as the Grave, which strait should Swallow up that Bombast Poet, but that you please to ransom him: My lips shall be seal'd up as close as Cockles, and never divide Themselves till you uncharm e'm.
Eth. Now as sure as the Death he talk't of, he speaks all by th' line, his Tongue runs like some mad chain'd dog, thus farre, and is then checkt for want of room and breath. 'Twere better you had obey'd without the tediousnesse of a reply, and not have bin thus stubborn out of Duty. Well pro∣ceed Lamprias. He bowes Lam. I blesse the Tongue that gives me leave, and shall Thank you hereafter that hee's not my Rivall. Eth. And yet 'twere not amisse to thank in present, if your Rime would bear it. But pray Sir, whence growes this perem∣ptory noise of yours? who hath inform'd you that Pisistratus is not the first in my Thoughts? Lam. Lady your self hath taught me this, for why You'd not bid him be silent, unlesse I Should be the Man, and since you deign this favour, I shall still be your Creature, still and ever. Eth. 'Tis true indeed, I bade him be silent, and see, he dares not so much as whisper; but 'twas only that I might have leisure to deny you. Do you not see how he is obedient? he dares not venture so near a disloyalty as but to breathe at's mouth; he sucks in all the Ayr at his Nostrils onely, and instead of speaking does but meerly shrug, and faintly nod his head, as if he fear'd this were a Disobedience too: faith try him, and see how stubbornly hee'l hold his peace. Lam. Pisistratus! why Pisistratus, what hath thy tongue Forgot his Thunder? Is thy speech all gone? Eth. You see he dares not trespasse, and I would you durst not too.—But did I command you to breathe nothing but what was clad in verse, and yet forsooth you dare utter your mind in Prose. Lam. Lady 'twas verse I said, I say 'twas verse, And if you please I will the same rehearse. Eth. A very fine, smooth verse indeed, where the Musick ends in Tongue and Gone: 'twas well chim'd you think: but no matter, I shall find time to punish these Enormities hereafter; mean while I'le tempt your Obedience a little further, and command your Silence, yet 'tis one favour I have done you, that you practise by Pisistratus, and hold your peace by Rule.
Lam. My Thanks and I could wish——— Eth. Stop there, and know, when I command a Silence, you must not promise but perform it: for once I'le pardon you your Rime, and give you leave to break off ith' middle. Now Pisi∣stratus I untye your tongue, and expect what you have to say. Pis. First let me humbly thank you, that I am still a Souldier, and may talk. Eth. You say right indeed, for most of you are skill'd at no other weapon. Pis. But if you'l give me leave to expresse my Thoughts, I'm none of those weak counterfeit Warriours; no shadow but a Souldier; my Part is not to say, but do: I disclaim these Trifles of Service, this talking way of Courtship: Give me a danger such as would strike astonishment in the bold Alcides: Plant me instead of Ordnance against the Walls of a besieged City, or let me enter on a Grove of Pikes, which I will mow down like a crop in harvest. Eth. Blesse us! what a volley of words is here; you do not Speak methinks, but Discharge, and make every sentence, a peal. Pis. Madam, I bring no puling Elegies, no Poetry I, Bellona is my Muse, and this bright Sword the onely offering I can pre∣sent: but such as when you please shall sacrifice whole Heca∣tombes of your Enemies; (if yet among Mortals there be any so prophane as to injure so Divine a Beauty.) Eth. You promise Liberally; but I fear when it should come to th' Test, your Sword will not be so nimble as the Tongue that brags on't; it shall be fastned so close in the Scabbard that you cannot draw it out, or some such pretty toy to delude a danger: Then instead of fighting you shall swear valiantly against the Cutler, and give no Death but in your Curses. Pis. Lady, your comment wrongs my worth, by your fair honour, and by those many Victories, which yet sit warm and fresh upon my cumbred Sword, were he a man, and such whom often Conquests had made great as my self, and to what height my vertues have arriv'd, to be thought immortal; if such a man should speak these words, I would strait confute the wild opi∣nion of the loose world▪ and leave this wonder dead before their Eyes.
Eth. Faith 'twould do well to have some proof of so untam'd a valour. But yet Sir, methinks you are much mistaken in the wooing way. Sister, what will you say if I take down this Lyon∣like Champion? this Spirit rampant? I'le undertake with two words so to humble him, that of a boysterous Roarer, he shall become as supple a Courtier as you would desire. Pan. I should as much admire the miracle, as the power that effected it. Eth. Mark then. Sir, as I told you, methinks you are mista∣ken in the way of wooing: I would have a tame Suitor, you make too much noyse in a Ladies Chamber; pray let me have your Courtship in a softer Dialect. Pis. Madam, the power of your love is so prevalent, that it can turn me to any shape; I can submit my mounting soul to a most gentle Carriage and sweet behaviour onely for your sake Lady. Eth. As how Sir? I long for an experiment. Pis. Why thus: Divinest Lady, my humble service being premis'd— Eth. What? Do you repeat your Letters? Sure this was the last you writ to your Country Mistresse. Does it not follow—Hoping you are as deep in love as I am at the writing hereof—and so forth? Pis. Lady I do esteem't the greatest part of my Duty, still at the first appearance to present my service to you. Eth. What and give the same thing twenty times over? I thought you had presented that sufficiently already, but now I begin to suspect it as at anothers command, and none of your own, you are so free on't. Pis. I hope you do not take me for a Serving-man, or Gen∣tleman Usher, Lady? Eth. And yet that lac'd Cloak being so near ally'd to a Live∣ry, may breed a foul suspition. Pis. Fair Madam y'are mistaken. Eth. What Sawcebox? tell me I lye. I'le make you more Obedient. Pis. Would it would please you Lady to descend so low, as
make me understand your will, you should alwaies find me as quick in the Execution, as apprehension. Eth. Blesse me! my servant all this while, and now to seek in what pleases me? I'le hear no more at this time, I care not what's your bus'nesse. Pan. Nay Sister, now you are too cruel. Eth. My doome's irrevocable; be gone I say; I expect no reply. Pis. Your Creature. offers to go out. Eth. Come back agen; my humor's alter'd; and now I think on't, I'le put a further tryal upon your Loyalty; you be∣gin to complement pretty well, I'le try the power of love, and see whether it can file you into a more smooth garb; and to that purpose I command you (upon pain of my displeasure) to appear never before me but as your Rival Lamprias is wont, in Rime. I know you are not such an Enemy to the Muses, but that upon such an occasion they may smile upon you. And then for you Lamprias, because I would not have you un-imploy'd, you shall assume his fighting humour; I love a man compleat in all wayes. Give him your Sword Pisistratus, he should have your Buffe Coat, but that your Doublet I fear is Canvas on the back: I know you'l fight couragiously; and for Pisistratus, I make no question, but in a short space we shall have him as good a Poet as most at Court, and make verses on one leg as well as the best of e'm. Come Sister, let's leave e'm to think on't, when you are provided let me see you agen. (Exe. Pan. Eth. Eud.) Pis. Make verses on one leg? I warrant they'l halt to the purpose. Shall I turn Poet and be feasted by the Players? well! I thank my stars I am not so far to seek yet, but that I can drink, and take Tobacco, with some other initiating qualities, in which we Poets and Souldiers are near ally'd. Lam. In good faith I have not one quality of a Souldier, but running away; I think we were best change habits, I could rime as well in thy Suit, and thou fight as manfully in mine, couldst not? Pis. I but doest think shee's no better sighted, then not to discern us by our faces? Lam. I had forgot that; but what then shall we do?
Pis. Nay that I know not, let's ee'n to our friend Miserotos, and take his Advice; A Looker on may see better waies in the game then a Party. The end of the second Act. ACT. 3. SCEN. 1. Artemone alone. I Do not doubt his Love, but I could wish His Presence might confirm it: when I see A fire well fed shoot up his wanton flame, And dart it self into the face of heaven; I grant that fire without a fresh supply May for a while be still a fire; but yet How doth its lustre languish, and it self Grow dark, if it too long want the Embrace Of its lov'd Pyle? how strait it buried lyes In its own ruines? Blesse me my kinder Stars From the bad Omen! Now methinks he wrongs The tendernesse of my Affection, And playes the Tyrant with my easier Love, He may perchance abuse the Liberty He ravish'd from me; and when he hath won Panareta, urge my own Consent against me. If his Love still be firm, O how he seems Too like the God that struck him; whil'st he can With-hold his Sight, too cruel! and himself. It much afflicts me that my message was Prevented by my Father, and my Uncle. I'le sift the bus'nesse out————— To her, Hyperia. —How now my Girle?
Methinks there sits a Truth still in thy looks: A Treachery upon that forehead plac't, May easily wrong a faith it self hath lost. Hyp. Madam, what unknown fault of mine hath thus Perplext your Entertainment? heretofore You were not wont to cast these frowns upon me, As if you meant to bury all my joyes Within your wrinkled forehead. Art. Whence hath guilt Borrow'd this glorious shelter? how can vice Become thus specious, hid within the shrowd Of an unfaulty look, and innocent tongue? Thy pretty pleadings make me almost love The Ruine thou throw'st on me. Hyp. Madam, I dare Pronounce my self still free; no guilt can stain My Innocence; unlesse it be a fault There to be guiltlesse where your Sacred Tongue Imputes a Blot: how my griev'd Eyes could weep To wash that scandal off from my clear Face, Which only your Suspition makes a Crime. Art. A vice thus painted out is the best Face That vertue can put on: O that Lysander Could thus dissemble too! I then were blest As much in his conceal'd Apostacie, As in his better Faith. Hyp. How I rejoyce To suffer with that Name: Then I perceive 'Tis some uncertain Rumor hath displac't Your wonted chearfulnesse. Art. Were but the fame Uncertain, I would then call back my Smiles, And still shine in a free and generous Mirth. But oh! the grave instructions of Age, And the more lively Precepts of a bribe, Whose Innocence will not these baits o'rethrow? Hyp. Now Madam, since I have discover'd thus The poyson of your sicknesse, give me leave
To cure the Malady with a present Ease. You sent me to Lysander, as I went Your Father and Diarchus met me, They, I must confesse, urg'd me with vehemence, And a severity printed in frownes Deeper then age had carv'd upon their browes: They threatned to Reward my falshood too. (For even that whiles it would take away My Faith from you were but a Punishment) I should have told Lysander, that your flame Cool'd by his absence now did onely aym To seat it self within the prouder Circuit Of Philonax rich bosome: I did then Promise Obedience, which I perform'd Onely in not betraying your commands, This is the onely guilt my vertue feeles In disobeying Artemone's Father. Art. Suspition yeild a little: how I fain Would force my self to a belief that thou Speak'st only Truth? but yet recall thy self, Do not heap guilt on guilt in a Denial Of what hath pass'd; alas! thy tender yeares Are too unripe for to delude the strong And mature pollicy of subtle Age, 'Tis but a slender fault to be o'recome By an experience such as theirs. Hyp. Madam, Could you perswade me that it were a vertue, I would yet scorn to own it (Pardon Madam) I am not rude, I ought in such a Cause To be as bold as Innocence. Art. Yet still methinks there heaves a Jealousie, And will not out oth' suddain, I feel it beat About my heart, O that I could believe Thee faithful, and might yet suspect Lysander: There's something whispers me thou art not false, And yet I must still doubt of him. Hyp. This Madam is
But to distrust me in a fairer word, You Gods that kept me Innocent, by the same Pow'r Make it appear so, else it is but vain To worship whil'st y'are as blind as Love, Vertue is worth your miracle; Create Some new way which may blot this scandal out: I can bring onely Teares to plead my Faith, And would I could weep Rivers to maintain My secresie to you, in the same way As I would expiate some horrid Crime. Art. Enough, Th' hast won my Faith, and kept thy own: Then pardon my best Girle the vain Surmise The frailty of my love possest me with. Let Father threaten, and that next dear Name Of Uncle plot against my happinesse, Let them contrive my Ruine, and infect Their Care with Malice too, so I enjoy Faithful Lysander, and Hyperia.— Yet oh this Absence!—— She wālks melancholy. SCEN. 2. To them, Theocles. The. O The strange subleties of a womans love. We must embrace our Punishment, and swear We are rewarded when they torture us: What Comfort dwells in that frail Sexe, whose best Of kindnesse proves a sting? have I for this Consum'd my heart in Passions? and through sighes Breath'd out my Soul to find a better dwelling Within Ethusa's breast, and yet does she Dislike my Presence, and pretend love too? Alas I must not visit her; Though't be death Not to enjoy that Face, I dare not see it. Let those unpitied Lovers turn their plaints
Into glad Jubiles, whose constant suite Meets a perpetual frown: I envy that Which they esteem the worst of misery: Would I might be deny'd still; They, at least Enjoy this Comfort, to behold the hand That strikes, whiles 'tis my Fate to dye ith' dark. The Tempest is then lessen'd whiles the Sun Mingles his rayes with the unruly showres, But in the horror of a gloomy night The Shipwrack multiplies, and the sad stroakes Fall double still. If I behold her face, (That Face which hitherto hath made me live) I then must cease to be; for that's the doom Of her displeasure; howsoere my Plot Back'd with successe may soon dispel these clouds.— —What? Musing Sister? your looks seems to wear A manly seriousnesse; all your Gestures Should be as soft as an embrace. Art. I confesse I did not dresse my look, nor put it on, As we do use our Gorgets, by the glasse; But if it brags no lustre sprung from joy Of your Arrival, it belies my heart. But where's Lysander pray y'? for sure you'l want Part of your wellcome, whil'st that Name's forgot. Hyp. Urge that way Theocles, 'tis the best Physick To a melancholy virgin to hear talk Of one that loves her, nay some say there is A sicknesse which that Name can onely cure, Which the poor Doctor fain would undertake. Art. Stop thy lascivious tongue, and do not dare To think the rest.—But brother, you tell me not How fares Lysander. The. How I see friendship throughly in that Name? Men talk of Pylades, and I know not what Strange Enterprizes of rash Theseus; But this Lysander, how he out-goes all story? Give me a man made up of the Extractions
And quintessence of all whom ever yet Fame with her lowdest Trumpet hath proclaim'd For Men of Loyal Breasts, and this same Man, This Man thus fill'd with Friendship, shall yet learn A way to love from our Lysander. Art. Sure You'l strait commend him into some new God: But I dare still wish after all this noyse, That he were yet compleat in a firm love. The. That were to loose a wish; I never yet Could tell of any that had made a choice To fixe his love within the tender compasse Of a fair Virgins bosome, to which he thought The heavens themselves were poor, and would contemn The gawdy competition of the stars, And yet one whom a friends request Might tempt from all these joyes, who for that Name Durst leap from his Elizium: just such A Miracle is our Lysander. Art. And is the faith you brag'd of come to this? How all his Praises vanish! you do ill To raise my hopes to such an height, and then The onely Argument of his Constancy Is, that he's false to Me: 'Tis no such miracle Of Love since you thus prize it, to betray A Credulous Maid. The. Heavens and Gods defend it! He plyes my Suit, but no way leaves off you: That love, which some say is begot by sight, And born within the eye, yet does not perish At every distance, nor yet die intomb'd In a dark mournful wink, 'tis stronger weav'd, And growes more knotty then to be easily broke At each small Absence. When you see two Irons Receive an equal vertue from the Loadstone, How they both stirre at once, and though divided By many envious miles, yet how they move And dance one way still! Thus your Lysander's love
As near as your own heart, replies to yours, And still is constant here, though still abroad: Indeed he's grown unto that strength of love Guarded with an unjealous Faith, he dares In such a Cause be absent from your face, And onely meet you in a Constant heart. Hyp. I alwaies told her thus, whil'st she reply'd I was too young to know a Lovers heart. Art. Heavens know, and the Gods witnesse, I'de allow So long an absence as might even bring My love in question, if ought thence should rise To further your Desires: But pardon Brother, If I esteem th'adventure of one visit Lesse fatal then to crosse your hopes: He might Advance your flame, and not neglect his own. The. Sister, he dares not dream of a neglect. Hyp. Still for my faithfulnesse. Art. He should much wrong The love I bear his vertues to contemn it: But though he fling no other Scorn upon me, 'Tis one that he is absent. The. How I grieve, That Love should be thus blind. aside. Art. What? troubled Brother? The. Onely I thought how ill Ethusa's Face Did suit with a disdain▪ Art. There's something more In the quick change, you were not wont so soon To let Lysander vanish from your Thoughts, When hee's fixt there he, fills so great a space, That Nothing else can enter, no not Ethusa; Your looks inform that you unwilling hide A truth which you are loath to utter: say, What strange mishap dares vex your knowledge? is Lysander safe? The. Alas Sister know, 'Tis one that's nearer then Lysander suffers. Art. What still Ethusa?
The. Nay one nearer yet: Know then 'tis your misfortune throwes these clouds Upon my darkned Face.—And I could still Suppresse the Cause. Faith Sister let it passe. Art. Nay then I will conjure you to reveal Your Thoughts at full. The. I can hold out no longer. First then (with pardon that your self hath scru'd And wrung out the Relation which my promptnesse Should freely offer) know that Lysander loves Panareta; nay so as I could wish His love as great to you: At first indeed He did but fain Affection, and put on Courtship, as if he thought you present still, But won by her sweet order'd Carriage And fair converse, he like the giddy Fly, Long sporting with the pleasant light, at length Embrac'd the cruel flame: He needs not strive To vent an artificial Sigh or Tear, He does not labour now t'expresse a groan Or doubtful accent, which may more betray Skill then affection; Cupid uncompell'd Sits in his Face, as proud to conquer him, Whose Counterfeit seem'd to upbraid his Pow'r. This sad discovery, to my troubled thoughts Carries an equal irksomnesse t'unfold, As to suppresse; for thus I lose a Friend, Who else should wrong a Sister. Art. Brother, Is not the summe of all, Lysander's falshood? Methought I heard a Thing like this: That sense Had but that discreet faculty to erre! The. O this villain Falshood! That I might Enjoy my own wish, and not murther his! aside. How I repent my Sin ere it be done! But I must through it, and yet bring it out This new strange way by still denying it. No Sister hee's not false.
Art. What was it then Your speech deliver'd to my trembling Ear? The. 'Twas that Lysander was grown false: I cannot With my best Art conceal't: Indeed hee's false. Hyp. What will become of me now? They'l believe My treachery hath wrought all this, and then Where is that Faith I bragg'd of? Art. Prithee Brother Withdraw a while; heaven knowes I love thee better Then to enjoy thy company in teares. The. I'le obey, and watch the progresse of his Suite: What though Lysander yet is my true friend, (If that can be whil'st hee's my Sisters foe) That Title shall not draw a wrong on you, Hold then and I already clasp Ethusa. Exit. The. Hyp. Fair Madam— Art. Prithee I am not fair, I was so when Lysander lov'd me; That Was all my Beauty. Hyp. I am glad yet she will not Hear me; she has not leisure then to chide. Art. And can Lysander thus forget his vowes? And cease to love? or place his unjust flame In a new Bosome? He can; and may perhaps Feel a Revenge high as his Injury. 'Tis vain to shed a Tear: if he be false He not deserves one Jewel from my eyes. (For thus he once would flatter even my teares) Grant me but this ye Gods, that he may feel A cold repulse, and once more wooe my love, I would then trample on his base Devotions, And joy in my revenge, which onely thus Would seem too Small that it comes after his; And to his further Rage, I'de even wooe A flame hid in his Enemies breast.
SCEN. 3. To them, Melesippus, Diarchus. Diar. PLy her strongly Brother, give her not time Meerly to breathe: if her unguided answer Would fain be cloath'd in a Denyal, if A discontent break from her forehead, then Lay out your Power, stifle her speech ith' birth, And choak all passage up with the rehearsal Of that lowd Name of Father. Mel. I am perfect In your Instructions. Daughter you still appear Wrapt up in Clouds, and whil'st other Ladies Study their boxes, and still practise helps For to preserve their Beauty, you alone Desire the ruine of your own Face: Fie! Grow chearful, I shall else perhaps conceive That I am your Disease. Art. Father, your presence Is alwaies welcome as of my Tutelar God, And it must needs be some strange unheard of message That makes your sight grow tedious. Dia. Brother now. Now for my counsel. Mel. Nay then I have it: Now Artemone by a Fathers plea, By the unbounded limits of Sire— Dia. And by the priviledge an Uncle beares In a reflexion from that Sacred Name— Hyp. Here are love Philtrums now; hey for Philonax. Art. Do not thus wrong the vertue you have giv'n me: What need these charms? when even your fainter breath, Though utter'd in a more familiar sound, Would prove a Spel unconquer'd. Mel. We do not bring Any severer Magick by whose art
Thou might'st be suppled to thy overthrow. Dia. Love is our sole Inchantment, and a Care For your continual welfare. Art. 'Las such Newes Would challenge its own welcome, though not involv'd In this mysterious Dialect: I've not heard Of any one so much his own bad friend As to be woo'd to a Good-fortune; know then Father and Uncle, Stiles of Providence, What e're the message be your Cares have brought, I will receive it with a Joy as great, As much unlimited as I grant your Pow'r, And in acknowledgment shall still remain Due to your free disposal. Dia. Some hopes yet, I see shee's well prepar'd. Mel. I, here's the sound Of sweet Obedience! why should tender years Fling off their Fortunes through an Appetite And fit of liking: That Affection Will prove most durable, where knowing Age And a considerate choice confirm the match. Dia. Well, I'le be silent yet, my lesser pow'r May but perchance hinder the good Event. Art. Then I perceive that love will be the scope Of this Authentick language; your discourse Well season'd with a grave discretion, And the Authority of a Parents will Have thus far won upon me: I confesse Though in the hastinesse of my Desires As far as my Affection is my own, (Yet still reserving a due share for you) I have in heart betroath'd it to Lysander, Yet not so chain'd, but that your just displeasure Might break the knot, or (what I'de rather wish) Your mild advice untie it. Hyp. A brave cunning Lady! Her Father now must thank her, and be oblig'd Because hee'l grant her wish.
Dia. Let but my Neece Hold on this course, and by my better hopes I will reward her as she were my Daughter: And by the Dowry I will cast upon her, It shall be thought she was Diarchus issue. Art. Sir, though I did not hope for a Reward Besides the naked Act of my clear duty, I should not start from my obedience: My thoughts are so Immaculate, that I Could never mean to buy my Innocence, And make a Trade of vertue. Mel. Then my Girle, I hope thou art prepar'd to entertain Philonax's love, he, the Senator? Art. I feel my Coldnesse melting! Sir, your breath Hath rais'd a heat in my Affections, Which until then were frozen. I confesse, And now dare speak it; I love Philonax, And were he present, could receive his Courtship With more then formal kindnesse. Dia. Hyperia, Go and intreat him hither. Exe. Hyp. Mel. Tell him we expect His quick approach: I would not have him slip This very punctual minute; Sure this Love Hath his set times; would he were here already. How aguish her desires are! Now 'tis her fit To like and to be well; now she growes hot And zealous in her Love, which erst was cool'd And fann'd by a chill Scorn: There is an hour Lucky to Suitors, and 'tis fall'n out now. Let all young men hereafter wooe by th'Clock, Try how the pulse beats, and promote their Suite, As we give Physick by the Almanack; Search how the weather goes; such a day's fair, For Lovers, fair as their own Mistresse Face; Such a day's clouded o're with frowns, and brings Foul weather, shed for her distorted looks.—
Is he not come yet? how I begin to fear This good time will be over-straight? not yet?— It is a wealthy Suitor.—Here he comes.— SCEN. 4. To them, Philonax. Hyp. —NOble Philonax, your quick arrival Honours your Servants, and I hope shall meet Their thanks in an Enjoyment of their wishes Phi. Thanks Melesippus, if I should adde Father, 'Twere but a while to antedate that Name, I know she cann't stand out long against me. Worthy Diarchus your Servant. Dia. I embrace Your love, and wish that we were nearer yet By an Allyance. Phi. You wrong your judgment, Sir, To wish it, shee's mine already. Mel. Or else no child of mine, We have onely chaff'd the virgin wax, To make her fit for your Impression. Dia. I hope his Confidence will prevail, Wee'l leave you to your starres, and courtship now. Mel. Be plaint Girle. Exe. Mele. Diar. Phi. Fair Lady, I am not like those that aym Instead of a fair wife to steal a Portion, But bring a Dowry with me; nor do I wooe With a set form of weary Complements, But with a strong Inchanting Title: tell me, Art thou the Senators Bride? Art. Sir, the Confidence Which your Deserts put on, would misbecome My native modestie: 'twere Arrogance T' accept proffers so beyond my state, And I should thereby seem to grant some worth ich caus'd your liking.
Phi. Strange, that we should be Deny'd because we are too great; a Title That other Ladies are ambitious of, Whose queazy Conscience stands not on such points To refuse honour. I have heard of some Have bin with child meerly with a deep thought Of a great Title; I must needs confesse It was my Fate to be born high and noble, Of proud Command; but yet I can vouchsafe And deignt' accept your love. Art. Worthy Sir, Do not thus stoop below your self, alas! When I shall sit circled within your Armes, How shall I cast a blemish on your honour, And appear onely like some falser stone Plac'd in a ring of gold, which growes a Jewel But from the seat which holds it. Phi. How I love One that so well can read my swelling worth At the first sight. Know then Artemone, My Judgment chooses Thee; for so it will Be stil'd what e're I do: our great Revenues Would prove half fruitlesse if that we could erre: It is a main prerogative of honour To be discreet whether we will or no; We are infallible whil'st we have thus much gold; To be call'd Prudent and Judicious, We challenge now as we would do our Rents: Th'art fair, and worthy, when th'art my Bride. Art. But I could wish I'de somwhat of my own, That my timerous consent might not wrong your merits. Phi. Ne're talk oth' disproportion; I'de not wed One whose estate already were as great, But I would marry that we might be equal: And even as far as love can make us so We are already. Art. Sir, if you understand a virgins Face Painted with red whil'st a true Lover's by,
You have my meaning. Phi. I've a divining guesse, And do conceive so well, that I could wish You would pronounce my thoughts, and blesse your self With that rich word of being call'd my Bride. Art. Then I assume the honour of your Bride. Phi. And thus we seal the Contract. I knew alwaies kisses her▪ 'Twas but the weaknesse of thy modestie That kept thee off: though some to try my Faith, Would often buzze in my incredulous Eares, That 'twas the love of one Lysander. Art. He Once begg'd indeed that he might be my servant. Phi. Thy Servant? 'faith handsomely urg'd, he sure Observes the learned Roman Apothegmes, And thinks it the best way to gain a Kingdome By his obedience: Thus hee'l be your slave, That he may rule and fetter you; thus he wooes With language pickt up from the Senate house: The vanity of these Affected Lovers Which hide their Suit in that submissive strain, Were well rewarded not to be understood. Art. With pardon Sir, 'tis but the common garb And fashion of most Suitors.— Phi. I, the common garbe, Give me a man that scorns that beaten way, And owes his Passage to himself; 'Tis base, And argues a low spirit, to be taught By Custome, and to let the vulgar grow To our example: 'Tis to betray a Virgin, And urge the merit of a Treachery To win Affection: I do not love This ridling Dialect, and how ever grown Above the pitch of any thing that's vulgar, Am plain in my Demands: Tell me, art 'mine, I adde not Mistresse, be that the fein'd voyce Of them who stretch their wits but to delude: And cheat thy love.
Art. Sir, I am so far yours As you shall please to stile me, and embrace The Name of any Thing your will puts on me▪ Phi. 'Tis the discretion of thy modesty Thus to rely on me; but prithee tell me, Is there no rival-Name left in thy bosome? Does no part of Lysander still rest there? Is He quite vanisht? for I would be loath To mingle Faith, and to divide Affection; Thou should'st be mine intire. Art. I would not wrong A Suitor of that bounteous worth which dwells Within your prudent breast, with an half Marriage I should be then but partly blest, since all My happinesse is onely thus confirm'd In being wholly yours. But I can bring A stronger proof then my bare Testimony, Thus to clear all suspition of a love Ty'd to some other; here I humbly offer, And (though against the priviledge of my Sexe) Beg your acceptance that we may be joyn'd As firm together as each of us are Chain'd to our selv's; Let the Marriage knot Combine our hands in witnesse of the league Made by our twinn'd Soules. Phi. Thus thou hast remov'd All scruple from my Thoughts, 'Tis not the voyce Of Hymen, nor his Priest can more confirm My faith in Thee: But for that other knot Which links our hands together, that a while Must be defer'd, to be attended on By the magnificence of Ceremony. It were a scandal to the height in which My Dignity is sphear'd to have a wedding With no more Celebration then the Priests: I must not wound my Fame, nor let my state Thus long held up now droop, and grow obscure, They must be both kept whole, and my repute Must flourish still unblemisht.
Art. My desires Shall wait on yours, amd I'le no more pursue The haste of Marriage, since 'tis your command That we expect it still. Phi. How I applaud The obedience of thy love! A while farewel: But stay; we must yet e're I leave thee, thus Salute, else we have parted all this while: I am not yet skill'd in the Complements Which love requires: no matter, I shall learn e'm. Once more farewel: I'le hasten the dispatch Of all fit Entertainments. Exe. Philo. Art. Sir, farewel: So; to my wish; Now whom Lysander hates Shall reap the comfort of my Bridal bed: I am not taken with this Philonax For all his stiles of honour: but no matter, It is resolv'd, I'le love him; and perhaps Wean him from those false pleasures, which his Pride Hath fastned on him; I see his vanity, He courts, as if against all Cupids rules, He would command upon the Marriage day, And yet I sooth him in it, lest my Coynesse Should drive him back, and my revenge be lost: Hereafter I'le reform him, and so gain A praise to vengeance, which though 'tis a vice, (If all hit right) yet shall produce a vertue. Exe. Omnes. The end of the third Act. ACT. 4. SCEN. 1. Panareta. Ethusa. Pan. SIster, you know how oft you have profest My word should be the Square of all your Actions.
Eth. I not deny the promise, and my deeds Shall speak as much. Pan. How I should hugge thy kindnesse, If this soft temper were but settled on Thee: And Thou as yet knew'st not the rigorous Scorn To hate a worthy Lover. Eth. Such a one Next to your self I'de cherish, but you then Must give me leave with mine own eyes to see And judge him worthy. Pan. Ah Sister! do you thus Observe what you profest? Is my word now The square of all your actions? Eth. Pardon Sister, This is a matter of a higher Nature, Then to be taken up on trust: In things Of an indifferent strain I shall submit: But on that base which props my Fate, I must Call my own judgment unto Counsel there. Pan. Where is that solemn Reverence then you'l pay To my experienc'd Discretion? Is this the honour you bestow upon A Judgment, to intrust it with meer Trifles? Eth. Then you would have me to love Theocles? Pan. 'Tis the Ambition of my best wishes: Hee's A man so well accomplish'd, that I should Grow Envious, if he were once bestow'd On any but a Sister. Eth. Hee's a man Sufficient, whose Suit I'de hear with pity, If you'l grant mine. Pan. Speak, and thou hast thy wish. Eth. Then cease to love Lysander; one of that state That hee'l be woo'd forsooth; you must bespeak And flatter his Affection; shortly I fear Hee'l have you visit him and kisse his hand. Pan. Ah cruel Sister! do'st thou thus reward My best of wishes for thy unhappy self,
To rob me of mine own? Th'hast giv'n a wound, Onely Lysander can inflict a greater: When that Name's tortur'd then I feel a rack, My fortunes are so woven into his, (Like Phydia's Image in the Deity) (And hee's my God too) that what ere mishap Strives to deface him, the same ruines me. Not love him? prithee bid me not be Panareta, Bid me confine the ayr within my hand, And grasp a Thought: This were an easier task. To them Theocles his Page. Pag. The onely fair of Ladies! My Master Theocles with his humblest service Directs this Letter to kisse your white hands. Pan. You mean my Sister sure. Pag. It is indors'd With your name to Panareta. She takes the Letter. Eth. The Lad speaks well, had his Neat Complement But left some beauty too for me: Did Theocles Teach you these manners? Pag. Madam within that Face I see your Picture drawn so well, I may Without a wrong to your divinest Feature, Stile that the onely beauty. Pan. Return our thanks, tell him h'hath shewn a Skilful Friendship. Pag. Madam, I'le blesse his Ears with your acceptance. Exe. Page. Pan. I must perus't again; such good Newes gathers Strength, and growes ith' Repetition. She reads. Eth. See how she melts! with what delight she reads? And dwells upon each syllable; as if She had receiv'd a packet in one letter. Sure it must needs be love! if Theocles (Fool that I am, that I cann't call him mine) But if my Theocles should bow his Flame, And force it 'stoop unto Panareta's Love▪ To what a passe then hath my Coynesse brought me?
I fear 'tis no vain guesse; perhaps he thus Shoots his disdain at me; and he may now Love with Revenge more then Affection. Now Sister; how do you like his Courtship? Is it not full, as if there dropt a heart From his swoll'n pen? Pan. I like his Courtship? Eth. Heavens! shee's too honest to deny't, H'hath learnt contempt from me. Pan. How Sister, caught? Eth. I am, and foolishly have caught my self; I had not lost him, had I not bin too sure That he was mine. Pan. Sister, y'ave made me glad In this discovery, Newes almost as good As that the Letter brought me. Eth. And can you then Prize any thing as high as Theocles? His love should be more then expression. Pan. Still you increase my joyes. Eth. Nay let it not Be sport that I am ruin'd, because thence You gain a fortune. Pan. Since 'tis gone thus far, I hope 'tis past recal: Then you love Theocles! Eth. As I do health or vertue: but do not mock At my misfortune; sure he lov'd me once. Pan. And does so still: if you desire a proof, Read his own Letter. Eth. Thus he that executes Holds out the Axe which cuts away our life, And we are first kill'd through the Eyes. I'le read, But prithee Sister, if I chance to sigh Or wet the paper with a Tear, as if I'de drown the sad contents, prithee at least Bestow a pity on me, and confesse My losse deserves this sadnesse. Now I die.
She reads. Artemone, through a Jealousie I wrought in her, hath cast off Lysander; my aym is; that despairing here, he may esteem your love as it deserves—— But is it then no worse? I feel a Joy Running through all my veins, and I conceive That I may live still. Pan. Nay but read on, There's somewhat else left that requires your notice. Eth. Oh is the wound behind still! I had thought There could no Poyson follow such fair words: But be it what it will, I'le taste it. She reads on. ——I have my reward, if you further my suit to Ethusa. Theocles. I'de thought I was in heaven before: but now I'm past the reach of Envy. If you further my suit to Ethusa. O what a rellish Flow from these words? I am thine Theocles, Thine own without a mediators help: But prithee Sister do not thou betray The weaknesse of my passion; let me still Hold out, and though you know my eageraesse, Let me come slowly on; I would yeeld Too soon, though I have yeelded all already: I cann't deny his suit, yet I'de be loath To flye into his armes; I would retain Some modesty ith' height of passion. Pan. As I would not desire you should wooe, So I would wish you would not be too stiffe, One stubbornnesse may lose us both. Eth. I'le not wrong The hopes of either, since to Tyrannize Longer o're him, were to torment my self.
SCEN. 2. To them Lysander walking silently. Pan. MY dear Lysander, Th'art opportunely welcome; for no time Is thought unfit when to enjoy thy presence. 'Tis season at thy very Entrance. He walks by. Eth. What? is he grown a Mummer? Lys. One of your Making Lady. Eth. 'Troth then you have forgot your vizard Sir, My Maid shall fetch a mask. Lys. No Lady, I can be content for once To look upon you through one pair of eyes. Pan. Come, do not thus revenge your self. still he walks by. Eth. What? is Lysander come yet? Lys. Yes, and with him the neglect you taught him. Eth. Troth Sir, I'de forgot the Mask, and was thinking to have Sent for your self. Lys. Prithee good Lady send: faith not worth a servant. Eth. I have one Sir ready at call. Eudora. To them Eudora. Eud. Madam. Eth. Go call Lysander hither. Eud. I go Madam. Lysander! Does not your Ladiship mean Theocles? Eth. I tell thee Girle Lysander. Eud. Madam hee's there before you. Eth. O I cry thee mercy, are you the man? well, leave us. Ex. Eud. Lys. I was once, and there are some here could wish I were so still. Pan. There is indeed Lysander. he walks by. Still slighted? what a strange rage tears my divided breast? See Sister, what a Monster your disdain hath
Made me; I'm not worth the speaking to: Prithee calm him, and yeeld a little, I know 'Tis thy neglect to his friend Theocles, That robs him thus of his Civility. Eth. I will endeavour. Pray Sir, from whence rise these strange Postures? Lys. You may inform your self. Eth. My Ignorance will not Admit of a conjecture. Lys. Know then, It is your cruelty to that best of men, The faithful Theocles. Eth. This is stranger yet; Suppose that true, yet how can this excuse The fullennesse of your Temper? Lys. Thus; You know my vowes are past so to regard Panareta, as you do Theocles, To whom your disrespect does bind my Faith To shew her this disguis'd behaviour: 'Tis you, her Sister, wrongs her. Eth. I know not, but methinks I feel Some yeelding passions; if there be a name Next under Love, That, he hath won already, I bear some good will towards Theocles. Lys. If you expect no more from me, that task Is soon perform'd: I bear some good will too Towards Panareta. Pan. 'Las, that's a bounty You have still granted me without a Suit; I aym at somewhat higher. Lys. Pardon Lady, My vow that keeps me off. Pan. Prithee Ethusa Grow nearer in thy love to Theocles. 'Tis one advantage yet, since 'tis my Fate To wooe, to beg help through a Sisters love.
Eth. Lysander then I challenge all your vow; That you affect constant Panareta, since I now begin to honour Theocles. Lys. Then vanish hence all roughnesse; fairest Lady, I now professe my self what I was forc'd to hide, My self your humblest Creature. Pan. Blessed change: 'Tis Musick all thou speak'st: this late disorder Heightens my joy: thus we owe thanks toth' cloud That robs us of our Sun, that after he May shew a face more washt and clean. Lys. But yet▪ I must needs grant there are some trifling vowes Made to another love, fair Artemone, Which I would fain forget. Pan. But dare you then If she send back those vowes, and remit all Your kinder promises; if she renounce And slight your former love, dare you then place Those vowes on me. Lys. By all the faith of oathes Then I will love none but Panareta. Pan. Fixt in this confidence, I will no more Be troubled with this torment Jealously. Lys. Nor shall you find just cause: you freely now Dare trust my absence; There's a Passion burns Strugling within my breast, which checks my love, And tells me, I delay the news too long, For want of which my Theocles doth languish. Eth. Confirm him strongly in my affection, Leave him no scruple unresolv'd; tell him I languish too, and shall expect his Visit. Lys. Worthy Madam thanks for these brave employments▪ Ex. Lys. Pan. I owe these joyes all unto Thee; nor yet Shall I appear ungrateful, since I have us'd No other means for my own happinesse, But what may prove the readiest way to thine:
Thus thou enjoy'st Thy Theocles; thus thy love Is like a vertuous Deed, it's own reward— SCEN. 3. To them Philonax. —NOw Noble Philonax. Phi. It wrongs my Faith To Artemone but to see that Face. aside. Pan. Dare you not trust our Ears with what you whisper? You were not wont to be alone with us. Phi. I dare, though what I speak be my own poyson. Eth. If he talk venom, will not his discourse Blister our Eares? 'Faith mine begin to tingle already. Phi. Know then Panareta, since I left that Face (In which resides my onely happinesse) I thought I could forget it, and at length I thought I might not love it: your disdain Rais'd up these treasons, 'gainst the Majesty Of your unequall'd beauty; then I strove To love fair Artemone, as the white Which Cupids shaft might easier penetrate: I woo'd but with an ill successe: for she Straight granted, and bethought her presently Upon the Marriage; she talk'd nothing but Wedding solemnities, and with such eagernesse I thought her self would make the Bridal song: It is agreed with all; Grave Melesippus And sage Diarchus too have feal'd the Match With their too free consents; my bus'nesse here Was to take back those vowes, which yet your Scorn Would ne're vouchsafe t'admit: but being uncharm'd From Artemone, and again fetter'd Within the glorious prison of your Face, I must now beg that you deny my suite,
Y'ave strook a ray with those fair wounding Eyes That chains my heart unto e'm. Eth. O the tricks That love deceives with, how it never goes Abroad with his own Face. Pan. But tell me, are you sure That Artemone hath bestow'd her self Freely on you? Do not mock my Fancy, Which may be credulous against my self. Phi. As sure as I shall hazard all my fortunes In your just hate, whom my still ardent flame Pursues with a strong Faith. Pan. Then carry hence This beam of comfort, if you dare affirm Shee's false to her Lysander, that I thus May be reveng'd of his unjust disdain, Whil'st he shall lose all his best hopes in her, You shall much please me, and soon meet my thanks. Come Sister. Exe. Pan. Ethu. Phi. Then happy Philonax who thus doth wooe One Bride, that he may have the choice of two. Ex. Phil. SCEN. 4. Mise. Pis. Lamp. Pis. NAy, but I prithee good Miserotos, hast thou thought on the means whereby we might effect our Desires? Lam. I, that is it we desire to know. Mis. O you can speak plain language now. Lam. Yes, 'faith, the power of love hath reform'd me, yet at first I was very unweildy to be wrought into passable prose. But to the Plot you promis'd. Mis. Then thus: You know your Mistresse hath enjoyn'd you to change humours; you Pisistratus to make Sonnets altogether,
and speak nothing but rime: you Lamprias to fight and swagger as he was wont. Lam. Yes, this we know too well, but which way we may execute it, are altogether ignorant. Mis. I'le tell you: you Lamprias shall pen some verses which Pisistratus shall deliver as his own. Lam. I, but what then? he cannot lend me any of his valour, how shall he requite me? Mis. Be patient a while and mark; you shall make him be∣sides some other verses by way of common place, to furnish him with an answer in rime upon most occasions. Now in lieu of this Courtesie, he shall let you in the presence of his Mistresse give him any opprobrious terms whatsoever, and with patience re∣ceive 3. or 4. blowes and kicks from you: which must needs give a sufficient Testimony of your mutual change, and her power that effected it. Lam. Thanks kind Miserotos; this plot is admirable: I'le pen some thundering speech for my self, which if I have the grace to pronounce with a brave courage, I am made for ever: But I much fear, I shall hardly find in my heart to beat this Pisistra∣tus, I have found him alwaies so boysterous; and then I have no skill at my weapon. Mis. O 'tis but practising a little, you may beat your man or so. Lam. What if I practis'd first upon one of my Landladies Maids? Mis. That's base and cowardly. Lam. Or one of her little boyes? Mis. Well, do as you will; but see that you look and speak very couragiously. Pis. But what shall I do if he chance to ask me some questions, to which I have no answer in verse? Lam. Why I'le tell you the trick on't; 'Tis but thinking of two words that are rime first; and I'le warrant you with a very little pain, you may screw some other words to make up the verse: 'tis no great matter though one be sometimes shorter then another; a cripple verse that halts upon crutches, sometimes does very well, and moves compassion.
Pis. Why look you, let's hear you rime, here's two words, Armado, and Lansprisado. Lam. For your sake Madam, I fear not an Armado, For I would kill e'm all with my Lansprisado. Pis. Very well: here's two other; Musket and Helmet. Lam. O Sir, that's no rime; you must by all means take a great care that your verses fall in the like sound, or else you spoyl all. Pis. What if I read some of our late versifiers for exercise? for I think there are none better to bring a man to a smooth familiar stile of riming, then some of our Modern Poems that treat of Executions, and Monsters born in other Countries. Mis. What Ballads? Pis. So I think they call e'm. Mis. Out upon e'm: treat of executions say you? it is one to read e'm; and for Monsters, they can feign none so prodigious as themselves: I'le be judg'd by your Friend Lamprias else. Lam. Indeed I alwaies esteem'd them scarce fit for a Gentle∣mans survey; and yet since Watermen, and such people have dabled in Poetry, I see no reason why they may not be gather'd into a Volume, and call'd Works: Howsoever I believe it will not be amisse for a young Sucking Poet as you are to take all ad∣vantage of imitation. Pis. I, as if I had a mind to wish her happy, thus would I rime. God save your beauty Lady fair, And send it long to raign; And eke your loyal Servants all In health and wealth maintain. Lam. Yes, yes, such may serve very well, being 'tis a way you never were skill'd in: But I'le furnish you as well as I can with verses and rimes to give an Answer to most questions, or else stand by and prompt you. You'l keep counsel, and never be discontented if it fall to my lot to enjoy her, as I promise in the same case for you. Pis. Ne're doubt me; but be you sure you do not kick too hard, for I shall be my self again presently if you do. Come let's be gone, and prepare our selves. Exe. Pis. Lam.
Mis. I will by no means misse this sport, it will be excellent mirth to hear the Captain thunder out his amorous soft strains, and my t'other friend whine out some bombast speech in a la∣mentable amorous tone: I'le be sure to follow e'm. Ex. Mis. SCEN. 5. Lysander alone. I Do repent thy wrongs vertuous Panareta; And will release the Injuries, and now strive To love in earnest; I'le repeat her sighes With a true groan, I'le mock her misery No more with grief printed but forehead deep, I know her love is as her vertues are, Intire and constant: But what rebellion Weighs down my soul? And can I spend a passion In any besides Artemones Name? She is all Faith and beauty, there my heart Chain'd with the strength of vowes hath fixt it self. Where I am equally belov'd of two, 'Tis not ingratitude but my destiny To forsake one: I should love Artemone, But must Panareta. O where's my Friend, The News I carry will chear him, though't wound The Man that tells it: I have won Ethusa Unto his bosome, but I've lost my self. To him Theocles. The. What Friend, alone? Lys. No; for I'm never dispossest of Thee, And thy fair Sister. The. 'Tis one of those good faults We cannot quarrel at: but I could wish That you were freer with Panareta. Lys. And I, that I were quite releas'd her sight! I've bin too free already, and so far Have yeelded though against my self,
That she hath gain'd Ethusa to your love: And I am now sadly imploy'd from her To tell you she is yours. Pardon Friend, If I can spin a grief out from the webbe Of your delights, suck poyson from your Joy: 'Tis not well done to put me on these snares And thorns of Friendship, There are smoother waies To shew an unmolested courtesie, And we might love at ease. The. Though I am glad At these good tydings; yet I cannot choose But grieve you envy them: I hope you will not Accuse my friendship as it were a burden. Lys. Then let my tongue be blasted. But how e're 'Tis in thy power to give a greater ease. As I've known men strong and healthful, yet Admit of Physick, though I dare not say I'm sick, yet certainly I should appear More vigorous if thou would'st cease to love Ethusa. The. If a friends breath can poyson, There is a hot infection now taints thine. Lys. Be not yet too rash: y'ave call'd me friend, And would you then grow strong out of my Ruines? The. Heavens forbid! Lys. Then see the Labyrinth in which I tread, I wooe Panareta in this disguise, Onely to win her Sister to your love: Whil'st thus I sue, that great Man Philonax Bends his Devotion towards my Goddesse, And is my dangerous Rival in your Sister, Now if you'd free me from this Vizard love, Then were my Artemone free from him, Who then would seize on fair Panareta, From whom 'tis onely my pretence hath barr'd him. The. And would you have me then not love Ethusa? 'Twas but a vain request, while my best Faith Was answer'd with the violence of scorn:
But now being strengthened with a mutual Love What fury can remove it? Lys. How I'm made up Onely of wavering! I must not see A Friend thus plung'd whilst I within my Power Can grasp the Remedy. Know then, friend Theocles, Though through my own misfortune I'le maintain Thy happinesse in its due height, methinks If Love to her must breed neglect to thee▪ I now could cancel Artemones vowes. The. O ye wonder of what was e're stil'd friendship! It were my Heaven if that thy Love to her Did not make faint, and cool Ethusa's heat, What now is warm'th might burn into a flame, If thou could'st truly love Panareta. Lys. I can, and shall not henceforth act thy love, Nor wooe as Proxie longer. I'le not be Onely a bare naked Interpreter, Nor spend my Suit in a third person more, I will professe my own vowes, and implore A med'cine which may cure a maladie Fest'ring within this breast: I see her love Settled, and though affronted with neglect, Unshaken still; I meet no obstacles, No threatning Father, nor too covetous Uncle, The Reins are in her own hands; she enjoyes A full command over her self, but that Sh'hath given the power to me. The. Being thus confirm'd, I'le rip my breast afore thee, and uncase A secret which till now I durst not utter. Lys. A Secret! Heavens, how have I lost my Faith, That ought between us two should be conceal'd? I thought till now thy breast was made of glasse, And lay as open to my curious view, As that Face doth. The. Call back thy former temper, When y'ave heard more, you may perhaps confesse I ought to hide it.
Lys. Prithee then quickly speak, That I may be thy Friend again: for sure That name is lost whiles there remains a Secret. The. Then since thou lovest Panareta, know my Sister Believes as much, and first hath cast thee off, It was my Plot (pardon good Lysander, Onely that one word which ere yet stain'd my Friendship) I workt her into this suspition, Told her she was forsaken, and Panareta Become her Rival; then she left thee too. Thus neither guilty, you have both cast off Each other first; my end in this contrivance Was to new plant thy Love, and make it firm Where 'twas but counterfeit, that I might thus Sooner Enjoy Ethusa. Lys. Have you now Vented your secret, is it quite out? The. It is, But I could wish that it were clos'd up still Within the private Cabin of my breast, Your frown hath made me thus unloyal. Lys. Sure 'Twas not well done then to be treacherous, When I my best faith and my falshood too Bestow'd upon thy safety—But I'm grown Too calm: If I should now consider Thee In thy first love, that thou wert once a friend, This were to season Madnesse with Discretion; And I should rave with Judgment: Ballance all Thy better deeds with this one Injury, They cannot weigh down my Revenge: then draw, That I may cut thee and thy false love off From any Title to my wounded heart. The. Sheath up your Sword and anger; let not thus Your passion rule, that you may after say Y'ave lost a friend. Lys. Base villain draw. The. If y'are so rash not to consider me,
At least remember your own spotlesse honour, The Noblenesse with which you heretofore Were wont to fight, would scorn to take advantage, Know then your challenge aymes at one that is Already wounded; your severer tongue Worse then the fiercest rage your Sword can bring, Hath almost slain me. Lys. Fy, do not thus increase The wrong th'ast done me; let me not be forc'd To kill the yeilding; for my own fames sake At least do one good deed, and to redeem The scandal which thus brands my Innocence, Die with thy sword in hand. The. Ify'are resolv'd Upon my death, inflict it; be it ne're said, (What ever the disgrace my tongue hath done) I took up armes against my friend. Lys. Ile tear That Name from thy false throat; to be thy freind Is to be treacherous, a Sin which yet Could never reach Lysander; which my sword (A name to me allmost as dear as fayth) Shall thus maintain. The. Then since I needs must draw, 'Tis with thy hand I do it. Lys. Take my thanks Yet for this latest Curtesy. They fight. Theo. wounded. SCEN. 6. To them Melesip. Diarchus. Philonax. Artem. Hypera. MEl. O my son Theocles! Art. O my Brother, my Dear Brother.
Diar. What sadnesse do we see? where is the Author? Phi. Here, 'tis base Lysander. Mel. You Artemone take care of Theocles; see the best Surgeons be quickly sent for. The. Be not thus tender, 'tis but a scratch h'hath given me. Exe. The. Art. Hyp. Mel. O false Lysander! canst thou pretend love Born to our family, and yet thus wrong The best part of it? Diar. Brother, y'are too mild, 'Tis not discourse, but law must right us. Phi. Let us strait tear a Satisfaction Out of his Inmost bowels. Mel. Noble Sir, We must not heal one quarrel with a new one, Here's too much blood already. Lys. I have not thus Stood silent, that I might with leisure frame Some Innocent Apology; I've heard And seen your griefs, which I my self have born: Th' Amazement which is stuck in all your browes, Is fixt within my heart too, this same hand Wonders as much at what is done as you, And I can scarce believe 'twas I that did it: Let Melesippus and Diarchus know I pity their misfortune as my own. Diar. But pray Sir let's know what reason was't That rais'd this Tumult. Mel. You were wont to joyn In close Embraces of another kind. What should thus change your greeting? Lys. Some few rash words too bad to be rehearst. Diar. 'Tis now past hiding, you must shew the cause To us, or to the rack. Lys. I cannot utter it. Mel. Lead on then, we must put you in the charge Of a strong guard if the wound be dangerous. Exe. Omnes. The end of the fourth Act.
ACT. 5. SCEN. 1. Theocles. Artemone. Hyperia. Art. I Would you had still kept the cause unknown Of this your fatal Combat, sure I am, 'Thas bred a Mutiny within my soul, Scatter'd Seditious wars through all my thoughts. O Brother! you have made me break a faith Firm as the Rock of Diamonds, and as precious▪ I must confesse continual waves of Fear And Jealousie much dash't it, and endeavour'd At least to overwhelm that which they could not Shake from its firmer station; yet it stood Unmov'd, though not discover'd. O Lysander! What will thy Innocence conceive, when Thou Shalt find my heart thus alter'd, and my Faith, (My Faith once given to Thee) plight to another, To Philonax thy Enemy, and owe all this Unto thy Friend, my Brother? yet I know His softer Disposition cannot choose But pardon, and still love you, call you still His hearty, constant, loving—Traiterous Friend, And thus embrace you. Closing with Theocles, she drawes out his poniard, offering to stab him, but is hinder'd by Hyperia. Hyp. Hold Madam, what's your meaning? The. Hyperia, thou didst but ill to hinder The wholsome wound, I have much blood still left me Might well be spar'd, much bad corrupted blood Which hath infected, more then fill'd my veins, That blood which prompted my unwilling thoughts To value my desires above my Faith; Would it were all exhausted, save so much As might preserve a Blush for my past Folly.
Come belov'd Enemy, unrip my bosome, You need not wound my heart, for that already Bleeds a Repentance in a showr of Teares, Which like so many purpled Magistrates Passe Sentence on my Guilty thoughts. Art. Oh Sir, Y'ave quite o'recome my rage by this unfeigned, This powerful Repentance, your hearty teares Have quite extinguish'd all my Flames of Anger: I now begin agen to be your Sister, Yet I could wish your thoughts had bin unspoken, I would this had not hapned. weeps. The. Think not my Speech, When first I did accuse your true Lysander, Utter'd the least Intention of my Thoughts: My words did then as much belie my knowledge As his unmoved Loyaltie. Alas, My own love tempted me to betray his, Art. That agen blowes my zealous rage. I would He had bin false indeed, (pardon Lysander) Would he had broke his promise: but that he Should then preserve so true, so strict a faith, When credulous I upon a bare report, Nay not so much but one Mans single word Should cancel all my vowes: And yet it was My Brothers word, the friendly, vertuous Theocles. For heavens sake take your poniard, and prevent All outrage that my passion may suggest. The. Nay do your pleasure, here I stand that would Most willingly now fall a Sacrifice To your offended goodnesse. Surely when This cottage of my soul shall fall to earth Crumbling to dust, your Fury will like that Be blown away; when you shall find me ashes, And think me made so by your Flames of Anger, You will forgive me, nay will you not? pray speak. Art. Sorrow thou comest too thick upon me, and My opprest Soul sinks under the vast burden.—
SCEN. 2. To them Lysander. —O Brother hide me from that Deity That is so much offended; I dare now Not look on any thing that is not false And like my self. And yet for ought I know, There's unexpected mercy. I have heard That Noble power does as oft appear In lenity as just Revenge. O Sir, If your breast harbour pity for that wretch That could find none for you, here you may use it: And this in all my misery shall be The seasoning comfort that I shall supply The object where you may imploy a vertue. Lys. Fairest, those knees were never meant to bow But to the Gods that made e'm. Art. Sir, let this Excuse My former stiffnesse: I have broke my vowes, And given away my Faith, as if you first By a recanting falshood had provok't it; But heaven knowes you are true, and I as black As sin can make me: yet methinks mistake Might somewhat mollifie the Censure of My giddy passion. No, it was enough That I could think ought true that might impair Your vertuous Constancy. Lys. I pray correct Your erring thoughts, for I was false indeed, And hither came for pardon. Art. O the vastnesse Of faithful love! undo me not I pray By that Immensity of Favours, which 'Twill be impossible e're to deserve. That love should force a Man t'accuse himself! And lest I might well think I had done basely
Thus to pretend a falshood. Come, I shall Sooner suspect the sprightly fire should Forget its natural wings, leave to mount upward, And creep upon the sordid earth, then once Your pure and elevated Thoughts could flag, Or that your Faith could know so low an ebbe As to think foulely. O Sir, I am anothers, And cannot now bestow my self upon you, Nor dis-ingage my self from all that load Of kindnesse you have heap'd upon me, but thus— offers to stab. Lys. Hold Lady, hear me out, and you will find I'm not the man for whom you ought to die. Know to my shame I speak it, I was false, Nay truly false. My faith was counterfeit, But not the breach of it: and that you may Know so much to your self, hither I come First t'implore a pardon, then desire That you would render back my vowes unto me, Forget that e're you lov'd me, or I you. And if the least Desert of mine remain In your fair breast, that still might prompt Affection, Tear it away; for I have blasted all My former merits by this Act of basenesse. Art. How I embrace that falshood! O it joyes me (As now my fortune stands) more then all Faith, All love could ever. And I would fain know The happy reason that first mov'd you to it. Lys. Madam, when first I had the licence from you To court Panareta, I was all your own, Yet somewhat doubtful through the Jealous fears, Chiefly through that old hate your friends bore to me, To which being added that fair Carriage, which Panareta alwaies studied, quite o'recame My dallying thoughts, and turn'd them at length To a true dotage. O she would often sit And breathe a clowd of sighes, tell me how much I should abuse a credulous virgin, if I did but personate that love I made.
How if I did enjoy another Mistresse, Her Ghost (for sure she could not well out-live it) Would fright my soul from this my body to her: O she would cast such powerful glances on me, Such charming Spirits danc'd in the bright rayes Of every view; They did draw up my soul, And chain'd it fast to hers. Thus the fond Lark Playing about the glittering snare does tempt The Nets, and dares its prison, till at length He finds his Liberty betrai'd, and all That pomp of brightnesse, but a glorious bayt. The. Methinks in all the story y'have forget The principal main businesse, my Obligement, The Cause of all these Troubles; yet I hope You did it not in that neglected way As to forget it strait: why tell you not How you may thank your Friend for these Disasters? How faithlesse Theocles wrought all this woe? And to Reward you, studied to betray you. Lys. O Friend! the rough behaviour I last used Hath wip'd off all your score; you now stand bound To me for nothing: nay you shall oblige me If you will sign my pardon, for which merit I hope I shall e're some few minutes passe, Make and pronounce you happy in your love. The. Your goodnesse still o'recomes us, and your Favours Flow in so high a strain they seem to scorn All competition of Desert or Thanks. SCEN. 3. To them Melesippus. Diarchus. Philonax. Panareta. Ethusa. Mel. COme Lovers to the Temple, you were best Make all the Speed you can when once agreed: There are so many tricks in love, I should
Never believe I had my wench untill The Ceremonies were all quite perform'd. Diar. And therefore we think fit my Lord, if you Can in your Judgment count it so, to passe All Ceremonious pomp. Phi. I'm yours, And onely do demand my Love here would Make but a Repetition of the vowes Which formerly have past between us two. 'Tis but to satisfie this Lady here, Who otherwise requires my love. Art. Nay sure They are all registred in heaven ere this, And onely want that approbation which The Church must soon allow. Phi. And therefore Madam, I here disclaim all right and title to you, Panareta, come, you see I have perform'd Your strict Injunction; I have woo'd her so, That you can witnesse now she disclaimes All other interest. Art. Now blesse me heaven! Shall I for ever be deluded? Phi. Oh! It cuts my very heartstrings thus t'abuse So fair a goodnesse: were I well quit here, I could recant and claim her love again. Mel. Sir, are you mad? Dia. What mean you Lady? Pan. Sir, I shall study to deserve this favour, to Phil. But cannot now bestow my self upon you, And therefore Madam here I deliver What lawfully ought to be yours. gives Philo. to Arte. Lys. What strange Mysterious clouds are these? Fair Mistresse let us to Pan. Not wander on in darknesse still, I pray What means this mad confusion? Pan. Philonax, I must confesse you first did wooe my love.
And court my thoughts, but still they were reserv'd Unto this noble Gentleman; yet still Finding him backward, in respect he had Before exprest some love to Artemone, I know no other means to dis-ingage him, But this by sending you to court his Mistresse, Which you were willing then to undertake, To please me in a Revenge I feigned, And finding to my wish such vowes between you Not fit to be revok'd, I much congratulate Your happy suite. And now Lysander, being You have here had experience how free You are from all this Lady can claym from you, I thus perform my promise unto Theocles, gives him Ethu. And therefore challenge yours. Lys. You cannot Madam More fully crown my wishes, and I hope Content dwells smooth on every brow. Eth. Sir I hope you'l pardon All roughnesse that I heretofore have used, It was but personated; now I freely Do speak my self and my own thoughts, when I Do say you are the man I onely Love, The. I am So quite distracted with my happinesse, I know not well to whom I owe it, and Therefore deferr my thanks. Art. Nay Sir, I hope you do not still repent you, Why look you so disturbed in your thoughts? Phi. I am studying what great merit I might do To win your pardon Lady. Art. Sir you have it. Phi. I now Begin to be awake my Artemone, I find I have but dreamed all this while, Now I can see your merit, and discern Your real vertues much out-ballance all
My vanted Glories, and I here shake off That personated pride I first took on me. Meerely to keep my self from such a blessing, Which now I do account above the World, Your Love; which I will study to deserve By all the Curteous humble Carriage That crownes a Genial bed. Art. O Sir, you have Redeem'd my desperate thoughts by this discovery, I ever lov'd you much, but yet I could not Perswade my self to think your pride a vertue, Which being thus shook off I do esteem you Of more then humane worth. To them a Servant. Ser. Here are some Gentlemen without desire admittance to Madam Ethusa. Eth. Bid the Trifles begone, I am now too serious. Mel. O by no means, pray Lady let e'm enter. Dia. If they bring mirth they'l do well to season our past fears. Eth. If they perform my Injunction, we shall have very good sport: one of e'm is Pisistratus the quarrelling fighter by my command turn'd Poet, and t'other my riming Gentleman Lam∣prias thrust into his humour: pray interpose not, but let me have▪ my will. SCEN. 4. To them, Pisistratus with a boy before him bearing a Lawrel, Lamprias in some Knight-like attire usher'd by his Squire bearing a Sheild and Lance, Miserotos. Pisistratus takes his Lawrel and makes towards Ethusa. Eth. VVHat have we here a prize? How now my Poet, What's the Newes with you? Pis. Madam see here the power of your love, Out of my proper sphear it makes me move.
I who whilome like Warriour thunder'd wildly, Am melted to a Poet, and now speak mildly. Eth. Most mildly deliver'd, sure you have spoke a speech in a Pageant: but where's your Sonnet? have you brought me no papers of verses? Pis. In sign I versifie by your command, This to your feet I offer; these to your hand. Laying his bayes at her feet, of∣fering his verses. Eth. Let your boy sing e'm.— Song. Two-topt Parnassus I defy, But that your swelling breasts supply, If every Poet there mightly, O who could choose but versify! A quill that's snatch'd from Cupid's wing in spite Of inbred Nature will compel to write. Then for a Helicon I know A purer far your lips do show, What in your Cheeks before was snow, Melted to Nectar there doth flow. I can out-vy Phoebus, whiles I enjoy A Daphne far more fair then his was coy. —Very well, let me see e'm. She reads. Two-topt Parnassus I defy, But that your swelling breasts supply. That I may know these are your own making, tell me what is Parnassus. Mis. She'l put him out of his way and spoyl his riming. Lamp. prompts. The Poets Mountain. Pis. Fair Lady to give you an answer plain, As I have heard some say, it was the Poets mountain. Mis. Now he is forc'd to rime of himself, mark how he hacks the Kings language. Eth. Well, and what can you say of Helicon? Lam. prompts, The Muses spring. Pis. By Bellona Madam, the truth to tell yee, The Muses spring heretofore was called Heli—Con by the Poets.
Eth. Well Sir. (reads) I can out-vy Phoebus, whiles I enjoy A Daphne far more fair then his was coy. I pray Sir what Relation had Daphne to Phoebus? Pis. She was—she was—what, what? jogging him. Lamp. prompts. His Mistresse turn'd to Lawrel. Pis. She was his Mistresse not turn'd—not turn'd— Eth. Yes Sir, she was turn'd, but to what? Pis. Now I have't) She was Phoebus Mistresse not turn'd to rue or Sorrell, But metamorphosed into a Lawrel. Eth. I see this suddain riming doth somewhat perplex you; but I find by your written verses which you have studied, That upon mature deliberation you write very well, and are like to make a hopeful Poet. Well, so much for you: Now my brave Knight let's hear you rant it. Pis. I think I came off with credit: but she put me shrewdly to it at last, I had no rimes provided for such answers. Lamp. having stalked about, talks in his amorous tone. Through many craggy cliffes of Mountains high and mighty, have I by the robustuous nerves of these brawny armes sought out Bellonian Encounters, to testifie th'affection I have conceiv'd to the fairest of Fayres, Ethusa; In whose defence I here stand up a Champion, and defie all Bradamants, all Knights of the burning pestle; by the dreadful thunder of my tearing throat I will astonish and confound them; by the Aetnean flashes which my bayting inrag'd blood shall evaporate, I will wrap them in flakes of lightning, or by the Boreasian Tempest of my most stre∣nuous breath shake in pieces their limbs, and sweep their scatter'd reliques into the Sea-like Dust. Eth. Most prodigiously valiant. Sir, your voyce methinks is much chang'd since last I saw you; you then spake in a mild amorous key, but now you do so thunder-thump it, heavens! how it pierc'd my Eares? but yet all this does not confirm me that you are valiant, I should desire some better testimony of your valour then this speech onely. Lam. Shall I then cut this Trayterous Gyants head off, and laying it at my feet (with a Non Curo for my Motto) look like the man that does contemn the world, and playes at Foot-ball
with the Globes of Earth. Worm I will trample on Thee. Kicks and beats Pisis. Pis. Hold, or I swear ere thou shalt have the higher hand▪ I'le rime thee to death as they do rats in Ireland.—Not so hard you Rascal. privately Eth. Most killing verses I promise you. Hold, this is pretty well▪ but I do not believe, but if I gave him Commission, he would return your blowes with some advantage. (I doubt there's some conspiracy betwixt e'm. I'le sift e'm strait) I think I must choose Piststratus, for I like him as well for a Poet, and better then you for a Souldier. Lam. Shee'l choose him now, and then have I play'd the fool all this while to very great purpose. I must prevent it. Lady, and if you please to breath a vigour into my nerves by your com∣mand, I'le beat this Coward, till he shall utterly disclaim all title to your favours. Pis. (privately) That's more then I promis'd Sirrah: take heed you vaunt not too much. Eth. Nay that's unequal, you being arm'd, and he having no offensive weapon but his tongue: He shall have another Sword, and then the Conquerour shall not fear a Rival. What say you, will you agree to that? Lam. Madam, I must confesse although I kick him here or so, there have such bonds of Friendship knit us together heretofore, that now they tye my hands from drawing his blood. I would not fight with my Friend. Eth. How say you Sir? are your hands tyed too by the bonds of Friendship? would not you accept the motion? Pis. Madam my love to you so firmly ty'd is, That for your sake I would not fear to fight with Alcides. Eth. See you that Sir, hee'l venture if you dare. Lam. Why Pisistratus, Friend Pisistratus, pri thee refuse it; I tell thee I will by no means fight with my Friend. Eth. Nay Sir, you see y'ave cast your self: he hath made me here very good verses, and then he is very valiant: I must choose him for— Lam. Hold Lady, pray you forbear; suspend your choice a
while, and I believe I shall prevent it when I have told you all. Know then, he is no Poet, I made those verses, this brain is the mint that coyn'd em. Pis. Which I will trample under my feet you Rascal, can you not keep conditions? Nay seeing you have discover'd. Lady, see here his fortitude, 'tis onely passive, he dares not advance a Sword against a mouse. I in charity, that he might hereafter appear in some credit, lent him my back for a while to use it as he pleas'd, but if you did observe, he struck me very heedfully, he durst not let his armes flee with a free swinge thus, nor went his feet without discretion, as if they kickt in earnest. Mis. Hold Sir, you'l kill the Gentleman; pray Lady end the strife. Eth. Then thus my Friends; neither of you can challenge any reward from me, neither having perform'd my Injunctions: how∣ever I will not be so severe as to detain the guerdon I alwaies intended, and you have taken such pains for: you shall be laugh'd at. Mis. Come, come, I told you at first what you might expect, ne're stand to reply for fear of being worse abus'd. Ex. Pis. Lam. Mis. Lys. Lady, these Trifles being gone, let us proceed to the Consummation of your joyes. I am glad yet you us'd Theocles better. Eth. Nay Sir, I can easily distinguish betwixt realities and out∣sides. The. Madam I thank your good opinion, and will study to continue it. Come forward to the Temple. Phi. Art. That is our general voyce, pray Sir, lead on. Mel. Why this is well, I thought 'twould come about at last. Dia. Now Joy unto you all: Lysander, Friends, and that I may comply with your now smiling Fate, At these your weddings, I divorce my hate. FINIS.
