N1491 E318_7 99861267 158997
THE EXCELLENCY AND LAWFVLNESSE of the Solemne League and COVENANT. Set forth in a Speech, or Exhortation made by Mr. Phillip Nye to the Honorable House of Com∣mons and Reverend Assembly of Mini∣sters at their taking the said Solemne LEAGVE and COVENANT. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for Tho. Ʋnderhill, at the signe of the Bible in Wood-street. 1646.
An Exhortation made to the Honorable House of Commons and Re∣verend Assembly of Ministers by M. Nye, at their taking the Solemne League and Covenant Sept. 25. 1643. A Great and solemne worke (Honorable and Reverend) this day is put into our hands, let us stir up and awaken our hearts unto it. We deale with God as well as with men, and with God in his greatnesse and excellencie, for by him we sweare, and at the same time wee have to doe with with God and his goodnesse, who now reacheth out unto us a strong and seaso∣nable arme of assistance. The goodnesse of God procuring succour and helpe to a sinfull and afflicted people (such as we) ought to be matter of feare and trembling even to all that beare of it, Jer. 33.9. Wee are to exalt and acknowledge him this day who is fearefull in praises, sweare by that name which is holy and reverent, enter into a Covenant and League that is never to be forgotten by us nor our posterity, and the fruit I hope of it shall be so great, as both we and they shall have cause to remember it with joy; and such an Oath as for matter, persons, and other circumstances, the like hath not beene in any age or Oath we reade of in sacred or humane Stories, yet sufficiently warranted in both. The parties ingaging in this league are three Kingdomes, famous for the knowledge, and acknowledgement of Christ above all the Kingdomes in the world; to sweare be∣fore such a presence, should mould the spirit of man into a great deale of reverence; what then to be engaged, to be incorporated, and that by sacred Oath, with such an high and Honorable Fraternity? An Oath is to be esteemed so much the more solemne, by how much greater the persons are that sweare each to other: as in heaven when God sweares to his Son, on earth when Kings sweare each to other; so in this businesse, where Kingdomes sweare mutually. And as the solemnitie of an Oath is to be measured by the persons swearing, so by the matter also that is to be sworne to; God would not sweare to the Covenant of workes, he intended not to honour it so much, it was not to continue, it was not worthy of an Oath of his; but to the Covenant of grace, which is the Gospel, he sweares and repents not of it. God sweares for the salvation of men, and of Kingdomes: And if Kingdomes sweare, what subject of an Oath becommeth them better then the preservation and salvation of Kingdomes, by establishing the Kingdome of a Saviour amongst them, even our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who is a Mediator and saviour for Nations as well as particular persons. The end also is great and honorable, as either of the former, Two is better then one saith he who best knoweth what is best; and from whom alone every thing hath the goodnesse it hath. Association is of divine Ofspring; not only the being of Creatures, but the putting of them together: the cluster as well as the grape is the worke of God: consort and harmony amongst men, especially amongst Saints, is very pleasng unto the
Lord. If when but two or three agree and assent upon any thing on earth, it shall bee confirmed in heaven: and for this, because they gather together in his name, much more when two or three Kingdomes shall meet and consent together in his name and for his name, that God may be one, and his name one amongst them, and his presence amidst them. That prayer of Christs seemeth to proceede from a feeling sense of his own bles∣sednesse; Father, that they may be one, as thou in me, &c. Unity amongst his Chur∣ches and Children must needs therefore be very acceptable unto him: For out of the more deepe sense desires are fetcht from within us, the more pleas ng will be the answer of them unto us. Churches and Kingdomes are deare to God, his patience towards them, his compassions over them, more then particular persons, sheweth it plainely. But Kingdomes willingly engaging themselves for his Kingdome, his Christ, his Saints, the purity of Religion, his worship, and Governement, in all particulars, and in all humility, fitting downe at his feet to receive the law and the rule from his mouth; what a price doth he set upon such? Especially when (as we this day) sen∣sible of our infirmity, of an unfaithfull heart, not steady with our God, but apt to start from the cause, if we feele the knife or the fire; who binde our selves with cords, as a sacrifice to the hornes of the Altar. Wee invocate the name of the great God, that his vowes, yea his curse may be upon us, if we doe not this; yea though wee suffer for so doing: that is, if wee endeavour not so far as the Lord shall assist us by his grace, to advance the Kingdome of the Lord Jesus Christ hereupon earth, and make Jerusalem once more the praise of the whole world, notwithstanding all the contradictions of men. What is this but the contents and matter of our Oath? What doe wee covenant? What doe we vow? Is it not the preservation of Religion, where it is reformed, and the Reformation of Religion, where it needs? Is it not the Reformation of three King∣domes, and a Reformation universall, Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, in whatsoe∣ver the Word shall discover unto us? To practise, is a fruit of love; to reforme, a fruit zeale; but so to reforme, will be a token of great prudence, and circumspection in each of these Churches. And all this to be done according to Gods word, the best Rule, and according to the best reformed Churches, the best interpreters of this Rule. If Eng∣land hath obtained to any greater perfection in so handling the word of righteousnesse, and truths, that are according to godlinesse, as to make men more godly, more righteous: And if in the Churches of Scotland any more light and beauty in matters of Order & Discipline, by which their Assemblies are more orderly: Or if to any other Church or person it hath been given better to have learned Christ in any of his waies then any of us: we shall humbly bow, and kisse their lips that can speake right words unto us in this matter, and helpe us in the nearest uniformity with the word and minde of Christ in this great worke of Reformation. Honorable and Reverend Bretheren, there cannot be a more direct and effectuall way to exhort and perswade the wife, and men of sad and serious spirits (and such are you to whom I am commanded to speake this day) then to let into their understandings the weight, and worth, and great importance of the worke they are perswaded unto. This Oath is such, and in the matter and consequence of it, of such concernement, as I can tru∣ly say, it is worthy of us, yea of all these Kingdomes, yea of all the Kingdomes of the World; for it is swearing fearly and allegiance unto Christ the King of Kings; and a giving up of all these Kingdomes, which are his inheritance, to be subdued more to his Throne, and ruled more by his Scepter, upon whose shoulders the government is laid, and in the encrease of whose Government and peace there shall be no end, Esa. 9. Yea, wee finde this very thing in the utmost accomplishment of it, to have beene the Oath of the greatest Angel that ever was, who setting his feet upon two of Gods Kingdomes, the one upon the Sea, the other upon the Earth, lifting up his hand to heaven, as you are
to doe this day, and so swearing, Revel. 10. The effect of that Oath you shall finde to bee this, that the kingdomes of the world become the kingdomes of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall reigne for ever, Revel. 11. His Oath was for the full and finall ac∣complishment, this of yours for a graduall, yet a great performance towards it. That which the Apostles and Primitive times did so much and so long pray for, though never long with much quietnesse enjoyed, that which our Fathers in these latter times have fasted, prayed and mourned after, yet attained not; even the cause which many deare Saints now with God, have furthered by extreamest sufferings, poverty, impri∣sonment, banishment, death, even ever since the first dawning of Reformation: That and the very same is the very cause and worke that we are come now, through the mer∣cy of Jesus Christ, not only to pray for, but sweare to. And surely it can bee no other, but the result and answer of such prayers and teares of such sincerity and sufferings, that three Kingdomes should be thus born, or rather new borne in a day; that these King∣domes should be wrought about to so great an engagement, then which nothing is higher, for to this end Kings raigne, Kingdomes stand, and States are upheld. It is a speciall grace and favour of God unto you Brethren, Reverend and Honorable, to vouchsafe you the opportunity, and to put into your hearts (as this day) to engage your lives and estates in matters so much concerning him and his glory. And if you should doe no more but lay a foundation stone in this great worke, and by so doing engage po∣sterity after you to finish it, it were honour enough: But there may yet further use bee made of you, who now are to take this Oath, you are designed as cheife master Builders and choyce Instruments for the effecting of this setled Peace and Reformation; which if the Lord shall please to finish in your hands, a greater happinesse on earth, nor a greater meanes to augment our glory and crowne in heaven, you are not capable of. And this let me further adde for your encouragement, of what extensive good and fruit in the suc∣cesse of it, this very Oath may prove to be, we know not God hath set his Covenant like the Heavens, not onely for duration, but like also for extension: The Heavens move and roule about, and so communicate their light, and heare, and vertue, to all places and parts of the earth; so doth the Covenant of God, so may this gift bee given to other Co∣venants that are framed to that patterne. How much this solemne League and Oath may provoke other Reformed Churches to a further Reformation of themselves; what light and heate it may communicate abroad to other parts of the world, it is onely in him to define to whom is given the utmost ends of the earth for his inheritance, and worketh by his exceeding great power great things out of as small beginnings. But however, this I am sure of, it is a way in all probability most likely to enable us to preserve and defend our Religion against our common enemies, and possible a more sure foundation this day will be laid for ruining Popery and Prelacie, the cheife of them, then as yet we have been led unto in any age. For Popery, it hath been a Religion ever dexterous in fencing and mounting it selfe by association and joynt strength; all sorts of professors amongst them are cast into Frater∣nities and Bother-hoods, and these Orders carefully united by Vow one with another and under some more generall notion of common dependency. Such States also and King∣domes as they have thus made theirs; they endeavour to improve and secure by strict combinations and leagues each to other, witnesse of late yeares that La Sainte ligue, the holy league It will not be unworthy your consideration, whether seeing the pre∣servation of Popery hath been by Leagues and Covenants, God may not make a League or Covenant to bee the destruction of it: Nay the very rise of Popery seemeth to bee after such a manner by Kings, that is, Kingdomes assenting and agreeing perhaps by some joynt Covenant (the Text saith, with one minde, why not then with one mouth?) to give their power & strength unto the Beast, and make war against the Lambe, Revel.
17. where you reade the Lambe shall overcome the Beast, and possibly with the same weapons, he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, he can unite Kings & Kingdoms, and give them one minde also to destroy the Whore, and be her utter ruine; And may not this dayes work be a happy beginning of such able sed expedition. Prelacie, another common enemie, that we Covenant and sweare against, what hath it been, or what hath the strength of it been, but a subtile combination of Clergy-men fomed into a policy or body of their own invention, framing themselves into Subordi∣nation and Dependency one upon another, so that the interrest of each is improved by all, and a great power by this meanes acquired to themselves; as by sad experience wee have lately found: The joynts and Members of this body, you know were knit toge∣ther by the sacred engagement of an Oath, the Oath of Canonicall obedience as they called it: You remember also with what cunning and industry they endeavoured lately to make this Oath and Covenant more sure for themselves and their posterity: And in∣tended a more publike, solemn, and universall engagement, then since Popery, this cause of theirs was ever maintained or supported by. And questionlesse, Ireland & Scotland also must at last have been brought into this holy league with England. But blessed be the Lord, and ble sed be his good hand the Parliament, that from the indignation of their spirits against so horrid a yoke, have dashed out the very braines of this project; and are now this day present before the Lord to take and give possession of this blessed Ordi∣nance, even an Oath and Covenant as solemne and of as large extent as they intended theirs; uniting these three Kingdomes into such a league and happy combination as will doubtles preserve us and our Reformation against them, though their iniquity in the mi∣steries of it should still be working among us. Come therefore (I speake in the words of the Prophet) let us ioyne our selves to the Lord, and one to another, and each to all, in a perpetuall Covenant that shall not be forgotten. We are now entring upon a work of the greatest moment and concernment, to us & to our posterity after us, that ever was undertaken by any of us, or any of our fore-fathers before us, or neighbouring Nations about us; if the Lord shall blesse this our beginning, it will be a happy day, and we shall be a happy people. An Oath is a duty of the first Commandement, and therefore of the highest and noblest order and rank of duties; there∣fore must come forth attended with choysest graces; especially with these two, humili∣ty, and feare. Feare, not only of God, which ought to be in an eminent measure, Gen. 31.53. Ja∣cob sware by the feare af his father Isaac, as if he coveted to inherite his fathers grace as well as his fathers God: But also feare of an Oath, it being a dreadfull duty, and hath this peculiar, its established by the oath of God, I have sworn that unto me every tongue shall sweare, Isa 45.23. Its made the very Character of a Saint, he feares an Oath, Eccles. 9.2. Humility is another grace requisite, set your hearts before God in an humble obedi∣ent frame, Deut. 6. Thou shalt feare the Lord thy God, and serve him, and sweare by his name. The Apostle Paul was sensible of this engagement, even in the very act of this duty, Rom. 1.9. I call God to witnesse, whom I serve in my spirit; Although it be a work of the lips, yet the heart and whole man must be interessed, if we expect this worship to be acceptable, Psal. 119.108. Accept the free-will offering of my mouth, and teach me thy judgements. Also it must be done in the greatest simplicity and plainnesse of spirit, in respect of those with whom we covenant; Wee call God as a witne se betwixt us who searcheth the heart: With him is wisedome and strength, the deceived and deceiver is his, Job 12.19. He hath wisedome to discover, and strength to punish, if our hearts be not up∣right to our brethren in this matte. Let us be contented with this, that the words of our Covenant be bands; It may not be so much as in the desire of our hearts, that they should
become snares, no not to the weakest and simplest person that joyneth with us. In the who worke make your addresse unto God, as Jacob did to his father Isaac, and let there be the like feare and jealousie over your spirits, Gen. 27.12. My father peradventure will feele me, and I shall seeme to him as a deceiver, and I shall bring a curse upon me, & not a blessing. I take liberty with more earnestnesse to presse this care upon you, because I have observed Oaths and Covenants have been undertaken by us formerly, and by the command of au∣thority, the fruit whereof, though great, yet not answered our expectation, the Lord surely hath been displeased with the slightnesse of our hearts in the worke. I beseech you be more watchfull, and stir up your hearts with more industry this day then ever before: As it is the last Oath you are likely to take in this kinde, so is it our last refuge, tabula post naufragium: If this help us not, we are likely to remaine to our dying day an unhappy people, but if otherwise, You will indeed sweare with all your hearts, and seeke the Lord with your whole desire, God will be found, and give you rest round about. 2 Chron. 15.15. And having sworn, and entred into this solemn engagement to God and man, make con∣science to doe accordingly, otherwise it is better thou shouldst not vow, Eccles. 5. As is said of fasting, it is not the bowing down of the head for a day, so of this solemn swearing, it is not the lifting up of the hand for a day; but an honest and faithfull endeavouring af∣ter the contents of this Covenant all our dayes; A Truce-breaker is reckoned up amongst the vilest of Christians, 2 Tim. 3.3. So a Covenant-breaker is lifted among the worst of Heathens, Rom. 1.31. But he that sweareth and changeth not, though hee sweare to his hurt, that is, he that will keep his Covenant and Oath, though the contents of it prove not for him, nay possibly against him, yet he will keep it for his Oaths sake; such a one shall have his habitation with the most High, and dwell in his Tabernacle, Psalm 15. And as for you, Reverend Brethren, that are Ministers of the Gospell, there is yet anather obli∣gation will lye upon you; let us looke to our selves, and make provision to walke answe∣rable to this our Covenant for the Gospells sake; it will reflect a great aspersion upon the truth of the Gospell, if we should be false or unconstant in any word or purpose, though in a matter of lesse consequence, as you can easily collect from that apology of Paul, 2 Cor. 1.17, 18. how much more in such a case as this is, if wee should be found to purpose, nay more, to vow, and covenant, and sweare, and all this according unto the flesh, & with us there should be, notwithstanding all these obligations, yea yea, and nay nay? That we may all who take the Covenant this day, be constant, immoveable, and abound in this work of the Lord, that we may not start aside, or give backe, or goe on uncomforta∣bly, there is a two-fold grace or qualification to be laboured after. 1. We must get courage, spirits that are bold and resolute. It is said in Haggai, that the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel Governour of Judah, and the spirit of Joshu∣ah the high Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, and they came and did worke in the house of the Lord; the work of Gods house: Reformation work especially, is a stirring work: read Stories, you finde not any where, Reformation made in any age, either in Doctrine or Discipline, without great stir and opposition. This was foretold by the same Prophet, chap. 2. vers. 7. the promise is, He will fill his house with glory; but what goeth before? vers. 6. Yet once it is a little while and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; that is, all Nations, as in the words following. This place is applyed, Heb. 12. to the removing Jewish Rites, the moveables of Gods house. The like you finde in the Apostles times, Acts 17. the truth being preached, some beleeved, others did not; here beginneth the stir, vers. 6. those that beleeved not, tooke unto themselves certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the City in an uproare: and when they had done so, complained of the brethren to the Rulers, as men turne the world upside down, vers. 6. Read also Acts 21.27.30.31. In such a work therefore men had need be of stout, resolute, and composed spirits, that we may
be able to goe on in the maine, and stir in the midst of such stirs, and not be amused at any such doings. It may possibly happen, that even amongst your selves there wil be out-cries; Sir, you will undoe all saith one; you will put all into confusion saith another; if you take this course saith a third, we can expect nothing but blood: but a wise States man, like an experienced Sea-man, knoweth the compasse of his Vessell, and though it heave & tosse, and the passengers cry out about him, yet in the midst of all he is himself, turneth not aside from his work, but steereth on his course. I beseech you let it be seriously considered, if you meane to doe any such work in the house of God as this is; if you meane to pluck up what many yeares ago was planted, or to build up what so long agoe was pulled downe, and goe through with this worke, and not be discouraged, you must beg of the Lord this excellent spirit, this resolute stirring spirit, otherwise you will be out-spirited, and both you and your cause slighted and dishonoured. 2. On the other hand we must labour for humility, prudence, gentlenesse, meekenesse. A man may be very zealous and resolute, and yet very meeke and mercifull: Jesus Christ was a Lion, and yet a Lambe also; in one place he telleth them he commeth to send fire on the earth: and in another place rebuketh his Disciples for their fiery spirits, Luke 9.54. There was the like composition in Moses, and in Paul, and it is of great use, especially in this worke of Reformation. I have not observed an disputes carried on with more bitter∣nesse in mens writings, and with a more unsanctified heate of spirit, yea and by godly men too, then in controversies about Discipline, Church Governement, Ceremonies, and the like. Surely to argue about Governement with such ungoverned passions, to argue for Reforma∣tion with a spirit so unreformed, is very uncomly. Let us be zealous, as Christ was, to cast out all, to extirpate and root out every plant his heavenly Father hath not planted; and yet let us doe it in an orderly way, and with the spirit of Christ, whose servants we are. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meek∣nesse instructing those that oppose, 2 Tim. 2.24.25. We solemnely engage this day our utmost endeavours for Reformation; let us remember this, that too much heate, as well as too much coldness, may harden men in their waies, and hinder Reformation. Brethren, let us come to this blessed worke, with such a frame of heart, with such a mind for the present, with such resolutions for the time to come; let us not bee wanting to the opportunity God hath put into our hands this day; and then can I promise you, as the Pro∣phet, Consider this day and upwards, even from this day, that the foundation of the Lords worke is laid, Consider it, from this day will I blesse you, saith the Lord: Nay wee have received as it were the first fruits of this promise, for as it's said of some mens good workes, they are manifest before hand, 1 Tim. 5. Even so may be said of the good work of this day, it's manifest before hand, God hath as it were beforehand testified his acceptance; while we were thinking and purposing this free-will Offering; hee was protecting and defending our Armie, causing our enemies the enemies of this worke to fly before us, and gave us a victory, not to be dispised. Surely this Oath and Covenant shall be Iudahs joy, the joy and comfort of this whole Kingdome: yea, of all three Kingdomes. Jesus Christ King of the Saints govern us by his Spirit, strengthen us by his power, un∣dertake for us according as he hath sworne, even The Oath which he sware to our Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our ene∣mies, might serve him without feare in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the dayes of our life, Luke 1. Grant unto us also, that when this life is finished, and wee ga∣thered to our Fathers, there may be a generation out of our loynes to stand up in this cause, that his great and reverend Name may be exalted from one generation to another, untill he himselfe shall come, and perfect all with his owne hand by his owne wisedome; even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen. FINIS.
