W3539 E861_5 99865766 168352
A WORD FOR GOD. OR A Testimony on Truths behalf; from several Churches, and diverse hundreds of Christians in Wales (and some few adjacent) against Wickednesse in HIGH-PLACES. With a Letter to the Lord Generall CROMWELL. Both, first presented to his own hands, and now published for further Information. Job 36.1. Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee that I have yet to speak on Gods behalf. Esa. 44.8, 9. Fear ye not neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it? ye are then my witnesses. Is there a God be∣sides me? Yea there is no God, I know not any. They that make a graven image are all of them vanity, and their delectable things shall not profit, and they are their own witnesses, they see not, nor know, that they may be ashamed. To Oliver Cromwell Captain Generall of all the Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland. SIR, FOr asmuch as you have caused great searching of heart, and di∣visions among many of Gods People by a sudden, strange, and un∣expected alteration of Government, and other actions to the great astonishment of those who knew your former publick Resolutions and Declarations; considering also, how (contrary to foregoing Acts and Engagements) you have taken upon you a Power by which you are utterly disinabled (if there were in you a heart) to prose∣cute the good things Covenanted and contended for, with so many great hazards, and the effusion of so much precious blood: and by reason whereof you are become justly suspected in your ends in time past, and actions for future to very many of those, of whose affecti∣ons and faithfull services, you have enjoyed no small share, in all
the difficult passages and enterprizes of the late War. These things considered by us, (as we know they are by many Churches & Saints) and there being a deep sence upon our Spirits of the Odium, under which the name of Christ, his Cause, People and wayes do lye (as it were) buried; and also of the exceeding contempt which the won∣derfull and excellent operations of God are brought into; even those eminent wonders, which the Nations have been Spectators and witnesses of, and wherein your hands have been partly engaged; We cannot after much serious consideration and seeking of the Lord, many of us, both together and a part, but present to your hands the ensuing testimony, wch (however you may look theron) is no more then necessity exacts from us, for the clearing of our own Souls from guilt and discharging of our duty to God & men. Therefore we ear∣nestly wish you to peruse and weigh it, as in the sight of God, with a calm and Christian like Spirit, and harden not your neck against the truth as you will answer it to the great judge, before whose impar∣tial Tribunal you (as well as we shalbe very shortly cited to give an account of the things done in the body, whether good or evill. Where the true motives and ends of all your Actions will be evident, where no apologie will be accepted of, your slighting and blasphem∣ing of the Spirit of God, nor for the hard measure you give his peo∣ple, by reproaches, imprisonment and other oppressions; and where Pride, Luxury, Lasciviousnesse, changing of Principles and forsaking the good wayes, justice and holinesse will not have the smallest rag of pretence to hide them from the eyes of the Judge: Which things (whatsoever you say for your self) are (even at present) to be read in your Fore head, and have produced most sad effects every where. Especially, first, The filling of the Saints hearts and faces with inex∣pressable grief and shame: And secondly, The stopping (at least) of the strong current of their Prayers, which was once for you; if not the turning thereof directly against you. To these we might adde (thirdly, The hardening of wicked men, yea the refreshing and justi∣fying of them in their evill doings, and speaking against the Gospel, Name, and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ. And lastly, Gods signall withdrawing from you and your designs. Oh then! that you would¦ly down in the dust & acknowledge your iniquity, and return unto the Lord by unfeigned repentance, doing your first works, and that you would make hast to do so, least Gods fury break forth like fire upon you, and there be no quenching of it. This would rejoyce us much, as being reall welwishers to your souls everlasting happinesse, though we must declare with equall pity and detestation against your designes and way.
A Word for GOD. THe wise God that teacheth the Fowls of Heaven to know their appointed times, who directs his peoples work in truth,Ier. 8.7. hath we hope directed us (after a long time of silence and earnest seeking the Lord) to expresse and and declare what we find in our Consciences touching the transactions of this season; and though some may think (as we our selves have been tempted to think) that this is a time, wherein the prudent should hold his peace, it being such an evill time, that men are made offenders; yea, Traytors for words:Ier. 20.9. Isa. 62.6. Yet consi∣dering how the Lords remembrancers should not keep silence, and fearing that if we should altogether hold our peace at such a time as this (as Mordecay said to He∣ster) deliverance would come another way, and we could expect no share in the en∣largement of Gods people, or safety in the day of trouble:Hest. 4.14. withall finding how self would prompt us (like Issachar) to see that rest is good, and outward prosperity plea∣sant,Gen. 49.15. and how the same temptations (which we finde and fear many of our deare Brethren to be under) have set upon some of us, as to have mens persons in ad∣miration because of advantage, and by good words, faire speeches and promises, to be deceived and drawn away in simplicity;Iude 16. Rom. 16.8.2 Sam. 15.7. Gal. 2.13.1 Chro. 4.23. especially, by the example of some eminent men (like Peter) in so much that many Barnabasses are carried away with their dissimulation, and as well Ministers as Military men willing to serve the King for his Work and Wages. However seeing every man must give an account unto God for himself; we have examined what particular duty was incumbent upon us, and how in faithfulnesse towards God and meeknesse towards men, we should per∣form the same:Rom. 14.12 Moreover considering how the Saints did formerly bear their Te∣stimony (not loving their lives unto the death) and by the blood of the Lamb, and their testimony did overcome;Rev 12.7 and how God did heretofore stir up some of his People (both in England and Scotland) to bear witnesse (to the truth and wayes of God) against the wayes and wickednesses of men) as a fore-lorn hope; though they were in comparison but a few; like Joshuah and Caleb, two of twelve;Numb. 14.6, 7, 8, 9. Rev. 7.3.2 Pet. 1.12. or like the two VVitnesses, a small yet sufficient number. Observing also, that there are present Truths, and every work being beautifull in its season (as in the beginning of the late VVars) was the witnessing against the Book of Common Prayer, Sur∣plesse, Crosse in Baptisme, and other Ceremonies (being superstitious things, impo∣sed by the Bishops) and against Ship-money, Monopolyze, &c. (civill things) imposed formerly by the King. All which were afterwards Declared, Protested and Covenanted against; which Protestation and Covenant are fresh in the memories, and pressing upon the Consciences of some of us, even unto this day: Besides the Engagement, and the severall Acts of Parliament, made against Monarchy or Kingly government; all which now seem to be forgotten or neglected and those that speak or write in defence of such things, as the Parliament, Army, and the Godly People in the Three Nations approved, asserted and purchased at a dear rate, are now accounted fanatick fools, disturbers of Civil States, and intermedlers in things that concern them not; under which notion many suffer imprisonment, and other tryals, as evill doers from those men, who now build what they did once destroy;Aug. 1.1650. pag. 7, 12. and justifie what they did once condemn. VVitnesse their own VVritings, particu∣larly the Declaration of the Officers and Souldiers of the English Army (whereof
the Lord Cromwell was General) the words whereof are as followeth. We are perswaded in our Consciences that the late King and his Monarchy was one of the ten horns of the Beast spoken of, Rev. 17. vers. 13, 14, 15. And that we were called forth by the Lord to be instrument all to bring about that which was our continuall Prayers unto God, viz. The destruction of Antichrist, and the deliverance of his Church and people; and upon this single account we engaged, not knowing the deep Pollicies of worldly States men, and have ever since hazarded our lives in the high places of the Field (where we have seen many wonders of the Lord) against all the opposers of the work of Jesus Christ, whom we have all along seen going with us, and making our way plain before us; and having these things singly in our eye, namely the destruction of Antichrist, the advancement of the Kingdome of Christ, the deliverance of his Church; and the establishment thereof, in the use of his Ordi∣nances, in purity according to his word, and the just, civill, Liberties of English∣men. These with many other expressions, both in the Declaration and severall other Papers of the Army,Saunders, Okey, and Allured. and Letters of the General, cited both in the Declaration of the Members of severall Churches, and Petitions of the Three Colonels; besides several other Papers which might be instanced in; which we leave to all unbyassed men to consider; and compare with actions done by the same men since that time: but in pursuance of our duty to God, our fellow members and Countrymen, as we are Christians, having a right to the things of Christ; and as we are men, having a Right to our native Priviledges: We do Declare our reall Apprehensions and Consciences (which to the great grief of some of us) we have so long concealed, waiting if God might by his Providence alter our mindes. First, That the sins and present condition of this Nation holds parallel in many things with the old Israelites after the mighty wonders of God, shewed unto them in their great deliverance out of Ægypt.Psal. 136.13. For instance: They and we have soon forgotten God our Saviour, and the great works which he did; we have not set our hearts aright, and our spirits have net been stedfast with God, but have gone back, and dealt treacherously, and turned aside like a deceiptfull bow; and not trusting to his salvation,Psal. 78.8, 9.10. Psal. 106.28, 29. Neb. 9, 3.7 have provoked the Lord to anger with our inventions; so that men have dominion over bodies, and over our Cattle at their pleasure. And we are in great distresse, for this is a day of trouble, and of Blasphemy, for the children are come to the Birth, and there is not strength to bring forth. Secondly, That blessed Cause, and those noble Principles propounded, and pro∣secuted by the old Parliament, and the good People of this Nation (in the maintain∣ing of which God did miraculously appear) are now altogether laid aside and lost; and another cause and interest (quite contrary as we conceive) espoused and main∣tained; For then the advancement of Christs Kingdome, the extirpation of Po∣pery, and popish Innovations, the Priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subjects, and an equall distinction of Justice were Declared and fought for; and Tyranny, Oppression, Injustice, Arbitrarynesse; Destroying the Priviledges of Parliaments we Declared and Engaged against: But how far some men have now receded from, and acted contrarily to the dishonour of God, scandall of Religion, great grief of many faithfull men, and the strengthening of the wicked in their principles, and justifying their practices, we leave to the consideration of all those that are sober and wise.
Thirdly, Moreover the unadvised and unwarrantable changing of the Govern∣ment and swearing thereunto, doth (as we judge) put a necessity upon the chief undertaker thereof to overthrow the very foundation of a Common-wealth: and to maintaine the things comprised in the said Instrument (whether right or wrong) and to turn the very edge and dint of his Sword against the faces and bowels of such as should or shall declare their consciences contrary thereunto. Fourthly, As a consequence and fruit of this forbidden Tree, many of the choice servants of God and faithfull of the Nation (some Noblemen, Gentlemen, Mini∣sters of the Gospel, Souldiers, &c.) are imprisoned without knowing their accusers or having so much liberty as was granted by the Heathens to the Apostles, or the benefit of a fair and publique tryall, according to the sundamentall laws of this Nation. Fiftly, Under pretence of necessity still to continue the heavy burdens of Taxes, Customs, Excise, &c. upon the Nation, without (yea contrary to) the Consent of the People represented in Parliament, and contrary to their own INSTRU∣MENT. Sixtly, Notwithstanding all the fair pretences and promises of Reformation; yet what abhominable and horrible Impieties, Injustice and Oppression are there cou∣ched and covered under this new Form, from the Head to the Taile (as the Pro∣phet saith) treading in the very foot steps of their Predecessors;Act. 27.30. witnesse the re∣ceiving of the Honours, Profits, Customs, Benefits, Tenths, and First-fruits com∣ming in formerly to the Crown; the exalting of Sons, Servants, Friends and Fa∣vourites (though some of them known to be wicked men) to the highest places and greatest preferment, which the good Rulers of old, as Gideon, Nehemiah and others did not do; because of the fear of the Lord, and the Bondage that was heavy upon the people: Witnesle also the unreasonablenesse of the Army to have so many Officers, which might easily be reduced to a lesser number, and both Of∣ficers and Souldiers for many years to receive their pay (even in a time of peace) when the poore Peasants or Tenants (who pay but ten shilling rent per Annum) doe pay out of their penury, to maintain them in their pompe and luxury. Seventhly, VVe cannot without grief mention the sad effects of the secret de∣signe of Hispaniola, to be the losse of so many mens lives, the expence of so much blood and treasure, and the endangering of this Common-wealth by Invasion; as also thereby rendring us a scorn and snuffe to the Nations round about. Lastly, We do declare and publish to all from our very hearts and souls, that those of us that had any hand in joyning with the Parliament and Army heretofore, had no other designe against the late King and his Party, save as they were ene∣mies to our Lord Christ, his Kingdome and people, hinderers of his work, and oppressors of the Nation, and that it never came into our hearts to think or intend the pulling down of one person to set up another; or, one unrighteous power to promote another: but we aymed as primarily at the glory of God; so likewise at the generall good of the Nation, and particular benefit and just liberty of every man; and it greives us, that any just cause is given them to stumble at Professors, or complain that they are deprived of their Freedome, and severall wayes more oppressed, then in the dayes of the wickedest Kings; we do also believe in our heart, that (though the worst things are not without Gods permission and provi∣dence) yet that this Government is not of Gods approbation, or taken up by his Counsell, or according to his Word; And therefore We do utterly Disclaime ha∣ving
any hand or heart in it, and for the Contrivers and undertakers thereof, we suspect and judge them to be great transgressors therein; and so much the more, because they are Professors of Religion, and Declarers, Engagers, and fighters a∣gainst the very things they now practice: And it is most evident to us, that they there by build again, what before they did destroy; and in so doing they render themselves and the Cause, Religion, Name and People of God abominable to Hea∣thens, Papists and prophane Enemies, which is a grief to our Souls to consider. We doe also detest the practices of these men in imprisoning the Saints of God, for their Consciences and Testimony, and just men; who stand for morall and just principles, and the freedome of the Nation and People; and their breaking off Parliaments to effect their own Designe. We do also from our Souls Witnesse a∣gainst their new Modelling of Ministers (as Antichristian) and keeping up Pa∣rishes and Tythes (as Popish Innovations.) And we Disclaime all adherence to, owning of, or joyning with these men in their wayes. And do withdraw, and de∣sire all the Lords people to withdraw from these men, as those that are guilty of the sins of the later dayes;2 Tim. 3.5. and that have left following the Lord, and that Gods people should avoid their sin; least they partake with them in their plagues: Thus concluding our Testimony, We Subscribe our Names hereunto. William Jones. John Morgan. John Thomas. Evan Jones. John Phillips. Thomas Jones. John Beevan. Thomas Lewis. Gabriel Lewis. Howell Thomas. Thomas Phillips. VVilliam Howels. VVilliam VVaters. Howell John. John Price. Meredith Phillips. William Jenkins. Thomas Prosser. Jenkin Griffith. Howell Williams. Thomas Williams. Richard Howell. Watkin Price. VVilliam Powell. Thomas Powell. Lewis VVilliams. Lewis Reece. Reece Iohn. Howell Reece. Richard John. Richard Price. John David. David Morgan. Morgan William. Morgan Robert. John VVilliam. Lewis David. Thomas Edwards. Reece John. Jenkin Jones. VVilliam Iones. Jenkin Rosser. Rice Rosser. Nicholas Griffiths. Lewelin Beevan. James Powell. Mirick Morgan. Evan Meredith. VVilliam Jones. Meredith Rees. VVilliam Edward. Richard Roberts. Lewis David. Morgan John. Richard Thomas. Meredith VVilliam. Witkin Rice. VVilliam VVatkin. Reece David. VVatkin David. David William. VVilliam Phillips. John VVilliams. Henry Thomas. John Jones. John Farmer. Henry Meredith. Trehern Morgan. Richard David. Evan John. Edward Evan. Thomas Evan. David Evan. Howell VVaters. Jenkin VVaters.
John Howell. Phillip David Rice Richard Edward Matthews. Watkin Richard Thomas Evan. Lewelin Jenkin. Jenkin William Thomas VVilliam Evan Lew lin John Lewis William VVaters Morgan David John David David VValter Reece Jones Phillip Jones Jervice Jones Edward Jenkins Watkin Jenkins David Thomas Rice Jones Evan John David William Henry Williams John Bedward Thomas Tunman Robert Tunman Roger Griffih. Thomas Morgan William Price David Davies David Price Richard Morris John Evans David Powell Walter Lewis Richard Meredith William Morris James Haydock William Bostock Phillip Russell Edward Williams James Morgan David Rutherch William Bayes Reece Jones Richard James William Hopkins Lewis Jones William Watkins Richard Mils John Thomas John Smith William Price Ʋavosor Powell John Williams John Hammer Moris Griffith Edward Owens Richard Griffith Walter Davies Thomas Gwin Thomas Ʋaughan John Powell Rees Havard Roger Thomas Thomas Lewis John Watkin VValter Lewis VVilliam Thomas William Lewis Richard Ʋaughan David Jones Rice Thomas Henry Thomas John Williams Thomas Powell John David Iohn Rowbuck Evan Watkin Charls Lloyd Hugh Thomas Rosser Watkin Thomas Griffith Lewis Price Morgan Lloyd William Thomas Lewis Iames Iohn Thomas Robert Thomas Howell Watkin Thomas Priee Roger Williams Iohn Baddam Iohn Powell David Roberts Iohn Pugh Thomas Parry Howell Williams Walter Price William Bevan Lewis Prytherch David William Lewclin ap Iohn Ienkin Griffith Peter Chidlowe Arthur Chidlow William Iones Owen Humphrey Evan Thomas Samuel Brees Iohn Lewis William Beatsley Thomas Morgans Iohn Symonds William Beddoes Morris Williams Iames Williams William Matthews Lewis Price Evan Ellis Richard Tudge William Fernell Edward Gretholder Iohn Tomkins Thomas Tudge Hugh Evans Owen Lewis Owen Iones Edward Brees Ralph Robothom William Lewis Iohn Powell David Kadwalader Rowland Tudge David Evan Iohn Tibbots Samuell VVilliams Richard Bromley Richard Baxter John Crowther Francis Mason Iohn Evans David Phillips VVilliam Evans Thomas Ellis Thomas Crowther Thomas Fernelb Richard Irish Henry Iones VVilliam Phipps William Becket Daniel Brees Francis Hanckock Edward Irish Oliver David VVilliam Dabellis Lewis Pugh Richard Rogers Owen Iones Edmund Rosser Iohn Meredith VVilliam Thomas Llewelin Lewis Iohn Rowland Lewis VVilliams VVilliam Lewis Edward VVilliams Howell Rees Kowland Morgan Phillip Gyles Iames Watkins Iohn Iames Lewis Iones Michael Watkins Edmund Morgan Rosser Thomas Iohn Rosser Thomas Iohn Iames Iohn Elias Thomas Iohn Howell William Iohn
Rosser Watkin Daniel John Thomas ap John Gilbert Morris Matthew Prichard Edward Jones Owen Edward David Thomas John Pugh Howell Thomas Reece ap David John Benan Thomas Lloyd Kenrick Jones James Quarrell Enward Williams Edward Moore John Roberts John Brown Alexander Powell Hugh Powell John Nicholas Phillip Williams Robert Sanctley John James Edward Roberts Walter Thimbleton. John Fowler Hugh Prichard Henry Williams William Win Richard Saltonstall Rice Jones Richard Williams Phillip Rogers Riohard Roberts Thomas ap Thomas Ellice ap Roger David ap Edward David Lloyd Thomas Edwards Francis Lith James Park Iohn Meredith Iohn Owens William Iennings George Ienkins William Heatley Iohn Lewis David Iones Ieffrey Parry Iohn Hughes Iohn Evans Richard Iones William Rider Iohn Ratlieffe William Iones Ralph Hopley Hugh Price Griffith Iones Brian Sixsmith Mathaniel Edwards Iohn Meredith A POSTSCRIPE. Reader, THis paper had sooner come into thy hands, if the Subscribers hereof (who were willing to do nothing rashly) had not waited for further Councel and direction from God herein then they had at their first intention of the publishing hereof, and withall it was deferred for a time,Rev. 2.21. hoping that God might some other way con∣vince the Person chiefely concerned in it; and seeing God gave him time to repent, and yet he repented not, we have published this our Testimony. To which you might have had many more Subscribers (who were willing to own this Paper) if conveni∣ency and Providence had made way for it to come into their view: There hath been great endeavours to stifle it in the Birth; to that end, some of the Subscribers were threatned with imprisonment, and Orders were issued out to imprison some (where∣of one was secured) namely Mr. Vavasor Powell, who was taken by a company of Souldiers, from a day of Fasting and Prayer at Aberbechan in Mountgomory shire, where many Saints were gathered together, which caused much sadnesse, yea and much heart breakings to them all; and he remained for some time a prisoner upon that account. FINIS.
