D1083A 99885290 182245
The Debtford Plumb Cake, OR, The Four merry VVives. Tune of, An Old Woman poor and blind. Licensed according to Order Come all you sweet lips, round me stand and hear a pleasant tale, With each some Plumb Cake in her hand and Cup of good napping Ale, Then you might all as merry be as lately was four good Wives, Who take their Glasses of free, and jollyly lead their lives. Carpenters Wives were two of them, and another a Smiths Wife prov'd, The fourth a Seaman's for the Game, these four did a young Man love, He was a Mealman's Servant to and often would frisk and play At heave and set as others do, let it be by Night or Day. But one time among all the rest, they wanted a good Plumb Cake, And this the young Meal-Man did Protest, he would have a good one bak'd, A Peck and a half of Flower stright he sent the good Wives to kneed, Of Plumbs be sent eleven Poud weight, to make up the Cake with speed. Seven pound of Butter to also, he sent when he sent the Plumbs, With Sugar for to make it so they might sweetly lick their Thumbs, And when 'twas bak'd, then ore a Glass they merry were all to be But mark I pray what came to pass, which spoiled their jollitry, For when the Cake was made and bak'd one of the good Wives did say, Come Neighbours where shall we it take and have our young Ned to day, You know that he's a Lad so free, and willing to serve us all, I swear I love him heartily, i'll venture with him one fall. What if we to the Fountain go, and there have our merry bout, Fie, Fie, one of the Wives did cry, our Husbands will find us out, What think you of the Greenwich blood, they say it is Liquor rare, A maich we all do think it good and our Plumb Cake we'll not spare. So the four wives with brisk young Ned, met over some Liquor stout, Each thinking on the Cake to feed, but Ʋulkn had found them out, And with his Hammer in his hand, he soundly the Cake did maul, Yet Ned did all the Wives command, and play'd Boys at up ails all. London, printed for I. Jackson, near Fleet street.
