E358 52614907 176073
Monsieur St. Ruth's SPEECH TO THE IRISH Army, On the 11th of July, 1691. Being the Day before the Battel at Aghrim, as it was found among the Papers of his Secretary, who was killed in the Battel. Gentlemen and Fellow-Soldiers, I Suppose it is not unknown to you, and to the whole Christian World, what Glory I have acquired, and how Successful and Fortunate I have been in suppressing Heresie in France, and propagating the ho∣ly Catholick Faith; and can without Vanity boast my self the happy Instrument of bringing over Thousands of poor deluded Souls from their Errors, who owe their Salvation to the pious Care of my thrice Illustrious Master, and my own Industry, assisted by some Holy Members of our Un∣spotted Church; while great numbers of those incorrigible Hereticks have perished, both Soul and Body, by their obstinacy. It was for this reason that the most Puissant King my Master, compassio∣nating the miseries of this Kingdom, hath chosen me before so many worthy Generals to come hither: not doubting but by my wonted Diligence I should establish the Church in this Nation on such a Foundation as it should not be in the power of Hell or Hereticks hereafter to disturb it. And for the bringing about of this Great and Glorious Work, next to the Assistance of Heaven, the unresistible Puislance of the King my Master, and my own Conduct, the great dependance of all good Catholicks is on your Courage. I must confess that since my coming among you things have not answered my Wishes, but they are still in a posture to be retrieved, if you will not betray your Religion and Countrey by an unseasonable pusilanimity. I am assured by my Spies, that the Prince of Orange's Heretical Army are resolved to give us Battel; and you see them even before you ready to per∣form it. It is now therefore, if ever, that you must endeavour to recover your lost Honour, Priviledges, and Fore-Fathers Estates: You are not Mercenary Soldiers, you do not fight for your Pay, but for your Lives, your Wives, your Children, your Liberties, your Countrey, your Estates, and to restore the most Pious of Kings to his Throne; but above all for the propagation of the Holy Faith, and the Subversion of Heresie. Stand to it therefore, my Dears, and bear no longer the Reproaches of the Hereticks, who brand you with Cowardice: and you may be assured, that King James will Love and Reward you, Louis the Great will protect you, all good Catholicks will Applaud you, I my self will Command you, the Church will Pray for you, your Posterity will Bless you, Saints and Angels will Caress you, God will make you all Saints, and His Holy Mother will lay you in Her Bosom. Printed at Dublin, and Re-printed at Edinburgh, 1691.
