L3120B 52612198 179500
The Most Christian Kings Edict or Proclamation, Concerning Scotish, English, and Irish Ships that shall be met at Sea by his said Majesties Ships, or By Privateers Acting by His Commission, Translated out of the French, and Published by Authority. By the King. HIS Majesty being informed of divers Complaints made by the Scotish, English, and Irish, that the Vessels belonging to them are stopt in their Voyages, and brought into the Ports of this Kingdom under divers pretences, by his Majesties Ships, or those of his Subjects acting as Pri∣vateers against his Enemies; and that although they do obtain the Release of their said Ships, yet nevertheless their Commerce is thereby extremely retarded, by rea∣son of the long stay of their Ships in Port, before they have their Orders of Release: His Majesty being willing to provide against the same, and like∣wise to evidence upon all occasions the particular consideration He hath for the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, hath prohibited and forbidden, and doth straightly prohibit and forbid all His Officers Commanding His Ships of War, and all Captains of Ships and Vessels of His Subjects acting as Pri∣vateers, that they do not Stop or Detain any Scotish, English and Irish Vessels met by them at Sea, which shall be furnished with Pas-ports signed by the King of Great Britain, or by the Commissioners of the Admiralty at London, and with Pass-ports or Sea-Briefs signed by the Majors and other Chief Magistrates, or the Commissioners of the Customs of the Maritime Towns of Scotland, England, and Ireland. And His Majesty doth require, that when the said Ships of War or Privateers shall meet at Sea any the Ships of the foresaid Nations, they send their Boat on board them to demand the said Pass-ports; Which when they have seen, they are to leave them at liberty to continue their course, without giving them any molestation or hindrance: And all this under pain of being punished according to the rigour of the Laws. And His Majesty doth require and command the Count of Vermandois Admiral of France, the Vice admirals, Lieutenants General, Intendants, Commanders of Squadrons, Commissaries General, and Captains of His Ships at Sea, that they see this present Order put in execution. And His Majesty doth enjoyn the Officers of the Admiralty to cause the same to be read, published, and affixed in all places requisite, to the end no one may pretend ignorance. Given at St. Germain en Laye, the 16th day of November, 1676. Signed, LOUIS. And Countersigned, COLBET. Edinburgh, Re-Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty: Anno DOM. 1676.
