L3482 99884533 183120
A new Sonnet, shewing how the Goddess Diana Transformed Acteon into the shape of a Hart. to a New Tune. DIANA and her Darlings dear, went walking on a Day, Throughout the Wood and Waters clear, for their disports and play. The leaves aloft were very green and pleasant to behold, These Nymphs they walkt the trees between, under the shaddows cold. So long, at last they found a place of Springs and Waters clear, A fairer Bath there never was found out this thousand Year; Wherin Diana dantily, her self began to bathe. And all her Virgins fair and pure, themselves did wash and lave. And as the Nymphs in water stood, ACTEON passed by, As he came runing through the VVood, on them he cast his Eye, And eke beheld their bodies bare, then presently that tide, And as the Nymphs of him were ware, with voice aloud they cry'd, And clos'd Diana round about, to hide her body small; But she was highest of the Rout. and seen above them all. And when Diana did perceive where Acteon did stand; A fuious look to him she gave, and took her Bow in hand, And as she went about to shoot, Acteon began to run, To hide he thought it was no boot, his former sight were done. And as he though from her to 'scape, she brought it so to pass, Incotinently chang'd his shape, even runing as he was; Each Goddess took Diana's part, Acteon to transform, To make of him a huge wild Hart, there they did all determ; His Skin that was so fine and fair, was made a towny Red, His body overgrown with Hair, from feet unto the head; and on his head great Horns were set, most wonderous to behold, a luger Hart was never met, nor seen upon the Mold; His Ears and Eyes that were so fair, transformed were full strange, His Hands and Feet compelled were throughout the VVoods to range. Thus was he made a perfect Hart, and wared fierce and grim; His former shape did quite depart from every joint and limb; but still his Memory did remain, although he could not speak, Nor yet among his Friends complain, his woful mind to break, at length he thought for to repair home to his dwelling place, anon of him his Hounds were ware, and 'gan to cry apare: Then Acteon was sore agast, his Hounds would him devour, and from them then he fled full fast, with all his might and power.
HE spared neither bush nor brake but ran through thick and thin, VVith all the swiftness he could make, in hope to save his Skin: Yet were his Hounds so near his tail, and followed him so fast, That running might not him avail, for all his speed and haste: For why his Hounds would never lin till they him overtook, and then they rent and tore his Skin, and all his body shook: I am your Master Acteon, then cry'd he to his Hounds, and made unto them rueful moans, with sad lamenting sounds; I have been he which gave you food, wherein I took delight. Therefore suck not your masters blood, his friendship to requite. but those Curs of a cursed kind, on him had no remorse, although he was their dearest friend, they pull'd him down by force. There was no man to take his part, the story telleth plain; Thus Acteon a huge wild Hart, among the Does were slain: You Hunters all that Range the woods, although you rise up rath, beware you come not nigh the Flood where Virgins use to hathe: For if Diana you espy among her Derlings dear, Your former shape she will disguise, and make you Horns to wear: and so I do conclude my Song, have nothing to alledge; If Acteon had right or wrong, let all true Virgins judge. A Lullaby, COme little Babe, come silly Soul. thy fathers shame & mothers grief Born as Idoubt to all our doles, unto thy self unhappy chief: Sing Lullaby, and keep it warm, Poor Soul, it thinks no Creature harm; thou little think'st, & least dost know, the cause of this thy Mothers moan, thou wantest wir to wail or woe, and Imy self am left alone: why dost thou weep, why dost thou wail And knowest not what thou dost ail. Come silly wretch, ah silly heart, my only joy what can Imore? If there be any wrong, thy smart, that may thy distiny deplore, 'tis I, Isay, against my will, I wait the time, but be thou still. And dost thou smile, O thou sweet face, I would thy Dad the same might see, No doubt but it would purchase grace, I know it would be for thee & me. But come to Mother, Babe, and play, Poor Father false is fled away. Sweet babe, i'st be thy fortune chance, thy father home again to send, if Death doth strike me with his lance, yet may'st thou me to him commend: if any ask thy Mothers name, tell how by love she purcha'st blame: then will his gentle heart soon yeild, I know him of a noble mind, Although a Lion in the Field, a Lamb in town thou shalt him find; ask blessing Lad, be not afraid, His Sugred lips hath me betray'd. then may'st thou joy and be right glad although in woe Iseem to mourn, thy Father is no Rascal Lad, an able Youth of blood and bone, His glancing look, if he once smile, Right honest Women will beguile. Come little boy, and rock asleep, sing Lullaby and do not cry, I can do nought else but weep, and sit by thee the Lullaby; God bless the babe and Lullaby, From this thy Fathers Cruelty. Printed by and for A. M. and Sold by the Booksellers of London.
