p3011 99887264 181975
A Posie of Rare Flowers: Gathered by a Young-man for his Mistris. To a pleasant new Tune. THe Summers o're heating, Within an Arbour sitting, under a Marble shade. For my true love the fairest, And of all flowers the rarest, a Psie thus I made. The first and last for trusting, Is called everlasting, I pulled from the bay. The blew and crimson Columbine, The Dazy and the Woodbine, and eke the blooming May. The sweetest Flowers for Posies, Pinks, Gillyoflwers and Ross, I gathered in their prime. The flowers of muskmillions, Come blow me down sweet Wiliams, with Rosemarry and Time. The Larkheel and the Lilly, The Flag and Daffadilly, the Wall-Flower sweet of smell, The Maiden-blush and Cowslip, The Peagle and the Tulip, that doth so sweet excell, The Violet and the Grecyline, The Oderiferous Eglantine, with thrift and modesty. The Muk Rose sweet and dainty, With other Flowers plenty, Oxlops and Pyony. The Gilly Flowers variety, Of every colour severally, the Lady Smock and Pancy. The Bachelors Button fair and fine The Primrose and the Sops in Wine with them the Maidens fancy. The time observing Marygold, Most fair and lovely to behold, I pluckt amongst the rest. The white and red Carnation, The sences Recreation, with other Flowers the best. The Flowers fit for smelling, Whose sweet is far excelling, all the perfumes of art, I pulled each several, And made a Posie there withal, to bear to my sweet heart. SWeet Basil and sweet Margerum, The Cowslip of Jerusalem, the Crow-foot and Sea-Flower, The Start up and come kiss me, A Flower that shall not miss me, in my true Lovers bower. The Lady of Essex fair, A Flower passing sweet and rare, I in the midst did place, Because my love is fairest, And of all Flowers the rarest, in body and in face. The Flowers being culled, And their branches pulled, did yeild a fragrant scent. Observing their due places, I bound them in bride Laces, and to my love I went. In hope she would receive them, To'th end that I might give them, as pleadges of my love. To her whose radiant beauty, Did bind me to this duty, hoping she'l nere remove. Her permanent affection, To me who by election, am hers while life both last. These flowers did resemble, My thoughts, which ne'r dissemble, but hold both smell and taste. When I had made this Nosegay, With joyful heart I took my way, to find out my true love. Who for my absence mourned, Vntil that I returned, as doth the Turtle Dove. At last I found her sporting, With other Maids consorting, close by a Rivers side. My Posie not refused, When she the same perused, upon her arm she ty'd. Quoth she although these Flowers. Will wither in few hours, yet take my word sweet heart. My word to thee shall never decay. Till death takes my life away, from thee Ile ne'r depart. The like to her I vowed, And while the same allowed. about such things we talked, At length because it waxed late, We for that time did leave our prate, and from each other walked. Whn with a mild behaviour, She thanks me for my favour, and more it for my sake, With enterchanging Kisses, The rest remains in wishes, unwilling leave we take. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and J. Wright.
