s1706 52529262 179007
symbols of royal authority: the Scottish thistle, Tudor rose, and fleur-de-lis A PROCLAMATION Appointing the Commissioners of Supply to be Justices of Peace. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Brittain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting. Forasmuch, as by two former Proclamations Emitted by Us, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, upon the Ninth and Thirteenth of May one thousand six hun∣dred and ninety two years, We did Authorize, Declare and Appoint the Com∣missioners of Supply of the haill respective Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, who had, or should Qualifie themselves according to Law, to be Justices of Peace in the saids several Shires and Stewartries. And We taking in∣to Our Consideration, how much the Appointing of Justices of Peace within all the saids Shires & Stewartries of this Kingdom, and their due Attending the Discharge of their said Trust doth Contribute to the Peace, Quiet and Good Government of this Our Kingdom, and to the speedy and easie Eecution of Law and Justice, to, and upon all Persons Subjected to their Jurisdiction and Power. Therefore, and without Prejudice of the foresaid former Proclama∣tions, but for the Furtherance of these Ends, We with Advice of the Lords of Our privy Council, Declare, Appoint and Authorize the Commissioners of Supply for the respective Shires and Stewartries of this Kingdom, Named for the said Trust, by the Acts of Parliament made anent the Supply, in the years one thousand six hundred and ninety, and one thousand six hundred and nine∣ty five, and by the first Act of the sixth Session of this current Parliament, dated the twenty fifth of September last by-past, who have, or shall Qualifie them∣selves according to Law, to be Justices of Peace in their saids respective Shires and Stewartries, betwixt and the fifteenth Day of January next to come; with Power to them to Conveen, Do and Perform every thing, which to the said Office and Trust of a Justice of Peace is competent and knowen to belong, by the several Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereanent, and Instructions therein set down. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strict∣ly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the third day of December, and of Our Reign the eight year 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, 1696.
