S2198C 47012646 174611
The Seamen and Soudiers Last Farwel to their Dearest Jewels. He must be gone, the Fates have so decreed, To serve his King and Countrey in their need: In fight against the Dutch upon the Main, Yet he's in hopes to see his Love again: He chears her up, and bids she should not Mourn, But wait with patience for his safe return. The tune is, I am so deep in Love, or, Cupids Courtesie FArewel my dearest dear, now I must leave thée, Thy sight I must forbear although it grives me: From thy imbraces love shall be parted: Yet will I constant prove and be true-hearted. My fortune I will try upon the Ocean, And fight most valiantly to gain promotion; My dearest blood i'le spend for this our Nation, My Country to defend from Foes invasion. Princes of high renown are now ingaged, To pull the courage down of Foes inraged: Dukes, Lords & gentry high, all are preparing Their valour for to try, no cost is sparing. Why should I grudge to fight under the Banners, Of such approved Knights and brave Commanders: My chanceI mean to try, I scorn to hide me, I'le face the Enemy what e're betide me, WHen I am on the Seas in haile and thunder, Where storms do raise the waves to all mens wonder, When Billows brush the sky and tempests threat me, Still on thy name I'le cry I'le nor forget thée Though Hogan Mogan States doe drag and bluster, And call upon their Mates forces to muster, We 'I make them for to know we can disturb them, Once again they must bow England will curb them. In mid'st of skirmish hot when blowes are dealing, Fiery balls fly about and ships are realing: When Cannons are roaring and bullets are flying, He that will honour win Must not fear dying. My dearest do not moan let not grief move thée, When I am from thee gone still I will love thee, If fortune me befriend, thou mayst he certaine He often to thee send after our parting. Thy Love I'le think upon in greatest danger, When I am from thee gone I'le Love no stranger, No flesh alive shall make me prove unconstant; I will wait for thy sake, till the last instant, This piece of Gold we'l break, love, nor a token, Which as a pledge we'l keep of faith unbroken, When thou the same dost see in my long absence, Then love remember me though at a distance. Hark how the Drums do beat with Trumpets sounding Souldiers in furious heat foes would be wounding From thy sweet company although it grieves me I must divided be and fore't to leave thee, My Captain calls away in hast they hurry To march without delay I may not tarry, Patiently thou must hear love, leave thy weeping, Farewell my dearest dear, till our next meeting. Finis With Allowance. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, R. Gilbertson and I. Wright.
