T3530A 51784690 175090
decorative border Tudor rose C2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Scottish thistle blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms portrait of woman portrait of one-legged man portrait of woman with two orphans Two PSALMS of Thanks-giving to be sung by the Children of Christ's-Hospital, the one on Monday, and the other on Tuesday in Easter Holy-daies at St. Mary's Spittle, for their Founders and Benefactors, Anno Domini 1665. This Chorus is to be sung by all the Children, & repeated after every Verse 1. O Blessed Lord, we will record Thy Glorious Name and Worth: To thee we'l sing, Our God and King, And praises warble forth. Verse. WHAT flouds of sorrow once indeed Poor Orphans did surround, Which made our hearts to ake and bleed, And caus'd a discord sound? Like Shipwreck'd Marriners were we, Being gravel'd on the shelves Of need and pinching po-ver-ty; But could not help our selves. Then did our God himself alone Stretch forth his liberal hand, And us poor Orphans did bemoan, And brought us safe to land. Chorus. O Blessed Lord, &c. 2. The Scene is alter'd quite, and now, Our Night of fears is past, Our Clouds dispelled are: see how The Sun appears at last. We weep this day for joy, that we In London's Hemisphear Such Bright and Glorious Starrs may see On this day to appear; Whose influence revives the Heart Of them that are brought low By pining Famine, and the smart Of penury and woe. Chorus. O Blessed Lod, &c. 3. Long may our Patrons live, and be Preserv'd from Envie's frown; When summon'd hence, Posterity Their lasting Name shall crown. Heav'n bless our Royal King and Queen, The Council, Church and State, Enrich them all with joys unseen, And keep off Envious Fate. Lord Mayor and Senate, Lord, protect; Our Cities Store encrease; Remove all jarrs and plots detect, That we may live in Peace. Chorus. O Blessed Lord, &c. The PSALM for Tuesday. This Chorus ito be sung by a the Children, & repeated after every Verse. 1. THou, Lord, dost reign, and still maintain The world by glorious might: Thy dreadful name we will proclaim In all Blasphemers sight. Verse. IF foul-mouth'd Atheists should deny, There sits in heav'n above A God, whose Glorious De-i-ty All things below doth move; Then we poor Or∣phans will alone Their lies make to retreat, To whom th'Almightie's care is shewn, And mercy wond'rous great. Our Number shall their Blasphemies Most plainly here confute, Who boldly dare by Hellish Lies Against our God dispute. Chorus. Thou, Lord, &c. 2. O Blessed Lord, 'tis thou indeed, That rul'st all things below; 'Tis thou alone the Poor dost feed, Oppress'd by pinching woe. And you, Grave Senators, likewise Our Dolefull state supply; You healed have our Miseries By your Benignity. We'l change our mournful Dirges then To Songs and Praises meet: The noble Acts of Famous men We'l study to repeat. Chorus. Thou, Lord, &c. 3. Our Royal Edward first did frame The model of our Weal, And Pious men uphold the same, That it shall never reel. The Lord stir up the hearts of more, That may with libr'al mind Diffuse their Bounty and their Store, And to the Poor be kind. Our King, our Queen and Royal Race Heav'n keep and still defend; To City, Senate, grant thy Grace, And joy that ne're may end. Chorus. Thou, Lord, &c. S. H. A true Report of the great number of poor Children and other poor People maintained in the Four Hospitals under the Pious Care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of LONDON. Children-put forth Apprentices and discharged out of Christ's-Hospital the year last past— 103 Children buried the said year— 008 Children now remaining under the Care and Charge of the said Hospi∣tal, which are kept in the House and divers places in London and Suburbs thereof, and at nurse in the Countrey, six hundred, and fifteen.— 615 The names of all which are registred in the Books kept in the said Hospital, and are there to be seen, from what Parishes they have been from time to time admitted. The number being so many, and the Charges of the keeping them so great, It is hoped several good Christians will freely contribute towards the maintenance of them, the cer∣tain Revenue of the said Hospital being little more then the moiety of the necesssary Charges thereof. THere have been Cured this year last past, at the Charge of St. Bartholomew's Hos∣pital, of wounded, sick, and maimed Souldiers, Sea-men and other diseased Per∣sons, from several parts, of the Dominions of the King's most excellent Majesty, and from other Forein parts, many whereof have been relieved with mony and other necessaries at their departure— 1561 Buried this year after much charge in the time of their sickness— 214 Remaining under Cure at this present, upon the charge of the said Hospital— 246 THere have been Cured this year last past, at the Charge of St. Thomas Hospital, of maimed Souldiers, Sea-men and other diseased persons, whereof many have been relieved with mony and other necessaries at their departure— 1163 Buried this year after much charge in the time of their sickness— 094 Remaining under Cure at present, upon the charge of the said Hospital— 211 THere have been brought to the Hospital of Bridewell, within the space of one whole year last past, of wandring persons and other Vagrants, to the number of— 908 Many whereof have been very chargeable to the said Hospital for Apparel, Sick-diet and Surgery, besides the ordinary diet, and other provisions and charges expended about them, which could not be avoided by reason of their necessities, and many of them have been passed into their native Countreys with Apparel, Cloathing, and other charges, which could not be avoided, considering their naked and miserable condition, nor they thence passed without such Charge. And there are now kept and maintained in the said Hospital in Arts and Occupations, and other useful and necessary works and labours, at the charge of the said Hospital, Apprentices and other persons, to the number of— 194 THe Hospital of Bethlehem is of great Antiquity, use and necessity, for keeping and curing distracted persons, who are of all other most miserable, by reason of their wants both for Soul and Body, and have no sense thereof. There having been brought into the same Hospital, within the space of one whole year now last past, out of several Parishes in London and place adjacent, distracted men and women to be cured of their Lunacy to the number of— 025 There have been Cured of their Lunacy and discharged out of the same Hospital this last year, to the number of— 013 And there are now remaining in the same Hospital, and kept at the great charge thereof, both with Physick, Diet and other Relief, under Cure, to the number of— 057 The Charge thereof being very great, as well in respect of their Physick, Diet, Cloathing, and other Relief, as also the great charge of servants to look to them, they being most unruly and not able to help themselves, and the Rents and Revenues of the said Hos∣pital being very small, not amounting to two third parts of the yearly Charge thereof; therefore this Hospital is a very fit object of all good mens Charity, to be extended, as God shall enable them, towards their relief, there having been, and daily are, by the blessing of God and the Charge of the said Hospital, and the care of those that are intrusted with the said distracted people, divers reduced to their former senses.
