V36A 47012695 174662
The valiant Commander, with his resolute LADY. Shewing, A brief discourse of a Commander bold, Who had a wife was worth her weight in gold, She bravely Fought to save her Husbands life, Let all men judge, was not this a valia fe. To a new Northern tune, called, I would give ten thousand pounds she were in Shrewsbury. Or, Ned Smith. a man and woman dressed formally, the woman holding a fan GAllants come list a while a story I shall tell, Of a Commander bold, and what to him befell, He was besieged round, in Chester Citie fair. His Lady being with him, which fil'd his heart with care, This unto her he said dearest come thou to me, I would give ten thousand pound thou wert in Shrewsbury. O my own hearts delight, my joy and Turtle Dove, More dear then mine own life, heavens know I do thée love, Those beautious looks of thine, my sences set on fire, Yea though I love thee well, thy absence I desire. Dearest come thou to me, &c. Thy fair red coloured cheeks, and thy bright shining eye, Makes me alwayes inflam'd with thy sweet companie. Thy breath smells far more sweet, then doth sweet frankincense And yet for all those fames I wish thee farther hence. This makes me sing and say, &c. Look how my Vncle stands I dare not come him neer, Because I love the King and am a Cavalear, Yet for my Ladie and her son, my heart doth bleed for thee, I would give ten thousand pound they were in Shrewsbury. They were in Shrewsbury, some comfort for to find, Amongst the Cavaleers to ease a troubled mind. My heart bléeds in my brest, for my fair Ladies sake, And how to save her life, I know no course to take Mark how the drums do beat and warlike Trumpets sound, See how the Musqueteers have now begirt us round. They Souldies they cry out, kill, kill, no quarter give, What hopes then can I have; that my true love should live.
two men and a woman travelling with goods on their backs in a wood with a dog WHen he thus spoken had, his Ladie be forlook, And with a manly heart his sword in hand he took, Farewell my Lady dear, now will I bandie blows, And fight my self to death, amongst my desprate foes, Dearest farewell from me, dearest farewell from me, I would give ten thousand pound, thou wert in Shrewsbury. His Ladie séeing then, the danger they were in, She like a Souldier bold, noblie then did begin My trustie love quoth she since thou so valiant art What are becomes of me, stoutly Ile take thy part. Dearest cast care away, let kisses comfort thee, Thou and Ile nere depart, Ile live and die with thee. Put me on mans attire, give me a souldiers Coat, Ile make King Charls his foes, quickly to change their note. Cock your match prime pour pan, let piercing bullets flie, I doe not care a Pin whether I live or die. Dearest cast care away, let kisses comfort thee, Thou and Ile ne'r depart, Ile live and die with thee. She took a Musquet then, and a sword by her side, In disguise like a man, her valour so she tride. And with her True-love she march forth couragiouslie, And made away with spéed quite throught the Enemie. Dearest cast care away, let kisses comfort thee, Thou and Ile ne'r depart, Ile live and die with thee. Their Souldiers brave and bold, behav'd themselves so well, That all the Northern parts of their deserts can tell Thus have you heard the news of a most valiant wight, And of his Ladie brave, how stoutly they did fight, Dearest cast care away, let kisses comfort thee, Thou and Ile ne'r depart, Ile live and die with thee.
