P1417A [ocm]80923337 191946
Some of the Quakers CONTRADICTIONS which they writ, &c. as suted the Times and their own Interests; by which 'twill appear, that the Highest Pretenders, are the Greatest Deceivers. Section I. 1. OUR giving forth Papers or printed Books, it is from the immediate Eter∣nal Spirit of GOD. 2. You might AS WELL have condemned the Scriptures to the Fire, as our Queries. 3. You are now answer'd from the Mouth of the LORD G. Fox and Rich. Hubberthorn, Truth's Defence, p. 2, 104, 107. printed 1653.. 4. If ever you own the Prophets, Christ or the Apostles, you will own our Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power G. F. Answ. to the Westmoreland Pet. p. 30. 1653.. 5. Que. Do you (i. e. Quakers) esteem your Speakings, to be of as great Authority as any Chap∣ter in the Bible? G. W. answers, That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and GREATER G. Whitehead's Ser. Apol. p. 49.. 1. WE are grosly abus'd, and our Inten∣tion and Principle, which NEVER was, to bring our Books in comparison with the Scriptures. [Is not this a gross Ʋntruth? compare it with their former Writings.] 2. We prefer the Bible before all the Books extant in the World G. W. Quakers Plainness, &c. p. 71. 1674.; [and yet formerly re∣proved John Chandler (at a Meeting at the Bull and Mouth) for having given the Scriptures Preference before their Books: And is not this a plain Contradiction?] Section II. 1. THE Scriptures are not the Word of GOD G. Fox, &c. Firebrand, &c. p. 159. 2d Part. 1678.. 2. The Scripture is not the Word of GOD, as thou blasphemously affirmed G. F. Great Mystery, p. 240. 1659.. 3. How can, or dare any to say without the highest Blasphemy, that the Scripture is the Word of GOD G. Bishop, Mene Tekel, &c. p. 22. 1659.? 4. The Letter (i. e. the Scripture) is a De∣claration of the Word, the Husk G. F. Way to the Kingdom, p. 8. 1655.. 5. The Letter [i. e. the Scripture] is Dust and Death G. F. &c. Brief Discovery, p. 9. 1653.. 6. That which is written is the Letter, which is Death and killeth G. W. Ishmael, &c. p. 10.. 7. Thou art one of them that fouls with thy Feet, Ezek. 34.18. that hath nothing but Husk which is fit for nothing but Swine G. Fox, &c. Truth's Def. p. 53. 1653.. 8. The Quakers do not call the Letter the Rule; and the four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John the NEW-TESTAMENT and Gospel, as thou and thy Generation do G. W. and Chr. At∣kinson, David's Enemies, &c. p. 7. 1655.. 9. But they frequently call'd them Earthly Letter, and Carnal Letter G.F. &c. Truth's Def. p. 14, 28, 56, 60.. 1. WE say Holy Writ is the declared Fundamental Law of Heaven W. Penn, Engl. Present Int. p. 36. 1675.. 2. We believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and NEW-TESTAMENT were given forth by Divine Inspiration G. W. Innocency, &c. p. 31. 1693.. 3. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and NEW-TESTAMENT are of Divine Authori∣ty, as being given by Inspiration from GOD Quakers Vind. &c. p. 4. 1693. sign'd by G. W. and 30 more.: 4. That they [i. e. Quakers] say, the Holy Scripture is Carnal, Dust, Death, and killeth, &c.— We do, in the holy Fear of Almighty GOD, and in behalf of the said People, declare and testify, That all these, and all other his Accu∣sations of the same Kind, or depending there∣upon, are utterly false, wicked and malicious, and never so believed, so said, nor so affirmed by us Charitable Essay, &c. p. 8. 1693. sign∣ed by G.W. and 12 more of their Preachers.. [Now my Request to G. W. and the rest of the Subscribers, is this, That they would view the Quotations on the other Side; and if they find that they formerly call'd the Scriptures Carnal, Dust, Death, &c. as they have done, that they would be so honest as to take shame to themselves, and acknowledg their Error therein, and that they have wrongfully accused Fra. Bugg for those Cita∣tions.]
OF GOD, and calls it Blasphemy in any to say so; yet, it is to be observed, he gives that very Stile to his own Writings, as in his Vials of Wrath, &c. printed 1654. where he says—And to you all this is THE WORD OF GOD, p. 7. and in p. 9. and p. 12. are the same word. And in the Way to the Kingdom, &c. 1655. p. 14. he has them again, viz. This is THE WORD OF GOD. And in his several Papers, &c. 1671. p. 62. he has the same over again. And I believe I could quote above 100 more Sentences of the like Import out of their former Writings, but here are enough at pre∣sent. And as to their denial of the Charge, that they should say the Holy Scripture is Dust, &c. their Evasion or Quib∣ble, I suppose, lies in these words, viz. Holy Scriptures, because in those Days they did not call the Scriptures Holy; but on the contrary, call'd them EARTHLY LETTER, CARNAL LETTER, DƲST, &c. as before-mentioned.] Section III. 1. WE have thousands at our Meetings, and none of us [Quakers] dare speak a word, but as eternally moved of the LORD A true Account, &c. p. 18. 1663.. [Never was a greater Ʋntruth than this printed and published to the World by any Mortals whatsoever.] 2. They are Conjurers and Diviners, and their Preaching from Conjuration that is not spoken from the Mouth of the LORD G. F. Saul's Errand, &c. p. 7. 1654.. 3. All you that speak, and not from the Mouth of the LORD, are false Prophets G. F. Answ. to the West Pet. p. 25. 1653.. 4. How can you be Ministers of the Spirit, if you be not Infallible G. F. Great Mystery, p. 33, 82, 96, 107, 267.? 5. And how can you but delude People, if you be not infallible G. F. Great Mystery, p. 33, 82, 96, 107, 267.? 6. Thou say'st, The holiest Man that is, can∣not give an infallible Character of another Man. G. F. answers, Hast not thou, in this, shewed thy self to be no Minister of Christ, or of the Spirit, that cannot give an infallible Character of another Man? How canst thou see an holy Man from an unholy Man, that cannot give an infallible Character of any Man's State G. F. Great Mystery, p. 33, 82, 96, 107, 267. 7. Thou being not infallible, thou art not in the Spirit, and so art not a Minister. But George Fox says, The Quakers are the ONLY Ministers of Christ G. F. Great Mystery, p. 33, 82, 96, 107, 267.. 1. WE are most horribly abus'd in saying, that we pretend all our Ministers to be infallible W. Pen's Rebuke to 21 Divines, p. 22. 1674.. [And yet but the very Year before the said W. P. writ thus] viz. 2. Our Ministry is of GOD, it stands in the Power of the living spiritual Gift of GOD Judas and the Jews, &c. p. 43. 1673.. And G. Fox exhorted the Parliament, in the Year 1659, in these words, viz. 3. Let none have the Name of a Minister, but such who are able to satisfy all Doubts, and all Questions; and for to convince and stop the Mouths of all Gainsayers and Oppo∣sers G. F. to the Parl, &c. p. 6. 1659.. [Then infallible to be sure.] 4. The LORD hath given his powerful Mi∣nistry (meaning themselves) the Gift of the Holy Ghost, as it was in the Apostles Days E. B's Works, p. 196.. [And, pray, were not the Apostles Infallible?] 5. And thou, and you all, that speak, and write, and not from GOD, IMMEDIATELY and INFALLIBLY, as the Apostles did, and Prophets, and Christ,— you are all under the Curse, G.F. Great Myst. p. 98. &c. Thou canst not know the Scripture, but by the SAME DEGREE of the Spirit the Pro∣phets and Apostles had p. 213.. [I think here is not only enough to shew their Contradiction, but also, that they were not abus'd in saying, they pretend all their Ministry to be infallible.] Section IV. 1. THE Quakers — can discern who are Saints, and who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a word G. F's Great Mystery, p. 89.. 2. We need none to give us Discerning and Judgment, Christ hath furnish'd us already, and doth on ALL Occasions Judas and the Jews, &c. p. 58. 1673.. [But did they discern the two German Cheats, (who pretended themselves to be of great Parentage, and whom they hugg'd, embrac'd, and provided for, and gloried in, as two of their Proselytes) till their Wickedness broke forth, and till they accused each other of many vile Practi∣ces Anno 1670.? Nay, they could not discern several of their own Ministers, who, whilst such, were guilty of Whoredom and the like, till they themselves, or others, made a Discove∣ry of them. Endless would it be to repeat their want of discerning in these and the like Matters; but here are enow to shew they have not that discerning they so vainly and nauseously boast of.]
Section V. 1. THE Quakers are in the Truth, and NONE but they.—Come Protestants, Presbyteri∣ans, Independants, Baptists, Fifth-Monarchy-men, Seventh-day Sabbath-men, and Fa∣mily of Love; the Quaker denies you ALL The Quakers Challenge, &c. p. 2, 3. 1668.. 2. The Tabernacle of GOD is with you; and His Dwelling-place is among you; and ONLY among you is GOD known E. B's Works, p. 64.. 3. All that ever own GOD and Salvation, shall own us Ibid. p. 318.. 4. And John Stubs In his Sermon at Devonshire-House, 1670. declared, That none could truly call GOD Father but Friends, [i. e. the Quakers, whom after he had highly extoll'd, further said] I know thousands of Friends that are free from Sin. [This being a notorious Ʋntruth, I reproved him for it in private. But I must con∣fess, I never found him, nor any of their Ministers, ever contradict themselves, in that high Character they give of themselves: So that this Section is not in two Columns.] Section VI. 1. WE [i. e. Quakers] are of One Mind, and Soul E. B's Works, p. 462.. [Witness the great Differences, and Divisions, that are among them, both in England, and beyond-Seas: And if to be so divided, be to be of one Mind and Soul, then in∣deed they are the People that are so.] Section VII. 1. THE Priests of the World are Conju∣rers, Thieves and Robbers, Antichrists, Witches, Devils, Scarlet-colour'd Beasts; re∣ally they are Blood-hounds See G. Fox, &c. A brief Discovery, &c. p. 7, 8, 9, 10. for much more of this, Ann. 1653.. 2. The Light condemns thee [i. e. Mr. Ben∣net a Minister] and ALL thy Generation eter∣nally—Thou dead Beast, thou polluted Beast, thou Sorcerer—O thou dark Beast and Conju∣rer See more of this in E. Bur. Works, p. 29, 30, 31.. 3. Scarlet-coloured Beast, painted Beast—Brazen-fac'd thou art, for thou art a Beast, thou blind Sot, thou dark Sot, &c See G. Fox's Truth's Defence, &c. p 81, 82. for more of this kind.. 4. Behold your Priest, fallible errable Priest, scoffing independent Priest, ungodly Priest, Mountebank Priest, taunting Priest, stingy Priest, mercenary John Faldo, a Quack, a religious Bone-setter, the Priests break-neck Mr. Faldo's Answ. and Vindi∣cation of 21 Divines, against W. Penn, p. 93. Ann. 1675.. 5. The idle gormondizing Priests of England—No sort of People have been so universally through Ages, the Bane of Soul and Body of the Universe, as that abominable Tribe, for whom the Theatre of GOD's most dreadful Vengeance, is reserved to act their eternal Tra∣gedy upon, &c W. Penn Guide Mistaken, &c. p. 18. 1668.. 6. Old canker'd Apostate, unruly Beast, Impostor or Renegade, Libertine, Ranting Spi∣rit, Son of Belial. [See more of this Nature in W. Penn, &c. Alexander, &c. p. 3, 7, 12. 1673. in answer to Mr. Mucklowe a Quaker.] Hear also what Geo. Whitehead calls him, and some other dissenting Quakers, viz. Wolves, Dogs, Devils incarnate, and the like, in his Preface to Judg∣ment fixt, 1682. MEN that are angry for GOD, passio∣nate for Christ; that call Names for Religion, and persecute for Faith, may tell us they are Christians if they will; but no bo∣dy would know them to be such by their Fruits; to be sure [saith W. Penn, and so say I] they are no Christians of Christ's making W. Penn's Address to Prot. &c. p. 242. 1679.. Section VIII. 1. LET all those Abby-lands, Glebe-lands, that are given to the Priests, be given to the poor of the Nation G. Fox to the Parl. of the Com. W. &c. p. 8. 1659..
2. Slay Baal, Baal must be slain; All the HIRELINGS MUST BE TURNED OUT OF THE KINGDOM, who have pretended that GOD sent them— G. F. News out of the North, &c. p. 31. 1655. 3. Away with Cap-men and Coif-men, as they are called—. 4. Away with all these Counsellors, that will not tell Men the Law without 20 s. or 10 s or 30 s Ibid. p. 5.. 5. Let all those Fines that belong to Lords of Mannors be given to poor People, for Lords have enough Idem, p. 8.. 6. If you query, how you should do with the Impropriators? Sell all the Glebe-lands—and all the late King's Parks, and his Rents—to give to the Impropriators G.F. Papers to the Parliament about Tythes, p. 63, 65. 1659.. 7. You should have sold all the Colleges and their Lands, and give them to the Poor Idem. p. 65..
1. FAR be it from me, to solicite any thing in diminution of the just Rights of the Church of England; let her rest protected where she is A Perswasive to Moderation, Presace, 1686..
2. I believe your own Consciences tell you, that we are a harmless People, and would do you no harm, nor hurt, but wish your good G. F. For the King and Council, &c. p. 2. 1660.. 3. Hath the like been done to any People, as is done to us, who are an Innocent People, and thy Friends Idem, p. 5.? Section IX. A Quaker said, he had a Command imme∣diately from Heaven, to take away the Priest's Hour-glass: which being complained of, Geo. Fox makes this Answer, viz. And for any being moved of the LORD to take away your Hour-glass from you, by the Eternal Power it is own'd G. F. Great Mystery, p. 77.. 1. HE that taketh what is none of his, as to things without, the things of this World, is a Thief, and truly so judged and accounted of Wounds of an Enemy, p. 13. 1656. Miles Halhead, Tho. Salthouse.. 2. We testify, if any Person whatsoever shall act or speak any thing that is evil, un∣der a pretence of a Motion from the Spirit of GOD, we utterly deny that Motion to be of GOD The Quakers Paper, Aug. 10. 1670.. [And was not the taking away the Hour-glass that was another's, an Evil in it self? and yet you see G. Fox (when one of his Friends pretended a Motion for it) had the confidence to own and justify it, and that in the Name of the LORD.] Section X. 1. THat is no Command from GOD to me, which he commands to another; nei∣ther did any of the Saints which we read of in Scripture, act by a Command which was to another, not having the Command to them∣selves E. Bur. Works, p. 47.. 2. You are in the Witchcraft, who observe Commands from without from the Letter Idem, p. 105.. 3. None are to observe any thing, nor teach to be observed, but what Christ (manife∣sted in their Bodies of Flesh) doth command them A. Defence, &c. p. 16. 1659.. BƲT when some of their own Friends pleaded for the Liberty of their Consciences, in not obeying G. F. &c. Impositions and unscriptural ORDERS, then they writ thus, viz. 1. It is the Root of Ranterism, to assert that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon thee, but what thou art perswaded is thy Duty W. P's Brief Exam. p. 3. 1681.. 2. Holy Writ is the declared fundamental Law of Heaven W. P's Eng. Int. p. 36. 1675.. [Surely did the Quakers re∣ally believe that Holy Writ is the declared funda∣mental Law, &c. they would never be so wicked as to enjoin G. F's unscriptural Orders upon their own People as they do.] Section XI. KEEP close to the LORD, and to the mea∣sure of himself made manifest in your own Hearts, for unto THAT you were di∣rected to in the beginning, and in it is your Safety and Presorvation to the End E. Bur. &c. An Epist. 1662.. BƲT when the dissenting Quakers insisted on their own Doctrine of not being impos'd upon in things not evil in themselves, then they writ, viz. The Enemy is at work to scatter the Minds of Friends by that loose Plea, What hast thou to do with me? leave me to my freedom, and to the GRACE OF GOD in my self W.P. Br. Exam. p. 11., &c.
Section XII. UPON a Rumour that the Quakers Meetings were to be broken, they writ, viz. 1. These Tidings do not trouble us, neither are we thereby moved, no not to BEG of any Man the countrary E. Bur. Declarat. of Suff. p. 33. 1659.. 2. And to any outward Authority we can∣not SEEK Idem, p. 40.. 1. WE DESIRE and REQUEST, that you would enact, or provide, that in place or in stead of an Oath, as the Cases may require, our Yea and Nay may be accepted The Case of Oaths to the King and Parliament, p. 6. 1673.. 2. Have a due regard to our suffering Con∣dition, we BESEECH you Treatise of Oaths to the King and Parl. p. 16.. Section XIII. 1. VVE submit to all Laws and Ordi∣nances of Man that relate to the paiment of Tribute, Taxations, Customs, Excise, Subsidy-money, and all things of this Nature, as becometh Saints to Superiors; and con∣cerning these things, no Man can justly accuse the People call'd Quakers Controversy with the Bishops, p. 23. 1663.. 2. We have always paid our Taxes, and other Dues and Duties, more than any People, according to our Abilities Declarat. by G. Fox, G. Whitehead, Broad-sheet, 1670.. [But do they not refuse paiment of Tithes to the Ministers and Impropriators? Nay, they say, Truth allows no paiment of Tithes at ALL under the New Covenant T. Elwood's Antidoce, &c. p. 16. 1680.. And do they not refuse paying towards the Trained-Bands, Trophy∣money, and the like? And are not these enjoin'd by the Laws and Ordinances of Men? And pray what are those other Dues and Duties, they say, they pay more than any People?] Section XIV. 1. THOU art without in the World, in the Church of the Pharisees, who had the CHIEFEST SEATS in the Assemblies, and so art an Enemy to Christ. 2. Your praying in the Synagogue Christ did deny, and we also deny the same G. F. and R. H. Truth's Defence, &c. p. 14, 17. 1653.. [1. Have not the Quakers Ministers the CHIE∣FEST SEATS in their Assemblies now, and so are E∣nemies to Christ by their own Judgment? 2. And do not the Quakers pray in their Syna∣gogues now, and so are to be deny'd by their own Rule?] Section XV. 1. YOU that talk of a natural Light, and a spiritual Light, produce one Scrip∣ture that speaks of a natural Light. 2. The Light is but ONE, which is Christ G. F's Way to the Kingdom, p. 3, 17. 1655.. 1. THE Light is Carnal, the Letter [i. e. the Scripture G. F's News, &c. p. 14. 1655..] 2. I wrote not as from Man, whose Light is ONLY Natural and Carnal, and doth ON∣LY make manifest Carnal Transgressions of a Carnal Law E. Bur. Works, p. 16. 1655.. Section XVI. 1. ARE these People [i.e. Quakers] so sim∣ple that they will not go to Law? Is not the Law open? Answer, If thou observ'd Christ's Words, thou would not call them Simple for not going to Law with their Ad∣versaries; for did he not say, If any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also? And altho the Law is open, yet they are not free to go to it Will. Caton's Moderate Enquirer Rosolved, &c. printed in 8o. 1658. p. 33. and reprinted in 4o. 1671. p. 22.. 2. It is laid upon us by the Spirit of Christ, not to sue any Man at the Law An Ac∣count from the Children of Light, p. 19. 1660. R. Hubberthorn and J. N.. [Let their fining and imprisoning several Qua∣kers of George Keith's Friends in Pensilvania See the Trials of Peter Boss, G. Keith, T. Bud, and Will. Bradford, Quakers, 1692., with their Indicting Mr. Bugg at the Sessions∣house in the Old-Bailey, 1693; and their Ar∣resting and Imprisoning John Andrew, Februa∣ry last, (one of their own Friends) with many more that might be named, bear Witness against them: So that it is manifest, notwithstanding their printed Doctrine of not suing any Man at the Law; yet when it is for their worldly Interests, they will act quite contrary.]
Section XVII. 1. THE Lord gave thee [Oliver Cromwell] the Necks of Princes to tread upon, and their Dominions to inherit. 2. If thou [Rich. Cromwell] chuse the LORD for thy Counsellor—then shalt thou prosper, and thy Name shall be greater than was thy Father's; and the numberless Number of this now distressed People [i. e. the Quakers] will be unto thee a Strength, and stand by thee in thy Day of Trouble, and DEFEND thee and thy JUST GOVERNMENT. 3. We know the LORD shewed Favour to him [i.e. O. Cromwell] and gave him Strength, Wisdom, Valour, and a right Spirit, and he was call'd of GOD into that great Work E. Bur. Works, p. 552, 573, 574.. 1. THE Men and Ministers which E. B. re∣prehended, were those very Persecu∣tors & Ʋsurpers over Conscience in O. P's Days. 2. Bug has at unawares run his own Head against a Wall, and at once justified those Magistrates and Governours, and consequently the USURPATION of that Government The Quakers Vindication, p. 3. against F. Bug; signed by G. Whitehead and 34 more, 1693. given to the then Parliam.. [Pray read the other Column over again, and see if the Quakers did not justify those very Magi∣strates and Governours, and the USURPATI∣ON of that Government, which they endeavour to make the Parliament and others believe they did and do now condemn; and is not this great Falla∣cy and Hypocrisy?] Section XVIII. GIVE Honour to whom Honour is due; but to a proud heady high-minded Man, there is no Honour due, tho he may be great in the World, and in Place to Rule W. Smith's Primmer, p. 43. 1668.. [Is not this strange Doctrine to teach Youth? is it not the way to make them rebellious against their Superiors?] BƲT when King Charles came into Power, then G. F. could say, viz. I honour all Men, (whether Good or Bad, he makes no Excep∣tion) much more the King G. F's Trial, &c. p. 8. 1664.. Section XIX. OH! what a Sincerity was once in the Na∣tion! what a dirty nasty thing it would have been to have heard talk of a House of LORDS among them G. Fox to the Council of Officers, &c. p. 7. 1659.! [But did not the Quakers talk of a House of Lords, yea and solicit them too in 1693, that an Act might be passed that their solemn Affirmation might be accepted instead of an Oath? to which the House of Lords consented, notwithstanding their dirty and nasty Language concerning them?] Section XX. IT was through Ignorance that the People subjected themselves to Hereditary Gover∣nours—or to the Government standing in a single Person successively — and our Nation hath been under the Bonds of Slavery in this respect E. Bur. Advice to the Parliament, 1659. but this Paper is left out in his Works, 1672., &c. AND when the Times were turn'd G. F. said, 1. If I could take any Oath at all, I could take that Oath G. Fox's Trial, &c. p. 10. 1664., (viz. the Oath of Al∣legiance) which Oath doth bind to the King, his Heirs and Successors; and if this be not contra∣dicting and temporizing, what is? And in their Case of Oaths, 1673, p. 6. they say, 2. Our Hearts and Hands could Seal to the Substance, both of the Oaths of ALLEGI∣ANCE and Supremacy. Section XXI. 1. ALL Kings and Emperors have sprung up in the Night since the Days of the Apostles among the Antichrists. 2. There was no King owned among the true Christians, but ONLY amongst the Apo∣states since Christ's Time. 3. They were all Traitors against Christ, that desir'd an Earthly King.—The true Chri∣stians
will not have any more Kings among them but Christ See G. Fox's Papers he writ to the Presbyterians, (who then were endeavouring the King's Restauration) p. 8, 5, 1659.. 1. WE love, own, and honour the King A Declar. June 5. 1660. p. 4. by G. Fox and 12 more., &c. 2. I honour all Men, much more the King G. F's Trial, &c. p. 8.. 3. If thou (viz. King Charles) take some speedy Course for the Repealing those cruel Laws—haply thou may'st be a Moses to stand betwixt GOD and thy People A Vis. to the King, 1662. signed by Josiah Coal, p. 7.. Section XXII. 1. COME answer me, you Papists, Whence came your Creeds, but from factious and corrupted Councils, dyed in the Blood of those that refused Conformity William Penn's Truth Exalted, &c. p. 5. 1671.? &c. 2. Whether in case they could not be con∣formed to, they would allow a TOLERA∣TION were they POWERFUL? Whether in case they should say YES, we ought to be∣lieve them, since it is one of their most Sa∣cred Maxims, not to keep Faith with Here∣ticks, as was seen in the Case of those of the Alpine Valleys, Jo. Hus, &c. and in that they have in all Ages, brought so great a Deluge of Blood upon the European World? 3. Whether it be the Interest of the English Nation to subject her self to a POPISH YOKE? Considering the incomparably bloody Massa∣cres of that sort of Men in several Reigns W. Penn's Caveat against Popery, &c. p. 37, 38. 1670.. 4. The Papal Interest is a Combination a∣gainst good Sense, Reason, and Conscience; and to introduce a blind Obedience, without, if not against, Conviction; and that Principle which introduces Implicit Faith, and blind O∣bedience in Religion, will also introduce Im∣plicit Faith and blind Obedience in Govern∣ment; So that it is no more in the one than in the other, but the Will and Power of the Superior that shall be the Rule and Bond of our Subjection. This is that fatal Mischief Popery brings with it to Civil Society, and for which such Societies ought to be aware of it, and all that are Friends to it W. P's Eng. Int. in Choice of Parl. Men, p. 4. 1678/9.. 5. Consider the Nature and Disposition of the Spirit of the Church of Rome, how it is not changed, but the self-same that ever it was, viz. a Spirit of Murder and Cruelty—I say this ought to be consider'd, even the Cru∣elty of that Spirit, and what Danger there is to give way to the Exaltation of that Spirit, and to embrace it in the least, whereby to give Occasion to get into the Power and JƲDG∣MENT-SEAT; for if it doth, then Fire and Faggot, Killing and burning about Religion will openly appear again See much more of this kind in E. B's Works, p. 810.. 1. I Must also tell him, (i. e. the Church-of-England-man) I cannot admire his Wis∣dom, Manners, or Justice, in his Reflections upon the Roman Catholicks, after the Assuran∣ces of so great an ONE has given him and his Friends of their Security and Protection The Pensilvanians Defence of the D. of Buck. Book, p. 26. 1685.. 2. One thing I must say, Roman Catholicks have been Loyal in England and Holland—and who knows not, that they (i.e. Church-of-Eng∣land) were such as hardly knew how to pray without the Liturgy, that attempted to ex∣clude the Presumptive Heir to the Crown, upon the Score of his Religion A Reply, &c. by G. C. [i.e. Gulielmus Calamus, Anglicè William Penn] p. 22, 23. 1685.? 3. I say, the Dissenters were invited to the Share they had in opposition to Popery by Church∣men Animadversions on the Apology, p. 3. 1687.. 4. Violence and Tyranny are no natural Consequences of Popery Good Advice to the Church of Eng∣land, p. 42. 1687.. 5. Let me ask them (viz. Church of Eng∣land) one Question, Have they not often charged them [i. e. the Papists] with those Doctrines, viz. not keeping Faith with Here∣ticks? Or, that They are not oblig'd, or do not account that of any Value or Tie to them that they promise to us Advice to Protestant Dissenters, p. 56. 1688.? &c. 6. We have been taught to entertain very hard Thoughts of their Religion; and as we learn'd to speak, we stammer'd out, no Papist, no Popery: Whence sprung this Aversion? mainly, I am sure, from this Apprehension, that Blood and Cruelty attended it. 7. Let her cease to be angry, (i. e. the Church of England) and rebuke her Sons very un∣mannerly sitting in Judgment upon, and cen∣suring the King's Proceedings Reasons, &c. p. 5, 6. printed 1687. (and approv'd) by Quakers., &c. 8. We pray God to bless the King and his Royal Family The Quakers Address to K. James, April 1687., &c. 9. We cannot but with grateful Hearts both admire and acknowledg the Providence of GOD, that made the King's retiring into our Country, [viz. Scotland] give a happy Turn to his Affairs, to the Defeating and Disap∣pointing the Designs of his Enemies.—We do justly conceive our selves oblig'd to praise GOD for his Goodness, in carrying him thrô and over all his Troubles The Scotch Quakers Address, June 1687..
Section XXIII. 1. WE directed all People to the Spirit of the Lord GOD in them, and if that led them to fight, I had nothing against it. [This was spoken before a Court by one of their Mi∣nisters, & recorded in their Book of Outland-Letters.] 2. We have chosen the Son of GOD to be our King, and he hath chosen us to be his Peo∣ple, and he might command thousands and ten thousands of his Servants at this Day to fight in his [i.e. Christ's] CAUSE E. Bur. To the present distract. Nation, &c. p. 8. 1659. but this is left out in his Works.. 3. To thee, Oliver Cromwell, thus saith the LORD, I had chosen thee—to execute my Wrath upon my Enemies, and gave them to thy Sword, with which I FOUGHT, and ma∣ny have I cut down by MY SWORD IN THY HAND G. Roff. Righteousness, &c. p. 11. 1656.. 4. If you had made Inquisition for Blood, and to demand all the Inquisitions in the whole Christendom, whereby the Innocent Blood hath been shed, then all the People with one Consent would have said, These be the Men that are gone out for GOD's CAƲSE, pag. 3. Thousands of US [i. e. Quakers] went in the Front of you, and were with you in the great∣est Heat, p. 6. And if ever you Souldiers and true Officers come again into the Power of GOD which hath been lost, never set up your Standard until you come to Rome, and it be a top of Rome, then there let your Standard stand G. Fox, To the Council and Officers of the Army, and Souldiers, &c. 1659., p. 8. 5. Let thy Souldiers go forth with a free willing Heart, that thou [Oliver Cromwell] may rock Nations as a Cradle, p. 37. 6. The LORD gave thee the Neck of Princes to tread upon, and their Dominions to inherit, p. 4. dated May 1657. And as for thy Father, the late Protector, [O.C.]—we know the LORD shew'd Favour to him, and gave him Strength, Wisdom, and Valour, and a Right Spirit, and he was CALL'D OF GOD into that great Work G. Fox and E. Bur. Counsel and Advice, &c. to Oliv. & Rich. Cromwell, printed 1659., &c. p. 53. [See abundance more about Fighting in E. Bur. Works From p. 536, to 540., and the Books quoted; but when the Government was settled upon King Charles, then they writ against all Wars and Fightings.] 1. ALL bloody Principles and Practices, we (as to our own Particulars) do utterly deny, with all outward Wars and Strife, and fighting with outward Weapons for ANY END (mark) or under any Pretence whatsoever.—And we do certainly know, and so testify to the World, that the Spirit of Christ, which leads us into all Truth, will never move us to fight, and war against any Man with outward Weapons, neither for the Kingdom of Christ, nor for the Kingdoms of this World.—So those that use any Weapon to fight for Christ, or for the Establishing of his Kingdom or Go∣vernment, both the Spirit, Principle and Pra∣ctice in that, we deny A Declaration from the Harmless and Innocent People of God called Quakers, signed by G. Fox and 11 more, 1660. p. 2, 3.. 2. It is not lawful (in the Administration of the Gospel) to fight against, or go to War with carnal Weapons in ANY WISE.—In the Administration of the Gospel, it is on ALL OCCASIONS WHATSOEVER, unlawful to go to War, and fight with any Man with car∣nal Weapons Quakers Plea, &c. 1661. p. 4, 5.. 3. It is not lawful for such who are come to the pure Administration of the Gospel, to DE∣FEND themselves by Arms R. Barcklay's Apol. p. 407.. 4. We cannot strive with Weapons of War, nor with any carnal Weapons of War, either fight to defend or offend The Quakers Remonst. 1665. p. 14.: [and yet would have defended R. Crom. and his Just Government.] I Shall now draw to a Conclusion, with a few of their own Words lately printed, viz. And this know for certain, that the way to recover the Deceived, is to lay open the DECEIVERS. [Tho. Elwood against G. Keith, p. 72. 1694.] And tho this Saying of theirs may be a Warrant sufficient for some others to UNMASK and DETECT them, yet I do hereby assure the Reader, it was never a Warrant sufficient for me: For tho I was made to bear, and suffer their corrupt Doctrines and Practices many Years in secret, yet I durst not dare to make them publick, till I believ'd I was call'd thereto, by the LORD of Life and Glory; whose Servant I am, whose Will I have done, and whose Reward I have received; for which my Soul doth bless, praise and magnify His NAME, who alone is worthy, saith London, Octob. 21. 1695. [ged 67 last August.] J. P. LONDON, Printed 1696. and are to be sold by J. Gwillim in Bishopsgate-street, and S. Clark in George-Yard, Booksellers.
This following is a Copy of a Letter which was sent Jan. 5. 1696. to the Persons hereafter nam'd, (with a printed Paper of their Contradictions, which are sold by S. Clark in George-Yard, and J. Gwillim in Bishopsgate-street). William Penn, George Whitehead, Thomas Green, and the rest of your Ministers. OFTEN, and many a time, have I been sent amongst you, with Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept Most of which have I order'd (in the Account of my Life, &c.) to be printed this Year 1696, but the said Book not to be made publick till after my Death.. But to this Day you have stopped your Ears, and hardned your Hearts against whatever I was made to say unto you; and not only rejected those Messages, but in a most gross and vile manner vilified and abused the Messenger Who hath been made willing to spare for nei∣ther PAINS or COST, so he might but discharge a good Conscience to∣wards GOD, towards you, and towards all Men., both with your Tongues and Pens; and likewise much violence done to his Person, [even by your own Disciples] who, seeing it pleased you, did frequently pull him down [and that in your sight] and several times thrust him out of the Meetings Tho he had not spo∣ken one word, nor given any sort of Provocation.; and not long since three or four of your Friends thrust him out of the Yard, all along into the Street, not without reproaching him to the rude Rabble Only for giving away a few Papers.; and Thomas Cox (Vintner) [was so zealous for you] that he pursued him out of several Streets 19 May last. and abused and defamed him to the People. I say, these things considered, with your Friends not being permitted to receive any Books or Papers from me, but charg'd to tear them, which they did, put me on serious Thoughts, whether I might not send you a few of these inclosed Papers, rather than farther to expose my self (at this time) to the Rage and Fury of you and your Friends; and finding no necessity laid upon me to the contrary [at present] I have freedom thus to send them. Your CONTRADICTIONS are placed in two Columns; and tho you have not hearkned to what I have been made to deliver to you, yet it may be you will give ear to what your own Preachers have writ, (as is mention'd in the said Paper) the which if you do, you may plain∣ly see they were not, nor are not, acted by the Good Spirit of the ever Blessed JESUS Who is my only and alone LORD, Law∣giver, and Saviour., but by an Erring, Fallible, Deceivable, and Tempo∣rizing Spirit; which ought to be disown'd, and testified against, by all that are call'd thereto, as hath been, Your true-hearted Friend without flattery, John Pennyman. WHerein you have erred, be not asham'd to confess, and return; for however you are filled with confidence of your selves, you are fully seen to others: You have lost your Glory, it cannot be hid: The SUBSTANCE is departed, tho the Shadows remain: Therefore let Humility, and unfeigned Repentance, be found amongst you; that Glory may be given to HIM who is the Searcher of all Hearts. Fret not at Instruments, neither look so much at them as at that Righteous HAND that is tur∣ned against you: For it is certainly so, that those who once knew the Way of the LORD, and afterwards gave way to the Spirit of Evil, Deceit, Hypocrisy, and Formality; such are more to be testify'd against, than the very Heathen, or open Profane; false Brethren are most perilous, and Hypocrites most odious in the sight of GOD and all good Men. The LORD is no respecter of Persons, whose Will is that hidden Things should come to light, not to cast off, but if possible to save. The AX therefore is to be laid to the Root of every corrupt Tree, that the Chaff from the Wheat may be separated. This latter Part was formerly [and now is] writ in that Spirit, that can [with delight] love, and forgive Enemies; but hates Iniquity and Hypocrisy in dearest Friends.
POSTSCRIPT. Here are a few of the [Legion of] scurrilous Names and Curses (with other Abuses) you have vented forth against an Innocent and Sober Man, and one who would not willingly wrong you, nor any Man living, viz. GRinning Dog, whifling Cur, bark∣ing Dog W. G. Jasper Bat, in their Sermons.. The Devil's Agent, the Devil's Emissary James Parks in his Sermons. The Devil's Drudg An antient Quaker.. The chief of the Devils One of your Hearers. The Devil's Porter, setting open the Gates of Hell, &c In a Letter, G. F. supposed to be the Au∣thor.. Vassal of Hell, and Bondstave of the Devil, &c In another Letter from C. P. Thou cursed Serpent, thou art cursed for ever Anthony Tomkins another of your Mini∣sters, [uttered this Curse upon J.P's saying (af∣ter Hallelujab Fisher had done his Sermon at the Bull Meeting) Decemb. 15. 1676. viz. It is good for every one to have Salt in themselves].. I am moved of the Eternal GOD to pronounce Woes and Iudgments a∣gainst him, &c Charles Marshal in his Sermon at the same Place, April 1673.. GOD's Power will choak thee. This G. W. also declar'd in the Name of the LORD George Whitehead at Gracechurch-street Meeting, from the Preach∣ing-place.. Without natural Affection. Wolf, Dog, Betray∣ing Iudas, Devil-Incarnate, &c G. W. Book, Judgment fixt, &c. Preface.. Devil-driven, dungy-God, Iudas, Athe∣ist, &c Your Book intituled, Righ∣teous Judgment, signed by Ro. Sandeland, ano∣ther of your Ministers, and recommend∣ed by G. W. 1682.. Runagade, Vagabond, creep∣ing Iudas, &c Your Book, Judas and the Jews, &c. 1673.. Ignorant Novice; and at another time laid violent Hands upon him, Francis Cam∣field, [and this he did without the least pro∣vocation, save that J. P. was going to stand on the Form whereon he sat; and the other time when he did stand up, but had not spo∣ken one word.]. Vnclean, nasty Spi∣rit, &c Ambrose Rigg in his Ser∣mon, Nov. 23. 1680.. Instigated by the Devil in the Spirit that would murder Christ; bro∣ken and discompos'd in his Mind and Vn∣derstanding, &c Your Paper prin∣ted Aug. 10. 1670. [against J. P. for his cau∣sing your Books to be thrown down, near the place where he burnt a little Waste-paper, at the Exchange].. [And the very next Day, (viz. July 29. 1670.) after their Books were thrown down at the Ex∣change, G. W. writ to him thus; Thou hast brought a great Reproach and Suf∣fering upon Friends, by this thy mad and wicked Action, unto which the Devil in∣stigated and led thee, for thou hast undertaken (as the Persecutors us'd to do) to burn OUR BOOKS, &c.] Craz'd, crackt-brain'd, distracted, &c These Appellations you and your Friends gave him several Years to∣gether, [tho 'tis certainly true he never had a better Understanding given him, in all his Life, notwithstanding you thus most infamou∣sly scandaliz'd him].. And at one of the last Meetings he was at at Ratcliff, after James Parks had much invey'd against him in his Sermon, calling him the Devil's Agent, the Devil's Emissary, (after his usual manner) [he (J. P.) stood up with an intent to have spoken one Verse of Scripture; but before he had spoken six Words] one of your Friends pull'd him down with great violence, and told the People, he was one of the wickedest of Men, that he was a Limb of the Devil, and deserv'd to be whipt at the Cart's Arss, &c Henry Sutton (Master of a Ship) Dec. 11. 1692.. And notwithstanding these and
all other your Revilings, &c. yet he did not in the least revile again, it being not for any Evil, but for Well-doing that he was thus defamed and abused by you, which made him bear all patiently, committing himself to HIM that judgeth righteously; who as HE hath already, in a great measure, so assuredly HE will more and more clear up his Innocency. I thought I should have ended here, but find I may not omit what follows, viz. One of your Ministers thrust his Stick with that Violence into his Side, [tho it did not pierce the Flesh] that forced him off the Step whereon he stood, and pre∣sently after strook him on the Face J. B. did this standing on your Preach∣ing-place, at the Bull, &c. 1680. [without the least provocation, but only for his saying, viz. He that loveth not his Friend, cannot be said to love his Enemy].. Another of your Ministers, altogether a Stranger to him, told the People (in his Sermon) that he was a Companion of one W. B. who, it seems, had been one of your Ministers; but, as he said, was turn'd a common Cheat, and that he would have ravished a Woman James Holliday, at a yearly Meeting at Gracechurch-street; who being told of this his A buse and false Accusation, and that it was expected he should publickly acknowledg the Wrong done therein, he replied, That unless the LORD required it of him, he would not do it.. After this two other of your Friends, from the same place, affirmed, that he was conversant and intimate with one John Tayler a Ranter, who, they said, had hang'd himself, being guilty (as some of your Ministers declar'd) of most horrid Wickedness, as Blasphemy, Whoredom, Drun∣kenness, and the like Thomas Ruddiard and William Briggins from the said Preaching-place, August 24. 1681.; when as he never was in company with the said J. T. but was wholly a Stranger to him, as he then declar'd. But why is it (may some of you say) that these things are thus reviv'd, and brought upon us now? One Reason chiefly is, that if possible, at length, you may come to see, and be made sensible, that 'tis not the Spirit of Christ, (for He Blest, but did not Curse; He was revil'd, and did not revile) but the Spirit of Antichrist, that hath bewitched and seduced you from the Simplicity and Innocency of Christ's Spirit, by which all the Holy Men of old were, and all the Holy Men are, at this Day, acted and guided. O that yet you would consider your Ways, and be wise, that so you may no longer be deceived your selves, nor any longer de∣ceive others, with your Pretences of being the ONLY Ministers of Christ, and of being guided by His Spirit, unto which you are as yet Strangers. O reject not, O despise not the Counsel herein given you, lest hereafter it be requir'd at your hands. J. P. Newyears Day, 1696. Note, The words within these Marks [ ] in this Postscript, were added since this Letter was sent. I Little thought that the abovesaid Abuses should ever have come to be printed, (especially in my Life-time) for I lock'd them up, chiefly, in my own Breast, as a great Treasure, re∣joicing in the Secret of my Soul, that the LORD counted me worthy to suffer, and to have all manner of Evil spoke against me [falsly] for his Name sake. But the time being come, that they are no longer to be hid, they are thus made publick.
is following is chiefly intended for, and recommended to the serious perusal of the People called Quakers, whom it nearly concerns. ERY Dispensation hath but its Season, wherein the Light of it is to shine; but after∣wards it must be put out, and be buried in the Dark. And when this is out of date, Persons are to be valued no more by it; but the highest in this Light and Worship, will be laid as even with the Meanest, as the highest and strictest Jews were (when their Dispensation fell) with the lowest Gentiles. Little did Israel think they could have been so deceiv'd about the coming of the Messiah; little did they think the Messiah could have laid their Laws and Ordinances so flat at His coming as he did. It is impossible for the Eye of that Wisdom [by which the Jews and the Quakers have judged, viz. only by outward appearance] to pierce into the various Ways and Appearances of GOD. Nothing is darker than the foregoing Glory, when a new One succeeds; none are farther from espying GOD in a new Discovery, than (many of) those that had the clearest sight of HIM in the Old. Look to your selves in time, lest this strange Catastrophe overtake you unawares. Dispensations, and the Fight under Dispensations, is not yet ended. We must contend, and remain strange a while longer: There is a Gulf as yet between us, that we cannot meet. Ye cannot know me, if it were so that I knew you: You will prosecute me with Hatred, tho I should woo you with the greatest and entirest Love. J. P.
