N938 C.21.f.1[25] R226642 99886823 192460
woodcut of English coat of arms, circa 1662 ONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV · ET MON · DROIT By the Commissioners appointed by his Majesty, for the Repairing the High-Wayes and Sewers, and for keeping Clean of the Streets, in, and about the Ci∣ty of LONDON and WESTMINSTER, &c. WHereas in pursuance of an Act of Parliament made in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth year of his Majesties Reigne, and Entituled, An Act for Repairing of High-Wayes, and for Paving and keeping clean of the Streets, in, and a∣bout the Cities of London and Westminster, &c. His Majesty according to the said Act, hath Issued his Commission under his Great Seal of England, unto us Montjoy Earl of Newport, Jeronimo Earl of Portland, Henry Earl of St Al∣bans, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir Charles Berkeley, John Ashburnham Esquire, Daniel Oneale Esquire, Sir Robert Howard, Sir John Denham Knight of the Bath, Sir Richard Anslowe, Sir Thomas Ingram, Sir William Petty, Stephen Fox Esquire, Ed∣ward Waller Esquire, William Glascocke Esquire, Clement Spelman Esquire, John Evelyn Esquire, Hugh May Esquire, Thomas Bales Es∣quire, Reynold Graham Esquire, and Anthony Ayre Esquire, or any five of Vs, to perform and execute the severall Clauses and Pow∣ers, in and by the said Act directed. And whereas by the said Act, all Persons are commanded to Sweep the Streets, &c. before their Houses and Walls, and the same take up in Baskets or other Vessels, every Wednesday and Saturday in every Week, for the Ra∣ker to carry away, upon pain of Three Shillings and Four Pence. And that all Persons are prohibited, to cast or lay any Seacoale-Ashes, Dust, or other Annoyance in any Street or Lane within the places aforesaid, before their own Doore, upon pain of Five Shillings, or before the Doore or Wall of any other Inhabitants, or cast it into any private or publick Sink, Water-Course, or High-Way, but keep the same in Tubbs or other Vessels, and deliver it to the Scavenger, upon pain of Twenty Shillings for every Offence. And that no Person Hoop or Wash any Caske or Vessel in the Street, or set empty Coaches, rough Timber, or Stones in the Street, up∣on pain of Twenty Shillings for every Offence. And it is Enacted, That all Scavengers, every Day (except Sunday and other Holy-Dayes) bring their Carts, and carry away the Dirt in their severall Parishes; and before their approach, give notice of their coming, by a Bell, Horn, or Clapper, upon pain of Fourty Shillings for every such Neglect. And also, that every the Inhabitants, from Michaelmas unto our Lady-Day, from the time it grows Dark, untill Nine of the Clock at Night, shall set forth Lights, upon pain of one Shilling: And al∣so, that all and every Housholder, Repaire and keep Repaired, the Street or Lane before his House or Wall, upon pain of Twenty Shil∣lings. And whereas the said Commissioners have formerly Issued severall Orders for the Paving and Cleansing of the said Streets, and removing Nusances thence, but the same have not taken effect as desired: whereupon the said Commissioners, conceiving the Neglect of the said Statute and Orders proceeds from the (Persons concerned) want of knowledg of the said Particulars Imposed and Enjoyned by the Law; have therefore thought fit hereby to informe them of their duty, and forewarn them of their danger, and earnestly require all Persons, to observe and performe the severall Clauses and Articles in the said Statute on their part to be performed. And to the intent that respect may be had for the due performance of these and all other duties contained in the said Act, We the Commissioners have ap∣pointed Stafford Tyndall, and James Reade Esquires, to be our Supervisors, Authorizing them to appoint their Deputy or Deputies, to see the same duly executed and performed. And in case any Inhabitants find themselves prejudiced by the Comportment of any Officer whatsoever that shall be imployed herein, upon their Complaint to Vs, they, and every of them shall have Redresse. Given at the Office of his Majesties Works in Scotland-Yard, the 17th Day of July 1662. Mo. Newport. A. Ashley. Ro. Howard. Jo. Denham. Tho. Ingram. Will. Glascock. Clem. Spelman. Jo. Evelyn. Hugh May. Tho. Bales. A. Aeyre. Printed for J. G. Printer to the said Commissioners. 1662.
