O123T [ocm]14985026 206151
An Occasional LETTER: Containing Some THOUGHTS ABOUT A National Reformation. AND Recommended to the Consideration OF THE Parochial CLERGY, And Others. LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1698.
Reverend Sir, INclosed I present you with a Christian Monitor, and do in a particular manner recommend this Ʋseful Book to be distributed by your self, and Reverend Brethren (of your Neighbourhood and Acquaintance) amongst your respective Parishioners, especially those of the Poorer sort: In many Parishes this may be done for about Twenty or Thirty Shillings; which it's to be hoped no good Man, that hath a due sense of the worth of Souls, will think much to bestow upon so good an Account. Many Pious, and Worthy Divines, &c. having already given away very considerable Quantities (near One Hundred Thousand) with very good Success, I doubt not but your self, and others, will be prevailed with to imitate their generous Example herein; and the rather, for that it will undoubtedly be a Means, with the Blessing of God, to render all your other Ministerial Labours, the more Easie and Successful; which is a point of the highest Conside∣ration. By this Method you may, with little Trouble and Expence, instruct those in your respective Pa∣rishes, that through Prejudice, or other wayes, will not come to Church to hear you. It being found by Experience that short, devout Treatises on the Lords Supper, are of very great Use
to Young Communicants, if Judiciously chosen, I take the freedom to recommend to your Perusal this Familiar Guide to the same, (bound up with the late Arch-Bishop's Perswasive to frequent Communion, if desir'd) wherein the whole Method of our Sal∣vation, by the Covenant of Grace, is so fully, and yet briefly stated, that I am of Opinion, if so Ʋse∣ful a Book were more known, it would be generally had in most Parishes of the Kingdom, and be sold by the Reverend Clergy to some, lent to others, and given to the poorest sort of their respective Pa∣rishioners that can read; and for those that cannot, this, or Bishop Patrick's help to young Beginners, may be often read unto them by others; I hope you will see yours effectually supplyed with the same, or some other you shall better approve of. I am very sen∣sible there are many Excellent Books already writ upon this Subject, yet considering the wretched Ig∣norance of the generality of People in their Spiri∣tual Concerns (for want of Early Instruction in the Nature and Obligation of their Baptismal Covenant) I am apt to think, few, or none, will be found to exceed this little Treatise, which is now to be sold for Three Shillings the Dozen, to incourage the speedy dispersing the same. It being matter of sad, but of very just, Com∣plaint, that the generality of Christians, and espe∣cially those of the poorer sort, do seldom, if ever, come to the Holy Communion, it would be an Act of the highest Charity for your self, and others of the Reverend and Pious Clergy, in Corporations and Market Towns, to set up Monthly Sacrament Le∣ctures upon your respective Market days; which would be of unspealkable Benefit, not only to your
own Parishioners, but also to the whole Neighbour∣hood, and no great Pains to your selves (being now and then assisted by the most Eminent Preachers out of the adjacent Towns and Villages.) And though you begin these Lectures gratis, you need not in the least to doubt but the Pious Gentry, (of both Sexes) Rich Traders, &c. will soon contribute to so Gene∣rous and Christian an Ʋndertaking; and the sooner, if it were but handsomely intimated unto them by some other Devout Persons of Reputation and Esteem; however, I would have them began Gratis, and that as soon as may be, for the greater Honour of the Parochial Clergy; and in the Interim to pro∣mote Monthly Communions in your several Parishes, preaching always a Preparation Sermon the preceding Lord's day, that the People may be the sooner convinced of their indispensable Duty and Obliga∣tion herein, and also come the better prepared to this Holy Ordinance; from which, (though the highest in the Christian Religion) nothing but Ignorance and Impenitence should keep the poorest Christian in the Parish away. It would be a sufficient Vindication of this Chari∣table Design of setting up these Sacrament Lectures in all the Cities and Market Towns of this King∣dom, could a Calculation but be made how many Hundreds of Young People, &c. have been brought to the Holy Communion by those already set up in and about this City. How many Thousands more will in all probability follow their Pious Example in little time, must be left to him alone that has so wonder∣fully blessed the joint Labours and Endeavours of so many of his faithful Servants, even beyond their own Expectations. We have all the Reason in the
World to hope for the like Success in other Places, where the same Diligence and Application shall not be wanting; and as I have already proposed this very Method to the Religious Societies that have be∣gun these Lectures in several Churches in Town (every Lord's day in the Evening) so I intend, God willing, to continue the same; in hopes it may fall into those hands that will see it effectually put in exe∣cution in so many other Churches within the Bills of Mortality, that may take up most, if not all our Parochial Clergy to preach the same in One Years time; whom I would have gratified with these Christian Monitors and Familiar Guides, &c. which will be of singular Ʋse to poor House-keepers, Ser∣vants, &c. (especially in the great Parishes without the Walls) being given by the hands of the said Clergy. And if poor People could but once be prevailed with to come well prepared to these frequent Com∣munions, they might meet with a very comfortable Subsistance, from the Collections that should be al∣wayes then made, which, for their greater Incou∣ragement, I could wish were chiefly distributed amongst them; and no doubt but the Contributions of the richer Communicants will be the more consi∣derable, when they shall understand their Charity in this kind will have respect to the Souls, as well as to the Bodies of their poor Neighbours, and Fellow-Communicants: For though we ought to do Good unto all Men (according to our Ability, and as we have Opportunity) yet we should have a more particular regard to those that are of the Houshold of Faith. If this Method were generally observed, I am per∣swaded that Article of our Creed, viz. The Commu∣nion
of Saints, would be much better, and more pra∣ctically, understood. I confess I am the more Importunate with you un∣der this Head, being firmly perswaded that with∣out more frequent Communions, and more regular and effectual Catechizing, all other Methods for a gene∣ral Reformation will be in vain; and whoever con∣siders the scandalous and profligate Lives of so many Christians, of all ranks and degrees amongst us, to∣gether with the prodigious growth of Atheism, Deism, and now lately of the Socinian and other detestable Heresies, amongst those of the higher Qua∣lity, must naturally conclude, that either they were never well grounded in the Christian Faith, by early Instruction in the Nature and Obligation of their Baptismal Covenant, or else impute it to their profane neglect in not frequently renewing the same at the Lord's Supper, or to both. And I do not in the least doubt but, upon Inquiry, it will be found that Dr. Beaveridge, and others, who have Weekly Communions, and Daily Prayers de∣voutly read (according to those excellent Directions of the Bishop of Rochester, in his Lordship's late Visitation Charge, &c.) have not only the most Communicants, but by far the devoutest Congrega∣tions, and fewest Dissenters in their respective Pa∣rishes; and I do unfeignedly wish that good Man's Pious Example herein were more known, and ge∣nerally imitated. Indeed he is an Honour to this our Church, which being generally agreed to be the purest in her Constitution this day in the whole World, we may the more wonder at any omissions, or remisness in these Two Fundamental Points, being directly contrary to her own Rubrick, as well as the
undoubted Practice of the First, and best Ages of Christianity. And it were to be wished, that the Parochial Clergy of this Kingdom would give or sell unto their respective Parishioners, Dr. Isham's short Exposition of our Church-Catechism, Dr. Addison's Catechumen, and also supply them with some Books of Family Devotion (such as Bishop Patrick's, Mr. Dorring∣ton's, Dr. Ashton's, Dr. Payne's, Mr. Rawlet's, &c.) at the most Reasonable Rates; whereby we might hope to see the so generally neglected Duties of Catechizing and Prayer restored in most Fami∣lies: But as this, together with bringing them well prepared to the Holy Sacrament, will challenge your utmost Application and Care, so the effecting the same in some good measure will not only tend to their Benefit and your own Honour now; but also to your unspeakable Comfort and Satisfaction in a dy∣ing hour: And above all, what a Jubile will it be to all such faithful Ministers at the great Day of Re∣tribution, to hear their Lord and Master pronounce their blessed Sentence before that vast Assembly of Spirits, and publickly acknowledge their indefati∣gable Labours herein, and then reward them with the highest degrees of Glory: For they that are Wise (or Teachers) shall shine as the brightness of the Fir∣mament, and they that turn many to Righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever. And though the Success should not immediately answer your Expectation, I would not have any Pious Divine (that has faithfully discharged his Pa∣storal Duty herein) be too much discouraged; for it's possible the next Generation may reap the benefit of your Labours; the good Seed will come up sooner,
or later, where it is truly sown, with the Blessing of God, which seldom fails to accompany the united endeavours of his Faithful and Industrious Servants; and I think we have as much Reason to expect it upon this occasion as any other, when the Doctrine of the New Covenant is truly stated according to the Tenour of the Holy Scriptures, as explained in the Book of Homilies, the Nine and Thirty Articles, and Liturgy of our most excellent Church. If some celebrated Preachers have happen'd to miscarry here∣in, I am apt to think, upon inquiry, it will be found they have not kept themselves in the Pulpit so strict∣ly to those excellent Orders of the Desk as they should have done; upon which account it were to be wished that we were more conversant with the same in the composing of our Sermons, always re∣membring the Apostles Rule, Christum praedicamus Crucifixum. For there is a sort of Preaching, as the Right Reverend the Bishop of Worcester very well ob∣serves, which the Church stands in no need of, be∣cause it tends so little to Edification; such are all fine Harangues, all dry, flat, insipid Discourses about Things of no great Consequence to Mens Salvations, all affectations of jingling Words and Sentences, far fetched Allusions, elaborate Trifles, all impertinent Disputes about needless, vain, intricate Controversies, and the like: But setting all these aside, there re∣mains a grave, serious, pious, affectionate, and con∣vincing way of Preaching, which is exceeding pro∣fitable for the best purposes in the World, so long as Men have Consciences to be awakened, Errors to be confuted, Vices to be reformed, &c. it being very easie to spend an Hour to little or no purpose,
(by shooting over the Peoples heads) but it requires the greatest Skill to preach plainly, without flatness, to set matters of Religion in the clearest Light ima∣ginable: That in short is the best Preaching, that carries both Light and Heat together with it, which cleares the Scriptures to the meanest Capacities, and at the same time warms the Affections to Spiritual Things, and sends People home to their Closets; it being hardly possible to mistake as to the best Me∣thod, when Ministers judge aright concerning the End, which is the saving their own Souls, and those that hear them. The extraordinary Zeal of the Dissenters of late Years in setting up of Lectures, dispersing of Books, and breeding up of Young Men for the Ministry in the way of Separation, makes me conclude with His Lordship, that something must be done by the Pa∣rochial Clergy, not only for the Honour, but indeed for the Safety of the Episcopal Government; it being obvious (as His Lordship farther observes) that they gain upon their People by an appearance of more than ordinary Zeal, for the good of Souls. We should indeavour to go beyond them in an un∣feigned and hearty concern for them, and so out do them in those very Things (so far as is consistent with Integrity and a good Conscience) which make them so very Popular. More to this purpose you have in his Lordship's, and other Visitation Charges and Sermons, &c. which with Mr. Herbert's Coun∣try Parson, I could wish none of our Parochial Clergy to be without. Now if to more frequent Communions and more regular Catechizing (and dispersing these Ʋseful Books) the present Method of His Grace the Lord
Arch-Bishop of York, my Lord Bishop of London, &c. in promoting Monthly, Weekly, and also Lent Lectures, were but universally observed in all Cities, Corporations, and Market Towns of the Kingdom, I am perswaded the Affections of the People would soon return into their proper Channel, and the most moderate of those that differ from us, be brought to a far better understanding in these matters: But if something be not done this way, we may almost despair of doing any Good amongst them. I shall add one thing more, with Submission, because the Success of this, and indeed of all our Undertakings of this kind, will in a great measure depend upon it; viz. That as we would be thought Members of the purest and most Primitive Church in the World, we should be exceeding careful not to dishonour her by our unsuitable and unholy Lives, which, after all that has been said by them against her Constitution, I am apt to think, will be found to be the only Just Cause of Prejudice our Dissenters have against us. Indeed we are altogether inexcusable if we do not excel others in the most Exemplary Piety, and all other Vertues, having far better Helps for Private, and also more frequent Opportunities for Publick De∣votion. In short, let us pretend what we will, nothing less will convince them, or indeed should sa∣tisfie our selves. And although this Consideration should affect all that profess themselves Members of so Excellent a Church, yet it ought to do so in a more especial manner, those that attend at her Al∣tars, who, like burning, shining Lights, should shew themselves to be the genuine Sons of the same; that others seeing their good Works may glorifie our Father which is in Heaven.
It having been the unfeigned desire of good Men, for some Years past, that an end should be put unto our unhappy Differences, the same is become more needful now than ever; when all Revealed Religion is either publickly derided by Atheists, Deists, &c. or subtilly undermined by Hobbists, Socinians, and other Modern Hereticks: Which should make those that differ from the Established Communion in lesser Matters only, impartially to consider the great Use∣fulness of the Creeds, Hymns, &c. in our Liturgy, to keep those Gentlemen at a due distance, being introduced into the same for this very purpose, and to remain as so many constant Tests in the Church (as the best Preservatives against all such pestilent and dangerous Errors) as well as to confirm and strengthen the Faith of all her Pious and Orthodox Members; which does sufficiently justifie the Wis∣dom and Prudence of our First Reformers, in retain∣ing these Antient Forms of sound Words, pursuant to the practice of the Catholick Church. Now if this Point alone were but duely weighed, as it ought to be, I should without any difficulty declare my belief, as well as hopes, that these very Heresies, which were undoubtedly designed by the great Ene∣my of our Religion further to divide, if possible, and then to ruine us, will be the very Means at last of Ʋniting us, by that over-ruling Providence which often brings Good out of Evil. Seeing there will, nay must, be Heresies, we should be so wise as to make the best and right use of them. And if all Patrons of Livings, Lords of Man∣nors, Gentlemen, Rich Church-Wardens (as well as the Reverend Clergy) would but present Dr. Combers on the Common-Prayer, and Dr. Cave's
Primitive Christianity, to be chained up publickly in all Churches, of any note, throughout the whole Nation, I am perswaded we should soon see the happy effects thereof: For by this Means the Mem∣bers of our Church will not only be confirm'd in the just Value, and Esteem, they bear for her Li∣turgy in general, but be also better instructed how to use the several Offices in the same with more Reverence of Body, and Devotion of Mind, then, it's to be feared, too many of them do that pretend to be her most zealous Advocates, and avowed Cham∣pions. And for those of our Dissenters that are so far and unhappily prejudiced against the Prayers, as never to come to Church to hear the same devoutly read, nor partake of the Holy Sacrament, where the same is duely administred, every Lord's day, (which I take to be the chiefest Beauty of our As∣semblies) I would earnestly beg you, &c. to put into their hands Dr. Beveridge's Sermon of the Ex∣cellency and Ʋsefulness of the same, Dr. Comber's Abridgment, or Mr. Clutterbuck's short Vindica∣tion, together with some of the Pious Mr. William Allen's Books; which last, it's possible, may pre∣vail more with some of them than any other, he being a wonderful Instance in this kind; for which Reason, and the true Spirit of Religion that shines in all his Works, I find them deservedly recom∣mended, &c. by many Worthy Divines, notwith∣standing he was a Man but of moderate Learning in other matters: Therefore I doubt not but the Sin∣cerity of that good Man might be of very great use to others, if his Example herein were more known, and his Reasons duely weighed; though I confess this great. Work would be much sooner brought about
if the chief Teachers amongst them would act with the like Candour and Ingenuity as Dr. Bates, and Mr. John Showers, and some others, have done, whom we ought to treat with the like Tenderness and Respect. And here I shall take the Freedom to recommend to the serious Consideration of our Nobility and Gentry, &c. the great Trust the Laws of this King∣dom have reposed in them as Patrons of Livings; being very sensible they have those Advantages in choosing, and presenting Men of the greatest Abi∣lities, that if they Conscientiously discharge the same, the Church can never fail being furnished with the very best Men in the Kingdom, (such being most likely to promote the Glory of God, the Honour of Religion, and the Salvation of Mens Souls, by the Soundness of their Doctrine, and Holiness of their Lives): But if to gratifie the Importunity of Friends, or to make a Provision for Relations, they happen to miscarry in this great Affair, the Con∣sequences are most deplorable, (although really there be no Symoniacal Precontract in the Case) the ra∣ther, for that the Thing is uncapable of Reparation. What a Melancholly Consideration must it be for such to reflect upon the same on a Death-Bed, if not sooner? And also upon the dreadful Account they must give, when Inquisition shall be made for the Blood of Souls, for the abuse of so great a Talent as this of Lay-Presentations is? I know very well the most cautious Patrons may be imposed upon, as I doubt not but many good Bishops have been, by false Certificates, Letters of Recommendation, &c. which are too easily given upon these Occasions, though I don't well see how they can, if the most
excellent Method of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, &c. by a Si quis, &c. were generally observed. But all this might be effectually prevented, by looking out in time for Men of undoubted Reputation for Piety and Vertue, as well as Learning (which are the truest Qualifications for the Minist); for such may be found, though their Modesty will not permit them to trudge after Preferment, as others too often do, to the Scandal of the Ministry, &c. It is observed in the Life of the late Reverend Dr. Horneck, to his Eternal Honour, that his Recommendation alone was of more Value to many Pious Patrons (who frequently advised with him upon these Occasions) than many Testimonials; and whoever trusted to him, was never disappointed of an able Minister, Chaplain, or Curate. The want of more Care in presenting the most Exemplary Pastors is looked upon, by the wisest and best Men, to be one of the chief Sources of our unhappy Divisions, &c. We may depend upon it, our Dissenters will never be effectually convinced of the Excellent Constitution of this most Primitive Church, unless our Lay-Patrons, &c. do acquit themselves with more Caution in this particular, be∣ing ready to exclaim (as one of them has already done in print) that some are presented to be Mini∣sters before they are really Christians. It's to be hoped this rarely happens, yet a few Instances in this kind are sufficient to give them too just an Oc∣casion of Scandal, who are ever ready to receive the same. Upon which account I cannot sufficiently commend the generous Example of the Right Re∣verend the Bishop of Sarum, in breeding up so
many young Gentlemen, &c. for the Ministry, and do heartily wish the same Method were generally observed, not only in our Ʋniversities, but also more early in our Grammar-Schools, by making choice of such as are there most promising, who can't well be too soon dedicated to this Holy Function; many of our most Celebrated Divines having been noted for their Early as well as their Eminent Piety and Vertue. It were to be wished that all School-Masters in such Schools would furnish their respective Scholars with these Christian Monitors, and Familiar Guides, (together with Dr. Addison's Catechumen, and Dr. Bray's short Discourse upon the Doctrine of our Bap∣tismal Covenant), and also put them upon often read∣ing over the same, especially upon the Lord's-days, and other Holidays, and by frequent Examination to see what progress they make in Divine as well as in Humane Learning; which might prove a very excellent preservative for our Youth in these dange∣rous Times, and also an effectual security to Poste∣rity against Vice and Error for the future. I con∣fess I am the more importunate with you, and them herein, by reason so many young Gentlemen, &c. having been lately perverted from the Christian Faith by Hobbists, Atheists, Socinians, and others, to the Scandal of our Holy Religion, and to the no small hazard of corrupting the very Fountains of Learning, Justice, and Honour. The Original and chief Design of Endowing so many Free-Schools, in this and other Christian Countries, was undoubtedly that our Youth might be early, and effectually instructed in the Principles of our Holy Religion, as well as in Humane Lite∣rature;
and as the Reverend Dr. Bray very well observes, one of them in this Nation has this very Inscription, viz. Schola Cathechizationis in Religione Christiana; and pursuant to the same design, the Twenty Ninth Cannon does expresly, and strictly, enjoyn all School-Masters to Catechize their Scholars. I would not be so understood as that I would have the Parochial Clergy hereby excluded doing their Duty: No; But as our School-Masters have far greater Power and Authority, then most People are willing their Ministers should have, over their Chil∣dren, I heartily wish they would make use of the same to this very purpose. Under this Head I shall take occasion to make a grateful Acknowledgment of the Benefit that my self, and others, received by these Catechetical, and other Instructions given us this very way; and I doubt not but many others have cause to bless God for the like. Indeed I don't see how the Intentions of the many Pious Founders of such Schools can be supposed, in any tolerable measure, complyed withal, unless the Scholars, to∣gether with their Reading so many profane Authors, be put upon these Christian Exercises; otherwise it may be justly enough said that we are more careful to instruct them in the Heathen Theology, &c. than in the necessary and fundamental Doctrines of the first and second Covenant; upon the knowledge of which, the Christian Religion does intirely depend. There is no want, God be thanked, of many ex∣cellent Books in this kind, for the lower Classis, in English; and for those of the higher, The whole Duty of Man in Latin, Tully's Enchyridion, and others may be very usefully added for variety sake; and I doubt not but, if due Incouragement were
but given, more would be written for this very purpose. I have taken the Freedom, this last Summer, to present His Highness, the Duke of Glocester, with these useful Books, together with Dr. Isham's Ex∣position of our Church Catechism, &c. and do under∣stand Dr. Bray has since done the like with his little Treatise above mentioned. Indeed there can∣not be too much Care taken of His Highness's Educa∣tion, and Instruction, which hath likewise induced me to recommend Dr. Taylor's Holy Living and Dying, Dr. Scot's Christian Life, and others, the most Practical Discourses, to His more mature Judg∣ment and Consideration, in hopes that all Tutors, Chaplains, &c. may be prevailed with to do the like to the Young Nobility, Gentry, &c. in their se∣veral Stations; which would be, not only, of sin∣gular Benefit to them, and their Relations, but also of incredible Advantage both to the Church and State, which will be best secured by the Pious and Vertuous Education of our Youth. It's certain they cannot be too early instructed in the Nature and Ob∣ligation of their Baptismal Covenant; which when they do in some good measure understand, they ought solemnly to take upon themselves by Confirma∣tion, and ever after frequently renew at the Lord's Supper. We can never sufficiently lament the deplo∣rable effects of the scandalous Neglect of too many Parents, &c. in this particular. Though I am willing to believe, as well as hope, that Atheism has seen its greatest height in these Nations; indeed it has been matter of just astonish∣ment to good Men to see it appear bare-faced so long: The very Heathens would never have suffer∣ed
half so much; and it's hard that we shall not do that for the true Religion that they would have done for the false; i. e. afford it a reasonable Protection. But as bad Customs and ill Practices do generally produce good Laws, so the intolerable Insolence, wherewith these Gentlemen have lately treated the most Sacred Things, hath at length necessitated the Parliament to bring in a Bill on purpose to oblige them to keep a better Decorum in their Writings and Discourses for the future. It having been an An∣tient Observation, That Severity hath never failed to extirpate Heresies, &c. when the true Religion hath rather increased thereby. There hath been more than enough written upon this unhappy Occasion to satisfie any sober, unpre∣judiced Persons (that will but give themselves lei∣sure to read and consider Things); but when Men are so far abandoned to Scepticisme, &c. as to dis∣pute every Thing, we must leave them, as Provi∣dence generally does, to a fit of Sickness, or some extraordinary Judgment, to rouse them from their security; when, if they are not stupified, we often find them in quite another Story (especially if they happen to have had a Religious Education). We have had many remarkable Instances in this kind of late Years, (and I doubt not but there have been such in all Ages of the Church, to the Glory of God, and the Honour of Religion) particularly in the Right Honourable James Earl of Marlborough, John Earl of Rochester, Sir Alan Brodrick, Sir Duncomb Colchester, Mr. Hambden, and others, as appears by their several Letters, Remonstrances, &c under their own Hands, which we may expect to see Printed altogether in a little time (if it shall
be thought adviseable); in the interim must refer such as require further satisfaction herein to the Original Copies, as they lye dispersed in the hands of their respective Relations, though some of them are already Printed in their Funeral Sermons, and by Mr. Turner in his Essay upon the Works of Provi∣dence; and after all, I am apt to think, this would be the shortest way of dealing with some of these would be Atheists, and not answer them alwayes ac∣cording to their Folly. Much Good having been done by this very Me∣thod of lending, recommending, selling and giving away such Practical and Devotional Pieces, as have a direct tendency to Holiness of Life, I make no question but much more will be done when this Pious and Charitable Design shall be generally known, and effectually put in execution; for by this Means we may instruct not only our own Families, but also those of our Neighbours, Friends and Relations, &c. to their unspeakable Benefit. Nay, it would be an Instance of the most Heroick Charity to let our greatest Enemies partake of our Kindness and Favour herein, whereby we may heap coals of fire upon their Heads, not to consume but to melt them down to a better and more Christian Temper: All which may be managed with the greatest Privacy imaginable, and that with very little Trouble or Expence. Under this Head I think it not amiss to take Notice of a very pious and laudable Custom in distributing such little Useful Books as these, Christian Monitors, Dr. Ashton of Death-bed Repentance, &c. amongst the Poorer sort of People at Funerals; and to the Richer, such as Dr. Taylor's Holy Living and Dying, Dr. Sherlock on Death and Judgment,
Drelincourt on Death, &c. Dr. Bates's Four last Things, Dr. Scot's Christian Life (the First Part), Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, Bishop Patrick's Devout Christian, The whole Duty of Man, and others judiciously chosen, whereby the whole King∣dom would be supplyed, in few Years, with the most Practical and Useful Discourses, (without any extraordinary Charge, being given instead of other Things). And as I wish these kind of Charities (inter alias) were intimated by the Parochial Clergy to their respective Parishioners whilst they are in Health, so in a more particular manner in their fre∣quent attendance upon them in their Sickness, which will be found to be the best Opportunity to incul∣cate the same: But herein a prudent regard must be had to the Ability of the deceased, and of the surviving Relations, as to the Prises of these Books, which may be had from Three Pence or Four Pence a piece to Five or Six Shillings, Licensed by Autho∣rity, which will effectually take off all Objections against the Ʋsefulness of this Ʋndertaking. Now seeing I am ingaged insensibly so far upon this pious Design of dispersing such Books which have a direct tendency to Holiness of Life, and a General Reformation of Manners, I shall take the Freedom to recommend to all High Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Magistrates, &c. in Cities and County-Towns (as also to the Judges, Sergeants and other Eminent Pleaders in their respective Cir∣cuits) the furnishing the Goals and Prisons of the Kingdom with Mr. Kettlewell's Office for Prisoners (or another little Treatise, Entituled, Relief for Prisoners) together with these Christian Monitors, &c. which would be of singular Use and Comfort
to all those unhappy and miserable people under Con∣finement in such places, either for Debt or for mat∣ters of a Criminal Nature (being given by the hands of such Magistrates, or of the pious Clergy) and will most suitably imploy their many idle hours, and so prevent much Profaneness and Wickedness which does too much abound in those places: And though I would have these little Books promiscuously given to all Prisoners that can read, (and for those that can∣not they may be read to by others) yet in a more especial manner to such as shall receive Sentence of Condemnation. And it would be an additional Cha∣rity, for more of the Pious Clergy, to be assisting to such in a timely Preparation for another World. And if the like Method were observed in all the Bridewels, and Houses of Correction, throughout the Nation, I am perswaded no small Good might be done upon many of those profligate and disorderly Persons that shall be sent to such places for the fu∣ture: For by thus mingling Piety and Mercy with Exemplary Justice, no doubt but some of them will be reclaimed from their dissolute way of living, which will be a piece of good Service to the State, as well as the most genuine Charity in the World for all such Offenders, many of whom will have just Cause to bless God for falling into the hands of such pious Magistrates, &c. And as I have already in∣timated thus much unto the present Governour, &c. of our Bridewel here, so I hope your self and others will not be wanting to communicate the same to the Justices of the Peace, and other Magistrates in your Neighbourhood, especially to such of them as are most likely to see it effectually put in execution. This may likewise deserve the Consideration of the
Societies of Reformation in and about this City, whose Ʋseful Ʋndertaking having the Approbation and In∣couragement of the King, Lords Spiritual, &c. and of so many Worthy Divines and Pious Magistrates, it's not doubted but in little time it will be intro∣duced into all the Cities, Corporations, &c. of note in the Nation. For a further Vindication of these Societies, I shall refer you to the Account of their Rise and Progress, written by the Reverend Mr. Woodward in a distinct little Treatise, and to their Black Lists, and also to the several Excellent Ser∣mons preached Quarterly before the same, which very well deserve the perusal of all good Men, especially those in Authority, whom it immediately concerns to see the many good and wholsome Laws effectually put in Execution against Prophaneness and Immorality pursuant to the King's Speech, the House of Commons Address, and His Majesties most Gracious Proclamation. There seems to be an happy Emulation at this time, amongst good Men, to out do each other in this intended Reformation, which gives us good ground to believe it proceeds from Above; and seeing the King intends to have a particular regard to persons of Piety and Vertue in the disposal of Places of Pre∣ferment, I am perswaded it would be no small In∣couragement to sincerity in Religion, if Lists could be made of such of the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry and Traders, &c. as are most Eminent for the same, in all the Cities, Corporations and Counties of the King∣dom, (more especially of such as are constant Com∣municants); for by this Method His Majesty can never fail being served by Persons of the greatest Integrity, which will tend no less to the Honour
than Sasety of His Person and Government; and it's to be hoped His Majesty will so far incourage this very Design, as upon all Occasions to counte∣nance the same, and particularly by furnishing His Fleet and Army with the Two other little Treatises. Religious Seaman and De∣vout Souldier, together with these Christian Monitors and Familiar Guides; which may be a means of promo∣ting Piety and Vertue amongst those dissolute People, be∣ing given by the hands of the respective Chaplains, &c. And I doubt not but many of our Merchants, Owners and Commanders of Shipping, may be pre∣vailed with to disperse these Ʋseful Books amongst Seamen, Watermen, Porters, Carmen, &c. and also to furnish their respective Vessels with Mr. Dor∣rington's Sermons for every Sunday in the Year, Mr. Bragg on the Parables of our Saviour, The Devout Christian, The whole Duty of Man, and others ju∣diciously chosen, together with Bibles with the Ser∣vice, to be read by such Commanders, &c. (where Chaplains are wanting) and that as often as Wind and Weather at Sea, and their other necessary Af∣fairs when in Port, will permit; which would tend very much to the Comfort and Benefit, not only of the Seamen and Passengers, but also of such Com∣manders themselves, especially in long and tedious Voyages, and in remote and Popish Countries. Doubtless their respective Voyages will succeed ac∣cordingly. The whole Charge for one Ship will not exceed Forty Shillings, which does not deserve the mentioning, it being to be considered these Books will always remain on Board, and should be Inventoried accordingly.
And as I have already intimated something of this Christian Design to the Governour, and some of the Members of the East-India Company, and also to di∣vers private Merchants and Rich Traders, &c of this City, so I intend, God willing, to continue the like Method, in hopes it will at length fall into many pious hands, who will see it speedily put in execu∣tion in all Shipping, where they are either concerned for the present, or shall happen to be so for the fu∣ture; whose Example herein may possibly excite many others in time to do the like: And it would be very well worth their while to send the Books mentioned in this ensuing Catalogue, together with their other Cargoes, to our Colonies in America, Factories in India, Africa, &c. or wherever else our Language is used, or understood. Who knows but such a mean undertaking as this may contribute to the more speedy propagation of the Christians Faith in partibus Infidelium, with more Honour and with better Success by us Protestants, than has been done by Popish Missionaries, though at present, I must confess, they really triumph over us upon this Topick? I fear with too much Reason. And whoever considers the Proposals of the Re∣verend Dr. Bray for the obtaining Parish Libraries for our Plantations in the West-Indies, and the Settle∣ments that are already made, and making, to in∣duce a Pious, Learned and Industrious Clergy to transport themselves thither, together with the In∣couragement that is already given unto this Chri∣stian Ʋndertaking by the King, Prince and Princess, the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and many others of the Pious Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, Merchants, Rich Traders, &c. may rationally conclude that this Glo∣rious
Work is not far off. May the Blessing of Al∣mighty God, that has already so signally attended these beginnings, still accompany the same; and may other Protestant Princes, &c. imitate their Example herein for the speedy promoting true Religion in their respective Colonies and Settlements abroad, and also pursue the Noble Design of the late Pious Mr. Boyle, and that of these Religious Societies in setting up their Ʋseful Lectures, &c. for the sup∣pressing all Impiety and Immorality at home; which would tend more to the Glory of Almighty God, and the Honour of the Reformed Religion, than such Uncharitable and Unchristian Disputations amongst us; which seldom, if ever, put an end to any Con∣troversies. Here is a large Field of Honour to ex∣ercise our Zeal and Emulation in, and it may prove a piece of good Service to the State to put an end to our Religious, as well as Civil Disputes, this way: For many Men, like some Souldiers, are of that un∣quiet Temper, that unless you keep them in Action abroad do often prove Troublesome at home. This Glorious Work, with many others, seems reserved to this time of Peace, which is now, blessed be God, so happily concluded; and I think we cannot give a better Instance of our unfeigned Thankfulness for the same, than by promoting such like Underta∣kings both at home and abroad, which have by our paltry Quarrels been too long neglected, to the great Scandal of the Reformed Religion in these Nations. And it is to be hoped our Planters, Merchants, &c. in America, will at length be prevailed with to permit their Negroes, &c. the Benefit of Instru∣ction in the Principles of Christianity, in order to their being admitted to Baptism, they having many
and great Reasons to convince them of their indis∣pensable Duty and Obligation herein, not only by the late Judgments there, such as Earthquakes, Plagues, and other Sicknesses, but also by their incredible num∣ber of Losses at Sea, throughout this long War, it was a Mercy that they were not totally ruined and destroyed. Their shameful neglect in this particular, together with other enormous Crimes, may reasonably be presumed to have been the principal cause of those dreadful Calamities, I have already observed how the Papists triumph over us, upon account of our shameful Neglect herein, with just Scorn and Indignation. Indeed it is matter of the greatest Scandal the Reformed Reli∣gion can be justly charged withal by those of the Roman Communion, because they generally permit their Slaves this invaluable Priviledge, and, by what I can learn, without any of those dreadful Conse∣quences some here would have us affrighted withal. This being matter of fact, I don't see what can be said, with any colour of Reason, against it: It's certain, nothing will excuse them to good Men here, or to their own Consciences in a dying hour (where this Neglect has been wilful); and we may depend upon it, our Blessed Saviour, who is to be our Judge, will call us to a strict Account for our guilty Omis∣sions herein, as well as for our other Sins, when none of these pretended Excuses (without unfeign∣ed Repentance) will stand us in any stead. I know there has been an Ʋnreasonable Opinion industriously spread, That if you Christen your Slaves, they must be discharged in course from their Servitude. But why so? The Christian Religion requires no such thing; for it's plain SAINT PAUL expresly
sayes the contrary, exhorting all Servants to conti∣nue in the same state wherein they were called; nor can I understand that our Laws require any such matter. However to obviate this Objection, that there may be some Temporal Inconveniences really apprehended by vertue of such a Spiritual Indul∣gence, I doubt not but the LEGISLATIVE POWER will very readily consider, and effectually provide against them. For further Satisfaction, I must refer you to the Negroes Advocate, and other Treatises writ on this Subject by the Reverend Mr. Morgan Godwyn, who whilst he was in Barbadoes, &c. had Opportunity enough to inform himself throughly in this Affair, and wanted neither Capa∣city nor Zeal to set on foot this Glorious Work, had his unfeigned Indeavours but met with suitable In∣couragement. The Journals of the French and other Missionaries in China, &c. may be usefully read also, with some Caution, upon this Occasion. I heartily wish all Parliament Men (present or future) would promote the setting up these Month∣ly Sacrament-Lectures, and dispersing these and other Useful Books (together with Bibles with the Service) in their respective Boroughs, Cities and Counties, which may be done with small Charge. It would be good Husbandry in them, and a very fair step towards reforming the Kingdom, by the same Method it has been in a great measure corrupt∣ed and debauched. It were to be wished that all Elections could be carried on without any Trouble, or Expence, to those Gentlemen that are willing to serve their Country upon these Occasions; I am sure it would be no small Incouragement to such of them as are most Eminent for Piety, &c. to stand Candi∣dates
in all such places: But if notwithstanding the late Act of Parliament, these Scandalous Disorders cannot be presently remedied, others may be made that will effectually prevent the same. In the Interim I humbly submit this to their Consideration, as be∣ing a much more Christian Method, and lyable to very few Objections; being intimated with some Caution, least it fall into some Mens hands who are too apt to ridicule every thing that is serious, or tends to a Reformation. The whole may be likewise proposed to Lord-Lieutenants, and others of the best of the Nobility and Gentry, &c. by the Reverend Clergy; in whose way it likewise fairly lyes to promote the setting the Poor at Work, and putting out their Children to School (to learn English and their Catechisms only), according to the Method of the late Reverend and Pious Mr. Gouge, by imploying the Parish Clerks, and others, which he so successfully carried on both in London and Wales, for many Years, by the assist∣ance of many worthy Gentlemen and Citizens, &c. of his Acquaintance: And if Publick Workhouses and Free Writing-Schools were set up in all Cities and Corporations, by such Parliament Men, &c. there would be the best Foundation in the World laid for an Industrious and Vertuous Posterity; and add to these Parish Libraries, no less for a Pious, Learned and Laborious Clergy. I have computed the whole Charge of supplying this Kingdom with these Christian Monitors, &c. at about Five Thousand Pounds, by a Method that is lyable to very few just Exceptions; which may be Collected by Subscription, or otherways, in the seve∣ral Counties, and at our County Feasts held in London,
with the greatest Ease imaginable. And to the end these little Books may be of more general Ʋse in Wales, I humbly propose that about Ten Thousand of the same be Printed in that Language (as the Bible and Common-Prayer already is, together with Dr. Beveridge's Sermon of the Excellency and Ʋsefulness of the same), which, with as many more in English, may be sufficient for that Principality, where such Books will be of more than ordinary Use, by reason of the remoteness of many Parish Churches, &c. I do most earnestly recommend the whole to your se∣rious Consideration, hoping it will meet with a speedy and suitable Complyance, as believing, it may be of very great Ʋse in this intended Reformation, to have the Reverend Clergy the chief Promoters of the same, which will tend not a little to their Honour as well as to the greater Glory of God, and the Good of his Church. I ask Pardon for this Freedom, begging the most favourable Construction; and conclude with un∣feigned Respects, as being with the greatest Sincerity, Reverend SIR, Your most Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant. POSTSCRIPT. THis Christian Monitor is now Translated into French, ready for the Press; and if Incou∣ragement be given will be Printed in that; or any other Language.
This PROPOSAL May be Reduced to PRACTICE: Thus, SUppose 100l. were laid out in these Christian Monitors and Familiar Guides, (and so in pro∣portion for a greater or a lesser Sum) to be disposed as follows. 1. To set up Monthly Sacrament Lectures in about Sixteen Market-Towns in a County, if so many, (if not in Two or more Counties) the Reve∣rend Clergy of such Towns to open the same, and to be gratified with Fifty of these Useful Books, to be distributed gratis amongst their respective Parishion∣ers of the poorer sort. 2. These Lectures to be continued Monthly in such Towns upon Market-days, by the Parochial Clergy out of all the adjoyning Villages; their Gratuity to be much about the same, delivered them in these Books, expresly to be given away, ut supra. 3. These Lectures to last for One Year, or longer, until such time as a whole County shall be tollerably well supplyed with the same. But that it may be more speedily and effectually done, it were convenient that the Reverend Clergy should make some addition of their own; which will procure them the Love and Esteem of all their Neighbours, and mightily contri∣bute to the Success of their Ministry. 4. If One Years time shall be found too short for the effectual carrying on of so great and good a Work,
these Lectures may be continued for a much longer time, by changing the Reward; for instead of these Christian Monitors and Familiar Guides; other Pra∣ctical and Devotional Pieces may be afterwards use∣fully added, and disposed of after the same manner. But if the Richer sort desire the same, it is but Rea∣sonable they should pay for them, though it's possible they may gratifie their Ministers better some other way. 5. This whole Design is capable of considerable Improvements, but I would not willingly have it lessen∣ed, materially altered, nor fall into any prophane Hands, your own Example herein will be of great∣est Use to others of your Reverend and Pious Bre∣thren; and it's to be hoped that when the Gentry, &c. shall see the great Usefulness of this Design, they will generally incourage the same, and also sup∣ply their Tenants, poor Neighbours, Servants, &c. with these, and other such like, Useful Treatises. Note, The Charge of setting up one of these Lectures in a County being but 6 l. per Annum, may be very easily collected. I am perswa∣ded, the Benefactions will be more than suffi∣cient, coming from so great a variety of Con∣tributors. Benedicat Deus Operi & Faventibus. FINIS.
Some Modern Books proper to be Re∣commended, upon this Occasion, to the Reverend and Parochial Clergy. ANnotations upon the Holy Bible by Bishop Patrick, Bishop Kidder, Dr. Hammond, Mr. Pool, and others. The Explanation of the 39 Articles by Ellis and Rogers. A. B. Tillotson's Sermons. B. Sanderson's Sermons. A. B. Tenison of Idolatry. A. B. of York's Sermons. B. of Worcester's Works. B. Cov. & Litchfield ditto. Dr. Barrow's Works. B. Pearson on the Creed Dr. Scot's Chr. Life, 4 P. Dr. Hammond's Pra. Ca. B. Wilkins's Ecclesi. &c. Dr. Cave's Works. Bishop of Rochester's ditto, especially his late Visi∣tation Charge. B. Sarum's Pasto. Care, &c. Bishop Patrick's Works. B. Kidder's Works. Mr. Dodwell's 2 Let. Ad. Dr. Taylor's Works. Dr. Comber on the Com. Pra. Bishop Fowler's Design of Christianity. The Works of the Author of the Whole Duty of Man. Bishop Williams, Dr. Bently, Mr. Harris, &c. Sermons at Mr. Boyle's Lecture. Mr. Butler, Mr. Bradford, &c. Sermons before the Societies of Reformation.
Dr. Hick's Case of Infant-Baptism. Aqua Genitalis. Mensa Mistica. Dr. Bray's Catechitical Lectures, &c. A Scripture Catechism. Bishop Williams, Dr. Isham, &c. Exposition of the Church Catechism. Dr. Addison's Catechumen. Introduction and Genuine Use of the Sacraments. Dr. Taylor, Dr. Hammond, &c. of Confirmation. Weeks Preparation to the Sacrament. Christian Sacrifice, and Devout Christian. Divine Banquet. Officium Eucharisticum. The Familiar Guide, with the Perswa. to freq. Com. Crucified Jesus. Happy Ascetick, &c. Unworthy Non-Communicant. Bishop Gauden, Mr. Kettlewell, Mr. Rawlet, &c. on the Lord's Supper. Kettlewell's Measures of Christian Obedience, and Practical Believer, &c. Dr. Taylor, Dr. Ingelo, Dr. Payne, Dr. Goodman, &c. on Repentance. Mr. William Allen's Works. Cases of the London Divines. Gildas Salvianus. Mr. Herbert's Country Parson. Arch-Bishop of Dublin, Bishop of Worcester, Bishop of Bathe and Wells, and Bishop of Chester, &c. Visitation Charges. Dr. Calamy, Dr. Wake, Dr. Pelling, Mr. Doring∣ton, Dr. Horneck, Mr. Bragg, Dr. Clagget, Mr. Norris, Mr. Kettlewell, &c. Sermons. Mr. Ray's Wisdom of God in the Creation of Man, &c. Moral Essays,
Dr. Moor's Mystery of Godliness. Dr. Clagget of the Operation of the Holy Spirit. Lord Chief Justice Hales Contemplations, &c. Bishop Hopkins on the Lord's Prayer, &c. Dr. Towerson on the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments. Dr. Sherlock on Death and Judgment. Ditto on Providence and Knowled. of Jesus Christ. A Conference with a Theist, in Four Parts; by Dr. Nicolls. Mr. Edwards upon difficult Texts of Scripture. Reflections on a Pamphlet, Intituled, An Account of the growth of Deism. Bishop of Worcester, Mr. Browne (of Dublin), Mr. Milbourn, Edwards, &c. against the Socinians, &c. The Occasional Paper, &c. Dr. Sherlock's Sermon before the Lord-Mayor. Callamy on Religious Vows. Collier's Essays; with the Office of a Chaplain. —on the Immorality of the English Stage. Grotius of the Truth of the Christian Religion. Dr. Bates Harmony of the Divine Attributes. Mr. Butler, Dr. Lucas, &c. Sermons at the Elect Lord-Mayors, 1696 and 1697, fit for all Magi∣strates. The late Queens Life. Lord Chief Justice Hales Life. Bishop Bedells Life. Earl of Rochester's Life, &c. Earl of Marlborough's Penitential Letters, and others. Mr. Rawlet's Answer to a Popish Catechism, fit for all Papists.
The Snake in the Grass: Satan disrobed: Insti∣tution of Water-Baptism and the Lord's-Supper, &c. which with Mr. Bugg's History and Picture of Quakerism, very proper to be put into the hands of all Quakers, &c. Bishop King's Invention of Men in the Worship of God. Bishop Hall's Art of Divine Meditation. Bishop Duppa's and Laud's Devotions. Monsieur Jurieu's plain Method of Christian De∣votion. Cum aliis, mentioned in Dr. Bray's Bibliotheca Parochialis, Pret. 2 s. 6 d. whose Useful Design very well deserves the Consideration and Incourage∣ment of the Pious Nobility, Clergy and Gentry, and more particularly of all Merchants, Rich Traders, &c.
Some Books proper to be Recommended to the Nobility, Gentry, &c. BIshop Patrick, Bishop Kidder, Dr. Hammond, &c. on the Old and New Testament. Articles and Homilies of the Church of England. Dr. Scot's Christian Life, in 4 parts. Arch-Bishop Tillotson's Sermons. Dr. Taylor's Holy Living and Dying. The Works of the Author of the Whole Duty of Man. Dr. Sherlock on Death, Judgment and Provi∣dence, &c. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, &c. Mr. William Allen's Works. Dr. Combers, Dr. Beveridge, Mr. Clutterbuck, on the Common-Prayer. Dr. Pelling's Existence of God. Grotius of the Truth of Christianity. Mr. Ray's Wisdom of God in the Creation of Man. Dr. Addison's Catechumen, and gen. Use of the Sac. Mr. Dorrington's Discourses. Mr. Bragg on the Parables of our Saviour. Mr. Norris's Sermon of Religious Discourse, &c. Dr. Goodman's Winter-Evening Conferences and Penitent Pardon'd. Dr. Nicolls Conference with a Theist, in 4 parts. Dr. Horneck's Law of Consideration and happy Ascetick, &c. Monsieur Jurieu's plain Method of Christian De∣votion.
Bishop Patrick's Devout Christian, and Christian Sacrifice. —Parable of the Pilgrim. Advice to a Friend and Friendly Debate, &c. The Familiar Guide, with the Perswasive. Mr. Ketthlewell's help to Worthy Communicating. Unworthy Non-Communicant, &c. Lord Chief Justice Hales Contemplations and Life. Dr. Barrow on the Creed, Lord's Prayer, &c. Dr. Sherlock's Sermon against the Socinians, &c. Mr Browne, of Dublin, against Ditto. Bishop of Worcester's Letter to a Deist. A Collection of the best Lives, and of dying Pe∣nitents, ut supra. Collier's Essays. —of the Immorality of the English Stage. Sir Sam. Morland's Urim of a good Conscience. Dr. Hammond's Reasonableness of the Christian Religion. Bishop Patrick Witnesses to Ditto. Bishop Hall's Art of Divine Meditation, Bishop Duppa's Devotions. Cum Aliis.
