P3784 [ocm]12248806 197367
PROPOSITIONS FOR PEACE. Presented to the Kings most Ex∣cellent MAJESTIE, At Beverly in Yorkshire. By the Right Honourable the Earle of Holland of the LORDS House. Sir Phillip Stapleton, And Sir John Holland, of the COMMONS House. Whereunto is annexed His Majesties gra∣cious Answer to the said Propositions. Ordered that this be Printed and Published. John Browne, Cler. Parliament. uly 23. LONDON, Printed by T. Fawcet, 1642.
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon surmounted by a crown
French fleur-de-lis flanked by both the Tudor rose and Scottish thistle on either side against a background of stylized foliage Propositions of Peace. PROPOUNDED To the Kings most Excellent MAIESTIE, by the High Court of PARLIAMENT. THE LORDS and Commons assem∣bled in this pre∣sent Parliament, finding that a ci∣vill Warre was already begunne in the Kingdom, to the great terror of all his Majesties lo∣ving Subjects, the continuance of which must consequently prove the ruine and
destruction of the whole Kingdome, the extirpation of Religion, and the losse of all that we can call good. All which the Honourable Court of Parliament taking into consideration, and being desirous to leave no way unattemp∣ted nor no meanes unassayed that might produce a peaceable effect, or conduce to a happy Pacification, they in their Wise∣domes thought it necessary, first to declare the causes of this dissention, and likewise to propound severall particulars, touching the removall of the causers and causes of these dissentions, to the end that the ef∣fects may cease. To which end the Earle of Holland, Sir Phillip Stapleton and Sir John Holland were appointed by the Parliament to present a Petition, for pacification to his Majesty from both Houses, in which was included these ensuing Propositions. 1 That His Majesty would be plea∣sed to forbeare and remove all preparati∣ons
and Actions of Warre, particular∣ly the Forces from about Hull, from New-castle, Tinmouth, Lincolne, Lincoln-shire, and all other places. 2. That His Majesty would be pleased to recall the Commissions of Array, which are illegall. 3. That he would be pleased to dis∣misse his Troopes and extraordinary Guards raysed by him. 4. That He would be pleased to come neerer his Parliament, and hearken to their faithfull advice. 5. That his Maiesty would be pleas'd to leave Delinquents to the course of Justice. These are the chiefe Heads of the things propounded to his Majesty by the high Court of Parliament, wherein is contai∣ned the summe of their desires, on his Majesties part. Now followes the chiefe particulars which they have promised to his Majesty
in case his Majesty should bee pleased to condiscend to the things propounded. 1. That they shall be ready to lay downe all roe ppartions which they have beene forced to make for their de∣fence, and for the protection of Hull. 2. That they would leave the Towne of Hull in the estate it was, before Sir John Hotham drew any Forces into it. 3. That they would deliver up his Majesties Magazine into the Tower of London. These things being of such great con∣sequence, was many times debated on in the House of Commons, and afterwards sent up to the Lords for their assent. Which being agreed upon, it was de∣livered to the said Earle of Holland, and the two Members of the House of Com∣mons, who having sitted them for their
Iourney, with their utmost speed posted to Bverley in Yorkeshire, where his Ma∣jesty now resides with his Army which he lately raised in the Northerne parts, with intent to besiege Hull, and to take Iustice against Sir John Hotham, a Mem∣ber of the Honourable Assembly of Par∣liament, and by their appointment Go∣vernour of the said Towne, by whose providentiall foresight the plots and in∣ventions of that Malignant party was happily made frustrate, for had he not let in the Tydes, and drowned the Coun∣try three Miles round, he could not have kept his Majesty out so long, for which cause his Majesty kept his Court at Be∣verley, where the Earle of Holland being arrived, information was given to his Majesty thereof, who gave command the Earle should come before him, which being effected, his Majesty having recei∣ved the Petition, tooke order for his safe Protection, withall giving him a most Royall welcome.
Also His Majesty having perused the aforesaid particulers, was graciously pleased to returne this Answer. That Hee would grant what in ho∣nour he could yeeld to the sequell being an expecta ion of Peace. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament that this be Printed and Published. John Browne, Cler. Parl. FINIS.
