12333 99854166 19575
THE IAYLERS IAYL-DELIVERY. Preached at Great Saint Maries in CAMBRIDGE, the 6. of February. 1619. By HENRY GREENVVOOD, Master of Art, and Preacher of the Word of God. 1. PET. 5. 5. God resisteth the proud, and giueth grace to the humble. AT LONDON Printed by George Purslow, for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the signe of the Sunne in Bethlem. 1620.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND WOR∣SHIPFVLL Mrs IANE BVRGOYNE, Wife to the Right Worshipfull M. IOHN BVRGOYNE of Sutton in Bedford, and Daughter to the Right Worshipfull Mr. WILLIAM KEMPE, of Spainshall in Fiching-field Essex, Esquire, all encrease of grace from the Father of light and of life be most heartily commended.({inverted ⁂}) RIght vertuous and much belou'd and grac'd of God, J cannot but present this trembling, (yet not all trembling) Tractate to
you, partly knowing how welcome holy subiects are vnto your soule, and especially considering your im∣portunity for a written Copie of the same. It is not fit that holy things bee giuen to dogges, nor pearles be cast to swine: but matters diuine, to per∣sons denoute most meete for present∣ment, both for godly vse, and strong defence against disgracers of them. J haue therefore made this Jay∣ler your Prisoner, and commit∣ted him to your safe watch and warde: looke what paines you take, and time expend about him, the Preacher of deliuerance to all Captiues, Luke 4. 18. will one day most faithfully and richly re∣ward.
I pray haue an eye alwayes vnto him, see him sicke, see him sound, see him condemned, see him saued, see his passage through Hell to Hea∣uen: Let his example be your in∣struction, his feare your humbling, his faith your happying: you must bee touchd with Legall attriti∣on, or else no taste of heauenly re∣mission. Let not his Hell despaire you, nor his Heauen presume you: but by the one, hold awe of God and feare, and by the other, hope of happinesse for euer. Now the Lord adde vnto your glory by these and other holy helps and meanes, and his best blessings bee multiplyed vpon you, your lear∣ned, louing, and religious Hus∣band,
and all your tender Oliue∣branches, for his deare Christs sake. Amen. From Hempstead in Essex, this 3. of April. 1620. Your Worships faithfull wel∣willer, and euer to bee comman∣ded in the Lord, HENRY GREENVVOOD.
THE IAYLERS IAYL-DELIVERY. ACTS 26. 30, 31. Sirs, what must I doe to be saued? And they said, Beleeue in the Lord Iesus Christ, thou shalt be saued, and thine houshold. THE onely course the Lord our God doth take in the effectuall calling and conuerting of such, whose names are written in the booke of Life, is this: hee hum∣bleth, before he exalteth; he shews our daninable estate through sinne by the Law, before euer hee signifieth vnto vs, that hee is our saluation. A three-fold reason may be rendred thereof: First, because till men bee thus humbled, they  will neuer seek after Christ nor desire him, without which they can neuer finde him, for God hath ap∣pointed that by seeking we shall finde him.
Secondly, that our redemption might be more  precious vnto vs: as health is more pleasant af∣ter sicknesse; liberty, after bonds; plenty, after scar∣citie; peace, after warre; and faire weather after foule. Thirdly, that Gods mercy in our deliuerance  might bee prized in his kinde: the redeemed, in heauen for this especiall cause extoll the Lord and the Lambe with a perpetuall Halleluiah: for an euerlasting redemption from an euerlasting dam∣nation requireth an euerlasting glorification. This generall truth is confirmed by a parti∣cular example, in the words of my text: for this poore Iayler is most greeuously tormented through the horror of the Law, before euer hee can finde his soule recouered by the saluation of the Gospell. Sirs, what must I doe to bee saued? and they said, Beleeue in the Lord, &c. In which words I commend to your religious considerations in generall these two. First, an earnest inquisition for saluation, and  that on the Iaylers part: Sirs, what must I doe to bee saued? Secondly, a comfortable resolution to this per∣plexed  Iayler; and that on Paul and Syla's part: Be∣leeue in the Lord Iesus Christ, thou shalt bee saued and thine houshold. In this Iaylers earnest enquiry for saluation, I note these three. First, his reuerent carriage to the Ministers of
the most high God, in the first word, Sirs. Secondly, the occasion of this his earnest inqui∣sition,  and that was his humiliation by the Law, in those words: What must I doe? I that am the sonne of bitternesse, indignation and eternall weeping; what must poore, lamentable, damnable I doe to bee saued? Thirdly, the inquisition it selfe, and that is for  saluation, in these words: To be saued. Sirs, Sirs, what must I doe? Sirs, what must I doe to be saued? Sirs, It is nomen honoris, a name of honour, and Sirs. title of dignity, elim tributum ijs qui sapientia abun∣darunt: in elder time appropriated to wisdome and learning. Heere first I might take occasion to shew with how great reuerence Ministers of the Gospell are to bee respected: good Pastors are to bee had in double honour: yea their feet to be esteemed bles∣sed, that bring glad tidings of peace to our soules; but I forbeare the prosecution of this point, and propound vnto you the marueylous change that is Note. found in this Iayler: for in the precedent verses it is euident how doggedly and despectiuely hee vsed these holymen: he laid vpon them hand and foot bolts and fetters as many as they could beare, hee thrust them into the inner dungeon and prison: but now the Lord hauing taken him to doe, and giuen him the true and terrible fight and sense of his sinnes, hee is of another minde: now he brings them out, washeth their wounds, refresheth their bodies, and reuerenceth their persons; Sirs, Reue∣rend
Sirs, you Ministers of the most high God; what must I doe to be saued? No reason can be rendred for this miraculous change, but this: The winde bloweth where it luftth: John 3. 8. and God hath mercy on whom he will haue mercy: and Rom. 9. 15. Of this stone God can raise a childe to Abraham. Math. 3. 9. This change wee must all be acquainted with, if euer wee will proue our selues truely conuerted. The Greek word for repentance,  by name signifieth a change, signifying vnto vs, that hee that will proue himselfe truly penitent for his sinne, must bee truly changed from his sinne. This change we finde in penitent Mary: those eyes which once inticed to sinne, and those hayres which once were employed to iniquity, were won∣drously altered and changed; for her eyes were conduits to distill whole buckets of teares to wash our Sauiours feet, and her hayres an acceptable towell Iohn 11. 2. to wipe them. This change wee finde in penitent Paul: who of a Persecutor became a Profossor, of a Lyon a Lambe: Acts 9. 6. and as he put to death others for the Gospell; so in the end himselfe put to death for the same. This change wee finde in Zacchee: who before his conuersion was a notable pick-purse and pol∣ler of the Commons: but when Christ came to the house and home of his heart, proued bounti∣full and liberall, insomuch, that halfe of his goods hee Luke 19. 8. gaue to the poore, and if any man could proue that hee had wronged him a penny, he would make him quadru∣ple restitution.
So this Iayler before his conuersion, an insidell, prophane, and hard-hearted member: but the Lord hauing taken him to taske, and trembling him by the spirit of bondage, now hee reueren∣ceth Gods Ministers, now hee humbly sues vnto them for counsell and instruction, saying: Sirs, Renerend Sirs; what must I doe to be saued? And thus must wee all be changed, (beloued in the Lord) from darkenesse to light, or el hell and damnation must bee our portion to drinke. The Lord then worke this excellent change in our hearts, the Lord create in vs all a new heart, and renew a right spirit within vs; the Lord take away our stony hearts and giue vs hearts of flesh; the Lord renew vs in our minds and iudgements, wills and affections, words and actions: turne vs (O Lord) and wee shall be turned, conuert vs thus (O God) and then, and neuer before then shall we bee conuerted. Thus much for the first word, Sirs. The second orderly to be considered, is the oc∣casion of this his earnest enquiry for saluation: and that was his humiliation by the Law in these words: What must I doe? I that am the childe of wrath and What must I doe? sonne of perdition, I that am leprous, lothsome, and out of measure sinfull, I that haue the wrath of God sensibly vpon my soule for my sinnes, I that know no way out of this my feare and misery; O what must poore lamentable, damnable I doe to bee faued?
Whence wee note the power, office, and property of Note. the Law: that it is (as we reade Galathians 3. 24.) A Gal. 3. 24. notable Schoolemaster to send vs to Christ: it sends vs to Christ, non aliciendo, sed compellendo, not by alluring, but by compelling. The Law is a killing letter: When the commande∣ment came, I dyed, saith Paul: it killeth by shewing Rom. 7. 10. vs and making vs feele the damnability of our sinnes: some by the Law killed to destruction, as Caine, Esau, Iudas, and such as wholly despaire: o∣thers killed to saluation, as Paul and such as by their despaire are driuen vnto Christ. The property of the Law is to humble and quake vs for our sinnes: it sheweth vs our sinne, and mi∣nistreth wrath vnto our soules. This humiliation standeth in two. Confession. Attrition. The first brings shame, the second horror: shame from sinnes filthinesse, horror from sinnes feareful∣nesse: This doth the Law being knowne and ap∣plyed, as a Centinel it bewrayeth the enemy, and makes vs flye vnto Christ. Thus were they humbled that heard Peter in the Acts: they were wounded in conscience and prick∣ed in heart before they cried out, Men and brethren, Act. 2. 37. what must we doe? Thus the Law wrought vpon them that heard Iohn, before they cryed out, What must wee doe Luke 3. 10. then? And so Nineueh being first humbled, sought vnto Ion. 3. 5. God, and Paul first trembled, then said, What shall I Act. 9 6.
doe Lord? And heere a poore Iayler in the sorrow of his soule, cryeth out for saluation; Sirs, what must I doe to be saued? so that the Law prepares vs to Christ. It is most certaine that saluation belongeth to none but the humble: To whom will I looke (saith Esay 66. 2. the Lord) euen to him that is of a contrite heart, and trembleth at my words: yea the refreshing is pro∣mised to none but the laden: for we must go through Math. 11. 28. the hell of a wounded conscience, before wee shall taste of the heauenly refreshing: Merchants waxe Similie. must leach in a candle, before it can take a stampe or impression: the terror of sinne must languish our soules, before wee can come to blessed re∣mission. The comming of God into the soules of his chosen, is notably resembled by his appearance to Eliah: First, there came a mighty strong winde 1. Kin. 19. 11. 12. that rent the mountaines, and brake the rockes, but the Lord was not in the winde: after the winde came an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake: after the earthquake came fire, but the Lord was not in the fire: at last came there a still and soft voyce. So the Lord appeareth to his redeemed ones, first by the winde of his wrath, breaking their hearts; then by the earth-quake of his anger, shaking their soules; then by the fire of his displeasure, smoking their consciences: but in the end, by the still voyce of his mercy hee refresheth their soules. This poore Iayler had an earth-quake in his conscience, as an earthquake in his Castle,
before euer hee perceiued his election and sal∣uation. There is an old saying, Wee must goe by the gates of Hell to Heauen: but I say more, We must after a sort be in Hell before euer we can bee capa∣ble of Heauen: that is, in the hell of an ashamed, affrighted, and confounded conscience, before e∣uer the Lord will say vnto our soules that he is our redemption. If humiliation by the Law precedes the saluati∣on  of the Gospell, then they are not conuerted that more or lesse were neuer humbled. Secondly, they that are troubled and amazed  at their sinnes, let them not be disparaged; so farre they are in this their hell from Hell, as hereby they are composed and fitted for Heauen; for wee must be lost before we can be found, wee must bee condemned before we can be saued. Thirdly, let not humbled consciences rest here,  but passe on still till they haue found the spirit of bondage become the spirit of adoption to their soules. And this counsell I giue all troubled soules for sinne: Let them come to the Temple. Let them impart their griefe to some friend or  Minister. Let them conferre with them that haue beene in  the like case. Let them know that they must be thus sicke, be∣fore  Christ will euer heale them.
Let them build vpon Gods mercy promised  to such. Let them pray that God in his good time would  minister refreshing. What must I doe? Text. AGaine heere wee may note the miserable Note. mischiefe and cursed condition of sinne: how burthensome and irksome it is to the soule, it ministreth nothing but horror and hell to our soules. The seruice of sinne is farre worse then the slaue∣ry of Egypt. The bondage of Egypt was of the body onely:  this of sinne is both of soule and body. In the bondage of Egypt they serued men: in this,  sinne and Satan. In the first, they had a sense of their bondage and  desired liberty: in the second, they thinke them∣selues free and despise deliuerance. In the first the misery was but temporall: in the  second eternall. In outward bondage men may help themselues  by running away, by intreaty, by ransome: in the the second they lye still till Gods mercy deliuer them. A wofull thing it is to abide in the estate of sinne: yea the damned themselues confesse that the way of sinne is a wearisome way to bee walked
in: Wee haue wearied our selues in the wayes of wic∣kednesse, Wisd. 5. 7. and the light of righteousnesse hath not shi∣ned vpon our soules. No maruell therefore if the bands of wic∣kednesse bee called, heauy and importable bur∣thens. Esay 58. 6. Sinne is onus Deo, a burthen to God: Esay 1. 14. Your sacrifices are a burthen vnto me. Sinne is onus Angelis, a burthen to the Angels: for it sunke them downe from heauen. Luke 10. 18. Sinne is onus creaturis, a burthen to the crea∣tures: for it makes them grone. Rom. 8. 22. Sinne is onus hominibus, a burthen to men: Mine iniquities are gone euer my head, and as a weighty bur∣then too heauy for me to beare. Psal. 38. 4. Let vs then beware of sinne that made this Iay∣ler roare and cry, O what must I doe to be saued? For though sinne fawne vpon thee now, yet it will in the end pluck out the very throat of thy soule. Let vs then flye from sinne as from a stinging serpent and biting Cockatrice; for they that doe such things, shall neuer see the saluation of God. To bee saued. Text. THirdly, let vs behold the substance and subiect of his fute, It is not with Iames, to sit by Christ in his Mat. 20. 21. glory:
It is not to haue an inheritance diuided with that Luk. 12. 13. worldling in the Gospell: It is not for any worldly pompe or honor, but it is for saluation: What must I doe to be saued? The most principall thing that all men should Note. striue for vnder Gods glory, is the saluation of their soules. First, and aboue all things seeke the Kingdome of Math. 6. 33. God and the righteousnesse thereof, and in a subordi∣nate manner the things of this life: for what if wee haue all the world, and bee damned when wee dye, what a miserable condition is this? O how Moses beg'd to see the face of the Lord! Lord (saith he) shew me thy glory. Exod. 33. 18. O how Dauid sued to God for his loue: Some Psal. 4. 6. craue worldly goods, and riches doe imbrace; but Lord, grant me thy countenance, thy fauour and thy grace. O how this Iayler cries out heere for saluation! O what must I doe to be saued? This meets with carelesse and desperate people of the world, that worke not out this their saluati∣on with feare and trembling, that make not sure their election and calling: O better for these neuer to haue beene borne, than not to be reborne. O how carefull were the Apostles, when Christ told them that one of them should betray him! they could neither eate nor drinke till they knew themselues freed from that cursed fact: Numquid Math. 26. 22. ego Domine? Is it l, Lord, is it l? O wee should resolue with Dauid, not to suffer our Psal. 132. 4.
eyes to sleepe, nor eye-lids to slumber, nor the temples of our head to take any rest, till wee haue found the boxe of Election opened vnto vs, and the sweete o∣dour of Gods loue shed abroad in our hearts. To bee saued. Text. IN that this Iayler by the Iudgements of God, is drawne neerer to God, wee may see the different Note. working of Gods iudgements vpon the Elect and Reprobate: the one hardened by them, the other humbled: the one desperate, the other seeking to God for remission and saluation. Euen as the Sunne in the Heauens melieth wax, Similie. but hardeneth clay: as the same water saued Israel, but drowned Pharao: and as the same trumpe in battell incourageth the one side, but discourageth the other: So the same word and iudgements of God draw neerer to the Lord the elect, but harden the hearts of the wicked: Cain hardened, Manasses humbled: Iudas desperate, but Paul by Gods iudge∣ments conuerted. It makes against such as with Pharac harden their hearts against God by his iudgements, vtterly de∣spairing of his mercy for remission: Maior est Deipictas, quam quaeuis iniquitas. Gods mercy is greater then mans misery: God is more merciful then man can be sinful, if man wil be truly and heartily sorrowfull. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth: God Psal. 25. 10.
hath two feet whereby hee walkes in his wayes, the foot of mercy and the foote of iustice: If we looke vpon his mercy only, ten to one we shall perish by presumption; if wee looke vpon his iustice onely, ten to one wee shall perish by desperation: there∣fore let vs humbly fall downe and kisse both of his feete, that in respect of his mercy wee may keepe hope, and in respect of his iustice wee may keepe awe, reuerence and feare. If therefore the Diuell tempts thee to presump∣tion, look what thou art in thy selfe, vile, wretched, miserable, and thou shalt neuer presume: if hee tempts thee to desparation, looke what thou art or maist be in Christ Iesus, spotlesse, holy, glorious, then thou shalt neuer despaire. Thus the Church of Christ did: I am blacke, (O Cant. 1. 4. yee daughters of Ierusalem) yet comely as the curteines of Salomon. How could shee bee black and beauti∣full? black in her selfe, and beautifull in Christ Iesus. Thus plainly haue I vnfolded the first part of my text, the Iaylers misery: the second part is mini∣stred mercy by Paul and Sylas, and as plainly by Gods assistance I purpose to passe thorow that: for I had rather pleasure your hearts then please your heads, worthy is your science, but (I feare me) farre short comes your conscience: giue me leaue then to bestow my labour where there is most need, and I pray God as meane an instrument as I am, I may be a meane to further you all in the way of Gods Kingdome.
And they said, Beleeue in the Lord Iesus Text. Christ, thou shalt be saued and thy house. BEfore I come to the particulars of their an∣swere, I must needs commend the wisdome and discretion of these Preachers: they minister a fit salue to this poore mans sore: they put oyle to vineger, mercy to iudgement, Gospell to Law: an excellent temper for health euerlasting. Had they preached the Law, and denounced Gods curses against him, they had sunke him downe to hell by despaire: but perceiuing him ready to bee swallowed vp of damnation, by the casting-net of the Gospell they saue his soule from sinking. A good president for all Gods ministers, that they bee carefull wisely, discreetly, and rightly to breake the Bread of life to the people. Wee must preach the Gospell to languishing soules, and the Law to presumptuous: otherwise wee shall sooner damne then saue by our prea∣ching. To this poore Iayler in the very iawes of Hell and mouth of damnation, Paul and Sylas tender Christ Iesus for his recouery and saluation.
And thy house. Text. I Must here resolue a doubt, before I come to this heauenly resolution. Some may obiect and say, What, shall the Iay∣lers Ob. faith redeeme his family? if the master belee∣ueth, shall the houshold be saued? It may seeme so by the words of the text: Beleene thou, and thy house shall be saued. To answer this: heere is something implyed Ans. that is not expressed: Beleeue on the Lord Iesus Christ, thou shalt bee saued and thy houshold: that is, they beleeuing with thee As if they had said: Poore Iayler, be no dispara∣ged, but looke vpon Christ Iesus, there's mercy e∣nough in store, not onely for thy selfe, but for thy whole houshold if they can but beleeue, yea aboundant saluation for all humbled belee∣uers. That the faith of one saueth not another, (at least in adultis) looke into Ezekiel. That soule that Ezek. 18. 20. sinneth, that soule shall dye: the righteousnes of the righteous shall be vpon him, and the wickednesse of the wicked shall be vpon himselfe also. In the old Law, it was Fac hoc and viues, Do this, and thou shalt liue. God gaue vs leaue to doe it by another Iesus Christ the righteous: but in the new Law it is Crede & viues; beleeue and thou shalt liue. God gaue vs leaue to doe this by no o∣ther.
Can a man see with another mans eye? No more can a man goe to heauen by another mans faith; Euery man must beleeue for himselfe, if he will be saued himselfe. This is notably apparant in the Parable of the Virgins: The foolish would haue borrowed oyle of the Math. 25. 9. wise, but they answered, Not so, lest there be not enough for vs and you: they had (it seemeth) grace little e∣nough to saue themselues, they could saue none for their sistren. I know, for the godly mans sake, God many times spareth the wicked: as if there had beene found ten righteous in Sodome, for their sakes the Gen. 18. 32. City had beene spared, but this was in a temporary saluation: but in the point of iustification to eter∣nall happinesse, euery man must haue faith in him∣selfe: therefore quod dixit Christus, dico vobis, Ha∣bete salem in vobis: what Christ said in his Gospel, that I say vnto you al, Haue the salt of faith in your selues: for Iustus exsua fide viuet: the iust shall liue Hab. 2. by his faith. Beleeue on the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou Text. shalt be saued. IN this heauenly resolution I note three. 1. First, the act: Beleeue. Secondly, the obiect: on the Lord Iesus Christ. Thirdly, the euent: And thou shalt be saued. Beleeue: Beleeue on the Lord Iesus Christ: Be∣leeue
on the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt bee saued. Beleeue. Text. FIdes, faith, in the Hebrew is called Amnah, of Aman, which signifies firmum esse, to be firme or strong, or well resolued. In the Greeke it signifies a perswasion: in the Latine, fides, quasi fiat quod dicitur, of the two sillables, fi-factum, des, dictum: that shall bee done, that is spoken. 'Tis Augustines descant vpon them. Thus therefore I describe faith: It is firmus ac Faith. constans animi assensus Verbo Dei, Spiritus Sancti afflatu ad credentium salutem: Faith is a stedfast and resolute assent or consent of the heart to Gods Word, by the breathing of the holy Ghost to the saluation, of beleeuers. The materiall cause of faith, is the Word of God. The formall cause, is the act of consent. The efficient cause, is the ho∣ly Ghost, the finall cause, is the saluation of our soules. Now lest wee should imagine euery beleeuer to bee blessed, wee are to know that there is a foure∣fold faith, yet but one salutiferous. The first, Historicall: when a man assents to the  truth of the word; the Diuels goe thus farre in Iam. 2. 19. faith, and tremble. The second momentany: when a man with
some howerly delight imbraceth the Word, meerely for knowledge sake and no further, and suffers not the power of it to bee lodged and seated in his soule, in prosperity to make a great flourish in Religion, but in the time of triall to fall away, as in that of Saint Luke, They depart from Luke 8. 13. God in time of tribulation. The third, Miraculous: spoken of in the Corinths,  What if I had all faith, that I could remoue moun∣taines, 1 Cor. 13. 2. and haue not Charity, such a faith profits me no∣thing. The fourth, Iustifying: whereby a man possessing  and imbracing Christ Iesus with his merits and graces, is accepted as iust before God: This is al∣so called a liuely faith, shewing that it may bee as easily perceiued in the wombe of the consci∣ence, as a childe after quickening in the wombe of the mother. Bede makes a triple distinction of faith. Credere Deum: Deo: In Deum. To beleeue there is a God: to beleeue that he is faithfull and iust in his mercies and iudge∣ments: to beleeue that hee is reconciled to vs in the bloud of his Sonne, into whom wee are in∣serted as an ympe or sciens into a stocke or tree, and so liue by the sap and iuyce of his deriued merits and graces: this is the faith that instru∣mentally is said to saue all our poore soules euer∣lastingly
aliue: And I may well say instrumen∣tally: for faith, as it is a bare and meere quality, sa∣ueth no man, but as it hath reference to the ob∣iect Iesus: As a Diamond Ring is said to be rich Simile. and precious: but take out the Diamond and it is worth little: Faith is this Ring, Christ is this Diamond which enricheth vs all with heauenly sal∣uation. Now lest wee should build vpon the sands of presumption, and thinke wee are in this faith, being yet farre wide: Let vs examine this faith by his fruits; for as fire is not without heate, and the Sunne without shine; so this faith is neuer knowne without workes of amendment: Hee that rubbleth muske, cannot but smell there∣of; so hee that hath put on Christ, cannot but bee a new creature, cannot but smell of Psal. 45. 8. Myrrhe, Aloes and Cassia, out of Christs Iuory Palaces, whereby his heart is made exceedingly glad. There are fiue especiall euidences and fruits of this faith. It brings peace of conscience, and ioy in  the holy Ghost, vpon our reconcilement with God: Being iustified by faith, wee are at peace with Rom. 5. 1. God &c. It causeth a man, boldly and openly to  confesse the name of Christ: For, by the heart Rom. 10. 10. a man beleeueth to righteousnesse, and by the tongue, a man confesseth to saluation: Where there is a beleeuing heart, there will bee a
confessing tongue and professing life to Gods glory. It teacheth a man to rest vpon Gods promise  and prouidence in all streights and tryalls whatso∣euer: The iust shall liue by faith: that is, they by faith Hab. 2. 4. shall rest vpon God in their streights, and God will preserue them. It stirres vs vp to often and earnest prayer: Lord,  I beleeue: there is his faith: Helpe mine vnbeliefe: Mark. 9. 24. there is his prayer: therefore no prayer, no faith; cold prayer, dead faith; vehement prayer, strong faith. It behaueth it selfe as a Preacher in the Pulpit of  the soule, alwayes mouing the soule to holinesse: Beleeue thus on the Lord Iesus Christ, thou shalt be sa∣ued and thy houshold. Now by these examine your selues, proue your selues whether you are in the faith: know yee not that Iesus Christ is thus in you, except you bee re∣probates? yee are reprobates, if these things more or lesse be not in you. The Lord then worke in our hearts this faith, and encrease it towards perfection, that so our selues with our houshold, euerlastingly may bee saued.
On the Lord Iesus Christ. Text. THe obiect of our faith, is the Lord Iesus Christ. There is not a name vnder Heauen, wherein sal∣uation Note. can be expected and had, but in the name, merit, and power of Iesus. Hee is our Iacobs Ladder, on whom wee must climbe to life euerlasting. Let vs not goe to Rome for a Pardon, nor to Mahomet for a blessing, nor to the Sorcerer for skill, nor to the Magician for counsell; but let vs come vnto Christ, and hee will refresh vs. Quo ibimus? Whither shall we goe? Thou (O Christ) and none but thou, hast the words of eternall life. Lord Iesus Christ. Text. ALl the names of our blessed Redeemer are hap∣pily met together. Lord: his name of power. Iesus: his name of propriety. Christ: his name of Office. Lord: a name of power, attributing to God his Essence and being, shewing that hee receiued his being from none but himselfe alone, as all things else haue their being from him: For in him wee Act. 7. 28. lie, wee moue, and haue our being.
Christ is a Lord By power, coequall with his Father. By purchase, redeeming vs by his bloud. And therfore called, Dominus Dens, Dominus E∣lectorum, the Lord of the Elect. Heerein his Deity is apparant: He must be thus a Lord, or else hee could neuer haue beene a Iesus. First, a Lord, to support, deliuer, and make conquer his humanity: Againe, a Lord, to dignifie and make meritorious euery act done in his humanity for the saluation of his Elect. That this glorious title is duely giuen vnto our Sauiour, witnesse that of the Psalmes, The Lord Psal. 110. 1. said vnto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enimies thy foot-stoole. And Thomas thus confesseth him, Thou art my Ioh. 20. 28. Lord and my God. This then is no small comfort to the faithfull, that they haue so powerfull and glorious a Messiah; And it maketh also much against those base Here∣tickes, that mock vs for our dependance on Christ for saluation. Againe, in the last place, it should teach vs what manner of persons wee should bee to our Redee∣mer. A sonne honoureth his father, and a seruant his Mal. 1. 6. master; if I then be your Lord and master, where is then my feare? Many would haue Christ their Iesus, but few can brooke him their Lord; Wee must bee conformed to this our Lord in two, in grace, in crosse, if euer wee will be glorified with him.
There are fiue properties of a faithfull seruant, which we must labour to haue, if euer we will make account of Christ for our Lord. The first is Obedience; such were the Centurions  seruants, He said to one, Come, and hee commeth: to Luke 7. 8. another, Goe, and he goeth: to another, Doe this, and hee doth it. O that wee were such obedients to our Lord! The second is Diligence; He toyleth and labours  dayly in his masters seruice for his masters aduan∣tage and gaine: so industrious and laborious should wee be for the glory of our Lord Iesus. The third is Reuerence; if his master doth but  bend his browes, hee quakes and trembles: so when our Lord seemes angry, we must (with Noah) Heb. 11. 7. be moued with reuerence. The fourth is Patience; if his master correcteth  him, hee beares it meekely, quietly, and patiently: so when wee are chastised of our Lord, wee should vndergoe it with meekenesse and patience. The fift is Loue; if his master bee wronged or re∣uiled, he will not beare it with patience, but stand vp to reuenge it: so if wee heare or see our Lord Christ blasphemed, and his most holy Profession derided, it should be a Simeons sword to pierce our soules.
Iesus. Text. THis name was giuen him by an Angell, before hee was conceiued in the wombe, and a reason thereof rendred, Because hee should saue his people Math. 1. 21. from their sinnes. Hee saues vs from sinnes Guilt. Punishment. Regiment. From sinnes guilt and punishment, by his im∣putatiue passions; from sinnes regiment, by his me∣rits and graces applyed and deriued vpon vs: and by his actiue obedience imputed, he doth entitle vs to the glory of heauen. Old Simeon acknowledged Christ such a salua∣tion: Mine eyes haue seene thy saluation, yea and my saluation; thine for sending, mine for sauing; thine Luke 2. 30. for loue, mine for life: Mine eyes haue seene this saluation. And the spirit of Mary also exulted in this her Sonne Sauiour. Luke 1. 47. And all you that would finde him a Iesus from Hell, bee carefull yee finde him a Iesus from sinne.
Christ. Text. CHrist signifieth Anoynted: In the Old Law they anointed three: Kings, Priests, Prophets. And for the worke of our Redemption, Christ was necessarily anoynted to a triple Office, with the oyle of holinesse aboue his fellowes. He was anoynted to be a King, Prophet, Priest. To be a King, a type whereof was Salomon; to be a Prophet, a type whereof was Dauid; to bee a Priest, a type whereof was Melchisedech; Mel∣chisedech, not Aaron: Aaron a Priest, but not a King; Dauid a King, but not a Priest; Melchisedech both King and Priest, King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God; and therefore a notable type of Iesus. Hee was anoynted to bee a King, to rule his E∣lect and protect them; hee was anoyuted to bee a Prophet, to teach his Elect and direct them; hee was anoynted to be a Priest, to ransome his Elect and redeeme them. If Christ be thy Christ as King, then the Diuell reignes not in thee but Christ; if Christ bee thy Christ as Prophet, then his word, not thy will, is the rule and square of all thine actions; if Christ bee
thy Christ as Priest, then thy affections are slaine concerning sinne, and thy whole man sacrificed to God. And thou shalt be saued. Text. THe reward of our faith is the saluation of our Note. soules: Blessed is the estate of Christianity, for it is rewarded with inexpressible felicity. The benefit of beleeuing is multiple. First, heereby wee are adopted the children  of God: Yee are all the sonnes of God by faith in Christ Gal. 3. 26. Iesus. Secondly, hereby our sinnes are forgiuen vs, as  we reade in the Gospell: Confide, fils, & remittun∣tur tibi peccata: Beleeue, my sonne, and thy sinnes are for giuen thee. Thirdly, hereby we haue right and interest in all  Gods blessings of this life: Godlinesse hath the pro∣mises 1. Tim. 4. 8. of this life, as well as of that which is to come. Fourthly, hereby we are freed from the damna∣tion  of hell: Now then there is no condemnation to Rom. 8. 1. those that are in Christ Iesus, which walke not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Lastly, hereby we shall be possessed with the sal∣uation  of heauen: the glories and ioyes whereof are so great, as they cannot bee numbred; so preci∣ous, as they cannot be valued; so lasting, as they are euerlasting. Neither, eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor 1. Cor. 2. 9.
heart of man hath euer imagined, the thousand part of this heauenly felicity. Beleene on the Lord Iesus Christ: thus thou shalt bee saued and thine houshold. If then to bee members of Christ Iesus bee so blessed a condition; O let vs begge of God the heauenly Husbandman, to rend vs off by true hum∣bling from the stocke of corruption, and to plant vs into Christ Iesus, by effectuall beleeuing, that at that terrible Iudgement, wee all with our poore housholds euerlastingly may be saued: And that for Iesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and euerlasting Redeemer. Amen. FINIS.
A GODLY AND Zealous Prayer. O Most glorious God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, and in him our Father, the Fountaine of all our welfare, and the giuer of all grace: we thy poore children (ac∣cording to our bounden duty) are at this present assembled together before thee in Prayer, to offer vp euen from the ground of our hearts, the Sacrifice of thanksgiuing, for all thy lo∣uing mercies and tender kindnesses whatsoeuer be∣stowed vpon vs. We highly blesse thy Maiesty for electing vs in thy Christ to life eternall, before all worlds, for creating vs after thine owne most glo∣rious Image in purity and perfection of holinesse, for iustifying vs by the perfect obedience of thy Sonne, for sanctifying vs by thy holy Spirit; and for the hope that thou hast giuen vs of our future glorification with thee heereafter in Heauen. We also returne vnto thee all due and possible prayse, for preseruing vs hitherto of thine especiall good∣nesse and mercy; supplying aboundantly all our
necessities both in soule and in body; and for thy blessing vpon vs and ours, keeping vs from diuers dangers, that might iustly for our sinnes haue come vpon vs, both spirituall and corporall. O what shall we render vnto thee for all these thy mercies done vnto vs? what are wee, that thou shouldst thus respect vs? or what are our deseruings, that thou shouldst thus esteeme vs? To vs, O Lord, to vs most miserable sinners, there nothing belon∣geth but shame and confusion. If thou (Lord) markest strictly what is done amisse, who is able to abide it? O how farre doth thy mercy exceed thy iustice! O the deepnesse of thy fauours towards vs! So vnsearchable are they, as no man can ex∣presse them, so vn-vtterable, as no man can de∣clare them. And (most mercifull Father) wee humbly in∣treat for thy Christs sake the continuance of these mercies towards vs: Blesse vs this day and euer with thy heauenly protection and benediction, guide vs by thine owne Spirit into all godlinesse, that we may profitably and conscionably walke be∣fore thee in our vocations, both generall and par∣ticular: blesse vs in the house, and blesse vs in the field: blesse vs in the basket, and blesse vs in the store: blesse vs in our out-goings, and in our com∣mings in; compasse vs on euery side with thy mer∣cies; guard thine Angels round about vs; keepe vs from the euill of this world, and euery worke of darknesse; and sanctifie both our soules and bodies with thy feare to thy seruice, that as heretofore we
haue serued the Diuell and the world by prophane∣nesse; so euer heereafter (redeeming the time) wee may apply our selues vnto holinesse. To which end we most earnestly craue (O hea∣uenly Father) the presence of thy Spirit alwayes to direct vs, the powerfull preaching of thy Gospell, alwayes to instruct vs, the holy vse of thy Sacra∣ments alway to confirme vs, that (all heresie and vngodlinesse remoued farre from vs) by these meanes sanctified vnto vs, we may glorifie thy ho∣ly name, by our holy conuersations in this life, and bee glorified of thee euerlastingly in the life to come. And because (by reason of our sinnes) in stead of thy mercies we haue deserued thy furious indig∣nation against vs: we therefore seriously begge at the throne of thy mercy, in the meritorious media∣tion of Iesus Christ, that thou wouldest remoue far from vs and our Land, all thy fearefull and heauy iudgements whatsoeuer, as famine, pestilence, sword, and the like; and giue vs all grace from the King to the beast, that we may be truly humbled for all our iniquities, that wee repenting vs of our euill which is sinne, thou maist be pleased to repent thee of thy euill which is punishment for sinne. Heare vs (Oblessed Lord God) in these our Pe∣titions, pardoning our sinnes, and granting to vs all our requests, with all other thy graces that we stand in need of, that may make for thy glory, and the sa∣uing of our poore soules, at the dismall Day of
Iudgement, and that for Christ Iesus his sake: To whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit, three glorious persons, but one immortall God, wee de∣sire to returne all possible praise, power, do∣minion, and thanksgiuing, this day and euerlasting. Amen. FINIS.
