12646B 99839388 3802
Certaine IRREFRAGABLE PROPOSITIONS WORTHY OF Serious Consideration. By J. H. B. of Exon. LONDON, Printed by M.F. for NATH: BUTTER. MDCXXXIX.
TO MY DREAD SOVERAIGN, THE KINGS MOST Excellent MAIESTIE. May it please your Matie, AS one, whose heart (amongst many thou∣sands) bleeds with the sad thoughts of the wofull Divisions of our deare Fellow-Subjects; and unfainedly pitties the mis-guidance of those poore well-mea∣ning soules amongst them, whose credulity hath heedlesly betray'd them into a zealous errour; I have let fall
these few Propositions; which I have presumed to set downe, not as in the way of a Challenger; for, most (if not all) of them are such, as be not ca∣pable of Contradiction, but rather of a faithfull Remembrancer to my dear Brethren, of those Points which they cannot but know, and yeeld: as well supposing, that nothing but meer want of consideration can be guilty of this perillous distraction, in them, who pro∣fesse to love their King, and the Truth. Now the good God of heaven open the eyes and hearts of us all, that we may both see, and be sensible of the invaluable blessing of our peace, and the happy freedome of his Gospel, which we doe comfortably enjoy under Your MAIESTIES sweet and reli∣gious Government, to the wonder, and
envie of all other Nations; and com∣pose the hearts of all your Native Subjects to meet Your MAIESTIES most gracious indulgence, with all humble thankefulnesse. And the same God forbid that any of us should be weary of our happiness: and be drawne to doe any act that may (before all the world) poure shame upon our holy profession; whose chiefe glory it hath alwayes hitherto beene to render us still loyall and obedient, and in this very regard, to triumph over the false religion of our opposites. Such shall be ever the prayers of Your Maties most humble, and faithfull Subject, and ancientest Chaplain, JOS: EXON.
Seaven irrefragable Propositions concerning Oaths and Covenants. 1. NO man may sweare, or in∣duce another man to swear unlawfully. 2. IT is no lawfull Oath that is not at∣tended with Truth, Justice, and Judgement, Jer. 4.2. the first vvhere∣of requires that the thing svvorn be true: the second, that it be just: the third, that it be not undue, and un∣meet
meet to be svvorn and undertaken. 3. A Promissory Oath vvhich is to the certaine prejudice of ano∣ther mans right, cannot be attended vvith Justice. 4. NO prejudice of another mans right can be so dangerous and sinfull, as that prejudice vvhich is done to the right of publique and Soveraign Authority. 5. THe right of Soveraign Authority is highly prejudiced, vvhen pri∣vate subjects incroach upon it; and shall, upon suspicion of the disa∣vowed
vovved intentions, or actions of their Princes, combine, and binde themselves to enact, establish, or al∣ter any matters concerning Religi∣on, vvithout (and therefore much more if against) the authority of their Lawfull Soveraign. 6. A Man is bound in Conscience to reverse and disclaime that vvhich he vvas induced unlawfully to ingage himselfe by Oath to per∣forme. 7. NO oath is, or can be of force, that is made against a lawfull oath formerly taken; so as he that hath svvorne Allegeance to his Soveraign,
and thereby bound himselfe to maintain the right, povver, and au∣thority of his said Soveraign, can∣not by any second oath, be tyed to doe ought that may tend to the in∣fringement thereof: and if he have so tyed himselfe, the Obligation is, ipso facto, void and frustrate.
COROLLARIE. IF therefore any sworne Subject shall by pretences and persvva∣sions, be dravvne to binde himselfe by Oath or Covenant, to deter∣mine, establish, or alter any act con∣cerning matter of Religion, vvith∣out, or against the allowance of So∣veraign Authority, the act is unlavv∣full and unjust, and the party so in∣gaged is bound in conscience to re∣verse and renounce his said act: O∣thervvise (besides the horrible scan∣dall vvhich hee shall dravv upon Religion) he doth manifestly incur the sinne of the breach of the third and fift Commandements.
Two, as undoubted Propositions, concerning Church-government. 1. NO man living, no History, can shevv any vvel-allovved and setled nationall Church in the vvhole Christian World, that hath beene governed othervvise then by Bi∣shops, in a meet & moderate impa∣rity, ever since the times of Christ and his Apostles, untill this present Age. 2. NO man living, no record of History can shevv any Lay-Presbyter that ever vvas in the whole Christian Church, untill this present Age.
COROLLARIE. IF men would as easily learne as Christian wisdome can teach them, to distinguish betwixt cal∣lings and persons, betwixt the sub∣stance of callings, and the not-neces∣sary appendances of them, betwixt the rules of Government, and the er∣rors of Execution, these ill-raised quarrels vvould dye alone. Da pacem Domine, F.E.
