13313 99839796 4248
Est mihi suppicij causa fuisse piam. Many daughters haue don well but thou surpass est them all. I S. Inunt.
ENGLANDS ELIZABETH HER LIFE AND TROVBLES, During Her Minoritie, from the Cradle to the CROWNE. Historically laid open and inter∣wouen with such eminent Passages of STATE, as happened vnder the Reigne of HENRY the Eight, EDVVARD the Sixt, Q. MARY; all of them aptly introducing to the present Relation. By THO: HEYWOO LONDON, Printed by IOHN BEALE, for PHILIP WATERHOVSE; and are to be sold at his Shop at St. Pauls head, neere London-stone. 1631.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE the Lord HENRY Earle of Douer, Vis∣count ROCHFORD, L. Hunsdon, &c. Right Honourable, WHen I had fi∣nished this short Tra∣ctate, (which may bee rather styl'd a
superficiall remem∣brance then an essen∣tiall expression of the of the passages of Queene Elizabeth's Life in her minori∣tie:) I could not ap∣prehend vnto whom the Patronage there∣of might more iustly belong, then to your Honour, whose no∣ble Grandfather, Hen∣ry Lord Hunsdon, after Lord Chamberlaine to her Maiestie (her neere and deare Kins∣man:) was the most
constant Friend and faithfull Assistant in all her troubles and dangers, who not onely imploy'd his whole industry, and made vse of his best Friends: but liberally expended his means, & hazarded his owne person as an Inter∣poser betwixt her safety, and the malice of her potent aduer∣saries, which makes me somthing to wō∣der, that so great and remarkeable a zeale
exprest in a time of such ineuitable dan∣ger, when all Her friends were held the Queene her Sisters e∣nemies; and her e∣nemies, the Queenes friends; when no∣thing but Examinati∣ons, sentences of Im∣prisonment, and ter∣rours of Death were thundred against her; that her (I say) whom neither promises of fauor could disswade from her Loue, nor threatnings of death,
deterre from her Ser∣uice, should not bee so much as once re∣membred by the Col∣lectors of Her Histo∣ry: Be this therefore (Right Honourable) a lasting Testimony of his unchanged af∣fection to her and her Innocence from the beginning, as like∣wise, a long-liu'd Monument▪ of her Royall gratitude to∣wards him, extended euen vnto his end, nd to his noble Issue
after him: what great confidence shee had in his loyalty appea∣red, at the Campe of Tilbury in the yeare 1588. where hee solely cōmanded the Guard for her Maie∣sties owne Person, which consisted of Lances, Light-Horse, and Foote, to the number of 34050▪ It hath pleased your Lordship to censure fauourably of some of my weak Labours not long since pre∣sented
before you, which the rather en∣couraged mee, to make a free tender of this small peece of service. In which if my boldnesse should beget the least distast from you, I must flye for refuge, to that of the Poet Claudian. —Leones, Quae str auisse valent, ea mox prostrata relin∣quunt. Thus wishing to
you and to all your Noble Family, not onely the long fruiti∣on of the blessings of this life present; but the eternall possession of the loyes future, I remaine your Lord∣ships, In all obseruances; THO: HEYVVOOD.
TO THE GENEROVS READER. WEre I able to write this little Histo∣ricall Tra∣ctate with the Pen of Tacitus, the Inke of
Curtius, and set downe euery line and letter by Epictetus his Candle; yet can I see no possibili∣tie to auoyd the Cri∣ticks of this age, who with their friuolous ca∣uils and vnnecessary exceptions, ambush the commendable labours of others, when they them∣selues will not or dare not either through idle∣nesse or ignorance, ad∣uenture the expence of one serious hower in a∣ny laborious worke in∣tended for the benefit of
either Church or Com∣mon-weale; and such Polupragmatists this age is full of; —Sed meliora spero, I doubt not but that they will spare this Ar∣gument for the worth thereof, and though their carping may cor∣rect my Poeme, yet they will haue a reuerend re∣spect of the Person here drawne out, whose ne∣uer-dying fame euen in this our age is so sacred
amongst all good men, that it is scarce remem∣bred, at the least vtte∣red without a deuout thanks-giuing. The prosperous and successfull Reigne of this Royall Queene and Virgin hath been large∣ly deliuered in the La∣tine Tongue whereby all forraigne Nations haue beene made partakers of her admirable vertues and religious Gouern∣ment; but for that part of her Life, during her tender and sappy Age,
all our domesticke re∣membrancers haue beene paring to speake. As they haue shewed you a Queene, I expose to your view a Prin∣cesse; they in her Ma∣estie, I in her Minori∣ty; they the passages of her incomparable Life from the Scepter to the Sepulchre, as shee was a Soueraigne; I the pro∣cesse of her time from the Cradle to the Crowne, as she was a sad and sor∣rowfull Subiect; in the discouery whereof, I
haue not fallen so pat as to make the relation of her Minority the whole scope of my intentions; but haue for the better enlightening thereof, made vse of all such e∣minent occurrences of State, as may aptly in∣troduce thereunto, as for those passages in the Cha∣racterizing of King Ed∣ward the sixth, and the Lady Iane Gray, and others; —Vix ea nostra voco, I haue borrowed them from my good friend
Mr. H. H. Stationer, who hath not onely con∣uersed with the titles of Bookes, but hath loo∣ked into them, and from thence drawne out that industrious Collection, Intituled Herologia Anglicana. Not to hold thee any longer in that to which all this but introduceth. If the Booke please thee, I am satisfied, and shall rest still, Thine; N. R.
HEN. 8. Anno 1501. ENGLANDS ELIZABETH. Her LIFE, and TROVBLES. Te better to il∣ustrate this hi∣story, needfull it is that wee speak somthing of the Mo∣ther,
before we proceed to the Daughter. A match was concluded betwixt Prince Arthur the eldest Sonne and Heyre apparant to Henry the 7th. King of England, and the Infant Katharine daught∣ter to the King of Spaine, shee landed at Plymouth Anno 1501. and was mar∣ried to Prince Arthur;Prince Ar∣thur mar∣rieth Infant Katha∣rine of Spaine. in Aprill next following hee expired at Ludlow, in that Castle, which hath beene an ancient Seate belonging to the Princes of Wales. (Death hauing thus made a Diuorce be∣twixt these two Princes) The two mighty and Po∣tent Kings (by their graue and politick gouernments
knowne to bee as emi∣nent in wisdome as great∣nesse) for the more assu∣red continuance of league and amity betwixt them, treated of a second match betwixt Henry the second sonne (but then the Sole Heyre and hope of Eng∣land) & the late Dowager, Princesse of Spaine. The contract by a dispensation solicited, & after granted by the pope then raigning was accordingly perfor∣med;Prince Henry mar∣rieth his Brothers wife. The marriage coun∣tenanced by their knowne wisdomes on the one side, and authorized by his Ecclesiasticall Iuris∣diction on the other side, was held not onely toler∣able but irreuocable.
Notwithstanding, the Father dying, and the So∣ueraigne Sonne inaugura∣ted by the name of Henry the eight, for many yeeres together enioyning a peaceable & quiet raigne, whether distasting his Queene, by reason that by this time she was growne somewhat in yeeres, or that hee had cast an af∣fectionate eye vpon a more choice beauty,The tiues per∣swading a Diuorce. or that through scruple of Conscience (which for his honors sake is most re∣ceiued) I am not able to censure. But sure it is, that hee beganne deepely to consider with himselfe, that notwithstanding the vsurped liberty of the Pope
(whose Prerogatiues till then was neuer thought disputable) that his mar∣riage was not onely vn∣lawfull, but incestuous: some are of opinion that hee was hereunto moued by the Nobility; others, that hee was instigated by the Clergy, but if we may giue credit to his owne Protestation in open Court, the first original of this touch in Consci∣ence, was, because the Bi∣shop of Bayon being sent Ambassador from the French King to debate a Marriage betwixt the Duke of Orleance his se∣cond sonne, and the Lady Mary, the sole suruiuing Issue of him and his
Queene Katharine, but as the match was vpon the point to bee concluded, the Bishop beganne to de∣murre and desired respit, till he were fully resolued whether the Lady Mary (by reason of the Kings Marriage with his bro∣thers wife) were legiti∣mate or not. The cause is doubtfull, but the effect I am sure is vnquestion∣able. Although the King re∣ceiued from this Spanish Lady a Prince called Ed∣ward,Prince Hery borne. borne at Richmond on Newyeeres day in the second yeer of his raigne, for whose Natiuity great Triumphs were kept at Westminster, yet breathed
his last vpon Saint Ma∣thews day following. Be∣sides hee had by her a se∣cond issue, the Lady Ma∣ry before-named, so that neither sterility and bar∣rennesse could be aspersed vpon her, nor any knowne disobedience or disloyal∣ty obiected against her, but that (as the King him∣selfe often protested) she was a wife no way refra∣ctory, but in all things corresponding to his de∣sires and pleasures: These things notwithstanding, the pretended diuorceThe Diuo∣uorce dis∣puted of. was to the Kings great cost and charge, so effectually negotiated, that after they had liued together by the space of 22 yeeres and vp∣wards
in vnquestioned Matrimony, it was made the publique Argument in Schooles, debated by the Italian, French, German, and our owne moderne Doctors, both Ecclesiasti∣call and Ciuill, by an vn∣animous consent determi∣ned, and for the better confirmation thereof, by th Seales of diuers Aca∣demies signed, that the Marriage betwixt the King and Queene (neuer till now called his Sister, or Brothers wife) was a meere nullity, absolutely vnlawfull, and that his sa∣cred Maiesty had liberty and licence (howsoeuer the Pope sought by all meanes to antipose their
opinions) warrātable from them, after a legal diuorce sued out from the Court, to make choice of any o∣ther lady to his wife where he himselfe best liked. Cardinall CampeiusCardinall Campeius sent from Rome. was sent from his Holinesse and Cardinall Wolsey was ioyned with him in com∣mission, to determine of this difficult point: the King and Queene were conuened in open Court, then held in Black Friers; the Resolution of the weighty Argument then in hand, was so abstruse, that it puzled all; though many seemed confident, yet not a few of the best Orthodoxall diuines then staggered in their opini∣ons,
in so much that the Legate departed the land before he would giue vp a definitiue sentence in the cause, the reason was be∣cause hee desired further Order and Instruction from his Holinesse. In the Interim the good Princess, greatly beloued, was much pittied, and the King much honored was greatly feared. (For now most mens thoughts were in their hearts, a time bet∣ter to thinke then speake) but before the Diuorce was publikly denounced, the Lady Anne BulleinThe Lady Anne Bul∣lein daugh∣ter to the Earle of Wilshire & Ormond created Marchio∣nesse of Pembrooke. on the first of Spt. An. 1532. was at Windsor created Marchiones of Pembrooke, and one thousand pound
per annum conferred vpon her by the King, which news no sooner arriued to the deiected Princesse eare, but shee beganne to consider with her selfe, the ficklenesse and insta∣bility of greatnesse; and seeing that Sunne to set in a cloud on her, which was beginning to rise serenely on another, who was now maiestical∣ly ascending those steps, by which shee was miser∣ably descending, exprest a womans wondrous mo∣desty, and without spea∣king any distastfull or ir∣reuerent word against the King, said: Great men en∣terprizing great things, ought neither by the Lawes of God,
nor man to employ their po∣wer, as their owne mind wil leth; but as Iustice and Rea∣son teacheth: but fearing lest in speaking so little she had spoken too much, shut vp the rest, of what shee thought to vtter in a modest and welbeseem∣ing silence. Vpon the 25. of Ianua∣ry An. 1533. the King was married in his Closset at Whitehall, to the Marchio∣nesse of Pembrooke, the La∣dy, Anne Bullein;Henry the eight mar∣ried to the Lady Anne Bullein. but ve∣ry priuately, few were present at the ceremonies, then celebrated by Dr. Rowland Lee, not long af∣ter consecrated Bishop of Chester. In this concealed So∣emnity,
one Mistresse Anne Sauage, much trusted y them both, bore vp the Queenes traine, this Lady was within few moneths after espoused to the Lord Berkely. In Easter Eue being the 12 of Aprill, the Queene being known to the King to bee young with child, went to the Chappell o∣enly as a Queene, and was proclaimed publikly the same day Queene of England & vpon Whitsun∣day following crowned at Westminster,Queene Anne crow¦ned. with all the ompe, state and magni∣ficence therto belonging. Queene Katharine who for many yeeres had been their Soueraigne Lady, is
now quite forgotten, and Queene Anne being to the people scarcely known, is soly honored: The rising Sunne is onely adored their ioyful acclamations▪ readier for the coronation of the one, then their vn∣iust exclamations to for∣ward the deposing of th other. Vpon the 7th of September, being Sunday, betwixt the houres of 3 and 4 in the Afternoone Queene Anne was deliuered of a fayre daughte at Greenewich,The birth of the La∣dy Eliza∣beth. who the great vnspeakable ioy both of Prince and peo∣ple,Not kept a fortnight or a month in state, as it is now v∣suall with ordinary people. was christened on th third day following being Wednesday; the May
of London and his bre∣hren,Lady Eli∣zabeth borne on the Eue of the virgins Natiuity, and died on the Eue of the Vir∣gins An∣nuntiation 1603 Euen that she is now in heauen with all these bles∣sed virgins that had oyle in their lampes. with more then for∣y other of the grauest Ci∣izens, being commanded o attend vpon the solem∣ities. It was performed n the Fryers Church in Greenewich, the Font was of siluer, placed in the middle of the church with n ascent of three steps igh; the old Dutchesse of Norfolke bore the Babe wrap'd in a Mantle of pur∣ple veluet. The Conspon∣sors or witnesses, were, Thomas Cranmer, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury,Lady Eli∣zabeths godfather are god∣mothers. the Dutchesse of Norfolke, and he Marchionesse of Dor∣set, both widdowes. Not long after the birth of the Lady Elizabeth, a
generall oath of allegianc past thorow the kingdom▪ to bind al such as by their yeers were capable there∣of,An oath taken to the succes∣sors of Q. Anne. to maintaine and vp∣hold the successiue heyre descending from the bo∣dies of the King & Queen Anne, lawfully begotten i the true and legall possessi∣on of the Throne, Crown▪ Sword and Scepter, with all the royalties and imperiall honors thereunto belonging. The coniecturall of the administration of thi oath, together with the suddenesse of the Queene coronation,The Rea∣son of Qu. Annes so sudden co∣ronation. was to stre then the match, and mak the legitimation of her isue (which by the King
former match was a∣mongst many yet made questionable) of more vaidity: for (as one obser∣eth, Anna coronatur, quod ulli nisi regni haeredibus cō∣ingere solet: Qu. Anne was herefore crowned, be∣ause it is an honour so∣y conferred vpon such whose issue are capable of ccessiō, wherby it is pro∣able that the Kings pur∣ose was to adnihilate and tinguish the Title of his aughter Mary, and to aue the Crowne and dig∣ty Royall, to the sole eires of Q. Anne: For this use were the two young adies brought vp apart, hich may be a reasō why ey were after so diffe∣rent
in their dispositions▪ and so opposite in thei Religions:The dif∣ferent dis∣positions of Eliza∣beth and Mary. both of them▪ though not sucking th milke, yet as well imitating the mindes as follow∣ing the steps of their mothers; Queene Katharin liuing and dying a constant Romane Catholique Queene Anne, both in he life and death, resolute the defence of the Reformed Religion, which ( the most probable coniectures haue left to vs vpon file) was by the instigation of some Romists the powerfull with the King who was not then fully seled in those tenents whic he after made his maxim the prologue to her fall an
ues Catastrophe which long after hapned. On May day, Ano 1536. as a great iusting held at eenewich,The pre∣paration to Queene Annes fall. in the which e chiefe challenger was e Lord Rochford, brother the Queene, and the de∣ndants were one Henry orrice of the Kings Bed∣amber, with others, they ānaged their armes with eat dexterity, and euery urse which they ranne, me off with the lowd ap∣ause of the people, inso∣uch that the King at first ght seemed in outward ewe to be wonderously lighted: but about the iddle of the triumph, e a storme in the midst a quiet Sea, the King a∣rose
suddenly from h seat, and attended with persons only, tooke Barg and was row'd to Westmi leauing no small amazment behinde him, eury one wondring and coiecturing as their affectons led them, what mig be the occasion thereo All things were with night husht vp and in qet;The Qu. Brothers, with other sent to the Tower. no appearance of dcontent eyther in King Courtier perceiued, b no sooner did the day pe out, but the King's discotent appeared wth it. Geo Bulleine, Lod Rochford Queenes brother, and Hery Norrice, the defenda were saluted with a co breakfast next their hea
their beds, & both con∣eyed to the Tower; the ewes being brought to he Queene, struck as cold o her heart, and hauing ast ouer dinner with dif∣ontent, ecause the King, his custome was, had ent none of his waiters to id Much good doe it her, the Table, but percei∣ing her seruants about er, some with their eyes glazed in teares, but all with looks deiected on the earth, it bred strange con∣epions in her, yet being onfident in her own inno∣ency, bred in her rather mazement then feare. The same day entred in∣o her chamber; Sr Thomas udley, L. Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolke, Thomas
Cromwell, Secretary, and dce after them, Si William Kinsman, Consta∣be of the Tower, at their first apppearance, her ap∣prehension was, that they were sent from the King to comfort her about the imprisonment of her bro∣ther; but obseruing them to looke more austerely v∣pon her, then vsually they were accustomed, shee began to mistrust their mes∣sage, but casting her eye beyond them, and espying the Constable of the Tower to accompany them in their vnwelcome visit, she grew then confident, that her death was now ap∣proaching, and that these were the Heralds to pre∣are
it, so expressing more odesty then Maiesty,Queene Anne com∣manded to the tower. oth in her behauiour, and ountenance, she prepared er selfe to attend their essage, which the Chan∣ellor deliuered vnto her in ew words, telling her, hat it was his Maiesties ōmand, that she must in∣antly be conveyed from hence to the Tower, there o remaine, during his ighnes pleasure, to which he answered, that her inocence and patience had med her against all ad∣ersities what soeuer, and such were his Maiesties ommand and pleasure, hey both should with all umility be obeyed: so ithout change of habit,
or any thing necessary fo her remooue, shee put her selfe into their safe custo∣dy, and by them was con∣ueyed into her Barge. Iust vpon the stroke o∣fiue,Qu. Anne entreth heowuer she entred the Tower the Lords with the Luietenant, brought her to he Chamber, to whome, a their departure, she spok these few words following (falling vpon her knees. I beseech God Almighty to my assistance and helpe, one∣ly so farre forth as I am nguiltie of any iust crime, that may be layd against me: the turning to the Lords, I intreat you, to beseech the King in my ehalfe, that it wil please him to be a good Lor vnto mee, which word
were no sooner vttered, but they departed. The fifteenth of the same moneth, the Lords of the Councell met at the Tower; the Queene was called to to the Barre, and arraigned before the Duke of Nor∣folk,Qu. Anne arragned. who sate as Lord high Steward, the Lord Chan∣cellor on the right hand, and the Duke of Suffolke on the left hand, with diuers others Marquesses, Earles, and Barons; the Earle of Surrey, sonne to the Duke of Norfolke, sate directly before his father, a degree ower, as Earle▪ Marshall of England, the Queen sit∣ing in a chaire, diuers ac∣cusations, especially tou∣ching inconstancy, were
obiected against her, to all which she answered pun∣ctually with such grauity and discretion, that it ap∣peared to her Auditory she could not bee found guilty of any aspersion whatsoeuer: But when in their fauourable censures they were readye (not without great applause) to acquit her;Q. Anne quit in the opinion of the Lords, but found guilty by the Iury. The Iury brought in a contrary ver∣dict, by which shee was convicted, condemned, and had her iudgement to be burned, or else her head to be cut off at the Kings pleasure; The Sentence being denounced, the Court arose, and she wa conueyed backe againe to her Chamber, the La
Bullein her Aunt, and the Lady Kinsman, wife to the Constable of the Tower, onely attending her. Two dayes after were brought vnto the Tower-Hill George Lord Roch∣ford, Henry Norris, Marke Smeton,The Queens Brother with others behea∣ded. Medlin Brier∣ton, Francis Weston, all of them of the Kings Pri∣uy Chamber, who seue∣rally suffered and had their heads stricken off, no other account of their sufferings being giuen out abroad, but that they deseruedly dyed for matters concerning the conuicted Queene. Two dayes after the Queene was brought to
the greene within the To∣wer, and there moun∣ted on a Scaffold where were present most part of the Nobility,Queene Annes death. Lord Mayor of London with certaine Aldermen and many other Specta∣tors, her last words were these,Her Speech at her death. My honourable Lords, and the rest here as∣sembled, I beseech you all to beare witnesse with me that I humbly submit my selfe to vndergoe the penalty to which the Law hath senten∣ced me; as touching my of∣fences, I am sparing to speak, they are best knowne to God, and I neither blame nor ac∣cuse any man, but commit them wholly to him, besee∣ching God that knowes the
secrets of all hearts to haue mercy on my Soule; next I beseech the Lord Iesus to blesse and saue my Soue∣raigne & Master the King, the noblest and mercifullest Prince that liues; whom I wish long to reigne ouer you. He hath made me Marchi∣onesse of Pembrooke, vouch∣safed me to lodge in his owne bosome, higher on earth hee could not raise me, and hath done thereore well to lift me vp to those blessed Inno∣cents in Heauen. Which hauing vttered with a smiling and cheerefull countenance, as no way frighted with the Ter∣rour of Death, She gent∣ly submitted her selfe to her fate, and kneeling
down on both her knees, with this short eiacula∣tion in her mouth, Lord Iesus Christ, into thy hands I commend my Soule, with the close of the last sylla∣ble the Hangman of Cal∣lis at one blow struck off her head. Phoenix Iana iacet, nato Phoenice, dolendum, Saecula Phoenices nulla tulisse duos. The King loth to shew himselfe too sad a wid∣dower for so good a wife, the very next ensuing day was married to the Lady Iane Seymor, daugh∣ter to Sir Iohn Seymor Knight, Sister to Ed∣ward Seymor Earle of
Hertford, and Duke of Somerset. Queene Anne was no sooner frowned on by the King, but she was a∣bandoned by her late friends and seruants, the young Lady her Daugh∣ter lost a Mother before she could doe any more but smile vpon her; She dyed the Phoenix of her Sexe, but left a daugh∣ter behind who proued the Phoenix of her time, the true Daughter of so rare a Mother Phoenix. Queene Iane is now the sole obiect of all the Peoples ioy, but within little more then the Re∣uolution of one yeare all their hopes are crossed,
death nip't the bud but preserued the blossome for a while after. On the 12. day of Octo∣ber in the yeare 1537.The Birth of Pice Ed∣ward the Queene was deliuered both of a Son & her own life together at Hamp∣ton Court about two of the clocke in the after∣noone. It is said, that newes being brought to the King in the time of her trauell, that her throwes were very vio∣lent, insomuch that her life was in great perill by reason of the extre∣mities of her hard la∣bour, nay that the issue was driuen to so strait an exigent, that either the mother or the infant
must nccessarily perish; hūbly desiring his High∣nesse in so great extre∣mity; his answer was that the Mother then should die, for certaine hee was that hee could haue more wiues, but vn∣certaine whether to aue more children; heere∣vpon preparation was made to saue both, if pos∣sible,The death of Qu. Iane in Child-bed. but her body was ripped vp to giue way to her Child in the conclu∣sion, and two dayes after her deliuery her Soule expired. The Queene dyed much pittyed, and the young Prince called Ed∣ward was the eighteenth of the same moneth cre∣ated
Prince of Wales,Young Ed∣ward Prince of Wales, &c Duke of Cornewall and Chester. The Father was so ioy∣full of his Sonne that hee seemed to cast a neglect vpon his two daughters, yet of them both, the Lady Elizabeth was in most fauor and grace, for when Mary was separa∣ted from the Court, and not so much as suffered to come within a certain distance there of limited, the Lady Elizabeth was then admitted to keepe the young Prince com∣pany in his infancy, who in the time of his mino∣rity was committed to the tuition of Doctor Coxe,Dr. Coxe and Sr. Iohn Cheeke Tutors to P. Edward and L. Elizabeth. and Sir Iohn Cheeke,
as they were guardians and Schoole-masters to the Prince, so were they the dayly Instructors of the sweet young Lady, Shee was 3. yeares elder then her Brother, and therefore able in her pretty language to teach and direct him (euen frō the first of his speech and vnderstanding) in the principles of Reli∣gion and other Docu∣ments; the Arch-bishop Cranmer her God-father was euer chary and ten∣der ouer her, as one that at the Font had tooke charge vpon him to see her educated in all ver∣tue & piety. Cordiall & intire grew the affection
betwixt this brother and Sister, insomuch that he no sooner began to know her, but hee seemed to acknowledge her, and she being of more matu∣rity as deeply loued him. Both comming out of one loynes, their affecti∣on was no lesse then if they had issued likewise from one wombe, they were indeede one way equally fortunate and vn∣fortunate, hauing one Father, and either of them depriued of a Mo∣ther, and euen in their seuerall deaths there was a kind of corresponden∣cie, the one dyed by the sword, the other in Child-bed, both of
them violent and enfor∣ced deaths. So pregnant and inge∣nious were either, that they desired to looke vp∣on bookes as soone as the day began to breake, their horae matutinae were so welcome, that they seemed to preuent the nights sleeping for the entertainment of the morrows schooling, be∣sides, such were the hopefull inclinations of this Princely youth and pious Virgin,The Industry of the Prince and L. Eliz. that their first houres were spent in Prayers & other Religi∣ous exercises, as either reading some History or other in the Old Testa∣ment, or else attending
the exposition of some Text or other in the New; the rest of the sore-noone (Breakfast∣time excepted) they were doctrinated and in∣structed either in lan∣guage, or some of the li∣beral Sciences, one mor∣rall learning or other collected out of such Authors as did best con∣duce to the Instruction of Princes; And when hee was cal'd out to any youthfull exercise be∣comming a Child of his age (for study without action breedes dulnesse) she in her priuate Cham∣ber betooke her selfe to her Lute or violl, and (wearyed with that) to
practise her needle; This was the circular course of their employment, God was the Center of all their actions, Ab Ioue Principium, they began with God, and hee went along still with them, insomuch that in a short time they were as well entered into language, as Arts, most of the fre∣quent tongues of Chri∣stendom they now made theirs, Greeke, Latine, French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch were no strangers, no forraigne Idiomes, but now made familiar with their natiue En∣glish, —Merito vt puer vnicus orbis
Iure vocaretur Phoenix: virgo alera Pallas. These concurrences met in such a Concor∣dancie that the Schollers (though Princes) for their good instructions were in a kind of duty obliged to their Tutors; and their Tutors (for their willingnesse, and Industry) as much grac'd and honour'd by their Schollers. Alexander the great confessed himselfe more obliged to Ari∣stotle his Schoole-master for his learning, then to his Father King Philip for his life, by the one he became a Man, by the other an vnderstanding Man. This Princely cou∣le
cannot bee taxed of ngratitude; if all the malice in the world were nfused into one eye, it shall neuer be able to de∣ract either of them: how forward was the one du∣ring his time to promote Doctor Coxe his Tutor,The Prince & La. Elizabeth not ingrate∣full to their Tutors. and the life that Marian persecution being drawn to the last breath, the o∣ther recald him from be∣yond the Seas, whither he was fled, restor'd him to many Church digni∣ties and grac'd him so far as that by her appoint∣ment he made a learned Sermon that day when she went to her first Par∣liament. These tender young
Plants being past their sappy age, and now be∣ginning to flourish, the old stocke begins to wi∣ther, the King feeling himself dangerously sick, many infirmities grow∣ing more and more vpon him, cal'd his Councell about him, made his last will and Testament, part of which, so much as concernes this present Discourse, shall be deli∣uered as it hath been ex∣tracted out of the origi∣nall Coppie, still reser∣ued in the Treasury of the Exchequer, Dated the Thirtieth day of Decem∣ber 1546. Item, I giue and bequeath vnto our two Daughters, Mary and Eli∣abeth,
if they shall be mar∣ed to any outward Poten∣tes,The last Wil and Testamēt of K. Henry the eighth. the Summe of tenn∣ housand pounds a peecee, nd that to be paid them by he consent of our Councell, Money, Plate, Iewels and Houshold-stuffe, if wee be∣ow them not in our life ime, or a larger, Summe t the discretion of our Ex∣cutors, or the most part of hem; And both of them vpon our blessing to be orde∣ed aswell in marriage, as ll other lawfull things, by he aduice of our fore said Councell, and in case they will▪ not, that then those Summes are to be dimini∣hed at our Councels plea∣sure: Further, our will is, that from the first houre of
our death, vntill such time as they can prouide either of them, or both of an honoura∣ble Marriage, they shall haue either of them, or both of them, three Thousand pounds vltra Reprisas to liue vpon. I haue knowne many a Noble Man's Daughter left as great a Legacie, nay a larger Dower, who neuer had any claime or alliance to a Crowne; but so it pleased the King at that time. Vpon the nineteenth day of Ianuary following the King lying vpon his death-bed,K. Henry dy∣eth. euen when hee was ready to giue an accompt to God for the aboundance of bloud al∣ready
spilt, when hee knew himselfe was no longer able to liue, hee imprisoned the Duke of Norfolke the Father, signed a warrant for the execution of the Earle of Surrey, the Sonne, within nine dayes after he himselfe expired and on the eighteenth of Fe∣bruary following,K. Henry bu∣ried at Wind∣sor. was with great State and magnificence interred at Windsore. On the same day wher∣in the Father deceased was the Sonne inaugura∣ed King of England by the name of Eward the xth being of the age of 9. yeares,Edward the 6. crowned. on the nine∣teenth of February fol∣lowing
he rode with his Vncle the Lord Prote∣ctor, Duke of Sommerset, through the Citie of London, and the next day ensuing was anoynted King at West-minster by Thomas Cranmer Arch-bishop of Canterbury who that day administred the holy Eucharist together with sundry other Cere∣monies appropriated for such Solemnities. Great is the person o a King, reigning heere vpon earth amōgst men▪ hee is a liuely Embleme of the high and glorious Maiesty of God in hea∣uen. The King was no ooner crowned, but the Lady Elizabeth gaue
ay to his State,L. Elizabeths obseruance to the King her brother. there as now a discontinu∣nce of that frequent nd priuate familiarity suall betwixt them, ormerly she loued him s a Brother, now she ho∣ours him as her Soue∣aigne; Honour and Royalty make difference etwixt the Sonne and he Father, the degrees f State distinguish be∣wixt brother and Sister, hey which liued socia∣ly in all familiarity to∣gether, now doe not so uch as talke but at a distance. The death of he Father which raysed him to the Crowne, re∣moued her from the Court, set him in the
Throne, sent her down into the Countrey,L. Elizabeth goeth into the countrey. i which retirement being nobly attended as wel by diuers voluntary La∣dies and Gentle-wome as her owne traine an houshould Seruants, sh led there, though a mor solitary yet a much more contented life, as hauin now more leisure houre to contemplate and ru∣minate on those Rudi∣ments and Exercise wherein she had for mer∣ly beene conuersant. Di∣ligence is the breee and productor of Arts▪ but practise and exercis doth nourish and che∣rish them, She in her great discretion made
gainfull vse of tis Soli∣ude, as is apparant by he future. Being setled in the Country to adde vnto her Reuenue, shee had many gifts and visits ent her from the King, who was very carefull oth of her honour and ealth, shee liued under he charge of a noble nd vertuous Lady, who as stil'd her Gouer∣esse: scarce was she yet ull fourteene yeares of ge, when one of her Vn∣cles, then in great office and place about the King, brought vnto her Princely Suitor,A Princely Husband of∣fered to the L. Elizabeth. as great in means as come∣y in Person. A stranger
richly habited and no∣bly attended, (whose name my Author giues not) he after much im∣portunitie both from himselfe and friends, yet at last crost in his pur∣pose by modest repulses, and cold answeres,L. Elizabeth will not by a∣ny meanes marry. and finding her immutable disposition solely addi∣cted to a single life, as not enduring the name of a husband, setled in his mind (though not satisfied in her denyall) retyred into his Coun∣trey; for though it may be said of women in ge∣nerall, that they are spare in their answeres, and peremptory in their de∣mands & purposes, tha
their affections are stil in e extreames, either so assionate as by no coun∣ell to be redressed, or so counterfeit, to be by no man beleeued, and again, f they are beautiful they are to be won with pray∣es, if coy with prayers, if roud with gifts, & if co∣etous with promises; yet his sweet L. tho her beau∣y were attractiue, yet by o flattery could be re∣oued frō her setled re∣olution, and being con∣cious neither of Pride, oyness, or couetousnes, ould not be easily drawn ithin the compas of any btile temptation. This rst vnwelcome motion f Marriage, was a
why shee liued after∣wards more solitary and retyred; If at any time the King her Brother vpon any weighty or im∣portant occasion had sent to enioy her company at Court, she made no lon∣ger Residence, then to know his highnesse plea∣sure and to make hum∣ble tender of her duty and allegiance. That done, with all conuenient returned backe into the Country, where she spent the entire season of her Brothers Raigne. The King had 3 Vn∣cles left him by the Mo∣thers side,The Kings 3. Vncles. Edward, Tho∣mas and Henry Seymour▪ Edward was Lord Pro-Protector,
and Thomas high Admirall of En∣gland; These two Bro∣thers being knit and ioy∣ned together in amity, were like a Bunch of Ar∣rowes not easily broke a∣sunder, but once disper∣sed, distracted betwixt themselues, they made but way for their Ad∣uersaries how to assaile them with little disad∣uantage. The two great Dukes of Northumber∣land and Suffolke,Northumber∣land and Suf∣folke worke a duision be∣twixt the two Brothers. Dudley and Gray murmuring that his Maiesties two Vncles should beare such great sway in the Kingdome (by which their glory seem'd to bee eclipsed
and darkned) sought all meanes how to oppose this great vnited strength of Fraternall loue, but finding that there was no other way let to cast this yoake from off their necks (which their Am¦bition held to be into∣lerable) but onely by making a disiunction of that brotherly loue which had so long conti∣nued, and doubting how to worke it by their Ser∣uants, tooke a neerer course to effect it, by their wiues, and so to draw their ruines out of their owne bosomes; and most successiuely to their owne purposes thus it happened: Sir Thomas
Seymour Admirall & the younger Brother, marri∣ed the Queene Dowager (whose hap it was of all the rest to suruiue her husband) she contested with her Sister in Law for precedence and pri∣ority of place, both were priuately encouraged, both swell'd alike with spleene, neither would giue way to other, the one claim'd it as she had beene once Queene, the other challeng'd it as she was the present wife of the Protector, the two Dukes were as suell to his fire new kindled bewixt the women, Dud∣ey incenseth the one pri∣tely, Gray encourageth
the other secretly; The wiues set their husbands at odds by taking their parts, the Gordian knot of brotherly loue is there∣vpon dissolued. Nor∣thumberland and Suffolke take hold of this aduan∣tagious occasion, inso∣much that within a short time after, the Admirall was questioned for Trea∣son, by consent of his brother condemned in Parliament,The. L. Admi∣ral beheaded. and his head struck off at the Tower-hill March 20. 1549, his Brother the Protector with his owne hand sig∣ning the warrant for his death. The one being thus remoued, there was now lesse difficulty to
supplant the other: in the same month of Febr. in which his brother lost his head,The Protector questioned. was the Protector cō∣mitted to the Tower by the Lords of the Coun∣cell, many Articles espe∣cially touching the go∣uernment of the State were commenced against him, but the yeare after, upon his submission to the Lords, and interces∣sion made for him by the King,The Protector quit of trea∣son. hee was released, this proued but a Light∣ning before death; his great and potent Aduer∣saries still prosecute their malice against him, in∣somuch that not long af∣ter, calling him to a se∣cond accompt, when he
had acquit himselfe of all such Articles of Treason as could bee inferred a∣gainst him,The Protector found guilty of Felonie, & beheaded. hee was in a tryall at Guild-hall con∣uicted of Felony, and on the 22. of Ianuary was beheaded on the Tower-Hill. These two next Kins∣men to the King, the proppes and stayes on which the safety of his minoritie leaned, the hinges on which the whole State turned, be∣ing thus cut off, it was a common feare and gene∣rall presage through the whole Kingdome that the two Vnces being dead, the Nephew would not suruiue long after,
and so accordingly it happened; for now all such Gentle-men and Of∣ficers as the Protector had preferred for the Kings attendance, were sud∣denly remoued, and all such as were the Fauou∣rites of the two Dukes, onely suffered to come neere his person. In the Interim was the Match concluded be∣twixt the Lord Guilford Dudley,A Match be¦twixt Nor∣thumberlands Son and Suf∣fok Daugh∣ter. Son to the Duke of Northumberland & the Lady Iane Gray daugh∣ter to the Duke of Suf∣folke:The King dy∣et. Not long after the King fell sicke and dyed the 6. of Iuly in the 7th yeare of his Pricely go∣uernment, and o the
tenth of the same month was proclaymed Queene the Lady Iane;La. Iane pro∣claymed Qu. It is to this day a question both how he dyed and where hee was buryed, yet o∣thers say hee lyes buried at Westminster, he was a Prince of that hope, that it would seeme impro∣per thus to leaue his ho∣nour in the dust vnchara∣cterized. Hee was studious for the propagation of the Gospell, the refining and establishing of true Re∣ligion, the foundation whereof his Father had proiected; Images hee caused to be demolished and as Idolatrous, to be taken out of all Chur∣ches
within his Domini∣nions; the learned men of his time hee encou∣raged and commanded them to open and ex∣pound the Scriptures, caused the Lords Supper to bee administred in both kinds vno his peo∣ple: In the third yeare of his Reigne, by Parlia∣mentall Decree hee abo∣lished the Masse, com∣manded the Liturgie to be made, and our Com∣mon prayer and Seruice to be read in the English tongue: hee was acute in witt,A true Cha∣racter of K. Edward the 6. graue in censure, mature in Iudgement, all which concurring in such tender yeeres, were beyond admiration; In
the liberall Arts so fre∣quent, that he appeared rather innate and borne with them, then either acquired by teaching or study; All the Port-Townes and Hauens in England, Scotland and France hee had ad vn∣guem, not the least pun∣ctilio of any State affaires past beyond his obserua∣tion, nor did hee com∣mit such obseruations to memory, but had a chest euery yeare for the reser∣uation of such Acts as past the councell board, himself keeping the key; hee would appoynt cer∣tain hours to sit with the Master of Requests, on∣ly to ispatch the cause
of the Poore, hee was the Inchoation and In∣stauration of a glorious Church and Common∣weale; hee was perfect in the Latine, Greeke, Ita∣lian, French and Spanish tongues, and (as Carda∣nus reports) was well seene in Logicke, and the Principles of naturall Philosophy, no stranger to Musicke singing at first sight; in Melancthon's common-places hee was cuersant, and all Cice∣ro's workes, with a great part of Titus Liuius; two of Isocrates Orations hee translated out of the O∣riginall into Latine; hee was facetious and witty, as may appeare in the
fourth yeare of his reign, & thirteenth of his age, being at Greenewich on S. Georges day, comming from the Sermon with all the Nobility in State correspondent for: the day, said, My Lords, I pray you what Saint is S. George, that we so much honour him heere this day? The Lord Treasu∣rer made answere,He that shalbut peruse the History of S George now written by M. Heylin, may soone goe be∣yond the L. Treasurers answer to the King. If it please your Maiesty, I did neuer in any History read of S. George, but onely in Legenda aurea, where it is thus set downe, that S. George out with his sword & ran the Dragon through with his speare; The King hauing something ven∣ted himselfe with laugh∣ing,
replyed, I pray you my Lord, and what did hee with his sword the while? That I cannot tell your Ma∣iesty, said hee. To con∣clude, hee was so well qualified, that hee was not onely the forwardest Prince of all his Aunce∣stors, but the sole Phoenix of his time. Dic mihi mu∣sa virum, shew me such another. As hee began and continued hopeful∣ly, so hee ended Religi∣ously, being fallen sicke of a Plurisie, some say consūption of the lungs, haung made his peace with God and the world, he lifted vp his eyes and hands to heauen, pray∣ed to himselfe, thinking
none to haue heard him, after this manner. Lord deliuer mee out of this miserable life,The Kings Prayer at his death. and take me among thy chosen: how∣beit, not my will, but thy will be done: Lord, I com∣mit my Spirit to thee. O Lord, thou knowest how hap∣pie it were for me to be with thee: yet for thy chosens sake send me life and health, that I may truly serue thee. Oh my Lord God, blesse thy people, and saue thine inhe∣ritance; Oh Lord God saue thy chosen people of En∣gland, defend this Land from Papistry, and main∣taine thy true Religion, that I and thy People may praise thy holy name, for thy
Sonne Iesus Christ's sake: to which hee added; Oh, I faint, haue mercy on me O Lord, and receiue my Spi∣rit. With which eiacu∣lation his life ended, not without suspition of poyson deliuered him in a Nose-gay: but the di∣uilish Treason not being enquired after, neuer came to light. The Lady Mary being at the time of the Kings death at Hunsdon in Hert∣fordshire,L. Mary vexed at the Procla∣mation of Q. Iane. was much per∣plexed with the newes of the Proclamation of the Lady Iane, as Queene of England; but more especially vnderstanding that it was done by the consent of the whole
Nobility; herevpon the Suffolke men assemble themselues about her,Suffolke men ayde the Lady Mary. not liking such shuffling in State, profer'd their free and voluntary ser∣uice towards the attai∣ning of her lawfull inhe∣ritance: this being brui∣ted at Court, the great Duke of Northumberland hauing a large Commis∣sion granted,Northumber∣land opposeth the L. Mary. and siged with the great Seale of England, by the vertue thereof raised an Army with purpose to suppress and surprize the Lady Mary: the designe was no sooner aduanced and on foote, but the Lords in generall, repenting them of so great an in∣iurie
done to the Kings Sister, and the imme∣diate Inheritrix, sent a Countermand after him, the Nobility forsooke him, the Commons a∣bandon'd him, so that being come to Cam∣bridge, he with his Sons and some few seruants were left alone, where notwithstanding he and his associates proclai∣med the Lady Mary Queene of England in the Market-place, yet for all this hee was arrested of high treason in the Kings Colledge;Lady Mary proclaimed Queene. from thence brought to the Tower, and on a Scaffold on the Hill the 12. day of August lost his head; This was
the end of the great Duke of Northumber∣land: Now those, two great opposing Dukes, Somerset and Northumb▪ whose vnlimited Ambi∣tions England & the go∣uernement therof could not satiate, one peece of ground containes them: They lye quietly toge∣ther in one small bed of earth before the Altar in St. Peters Church in the Tower, betwixt two Queenes, wiues of K. Henry the 8th. Queene Anne and Queene Ka∣therine, all foure behea∣ded. All their greatnesse and magnificence is co∣uered ouer with these two narrow words, Hic
iacet. Northumberland o∣erthrew Somerset and aised himselfe vpon his Ruines, Mary who was friend to neither, but in∣different to both, easily dispenced with the cut∣ing off Northumberland, thinking her selfe to stand more firme by his fall and ruine. The Lady Elizabeth re∣siding at her Mannour in he Country,L. Elizabeth lamenteth her Brothers death. much la∣mented the death of her Brother, being strange∣y perplexed in her mind as not knowing by a∣ny probable coniecture what these strange passa∣ges of State might come to: but considering that amongst these tempestu∣ous
stormes, her Sister Marie's and her owne were now at an Aduen∣ture in one bottome, she resolutely first ayded her Sister with 500. men, her selfe the formost, Prima ibi ante omnes, then the storme being ouer, shee attended her Maie∣stie in her Barge to the Tower,The L. Eliz. in policy gra∣ced by the Queene. where was relea∣sed the Duke of Norfolke, the Lord Courtney, and Dr. Gardiner; soone af∣ter diuers Bishops sus∣pended in the dayes of her Brother Edward,Protestant Bishops put off, Popih re∣stored. were restored: viz. Dr. Gar∣diner to Winchester, and Iohn Poynet put out, Dr. Bonner to London, and Nicholas Ridley confind',
ohn Day to Chichester, nd Iohn Scory excluded, Dr. Tonstall to Duresme, Dr. Heath to Worcester, ohn Hooper excluded, nd committed to the Fleete, Dr. Vesey to Exe∣er; and Miles Couerdale ashier'd; The misera∣le face of a wretched Kingdome began now o appeare. They that oul dissemble their Religion, tooke no great are how things went; ut such whose consci∣nces were ioyned to uth, perceiuing that e Lamps of the Sanctu∣y began to shine dim, eing those bright Ta∣ers pull'd out of their ckets and extinguished,
concluded that coles were now kindled which would proue the destruction of many a good Christian, which accordingly happened. From the Tower of London the Queene rode through the City to∣wards her Pallace at West-minster; The Lady Elizabeth to whom all this while shee shewed a pleasant and gracious out-side, rode in a Chari∣ot next after her drawne with sixe Horses trapt in cloath of siluer, the Cha∣riot being couered with the same, wherein sate only to accompany her, the Lady Anne of Cleue. The fifth day of Octo∣ber
shee was crown'd at West-minster by Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester,Q Mary crow∣ned. (Dr. Thomas Cran∣mer being at that time in the Tower) The Lady E∣lizabeth was most Prince∣ly attended at her Sisters Coronation; fiue dayes after began the Parlia∣ment, wherein besides the supplantation of the reformed Religion,Guilford Dud∣ley and L. Iane conuicted of treason. Guil∣ford Dudley and the Lady Iane his wife lately pro∣claymed Queene, were both arraigned and con∣uicted of treason. As for the Lady Iae, how vn∣willing shee was to take the imperiall dignitie vpon her, doth appeare by this letter following
sent to her Father a little before her death. FAther, althoug it hath pleased God to hasten my death by you, by whom my life should rather haue been lengthened, yet can I so pa∣tienly take it, that I yeeld God more hearty thanks for shortning my wofull dayes, than if all the world had beene giuen into my posses∣sions with life lengthened at my owne will: And al∣beit I am very well assured of your impatient dolours, redoubled many wayes, both bewaling our owne wo, nd espcially (as I am in∣formed) my wofull estate: yet my deare father (if I may without ffence reioyce
in my owne mishaps) herein I may account my selfe bles∣sed, that washing my hands with the innocence of my fact, my guiltless blood may cry before the Lord, mercie to the innocent: And yet though I must needes ac∣knowledge that being con∣strained, and (as you know) well enough continually as∣sayed; yet in taking vpon me, I seemed to consent, and therein grieuously offended the Queene and hr Lawes: yet do I assuredly trust that this my offence towards God is so much the lesse, in that being in so Royall estate as I was, my enforced honour neuer mingled with mine in∣nocent heart: And thus good father, I haue opened
vnto you the state wherein I presently stand, my death at hand, althought to you per∣haps it may seeme wofull, yet to mee there is nothing that can bee more welcome than from this vale of mi∣sery to aspire to that h∣uenly thrne of all ioy and pleasure, with Christ my Sa∣uiour, in whose stedfast faith (if it may be lawfull for the daughter so to write to the father) the Lord that hath hitherto strengthened you, so continue to keepe you, that at the last wee may meet in heauen with the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. I am Your obedient Daugh∣ter till death. IANE DVDLEY.
Shee was no way con∣scious of those illegall proceedings practised a∣gainst the Queene by her owne and her husbands father;The Q. pitti∣eth the Lady Iane. much griefe there was for the Lady Iane, the Queene her selfe tooke the sadnesse of her estate into considerati∣on, gaue her leaue to walke in the Queenes Garden, not debarring her of any pleasant pro∣spect belonging to the Tower, and had not her fa∣ther after first offence re∣mitted, ran headlong into a second, it is generally conceiued shee would haue pardoned her life; his mis-councelled rash∣nes hasten'd the deaths of
these 2 Innocents, Guil∣ford and Iane:No Prote∣tant thought fit to liue. The Sta∣tists of that time, especi∣ally such as were addi∣cted to the Romish fa∣ction, held it not policie to suffer any that were addicted to the contrary faction to liue, especial∣ly if they could entrap them, being fallen into a∣ny lapse of the law; ther∣fore vpon the twelfth of February 1554. being the first day of the weeke, Guilford Dudley was brought to the Scaffold on the Tower-Hill, where hauing with great peni∣tence reconcil'd himself to God, with a settled & and vnmooued constan∣cie patiently subiected
himselfe to the stroke of death: The head with the body still bleeding, were both laid together in a Cart; and brought into the Chappell with∣in the Tower, euen in the sight of this sad and sor∣rowfull Lady, the obiect striking more terrour, then the sight of that fa∣tall Axe, by which her selfe was presently to suffer death; being in∣stantly led to the Greene within the Tower, where being mounted on a Scaffold with a cheere∣full and vndaunted coun∣tenance shee spake as followeth. GOod People,The La. Iane her speech at her death. I am come hither to dye, and by a
Law I am condemned to the same; my offence against the Queene was onely in con∣sent to the deuice of others, which now is deemed trea∣son; yet it was neuer of my seeking, but by counsell of those, who should seeme to haue further vnderstanding o things then I, which knew little of the Law, and much lesse of titles to the Crowne, but touching the procure∣ment thereof by mee, or on my behalfe, I doe wash my hands in Innocency thereof, before God & the face of you all; this day: And there∣withall she mooued her hands, wherein shee had a Booke and then procee∣ded thus, I pray you all good Christian People beare
me witnesse that I dye a true Christian Woman, and that I looke to be saued by no o∣ther meanes then by the mercy of God in the bloud of his onely Sonne Iesus Christ; I confesse that when I did know the word of God, I neglecIed it, and loued my selfe & the world, and ther∣fore this plague and punish∣ment is iustly and worthly happened vpon mee for my sinnes, yet I thanke God of his goodnesse that hee hath giuen me a time and respite to repent, and now good peo∣ple whilst I am aliue, I pray you assist mee with your Prayers. As soone as shee had thus spoken, she humbly
kneeled downe and re∣hearsed the one and fifti∣eth Psalme in English, then she raysed her selfe vpon her feete, and deli∣uered her Booke to Mr. Bridges, who was then Liefienant of the Tower; beginning to vntie her gowne to prepare her selfe for death, the Ex∣cutioner offered to help her▪ but she turning her selfe to the two Gentle∣women that then atten∣ded her, was by them disroabed both of her gowne and other attires▪ Then the Heads-man kneeled downe to aske her forgiuenes, to whom she replyed, The Lord for giue thee, and I doe, and I
entreate thee to dispatch mee as soone as thou canst; then kneeling againe, she loc∣ked suddenly backe and said, will you take it besore I lie downe? he answered, No, Madame; then she tyed her handkercher before her eyes, and be∣ing blindfold, shee felt a∣bout for the Blocke, and said twice, Where is it? then laying her necke vpon it, shee stretched forth her body, and said, Lord Iesus into thy hands I commend my spirit,Lady Ianes death. the Axe met with the last word, and she expired. Neuer was a Ladies fall more deplored, and here∣in it was remarkable: Iudge Morgan,A memorable note of Iudge Morgan. who gaue
the sentence of her death presently fell mad, and in all his distracted fitts cryed out continually, take away the Lady Iane, take away the Lady Iane from me, and in that ex∣treame distemperature of passion, ended his life Some report that the Lady Iane was young with Child at the time of her departure,Lady Iane thought to be with child at her death. but though her Romish op∣posites were many, and the times bloudy, Chri∣stian Charity may per∣swade vs that they would not vse such inhumanity against so great a person: She was indeed a Royall Lady,A true Cha∣racter of the L. Iane. indued with more vertues, then are fre∣quently
found in her Sexe; in Religion and Piety praecellent, her de∣uoute Prayer to God, & Oration to the People, demonstrated no lesse at the time of her Executi∣on, shee was but 16. yeares of age, of inforc'd honors so vnambitious, that shee neuer attired her selfe in Regall Orna∣ments, but constrainedly and with teares; whilst shee was Prisoner in the Tower these subsequent verses were found writ∣ten on the wall with a Pinne. Non aliena putes, homines quae obtingere possint, Sors hodierna mihi, cras erit illa tibi.
Thinke nothing strange that doth on man incline, This day my lot is drawne, Tomorrow thine. And thus. Deo iuuante, nil nocet liuor malus. Et non iuuante, nil iuuat labor grauis, Post tenbras spero lucem. God on our side, vaine is all strifes intention, And God oppos'd, bootlesse is all preuention. After night, my hope is light. There be extant of her workes in the English tongue, a learned Epi∣stle to M. Harding, Chap∣laine
to the Duke of Suf∣folke her Father, former∣ly a stout Champion in K. Edwards dayes, but now a Renegado from the Faith. A Colloquy with one Fecknam a Priest,The L. Ianes Workes. two nights before her death, about Faith and the Sa∣craments. An Epistle to her Si∣ster written in the end of the New Testament in Greeke, sent the night before she dyed. As for the Duke of Suffolke her Father, I can parallell his betraying to none so properly as to the Duke of Buckingham in the Reigne of Richard the Third; as the one
had a Banister,Suffolke be∣trayed by his Seuant. the other had an Vnderwood, a man raysed by him onely to a competent estate, vnto whose trust and gard hee committed his Person, was by him conueyed into a hollow tree, mor∣ning and euening relie∣ued with sustenance by him, euery time of his appearance renewed his confidence vnto him, and engaged himselfe with millions of oathes for the performance of his truth and fidelity, yet easily corrupted with some small quantity of gold, and many large promises, Iudas-like be∣trayed his Master, dis∣couered him, and deliue∣red
him vp to the Earle of Huntington, vnder whose conduct hee was with a strong guard con∣ueyed through London, to the Tower, arraig∣ed and conuicted of Treason in the great Hall at Westminster, and vpon the 12. of the month of Feb. wherein the Daugh∣er expired, was the Fa∣her be∣headed on the Tower-Hill,The Duke of Suffolke be∣headed. Tower-Hill, Northumberland and is Sonne Guilford, Suf∣folke with his Daughter ane being thus cut off, aries nunc proximus ardet, was generally fear'd hat the Lady Elizabeth's rne would bee next: he Queene was no soo∣ner
Crown'd, but shee sleighted her, and remo∣ued her into the Coun∣trey;The begin∣ning of Qu. Elizabeths Troubles. the good Lady was in the meane time much troubled to see how Bethel lay in the dust vnregarded, and Ba∣bel onely exalted, true Religion deiected, and Superstition aduanced, but more especially vn∣derstanding, that her self the sword was turned in∣to their owne bosomes▪ she pass'd the storme and at last arriued safely to the ioy of all true hear∣ted Christians. This Birth of Ours, is
but an entrance into this Life, where in the sight of Heauen wee must en∣dure for a tryall of our valor, the furious shocks of many fierce encoun∣ters; hee that soiournes in the Camp of this life, must not hope for Holy∣dayes, his traualie can haue no rest, his labour can haue no end; no Countrey but can yeeld a Pharoh to destroy him, no Clime but can afford a Herod to pursue him; The allusion needs no further illustration; The Troubles of the Lady E∣lizabeth will make a per∣fect Comment; Shee swamme to the Crowne through a Sea of Sor∣row,
and hauing obtai∣ned it, how dangerou∣sly was her life insidi∣ated by Popish Assassines? there wanted not a Ie∣suiticall Mariana to perswade treason, nor a bloudy Rauiliacke to performe it: then the Pope menaced her with his Bulls abroad; now the Bishop of Winchester the Popes Agent endea∣uours to supplant he with Warrants at home now she liues captiuated to an incensed Sisters in∣dignation, hurryed from one place to another from post to piller. Quocunque aspicio nihil ∣nisi pontus & ar.
The Sea of her Sorrow is so broad and spacious, I can see no shore, discry no land at all. Shee was greatly sto∣mack't by Stephen Gardi∣ner Bishop of Winchester,Gardiner a bitter enemy to the L. Eli∣zaeth. and other Romists as well of the Laity as the Clergie, who studyed by all meanes posible, not onely to supplant her from the Queenes loue, but to depriue her of her life, the first being the way to the secōd; for the better effecting where∣of with the more speed and safety, Fortune see∣med thus to smile vpon their enterprise (Sir Tho∣mas Wiat's insurrection &
suppressiō both apning within some few weeks, but being ouer, and ma∣ny hauing suffered for the same) others were likewise had in suspition by the Clergie, especial∣ly those whom they ter∣med of the new Religi∣on, here the traine is laid or the Lady, the net is spread, they thinke now all sure, but the Phoenix they aym'd at, was deli∣uered from the hands of the fowler. This which at the first was in the Queene but meere suspition, by Bishop Gardiners aggraua∣tion grew after into her high indignation, inso∣much that a strict Com∣mission
was sent downe to Ashridge,The Lady E∣lizabeth sent for out of the Countrey. where shee then soiourned to haue her with all speede re∣moue from thence, and brought vp to London, there to answere all such criminall Articles as could be obiected a∣gainst her. The Charge was com∣mitted to Sir Iohn Wil∣iams Lord of Tame,Lo. of Tame, Sir Edward Hastings, Sir Thomas Corne∣wallis sent for the La. Eliza∣eth. Edward Hastings, and Sir Thomas Cornewallis, all hree Concelors of ate, and for the better ccomplishment of the eruice, a guard of two undred and fifty horse en were attendant on em. The Princesse was at
the same time dangerou∣sly sicke and euen almost to death,L. Eliz. very sicke. the day was quite spent, and the eue∣ning come on, newes be∣ing brought vnto her by her seruants (much af∣frighted) that so grea a strength had begirt he house, and in such a time whē her innocence could not so much as dream of any thing dangerou that might be suggeste against her, it bred in he howsoeuer no small a mazement; but ere she could well recollect he selfe, a great rapping wa heard at the Gate; she sending to demand th cause thereof, in stead returning an answer, th
Lords stept into the House, without deman∣ding so much as leaue of the Porter, and com∣ming into the hall where hey met Mistris Ashley a Gentlewoman that at∣ended her, they will'd her to informe her Lady hat they had a message deliuer her from the Queene: the Gentlewo∣man went vp & told her hat they had said, who ent them word back by er againe, that it be∣ng then an vnseasonable ime of the night, she in er bed and dangerously cke, to entreate them, not in courtesie, yet or modesties sake to de∣r the deliuery of their
Message till morning, but they without further reply, as shee was retur∣ning to the Princesses Chamber, followed her vp the staires,Vnciuill in∣trusion. and press'd in after her, presenting themselues at her bed∣side, at which sight shee was suddenly moued, & told them that shee was not well pleased with their vnciuill intrusion; they by her low and fain speech, perceiuing he debilitie and weakness of body, desired her graces pardon (The Lord o Tame speaking in excu of all the rest) and tol her they were sory find such infirmity vpo her, especially, since
was the Queenes express pleasure that the seuenth of that present moneth shee must appeare be∣fore her Maiestie at her Court neere Westminster; to whom shee answered, that the Queene had not a Subiect in the whole Kingdome more ready or willing to tender their seruice and loyalty to her Highnesse,La. Elizabeths loyalty. then her selfe; yet hoed with all, in regard of her pre∣sent disaility, they who were eye witnesses of her weake estate, might in their owne charity & goodnesse dispence wit their extremity of hast, but the hast was such and the extremitie so
great, that their Com∣mission was to bring her either aliue or dead. A sore Commission it is, said shee, herevpon they consulted with her Phy∣sitians, charging them on their allegiance to re∣solue them, whether she might be remoued thēce without imminent perill o her life; vpon confe∣rence together they re∣turned answer, that she might vndergoe that iourney without death, th not without great danger, her infirmity being hazardfull, but not mortall: their opinions thus deliuered, they told her Grace that she must of necessity prepare her
selfe for the morrow's iourney, and withall, that the Queene, out of her great fauor and care, had sent her owne Littr; at which words she raysed her self vpon her pillow, thanking the Queene for such grace & fauour ex∣tended towards her, tel∣ling them that she would contend with death to tender her life before her Maiestie, and with that small strength she had, be ready for them in the morning, intreating thē to take such slender pro∣uision as her house a such time could afford, & afterwards to repose themselues in such Lod∣gings as were prouided
for them, and so gaue them the good-night; they tooke their leaue with great respect, and euerence to her person, and after they had set a strong watch vpon the House, first, went to sup∣per, and after that to ed. Early the next mor∣ning, by the Rising of the Sunne, she was mounted into her Litter, and set onwards towards Lon∣don,L. Elizbeth remoueth to∣wards London. the people as they past the way, wondring at so great a guard, espe∣cially set vpon one they dearely affected, fea∣ring the more, the lesse they knew, and because they saw her conducted
as a Prisoner,The Peoples loue to the L. Elizabeth. generally commiserated her case; some smothering their griefes in silence, and shaking the head, some expressing it in teares, o∣thers in loud acclamati∣ons, that the Lord God Almighty would safe∣guard and protect her from all her enemies, in this manner she past on∣ward on her way to Red-burne, where she was gar∣ded that night, her sick∣nesse and infirmity had beene guard enough, be∣ing able to ride but 3. miles the next day, tar∣rying that night in Sr. Ralph Rowlets house at St. Albones; from thence shee passed to South-Mymms,
resting her wea∣ry body at Mr. Dods house there, and so the next day to Hiegate, where being very weake in body and much deie∣cted in mind, she stayed that night, and the next day following; thus was shee brought to the Court,L. Elizabeth kept close at Court. and for full four∣teene dayes after remai∣ned in a priuate Cham∣ber altogether solitary and comfortlesse, not so much as suffered to see, much lesse to speake with any friend, onely the L. Chamberlaine, and Sr. Iohn Gage who aten∣ded at the dore of her Lodging; shee had no comforter but her inno∣cence,
no companion but her Booke; she was armed with Patience to vndergoe the heate of the day, to endure all op∣position. —Quo fata trahunt, retrahunt{que} sequemur, Quicquid erit, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est. None can be brought to so wretched a Condi∣tion, but they may haue hope of better fortune; she knew that the clouds being ouer; the day wold become cleare, the Sun but once appearing, those thicke mists would be soone expelled, thus she remained a sorrow∣full
and deiected Pri∣soner in the hands of spleenfull and potent ad∣uersaries, brought into so straight an exigent, ei∣ther to forsake her faith, or else to fall vnder the merciles cruelty of such as sought her innocent life. Vpon the Friday be∣fore Palme-Sunday the Bish. of Winchester with nine more of the Coun∣celLa. Elizabeth brought be∣fore the Coū∣cel. conuented her; being come before them and offering to kneele, the Earle of Sussex would by no meanes suffer her, but commanded a Chayre to bee brougt in for her to fit on: Gardiner, Bi∣shop of Winchester, and
then Lord Chancellor, ta∣king vpon him to be the mouth of the rest, began very sharply to reproue her▪ (as if shee had beene already conuicted) for hauing a hand in Wiat's Rebellion, to whom she mildly answeredLa. Elizabeth answereth all obiections. with a modest protestation, that shee neuer had the least knowledge of his pra∣ctice and proceedings; for proofe whereof, said shee, when Wyat at his death was by some ma∣licious enemies of mine demāded whether I was any way knowing, or ac∣cessary to his insurrecti∣on, euen at the parting of life and body, hauing prepared his soule for
heauen, when no dissi∣mulation can be so much as suspected, euen then he pronounced me guilt∣lesse; besides the like question being deman∣ded of Nicholas Throck∣morton and Iames Crofts at their Arraignment, I was likewise cleared by them, and being acquit∣ted of all others (my Lords) would you haue mee to accuse my selfe, after this shee was que∣stion'd about a stirring in the West, rais'd by Sr. Peter Carew, but answe∣red to euery particular so distinctly, that they could not take hold of the least circumstance, whereby they might any
way strengthen their ac∣cusation; which Gardi∣ner perceiuing, told her that it would bee her sa∣fest course to submit her selfe to the Queene, and to craue pardon of her gracious Maiestie: wher∣unto she answered, that submission cōfest a crime and pardon belong'd to a delinquent, either of which being proued by her, she would then and not till then make vse of his Graces councell; Gar∣diner told her she should heare more anon, re∣tiring with the ret of the Lords to know the Queens further pleasure; they being gone, she left alone,The La. Eliz. left alone at the Councel-board. without either ser∣uant
to attend her, or friend to cheere her, be∣gan to thinke with her selfe, that beauty was but a flower soone faded, health a blessing soone altered, fauour a Sun∣shine often clouded, ri∣ches and glory no better then broken pillars, but innocency and truth vn∣moued Columns; In the midst of these concepti∣ons Gardiner and the rest entred the Chamber & told her that it was her Maiesties pleasure shee must instantly bee con∣ueyed to the Tower,La. Elizabeth commanded to the Tower. that her houshold was dissol∣ued, and all her seruants discharged, except her Gentleman. Vsher, three
Gentle-women, and two Groomes, and that for her guard two hundred Northern white Coates were appointed that night to watch about her lodging, and early in the morning to see her safe∣ly deliuered into the custody of the Lieftenant of the Tower,La. Elizabeth affraid of the Tower. the very name of Tower, strucke a deepe horror into her, insomuch that the cheer∣full blood forsaking her fresh cheeks, left nothing but ashy palenesse in her visage, shee spake these words.La. Eliazbeth her Speech to the Councell. Allasse, my Lords, how comes it that I haue so incensed my Sister, and So∣ueraigne? if it be held to be either Criminall or Ca∣pitall
to bee Daughter to King Henry, Sister to King Edward of Sacred memo∣ry, or to bee the next in blood to the Queene, I may then perhaps incurre as well the seuerity of censure, as the rigour of Sentence; but otherwise, I here protest, be∣fore heauen and you, I neuer either in act or thought haue as yet trespass'd against her Maiesty, whose plea∣sure if it be so, that I must be confined, and my liberty re∣strain'd, my humble suite is vnto you, to be Petitioners on my behalfe vnto her Ma∣iestie, that I may be sent vn∣to some other place lesse no∣torious, that being a Prison for Traytors and Malefa∣ctors in the highest degree.
The Earle of Sussex pre∣sently replyed,The Earle of Sussex a fast frind to the L. Eliz. that her request was both iust & reasonable, desiring the rest of the Lords to ioine with him on her behalfe, whereuppon the Bishop of Winchester cut him off, and told him that it was the Queenes absolute command, and her plea∣sure was vnalterable, when after a little pause; well sayd she, Flebile principium melior fortuna sequatur. Iniury is but the tryall of our patience, troubles are onely instructions to teach vs wisedome, by the one falshood from faith may
be perceiued, by the other true friends from Traytors may be easily discerned. Guttacauat lapidem— hard things may bee molli∣fied, crooked things straight∣ned, a Rocke will in time relent, and Troy, though it stands out long, it yeeld at last, whilst there is a Sun to set, I wil not despaire of a good issue, Non omni∣m dierum Sol occidit▪ shall bee still my Comorter▪ nd with hese words they all left her. That night being spent in pious deuotion, the next day following two Lords brought word that she must instantly to the
Tower, & that the Barge was ready at the staires to conuey her thither; for saith one of them, (whose name I purpose∣y omit) The tide will ry for no body,La. Elizabeth commanded to the Tower. vpon which shee humbly be∣sought them that shee might onely haue the freedome of one tide more, and that they would solicit the Queen or so small a fauour, whereunto he very chur∣lishly replyed, that it was a thing by no possi∣ble meanes to bee granted▪ then shee desire that she might write vn∣to the Queene, which he would not admit: but the Earle of Sussex, bein
the other that was sent from the Queene, knee∣led vnto her,Earle of Sussex continues a fast friend to the L. Eliz. kist her hand, and said, that vpon his owne apperill shee should not onely haue the liberty to write, but as he was a true man vn∣to God & his Prince, he would deliuer her Let∣ter to the Queenes owne hands, and bring an An∣swer of the same, whatso∣euer came thereof. Whilst shee was wri∣ting,La. Elizabeth writeth to the Queene. (for a small peece of paper could not make sufficient report of her Sorrowes, being so great in quantity, so extraor∣dinary in quality) the tyde was spent, then they whispered together to
take aduantage of the next, but that course was held to be inconue∣nient, in regard that it fell out iust about mid∣night, the difficulty al∣leadged, was lest that be∣ing in the darke, shee might perhaps be rescu∣ed, therefore the next day being Palme-Sunday, they repaired vnto her Lodging againe, and de∣sired her to prepare her selfe, for that was the la∣test houre of her liberty; & she must to the Barge presently, whereunto shee answered, The Lords will be done, since it is her Highnesse pleasure, I am therewith very well conten∣ted; passing through the
Garden and the guard to take water, shee looked backe to euery window, and seeing none whose lookes might seeme to cōpassionate her afflicti∣ons,La. Elizabeths speech at her departure out of the Court. said thus, I wonder whither the Nobility in∣tends to leade me, being a Princesse, and of the Royall bloud of England: Alasse, why being an harmeles in∣nocent woman, am I thus hurryed to captiuity? the Lord of Heauen knowes whither, for I my selfe doe not. Great hast was made to see her safe in the Barge, and much care to haue her passe by Lon∣don vnseene, which was the occasion that both she and they were enga∣ged
to remarkable dan∣ger, the Tyde being young,La. Elizabeths danger in shooting Lon∣don-Bridge. the Barge-men fear'd to shoot the Bridge but being forced to it a∣gainst their wils, the sterne struck against one of the Arches, and wan∣ting water, grated a¦gainst the Channell, with great hazard to be ouer∣whelmed; but God in his mercy preseru'd her to a fairer fortune.L. Eliz. lan∣ded at the Traitors staires. Shee was landed at the Tower-stayres, the same inten∣ded for Traytors; loath she was to haue gone a∣shore there, laying open her innocent and loyall behauiour both towards the Queene and present State: but being cut short
by the churlish reply of one who was her con∣uoy; shee went ashore, and stept short into the water, vttering these words.La Elizabeth peec at her and  in  Tower. I speake it before thee, O God; hauing no friend but thee in whom to put my confidence, heere landeth as true a subiect, be∣ing Prisoner, as euer landed at these stayres, since Iulius Caesar laid the first foun∣dation of this structure. Well if it proue so (said one of the Lords) it will be the better for you; as shee passed along, the warders then attending, bade God blesse her Grace; for which some were re∣buked in words, others by a mulct in the purse.
She was then deliue∣red to the charge of the Constable of the Tower,La. Elizabeth deliuered vp to the Con∣stable of the Tower. who receiued her as his Prisoner, and told her, that hee would shew her to her Lodgings; but shee being faint, began to complaine: the good Earle of Sussex, seeing her colour began to faile, & she ready to sinke vnder his armes,The inhuma∣nity of the Constable to∣wards the L. Elizabeth. call'd for a Chayre; but the Consta∣ble would not suffer it to be brought; en shee sate downe vpon a faire stone, at which time there fell a great shower of raine, the Heauens themselues did seeme to weepe at such inhumane vsage; Sussex offered to
cast his Cloake about her,The Earle of Sussex loue to the L. Eliz. but she by no means would admit it: Then the Lieftenant,The Liefte∣nants courte∣sie to the La. Eliz. M. Bridges entreated her to with∣draw her selfe from the violence of the storme into some shelter, to whom she answer'd, I had better to sit here then in a orser place, for God know∣eth, not I, whither you in∣tend to lead me. At which words, looking vpon he Gentleman-Vsher, and seeing his eyes full o teares, shee told him he did not well to discono late her with his sorrow who had so much grief of her owne, that she doubted whether she had strength enough support it.
Being lock'd and bol∣ted in her Lodgings with some of her seruants,La. Elizabeth lockt vp close in the Tower. she was much daunted and perplexed; but called to her Gentle-woman for her booke, desiring God not to suffer her to lay her foundation vpon the sands, but vpon the Rock, whereby all blasts of blustering weather might not preuaile a∣gainst her, whereunto shee added,The La. Eliz. speech being lockt in her Chamber. The skill of a Pilot is vnknowne but in a tempest, the valour of a Captaine is vnseene but in a battell, and the worth of a Christian is vnknowne, but in tryall and temptation: this earthly Globe, O Lord, is but a Theater on which
thou hast placed vs, to get some proofe from hence of our sufficiencie, death will assaile vs, the world will entice vs, the flesh will seeke to betray vs, and the Diuell ready to deuoure vs; but all this and much more shall neuer deiect my spirits; for thou, O King of Kings, art my Spectator, and thy Son Christ, my Sauiour Iesus, hath already vndergone these tryals for my encou∣ragement; I will therefore come boldly to the throne of Grace, there it is, I am sure, that I shall find comfort in this time of neede, though an Hoast should encampe a∣gainst mee, my heart shall not feare; though warre should rise against mee, in
this will I be confident, Thou Lord art my light and my saluation, whom shall I feare? thou Lord art the strength of my life, of whom shall I be affraid? In this Interim the Lords tooke aduice about a more strict watch and ward to be set vpon her,The Lords take aduice about a watch to keepe the L. Eliz. safe. all a∣greeing that it should be exactly performed; but the good Earle of Sussex was very passionate to heare all this, and said, My Lords, my Lords, let vs take heede, and doe no more then our Commission will well beare, consider that he was the King our Ma∣ters Daughter, and there∣fore let us vse such dealing, may hereafter proue an¦swerable:
the other Lord agreed to his words, say∣ing, it was well spoke of him, and so for that time departed. Two dayes after, Gar∣diner making vse of the Queenes name and au∣thority,Masse said & ung in the La. Elizabeths Chamber. caused Masse to bee inforcedly said and sung before her, which seemed to be the grea∣test tryall shee had till that time endured, but necessity hauing no law, shee was forced to giue way to it, and not vnad∣uisedly; that spirit is pro∣digious, which rather than shake hands with inconueniencie would cast it self into the iawe of danger, shee with
setled countenance swal∣lowed downe vpon ex∣tremity, the bitter poti∣on of indignity, shee would rather bow then breake; rather strike sayle, then perish in the storme; the greatnesse of her mind gaue place to the weakenesse of her meanes, because shee could not harbor where shee would, she ancho∣red where shee might with best security. Philip of Spaine being interressed in this Story as one whom God vsed for an instrument to pre∣serue the Lady Eliza∣beth: All those that in∣terposed his comming into the Kingdome be∣ing
cut off, namely, the Duke of Suffolke, Sir Tho∣mas Wat, with all his consederacie, and the much suspected Lady Elizabeth being vnder safe custody, in the Tow∣er, I hope it will not bee impertinent to impart somwhat of his landing, Marriage and Corona∣tion. On the twentieth day of Iuly,Phi▪ of Spaine landeth. Anno 1554. hee arriued at South-hampton, and was there honoura∣bly met and receiued by the Queenes Counsell, and the greatest part of the Nobility: at his first setting foote on Land, the Garer was presented to him, and fastned about
his Legge; before hee would enter into any house,The deuoti∣on of K. Phil. hee went first to the Church of Holy-Rood, there to giue thankes for his prosperous and suc∣cessfull Voyage: ha∣uing spent about halfe an houre in deuotion, he mounted on a goodly Iennet, richly Capari∣son'd, sent to him that morning frō the Queen, and rod backe againe to his Lodging, neere ad∣ioyning to the Water∣gate. The Monday follow∣ing, he left South-hampton, and being most honoura∣bly attended by the No∣bility and Gentry of En∣gland, hee rode toward
Winchester; but by rea∣son of much raine that fell that day, the iourney seemed lesse pleasant. The next day,Philip com∣meth to Win∣chester. betwixt sixe and seauen in the E∣uening, hee was there re∣ceiued▪ magnificently, and rode to Church be∣fore hee saw his Lod∣gings; lowd Musicke sounded at his alighting; The Bishop of that Sea, with foure others, met him at the Church-dore, with Priests, Singing-men, and Choristers, at∣tired in rich Copes, with three faire Crosses borne before them. At his first entrance into the Church, hee kneeled downe to pray; which
done, he arose and went vnder a Canopye from the West dore vp to the Quire, perceiuing the Sacrament, hee put off his hat to doe it reue∣rence, then entred into a goodly trauerse hung with rich Arras & there kneeled againe, till the Chancellour began Te De∣um, and all the Quire se∣conded, that done, hee was brought thence by Torch-light, going on foote to his Lodgings, where the Queens guard attended on him; all the way as he passed along he turned himselfe to the people on both sides, wth a pleasant countenance. After Supper certaine
of the Councell brought him to the Queene by a priuate way,Phil. brought into the pre∣sence priuate∣ly. shee recei∣ued him both graciously and louingly, they had conference together a∣bout halfe an houre in the Spanish tongue, which ended, he tooke his leaue and was conducted back to his Lodging. Vpon Tuesday follow∣ing about three in the af∣ternoone, he came from his Lodging on foot, ac∣companyed by the Lord Steward, the Earles of Derby and Pembrooke, with other Lords and Gentlemen▪ as well stran∣gers as English: hee was all in blacke Cloath, he shewed himselfe freely
and openly to all men;The courte∣ous behaui∣our of Philip to the people. at his entrance into the Court, lowd Musique plaid; the Queene met him in the great Hall,Q. Maryes en∣tertainment o Philip. and kissed him in the presence of all the peo∣ple, and taking him by the right hand, they went vp together into the great Chamber of Pre∣sence, and talked toge∣ther about a quarter of an houre, hee then tooke his leaue of her Maiesty, ent to the Cathedrall to heare Euen-song, from thence was conueyed to his Lodgings with torch-light. On St. Iames, day being the Tutelary Saint of Spaine, Iuly 25. the King
and Queene came from their Lodgings towards the Church, all on foote, richly attired in gownes of Cloth of gold, set with Stones and Iemms, hee with his Gard, and shee with hers, each of them hauing a sword borne before them, that of hers by the Earle of Derby, the other of his by the Earle of Pembrooke; being come into the Church, he went to one Altar, and she to another, both hanged with Cur∣taines of Cloth of gold, which being after drawn it was thought, that they were there shriuen; then they resumed their pla∣ces, and being met, cour∣teously
saluted each o∣ther, hee being at that time bare-headed. Sixe Bishops went to the place prepared for the Ceremony;The Marri∣age solemni∣zed between Philip and Q. Mary. the King was on the left hand, and shee on the right. Win∣chester celebrated the Nuptials first in Latine, then in English, the mar∣riage Ring was a plaine hoop Ring of gold with∣out any Stone: the Ce∣remonies being consum∣mate, they both went hand in hand together, comming to the Altar, they both kneeld a while with each of them a ligh∣ted Taper in their hand. After the Masse was en∣ded, the King of Heralds
openly in the Church proclaimed their Maie∣sties King and Queene, with their Stiles and Titles, as followeth. PHilip and Mary,Philip and Q. Mary proclai∣med King & Qu. of En∣gland, &c. by the Grace of God, King and Queene of England, France, Naples, Ieru∣salem, and Ireland, Defendors of the Faith, King and Queene of Spayne, Sicilia, Leon, and Arragon, Arch-Dukes of Austria, Dukes of Millaine, Burgundie, and Bra∣bant,
Countees of Hasborough, Flanders and irroll: Lords of the Ilands of Sardinia, Maiorca, Minorca, of the Firme-land, and the great Ocean Sea, Palatines of Henault, and the holy Empire, Lords of Freezeland and Ireland, Gouer∣nours of all Asia and Affrica. The Trumpets ceasing,Philip and Q Mry dine to∣gether at one Tabe. the King and Queene ame forth, hand in hand royally attended, and dy∣ed together openly in the Hall at one Table.
On the eighteenth of August they came to Suf∣folke place in Southwarke, there they dined, after dinner roade ouer the Bridge, and so through London to Wst-minster;Philip and Q. Mary passe through Lon∣don in State. great Triumphes met them by the way, with the presentation of di∣uers Pageants & Shewes, hauing reference to thei Persons, and the great ioy conceued of their Royall Marriage. Heere is one Sister in her Maiesty, the other i misery; the one vpon her Throne, the other i the Tower; euery day expecting some newe or other of her death it would make a pittiful
and strange Story, to re∣late what examinations and rackings of poore men there was to finde but out that knife which might cut her throat: Gardiner,Gardiner exa∣mineth the L. Eliz. in the Tower. with diuers o∣thers of the Councell came to haue a second examination of her, de∣manding what confe∣rence shee had with Sr. Iames Acrofts, being then a Prisoner in the Tower, and brought into her presence on set purpose to confront her, allead∣ging that the speech which they had priuate∣ly, was about her remo∣uall frō Abridge to Dun∣nington Castle At the first shee was somewhat
amazed, not remem∣bring that shee had any such House; but hauing recollected her selfe, I doe remember,La. Elizabeths answer to the obiections of Gardiner. my honoura∣ble Lords, that I haue such a House: but me thinkes you doe me great iniury, thus to presse, examine, and produce euery petty meane Prisoner against mee; if they haue beene Delinquents and don ill, let them at their owne perill answer it, but neither number mee nor ioyne mee with such malefactors and offendors: as touching my Remoue to Dunnington, my officers, and you Sir Ia. Crofts being then pre∣sent, can wel testifie whether any rash or vnbeseeming word did at that time passe
my lippes, which might not haue well become a faithfull and loyall Subiect; but what is all this to the purpose (my Lords) might I not with∣out offence goe to my House at all times when I best pleased? At which words the E. of Arundell knee∣ling downe,Ardels kind reply to the L. Eliz. said, Your Grace saith truth, and for mine owne part I am much greeued that you should bee thus troubled, about mat∣ers of no greater moment; ell my good Lords (said he) you sift me very nar∣owly, but you can doe no ore vnto me, then God in is diuine prouidence hath ppointed, and to him one∣ will I direct my prayers forgiue you all. Sr. Iames
Crofts kneeled vnto her, being heartily sory that euer hee should see that day to bee a witnesse a∣gainst her, taking God to witnesse that hee neuer knew any thing by her, worthy of the least suspi∣tion; yet notwithstan∣ding there appeared no the least probability o any fault, nothing bu meere suspitions & suggestions could bee obiected; shee was still kep close Prisoner,The seuerity of the Con∣stable of the ower to the L. Elizabeth. the Constable of the Tower the L. Chamberlaine, woul not suffer her owne seruants to carry vp h yet, but put it into th ands of rude and vnmannerly Soldiers,
which shee complaining to her Gentleman-Vsher to haue that abuse better ordered; the Lieftenant not onely denyed to see it remedied, but threat∣ned him with imprison∣ment, if hee againe did but vrge such a motion; neither would hee suffer her own Cooks to dress her dyet, but mingled his owne seruants with hers; violent he was in the persecution of her innocence, his malice was sharpe and keene a∣gainst her, insomuch that shee was ready to sinke vnder the heauy & insupportable burthen of his cruelty, but that God who still protected
her, raised vp an instru∣ment to take off the edge of his so violent oppres∣sion.Lo. Shandois moueth the Lords of the Councell on the behalfe of the L. Eliz. The Lord Shan∣doys, then one of her Kee∣pers, moued the Lords of the Councell on her be∣halfe, and by his only in∣tercession shee had the freedome of the Queens Lodgings,La. Elizabeth suffered to haue a Caze∣ment open in her Chamber. and liberty to open her Casement to take in the Ayre, which before that time could by no meanes be possibly granted. In the interim a Wa∣rant came downe vnder Seale for her execution;A Warrant for the Lady Elizabeths death. Gardiner was the onely Daedalus and inuentor o the engine;Mr. Bridges made a hap∣py instrument to preserue the L. Eliza∣beth. but Master Bridges had the honou
of her deliuery; for hee no sooner receiued the Warrant, but mistrust∣ing▪ false play, presently made hast to the Queen, shee was no sooner infor∣med, but renounced the least knowledge thereof, called Gardiner and o∣thers, whom shee suspe∣cted, before her, blamed them for their inhumane vsage of her, and tooke aduice for her better se∣curity; and thus was A∣chitophels bloudy deuice preuented. Soone after on the fift of May the Constable of the Tower was dischar∣ged, and one Sir Henry Benningfield succeeded in his place, a man altoge∣ther
vnknowne to her Grace,The Consta∣ble of the Tower dis∣charged, Sir Henry Ben∣ningfield put in trust with the La. Eliza∣beth. and therefore the more to be feared. The sodainnes of the change did at that time some∣what daunt her; but the same power which re∣mooued the one out of his Lieftenantship, at the very same time released her out of her close and strict imprisonment in the Tower, and from thence conueyed her to Woodstock,La. Elizabeth remoued to Woostock. vnder the con∣duct and charge of Sr. Henry Benningfield, with whom was ioyned in Commission Sr. Iohn Wil∣liams, the Lord of Tame, and a hundred Northren Blew-Coates to attend them; these presenting
themselues before her, shee instantly apprehen∣ded them to bee her new guardians; but at the sight of Sir Henry,La. Elizabeth afraid of Sir Henry Ben∣ningfield. whom shee had neuer till that time seene; she sodain∣ly started backe, and cal∣led to one of the Lords, priuately demanding of him, whether the Scaf∣fold were yet standing whereon the innoce Lady Iane had not long before suffered? hee re∣solued her, that vpon his honour it was quite taken downe, and tha no memoriall thereof was now remaining: then shee beckoned another Noble-man vnto her, & asked of him what Sr.
Henry was? if hee knew him? or if a priuate mur∣ther were committed to his charge, whether hee had not the conscience to performe it? answer was made that, hee was a man, whom the Queene respected, and the Chan∣cellour much fauoured, and that she should with∣out doubt finde him a man better qualified then she supposed, both of a stricter Conscience, and more Christian-like condition. It is well (said shee) if it proue so. Shee seemed herein somthing satisfied, and the rather, because from the mild aspect of the Lord of Tame, shee expected
some comfort, shee per∣ceiued compassion in his eye, to defend her from the countenance of the other, which prefigured vnto her nothing but op∣pression. The nineteenth of May shee remoued from the Tower towards Wood∣stocke, being that night appointed to lie at Rich∣mond, whither they were no sooner come, and she entred into her Lodg∣ings;. liazbeth feareth to be murthered at Richmond. but the Souldiers▪ were placed about her, and all her seruants billi∣ted in by & out-houses, which shee perceiuing call'd her Gentleman V∣sher fearfully vnto her, bad him and all the rest
of her's to pray for her, for shee doubted that night to be there murde∣red, and that she had no hope to suruiue that morning; wherewith he being struck to the heart, said,La. Elizabeth rceiueth comfort from her Genle∣man Vsher. God forbid that any such wickednesse should bee intended against your grace, if it were so, that God who hath thus fauourably sup∣ported you hitherto, will de∣fend you still, he is God om∣nipotent, God allsufficient, God that hath releeued, God that can helpe, God that ne∣uer will forsake all such as put their trust in him; bee of good courage, let not your Grace be deiected, though sorrow be heere in the eue∣ning, yet ioy will be in the
morning; shee thanked him for his comfortable aduice, and dded; Bee mercifull vnto me,La. Elizabeths meditations. O God, be mercifull vnto mee, for my soule trusteth in thee, yea in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, vn∣till these calamities be ouer∣past: herevpon hee de∣parted with teares in his eyes, leauing her to God, and her selfe; but could not rest, till hee had ac∣quainted the Lord of Tame with all such feares as her Grace had con∣ceiued; comming downe into the Hall, hee found Sr. Henry Benningfield and the Lord of Tame wal∣king together, and ha∣uing singled out the L.
of Tame, told him, that the cause of his com∣ming was to bee resol∣ued, whether there were any secret plot intended against her Grace that night or no, and if there were, that hee and his fellowes might know it, for they should account themselues happy to lose their liues in her rescue: The Lord of Tame nobly replyed,The noble re∣solution of the Lord of Tame. that all such feares were needlesse, for if any such thing were attempted, hee and all his followers would spend their blouds in her defence: so praise be to God they passed that night in safety, though with no little griefe of heart.
The next morning the Countrey people vnder∣standing which way she was to take her iourney,The Coun∣treyes loue to the L. Eliz. in her passage to Woodstocke. had assembled them∣selues in diuers places, some praying for her preseruation and liber∣ty, others presented her with Nose-gayes and such expression of their loues as the Countrey af∣forded, the inhabitants of neighbour Villages commanded the Bels to be rung, so that what wth the lowd acclamations of People, and the sound of Bels, the very Ayre did Eccho with the preser∣uation of Elizabeth, which being perceiued by Sr. Henry Benning-field, hee
call'd them Rebells and Traytors beating them backe with his Trunche∣on; as for the Ringers he made their pates ring noone, before they were releast out of the stocks; the Princesse intreated him in their behalfe, and desired that hee would desist from the rigour v∣sed to the people. I can∣not by any meanes suffer (saith he) their clamorous out-cryes, they grate my eares with their bablings, besides it is not tollerable, by vertue of my Commissi∣on; and at euery word he spoke hee still had vp his Commission, which the Princess taking notice of, told him that he was no
better then her Goaler;La. Elizabeth caleth Sir Hen: Benning∣field her Ga∣ler. the very name of Goaler moued his patience; but but knowing not how to mend himselfe, he hum∣bly intreated her Grace not to vse that name, it being a name of disho∣nour, a scandall to his Gentry. It is no matter (said she) Sir Henry, me thinkes, that name and your nature agree well together; let mee not heare of that word Commission, as oft as you but nominate your Commission, so oft will cal you Gaoler. As shee passed along towards Windsor, diuers of her seruants seeing her passe so sadly by the way, being such as had beene
formerly discharged at the dissolution of her Houshold, requested her Grace, that shee would vouchsafe to resolue thē whither she was carryed, to whom shee sent backe an answer in these two narrow words,Tanquam ouis, As a sheep to the slaugh∣ter. Tanquam Ouis. She lodged that night at the Deane of Windsors house, & passed the next day to M. Dormers house; by the way, there was great concourse of Peo∣ple to see her Grace; the next night shee came to the Lord of  his house,L. Elizabeth lodgeth at the Lord of Tames house. where shee was most nobly entertained by all the Gentry of the Countrey, comming to
congratulate her safety, to condole her misery, whereat S. Henry Ben∣ningfield was highly dis∣pleased, and told them, that they could not tell what they did, and were not able to answer the least part of their acti∣ons, informing them that she was the Queens Prisoner, and no other∣wise, aduising them withall, to take heede what they did, and be∣ware of after-clappes: whereunto the Lord of Tame made answer, that hee was well aduised of his doings, being ioyned in Commission as well as he, and that he would warrant both her Gra∣ces
mirth and entertain∣ment in his house: Sir Henry being thus oppo∣sed, went vp into a Chamber,The saucy rude behaui∣our of Sir Hen. Benning. where was prepared a Chayre, two Cushions, and a rich Carpet for her Grace to sit in; but he impatient to see such Princely fur∣niture for her entertain∣ment, rather then hee should not be taken no∣tice of, like Softratus that set the Temple of Diana on fire onely to get him a name, hee presumptu∣ously sate in the Chayre, and called one Barwicke his man to pull off his Bootes; which being knowne ouer the house, he was well deided for
his vnciuill behauiour; that night she passed as a welcome guest to the Lord of Tame; but Sir Henry being formerly alled what with the Royall entertainment of her Grace, and partly by the ieering speeches late∣ly put vpon him; hee would not suffer her to sleepe vnder the sole cu∣stody of the L. of Tame, being in mistrust of his owne shadow, and there∣fore set a strong watch vpon the house. The next day they came to Woodstock, where shee was no sooner en∣tred,L. Eliz. lockt and boked vp in Woodstock but locked and bol∣ted vp as formerly in the Tower, here her feares
grew greater, and her li∣berty lesse, her Lodgings the meanest and coursest about the house, night and day guarded with rude and vnciuill Soldi∣ers, besides the Keeper of the house was reputed a notorious Ruffian,The Keeper of Woodstocke attempted to kill the La. Elizabeth. of an euill conditioned life, one that waited his op∣portunity to depriue her of hers, and being en∣couraged by some great ones then at Court, made diuers attempts, but by the immediate hand of God was still preuented; and for S. Henry Benning∣field, he was stil the same, omitting not the least oc∣casion to set his Com∣mission on the Tenter∣hooks
of seuerity, in this onely shee espyed some small glimpse of com∣fort, that by the means of a worthy Knight of Oxford-shire, ioyned in Commission with Sir Henry,La. Elizabeths liberty to walke in the Gardens. she had at last the liberty of the Gardens to walke in, but S. Henry locked and vnlocked the dores himselfe, not da∣ring to trust any with the keyes, whereupon shee said vnto him; Why; are not you now my Gaoler? I beseech your Grace (said hee) doe but forbeare that word: I am not your Goa∣ler, but an Officer appoin∣ted by her Maiesty to keepe you safe. God blesse her Ma∣iestie (said shee) and from
such officers good Lord de∣liuer mee. Being in the Garden, she was alwayes employed in Deuotion,La. Elizabeths meditaious as she walked in the Gar∣den. taken vp with one medi∣tation or other, not the least pile of grasse shee trod on but afforded in∣struction, humus aut hu∣mirepens, grasse or gras∣hopper shee acknowled∣ged her selfe; then casting her eyes vpon those goodly Parkes, furni∣shed with tall and state∣ly Oakes, whose erected tops and large-spreading branches ouer-looked the vnder-woods and lesser Plants, not so much as admitting any Sun∣beame to reflect vpon their Boughes, but such
faint chequer-spotted light as shined through the sufferance of their leaues▪ nor allowing the Raine of Heauen to fall vpon them, onely such as from superfluity and aoundance drop't from their branches, to these streight and extending trees, shee compared the Nobilitie; to the Ar∣busculae or smaller Plants, the Commons; but to the Tamarix, the bryer and bush, the poorest & meanest of the People; then conferring the e∣state of the Honourable with the condition of the humble, the tem∣pests that shake the mighty and blow ouer
the meane, as being sci∣tuate in the lesse emi∣nent place, that it is the longest Roab which contracts the greatest soyle, they that walke on the tops of Pinnacles are onely in the danger, whilst those which are vpon the ground march more securely. Many were the Trou∣bles of this good Lady, her dangers more, shee had very neere been bur∣ned in her bed one night had there not beene pre∣uention; she was in me∣dio ignis, in the midst o a fire kindled, as it is reported, on set purpose t haue consumed her; bu being espyed by a worthy
Knight in Oxford∣shire to flame through the boords of her Cham∣ber,La. Elizabeth almost bur∣ned in her bed. was presently ex∣tinguished; shee was in medio ignis, in the midst of that fiery tryall; the whole Kingdome was then enflamed with Bone∣fires of Gods Saints, there was Fire in the Center, Fire all about the Circū∣ference, Fire at home, Fire abroad, Fire in her priuate Chamber, Fire all ouer the whole King∣dome; what a dange∣rous exigent must shee needs come to, whose life was thus assaulted? Tu quibus ista legas, incertum est lector, ocellis,
Ipse equidem siccis scribere non potui. Reader, with what eye canst thou this peruse, Since writing them, I wept, and could not chuse. God, whose breath is as a flaming fire, blasted all her fiery Aduersaries, suspended the violent rage of al this Fire, and snatched her as a brand out of the midst thereof, not so much as a haire of her head being sindged: Being thus deliered out of the hands of her ene∣mies, she perseuered in the seruice of God all the dayes of her life; and for the present hauing
well weighed the dan∣ger lately escaped, shee said,La. Elizabeth thankfull to God for her deliuery out of the fire. Quid tibi retribuam Domine? What shall I ren∣der vnto the Lord for all these blessngs so fauourably from time to time bestowed vpon me? then retyring into her priuate Cham∣ber, shee thus began to pray. O Gracious Lord God,La. Elizabeths prayer in the midst of her sorrow. I hum∣bly prostrate my selfe vpon the ben∣ded knees of my Heart before thee, intreating thee (for thy Sonnes sake) to
be now and euer mer∣cifull vnto me; I am thy worke, the work of thine own hands, euen of those hands which were nayled to the Crosse for my sinnes; looke vpon the wounds of thy hands, and despise not the worke of thy hands; thou hast writ∣ten me downe in thy Booke of preseruati∣on, with thine owne hand, Oh read thine owne hand writing, and saue mee, spare
me that speake vnto thee; pardon mee that pray vnto thee; the Griefes I endure, enforce me to speake, the calamities I suffer impells mee to com∣plaine; if my hopes were in this Life on∣ly, then were I of all people most misera∣ble; it must needes be so, that there is another Life, for here they liue many times the longest liues who are not worthie to iue at all: Heere the
Israelites make the Brickes, and the Ae∣gyptians dwell in the houses; Dauid is in want, and Nabal a∣bounds; Syon is Ba∣blons, Captiue; hast thou nothing in store for Ioseph, but the Stocks? for Esay, but a Saw? will not Eli∣as adorne the Chari∣ot better then the Iu∣niper-tree? will not Iohn Baptists head be∣come a Crowne as well as a Platter? Sure∣ly there is great Retri∣bution
for the iust, there is fruit for the Righteous; thou hast Palms for their hands Coronets for their heads, white Robes for their Bodies; thou wilt wipe all teares from their eyes, and shew them thy good∣nesse in the land of the liuing. Oh good and desirable is the shadow of thy wings (Lord Iesus) there is the safe Sanctuary to flye vnto, the com∣fortable refreshing of
all sinne and sorrow; whatsoeuer Cups of affliction this Life propines vnto me, is nothing to those bit∣ter draughts thou hast already drunke vnto me; helpe me, O thou my strength, by which I shall bee raised, come thou my light, by which I shall be illuminated ap∣peare thou glory, to which I shall bee exalted, hasten thou life through which I shall bee hereaf∣ter
glorified. Amen, Amen. Thus did shee both deuoutly and religio∣sly make vse of all affli∣ctions imposed vpon her, shee euer laid her Foundation vpon that Primum quaerite, which is the chiefe Corner-Stone both of Diuinitie and Philosophy; but being ouer-whelmed with an inundation of Sorrow and Feare, she humbly petition'd the Councell that they would admit her to write to the Queene,La. Elzabeth desireth to write to the Queene which at first was prohibited, but af∣terwards most louingly
permitted; Sir Henry Benningfield brought her Pen, Paper and Inke, and would not so much as depart the Roome whilst shee had Pen to Paper; and euer when shee was weary of writing, hee carried her Lettes away and brought them again at his pleasure; but ha∣uing finished her Let∣ters, hee said, that hee would carry them to Court: No (said shee) one of my owne shall carry them,S. Henry Ben∣ningfield will not suffer any one but him∣selfe to con∣uey the La. E∣lizabeths Let∣ter to the Qu. I will trust neither your selfe, nor any that be∣longs to you therein: wher∣unto he replyed, You are a Prisoner to the Queene, I hope there is none of your Seruants dares be so bold as
to deliuer any Letters of yours to her Maiestie, you being in that case. Yes (quoth shee) I haue none that are so dishonest, but will be as willing to doe for me in that behalfe, as euer they were, That's true (said he) but my Commission is to the contrary, I can by no means suffer it; her Grace re∣plying againe, said, You charge mee very often with your Commission, I pray God you may hereafer an∣swer the cruell dealing vsed towards mee: then hee kneeling downe desired her Grace to conside that hee was but a Ser∣uant put only in trust by her Maiesty to keepe her safe, protesting that if
the Case were hers, hee would as willingly ob∣serue her Grace, as now hee did the Queenes Highnesse: For his an∣swer shee returned him thankes, beseeching God that shee might neuer stand in need of such ser∣uants as he was; giuing him further to vnder∣stand that his actions to∣wards her were neither good nor answerable; nay such, as the bet friends he had could ne∣uer maintaine; I doubt not (said hee) but to make good account of my Acti∣ons; there is no remedy but that I must answer them, and so I wil wel enough, I'le warrant you: being an∣gred
and vexed with her Graces speeches,Sir He. Ben¦ningfield kee¦peth L. Eliz. Letters foure dayes after they were dated. hee kept the Letters foure dayes after they were dated; but in conclusi∣on, hee was faine to send for her Gentleman-Vsher from the Towne of Woodstocke, and asked him whether hee durst deliuer his Mistris Let∣ters to the Queene; Yes (said hee) that I dare and will withall my heart; then Sir Henry halfe against his stomacke deliuered them vnto him. Not long after,La. Elizabeth sicke. her Grace fell sicke, which the Queene no sooner heard of,The Qu▪ sen∣deth two phy∣sitians to the La. Elizabeth. but shee sent D. Owen and D. Wndye to visite her: being come
to Woodstocke, they care∣fully administred vnto her, let her bloud, and in sixe dayes set her on foote againe, and so ta∣king their leaue of her Grace,The Physiti∣ans returne a good report of the L. Eliz. to the Qu. return'd to Court and made a large report both to the Queene and Councell of her humble behauiour and allegi∣ance towards them. The Queene no sooner heard it, but reioyced at it; her aduersaries looked black in the mouth, not know∣ing how to mend them∣selues, but onely by in∣inciting the Queene a∣gainst her, telling her, that they much won∣dred that shee did not submit her selfe, ha∣uing
offended her High∣nesse. In the Interim,Diuers tam∣per with the L. Elizabeth to haue her to submit her selfe to the Queene. her Grace was much solici∣ted by diuers pretended friends, to submit her selfe to the Qu. infor∣ming her that it would be well taken, and bee very conducible to her benefit and further in∣largement; the words were no sooner vttered, but shee most resolute∣ly made answer in this manner,La. Elizabeths answer con∣cerning her submission. I will neuer sub∣mit to any one whom I ne∣uer offended in all my life; If I am a delinquent, and haue offended, Currat Lex, let the Law take course, I craue no mercy at all, the law is iust and will not con∣demne
me; my Keeper that locketh mee vp day and night; doth continually mo∣lest mee; if I were but as free from the one, as I am from the other, I should thinke my selfe most happy, howsoeuer God in his good time, will either mollifie his heart, or moue some other to procure my further in∣largement. The Counsell board, especially the aduerse party were no sooner possess'd with the con∣stancie of her resolution, but they sent vp for Sir Henry Benning field her Keeper; no way was vn∣attempted,Sir Hen Ben∣ningfield sent for to the Councell∣board. which might make for their ends; great Consultation was
held about a Marriage for her,Consutation what to doe with the La. Elizabeth. the Spaniards thought it most conve∣nient to bee with some Stranger, that she might haue her Portion and so depart the Land; some thought that not to bee the safest course to send her abroad, but one Lord and Gardiner resol∣ued vpon a more spee∣dy one,One of the Lords and Gardiners so∣daine aduice. the one said that the King would neuer haue any quiet Com∣mon-wealth in England till her head were struck off from her shoulders: the other, My Lords, we haue but all this while beene stripping off the leaues, and now and then lopped a branch; but till such time
as wee strike at the Roote of Heresie (meaning the La∣dy Elizabeth) nothing to purpose can bee effected. God forbid,The Spaniards loue to the L. Eliazbeth. replyed the Spaniards, that our K. and Mr. should once conceiue a thought to consent vnto such a mischiefe; and from that day forward they did not let slip the least opportunity to solicite the King on her behalfe, informing him that the like honour he could ne∣uer obtaine, as he should haue by deliuering her out of Prison, which was not long after effected; Sir Henry Benning-field staying long at Court, made her iealous that his businesse was not great∣ly
for her good, during his residence there one Basset, a Gentleman and great Fauonrite to the Bish. of Winchester, came to Blanden-bridge, a mile distant from Wood-stocke,A great dan∣ger escaped. where met him twenty men well appointed and secretly arm'd in priuy Coates. From thence they came to the house, ernestly desiring to speak with the Princesse about serious and important affaires; but by Gods great prouidence, Sir Henry her Keeper had left so strict a charge be∣hind him,A great con∣spiracie a∣gainst the L. Elizabeth. that no liuing Soule might haue access vnto her vpon what oc∣casion soeuer, till his re∣turne,
no not though a messenger were dis∣patched from the Coun∣cell, or the Queeene her selfe, hee should not bee admitted: by which ex∣traordinary Prouidence of God, drawing the meanes of her safety e∣uen from the malice of her aduersaries, their bloody enterprize was vtterly disappointed: these things with other of the like nature being deliuered vnto her, her doubts and feares dayly more and more increa∣sing; it is constantly re∣ported that hearing the Milke-maids morning & euening singing so sweet∣ly, considering their
hearts to be so light and hers so heauy; their free∣dome, her bondage; their delights abroad, her dan∣gers within, shee wished euen frō her soule,La. Elizabeth wisheth her selfe a Milke∣maide. both for safety of her person, and security of her Con∣science, that no Royall bloud at at all ran in her veynes, but that she had beene descended from some meane and hum∣ble Parentage. Queene Mary was brui∣ted to bee with Child,Queene Mary bruited to bee with Child. great thanksgiuing was made, and prayers for that purpose were ap∣pointed to bee read in Churches; King Philip was chosen by a decree in Parliament, Protector
of the Infant, Male or Female, yet notwith∣standing hee greatly fa∣uoured the Lady Eliza∣beth,K. Philip fa¦uoureth the La. Elizabeth. her aduersity made him very iealous of the English Nation, appre∣hending that if they ay∣med at the life of a Naturalist, being their Queene and Soueraigns Sister, they would then make it a small scruple of Conscience, to assault him and his Followers, being meere Aliens and strangers; hee did there∣fore hasten her enlarge∣ment, which happly was granted within few dayes after; but before her departure frō Wood∣stocke, hauing priuate no∣tice
that one M. Edmond Tremaine and M. Smith∣weeke were on the Racke, and strictly vrged to haue accused her inno∣cence, at her remoue frō thence shee wrote these two Verses with her Di∣amond in a glasse win∣dow.La. Elizabeths farewell writ∣ten in the glass window at Woodstocke. Much suspected by me, Nothing proued can be.Quoth Elizabeth Prisoner. Immediately after or∣der came down to bring her vp to Court,The La. Eliz. commanded vp to Court. where∣vpon all things were pre∣pared for the iourney. Sir Hen: Benningfield with
his souldiers, the Lord of Tame and Sir Henry Chamberlaine were her guardians on the way; as shee came to Ricot the wind was so high, that her seruants had much a∣doe to keepe her cloaths about her, her hood was blowne from her head twice or thrice, where∣vpon shee desired to re∣tyre her selfe to a Gen∣tlemans house neere ad∣ioyning, to dresse vp her head, which by the violence of the winde was all vnready, the request was reasonable and mo∣dest, but S. Henry would not by any meanes per∣mit it,Sir Hen Ben∣ningfield. cu∣elty to the L. Eliz. insomuch as shee was faine alight vnder a
hedge, and there to trim her selfe as well as shee could, that night shee lay at Ricot, the next day they iourneyed to M. Dormers, and the third to Colebrooke, lying at the signe of the George, di∣uers of her Gentlemen came thither to see her: but by the Queens com∣mand were immediate∣ly sent out of the towne, to both their and her Graces no small heaui∣nesse, being not so much as suffered to speake to each other; the next day following her Grace en∣tred Hampton Court on the Backside, the doores being shut vpon her, the Souldiers in their anci∣ent
posture of watch and ward, she lay there four∣teene dayes before any man had admittance vn∣to her: many were her fears, her cares doubled, but at length a Sonne of Consolation appeared, the Lord William Howard came vnto her,The L. Wil. Howard com∣forteth the La. Eliz. vsed her very honourably, con∣dol'd with her, and rais'd her deiected Spirits with comfortable speeches, wherein shee conceiued much ioy, and requested his Fauourable encou∣ragement, that she might speake with some of the Councell, which he most louingly effected, for not long after came her fast friend the Bishop of
Winchester accompanied with the Lords of Aron∣dell and Shrewsbury,Gardiner, A∣rondell, Shrewsbury, Peter present themselues louingly to the Lady Eli∣zabeth. and Secretary Peter, who with great humility humbled themselues to her grace, she was not behind in courtesie, but louingly re∣saluted them againe, and said: My hoourable Lords, I am glad with all my heart to see your faces,L. Elizabeth. speech to the Lords for mee thinks I haue beene kept a great while from you, deso∣lately alone; committed to the hands of a strict keeper, my humble Request is to all your Lordships, that you would bee the happy instruments of my further inlargment: it is not vnknowne vnto you what I haue suffered now a long time, I be∣seech
you therefore to take me into your louing Consi∣deration; the Bishop of Winchester kneeling down replied thus:Gardiners an∣swer to the L. Elizabeth Let mee re∣quest your grace but to sub∣mit your selfe to the Queene, and then I doubt not but that you shall presently enioy an happy issue of your desires. No (said she) rather then I will so doe,L. Elizabeths solute an∣swer to Gar∣diner. I will lye in pri∣son all the dayes of my life; if euer I haue offēded her maie∣sty in thought, word, or deed, then not mercy, but the law is that which I desire, if I yeeld, I should then speake against my selfe, confes a fault which was neuer on my part inten∣ded, by occasion wherof the K. & Q may then iustly cō∣ceiue an euill opinion of me;
no, no, my Ls. it were much better for me to lye in prison for the truth, then to be at li∣berty suspected by my Prince; she had no sooner vttered the words, but they al de∣parted, promising to de∣clare her mind to the Qu. On the next day the B. of Winch.Gardiner with other Lords repaire to her lodging the next day. came vnto her againe, and kneeling on his knees, declared, that the Qu. wondred that she should so stoutly stand out, not confessing to haue offended, so that it should seeme, the Q. Ma∣iesty had wrongfully im∣prison'd her; no (said she) I ner'ehad any such thought, it may please her Maiesty to punish me, as she thinketh good; well (quoth he) her
Maiesty willed me to tell you, that you must tell another tale before you are set at Liberty; Alas, (said she) I had rather bee here in custody with honesty and truth, then abroade at Liberty suspected by my Prince, and this that I haue said, I will stand to; for I will neuer belye my selfe; why then (said he) your grace hath the aduantage of of mee and the rest of the Lords, for your long and wrong imprisonment; what aduantage I haue (said she) God and your own conscience can best tell, and here before him I speake it, for that dea∣ling which I haue had a∣mongst you, I seek no remedy, but pray that God may for∣giue
you all: Amen, Amen,La Elizabeth lock'd vp se∣uen dayes in Court before she spake with the Qu. (said he) and so departed seuen dayes & nights she continued lockt vp in her lodgings, not so much as hauing seene the Queene, though both vnder one Roofe, yet at last after many Letters written, long Suite, and great friends made, she was ad∣mitted to the presence of the Queene, whose face in two yeeres and more she had not seene;K. Philips riendship to the L. Eliza∣beth. King Philip hauing before me∣diated for her, and placed himselfe vnknowne to the Queene behind the hāgings of Arras on pur∣pose to heare the dis∣course, her grace about ten of the clock at night
was sent for into the pre∣sence;L. Elizabeth commeth be∣fore the Qu. the suddennesse of the message did somwhat daunt her, especially be∣ing at that time of the night, wherevpon she en∣treated those that were about her, to pray for her, and then with the con∣stancy of her former re∣solution, shee went to∣wards the presence, where being entred, finding her Maiesty sitting in her Chaire of State, after three conges, she humbly fel down vpon her knees, praying for the health, long life and preseruati∣on of her Maiestie,L. Elizabeth protesteth loyalty to the Queene, pro∣testing her truth, and loy∣alty towards her person, notwithstanding whatso∣euer
had been malicious∣ly suggested to the con∣trary;he Queene sharpely an∣swereth the L. Elizabeth. whereunto the Q. very sharpely answered; Then you will not confesse your selfe to be a delinquent I see, but stand permptori∣ly vpon your truth and inno∣cence, I pray God they may so fall out; If not (replied the Princesse) I neither re∣quire fauour nor pardon at your Maiesties hands; Well (said the Queene) then you stand so stiffly vpon your faith and loyalty, that you suppose your selfe to haue been wrongfully punished and im∣prisoned: I cannot (said she) nor must not say so to you, why then belike (said the Queene) you will report it to others; Not so (replied
the good Lady) I haue borne and must beare the bur∣then my selfe, and if I may but enioy your Maiesties good opinion of me, I shall be the better enabled to beare it still, and I pray God that when I shall cease to be one of your Maiesties truest and loyall subiects, that then I may cease to bee at all; The Queene onely replied in Spanish, Dios lo sabe, that is, God knoweth it, and so turning aside, left her to bee conueyed to her for∣mer custody. King Philip hauing pri∣uately ouer-heard the Conference, was now ful∣ly settled in a good opi∣nion of her loyalty; hee well perceiued the inue∣terate
malice of her Ad∣uersaries, and her extra∣ordinary patience in such a trial, did forthwith take order for her deliuerance, she in the interim remay∣ned very solitary, not knowing what the euent wold be, not one word of comfort could she i∣magine to haue procee∣ded from her Sister, yet, after long expectation in this deluge of sorrows, a doue appeared with an oliue brāch in her mouth, within seuen dayes after by the intercession of som eminent friends, she was discharged of her keeper Sir Henry Beningfield, yet so that, Sir Thomas Pope one of her Maiesties pri∣uy
Councell and Master Gage her Gentleman vs∣her were made superin∣tendents ouer her, the change was howsoeuer most happy,L. Elizabeth committed to her louing friends. she was now in liber a custodia, vnder the hāds of her louing friends with whom shee went downe into the Country, and there spent the Re∣maynder of her Sisters raigne. The bishop of Winchester and others of his faction look'd blacke in the mouth,Gardiners pursuit in mis∣cheie. to see all their plots discouered, all their deuices frustrate, yet ra∣ther then they would giue off, they would play at small game; because they could not touch the La∣dy
Elizabeth, they would haue a fling at her house∣hold, and at those who were neerest vnto her per∣son. A warrant was sent downe for no lesse then foure of her Gentlewo∣men at one time (which the Lady no sooner heard of,Foure Gentl∣women of the L. Eliza∣beth cōmitted to prison at once. but said) they will fetch away all in time; but not long after, it so pleased God, that Gar. himselfe was fetched away to giue account for his actions, howsoeuer his death was the cause why she liued in lesse feare and more quietnesse. Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester hath had a long and tedious part in the troubles of the Lady
Elizabeth,Fox. acts and Monuments. not one Scene of all her Tragicall Story but he hath had a share in it, it will not I hope bee therefore impertinent to write a line or two of his Exit, wherin I will wade no further then the war∣rant of sufficient Autho∣rity shall direct me: The same day that those two bright shining lamps, Bi∣shop Ridley and Master Latimer were extingui∣shed at Oxford, Gardiner had inuited the Duke of Norfolke and others to dinner, but caused the good old Duke to stay for it, till about 3 or 4 a clock in the afternoone, being, as it should seem, not dis∣posed to dine, till he had
heard that fire was put to the two good Martyrs:A iust iudge∣ment vpon Gardiner. he would not feede his own body, till theirs were quit consumed, at length came in a seruant betwixt 3 and 4 and informed him of the certainty thereof, he no sooner vnderstood it, but came out with great ioy to the Duke, and said; Come now lets vs goe to din∣ner, the meat was serued in, he fell merrily aboard; but before the second messe came in, he fell sick at the table and was im∣mediatly remoued thēce to bed, where he remay∣ned full 15. dayes in such anguish & torments that he could not voyd, what he had receiued, either by
vrine or otherwise, lyin in this extremity, Doctor Day Bishop of Winchester came to visite and com∣fort him with words of Gods promise, and free Iustification in the bloud of Christ Iesus; which he no sooner heard, but he answered thus: What my Lord, will you open that gap now, then farewell all to∣gether; to me and such other in my case, you may speak it, but open that Cazement once to the people, then farewell all together: more hee would haue spoke,Gardiner had enflamed ma∣ny Martyrs, and hath now his body en∣flamed. but his tōgue being so swell'd with the inflammation of his bo∣dy he became speechlesse and soone after died. After the death of Gar∣diner,
one or other of the good Ladies Aduersaries dropt away,Diuers of the Ladies, Ad∣uersarie drop away. insomuch, that by little and little her dangers decreased, feares diminished, and hope of comfort as out of a thick cloud beganne to appeare, she spent the re∣maynder of her Sisters reigne in thankes-giuing, and prayses vnto Gods who had thus mercifully preserued her. The time of Queene Maris reckoning being come, rumours were spred abroad, that shee was already deliuered of a sonne, yea and such a one, as it was then suspe∣cted, was readily prepa∣red, whereof King Philip
being informed, and corning that by any such Impostory a coun∣terfeit brood should be the heyre of all his King∣domes, would not de∣part the Chamber all the time of her trauell, by which meanes the Plot tooke no effect;Reports spred abroad that Queene Ma∣ry was deli∣uered of a Sonne, but afterwards proued false. howsoeuer the rumour of this young Heyre, made the Bells ring me∣rily in London, & spread it selfe as farre as Ant∣werpe, where it was en∣tertained with great tri∣umphs both on Land and Sea, towards which charge an hundred Pi∣stolets were conferr'd on the Officers by the Lady Regent; but the newes on
their side was too good to bee true, their ioy∣full acclamations too extreame to continue, their Haleluiahs were in∣stantly turn'd to Lachry∣mae, the report proued but poin'd, and turned the Vane presently into another poynt; it was af∣ter knowne to all their greefes, that shee neuer had conceiued, or euer was likely so to do; some gaue out that shee was with Child, but miscar∣ried; some, that she had a Timpany; others, that such a thing was ru∣mour'd onely for policy, but the truth is, King Philip seeing himselfe frustrate of his expected
Isue, and perceiuing such shuffling and cut∣ting amongst them,K. Philip re∣solueth for the low-Coun∣treis. not long after took his leaue of the Queene, to visite his Father the Emperour, and take possession of the Low-Countreys; his departure was very grie∣uous vnto her, but (as most are of opinion) hee did but little affect her. King Philip styed be∣yond Seas a full yeare & sixe months,K. Philips stay, the Ppists opportunity. during his abode there, the Statists of that time lost not the least opportunity to ex∣tinguish, if it might bee possible, that Cause of God, that hereticall fa∣ction, as they termed it,
how many deere Saint of God (during the Kings absence in the space of 18. months) mounted vp with Elias in a fiery Cha∣riot to Heauen? the fire was then at the hottest, the flames were then at the highest, and the La∣dy Elizabeth, though peaceably seated in the Countrey with her lo∣uing friends, yet was much daunted with the fearefull apprehension of such extremities, she fea∣red the more, because shee knew that such as were aduerse vnto her, would, like the Diuell, worke vpon the weake∣nesse of her Sisters fraile∣ty; they would leape o∣uer
the hedge where it is the lowest, and that now the absence of King Phi∣lip beyond the seas was the only opportunity for the aduancement of their intended designes, but King Philips returne into England, not long after, proued the happy resolu∣tion of all her feareful ap∣prehensions, her life was a continuall warfare, like a ship in the middst of an Irish Sea, where nothing can be expected but trou∣blesome stormes and tempestuous waues, and certainly it will appeare, that those peillous occur∣ences shee met withall in the foure yeeres of her Ante-Regnum during the
principality of her Sister, will way downe the bal∣lance, being poys'd with those seuerall Treasons which threatned her Ma∣iesty, being an absoulte Princesse; Then her op∣posites were aliens,L. Elizabeth troubles com∣pared with those of her raigne. now natiues; It was thou o my friend, &c: then forraigne Kings sought to inuade her, now a moderne Qu. striues to entrap her; they strangers, this a Si∣ster; she liued then at liberty without their iu∣risdiction, now a priso∣ner captiuated to an in∣censed Sisters indignati∣on; she was then atten∣ded by her Nobility, and graue Counsellors, shee hath now not any to con∣uerse
with, but keepers and Goalers; but that God wherein she still tru∣sted, first, let her see her desire vpon her Aduer∣saries, then in a good old age gathered her to him∣selfe, freed her from the opposition of the one, and the decease of Queen Mary her Sister, set a pe∣riod to the malice of the other. Cardinall Poole with the rest of that suruiuing fa∣ction,The malice of Cardinall Poole, Bonner, anothers. seeing things thus retrograde to their de∣sires, perceiuing the dis∣contents of the Queene, and that but a few sands were left in the glasse of her time, they, Nebuchad∣nezzar-like, heated the o∣uen
of their persecution seauen times hotter then before;2 put to death in Qu. Maris raigne for hauing al∣ready burned fiue Bi∣shops, twenty one Do∣ctors, eight Gentlemen, eighty foure Artificers, an hundreth Husband∣men, Seruants, and labourers, twenty sixe wiues, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two boyes, two Infants, the one whipped to death, tho other sprange out of it's Mothers wombe being at the stake, and was cru∣elly cast into fire againe; Sixty foure persecuted, whereof seuen whipped to death, 16. dyed in pri∣son and were buried in Dung-hils, many in Cap∣tiuity
abroad, leauing all they had, only for consci∣ence sake. Quis talia fando, tempreet a lachrimis? Yet did not their fury cease here,The bones of Martin Buer and Paulus Phagius burnt they filled the cup vp to the brim, per∣ceiuing the heat of those fires beginne to slake and wanting fuell to encrease the flames, they consul∣ted to burne the bones of those which had beene long since expired, they digged vp the bones of Martyn Bucer and Paulus Phagius long since buried at Saint Maries in Cam∣bridge, and with great Pontificall State first de∣graded
them, then com∣mitted them to the secu∣lar power, afterward to the fire; and lest the one Vniuersitie should mock the other, they tooke vp the bones of Peter Martirs wife formerly interr'd at Oxford, and buried them in a stinking dunghill; nay, in this fury, the bones of K. Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth, hardly scaped free, now they thought all sure, that the hereticall faction (as they termed it) were with these bones vtterly ex∣tinguished, but whilst they thus solace them∣selues in the supposed vi¦ctory of Gods Saints, e¦uen then did the hand∣writing
appeare vpon the wall against them, newes came ouer, that Calice in France, a towne of great import, was re∣couered by the French, hauing belonged to the Crowne of England two hundred & eleuen yeeres, and herin the losse of Ca∣lice was most memo∣rable; It was first won by Edward the third, be∣ing the eleuenth King from William the Con∣querour, and lost againe by Mary, being the ele∣uenth from Edward, in 8 dayes;The cause of Qu Maries death The Queene took the losse to heart, the people beganne to mur∣mure, some imputing the losse vnto the neglect
of the Clergy, who then sate at the helme of state, others whispered that it was a iust Iudgement of God for the abundance of bloud already spilt & broyled in the land; In the interim, those of the faction striue to allay the heat of this distempera∣ture both in Prince and People, by extenuation of the losse, saying, that it was a Towne of none such consequence, but rather of greater in∣conuenience then they were aware of, that it was onely a refuge for runnagate hereticks, and cōsequently, that no true Romane Catholik ought to deplore, but rather
reioyce at the dammage. At Regina graui iam dudum saucia cura Vulnus alit venis.— How soeuer the Queene being struck to the heart, the wound became vncu∣rable, then they call'd a Parliament, many large profers were made for the recouery of Calice wherin the clergy did exceed, yet all this would not do, Ca∣lice still stuck in the Qu. stomack, she went vp and downe mourning and sighing all the day long, which being asked her by some, what was the rea∣son thereof; whether K. Philips departure were the occasion? No said she, The losse of Calice is
written in my heart, and there may be reade the occa∣sion of my griefe, when after death my body shall bee o∣pened; her conceptions at length fayling, great dearth in the land raign∣ing, much harme done by thunders on shoare, and by fire on her Royall Fleete at Sea, home trou∣bles, forraigne losses, K. Philips vnkindnesse, there with others discontent∣ments brought her to a burning feauer, of which he died at Saint Iames nere Westminster, on the 17th of February being Thursday,On a Thurs∣day died King Henry the eight an  the sixth, Q. Mary &c. An. 1558. and lyes buried in a chappell in Saint Peters Westmin∣ster, without any monu∣ment
or remembrance at all. Queene Mary was well inclined of her selfe, had not the blind zeale of her Religion, and authority of the clergy ouerswayd her, the flames of their consuming fire had not mounted so high as hea∣uen, there to solicite for vengeance, it is obserued that her raigne was the shortest of all Kings since the conquest (Richard the third only excepted) and that more christian bloodMn of blood sha not liue hale their dayes, Psal, 55. was spilt in her short time, then had beene in case of Religion in any Kings raign whatsoeuer, since K. Lucius, the first e∣stablisher of Christiani∣ty
in England, and God grant the like may neuer be seene againe, Amen. The Cloud thus set, that wished Sunne appeared in our horizon like a fresh spring after a stormy winter: The Parliament then sitting at Westminst. newes was brought that the Queen was deceased; the soddainnesse of the news struck the house in∣to amazment. Some look'd backward to the dead Queene,La. Elizabeth proclaimed Queene of England. o∣thers looked forward to the suruiuing Princesse, but at last they pitch'd vpon the proclamation of the L. Elizabeth, which was accordingly perfor∣med the same day, in the
24th yeere, 2. month and 10 day of her age, at what time she remooued from Hatfield, to the Charterhouse, from thence she was royally attended to the Tower of London, and the 24 of the same month passed with great state through the City to Westminster. On the foure & twen∣tieth of Nouember, Queen Elizab.Q. Elizabeth passeth tho∣row London. set forward from the Tower, to passe tho∣row the City to Westmin∣ster, but considering that after so long restraint she was now exalted from misery to Maiesty, from a Prisoner to a Princesse, before shee would suffer herself to bemoūted in her
Chariot, shee very de∣uoutely lifted vp Her Handes and Eyes to Heauen, vering these words. O Lord Almighty and euer-liuing God,Q. Elizabeths payer com∣ming out of the Tower. I giue thee most humble and hearty thankes, that thou hast beene so mercifull vnto mee, as to spare mee to see this ioyfull & blessed Day; and I acknow∣lede that thou hast dealt as graciously
and wonderfully with me, as thou didst with thy true and faithfull Seruant, Daniel thy Prophet, whom thou deliuered'st out of the Lyons Denne, from the crueltie of the greedy and raging Lyons, euen so was I ouer-whelmed, and by thee deliuered; to thee therefore onely bee thankes and ho∣nour and prayse for euermore. Amen.
Hauing made an end of her thankes-giuing to God, shee put onwards through the City, where diuers magnificent Pa∣geants presented them∣selues to her view, the throng of people was ex∣traordinary, their accla∣mations loud as thunder, many were the expressi∣ons of loue tendred vnto her, and by her as grate∣fully entertained, as they were louingly presen∣ted. To make a particu∣lar relation of the seue∣rall occurrences in that one dayes entertainment would require aboue a dayes expression. I will onely but point at some more remarkeable passa∣ges,
wherein shee shew∣ed her selfe extraordi∣narily affected to her People. She would many times cause her Charriot to stand, that the people might haue their full sight of her; amongst the seuerall speeches that were addressed vnto her from the Pageants, if at any time any word did reflect vpon her, a change of countenance was obserued in her; but a settled constancie to heare it out; then her loue and courtesie in gi∣uing the people thankes: In Cornehill a Pageant presented it selfe, called the Scate of worthy Go∣uernement,
intimating their dutifull allegiance to her, with the gene∣rall conceiued hopes of her Princely Gouerne∣ment; the Speech was no sooner deliuered, but shee immediately an∣swered. I haue taken notice of your good meaning toward mee, and will endeauour to AnswereQu. Elizabeths answer to the Speaker. your seuerall expecta∣tions. Passing forward, ano∣ther Pageant appeared, representing the eight Beatitudes, euery one ap∣plyed
to her in particu∣lar by the Speaker: the multitude crying out, A∣men, Amen. But being come to the litle Con∣duit in Cheape, shee per∣ceiued an offer of Loue, and demanded what it might signifie? one told her Grace that there was placed Time; Time! (said shee) and Time I praise my God hath brought me hither; but what is that other with the Booke? shee was resolued that it was Truth the Daughter of Time, presenting the Bi∣ble in English,Qu. Elizabeth receiueth th Bible louing∣ly. whereun∣to she answered; I thanke the Citie for this guift a∣boue all the rest; it is a Booke which I will often and often
read ouer; then she com∣manded Sir Iohn Perrot, one of the Knights that held vp the Canopie, to goe and receiue the Bible; but being informed that it was to bee let downe vnto her by a silken string shee commanded him to stay; in the Interim a Purse of gold was presented by the Recorder in the be∣halfe of the City, which shee receiued with her owne hands, and after∣ward gaue attention to a speech deliuered, ma∣king reply in the con∣clusion: I thanke my Lord Mayor,Q. Elizabeths speech to the City. his brethren the
Aldermen, and all of you, and whereas your request is, that I should continue your good La∣dy and Queene,Q. Elizabeths grand-fathers fathers was a Lord Maior of London. be you assured that I will be as good vnto you as euer Queene was yet vnto her people; no will in me is wanting, neither doe I hope can there want a∣ny power; As for the pri∣uiledges and Charters of your City, I will in dis∣charge of my oath and affection, see them safely, and exactly maintained, and perswade your selues
that for the safety and quietnes of you all, I will not spare, if need bee, to spend my blood in your behalfe, God blesse you all good people. As shee went along in Fleete-streete at St. Dun∣stans Church, the chil∣dren of Christ's Hospitall,Q. Elizabeth pleased with the sight of the Children of Christs Hospitall. sate there with the gouer∣nours, shee tooke great delight in the obiect, and calling to minde that it was her brothers founda∣tion, shee expressed her selfe very thankefull for the presentation of such a charitable sight, saying; Wee are Orphans all, let me
enioy your Prayers, and you shall be sure of my assistance. As shee went through Temple-Barre, the Ordi∣nance and Chambers of the Tower went off, the report whereof gaue much content: thus pas∣sed Shee along to West∣minster, royally attended with the Nobility of the Kingdom, and was there Crowned, to the ioy of all true-hearted Christians. Est et quod Regnat causa fuisse piam. FINIS.
