14280 99856094 21613
ARCHIDAMVS, OR, THE COVNCELL OF WARRE. Being 2000. yeares old, and written by Isocrates the couragious Orator, tran∣slated by a Tho: Barnes. LONDON, Printed by William Iones for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop at the South entrie of the Royall Exchange. 1624.
THE PREFACE. BEing in my apprentiship of Grammar Schoole, I cast a view vpon that excel∣lent and most famous Pa∣negyrique Oration, about which as some say, that flower of oratorie Isocrates was in hammering ten yeares or more. But mine eye glauncing a little further, I chanced to reade that little lesse admirable Oration to King Philip, which the Grecians so reueren∣ced, inasmuch as King Philip and his sonne and heire Alexander by reading thereof, were stirred vp to set vpon the kingdome of Persia. But proceeding, I hapned vpon this no lesse famous then the rest, entituled Archidamus; in the beginning whereof I found such excellen∣cie of elocution, that it still more inflamed the scorching heate of my desire to reade it more exactly then the othets. First, because it was vndertaken
in so important a cause, and for so  Potent, and so Noble descended a young Prince: Secondly, because in this Oration was required varietie of matter, Monarchicall, Mi∣litarie, publike and priuate, either aduance∣ment or ruine; and lastly because it seemes to mee the Orator spent his best vigour and strength of wit, and learning at least to paral∣lell, if not to excell his other Orations. But the noise I now heare of preparation for warre, hath made these his Arguments, and whole discourse not only to run in my minde, but also to run out at my pen. Hath my plen∣tifull instructor Isocrates taught me to speake any Greeke? why should not I teach him to speake a little English? In attempting where∣of, I doe but pay a part of that gratitude, which I owe him as a reward for mine educa∣tion, which kinde of duty he in this Oration calleth by the name of . If any man thinke that I soare too high in medling with Orations that concerne politique affaires. I answer that in our Schooles we reade all man∣ner of Histories and discourses, wherein we looke after only the
outward barke of the phrase, and Rhetoricall figures. My end and taske is only a , not of souldiers, but of words, construction of Phrases, not applicati∣on of Histories. Therefore (good Reader) ac∣cept my petty labours, and pardon mine er∣rours, remembring that thy selfe either art a yong learner, (like my selfe) or, hauing beene so, hast learned at least this lesson Minori par∣cere, (that is) not to strike with deeper censure those that haue not withdrawne their hand from the ferula. Courtious Reader, farewell, and prosper, which is the word wherewith now I salute Westminster Schoole, thence hoysing sayle for Eton. Thomas Barnes.
THE ARGVMENT. AFter the battell at Leuctra, the Thebanes inuaded Lacedemon, and made much spoile of them, so as the Lacedemonians flying and their wiues running to them, thus spake, Can we again receiue you in∣to our wombes? Whereupon they char∣ging the enemy, gaue them the ouerthrow at Mantinea, be∣ing stoutly aided by a troupe of the Athenian horsemen. After this ouerthrow at Mantinea, by Embassadours they demanded a league or peace of the Thebanes: who promi∣sed it vpon this condition, that they should reedifie Messe∣na, and suffer it to be a free Citie: which some counselled the Lacedemonians to yeeld vnto, but Archidamus the younger aduised them to the contrary. This Prince Archi∣damus was sonne to King Agesilaus. Some say, that Ar∣chidamus sending to Athens, obtained this Oration from Isocrates, others say, that Isocrates penned it to exercise his Oratorie, and to shew what might be spoken by Archida∣mus, aduising the Lacedemonians in their Senate, or Par∣liament. And this is the Argument: the kinde of this Ora∣tion is deliberatiue, the principall matter is profit, or ex∣pediencie.
ARCHIDAMVS, OR, THE COVNCELL OF WARRE. SOme of you peraduenture won∣der, that I who haue hitherto kept the Lawes of our Citie, so as I know not whither any of my equalls haue done, should haue so changed my maner, that con∣cerning those things which mine Elders would feare to speake of, I who am yet but of blooming yeares should begin to deliuer my opinion: but if any of them who are wont to make deliberatiue orations among you, had spoken as the dignitie and the honour of the Cittie required, I had been silent; But perceiuing of them to whom the Commaunders in warre commit the authoritie, or precedency, not stoutly to oppose, and others to be al∣together mute. I arose vp, that I might declare what I thought concerning these affaires. For if I should keepe a retired state of life, I should hold it a shame for to vse the matter, that the Cittie should haue a respect to the safety, and not to the honour thereof. And I suppose that if in any it be lawfull for young
men to  giue their opinions, then in this surely: to perswade to warre or peace is most fit for them on whom the grea∣test part of the danger shall redound; and then espe∣cially when it concerneth all in generall to see, and to vnderstand what is fit to be done. For if it should ap∣peare that they who are graue, and stricken in yeares, onely concerning all things iudge rightly, and that young men should be in all things deceiued: then they might take iustly from vs this priuiledge of deliuering our opinions in consultation; but sith it consisteth not in multitude of yeares, that we should excell on ano∣ther in wisedome, but in the induements of nature, and diligence of cricumspection, or care, why should wee not (both of young and old) make tryall of the most able, that of such things as shall be consulted of, yee may take the most expedient? it is wonderfull to me that you should so absurdly thinke, that we whom yee allow worthie to commaund both at sea and land, whereby we cannot miscarry without great hurt to our Cittie, should not open our mouthes to consult of those things of which you of your sole power are to determine: wherein if we rightly iudge, all receiue a common benifit: and if we misiudge, the dishonour is onely ours, without any hurt or impeachment to the publique. Nor hath any desire of speaking, or changing my former course of life, begot in me this opinion concerning these affaires: but that I would exhort you not to oppose the incitments of such as are not elder then my selfe, but out of age to seek out who are able to giue touching the present estate of things some good and profitable aduise.
For neuer since this was  made a State, did either warr or danger offer so waigh∣tie a consideration, as the things now to be deliberated of. In former times we stroue for dominion with o∣thers, but now not to put our selues vnder our ene∣mies designes or demaunds: which is an argument of libertie: in defence whereof no perills are to be refu∣sed, not of vs onely, but of all others who would keepe the reputation of manhood, and dispise not the com∣mendation of vertue. And for mine owne part, (if I may speake what concerneth mine owne particular) I had rather dig and loose my life for refusing to vnder∣go the conditions of the imperious demaunds of mine enemies, then to prolong my dayes much beyond the ordinarie course of nature, by yeelding to the Treatie of the Thebans: For it were a shamefull dishonour for me descended from Hercules, and from a Father which swayeth the Scepter of a Kingdome, who am also Heire apparant of the same State of honour, to giue way as much as in me lieth, that the State which our Ancestours left vs, should come to the managing of those who haue beene vnder our seruice and sub∣iection; wherein I would haue you to consent with me, well knowing that in the Theban warre, though fortune haue not fauoured vs, and through our Cap∣taines misleading errours, we haue not in our bodies been conquerours, yet did euer cary the mindes of in∣uincible conquerours. And if for feare of any imminent dangers we depart from our owne right, we shall strengthen the insolency of the Thebans, and shall erect the Trophe against vs more conspicuous, and illustrious then that of Leuctra: for that was done by much fortune; but this by
our  owne choise and voluntary pulling of mischiefe vp∣on vs. Let me therefore perswade you not with so great dis∣honor to blemish this Citty, for our associates haue to vnaduisedly giuen councell that we should entertaine peace, (Messena being left out) with which our associ∣ates you should be iustly much more offēded, thē with those who from the beginning haue defected and fal∣len away from you: for they when they had alienated themselues from our friendship, haue ouerthrowne their owne Citties with seditions and slaughters, the whole State declining into worse. But these doe pur∣pose to vndoe you, who doubt not but to perswade you to cast away in a small moment all the glory which our Progenitours with many dangers, within the space of 700 yeare haue purchased and estated vp∣on vs. Then which the Lacedemonians could inuent nothing more grieuous, nothing more contumelious: so that furthermore, they are so desirous to satisfie themselues with our dammage, and suppose vs to be so addicted to cowardise: that they which thinke it honorable that yee should often vndertake warre for your owne estates, iudge it not meete that ye should vndergoe any perill in the behalfe of Messena. And that they may the better enioy their owne, they assay to teach you, how it behoueth you to submit to the enemie what is yours; and further more, doe threaten vs that if wee yeeld not to these ill men, they will make conditions of peace for themselues a∣lone, without vs: and I thinke the danger will not be so great, the honour will be vnto you without them,
more conspicuous, illustrious, and your name before  all men more glorious. And if not by others, but by your owne powers or endeuours you can saue guard, or defend your selues, and vanquish your enemies: this shalbe very agreable to the other former braue acts of this State. And albeit I haue not beene an admirer of those men whose best abilitie is in oratorie, but rather suspected these who are nimble in the tongue; to be whit-livered in their hands. Yet now I desired no∣thing more then I might haue liberty to speake accor∣ding to mine owne opinion, of those things which are now in agitatiō, (in performing wherof) I hope I shall doe good seruice to the common wealth at this time. And first of all it behoueth you to remember in what manner you got the Cittie of Messena;Now called Morea. and for what causes ye were first planted or seated in Pelopome∣sus, being at the first Doreans; and therefore I will be∣gin to repeate the matter a little farther off, that ye may vnderstand that Prouince to be taken from you, which yee possesse by as good right as all the rest of Lacedemon. For when Hercules deceased, and changed this mortall for an immortall life with the gods: his children in the begining by the power of the enemies nourished too and fro with many trauells: but after the death of Euristhus, they set vp their rest amongst the Doreans; at last, three ages after they went to Delphos, to consult with the Oracle of certaine doubts: but the God Apollo gaue them an answer to their de∣maunds: and bad them returne into their owne na∣tiue and proper Country: considering therefore the oracle, they found Argos to belong vnto them by right of propinquitie. For Euristheus being dead, onely they of all the stocke of
Perseus remained: Lacedemon being  brought vnder seruitude, (for Tyndareus being driuen out of his Kingdome,) after that Castor and Pollux vani∣shed (from humane societie,) being restored to his Crowne by Hercules, gaue him this Countrey both in recompence for his noble deeds, and for affinitie sake with his children, (Messena also then subdued by the sword:) for Hercules robbed of his cattle which he draue out of Erythia, by Neleus and his children, (Nestor onely excepted) conquering that Cittie, put them to the sword which offered him this wrong, and made Nestor Gouernour of this Cittie: iudging him a wise and prudent man, in that he being the youngest, was not found culpable with his other bretheren: conceiuing this therefore to be the meaning of the Oracle. And taking in your Progenitours as confede∣rates, and leuying a great Army, they gaue in common this particular countrie to such as followed them in the warre; but tooke the maine Empire into their owne Soueraignitie, and vpon these conditions interchang∣ably pledging their fidelitie, made an inuasion: But the danger and other Acts in this expedition, (not pertinent for the present.) What neede I more amply persecute: they being then conquerours of the inhabi∣tants in these foresaid places, deuided the Kingdome into three parts: yee therefore do abide euen to this day in the league which yee made with our progeni∣tours. Therefore in time past you haue beene more em∣minent then others, and being so: ye may expect for the time to come, that your actions should make you more honourable then now yee are. But these of
Messena fell into that impietie, as they trecherously put to death this Citties founder, Cresphon the Lord of the Countrie, one of Hercules Progenie, and their Commander. And his ofspring hauing escaped this danger, became suppliant to this Cittie, iudging it worthie that ye by a due reuenge of this dishonorable act to their deceased father, should get you honour surrendring vnto you this Countrie; yee then suing vnto (god Apollo,) and he commanded to vndertake this, and to redresse the wrong: ouercomming the Messenians, thus haue possessed this Countrie. Nor haue I accurately treated of what your right was from the beginning, for the present time is not sufficient to in∣large all: but it was requisite that I should discourse of things more briefely then plainely. Notwithstan∣ding I suppose euen by what hath been vttered, it will appeare vnto all men why it should be granted and confessed, that the Countrie of right appertaineth to vs, we possessing it on no other tearmes, rather then to be any way questioned or doubted of. For wee in∣habit this by donation from Hercules of-spring, and being warranted from the Oracle of Apollo confirmed, and by conquest of them that possessed it: that other we haue taken from the same men, in the same manner, and by the same Oracle. And if it be so with vs, that there can be no proud command layd on vs touching contradiction in the one, or the relinquishing of Spar∣ta, it is a needlesse labour to trouble our braines con∣cerning Messena. And if none of you thinke it fit that you should liue banished from your owne countrie: yee ought also to be like minded concerning Messena. For we must pleade the same right and reason touching them both. Nor is this vnknowne to you, that all
men account possession whether priuate or publike, by prescription of time, to be proper and patrimoniall. Now wee got Messena before the Persians got their Monarchie, or subdued the continent (Asia,) and be∣fore some Citties of Greece were made habitable. These things remaining thus to you, they (the Thebanes) haue yeelded Asia to a stranger as his own patrimonie: who hath not had the Empire 200 yeares, but would take away Messena from vs, who haue possessd it more then double that time. And Palatiua and Thespeas they haue now a late dimolished: but Messena after 300 yeares space they would haue reaedified, in both brea∣king the conditions and league. And as they should as of right reduce Messena, yet they should be iniuri∣ous or offend vs with more colour, or shew of reason. But now they plant vassells vpon our confines; so this is not the most fearefull offence, that we should loose our Cittie contrarie to all right, but to behold our vassells to be now our Citties Masters. Out of that which followeth ye shall euidently dis∣cerne, that now we suffer intollerable wrong, and that formerly we iustly held Messena; for after many perills were sustained by vs, we were constrained to make peace, fearing much worse then if we had bin enemies: but yet our couenants being drawne in those times, wherein it was not possible to haue better, there fell out some contention about other things: but about Messena, neither the great King (of Persia,) nor the State of the Thebanes at any time could obiect any thing for the holding thereof. And how shall we find a more elaborate testimonie touching our
right, then this decree make knowne by  our enemyes, and notified in our grearest infortunats. Moreover the oracle which all acknowledg to be most ancient, uniuersall, and faithfull, foreknew that then Messena was ours, when vppon the guift or donation of Cresphons princely heires, it bid vs receiue the Cittie, and releiue the wronged; but the warres continuing a long time, both parties sending to Delphos, they seeking for succour, and we questioning how we might with most celeritie be possessed of the Cittie, the Oracle gaue no answer at all vnto them, as making no iust pe∣tition, but declared to vs what sacrifices we should of∣fer, and from whom we should haue most strong ayde. And how can any giue a more sure and cleare testimo∣ny then these? First it was manifested, that we received this Countrie of the true Lord, and owners thereof, (nor is it vnnecessarie breifly to repeate and inculcate these points:) next by conquest, as many other Citties in those times were erected, after that we cast out those impious wrongers of Hercules children, who were iust∣ly expulsed all countries. Add hereunto our right of possession by times pre∣scription, our enimyes approbation, and the goddesse determination, every one of which is sufficient to over∣throw their words that dare accuse vs, either now for covetousnes we conclude a peace, or formerly for am∣bition of other mens estates, we waged warre against the Messenians. And of the possession of Messena haply the matter affordeth more to be spoken, but I suppose what is already said is sufficient. But they which aduise vs to make peace, affirme, that it behoveth wise and prudent men, not to carrie one and the same minde, in
managing their affaires  when they are in prosperitie as in adversitie, but to ap∣plie to the time, and to follow Fortune, not to beare mindes greater then meanes, nor to seeke for iustice in those straites, but for expediency; In other things I a∣gree with them, but how expediency is to be prefer∣red before iustice, no man of the deepest consultation, can perswade me. For I perceiue that for iustice sake, Lawes were enacted, and in iustice vpright and good men much glory and reioyce, and for iustice, Citties governed honestly, and honorably labour most excee∣dingly. Yea and the warres in old times haue had a succesfull end, not according to force but faith: and the whole life of man perisheth through wickednes, but is conserued by vertue. Therefore they must not be weake, or faint-harted, that try all dangers for iust causes, but much rather they who iniures others con∣tumeliously, and cannot beare prosperitie moderatly. Next you must cast your eye on this poynt, that all mens opinions are agreed concerning the iustnesse of the matter, but difference is only about the expediency thereof. And of two goods propounded: whereof the one is manifest, and the other vncertayne, how can you but doe absurdly, if yee shall refuse that which is certaine and out of question, and chuse that which is doubtfull. Your owne election being so distracted in it selfe, for it is comprehended in your speeches: that we should loose nothing of our owne, nor involue the State with any disgrace, and being exposed vnto dan∣gers for a good cause to hope our battails shall haue more prosperous successe then our enimyes. And in all these our advises to loose Messena, yee shall wrong your selues herein, and peradventure
misse in expedi∣encie  iustice, and other things, which you expect. For it is not assured, that if wee graunt our enimyes de∣maunds, we shall haue a firme peace, and I thinke yee are not ignorant, that all men vse to discourse of iustice or equitie to those that are defendants; but on those which are somewhat more ready in yelding to the de∣maunds of their enimyes, worser conditions are im∣posed then at the first were intended, so as it falleth out, that they who are inclined to warre, settle a better peace, then they who easily submitt to any condi∣tions. And that I may not be thought to wast more time about these things leauing them all, I will addresse my speach to the most substantiall poynt. If never any, at any time having been put to the worse, haue reco∣uered themselues, nor overcome their enimyes, nei∣ther could we by any likelihood hope to be by warres advanced. But if oft times it hath come to passe that the stronger haue been vanquished by the weaker, and they who haue laid seidge, haue been put to the worst by those who haue ben beseidged, what wonder were it, that the estate wherein we now stand, should admit alteration. But of our Cittie I can averre no such mat∣ter; for in former times none ever thought stronger then wee, invaded these territories; but of others ma∣ny instancies may be vsed, and especially of the Cittie of the Athenians, whom we shall find by incroaching vpon others to be much blamed by the Grecians. But for their revenging of wrong, haue ben praysed of all men. And if I should recount the old perils which the vnder went against the Amazones, Thracians, and Peloponesians, who breaking into these Countries with
Euristieus, I should be thought to tell you of things too high, and remote from these present times: but in the Persian warre: who knoweth not out of how great calamitie, into how great prosperitie they were ray∣sed; for they only out of the inhabitants, which came from Peloponesus, perceiuing the power of the Barbare∣ans to be vnsubsistable, thought it vnworthy for them, to condesend to the conditions propounded to them: but presently resolved, to make lesse reckoning of their Citties subversion, then to become servily in subiecti∣on. Therefore, forsaking their Territories, and Cit∣tie, (minding their Countries fredome) associating vs in their dangers, obtained such a change, that they, who for a few dayes were made a spoyle, were for a long time after Lords over others; neyther in this Cit∣tie onely is it very available for the common good, to take courage and to avenge our selues vpon our eni∣myes; but also even Dionysius the Tyrant: by his exam∣ple confirmeth the same. He being beseidged by the Carthaginians (there being left) and having no safegard or defence for him,) but hemmed in with warre, and his subiects hatefully harted towards him, the tyrant offered to escape by Sea-flight, one of his servants ad∣ventured to say, he that dyeth a King, leaues a faire Monument, whereupon, being ashamed of what hee had purposed, and againe bestirring himselfe and tak∣ing armes, slaying many millions of the Carthaginians, made his Soveraignty over his Subiects farre more firme, and that power which he first had being more strengthened, he ended his dayes in King-like autho∣ritie, and left his sonne in the same honour, and princi∣pallitie, wherewith hee was
invested. In like sort to  these, did Amyntas the King of the Macedonians, for be∣ing ouerthrowne in fight by the barbarous people, that bordered vpon him, and being stript of all Mace∣donia, first he minded to leaue his Countrie and to saue his person, but hearing one commend that, which was spoken to Dionisius, and taking courage as he did, sur∣prised a smale Castle, or hould, and sending for aid thi∣ther, within three Monthes space, he regained all Ma∣cedonia, and raigning all the residue of his life, dyed ve∣ry aged; we shall be very weary both in hearing, and speaking, if we should search out all such actions. If we should remember the deedes concerning the Thebean warre, we could not but lament for these pre∣sent accidents; but for the future wee conceiue better hope, for they being so hardy as to sustaine our assaults and threats, in this estate stood their affaires, that at o∣ther times being in subiection to vs, now they seeke no lesse then to command vs, it is a sensles thing to thinke that when as such alterations haue ben in others, their should be a stand in vs onely. But we must not bee daunted with our present estate and bestirr for the fu∣ture, and trust in what time must bring forth, being confident: that Citties remedy such calamities by wise Goverment at home, and by marshall skill abroad. Nor shall any dare to gainesay, that our experience in the warres, is not much more then others, and for good Domistick Govermentt, it is in vs alone: such as it ought to be; which being so, our affaires must needes be more fortunate then theirs, who bestow small care vpon either of these two. But some inveigh against the warre and tax it by vncertainty
of events, vsing as many other arguments,  so especially those disastars which haue befallen vs, and thinke it strange that any should iudge it fitt, to put confidence in a thing so hazardous, and difficult. But I haue knowne much happinesse to haue accrewed to many by the warres, and through peace many haue lost. For none of these courses are of themselues: ei∣ther ill, or good. But as a man shall vse things, and op∣portunities, so of necessity haue they their events. For it is behouefull that they who are in prosperitie, should desire peace, for so in that estate they shall greatly pre∣serue that they haue. But those that are in adversitie must listen vnto warre. For by troubles and bustling, a speedie mutation will follow, and I doubt we practise the cleane contrary to this. For when we might haue liued at ease and pleasure, we followed warre more then was expedient: but now that we are driven into great distresses, wee seeke for ease, and take counsell for securitie. But they who would inioy their liberty, must shun compositions ten∣dred by commaund or strong hand: as tending vnto servitude. And should come to parleyes, either when they haue super eminency, the better of their enimyes or at least equall to them,aliter) the con∣ditiōs of peace which any pub∣like state ob∣taines of the e∣nimy are suta∣ble to the terms wherein their warre hath en∣ded. that they all may haue such a League, as may bring a totall cessation of armes; which yee minding, ought not rashly to cast your selues into base and ignominious cōditions of peace, nor appeare more timorous advisers in your Countries behalfe, then in other affaires, and remember that in times past, if but onely one Lacedemonian did ayde any of their confederate Citties, which was beseidged, all men would confesse, that for that one man only, they did
obtaine their safety. And a man may heare of our aun∣cestours many such men, and my selfe can reckon some of most note, and name. Paidaretus going to Chius with his navie: preserved that Cittie. Brasidas entring Amphipolis marshalling but a few of them that were beseiged, in fight over∣threw many of the beseidgers. Gylippus also ayding the Syracusians did not onely saue them, but captived all their enimyes army royall, both by Sea, and Land. And how can this but be dishonourable to you, that in those times every one of you, was enough to pre∣serue other Citties, but now all of you dare not at∣tempt to saue your owne. And you haue filled all Asia and Europe with your tryumphes: when you fought for others, yet for your owne Country, so manifestly not only wronged, but reproached, there is no appea∣rance of any battell, which you haue fought worthy so much as to be named, but other Citties in the de∣fence of our Empire, haue endured the most extreame Leaguers, but we our selues haue not the courage to beare the least hardshippe, that we be not compelled to doe that which is dishonorable. Now when as we are furnished with good troopes of horse well fedd and trained for the warres, should we now make so base a peace? As may be seeme only those that are brought downe to the lowest ebb of ne∣cessities, and want meanes for their dayly sustentation. But this of all is most vnworthy: if we who are thought the most actiue of all the Graecians, shall be most slow in these deliberations. And is it meete to mention some of these braggs, with which we are out∣faced by these men? They (say these men) who are but once overcome, and haue but one assault, or im∣pression
made on them, so effeminately yeelding, to what conditions soever the enimyes propound, how will they be able to endure a continuall calamitie? And who would not disdaine vs, (the Messenians indu∣ring the seige of twentie yeares in this Country,) if we should through a sodaine composition forsake the same, not remembring our Auncestours, but what they with much labour, and danger, haue possessed, wee should through a verball perswasion cast away? Which some nothing respecting, nor regarding the dishonour that will fall vpon vs, advise those things: which will make our State for ever infamous. And so eagerly doe they exhort vs to deliver vp Messena; that they haue been bold to discover the weaknes of our Cittie, and the strength of the enemy, and bid them which oppose their advise, to answer and tell from whence any help can be expected, wherevpon we should giue counsell for a warre. Truely I thinke the best procuring of ayd for warr, and the most assured, is to vndertake iust causes. For it is right and meet, that even the good pleasure of the gods should assist such; if we may coniecture of the future by the present. Add herevnto to governe the Common wealth well, and warily, and even vnto the death to resist the enimy, and to iudge nothing so heavie, as to be ill spoken of by our owne Countrie men, which worthy disposition is to be found more in our Nation, then in any other: And truely for my parr, I had rather go to the warres assisted with troupes of our owne Nation, then with the strength of many millions of other Nations. For we know our predecessours comming into these
Countries, were not Conquerours by the multitude of others aydes, but by those virtues before recited. Therefore it is unworthy to feare the enimy, because they are many, but rather herein to set vp our resoluti∣on, sith we see our selues so to haue suffered calamities, as none others ever did, continuing in those constitu∣tions (of our Auncestours) which were ordained from the beginning: But some not contenting, nor contai∣ning themselues within their happy estates, but being of turbulent spirits, others combined with warlike confederacies invading other Citties: others doyng the cleane contrary; and the rest are at difference with their neighbours, rather about the boundes of their territories, then warring against vs. So as I wonder men should seeke greater helpes in warre, then those which the weakenesses of the enimyes afford, these shalbe our aydes, and assistance. But if it be needfull to speake of forraine aide, there be many I thinke that would leavie forces for vs. First I know the Athenians, though they stand not for vs in all things, yet for their owne safetie will doe any thing: and some other States will ioyne it in Counsell, for what may as well now availe vs, as themselues. Yea, Dionysius the tyrant, and the King of Aegipt, and other Potentates of Asia as in them is, will readily send vs assistance. And besides these the wealthy and famous Graecians endevours in all excellent actions, though yet not ioyned to vs, yet in good will are with vs, of whom we haue good cause to hope well for the future. And I thinke the people in Peloponesus and that Popu∣lar State which we may well thinke, although not hi∣therto yet at this time would
take care on our side.  For they haue not obtained by their falling from vs what they expected: but instead of their libertie the contrary hath befallen them: For they haue both lost the best men in their estate, and are now becom subiect to the worst of their owne Cittizens: and when they would liue after their owne lawes, they are fallen into many and greivious breaches of all Lawe. And where∣as heretofore they were wont with vs: to goe against others, now they see others warring against them, and the seditions which they heard before amongst their neighbours, now they also behould almost every day, commotions amongst themselues. And they are so brought vnder by afflictions as they be now, not who are the most miserable among them, for none of their Citties are so without dangers of sword, that hath not their neighbours doing them mischeife, so as their territories are layd wast, their Citties dimolished, their dwelling houses ruinated, their goverment tur∣ned top-side turvie, their lawes abrogated, which while they enioyed: they were the most happie of all the Graecians; and so faithlesse, and hostile are they among themselues, as they rather feare their owne Cittizens, then the enimy. And in-stead of that wealth which they enioyned vnder vs, and good will which they had from vs, they are fallen into such barbaronesse and hard-hartinesse, as they, that haue wealth, more contentedly will cast it into the sea, then to impart it to the poore in necessitie, and the poore had rather rob, and forcibly catch from the rich, then take them vp though they might find them by chaunce. And abrogating their sacrifices, they
sa∣crifice one another on their altars; and there are more exils now out of one Citty, then there were before out fo all Peloponesus, notwithstanding all which recited miseries, those which are concealed are more then are declared, there is no wretchednes, nor heauines which concurreth not with the times, with which some are already, and others very shortly will be filled: all see∣king to find deliuerance from the present calamitie. For think not things can continue in this stay, for they whom prosperities hath burthened, how can they long indure the waight of aduersitie? therefore not onely if wee get the victorie by fight, but also if wee remaine inioying peace yee shall see them changed, and they will thinke that confederation with vs will bee their best safeties: this therefore is the hope I haue, And I so farre abstaine from yeelding to our ene∣mies demands, that if none of these things come to passe, no aide from others, and though some of the Graecians should hurt vs, and others of them should neglect vs, I would not hereafter be otherwise minded, but would sustaine any dangers of warre rather then signe any such conditions: for I should be much asha∣med of both these, either to condemne our Ancestors, as if they had iniuriously taken from the Messenians their territories: or that wee, if they haue lawfully pos∣sessed them, should giue away any part, beyond right and equitie. And neither of these two must be done; but wee must consider how wee may make a warre be∣seeming our worth, least wee should giue the lye vpon them, who praise and admire our state: but rather so to behaue our selues, that they might be thought to haue praised vs lesse then wee haue merited. For I sup∣pose nothing more grieuous shall euer fall out
then  what now is; and that our enemies consultations and actions shall much aduantage vs. But if our hope should be frustrate, and wee should on all partes bee circumuented, and that wee could not preserue the State, these are dangerous things which I shall speake of, (yet I will not spare to speake freely of them, for these are better and more agreeable to our wisdomes to be told among the Graecians then those which some ad∣uise vnto) I hold it meete our parents, children, and wiues, and other our people should bee sent some into Sicilia, and Italy, some into Syrene, some into Epirus, whom all these will willingly receiue with sufficient proportion of ground for their habitation, and other prouision for liuelihood, some in rendring thankes for the benifits already receiued from vs, others in expec∣tation of the profit they may receiue for the good they doe to vs. Those which remaine and are willing, and able to vndergoe perills shall forsake the Cittie, and all their possessions, and goods sauing what we can carrie with vs, taking some Castle or Hold which is well fortified, or fittest for warre, to offend and infest our enemies on all sides both by sea and land, till they shall giue ouer challenging that which is ours. And if wee shall valorously attempt these things without delay, wee shall see those that now Lord it ouer vs, and giue the Lawe, become our humble suppliants and su∣ters to receiue Messena againe, and to make peace with them. Now which of the Citties in Peloponesus hath vndertaken so great a warre as is requesite this should be; if your wills be not wanting. Yea who will not be astonished, and tremble, at an army so mightilie com∣pacted,
and so well exercised, so iustly incensed against those who haue beene the causes of these mischiefes, so resolute to spend their liues in publicke seruice to im∣ply them selues vpon nothing else but vpon the warres, neglecting all other occasions not vnlike those armies which consist of mercinary forces whose trade is no∣thing but warre.A discription of Mansfieds Ar∣my. Moreouer hauing no certaine Cittie of abode, able to liue without houses in the open field, rouing vp and downe throughout all countries, and can make them selues borderers, or neighbours on whom soeuer they will, and thinke all places which are fit for warre to bee their habitation and natiue Coun∣trie. I thinke if these wordes allready spoken by me were diuulged through out Graece, our enemies would find themselues very much perplexed, and so much the more if necessitie force vs to put this in execution. For what shall we imagine they will thinke, that they should be subiect to suffer mischeife, but shall not be able to doe vs any hurt, and shall behould seige layd to their Citties, but ours so well appoynted that it can∣not fall into the like affliction, beside nourishment for our bodyes shalbe easily had out of our goods brought with vs, together with such as shall come by forraging and spoyle, but theirs will be hard to come by, because it is not all one, to provide for an armie and to feed a company of people in a Cittie, and that would vex them most of all, when they shall heare, that our people doe florish in great experience, and wealth, but shall see their owne every day hunger-star∣ved, and themselues not able to supply their indigen∣ces, yea, when they shall plough their ground:
they shall haue theirs reaped for them against their wills, and on the other side if they leaue it vntilled, they shall neuer haue to suffice them. But perhaps they will vnite their forces and raise a generall army, and follow vs at the heeles, and so hin∣der vs from hurting them. But what will be more wi∣shed of vs, then to meet their fullest forces, and their best preparations to battail, and in the same difficulties with vs pitching their Tents against vs: their souldi∣ers ill ordered, out of the common rout, vsing many generalls, but we shall easily make a quicke hand of them, by compelling them to fight at our pleasure not at their owne choice. The residue of the day would faile mee, if I should take in hand to tell how much our estate would be bet∣tered by these courses. This is againe manifest, that we excell not the other Graecians in greatnes of our Cittie, nor in multitude of men, but because we haue framed our gouernment, like to an Army well ordred, willing to obay the commanders. And if wee shall represent that whose imitation hath profitted vs, it is not ob∣scure that wee shall be more powerfull then our ene∣mies, for wee know that they who were made Lords of this Citty, hauing but a small army when they came into Peloponesus, haue achieued many and mightie en∣terprises. It shall therefore well become vs to imitate our an∣cestors, and returning to our first originall because we haue stept aside, endeuour to recouer our auncient ho∣nour, but wee shall doe most disgracefully if knowing how the Athenians left their Countrey for the safegard of other Graecian, we should not dare to leaue our
Cit∣tie for the safety of our selues. And that when wee  ought to giue examples to others of such worthy at∣chiuements, wee are not willing so much as to imitate their honourable actions. Yea this is much more re∣diculous, if the Phoceans flying from the dominion of a great King, leauing Asia, fled into Massalia, wee should come to this pusillanimitie, as to suffer, or vn∣dergoe their imperiousnes, of those whose masters we haue been heretofore. We must not ere in our minds to reuolue that day in which wee should seperate our most deare, and neere suddainly from vs. But rather are wee to looke backe to those times in which as vic∣tours ouer our enemies wee shall rectifie our Cittie, and imbrace those which are soe neere and deare vnto vs. And now wee are to make it appeare to all, that we haue been without desert infortunate, and that in for∣mer times wee iustly would haue commanded ouer o∣thers. And thus stands the matter. I haue made this speech, not as that we should instantly do these things, nor as though our safety consisted in no other course, but as desirous to vndergoe these, and farre greater mi∣series, before wee make composition about Messena, such as they require. Nor would I so feruently ex∣hort you to warre, if I found not that this course which I haue propounded to be the best way for a faire and firme peace for future, but out of that which others haue counselled vnto, it will be dishonorable, and for no time durable. For if wee shall dwell neere this Cit∣tie enlarged and repaired, who discerneth not, that we shall euer be ending of our daies in tumults, and dan∣gers? These therefore discoursing of securitie, hide from themselues that they make but a few dayes peace for vs, which will beget hereafter a continuall warre,
Faine would I heare of them, for what things and when they thinke we should fight euen to death, Not then when our enemies impose vnreasonable conditi∣ons vpon vs? Not then when they would catch vs out of our countrie, and make free our bond-slaues, and place them in the countrie which our Ancestours left to vs? Not then when they not onely turne vs out of that wee haue, but make vs the reproach and scorne of our neighbours. I truely thinke that for these it is fit to endure not onely fight, bvt flight, and death. For it is farre better to end our liues in the honour which wee haue, then to prolong our dayes in dishonour, subiecting our selues to our enimyes commaund. If I must not dissemble to say what is evident. It will be more tollerable that our enimyes should de∣stroy vs, then deride vs. For they who haue lived in such reputation of courage and worth as wee haue done: must choose one of these two, either to be emi∣nent among the Graecians, or else to dye every mothers child of vs, without subiecting our selues to bassenes, which we must thinke on, not with loue to our liues, nor following the opinion of our confederates, whose guids, and rulers we haue ben thought worthy to be heeretofore. But these things being considered, to choose not what is most expedient for them, but what is most comely for Lacedemon, and for our braue acti∣ons. For of the same things all must not ever delibe∣rate alike, but as from the beginning every one hath layd the foundation of that matter. For none will im∣pute it as a fault to the Epidareans, Philasians, and Co∣rinthians, if they regarded nothing but the life, and the
preservation of themselues; but it is not decent,  for the Lacedemonians to stoope to all kind of meanes, but if they cannot saue their liues with their honour, death must be preferred. For they who contend a∣bout vertue, must labour in nothing so much as that they may be seene to doe no shamefull act. And the cowardice of Citties is no lesse perceiued in such de∣terminations, then in the hazards and perrills of the warre. For the greatest part of the things their done consisteth in Fortune, but what is decreed in those things: is the very index of vnderstanding. There∣fore we must alike studeously prouide for those things which are heere decreed, as the things which in the warres are fought for. And I wonder that they who would dye for their proper estate, should not beare the same minde for the publique, for which wee should suffer any thing, and not shame our Cittie, or see it forsake the Orders, and gouerments where∣in our Ancestors established it. And of these many affaires, and mightie dangers which presse vs, and must be avoyded of vs, this must especially be looked vnto, that we appeare not to doe ought effeminately, nor yeeld to our enemyes beyond what is right. For it is a shame that they who are dignified to com∣mand the Graecians, should stoope to their enimyes demaunds, and be so farre cast behind their Aunce∣cestours, that whereas they to get Soueraigntie ouer others, were ready to suffer death. One the contra∣ry, we doe vndertake the danger of a warre, to ridd our selues from subiection vnto others. Well may wee be ashamed to looke on the games of Olympus and other famous solemnities, wherein euery one of vs was
emulous, and more admirable  then any champion that did beare away the bell in these games. Into which, how thinke you any of vs dare enter: when we are like to be scorned, instead of being honoured, instead of being conspicuous aboue all for vertue, and hereafter obscured and despised of them for our dastardlinesse. Besides we shall see our vassalls out of that Coun∣trey which our Auncestours left vs, bring greater of∣ferings and sacrifices then we: and we shall heare from them reproaches so disdainefull as may be ex∣pected. For those who were before our seruants, and now haue pircked vp: to stand one euen ground to make conditions with vs being their Masters: with which Couenanrs they will so pinche vs, as no man living by words can expresse; whereof we must (now) consider, and not then repine when their is no o∣ther remedie. And now let vs be watchfull how none of those things may happen, or light on vs. For what shamefull basenes is this, in former times we could not endure to be equalized of free men, but now we shall be seene to suffer the bold insolencies of bondmen. And wee shall be thought heretofore to haue flourished in brauadoes, and when we were encouraged no better then other men, yet to haue set a good face vpon it and to haue put on a fayned grauitie. Let vs therefore giue no cause to such, as vse to re∣vile vs, and endeauour to conuince their euill speeches with our deedes, acted in imitations of our Aunce∣stors worthy exploits. Remember our predecessours warring against the Arcadians, whom as they say ran∣ked, or
ordered vnder the buckler of a few targette∣rers,  got the victory of many millions. And also those three hundred, who at Thyrea, vanquished all the Arguies. And those embattailed thousand at Thermopolis, who fighting with Seventie millions of the Barbarians, turned not their backes neither were subdued, but left their liues vpon life, where they were set in aray, shewing themselues such, as they who imploy their best art and skill in celebrating commendations, cannot paralell their prayses with their vertues. Calling all these therefore to mind, let vs cou∣ragiously prepare to battel, not expecting any others to salue our present maladie, but what dangers doe assaile vs, let vs assay to defeate. For it behoueth men of valour in such times to be more couragious: For prosperitie couereth the vices, and cowardice of all men, but aduersitie discouereth what all men are, wherein we must shew that we haue been better trai∣ned, and instructed in vertue. Nor must we despaire, out of those things which we now haue: should arise those things which we yet ioy not. For I suppose yee are not ignorant that many acti∣ons haue happened: which at the first all men ac∣counted miseries, and were greiued with the indu∣ring thereof, but afterward yee experimented the selfe same to be the causes of much happines. And what need we forraine examples? (I say) of the Athentans, and Thebans, haue not come to that greatnes by peace, but out of calamities of warres haue recouered them∣selues: and of one is become the chiefe of all, and the other at this instant, so great, as none would euer haue supposed it could euer haue
been for renowne,  and shining greatnes, affect not to be produced out of sloth, but out of bloody conflicts, in desire wher∣of, neither our bodyes, nor liues, nor ought else that we haue, are to be spared. For we shall set all things in good plight, and recouer our State into that digni∣tie, from whence it is lapsed, we shall surpasse all our Ancestors in honour, and shall leaue nothing for our successours to exceede vs; and we shall be in so good case that they would speake well, who are willing to speake well of vs, shall not be able by their praises to equall our exploits. Neither must we forget this, that all men set their minds and hopes on this Parliament, and open your determinations in it. So therefore let euery man set downe his resolution, as if wee were now vpon the common stage of all Greece. It is but one marke that we ayme at in all these deliberations. For if we will resolue to maintaine our vpon equall tearmes euen vn∣till death, we shall not only be well reported of, but all the residue of our time we shall liue secured. But if we be faint-hearted in perils, we shall perplex our selues with many incumbrances. Therefore exhorting one another, let vs pay backe to our countrey her due for breeding and feeding vs; and let vs not behold our Lacedemon as it is now contumeliously oppressed, and contemned. Neither let vs frustrate of their hopes, such as are our well wishers, nor making too much ac∣count of our liues, appeare traytors to our reputation, considering that it is the highest point of honour to exchange a mortall bodie for an immortall Glory. And (with expence of our liues, which we can enioy but for a few yeares, to
purchase that good name,  which we shall leaue to all our posteritie for euer. For it is much better by this exchange, to get that honour which shall neuer weare out, then to hedge our selues in with great reproaches for a little season. And I thinke yee may be more encouraged to warre, if yee represent vnto your minde, as present your parents, and your children, these calling vpon you not to staine the name of Sparta, nor the lawes in which you were brought vp and instructed, nor the battels waged in their dayes, these other challenging at your hands that countrey, which their Ancestors bequeathed them, their Soueraigntie ouer the Grecians, and their princi∣palitie which they receiued from their forefathers to whom we cannot answer, that either of them make vn∣iust requests. I know not why I should prolong my speech, only thus much: that if for the many warres in this State, and dangers vndergone, our enemies at no time erected any trophe against vs, while any King of our owne family was commander. And it is the part of wise men that whom they haue vsed as Lea∣ders, and Generals in Warre with victorious successe, by these deliberately aduising touching future dan∣gers, rather then by any others should they be per∣swaded. FINIS.
