16754 99857242 22934
ALARVM FOR LONDON, OR THE SIEDGE OF ANTWERPE. With the ventrous actes and valo∣rous deeds of the lame Soldier. As it hath been playde by the right Honorable the Lord Charberlaine his Seruants. LONDON, Printed for William Ferbrand, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes-head Alley, ouer against the Ta∣uerne doore, neere the Royall-Exchange. 1602.
Prologus. Enter Time. ROund through the compasse of this erthly ball, The massie substance hanging in the skye, Hath fleeting Time pursu'd this froward age; And searcht the worlds corrupt enormities. Heere found I some, despite my hoary scalpe, There sound I Courtiers laught my course to scorne, In that place daintie mouthed Damsels scoffe, Sticking my feathers with their borrowed plumes, As though my beauty were not good enough. And now this faire concourse heere met together, That haue cale leasure to be holde their faultes, VVithin my furrowed bosome deepe ingra'd: Like a steele forg'd impression (fixed firme) Are met together: you will scorne my wants, Laugh at my anenes, looke basely, fume and frowne But doe so, doe so, your proude eyes shall see The punishment of Citty cruelty: And if your hearts be not of Adamant, Reforme the mischiefe of deg enrate mindes, And make you weepe in pure relenting kinde. FINIS.
A Larum for London, or the siedge of Antwerpe: with the vertuous actes and valorous deedes of the ame Soldier. Enter Sancto Danila and two other Captaines. Dani. SO, leaue me now, and in mine absence, see That not a Soldier pearch vpon the walles; Least by the Citizens they be espyed, And thereupon they grow suspicious, Be gone, and giue the Centenels in charge, They haue an eye vnto the Southerne Port: And heare yee? if that any forces come, Let them be straight receiu'd into the Castle, But with as little tumult as you may. Cap. It shall be done my Lord. Exeunt. Dan. We must be secret, as befits the care, And expedition of so great a cause; Antwerpe is wealthy, but withall secure, Our Soldiers want the crownes they surfet with, And therefore she mu spare from foorth her store, To helpe her neighbours; nay she shall be forc't, To strip her of her pouches, and on the backes Of Spanish Soldiers, hang her costliest roabes. The plot already is determin'd of, And say Cornelius doe but keepe his word; These swilling Epicures shall taste of death,
Whilst we suruiue to rifle their rich Coffers. Enter Cornelius. Heere comes the man, welcome Cornelius, I see you make religion of your word. Cor. Speake softly good my Lord least yee be heard, The Cittizens are scouting heere about. Dan. Not one Gernelius dare approach so neere, The Castle shot keepes them in greater awe, And for discouery by the eye, feare not; Within this valley we may talke at large, And no man see vs: say are you resolu'd, To stand firme friend vnto the Spaniard? And Sancto Damla vowes you shall partake, Both spoyle and honour with the best of vs. Co. Suppose my Lord I gaue you my consent, In all the world there's not (at my commaund) Aboue sixe hundred Almaignes; you your selfe, Are in the Castle scarce a thousand strong, And what are these to sacke so great a towne? So populous and large as Antweerpe is. The Citizens (were they but polliticke, Carefull and studious to preserue their peace) Might an houres warning, fill their streetes, With fortie thousand well appointed Soldiers. Dan. I, but they are remisse and negligent, Their bodies vs'd to soft effeminate silkes, And their nice mindes set all on dalliance; Which makes them fat for slaughter, fit for spoile: But say twere otherwise that in their peace And daies of plenty, whilst they flourished They had fore-seene the daunger might ensue, And exercise themselues in feates of armes; Yet wee being sole commaunder of the Castle, And that commaunding them, what let is there, (Were we much weaker) but we might preuaile?
When once the A larum soundes (like silly mice) They'll hyde them in the creuice of their walles, And some for ignorance, will stand amaz'd; And some will be so tender of their flesh, As they will scorne to beare the weight of steele, No, no braue Almaigne if men euer had A fit occasion to inrich themselues, And fill the vast world with their ehoing fame; Now is that instant put into our hands; And now may we be Lords of this proude towne▪ My minde deuines no lesse, and till my feete Tread a venturous measure in their streetes, I shall be sicke to thinke vpon the deed. Cor. I wish my Lord as much as you detaine, But such an enterprise must be well grounded, Least in performance there be found defect. Dan. What patient eye can looke vpon yond Turets, And see the beauty of that flower of Europe, And in't be rauisht with the sight of her? Oh she is amorous as the wanton ayre. And must be Courted: from her no comes A breath, as sweete as the Arabian spice. Her garments are imbrodered with puregolde; And euery part so rich and sumpous, As Indias not to be compar'd to her, She must be Courted, ary her self inuites, And beckons vs vnto her sportfull bed; What is he then more umpish than rude Iron, By such a load-farre may not be attempted? Oh braue Corneliu, if within thy vaines, There be that heate of vallout? I presume; Let vs for-slowe no time till wee obtaine To Reuell in that bower of earthly blisse. Cor. My Lord, what lyes in me yee shall dispose, My Regiment of Almaignes, and my selfe, Will on the first assault reuolt to you;
Meane space Ile giue you close intelligence, Of any thing the Cittizens pretend: But as I said, what makes this to the spoile, Of such a might Citty as this is, Vnlesse we be confirm'd with more supply? Dan. Beholde this scroule and be resolu'd in that, From Nastricht first there comes a thousand horse, Beside fiue hundred foote: vnder the guiding Of Don Alzo de Verdugo: Then From Lyre doth  de Romero, bring Fiue hundred foote; From Alst two thousand more Follow the conduct of Emanuell; The Duke of Ala likewise brings his power, And for a better cullour, to delude These credulous inhabitants of Antwerpe, He causeth it be publisht he is dead, And that his Soldiers guard his body hyther, To haue it shipt for Spaine to be interd: Which well may serue to shaddow his approach, The rest by night shall haue their entraunce; So that within two daies I make account, We shall be gathered to a perfect head, Of (at the least) sixe thousand Spaniards. Cor. I mary my Lord, this soundeth somewhat like, Now dares Cornelius promise victorie. But how intendes your Lordship to begin, And giue an entraunce to this busines? You know th' Antwerpians neuer yet tooke part, In any action gainst his Maiesty, But haue remain'd as neutrall, neyther ayding The Prince of Orenge nor offending you: How will you then inkindle flambes of warre, And take occasion to commence your quarrell? Dan. Why any way; it shall be thus Cornelius, Ile charge the Master Gunner of the Castle, To make a shot or two vpon the towne;
And when they come to know the cause of it, Ile say it was, because they doe not sincke, The Prince of Orenge ships: but suffer them To lye so neere within the Lyuer , Which not withstanding, we precisely know, Doe houer there about, to no end else, But to safe conduct victuals to the towne. Yet this excuse will serue to cloake our hae, And shew some reason for what after follows. Cor. It cannot be but good my noble Lord, And shortly (as their dayly custome is) Changing the Gouernor and other Burgers, Intend a solemne banquet at the State-house. Euen then, and at that place, giue you direction, The Gunner take his Leuill, twill affright, And strike the greater terror to their soules. Dan. Enough, Ile play them Musicke to their meate, And send such Reuellers into the roome, As some of them shall haue caroust their last, The most I craue, is that Cornelius Will be as constant as he hath profest. Cor. Once more my Lord I gage my hand with yours, And as he is a Soldier and a Knight, Cornelius vowes to be a friend to Spaine. Dan. I take thy word faire Knight, and backe againe Returne the like to thee; both I and mine, For euer vow to loue and honour thee: Now breake we off our secret conference, And closely as we came vnto this place, So let vs circumspectly make retreate. Walke thou into the towne as if thou hadst But only come abroad to take the ayre. I to the Castle will with-draw my selfe Downe some backe way, and euer as we need, Be this our meeting place, till Antwerpe bleed. Cor. Farewell my Lord, Cornelius is agreed. Exeunt
Enter Danila and the Gunner. Dan. What Ordinance haue you laden on that part: Gun. A Faulcon and two Harguebuz of Crocke. Dan. What telst thou me of Harguebuz of Crocke? A poxe vpon your rascall squibs and crackers, Haue you been loading all this day till now, And come you with your Harguebuz of Crocke? A plague vpon't. Gun. My Lord, blame your direction: neuerthelesse, Not full assured of your Lordships pleasure, We haue rais'd the Cannons that came last from Harlam, And planted them this morning for the purpose. Dan. Twas well aduis'd; but Gunner for what part? Gun. That's as it please your Honour to direct, Dan. That's for the State-house Gunner, where the Duch Sit swilling in the pride of their excesse; Commend vs to them, tell them we haue sent Musicke to make them merry at theyr Feast: Goe bid thy full-mouth'd Cannon▪ much good doo't them. Should we discharge some scuruie Culuering, They'll thinke we are about some fire-worke, To make them sport with. For sure they fall a sleepe vpon full stomackes, Shoote me their State-house through both the sides, And tell them thou didst it for their health, To kepe them waking. Gun. I warrant you my Lord, Ile peirce her sides, Or neuer thinke me worke-man whilst I liue. Exit. Dan. I will not stirre till I haue heard the shot. Goe light thy Linckstocke at some hellish brand, To send blacke vengeance to that hated towne; Let euery corne of powder be a spirit, Thy mortall ayme as ominous as death, And neuer a splinter that the Bullet strikes,
But let it prooue a very murdering piece, Amongst the Burgers at their Banqueting, To vomit horred plagues vpon them all. The peice discharges. There be thou like the Club of Hercules, Amongst the Bouzing Bacchanalian centures, To beate their Renish Cannes about their eares. A great screeke heard within. Good lucke I hope hark how the sodaine noyse In countring with the Cannons loude report, Stops his full mouth, with the reuerberate sound, And fils the circle of the emptie ayre. Enter two Burgers running. 1 Bur. The Shot what from the Castle questionlesse. 2 Bur. The smoke and the report may tell you so. 1 Bur. And certainly intended at our liues. 2 Bur. Call to the Gouernour. 1 Bur. Hee's walking heere without the Castlestay, The Cittizens haue sent me to demaund, On what occasion, or by whose commaundement, You haue discharg'd this shot vpon the towne? Dan. At my commaund Sir, what is that to you? 2 Bur. Then thy command (I tell thee Sancto Danila) Is deuilish and vnchristian; Which passing through the State-house of the Cittie, Hath slaine three persons. Dan. Three froathy Renish fats that haue drunk dead, Or in their cuppes haue falne to cutting throates, And fearing that it would be nois'd abroad, To couer your foule Bestiall Gurmandize, Giue it out to be a shot sent from the Castle. 1 Bur. That men are slaine wee'll not expostulate, But Gouernor, was it by your commaundement? Dan. Tell me you men of Antwerpe, If you doe startle at a Cannons burst,
Why suffer you the Prince of Orenge Ships, To ride vpon the riuer at their pleasure? And with their feering tops to mocke our Fames, The whilst the Sconses which doe lancke the Riuer, Serue but for Fishers to vnload their nets; Whilst Cankering rust, deuoures your emptie Cannons: And they lye hulling vp and downe the streame? Burgers of Antwerpe answere me to this. 2 Bur. They be of Zealand, and the Prince of Orenge Hath euer been a friend vnto the State. Dan. But enemy vnto the King my Master; Therefore they shall not ride vpon the ryuer; Which if your owne security doe suffer, Wee'll make our Ban-dogs to awake your towne. 1 Bur. Is that the cause and reason of your shot? Dan. Burger it is. 2. Bur. You should haue sent vs word of your dislike: Dan. Why so we did, did we not send our poast Euen now vnto you? And wrapt our Packet in a ball of lead? I thinke we sent a bolde Embassador. That spoke our minde in thunder: did he not? You might before haue knowne of our dislike, But that we did perceiue you would not see, Twas well you heard of vs. A signet sounded, enter two with mourning penons: a Drum sounding a dead march: Dalua carried vpon a horse couered with blacke: Soldiers after, tray∣ling their Pykes. No Cittizens of Antwerpe, this the cause That makes you carelesse and neglect our power, The death of Princelie Dalua, had he liu'd, The Fleete of Orenge had not traded thus, Nor brau'd our Castle.
Enter two or three Cittizens running. 1 Cit. I pray God they meane not to assault the towne. 2 Cit. Tis Daluas Body brought vnto the Castle. 3 Cit. I would he had come thus, when he came first Into these Countries. 1 Cit. So would I, what's become of this damned fiend? 2 Cit. Let the deuill looke to that, for he has most right to him. 3 Cit. I would the cowe hyde were off, wee might see the foure quarters. 1 Cit. A plague goe with him. 2 Cit. There will be olde tryumphing in hell. 3 Cit. There will be olde supping of boyling leade. 1 Cit. That Dalua was a bloudy villaine. 2 Cit. He was worse then the Spanish inquisition. 3 Cit. Well, if euer man would haue eaten vp the Ca∣niballes, twas he. 1 Cit. I feare nothing but one. 2 Cit. What's that? 1 Cit. That the people will curse him out of's graue. 2 Cit. I am glad they haue curst him into it. 3 Cit. Well, it was neuer heard that Dalua was dead, But there was some notable villanie followed it. 1 Cit. What dost thou thinke he will reuiue againe? 2 Cit. If doe, the deuil's on't, Ile neuer trust death on's word for a halfe pennie. 3 Cit. Come, wee'll mourne in sacke for him. Exeunt. Bur. Come, let's retyre our selues into the State-house, Tis Daluas body brought into the Castle. Exeunt Dan. March neerer to the Castle with your hearse, Before you set it downe. Alu. in the hearse. What are those villaines gone that rayl'd vpon me? Sould. They are my Lord. Alu. Set downe and let me light, He comes from vnder the hearse.
I would not heare my selfe againe so rayl'd on, Not for halfe Belgia. Zwounds the dogs barke at me, a plague vpon them all, I thinke they doe ot hate the Deuill so; Dalua is neuer nam'd but with a curse, Thinke but these roges, this is a tyme to dye, And heare these damned dogs reuile me thus: Well I am dead, but Aluas spirit (ere long) Shall haunt your ghostes, and with a fatall troope, Come in the dreadfull night about your walles, Grimme death did nere affright the fearfull martiall, As I will fright these Bouzing Begians: Whose that aboue? Lord Danila? Dan. My Lord of Alua; enter the Castle. Alua enters and his troope. Enter Alonzo Verdugo, and his Soldiers with a still march. O the Lord Verdugo, and his Regiment, From Mascricht? tis well. Enter Iulian Romero, and his power with a still march. Iulian Romero and his Regiment from Leyre? My Lord Romero where is Don Emanuell? To bring the power that we expect from Alst. Rom. Who's that? Lord Sancto Danila? Hee's entred on the other side the Castle, Withall his power. Dan. Not yet full ten, my minde presageth good, Antwerpe ere night, shall bath her selfe in bloud. Exunt. Enter Marques d'Hauurye, Egmount, Champaigne, Van End and his Page: English Gouernor and one Burger. Mar. Monsieur Champaigne, great Antwerpes Gouer∣nour, Will you refuse these faire and fresh supplyes?
Sent from the Prince of Orenge and the States, Vnder our Conduct for your Citties guard? Cham. Lord Marques Hauurye, we reiect them not, Nor yet neglect the loue of that great Prince, And our kinde friend the Co-vnited States: But ince we haue no neede of such a power, Why should we pester Antwerpe with such troupes, To spend the victuals of the Cittizens, Which we can scarcely compasse now for gilt. Egm. The Prince & States will furnish yee with stoe, To feede the Army and relieue the Towne. Cham. It may be so. Bur. And it may not be so. Mar. Outwords and honours be engag'd for it. Eng. Gou. Vnder correction my Lord Gouernour, The Marques and Count Egmonts noble words, (Although the Prince of Orenge and the States Should be forgetfull) were a pawne of worth. Mar. What sayes the Collonell of the Almaines to it? Van. This is Van Ends opinion my good Lord, That the rich promise of such noble Peeres, As Marques Hanurie and Count Egmont are, Is pawne nough for all the Citties wealth. Bur. The Almaine lyes, wealth is worth more than wordes. Standing aside. Cham. I way their promise with my sound beliefe, And tye my thoughts to their assured trust, Yet are there many reasons of import, To bare your Armies entrance to this towne. Egm. The graund obiection is decyded. Cham. True. Egm. The lesser then are easily refeld. Cham. Suppose the Prince & States do Victuall them, Yet their isorder in our Ciuell streetes, May be perniious, and breede mutinie. Mar. By this supposall you enfeeble vs,
And taxe our worth with indiscretion, As though our skill and our Authority, Stood vpon bases of weake discipline. Bur. We said not so, and yet their ryotings, May taynt our wiues and ieoperdize our wealth. Van. In silence be it my Lord, you need thē not. To cham aside. Egm. All ryots shall be death by martiall law, And all commaunders, shall be vigilent Ouer their troopes, that order may he kept. Cham. My Lords of Egmount and of Haurye, What are your numbers? Mar. Iust 3000, foote, One thousand horse, 800. at the least. Eng Gou. An honourable tender of true friends, To send such ayde for safeguard of your Citty. (Aside. Bur. T will shake our bags too much to pay so many. Cham. At whose expence shall all this army rest? Egm. Some part your selues, some part the Prince will pay. Cham. Sixe hundred Almaignes are our garison, A guard sufficient to defende our walles, And men enough, because we need no more. Bur. And they too many to be paide by vs. Van. O may these slaues refuse this succour sent, Their myserie shall bring their miserie. Aside. Mar. Count Egmont, surelie Ant werpe is bewitcht, Securitie hath slaine their prouidence, Take Egm. aside And riches makes them retchles of their friends; We must assume the charge vpon ourselues, And pray the Prince and States to beare the pay; Or else their priuate auarice, will pull Publicke destruction on this flower of townes, To the disgrace of all the Netherlands. Egm. I will make tender of so much to them, Two monthes the Prince of Orenge and the States, And we our selues, will pay foure thousand men: If afterward, our powers be not of vse,
We shall withdraw them to their Prouinces, May this content you curious Cittizens? Cham. The offer is so Honorable now, As modestly, we cannot challenge it: Captaine Cornelius what's your counsell? Van. This: Say, that you feare the Spaniards will conceiue Aside to Champ. Some high displeasure, if you take them in, My Lords these fat purs'd peasants are so proude, Friends and defence, are lesse esteem'd then pelfe. Mar. Gouernor of Antwerpe, how are you resolu'd? Cham My Lords, the Prince of Orenge and your selues, And all the States deserue our dutious loue And humble seruice: first, for sending power, Then promising pay and victuals for that power: But with your pardon, yet there is a let, That makes vs loath to take your armie in. Egm. What let Champaigne? Champ. The Spanish Gouernor, Danila, commaunder of the Castle heere, If we receiue your troopes into our Towne, Will iudge we haue some purpose of reuolt, And raising armes against the King of Spaine. Mar. What if he doe? Cham. His fierie spirit enflam'd, Will send our bullets from the Cittadell, And teare the sumptuous buildings of ou towne. Bur. As late he did when we were banqueting, And thought no harme, but drinking health to health, He shot, and slew some innocent poore soules, And rent our State-house and some buildings else. Van. Hee'll rend you better if our purpose holde. Egm. What was the cause? Cham. Because we did not sincke, The Prince of Orenge Ships, that lay to waft Prouision to our Citty vp the Riuer.
Eng. Gouer. Obserue by that you discreete Gouernors, What loue or faith the Spaniard holdes with you, That for his pride would haue your Citty pine; Hauing destroy'd the corne on Flaunders side, And cross'd a bridge of Conuoy to your towne; Then that the Riuer should not victuall you, He wish'd you sinke that shipping in the Skelt. Egm. Collect by this the Spaniards crueltie, Who though occasion should not come from you, Would picke a quarrell for occasion, To sacke your Cittie, and to sucke your bloud, To satisfie his pride and luxurie: Let Harlem▪ Marstricht, Alst example you, And many Citties models of his wrath, Thinke on my Father and the Countie Horne, Whose tragedie, if I recount with ruth, May mooue the stones of Antwerpe to relent▪ They seru'd the Spaniard as his Liedge-men sworne, Yet, for they did but wish their countrie good, He pickt a quarrell, and cut off their heades. Burgers the Spaniard waites to take your liues, That he may spoyle your towne, your wealth, your wiue Eng. Gou. Receiue your friends, preuent his treachery, Least vnawares you taste his tirranye. Mar. What benefit (good Country-men) gaine we, That prostitute our fortunes and our bloud, In your defence? Cham. Say, shall we let them in? Van. In troth I thinke the Spaniard meanes no harme. Cham. Meane what he may, wee'll not offend such friends, As these, the Prince of Orenge and the State, Your Armie is at Kibdorpe Port you say? Mar. There stay our forces. Cham. We will let them in, And quarter them with all conuenient speede, Van End draw vp your Almaignes to one place,
And keep good rule for feare of ciuill braules, And now my Lords I will attend on you. Exeunt Champ. Marq. Eg. Bur. I will attend to looke and guard my doores, And keepe my wealth, my wife, and daughter safe, For feare these hungry soldiers get a snatch. Exit Manet Van and his boy. Van. Yonker come heere, haste to the Castle wall, And call to speake with Sancto Danila, Tell him from me, the Flies begin to swarme▪ The Sunne growes hot, the heards do shake their hornes, The Shepheards bring great flockes home to the folde; Say, if the Butcher slaughter not in tne, The beastes will surfet, and the Soldiers pyne, Therefore begin before one glasse be runne, And we shall win ere setting of the Sunne: Remember this, be secret and away. Exit boy. Now (Antwerpe) comes the Spaniards holly-day, With them ioyne I, my share is in the gold, I runne with the Hare, and with the hound I holde; This Sunday shall be dismall to the towne, The Burgers dye, their gallant wiues go downe. As he is going out Stumpe encounters him. Enter Burger, Champaigne, and their Wiues. Bur. Afore good wife, I feare that all's not well, Monsieur Champaigne what's your opinion? Cham. Doubtles, the Spaniards do intend some hurt, Harke how the tumult still increaseth? Wife. For shame, Be not so fearefull, say that for some offence, Eyther commenced, or but in conceipt; The Spaniards were maliciouslie inclin'd: Haue yee not Soldiers to withstand their force? What should you need to be solicitous,
Keepe yee . Bur. Nay wife thou dost mistake, If thou immagine we inten to fight; Tis not  at the charge To pay  should not they Be at the care to see the Cittie safe. 2 Wif. The Citty's safe enough without their care, Will you to dinner? Cham. Wherefore shoote they thus, Vnlesse there were some villanie abroach? 2 Wif. Wherefore shoote they but to trye their peeces, I warrant you husband tis no otherwise. Enter Marques with his swoord drawne. Bur. Heere comes the Marques he can tell the newes. Cham. The cause my Lord of this intestine vpore? Mar. The cause is murder, miserie and death: You men of Antwerpe, if with all the speede And expedition, that in men remaines, You take not weapons to repulse the foe, That like a swarme of deadlie stinging Hornets, Haue all this while lay hid within their nest; But now doe flye abroad with dreadfull noise, As if so many Furies were awakt. To armes then all that loue your Countries peace. Bur. How doe ye meane my Lord? or who are those Your Lordship shaddows, vnder-neath the name Of swarming Hornets? Mar. Are you so dull ofence? And still so lull'd in your securitie? Whom should I meane, but bloudie Danila, And furious Alua his compeere in armes, That fill the Castle yard with their Battilions, And striue to take possession of your streetes: To armes then straight, if you will keep them backe. Exit. Bur. Ist like that Alua is reuiu'd againe?
1 Wif. As like as he intendes to take the towne. Cham. But I suspect there is some treacherie. 2 Wif. Will you beleeue his words, he doth but iest, To try how we will take it if twere so. Champ. Nay by his lookes and by his sodaine haste, It should appeare the Marques doth not iest. Enter Egmont and Stump. Egm. To armes to armes, oh where's the Gouernor? Giue order that your Cittizens prepare, To stand vpon their guard, defend themselues, For whom you trusted, turnes his weapons point Vpon your bosomes: all the Almaigne force, Is quite reuolted, and the enemie Entring your streetes: Van End that damned slaue, Giues ayde to Spaine, and with his trayterous hand Drawes in destruction, if you looke not to it. Cham. Where are the Switzers should supply the Trenches? Egm. Drunke in their lodgings, and in reeling foorth, The Spaniards (vnresisted) murder them. For honors ske, for wretched Antwerpes sake, Stand not amazed, but with couragious hearts, And forward hands, fight for your libertie. Exit. Stum. Are yet your eye-lids open, are you yet Awakt out of the slumber you were in? Or will you still lye snorting in your sloath? Be still perswaded you are safe enough? Vntill the verie instant, you doe feele Their naked swoords glide through your weasond-pipes? Or doe you thinke with belching Pffes that flye From your full paunches, you can blow them backe? Or is the bottom of a deepe carouse, Able to drowne them? will their furie melt At the beholding of your daintie wiues? Or can submission be a stickler In these hot braules? I tell ye burgers no,
Faire words will be as oyle to burning pitch; And golde as Sulpher to inkindled; flames, Your daughters chastitie must quench their lust; And your deare wiues, their lawlesse armes: I said as much but would not be beleeu'd, Now tell me if I prophesied aright? Or that my zealous words deseru'd rebuke? Did I not say, the Crocadile did weepe, But to obtaine his pray? the Sea looke smooth, But for a storme: would any thing be thought, By the close confluence of the Spanish troopes Into the Castle, but some massacre? Yet was I rated to obiect as much, Reuil'd and bafled for my loyaltie: Cham. I  Soldier, leane thy bitter words, And helpe to fight for Atwerpes libertie. Stump. You haue another groate to giue me then, I know your liberall mindes will scorne t'impose, The sweat of bloudie daunger on the brow Of any man, but you'l reward him for it: He shall atleast (when he hath lost his limmes) Be sent for harbour to a spittle-house. How say yee, shall he not? Good reason then, But we should venture; yes, to laugh at you, Whilst we beholde the Spaniard cut your throates: An obiect base  set aworke; A swettie Cobler, whose best industrie, Is but to cloute a Shoe, shall haue his fee; But let a Soldier, that hath spent his bloud, Is lame'd, , or any way distrest, Appeale for sucour, then you looke a sconce As if you knew him not; respecting more An Ostler, or some drudge that rakes your kennels, Than one that fighteth for the common wealth. Bur. It is thy countrie that doth binde thee to it, Not any imposition we exacte.
Stum. Bindes me my country with no greater bondes, Than for a groate to fight then for a groate, To be infeebled, or to loose a limme? Poore groates-worth of effection; Well, Ile learne To pay my debt and to measure my desert According to the rate: a groate I had, And so much as a groate amounts vnto you, My swoord shall pay ye in exchange of blowes. Ex. Enter two Cittizens. Cham. Cittizens how now? 1 Cit. Oh Monsieur Champaigne, We are vndone for want of discipline, 2 Cit. The Spaniards hurrie into euerie streete, What shall we doe for safeguard of our liues? Bur. What shall yee doe? stand euery man at's doore, And take in's hand a Holbert or browne bill, And studie to defend him as he may. Cha. I heare them comming, let vs shift away. Exunt In the Alarum, Alua and Danila pursue Marques Hauurie, and Count Egmont furisuse. Alu. Marques d' Hauurie stay, thou canst not scape. Dan. And stay Count Egmont: Danilaes conquering sword, Pursues thy life, therfore abide and yeeld it. Ma. Insatiate Alua, that like Sun-rie ground, Neuer suffis'd with sweetest shewers that fall, But with a thousand mouthes gapes still for more. So thy desire of bloud nere satisfied, With the rich tribute of so many liues, Whose guiltles bloud hath dyed poore Belgius checkes, And chang'd her like a drunken Bacchanall, Still with a thousand quenchles appees, Dost thirst for more, as if that epithite Were the sole obiect of thy hearts best hope
Know Tyrant, Marques Hauurie flyes thee not, As fearing all the vttermost thou canst, But the oppression of vnequall power, False treason, that betrayed our liues to thee, And the sharpe scourge, that fond securitie, Hath iustlie throwne on Atwerpes wilfulnes Egm. These are the sluices that haue brought on vs, The swelling pride and tyranie of Spaine, Which Antwerpe careles off, although fore-warnde By many bleeding instances about her, Could not; nay, would not be aduis'd at all. Tell me but this, Alua and Danila both, What state is there, be it nere so populare, Abounding in the height of fortunes giftes; And all felicities of worldlie Pompe, That sees sad desolation sit in teares, Vpon her neighbour Citties? warres keene edge, Hath surrowed through their entrailes, let them blood, In euerie artre that maintaineth life, Yet will not dread her daunger to be neere? But warme her at their fiers, sing at their sighes, Reuelling in her countlesse vanities, As a perpetuall date were set thereon. Tell me I say, you that haue seene all this, And as deuils, Saints in the blacke Kallender Of wretchedst woe may truelie be set downe, As Authors of these sad confusions? Doe not you deeme that state well worth the illes, That this remissenes brought vpon the rest? Mar. They cannot but confesse so much Count Eg∣mont. Eg, If this be graunted what's your glorie then? An armed man to kill an naked soule: A thousand Sickles thrust into a field, Of Summer ripened and resistles corne: A mightie tide to ouer-run a land; Where no defence or bancke to keepe it backe▪
This is your honor, this their miserie, That are not conquer'd, but dye wilfullie. Alu. Warre taketh hole on all aduantages. Mar. What neede aduantage, where is no resist? Dan. So much the better, this is our discipline, Therefore submit or dye. Mar. Not while I haue a hand to lift my swoord. Alu. Nor you Count Egmont? Egm. Alua, nor I. Egmont will with honour both liue and dye. The Alarum againe, and Champaigne is pursued in by Ro∣mero, Verdugo and Van End, where he is slaine: so is the Marques Hauurie, and all engirting Count Egmont, Alua steps to defend him, & they strike at him. Alu. Holde when I bid ye; strike yee all at mee? Dan. Why stands thou then to guard an enemie? Alu. Because I will, honor encites me to it, The honor of this worthie Noble-man, And his high spirit euen in the face of death. Yeeld thee braue Egmont, Alua doth intreate thee, In pittie of thy bolde aduenturous youth, And hopefull Fortunes shining in thine eyes, Thou seest these slaine, yet will saue thy life: Thou seest me wounded to preserue thy life. I that was neuer pittifull before, Am forc't to pitty thee, what wouldst thou more? Egm. Such pitty Alua, as thou shewedst my Father, And Noble Horne, such thou intendst tome, Therfore proceede & neuer pitty me. They offer at him agen Alu. Strike not I chargeue: come Egmont come, Is weare that thou shalt yeeld; strike, spare me not, Alas thou art too faint; come, yeeld thee now, Striuing to gt againe his weapons I faith I will not hurt thee: So, haue done, Nay, no more weapons, thou art my prisoner.
And I will vse thee verie honorablie. Egm. Alua, let foorth my life, & then thou honorst m Alu. Not for the world, prisoner thou shalt to Spaine, And there be entertain'd to thy desertes. Now pittie, packe from Aluaes hart againe, Against my nature once I lookt on thee, For this Cunts sake: now to the desarts flye, For hauocke, spoile and murder now I crye. Exeunt Champaignes wife hurried by two rascall Solders. Lad. Haue mercie on a woman I beseech you, As you are men and Soldiers: If you be christians doe not doe me shame. 1 Sod. Search her. 1 Sold. Zwonds turne her inside outward. 1 Sold. Ransacke her, euerie part of her. Enter Stump. La. For manhood spare me. They stand to search her. Stm. How nimblie death be-stirs him euery where, And I that am a wearie of my life, And would faine dye I cannot, Death is so proude he will not looke on me, These muddie roagues that hoorded vp their coyne, Now haue their throates cut for the coyne they haue: They that for two pence would haue seene me starue, And still my olde rotten stump and I, Trot vp and downe as long as we can wag. They begin to strip her. La. As you are men▪ be mercifull to me. 1 Sol. Cast lots who shall haue her. 2 Sol. Ile giue thee my share for thy part. 1 Sol. Ile haue my share in her. 2 Sol. Off with her Iewels Stum. How now, two Soldiers ransacking a woman?
O tis Champaignes wife that was the Gouernor, Heere is she, that would not haue been seene with a moath vpon her, for a thousand pound; That spent as much on Munkeys, Dogs and Parets, As would haue kept ten Soldiers all the yeere. Zblood I haue seene her, where I haue past by her In the streetes, to stop her nose with her sweete gloues, For feare my smell should haue infected her; And now I liue to see her lg'd, and torne By lowzie totter'd roagues: O Antwerpe, Antwerpe, Now Madame Marchpaigne, minx, your Blowes And you are one. 1 Sol. Lets haue her in the next corner. 2 Sold. Draw her along, Stum. Take that she has it is sufficient, But goe no further, it is inhumaine to abuse a woman. 1 Sol. What roague art thou, darst speake vnto a Spa∣niard? Stumpe. No roague Sir, but a Soldier as you are, And haue had one leg more then I haue now. Pointing to his leg. Sir, heer's my Pasport, I haue knowne the warres, And haue had the vantage of as faire a spoile as you haue heere. 2 Sol. Away you whorson cripple rascall. Stu. You totter'd shake-rag'd roagues, what domi∣neere you? If Daluas self were heere, he should not doe it. He drawes his swoord, killes one, and the other flyes. La. Good Soldier, heer's one Iewell that they haue not That I doe vallue at a thousand crownes, I pray thee take it. Stum. What should I doe with it, can you tell? To haue my throate cut for it, ha: No, no your Sister Mince-pies groate Will doe me no pleasure now. La. For Gods loue, as you euer did respect a woman, Helpe to conuay me to some place of safetie.
Stum. Where is it? not in Antwerpe. Your closet will not serue your turne, You cannot walke to your garden-house. La. For Gods sake helpe me as you are a man. Stump. Well, follow me, Ile doe the best I can. A company of rascall Soldiers came heere pursuing the Ladie, he fightes and beares her away from them all. After a triumphant shout within, enter Alua, Dauila, Rome∣ro, Verdugo, Van End, with their Rapiers drawne, crying. All. Victorie, victorie, Antwerpe and victorie. Alu. So valliant Lords, this Musicke likes me well, Now may we boldely say the towne is ours: Yet sheath not your victorious swoords awhile, Till you haue reapt the Haruest of your paine, In which pursuite, torture, exacte and kill, No lesse then in your fury you haue done. If the proude Antwerpers (that doe suruiue) Lay not their treasure at your conquering feete. Dan. Though no resistance any where appeare, Yet let not anger so decline with you Be proude of victorie, as well yee may, Knowing the worth of your attained prize. Tis wealthie Antwerpe you haue won, and how? Not by a lingering siedge, of monthes or yeares, But in a moment; entring at a leauen, By two a clocke her haughtie pride is shrunke, And she in duetie stoopeth to your will. Alu. Can any heere report the certaine number, Of those that haue been slaine during the conflict? Ro. I had a note my Lord, as I remember, The number of the dead, by vs cut off,
Is seauenteene thousand. Dan. But of our men, How many fell there in this short assault? Ro. Three hundred, or not manie more my Lord. Alua. For those three hundred, let ten thousand more, Of this subiected Cittie loose their liues, Chaine them together in the Market place, By hundreds and two hundreds▪ and with shot, Ring them about vntill they all be slaine, Spare neither widdow, matron, not young maide, Gray-bearded Fathers, nor the babe that suckes. One Spaniards bloud, I value better worth, Then many hundreds of these drunken Dutch. Ver. First, if it please yee, quarter we the towne, That euerie one may know his priuiledge. Alu. Well thought vpon Verdugo: thus it shall be. The Burse, the State-house, and the Market place, Belongs to me: the Castle and that side, To Sancto Danila: on the other hand The key, and water-port (Verdugo) is yours. Saint Georges port, and Kibdop, we assigne To Lord Romeso: and for you Van End, The North part of the Cittie, Venus streete, Remaines the subiect of desired spoile: So Lords, if I haue well deuided, speake; If not, you shall be pleas'd before we part? Dan. Your Lordship hath discreetelie cast our lots, And for my part, I doe accept of mine. Ro. So doth Romero. Ver. And Verdugo too. Van. And I no lesse, than who is best content. Alu. About it then, be euerie one as quicke, In rifling of these rich Burgers, as he was In the assault: the world may talke of vs, As well for vallor as our quicke dispatch. Da. My Soldiers and my self will straight begin. Exit.
Rom. And mine shall follow. Exit. Cor. Ile not be behinde. Exit. Alua. What will Verdugo? Enter English Gouernor and Godfry. Ver. Not be Idle long, But who are these so saw cily intrude? Alua. Who are ye? speake, that like vnbidden guests, Dare tempt the patience of incensed Alua? Gou. We are of England (astiles Generall) Alu. Of England are ye what although you be, Backe slaues vnto the doore from whence ye came, And on your knees sollicite Aluaes greatnes: If you doe looke for mercie at his hands. Ver. Backe when he bids you; now downe vpon your knees, And craule vnto his presence to beg life. Alu. Verdugo, drag him by the long tail'd beard, Alua doth scorne to waite vpon their leasure. Ve. Come forward with a pox; now speake your mind, And speake discreetlie, least you speake your last. Gou. This crueltie is more then we deserue, And more than we expected would be showne. Alu. Taxe ye me then with crueltie so soone? You shall haue cause. Offer to strike▪ Ver. Nay heare them speake my Lord. Al. What can they say to shield thēselues from death? Goue. Nothing my Lord if in your angrie spleane You haue alreadie past your sentence on vs: But would the Duke of Alua coole his rage, And mildelie heare vs: we would say my Lord, That Englands league with Spaine, King Phillips word, Past to our gratious Mistris, were enough To warrant all the liues of any such, As are her subiects in this wretched towne: And not their liues alone, but safe protection Both for their goods and money: but if now
Your Highnes hath commission to breake The holie contract which your King hath made, We must be patient and abide the worst. Al. Why what art thou that standst vpon the league? Go. Gouernor (my Lord) of the English house. Al. Sirra, you challenge the vertue of the league, Yet vnderstand not how the league is made. So long as you conuerse not with the foes Of royall Phillip, nor withstand his right, You are exempt the rigour of his scourge; But being heere, in this rebellious towne, You must partake the punishment they feele. Go. We are not heere great Lord, to ioyne with them In any bolde confederacie of warre, But for the trafficke, which all nations else, (As well as England) haue within this place. Alu. Why left ye not the Cittie then, perceiuing We meant to call their duetie to account? Go. We had no signe of any such intent. Al. You cannot so be quit nor so excus'd, Therefore prouide before to morrow night, To bring vnto vs fortie thousand Crownes, For ransome of your house; or if you faile, Both goods and liues shall all be forfeited: So much we are content to yeeld vnto, Because we will not seeme to breake the league. Go. Alas my Lord, tis more then (at this time) Our goods and money will amount vnto, Considering that our credit (by this trouble) Is quite cut off, with any of the Citty. Alu. Shift as you can, I vow to haue no lesse, And at the appointed time. Exit. Ver. Consider of it, His fauour's great in giuing you such scope. Exit. Go. So is the Cat that dallieth with the mouse, But in the end, her pastime is his death;
We must prouide, the Spaniards thirst is great, And better that we quench it with our golde, Than let them swallow and carouse our bloudes: I prethee Godfrie trie thy friendes abroad, And any money that thou hast bring foorth, That we may make the summe which he desires. God. Ile doe the best I can, though hard it be, To finde a friend in this extreamitie. Exeunt. Enter Sancto Danila, an olde Cittizen and Soldiers. Cit. Let not your rough intreatie so molest, The soule of him whose spirit alreadie stoopes, Vnder the heauy burthen of weake age; You haue my treasure, what more can you craue? Dan. Thy  so we please: there yet remaines A ewell of more worth than all thy wealth, Which (like a ) thou didst hide from vs. Thou hast a daughter, whome till we enioy, All  proceedes from vs, sits heere, point of my Semiter; speake? in this tumult. What  than her graue my Lord, Can be  she hath? Dan. Torture the slaue, His guilefull heart, that studies to conceale, My deare hearts treasure, shall be forc't in sighes To publish, what his stubborne tongue denies. Sol. Thou hearst olde fellow, trifle than no longer, But shew him where thy daughter doth abide. Dan. Why pawse ye on my bidding let him dye, That doubles with a Spaniard in his will. Cit. Heare ye my Lord. Dan. Not any whispering noise, Not any tittle, doth not beare the sound,
Of beauties sweet fruition to mine eares. Cit. My daughter lies, but not within the reach Of my commaund: a Nunnerie in the armes Of her religious peacefull priuiledge, Doth clip her silly frighted Virgins life, From whence my Lord she cannot be recall'd. Dan. Beare Arte vpon thy tongue, that may vnlocke The gates of that in closed Sanctuarie, And first intreate; but if intreatie faile, Then vse commaund; if neither will preuaile, Yet so thou shalt not cease, but in the cordes Of violent furie drag the Damsell thence: My soldiers shall attend to see it done, That if, thou shrinke, their weapons naked points, May gordge thy sides, till thou bleed out thy life. Cit. I would that Sacrifice might end this strife. Da. Away with him loue faints through colde delay, Tis Danila speakes, and what he will he may. Enter Factor. Of whence are you? Fac. Of England Noble Lord, A Factor to a London Marchant heere, Who hauing tryed my friends, and strain'd my purse, To make my ransome: am now carrying it To mightie Alua, to redeeme my life. Dan. What value is it? Fac. Full fiue hundred Dollors. Dan. Is this the vtmost penny thou canst make? Fac. The length and depth of my abilitie. Dan. It will not seruetor search thy chest for more Or bide the torture we impose on such, As cunningly, withholde what we demaund. Fac. There is not in the world (that I may call Rightly mine owne) one Stiuer or one Dote, More then is there compriz'd within th bag. Dan. Giue him the strippado;
Out of your disioynted limmes other summes. Fac. The world doth know, my conscience and iust heauen, That there is all (at this time) I possesse. Dan. Saue what is throwne into some hollow vault, Or sunke into some Well; or buried deepe Hois him vp and let him downe againe. Within the earth: so hoise the peasant vp, Now let him downe; will ye confesse as yet, Where we may finde the treasure you haue hid? Fac. That which (my Lord) is not, cannot be hid, And to say that I know not, will but wrong Your expectation, and deceiue my selfe. Sol. Let him rest my Lord, it seemes the wretch Argues the troth, and this is all he hath. Dan. Hence greedy begger, harke (peeld sheepe) Goe hide thee in some bush, till waxing houres Giue thee another fleece to cloath thee with. Yonder ariseth the bright morning Starre. Enter an old cittizen with his daughter. Whose rich resplendour gildes my happy thoughts, And opens mynes of treasure to my soule; Welcome faire sweet, mine armes shall be thy throane, Where seated once, mocke death, and laugh to scorne, The boysterous threates, of bloud be-sprinckled warre, Who whilst he shewes wilde Friscoes in the streetes, And with his Gamballes, ouerthrowes huge buildings, Mingle their totter'd ruynes, with the limmes And Clotted bloud of many thousand soules: Shall as an Anticke in thy sight appeare, Yeelding no more occasion to be fear'd, Than painted shapes of Lyons on a wall. Daug. Beholde a Virgin, whose distilling teares Turne the drye dust to paste, where she doth kneele, Beholde the Siluer cognisance of age,
Soyl'd with dissoluing drops of sorrows rage: If me you touch with a lasciuious hand, As from his eyes descendes a floud of teares; So will you draw a riuer from his heart, Of his lifes bloud; both waies you shall obscure, The honor of your name: if Virgin I, Or aged he, misdoe by tyranie. Cit. Let conquest satisfie, since in the strength Of your succes-full power, our Cittie vailes, And lyes in prostrate duetie at your feete: Or if not conquest, be appeas'd with golde, Which in aboundance pleades for our release, Onely refraine, our conscience to wound, With that, for which there is no phisicke found. Dan. I am impatient, she shall be my loue, Of all the spoiles are reapt by painefull warre, Blot beautie out, and what's our victorie? But as a banquet without companie. Alarum. Enter a Soldier. Sol. Arme you my Lord, and to the fight againe, A crew of stragling Soldiers (lately vanquisht) Haue gathered head, and in the heate of rage, Giue fresh assault: the leader to the rest, Is a lame fellow that doth want a legge, Who layes about him like a deuill of hell. Dan. A troope of Muskets guarde this damsell hence, And to my lodging see her safely brought, alarum againe Why stirre yee not? inuiron her with shot, Whilst we extinguish (with a shewer of bloud) This late inkindled fire: be gone I say. Sol. It is impossible to passe the streetes, They are so pesterd with this brainsicke : And harke my Lord, except you mount be time, (The clamorous tumult drawes so neere this place,)
Both you and we shall be surpriz'd by them. Da. Is there no Fortresse neere, nor house of strength, Where I may leaue my Loue, till this blacke cloude, Of swolne Hostilitie be ouer-blowne? Sold. Not any (good my Lord) leade on your troopes. Dan. Then rather than another shall inioy, What Danila held esteemed in his eye, Heere it began, and heere my loue shall dye. Shootes her with a Pistoll. Another Stab her Father, both combinde, By natures lawes, by natures law shall end. Exeunt Stab the olde man. Enter Leiutenant Vaughan and Captaine. Vaugh. Yet is not Antwerpe quite bereft of life, So long as we two breath, to stand for her, Nor shall her ransacke passe, without some right Of iust reuenge: witnes this last assault, Wherein the Scales of Iustice haue been fill'd, With (at the least) a hundred Spaniards liues, That thought their victorie to be secure. But who are these? a Burger, and with him His tender daughter, hauing both sustain'd The heauy stroake of death? Cap. I knew them well. They were my neighbors, nere vnto the Buse. Vau. Had these gray hayres retain'd the reuerent worth Of graue experience, as they might haue done; And had you bin more rich in inward giftes, And lesse magnificent in outward shew, Then had you liu'd, to dye a naturall death: And you to see some of his honor'd yeeres. But pride and luxury, haue euer been, The gate of miserie, and nurse of sinne: Yet though you me contemn'd, I grieue your fall, And will in pitty, giue you buriall. Exeunt.
Enter Lenchy and Martin two little children running. Mar. Alas poore Lenchy, whether shall we goe: Len. I cannot tell; come Martin let vs hide vs. Mar. Where is my Father? Len. He is in our house. Mar. Let vs goe thether? Len. All the streete is full of Spaniards; they haue kil'd Little Maria, and Hans Vanderbrooke. Mar. Ah whether shall we goe? Len. Let's hide vs heere, no Spaniard wil come hether. Mar. Nay M. Hulders Orchard is hard by. Wee'll get in there, and hyd's among the trees, Len. Come let vs run. A great noise as they are going. Mar. Alas the Spaniard's comming, what shal we doe? Len. Alas poore Martin we shall both be kil'd. Mar. Alas poore Lenchy, kisse me prettie Sister, Now we must dye. Len. Let's sit downe heere, and Mart. I wil clip thee in Mine armes, they shall not see thee. Mar. But they will kill thee, Alas where is my poore old Father now, and my poor mo∣ther? Enter two Spaniards running, with theyr swords drawne. 1 Spa. Kill, kill, kill. 2 Spa. Tue, Tue, Tue, Tue. 1 Spa, Fuora villiaco. 2 Spa. Follow, follow, follow, follow. Mar. I pray you M. Spaniard hurt vs not, We are poore children, we haue done no harme. Len. Good Gaffer doe not kill my little brother. 1 Spa. Fuora villiaco, sa, sa, sa, sa, Mar. Ah Master Spaniard doe not kill my Sister, My father is a poore blinde man, and he will dye,
If you kill her. 2 Spa. Cut the Bastards throates. The children gets fast holde, and hang vpon the Spaniards. Len. O kill vs not, wee'll hang vpon your armes, Sweet Gaffer, stay and looke me in the face, Haue you the heart to kill a prettie Girle? Mar. Good Master Spaniard doe not kill vs, Take any thing we haue, but saue our liues. 1 Spa. How the young brattes cling about our swords? 2 Spa. Zwounds, dash out their braines. Enter olde blinde Harman and his wife. Har. Where are my children? Martin, Lenchy speake, I heard you cry speake prettie soules, where are you? Wi. Husband, Harman, whether will you goe? Alas you fall into the enemies hands For lacke of sight. Har. My children wife, my children, where are they? 1 Spa. Heere you blind traytor, whether you shall go, To your throate-cutting. Mar. Heere Father, heere, alas we shall be kild. Wif. O my sweet children, 2 Sp. Out you Brabant bitch, thinke you with whining To preserue your whelpes? Wif. O spare the infants▪ and the aged blinde, These haue not might, nor power to doe you hurt. 1 Spa. Cut all their throates. Har. Kill vs, but let our little children liue. Len. Helpe mother helpe, or else we shall be kild. Har. weeping. Hard harted Soldiers, where haue you bin bred? Get honour on the proude resisting foe, My selfe haue bin a Soldier as you are, Now blinde with age: Olde men, weake women, and poore wretched infants, Should be respected in the heate of slaughter.
O doe not this foule iniurie to armes; Let my poore Babies leade me to my graue, Where are you my poore children? Mar. Father, heere. Har. Where art thou Lenchy? Len. Heere poore Father. Har. Olde as I am, and I haue tolde this towne; That you should sacke it, I did prophesie. 2 Spa. Then Prophet, didst thou prophesie of this? Stabs the Children. Wif. Ah bloudie Spaniard, that hast slaine my children. 1 Spa. Bitch, art thou rayling? take thou this. Stabs her. 2 Spa. And this, Stabs him. Get you together with your damned brats. Har. O cruel Spaniard that dost spare no age nor sexe, Where art thou wife, and my poore little children? Falles downe. Wif. Their blessed soules in Abrahams bosome restes, Their bodies lye betwixt thy selfe and me, By whome these prettie wretches were begot, O let me ioyne my freezing lips to thine, Now farewell Antwerpe, say not we did flye, Where with thy fall, olde, yong, and all must dye. Enter Alua, English Gouernor and soldiers. Alua. Thinke yee to purchase freedome at this rate? Some thriftles prodigall bestowes in wine, Or spends in dalliance on his Curtizan, Fiue thousand crownes: like your store affoords No greater plentie▪ eyther from your chestes, That swell with surfet of your auarice, Raine downe a larger shewer of fruitfull golde, Or tender flowring pittie, nere will spring. Gou. I doe protest (my Lord) beside our Plate, And housholde furniture, this is the summe,
Of all the wealth, at this time may be found Within the English-house. Alu. And is not plate Good boote for Soldiers? haue you that And dare yee yet pleade needie pouertie? Goe fetch it me, or presentlie Ile send A crew of such sharpe caruers to your gate, As shall anotamize your panting hearts, To fill their conquering hands with wished spoiles. Go. The League with Engl. gaue vs better hope. Exit Alu. Talke nor of league nor England, nothing sound In our warres musicke, that can please the sence; Vnlesse it haue the chearefull sound of golde. Enter Factor. What's he? examine him: if he bring golde, Free passage haue he; but if emptie be The hollowes of his hands; or cannot point By Demonstration, or expresse by speech, Where it is fled, in this tempestious storme, That we by hugging it, may bannish feare, And burnish her pale cheekes with firmer red, Let him haue that belongs, the torturing Corde. Fac. Excuse my want, that haue alreadie paide To Sancto Daila, fiue hundred Dollors. Alu. Why not as much to me? Fac. I haue it not, Alas (my Lord) consider of my state, I am but Factor for another man; Yet of those goods committed to my charge, Haue I made bolde (so much as I haue said) To free my life from further preiudice. Alu. How art thou free, when Alua is not fee'd? Fac. I hope (my Lord) one ransome will suffice, For one poore life. Alu. That ransome let me see.
Fac. Tis paide (my Lord) to Sancto Daila. Alu. That which he hath is his, and none of mine, vnlesse thou canst transforme vs, and of two Make but one person: goe to, trifle no, But shew me how I may be satisfied, Or bide the perrill that ensues thereon. Fac. More satisfaction than I haue (my Lord) I cannot giue, how ere you torture me. Alu. That will we try, if roape and Gibbet holde, Let him indure the punishment, he needes Will wilfully impose vpon himselfe. Fac. Oh that you would at once with ruthles steele, Carue vp my brest, and let my bloud suffice, To quench your thirst for that I cannot giue. Alu. So, let him downe, stand off and giue him ayre, Speake now, and tell vs where thy coyne is hid? Fac. Will yee beleeue me if I speake the truth? Alu. So it be truth which thou intendes to speake. Fac. As I doe hope this troubled soule of mine, Which now is ready to forsake this flesh, Shall finde a resting place with my redeeme: The coyne you seeke, and all the coyne I haue, Lyes in the Coffers of proude Danila. Alu. Lye there and pine then, for deluding me. Exit. Enter Verdugo. Fac. Heere comes another; many strokes (at last) Cut downe the strongest Oake, much more, the tree Hath but a few yeares growth, and that by stormes, And often whirle-windes shaken and decayed. Ver. Hast thou bin lately falne into the hands Of such as haue had ryfling of thy purse? Fac. I haue good Sir. Ver. What art, a Cittizen? Fac. Euen what ye will, a miserable man. Ver. It seemes, I come too late to profit by thee?
Fac. You may immagine by my sicke faint speech, And by my faltring limmes distract and seuer'd, Whether I haue bin tortur'd, yea or no. Ve. Did they then torture thee for that thou hadst? Fac. They did and had it. Ver. Nothing then remaines? Fac. Nothing but this poore miserable life, Which I would gladly were surrendred too. Ver. They for that thou hadst, did torture thee, I see that thou hast not: heere wee'll put A period to thy daies. Hang him out-right, And so speed all, whose naked indigence, Haue not to feede Verdugo for expence. Exit. Fac. My destiny, was to dye this shamefull death, Which I accept with thankes to him that giues it, And England now and London both farewell, Let after times of Spanish rygor tell. Hang him. Enter Van End and a Burgers wife. Van. Thus will I feast my selfe with Antwerpes spoile, And glut my pyning soule with tragicke Actes, Say pamperd Froe, where is thy treasure hid? Speake truth, or breath thy last vpon this steele, The bloudy temper'd torment of this towne. Ile batter downe your pride from whence it came, And with your ornaments adorne vast hell. wif. Spare me Van End I am a harmeles woman, Astonisht vnto death with frighting wordes, Refraine thy deedes, and let the stronger sort, Be miserable patients of thy wrath Van. Pittie preuailes not, treasure is the fee, That bribes the terror of my threatning brest; And therefore speake, else hast thou spoke thy last. wife. Within that vault lyes all my wretched wealth, My golde my plate, my Iewels all are there.
Van. Then, there that heape of glorie lyes for me, Which is the way? She pushes him downe. wif. That is the cursed way, Goe thou accurst into that shade of hell, The Image of that euerlasting night, Where thy damn'd ghoast must dwel exempt from light. Enter Stumpe. Stum. What stirre is heere? what discontented rumor Sendes second message to my dull strucke dayes, Accustom'd to the screeching yell of death? Lady, what grieuance? what is there to doe? wif. Oh gentle Soldier, heauen hath got me triumph, Ouer that hell-borne furie, damn'd Van End, That solde the beautie of this famos towne: And rauisht Antwerpe of her Maiden ioy. Stum. For Gods sake let me come plague the dog, Ile stone the Iew to death, and paint this Vault With the vnhallowed bloud of wicked treason: Heere, weare this waightie Iewell in thy hat, The towne hath sent it for a token slaue; Throw stones. I bought this with the goate you gaue me sir; Another sto. Soldiers must loath despis'd dingratitude. This woman for her ransome sends you this; another. Giue these two vnto Charon for your passing. another. And with this last, present grim Belzebub. another. So sleepe thy soule with princely Lucifer, And take such fare as treason will affoord. Come Lady, thus you see good friends must part, Lament not for his losse his tyme was come, And friendes from friends, must eyther goe or run. Enter three or four soldiers. 1 Sol. You see that all is lost, all spoilde and sackt,
What thinke you the best course to get away? 2 Sol. Is there no place of strength, nor hope of safetie▪ 3 Sol. No hope but death for three daies being past Since the first entred; now being in colde bloud, The Spaniard is as hot in execution, As the first houre he entred on the towne. 1 Sol. Like maymed men let's passe out one by one, The safest way and with the least suspect. 2 Sol. Disseuering of ourselues, and knowne for Wallons, ther's not a man of vs shal passe the gates. Enter Stumpe and hearing them. 3 Sol. And if we troope thus as we doe together, We shall be put to swoord immediately. 1 Sol. It were best to seeke some low part of the wall, On the moate side, and so escape by swimming. 2 Sol. The Courts of guard, and Sentenels are kept, And there's no hope of that. Stumpe. Harke you hark you, whether wil you flye? I wold know that; sbloud whether? whether? ha; where will you be releiu'd? there's not a towne dare receiue you: the Spaniard has all the country; you cannot stragle a foote out of the walles, but your throates are cut; what haue you to carry with you, but your scuruie notch'd limmes? you damn'd roagues, whether will you goe, to feede Wolues? A you whorson rascals; and though these villanos Bur∣gers haue (by their owne securitie beene the destruction of the Cittie, a pox on them: yet it will bee laide to our charge, because we were in it. 1 Sol. By the mas the olde Lieuetenant sayes true, it wil be so indeed. Stum. You are all Wallons, but in the miserablest case that euer poore slaues were in: for you see, that if any man hate a man, call him but Wallon, the Spaniards cut his throate, what country-man so ere he be▪ 2 Sol. Nay it is very true, it is most sure:
Stu. The Dutch on the other side, they hate you worse then Deuils, because the Spaniards entred where you kept the Trenches. 3 Sol. Villaines doe questionles, nay it is certaine. Stum. What will you doe then? here is my poore stumpe and I haue stumbled through a thousand shot, & yet we halt together; there was neuer one poore peece of Timber has been so sindg'd as it has been: bloud it has been foure times a fire vnder me, and yet we scramble to∣gether trotting, trotting: You'll bee staru'd euerie mo∣thers Sonne of yee, and worried with dogs, and yet you'll flye. 1 Sol. Why Lieuetenant Vaughan, what would yee haue vs doe? Stum. Dye like men, what should we doe, if there were any hope of safety but there is not, there is not. 2 Sol. Leiuetenant Vaughan, leade vs, and wee'll follow you to the death. 3 Sol. Wee'll not forsake you to the last gaspe. Stum. Yes, Ile halt before you, follow mee as straight as you can▪ 1 Sol. Yes, and cut some of their throates before wee dye. Stum. They say the Spaniards and their whoores are at dice vpon the Change: Ile lay my wodden legge afore them, cast at it who will; but who stands there? Enter the Captaine. Cap. It is Leiuetenant Vaughan as I take it, Leiuetenant what newes? Sum. What newes quoth our Captaine! where haue you been? Cap. I tooke the Friery to escape the Spaniards. Sum. Well, haue seene the day Captaine, you rather been a cting throates, then at a Masse,
was not de∣ion  draue you to the place: so Captaine, Captaine, the world is turn'd: doe you remember the groate they offe∣red me, when you came to trayne Soldiers? ha, giue him a groate? ha, ha, I haue since that seene their Mistresses by a lowzy Lackey, as naked as a new shau'd Water-dog: & Lord why went you to the Fryery? why to the Fryerie? Cap. What should I doe when the poore Wallons fighting at the Trenches, The Spaniards entring on the counterscarfe, Had not a Soldier sent to second them. The great swolne bellyed Burgers get browne Billes, As to driue rascall beggers from their doores; The madding people so amaz'd with feare, That turning head with euery little noise, Stopt vp the entrance of the streetes with throngs, That when Count Egmont, Hauury and the rest, Call'd to the Burgers for supplyes of men, The vncertaine murmure of the multitude, Increast but the confusion of the towne: The villanous and dastard recreant Almaines, Kneele to the Spaniards, casting downe their armes. Stum. A those Almaines, those Almaines, they cryed liue Spaniards: a vengeance take them, they were cal'd hygh Almaines, but they are low enough now; for a num∣ber of them are cut off by the waste: you may call them blanch'd Almaines and you wil, for their guts are blanch'd about their heeles. Cap. By these disorders of witlesse Townes-men, Perceiuing that the Spaniards would preuaile; What should I doe but shift to saue my life? Stu. Capt. your life's in as great danger now as ere it was, The Spaniard is as cruell in colde bloud as ere he was; O Captaine, Captaine, where is Antwerpe now? It  my natiue place, where should I then be free, If made a slue, where I was freelie borne?
Ther's not a towne almost in Brabant now, That giues a man the safet of a night: What should we then doe liuing: Haue you and I seene that, that we haue seene, And come to this? If you reserue the courage you were wont, Of a braue Soldier and a Gentleman, Let's doe something yet worthy the talking of, I haue wonne a companie of poore hurt Soldiers, Yet able to welde weapons and to fight. 1 Sol. And we will follow you, liue or dye: 2 Sol. Loue life and loue death. 3 Sol. Through Aluas quarter. Stum. Why brauely spoke, If you will take such part then as we doe, Helpe me to leade these stragling companies, And wee'll amongst their quarters ere we dye. Cap. My hand and heart, and doe engage my soule. Stu. Why then come lads; why this is resolu'd like men, If we must goe, wee'll goe together then. Exeunt. Enter two soldiers leading in the fat Burger in a Cord. 1 Sol. Confesse ye slaue where thou hast hid thy money, Or we will hang thee on a Gibbet straight. Bur. That euer I was borne; Gentlemen beleeue me, I haue no more than what I tolde you of, Some thousand Gilders in my counting house. 2 Sol. You haue no more than? Burg. Not as I haue faith To God, and to the safetie of my Country. 2 Sol. Then hang him presentlie. Bur. Nay curteous Gentlemen, As you are Spaniards famous for your actes, Let me not dye. 1 Sol. The roague would flatter vs,
Sra, immagine tis too weake a key, To tune our hearts to; when the cryes of Babes, Screekes of distressed women and olde men, Haue not preuail'd to quallifie our rage: Let vs dispatch him. Bur. Gentlemen, but heare me. 2 Sol. If thou canst tell vs where thy treasure's hid, Or else for euer let thy lips be dumbe. Bur. Alas would yee haue me lye? 1 Sol. Stay fellow Soldier, I hae bethought me of a prettie tricke, To sift this butter-box a better way: Wee 'll tye him by the thumbes vnto this poast, And tickle him vntill he doe confesse. 2 Sol. Contentyfaith, so at the least, suppose We get no money yet we shall haue sport. Bur. Nay Gentlemen. 1 Sol. Sirra, apply your wits, Or with my swoord Ile hacke your Filchers off. Bur. O that I were in'th bottom of my Seller. 2 Sol. Is thy money hid there? speake? Bur. No truelie sir, But then I hope I should not hang byth thumbes. 1 Sol. He dallyes with vs, tickle him a good. Bur. Oh God, God, what shall I do, sweet gentlemen. They tickle him. 2 Sol. Confesse then, sirra. Bur. O Lord I shall sound, By these ten endes, I haue nor plate nor coyne, Your Generall and Countrimen haue all. Alarum, enter Stumpe and Captaine, the Spaniards fly. Cap. What  we heer, a Burger tyed yth thumbs? Stum. It is the Tallow-cake, the Rammish Fat, That would not giue a penny to a Soldier,
I know him well; now Sir how feele your selfe▪ Bur. Oh Gentlemen neuer so much distrest. Stum. Your greazie panch will not defend you then? Bur. Not from these Spaniards, they think, Nay farre more couetous than deuils of hell. Stum. You cannot satisfie them with a groate, But if I should requite thy vilde contempt, Heere should I leaue thee, that as thy treasure Has bin a pray to their deuouring lust, So in this dung-hill of thy carryon flesh, Their rauenous swoords might finde a dutie feast, For naught but draffe art thou composed of. Nor fit for any thing but to feede wormes, Yet thou shalt finde a difference twixt my thoughts And the base temper of thy muddy minde: Goe liue, if thou canst scape their bloudie hands, Till want and beggerie cut short thy daies. Bur. I thanke you sir; I haue (for all their threates) One bag of Dollors cast into a well, And that Ile giue yee for this friendlie succour. Stu. Hence tumbrell from my sight, when boūty might Haue calm'd my sharpe affliction then thy hand Was fast closd vp; but now it is too late, Thou wouldst seeme prodigall, away base churle. Bur. Let me intreate you sir, to take that summe, My heart repents me much, for what is past. Stum. Guts, trouble me no more. Bur. The Lord preserue you sir, Surely you seeme an honest Gentleman. Cap. Wilt thou leaue off thy prating and be gone? Bur. With all my heart sir, and I thanke you too. Exit Cap. How like Leuiathan, his clumsie limbes Walke not but tumble, that sad common wealth, Nourceth such Droanes to sucke her honny vp, In time of need shall finde as small supply, As he hath been to Antwerpes wretchednes:
But valliant Soldier, what is now to doe? Stum. What, but to hunt the foote-steps of pale death, Vntill we rouze him in his sooty caue, There, will no prospect of our Countries fall, Offend our eye-sight; there no treacherie Of haughty Spaniards treade a bloudy March; Nor any base obiection of ingrate, And thankelesse Cittizens sit in our doores: But we shall quietly inioy the peace, For which we breath; there shall we be secure, There free from thought of this worlds miserie, And there indeede finde true felicitie: For there our trauell shall be recompenc'd, Our loue requited, and our wounds repayde With double merrit. Haste then vnto the place, Vpon the earth is nothing but disgrace. Cap. I flye with thee true honourable minde, And we together will that Mancion finde. Exeunt. Alarum and excursions, enter Stumpe and Captaine, bloudy and wounded. Stum. See Captaine, now I haue it on my brest, The Honourable cognisance of death, This purple riuer, from this weeping fount, More glads and quickens my decayed spirit, Than euer christ all spring in heate of Summer: The weary traueller, his strength reuiues, To draw out tedious houres still on earth, But mine doth florish to possesse, anon The blessed hauen of eternity. Cap. I trust I shall be there with as much speed, My pasport (I doe thinke) the Spaniards Has seal'd as deeply, and my iourney layde With no lesse easie trauell to be there. See, if thy bleeding woundes can speake to me,
Mine can as fast make answere vnto thine. Stum. Let me imbrace this sweet affinity, Like in our liues agreeing in our deathes: But what doe I behold? thine eye-lids faint, And the warme touch of thy desired cheeke, Begins to freeze; wilt thou anticipate Those ioyes before me? gentle Captaine slay, There's but a minute that deuides our hopes: Oh he is dead, may his departing soule, Vsher my spirit aboue those fleeting clowdes: Death, why delayst thou? set thy lazy hand To the deuorcement of my loathed flesh. I am prepar'd, my penitent sad thoughts, Haue long agoe washt my contagious sinne: The bloud that I haue spilt (the Massacres Procur'd and practis'd by this hand of mine) Heauen lay not to my charge; for though my sword Was neuer drawne but in a rightfull cause, Yet much misprision hath attended it; That, and all else, this sigh craues pardon for, Mine eyes were nere accustomed to teares, Let it suffice, these woundes doe weepe for them: Antwerpe farewell, if thou haue done me wrong, This latest gaspe, sends pardon from my tung. Astorish. Enter in triumph, with Drum, Colours and Soldiers, Sancto Danila. Dan. Now warre hath wrapt his bloudy colours vp, And sheath'd his fatall swoord with his, we ours, Prefixing truce to our laborious armes; This Cittie late of christening the fame, For wealth and glorie: now remaines the Map, destruction and perpetull yne; with slaughtered carkasses, before were stuft with pride, An left as :
Oh in remorse of humaine clemency, My heart (not thinkes) could sigh, my eyes shed teares, To call to minde and see their misery: But they were wanton and lasciuious, Too much addicted to their priuate lust: And that concludes their Martirdoome was iust. Holde, one of you, conuay this serious letter To warlicke Alua, tell him as he wil'd, After my forces lodg'd in Garison, Ile meete his Grace at Bridges, and from thence Acquaint the Court of Spaine with our successe; Pray God the tyrany exprest in Antwerpe, Like to the ecchoing clamour of a Trumpet, Speake not our deedes before our owne approach. 1 Sol. My Lord, behold where lye the mangled bodies Of those two fierce assailing Brabanters, That all this while kept vs at such a bay, And when we thought the towne was wonne, procur'd So great a deluge of berian bloud. 2 Sol. Let's drag them at our horses tayles my Lord, And as we passe through euery towne and village, Make them example to the world for pride? Dan. Who toucheth them but in disgrace, my swoord Shall lop his arme off▪ were they proude sayst thou? Their pride was honourable, deseruing loue Rather then hate; nay should we doe them right, Had they been strengthned with conuenient ayde We had been bea from the towne againe And made exchange of conquest: which subdu'd There neuer liued two Heroieth spirits That for their Country haue deserd as much To be renouned; as euer was Or Romaine  or the They for their  could but loose their Liv These haue inequall serice done as much Take vp their bodyes; of ten thousand others
Rest by our swords, and left unvied These two will we in person see interr'd, And doe them right, the law of Armes require; So march we hence, striking a mournfull sound Till we haue sayde our honourd foes in ground Exeunt Epilogus Enter Time Time Thus worldlings, Time in his unwonted loue Hath staid his course, to rubb the memorie Of actions long since cast behind his back His care is fruitefull, and doth wish to see No heauie or disastrous chance befall The sonnes of men if they will warned be But when they against my discipline Wasting the treasure of my precious houre No maruayle then, like misery catch holde On them, did fasten oh this wofull toune Whose bleeding fortune, whose lamenting Whose streetes besmear'd with bloud, whose blubred eyes Whose totter'd walls, whose buildings ouerthrowne Whose riches lost, and pouertie made knowne: May be a meane all Citties to affright How they in sinne and pleasure take delight FINIS
