17507 99838300 2674
A TREATYSE OF CHRI¦AN PEREGRINATION, W¦ten by M. Gregory Martin Licentiate,  and late reader of diuinitie in the Englishe Coleadge at Remes. VVhereunto is adioined certen Epistles vvrit∣ten by him to sundrye his frendes: the copies vvhereof vvere since his decease founde a∣monge his vvrytinges. Novv especially puplished for the banifite, of those, that either erre in religion of simplicitie, or folovv the vvorlde of frayli. ANNO DOMINI 1583.
The contentes of this booke. A briefe preface. 2. A treatise of Pilgrimage and Re∣licks. 3. A letter sente to M. N. a maried priest. 4. A letter sent to his Sisters, maried to protestants, and them selues trained vpp in heresie, where he sheweth and proueth the Catholicke Church to be the true Church. 5. A letter sent to M. D. Whyte then warden of newe colleadge in Oxford, touching his folowng the worlde and dissmbling in religiō agaynst his con∣science and knowledge.
The Printers Preface vnto the Christian Reader. THE aunciente Authour of here∣sie by innumerable meanes endu∣ceth his instruments (the profes∣sed enimies of Catholicke truth) eruersly to opugne by flat denyall, impudent∣ to vvrest by absurde cauills, or Ievvishly  reiecte vvith blasphemous tauntes, those inges vvhich either they liste not to beleeue,  desire not to learne: In all vvhich, though eir facilitie vvere euer ntorious, yet their pudencie vvas neuer more manifest then in is age. But seeing truth is eterall, heresie ariable, and incredulitie atbisme: The mem∣rs of Christ his Catholicke Church on the o∣er side being guided by the holy Ghost, haue e seased sufficiently to circumuent and dis∣uer the finall driftes of those deluders in ma∣y most excellent and learned discourses late∣ vvritten, amonge the vvhich this briefe reatyse of Christian Peregrynationme vnto my handes; the vvhich by lycense
of my Superiours, I haue here published, and annexed there-unto certayne Epistles of the same Authors, a man of rare vertue and ex∣cellent learning. Leauing thee (good Christian Reader) vvith attention to consider thereof: trusting the same vvill sufficiently geue testi∣monie vnto thee, that there is no parte or poy of the Catholicke Fayth vnable inuincibly to be defended. Further assuring thee, that vvhat∣soeuer incredulous hereticke gayn-sayeth the same, he not onely resisteth here in earth the Church millitant and the members therof, but violently stryueth agaynst the Prophetes, A∣postles, Fathers, Doctours and blessed Sayntes in heauen, vvhose very vvords and vvrytings here alleadged he vvickedly oppugneth, the vvhich action of his and comparison of him vvith those, may be a suffici∣ente motiue to confirme thy fayth. Vale. R. V.
A SHORTE DISCOVRSE OF Pilgrimage and Relycks. PILGRYMAGE cō∣minge of the latyne worde perigrinatio, is nothinge ells in this presente case which now I mene to write of, The name of pilgri∣mage & pil∣grime. but going of de∣tion to visite some holy monument f Christ or his Saints, as to Hierusalem,  Rome, to Compostella. To the which aces because there hath bene alwaies eat resort of strangers (in latin pere∣ini) out of all Christian countries, erof is it that we say, Pilgrimes of Hie∣salem, of Rome, of Compostella, that is, raungers and religious trauelers to ose places. For example, wheras the ree wyse and honorable persons na∣ed Magi came from the Easte to wor∣ip Christ in Bethlehem, Mat. 2. we may very uely say of them, that they came in
Pilgrimage to Christ. Whē the Cha∣berlayne to the Queene of Aethiopr whom Philippe baptised, went out of hi countrye to worship God in the tem∣ple at Hierusalem, he wente also in Pil∣grimage. S. Paule him selfe goinge to Hierusalem of purpose to see Peter, and (as Theophylactus noteth) not to see him onely, In. 1. Galat. but vvith all to honour him as his be∣ter, euen as vve goe to holy vertuous men, made a certeyne Pilgrimage. The dif∣ference is, here was Pilgrimage to the persons them selues, as to Christ and to Peter, we hauing now their monumēts onely and of other Saints, make Pil∣grimage vnto them. Ho. 5. ad po. Antioch. And accordinge to this sense S. Chrisostome in one of his Sermōs most properly speaketh thus. If I vvere voyde of Ecclesiasticall cares and had a strong body, I vvould not refuse to make soe longe a iourney, (as from Antioch to Rome) to see the cheynes at the least and the prison, vvhere Paule vvas bound. In the la∣tin we read it thus, peregrinationem tan∣tam facere non recusarem. I woulde not
cke to make so longe a Pilgrimage. nd this much for the names of Pil∣ime and Pilgrimage, which heretiks ue made sore bugges-wordes, as ough a man would saye, Idolatour d Idolattie. Which termes to the ende thou yest vnderstand (Christian Reader) w falsely and foolishly they are ob∣cted to vs: The princi∣pal cause of pilgri∣mage, Gods honor. Marke in all that I shall  hereafter, the feruent deuotion of grymes, and the princypall cause reof, to wit the glory of God and  honour of his Sonne Iesus Christ: ich are the very grounds of Catho∣ke Pilgrimage, Ho. 5. ad Po. Antioch. Deuotion or affecti∣, as when the forsayed holy Doctor ulpet vehemently brake out into se words: Vellem nunc in illis locis ver∣ &c. I vvould vvish novv to be for a e in the places vvhere these chaynes re∣yne, and see the fetters, vvhich diuels feare,  Angels reuerence. The cause of this  affection, because they were Paules ynes, his cheynes that was Vas electi∣onis,
God chefe∣ly is hono∣red, when sayntes or their reliks are honoted Gods chosen vessell: his cheyn that caried the name of Christ before Kinges and countryes, that turned a great parte of the worlde to the fayth, that wrote so many excellent Epistles for our edifying, that for Christ suffe∣red infinit miseries, finally his cheynes that vnder Nero shed his bloud for the Ghospell. These considerations and the lyke made this learned Father so in loue with the Apostle, that he could not conteyne him selfe, but woulde needes signifie, how he honored the very fetters, cordes, and linckes, wher∣with this Champion was tyed for the name of Christ. This religious zeale towardes Christ and his Saynts caused him in an other place to saye in this heauenly maner. I remember thee Peter, and am amased. I thinke vpon thee Paule, and being in maner past my selfe, can not re∣frayne vveeping, for vvhat I may say or vvhat I may speake beholding your afflicti∣ons, I knovv not. Hovv many prisons haue you sanctified? Hovv many cheynes haue you
eautified? Hovv many tormentes haue you usteyned? You haue folovved Christ in all hings. VVell mayest thou reioyse Peter, that adst the gift to suffer vpon the Crosse as Christ id. Blessed are the nayles that persed those oly limmes of thyne. Thou also (O blessed aule) haste greate cause to be glad, vvhose ead vvas cut of vvith the svvord. VVhat a recious svvord is that vvhich perced thy sa∣red throte, the instrument of our Lord, vvhich eauen doth admire, and the earth doth reue∣ence. That svvord I vvish to be my garland, nd thoso nayles of Peter in steed of precious nes to stande in my golden crovvne. This euotion proceding of that cause and eferred to that end, which is the wor∣hip and glory of Christ, is the very round of honoring Relicks, and con∣equentlye the cause of Pilgrimage: The glory of Christ I say. 1. cor. 3. For vvhat is Paule, vvhat Apollo, vvhat Peter, but his inisters and seruantes in vvhom vve be∣eeue? Our Sauiour sayeth, he that ge∣neth a cuppe of could water to one of his litle ones, tantum in nomine discipuli,
onely in the name of a disciple, and  S. Marke expresseth it, Cap. 9. quia Christi sun, because they belong to Christ, he shall not loose his rewarde. And he that re∣ceaueth a Prophete in nomine Propheta, because he is a Prophete, not for an other worldly consideration, he shall haue a rewarde answerable to the dig∣nitie of a Prophete. Li. 4. cap. 4. We reade in the bookes of Kinges, that the welthy wo∣man of Suna hauing entertayned Elie∣us, at length sayed to her husband I per∣ceaue this is a holy man of God vvhich passeth by our hovvse so often: let vs therefore prouide a litle chamber for him, and set a hed in it, a table, a stoole, and a candlesticke, that he may rest vvith vs, vvhen be commeth. Therefore (sayeth she) let vs doe it, because he is a holy man of God. A goodly reason and godly consideration. But what re∣warde had she? Being barren before, now she had a sonne: the sonne dyed, and was restored to lyfe agayne, that after sorow her ioy might be greater. In the greate dearth that then happe∣ned,
she was well prouided for in an o∣ther countrye, and after seuen yeres receaueth all her possessions agayne, and the rents for the tyme that she was absent, by the Kings commaundment, and all this by the meanes of that Pro∣phete whom she so entertayned. Leoni∣des father to Origen that learned Doc∣tor, him selfe a great clerke and after∣ward a Martyr, was wonte to kisse his sonnes brest, being then a litle boye, when he laye sleeping. useb. li. 6, cap. 2. If therefore be∣cause he was his prety boy, it had bene  litle fondnes, but the storye sayeth: Osculabatur tanquam Spiritus sancti habi∣aculum: Hiero. in. pitaphio. He kissed it as the dvvelling or tem∣ple of the holy Ghost. Paula an honotable widow and religious marrone of Rome comming in Pilgrimage to Bethlehem, after many godly meditatiōs, at length concludeth thus. Here is my resting place, because it is the country of my Lord: here vvil I dvvell, because our Sauioer hath chosen it. S. Hierome speking of Origens commen∣taries vpon the twelue Prophets, In  saith
that he esteemed them as much worth as Craesus welth. Whye? because they were written with Pamphilus the mar∣tyrs owne hand. Si enim laetitia est &c. For if it be great ioye to haue one epistle of a Mar∣tyr, hovv much more, to haue so many thovv∣sand verses, vvhich I imagine as though they vvere dravvne vvith the printes of his bloud. This deuotion toward God and his sonne Iesus Christ, maketh holy per∣sons to honour all thinges that belong to them. The trewe end and pur∣pose of god∣ly pilgrims. Prophetes, because they are Gods Prophets. Mattyrs, because they are the matyrs of Christ. All monu∣ments of them, for their sake. Concer∣ning places: Bethlehem, because our Sa∣uiour was borne there. Mount Caluarye, because he suffred there. Rome, because Peter and Paule are buried there, there they dyed for Christ, there are their bodies, their shrynes, their chaynes, o∣ther their glorious memories. In this respect to goe to Hierusalem, to trauaile to Rome, is a very frutefull Pilgrimage. Otherwise to goe to see strange coun∣tryes,
gaye buildinges, prophane anti∣quities, to learne tongues, yea and as ome traytours doe, to espye faultes, ometyme it is sinfull, and neuer to be alled Pilgrimage. Socrat. . 4. ca. 18. It is tould much for he prayse of Ammonius an auncionte monke, that going to Rome with Atha∣atius, he was so farre from all vayne uriositie, that he desired to see no∣hing at all of the stately buildinges here, but onely Peter & Paules Church: arre contrary to a certen countrye∣man of ours, whoe making large re∣orts of courtysāts, what goodly how∣es and how many they had, wherin by he authority of a traueler he thought e might bouldly feyne at his pleasure: eing demaunded of a wyse man, how any Churches were there, how bew∣ifull, how deuoutly frequented, could make no answere. Such a wonderfull difference there is betweene a good godly Pilgrime, and a worldly wicked traueler. In Ep. ad. Rom. S. Chrisostome declaring his sin∣guler affection toward Rome, hath after
his maner these excellente wordes. I therefore loue Rome (albeit I might prayse it for other causes, for largenes, for antiquitie, for beautie, for number of people, for the Empyre, for ryches, for mightye thinges atcheiued in vvarfare, but letting passe all these, therefore I accompt it a blessed Cyttie,) because Paule did so loue them, vvhen he lyued, and prea∣ched before them, and at length ended his lyfe among them: vvhose holy body they haue, and therfore that Cittie thereby is made more glorious, then by all other thinges. And as it vvere a great mightye bodye that had tvvo gliftering eyes, so it hath the bodyes of those Saints (Peter and Paule): The heauens I tell you doe not so shyne, vvhen the sunne cas∣teth his beames, as doth the Cyttie of Rome vvith these lampes, that lighten the vvhole vvorld. Consider me I pray you, and be ama∣sed to thinke, vvhat a fight Rome shall see vvhen Paule shall ryse sodenly out of that Coffin of his, vvith Peter, to meete our Lorde. O that I might be so haeppie as to embrace and grype that body of Paule rounde about, to be tyed in his graue a vvhyle, to see but the duste
of that bodye vvhich caried the markes of Christ. Tell me (gentle Reader) when thou hearest this, art thou not moued with deuotion towarde the very car∣casses of those Apostles, and cōsequēt∣ly toward the Cittie where they are to be seene? I confesse vnto thee my fo∣lish kind harte in this case: As often as I reade it I am redy to melte for ioye. But marke as I began to say the cause of his affection towarde Rome: to wit the bodies of the Apostles lying there, and why the bodies? because they ca∣ried the markes of Christ. This is it that causeth Pilgrimage. This conside∣ration, The eruen deuotion o pilgrimes whence it procedeth. for the loue of Christ and the honour of him, inflamed this godly Father and all the beste Christians in the Primitiue Church, to loue sacred monumēts, to be desirous to see them, to goe farre and neere vnto them, to touch, to kisse, to licke them, to weepe in the place, to conceaue such a lyuely imagination of thinges done there by Christ or his Saynts, and withall such
a sensible feeling of heauenly deuoti∣on, that it was a payne to remoue from thence, a death to dwell farre of: A ioy and comfort to say with the Spouse of Christ, Inueni quem quaesiuit anima mea: te∣nebo eum & non dimittam. I haue founde him whom my soule sought for. I will hould him fast, and neuer let him goe. One example may suffice in steede of a number, being of most excellent im∣portance, and therefore I will tell it at large and neuer craue pardon for the matter, because I know it can not but much delight al such as are not sworne ennemies to the honour of Christ and his sacred monuments. I named a litle before one Paula a verye honorable gentle-woman of Rome: who after the death of her hus∣bande entred into religion with her doughter Eustochium, traueled both to∣gether to the holy lande, dwelt there aboue twentie yeres, vntill her death. Whose vertues vere such that S. Hie∣rome doth protest, if all his ioyntes and
limmes were turned into tongues, he could not sufficiently prayse her: and calleth IESVS to witnes, that whatso∣euer he wryteth of her, is a playne his∣toricall truth, and no retoricall ampli∣fication. In Epita¦phio. The order of her Pilgrimage for the cheefe points was this as S. Hie∣rome telleth it. The pilgri¦mage of paula. After she had passed Rhodes and Lycia, she came at length to Cypres, where she fell at the feete of the holy and reuerent Bishop Epiphanius, and was content to be stayed there ten dayes, not to rest her in steed of a bayt, but to doe workes of charitie: For in that space she visited all the religious howses of that country, Cypres fu of religion men. and as she was able, gaue them almes: From thence she made a litle cutte ouer the water to Selencia and so to Antioch, where the holy Confessour Paulinus could staye her but a very litle tyme: but euen in the mids of winter (so feruent she was in fayth) a woman of honorable cal∣ling, tooke her iorney vpon a lytle asse: Arryueth at Sarepta, where she en∣tred
into a litle turret of Elias, and ma∣king her prayers to our Sauiour, pas∣seth by the sandes at the shore of Tyre where Paule kneeled: From thence to Caesaria: In it she saw Cornelius howse, whose houshold was the litle Church of Christ: and Phillips chambers with the fowre closettes of his doughters that were Virgins and Prophets: Then to Nicopolis, which before was called Emaus, where our Sauiour was know∣en in the breaking of bread. To make shorte, Hermynd was onlie to sacred monumēts. she forsooke the princely mo∣numente of Queene Helena (who had succoured the people with corne in a tyme of famine) and went on streyght to Hierusalem. The Lieutenante of Pa∣lestine knowing her howse and family very well, commaunded the Palace to be prepared for her, but she chose ra∣ther a litle base cottage, and with such feruente deuotion visited euery holy place, that but for hastening to the rest she might hardly haue bene plucked from the former. In Hierusalem knee∣ling
before the Crosse, Her manner of reuerēce in holy places. euen as though she had seene our Lord present, so de∣uoutly she adored and did humble re∣uerence. Entring into the Sepulcher, she kissed the Resurrection-stone, which the Angell had remoued from the doore: and the very place where our Lords body did lye, she licked with a fayth∣full mouth, as one that thirsted after water much longed for. All Hierusalem beareth witnes, what teares, what sob∣binge, what sorowe she powred out there: Our Lord him selfe is witnes to whom she prayed. Comminge furth from thence, she went to Sion, which is (to interpret) a peere or watch-tower: there was shewed vnto her a piller that bare vp part of the cloyster, embrued with our Lords bloud, to the which they say he was tyed and whipte. The place was shewed where the holye Ghoste came downe vpon a hundred and twentie persons that beleeued, to the fulfilling of Ioels Prophesie. This donne, she deuided the litle substance
she had to the poore Pilgrimes there her felow-seruants, and went forward to Bethlehem. In the way at the righte hand she pawsed at Rachels sepulcher, where she was deliuered of Beniamin: From thence being entred into Bethle∣hem, after she saw once the Inne of the blessed Virgin, and that stall where the oxe did acknowledge his lord and the asse his maisters stable, Wonderfull deuotion by occasion of the plrce. she sware in my hearing (sayeth S. Hierome) that she saw with the eyes of faith, the Infant wrap∣ped in his clowtes, our Lord crying in his cradle, the wyse men adoring, the starre shining ouer the howse, the Vir∣gin Mother, the carefull Tutour, the she pheards comming in the night to see what the matter was, the yong In∣nocentes slayne: Herode raging, Ioseph and Mary flying into Egipte: wherat be∣tweene teares and ioy she brake furth into these words, So the he∣brew words do signifye. saying: All bayle Beth∣lehem the verye hovvse of bread in deede, wherein was borne that bread which came downe from heauen. All hayle
Ephrata, vvorthely called a moste plentifull and frutefull country, whose fruteful flow∣er is God him selfe. Of thee Micheas prophicyed long agoe. And thou Beth∣lehem the hovvse of Ephrata, art not the least among a thousand other in Iuda: out of thee shall come surth to me euen he that shall be prince in Israell, vvhose proceeding is from the beginning and from the dayes of eternitie. And I wretched and sinfull woman that I am, how is it that I am thought worthy to kisse the manger where my Lorde first cryed, being a litle pretye one, and to pray in that cabbin, where the Virgin Child-wife brought furth our Lord a yong babe? Here is my rest∣ing place, because it is my Lords coun∣trye: here will I dwell, because our Sa∣uiour hath chosen it. Thus farre S. Hie∣rome, and much more which I omitte. Tell me Reader who so euer thou art, I appeale to thy conscience: what do∣est thou thinke of this noble womans Pilgrimage? Hast thou not read here her wonderfull desire and longing to
these holy places? her exceeding de∣uotion in them? her words? her teares? her maner of worship, in all poyntes so feruently and discretely applyed to the honor of our Lorde and Sauiour, that to dreame of her superstition in this case, were colde Christianitie: to imagine Idolatrie, were playne infide∣litie? Moste happie is he that can feele in him selfe these heauenly motions toward the least thinges that concerne Christ, for his sake: And most vnhap∣pie is he that doth not at the least de∣sire it: for to dispyse and condemne it altogether, I knowe right well is no small poynt of heresie, but in deede that name is to common and therefore to good for it. This this I saye, and often I must repete it, is the true cause, and maner, and frute of Catholicke Pilgrimage, exemplified by me in the forsayd Pau∣la, Pilgrimage to Hierusa∣lem from al countries in al ages. but so vniuersally vsed of all the moste holy and best learned men in the Primitiue Church, that S. Hierome in an
other place wryteth thus. Ad marcel∣lam in the name of Paula and Eustockium. It were long for me to runne through euerye age from the Ascension of our Lord vnto this day, and to shew, what Bishops, what Martyrs, what excellent Diuines haue come in Pilgrimage to Hierusa∣lem, thinking that their deuotion and knowledge was so much the lesse, and that they wanted some-thing to the perfection of vertue, if they had not worshipped Christ in the same places, from whence the Ghospell gan first to shyne downe from of the Crosse. Sure∣ly the companye of religious persons both men and women (that haue re∣sorted thither) is a certayne flower and most pretious iewell among the orna∣ments of the Church. pilgrimes of our owne countrye in S. Hieromes tyme. In Fraunce who soeuer is the cheefe, he commeth hy∣ther in all hast. The Britayne whom the seas deuide from this mayne part of the world that we are in, if he grow once to be any thing religious and well dis∣posed, he forsaketh the west parts, and seketh after this place which he know∣eth
by commō brute only & by report of the scriptures. What neede I reckon here the Armenians, the Persians, Indians, Aethiopians, and Aegypt, adioyning to it ful of Religious folke, Pontus, and Capa∣docia, Coele-syria and Mesopotamea with whole swarms of the East, and so furth. Gentle Reder, be wyse and sober in es∣teeming of holye thinges, marke those few examples, and be not wise in thine owne skoffing conceyte to condemne the authoritie of the whole world, and of that auncyent world, which by our aduersaries cōfession was without cor∣ruption. Thow hast here the custome of all states and degrees, out of all con∣tryes, synce CHRIST ascended, by S. Hieromes accompt. Vnles perhaps thou desire also to heare of Kyngs and Em∣perours: which demande is not vnrea¦sonable, for that some Prynces now a dayes are partly so prowd, and partly so farre from all deuocion, that it may seme incredible that the mightie Em∣perours of the world, aboue a thou∣sād
yeres ago, would not only reuerēt∣ly kneele in the place, Vbi steterunt pedes eius, where he stood, walked, died, rose againe & ascēded, that is Lord of lords, The Pilgri∣mage of Princes, and their honor of Relikes. but stoupe to the dust & ashes of poore fyshers his Apostles, & of meaner men his beloued seruants. And yet how ea∣sy it were to be copious in this poynte, they cā not be ignorant, that haue read the ecclesiastical histories of Constātyne the great, and his mother Helena, of Arca∣dius, of Theodosius his sonne and Eudocia the Emperesse his wyfe, of others. My purpose to be short doth not suffer me to tell of all perticularlye, Generally of al I will bring two testimonies very sufficient. Ep. 42. S. Austen wryting to Madau∣rēces that were Idolators: you see (saith he) that the potestates and Peeres of this world them selues, that haue bene wonne by the Christians not resisting but willingly dyeng, haue turned theyr force and lawes aganst these Idols, for the which before they put Christians to death. Et Imperii nobilissimi culmen emi∣nentissimum
ad sepulchrum Petri piscatoris submisso diademate supplicare: haec omnia scripturae diuinae ante longissima tempora fu∣tura esse testata sunt. And the most lofty toppe of the noble Empyre humbling the stately crowne, maketh supplicati∣on at Peter the fishers tombe: all these things the diuine scriptures witnessed long before should come to passe. Chri∣sostome also wryteth thus. Homeli. qd. Christus sit Deus. Romae quae vrbs est regalissima &c. At Rome, vvhich is the most royall citty, Kinges, Lieutenantes, Cap∣taynes, all other things set apart runne to the tombes of the Fisher and the Tent-maker. And in Constantinople our Emperours thinke it a great benefite to haue their bodies buryed not hard by the Apostles, but at the least vvithout their chappell dore a litle, and notvvithstan∣ding they vvere Princes of the vvorld, are con∣tent to be dore-keepers to poore fishers. Is not here going, running, kneeling, pray∣ing, burieng at the Apostles memori∣es? And is not that playne Pilgrimage? Is it not the verye honoring of sacred Rlikes after the present Catholicke
maner? Were they all fooles, all asses, all superstitious, all Idolatours? Yea I will say with S. Hierome: Cont. Vigil. scripto. 2. Did Constan∣tyne the Emperour commit sacriledge, vvhen he translated the holy Relikes of Andrevv, Luke, and Timothie to Constantinople: Great solē∣nitie in tras¦lating or re∣mouing of Relikes. before the vvhich Reliks the diuels rore, and confesse they feele the presence of these Saynts? Shall vve say that Arcadius (Emperour at this pre∣sent) is guiltie of sacriledge for translatinge Samuels bones so longe tyme after his death from Ievvry into Thracia? Are all those Bi∣shops not only sacrilegious but also fooles and asses, vvho caried in silke and in a golden cof∣fin that vvhich Vigilantius calleth a moste vyle theng and nothing els but vvynd-blovv∣ed asshes? Are the people of all parishes doltes and dysards, vvho came to meete the boly Re∣liks, and receaued them so ioyfully, as if they had seene the Prophete presente and alyue a∣mong them? in so much that from Palestine to Calcedō svvarmes of people vvere clustered to∣gether, singing vvith one voice to the praise of Christ. Here are many goodly poynts to be noted: the vniuersal practise of the
Primatiue Church, the principal cause and finall ende thereof, the prayse of Christ, Reliks honored because they were the Reliks of Samuell, Samuell ho∣nored because he was the Prophete of Christ, so deuoutly & in such swarmes because they now sawe them, and by occasion thereof entred into a higher consideration what a maruelous man he was, how farre in God his fauour: borne by miracle of a barren woman, dedicated or vowed to God before he was borne, famylier with him beinge but a child, nerer then of his counsell thē Hely the high priest, able to cōmaūd rayne and to stay it, to make Kings and to depose them, at one worde a moste excellent Prophete. These meditati∣ons I say by occasion of the eye trick∣ling into the mynd (as S. Cap. 18. Ba∣nist. Chrisostome and S. Austen speake in the lyke cases) made them so affected toward the Reliks as if they had seene the Prophete present. Cap. 5. de cu∣ra pro mort. Now then to go one steppe furder, If to see the place onely or some blessed
monumēt, doth so much styrre vp de∣uotion (as by these former examples appereth) that it iustly moued al good folke to trauail vnto them: Myracles wrought by Reliks cau∣sed Pilgri∣mage. which is properly Pilgrimage. When it pleased God moreouer to shew not onely quā pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors sanctorum eius: How presious in his sight the death of his saintes is, but also quam mi∣rabilis Deus in sanstis suis: HOW merue∣lous a God he is in his saynctes, when it pleased him I say to worke strāg mi∣racles, to bestow his gratious gifts vp∣on the poore, the lame, the sicke, and such like, and that at the tombes, by the verie vertue of his saintes Relikes: That, by al reason did much more in∣crease this desire, inflame this deuotiō, multiplye Pilgrimes and Pilgrimages. This was it that made the Princes of the earth bowe their crownes to the shrynes of the Apostles and Martyrs: When they saw the deuels rore there, wicked spirits cast out, the blind to see the lame to go, the dead to rise agayne,
Ipsi videntes sic, psal. 47. abmirati sunt, conturbati sunt, commoti sunt, tremor apprehendit eos. They seeyng such wonderful works, were amased, astonyshed, apawled, trembled to consider it, sayng that that goeth before in the same psalme. Mag∣nus Dominus & laudabilis nimis: The lord is great and exceeding prayse worthy. And agayne: For the cre∣dit of myra∣cles. Nimis honorati sunt amici tui Deus: Thy frendes O God are become very honorable. But doubtest thou Reader, whe∣ther euer anye such thinge hath bene done or no? No maruayle in this our faythlesse age wherein is veryfied the saying of our Sauiour: Luc. 18. Putas cum vene∣rit filius hominis, inueniet fidem in terra? Shall the sonne of man thinkest thou finde any fayth vpon the earth, when he cometh? But thou art a reasonable man, thou wilte beleeue those that in thyne owne iudgemente are worthye of credit, if they tell it thee. To omit S. Ambrose, Chrisostome, Hierome, and o∣thers, whose testymonyes are verye
playne and very many: let S. S Austens. testimonie of sundrie myracles. Austen suf∣fice in this my breuitie for all the reste: a man so farre from all superstition as he is from fayning or forginge: from both so farre, as the grauest, wisest, best learned Doctor of the Church muste needs be: Read at thy leasure the eight chapter of his twentye two booke de Ciuitate Dei through out. In the maene tyme I chose out these his wordes for thee to waye indifferently. Miraculum quod Mediolani factum est cum illic essemus. The miracle that vvas vvroughte at Millan vvhen vve vvere there, at vvhat tyme a blynd man vvas made to see, might vvel come to the knovvledge of manye because it is a great cittie, and the Emperour vvas there at the same tyme, and the thinge vvas done be∣fore a greate concurse of people to beare vvit∣nesse thereof, that ranne by heapes to the bo∣dyes of the Martyrs Geruasius and Protasius: vvhich bodies hauing bene longe so hid that no man could tell of them, Amb. ser. 91 nameth the man & his occupation vvere founde by a reuelation that Ambrose the Bishoppe had in his sleepe: At the vvhich very place the same
blynd man vvas deliuered from his olde dark∣nes, and savve the daye lighte. He telleth moreouer of a yong man so horribly possessed of an euill spirite, that he lay for dead, from the which he was dely∣uered, and restored also to his eye, that by force of the spirite departing from him, hanged downe vpon his cheeke. And this was done at the memory on∣ly, that is to saye some litle Relike of the forsayed Martyrs, farre from Millan where the bodyes lye: in Africke, at a towne called Victoriana, lesse then thir∣tie myles from S. Austens bishoppricke. Note by the waye that of one Martyr there were dyuers memories, S. Steuens relikes in sundrie places. that is, some Relike or other of him in sundry places: As of S. Steuen he reconeth vp seuen or eight, at all greate myracles wrought: At the one, a blynd woman saw, at an other, the Bishop that caried the Reliks was immediatly healed of a fistula: at another a Preist cured of the stone or grauell per memoriam supradicti Martyris: by the Relike of the forsayed
Martyr. Agayne a man of worship that was a verye Infidell, made an earnest Christian by the feruent prayer of his sonne in lawe ad memoriam Martyris, at the Martyrs Reliks: At another, a yong chylde and a nonne raysed from death to lyfe, and many other besids at other places reuyued whom he there recy∣teth. At length he concludeth thus: Quid faciam? VVhat shall I doe? My promise to ende this booke forceth me that I can not re∣hearse all vvhich I knovve. And vvithout doubt moste parte of our countrye men vvhen they shall read these, vvill be sory that I haue omitted so many thinges vvhich they knovve as vvell as I: of vvhom I craue pardon. Myracles in many places by S. Steuēs Relikes, For to let passe other, if I vvould vvryte the myra∣culous cures onely that haue bene done by this Martyr, to vvit, Steuen that moste glorious saynte, at Calamnes and vvith vs, I mighte make many bookes. In the ende he telleth at large a wonderfull cure donne vpon one Paule and his sister Palladia in his owne Church at S. Steuens Reliks, whē him selfe was present: Tam clarum atque
illustre miraculum, vt nullum arbitrer esse Hipponensium, qui boc non vel viderit vel didicerit: nullum qui obliuisci vlla ratione potuerit. So euident and famous a mira∣cle (sayeth he) that I thinke there is none in al Hippo but he saw it or hath heard of it, none that can possibly for∣get it. His conclusion to shut vpp the matter is that which I make the prin∣cipall ground of all these Pilgrimages, the honor of Christ in his sayntes. Ex∣ultabant in Dei laudem voces &c. There vvas such a sound of their voyces that coulde not speake for ioy, in the prayse of God, that our eares might hardly abyde it. Quid erat in cordibus exultantium nisi fides Christi, pro qua Stephani sanguis effusus est? VVhat vvas there in their hartes that so reioysed, but the fayth of Christ, for the vvhich Steuen shed his bloud? And are there yet Christian men in the worlde that doe discredite the mighty power and glorious workes of Christ in his sayntes? Agaynst faythles he∣retikes that discredit myracles. Yea (God wot) there are yet Eunomians and Porphirians
that saye these were but delusions of noughty spirites, Hiero. aduc. Vigil. and that they did not rore in very dede, but fained as though they suffered intollerable tormentes. Yet there are stubburne Arians that is to say heretickes, who (as Ambrose tel∣leth) would in no wyse confesse that the martyrs Geruasius & Protasius did vex the diuels, or make the blynd man see: Sermo. 91. whereas the spirites them selues con∣fessed it, and of the man named Seurus it was a thing famously knowen: yet there are Iewishe Scrybes that saye of Christ and his saynts: In nomine Belzebub eiiciunt daemonia: In the name of Belzebub they cast out diuels. Yet there are hypo∣criticall Pharises that pretēd as though they gaue all the honor to God, which they detracte from his saynts and their Reliks, lyke to the Iewes that sayed to the blynde man whom Christ had cu∣red. Da gloriam Deo: Geue God the prayse good felow: yea a lamentable case to consider, yet there are among Christi∣an men as farre from beleeuing the mi∣racles
done by Sayntes, To discre∣dit miracles is plaine pa∣ganisme. as were some∣tyme the Paynims: in so much that the learned bookes of Chrysostome, Austen, and others made in this case to proue agaynst them, are not sufficient to per∣swade our owne faythlesse false bro∣therhood: wherein I maruaile they are not ashamed, pretending the name and profession of Christians, agaynst the authorytye of the wholle Prymytiue Church, to plead the Paynims cause who to discredit the miracles of Christ and his Apostles, 22. eiuit. c. 8. obiected thus, as S. Austen writeth. Cur nunc illa miracula quae praedicatis facta esse, non fiunt? VVhy are not the lyke myracles donne novv a dayes to them vvhich you saye vvere vvrought sometyme (by the Apostles?) To answere them fully (although to alleage later myra∣cles was not necessary, because at the beginning they were requisite til faith was planted, afterwarde they were not to be loked for) yet to answere them fully, whereas it pleased God alwayes from tyme to tyme to nourishe fayth
and deuotion by them, these holy Fa∣thers alleadge myracles wrought at sayntes tombes, by their Relikes. The paynims were at a poynt to beleeue neither the one nor the other. what doth Luther? what Caluin? The former they are content to admit, least they shold be otherwise no christiās. The la∣ter they wil not graūt least they should be good Catholiks. But, S. Austen saith of both sorts thus. Non credūt hoc, qui eti∣am dominū Iesum per integra virginalia ma∣tris enixum, & ad disspulos suos ostiis clausis ingressum fuisse non credunt. They do not beleeue these later, which also do not beleeue that our Lord Iesus was borne of his mother wythout empayring of her virginitie, and that he entred in to his disciples, the doores beyng shutte: The auncy∣ent Doctors did easely-beleue my∣racles. Againe he saieth to philosophers con∣cernyng the former, that which may verie wel be sayd to our aduersaries touching the later. Vlt. ciuit∣dei. Si rem credibilem cre∣diderunt &c. If christian people did beleeue such thinges as vvere not incredible, let them
consider vvhat fooles they are that do not also beleeue it. Agayne if it vvere incredible, hovv is it that al the vvorld hath so long beleeued it? S. Hierome in another case of certen mer∣uelous fasters, but in the same case con∣cerning faythles heretikes, saith verie fynely. Hoc illis incredibile videbitur, qui non credunt omnia possibilia esse credentibus. n vita Pau∣i Eremitae. This wil seme incredible to such as do not beleeue that al thinges are possible to them that beleeue. Nafianzene also that famous doctor wryteth thus. Et il∣lud est narratu dignum. Corin. de∣vita sua. That also is vvorthy to be toulde, vvhich to many seemeth incredi∣ble, as other things doe, such men as thinke no∣thing that they see done playnely and vvith∣out delusion. My selfe dare not discredit them, vvhom strang thyngs do moue as much as any man: for in deed it is vvorse to stand styfly a∣gaynst all thinges vniuersally, then contrarie∣vvyse to be contēt to beleeue any thing easely: this proceedeth of simplicitye and lightnes, that of presumptuous bouldnes. Fynally the Apostle sayth, Charitas omnia credit. Cha∣ritie beleeueth al things. which is trew
in this sense, that a charitable man is not contētious and selfwilled to stand agaynst the likely report of an honest man, much lesse against al senses, al rea∣son, al authority al custome & practise. and therfore to such, S. Austen sheweth also the reason why it is verie credible that saynts do worke these myracles at their tombs & Reliks. Haec a domino im∣petrare possunt propter cuius nomen occisi sunt. 22. ciuit ca. 8, 9. 10. They can easely obteyne these thinges of our Lord, for vvhose names sake they vvere put to death. Praecessit corum mira patiētia, vt in bi: miraculis tanta ista potentia sequeretur. Their vvōderful patience vvent before, that in these myracles this so great povver might folovve after. Credamus ergo eis & vera dicentibus & mira facientibus. Dicendo enim vera passi sunt, vt possint facere mira. Let vs therfore beleeue them both when they say tru∣ly and when they do wonderfully: for by sayeng trewly they suffred death, that they might be able to do wonder∣fully, So far S. Austen. To conclude this point agaynst al stubbourne negatiues
and Ethnyshe reasoning, the same ho∣ly Father him selfe was so easie to be∣leeue, and so careful to publysh them, because he knew God was much glori∣fied in them, that he toke orderin his owne Church where S. Steuens Relikes were, to haue al the miracles from tme to time written. Id namque fieri voluimus, cum videremus antiquis similia diuinarum signa virtutum, etiam nostris temporibus fre∣quentari, & ea non debere multorum noticiae deperire. For we would haue it so, for as∣much as we saw that, the like signes of God his power to them of olde tyme were often shewed in our age also, to the ende they might not dye but be knowen of manye. To say the very truth, there are two euident causes why the heretikes of our tyme abhorre from this article and others: The causes of heretical increduli∣tie and ha∣tred of Relikes. Lacke of fayth, and want of de∣uotion: such as S. Iude discribeth in his epistle. Animales, spiritum non habentes. Brutish men that haue no feelinge of the spirit at all. Arbores autumnales, lyke
dead trees, when their leafe is sllen. They litle consider the power that Christ so assuredly promised to his sayntes. Amen Amen dico vobis. Verely Ve∣rely I say vnto you, he that beleeueth me, the workes that I doe, shal he also doe, and greater then they are shall he be able to doe. They can be as stoute as S. Thomas to auouche and to sweare it, that they wyll not beleeue, vnles they put their fingers in the verie print of the nayles. But when the thing is so e∣uident & palpable, Heretikes haue no sp∣ritual film of feruen deuotion. that in deede they may see, touch, & handle the glorious myracles wrought at holie places, as it were the marks of martyrs blood, and certen prints of Christes nayles left to vs by the vertue of his passion, they are farre from the heauenly affection that Thomas felt, when he brake out with hart & voise into this goodly confessi∣on, Dominus meus & Deus meus. My Lord and my God. O if they did know what it were to touch the memorie onely of Christs wounds and his ayntes, what
it were to adore but in the place where his feete stoode, to sitte at his feete a whyle with Mary and washe them with weepinge teares: to touch the hemme onely of his garment and feele the ver∣tue that proceadeth from thence, to see but a glimse of his glory and his saynts with the three Apostles, and in all this to heare as it were this voyce of S. Iohn vnto Peter, Dominus est, It is our Lorde, it is he that maketh the di∣uils rore, he healeth the sicke, he ray∣seth the dead, because his saynts doe it by him, his presence and power is in all these thinges: then vndoubtedly they would take Peters fayth and nothing doubt safely to tread vpon the seas and waues of infidelitie: they would con∣ceaue his inestimable ioy, saying: Bo∣num est nobis hic esse. O this is a sweete place, well were we if we might tarry here: The won∣derful de∣uotion of chatholiks. let vs make here tabernacles, to thee O Lord first, and next to thy glo∣rious sayntes. This fayth and affection had Paula, when she came to the place
in Bethlehem where Christ was borne, saying: here is my restinge place, be∣cause it is my Lords country: here wil I dwell, because our Sauiour hath cho∣sen it: and agayne when in her letters to Marcella which S. Hierome penned. Shall it euer be our good happe to see the day, vvhen vve maye goe together into the litle vaulte, vvhere our Sauiour vvas borne? To vveepe a litle in our Lords sepulcher, to licke the vvood of the holy Crosse, and in Mount-oli∣uet vvith vvill and vvish to ascende after a sorte vvith our Lord, as if he vvere very novv ascending? To see Lazarus come furth tyed in his vvynding sheete? Amos the prophet euen yet playing on his bag-pype vpon some litle hillocke? aftervvard in Samaria to honour the ashes of Iohn Baptist, Heliseus and Abdias, all three together? This deuotiō had Chry∣sostome to Paules cheynes, the people of the Easte parts to Samuels Reliks: the beste men out of all places to the holy land, as before I haue mentioned. This made blessed Anthony to goe a dange∣rous iourney to Paule the wonderfull
Eremite of whom he reported to his scholers thus: I haue seene (I tell you) Eli∣as, er. in vi∣a pauli. I haue seene Iohn in the vvildernes, and to say truely, I haue seene Paule in Paradyse. This deuotion was it that made Hilari∣on to doe the lyke toward S. iero. in vi∣a Hilario∣is. Antony af∣ter his death: in whose litle cabbin he layed him downe, and as though he had felte it warme as yet of the holy man departed, so he culled and kissed it: This was it that caused the godlye contention betweene the Palestines and them of Cypres aboute the selfe same wonderfull man Hilarion, who after his death in both places wrought greate miracles, but especially in Cypres, be∣lyke (sayeth S. Hierome) because he lo∣ued that place best. 2. Ciuit. 3. This deuotion and this fayth was it that worked in those Africanes, ouch of relikes. which S. Austen wryteth of, when they touched three dead persons with the garmentes, and anoynted the body of an other with the oyle that had touched onely S. Steuens Reliks, & immediatly all fower were reuyued.
Where marke for your comforte and ioy al you good religious and wel disposed persons that carry Crosse or beades, The lauda∣ble deuoti∣on of Ca∣tholiks to∣ward  esser thinges then relike hauing touched glorious Re∣likes, the better to put you in mynd of such sayntes and to pray the more de∣uoutly (for to that purpose I would haue it employed.) Marke I say how exceedinglye such deuotion pleaseth God, wheras he confirmed it so long a∣goe by myracles. And no maruaile, for he is the same good Lorde still, that streight perceaued the feruente fayth of the pore woman, that thought it suf∣ficient, with great feare and reuerence to touch but the hemme of his garmēt. He that by Peters shadowe and Paules clothes healed the sicke and cured the lame, must now also needs accepte all deuotion donne towarde him and his sayntes for his sake: he can not chose, because he is alwayes lyke him selfe: Fidelis est, seipsum negare non potest. You al∣so that delight to haue Agnos-Dei, M∣dalias, Graynes or the lyke honorable
memories of heauenly thinges and in∣slamers of deuotion, such I say as the holy hande of Christs high Vicar hath blessed for that intent, geue God harty thankes for your religious mynde, if you feele in deede that it proceede of deuotion. It is not geuen to euerye man although he would, to haue to∣ward small thinges no small deuotion. Smal things in comparison, otherwyse not small that haue greate commodi∣ties. Litle halo∣wed tokens sent from Byshoppes as appereth in their epistles. The learned Fathers and holye men of auncient tyme, Austen, Paulinus, Leo, Gregory, here also haue geuen you example: who although by their ex∣cellent knowledge of scriptures they vnderstoode all diuine misteries and thereby were inflamed to loue Christ exceedingly, yet they gladly vsed to practyse their deuotion by these lesser meanes also, Leo. ep. 72. sending one to the other panes benedictos, imagunculas, particulas ter∣rae sanctae, particulam Dominicae Crucis cum culogiis, halowed bread, litle images of Christ, our Ladye, and the Apostles:
some portion of the holy lande, and as Leo speaketh a litle peece of our Lords Crosse with blessings adioyned. S. Li. 8. y. 60. Gre∣gory in an epistle to Edelbertus Kinge of our country hath these wordes. Parua autem xenia transinisi, quae vobis non crunt parua, cum a vobis ex beati Petri Apostoli be∣nedictione fuerint suscepta. I haue sent you certen small tokens, which shall not be of small valew to you, when you haue receaued them as hauing the bles∣sing of S. Peter the Apostle. Wherby he meaneth that the gratious blessing of Peter the firste Bishop of Rome remay∣neth still in al his Successours to blesse and sanctifie sacred tokens: So that the Bishop of Rome his blessing is the very blessing of S. Peter him selfe, euen as in other cases also the whole Councell of Chalcedon protested: Petrus per Leonem locutus est: Peter him selfe hath spoken by the mouth of Leo. It is a very com∣mon phrase or speach in S. Gregory that he sendeth S. Peters blessinge when he sendeth litle golden keyes or crosses
that had touched his bodye, to noble men, to Princes, to the Emperesse, to Bishops in all countries, wherin some∣tyme to make the gifte more pretious he put a litle of the holy Crosse, of S. Peters cheyne, of S. Iohn Baptists heare, of S. Laurence gridyron: which the for∣sayed partyes did weare aboute their neckes for most holy and sacred rew∣els, Li. 2. cp. 72. 86. li. 3. cp. 30, li. 5. cp. 6. li. 7. epist. 126. ind. 2. full of spirituall grace and heauen∣ly blessinge. Men of comon sense and colder feeling in religiō (if they be catholiks) are moued with the reuerence of sacra∣ments, sacrifise, and great solemnities, but the morefe ruent a man is and as it were the more famylier With Christ, the soner he espyeth him if he doe see but his shadow, and sayth with S. Iohn, Dominus est, it is our Lord: which other thincke to be pbantasma, an imaginatiō onely and darke appearance of some tryfling thing. S, Antbony, a man of so deepe contemplation that he desyred no other booke to know the infinite
wysdome and mercie of God, but one∣ly the sighte of his goodly creatures, sawe so farre in the very cote of Paule the Eremite aboue-named, Hiero. in vi∣ta Pauli. which that good man himselfe had made of palme leaues, that he kepte it for a Relike of that faint, and ware it onely vpon high feasts in honor of the day. S. Hierome al∣so in the ende of Paules lyfe which he writeth, is wonderfully moued to con∣clude with these wordes. I humbly re∣quest euery one that readeth this story to remember Hierome the sinner, who if he mighte haue his wishe of God, would much more desire Paules cote with all his good merits, then Princes purple with their painfull punishmēts. And because we talke of holye mens garmēts, Socea. i. 7. ca. 22. Theodosius the yonger a Prince of noble vertues and verye religious was wont to weare the facke cloth of a certen holy Bishop that died at Con∣stātinople quantūuis sordidatū although it were not very cleane, persuasus se ali∣quid ex mortui sanctimonia inde perceptu∣rum.
Beinge fullye perswaded that he should receaue thereof somewhat of the dead mans holines. But to returne backe a litle to such men as Christen. dome esteemeth for renowmed Saints: Blessed Hillarion going in Pilgrimage to S. Authonies eremitage, Hicro. invi∣ta Hilario∣nis. reioysed in his spirit at euery litle memory of that holy man, when it was tould him, here he was wonte to sing, here to pray, in this place he did worke, and there he rested him selfe, these vynes and litle stocks were of his planting, that alley he made with his owne handes, this poole cost him much labour & paynes to water the garden, this mattocke he had manye yeares to digge and delue withall. If this good man be therefore thought a superstitious foole, because he was a monke forsoth almost twelue hundred yeres agoe, and a myracle of that age. Chrysostome an Archbishop and honorable in the world, was no foole vndoubtedly, howe so euer he maye seeme superstitious because he is a Ca∣tholicke:
He expresseth the very lyke affection to the least monumentes of the Apostles that you can deuyse. Praefat. in cp. Pauli ad. philemo∣nem. Vti∣nam (sayth he) non defuissent &c. I vvould there had bene some one that could haue geuen vs the vvhole story of the Apostles, not onely vvhat they vvrote, but vvhat and vvhen they did eate, vvhere they sate, vvhither they vvent, and so furth. For if vve see but the pla∣ces onely vvhere they sate, thither vve direct our mynd oftentymes, and beginne to a vvake, and feele our selues better disposed. And that you may knowe he was alwayes the same man, tender harted toward all sa∣cred monuments were they neuer so litle, See. qd vtri∣usque testa∣menti sit v∣nus legisla∣tor. he wryteth of him selfe that ha∣uing a picture in wax, wherein the An∣gell destroyed so many thousand Assy∣rians in one night, as in the booke of Kinges is mentioned, he was wonder∣fully delighted to behold the mighty power of God in that small image of sory wax. All the which examples doe declare this one point what grace they had and how vertuous men they were
that of small thinges could reape great deuotion, Prophane affection to∣ward see u∣ler monu¦mentes. deuotion I say toward God and his sayntes, not as prophane here∣tiks that more gladly looke vpon Tul∣lies face because he was eloquente, or Caluins rounde cappe because he was a minister, or some noble mans armes, that is Patrone of their bishopricke. No no, but the sweete picture of some heauenly thinge, the blessing of a ver∣tuous hand or of Gods anoynted, the vew of holy place, and touch of sacred Relike, these worke wonderfully the prayse of God in the hartes of sad and sober Christians. 22. ciuit. 8. S. Austen noteth ve∣rye diligently in him that prayed inst∣antly at S. Steuens memory for his fa∣ther in law that was a Panyme and lay very sicke, how he tooke away with him of the flowers that were vpon the Altar, such as came first to hand, which in the nighte he putte vnder the sicke mans head, and before day he cryeth out in all haste to sende for the Bishop, and so was baptysed and not long after
made a godly end. Of another he wry∣teth that had the palsye, who requested to be brought to a new chappel that was built a litle before by S Austens cō∣sent ouer a portion of that holy land wher Christ rose agayne, for the more reuerent reseruing therof, thyther he was brought and imediatly recouered. Agayne, I know (saith he) a mayd of Hippo this cittie, who anoynting her selfe with oyle embrewed with the teares of a preist that prayed for her, was deliuered from an euill spirite. S. Hierome wryteth of the aboue-named Hilarion that Bishoppes, preists, iudges, men of great calling, graue and welthy matrones, besides the common people out of country and towne, tanne to him in heapes onely to take halowed bread and oyle at his handes: Halowed bread and oyle. which had the vertue to preserue from death, namely the doughter of one Constance and her husbande. All these thinges being practised by men of such vertue and reported to vs by doctours of so Agaynst scoffing he∣retikes.
great authoritie, skoffyng heretickes wil iest at: and no maruel. The prophe∣cie of Inde the Apostle can not be false. In nouissimo tempore venient illusores, secun∣dum desideria sua ambulantes in impietati∣bus. In the later tyme ther shall come mockers, walkyng at their pleasure in all vngodlines. Such were the yong laddes, irrifores as, S. Austen calleth them that laughed the poore olde man Florē∣tius to skorne for prayeng at the Re∣liks of the twēty martyrs, 22 ciuit. 8. that he might by some meanes haue wherewith to cloth him, which he obtened as there is told very myraculosly. Such were they that iested at Macarius the Byshoppe of Hierusalem, Sozom. li. 2. Cap. 1. when they saw him put two of the crosses to the sycke woman and that she Was nothing the better, and thought it a verie foolyshe moc∣kery: who were controwled by and by with the third crosse, that healed her, bycause it was the same crosse that our Sauiour suffered on, as appered by the myracle. Mauritius the Emperour al∣though
he was sometime in these cases very incredulous, Niceph. li. 18. ca. 31. yet such a skoffer he was not: who thought at the first that the myracles done at Euphonia the Mar∣tyrs shryne were delusions wroughte by men, but he tryed the contrary by such vnfallible meanes that euer after he honored them exceedingly. Hiero. But Vi∣gilantius was an ould captayne of such scoffing mates, who called the Catho∣liks, ashmongers: Reliks, folish duste wrapped in a clowte: wax candles bur∣ning before them, vyle taper lighte. Such were Eunomius and Porphyrius that sayed the diuels made as though they had bene formented greeuouslye by martyrs Relikes, whereas they felte no such thing. Marc. 5. Such were they that laugh∣ed at Christ him selfe: Irridebant eum (sayeth the Euangelist) when he sayed of Iairus doughter, Puella non estmortuae, sed dormit. The mayed ie not dead but sleepeth. And vndoubtedly these iest∣ers of our tyme, if very shame of the world rather then feare of hell did not
stay them, would laugh merely at Pe∣ters shadow, Act. 5. Iac. 5. Io. 9 Tob. 9. Dan. 14 Iud. 1. 4. Reg. 2 Iames oyle, Christs spittle, Rphaels fishe, Daniel dragon, Samsons law-bone, and Elias cloke. Doest thou wonder why I will say so, and tell me that I ought not to iudge? Because it is euidente they can neither abyde ce∣remonies, nor beleeue myracle, it is their profession. For example, Peter Martyr in the disputations at Oxford be∣ing vrged in the question of the bless∣ed Sacrament with this axample, Peter mar∣tir iudgmēt of Christes miracle en∣tring when the doores was shutt. that Christ entred into the place where his disciples were, the dores being shutte, sayed that he first opened the dore for∣soth, and so entred: A wonderfull my∣racle that Christ did goe in when the dore stood open. As well he might say that he could not haue rysen agayne vnlesse the Angell had firste remoued the stone from the sepulcher, nor be borne of his mother without breache of her virginitie, which infidelitie S. Austen obiecteth to the Paynims as I haue before mentioned. But especial∣ly
in the facte of Eliseus, 4. Reg. 6. when he caste a pyce of wood into the water to make the yron swimme that before did sinke appeareth what they would do if they durst: which when a witty catholicke to confound a scoffing hereticke pro∣pounded to him barely without cir∣cumstance of Eliseus or of scripture, A skoffing heretike finely con∣futed. as though some monke had wryten it, asking his iudgment, if it were not like to the foolish fables of Papists concer∣ning miracles at martyrs tombes: This good felow by his wisdome made gay sport with it, till he vnderstood it was playne scripture, & thē in what plight he was you may easely ghesse, in his owne play to be so flatly foyled. So li∣tle they vnderstand the wisdome and power of God, Myracles as truly wro∣ught by re∣likes, as sometyme by the A∣postles. who of purpose hath chosen by small and folish thinges (as they may seeme) to confound and con∣trowle the hawty witts of worldly re∣soners. If they will tell me that whatsoe∣uer scripture reporteth, the authority
therof forceth them to beleeue it, al∣though reson reclayme: but for all o∣ther testimonies, it is at their pleasure to beleeue them or not: S. Austen an∣swereth, 22. ciuit. 8. that for the truth of thinges: Etiam nunc fiunt miracula in eius nomine, siue per sacramenta eius, siue per orationes vel memorias sanctorum. Nowe also at this present myracles are wroughte in his name what by his sacacraments, what by the prayers or memories of sayntes. But the difference is: Non eadem claritate illustrantur, vt quanta illa gloria diffamen∣tur. They are not so famously knowen not bruted abrode so gloriously as the other: the reason whereof is there also to be seene moste reasonable. If they had rather cauill thus, that signae sunt in∣fidelibus, the myracles that Christ and his Apostles did, were for vnbeleeuers to bring them to the sayth: now since all the world beleeueth, they are to no purpose, Aduers. vi∣gilantium. & therfore they thinke there is no such thing. Firste S. Hierome shall answere them & Vigilantius all at once,
that the question is not betweene vs, for whom they are wrought, but by what power, and therefore tell me not (sayeth he) that vvonders are for such as vvill not beleeue, but ansvvere me bovv in dust and ashes there is such a forcible presence of vvonderfull operations. Secondly I add moreouer, that because there are al∣wayes in the worlde infidels or vnbe∣leeuing heretiks, myracles are alwayes to good purpose agaynst both sorts, to maintayne true fayth in the hartes of Catholicke Christians, eodem Deo (as S. Austen sayeth) nunc faciente per quos vult & quemadmodum vult, 22. ciuit. 8. qui & illa quae legi∣mus fecit. The selfe same God working now by whom he will and as he will, that wrought those former which we reade of in scriptures. Of abuses. If they will tell me sadly and roūdly that their be many abuses here∣in, delusions esteemed for myracles, false reliks, much superstition. First it is great rashnes to thinke so without euident causes as in the notable exam∣ple
of Meuritius the Emperour before is declared. Agayne, the lyke abuses haue bene in all ages euen of the Pri∣mitiue Church, without any preiudice to the Catholike customes, but to the better tryall of constante Christians, which will not stumble at euery straw, and refuse the corne because of the chaffe: Adue. vigil. Paucorum culpa (sayeth S. Hie∣rome) non praeiudicat religioni. The faulte of a few is no preiudice agaynst religi∣on. Iudas treason did not destroy the Apostles fayth. Ep. ad Rus∣tic mona∣cum. And agayne: In omni conditione & gradu optimis mixta sunt pessima. In all stats and degrees the worst things are ming∣led with the best: which consideration of former tymes (which by all reason shoulde be moste pure the neerer to Christ) and that our Sauiour sayed. Necesse est vt veniant scandala. It is ne∣cessary that offences do come, seemeth to me a verye goodly instruction for weakelings that quickly condemne a good thing, when they see it abused, of one superstitious woman iudge all I∣dolatours,
for one false relike thinke none true, S. Gregorie in this case put trew Relikes in Place of the false, maintey∣ning the ca∣tholtke vse redressing the abuse, in his ans∣wer to the tēth inter∣rogatorie of S. Austē our Apos∣tle. for one fayned myracle will geue credit to none. Where of the lear∣ned and holy Martyr of our country S. Thomas Moore hath moste wysely and pithely (as his maner is) disputed in his english volumes, sufficient to satis∣fie any reasonable and graue witte. S. Austen wryteth of certen idle monkes or rather false monkes in that weede, that went gadding abrode out of their cloyster shewing martyrs reliks (si ta∣men martyrum, De. op. mo∣na. ca. 28. if happely they were so in deede) for to gayne by it or to seeme the more holy: And yet I trow no man will say that he condemneth monkes or reliks, that shall reade the selfe same booke de opere monachorum, how monks ought to be occupied, and my former testimonyes out of him for myracles. S. Hierome telleth of some superstitious womē that caried crosses about them: whereupon some hastie hereticke will take me short, and by & by conclude, ergo S. Hierome doth mislyke of wea∣ring
Crosses: Let him staye his wis∣dome, for he addeth also, & parua euan∣gelia, and she caried also the Ghospell in a litle volume: did that also mislyke S. Hierome trow you? No soothly, nei∣ther the one nor the other well vsed, and as well the one as the other abu∣sed, Hiero. Cu∣lantiae ma∣trouae. if they beare them to seeme the more holy, as the Pharisees did their ten commaundementes in the brode hemme of their garments, and therfore are checked of our Sauiour. It would requyre a iuste volume to reckon the enormities crepte in among religious tytes and customes, in all ages since the ascensiō of Christ, and as the num∣ber of Christians multiplyed, so (as it happeneth in a multitude) the more ab∣uses: whereof the aunciente Fathers make often mention and lament it. Ad. Rust∣mona. As when S. Hierome sayeth: Vidimus nuper & planximus: we hane seene of late and it greeued vs not a litle. And agyne, piget dicere: Ad Eusto∣chium. I am loth to tell how many vir∣gins dayly fall from their porpose and
profession: And agayne, Ad Sauin Diacoum. prorumpunt la∣crimae antequam verba. O villanie, I can more easelye weepe in this case then speake. Of all the which things, as al∣so the vnprofitable ceremonyes and superfluous deuotion, which are the priuate fansies of vnskilfull persons, not the publicke ordinances and de∣crees of the Church, the first Councel of Nice and after it S. Ep. 11. Austen geueth this generall rule, which at all tyme taketh place and is our warrantyse: what so e∣uer is agaynst fayth or good lyfe that the Church of God nec approbat, nec ta∣cet, nec facit: doth neither allow, nor dissemble, nor put in practyse. And this much mighte well be answered if happely there be any sinfull abuses at this day. First that we can not be hap∣pyer thē the Primatiue Church, which in all points had the like, as I wil shew if it be needefull. Secondly all good Catholicks that see any such faultes, much more lamente them then the he∣reticke doth blame them, the more it
greeueth them that by such offences the truth is ill spoken of among our e∣nimies, and suspected of them that are indifferent to both. Thirdly, the words of our Sauiour must needs be fulfilled, Necesse est vt veniant scandala. Offences must necessarely come, there is no re∣medy, such is the sinfull frayletie of mans nature. Psal. 118. But Pax multa diligentions eum, & non est illis scandalum: They are at greate peace which loue him, and no∣thing can offende them or make them to fall from the truth. Loue Christ and his Catholicke Church as thou shoul∣dest doe, and no abuse be it neuer so greate shall be able to moue thee one iotte from the pure profession of all laudable customes. Howbeit to say truly, Of supersti∣ so called. I thinke he∣resie hath partly so extinguished and partly so cooled the feruent deuotion of ryght good earnest Catholicks, that if there be any religious zeale lefte in some few more then in others (which therefore seemeth superstition because
it is rare and singuler) the same is so farre from heynous crime or greeuous fault, Adue, vigil. that I may compare it rather with their deuotion which in S. Hieroms time lyghted tapers at the Ghospell tyme, and burned wax candels before Mar∣tyrs tombes, of whom he geueth sen∣tence that ech one had rewarde accor∣ding as they were deuoutly disposed: or with their persuasion that at the same tyme also were wont to shew Pil∣grims comming to Hierusalē, Comin matth the paue∣ment of the Church as yet imbrewed with Zacharias bloud as it was thought, and therefore visited not without re∣uerence: which their godly affection (albeit they were possibly deceaued) S. Hierome did not mislyke, toward that glorious Martyr, whose death was so pretious in Gods sight, that it was one cause of the Iewes extreme desolati∣on, as our Sauiour himselfe witnesseth. So lykewyse it maye fortune that in some Churches or Chappels there is proposed some false relike, Of doubt∣ful relikes. and so ho∣nored
as the relike of that saynt whose it is not: which thinge if it were done rashly vpon light credit, and if it might easely be discerned, were a faulte in no wyse to be suffered: but be cause it hath from tyme to tyme bene esteemed so, nothing knowen to the contrary, not disalowed of the Bishop (whose dili∣gence in examining such thinges is to be wished, and in Fisher Bishoppe and Martyr of Rochester is greatly commen∣ded) and especially because the honor resteth not in the Relike, but is wholy referred to that saynt whose Relike it is esteemed: For these causes I say their is no more feare of superstition or I∣dolatry in this case, Mare. 10. then if Bartimens the blinde man (in the Ghospell) had sayed to anye other man in steede of Christ, Misertre mei fili Dauid, Sonne of Dauid haue mercye vppon me: as he might quickly haue done being blind, if they had mocked him and shewed an other for Christ. Or if a Catholicke should adore that hoste which a preist
at the tyme of eleuation lifteth vp not consecrated, or worshippe one of the theeues crosses for the Crosse of our redemption, if one sodenly were chan∣ged for the other: In all these cases and the lyke, ignorance doth excuse, being neither rashe nor wilfull: and sincere meaning hath rewarde before him that knoweth the harte of the worshipper, that he honoreth vndoutedly the prī∣cipall it selfe in heauen, howsoeuer he be deceaued agaynst his will in mista∣king some earthly monumente or re∣membrance therof. For example, thou meanest to honour the Kings Lieute∣nant as if he were the King him selfe: among a number thou doest not know him: it is tould thee sadly that it is he that weareth the gay cote, perhaps he is of his meanest gentlemen, yet no doubt thou hast done thy dutifull obe∣isance to thy Lorde and Prince, how∣soeuer thou be deceaued in this per∣son or that, which is sayed to repre∣sent him. How be it in sacred thinges
more heede is to be taken and greater discretion to be vsed. Psal. 89. Honor Regis iudi∣cium diligit: In honoring the Kinge of Kings and his seruants there is much iudgement required. Psal. 46. We are commaū∣ded to sing to our Lord, but sapienter, wysely: 150. and in an other psalme, in cim∣balis bene sonantibus, vpon well sounding cymbals: They sound well when eue∣ry string is in tune without discorde, neither to high nor to lowe, but in a golden meane, which all good Catho∣licks in all poyntes of religion most hartely wish and pray for, Tit. 2. vt is qui ex ad∣uerso est, vereatur, nihil habens malum dicere de nobis: That the aduersary may be a∣frayed to open his mouth agaynst vs, when he is able to say no euill of vs. Thus I haue breifly touched certen poynts concerning Relikes and pilgri∣mage: the name, the cause & the groūd, the fruite, the myracles, the vse and ab∣use, which may be an interim to thee Christian Reder agaynst the odious termes of Idolatrye and superstition,
deuysed by heretikes as buggishe bau∣bles to feare babyes. A full discourse of this matter I reserue as not neces∣sarie, if after these fewe the aduersa∣rie be quyet: if not, then I meane God willing to opē the whole pācke. And to shew such a glorious sight of vniuersall practise and infallible testi∣monies, so cleare as none dayes. that the best of our aduersaries shal be no more able to looke aganst it although he take Caluins spectacles, thē the owle or the bastard-egle agaynst the sunne beames: not because I can doe much or any thing at all of my self, the mea∣nest student of catholike diuines, but because it is very much to haue lear∣ned of them that can doe exceading much if they were in place, how much the catholike Church is able to aledge as for al the rest, so for this article also. That church, wherof the psalme sayth: Gyoriosa dicta sunt dete ciuitas dei. Psalm. 86. Glori∣ous things are reported of thee O citty of God: agaynst that synagoge, of the
which is sayd: salm. 136. Filia Babilonis misera, the daghter of Babylon is a wreched one. Blessed is he that taketh her vngratious chil, dren (al heretikes and scismatikes) and squiseth them aganst the Rock. which is the present fayth of the Church of Rome, by that commission which Christ gaue to Peter, whom he made a rocke and foun∣datiō, vpō whom he built his Church, to whom he promised it should not fayle, Ma. 16. and hath performed his promise vntill this day. To whom for his ex∣cellent gifte and our assured safe∣tye, as many as stande vpon this Rocke, be all ho∣nour and glory for euer. Amen.
A LETTER SENTE BY M. LICENTIATE MARTIN TO A MARIED priest his frende. GENTLE M. N. beinge al∣waies myndful of your cur∣tesie toward me, I haue of∣ten thought howe I might beste requite it; and because I neither haue temporal abilitie, nor you (God be thanked) haue neede therof, I haue purposed many times to communicat with you some spirituall benifite that mighte be to the health of your soule. And hauinge differred hitherto, this I truste is that good houre which God hath appointed me to tel you, and you patiently and willinglye to heare that, which, if you wel consider, is the most necessarie thing for you of all other, if you be such a one (as I hope you are) that looke to be saued. To be shorte and to come to the pointe: you haue bene a priest manye yeres, your selfe for many yeres toge∣ther neuer imagined that you mighte
marrie, no more then any other priest made in the like sorte as you were. Af∣terwarde the libertie of the time and the sensualitie of the fleshe and onlye worldly considerations pricking you forward, and no good or godly reason (as your owne consciēce can tel you) your fancie fel vpon a woman, and to accomplishe your desire, you remem∣ber how gladly you woulde haue had some authoritie of scripture or doctor to haue soothed you in your fleshlye purpose; and when it was tolde you that there was nothing for it, but all a∣gainst it, you thought or rather you sayed so (for you could not thinke it) that you neuer vowed, and so you be∣gan to flatter your selfe: and when that also was shewed vnto you and proued cleane contrarie, because all that pre∣sent them selues to a catholike bishop for orders of subdeacon and so forth, by their verie presentation and taking of the orders (although no more were saied) do make their vow before God,
because the Church alwaies presuppo∣seth that, and admitteth none but with vow, this I say standing so, you wente farder, and hoped the Counsell of Trēt would release the vow, or that by your frendes you at the least might obteine a dispensation: whereby you declared that your selfe thought it not lawfull without dispensation, and howe you could once thinke of a dispensation, I doe maruell much, wheras there is no example thereof in any priuate mans case, such as yours is. But when all these means failed, yet the deuil blew the coles of concu∣piscence still, spite of the Church, of your vow, of holy and chast priesthod, to match your selfe with a woman, not in matrimonie (for you wot wel it can be none) but in damnable sacrilege worse then any adulterie, as S. Austen telleth you, if it woulde please you to reade it, saing of such as haue vowed, Talibus non solum nubere, De bono vid. ca. 9. tom. 4. sed velle nubere damnabile est. To such it is damnable, not on∣ly
to mary, but to haue the vvil to mary. And this he saith vpon S. Pauls authoritie, who writinge of widowes that had vowed and would afterwarde marrie, saith: 8. Tim. 5 Cum luxuriatae fuerint in Christo, nu∣bere volunt: habentes damnationem, quia pri∣mam fidem irritam fecerunt. For vvhen they shall be vvanton in Christ, they vvill marie: hauing damnation, because they haue made voyde their first sayth. They are damned, because they haue broken their firste promis, and they brake their first pro∣mis, because they would marie: so that their firste promis was as yours also was, not to marrie. And therefore S. Austen saith bold∣ly in an other place, Eodem . ca. . that such mariages are not onely adulteryes, but worse then any adulterie. And beleeue me M. N. as your verie frend that doe ra∣ther tender your soule toward Christ thē feede your carnal humour toward the world, beleeue me I say, that if S. Ambrose, S. Austen, S. Chrisostome, S. Basill, S. Gregorie Nazianzene, S. Ierom, S. Gregory
the great, S. Bernard, or any other aunci∣ent and learned Doctor were aliue to tel you, they would plainly say as now their bookes doe say, that your state is damnable. And what if you did but aske your olde maister and Lorde the last true bishopp of Lichefilde, would you not beleeue him, and so manie o∣ther learned and vertuous prelates of these our dayes? Shall fleshe and bloud ouerrule you to doe against your con∣science, and to your exceeding shame before all your frends and al the good christians of the world? Shal not time at the least reclaime you, & make you consider of your daungerous state? At the firste perhaps phantasie and plea∣sure mighte ouercome you, but hath not time and experience taught you to be wearie thereof? Wil you sel heauen for the companie of a woman, or gaine eternall paines for so short a pleasure? because you are fallen, will you neuer rise againe? or wil you deferre til God sodenlie take you away in the middes
of your filthy sinnes? or do you thinke that both stand well together, God his fauour, and abhominable lecherie? O M.N. you should rather be ther where those handes should handle the blessed body of Christ, for which they were anointed and cōsecrated: where those lippes should say ordinarie Mat∣tins, Masse, and Euensong, as you are boūd also by precepte, then to employ your whole bodie vpon the dailie doing of such thinges, which good preests dare not thinke once vpō (but against their wil) for feare of sinne. Or if you can not be in place to doe as you shoulde, yet you may alwaies be in place to re∣fraine from that which you shoulde not doe. Good M. N. consider at length the case deepely as it deserueth. As it is o∣dious before God and man that you haue thus fallen, so it shal be alwaies honorable for you to rise againe: we haue knowen maried priestes, after∣warde holie men, and by their repen∣tance
no lesse esteemed then if it had neuer bene. The Church of God (as also God him selfe) is alwaies glad of a penitent sinner, and the Angels in heauen reioise therat: let it suffice you that you haue taken your pleasure all this time, and geue God thankes that he hath spared you and reserued you al this time to repentance, wheras you might haue died in your sinnes and so haue bene damned euerlastingly: des∣pise not his calling of you vnto him selfe and to his CATHOLIKE CHVRCH. You haue where-withall to lyue al∣though you did forsake all. And so you muste, and make away with all at once, to folow him that being God of goddes and Lorde of lords came into this world and went out of this world in all pouertie and miserie, for your sake, and for my sake, and for euerye sinners sake, to redeeme vs vnto him selfe. Be not tyed any longer to wo∣man, or benifice, or bishop, or this or that. Play the man once in your time
for God his sake, who haue bene stout and stroung to abide the verie cutting of your body for your owne healthes sake. O it is an honour to be compted a good mau of good men, rather then rich of the rich, and happie of the vn∣happie: and a litle miserie, or wante, or disgrace in the world & before world∣lings, is in deede the greatest glorie & renowne before God and good men that can be wished. God be thanked for it, for it is his grace and nor our de∣sert. But I thinke I may saye of vs all which are here no smal number, if vve should die in banishment, if vve vvere driuen to begge among strangers, if any miserie should befall vs, yet if vve continevve catholike and in the feare of God, al is our ioy, our crovvne, our triumphe. But to say trulie, vve haue all sufficientlye, and my selfe vvas ne∣uer in so good state in Ingland, as here I am in all respectes. And yet vve in comparison of that vvhich you might
prouide, are of meane state: you might be as greate a man beyonde the seas as you are there, and be so vvell accepted of the best as you vvould desire, and it vvould be a singular ioye to all your frendes, and a greate honour to your selfe, besids the ioy and peace of your conscience, vvhich novv either doeth much tormēt you, or you are so much the vvorse if you haue no feeling ther∣of. You see vvhat might be said if a man vvere disposed to set your selfe before your ovvne eies as in a glasse: but I hope you are vvise ynough to gather much of this litle: & I vvould to God I had novv as good oportunitye to talke vvith you face to face as I haue had heretofore: I doubte not, by the grace of God, but I should reclayme you: for I persvvade my selfe that you vvould doe vvell, but the vvorld and the flesh ouercometh you: and yet (a∣las) flesh and bloud shall not possesse the kingdome of heauen. Thinke then
of the losse of heauen, nay thincke on the paines of hell, vvhich shal beginne perhaps to morovv, perhaps one yere hence, and shal continevv for euer, for euer, for euer, (this is a long day,) and in more terrible torment then can be imagined in this life. And yet the ve∣rie goodnes and loue and benifites of God & of our Sauiour Christ, should make vs to doe vvel and to please him, more then the feare of hel paines. Sla∣ues and seruauntes vvill not vvorke vvithout stripes: but children ought to doe vvell of verie loue and consci∣ence. Your vnlavvfull vvoman (M. N.) is but one thing (albeit a great and hor∣rible thing) but your liuing in schisme, out of the Catholike Church, in all com∣municating vvith heretikes, these are also of great importance. If your good L. and master had also kept his bishop∣ricke and folovved the vvorld, his ex∣ample perhaps might haue diminished your fault. Novv vvhat excuse haue
you, after the vertuous example of such a prelate, of so many like vnto him either dead in prison, or yet pri∣soners, or beyonde the seas, in losse of goods and countrie and frends; of so manie yong men and children vvhich contemne all the vvorld and vvorldie frends to folovv CHRIST and the CA∣THOLIKE CHVRCH, and shal condemne such as you are that ought to be lan∣terns and lights to them? What excuse (I say) haue you in this case, especial∣ly hauing so manie examples of your neere frends and acquaintāce, vvhom you may remēber, namely that graue and learned priest, vvhich committed that vvoman and her children to you as to a spirituall patrone & not a flesh∣ful father, vvho if he vvere aliue, hovv vvould you looke him in the face? An other example you haue your felovve chaplen sometime, novv many yeres a moste blessed prisoner. Whose happie state and your ovvne miserye if you consider vvell, you may iustlye feare
that saying in the Ghospell: Tvvo in the filde, tvvo in a bed, tvvo at the mill, the one taken & the other forsaken: You may feare it I say, and thereby take occasion to reclayme your selfe before that terri∣ble day of seperating the euil from the good, the reprobate from the electe & chosen: When to the electe it shall be saied, come ye blessed, you haue done this and this for me: And to the reste, Goe ye cursed, you haue done nether this nor that. And here I pray you thinke vvell vpon it and examine your selfe vvhat you haue done for Christ and for his Church in this time when Catholike men are proued as golde by the fire. You haue broken your vow, taken a woman, liued in pleasure of the fleshe, kept all liuings and perhaps increased them, said or caused to be said hereti∣call seruice, interteined blasphemous and lying preachers, flattered and de∣sired the fauour of your false bishopp, you haue generallie loued the worlde
in al respects more then God, and that against your conscience which muste needes condemne you. And are these (trowye) the meanes to come to hea∣uen? No, no. Act. 14. Per multas tribulationes opor∣tet intrare in regnum colorum. By many tri∣bulations vve must enter into the kingdome of God. And, Mat. 10. Qui me negauerit coram homini∣bus, negabo & ego eum coram patremeo. But he that shall deny me before men, I also vvill deny him before my father vvhich is in hea∣uen. For Gods loue (M.N.) thinke vp∣on it betimes, and dispatche at once, and beare with my boldnes and plain∣nes, which is necessary for your soules health, as your selfe will confesse if it may please God to send you his grace and his spirit abundantlie to make you a new man. Then shall I loue you and honour you more then euer I did, and all good men with me, who do not maruel that you or anie man should fall, whereas we are all sinners and haue all sallen one way or an other but if after admo∣nition
you will not rise agayne, that wil make vs to maruel, & to pitie your ease as altogether desperate, which God forbid, whoe conuerte you and saue you and blesse you both soule & bodye, euen as I wishe to mine owne selfe: For a farewel, remember the later ende of man, the accompte to be made, the consequent there of, hel or heauen, and before all other respectes doe well for his sake that made you, redeemed you, sanctified you, and hath hitherto preserued and enriched you, and will hereafter in heauen fully rewarde you, if you wil come euen now at the ninth and eleuenth howre. Our Lord keepe you. Paris. 15. Fe. 1580 Your louing frend vndoubtedly G. M.
TO MY LOVINGE AND BESTBELOVED SISTERS. DEERE Sisters, my care, my loue, & of al worldly things (next to my good mother) my greatest comforte and ioye. Vnlesse you did thinke, that I doe most hartely loue you, you coulde nor alwaies heretofore haue declared your exceeding loue so plentifully towards me, for the which almightie God re∣warde you. This my loue because it is not a naturall affection onely, but sin∣cere and true charitie, forceth me to wish vnto you, my louing Sisters, not onelie manie worldlie commodities, which (God be thanked) you lacke not: but much more, all spirituall trea∣sure and heauenlie riches, wherof you can not haue great store, because you dwell not where it groweth. I know good Sisters, that you meane well, and moste willing are you to doe that which might please God: but in
good sooth you are out of the way, and therefore the further you hold on, the further you are from your iornies end, the further from heauen. The wise man saith: There is a vvay vvhich seemeth to a man right, Prouerb. 14. but the end therof leadeth to dis∣truction. Beare with me if I write bold. lie, and tell you the truth plainlie. I am your brother, I loue you (as nature bin∣deth me) not onely in worldly respect, but much more towardes God. Your soules are deare vnto me: my harte al∣waies mourneth to thinke vpon your dangerous state wherein you stand. O good Sisters, the paine of hell excee∣deth all tormentes, and that fier shall burne for euer. Happye are they that keepe them selues by God his greate goodnesse within the CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH, for out of it, there is no hope of saluation: And most happy are they that hauing bene out of this Church by the wicked perswasiōs of false preachers, whē it pleaseth God to send them true teachers, will not remaine obstinate,
but folow good exhortations and hol∣some doctrine, and so returne agayne as obedient children to Christ their fa∣ther, and to the Church their mother, who are alwaies redy to receiue them: remembring that which a most aunci∣ent and learned Father writeth. S. Austē vpō the 88. psal. He can neuer accompt God to be his father, vvho vvil not haue the Churh to be his mother. If you aske me what this Church is, that is called CATHOLIKE, and how you may know it, behold the true and certen markes thereof, and your selfe iudge whether you be within it or no. This Church is a congregation of all true christians which began in Christ & his disciples at Hierus lem, & from thence grewe and multiplied through∣out the whole world, according as it is sayd in the psalme: Their sounde (spea∣king of the Apostles) is gone out into the vvhole vvorlde, psal. 18. v. 5. and their vvordes into the ends of the earth. The firste mark of the Church is to be visible. So that the first marke of the true church is, that it must grow and multiply, be seene and appeere al∣wayes
as a light in the world: and ther∣fore Christ calleth it A Cittie builded vp∣on a hill, Mat. 5. vvhich can not be hid. And the blessed Martyr S. Ciprian sayth: The Churche beinge lightened with the brightnes of our Lorde, doth reache foorth her beames through-out the whole worlde. And S. Austen besides manye other places to this purpose, compareth Christ and his Church to that stone vvhich vvas cutt out of a hill vvithout mens handes, Daniel. ca. 2. and after grevv to be a mightye mountayne, so that it filled the vvhole earthe. For vndoubtedlye this stone whereof the Prophet speaketh is Christ, who was borne of a virgin without the helpe of man, and is now growne from a few Apostles and dis∣ciples to an infinite number of christi∣an people in all countries, confessing one fayth and one beleefe: and this is the Catholicke Church, whereof your Creede telleth and teacheth you to say. I beleeue the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH. Let vs see nowe whether this
marke doth agree to your brethren in England who call them selues Protes∣tants, or to vs whom it pleaseth them to cal Papists. First they cal thē-selues in their bookes the Englishe church, that is to say, of that fayth which is professed in England: but we are of the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH, that is of such a fayth as is professed in Fraunce, in Spaine, in Flanders, Brabant, zelant &c. In a great part of Germanie, in all Italy, and beyond, wheresoeuer there be christi∣ans, and is now preached to the Indi∣ans, that neuer heard of Christ before, and encreaseth wonderfullye. And within these fortie yeares, in Englande, Scotland, Ireland, Denmarke, and Germa∣nie, there was no other faith openly professed but ours. And now also in all these countries, how many are there thinke you of secret catholickes that wish for the olde religion againe with all their hart, and folow the new onely for feare? Nay how many are there es∣pecially in England that doe yet open∣ly
professe the CATHOLIKE FAITH? Aske good Sisters aske, and you shall learne that all the prisons not on∣ly of London, but of England are full of them, because they will not yeeld to these new proceedings, nor contami∣nate their soules with this newe ser∣uice, and leaue the olde true and Ca∣tholicke fayth: besides a number of sundrye degrees, which are deade in prison: namely twentie three Bishops all depryued of their liuing these twē∣tie three yeres, & now but two of them alyue: I omit Doctors, Deanes, Archdea∣cons, Krights, Squires, partlie in prison, partly departed the Realme and for∣saking all, rather then they will for∣sake God; and his moste true and vn∣doubted religion. This is true (good Sisters) as knoweth God, you seldome heare of these things, and therfore you thinke either their is no other religi∣on but that could seruice with-out all comfort and deuotion which you see in your parish church, or you thinke
that must needes be the best, because you are not taught anie other: whereas you see (if you beleeue me) that all christendome almost is of an other re∣ligion. And therfore this is the CA∣THOLIKE CHVRCH, and yours is wor∣thily called by your owne ministers, the church of England. But this shall better appeere, The second marke is successiou. if I geue you an othr marke of the true & Catholicke Church, which is, that it must continew for euer, and from the first beginninge, which was in Christ and his Apostles, neuer to fayle, but to appeere and be seene still as a citrye vpon a hill, or a light in the world. Mat. 28. For Christ said: I vvill be vvith you vnto the ende of the vvorld: And againe: I vvill sende you an other Comforter, the spirite of truth vvho shall remaine vvith you for euer. And vnto Peter: Vpon this rocke vvill I build my Church, Mat. 16. and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. That is to say, the deuill and all his ministers, shall neuer so preuayle against this church, but
that it shall still appeere and professe one, and the same fayth. So that there shall be no time, wherin this fayth and this church is not. Now marke (good Sisters) I pray you hartely, whether your Englishe church, and your Englishe religion hath bene alwayes in the worlde since Christ his time. I will speake vnto you as before God, and as I shall answeare before him at the later day, and there∣fore I requeste you to marke well my wordes and to consider of them. A whole thowsande and fiue hundred yeres after Christ, your English religi∣on was not heard of in any parte of the world, but I tolde you before, that the true church must continewe for euer, & appeare alwaies, vnlesse you thinke Christ is false of his promise. When began your religion then? Forsooth about fiftie veres agone, by one Mar∣ten Luther in Germanie a frier: who as∣well for other vngodly respects, as al∣so because he would needes marie and
breake his vow which he had made of chastitie, began to preach against the POPE, and against the CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH, and because he taught great libertie, as that Princes ought not to reuerence the POPE, that all Preestes might mary, that no man neede to fast, and such like: he found many disciples in Germanye, and hath vnto this day carnall and fleshly men that loue their owne pleasure, more then the will of God, and his holy church. But will you know what manner of man this was? Forsooth being exa∣mined by learned men concerning his doctrine, he was so prest and so angred with the force of truth, that he sayd in a great rage: This quarrell vvas neuer begon for Gods sake, neither for his sake shall it be ended. Will you know further that he wrote against the POPE for malice and not for conscience? himselfe in his let∣ter to Argentmenses fayeth: I neither can deny, neither vvill I, that if Carolstadius or any other man could fiue yeares agone haue
persvvaded me that in the Sacrament is no∣thing but bread and vvine, he might haue deserued of me great thankes: for I labored in that matter very carefully, knovving righte vvell that by that meanes, I might much haue hindred the Popes authoritie. Marke that this man would gladly haue foūd some-what agaynst the BLESSED SA∣CRAMENT, but a long time he could not, till at length the deuill had taught him to wryte agaynst the Masse, De missa angulari. as him selfe witnesseth in his bookes, where he telleth what talke he and the deuill had together. Much more could I tell you of this man: but of this little you may iudge whether you may aduen∣ture to build your faith vpō this man, who lyued within these fiftye yeares, and to forsake the auncient fayth of all Christendome continewed from Christ vntill this day: for it is moste certen that from this man came your new religion into England, but not immediatly at the first when he began to preach, for Kinge Henrye the ēight,
wrote a learned booke very earnestly against him, The Quenes M. father wrote a lear¦ned booke a gaiust Luther for the pope. Afterward he forsooke him not vpon religion or conscience but vpon displeasure. which is common to be seene, but long after, partly when the King began to take displeasure against the POPE, because he might not be ma∣ried and vnmaried as he list: Partly and especially, when King Edvvard being in the beginning of his raigne but a ve∣ry child, was oueruled by wicked coū∣sellers to maintayne such a religion as might best agree to their carnall appe∣tite. This was the beginning of your religion; the beginning I say, for as for King Heury, he wente nothing so farre as they are now come: but whereas for his pleasure he had put awaye the Popes authority, and for his profit had plucked downe Abbaies, he let all o∣ther poyntes in manr remayne as be∣fore: and of this also repnted before he died, as it is knowen, if not? wo be vnto him that euer he was borne: for there in the next world (good Sisters) Kings and Queenes come to their ac∣compts, as well as you and we poore
folkes. I could here tell you of many lear∣ned and vertuous men that were then put to death, because they would not yeeld to the King in his vnlawfull do∣ings: knowing right well that it was all contrary to the lawe of God. A∣mongst whom were these two: The Bishop of Rochester the most vertuous and best learned of all the Clergie, as appeareth by his books. And Sir Tho∣mas Moore Lorde Chauncel or of Eng∣land a lay man, who for his vertue, wis∣dome, and learning passed all tempo∣ral men that euer were in that Realme, as appeareth by his learned workes written in the Englishe tongue, but now not suffered to be redd, because they teach the CATHOLIQVE FAYTH: Some man will tel you, that they were behedded for treason; but beleeue him not, vnlesse it be treason to obay God rather then Princes, surely other treason they committed none. One Marke more I will shew you
to discerne the true Church, The thire marke is ∣nitie. & that in few wordes, but so playne that your selfe will confesse it. To know the CA∣THOLIKE CHVRCH, this is a certayne and an vnfallible marke, if it be in vni∣tie and concorde? if it haue an agree∣ment and consent of hartes and opini∣ons: that is to saye, if it haue but one fayth and one religion. Act. 4. For of the true Church it is sayd: The vvhole multitude of beleeuers had one hart and one mynd. Ephe. 4. And S. Paule sayth: One God, one fayth, one bap∣tisme. And againe: 1. Cor. 14. God is not a God of dis∣sention, but of peace and vnitye. Looke now & consider the state of your Pro∣testants in England onely, are they all of one religion? Haue you not among them, some Lytherans, some Caluinists, some Puritanes, all agreeing against the POPE, and ech disagreeing one from the other? Do not your Luther̄s preach yea before the Queene, not with-out great thankes for their labour, that the body of Christ is really present in the Sacrament? And doe not your Caelui∣nists
preach cleane contrary, that there is onely breade and wine? And as for your Puritanes doe not they preach and wryte so farre contrary from the other two, that they are now forbidden to preach and cast into prison, and put from all liuings? Yea the communion booke it selfe doth it not nowe saye cleane contrary to that which it sayed in the later end of King Henry his time? Then you were expreslye commaun∣ded to beleeue that vnder each kind of bread and wine are conteyned the bo∣dy and bloud of Christ, now it is petty treason to fay so? I speake not here of Dermarke, of Geneua, of other cities in Germanve, who are all Protestants, and all differing among them selues, and from you. I haue onely declared how great diuersitie and disagreeing their is amonge your Protestantes at home within one little Ilande: which is so euident, and so farre from good christianitie, that it may be vnto you a very certen and suer token, that the
true fayth can not be amonge them, which hitherto can not agree in one fayth, each condemning the others o∣pinion. Thus (derely beloued, and my ve∣ry louinge Sisters) I haue geuen you certen generall Markes to learne the true Church: To wryte all were infi∣nite, because all bookes are full of our religion, I trust hereafter to instructe you in euery pointe, as you would de∣sire, and I pray God geue you grace, that you may desire it: All at once woulde be to tedious: In the meane time remēber these two things: VVhen your religion began, and by vvhom, and how it came at length into England. This is the yeare of Christ a thowsand fiue hundred, eyghty and three. Luther began to preache with-in these fiftye yeares: If he preached the truth, and all before him were deceaued, where was the Church of Christ in all the worlde for a thowsande and fiue hun∣dred yeares before? and how is Christ
ue of his promis, that sayd: I vvill re∣mayne vvith you for euer, and the holy Ghost shall teach you all truth, and the gates of hell shall not prcuile against it: But for out Church, that is to say the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH, we can shew how it is grown and continued from the Apostles vn∣till this day, and neuer fayled: We can reccon you from time to time, Councels, Bishopps, Doctors, infinite numbers of good christians of all ages that were all of our fayth and of our Church. Can your Ministers denye but that S. Chrisostome alloweth praying to Saints? or that S. Ierome calleth the Bishoppe of Rome Supreme head of the vvhole Church vnder Christ? or that S. Austen prayed for his mother being dead? or that he honored the Reliques of S. Steuen? or that S. Gregory sayd Masse? or that S. Ambrose sayeth, he∣fore the vvords of consecration it is bread and vvine, but after the vvords are spoken by the preist it is the very body and bloud of Christ or that all christians in S. Austens time, did vvorship the blessed Sacrament? or that
the second Councell of Nice, did ma∣ny hundred yeares agoe, allovve the vse of Images for the memorie and representation of Christ and his sayntes? condemning I∣mage breakers: or that S. Barnerd was an Abbot and had monkes vnder him, as in ca∣tholike countryes now a dayes? can they deny but that all this is true? and dare they deny these vertuous Fathers, and Doctors of the Church to be now Saints in heauen? O my good Sisters, that you could vnderstand their books and their wri∣tinges, that you might your selues see what they say, and what wonderfull men they were, endued with the spirit of God exceedingly aboue other euen good men, much more then your li∣centious leaders, I doubt not but you would suspect your new doctors, and folow these: you should perceaue they had the scriptures at their fingers eds, they knew right well the meaning and sense thereof, night and day by fasting and prayer, and chast lyfe, beseeching
God that they might vnderstand and truly expound his word. O what a dif∣ference is there betweene them and these new Preachers? Sisters, I appeale to your consciences, whither wil you, or ought you to truste in the expoun∣ding of Scripture, your yong vnlear∣ned, & fleshly Ministers; or these aun∣cient, most skilfull, and most vertuous Fathers? When Christ sayed: Mat. 26. Take, eate, this is my body: Al these Fathers say and agree that it was his bodye in verye deede: Your ministers tell you it was but bread and wine. Mat. 16. When Christ sayed to Peter, thou art Peter, that is a rocke, and vp∣on this rocke vvill I build my Church. These Fathers say that Peter was made Head of the Church, and after him all his suc∣cessors in the See of Rome where Peter was the first Bishopp: Your Ministers tell you that Peter had no more prehe∣minaunce then the other Apostles, & therfore the Bishop of Rome hath no more authoritie then an other bishop
hath. When Christ sayed to his Apos∣tles: Receaue ye the holy ghost, Io. 20. vvhat soeuer ye doo loose in earth, shalbe loosed in heauen, and vvhat soeuer ye doe binde in earth it shal be bounde in heauen: These Fathers saye that Christ gaue to his Church autho∣ritie to remit sinne by the ministrie of the preist to all such as doe truely re∣pent, and therefore will haue the peo∣ple goe to Confession: Your ministers haue taken that comfortable Sacra∣mēt of penance away altogether. Whē Raphael the Angel sayth in the twelfth chapter of Tobias: That he did offer vp Tobias prayer to almightie God. And when in the second booke of Macchabees the fifteenth chapter, Onias the priest saith of Ieremie being dead This is he that pray∣eth much for his people, and for the holie citie: these fathers say, that the Angells and Sainctes doo praye for vs, and that we may pray to them: your ministers doe not stricke to say, that these books of Tobie, & the Macchabces are scant good scripture.
Many other things lyke vnto these I could reccon, but I should be to lōg, fearing least I should werie you, these fewe are sufficient to geue you to taste of such marks as may shew you the CA∣THOLIKE CHVRCH. These and many o∣ther great reasons doe keepe all good christians within the Church. These thinges make so many catholiks, part∣ly to haue suffred death: partly to haue died in prison: partly to continew in prison so many yeares: partly to for∣sake their pleasant countrie, their dere frends, and to liue to their conscience among strangers, being thought of ma∣ny worldly men to be very fooles for so doing: but they know right wel that the wisdome of this worlde is foolish∣nes before God. Mat. 10 And Christ sayth, He that loueth father and mother, sister and bro∣ther, better then me, is not vvorthie of me. Sisters geue me leaue to tell you some-what of my selfe, not for anye bragge, but the more to moue you and to geue God all the praise for his great
goodnes towardes me. It pleased my parentes to bring me vp in learning as you know, as I was not the best, so I was at al times not compted the worst among my felowes and companions: some small estimation I had in Oxforde aboue my desert, more afterwards whē it pleased the Duke to make me though vnworthy, Tutor to the Erle his sonne: as long as his grace did prosper, I liued in his howse to my conscience with∣out trouble: when he was in the Tow∣er, & other men ruled his howse, I was willed to receaue the Communion, or to depart: if I would haue yeelded, I had verye large offers which I neede not tell. It pleased God to staye me so with his grace, that I chose rather to forsake all then to doe agaynst my be∣leefe, against my knowledge, agaynst my conscience, agaynst the law of al∣mightie God: For a time I lay secretly in England, afterwards I came beyond the seas into these catholicke coun∣tries, out of schisme and heresie: for the
which I do thāke almighty God much more, then for all the estimation that I had or mighte haue had in Englande. Whatsoeuer my estate is here, I doe more esteeme it, then all the riches of England as it now standeth. And were I so mad thinke you to forsake all preferment, all liuinges, all estimation, to liue from my good Mo∣ther, from you my louinge Sisters and your husbandes, from other my deere frendes and companions, out of mine owne most pleasant countrie, would I doe this thinke you, but that my lear∣ning & my conscience telleth me, that to solow your religion is present dan∣ger of body and soule: and to be in the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH is the onely way to saluation? Fye vpon all worldy ry¦ches when the soule is in danger: no∣thing is so precious as the soule: first seeke for the kingdome of heauen, & for other things as it pleaseth God. O that I might vnderstand once, that you were of my mind, and of the catholike
religion: O my harte would leape for ioy, to consider that althoughe we can not lyue together vpon earth, yet we may hereafter meete in heauen: which is vnpossible as long as we disagree in fayth. S. Paule sayeth: There is one God, one fayth, one baptisme. S. Austen sayeth, speaking of one Emeritus, He can not be saued but in the Catholicke Church. Doe you thinke it sufficient to beleeue in the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost? Vpō the 88 psalme. Harken what S. Austē sayth: VVhat doth it profit thee, if thou con∣sesse the Lord? If thou bonour God? If thou preach and praise him? If thou acknovvledge his Sonne? If thou confesse that he sitteth at the right hand of his father? VVhat dooth this profit thee, if thou blaspheme his Churche? S. Athanasius in his creede saith: VVhoso∣euer vvil be saued it is necessarie that he holde the Catholicke faith, vvhich faith vn∣lesse a man beleeue in all points, and euery ar∣ticle, vvithout doubt (sayth he) he shall pe∣rish euerlastingly. One poynte is (good Sisters) that Christ gaue vs at his laste
supper, his owne blessed bodye and bloude to feede vpon in the remem∣brance of his bitter death: he that saith it is not so, doth he beleeue in Christ? Doth he not in effecte say that Christ was not able to doe it, and by that rea∣son that he was not omnipotent? For when the three Euangelists reporte it so playnly, Mat. 26. Mat. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. & S. Paule after them: Take, eate, THIS IS MY BODY, that shall be dely∣uered for you: THIS IS MY BLOVD that shall be shed for you: What maketh a man to doubt but that it is so in deede? O you will say, I see nothing but bread and wine. If you should see his body, no god a mercy if you did beleeue it: But Christ sayed to Thomas: Thou Thomas doest beleeue because thou hast seene, 10.20. but hap∣py are they that beleeue vvhen they see not. Mat. 2. I pray you when the three wise men came from the East to worship Christ, what did they see in him? Forsooth a yong infant, not able to helpe himselfe suckinge his mother a poore carpen∣ters wyfe, and that in an oxe stawle:
yet they fell downe and worshipped him as a God: Is it not as easie to be∣leeue the body of Christ is vnder the forme of bread, as that almightie God himselfe was then vnder the shape of a seely weake infante? O good Sisters, vnlesse you beleeue, you shall neuer vnderstande: beleeue once Ghrist his wordes, and that he is Almightie, and that he is able to doe what soeuer he sayeth, and you will thinke that all is easye: returne to the CATHOLIKE CHVRCH, and be content to learne that which you know not, of them that wil not for all the world deceaue you, and you shal fynde exceeding comfort. When Christ shall say at the later day, as it were in this maner. Was it not of my great kyndnes that I lefte vnto you mine owne body and bloud? And was it not of my exceedinge goodnes and wisdome to leaue it, not in the forme of flesh and bloud, least your na∣ture should abhorre it, but of bread & wyne which can be lothsome to no
man? and you make me this gaye re∣compence, saying that it was nothing but bread & wyne, because you could tast nothing els in your mouth, and be∣cause your new preachers tould you so, whom I sente not? Were not you christened in an other fayth? Did not my church vvhich is my spouse and the pil∣ler of truth, Apoc. 21 1. Timo. 3. alwayes teach otherwayes? What haue you to saye for your selfe, but that you haue most vukindly abu∣sed that BLESSED SACRAMENT and hea∣uenly misterie, and make me a lyer, and deny my omnipotencie, and therefore deserue eternall damnation with all such as haue deceaued you? When Christ shall say this, will it not be a heauye case? When Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrisostome, Austen, Ierom, Grego∣rie, Bernard, all the olde Fathers now Saints in heauen, shall come and beare witnesse against you, and say that they taught otherwise? When your Bishops that are now partly deade, and partly in prison for the defendinge of this
cause, shal condemne you because you did not folowe their good example? When your owne doctors & teachers shall not be able to answere for them∣selues, will it not be a pitifull case? But I hope better of you (good Sisters) I can not mistruste your good natures, but that you will be glad to learne the truth: which almighay God graunt vn∣to you for his deere Sonnes sake who died for vs: and that I may heare some comfortable newes from you. Doe but signifie vnto me that you are content, if any thing be amisse, to be better instructed. Proue me what I can say for any thinge that trowbleth your consciences: It shall be farre bet∣ter newes vnto me, to receaue two lines from you to such a purpose, then to vnderstād that your husbands were made Lords and you Ladies. He is rich that is in the Catholike Church, and he is honorable that is in the fauour of God. Sisters if I might doe you good to God-warde, I would not sticke to
aduenture this body of myne to saue your soules, to come and talke with you: my bodye is not more precious vnto me then your soules: How you are disposed, & what you would haue me to doe for your sakes let me vnder∣stand by the next. Deale wisely I pray you & warily both for your owne sake and for our good frend this berer: It is not reason that for his good will he should incurre any danger: God for∣bid: my truste is in your wisdome that you will keepe this very close til here∣after by reason of the great persecuti∣on. The matter is waighty and concer∣neth both you and this berer verye much: be wise and trusty, and deceaue not your brother that loueth you as himselfe, and therefore wisheth by all meanes to do you good. S. Paule sayth: He that hath not regard of his ovvne kindred, 1. Timoth. 5. hath denied the fayth, and is vvorse then an Infidell: S. Chrisostome vpō the same place wryteth thus: If a man instruct strangers in the fayth, and suffer his ovvne kinne to conti∣nevve
in their error vvith vvhom he vvere lykelly to preuaile most, because they make most accompt of him, vvere he not a most cru∣ell and barberous man? For this cause I wryte vnto you, and wish you al grace, al goodnes, al heauenly comfort: laste of all, and least of all, to prosper in this world, and yet I wish you that with all my hart at the pleasure of God. Other good thing I haue none to sende you but this, I will remayne in your debte for your gentle tokens. Commend me to your selues, your lo∣uing husbands, and your litle ones: and when you haue learned to beleeue ryght your selues, bringe them vp ac∣cordingly, & teach them to feare God. Make much of this berer I praye you: and saue him harmelesse by your wyse and discreate dealings. Almighty God preserue you, and by his holy spirite leade you into all truth. Amen.
THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN TO M. DOCTOVR Whyte Warden of the new Colledge in Oxforde. RYGHTE Worshipfull, al∣though your worldly dig∣nitie, and the iuste opinion of your greate wysdome compared with my contraries mighte feare me from writing vnto you in this bould maner, yet many thinges moued me, especially my charitie towardes you to whom I am beholding for cau∣ses which you may remember, and my dewtie towards God, whose good mo∣tion I hope it was, that I should tell you rather frendly then finely, playne∣ly thē curiously, that which your selfe doe knowe much better, but haue not cause so well to remember: Isa. 28. Because that vexation doth geue vnderstanding, Ps. 8. and man vvhen he vvas in honor did not vnderstand. Which differēce in estate, maketh that
the yonger man for yeres & more sim∣ple for wit and knowledge, may not∣withstanding sometime truly say with the prophete: Ps. 118. Aboue auncients haue I vn∣derstood. Quare doctoralis ille facessat splen∣dor cuiuscunque dignitatis recedat ambitio: cum fratre & conseruo meo, filig matris eccle∣fiae, discipulo Iesu Christi loquor. Therefore setting a side that doctor all honour and the re∣spect of vvhat dignitie soeuer, I may be bould to speake playnely vvith my brother and fel∣lovv-seruant in Christ, vvith a childe of our Mother the Church and a scholler of Iesus Christ. Presupposing then that you are in conscience a catholike, and seing that in outward shew you professe the con∣trary, I am bould to reason familiarly with you, and to demaunde: whether you thinke it lawfull to beleeue one thing inwardly, & to protest the con∣trary openly? and how you can auoyd these euident scriptures: VVith the harte vve beleeue to Iustice: But when there is necessary occasion: Ro. 10.10 VVith the mouth con∣fession
is made to saluation. He that shal deny me before men, Mat. 10.33. I also vvill deny him before my Father vvhich is in heauen. But if you thinke it vnlawfull so to doe, (because you wote well it is condemned of old in the hereticks called Helcesaitistes and Priscilianistes) and yet doe agaynst your owne perswasion, Buscb. li. 6. ca. 31. Aug. cōt. Mendac. Cap. 2. Ro. 14.22. how answere you these places: Blessed is he that iudgeth not himselfe in that vvhich he approueth. And: vvhatsoeuer is not of fayth is sinne: Ro. 6. That is (as S. Augustine and others expounde it) reluctante conscientia: Our conscience stri∣uing against it. If neither the one nor the other, but you are perswaded that a man may lawfully professe both religi∣ons as time and Prince altereth: Besids that it was the heresie of Basilides. Lib. 4. ca. 2. Tò á∣diaphore in, as Nicephorus wryteth: What interpretatiō haue you for these scrip∣tures: Vsquequo claudicatis in vtramque partem &c. 3. Re. 18.21. Hovve longe haulte you on both sides? I four Lorde be God? solovv him: But if Baal? folovv him. Ecclesiast. 3. And agayne: Coringre∣diens duas vias &c. A harte that goeth tvvo
vvayes shall not haue successe, and the per∣uerse of harte shall be scandalized in them. And: 1. Cor. 10.11. you can not drincke the chalice of our Lorde, and the chalice of deuils: Mat. 6.24. Mat. 12.30. you can not serue tvvo Maisters. He that gathereth not vvith me scattereth. And agayne: Iac. 3.16. Doth the fountayne geue foorth at one hole svveete and sovver vvater? And yet agayne: Apoc. 3.16. But be∣cause thou art lukevvarme, and neither could nor vvhot, I vvill begin to vomit thee out of my mouth. I neede not vrge the terrible threatenings, your wisdome may car∣nestly consider of it. But it is possible that you mislyke of certen things in the Catholicke re∣ligion which you would wish to be o∣therwise, and conceaue a mixte religi∣on, compounded of that which is best in both. But M. Doctor, you are in myne opinion wyser then they whoe notwithstanding for this singularitie are esteemed to be wyse men, and of graue iudgement, but of the vnwyser sort. You know concerning things to be mislyked, ether they pertayne to
fayth or to manners: If these later of∣fend, you wot what S. Augustine hath long agone answered the Donatistes: Tollerare ecclesiam, non probare, paleas in tanta copia esse vt frumentum tegant, donec veniat is qui ventilabrum habet in manu sua vt purget aream suam. That the Church doth tollerate and not approue them, and that their is so great quantitie of chaffe that it couereth the corne, till he come that hath the fanne in his hand to purge his floore. If any poynte of doctrine agreed vpon by the whole Church (which is alwayes directed by the holy Ghoste) mislyketh you? you may vpon deeper consideration, iustlye feare leste your selfe, or any other man in this case be not a true Catholicke, nor of that Church, out of which is no saluation: For that which is the grounde of your fayth in one poynt must consequently be the grounde of it in all the rest. So that if you beleeue (as you doe) the presence of Christ in the blessed Sa∣cramēt, because the vniuersal Church
out of the scriptures hath so conclu∣ded: then if the same Church doe de∣fine any other Article, for example, Of Purgatorie, of praying to Saincts, of Pilgri∣mage, of Pardons, of Images, you must in like maner beleeue the same. If not? What authoritie doe you folow? What doe you make your grownd? but your singuler fancie, as in these, so in all the rest which you seeme to beleeue, Farre from the obedience which the Apostle teacheth: Captiuatinge their vnderstanding to the obedience of fayth: 2. Cor. 10.3. And very wide from S. Austens moste learned and humble opinion. Contrcy. fundaa. 5. Non crederem Euangelio nisi authoritas Ec∣clesiae me moueret: I vvoulde not beleeue the Ghospell, except the authoritie of the Church did moue me. He that sayed so, would he not also vpon occasion offered bold∣ly and confidently haue sayd: I beleeue their is Purgatorye, that their are Par∣dons in the Church, that we may pray to Sainctes, because the Church doth teach me to beleeue so. And if you aske
him what church, he wold send you to his long treatises against the Donatists & shew you as in a glasse a very liuely discription of this present CATHOLIKE ROMANE GHVRCH. No dout the autho∣rity of the Church is ether so necessary or so sufficient a foundation to builde vpon, that without the warrantise of it a man beleeueth nothing, because he beleeueth his owne braynes: and with it, a man may and ought euen agaynst humane reason beleeue any thing, be∣cause it is the Oracle of the holye Ghost. And in good sooth, it is a small reason to credite one article and dis∣credite an other, both defined by the Church. As to saye: this is golde and this is copper, both being tryed golde by the touch stone. As much to say in playne wordes, this I will, and this I will not. Prospe. pru. P. 2.0.27 Siyolo, siiubeo, stet proratione voluntas. Vnnaturall children, and ther∣fore in deede no true children, that deuideth their mother the Church, ly∣king
this, misliking that: which is pro∣perly deuidere sententiam: Euen as Salo∣mom iudged moste truly her to be the false mother, that requyred moste im∣pudently: Be it neither to me, nor to thee: but let it be deuyded. 3. Reg. 3.26. In. Ps, 88. conc. 2. Quid prodest si Domi∣num confiteris? Deum honoras? if sum predi∣cas? Filium eius agnoscis, sedentem ad dexte∣ram patris confiteris? & blasphemas ecclesiam eius? VVhat doth it profit thee (sayeth S. Austen) if thou confesse our Lord, if thou ho∣nour God, if thou prayse him, if thoudost ac∣knovvledge his sonne, and confesse him to sit at the right hand of the Father, and yet doest blaspheme his Church? And after he had recyted all the heresies before, and in his tyme, he sayeth: Omnis christianus catholicus ist a non debet credere: Ad Quodul. in sine. sed non om∣nis qui ista non credit, consequenter debet se christianum catholicum iam putare vel dicere. Possune enim & haereses aliae quae in hoc opere nostro commemoratae non sunt, vel esse vel fieri, quarum aliquam quisquis e∣nuerit, Christianus Catholicus non erit. Euery christian catholike ought not to beleeue
these thinges, but it follovveth not that euery one that belecueth not these thinges ought to thinke and accompt him selfe to be a christian catholike, for their may be many other here∣sies vvhich are not reconned vp in this booke, any one of the vvhich, vvhosoeuer holdeth, is not a christian catholike. And therfore A∣than si is in Symbolo sayeth: VVhich (Ca∣tholicke fayth) except euery one doe keepe vvholy and inuiolable, vvithout doubte he shall perish euerl estingly. Thus much I haue sayed by the way, rather to you, then of you: because I haue knowne certen learned and wyse men of that mislyking and distinguishing humor. But to you I will talke as to one that is in conscience a full Catholicke, and for outwarde behauiour may be esteemed contrary. S. Austen exhorteth vs: Vbi supra. Amemus Dominum Deum nostrum, Ame∣mus Ecclsiam eius, illum siout Patrem, istam siut Matrem Matrimonium hoc magna cum charitate compaginatur: Nemo offendit vnum & promereur alterum. Nemo dicat ad Idola quidem vado: sed tamen Dei ecclesiam non re∣linquo,
Catholicus sum: tenens Matrem, offen∣dis Patrem &c. Let vs loue our lord God, let vs loue his Church: Him as our Father, her as our Mother. This matrimonye is knitte together vvith greate charitie. No man offendeth the one, and deserueth thankes of the other. Let no man say, I goe to the Idols, and yet for all that I doe not forsake Gods Church: I am a Catho∣licke, houlding thy Mother (in harte) and of∣fendinge thy Father (in facte openly) &c. I neede not tell you, that to communi∣cate with Idolaters and with hereticks is all one, Passim in propheta Quia omnis heresis Idolum est sec∣tatorum eius. Because all heresie (as S. Hie∣rome sayeth) is the Idoll of her follovvers. And therefore S. Austen declaring the danger of the one to be more then the other sayth: Vpon the. 54. Psal. Ab illis qui longe sunt facilis cautio est: non me tamcito fallit qui dicit: ve∣ni Idolum adorare: multum a me longe est. Christianus es? Christianus inquit: expropin∣quo aduersatur, prope est, redime in pace ani∣mam meam ab iis qui appropinquant mihi. VVe may easily bevvare of those that be a∣farre of, for he doth not so soone deceaue me,
vvhich sayth: Come adore the Idoll, he is very farre from me. Art thou a christian? I am a christian sayeth he: he is neere to me: he is a∣gainst me euen at hand: redeeme thy soule in peace from those vvhich are neere vnto thee. S. Ambrose: Fraterno nomine non fraterné ecclesiam persequntur: e Incar. Ca. 2. siquidem sub optione. nominis Christiani & quadam nuncupatiua fidei germanitate paricidalibus gladiis nos cu∣piunt vulnerare. They persecute the Church vnder the name of a brother, but not brotherly: truly they desire to vvounde vs vvith their murthering svvord vnder the chosen name of a Christian, and a certen fayned brotherhood of fayth. Now if the pretensed name of a Christian doth so easely procure cre∣dite to false doctrine? What doth the name of a Catholicke to perswade er∣ronious opinions? which I beseeche you consider deepely. For a Catho∣licke you are esteemed, and learned and wyse: Many good meaning men that gladly would doe well depende vpon you, harken what you say, looke
what you doe, and because they are de∣termined to folow you, by your do∣ing ill and saying worse, you doe piti∣fully infecte many hartes, either with error or dissimulation, and wounde their soules to euerlasting death: and that because they compte you a Ca∣tholicke, and therefore are perswaded, that you will not teach them amisse. Lyke as the Iewes conceyued of one Almius the hygh Priest, saying: 1. Mac. 2. The man being a Priest of Arons stocke and comming vnto vs after this sorte, vn∣doubtebly will not deceaue vs. But you can well remember howe by that name and tytle he abused them. Surely, if Heresie should choose persons for her commendation, there could be no greater pollicy, thē to hire such as haue bene wyse Catholicks & are so esteemed yet. But in deede to be a slaue to heretical aduauncements doth not become a wise mā: & so great contēpt of Christ & his Church cā not stande with the name of a Catholicke:
Besids that, the danger thereof is terri∣ble, and with litle consideration may iustly make a stony harte to quake and tremble. For what will you alleage at the later day? or vnder what name will you pleade for your saluation? VVhen he shall render euery man accordinge to his vvorkes. Mat. 6.27 Amb. li. 3. e sp. san. c. 18. That you are a Christian? But Christ will answere: Non agnosco nomen meum, vbi non agnosco doctrinam meam. I doe not acknovvleage my name, vvhere I doe not acknovvleage my doctrine. Ps. 49 That you are a Catholicke? But if thou savvest a theese, Ro. 2.24 thou rannest after him. And my name through you is blasphemed a∣mongst hereticks. Ps. 16. And: Their belly is fil∣led vvith my secrets. 1. Tim. 6. Of close dissembling catholicks, their congregation was in∣creased and multiplyed. When our sweete Sauiour (who made that nota∣ble confession for euery one of vs be∣fore Pontius Pilate) shall thus say vn∣to you that now dare not confesse him, will you not then wishe that you had prayed with the Prophete: Ps. 118. Take not a∣vvay
out of my mouth the vvord of truth vt∣terly: Ps. 38. And that you had donne with the Prophete: I haue not hid thy truth from the great Councell. And: Ps. 39. Lo I vvill not stay my lippes, Lord thou haste knovvne. Looke well vpon your person, your calling, your place, what a foule example it is to others, and when such a man doth (I will not say) further, but tollerate onely and dissemble false re∣ligion. Wo be to the worlde for scan∣dals. S. Austen hath a place much wor∣thy of your consideration. Ca. 7. de. pastor. Si indifferen∣tr habuero errorem tuum, attendit qui fortis est, put at nihil esse ire in haeresim. Quando ali∣quod commodum de seculo illuxerit, vnde mu∣tetur statim mihi dicit, fortis ille periturus: & hâc & hâc Deus est: quid interest? homines inter se litigantes hoc secerunt, vbicunque co∣lendus est Deus: si forte illi dixerit aliquis Do∣natista, non tibi do filiam meam, nisi fueris de parte mea: illi opus est vt attendat & di∣cat: si nihil mali esset de parte eorum, non con∣tra illos dicerēt tāta Pastores nos̄tri, nō pro illo∣rum errore satagerent. Si ergo cessemus & ta∣ceamus
contrar: ō loquuturus est. Vtique si ma∣lum esset in parte Donati, loquerentur contra, redarguerent eos, satagerent lucrarieos, si er∣rant, reuocarent illos: si pereunt, quaererent. If I (being a pastor or guide of others) should make it (in the weaker sorte) a matter indefferent, to be of your error, then the strong in fayth vvould note it, and thincke it vvere no matter of importaunce to fall into heresie. Therefore vvhen any commoditie that the vvorld mighte proffer by changing of his religion, the stronge prone to perishe vvould strayght say to me: ush, God is on this side, and that sle, there is no difference, men onely falling at varience aboute the matter, haue made all this adoe. God may be serued on each hande. If some Donatist (so was the secte of that tyme called, as now Protestant or Caluinist) should happely say vnto him, I vvill not besto vve my doughter vpon thee, excepte thou vvilte be of our secte, such a one bad neede to take good beede and saye, if it vvere no hurte, but an indifferent matter to be of the Donatistes partye, then our Pastours vvould not speake so many thinges agaynste
them, they vvoulde not busye them selues so muche aboute that errour. Therefore if vve cease and hould our peace, he vvill saye all contrarye: Surely if it vvere so ill a thinge to be of the secte or parte of Donat, our Pastors vvoullde speake agaynste it: vvould reproue them: vvould seeke to vvynne them: If they erred, they vvould reuoke them, if they be lost, they vvould seeke them. If it be such a blocke for other men to stumble at, when the learned Doctour and Pastour doeth not con∣fute heresie? What is it when he prea∣cheth and prayseth it? Alas you can not denye, but that you doe so. 1. cor. 8. And so through thy knovvledge, the vveeke bro∣ther shall perishe for vvhom Christ hath dy∣ed. Saynte Cyprian bringeth in children, Ep. de. laps. whose Parentes example made them dene Christe, Aug. ep. 23. pleadinge for them selues at the daye of Iudgemente, in this manner. Nos nihil feimus, nec dere∣licto cibo & poculo Domini ad prophana conagia sponte properauimus: Perdidit nos aliena perfidia, parentes sensimus parrici∣das:
illi nobis ecclesiam Matrem, illi Pa∣rentem Deum negauerunt, vt dum parui & improuidi, & tanti facinoris ignari per a∣lios ad consortium criminis iungimur; aliena fraude caperemur. VVe our selues did nothing: vve forsooke not of our ovvne accorde the meate and cupp of our Lorde, and hastened to prophane contagions: other mens faythlesnes destroyed vs. VVe felte our parentes murthe∣rers of vs their ovvne children, they for vs de∣nied the Church our mother, they forsooke God our Father that being in our young and vnskilfull yeares, and vvholy ignorant of the vvickednes, vve mighte be intangled by o∣thers in the felovvship of the sinne, and be in∣trapped by other mens fraude. If the carnall children may iustly thus accuse their naturall parentes in the case of Idolatrie? May not spiritu∣all children much more impute their damnation to their spirituall fathers in the cause of heresie? I will not dispute how the crymes differ to commit Ido∣latrye and to preach heresie, both a∣gainst a mans conscience, but because
dissimulation is the least of them, and scandalizare fratres is an horrible sinne: Therefore the authorities which ser∣ued sometymes agaynst the one, may now be aptly vsed agaynst the other. S. Austen: Apparet illud esse prohibitum, ne in honorem alienorum Deorum aliqua re vtamur, aut vti existimemur, Ep. 15. sic eam accipien∣do, vt quamuis animo contaminamus eos ta∣men qui nostrum animum ignorant, ad haec honoranda, aedificemus. It is euident that vve be forbidden to vse any thing vvhatsoeuer for the honour of straunge gods, or in such sorte as vve may be thought to vse it to that end so taking it, that though vve in our harte con∣temne it, vve yet prouoke them that see not our mindes to honor the same. And agayne speaking of Seneca: Eo damnabilius cole∣bat Idola, quó illa quae mendaciter agebat, De ciui. Dei li. 6. ca. 10. sic ageret, vt eum populus veraciter agere ex∣istimaret. He did so much more damnablye vvorship Idols, for that he so did those thinges vvhich he did in fayned shevv onely that the people might thinke he did them truly and vnfaynedly.
For howe shall the people iudge, but accordinge as they see and heare? If a good meaninge or interpretation would serue: Peter, might haue sayed, (as some olde wryters excused him) that dicendo, Theeph. in. . 22. Lu. Nescio bominem, illud voluisset, Nescio purum hominem, sed Dcum bominem factum: sayinge: I knovve not the man, be meant I knovve him not for a pure man, but for God, Ep. Cleri. Roms. 31. Apnd. Cyp. made man. But: Cum totum fidei Sa∣cramentum in confessione Christi nominis in∣telligatur, esse digestum, qui fallaces in excu∣satione peaestigias, quaerit, negabit. Et qui vult videri propositis aduersus Euangelium vel edictis vel legibus satisfecisse, hoc if so iam paruit quod videri paruisse se voluit. Seeing the vvhole Sacrament of fayth is knovvne to consist in the confession of Christ his name, be shall be deemed to deny him that seeketh de∣ceiptfull and vayne shifts for his excuse. And he that vvould be compted to haue satified or fulfilled Lavves or statutes promulgated a∣gainst the Ghospell, in that he must be adiud∣ged to haue obeyed them, that he vvould haue him selfe seeme to haue done it. And there
fore constante Eleazarus woulde not eate, no not lawfull meates, 2. Mac. 6. leste it should be thought he did eate meates vnlawfull. I appeale to your consci∣ence onely (for what neede I vrge e∣uidente places) whether these autho∣rityes doe not concerne you? S. Am∣brose sayeth: Li. 2. of. c. 24. Licet bi silere in negotio dun∣taxat pecuniario, quanquam si constantiae adesse aequitati: in causa autem Dei, vbi communionis periculum est, etiam dissimulare peccatum est non leue. It is lavvfull for thee in a monye matter onely to hould thy peace, though it vvee the part of a constant man e∣uen therein also to stand in a matter of equi∣ty: but in the cause of God, vvhere commu∣nion or felovvship in ayth is in perill, euen to dissemble is no small sinne. O but it is good wisdome to mayn∣teyne credit in euery worlde, and to loose neither welth no estimation. I wounder that any wyse man shoulde thinke so. Much lyke as Cato Vticensis thought it great manhood to kill him selfe: and the secular Poet calleth it
Catonis nobile laetum: Cato his noble death: Whereas S. Austen proueth it to haue bene dastardly cowardnes, and woma∣nishe pucillanimitye: Ryghte so that worldly wisdome, is foolishnes vvith God: vnlesse a christiā man may say with the vnchristened and prophane Oratour: Seruire temporibus sapientis semper est habi∣tum: 2. Cor. 3.19. It vvas alvvayes compted vvisdome to apply him selfe to the tyme. And Non idem semper dicere sed idem semper spec̄tare debe∣mus. VVe ought not to speake the same thing advvayes, but to approue the same thing still. And: Quem fugiam scio, ad quem fugiam ne∣scio: I knovv vvhom I should fly: but I knovv not to vvhom to flye. O but we are com∣maunded to obey our Prince: I neede not tell you how sarre, and in what de∣grees: S. Peter and S. Iohn tell you by their example the case muste be limi∣ted. I will onely put you in mynd of o∣ther worthy men sometyme Prelates in the Church, and as it were houlde you the booke to reade howe they haue delt with Princes and potentates Act. 6.19.
vpon the like occasion: what vehemēt perswasions, how manifestly they re∣sisted for his sake: VVho is terrible and ta∣keth avvay the spirit of Princes, Psal. 75. terrible to the Kings of the earth. Theodoretus wryteth thus: Ec. histo. lb. 4. ca. 17 Cum Prae∣fectus (Modestus) Caesaream venisset, Basi∣lium Magnum accercitum honorificè excipit, leui & blanda oratione compellat: hortatur vt cedat tempori, & ue propter nimis curiosam dogmatm obseruationem, eamque paruo esti∣mandam, tot tantasque ecclesias prodat: polli∣cetur se Imperatoris (Valentis) amicitiam ei conciliaturum beneficiaque multis aliis in∣de euentura praedica. Cui diuinus ille vir: pueris (inquit) haec quidem oratio conuenit, siquidem illi ac sui similes eiusmodi verba a∣uidé arripiunt: at qui sunt in sacris literis e∣ducati, ne vnam quidem sillabam diuinorum dogmatum prodi siaunt: sed pro istorum defen∣sione, si opus sit, nullum non mortis genus liben∣ter amplectuntur: quod autem ad Imperato∣ris amicitiam attinet, eam cum pietate iunc∣tam magni aestimo, sed si ea careat, pernicio∣sum esse dico. &c. VVhen the Lieutenante
vvas come to Cesara, he called for Basill the great, and receaued him honorably, and by a svveete and gentle speach exhorted him to yelde to the tyme, and not vpon to curious ob∣seruation of some poynte of no great vvayght to betray so many and so great churches, pro∣mising him vvithall to reconcile him to the Emperours fauour, and affirming that much good might come thereof to many. To vvhom this diuyne man ansvvered, that his tale vvere fit to persvvade children and such like, vvhich vvould easely lyke of such offers: but that those vvhich are brought vppe in holy vvrit, can not suffer one fillable of heauenly doctrine and lavves to be betrayed, but for defence thereof vvould embrace, if neede re∣quire any kinde of death. As for the amitye of the Emperour, if it might be had vvith pi∣etye, I much vvould esteeme it, but vvithout that I saye it is . May it please you to reade a litle after the constante confession of the Preists and Deacons of Alexandria, Lib. 4. ca. 20. being exhorted by Mag∣nus the Count:  fidem b Aposto∣lis per Patrum successionem traditam prode∣rent,
affirmando Valenten Augustinum Im∣peratorem clementissimum hac re veheme ∣ter delectatum iri. Postremó cum maxima con∣tentione vocis haec verba protulit: O misri, obsequimini. Ariani opinioni assentite. Nam diuinum numen, licet illa quam colitis religio vera sit, si non vestra sponte, sed necessitate ducti ab ea discedatis, veniam vobis daturum est: Etenim in his quae necessitate peccantur, relinquitur excusationi locus, sed cum sua sponte quisquam deliquerit, carere reprehen∣sione, non potest. To betraye their Auncestors fayth receaued of the Apostlis by succession of the Fathers, affirming that Valens the moste clemente Emperour vvoulde be much pleased thereby. Lastely vvith greate vehemency of speach & loude voice be vttered these vvorde: O miserable men, obey, assent to the Arians opinion, for though your religion vvere true, the diuyne Maiestye vvould pardon, seeing you fall  from it vvillingly, but of neces∣sity compelled: for their is euer iuste excse to them that offend by necessity, though vvhen a man falleth vvillingly he can not be vvith∣out blame. Reade the place and marke
how litle they esteemed these World∣ly perswasions, which I haue therefore recyted at large, because the worlde is prone now a dayes, not only to vse, but also to follow the lyke inchaunte∣ments. But must the Prince needs be soo∣thed? Then Symeones an Archbishop of Persie is without cause praysed in the Ecclesiasticall histories. ozo. lib. 2. ca. 8. Qui introductus ad Saprm Regem vt de fide sua responderet, neque veritus est quiequam, neque Regem ad∣orauit: Rex commotus sciscitatur cur iam neu∣tiquam psum adoret, cum ante fecisset. Cui Symcones, non ante (inquit) eram deductus ad verum Deum prodendum, & propterea non reus tham debitos honores Regi praestare: at iam idem ipsum facere fas non est, nam iam pro pietate & nostra religione decertaturus venio. VVho being brought to King Sapor to genen accompt of his fayth, neither vvas a∣ny vvhit afrayd, neither adored the Kinge: vvhereat the King being offended, demaunded vvhy be novv did not his duty to him as at o∣ther tymes before he had done? To vvhom Sy∣meon,
I vvas not sayed he before brought to your presence to renounce the true God, and therefore then I refused not to doe due honour to the Kinge, but novv it is not lavvfull to doe the same, for novv I come to combat for piety and our religion. Thus to obserue tymes (M. Doc∣tor) was good wisdome so to honour the Prince at one tyme, that God be not dishonored at an other tyme. Luc. 2. This was to render to Cesar the thinges that are Cesars: and the thinges that are Gods, to God. O that all Prelates, in worldly consi∣deration worthy men, would learne by these examples and the lyke, to teach Princes, rather then to be taught by them, to be stout in God his cause: and so happily to winne both the Prince and the people, rather then by the con∣trary to peruerte them. Will you haue an example of such lamentable conse∣quents: Theod. lib. 4. ca. 32. Vlphilas Gotthorum Episcopus cuius verba pro ratis legibus habebant, cum ab Eu∣doxio pecuniae illecebris persuasus esset, nul∣lam doctrinae esse differentiam (Catholicorum
& Arianorum) idem barbaris suis sua autho∣ritate potiús quam ratione vlla ita persuasit, vt patrem maiorem quidem dicant sse, crea∣turam tamen esse filium noluit dicere. Vlphi∣las Bishop of the Gothes vvhose vvordes the people compted of as of very lavves, being cor∣rupted of Eudoxius by mony, so persvvaded those his barberous men, not by any reason but by his authoritye onely, that betvvixte the Catholicks and the Arians their vvas in doc∣trine no difference: that they affirme the Fa∣ther to be greater then the sonne, but yet vvill not say that the sonne is a creature. Lyke as if an hereticke Superintendent should aske a dissemlinge Catholicke: doest thou beleeue, that Christ is in the Sa∣crament? No forsooth: and sayth no mre, but meaneth he is not there vi¦sibly and fleshly: were not this to say as the hereticke woulde haue? And if some learned man would teach in this ease that he might say so verve well, were it not a damnable lesson both to Maister and Scholler? Your learning & your wisdome knoweth it were so.
But will you geue me leaue to bring one example more of the peo∣ples dangerous error through the scā∣dalous demeanure of Catholicke Pre∣lates? Misinus & Vitalis sent to Constan∣tinople from the Bishop of Rome to examine the case of one Peter esteemed an hereticke, delte so couldly in the matter, and kept such familiar compa∣ne with the hereticks: Euang. lib. 3. ca. 21. Vt ea ratione mul∣ti simplices homines ab hereticis in errorem in∣ducerentur qui affirmare non dubitarunt Pe∣trum ab Episcopo Romano in communionem receptum esse. That by their meenes, many simple men vvere brought into errour by the hereticks, vvho sticked not to affirme that Pe∣ter vvas admitted, by the Bishop of Rome to his Communion. And because I spake of yelding to Princes, the selfe same his∣tory telleth that Acacius the Bishop of Constantinople (otherwise a worthy man) was iudged by the Councell of Calced on grauissimo crimine dignus, vvor∣thy of a most greeuou fault, because he did not tell Zeno the Emperor which com∣municated
with Peter, the Councells sentence vpon him. Cume rte istud simo∣do amaret Zeaonem, . Cap. prestare deberet: verum Imperatoris desiderio satisfacere quam fidei¦consulere expetebat. VVhen perdy, if he had loued the Emperour Zeno, he should haue done that, but he had a greater desire to satisfy the Emperours mynd, then to aduaunce the fayth. He saw that the Emperour had prefer∣red him, and therefore to gratifie his Maiesty, dissembled what was done in the Councell, and him selfe communi∣cated with him. But it was small for the Emperours honour to haue such a freend that would not deale plainlye, as it appeareth by the story. Themistius the Philosofer speaking of the Aacians, that applied thē selues to the Emperours pleasure (then Ioui∣anus) agaynst their conscience, sayth: Assentatores non Deum sed purpuram Colu∣isse, Socrat. lib. . ca. 21. Euripoque similis esse, qui modò in hanc, modò in illam partem praecipitatur. That those flatterers did not vvorship God, but the Em∣perour: and vvere lyke to Euripus, vvhich
runneth one vvhyle this vvaye, an other vvhyle that vvay. Vndoubtedly besides that, simulation is an horrible offence toward God, besides the euell exam∣ples ministred thereby, to the simple, and the punishment due for so many soules miscaried: vndowtedly I saye a knowne dissembler is neuer well thought of: yea he is alwayes secretly misliked of the same Potentats whom he thinketh by soothing and yeelding to gratifie. And it is certen that among them selues they iest at such cōterfaits. As Octauius. Augustus drinking to a frēd of his taxed one that sate present, say∣ing: Proditionem amo, Proditores non ludo. I loue the betraying of treason, but I doe not prayse the betrayers thereof. And here I remember the terri∣ble storye of Constantinus the false Bi∣shop of Constantinople, Who hauing yelded to the Emperout against Ima∣ges, and vtterly abiuring them, and consented to the excommunication of Iohn Chrisoroas (otherwise) S. Damsn
and other holy men for the same mat∣ter, notwithstanding, fell into such dis∣pleasure and disgrace, that as it is long, so it is lothsome and pittifull to tell what dishonotable reproche he suste∣ned before all the people where he had bene Bishop, not one of them all mourning or lamentinge his case be∣cause of his inconstancy and dublenes: for euen vntill his miserable death the wretched man sayed, whatsoeuer they would haue him, hoping thereby to wynne fauour, but it full out farre o∣therwyse. Nm ssisimp Imperator p∣triciis, significate, dicens: Quid dis de de nostra & Concilo quod  (inqui) & credis, & hone : pu∣tas abhor . t conscstim  respondentes dierunt e:  audire nolunius de Rspan pollue, exho ergo vadiin terebrs, & sic  sententia, descendit ad claustra firarum & decollatrus est. or the  to him certen of his  caused him to be questioned vvithall thus: VVhat sayest thou of our  and the
Councell that ove held? You beleeue vvell Sir sayeth he, and the Councell vvas good, thinc∣king by these vvordes to please the Emperour: but they strayght ansvvered him, vve vvill not beare these thinges of thy pollured mouth: from benceforth therfore go dovvne into darke∣nes, and so bauing that sentence geuen vpon him, he descended into the places vvhere vvild beasts vse to be kept, and there vvas behedded. So that in this man (as in all doble de∣lets) is and shall be verified the pro∣phesie: Sophon. 1 I vvill destroy those vvhich svveare by our Lord, & by Melchom: By their Lord God in hart, and the Idoll, or (as in the hebrew) in their King with tonge and lippes. Contrarywyse when a graue Pre∣late will deale playnly and resiste the fancy of his Prince, although he might thereby incurre displeasure, that thing hath greater commodities then may easely be esteemed: that is, so glorious in heauen, and heroicall vpon earth, as might moue a man in many respectes exceedingly. To omit all others, the
aboue named Constantine shall suffice to declare what wisdome it is, in tyme and place mildly to mortifie the Prin∣ces humor. Whoe being asked of the Emperour (named also Constantine) Mo∣do quid nos laederet, si dixerimus Theotòkon Christotòkon: At ille hunc complexus, ait: Mi∣serere domine, ne ad contagionem tuam venit sermo iste. Nonne vides qualiter deuulgetur & anathematizetur Nestorius a tota ecclesia? Qui respondens, ait: I go discere volens inter∣rogaui, verum vsque ad te sermo. VVell, vvhat burte vvould it doe vs, if vve should call our B. Lady the mother of Christ? (For the Ca∣tholicks called her Gods mother, and the Nestorians would not so doe, but called her Christs mother onely) But the Bishop Constantine embracing the Empe∣rour sayed: Oh my Lord haue pitye, let not that terme be vsed to thy defiling: doest thou not see, hovv Nestorius is published and proclaymed as accursed by the vvhole Church? VVhoe an∣svvered and sayed: I asked the question but for my learning only, it vvas but to thee spo∣ken. Is it not very playne here, that if
the Patriarch had soothed him in this as he did afterwardes in other things a great parte of the worlde had bene in danger of Nestorisme? But when he heard the matter gaynesayed, he excu∣sed him selfe and was ashamed that he had moued the question: Such a ver∣tue it is to deale discreatly and religi∣ously betweene God and Princes, that we alwayes remember: 1. ps. 117. It is good rather to hope in our Lord, then to hope in Princes. Thus I haue rudely and breifely, but truly and charitably set downe be∣fore your eyes dyuers examples, if it may please God to geue you heauenly vnderstandinge by some one or other of them to see your owne faulte and to repent before the dreadfull accompte which you must needs make, so much the sooner the elder that you are. Doe not conceaue I beseech you that by these sundry histories I meante to dis∣crybe your person, good M. Doctor take me not amisse. If by the vniuersal vew of other mens noughtye demea∣nure
you doe the better perceaue what soeuer little or greate faulte is in your selfe (as by the Preachers generall Ser∣mon, we doe all the better espye our owne defects) that is my meaning, that was my purpose. If my manner of vt∣terance doe offende, pardon lacke of skill, or thincke that I was rather oc∣cupied about the matter, then curious in the arte. If you will needs thincke that I touch you sometyme more then was neede: let the chidings of a frende preuayle more with your good nature and wisdome, then the kisses of an e∣nemye. For learning or wisdome, I am not worthy to counsell you, but of duety and good will I presume to exhorte you, so earnestly as I doe sincerely ho∣nour and loue you, that you consider your calling: A Preist, a Doctor, a man of worship, of estimation. What could Christ haue done more for you then he hath done? 215. VVhat then vvill you ren∣der to our Lorde, for all that he hath rendred
to you: Will you dye for his sake? Mat. 26. Spiri∣tus promptus, caro infirma: The spirit is prompt, but the flesh is infirme. Heb. 22. That is not requi∣red at your hand. Non dum vsque ad san∣guinem resistimus: vve haue not yet resisted vnto bloud. Mat. 19.2 Will you forsake all and be∣come a beggar? Si vis perfectuss esse, vade & vende omnia & sequere me: If thou vvilt be perfecte, goe sell the things that thou haste, and folovve me. But neither is that ne∣cessitie. Wil you suffer imprisonment? Act. 16. And at midnight Paule and Silas pray∣ing, did prayse God: when their seete were fast in the stocks in the inner pri∣son. But we see that many earnest Ca∣tholicks haue also their libertie. Will you goe into banishment and lyue in a Catholicke countrye? Mat. 10. VVhen they shall persecute you in this countrye, flye into an o∣ther. And yet a man with wisdome may lyue also quietly at home. Will you then for Christ his sake leaue your ly∣uings onely, and lyue still worshipful∣ly vpon your stocke? To ould your peace vnlesse you be vrged o confesse
your fayth: to prefer heresie, and fur∣ther it neither by worde nor deede? What may a man doe lesse that will do any thing for his sweete Sauiour and mercifull redeemer? at. 19.16. VVhat permutation shall a man geue for his soule? If you had liued in the primitiue world when you must either haue de∣nyed Christ, or suffer a long death full of exquesite torments, what woulde you haue done? whereas now so little losse a little before the tyme of some little temporalities, maketh you not only deny your religion, but to main∣teine the contrary? uc. 12.48. and yet you can re∣member well: much shalbe required of him that hath much. ap. 6 And Potentes Poten∣ter tormenta Patientur. The mightye shall mightily suffer torments. uc. 17.1. And: VVo to him by vvhom scandalls come. s. 13. And shall they not all knovv that vvorke vvickednes that deuoure my people as they vvould eat bread? And S. Austen. a. ps. 52. Cum scis malum esse quod facis et ta∣men facis, nonne viuus descendis ad inseros? vvhen thou doost knovv that that is ill vvhich
thou doost and yet for all that doost it, doost thou not goe dovvne to hell, aliue? But I will not haue you feare onely: Perfecta charitas, 1.10.4.18. foras mittit timorem. Perfect charitie casteth out feare. Good M. Doctor as you are not without cause esteemed wise, so employ it to his honour who giueth all wisdome. Be contēt to be a foole to the world, that you may become hea∣uenly wyse. S. Ambrose. S. Bafill. S. Chrisos∣tome were wise men, thinke what they haue done long a goe, and would doe in your case. Follow them, and be not seruant to them, that are the seruants of noughtines: that say in effect, Eda∣mus et bibamus, cras moriemur. 1. Co. 15.32. Let vs eate and drincke for to morrovv vve shall dye. Yf that were the way to heauen, to followe all worldes, all rellgions, all Princes, to be still in fauour, to sleepe in a whole skynne, to loose nothing which way soeuer the winde bloweth. Suerly ma∣ny men could wisely doe all this, that nowe are esteemed for very fooles: but of such as in the last Iudgement
shall howle and crye out for very an∣guish and confusion: ap. 5. VVe senselesse estee∣med their life madnes, and their ende vvith∣out honor: Behould hovv they are compted a∣mong the children of God, and their lott is a∣mong the Saints. This that I haue said is in truth nothing, in respect of the matter, but in respect of your wisdome it is much. I beseech God to add more then I can vtter or think, Psa. 26. of his holy spirit which may leade you, In semitam rectam & osten∣dat tibi viam in qua ambules: in the right path, and shewe you the waye in the which you ought to walke. As for me, I am in this case to you as one that car∣rieth the candle or opening the gate before his master. I seeke no thanke by this my seruice, as knoweth God: one∣ly I quake to thinke of my friends dam∣nation: and therfore I crye out vnto you and make a noyse, such as I can in this my infancie. 1. Cor. 3. Nam neque qui plantat est aliquid, neque qui rigat sed quidat incre∣mentum, Deus. For nether he that planteth is
any thing, nor be that vvatereth, but be that geueth the increase, God. Christ our Sauiour keepe your wor∣shipp in longe and good health. The 15 of October. 1575.
