1969 99837485 1810
AN APPROVED TREATISE OF Hawkes and Hawking. Diuided into three Bookes. The first teacheth, How to make a short-win∣ged Hawke good, with good conditions. The second, How to reclaime a Hawke from any ill condition. The third, teacheth Cures for all knowne griefes and diseases. By EDMVND BERT, Gentleman. LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstans Church-yard. 1619.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE HENRY, Earle of Oxen∣ford, Viscount Bulbecke, Lord Sanford and Scales, and Lord Great-Chamberlaine of ENGLAND. MY Honourable Lord, I neuer affected flattery, if I had I should now haue beene much disap∣pointed; for your no∣ble worth exceeds what I can say. To particularize your honourable Titles, or here to blazon your excellencies were needlesse, and shall rather be printed in my faithfull heart, then published by my ruder pen; especially vpon the dedication of so slight a subiect. Sir, I haue long waited
for opportunity, & this great while whipt oc∣casion on, whereby I might tender some open testimonie of my loue, before I dye, which may remaine as a perpetual memoriall of my euer∣deuoted seruice. To that end (my Lord) I haue runne backe into my younger yeares, to summon the delights of my able youth, toge∣ther with the fruits of my more experienced age, (comprised within a few leaues) to at∣tend your Lordships leasure, and humbly to craue your Honours patronage. To arrogate to my selfe by an immoderate commendation of the Worke, were poore: to derogate too much from it through modesty, were as silly: Therefore (not to be excessiue in the one, nor too liberall in the other) I would (with your honourable fauour) doe you thus much to vn∣derstand: As for the subiect it is not waighty (being but a Treatise of sport) and to attend and to giue place to your Lordships honoura∣ble affaires, and more serious imployments; but as for the handling of the Subiect (I dare, and will boldly say and auerre) it is good: Nay, I will submit my selfe to partiall censu∣rers
vpon due triall, and bazard my reputa∣tion vpon true iudgement. My Lord, I frame not my wauering surmizes vpon probabilities of sic dicunt; but I ground my constant opi∣nion vpon certainty of probatum est: Nor can I quote any Author but my selfe; and out of my owne industrious experiments I (first) extracted my owne conclusions: I reape no mans haruest, but plough with my owne Hei∣fer. In fine, I here dedicate to your Lordship the delights of my Childe-hood, the pleasures of my youth, the experiments of my age, my faithfull (though painefull) labours, my fruit∣full (though slight) indeauours, myselfe, my continuall seruice and obseruance to your truely-noble Selfe, humbly requesting your Honour not to be ashamed to Patronize that which your seruant is not afraid to present: And that shall crowne my poore indeauours, and giue my labours an eternall sufficit; and make me euer rest Your Lordships humbly deuoted, EDMVND BERT.
To the friendly Reader. FRiendly Reader, I did ne∣uer purpose to publish in common these my la∣bours, but to haue giuen them priuately to whom they are dedicated, and to whom I stand deuoted: but being discouered to some of my friends, and by them made knowne to many of the rest, there importunities and earnest perswasions haue made mee put it to the presse, whereby I shal be sensured of such as haue lest Iudgement, but let it answere for it selfe; I haue not set down any thing so erronious, but being well exami∣ned, it will proue iudicious: and although this subiect hath already beene dealt withall, and well handled by a Gentleman of good experi∣ence, whose good and probable discourse might be a meanes to hinder my proceeding herewith, yet a great many gentlemen to whom the good∣nesse of my hawkes haue beene knowne to be such as that they could not be bettered, doe
strongly inforce it, that my Skill, Art & know∣ledge must be in the same degree: In truth I haue not kept any hawke aboue three yeeres, but I haue put them off for much money, besides ma∣ny thanks, and much loue. I had for a Goshawke and a Tarsell a hundeed Marks, both solde to one man within sixteen moneths. I know there are many of good experience will ouerlooke this my booke, and some that are young professors, and some that would learne to professe, but whatsoeuer he be that vndertaketh this professi∣on, I will wish him an able body, a quicke spirit, and most of all, an earnest loue and delight thereunto; to such a man a hawke will quickly teach knowledge, but of him that wanteth wit shee will make a foole, and of a dull-spirit a true pack-horse: If these good properties shall be wanting in a man, he is hardly to be made a good Austringer, and it will be hard for him to make a good hawke. I would I were able to de∣liuer plainely what I vnderstand, I will set downe as familiarly as I can, the best instructions I am able, but knowledge and vnderstanding, louing practitioner must be gotten by thy diligent and carefull obseruing thy hawke, in her sundry passions and sudden toyes, such vigelance, such diligence, and such carefulnesse will worke such an apprehension in thee, as in a little time thy knowledge and vnderstanding will bring forth such effect, as that thou wilt be able to preuent
all her ill intendments. I cannot set downe what thy experience will teach thee; but I rest to giue thee fullersatisfaction, by conference, then I haue herein or can possibly publish: Farewell. From my house at Collier-Row, neere Rumford Thine to his power. EDMVND BERT.
THE CONTENTS OF the seuerall Chapters of this BOOKE. The first part, teacheth how to make a short-winged Hawke good, &c. CHAP. I. THe Authours opinion of the Gos∣hawke and Tarsell, and of their defference; which hee writeth to them that are of small practice, and would haue their labours put to the best profit. II. Wherein the Tarsell differeth from the Gos∣hawke. III. Of the seuerall kindes of the Goshawkes and Tar∣sels, viz. the Haggart, the Rammish, and the Eyes Hawke; (I will distinguish no further)
and of their differing dispositions: And first of the Haggart. IV. The description of the Rammish Hawke. V. The description of the Eyas, vpon whom I can fasten no affection, for the multitude of their follies and faults. VI. A pre-admonition to the Reader. VII. The manner how I have vsed the Rammish-sore-Goshawke, after I haue taken her from the Cage vnto my fist, vntill shee hath beene fly∣ing.
The Contents of the second Booke. Wherein is set downe, how to reclaime a Hawke from any ill condition. CHAP. I. HOw to make a Hawke hoode well that will not abide the sight thereof, and (how disorderly soeuer shee be) it shall be effected in forty eight houres, with lesse then forty bates. II. How to bring a Hawke that will royle, and seeke for Poultrey at a house, to good perfection: And how to winne her loue, in whom an ill keeper hath wrought such carelesnesse. III. How to reclaime a Hawke that will carry, and not suffer her keeper to come vnto her. IV. To reclaime a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree.
V. How to vse that Hawke, that assoone as she hath a Partridge will breake it, and gorge her selfe vp∣on it. VI. How to vse a Hawke that will carry a Partridge in∣to a Tree, and will not be driuen to the ground, but will there assuredly eate it: And (it may be) not be taken vp vntill the next night. VII. How to reclaime a Hawke that will neither abide horse-men, strangers, Carts, or Women, or such like. VIII. How to vse a Hawke that will sit vpon the ground at marke, and by missing many flights, beate out her selfe from her true stying. IX. That the Tarsell is more proane to these ill conditions then the Hawke, and how to reclaime him that will seeke for a Doue-house.
The Contents of the Third Booke. Wherein is set downe, Cures for all knowne diseases. CHAP. I. FIrst, for the beake, mouth eyes, head and throat, and of the seuerall griefes and diseases there breeding, and offen∣ding. II. A medicine for a wet Canker in the mouth or beake, which will eate into her eyes and braine; and (vnlesse it be killed) will kill her; and this is more common with the long-winged then short-winged Hawke. III. A medicine for the Frounce, whereunto the long-winged Hawke is much more subiect then the short. IV. A remedy for the kirnels, whereunto the long-wing∣ed Hawke is not subiect, but it much followeth the short winged Hawke.
V. There is a disease in the head, of some called Verte∣go, a swimming of the braine, and the cure fol∣loweth. VI. The Pinne in the throat, of all other the most despe∣rate and vncurable disease: I haue not knowne a long-winged Hawke troubled therewith, but to a shortwinged Hawke it brings death. VII. An excellent medicine for a blowe or lash in the eye. VIII. An excellent water for a hot rhume that runneth out of the eye, the heate whereof scaldeth all the feathers from that part vnder the eye, and ma∣keth it bare. IX. For a Snurt, or colde in the head of the Hawke, or the Rye. X. For the Mytes, wherewith I haue knowne many Hawkes that haue not onely beene troubled about
the beake, but the very Ieukes haue beene left without feathers, and eaten the very skin off. XI. A receipt beyonde all other, to take out Lyme from the feathers of a Hawke. XII. A powder to be giuen to a Hawke that bloweth, and is short-winded. XIII. A medicine for the Wormes, wherewith all Hawkes are troubled, and other Creatures also. XIV. A receipt for a Hawke that hath lost her courage, and ioyeth not. XV. To distill a water wherewith to strengthen a weake Hawke. XVI. To distill a water, whose property is to kill any vn∣naturall heate in the mouth or body; a great cleanser and increaser of the breath; and the best
that euer was for the Liuer that is hot, and no∣thing better for a field hawke that flyeth in Som∣mer. XVII. An excellent approued medicine for a dangerous bruise, to be giuen presently after the hurt. XVIII. A medicine for a Hawke that hath receiued a wound by some ill accident. XIX. A medicine for the Cray. XX. A receipt for a streine or bruise in the foote. FINIS.
AN APPROVED TREATISE OF Hawkes and Hawking. CHAP. I. The Authors opinion of the Goshawke and Tarsell, and of their difference; all which hee writeth vnto them that are of small practise, and to them that would haue their labours put to the best profit. THe Goshawke is most a∣ble to indure much, and is more profitable then the Tarsell, not onely with bringing home many quarries, but with bringing di∣uersity and variety of quarries: Her disposi∣tion is meeke and gentle, if she be mildely delt with, and not so apt to ill conditions as is the Tarsell, she is subiect to seeke for poultry, into which fault she will neuer fall, except it be through want of knowledge in her keeper; which fault to preuent,
as also how to reclaime a Hawke from that euill condition, or any other, I will hereafter giue most plaine and true instruction in his proper place. CHAP. II. Wherein the Tarsell differeth from the Goshawke. EXcept it be for his practise, I would not aduise him that cannot rightly effect all things in a Goshawke, to meddle with the Tarsell, for hee is apt to ill conditions, which euery good Austringer (if he will) is able to preuent: He will take dislike at many things, or at any thing; he is apt to royle, and sometimes may finde poultry that is fit for his turne; and if he once take a liking, and stand well affected that way, there is none vnfit for him: Hee will quickely know a Doue-house, and too soone learne to finde the way into it, and then he hath wit enough to please himselfe; but these faults and many more follow such Hawkes as are not well handled, but are harshly and vnkindely delt with in their first manning: He is light-headed and nimble winged, the quicke handling of them in his flying pleaseth more then the Goshawke, and therein the Spar-hawke exceedeth the Tarsell, and the Marlin therein exceedeth both Goshawke, Tarsell & Spar-hawke. They may fitly be compared vnto a A compari∣son. large Gelding, and a smaller, the first hauing a large and long stroke goeth faster then he seemeth, the o∣ther In either kinde this holdeth not generally. that gathereth short and thick seemeth to goe much faster then he doth; the larger shall inforce
the lesser to strike thrise for the ground that he will almost at twice performe; my opinion is, hee that riddeth most ground, with most ease, shall longest endure. Iudge your selfe the difference betweene the Goshawke, Tarsell, and Spar-hawke. CHAP. III. Of Goshawkes there are three seuerall kindes, and so of Tarsels, the Haggart Hawke, the Ramish, and the Eyas, much differing from the rest. I Onely write now the differing dispositions of these Hawkes, of their seuerall properties, and the inconueniences that followeth them in parti∣cular: and first of the Haggart in generall. She hath liued long at liberty, hauing many things at her command, and she is therefore the harder to be brought to subiection and obedience: In her first manning she is apt to take euery accidentall occa∣sion that giueth offence to come from her keeper; A compari∣son. As a yong horse in his first riding, if he shall bogge or be afraid of something, if his rider shall then spurre him vpon it, the horse may thus thinke that the thing whereon now in feare all his thoughts are placed, is the true moouer of the spurres that tor∣ment him; so the Haggart tyed to her Masters fist, that bateth, and then findeth her restraint, the ob∣iect taken away, she will stare her keeper in the face, and thinke all the offence came from him, to whose fist she was tyed, otherwise she had beene at liberty, and so could haue freed her selfe from whatsoeuer
feared her. But let mee speake this now more A caueat. than I purposed, lest hereafter in his proper place I may forget to giue that caueat, if thy Haggart be so angry as that she stare thee in the face vpon any such accidentall occasion, or sodaine thought of her present bondage, owne it not, see it not, and by all meanes possible carry thine eye from looking vpon her, for that will worke her more dislike to∣wards thee; which if you obserue, you shall the sooner finde her pacified. She seldome meweth timely or orderly; and although some can say that A great in∣conuenience. they haue had a Haggart Goshawke mewed well and faire, fit to draw at Bartholomew; I answere, one Swallow maketh not a Summer. When the Haggart is flying, nature is altered, and therefore I must not here speake of her good or bad properties at that time, for they are wrought in her through the good or bad discretion of her keeper, when she was in making, or after she was made, as her keeper thoght. I will leaue those to their proper place, onely I say & so conclude, that your Haggart is very louing and kinde to her keeper, after that he hath brought her, by his sweet and kinde familiari∣ty, to vnderstand him; but if shee fall into any vice, shee is most hardly reclaimed from it, and brought to good perfection againe; if it shall be hoped for, it shall soonest be gotten and perfor∣med, by exchanging her keeper, if his skill may e∣quall her former keeper.
CHAP. IV. The description of the Rammish Hawke. THere is small difference betweene the Haggart and the Rammish, onely the Rammish Hawke hath had lesse time (by preying for her selfe then the other) to know her owne strength and worth, but in manning and making her I will set downe my whole practise, with my friendly aduise to others that will enter into the same course, for in the Ram∣mish Hawke is my especiall delight, for in them my labours haue proued most successefull. CHAP. V. Of the Eyas Hawke, vpon whom I can fasten no affe∣ction, for the multitude of her follies and faults. I Feele it most burthensome to spend my time idlely; I thinke the difference little, either to be idle, or spend the time to no purpose, or be long of doing a little, and such effect his trauell will giue him for reward that medleth with an Eyas, except a long expectation of good will giue him satisfacti∣on; For they are so foolish as the first yeare they will hardly be taught to take a bough well, and if that cannot be effected, there can no prosperous successe be expected. I haue knowne some that haue not prooued very excellent the second yeare in taking a bough, and then it is a foule fault, to doe
nothing the first yeare, and not very much the se∣cond; for I haue seene diuers entermewers hang I will not af∣firme that all will prooue thus. with their head downward, holding a bough fast in her foote or feete. I haue knowne some of them likewise that would sooner catch a dogge in the field then a Partridge, and although she had flown a Partridge very well to marke, and sat well, yet so soone as a dog had but come in to the retroue, she would haue had him by the face. One other as ill a fault as this, if she flye well, yet it is oddes you Neither is this generally to be vnder∣stood. shall finde her sitting vpon the ground at marke, when although you keepe your dogs quietly be∣hinde you, and though you vse some course to ter∣rifie her, or take her betweene your hands and You shal finde hereafter a remedy for this. throwe her vp, you may perhaps finde her folly giue her leaue to fall againe vpon the ground with∣in twelue or twenty yards of you; feare the worst, the best will helpe it selfe, it may be she will not goe to a tree at all, (this is grieuous.) Neither will most of them like the hoode well, and many of them will cry as loud to you, as you will speake to them. Neither can I hope to buy a sound Hawke of them from the Cage, who knoweth not that they are hot and scratching vpon the quarry: Art will easily amend that fault, which I will not faile Easie to be amended. to deliuer in his place. But this I say, if a man haue the patience to endure their impatience, and at∣tend a long time for their good proofe, if at the last she shall prooue well, she may be ranked among the best in the highest degree: She will euer mewe orderly and timely, and except some euill accident
shorten her dayes, she will liue longer then any of the rest, she is not apt to be sicke, or surfeit so soone as the other, yet if a sicknesse should befall her, she will out-grow it with lesse danger then the other. In this discourse I haue altogether spoken of the Eyas-Hawke, but the Tarsell is not so vnapt to take a bough, neither is hee apt to catch dogges, if hee prooue well: there can no attribute be giuen to the Rammish Tarsell (but all qualities examined) he shall owne as good, or better. And thus much as concerning my opinion of the Eyas Hawke. CHAP. VI. To the friendly Reader. FRiendly Reader, before I beginne to treate of the Rammish Hawke, and to set downe the cour∣ses whereby I haue made so many and so extraor∣dinary good Hawkes, as they could not be bettered both for flying and good conditions, I must tell you, and so farre explaine my selfe, that I doe not therein so much arrogate to my selfe, as to thinke my courses are not to be equalled, but they may be bettered, euen by men that liue in obscurity, but for what I write, is my opinion; from which (al∣though it shall mooue others but little) I cannot be drawne, because I haue had thereby so good, so prosperous, and so profitable successe: Some may contrary my opinion, who can for themselues say but as I doe, that their opinion is such; if I cannot
set downe sufficient reasons for my proceedings, my Hawkes shall testifie for me, it hath long laine by me, and that I haue not beene forward to pub∣lish this but in a Manu-script, is very well knowne to many of my friends, Gentlemen that haue come to visite and comfort me in the time of my sicknes (which hath continued with me for the most part these three yeares, in all which time I haue made but onely one Hawke, but diuers haue beene brought vnto me to be cured of diuers diseases, and some to be reclaymed from ill conditions) and by these Gentlemen I haue been ouer-powred (desiring that my knowledge might not be buried with mee) to thrust out my labours to publike view. And al∣though my memory hath escaped some secret, yet I am assured the skilfullest shall finde something herein set downe, that neither he nor any man hath made vse of, either in making his Hawke of good and faire condition, or in reclayming her, or any other of their kinde, from any ill condition. And thus followeth my direct course for the reclay∣ming, manning, and making of my short-winged Hawke. CHAP. VII. The manner how I haue vsed the Rammish-sore-Gos∣hawke, after I haue taken her from the Cage vn∣to my fist, vntill she hath beene flying. I Must speake something of the time wherein vsu∣ally I make choyse to buy my Rammish Hawke,
about the latter of Michaelmas terme; or if I can learne that there are more Hawkes comming before Christmas, I will tarry their comming, for those Hawkes doe not shew themselues out of the great couerts vntill after Saint Iames: And to buy one of them in the beginning of Michaelmas terme that hath beene so long taken, and done so little for her selfe, I like not, but I will hope for a more late taken Hawke, which when I haue, I fol∣low How I begin with my Hawke. in this manner. I continue her vpon my fist tenne dayes or a fortnight, (vnlesse in a shorter time I finde her a sound Hawke) which I shall the soo∣ner vnderstand, because I see how she putteth ouer This must be especially ob∣serued. her meate, how shee doth in due it; and if there be any doubt of her well-doing, there shall hardly a mute escape my sight whosoeuer doth carry her for mee, for she shall be well assured to finde no other perch then the fist, from that time I rise vn∣till Thus you may recouer her strength, that in so long a iourney is made weake. I goe to bed, when she shall goe with me; and if in this time I finde it fit, she doth not faile to haue casting. I finde no time lost in this course, for in this time I will raise my Hawke and giue her strength, and she will be the lesse time after she is vnhooded before shee doth flye; my castings that My manner of castings in the begin∣ning. I giue, are Thrums, gotten of the Weauer, I get them washed, but not with Sope, I cut the threads an inch long or lesse, and I size them out for a small casting, and giue them lose with her meate; or o∣therwise, I tye vpon the thrids two or foure small knots, leauing some thrids open at the end of ei∣ther knot; otherwise I giue plumage and some small
bones, if the fowle like me, the bones of that part of the wing that is vsually broken from the Par∣tridge. Flannell I could neuer approue of, neither did I euer vse the iukes and feathers of a house-Doue, The Feathers of the House-Doue not good. for they (by reason of their owne dung they sit in) are hot and strong in sauour. I am care∣full not to make my casting too great; I thinke there is no man but hath that care if hee but vnder∣take to feed a Hawke. When I find my Hawke in strength of body and stomacke bettered, I proceed to peppering, (for I will let nothing escape me vn∣set downe in the whole practise of my Hawke, vn∣till For peppe∣ring. I haue made her flying) and although peppe∣ring be as common with euery man as feeding, yet because I haue knowne and heard of many Hawks that haue dyed vpon peppering, when I had youn∣ger experience, I grew very carefull thereof, and I tooke this course: First, I made my water seeth, and then I put thereto a quantity of pepper, and a lesse quantity of Staues-acre pounded small; I put in the lesse of both, because I seeth them in the wa∣ter, which maketh the water strong: When the wa∣ter had sod a while, I did streine it through a fine linnen cloth, which should suffer neither Pepper nor Staues-acre to goe through, and therein I would then wash my Hawke. My reason why I doe not alow of, nor vse the common course of A reason why thus. peppering, is this; The water not strained through a cloth, the Pepper hangeth in the Hawkes fea∣thers, and when she falleth to pruning of her selfe, shee oftentimes getteth it into her beake, and so it
hangeth either vpon the tongue or in the mouth of the Hawke, and setteth it on fire, the heate and dislike whereof maketh many Hawkes to cast Especially such as are not perfectly sound. their gorge, and so their sicknesse encreasing, they dye. Besides, I haue come many times to some places foure or fiue daies, or a weeke after that they haue peppered their Hawkes: And I haue seene the backe part of their wings red so long af∣ter their peppering: There may thereupon grow (although not sodainely) an incurable blister, which will lame his Hawke, and her Master shall neuer know how it commeth; but with the rough∣nesse An office ill performed. of the Pepper, and with the ill handling of them that haue executed that office, I haue many times seen the skin in that place rubbed off. If any man will follow my course he may, if not, let this warne him of the inconueniences that follow the other, many Hawkes hauing dyed vpon peppe∣ring, Auoyde euery inconueni∣ence. my reason can finde no other cause than what is aforesaid, or else a great fault in her kee∣per, that would put his Hawke to such a hazard, A fault in her keeper. before he had made her body able and fit for it. My place of peppering should be in a very warme roome, although the fire were not very great I cared not, my time should be in the eue∣ning, and for my company I cared not how ma∣ny both men and dogs, the more the better, for The earnest∣lier she loo∣keth at many things, the lesse she will feare any. then the Hawke seeing so many things, that any one of them might giue offence alone, there is now so much change, men, dogges, fire-light, and candle-light, that she looketh at all, and knoweth
not which to be afraid of. Besides, she hath a de∣sire to dry her selfe, and so let her continue vntill she be dry, and hath picked her selfe, by that time I would thinke it time to giue her some meate, & that should be but a little: she had none aboue one houre before I beganne to pepper her; my Let her haue no meate a∣boue when you pepper her. hoode is layd away with no purpose to handle it before foure and twenty houres were spent, that night she neuer went from my fist, but when I entreated my friend to ease me. But note, I sel∣dome did sit still with her, but I would walke, and Sit not still in manning your Hawke. when I walked, or whether I sat still, I would en∣treate my Hawke not to be idle, but in this man∣ner to walke and trauell with me, very often tur∣ning my hand gently, forward and backeward, A good meanes to man your Hawke. whereby my Hawke should be made, leisurely, to remooue her feete one after another, forward and backeward. I had rather she should gently re∣mooue a foote, then with anger strike a wing, and the often remoouing her foote will saue her ma∣ny a bate. It may be your Hawke (good friend) shall want that attendance that mine hath had for a fortnight before, if you faile in the begin∣ning, looke for no succesfull ending, it is very like Obserue this. you shall finde it at this time, when shee will di∣stemper and ouer-heate her selfe with bating, which my former courses taken with my Hawke, assureth me that I neede feare no such thing. To proceede, I with my Hawke vpon my fist walke, and I entreate her to doe so likewise, by the gen∣tle remoouing her feete, which she should practise
that night either vpon my fist, my friends, or my mans; towards the morning (if the weather Lose not the morning. would giue me leaue) I walke abroad with some company, both men and dogs: and howsoeuer the weather was, I would euer be abroad at the breake of the day, and so continue so long as I could conueniently. If my Hawke were vnquiet, All Hawkes are then natu∣rally disposed to stirre. it would be about, or rather before, the Sunne ri∣seth, it is a time wherein all creatures spirits are quickened: Although my Hawke hath been thus truely watched, yet I should finde in her a natu∣rall working and stirring, as though she had som∣thing to doe; then to put her out of that humor, I would haue either the wing of a Mallard, Pullet, or such like, to set her a-worke, and put-by those thoughts which nature taught her, and teach her to alter nature. All this while I haue both company and dogs with me; as I finde cause I goe into the house, where I and my Hawke walke, she walking vpon her feet as well as I vpon mine, I would tend her many times with tyring and plumage: And thus either vpon my fist or vpon some mans else, she should sit and walke all that day, for I thinke that is the day of marring or ma∣king; and this I thinke that if she should be set down vpon a pearch but whilest I should change Allow her no ease but vpon the fist. my Gloue, she would be more impaired thereby then she would profit in tenne dayes trauaile, be∣ing compared to my course herein taken, and which I vse, and will take two nights and two daies together. I assure you that I haue neuer
met with that Hawke that hath shewed her selfe froward, or vnruly, no not this first day, neither shall I euer doe, if I order her after this manner. Well this day is spent in this manner, euening ap∣proacheth, and bid'deth the Hawke take her rest, which I haue euer found her very ready and wil∣ling vnto, & fashion her selfe to take her vp lodg∣ing vpon my fist, neither owning nor looking for other pearch. Now she is conformable vnto my will, she is euen already become familiar and so∣ciable, Already so∣ciable. and so I will continue her. Now I shew her the hoode, which my care hath before-hand prouided, and made very large, I thinke some∣what larger then is vsuall, but much larger at the top of the beake then I euer saw vsed. My hoode made fit and easie, I would offer to put it on, Take care to haue a very easie hood. which at that time I could neuer haue my Hawke dislike. Thus I would vse her with hooding and vnhooding that night; and then would I be∣thinke mee whereof my Hawke was likelyest to dislike or be afraid; I would now seeke out the Smiths Forge, and there shee should endure the blowing of the fire, and knocking of the Anuill, and the sparkes flying about the shop. I pray you marke, it is not long since shee was begunne with, and what I haue done to her I haue deliue∣red plainely, belieue me within this little time, and with this my small paines, I haue made my hawke such as she would not be distempered, disorderly, Who will not take this course? froward, or more vnruly, but that I haue seene flying Hawkes much worse. It will be no hard
matter to watch her this night, but it will be al∣most vnpossible to keepe her waking. I haue heard of some that haue watched their Hawkes seauen nights and as many dayes, and still she would be wilde, Rammish, & disorderly. Know (good Rea∣der) that a little sleepe will suffice nature in any creature, and when a Hawke is vpon the fist, the man spending his time with sitting still, talking, or at Tables, hee may be vertuously spending his time in reading the Scripture; in this time his Hawke sits still, she hath no exercise, and there is little difference in this, either to be vpon a pearch or his fist: hee may say, if I should set her vpon a pearch, whensoeuer it were in her sight shee would bate to goe to it; I aske what is the diffe∣rence betweene bating to goe to the pearch, or I doe not al∣low that she should be set vpon a pearch. bating to flye from all things else? And thus you shal neuer haue her a well-manned Hawke. What are the discommodities that follow a Hawke thus manned? She will endure nothing, because shee hath not beene made acquainted with any thing; for when her Master or keeper should see her to take offence or dislike, hee will auoyde that be∣cause she shall not bate: Another-while he cry∣eth All which I would haue my Hawke vsed vnto. out, come not in the taile of my Hawke; but whosoeuer shall vndertake the course that I haue vsed, he shall finde his Hawke seldome apt to take any offence at all. In a mans much sitting still in the time of manning his Hawke, an easie appre∣hension will finde a great errour, for when the man sitteth still, the Hawke sitteth still, and if she To sit still an ouer-sight.
hath been truely watched, although she doth not winke or shut her eyes, yet her heart may be fast sleeping; or if it be in the day, so long as her kee∣per sitteth still, she will be quiet, but let him but stirre and walke, she liketh not that, she hath sit∣ten quietly vpon his fist, and she is very loath to haue that custome broken. Euery Austringer of any experience knoweth, that a Hawke thus vsed will thus bate. Why is it so? Not because her eyes meete with that which sitting still shee saw not, but because now she meeteth labour, shee is angry and discontent, because shee is not as shee was sitting at ease. A Hawke before she is truely manned (that hath been set & vsed vnto a pearch) will perpetually bate to be there. I hold it a great He is in an errour that setteth downe his Hawke hooded before she be well manned. error to set her hooded, because she should not see whereon she sitteth; for sure I am this fashion will breed more than a little inconuenience, and yet hereby there is no loue gained from his Hawke. I haue obserued that it is much walking with my Hawke that hath wrought such good effect in her; for in my walking and turning, her eye The Authors obseruation. doth still behold change of obiects, and the stir∣ring of her feete doth worke as much or more good in her, for that maketh her desirous to sit still, and desirous of ease, which bating doth not giue, and in the first making saueth her many a bate. As at my first beginning I labor to acquaint her with whatsoeuer a Hawke may dislike; so my manner of working this, is by that meanes, which The meanes is most neces∣sary. otherwise she would dislike, and that is carriage,
and in this beginning to make my fist her pearch, vntill she be such as I would haue her, which this night and the next day shall make her, for this night is but the second night; and now my chie∣fest practise is the vsing her to the hoode, which she will as familiarly take as the Faulcon. I will shew you my manner therein: I shew her the hoode, put it to and ouer her head many times, I finde her so truely manned, as that shee will no more dislike the stroaking therwith, then the bare hand, I put it on gently and very leisurely, and I could neuer meet with any dislike hereof in my Hawke; I would either put it on with my full hand, or else holding it by the tassell, whereby Obserue this. you may know that it was lesurely & gently done, which will be a means that she shal neuer hereafter be coy of it: But if my fine Austringer will shew his dexterity and nimblenesse of the hand, and with his finger in her necke thrust her head into the hoode, if he misse the right doing it, the next time he commeth in such a manner, he may per∣aduenture finde her dislike, this is the next way to make her thinke her head shall be pulled off; for the putting it on in such a quicke manner, or thrusting her head into the hoode with the finger Auoyde all such vnkind∣nesse. behinde, will make the Hawke vnderstand that it is no kindnesse, but violence and churlish vsage, which must neuer be offered a Hawke, and then you shall perhaps finde her dislike your hand and hoode comming to her, and so being a little coy or angry, neuer be content to carry her beake
right, but turne it in the hood; and so my fine quicke hand bobbeth his Hawke, and maketh her vtterly dislike the hoode. There is no way but gentlenesse to redeeme a Beware of hasty hoo∣ding. Hawke so bobbed, and therefore I aduise thee not to trust to the quicknesse of the hand, but ra∣ther to holde the hoode by the tassell to her head, & then to put it on leisurely, with a light carriage. You may say she will not suffer this; so thinke I al∣so, after she hath once taken a dislike thereof; but I spake in the beginning how to vse your hoode, so as she shall neuer with such vsage take dislike thereof: vse her as I haue vsed mine, and you shall finde yours as I finde mine; Admit your Hawke shall turne her head away from the hoode, I know she will not bate from it, perhaps she will I could neuer finde more distemper. likewise turne her body by the remoouing one or both of her feete; vpon the putting her head a∣side, I would still holde my hoode within an inch of her head, vntill she should turne her head, and then to put it on leisurely; but if she stirre her body and remooue her feete, then pull backe your hand, and by turning your body and your fist whereon she sitteth, set her right and fit, and then holde the hoode gently to her nose, which she will be willing to put her head into, rather then stirre any more, for she knoweth there is no hurt ensueth. I could with ordering of my hawke She will finde no hurt in lei∣surely hoo∣ding. (as I haue already set downe) neuer finde any Hawke at a worse passe then so. Well, she is now wel made acquainted with the hood, the morning
commeth, which I haue said before, reuiueth all her spirits, which before were heauie and dull, at Morning and euening are the times to make a hawke well conditioned. the breake of day getting company and dogges with mee, or in the Towne, or rather where I should meete most passengers, there would I be walking, hooding my Hawke, and sometimes let her feede after her hooding: After one or two houres being abroad I would into the house a∣gaine, where my Hawke should shew her selfe as sociable and familiar as a Lanner. I vse altogether a lowe pearch, which set in the middest, or in such place of the roome wherein I was, as that both men, women, children & dogs should goe by her, Their desire of ease will make them endure all things, and their so sitting, man them with all things. I did not feare although they did wipe their Gownes against her, I euer found them so glad of their ease. The second day, I know my hawke is as wel man∣ned as I can desire, it may be I will set her downe vpon such a lowe pearch, and in such a place as I haue foresaide, and I know there shee would sit, not fearing any thing, and not making one bate in two or three houres, (if I would let her sit so long, which as yet I must not) vnlesse hunger should enforce her to stirre. I make no doubt but Haue some∣thing to please her howsoeuer. she would be very gentle to take vp, if she doe not iumpe to the fist. Now I follow her with castings, and I keepe her vpon my fist vntill I goe to bed, and now I am able to gouerne her, not needing any more helpe, and yet I pray thinke, A Hawke must be kept to her good perfection. that I know if shee be not held and kept in this good perfection, she will fall againe: But all this
I am able to doe, onely with late sitting vp and early rising. I feede her so as that I know she shall cast betimes, which I will carefully looke for one houre before day; and when I take her vp I will surely please her with something, then I fall to my olde Trade againe, walking abroad as I did be∣fore, vsing her hoode as I finde cause. I neuer call her aboue eight or tenne yards, vntill I finde that shee is bolde enough and not fearefull, and that she be farre in loue with my voyce, which I neuer faile to giue her, euen from the beginning of her feeding, vntill shee is flying, and that is lowde enough, as if I were to call her thirty or forty score, although I call her but ten yardes. Well, when I beginne to call her in cranes, al∣though it be for so small a distance, it shall be done from the hoode, and from the fist of another man, in manner as your long-winged Hawke is lewred: and when I call her twice or thrice at a time, be∣tweene euery calling I put on her hoode, and so still I haue her let in from the hood: Who know∣eth not that a Hawke set downe vpon a stile, blocke, or any other conuenient thing, when she shall with the often seeing the Cranes drawne at length, and her keepers accustomed manner in calling her, soone learne to know that now shee After she is once called and set downe againe, she will not let him goe fiue yards. shall be fed, & will be ready to follow him before he can get twenty yards from her? But all this is not to the true purpose. I haue seen a Haggart with foure dayes calling, not suffer the going from her fiue yards, but she would haue been at his elbow,
after she had beene once set downe, and yet she was far enough from the perfection of comming; for it is the voyce that must not onely in this, but The voyce is the Mistresse of knowledge to your Hawke. in greater matters, worke a good effect in my Hawke. As I am thus calling my hawke in cranes, it is very certaine she will soone come to that vn∣derstanding as that she will bate vpon hearing my voyce, before she be vnhooded, I then stay my voyce vntill she be quiet; then I call againe, and then stay my voyce vntill she be vnhooded: and againe, I giue my voyce, not holding out my fist, vnlesse I see her comming: My experience hath taught mee to stay her, and not to let her come vntill she be quieted, because I haue seene long A reason. winged hawkes, (with which profession I haue made an end thirty yeares since) let into the lewer in the time of their bating, when they haue had their eye presently setled vpon some other farre remote from the lewer, whether they haue pre∣sently gone, and then not come to the know∣ledge, could not finde the lewer, and so haue beene lost. I spend two, three, and often foure times of the day thus in calling my Hawke, then I call my Hawke often. for the day, for the most part my fist is her pearch, and if I set her downe, it shall be euer vpon a owe pearch, where all sorts of people and dogs shall How I be∣stowe my Hawke. trauell by her, and where she shall see the fire stir∣red and blowen, and wood brought thereto, and diuers other such like obiects: She will not for any, or all of these make a bate. In this manner I haue trained my hawke, that when shee hath
beene a flyer. I durst set her downe vpon a Vel∣uet stoole, in a cleanely kept dyning-Cham∣ber or Parlour, as the place was whereunto I went, for I would haue my Hawke as much in my eye as could be; perhaps I should see the Lady or Mistresse of the house looke disconten∣tedly hereat, so well haue I beene acquainted with my Hawkes good disposition, that I haue promised if my Hawke should make a mute in the roome, I would licke it vp with my tongue; Anger and vnquietnes is the cause of many mutes. for well I knew no angry mute should come from her, otherwise she would not mute; And I knew well (vnlesse I were negligent, which I would ne∣uer be) that she would not stirre vntill hunger did prouoke it: This for the day. In the euening when I had called and supped her, then I would no more let her part from my fist, but continue her vntill I fed my selfe, it may be if I had such meanes she should be vpon the fist for that season also, and so vntill I went to bed, (which the loue to my Hawke would not haue me hasten.) In the morning before day I would assuredly haue her vpon my fist, and fol∣low her in such manner as I haue formerly done, thinking that I could neuer be too frequent with There cannot be too much familiarity betweene the man and Hawke. my hawke, nor she with me. My inducements to carry her thus in the euening, and night, would make her loue me as her perch, and by my taking her vp so early in the morning, I would perswade her that there had beene her pearch all night: But whether my hawke will haue this louing appre∣hension,
or no, I know not, yet I am assured it worketh this benefit, that she will indure as much or more than any other hawke not so delt with; And it is this that maketh her so willing to sit still and take her ease, and not take offence, although there should fly about the house fire, dishes, tren∣chers, and any thing else that would mad other hawkes, they shall not mooue her. Me thinkes I heare some man say, I haue taken a very painefull course in making my hawke. I aske who will not fast one-day to be assured that hee shall feele no A question. want so long as hee liueth? Worke but out your taske in this fashion, and you shall during your A sweet satis∣faction. hawkes life finde none but playing-dayes. Let me not omit any thing in my proceedings; As for the hoode, I neuer in the house let her sit hooded at all, and when shee is a flying hawke, neuer vnhooded in the field. Bee not negligent to∣wards your Hawke at no time, but especially whilest she is in manning, if you be, shee will pay you for it in her flying. I am afraid to be tedious, and I cannot more briefly deliuer my practise and my experience, I would glad∣ly walke plainly, and giue vnto euery man full satisfaction. I should haue forgotten one speciall benefit By these meanes if she be found ta∣ken from the Cage, she will be made fly∣ing in twenty dayes. that is gained by your three nights painefull fol∣lowing your Hawke, that is, she shall not at all weaken her selfe with many bates: also her fami∣liarity will be such, as that you may thereby bet∣ter her dyet in her calling, and of a poore Hawke
from the cage, make her strong and full of flesh, the contrary no doubt followeth those Hawkes that are by fits dealt withall; one while carefully watched and manned, and to another time neg∣lected, and then their dyet shortned to make The fruits of negligence. them conformable at a keeper without forme. Hence proceed the marring of many hawkes, that when they should be entered and flye, they are so weake, as they are not able to shew what they would doe if they had strength. If this be not motiue enough to make you haue a care of your hawkes decaying strength, and her falling of flesh, then know that pouerty is the mother and If you will haue your Hawke flye well, let her be full of flesh. nurse of all diseases: I haue followed aduising too long, and left the deliuering of my practise. Now to proceede therewith, my hawke is to be called lose, she shall not be weakened or hanged with draging her cranes aboue eight or nine score, and my manner is to call her thirty and forty score before I put her into a tree, and I vse to call her at all houres in the day, I feare not her comming home vnto me; but admit what I haue not met with, that she falleth off and goeth to a tree, it must be want of a stomacke that maketh her doe so, or want of weathering, or bathing, which I will be sure she shall not want, neither do I thinke she should want a stomacke, which if she should want, that want will make her sit quietly, Patience is an excellent ver∣tue in an Au∣stringer. and I had rather attend her pleasure with pati∣ence now, then when I am in sport. I will tell you something touching this point: when I am
trauelled with my flying hawke, that is as louing as sociable & conformable to my wil in all compa∣nies and times as I can desire; yet, I do beare her bare-fac'd for the most part all my iourney, and when I perceiue she groweth hungry, then I put on her hoode, and if there be no present hope of a flight, I set her vpon the fist of one that knoweth what doth thereunto belong, then I pray him to ride hind-most of the company, and I put my selfe formost; then I call my hawke, when her I call my Hawke al∣wayes when I feed. hoode being pulled off, she commeth by all the company merrily to the fist; Vse maketh perfect∣nesse, thus I vse my hawke, and she neuer receiues meate from me, but I call her. It may be you will be aduised hereby to doe the like, if you once finde the benefite thereof, you will hold the grea∣test paine in effecting it, sweet contentment and Paine is re∣warded with pleasure. pleasure: But to my hawke which doth not so, (but granted she should do so) make me waite her pleasure; I am not hasty to call her vntill shee hath taken her pleasure: which with my obserua∣tion, I will soone discerne, and then when I call her, I know she will soone please me, and so con∣clude, we are both pleased: but if such an accident should befall me three or foure nights before I went to flye her, I would now not faile but shew her a Partridge the next night, if I could get a You shall find a reason for this else∣where. hand Partridge it would please me, if not, I would not be at all sorry; but such a chance hath sel∣dome befallen me, & therfore to hold on with my true proceeding: when I haue my hawke perfectly
comming, strong and in all points fit to flye, the night before I shew her a Partridge, at Sunne-set, I set her downe vpon some stile, gate, or raile, and walke from her; I would chuse a place where there should be many high trees, I would not giue her my voyce vntill she went to a tree, but I would keepe my selfe with my company twenty-score from her, vnlesse I should haue one, whose eye should attend her remoue, lest shee should goe from me another way, thereby I should know the better what I had to doe: when she doth remoue and let vp and downe, then I giue her my voyce, which shee is glad to heare; hauing taken her downe, I sup her, not putting her vp any more, my reason for this course, so taken, is this; when my hawke is in a tree, that hath beene long kept This my rea∣son for my former flying. and man'd by me, and a longer time bene kept in bondage before she came to me, now she begin∣neth to know her selfe, and thinke of what shee hath formerly done for her self, she would get her supper, and it is so late that shee seeth nothing A Hawke may be sotted with long cal∣ling and drawing af∣ter a man. whereon to prey, and therefore when she shall see the next night, what is in her power to command; you shall not need to bid her goe, but shee will giue you cause of ioy, to see with what mettall and spirit she flieth. No Partridge in the world can flie from a good short-winged hawke, and the Pur in her springing will make any hawke flie therto, When you en∣ter your Hawke looke she hath all her rights. if she haue been rightly ordered, and in strength. I aduise you once more, be sure your hawke hath all her rights, let her not haue any smacke of
wildenesse, nor want either weather or water. It is to be vnderstood, that I haue shewed my hawke water within two or three dayes after she hath beene peppered, but it should be at a brooke, or some other grauelly place, fit for that purpose, holding my first to the water, and the end of my lines in my right hand, if she did not bathe at my first or second day shewing her water, but refu∣sed, it should be that she had no desire to bathe, and that when she refused so to doe, wildenesse or Rammishnesse should not be the cause thereof: Let her not bate to flye from you, which al∣though you haue nothing in your fist she will doe. if she did iumpe to the water, I would haue some∣thing in my fist ready to shew her, when she made shew of comming from the water; which should make her euer after, when shee had done, looke for the fist, where she should dry, prune, and oyle her selfe, and as yet she neuer had other pearch to weather vpon then my fist, neither shal she vntil she be a true flying hawke. Now for the place where I would first shew her a Partridge, it should be in a champion, where Partridges will assuredly flye The place to enter my Hawke champion. to a hedge, then my hawke must needs take stand vpon a bush in the hedge, for it is great oddes that she shall not haue it in the foote, & although she be farre behinde it, yet she will assuredly goe to the place, because the loue of the Partridge in∣viteth Hereof I can∣not make any doubt, be∣cause I ne∣uer knew it worse. it, & it is ods, that neerer then that she shall haue no place fit to goe vnto; Well at the retroue, there is no doubt but shee will haue it; but say that my hawke either hath it in the foote, or otherwise, that she was so neere it that she hath
with striking at it, in the fall beate it cleane through the hedge, and there my Hawke sitteth vpon the ground, it can prooue no worse; if shee haue it in the foote we are all well pleased. If she sit vpon the ground I stay both men and dogs, for it may be it is not flicked. A Hawke that hath thus shew∣ed her mettle will not sit long so, but vp vnto a A Hawke that hath that mettle is not so dull as to sit long vpon the ground. bough; then I ride in quietly, if the Partridge be there, it is very lucky, if not, I hold it no ill lucke to haue so hopefull a young Hawke; but I goe presently about to please her, hauing a browne Chicken in my bagge, the necke I pull in sunder, but breake no skinne, and tyed to my Lewers or Cranes, holding the end in my hand, I throw it out fluttering, and thereupon please her as well as if she had killed a Partridge: I doe not tye it A preuention of euill. to my Lewers, as fearing her dragging, or offring to carry it, out of a wilde, Rammaish, or any other ill disposition; for I haue before this tyed a dead Vse the same course. Foule to my Cranes, and throwne it out vnto her, amongst men, dogs, and Horses, walking about her, and thereon I let her take all her pleasure, but by little bits of warme meate I sup her from my hand, letting her wholly see all that I doe, vntill I see her ready to forsake the quarrie to catch my hand, then I deliuer vp more couertly, vntill I haue her iumpe to my fist, where with plumage or tyring I end her supper. You shall hereafter finde a better benefit to many purpo∣ses Expect a bet∣ter benefit. by your dealing with your Hawke thus. Thus I reward my Hawke vpon her Partridge, and the
commodities thereof exceed their vnderstanding that haue not made vse thereof. As I haue tolde you that I would choose a champion-Countrey wherein to enter my hawke, yet it should be so as that there should be some small hedges: And I haue alwayes this conside∣ration that I will well know, that whither I ride there should haue beene no store of hawking, and then I know they can flye no better then a hand Partridge, and they will flye worse at that season Choose such Partridges as are heauy flyers. then some Partridges doe that haue beene well flowne too, three weekes before Michaelmas. I haue ridden out of Essex into Sussex, vnto the East part of the Downes there, to enter my Hawkes; Where I haue not failed to doe it, to the great woonder of the worthy Knights and Gentlemen in those parts, and some (right Wor∣shipfull) in the West parts of those Downes can witnesse, that in their company I haue killed for the most part of a moneth together with an enter∣mured Goshawke, eight, nine, and tenne Partridges in a day. The day of my going thither, and the day of my returne to London, was iust fiue weeks, and it was a fortnight or more in Michaelmas terme when I came backe. I killed in that time with that one Hawke foure-score and odde Par∣tridges, fiue Pheasants, seauen Rayles, and foure A note of a large quarry. Hares against my will. This is not vntrue, for I will present that much honoured Knight with one of my Bookes, who saw all this done: And euery man may know that we lost some time with
fogges and raigne, and my going and comming spent foure dayes. I haue in the East part showne such Hawkes, as there was neuer seene the like there, and all of them made in this manner, as I haue deliue∣red. If they had fallen in Fearne, or among some small shrubbed Purzes, I would when I came in but holde vp my hand, and she would presently be there; or if any man else got in be∣fore me, if he did not hold out his fist, she would light vpon his head. Is not this a sweet comfort, A sweet comfort. for so little paines? If your Hawke be followed with flying as I vse mine, you shall haue no cause to complaine of the short-winged Hawke, that if they fit still but one houre they are presently wilde, and care not for their keeper; you shall ra∣ther haue a care to giue her ease, setting her still (as I haue vsed mine) vpon a lowe pearch, and in the greatest assembly, neuer hooded in the house; and so when she is to weather abroad vnhooded, vpon a lowe pearch, neuer putting her in a cor∣ner to take weather and ease in, for neither all nor none of my Hawks will be diseased, except of pur∣pose foule play be offered, which I hope I shall ne∣uer meet with. If it hath rayned, then you shall be enforced to set her high, for if she bae to come to The vsing of her to a little meate as she doth sit vpon the pearch will make her loue you, and looke for it. you, either when you come to take her vp or o∣therwise, she shall wet her wings, so is she shall haue more neede to weather, then when she was set out. So neere as I can remember I will omit nothing of my practise. The manner of giuing
my casting was ouer hand without any meate My manner of giuing casting. when I went to bed, although she had much meate aboue, it did not hurt: Casting thus giuen could not hinder the putting ouer her meate, nor should lye in her pannell with her meate, but after the meate is gone then commeth the casting that ma∣keth cleane, and carryeth away what is left; Thus I doe before she is flying, but after she is flying she will vpon euery flight take some plumage, and She proui∣deth casting for her selfe. therefore with the bones and feathers of a Par∣tridge wing I conclude her supper. I neuer faile giuing her castings, for I can finde the perfect or imperfect estate of my Hawke no better then by the knowledge of her castings: And I thinke it will giue the best instructions to a young begin∣ner, A helpe for a yong Au∣stringer. euen to know the times of feeding his hawke, and so by his diligent obseruation come to better vnderstanding; I thinke castings are as naturall as meate: For mine owne part, from the begin∣ning of Hawking, vntill after Michaelmas, I haue giuen two castings, and receiued two euery day from my Hawke, and sometimes three. I must explaine my selfe thus; When I haue An explana∣tion that I may not be mis-vnder∣stood. early in the morning killed a Partridge, and giuen my Hawke the head in her foote, which I sudden∣ly get againe, for if I should giue her leaue to eate all the heads, I must not flye so often as I doe, but so soone as she hath the head, I quickly pull out the heart, and breake off the wing, and then holding the heart to her, and bruising it betweene my finger and thumbe, she receiueth it at three or
foure bits, I continuing my hand still in his place, and then cunningly I take vp the head, letting her iumpe to my fist, where she shall plume vpon the wing, vntill I haue bitten the skull from the braines, that she may haue them without bones. But it hath thus fallen out, when I haue so early flowne my hawke, that she hath eaten the head, which I haue beene willing to let her doe, and I haue giuen the heart withall, because there were other hawkes to flye, and no great store of Par∣tridges; An obserua∣tion. by which meanes it would be long be∣fore my turne would be to flye againe, and it hath so prooued that I haue not flowne at all; but ryding homeward, for such is my manner, euer to call my hawke, I set her loose vpon a paire of barres, going from her, preparing meate for her dinner, when I had walked about fifty or three∣score paces, I gaue her my voyce, she made no re∣spect About tenne of the clocke I called my Hawke. of it, that vsually vpon my first call, would be at my elbowe; I stayed and maruelled, and be∣cause the day was glorious, and the time dange∣rous to tempt a hawke to play the wanton, I went backe (I must confesse) in some feare, giuing the fairest words I could to stay her, lest shee should remooue; good hawke she had no such thought, but when I came neere her, she gaue mee a small casting that she had taken in the morning, and then I gaue her another, which shee repayde at three of the clocke in the afternoone. I haue many times (and lately) seene olde and such as went for most expert Austringers, when
we haue had a hawking iourney, beene afraid to haue any thing stirre in their Chamber, for hin∣dring This hath beene in the beginning of hawking. their hawkes from casting, and to keepe the curtaines drawne before the windowe, not suffe∣ring the least light to appeare so neere as they can, for that would be another hindrance to their Fall not into this inconue∣nience. casting, all this while they lye in bed and giue aime, and when they are vp they are driuen to seeke darke corners, wherein to set their hawkes vntill they cast, when it were more fit they were in the field to flye. I dare not reprooue, I know they know their owne errours. I was neuer yet inforced to stay for my hawkes casting, neither doe you make any doubt, if you will follow your hawke with that familiarity as I haue followed mine, either in the field, or in the house, carryed bare-faced in either If she be wild and fearefull, it may make her put it o∣uer againe. places, she will cast, or in any of them, to pull off her hoode when she offereth to cast. Not long af∣ter my hawke hath cast I vsually giue her a little meate; There is nothing but sicknesse, (a barre against all good perfections) or wildenes, or ram∣mishnes which maketh her stare and looke about her, which makes her afraid to performe those du∣ties, which otherwise she would do: The hawks no better manned then so, are many other ways more defectiue and disorderly then so. Thus much for ordering my hawke with castings for her dyet. I haue flowne a hawke all one season, and ne∣uer fed but vpon the best meate I could, she neuer My manner of feeding, and with what I feede. tasted Beefe, neither was her feathered meate (but
very seldome colde; and to helpe her better, a night did hardly escape me but I thrust out the marrow of the wings of either Ducke, Pheasant, Partridge, Doue, Rooke, or such like, breaking the bone off at either end, and so with a feather the end cut off, driue it whole without breaking into a dish of faire water, setting my hawke loose vpon the Table, I would giue it her betweene This will keepe your hawke-strong and able. my thumbe and finger, which she would much desire, & very much ioy in, & would expect such kindnesse at my hands. The better the meate is the lesse will serue; your practise will soone tell you that there is difference betweene the wing of an The diffe∣rence of meat is to be re∣spected. olde Doue, and the wing of a young Pigeon, and so much is the difference betweene the wings of a Doue flying abroad for his foode, and the Doue long kept in a mewe for prouision; although you shall finde the one leane, yet you shall finde it ten∣der and moyst; and the Doue in the mewe, al∣though it be extreamely full of flesh, and with his ease and good feed layd with fat vpon the necke, and vnder the wing, yet this pulled in peeces you shall finde it hard and extreamely drye. Now you vnderstand how I made my hawke flying to the field, and if you will now suppose her to be truely flying, and that she will tend vp∣on the Dogs for a retroue; for nature will quick∣ly teach her to know what good seruice the Spa∣ntell doth her: Say by some ill accident I misse a flight, the Partridge may be runne into a Cony∣hole;
it is in Kent a safe and common rescue: or the hawke may strike at it in the fall, and so the Nature tea∣cheth the Partridge to saue her life by any means. Partridge flicke. In Sussex I haue seene two flights in one after-noone lost, the Partridge would fall vpon the hedges which were a rod broad in some place, very thicke, and neuer come to the ground; If (I say) one of these or other such like accident should befall me, otherwise I held it a very hard matter to misse a flight, and although I know (if I would let my hawke alone, and beate to serue her with one other Partridge) that she would tend vpon the Dogs, and so kill it. I dare do no such thing, for I know if I should Worthy to be well marked. vse her much to that, she would fall better in loue with my Dogges then with me, for they answere her attendance with springing a Partridge vnto her, and after a few times so serued, although for want of Partridges they cannot doe it, yet she will expect it with such desire, as that she will neglect my calling her, and so in the end prooue an ill commer, and then want no ill conditions; there Let your care preuent such mischiefe. is no readier way to teach her to catch a Henne; one fault begetteth another: If she should in this following the Dogs light vpon an Hen, get some in your company to runne and catch her by the legs, letting the Henne goe, if you haue none in your company that can doe it handsomely, doe it your selfe; in such manner, and then setting her downe vpon some conuenient place, call her and giue her some meate and plumage, and so she will be well reconciled, and not at all the more vnfit Make a re∣concilement.
to flye againe. Now I haue my hawke at this passe I desire to goe to the couert, if the couert be large I hawke to the Couert. I put vp my hawke, not making question but she will draw after the Dogs, although I should stand still (the field hath taught her that;) If I serue her not in a quarter or halfe an houre, I take her to my fist, and giue her something, and then I put her vp againe, and this bettereth my hawkes con∣ditions: But it I should with a vaine hope let her still drawe, and not serue her, I feare very hunger The hawke free from blame. will make her looke out to saue her life. The hawke is not herein to be blamed, for extreame hunger will make her keeper forget himselfe. I pray you note hereby, and by what I haue for∣merly said, that your voyce, be it high or lowe, neither your action in the couert, is that she loo∣keth for, for she will giue diligent attendance vn∣to the Dogs. If I spring a Phesant, I cannot in the couert haue my Dogs at that commaund that I haue them in the field. Let me make all the hast I can after my hawke, I might misse of the quick finding her, if by The field hath taught her better. my dogs questing I were not drawne where she is; it is ten to one she will not hunt for it vpon the ground, if she should it will teach her wit; but it is more likely that she will, if the couert with Broome or Furzes be not thicke in the bottome but that she may see it, she will as it runneth tend it, flying ouer it from tree to tree, and when the Dogs doth spring it, she is so ouer it, as that it will neuer rise to goe to a high pearch, if it should the
hawke would haue it before it come there, and I haue seene diuers hawks spoyled with Dogs. then falling amongst the Dogs they striue who is most worthy: All this is quickely done, and be∣fore the Faulconer can get in to them; it may be you shall finde your hawke to enioy it, if it be with some contention all the better for my hawke, for it will forbid her not to be too hot of a Pheasant vpon the ground, and you shall with your practise finde the profit of it as I haue done; for in the killing of more Pheasants then I will name, and I thinke in seauen yeares hawking to the Couert, I neuer had cause to cry, Here ret: For if my hawke hath it not in the foote the first flight, when I know my Dogs will not meddle with it, then I shall before I can get to them assu∣redly here a baye, and my hawke ouer the head of it, when hauing beene well flowne, the feare of the hawke, maketh the Pheasant sit fast: An Eyas hawke would be hotter, and it may be strike at it, and misse it, and so strike her selfe vnder the Phe∣sant, Thus may a Rammish hawke lose a Pheasant. and then if the Pheasant goeth our vpon that aduantage, it is lost without great lucke. Your Rammish hawke will not often lose a Pheasant thus, she partly forbeareth, because the Dogs are so hotly baying, and it may be she hath met with some rough dealing amongst them before, but Which I wish she should as the first flying. she will so tend it as that she will challenge it for her master: And I haue euer had such successe with such hawkes, as what with their true flying and diligent attendance at the retroue, I should seldome finde the Pheasant but so high as that I
might take it downe with my hand, or else shake it downe in my armes; which done, I would goe to a conuenient place, whether my hawke would diligently wayte vpon me, and there holding it by the legs, I should soone haue my hawke vpon the body, but I would cleanely put her to the head, couering the body with my Hat or Gloue, I would not sticke to please her well: Notwith∣standing, some mens opinions are, that if they be well rewarded, and kindely pleased vpon a Phea∣sant, they will forbeare the true stiuing Partridge: I know not whether my discretion hath so pre∣uailed with my hawkes, or their own good dispo∣sitions haue wrought such vnderstanding in them; but assuredly I neuer had hawke that I haue had the handling of from the beginning, but they haue loued a Partridge much better then the Pheasant. Loue a Par∣tridge better then a Phea∣sant. It may be a wonder to some why I desire not to haue my hawke take a Pheasant from the pearch, and further wondred at, why I should allowe of some contention betweene my hawke and Dogs. I vnderstand that generally all dogges are hotter in the couert then in the field, and I may meete with dogs, that if she should not be coye of them they would endanger her life, espe∣cially if she should catch a Hare, and so might my owne dogs doe against their will. I haue seene a Pheasant when the hawke hath come to strike at him at the pearch, chop to another bough with such skill, as that hee hath gotten a long bough
betweene him and the hawke, and with his cun∣ning remoues beate the hawke out of breath, and in all this conflict would striue to get aboue the hawke; and when he hath had this aduantage, goe proudly away, and leaue the hawke out of breath, or vnable to follow. It may likewise be said that I am too perempto∣ry in my opinion, in presuming my hawke shal kill the first Partridge: For my opinion to the couert, hauing my hawke so familiarly made, as that in the field she is wel pleased with my louing dealing with her, and will attend my comming in to her, not fearing any thing so I be by her: so would I haue her in the couert wholly to relye vpon mee, and be confident that when I shall come vnto her, shee shall haue her desire satisfied; she will soone vnderstand thus much, with vsing her in such manner as I haue fore-tolde; and as for my hawke I am most confident in her entring her selfe, she hath no way beene weakened, she is fa∣miliar, Make her lo∣uing and fa∣miliar, or else her strength and ability are Tutors to ill conditions. strong, and able, and I know nature hath taught her to doe the best she can. You haue formerly been told how and where I would enter my hawke, at Partridges that had not beene flowne at, and in faire flying; I aduise you what to doe, by telling you what I haue done. I was entreated to flye a Goshawke of my neigh∣bours, that would not kill a Partridge, nor had killed one that yeare; I flew her to the couert,
where I so encouraged my hawke, as that Winter The couert hindreth not a hawks fly∣ing in the field. she proued a good Partringer. This approoueth that the flying to the Couert doth not hinder a Hawkes mettle in the field. I did know Sir Edward Suliard, a Knight of high estimation in that Art, as well as otherwise, for his worthy disposition, flye a foolish Gos∣hawke at Blacke-bird and Thrush, and hee was glad when he had gotten her to that perfection, to beate it into a hedge or bush: he did it to make her know that she had a commanding power o∣uer Fowle, if she would put her selfe to it; she pro∣ued a very good Hawke. I know many will say they haue had Hawkes, Hawkes that are once flown to the Phea∣sant will flye no more to the Par∣tridge. that if they had once seene a Pheasant, that then they would kill no more Partridges that yeare: It is very like there haue beene many such; and as I confesse that, so I pray you giue mee leaue to thinke that the fault was not in them, but in the vnskilfulnesse of their Keeper. Some men so soone as their Hawkes giue vp a Partridge, doe presently worke vpon them with scourings, and then pinch them and shorten their dyet, by which meanes they are vnable to kill a How they are made vnable to kill a Par∣tridge. Partridge, or thereby their courage is so taken from them, that they will not shew what they are able to doe. I would aduise you herein, but all is in the practise and handling; I will tell you my course, if I meete with such a Hawke, and my reason for
it, contrary to most mens opinions. I set vp my rest that in tenne dayes I will flye my Hawke no more; but I striue with all the Art I haue, to Rest increa∣seth strength and courage. bring her to as much courage and strength as euer she had, with good meate, and some other deuices I would practise vpon her, (where with you shall meet amongst my receits, set forth for cures.) I would now haue more care in ma∣king this Hawke, for it is credite to make of a Herein true Art is shewed. Bussard a good Hawke. It is not my meate and dyet I giue her must alone effect this in my Hawke, but a diligent care ouer her for other wants, as manning, ba∣thing and weathering, all speciall meanes to make a hawke ioy in her selfe; and she shall bate as little as I can, for weakning her. When I haue brought my Hawke to such perfection, I dare promise to my selfe she shall then doe as well and better then euer she did. Although I haue beene tedious, and at large set downe my manner of practizing with the sore Rammish Hawke; yet I doe not thinke there is any thing set downe but some will be con∣tent to haue the reading thereof: and let mee deliuer this as my last request. When you haue made a perfect good A Hawke well made as∣keth small tendance. Hawke, let her not be neglected, but keepe her so; the keeping is much easier then the making her so. I assure you in all my proceedings, from
the first to the last with my Hawke, I neuer I was her friend, she my playfellow. found it painefull, but the comforts I had of a good conclusion fedde mee with sweete contentment and pleasure. It now follow∣eth that I shew how to reclaime any short-winged Hawke from any euill condition.
THE SECOND TREATISE, OF Hawkes and Hawking: Wherein the Austringer is taught to reclaime his Hawke from any ill-condition. CHAP. I. How to make a Hawke hoode well, that will not a∣bide the sight of the hoode, but bite at it, and with her feete strike at thy hand and hoode, bate, shricke, hang by the heeles, and will not stand vp. on the fist; and this shall be done within fortie eight houres, with lesse then fortie bates. THe greatest motiue that set my thoughts a-worke to finde out a secret, whereby a hawke should be brought to like of that which she did most detestably hate, was that in my hearing, it hath been often and many times said, by many Gentlemen, of which, some would say they
would giue forty shillings, some would giue fiue pounds, and some other would giue ten pounds that their hawke would hoode well. Many experiments I tryed, wherewith I could haue hooded such a hawke well, which I will not publish, because they brought as much ill to the hawke in some other kinde, as the well∣hooding would profit them. At length I thought of feeding a hawke through the hoode, cutting the hole for her beake very wide, it is but the marring of a hoode. I would haue the hole so wide, as when I did holde it by the tassell, she should very easily (when it was layd vpon the meate) feede through it. I would continue fee∣ding her so three or foure dayes, neuer offering in all that time to put it on. But now that shee was growne familiar with the hoode, all feare thereof forgotten, which she would shew by her bould feeding therein, and that she should make no shew of disliking my putting it ouer the meate, and my taking it backe. When I found her thus securely feeding, and her head in the hoode, I would then gently and lightly raise my right hand, a very small motion will serue, and so leaue the hood vpon her head; Take heed you giue her no dislike by the sodain putting it on, and by the too high raising your hand in this your beginning with her; & haue as great a care that she be throughly imboldened with the hoode, before you offer to put it on: with this practise, putting on her hood & pulling
it off, oftentimes in her feeding, you shall effect her taking the hoode to your desire; prouided alwayes your practise be with patience and lei∣sure: for if you shall pop it on sodainely, and with haste, you may thereby put her in minde that thereby she tooke her first offence: You cannot wrong her by any other meanes; re∣member also to leaue her with the hoode vpon her head when she is seeding. This I did priuately deliuer to some of my friends, by word of mouth, aboue twenty yeares since, and some did carefully follow my directi∣on, and did not faile, but brought their hawkes to such perfection, as when shee was most dis∣contented, with a stumpe of a Partridge wing he would readily hoode her. Others, whose patience could not endure the time whilest they were throughly embolde∣ned with the hoode, and would feede securely and gently in it, would be offering to put it on; and then what through her feare, and his hasty carrying his hand, which encreased her feare, brought her to that passe, that shee would not feede any more through the hoode, but with such a cautill feare as that shee would not be hooded, but was then as ill as euer she was, and so much worse, because he had now bobbed her with this tricke, whereby she might haue beene taught. Swolne big with desire to effect this by some more ready & easie meanes, which might more
speedily be done, and truely performed. I had an imagination of this course, which here I will deliuer, by which meanes I brought fiue hawks and Tarsels to as good perfection as I could de∣sire in the time of keeping my house and cham∣ber, being at that time very weake, and all of them were as much disordered as hawkes could be, and I deliuered them as gently hooding as could be desired. After they came vnto mee, and that I had bestowed them vpon the fist of one of my people, I kept them vpon the fist, that day they came vnto me, and that night they were truely watched, after the former manner of watching my hawkes, both man and hawke to walke, or at the least the hawke to walke. So soone as it was faire and light, I did male them vp in a handkercher, (I pray you vnderstand thus much, that it is not good shee should be fed before she be maled) making it very close about the shoulders and body: I would not male vp the tops of her flying feathers, lest I should thereby marre the web of the feather; her legs they were laid along vnder her traine, but to saue her traine from breaking any feather, be∣cause her legs and it must be tyed together, I plaite a large handkercher sixe times double, and lay that vpon her legs vnder her traine, by which meanes, by binding her vp you, cannot bruise or cracke a feather. There is nothing but all safety in this course. My hawke thus maled vp, I lay her vpon
a cushion, and carry her vp and down vnder my arme; She is now fast she cannot rebell, I offer the hood, whereat although she shrike, and striue to stirre, she cannot: so soone as she is quiet, hol∣ding the hoode by the tassell, I gently put it on; she cannot forbid it: thus I follow her hoo∣ding and vnhooding; I lay her vpon a Table, I walke by her, I put it on, and pull it off very of∣ten; and if I shall be made acquainted with any thing that she cannot endure, I will then pre∣sent her with that: Say she will not abide the fire, or not the blowing or stirring thereof; I walke vp and downe before the fire, which shee should heare blowne, and see it stirred and rat∣led together, she cannot bate nor hurt her selfe; and when she shall patiently lye still, and finde that it doth not hurt her, shee will be the lesse a∣fraid therof, & in al this time I lose nothing about my other practise: It may be shee is coye and fearefull of the dogs, I lay her vpon the ground with her cushion, where she shall for that time haue familiarity enough with them: lying so, walking by her, I ply her with the hoode, and so I continue vntill night: When night commeth I vnmale her; I haue had a hawke thus maled, that in a winters day she hath not made a mute; admit shee doth mute, it is great oddes shee shall, she fouleth none but a few of her small fea∣thers about her tewell, which are presently washed with a spunge without any hurt.
When she is now vnmaled, and sitteth vpon my fist, she will take the hoode by Candle-light, as well as she did when she was maled, which it may be she would do before she came vnto me, for many hawks will hood by Candle-light that will not abide the sight of it in the day. But for your better instruction, it must be with holding it gently to her beake, which she must be as willing to put into the hoode, as you are to put it on. I pray you let your owne rea∣son guide you thus farre; hastinesse to hoode her, when she would not be hooded, brought her to this imperfection; therefore keepe you as farre from that as may be, and in this practise to doe it with as much leisure as may be. It is not to be belieued how the least hasty motion will put her in minde of what she hath formerly met with. I watched her this night with the often vsing the hoode, and whether I did sit still or walke, I would be sure she should not be idle; belieue it, all this night she will take the hoode as well as you can desire, but the question is for the morning: Therefore I would be with∣out faile walking abroad in the morning before day, and then and there follow my practise, when it may be I shall not finde him contrary my desire: As I feede often in the night, so now I faile not, lest hunger should make him stur, if he be not coye of the hoode, at or a little before the Sun riseth, if they be carefully handled they are for euer made well hooding. I neuer had any
but one Tarsell, but with the night and day be∣fore, were made very gentle to the hoode, onely that one Tarsell I was driuen to male vp againe the second day; I must let none of them all haue their full rest that night; but when they are thus made, they must be followed, for feare they fall againe: Be sure to be abroad early in the mor∣ning, following her with the hoode; I hope this is sensibly to be effected by any man; But if my hawke turne her head from the hoode, I pati∣ently attend her patience, holding my hoode to her head, and with turning my hand set her right and fit to take it; but if she will be wilde Her watch∣ing hath bro∣ken her from that. or angry, she cannot vnderstand me. He that will vse violence with a Horse alrea∣dy distempered, and with spurre or chaine adde fury to furie, may perhaps at that time be de∣ceiued of his expectation: So, he that shall deale with a man in the time of his impatience, may An example or compari∣son. peraduenture at that time want of a reasonable hearing; but giue the man time vntill that hu∣mor be spent, and so thy Horse, and Hawke, and they will all mildely attend thee. If your Hawke be distempered, and you know no reason why, vse her not other∣wise but with a louing respect, and assoone as may be make a peaceable loue and reconcile∣ment betweene you; there is no indifferent hoo∣ding to be looked for by this manner of vsing her, for she must doe it well in the highest de∣gree. Hereof I conclude, and so I proceede to
the recouery of all other ill conditions. And first for a Hawke that will royle and house. CHAP. II. How to bring a Hawke that will royle and seeke for Poultry at a house, to good perfection and staid∣nesse, and how to get that Hawkes loue in whom an ill Keeper hath bred such carelesnes. IF a man should deliuer among many Austrin∣gers, (and such that would scorne that any man should exceede them in knowledge) that there were a man that would and could recouer a hawke to good perfection that were plentiful∣ly furnished with all faults, and wanted no ill condition, I know they would laugh at him, and say it were a lye, and vnpossible: But I auouch it, and am warranted through my practised ex∣perience, not to blush or care for what they say; but this I aduise them that stand affected to company and good-fellowship, to haue care how to order their hawkes, for now their ma∣sters shall finde, that diligence will effect any thing, and not vsing carefull diligence there is no good to be gotten at their Hawkes hands. But now to make proofe of my Art, and for thy instruction (good Friend) you are to note, you are to deale with hawkes that haue beene ill handled, and not to beginne with them as with hawkes from the Cage, for she will royle
and house, which at the first did come by her not comming, and her not comming was want of loue to her keeper; for if she had so loued her keeper as that she would haue come to him, hee had beene out of his wits, if hee would haue let her alone to royle, and house. I cannot otherwise thinke, that hauing this fault, but she is withall wilde & rammish, which might be a second meanes to make her trauell in this sort, and therefore your first course must be by watching & manning to make her very gen∣tle & familiar, and in that time you must labour to get her a good stomake. It is not short meales alone breede a hungry desire in your hawke, but continuall carriage, castings, and often and cleanely feeding, with cleane and light meate drawne through water, but after drye your meate, for if the hawke shall be fat and in grease when she doth come vnto thee, your care must be the more for her dyet; for if she want meate wherewith to carry away her grease, the break∣ing of her grease will take away her stomacke, and her grease too fast broken, will not onely make her sickely, but truely sicke, and kill her, or breed diseases, such as shee had as good be dead: Therefore let her not last, nor doe not ouer-feede, which fault is as dangerous as fa∣sting; for with her meate in her mutes shee will spend more grease then she can bring vp with her casting. Her grease gone, and your hawke made gentle,
your Hawke will quickely shew a good sto∣make, Wildenes will not suffer a hawke to shew her hun∣ger. let not your hasty desire hinder your good conclusion herein. When your hawke is come to a good sto∣make and perfect gentlenesse, as I did reclaime my sore Rammish hawke, calling her to the fist out of the hoode, from the fist of another man, in manner as the long-winged hawke is lewred; you must obserue the same course, onely diffe∣ring herein, for you must call her to a catch or lewer, and therevnto take her as the long-wing∣ed hawke is vsed, wherewith thou must make her much in loue with thy sweet and milde v∣sing her, and in doing thus, it will make her loue thee better then euer she loued house: Let her please her selfe vpon the catch, offer not to meddle with it, but let her freely and peaceably inioy it; and when she is pluming vpon it, feede her with bits of good meate from thy hand, it wil make her look for that sweetnes not only then when she is vpon the catch but it will likewise make her loue thee when she is vpon the quarry. If thou shalt ply her thus with thy hand, it will bring her to such passe as she will readily iumpe to your fist from the catch, and the sweet and often vsing hereof, will make her leaue the quarry in such manner, & so preserue her fethers from wetting. At the first beginning of calling her. I hope your vnderstanding will aduise you to haue her in cranes, wherewith if she would checke she shall be preuented, and wherewith
shee shall be staied if shee offer to drag or carry the catch; for the want of loue to her former keeper, could not but breed these as well as other ill conditions: but I hope your gentle vsing & manning her, before you did euer shew Catch or Lewer, hath freed her from these, and your now kinde dealing with your hawke, fee∣ding her so from the hand vpon the catch, will giue her such contentment, that neuer met with such content before, as that I am perswaded shee will be made thereby more truely louing vnto thee, then a hawke shall be made, bought from the cage. I pray let vs admit that shee was a good con∣ditioned hawke once, and would come to the fist very familiarly; how should shee then lose this, by her keepers negligence, being not often or seldome called, and then vpon her comming slightly rewarded, supposing if hee should giue her any meate, it would hinder her well-flying, which might fall out to be presently, but such reward as would please her, will worke no such ill effect; and now thou hast her most readi∣ly comming to the catch, if thou wilt handle her; with no better respect, but onely caring how for that present to get her to your fist, and there∣by please your selfe, and not at all her; she will be weary of it, and such vsage, and fall to her olde trade; which being handled as I haue di∣rected, I would not doubt but to put her vp a∣mongst hens, when at any houre in the day she
should leaue them all for loue of mee, and the catch, which asketh no longer time then throwing it out; which I would vseher vnto euery houre, if I were not sure of my flight. And this I hope will suffice for this: But if you will haue me graunt that which I cannot yeelde vnto, that hauing flowne a Partridge to a house, notwithstanding all these kinde courses taken with her, shee hath caught a Hen, then let some one in the company, that can tell how to doe it, make haste vnto her, taking vp both Hawke and Hen, and runne to a pond or pit of water (there is no dwelling house inhabited, and where hens are, but you shall find some water) and thereinto ouer head and taile wash them both together three or foure times; then hauing the hawke vpon his fist, let not her kee∣per shew himselfe vntill he that hath her, hath with her lines fastened her calling-cranes vnto her; then I would aduise her keeper to giue her his voyce out of her sight, but the hawke to be still held although shee doth make a bate to goe to him: Hee is to giue his voyce but once or twise, and that is where she seeth him not; after when hee commeth neere her let him giue her his voyce cheerefully; and let her in cranes be let goe to him, when he throweth out the catch in cranes, lest beeing wet, shee should desire to flye to a tree to weather and drye her selfe; her cranes forbid it. And now you must not thinke shee hath committed a fault, for shee hath done
pennance for it, and comming to you she loo∣keth to be much made of; satisfie her expectati∣on, giuing her all the contentment you may: It is not possible there should be a hawke so ill but by this meanes she will be recouered. It may be some young professor in this Art is possest, that if his hawke be very hungry and sharpe, she will the sooner come vnto him: He is herein much deceiued; for vnlesse she loueth him very well, hunger is the speciall meanes that draweth her from him, for hunger must be sa∣tisfied, and her little loue to him will make her the better pleased with that she prouideth for her selfe, and make her looke out for her owne prouision: But if she be truely louing him, then there is no doubt but she would come the readi∣lyer. Marke then, if this be not the onely maine A speciall and maine poynt to be looked vnto. poynt, for an Austringer to haue his hawke in loue with him. There be many that will neuer affect my doctrine, because my course herein set downe is painefull; but what is any thing worth that is easily gotten? but he is deceiued that holdeth it paineful, for his hawke once well made, she will not aske halfe the paines or attendance in the time of her flying, as other hawkes, that are but halfe, for halfe made hawkes must be followed with. Whensoeuer thou callest thy hawke giue her some reward vpon the catch, and likewise please her vpon the fist. If I may be so bolde without reprehension,
for my recreation, to thinke of a more worthy delight, I will rest thankfull, I will speake of the Horseman and his horse, the Austringer and his hawke; alwaies vnderstand that I acknowledge the one to exceede the other as much as golde exceedeth drosse; but what I intend is this, both horse and hawke are as they are taught. If a horse prooue hard-mouthed, a run-away, carry an vnsteady head, his necke awry, or his body vn-euen; nay sometimes he may and will refuse to turne of the one hand, and some other time dislike some part of the ground wherein he is ridden, and there will flye out, or perhaps stop of his forefeet, without either rucking be∣hinde, or aduancing before, vntill after his stop, and other such vices, can it be said that that horse hath gotten such a fault or faults, other∣wise then through the vnskilfulnesse of his rider, when the true Artist is not onely able to amend these faults, but in some parts to amend what nature hath made defectiue? The hawke is sel∣dome seene to haue any naturall defect, and therefore asketh no such Art: Neither doe I question the shapes of horses and hawkes, for in both kindes their shapes much differ, but what I write is for the manner of their making, for the ill shape of either of them cannot excuse their ill conditions; the worst you can say by an hawke for her shape is, that shee is a long, slender and beesome tailed hawke. I say all fea∣thers flye, as horses of seuerall races, are of
lighter, quicker, or duller disposition: So are your hawkes out of some Countrie and eayrie, of much more spirit and mettle then the other; and will aske shorter or longer time in making; but for their vicious making, therein resteth the comparison. If thy hawke will not come, or not abide company, or a stranger in the com∣pany, perhaps not a woman, a basket, a horse or Cart, or will royle or house, or any of these vices; can the Austringer haue a lesse imputa∣tion layd vpon him, then the ill-ridden horse hath giuen his rider, which is, he was ignorant and wanted knowledge? Alas, simple Austrin∣ger, how shallow is thy Art in respect of Horse∣man ship? and so much the more art thou wor∣thy of blame: The excellent horseman will make and shew his horse without any vice; and so will the exquisite Austringer shew his hawke without any ill condition: In euery Trade wherein a man is most exercised, he is most ex∣cellent; Then striue and labour to exceede them in some measure that haue little skill, for the ordinary Handicrafts-man passeth by with lesse then ordinary or no respect, when the skil∣full is desired and much sought after. Who vn∣derstandeth not that the loue of one Hawke is more readily gotten, then the loue of another & that it is not so easie to get the loue of a hawke that hath beene dealt with and bobbed, as to haue it from a hawke that hath not beene dealt with? And therefore in your practice haue
patience, and neuer thinke she doth well vntill shee be wholly at your commaund, thy paines will be answered with pleasure; worke out the weeke, and Sunday will be holy-day. I will now proceede and examine what other ill quality a hawke may haue. There is an excellent hawke will fly and kill a Partridge very well, but shee will carry it from her keeper when he commeth in. The remedy. CHAP. III. How to stay that Hawke that hauing killed a Par∣tridge, will very unwillingly suffer her keeper to come vnto her, but will carry it. HE was an vnkinde keeper, and handled his hawke very ill, so to get her hatred, from whom but through loue he could not hope to receiue any good; otherwise hee was very vn∣skilfull, Dislike of her keeper, or rammishnes to flye his hawke so wilde and so ill man∣ned; for one of these must be the cause, then by working the contrary in her, shee is faultlesse and will flye the better: If shee will come well, then it is not meerely out of dislike of her kee∣per; and so much the sooner brought to good perfection: But it may be partly so, and part∣ly wildenesse and rammishnesse, and there may be a third dislike, which stronglier possesses her then any of the other, which presently shall be deliuered vnto you. Before a hawke be truely
manned and made gentle, she will neuer learne good, or leaue bad conditions; for so long as she is wilde, shee is altogether angry, froward, vn∣ruly, and disorderly, therefore be sure to vse such patience and gentlenesse, as that she may vnderstand thee: then put her in cranes, and set her vpon some mans fist; haue a dead doue or some other foule, it mattereth not although you stand not aboue twenty or thirty paces from her, giuing your voyce as though you would call her, throw the fowle as farre from you, as you can, which when shee hath in her foote and doth offer to carry, which the cranes Now she dis∣couereth the cause of her fault. forbid, then know, that it is not wildenesse or rammishnesse, for before this with carriage in company thou hadest made her gentle, neither can it be that she feareth thee, for thou hast la∣boured before this to a better purpose; if you haue not, I haue set downe my directions in vaine: If then you haue so carefully manned her, as that she neither feares you, nor is in feare of any man else; yet it is feare that causeth this, not fearing thee, but shee feareth the quarry shall The third cause of her carrying. be taken from her by thee, and shee would be glad to giue her selfe a better reward therevpon then you will alow of, and the small rewards you haue giuen her, when you haue taken her from the quarry hath bred this fault; but this fault sheweth the hawke hath mettall and spirit It is a good signe to haue a Hawke loue the quarry. enough. Well now that shee is vpon the catch, and so long as she stands still, fearing shee know
not what, stand you still, not offering to goe nee∣rer then you are, vntill shee fall to be busily pluming, houlding the cranes fast, and continu∣ally giuing her your voyce: When she fails to plume, walke gently to her, still giuing her your voyce; and whereas her feare was the quarry should be taken from her, let her finde altoge∣ther the contrary, let her inioy it; and take this course, whereby you shall soone winne her fa∣uour, that at any other time shee will not onely giue you leaue, but louingly expect your com∣ming vnto her, haue in readinesse her supper or breake fast, or at any or euery time of the day such meate as is warme and good, (her taste is very good, although it cannot compare with her sight) feede her therewith by little bits out of your hand. If she look at you for more, for∣bearing what is in her foote, then doe you for∣beare to giue any more vntill she fall againe to plume, then giue her your voyce, and feede her so againe. If you will doe thus, you shall finde her looke as earnestly at your hand for re∣ward, as a hungry Spaniell will looke for a crust, and she will be so pleased with your voice, as when she hath a Partridge in her foote, shee will diligently attend and stay your comming, when I thinke hereby you are well taught how to vse her: And now for this fault I may con∣clude, and inquire what other fault may dis∣grace a hawke: She will carry it to a tree.
CHAP. IV. To reclaime a Hawke that will carry a Partridge into a Tree. IT is so lately set downe how to stay a hawke, and make her louingly expect your com∣ming vnto her, as it is fresh in memory. Your hawke being brought to that passe, this fault wil soone be left, I haue approoued it: So soone as your hawke is gone into the tree, get all the The remedy. company to goe vnder her, vsing as fearefull noyle as they can, shewing Hats and Gloues, which will soone make her remoue, but it may be to an other tree, follow her againe with the like noyse, there is no doubt but it will remoue her, if not, they must vse some more violent meanes, as striking the tree with sticks, or throw∣ing cudgells vp, she may peraduenture remoue twice or thrice before she come to the ground, but so soon as she is come to the ground, wherof you shall not haue so great cause of ioy, but she will ioy more to heare your louing voice, which I would then haue you freely and familiarly giue, when she will soone vnderstand she shall enioye what she hath with sweet content and quiet.
CHAP. V. For a Hawke that so soone as she hath caught a Par∣tridge, will breake and gerge her selfe vpon it. THe cause of a griefe knowne, the disease is soone cured; and so it must be enquired how she came by this foule fault, and then it is soone remedied. I cannot vnderstand it should be any otherwise then thus, at the first when she had caught a Partridge, and before you come vnto her had begunne to feede, and peraduen∣ture fed so much as you feared it would hinder your whole dayes sport, it could not but moue some passion in you, which you should haue dissembled; but it could not be but with some The Cause. impatience you take her from the quarrie, not suffering her to eate any more, which now at the first she did fall vnto by chance, but now she hath found the sweet therof, and the wrong you offered her in so sodaine taking her vp, will make her the next time more earnestly and with the more haste to feede, remembring how she was taken from it before, lest she now be so serued againe: The best remedy is this, when The remedy. she should flye to the next Partridge and kill, if you come in vnto her before she breake (it may be she may catch it neere you at the retroue) let her alone with it, and feede her with your hand, she sitting vpon it, as I taught you before: If
by chaunce she happen of a bare place, be not discontented, but plye her with giuing her meat from your hand, and let her eate in such abun∣dance vntill she doth forbeare to eate any more; In her plu∣ming put on her limes. it shall not be amisse when you haue put on her limes to pyne her downe at length, and whether she hath it in a ditch, bush, or hedge, neither re∣ward her, nor any other hawke, vntill you haue her in the plaine, and that will make them so soon as they haue a Partridge get out with it into the plaine; then if she bate vpon any extraordi∣nary occasion, she shall not goe away gorged. You must not now be sparing of your labour, for if you spend three or foure houres in thus feeding her, (she will not be so long in feeding) yet with the Partridge in her foote, whereon al∣though she will not feed, she will be vnwilling to part from, let her enioy it, & be often offering her meate, and when you finde that she is carelesse of the quarry, take her to your fist; it may be A supposition. in your first entring, you were too sparing in your reward, but howsoeuer she commeth by this, in following this practice but twice or thrice, you shall with kinde handling her in her rewards, which should be much from the hand, you shall haue her handle a Partridge, as that you may at any time take a liue Partridge out of her foot, to enter one withall. And thus I con∣clude for this, vnlesse you will say she hath al∣most eaten the Partridge before you come to her, I say let her eate, and feede her still with the
most prouocation you can, no doubt it will make her very choyce how she feedes after shee hath beene so ouer-fed, and after she hath been twise or thrise so dealt with take leisure. A hawke loueth her keeper very well shee will draw after him and come at his pleasure, she will in her drawing be still vpon the head of the dogs, but when she hath killed it, will carry ve∣ry fouly. CHAP. VI. How to vse that Hawke that will carry for feare of the dogges. I Must herein suppose that shee will draw after the dogges, or otherwise after her keeper; but so soone as shee hath the Partridge, and as soone as the dogges come to her, she carryeth away the quarry; this can be but to the next hole to hide her selfe; but then if the dogges shall follow her thither, and thrust her out from thence, herein the hawke is not to be blamed but the Examine by which, it soone amended. Spaniels, that better deserue a haulter then a crust. It must be thought vpon how shee came to be thus fearefull of the Spaniels, it could not be in the field, because the Faulcknour shall be at the retroue, and then hee is onely to be bla∣med, that hath not taught his Spaniels better; if by neither of these, then this must be gotten by very foule dogges in the couert, where if the
Spaniels be but a little hot in their sport, it My obserua∣tion. teacheth the hawke more wit then knauery; for as I haue partly said before, shee will not be too Not to hunt for the Par∣tridge vpon the ground. hot vpon the game for feare of them, but will trust to my helpe, and will tend it so as that she will not lose it, so that I shall be sure to haue it of my owne catching. I reape this benefit by her feare, that she will not strike at the Pheasant vpon the ground; for if shee should so doe, it is A discommo∣dity. great ods but so shee misseth it, and if it then springeth, it is more ods, but it is cleane lost; but if she tend it, and the doggs, as I haue foresaid, it is great ods but it goeth to pearch, from whence it is likely it will neuer flye, but by my hands is to be deliuered to her; I doe not as I haue seene some doe, tosse it vp high, that thereby shee shall catch it, and so fall among the dogs, which as they say, doth imbolden her vpon the dogs, Some mens opinion. it must be there so, because she knoweth shee is not able to carry it from them, but when shee is in the field, and hath a lighter matter in her foote, it may then worke a worse effect, and ha∣uing field-roome & sight whether to carry it in safety, she wil remoue. The discommodities that I haue met with in hauing my hawke take a Phe∣sant from pearch, some I haue before set downe, in the seauenth chapter, & this is an other; Many times shee hangeth of one side of the bough, ha∣uing fast holde vpon the Pheasant, and the Preuent what you finde may worke any ill. Pheasant vpon the other: whether your hawke receiueth hurt hereby or no iudge you; and the
like mischiefe must needs befall, when a Phea∣sant is tossed high vnto her; for when she catch∣eth it so high, she will not fall plumme downe therewith, but will a little striue to shew her strength, and then the Pheasant hitting a bough neuer so little, although the twig be very little, if the hawke letteth it not goe, she must needs hang as before: I desire not to make my hawke hot in the couert, my reasons before expressed may suffice; but these inconueniences may ad∣uise other men how to deale in this case: But in my practise I am sure there is no inconuenience No inconue∣nience. by carrying it into a plaine, and there to serue her as I vsed my rammish hawke; I am well assu∣red that thereby I make my Hawke as truely to loue mee, as a Hawke can possibly loue a man; and this benefit thou shalt finde it worke in thy Hawke that will carry, it will make her so to loue This good in∣sueth. thee, and to assure her selfe in thee, as that if shee doth carry a Partridge for feare of the dogges, yet hearing thy voyce shee will be so confident and secure in thee, as shee will stirre no more; for she knowes she shall haue her reward with qui∣etnesse. If your Spaniells will not leaue to fol∣low her, but be more ready to beat her out of the country then otherwise; if you will not part from them, God send him sorrow that loueth it.
CHAP. VII. How to vse a Hawke that will carry a Partridge in∣to a tree, and will not be driuen to the ground, but will there assuredly eate it. THere is no Hawke trayned as I haue done mine, and as I haue taught to vse yours, will suffer such a vice to take hold of her: but I must not stand vpon, if shee had beene thus, or thus dealt with, this would neuer haue beene, but now wee must seeke to amend it; and say shee doth it neither for feare of man nor dog, but out of a naturall disposition, and accustomed pra∣ctise, let her be short coped, so I would aduise all short-winged hawkes to be vsed, for the safty An obiection. of thy owne hands: It may bee obiected, how shall shee then hold a Pheasant? How haue my hawkes done that would hardly misse a Phea∣sant, Answere. and all of them short coped? I will now deliuer a truth, for the affirming whereof I am willing to take my oath; I had a Tarsell of a Goshawke, that one after an other, let two Phea∣sants slip out of his foote; I was thereat much perplexed, I found many of their feathers, but I feared the spoyling my Hawke. neither of their bodies: standing with my hawke vpon my fist not knowing what to doe, whether I should flye any more or no, the wood was large, but the groath of two or three yeares; as I stood still, a Cocke did spring very neere mee,
my Hawke did neither sodainely nor earnestly bate at him, yet when he did bate I did let him flye, when he shewed he neuer meant to catch it, but flew to marke, and I saw him darte vp into a speare, I made haste vnto him, and I did spring the Pheasant iust vnder him, hee turned vpon his stand, and then flew after, not losing a∣ny ground of him, but when he plained to fall, he caught him by the head, and did hang almost a yard from the ground, I came to him, layd him in the plaine, and couered his body, so hee had as much pleasure and as good a reward as I could giue him vpon the head and necke: After this I assure you in all the time I kept him, & in the killing of very many Pheasants, which then were very plentifull, hee neuer made mee a re∣troue, but would most assuredly haue him by the head at the fall, when the Pheasant would lye stretched out at length and neuer stirre fea∣ther. His nature not to stringe, if so caught. If when I had drawne a couert, a Pheasant had gone to pearch, hee would come and sit neere him, but not in that tree; put him out, he would take an order with him, he should neuer fall more, but when he had him by the head. It hath beene said that hee killed one olde Cocke that had beaten an excellent Goshawke of olde Sir Robert Wroths, & Master Rainefords hawke. I could neuer meete with any Pheasant that e∣uer serued me so; and I deliuer this vpon heare∣say. Now your Hawke is thus coped, take a leather in all poynts fashioned like a bewet, put
it about her hinder tallent, and then button it The practise. to her bewet, whereon her bell hangeth, and it will so holde vp her tallent that shee cannot at all gripe with it, then shee cannot sit vpon a bough, holde a Partridge, and feede. For a plai∣ner demonstration, make your leather in all poynts like your bewet, for the length, that you must make fit to holde vp her tallent in such place as you shall see cause, I aduise you make it not too short, lest it should hinder her trussing a Partridge, and so be discomfited; cut a little slit in the midst of it, or neerer the button then the midst, as you doe in the leather wherewith you couple your Spaniels, and as you fasten that about the ring of your couples, so fasten that about the tallent of your Hawke, and so fastened, button it about the bewet, as you but∣ton the couples about the Spaniels necke: Here∣in you are satisfied; let vs now enquire for more ill properties. CHAP. VIII. How to reclaime a Hawke that will neither abide Horse-men, Strangers, Carts, Foote-men or Wo∣men, and such like. LEt it be enquired how she came by this coy∣nesse, and why shee should not endure all these, or any of these, as well as other Hawkes: There can be nothing said for it, but that shee
hath not beene well and orderly manned; then it should appeare that well and orderly man∣ning them should make them familiarly endure these or any of these, and so it will; but now it must be done by other meanes. You well vn∣derstand the courses I haue vsed in manning my hawkes, which truely practised vpon them, there shall no ill condition follow them: But when a hawke is but halfe made, then shee falls from bad to worse, and so she is harder by much to be reclaimed then she was at the beginning, and will aske more tendance and respectiue care to holde her well at the second making, then a cast of hawkes, wellmade, in their first handling. Be∣fore you beginne to practice vpon her let her be watched, and carried a day or two, when you haue so done, if shee haue a good stomake, you may the sooner beginne with her, and yet shee may haue a good stomake, but rammishnes will not suffer her to shew it. There is nothing to be done with such a hawke, vntill by watching and manning she be brought to patience, which done, beginne thus; finde out some place where there is some great assembly either at bowles, or some such other exercise, and hauing her in cranes there, set her vpon some mans fist, & let her iumpe to a catch, and thereupon dandle the time with her: This must be done many dayes, and many times in the day. I would be neere some Market-Towne, where vpon a Market∣day I would find some conuenient place, where
Women with their Baskets, Horses with loads vpon them, Carts with their carriage, variety of coloured Horses, and passingers-by in diuers paces should come by her, there I would be sure to spend the whole day in playing with her in such manner vpon the catch. If you will aske me how long she will be in making famili∣er with all these things, I say you will neuer do it, if so soone as you haue ended your practice, you goe and set her downe to growe wilder, and be the second day as ill as she was at the first; but in the continuance hereof three or foure dayes, and thy carefull attendance ouer her day and night, will greatly preuaile with her: I would not doubt but to make such a Hawke with my diligence and paine (vsing her as I haue herein taught you) to sit vpon the pelt in the Market-place, nor fearing nor caring for any thing, (assidua stilla saxume xcauat) hath not God made all Creatures? haue not wilde Stags by watching & manning been driuen like cattel vpon the way? What is it that Man cannot ef∣fect, if he wil thervnto apply himselfe? If one day will not serue the turne, take two; if not two, then ten, and twenty more, but I would haue my trauell satisfied with a sweet conclusion. There is something else to be thought vpon, and therefore I will proceede.
CHAP. IX. What course is to be taken with a Hawke that hath flowne a Partridge, and will continually sit vpon the ground at marke, and thereby is likely to beate out her selfe from her true flying, by missing of many flights. A Speciall care is to be had herein how you flye your Hawke, which must be as the Countrie is where you flye your Hawke, as thus; if it be in the Champion, then you must In the Cham∣pion flie farre off. let flye farre from the Partridges, there she can∣not lose sight of them, and yet it may be shee shall not see the fall so well, but being farre be∣hinde, if she be in strength and courage shoote vp to a tree, for she is more then a dull-spirited Hawke, and I thinke there is not such a hawke will flye home a Partridge, but she will stirre or hunt for it if she be neere it at the fall, or soone learne to goe to a tree, which I said before I would haue you preuent, by flying farre from the game, when she shall not be inticed by be∣ing neere to them to fall vpon the ground. If this please you not, goe hawke in the Wood-land, and make choyse to fly at such Partridges as will flye to a woode: Here your course must A contrary course in the Woodland. be, not as you did in the Champion, but to flye as neere them as may be, for feare, if she should be farre behinde, shee should lose the sight of
them, but being neere, they then tempt her to fall in the wood vpon the ground; then let her set and hunt vntill she be weary of so doing, be carefull not to suffer a dogge to goe vnto her, neither let her heare your voyce at all; at length shee will finde that there is no good to be got∣ten by walking, and then shee will vp to a tree; now your owne knowledge assureth you that It is the strength, and safety desired. out of the wood the Partridges will not flicke, and that putting your dogs into the wood you shall be sure to shew her a flight, wherewith if shee fall againe, I would without question let her alone vntill she should wish she had her sup∣per: if in the wood-land you shall sometime make her draw after you, and serue her with the Draw not neere houses. Spaniels, it will doe her good; but the generall practise will very quickly worke wit in her. And thus much for this, hauing a little spoken of it before. CHAP. X. That the Tarsell is more prone to these ill conditi∣ons then the hawke, and how to reclaime him that will seeke out for a Doue-house; with which fault I neuer knew Goshawke tainted. ALl my proceeding and direction hath been wholly intended for the reclayming and making the hawke, which is all one for the Tar∣sell, who is to be practised vpon for such faults
in the same manner as is the Goshawke, but there is one vile quallity that I haue heard a Tarsell would often practise; wherewith I ne∣uer yet knew Goshawke tainted, and whereun∣to a Tarsell would neuer fall, if he be handled in that forme that I haue set downe. Some Tar∣sell after a Haggourtly or Rammish disposition, will vpon the missing of a flight, not stay at The keepers fault. marke your comming to serue him; some other will sit fast vntill some stranger shew himselfe, and then he is gone: These quallities follow ill manned hawkes, as well as the Tarsell; this is nothing but wildenesse; want of true manning brought him vnto this; & he is of this fault to be reformed as is the hawke, by feeding often, and many times in the day amongst a multitude of people in cranes, vpon a catch, where you must make a true practise, with feeding him from the hand: It may be said he will kill him∣selfe before he will be quiet in such an assembly, he must be then watched and carryed bare-faste vntill he be so gentle, as that he will indure all company, and then vpon the catch thou shalt make him so in loue with thee, with thus vsing him vpon it, as I haue formerly set downe that hee will indure all things whatsoeuer. I haue heard, but I thinke it was more then truth, that a Tarsell royled from marke, and was that night taken in a doue-house earnestly feeding vp∣on a Doue, twenty miles from the place from whence hee was flowne: It is beyond all
vnderstanding, that louing and knowing a doue-house well, as he did, he should trauell so farre before he should finde one should please him, and this should be in a country that of my knowledge affordeth plenty of doue-cotes: But truth is, such was his fault, that vpon euery lit∣tle discontent, he would so please himselfe; from which hee is thus easily to be reclaimed, but be sure by watching and manning he be made ve∣ry gentle before you begin thus to practise, then As gentle as a Parrot. call him in cranes to a catch, as I haue taught you to doe a Goshawke that will house, feed him in the same manner, and call him vntill you finde that hee will come so soone as the catch is throwne out, it may be a doue that hee loueth so well, but it is not much to the purpose what foule it be, although it be a Lewer well garnish∣ed, for he will soone fall in loue with any thing wherewith he shall be so well pleased. When he is brought to that passe that he is truely in loue with thee and the catch, comes readily, and will indure all company, then vse him to draw after thee all times of the day, and take him downe very often: I would aduise that in the euening hee might be called neere vnto a doue-house, where some of purpose should shew and stirre the Doues, that if hee went into the house, one of your company, rather then your selfe, might be quickely with him, hauing in a readinesse prepared a boxe filled with beaten Pepper, and where hee hath broken the Doue,
strewe Pepper aboudantly, and so haue a care that so soone as hee shall bare a new place, that you presently plye that place with strewing more pepper, which will soone make him dislike such and so hote a dyet, and make him so much the more to loue him who shall or hath so kindly vsed him. I would shew my selfe a little negligent, and not with much haste to take him downe, when he were so neere that he loueth so well, for now you are so neere him, as you would quickely be with him to giue vn∣to him more than hee would cate, and thereby make him out of loue with a Doue-house. It may be said this is the next way to kill him; no, he will cast his gorge, wherein there is no dan∣ger or cause of feare; when a Hawke casteth his gorge vpon dislike of his meate; for some∣times the lying of a bone awrye will make him cast his meate, or part of it: but if a hawke ca∣steth his gorge, and the meate stinketh, this is of an other cause, he is then sicke, his stomake can∣not digest what nature desireth, and so the con∣tinuing thereof, with a desire to put it ouer and cannot, putrifieth the meate and stinketh, and maketh that hawke in a desperate estate. Your seruing your Tarsell thus shall not affect any such matter, but hee will finde a difference be∣tweene such a distastfull supper, and a sweet pleasing breakefast, which I would aduise should the next morning be giuen in Cranes, where the sweet hand and kinde dealing with him
vpon the catch will stay him or any hawke from royling. When he is thus made, keepe him so, and that must be with continuall familiarity: If I thought a hawke so gentle and familiar could be drawne by any meanes from her keeper, then I would set downe another course, which although you shall neuer haue neede of, I will set downe. When he is at the height of this fa∣miliarity, cut out of either wing three of his best flying feathers, and put to his heeles a knocking paire of bels, and so traine him when his want of power will hinder his desire to trauaile fur∣ther, then you may with ease follow him; and I would wish you to follow him so as he should not see it, but be continually thirty or fortie score from him, and sometimes giue him your voyce. If you finde him not inclined to heare you (which should be more strange to me then any thing belonging to a hawke, if hee be made gentle and in cranes well-comming as aforesaid) then get one with you that may follow him, but neuer offer to take him downe, but let him be as neere the Tarsell as may be, who when hee the hawke remoueth, by his voyce he may giue you knowledge thereof, when I would aduise you to giue him your voyce, and call him, but goe no neerer vnto him. When it groweth to that houre that you thinke hee will remoue no more, then let a liue Doue, by him that is with him, be throwne out in a paire of cranes, and so soone as he hath it, let him be bestowed vpon
his fist, vntill he commeth home, where let him fast vntill you goe to bēd; then for his supper giue him a set of stones and knots, (the number and size I will deliuer hereafter, with their pro∣fits:) The next morning carry him abroad with you an houre before you call him, then let him goe at liberty: You haue your friend if neede be to follow him, whereof there shall be no need; then let him see you kill and pull off the feathers of a Pidgeon, and before you call he will come so soone as you throw out the catch, and if he could speake, thanke you. When you haue made him such as you would haue him, then put in his feathers againe, which I hope were so carefully cut out, and well preserued in a booke vntil you should haue this vse for them, that hee may be better imped with his owne feathers then it is possible to impe a hawke with any other then his owne, and he will not fly one pinne the worse. I cannot in my vnderstanding thinke of any other fault that my Hawke hath, and therefore hereof I must of ne∣cessity leaue further to speake; and so proceed with my cures, which follow in this third and last Treatise. FINIS.
THE THIRD TREATISE, OF Hawkes and Hawking: Wherein is contained Cures for all knowne Diseases; all which haue beene practised by my selfe, more vpon worthy mens Hawkes that haue beene sent vnto me, then vpon any of my owne. First, for the beake, mouth, eyes, head, and throat, and of the seuerall griefes there breeding and offending. IN the Beake there is a drye Canker, whereof I haue little desire to write, because it is so common, and the cure as easie; but to him that knoweth it not, this shall giue him sufficient vnderstanding: That it sheweth it selfe white in that part of the Beake where it is, it may haue a cracke or slawe
in it before you shall discouer it, vnder that white it eateth into the beake. With a knife pare the white off so farre and so deepe as it hath ea∣ten into the beake: with a piece of glasse new broken you may scrape it, and make it more smooth then you can with a Knife. After you haue fashioned the beake so well as you can, wash it either with the iuice of a Lemmon, or with a little Wine-vinegar, and it will require to be no oftener dressed. A Medicine for the wet Canker in the mouth or Beake, which will eate into her eyes and braine, (and vnlesse it be killed) it will soone kill her: And this is more common with the long-winged then the short winged Hawke: This of my owne practise, and how dangerous soeuer it shall appeare to him that hath not made vse thereof, belieue me, in the administring thereof there is nothing but safety. TAke Aqua fortis, you shall haue it at the Goldsmiths, for there is most vse made of it; there is some of it made more strong then other, but how strong or weake soeuer it be, you shall quallifie them in this manner. Haue in a readinesse a porringer of spring-water, and a feather in it, then poure some of your Aqua fortis into the deep side of an Oyster-shell, where you shall see it presently boyle, as if it were ouer a fire, and would soone eate
through the Oyster-shell, take your feather in the spring-water, and therewith of the same water, drop into the Aqua fortis that is boyling, by drops, drop after drop, vntill you shall see it leaue seething, then for your vse put it into a violl, and we call it Aqua fortis quallified. Now you are prouided of Aqua fortis in his vigour and strength, and you haue it also quallified. For the Canker, I would aduise you to take the most speedy and most sure course to kill it: And therefore for cure thus proceede: With a quill made fit for the turne, search the sore well, and take off the roofe (that couereth and groweth fast to the sore,) as cleane as may be; and lest the bleeding shall hinder the true search, haue in a readinesse a sticke with a little clout tyed to the end, which wet in faire water, you may therewith wipe away the bloud sometimes, whereby you may the better see what you haue done to the sore; you may perhaps finde a lit∣tle core feeding within the sore, pull and get out of it as much as is possible, and then hauing a little sticke, with a little clout, to the bignesse of a small Pease fastened to the end thereof, and wet in the Aqua fortis, and not to haue it other∣wise then wet, not that it shall drop; herewith doe but touch the sore once or twise that it may be wet, and it will soone kill it: Dresse it once in foure and twenty houres; and if it be not in a very desperate estate when you beginne there∣with, twise or thrise dressing shall be the most
it shall neede; and if the core shall be at the first taken cleane out, it will not aske more dressing: You may feede within one houre, or an houre and a halfe after she is thus dressed. A Medicine for the Frounce, whervnto the long-winged Hawke is much more subiect then is the short-winged Hawke. I Haue heard many men of this opinion, that the Frounce & Canker are all one; and such they were as held themselues very skilfull: But such as haue skill & iudgement know that they were disceiued in their opinions. The Frounce proceeding out of a heate and drynes in the bo∣dy, or of a bruise, and it followeth most your fresh Haggard. Although the sore-Hawke or Tarsell is not free, but are vpon heats subiect to that infirmity, the older a Hawke is shee is the more hote & drye; and you shall haue sodainly growe vpon an olde Haggart, although shee be well kept, for it will growe vpon that Hawke soonest that is of a fretfull disposition. A Faul∣conour of iudgement will hereupon worke to seeke out meanes to amend the cause, and then Heate and drinesse. euery small matter will cure the griefe, when it is but little and newe bred. I haue knowe it killed with washing her mouth with the iuice of Lemmon, and so giuing her stones out of the same iuice; this worketh as well in the body as the mouth: But Aqua fortis to be vsed for the
Frounce, as I haue directed for a Canker, is be∣yond all other receits. Otherwise for the Frounce. TAke of your Aqua fortis that is quallified, and with a quill made for that purpose, take off the scabbe or roofe from the sore, then with a sticke and a cloth at the end thereof, well wet in your quallified water wash the sore: and although there be so much water as some of it doth goe into her body, I haue found no hurt but profit thereby; for without doubt it hath had an extraordinary working in her body, without making any shew of sicknes, but there hath come from her drossie mutes that haue stoode full of bubbles: I haue herewith recoue∣red Hawkes troubled with a sore Frounce, and made them sound. An approued medicine for the Frounce, that is to be had in euery Towne. TAke a piece of good Roche-Allum, and burne it leisurely, and then pound it to as fine powder as may be, then take a little English Honie, and a little of the powder, let them be wrought together with a kniues point, and then your Hawke cast, and the scab cleane taken away to the bottome, (feare not to make it bleed, which you may wipe away as you are
formerly taught) and this receipt clapped vp∣on it, without doubt with lesse then sixe times dressing, it shall kill it; and let it be dressed once in foure and twenty houres; let her not be fed in two houres after shee is dressed. I could set downe forty common receipts more for this griefe, and all needlesse, for any one of these three last shall kill any Frounce. I would not haue set downe this last receipt butthat Aqua fortis is not to be had in euery place. A remedy for the kirnells whereunto the long-winged Hawke is not subiect, but it followeth much the short-winged hawke. THe kirnells beginne and breede vnder the eye, betweene the eye and chap, outwardly appearing, and will very soone shew it selfe as bigge & long as the halfe of an ordinary Beane, and will soone grow greater and swell vp the eye, and kill her if it be not preuented. For cure thereof doe thus, launce the place swelled long∣waies, and with a quill take out the kirnells as you can, they are white as kirnells in cattell, (but I pray vnderstand) that they are of a very small size; without any danger you may cut the hole large enough, seeth some spring water, and when it hath sod, put into it a peece of Roach-Allum, and some English-honey, let it seeth no more, but let the ingredients disolue therein; then hauing a linnen cloath fastened to the end
of a sticke, wet in the water, the water not being otherwise then the colde taken off, wash the place very cleane within, and then put into it some powder of burnt Allum; you shall neede to put your Allum into it but once, and once it must be, otherwise it will be in foure and twen∣ty houres closed vp againe, and shew it selfe healed, and so the kirnells increase againe, and very soone be as ill as it was at the first; but the Allum once applyed, and the place washed three mornings together, feare it not, for it is cured and sound. There is a disease in the head of some, called Ver∣tego, it is a swimming of the braine, and thus followeth the cure. THis griefe is very dangerous, and it appea∣reth too plainely, for very seldome the hawke holdeth still her head, but continually putteth her head ouer her shoulder, and so let∣teth it fall to his proper place againe, it procee∣deth of a colde cause in the body. Take a quan∣tity of Butter out of the Churne, doe not wash it, take a Gloue of the middle size, and as much Mace, let them be bruised, not beaten, and sap them in a little of your Butter, to the bignesse of a stone, such as you gaue that hawke; (al∣though it it be very large it will be a casting lit∣little enough) put it into a fine peece of Lawne, and then tye it fast; giue it vnto your hawke, and
after it, giue vnto her, her supper; in the mor∣ning shee will cast the Lawne againe, with the Cloue and Mace therein, the Butter passing through her, then giue vnto her a cloue of sod∣den Garlicke. And because euery man hath not made vse thereof, I will therefore set downe the manner how to seeth it, for it is very profitable for very great vses; take the cloues out of the head, but doe not pill them, seeth them in faire water, & with a spoone feele of them very often, lest they ouer seeth, for they must be soft, and yet no softer, but that if your Hawke will not take them in meate, they may be put into her without breaking, but now the huske and thin white filme must be taken off, giue vnto her, her breakefast before, or therewith, she will not one∣ly indew it, but that will worke good digesture for her other meate; at night giue her Butter, Cloue & Mace againe, as aforesaid, and so euery night, and euery third morning a cloue of sod∣den Garlicke, vntill shee be cured, keepe her warme and continually hooded, if shee will not sit quietly let her be maled vp. The Pinne in the throat a most desperate and vncu∣rable disease, I haue neuer heard of a long wing∣ed hawke troubled therewith, but I haue knowne many short-winged hawkes killed with it. THis disease is plainely discouered, for vpon any bate she wil heaue & blow, and rattle in
the throat. In my very friends house, I found a Goshawke at that passe, it is ten yeares since, and they did not perceiue it vntill that day; my aduise was desired, which I deliuered, and thus put in practise; they did cause presently some Butter to be made, which I tooke, not washing it; but I laped or noynted a wing feather of a Henne therewith, and so twise or thrise in a day put it vp and downe her winde pipe, and twise or thrise at a time. Whether this was the Pinne, or no, I know not, or the Pinne bree∣ding; but I am sure that in three or foure dayes the Hawke did well, without any other thing administred. And by others it was thought to be the Pinne. One Sparhawke had the Pinne this last yeare in her sore-age, and I tolde her Master of the happy proceeding I had with the Goshawke, and he did practise the same: But I beleeue he rather put the feather which was but small into the throat, then into the winde-pipe, for within one fortnight or tenne dayes after it begun, she dyed thereof. One other Goshawke was brought vnto me in her rufter-hoode, to be made flying, as hee said that brought her, shee had beene drawne three weeks, and for a fortnight & more she had taken euery night a casting; the Hawke I knew for her goodnes & good conditions could not be bettered. I was glad of her comming, my house being full of my friends: I imparted so much vnto them in the euening, hauing formerly
beene well acquainted with her good conditi∣ons, I pulled off her hoode, after awhile sitting quietly shee made a stout bate, but so soone as she had done so, she gaped, and ratled so in the throat, as that shee might easily be heard into the next roome. If this were not the Pinne, then no hawke hath the Pinne; but the sight hereof did very much perplexe mee. To be ridde of her I could not, for her Master was ridden into the Countrey a hawking iourney, as his owne letter that day sent did testifie: Seeing in what desperate estate the hawke was in, I would wil∣lingly haue giuen forty shillings I had not med∣led with her; Hee was a worthy Knight that ought her, and to him I stoode bound for many former kinde guifts, which was in truth the most especiall cause that encreased my griefe, rather fearing her death, then hoping for life. The next day by some occasion there were two Knights, both of them very iudicious Austrin∣gers, and two Gentlemen of the same family, though dwelling tenne miles a sunder, and di∣uers others; all which, for my colde comfort, said she was a hawke not to be recouered. Then I practised vpon her in this manner: First, I put on her rufter-hoode againe, and then with a large feather lapped about with butter, I did twise or thrise together, and three times in a day put vp and downe her throate, (I pray you re∣member that it was butter out of the Churne, & not washed.) Whilest I was in this practise, I
must tell you that shee did not thereupon leaue her ratling in the throat at all, but it did en∣crease a while after she was dressed, and made a greater noyse; and great reason for it, for shee had in her dressing striued very much, and now labouring in the body, her throat full of butter, shee must needes make the noyse the greater, which after she stoode still a while and was quiet, shee neuer made shew of: After a weekes practse thus, I tyed two feathers toge∣ther, in such manner, as some Arrowes and Bolts for Crolbowes haue their feathers lapped about, then did I clip off halfe the deepe side of the feather, and being drye, I put that into her winde-pipe, putting it vp and downe, and tur∣ning it round, insomuch that the feather was bloudy, (it troubled mee much, but the cure be∣ing desperate, I thus followed on my practise, I confesse I neuer had that experiēce before) I had then two other feathers lapped together with silke as the other two were, about and into which I had laped and wrought, the powder of burnt Allum and English Hony, prepared as I taught you for the Frounce, and with that I did well rubbe her winde-pipe vp and downe once a day, for three daies together, and so left, know∣ing that it had wrought much in so short a time vpon a sore Frounce. I continued this Hawke one weeke longer in her hoode, when she gaue mee assured knowledge that she had no Pinne, neither would she blowe for one bate, or two,
or thrce, if they were not great, and for that blowing I doe not thinke it was the Pantise, but rather a faintnesse and weakenesse after her sicknesse, as it is very commonly approued a∣mongst our selues after a long sicknesse; and her disease was none of the lea: I met with the messenger that brought her vnto me, (within one weeke after I had her) vnto whom I impar∣ted my griefe for the hawke, when he did con∣fesse vnto mee shee had met with two or three mischances, by scratching of her hood before she came vnto me, which might be a cause of breeding the Pinne, which being the greater griefe, would not suffer the lesser to be seene vn∣till that was cured, which was the Pantise, if it so proue: You haue herein heard my opini∣on; but for the Pantise I cannot meddle with, for therein my discourse would proue very tedious, as to deliuer the cause thereof, &c. I should compare it to the Tissicke in a man or woman, or to a Horse, which some say is broken-winded, and I should contrary that o∣pinion: And although I should haue many a∣gainst mee, yet I should haue many maintaine my opinion. And thus I leaue that vndiscour∣sed of, because it would proue very tedious to set downe the reasons, pro & contra. But for this vncurable disease, I am perswaded, that if it shall be rubbed with two drye feathers, lap∣ped together and clipped, as I haue before said, See the Frounce Capt. and afterward to wet them in Aqua fortis that is
quallified, and so thrust the feather vp and downe her throat, I must needs thinke it should eate away the Pinne, and cure it, hauing had so good experience of the working thereof, which doth confirme my opinion, and not to danger the Hawke: Admit it should endanger her life, shee can be in no greater daunger then the Pinne putteth her in. I leaue the vse thereof to your owne consideration. An excellent medicine for a lash in the eye. TAke white Sugar-Candy, burne it as you burne your Allum, then bruise or beate it to a very fine powder, and thereof morning and euening put some of it into her eye, let her be alwaies hooded, vntill shee be well, which will be in a very short time; yea, although a filme beginne to growe ouer it, because it hath not beene looked vnto in time; yet rest assured it will cure it. A Medicine for a salt or hot humour that runneth out of the eye, and scaldeth all the feathers from that part vnder the eye, and maketh it bare. THis disease will make the one eye seeme bigger then the other, and at all times seeme to be full of water, it may be both the eyes be in that ill estate, the often wiping of the eye against the wing, putteth off the feathers, and maketh
the eye the worse. For cure, take the stalke of Fennel and cut it off at one ioynt, and into that part of the stalke which you leaue long, being stopped with the ioynt at the other end, you shall put or fill with the pouder of white suger∣candie, very finely pounded, and then with waxe make very close that end, and so doe three or foure, and then bury them in the earth two or three dayes, and your pouder will be dissol∣ued into fine water, which you shall drop into your hawkes eye, or your owne, if you shall haue neede: It is approued very good. For the same otherwise. TAke a piece of Gum-draggon, and let it lye in three or foure spoonefulls of spring-wa∣ter, vntill it dissolue and grow soft, then drop of that water into the eye; it is very good for our selues if we haue neede. For a snurt or colde in the head of any hawke, it is most properly to be learmed thus in long-winged hawkes, for short-winged hawkes the Rye, and yet they differ. I Haue known Faulcons that haue been wash∣ed at the brooke in colde and frosty weather, or so wet with raine, that therevpon they haue beene so troubled with a colde in the head, as that in a moneth or sixe weekes they could not
be brought againe to true flying: The Rye in a short-winged will grow as well vpon her, and sooner, by being ill kept without tyring or plu∣mage, or by being in pouerty, as through colde or wet. Notwithstanding shee is the tenderer hawke; yet if shee be full of flesh and haue na∣turall meanes, good and warme dyet, with plu∣mage and tyring enough, and kept warme, shee will soone outgrow it; but for the Faulcon and such like, a wilde Primrose roote dryed in the Ouen after the bread is drawne, and made so drye as that it may be beaten to a fine pouder, and so blowne into her Nares, will very soone break it▪ If you will take the leaues, be sure they be of the wilde primrose in the field or wood, stampe & straine out the iuice and put some of it into her Nares, and it shall worke the like effect. It shall not be idlenesse for mee to deliuer, nor yet vnprofitable for you to heare; that one did lye in his bed so troubled with paine in the head, that vpon the least motion or stirring hee would cry out in such manner, as that he shew∣ed hee suffered much torment. I was talking to one of this receipt for my hawke, where vpon the parties petitions were so piercing, as that there must be no denyall but that some leaues should be sought for and gotten, and which was done, the iuice taken out, I thinke hee did snuffe vp into his nose one sponefull, but hee was for halfe an houre after so tormented, as that I for my part wished that I had neuer
spoken of the receipt, but that little season so borne out, the party was presently as wel as euer he was in his life; this was sudden and this was strange, administer neither of these to your hawke but when she is empty, and feed not too soone after it, but be sure to keepe her warme; for otherwise her powers being so open, shee is more apt to increase the colde shee hath alrea∣dy taken then to breake it. A medecine for the Mites, some hawkes haue beene so ill looked vnto, that they haue not onely beene troubled about the beake and eyes, but the nicks of the wings and hinder parts of them haue beene eaten to the quicke. HIs iudgement should much faile him that will not thinke that hawkes so ill furnished haue beene neither cleanly kept nor carefully looked vnto; by both which meanes a hawke may haue them, and they are soonest gotten from the pearch or blocke where an other hawke hath sate that haue had the mites: If they be timely discouered, and that they haue not ouer-runne the whole body, Aqua vite and Stauesacre will kill them, onely rubbing her Nares therewith when you set her downe for all night, and so will Vinegar and Stauesacre. The Iuice of Hearbe-grasse, the leaues stam∣ped and strained, and the parts offended about the head rubbed therewith, when you goe to
take your rest, is as good as any of the rest: Take heede where you set your hawke, for if shee sit by a hawke that hath the Mites, shee will too soone finde that shee hath met with too many ill neighbours. Master Batcheler that was Master of all the Faulconers by Powles, to whom my loue then was such as that I could speake much good of him now; hee I say had a sparhawke, all her body ouer-runne with such vermine, which he could destroye by no meanes vntill hee did vndertake this course; Hee got Staues-acre, and beate it small, and then boyled it in faire water, making it strong, and then streined it gently through a fine cloath, suffering none of the Stauesacre to goe through; and in that he did well wash his hawke; and when hee had her out of the water, helapped hervpin a Lambs skinne that was made warme and ready for that purpose, and therein kept her vntill she was ve∣ry neere dry, when hauing another skinne war∣med, he put that about her, and so continued two houres, into which Lambes skinnes the vermin did runne, and so the hawke was made cleane and freed from her death. A receipt beyond all other, to take out the Lyme out of a Hawkes feathers. TAke Neates-foote oyle, any oyle else will neuer be gotten out of the feathers, and annoynt the place lymed therewith; that
done, draw the webbe of the feather euen as it groweth from the quill, betweene the flesh of your fore-finger and the naile of your thumbe; with the naile neuer leaue working, vntill there∣with you haue drawne the Lyme cleane out, and then you shall finde the feather looke with as good a glosse as any of the rest, and stand smooth as you draw them. A receipt to be giuen to a Hawke that bloweth, and is short or thicke-winded. I Was once asked by one of my friends what was good for such an infirmity, I tolde him the tops of Rosemary leisurely dryed betweene two warme Tyles, either made warme, and set vpon hot embers to continue them so; or in an Ouen, so soone as the bread was taken out; and when they were so well dryed as that they would be beaten to a fine powder, to giue of the powder in good aboundance to his hawke with her meate. I made it knowne vnto him that this was taught mee by one that was an ancient and skilfull Austringer; and withall tolde him, that I had made no vse thereof, neither could I al∣leadge a reason why it should be good; As he was a Faulconour, so was he a Cocke-master, and he tolde mee he had made vse of it in such manner for his Cockes; since when, for a hawke so troubled I haue made proofe of, and found it very profitable.
A Medicine for the Wormes, wherewith all crea∣tures (I thinke, as well as Hawkes) are trou∣bled. FLos sulphuris giuen in her meate is very good, and so is Corolinum, otherwise called Sea∣mosse dryed, and in powder giuen the Hawke with her meate. Puluis contra vermis is to be had at some Pothecaries, giuen with her meate in the morning, shee will not at all flye the worse at night. Lauender-Cotten, minced and made in∣to a pill with butter, and rouled vp in Sugar, is good. Castings of Wormewoode, and Saintu∣ary are very good. Sodden Garlicke in my practise is better then any of these. There can no better thing be giuen to a long-winged hawke for the Fillenders; if so, it must then be granted, nothing can helpe digesture better. You shall finde how it is sodden in the Chapter for the disease in the head. I haue giuen euery night a Cloue to a short-winged hawke, sixe nights together. Wormeseed giuen with meate, or Wormeseede with Aloes, Butter, and two or three chiues of Saffron giuen in a pill, is very good. And I thinke so are a hundred more me∣dicines for this disease; and there are more Hawkes dye hereof, then of all other diseases besides.
A Medicine or Pill to be giuen to Hawke that hath the Wormes, whereof I make the best allowance. TAke English-Honie and clarifie it, take off the scumme with a feather when it hath boyled a little, and then it is clarified; let it boyle leisurely vntill it groweth so stiffe as that you may make it vp in pills, which you shall thus approue; take a little out of it vpon a kniues poynt, and drop it vpon a Trencher, when it is cold you shall see whether it be stiffe enough, or no; then beate some Wormeseede and put into it, and so make it vp in pills. I will tell you how I doe vse to giue them; I lappe them vp in a single white paper, of the thinnest paper I can get, and then I put therein my pill, and tye the paper close about with a thrid. I am very carefull not to touch the out-side of the paper, after I haue handled the pills before I wash, for feare she should take any dislike in the taste. I put it into so thinne a paper that it may the sooner dissolue; for if it be in a thicke paper that will not so soone take moysture. (I haue approued both) and then if shee offer to cast it, she may with so strong paper cast all: Which to preuent, if I know any thing my Hawke will dislike, I shew her that, it will be a meanes to make her keepe it; otherwise I will haue in a readinesse a wing of some Fowle, wherewith I
will tend her, sometimes with shewing it, and sometimes suffering her to plume, by which meanes you shall haue your pill or pils worke kindely. You may giue two as bigge as a small Hazell-Nut to a Goshawke, one to a Tarsell; it is a good scouring, besides the benefit of killing Wormes. I haue heard very experienced Au∣stringers say, that there is no killing of Wormes with any such receipt as I haue mentioned; but their aduice is to beate a small flint-stone to small pummis, and to giue it her with her meat: And this they say must first breake the bed of Wormes, and then any of these receipts will kill them. I cannot vnderstand where these wormes should lye, that must haue this helpe, and with∣out which the other cannot profit. I haue seene a small grub worme in long-winged Hawkes, and especially in the blancke Tarsels, that haue beene muted daily, sometimes two, sometimes three, and somtimes foure in a mute and more. And to kill these I haue laboured, but I will ne∣uer approue it more, for I cannot doe it; and besides, I thinke they rather benefite a hawke then doe any hurt: For I flew a Tarsell so trou∣bled all his sore-age, and when he was an enter∣mewer, vntill after Christmas at the Cocke, hee was a very high flyerthat yeers remain; & three yeares after he was a lead Hawke at the Brooke in Leicester-shiere, and all this time had these wormes, and hee was called by that name Wormes. I am put in minde of giuing a Hawke
Brimstone, by speaking of the pounded flint, and I haue very often approued it, to giue it in this manner to any hawke, broken like small grauell, & at night giue it with her meate, & she will in the morning bring it vp in her casting: It will helpe greatly to cleane a Hawke, and breed a good stomacke. There is not so com∣mon a disease followeth a hawke as the wormes, and I haue found them in most feathered Fowles, but neuer any within the bowels, but in the body most aboundantly, and without all doubt the backe-worme, if a man were cer∣taine his Hawke were so diseased, both the pill and sodden Garlicke with continuance would destroy it. A receipt for a Hawke that hath lost her courage, and ioyeth not, or is lowe in flesh. TAke a wilde and a well-fleshed house Doue, and draw out a wing, you know what to pare away, and how to prepare it fit for your Hawke: Take a new-layed egge, whilest it is warme, and warme a Porringer or Pewter-dish against the fire, then breake the egge, and put the yolke thereinto, let it be broken a little with a spoone, and then drawe your meate through it, and as your Hawke is feeding, with a feather lay on more. I would haue this so quickly done, as that the Doue nor Egge should lose but little of their naturall heate, & by making it more hot
you make it worse then the losing of the heate. Vse this but two or three mornings, & you shall finde your Hawke growe brauely vpon you. For a hawke to be proude and full of flesh, is but a spurre or whetstone to put her into all ill conditions if shee be wilde: But let her be gen∣tle and not wilde, shee is able to kill any thing that is fit to be flowne vnto. Another receipt very good for the same purpose. TAke a pound of Beefe of a young beast, or more Beefe if you will, make it very cleane, not leauing either fat or string therein: You may the better doe it because the Beefe must be sliced very thin, which when it is so sli∣ced, and well picked, lay it in a still, and put thereto as much Claret wine, of the best high Country wine you can get, as may couer the Beefe, put thereto one or two ounces of white Suger-Candy, beaten to fine powder, and then still them together, but let the still be very tem∣perately kept, and through this you may often drawe your Hawkes meate.
How to draw a water that is cooling, and the pro∣pertie thereof is to kill any vnnaturall heate in the mouth or body, it is a great cleanser, and in∣creaseth breath; it will keepe the body in good temper, and helpe the body distempered with heate. I Would gladly set down euery thing so plain∣ly, as that there might neither be question made of my meaning, nor that there should be any thing mistaken, for want of a true discrip∣tion. Prim, of some called Prim-priuet, it is that which is planted in some Orchards, and in some Gardens, to beautifie the walls, and is kept with cutting, it doth carry a white flower, which when they are blowne, I would haue cleanely picked, taking nothing but the flower, let not your fire be kept ouer-rash or ouer-hot, but let them be carefully distilled, and then put it into a glasse vntill you haue vse of it, no hawke will dislike the taste of the water, and the water thus stilled hath a very good smell, but it leaueth a most stinking Still. If you shall giue her this water with her meate, you shall finde admira∣ble profit therein: It is very good wherewith to ensayme a hawke of any kinde, for a long-wing∣ed hawke that is in summer flowne to the field, there neuer was or can be vsed any thing better, it is most true that in giuing something to heate the stomacke, you may therewith ouer-heate
the liuer; and it is so for the liuer, giue some∣thing to coole that, and so you may ouer-coole or kill the stomacke. But there is such an excel∣lent propertie in this water, as notwithstanding it cooleth the liuer, yet it bettereth the stomacke, the vse of this water will preuent many diseases, for infirmities and sicknesse doe continually follow such hawkes, as are not cleanely fed; but flowne fowle before they be well ensaymed, it will keepe thy Goshawke and Tarsell in conti∣nuall health, if you be carefull in the ensayming of them, and not flying of them before they be cleane; If you will not be carefull, but thy ouer∣hasty desire of sport, shall make thee flye them before they be fit to flye; then you shall haue from them for a little season some sport, but then the conclusion will be confusion: to be weake and sickly is the best hope can be had of a hawke het or flowne before she be cleane, but to be het or flowne when she is more then foule, so soone as colde weather doth come, be assured of the Pantise, and other diseases which will fall into her feete and legges, and then as good pull off her head as keepe her. I know not any man that hath had the vse thereof but my selfe, and I haue vsed it, this sixteene or seauenteene yeares, and I did neuer impart to any man, but one Knight what it was, who to my knowledge did neuer cause it to be drawne.
A very excellent medecine for a dangerous bruise, presently to be giuen after the hurt. TAke English honey and clarefie it, and so soone as you haue so done, before it boyleth any more put into it halfe so much stone∣pitch or something lesse then there is honey, and then let it boyle againe: It shall not neede to boyle long, because the pitch will make it strong and fast enough to make vp in pills; as soone as you can, giue her a large pill thereof, and al∣though shee fast aboue twelue houres after the receiuing, it is the better: I pray let mee make all plaine vnto you, for this is worthy to be had in good estimation, both of the Faulconer and Austringer. It is a practise of my owne deui∣sing; and thus I vsed the same: I haue had di∣uers Tarsells flying at the Cocke, so hurt them∣selues that they haue not beene able to stand or holde vp a wing, I haue presently maled them, to keepe them warme vntill I came home, (I tell you this because you shall vnderstand that it is very dangerous to let them take colde before the receipt of this pill or pills, for making of them something lesse, you may giue two,) when I came home, I would keepe her still maled vp, lest she should catch colde vntill I had made her pills ready, when I would not yet vnmale her if I found it a dangerous bruise, but kepe her so all night or day, and I would be sure that when
I did vnmale her to feede, or to see how shee could stand, it should be in a very warme Chamber, where there should be a good fire. I did flye a Goshawke that was not my own, for which hawke I was offered fortie pounds, I could not, and her Master would not sell her; the next yeare shee had such a bruise vpon her body against a small tree, not much bigger then my leg, crossing to catch a Pheasant-Cocke, that shee lay there to the beholders dead, and there she had beene dead but that this accident happe∣ned very neere vnto one that was with me, when I came vnto her I saw her eyes stirre a little, I opened her mouth, and put my finger downe her throat, shee stirred no part of her body, I lapped her vp in a good-fellowes Ierkin that was with mee, and so I carryed her vnder my arme to a house two miles from thence, I found she had life in her, & then I had hope; I gaue her two pills, such as I haue formerly spoken of, she did lye so lapped vp at the least sixteene houres, and when I did vnmale her to see her strength, she was very vnable to stand, and hardly able to offer to stand, I fed very short, but with my care in one week I deliuered her to her Master, with some directions; in all the time I had her after her bruise she neuer cast any meate, but af∣ter I parted from her, she would once in three or foure meales cast part or all of her meate, my consent was asked when I came thether, that her Consulecum vinis.
head might be pulled off, I would not yeeld to that: but vpon easie tearmes I tooke her home with mee. In the Strand I met with that worthy Bar∣ron who before had made meanes to buy her, and he asked mee, if I would not helpe him to that Goshawke; I tolde him truly in what des∣perate case shee was in, and all the truth. Hee said you will recouer, you will recouer that; I promised if she did recouer, he should haue her, and at Easter-tearme (shee receiuing her hurt, neere Shrouetide) I did deliuer her a very sound hawke, and I had for her thirty pounds, and her well-prouing was worth twenty pounds more vnto mee. One other Goshawke I recouered, that wanted not much of her danger, and her Master solde her in Sussex for fifteene or six∣teene pounds, and a young Goshawke cleane mewed out of the mew. I dare write no vn∣truth, for this must be ouer-viewed by the actors: what shall I neede to set downe any more for this, knowing this to be so approued good? and which maketh it the more excellent, it is to be had in euery place, so is neither Par∣masite, nor Mumma, I could mention more but all worthlesse in respect: If you will giue any thing else, let it be Mumma beaten into pow∣der and so giuen with her meate, you shall finde it in the morning in her casting, and it is very good where the other is vnknowne.
A receipt for a wound or hurt taken either by a Dog, or the clawes of a Hare, or otherwise. HAue a speciall care that the winde or colde enter not into the wound before you haue wherewith to dresse it; If it be where you can haue soueraigne Balme, there is nothing better, that is to be had but in few places: And there∣fore for want thereof, take a quantity of Spring∣water, and let it seeth, then take it from the fire, and put into it a peece of Roche-Allum, and some English-Honey, and so let them dissolue in the water, the water being bloud-warme; therewithall wash the sore, it will keepe it cleane from putrifying, and heale it, but still be care∣full that it doth not take cold. A medicine for the Cray. THis griefe proceedeth of a hot & dry cause, and it is a dainty cure. Hawes distilled, and the meate drawne through the water is very good. To drawe your hawkes meate tho∣rough Cowes-milke warme from the Cowe, is very good, and so approued.
Another for the same. MIlke from the Cowe distilled is excellent good for that griefe; but thus followeth the discommodity, it cooleth and hurteth the stomacke. I haue knowne this water vsed for the stone, but the discommodity was soone found. But if you will distill a pinte and halfe of milke, and withall an ounce of white Suger-Candy finely pounded, it will rectifie all, it hin∣dreth not its property for the Cray, and yet it doth now comfort the stomacke. Another for the same, and the best of any for the same. I Haue knowne some pare the end of a Candle to a small quantity, and so put it into her tewell gently▪ and it hath doone good. But I vse Castle-sope, and thereof cut a peece an inch long in manner of a Supposita, and so put it vp, and so leaue it, this is very good: But withall I haue pared a little of such Sope, and conueyed it into the gut of a Foule, being very carefull of the cleanely doing it, not knowing whether the taste might offend, or no; so doone, I cast my Hawke, and put it downe, and then I feede vp∣on it, to make her the better to put it ouer; this with the Supposita will so open & make glibbe
the passages, that you shall soone finde amend∣ment in your Hawke. Otherwise for the same. I Was taught to put vp in the manner of a glister oyle of Roses, with a Syrren. A receipt for a straine or bruise in the foote. TAke a handfull of Mallowes, and boyle them either with Neates-foot-oyle, Goose∣grease, Capons-grease, or Hogges-grease, when they are well boyled, streine them through a cloath, and then mingle with them good Aqua∣vite, and let them boyle all together a little, and therewith annoynt the place. FINIS.
