21499 99839459 3883
CERTAINE WORTHYE MANV∣script Poems of great Antiquitie Re∣serued long in the Studie of a Northfolke Gentle∣man. And now first published By J. S. 1 The statly tragedy of Guistard and Sismond. 2 The Northren Mothers Blessing. 3 The way to Thrifte. DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS. Imprinted at London for R. D. 1597.
To the worthiest Poet Maister Ed. Spenser.
THE STATELIE Tragedie of Guistard and Sismond in two Bookes. The first Booke. TANCREDE the noble Prince of Salurne▪ Flowre of Knighthood, and myrrour of prowesse, The which long time his people did gouerne Wittilie by benignitie and gentlenesse, Iche man reioyced of his great noblesse: Discreete in all thing that was iudiciall, And euermore Prince-like in things imperiall. His law he kept iustly through his Prouince, Rigorous to vice, yet bounteous to all, And mercifull als as euer was any Prince, And shortly as my Doctor makis rehearsall, His fame had neuer spot in all his gouernall, Til hasty cruelnesse procured in greate yre The fatall death of tweyne that loue had set on fyre.
A wife he toke, which come of blood Royall, But of what prince or yet of what linage, What was her name, or what men did her call, Nought sayes mine Author▪ But of high parage Men may well know, that thus in marryage Was ioyned with so high a Prince as was Tancrede: Therefore I passe ouer & take there of none heed. This noble Prince Tancrede had neuer issue In time of all his life to be his heire Saue only a doughter whome Nature & vertue Excellently indued, so was shee good and fayre. But ôcruel destiny that mirth does oft appeyre, And after great gladnes maketh men to morne! Better had Tancrede bene that childe had neuer be borne. But all that was full ferre fro his minde, He red not in the booke of her Destinye, Her fatall chaunce was to him derke and blinde; Let all this passe: This childe was put to noiye, Daily she increased in fauour and beauté So that when her nonage passed and her youth Her noble fame & beautè was in ich mans mouth.
If I should discriue this beauteous creature▪ Nature had her specially in remembrance▪ For she was wel fetured & seemly of stature, Her chere was ruddy according to pleasaunce, Aspere it was to louers her goodly countenance, Her beautie not made be signement ne other gere But of her kinde as Nature gaue to her. She excellid in beauté Vlixes Ladie fayre Penelope of Greece, and eke fayre Helene: Hypolita also, and Emely her sister Might not compare with her, nor Polixyne: Instedfast loue she passed Dido the Queene; Faithfull and true without daungerous disdaine, Curteys and deboneyre, she was not sullein. As for to speake of her pregnant wit, Her perfite minde, and her intelligence, No thing was so heard, but she conceiued it; In ferre sottell casting she had experience: What should I say more but shortly in sentence, She knew more happily than was expedient Vnto any woman, or ellis conuenient.
Like as the vnhappie fader ofyssue had no more, But this child onely, so loued he her truely: His heart, his mind, his loue was set on her so sore, That if she were absēt him thought he shuld die; So that in his minde he is determind vtterly Euer to keepe his daughter with him in his sight, And neuer to graunt her in marriage to no wight: Tho Princys royall, to whome of high fauour Fortune had grauntit great inheritance, Desyren this feyre Lady to their Paramour Euer to be true withouten variance And so by matrimony to make Aliance. But tho Cupid hit them with his firie dart Yet nolde her fader suffer her to depart. So shortly for to tell, this maide fro her desire Was also needly compellit to abstaine: Tho lustie youth and corage brent her as fyre, Yet mought she neuer pleasure of her loue at∣taine, But euer contemned, still liuing in paine Till many of her lustie yeris were agoo, Her owne cruell fader did her all this woo▪
It fortund in a time I wot not in what wise Wheder that her fader had compassion Vpon her great woe, or ellis for som promise Of good riches, or of possession, But shortly to Champayn the Dukes sonne He graunted his doughter to haue in marriage; A man of blood royall and of high parage. It needith not rehers the rich Apparell Of those two louers the day of their wedding: Or to my purpose what may hit auaile To tell of the curious feest, and the guyding? All this I passe ouer, and make notarying: I speke not of the myrth & melody that was there, But for a conclusion, thus wedded they were. Of sorrowfull morning now is the clowdie night By the fyre of loue driuen farre away, The feruēt sun of plesance shineth now fulbright, His fresh lustie beames hath turned night to day, Now may she dāce & sing now hath she lust to play▪ For euer after mourning the mirth is the sweter, And after great sorrow the ioy shalbe the greater.
But as lustie Phoebus with his fierie beames When his golden Carrehath raught into the west, Anon he withdrawes his hote brenning streames And then aperith Phoebe out of her cloudynest, Then comes the night when al men drawn to rest, Vntill on the morrow that Lucifer appeare Called the Day-starre, the daies messengere. Right so the feruent Sun of her lusty pleasance. Was wrapped with weeping of the cloudy raine: For within little space of continuance After their wedding, Death parted hem tweyne, I wot not by what meane: her Lord her soueraine By sicknesse or by battell I can no knowlech haue, But shortly this Duke-is son is dede in his graue. Alas departure ground of all heauinesse, Causing the darke night of cloudie diuorse! O cruell Death, I meane destruction of gladnesse Disdaining the pleasure of this wofull corse! Why would thou thus with thy malicious force Eclipse the cleerenesse of this her ioyfull day Bringing forth the night, and care, and wele-away?
Falsly thou robbest her of her harts pleasure Taking from her him that she loued best. Alas thou art the common theefe of Nature That hast take from her all ease and herts rest. Wold God on thee she mought call a Quest Of Louers▪ and then for all thine art Thou shouldyst be do to death with thin owne dart. What needith it to speake of thine Enuy? When this woful woman shal neuer be the better For that hath be the cause of all her Malady If it be rehersed, it makys her wo the greater, Wherefore my pen shall write therof no letter▪ But thus this woman wepith, & can none otherrede, It helpeth her nothing, for her make is dede. How shall she now be ruled, shee takis her councell Deuoide of comfort, for her lacks her guide: Anon she hath cōclud within her mind right well At home with her fader she thinkith to abide, And there to leaue her sorrow if it would betide Whereas all her penance first of all was take; So wedow to her fader she comith in clothis blake.
Things artificiall that be violent Wrought or ellis made by cause accidental May not euer indure▪ for when the cause is shent The effect thereof shall sone faide and fall. Why should this woman then lenger, feynt, or pall, Syth the cause of her mourning is fro her mind ycast The death of her Husband is so fer-since past? If still she bide, and dwell euer still In wofull care to continue and indure, Within short time she should her selfe spill: For sorrow is a poyson which no man may cure, It bringeth hearts proude full low vnto the lure, It maketh strength to faide and also Beautè, It is the greatest malady that to man may be. So she still bided in hir faders house, Young and coragious also in high degree, With affluence of all thing that was delicious▪ But when at last she gan perceiue and see That for loue, hir Fader intendeth not that she Should neuer more none other husband haue, But still to dwell with him to he be dead in graue:
Thus then hath her Fader determind vtterly Neuer to procure for her no marriage, And her selfe to axe it her seemed velonye, She thought therfore to take her best aduantage, Gife she mought espy a man of good linage, So that he gentil were, to take her owne choyce, And in the electiō her Fader should haue novoice. Now this noble Tancrede had in his houshold, As in a Princes Court is wont for to be, Both Lords and Knights couragious to behold, Som gentlemen, som yemen, some of low degre, Among these she began to looke and see If she can any finde that were to her pleasure, Whome she would euermore loue while she might endure. So dayly in her minde she was full diligent, For to note ech man in his demeanance: But Guistard to loue is only her intent, And he right well knew by the apearance Of her chere and her chaunged countenance That of brennyng loue she daunced in the trace, Which hath bound her heart with his goldin lace.
But where she set her loue he wist in no case, Till ones he fortuned to stond before this Lady, And she beholding him with deadly pale face Not speaking o word, she sighed greatly And anon with that she can withdraw her eye Casting downe her looke farre vnto the ground, So womanly shamfast she sat a greate stound. And when this young louer now brought in loues daunce Of her entent had such experience He was not dull of wit, but gaue attendance, Her to serue and please he did his diligence, Cupid hath smitten him with so great feruence Of loue, that their hearts be together bound, Both perished with one dart, two louers with one wound▪ Right ioyfull he was that he stode in such grace Of this faire Lady But euer he drad fortune: Alas he seyth thy where turneth in litle space Thy double chere vnstable neuer will continue, More variant then is the flitting Lune: I feare that thou will cause my Lady soueraigne Vpon my simple birth of daunger to disdaine.
Yet know I her heart so true and so stedfast And shee began also to proffer loue, Why should I then feare or ellis be agast Or put default in her? O mercie god aboue! For all treasure in earth it would not me behoue That my hearts ioy, my ladie hereof wist That I shuld put in her any such mistrist. And percase that if shee loued mee not, Yet would I in her seruice still perseuer: Mee nead not by reason argue, for I wot Loue hath her heart imbrast me to loue euer, What should I shortly say? for they had leuer Ych of hem die than to part fro other, More feruently they loued than sister or broder. So betweene hem both that loued on this wise They desired only for their great pleasaunce By some sottle meane how they mought deuise For to speake togeder and haue their dalliaunce, They will not put noe trist ne noe affiaunce To any on liue their matter for to tell, But euer to hemselues they kept it counsell:
Till it fell on a time of a sudden aduise The Lady found a mean that was a great cautell, As oft it faris that women bin sone wise And in a sudden case they bee right suttell: Shee tels him her intent by wrighting euerie deale And the letter closed in a reed-spyre Shee tooke it to Guistard for to stur the fire. Guistard remembred well that for som priuie cause The reed was take to him, he did it sone on close, And when he saw the letter, made a little pause Sitting in a studie and anon he rose And to reade this letter can himselfe dispose, The which the Ladie made of her owne inditing She was her own secretarie, it was her owne writing. The tenor of this letter was this and all the effect: I send you greting with hart & loue entere Not bold by rehersall my counsell to detect For dredful shamfastnes. Wherfore this messēgere Shal do this enterprise whose coūtenance & chere Changeth for no sham; therfore these letters blake I pray you disdaine not to read them for my sake.
Certefying you all my herts pleasaunce All my worlds rest, my ioy and comforture, That my life, my deth, as in a balance Dependith and hangith only in your cure, In you alone is put mine Auenture: Wherefore I require you that you be not strange, For I ensure you verily my hert shall neuer change. And I trow certaine that your gentill hert Disdeineth not my loue, nor is not dangerous Considering your birth, and your great pouerty, And I a Ladie both young and beauteous: For Cupid knoweth right well & his moder Ve∣nus That only for your vertue and your gentilnes I set my loue on you and for no great riches. But because also my Fader hath made an othe That I shall neuer wed while he is liuing, To suffer me depart from him he is loth: Yet lustie youth like as the fire brenning Hath chose you for my souereyn all my life en∣during, And also fortune of her high fauour Hath shewed me the meane to saue all our honour.
Remember there is fast by my faders place A dungeon deepe & strong farre vnder ground The which at his entry has no more space But an hole aboue that litle is and round, And because it is not vsed ne is found, With bushes and briers it is ouergrow So that the dungeon deep ther may no man know. Out from thilke pit is there a secret way By a posterne dore that stands full preuely Strong bars, and posts, both with locke and key That leadith to the Chamber where as I Am wont of custom in sleping for to lye, And by great dis-use this way is out of minde, This little dore this posterne can no man finde. Till at the last loue to whome nought is hid, The which for euery sore can finde a remedye, This way into my minde sone hath reducid: But shortly I taried not but hastly did me hie To vnbarre and vnlock I can looke and spy, And at the last with great paine and beesy labore I haue found all the craft for to vndoe this doore.
Be my selfe alone I went into the caue, I saw the little hole where is the entering How and in what wise ye may your selfe saue Agein all manner perils in theder comming, The hight and the depenes I send you be writing So that you need not dread for no misauenture, Ye know where & whan you may haue your plesure. And after this in her inditing There was a little clause for a conclusion As is the common vsage in each writing Whose name should be callid Subscription; She wrot ther By your owne, and made no mentiō Of her name: till after a great stound With sighing sore she added to, Sismond. What maruaile now if he be not pensiue? Now he hath rad this letter of comfort And from his deedly sorrow turns againe to liue, Sith he has almost raught the lustie port Of pleasance, lust▪ solace and of all disport: Wherefore he hasteth full besely and hieth To meet his Ladie as the letter specifieth.
Who now but this Guistard with his diligence To this pleasant Iourney spedith him apace: Euery houre that he is out of her presence, Him seemeth for to be a thousand yere of space: But tho the sluggish carkasse be far fro her face Yet with the flighty wings of amorous desire He is euer in her seruice brenning as the fire. A cord he let adoun anon of great length, And fast vnto a Bough aboue he did it tye Fret all full of knots sufficient of strength By which into the pit he mought himself cōuey, To close himselfe in ledder also he did puruey Fro bushes and fro briers to kepe him sewre: And thus towards the pit he went in this armour. The bright eye of the world when that the shining day Withdrawith, and also Titan with his sparkling light, Then this young louer takith his iourney Towards the foresaid pit: abiding there al night Till on the morrow Aurora shone full bright; Whē som haukith, som huntith, som to their labour, Then gins this Ladie to com out from her towre.
Remembring her well, when the night was gone, Of their couenants made by iust appointment, All her gentyl-men and maydens euerychone To her gardent to sport and play she sent Feyning her to be sick, and for that intent She said to her chamber ageyn she would forth right To taken rest and slepe if she might. The dores & the windowes she closed anon ful sure, Then towards the dungeon took she the right way Where she found Guistard her herts pleasure: Ioyfully they kissed, Then she gan to say, Gramercy fortune that I may see this day To speake with him that is my worldly pleasaunce, In whome is all my trust and affiaunce. She brought him to her chāber this Lady beauteous, Her fresh apparrell full Lusty was and gay, Her surcote of gold furryd with Ermin precious, A fayre mirror of Loue her beautie and ary: So shortly▪ for to tell, I can no more say; But construe if ye can, louers, what they did, For I can no more, but long they there abid.
And when them seemed best they parted in sondre, Not long they tary, ne dayly their sports vse, For dayly comming maketh men to wonder, And eke long taryaunce makith men to muze, But cheifely womens shrewd tongues will accuse Your noble fame, and sey your life is nought, Tho neuer ye do offend in word ne thought. Wisely they prouided to eschew infamy, And for all thing secret mought be kept Into the garden went she full hastely, Where that her maydens pleyd thinking she slept, And at night Guistard out of the pit crept: So comming thus, and by night parting away, Continued they their pleasure till after many a day, That fortune alas by treason falsly compast, Bewrayed all their counsell of misauenture, All their lusty pleasance turned at the last Into cruell deth at their departing: O thou false fortune that euer is on sure, Bringing herts light to wo when they be well, It seem is thou art not able for to rule thy whele!
It is next in our processe to speake of Tancrede The noble Prince her fader, which of great fre∣quēce Of tender loue & Ielousy more then need, So he delyted in her speche and eloquence, That he vs'd of custome vnder cares pretence To come vnto the Chamber of his doughter feyre, And after they had talkyd, agayne home to repeyre. Explicit Liber primus.
THE SECOND booke of Guistard and Sismond. IN the mery season of Summer feyre and hot, When euery thing renewith by course of nature, And winter with his frosty beard and fiesed cote Is put into exile and may no lenger dure, Then Summer geuith his liuery with besy cure, New clothing all the Earth in a lusty greene All browderid full of flouers right freshly to seene. Sterring harts light in gardens to walke, So did this Lady Sismond for her pleasaunce In this fresh season, plucking flowres fro their stall▪ She made her garlōd wherwith she thought to daūce: But in the meane while, alas the vnhappy chaunce, Her Fader, of a Custom as he was wont to do, Only to talk with her is to her garden go.
But when he perceiuit she was in her disport, Right loath he was to let her recreation, He would for nothing his doughter discomfort, Neither disquiet her till she had all done, Forth into the chamber entred he full sone The curteyns were draw by the bed side, He sat behind the curtein his doughter to abide. And as he sat still, sleep did him encumbre, He waxed all vnlisty and also somnolent, Then to the bed lened he began to slumbre. O thou vntristie fortune what is thine entent? To distroy this Lady it seemith thou hast ment. Where thou may bewray, it is not kept counsell; That should be counsel kept, thou tellist euery deal. O princis doughter Sismond infortunate by birth, O houre vnhappy when thou began to so iourne With Loue in his Palace: The pleasant Sun of mirth Ys comin to his hiest, & beginnith to turne. O slow malicious meeuer, thou cursed Saturne, I trow by some enuy or malicious aspect Of all this feruent loue thou hast broken the affect.
Poore Sismond thinking no deceyt ne guile Partid fro her maydens & to her chamber went, And so forth to the pit: wher in a little while She found her Guistard all readye present, For a little before (alas) for him she sent: And when they wer in comin, they put no mistrist, They know no body there, they did what they list. Now when her fader see the abhominable Crime After he was out of his sleepe awake He thought haue cryed: but for a litle tyme It seemed him best to let his anger slake And easily within himselfe this payne to take: He made no stirring, but sat euer still Till they had done their pleasure at their owne will. And after that departed as before, Guistard to the pit, and she to her women▪ Her wofull fader would tarry there no more, But home he went in hast, and callyd for his men, Of which he sent a certain to the den For to take Guistard when he should goe hence, And so to present him to the Kings presence.
When this man come vp, anon they him arrest, With dread and pale visage for dread he shooke, All they had ruth on him both most and least, But forth in that Aray they there him tooke, They brought him to the Prince, & he did on him loke, For great wrath and anger very pale of chere, Seying vnto Guistard as ye shullen after heare: Guistard, he seyd, my loue and tender fauor, The mekenes & gentyll hert that I haue shewd to you Hath nothing deserued so great a dishonor To mee and mine as ye haue doe right now, Seing my selfe all thing, what ye did and how: That truly so I mought my worship keepe and saue, I would I were dede and beryed in my graue. This great rebuke and contum ele went euen to the hert Of Guistard that for shame cannot speake o word, Till at the last with corage forth he stert, Saying no more but this▪ Remēbreth wel my Lord, Experience I trow will to my sentence accord: The mightie power of Loue is a stronger bond Then other ye or I am able to withstond.
But all his excuse was euin samfayll, So was his mind with malice and Ire obumbrate. Alas where malice reigneth may non excuse auail, A great abusion is a ruler to be passionate. O ye princis therefore to whom of high estate, The guiding is committed of noble nations, Well ought ye take heed to rule your passions. Permit not your willfull Sensualitè, Geinst wisdoms councell for to put restreant: Be not ruld only by your voluntè, Oppressing by power him that is weak and feynt, Whereby your noble fame is hurt and attaynt: It causeth your people also in tyme of your distresse To withdraw their fauour and herty faithfullnes. To euery glosing tale giue no credence, Let not hasty cruelnes guide your iudgment: Remember well or ye define your sentence, What shalbe the end and what the hole intent: Rule your selfe discretly by good auisement: Remember the prouerbiall seying long agoo, A cruell hasty man shall neuer lack of woo:
Preeued wellby Tancredes cruell hastinesse, Committing Guistard anon to close preson, Putting him in Irons and in great distresse, As a traytor guiltie of false prodicion, And afterwards alas agein all reason This innocent was do to deth so cruelly, That ech man abhorrith to here that tyranny. What man of his wit is so dull and herd, That cannot think herby of sorrow augmentatiō? The gret thought this Lady had for her Guistard Sore trobled in her sleep by fearefull vision, Her mind was set on him with such oppression, That both of wele and wo all his auenture Was shewed her in sleep by a feyned figure. I trow she see full dreadfull visions and dreamis When her loue was presoned in that wofull night, In weeping her eyne waterid like two streemis, And euer she thought Guistard stood in her sight Holding a cup of gold, with an hert al blody dight, Himselfe eke sprent with blood did her salue, Seying: Farewell Sismond, thys is my last adieu.
She thought her answere was to him anone, Alas will ye so sone make a departure, And voyd of comfort leue me thus alone? Ye shall not so dere hert: For certain I ensure, I shall but once drinke and do my besy cure To go with you euer: how so your Iourney turne Mine hert and yours shall ay togeder soiourne. And sodenly with that out of her slepe she stert As a woman from her self, she was so sore dismaid, She thought of very deth the sword went to her hert, And thus weeping by her selfe she prayed: O myrror of all women Mary she seyd, From all shame and velony my loue & me defend, And helpe that my dreme to me none pretend. All these and many mo thing is conuenturall May well be ymagined by persuation▪ But all this is feyning as dreme fantasticall, And therof mine Author makith no mencion, So that I think to make no manner digression, Encreasing any thing that is not pertinent To my first purpose or to mine entent.
Wherefore I will proceede to speake of Sismond, Which of Guistards duresse had no notice Saue only by her dreams, till after a great stound Tancrede to her chāber com as was his old guise, And she anon with reuerence did again him rise Welcoming her fader with obeysant lowlines, The which seyd vnto her as I shall expresse: Doughter Sysmond, he seys, your womanly Ap port, Your vertuous talke and carefull demenaunce, Your stedfast hert and guidance gaue me such cōfort Trusting in your hert with hole affiaunce, That ye of voluptuous Venus the lusty pleasance Without assent giuen, I meane of mariage, Would not haue take your selfe leaue for all your corage. But well I see my wit was dull and blynd, For sure I would haue demid the great occasion Shuld sooner haue dryed flaming agein kinde, Thē ye wold euer haue thought to be a mis-womā▪ For had I not seen the deed in what place & whā, Shuld neuer man haue causit me haue supposaill E re that you would so done but in your spousaill.
Remember well what hurt therefore and damage Ye did vnto your birth and blood royall, When ye like women of brothel and prostrage Toke what com to hond as the chaūce would fall: It seem is ye put no difference twixt Get & Chri∣stall: All one to you a flint and a Diamond, Peasin as good as Perles orient and round. From all womanhode you be degeneraunt, Which of worshipps souerance is euer desperous; But ye peruert all this, ye be so variaunt, Taking in steed of worship, lust voluptuous, And sikely the offence were not so grieuous Hadye taken such as had be commendable, To your noble birth or elis conuenable. But in all this region yt seemith by your choyce, Lord, knight, ne squire was none to your pleasure Of royall blood, in whome ye couth reioyce, Saue only poore Guistard, whose birth & auēture Fortune of disdain hath take no thing in cure: Which for great pouert in time of misery, Without my releife had dyed for penury.
So that my creuell deth dayly doth renew, Death? nay more then deth I may call it truly Percing my brest ay fresh, new and new, By the shamefast sword rebuke and velony, Which you haue do Sismond to all our Ancetry, Chusing such one to be my Londs inheritaunt As is by birth ignoble and poore mendicant. Wherefore I verely purpose to represse His great inhaunced pride and great presumtion Condemning for his yot in payne and duresse, Intending the law shall haue due execution, Shortly shall he die, this is the conclusion Vtterly I am determined for his great offence: But of you Sismond I giue yet no sentence. For I may resemble as in my ragious minde, A ship without anckre, lacking sterne also In stormy rage of euery furious winde, It is a thing vnstable waning to and fro, Semblable now am I one of thoo▪ My doubtfull minde is brought in perplexité, And cast fro side to side twixt iustice and pité
Furst iustice meueth me to do correction, Rewarding euery wight to their desert, Some loue, some payne with great affliction, But faderly pity so stirrith my tender hert That it sufferith mee not see nor aduert Your criminall offence, but rather doth it excuse; So that twixt both I stand a man confuse. And forth with anone he fell to weping, As a young infant sore scourged and bett, In all worldly pleasaunce reioyced he nothing Sorrow and shame so by the hert him fret, Seying nothing thus sat he still and muet: Doughter he seyd gif ye will axe mercy, To pardon your offence forsooth I am redy. But when Sismond saw how her loue Guistard In preson was intreted kept in yron strong, That fortune to her also was so cruell and hard To publish her councell that secret was so long, With gentilles and rurals it was a commen song, That euery man within the country round Spake of the vnhappy Guistard and Sismond.
Wherefore she plunged so far in pit of sorrow deep, That I trow ech hart that gentill is & tender If I shuld tel her payne wuld also mone & wepe: Full oft she wrung her fingers long and slender, Seying; all wordly pleasaunce here I surrendre: For sithence my loue Guistard is iudgid for to dy, I will doe the same, I thinke not to abye. Wherefore ô cursed Fortune with thy double chere All thy great malice wholly I defy, Setting no thing by thy deynous daungere, Thou shall vs not depart for all thine enuy, For our loue togeder shall dwell perseuerantly▪ And turnid to her fader with corage and boldnes, Seying as in this booke myne Author doth witnes: Tancrede, she seyd, Fader if I shuld ye call, Nother will I denie it, nor prey you of fauour▪ The furst it will helpe me nothing at all, Sith ye haue full knowledge of my Paramour▪ But for the second, to axe grace or succour, I will not axe no grace for that in no wise, Nor of your grace and fauour aske no benefice.
So that I knowlich plainly all mine entent, My loue is set on Guistard, & hath be many a day▪ And shalbe when my spirit and soule is went From the brotle mansion of this bodies clay: If nature would me helpe meane to puruey That I mought execute mine affection and will, Yet would I after my deth euer loue him still. And if ye thinke this Loue so great a cryme, Forsooth the cause thereof was your negligence When in youth and corage my lusty prime The brenning fire of loue with so great feruence, Persid myne hert: And yet your cruell insolence Would not me suffer for all my great payne After myne husbands deth be marryed againe. Hadye well learned the doctrine of prudence, Ye wold remember your substance materiall, I trow it should be imprinted in your aduertence, That you bene made of matter freale and carnall, Right so am I your doughter by vertue seminall; I am nother of stone yron ne brasse, But of flesh and blood more brekill than the glasse.
Altho your head be white snowid for age, Your frosty lims eke be vnweldy and cold, The hete ny extinct of your lusty corage, Right well ought ye forsooth consider & behold How hote is youth with brenning pricking mani∣fold Assayling ech man be he neuer so haute With many a fyry dart and hote brenning assaut. Aboue all thing ye shuld haue memory, Tho ye haue spent most of your lusty season In arms of knighthoode and of cheualrye, Yet shuld ye not foryet, as seemis by reason, Ease, rest, and dilicates what great incheason They giue to sterre a man to corage hote feruent, As well in crooked age as lusty Iuuent. All these occasions I had and many moo By which I meuid was so gretly desirous, Borne by Natures course of flesh and blood also, Of corage lusty young and amorous, Fosterid also in pleasaunce and metes delicious: And that that stirred most, & was my cheife motife, The experience therof sith I was a wife.
But all this is ferre fro your remembrance, Ye think not your youth which is past & goo, Ye may well resemble him in your demeanaunce Which fell into the water with others one or two, But after he was deliuerid of his care and wo Thought nothing at all where he had bin beforne, His fellows he rebukith, laughing them to scorne. And if ye haply couth rule your passions Nor set nought by their force and violence, Yet mought not my frailté geinst such occasions Make no champarty nor no great defence, My hert was not so big to make resistence: So at last woundid, at last with loues firie launce I was subdued as prisoner to Castle of Pleasaunce. Nathelesse with deuour I put my diligence All sklaunders and infamie to auoid and eschew, And fortune of her fauour gaue vs assistence Our lusty sport oft tymes for to renew▪ We thought her promise had be stedfast & true, Blandeshing vs euer with countnaunce and chere As tho the sun of pleasaunce shuld shine euer clere.
But now I see right wel shee ginneth for to change, Sith ye of all our counsell haue plainly notice, Such is false fortune, ay variant and strange: But how ye come to knowledge or in what wise My wit is rude and dull, I can it not deuise; Whether by experience or by information, By force prestigious, or some superstition. And wold God your knowlech were certain & true Not meued ne made by false suggestion, Ye wold not then your doughter thus pursue Seing that I erre in mine election Taking no sad guiding or direction▪ But let my reuell ren at the hole chaunce, I nas not so fool-hardy without deliberance. For I set not my loue ne my fatall intent Of sudden hap as a comen velayne, But with deliberation and auisement I gaue my loue to Guistard as my Souerayn, And truly to no mo, this is, certayne: Wherefore ye be to blame fader, yt semith mee, To sey my loue was to ych in like free.
As to the great repreeue also contriued, Which alder first ayen me ye obiect▪ Seing of pleasaunce my ship was ariued In a port that was ignoble and despect, I mean that Guistard was pore and deiect Hauing no part of noblesse by discent, Which maketh my fault greater after iudgment: But as in this ye follow the vnstable vulge Clacking and blasting, variant as the winde As fame the flying messenger can diuulge Their rude opinions ignorant and blinde, Seing it is a prouerbe sufficient and kinde Hee that is not borne to habundance of good But needy for pouert, is not of gentle blood. Thus by fond reasons daylie talking they erre Not thinking how fortune fro her vnstable center Plongeth downe Estats fro her wheele aferre When she list of daunger to frowne & repent her▪ But would they first weigh the originall enter Of our common birth in all our first beginning Brought forth into this world poor naked & weping,
Then should they remember who were of noblesse, Who might intitle him to the blood royall▪ They should see how Nature whith her besinesse, Brings forth her effect & wondrous gifts all, Being as in her birth to euery man egall: For as naked is a King borne as I vnderstond As is the lowist borne that neuer had house ne lond. For when our moder Eue brought forth A bell and Caine, Who couth prefer himselfe for birth or linage, Or of these two infants who couth the title clame Of gentle blood of noblesse or parage? That time no difference was twixt gentle & page, But euery one was fayn to endeuour His liuing to get with sweat and with labour. Of all this time was none bond in seruage, Was none by seruice vnder subiection, Till that the people gan to rule and rage Guiding hemselfe by will and not by reason Offending their lawes by their transgression▪ Then of right and Iustice they must bee correct Of one their soueraigne, and they to him subiect.
But he that should bee ruler and haue regency May not of right bee such as a transgressour: Agen all due order of nature is it trewly That vice shold sit aboue as gouernour: But when that vertue gentlenesse doth honour He is of right prouided soueraigne, Although his birth is poore, this is certaine. Of this wife was Moses and Gedeon also, The noble duke Iosuah of God himselfe elect, And scripture reherseth eke of many moe, Which though for their birth were poore & de∣iect, Yet were they for their vertue chosed to direct And guide the people. So shortly it is true, There is no gentleman saue only by vertue. Then fader Tancrede in all your great houshold Remember well your gentles in their gesture, The guidance eke of Guistard if you list behold, His lowly demeanance with all his hauiour, I trow yee affirme that madam nature Hath graunted more to him than many of tho Which yee call gentlemen, tho all they bee not so.
And truly I heard neuer such relation In praise and laud of Guistards noblesse, As I haue often heard by your assertion Commending his Vertues and his gentlenesse, Yet was his vertue more than the name doubtles: Hee that saith Guistard is no gentleman, Forsooth he saith vntrue and little good can. Had yee him called poore yee had not greatly erred; And yet forsooth it is great velony To bee with you a gentleman vnpreferred, Such one as tends on your seruice daly, A gentle maister bids not his man needy, And though needie pouert take fro a man riches Yet reues it not nurture nor gentlenesse. As for your doubtfull ambiguity What doome to giue of mee, or what sentence, Bee not in doubt thus nor perplexity, Dye he, I dye with cruell violence: For I was roote and cause of this offence. For thy, if you will not my death complish, These cruell honds my life shall soon finish.
For iustice knoweth with her egall ballaunce, Which rightwise iudge is vnto euery wight, My fault is more than his in ponderaunce: Why then shold not her sword mee sharply smite Sith that in my person is all the wite? Reason wold that I shold haue correction, Which was the very cause & the occasion. And if your pleasure be at my request To chaunge his mortal fait with merciful pardon, I for your finaunce giue that ye loue best, Mine owne life I meane I giue you to guerdon: For sley yee Guistard, this is the conclusion, Let your foolish hastines your doughter sley also: For if ye do it not, my selfe sone shall it doe. The prince her fader anone perceiued well Her chear nought abashed, her hert not feminine: Yet thought her not soe tigrous and cruell To procure her owne deth, and her mortall fine: Hee thought her loues feruence world decline, If the fire were not kindled ay new and new By the sight of Guistard comfort of her hew.
Wherefore Tancrede meaning his ire to complish, Sent forth his men by night so priuily To sley Guistard. Oh Tancrede thou might wish Sismond had not be borne: for her noble glory Is macculate by this thy tirrany, Commaunding the bloodie hart with violent force Furiously be rent from his dead murdered corse. Tancred hath closd this hart sprēt with blood round In a cupe of gold in stead of sepulture, And by a messenger sent it to Sismond, Which doth her diligence with busie cure Intending her owne death for to procure, Of herbes and roots to make a potion Mixt in a viole with venemous poyson. And what the bearer said shortly to expresse, Madam, he saide, your father hath you sent This woefull donatiue to your noblenesse, The thing you loued best he sends you to present, Telling you that it is his whole intent To giue you of Guistard such ioy and comforture, As ye gaue him of Sysmond. This was his pleasure.
When Sismond saw the hart closed in gold, Shee vnderstoode her soueraigne was deed: Alas now been deathes Kalenders so cold Entred this Lady, now can shee no rede, Now is she wan the flower of woman head That sometime was the mirrour of fayrenes, The orient margarite of all gentlenesse. Voyde of all comfort sat she still dismaid, Till at the last with bold hardy courage Beholding the messenger, thus to him shee said, It were ayen reason to put you in dammage Onely for the doing of your message: But for my fader I giue you in witting, Ye shall on my behalfe be are him no greeting. For he resembleth more in his wood rage A tyraunt than a prince ay thirsting for vengaūce, Which no whit couth his passion assuage, Nor all his life himselfe culd auaunce To such worship, as when his violence Let this heart be shrined in a tombe of gold, And in this only his goodnes may be told.
And when she list no lenger talke continue, Viewing the bloody hart in wofull sepulture, She gan his Exequy with pitious intune, Saying with faynt Spright; o peece so pure, Hostage of lowly lust, very port of pleasure, Cursed might he be and waried eternally Which causeth the be seene with mortalleye. Sufficient was to me and eke more pleasaunt. To view the with my minde with thy lusty sight, Of true loue ay stedfast and not variant, It is too much to see thee thus in light: But now thy course is done, thy counts are quite, Thus Fortune hath complished thy fatall fyne Buried in gold in stede of Lybitine. I trow no lack was of what should behoue To deadly faite and seruice funerall, Saue teerling teares of her that was thy loue, For weeping shold be at departing mortall: Wherefore I trow my fader at thy bane fatall Hath sent thee to my chamber of full remembrance That I shuld bewail thy dethper soluing al obseruāc.
And I shall fulfill with my power and might All thing requisite to thy mortuarye: And after all is done by custom and right I shall yeild my selfe to death tributarie, Suing thy fearefull trace: for sooth I shal not tary, But among other in deathes wofull daunce, Following next thy hond as is my fatall chaunce. In whose felowship, or whose comitiue, Might I better passe that painefull iourney, Than in his whom I loued most on liue? And also he tarryeth for me I dare well say: Wherefore sith his partner was alway Of pleasure; I shall take part of his payne, Death shall not vs disseuer thus in twayne. And anon with that her chere she gan to turne, Her eyne in weping ran like showrs ofrayne, Till she had wash'd the hart filling the vrne By the stilling water of her eyne twaine: And after she had ceas'd weeping againe Beholding the hart againe with deadly chere, With sobbing voice she saide as ye shall here.
O ioyfull hart, ô amiable mirrour! Now lacks there nought required of duty Vnto deadly fine and funerall honour Saue only this that I might follow thee. But for it seemith that death disdaineth mee, I shall therefore my selfe with violent force Disseuer my spirit fro his wofull corse. Alas my wofull penne sorroweth to write, That lamentable end of this Tragedy, Who couth without weeping this matter indite, To se so faire a creature dy so wretchedly, Of beauty surmounting and well of curtesy? Shee tooke alas the viole with the potion, That she had made afore, & dranke vp the poyson. After she had dronke that pestiferous drought. Desunt nonnulla.
So came he in with pale affrighted chere, Saying sweete Sismond be of good sembland, If ye thus mourne it will bring mee to dispaire: Thus he supposed to loose her of her band With his wordes of cōfort, but death was at hand Crampesing her limes, and gone was her sight, Yet she answered againe her fader as she might, And saide, Tancrede bestow better, if thou can, Thy tears, for they stand mee in no effect: Thou resemblest him that first slew the man, And after him repenting sore bewept: Had it not be better him to haue kept Thy sorrowfull doughter with ioy then liuing At hir owne pleasure secretly a man louing, Than to see by thy cruell execution Her hard death to thine endles languor? The which death shall bee a direction, Giuing open knowledge of this error The which was secret, but now the rumor Shall make the thing which was not fully knowen Through all the wide world to bee ouer sowen.
And in so much shee might no lenger speake Nor throwes of death no lenger would delay, She holds the cup till her hart gan to breake, Yelding vp her spirit to God euer and aye▪ There was but Alas, Alas and welaway, Some wept & cryed and some fell in sownd, It was a piteous sight and a piteous sound. The wofull fader so sory in that stound Seing his most ioy in this world ygon He made a great shrike falling to the ground, No moe wordes spake he, but dead as any stone; Thus was there griefe on griefe, & mone vpō mone. Wherefore it hath be spoken long agoe That an hasty creature wanted neuer woe. Vpon this Prince thus may be verifyed, Which was too hasty and furious certaine, Without iudgment causing the man that he dyed, Whose cruell death hath his doughter slayne, And for her death he tooke such sudden payne, He dawed neuer good day, but he was dead, And all the world wondreth at his folyhede.
Ensample of this euery wise man take What it is to be cruell in violence, And of a secret thing a wonder to make Through hasty ire wanting of prouidence: Euery man remember his owne negligence, And vice into vertue to plant or to root: For truly against loue there is no manner boot. For certes it is of true louers the guise, When their vexation is most sharpe and sore Then loue they each other in most hartie wise An hundred fold more then they did before: Youth will to youth, loue will to loue euermore, And shortly in my minde this processe to conclude, Each thing will draw to his similitude. As betwixt these louers plainely did appeare, Which were both young and in flowring age▪ For their great trouble they loued better yfeare, And passed of death the dreadfull viage: Alas the letting of their mariage Was cause of this mischeefe and their fall: Lo what it is to be agen spousall!
Wherefore that prince standeth in great perill, That to the law of wedlock nold incline▪ But as a tirant ouer feirce and fell Caused Guistard be put in mortall fine: Of whose soule if I should determine, I trust to God his faithfull intention Hath furtherd him to his saluation. For why? he thought none harme of earthly wight, But to the will of Sismond did assent, Notwithstonding that I trust to God almight Shall be to his soule none impediment; For to haue bee maried was their intent: Then recken the sorrow shee had withall And great contrition to her end finall. That as I trust she is in blesse celestiall, As of faith and troth all louers surmounting, See was a mirrour vnto women all, Example of true and stedfast loue giuing: Wherefore I beseech him that is of all thing▪ Lord and gouernour, and comfort agen bale, Graunt all louers ioy. And thus endeth my tale▪
Explicit Guistard and Sismond. FINIS.
THE NORTHREN MOTHERS BLESSING. The way of Thrift. VVritten nine yeares before the death of G. Chaucer. DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS. LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson for Robert Dexter. 1597.
The Northren Mothers Blessing. GOD wold that euery wife that wonnyth in this land Wold teach her doughter as ye shal vnderstand, As a good wife did of the North countré How her doughter should lere a good wife to bee: For lack of the moders reaching Makes the doughter of euill liuing, My leue dere child. My doughter gif thou be a wife, wisely thou werke, Looke euer thou loue God and the holy Kirke, Go to Kirke when thou may, and let for no rayne, And then shall thou fare the bet, when thou God has sayn: Full well may they thriue That seruen God in their liue, My leue dere child.
Gladly giue thou thy tithes and thine offrings both To the poore at thy gate, be thou neuer loath; Gif hem of thy good, and be not ouer hard; Seldom is that house poore there God is steward: For that is best I spende, That for Gods loue I lend. My leeue deere childe. When thou sits in the Kirke thy Bedes shalt thou bid, Therein make no iangling with friend ne sib, Laugh not to scorne no dir old ne young, Be of good bering and haue a good tongue: For after thy bering, So shall thy name spring, My leeue dere child.
Gif any man with worship desire to wed thee, Wisely him answere, scorne him not what he be, And tell it to thy friends and hide thou it nought, Sit not by him nor stād not that sin mow be wrought: For gif a slaunder be once raysed, It is not so sone stilled, My leeue dere child. What man that shall wed the fore God with a ring, Looke thou loue him best of any earthly thing, And meekly him answere and not too snatching; So may thou slake his yre and be his darling: Faire Words slaken yre, Suffer and haue thy desire, My leue dere child.
Sweete of spech be thou and of milde moode, True in word and dede, so bids our Lord God, And keepe the euer doughter fro velony and shame That men for thy doing speake the no blame: Good life ends wele, Be true euer as the stele, My leue dere child. Be of fayre sembland and of good manere, Change not thy coūtnance for ought thou can here, Ne fare not as a giglot what euer thee betyde, Laugh not too loud ne gape not too wide▪ Maydens should laugh softlye That men here not they bee. My leue dere child.
When thou goes by the gate go not too fast, Ne bridle not with thy head, ne thy shoulders cast, Be not of mony words ne sweare not to gret, All euill vices my doughter thou foryet: For gif thou haue an euill name, It will turne the to grame. My leue dere child. Goe not oft to the towne as it were a gaze Fro one house to odir for to seeke the maze, Ne go not to market thy barrell to fill, Ne vse not the Tauern thy worship to spill: For who the Tauerne vsis His thrift he refusis, My leue dere child:
Gif thou be in place where good drinke is on loft, Wheder that thou serue or thou sit softe, Mesurely take thou, and get the no blame; Gif thou be drunken it turnes the to shame. Who so loues measure and skill, He shall ofte haue his will, My leeue dere child. Go not to the wrastling, ne shoting the cock, As it were a strumpet or a giglot: Be at home doughter and thy things tend, For thine owne profit at the latter end: Mery is owne thing to see, My dere doughter I tell it thee, My leue dere child.
Acquaint the not with euery man goes by the strete, When folks thee bespeaken curtesly hem grete, Let hem not by the wey, nor by hem doe not stond, That they with velony make not thine hert bond: For all men are not tristy, Gif they speake to thee gayly, My leue dere child. Of lefe men doughter gift thou none take, But thou wote wele how sone it forsake: Men with their gifts wemen oregone Gif▪ they of herts be herd as stone: Bounden is he or shee That gifts takis securely, My leue dere child▪
In odur mens housen make thee no mastrye, Ne blame thou nothing thou sees with thine eye, Doughter I the prey bere thee so wele That all men may sey thou art true as steele: For wise men and old Sayne good name is worth gold, My leue &c. Be thou no chider ne of wordis bold, To missay thy neighburs neder young ne old, Be thou not too proud ne too enuious▪ For thing that may betyde in odir mens house: For an enuious hert Procures mickle smert, My leue &c.
Gifthy neighburs haue rich instore or tyre Therefore make thou no strife ne bren not as fire, But thanke God of goods he has thee yeuen, And so shalt thou doughter good life liuen. For oft at ease he is That loues peace I wis, My leue &c. Huswifely shall thou go on the werk-day, Pride, rest, and idlenes put hem cleane away, And after on the holyday well clad shalt thou be The haliday to worship, God will loue the, More for worship of our lord Than for pride of the world. My leue &c.
Mekill shame doughter shall that wife tyde That maken poore their husbond with their great pride: Therefore doughter be huswife good, After the wren has vaines men may let blood. For their thrift wexis thin That spend more than they win, My leue dere child. Wisely looke thy houshold thy meynye, To bitter ne to boner with hem ne bee, And looke what neede is best to be done And thereto set thy meiney sone: Before done deede Another may speede My leue &c.
Looke to thy meyny and let them not be ydell, Thy husband out, looke who does much or litell And he that does well quite him his meede And gifhe doe amisse amend thou him bidde, And gifthe work be great and the time strait Set to thy hond, and make a huswifes brayd For they will do better gifthou by them stond, The worke is soner done there as is many hond My leue &c. And looke what thy men doon, & about hem wēd, At euery deede done be at the tone end And gifthou finde any fault soone it amend, Eft will they doe the better and thou be nere hand Mikell him behoues to doe A good house that will looke to. My leue &c.
Looke all thing be well when they worke leauen, And take thy keyes to the when it is euen Looke all thing be well, and let for no shame And gifthou so do, thou gets thee the lasse blame. Trust no man bett than thy selfe Whilest thou art in thy helth: My leue &c. Borrow not too gladly, ne take not to trest But the more neede it make or the more breste Make the not rich of oder mens thing The bolder to spend the worse thriuing For at the ending Home will the borrowed thing My leue &c.
Giue thy meiney their hire at the terme-day Wheder they abiden, or els gone away Be wise euer doughter of their doing That thy friende may haue ioy of thy prouing Loose not the loue of thy frind, For a litle that thou mighst spend. My leue &c. Now haue I taught the doughter, so did my moder mee And therfore do therafter gifthou think to the Look or thou wed any mā, that he haue agood name True of hand and tongue without any blame: For better it is a childe to be vnborne, Than for vnteaching to be forlorne. My leue &c.
Sit not at euen too long at gaze with the cup For to wassell and drinke all vppe, So to bed betimes, at morne rise beliue And so may thou better learne to thriue: He that woll a good house keepe Must ofte-times breake asleepe. My leue &c. Gif it betide doughter thy friend fro the fall And god send the children that for bread will call, And thou haue mickle neede, helpe litle or none, Thou must then care and spare hard as the stone: For euill that may betide, A man before should dread, My leue &c.
Of all thing doughter looke thou thinke, Gif men wold for worship set thee on the benk Be not too statly doughter noder young ne old, Forsome folk are now pore that somtime ware gold▪ Many folk for pride After weren a naked side. My leue &c. Gifthou be a rich wife be not ouer hard Welcome thy neighbours that come the toward, Giue hem meat and drink, the more is thy meed Each bodie to his state shold giue the pore at need: For thing that may thee betide Loue well thy neighbour thee beside My leue &c.
Take heed to thy children which thou hast born And wait wel to thy doughters that they be not for∣lorne And put hem betime to their mariage And giue them of thy good when they be of age. For maydens bene louely, But they bin vntrusty. My leue &c. Gif thou loue thy children hold thou hem lowe And gif any of hem misdo banne hem not ne blow But take a good smart rod and beat hem arowe Till they cry mercy and their gilts bee know. For gif thou loue thy children wele Spare not the yard neuer a deale. My leue &c.
Now looke thou do doughter as I haue taught thee And thou shalt haue my blessing the better may thou the And euery maiden that good wife wold bee Do as I haue taught you for saint charity: And all that so will do God giue hem his blessing And send hem all heauen at her last ending. Explicit. AMEN.
THE WAY TO Thrift. LOrd God what is this worldes wele, Riches, reuell and great aray? Nothing to spare, and all day to spill, Full sone it wastes and weares awey. When plenty may no lenger paye What wight with him wold then abide? A carefull man both night and day With heauie hart his head must hide, And all is for default of grace, That God grutches ayenst our gouernaunce When measure may not medle in place▪ What is it to a man more grieuance, Than sodenly fro manhood for to fall In pride his simple purueyance There pouertie is stewardin hall: But hee that can in some season Gedder and keepe or that hee grynde In winter tyme by way of reason Hee shall not be farre behinde. For ther as measure is in mynde
Good rule may not long faile, Yet beware to bee ouer kinde For skoring in the comiter tayle; But wele and worship with welfare Mickle wastes with little winne Full soone brings a housholder bare, With large spending both out and in, Then bee aduised or thou beginne That thou haue none need to plaine Think what a state thou standest in For Pouerty is a priuie payn, And if thou haue hope of help and trist Of lords and ladies with her pleasance And yet beware of Had I wist For old enuy makes new distaunce In pride and pouerty is great penaunce And yet is danger most disease Here is a cumberrouse acquaintance When noder of hem oder please For Had I wist comes euer too late
When there lackes both lock and key, What nede is then to spare the yat When nothing is leaued in the way With a pennylesse purse for to pay How can he then his people please Many a man had a leue dye, As long to liue in such disease, A bare beard may soon bee shauen There as is none heyre about It faireth as a man that mickle wold hauen And is not else but pore and proud, But euer ready in ilke rout And lay to wed both pot and panne When the fire clean is blowne out Where shall wee go dyne than? What need is it to delue deep, There as is no seed to sowe? The pot is easie for to keep When all the fat is ouerblowe, Noder for the kyte ne for the crow.
Incumber not thine owne nest Too mickle bend will breake thy bow When the game is alder best Ensample men may see all day. Yet keep I no man to defend Hie houshold and great aray Is Lords life and Ladies game, When gladshippe growes into grame And for need must begge and borrowe, First comes pride and after shame, And from solace turnes to suddain sorrow. FINIS.
