25057 S119471 99854678 20114
GODS ARROWES, OR, Two Sermons, concerning the visitation of God by the Pestilence. Very profitable to be read at all times, but especially in the time of Gods visitation. By William Warde Minister of the word of God. Deut. 32. 23. I will spend plagues vpon them; I will bestow mine Arrowes vpon them. ❧ London, printed by HENRY BALLARD. 1607.
TO THE right VVorshipfull, Sir William Skipwith knight, and one of his Maiesties Iusti∣ces of the peace in the county of Leicester, the rich blessings of God, to his comfort in this life, and eternall saluation in the life to come. THese two ser∣mons (right worshipfull) were penned by me, at the instance of a neere friend, presently after they were preached, but (I protest) not with a purpose euer to haue had them put foorth in print.
Notwithstanding, the partie that hath them in possession, is growen so resolute, that they shall to the presse, (how vnpol∣lished soeuer) that I am com∣pelled to yeelde thereto, though against my will, because I see no remedy. Onely thus much, I haue obtained, that they may go foorth vnder your protection, to whom next vnder God, I am beholding, and from whom, to∣gether with your deceased fa∣ther, I haue receiued maynte∣nance, and vnder whom I haue spent my time by labouring in the Lords vineyard now full twenty and seuen yeeres: Per∣swading my selfe, that as you loue the Word, and the teachers
thereof, so you will vouchsafe to accept of this my litle worke, though simple, yet agreeable to the sincere word of God, not so much respecting the worke-man far vnworthy to vndergo such a waight, as in regard of him who first opened my mouth, and made me able to deliuer it to his people. And the rather for that, as the Euangelist Saint Luke did of loue, (being inspi∣red therunto by the holy Ghost) dedicate his booke to the most noble Theophilus: so I, though no way by the abundance of Gods Spirit so enabled, yet ac∣cording to that piece of a Talent giuen me of the Lord, haue out of that dutifull loue I alwayes
bare towards you, presumed to commend vnto you these abor∣tiue first fruits of my publique abours by writing, presented like the widowes mite into the treasury of your fauourable tu∣ition, to be protected from the poyson of Momus and Zoilus, and others of that viperous brood. And thus I humbly take my leaue, committing you to him who neuer leaueth his, &c. Your worships to be com∣manded in the Lord. William Ward.
Gods Arrow. The first Sermon. DEVT. Chap. 28. Verse 58. If thou wilt not keepe and doe all the wordes of this Law, that are written in this Booke; and feare this glorious and fearefull name; The Lord thy God, Verse 59. Then the Lord will make thy plagues woonderfull; and the plagues of thy seede, euen great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore diseases, and of long du∣rance. IN this booke of Deutero∣nomy is set forth the won∣derfull loue of GOD to∣wardes his church, with whome the Lorde from time to time dealt most mercifully, euen for his owne names sake, notwithstanding their manifold
rebellious, and vnthankfulnes towards him: and therefore hee did not onely bring them into the land of Canaan, de∣stroyed their enemies, gaue them their countrey, cities, and goods to possesse, but also ordeined lawes for them, both concerning his diuine worship and ser∣uice, and also for the mutuall dueties one towards another, threatning with∣all most horrible plagues and curses a∣gainst them that breake his commaun∣dements and Lawes, and promising blessings and goodnesse to them that ob∣serue and obey them. In these 2. Verses is set downe a com∣mination, or threatning of the Iudge∣ments and curses of God. Where obserue, First, against whom these Iudge∣ments  are threatned. viz. 1. The Disobedient, namely them Disobedtent. that doe not keepe and doe all the words of this Law. 2 Such as want the feare of Gods Name. Secondly, what maner of seruice  the Lord requireth for auoydance of his iudgements. viz.
1 Not onely to heare, but also to epe and doe. 2 Not to obserue and doe some rt, but all the words of the Law. Thirdly, the cause of these Iudge∣ments  threatned, and that is, The not keeping of Gods comman∣ments, which is sinne. Fourthly, the iudgments threatned. 1 Plagues. 2 Diseases. Which are aggrauated by their ad∣cts. 1 Wonderfull. 2 Great. 3 Soare. 4 Of long continuance, euen to ir posterity. Fiftly, the authour of these plagues,   Lord. First, against whom are these Iudg∣nts  threatned? Against the diso∣ient, and such as will not keepe and  all the words of this Law. It is  manner of the Lords dealing with  people to allure them to serue him,  offering his mercies and blessings porall and eternall to them that
obey his commaundements: And al to threaten iudgements, woes, curse and plagues against them that are di¦bedient: so Deut. 11. 26, 27. Behold, I before you this day a blessing and a curse. The blessing, if ye obey the commandeme Deut. 30. 15, 16, 17, 18. of the Lord your God, which I command y this day. 28 And the curse, if ye will obey the commaundements of the Lord yo God, but turne out of the way which I co¦maund you this day, &c. Reuel. 22. Bles are they that doe his commaundements, t their right may be in the tree of Life, may enter in through the gates into the (i 15 For without shall be dogges and ench¦ters, and whooremongers, and murther and Idolaters, and whosoeuer loueth or n¦keth lies. At the day of iudgement, shalbe saide to the obedient which ha serued God in this life, and made c¦science to kéepe and doe all the wordes this Lawe, Mat. 25. 34. Come ye ble of my Father, inherite the kingdome pre¦red for you, from the foundations of the wo &c. But to the disobedient, Christ Iudge shall say, Depart from me ye c¦sed into euerlasting fire, which is prepa for the Diuell, and his Angelles, verse
s the Lord then offereth mercies and essings temporall and eternall to them at are obedient to his Lawes, so hée reatneth and powreth downe venge∣ce vpon the disobedient. Reward and euenge (saieth one) are as Gods twoo te, which he setts on mans heart, to ake him better: they are as twoo poy∣s of a clocke, to make it strike; and oe to that man, who neyther the pro∣ises, nor threatnings, mercies, nor dgements of God can amend, nor ake better. In the beginning of this apter the Lorde promiseth great and mirable blessings to the obedient, and  the other side, hée threatneth woes, rses, and plagues, to the disobedient. e promiseth the obedient, that kéepe d doe all the wordes of his lawe, that ey shall be blessed in the cittie, and blessed o in the field, blessed shall be the fruite of eir bodies, the fruite of their ground, of eir cattell, &c: Blessed when they goe in, d blessed when they come out, Deu. 28. 3, 4  6, 7. Temporall blessings in this life, d eternall in the life to come; yea, no ortall mans tongue can expresse how eat the blessings of God are to the o∣obedient:
And contrarywise hee pr¦nounceth curses, plagues, and iudg¦ments to them that doe not keepe a doe all the words of his Lawe, all th curses of God shall ouertake them, con vpon them, and cleaue to them. Curse they shalbe in the towne, and in the field Dou. 28. 15, 16. 17. 18. 21. cursed shall be their basket, and their stor cursed shall be the fruit of their bodies, a the fruit of their land, &c. Cursed wh they come in, & cursed when they go out, & And Verse 21. The Lord will make t pestilence cleaue to them, vntill he haue co¦sumed them, &c. Seeing then that G promiseth such and so great blessings them that keepe and do his command¦ments, and threatneth such heauy curs to the disobedient; Let euery one ta speciall care to frame his life accordi to the Lawes and commaundements God. Woe to thee whosoeuer tho art, which makest but a mocke of t commandements of God: It were bett for thee, if thou hadest neuer beene borne, Christ sayd of Iudas. Mat. 26. or better th Mot. 16. 24. God had made thee a venemous toad, then be accursed of God, cursed in this life wi temporall plagues, with strang sickn
ses and fearefull diseases, thy children which should be blessings and comforts vnto thee▪ shall be curses vnto thee, The curse of God shall be as a garment to couer Psal. 109. 18. 19. thee, and as a girdle to put about thee, when thou girdest thy clothes to thée, thou gir∣dest Gods curse to thee, the curse of God shall enter as water into thy bowels, and as oyle into thy bones, thou shalt eate and drinke Gods curse with euery morsell of bread that thou eatest, and with euery suppe of drinke that thou drinkest; a secret curse of God shall cleaue to thee in euery thing, and af∣ter this life ended, the curse of God shall remayne with thee, and it shall bee confirmed vnto thee from Christ his owne mouth, at the resurrection, with a Goe yee cursed into euelasting fire. Psal. 50. 22. &c. Oh consider this then you that forget God, least the Lorde teare you in pieces, and there bee none to deliuer you. Psalme 50. 22. Now as the iudgements and curses of God are threatned, and shall fall vp∣pon the disobedient, namely, such as wil not keepe and do all the words of Gods Lawe: So also vppon them shall the
same plagues fall, which doe not feare the glorious and fearefull name of the Lord God, as I told you in the second place, and now in order commeth to be handled. The name of God is diuersly taken Exod. 4. 5, 6. Rom. 1. 19. Psal 20. 1. 1. Sam. 17. 45, 49. in the Scriptures, sometimes for the at∣tributes of God, as his mercy, goodnes, power, &c. Sometime for the Lord him selfe, as Gen. 12. 8. Abraham builded an Altar, and called vppon the name of the Lord. Sometime for the name of God Iehouah, and so I take it in this place. Seuit. 24. 11. This glorious and fearefull name of God is many waies prophaned, and vn∣reuerently abused amongst the wicked, whereby they draw downe the plagues and iudgements of God vppon them∣selues, but most vsually, 1 In their idle and ordinary talke. 2 In vaine swearing. 3 In false swearing to deceiue. For the first, we ought not so much as thinke of, much lesse speake of that glorious name of God, but with feare and trembling. Leuit. 19. Thou shalt not defile the name of thy God, I am the Lorde, Sap. 1. 1. Thincke reuerently of the Lorde,
and seeke him in simplicitie of heart. And in this chapter Deut. 28. 58. vnto all the curses, iudgements and plagues which the Lorde threateneth, as the curse at home, the curse abroad, the curse of sick∣nesse, of madnesse, of famine, oppressi∣on, captiuitie, &c. In the end, hée addeth this as the chiefest: These and many moe plagues the Lord will lay vpon thee, if thou doe not feare the glorious and fearefull name of the Lord, Psal. 8. O Lord our God howe excellent is thy name in all the world! The Aben Ezra. Egyptians had a custome to sweare by the head of their king, which othe who∣soeuer did not performe, might not bée redéemed from death by any ransome, bi∣cause he despised the king: how much more then ought not wée to name, or so much as once thinke of the name of our glorious God, but with feare and reue∣rence? Exodus 20. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine. As wée must take héede of the errour of the Ana∣baptists, so we must not take Gods ho∣ly name in vaine, but vse it reuerently, with feare and trembling. But it is an ordinary thing with most men, to haue the Name of God continually in theyr
mouths, when as (for the most part) they neuer thinke of him while they speake of him. How vsuall is it to say one to another, God spéede you, God be with you, God helpe you, God send you health, &c. when they haue no such thing in thought? Take heed then how at any time thou speakest of God, except thy tongue▪ and heart goe together with feare and reuerence, For as Ecclus. 23. A seruant which is often punished cannot be without some scarre, so hee that sweare:  and nameth God continually shall not bee faultlesse. And let all good children say with Dauid. Psalme 72. 18. Blessed bee the Lord God, euen the God of Israel, which onely doeth wonderfull things, and blessed be his glorious Name for euer. Againe, some doe not onely so abuse Gods glorious Name in their idle and ordinary talke, but also by vaine swea∣ring doe binde, almost euery word with an oath, whereby also they bring Gods heauie iudgements, woes, and curses vpon their owne heads, yea, some can∣not speake vnlesse they swrare: It is their Rethoricke, the vulgar poyson of the world, and it is in the mouth of eue∣ry
child, for as soone as they can speake, they are able to hurle out any oath, as if they had béene old practicioners. It is an horrible thing to see how this sinne is vsed in all companies, the old man sweareth of custome, the young man in a brauery, the childe by immitation, the Gentleman thinks his spéech not grati∣ous if hee grace it not with gracelesse oathes; the poore man sweareth for ne∣cessity, the thiefe to couer his fault, and the strumpet sweareth to deny her sin. A vaine swearer is worse then a thiefe, an harlot, or a slaunderer: the thiefe of∣ten stealeth for necessitie, the swearer stealeth Gods glory in a brauery, the harlot sinneth in the darke, the swearer openly: the slaunderer hurts his neigh∣bour, the swearer offends his heauenly Father. The souldier once pearced Christ with a speare. Iohn 19. but swea∣rers with their poysoned tongs breake vp all the wounds of Christ, and tread vnder their féet the blood of the couenant they are worse then the Deuill, who trembleth at the name of Christ, but they without feare or reuerence doe most horribly blaspheme it. A man is
knowne of what hart he is by his swea∣ring; for as the Apostle saint Peter was knowne to be of Galile, by his spéech, Mar. 14. 70. so a man (because of the a∣boundance of the heart the mouth speak∣eth) may know the children of God, the children of the world, and the children of the Diuell by their spéech. Of the first Dauid speaketh Psal. 84. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will euer praise thee. Of the second sort Iohn saith 3. 31. He that is of the earth is of the earth, and speaketh of the earth. And of the third the Prophet Esay saith, Esay 1. 21, 22. They fret themselues, and curse their Kings, and their gods. As hée is an English man that naturally speaketh English, a Spa∣niard that naturally speaketh Spanish, and a French man that naturally speak∣eth French: so they that in their vsuall spéech doe praise God, are of God: they that speake most of earthly things, are worldly and carnall men: but they that vse much swearing and cursing, are di∣uellish, because their spéech is alike. In the auntient Records of the Romans it Iohannes Beetes in preceptorio. is remembred, that a certaine adultresse hauing thrée sonnes, tolde her husband,
when she lay on her death bed, that one∣ly one of them was his, but which of them it was, she would not at any hand make knowne. At last, when the time came also that this man should departe the world, he bequeathed to his vnkno∣wen sonne all his lands and goodes, in∣treating his executors that they would vse all the best meanes they could, to know which of them thrée was his natu∣rall sonne: the matter was brought be∣fore the Iudge, who calling to minde the wise fact of king Salomon concerning the two women that contended for the liuing childe 1. Reg. 3. thought it good to make experience where Nature rested: and therefore gaue sentence, that the dead body of the father should be boun∣den vpright to a stake, and that to euery of the thrée children should be deliuered a bowe and an arrowe, and each one of them should shoot his arrow at the dead body, with promise, that he which could shoot néerest the fathers heart, and pierce deepest into his flesh, should haue land, goodes, and all. The two bastardes (in whome was no sparke of naturall loue) shot earnestly at him, but the third with
reuerence refused to shoot, abhorring to doe so vnnaturall an action, and sharpe∣ly reprooued his brethren, for commit∣ting so filthy a fact, affirming that hee had rather loose all, then doe as they had done: whereuppon iudgement was gi∣uen that he was the dead mans onely and naturall sonne, and the other two but bastards, and so enioyed his fathers inheritance. Such bastards are they and no true children of God, which in their dayly talke shoote out arrowes of blasphemy at euery part of Christ his sacred body, they cannot beare any na∣turall loue to Christ that so wound him with oathes, and shoot at his heart, nay, they are Gods enemies. Psal. 139. 20. Thine enemies (O Lord) take thy Name in vaine. As the Salamander which way soeuer he goeth powreth out his poyson, which maketh the herbes to wither; so there are some, who which way soeuer they goe, doe powre out the poyson of their soules. The seruants of Antichrist haue a marke in their right hand, & the Reuel. 13. 16. seruants of the deuill in their tongue: As the godly doe glorifie God, so these dishonour God: What hypocrisie is it
pray euery day that Gods Name ay be hallowed, and yet daily to blas∣heme it, a sonne in profession and a re∣ell in practise: But let our seasoned péech, and reuerent vsing of Gods ame witnesse with vs, and for vs, that e are the children of God, and let our ea, be yea, and our nay, nay, lest we fall nto temptation, and snares of Satan, and so in the end bring an heauy iudge∣ment vpon our selues. Thirdly, the glorious and fearefull name of the Lord God is vnreuerently abused among the wicked by their false swearing to deceiue, Heb. 6. 16. God hath appointed an oath as an end of all controuer∣sie, and a seale of the truth. But false swea∣rers take the seale of God, & counterfeit it. He that counterfeits the seale of a prince is worthy of death: then what of him that taketh the seale of Gods name to confirme a lye withall? It was a mi∣serable thing that the Iewes required not Iesus, but Barrabas, a thiefe and a murtherer: So periured persons re∣nounce Iesus Christ, & the hope of sal∣uation, the kingdome of God, and all they regard not so much the safgard of
their owne soules, as the fauour of some mortall man, and as Iudas solde Christ for thirty pence, so they renounce Christ Iesus and the kingdome of heauen for a summe of mony, or worldly commodity. This swearing falsely, to deceiue, is too common a sinne: As the Cretians were saide to be all liars, Tit. 1. 12. so for the most part, among vs, all are swear∣ers, to gaine by it. This is too vsuall a sinne in shoppes, faires, and markets, and I would God no where else. That which is so gotten, hath a fearefull curse vpon it. Maisters will teach their ser∣uants to sweare for gain, and such bring in most profite. 2. Sam. 23. When Da∣uid lusted for water of the well of Bethle∣hem, the thrée Woorthies brake into the host of the Philistims, in danger of their liues, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, and brought it to Dauid, who would not drinke thereof, but powred it out for an offering to the Lord, saying, O Lord, be it farre from me that I should doe this, Is not this the bloud of the men that went in ieoperdie of their liues? Therefore he would not drincke of it. If Dauid would not drinke of the water that was
fetched with danger of those mens liues, wilt thou eate and drinke of that which is gotten with danger of the soule of thy child, seruant, or their owne soule? Let men take héede, swearing falsly to de∣ceiue is but mad sport, whereby mens soules are endangered, but it is so com∣mon that it sheweth how few take care for their soules. It would make a mans heart quake to here how the wic∣ked, when they séeke to deceiue them with whom they deale, will sweare and take God to witnesse. 1. Samu. 28. Saul going to the witch to deceiue, put on o∣ther apparel: So men purposing to de∣ceiue, take on them the name of God as a cloke: Woe to thée then whosoeuer thou art, that so takest Gods glorious Name into thy mouth to confirme a lye withall, therby to deceiue thy neighbor, God will make thy plagues wonder∣full, great, and fearefull. Further, I obserue that as the name of God is many wayes vnreuerently abused, so the Lorde will send downe Iudgements, woes, and plagues vpon them in this life, and eternall curses in the life to come, which do not with great
feare and reuerence vse the glorious and fearefull Name of the Lord. Exod. 20. 7. The Lord will not holde him guiltlesse, that taketh his name in vaine. If all the iudges and courts on earth acquit him, God will condemne him. It is a fearefull and venerable name. Ecclus. 23. 11. He that vseth much swearing shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall neuer depart from his house. If gun-powder be stra∣wed in an house, there is danger of burning, but when there is a swearer in an house, there is the curse of God more dangerous and ready to take fire then any gun-powder, which will consume the house, and bring it to vtter ruine. Zach. 5. 1, 2. Hag. 2. 11. Ierem. 23. 10. Because of oathes the lande mourneth, swearing euer brings a iudg∣ment with it: The Law and comman∣dement of God by Moses was, Leu. 24. That the swearer should be stoned to death. 2. Reg. 19. 35. One Angel in one night destroyed in the host of Senache∣rib, one hundred fourescore & fiue thou∣sand men for this sinne of blasphemie. And not onely the iudgements and cur∣ses of God belong to this sinne in this life, but also eternall torments in the
life to come except they repent with Za∣charie the Prophet foreshewed, Zach. 5. 1, 2, 3. who in a vision from heauen saw a flying booke, the length whereof was twenty cubites, and the breadth of it ten cubites, wherein was written curses a∣gainst swearers, and that the curses should enter into their houses and con∣sume them with the tymber and stones thereof. You see how great and feare∣ful a flame a blasphemous tongue kind∣leth, Iam. 3. 5. If then God send downe such wonderful plagues on them which do not with great feare & reuerence vse his dreadful name, then (beloued) it can∣not be denied but that this present iudg∣ment of God by plague and pestilence is iustly fallen vpon our English nation: For (alas) how often, and how rashly is that fearefull & glorious Name of God blasphemed among vs? Some thinke there is no grace in their words, if they be not imbossed with damnable oaths, & notwithstanding, who trembleth at it? Nay, who almost reprooueth it? The Iewes rent their garments, Mat. 26. 65. when they heard Gods Name blasphe∣med, but who among vs sheweth any
token that he is discontented with it? If Pilate an Heathen man, who knewe Iohn 19. 7. not Gods word, was stricken with feare at the hearing of the name of the Sonne of God: No doubt Pilate shall rise vp in iudgement against many among vs, who without all feare and reuerence rende the Name of God in pieces by cursed swearing and blasphemie, and tosse that dreadfull Name of God in their mouthes, as a football is tossed too and fro on the plaine ground. Some maruell to sée Lordshippes, houses, and landes translated to strangers from the ancient owners: maruell not at it, there are many houses wherein that fearefull and terrible Name of God is seldome remembred, vnlesse it be to Gods disho∣nour, and therefore Gods vengeance doeth watch for their destruction, and a secret curse remaineth in their houses; God will make their plagues wonder∣full, and the plagues of their seed, till he haue vtterly destroyed them from off the face of the earth: Others wonder to sée this man or that suddenly stricken dumbe, and depriued of spéech, euen in time of their health: If thou wonder at
it, glorifie God in thine admiration, for it standeth with Gods iustice that wherein a man sinneth, therein he shall be punished: and therfore as to the rich glutton, Luke 16. who sometime had his choice of drinke and daintie fare, but abused it, a time came (by Gods iust iudgement) when he would haue béene glad of a droppe of water to coole his tongue: So it is a iust thing with God that they which abuse their speech by swearing and cursing (which is a gift that no creature but man hath) should in their life time be depriued of speech, and left dumbe as brute beasts, that others might sée & feare, and by their example take heed how they do vnreuerently vse Gods sacred Name. Some againe thinke it strange that God doth at one time threaten vs with sword, at another time punished vs with dearth & famine, and eftsoones with fearefull plague and pestelence, as at this present; but let them thinke it more strange that God doth not rayne fire and brimstone from heauen vpon vs, as he did vpon Sodom and Gomorrah, Gen. 19. or that the earth doeth not swallow vs vp quicke, as it
did Corah and his company, Numb. 16. 32, 33. for our beastly and blasphemous swearing, and vnreuerent trampling of Gods feareful Name vnder our féete. Take héede then whosoeuer thou art, how by thy filthy swearing, thou blo∣west at the coale of Gods curse, and kindlest the wrath of God as a fire to consume thée, and thy posterity; And as thou tenderest the glory of God, the sal∣uation of thy soule, or wouldest haue these present iudgments of God remoo∣ued, or taken away from vs, repent thée of this and other thy sinnes, that God may command his punishing Angel to stay his hand. Hitherto you haue heard how God threatneth iudgments, first, against the dissobedient, and secondly, against such as doe not feare that glorious and fear∣full Name, The Lord God. Now in the second generall place you shall heare what maner of seruice the Lord requi∣reth for the auoydance of his iudge∣ments, and that is, That we doe not on∣ly héere, but also kéepe and doe all the the words of this Law. They that would haue the splendent
beames of Gods mercies to shine vpon them, and the woes, curses, and iudge∣ments of God remooued from them, must not onely make an outward shew of hearing the Law of God, but are bound to kéepe and do all the words of this Law. For manifest proofe of which doctrine, though the Spirit of God sets downe sufficient of this in the 28. of Deuteronomy, and Leutt. 26. yet I Deut. 26. Deut. 28. will adde thereunto that in Esay 1. 19. If you consent and obey, (Hee sayeth not simply, if you heare) you shall eate of the good of the land: But if you refuse and be re∣bellious, you shall bee deuoured with the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spo∣ken it. The wicked world in the daies of Noah, no doubt heard him speaking vnto them the truth from God, but be∣cause they did not also kéepe and doe the wordes of Gods Lawe, the iudgement of God fell vpon them by a generall flood. The people of Sodoma often heard Lot, but their hearing was to their further cōdemnation, because they did not obserue and doe that they heard. The Iewes, the people of God had Prophets, and good men sent vnto
them, to call them to repentance, yea, Christ Iesus and his Apostles, but what they heard, serued but as a wit∣nesse against them, because they yéelded not obedience to that they heard, the Iudgements of God fell vpon them in most fearefull maner, and God made their plagues wonderfull, & the plagues of their séede. The wicked and repro∣bate ones may heare the worde, and talke of the worde, but the kéeping and doing of it is onely proper to the elect children of God. When the Nineuites repented, It is not sayde, Iona. 3. that God saw or respected their wordes, or outward shew, but their workes. The Iewes had good wordes ynow in their mouthes, though they wanted good workes. Ierem. 7. 4. Templum Domini, templum Domini, the temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, wee haue the temple of the Lord, and we haue Abra∣ham to our father, Matth. 3. 9. when as Matth. 3. 9. they did nothing sutable, but contrary to their wordes, much like many hypo∣crites now a dayes, who (for the most part) seale vp all their sayings, and daube vp all their doings with an In
trueth, whereas often there is no truth, neither in their wordes nor déedes. If words and outward shew would haue serued the turne, then the Pharises had Mat. 6. 5, 16. béene the onely men, for they prayed in the stréetes, disguised their faces when they fasted, and yet Christ brands them for hypocrites, Mat. 23. and he speakes Mat. 23. 13, 1 15, 23, 25. to all in generall. Matt. 7. 21. Not euery one that sayeth vnto me, Lord, Lord, shall en∣ter into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in hea∣uen. Many good workes shalbe found in hell, but good workes done in faith, goe all to heauen. They shall leaue their hearing and talking behind them, but their practising and walking, and good workes do follow them. Reuel. 14. 13. and therefore the Apostle exhorts vs 1. Pet. 1. to make our election sure by good works. We haue had the Ghospel preached a∣mongst vs now full fourty and eight yéeres, in more plentifull sort then euer heretofore, but (alas) what effect wor∣keth it among the greatest number? Sin neuer more abounded, the Gospel hath many hearers, but few followers: many talke of it, but few walke after it. Take
héede then of hypocrisie in Gods wor∣shippe and seruice, thou mayest blinde mens eyes with outward shewes of holinesse, but God seeth thine heart. We say, It is ill halting before a crée∣ple, but it is worse dessembling before God. In many places citizens and townsemen desire to haue much prea∣ching, but too few make conscience of practising: Neuer any age wherein there was more séeming and lesse be∣ing; but take heede, God looketh fur∣ther into thée then all the world besids, not onely into thy words and workes, but also euen into thy heart, whence thy words and workes doe flowe: And at the iudgement God will not giue sen∣tence according to thy outward shewe in hypocrisy, but according to the works which thou hast done. God will not examine thée how many sermons thou hast heard, but how much thou hast pra∣ctised of that thou hast heard, and thy conscience shall answere either for thée, or against thée. Moreouer, you shall see some hypocrites and dessemblers in Gods worship and seruice, sometimes more zealous in outward profession
then the children of God, talking so godly, and making it so godly as if they were some petty saints dropt downe from heauen, when as indeed, they make no conscience to kéepe and doe all the wordes of Gods Law. Some of them in outward profession almost as hotte on the spurre as Baals Priests, 1. Reg. 18. 28. who in their blind zeale cut themselues with kniues and launcers, or as the Donatistes, who about 420. yéeres after Christ, for zeale killed themselues as men not worthy to liue, and so laboured to striue for God, they stroue against God: Such wee haue some who in a blinde zeale runne vp and downe to heare the worde, as if there were a famine of the word in the lande, because (forsooth) they would séeme to bée more religious then o∣thers, but looke into their liues, and 2. Pet. 2. 17. Iude 12. you shall find many hallow trées with∣out fruite, cloudes without water, and caried about with a tempest, to whome the blacke darkenesse is reser∣ued for euer. As Dauid, a man other∣wayes zealous for Gods glorie, by his grosse sinnes of adulterie and murther
made the enemies of God to blaspheme, 2. Sam. 12. 13. So the Name of God, and the word of saluation is euill spoken of among the wicked by their meanes which are zealous in profession, but practise nothing, saue that which is naught, and by their bad example, and loosenesse of life many poore soules are endangered of their saluation, for simple men are sooner drawen to God by the good workes that they sée, then by the good words that they heare. Looke in∣to the outward face of the Church, e∣specially of the Popish séeming Church, and you shall sée Ananias renting his clothes, Mar. 14. 63. and taking on with himselfe at the hearing of such wordes as séeme to sound like blas∣phemy or heresy, with an outward zeale of Gods glory, and yet buying a bishop∣pricke for money, and who will not be bold to doe as such a one doeth? You shall sée Herod, Mar. 6. 20. hearing Iohn Baptist preach, and yet make no consci∣ence of adultery nor murther, you shall sée the Pharises, vnder a culour of holi∣nesse, Mat. 23. 14. tything mint, and comine, and curious in trifles, and
leaue waightier matters of the Lawe: you shall see some zealous hearers, but méere hypocrites, vsurers, adulterers, slaunderers, backbiters, busie bodies, crafty dealers, dessemblers with God and man, as full of malice, as a toad is full of poyson. It is our duety to talke Deut. 6. 7. of all the words of Gods Law at home and abroad, when we lie downe & when we rise vp, & to heare the word reuerent∣ly, because fayth cōmeth by hearing, and we must be begotten by the immortall Rom. 10. 17. séede of the word of God: Notwithstan∣ding, they that séeme zealous, and are but bare talkers and hearers of the word, without practising and doing all the words of Gods law, are so far from pleasing God, or pacifying his anger when it is once kindled, that they are meanes to increase his vengeance, and to bring downe more fearefull plagues, because God will not be dallyed with∣all Acts 5. 3, 9. in his worshippe and seruice; and therefore to them, who at the day of Iudgement shal say to Christ, that they Mat. 7. 22, 23. haue prophesied by his Name, and by his Name cast out Deuils, and done many great workes, he shall answere,
I neuer knew you, depart from me ye that worke iniquity: Let then the fruit∣lesse naked zeale of hypocrites in Gods worshippe and seruice serue as spurres in our sides to pricke vs forward, and make vs earnest to kéepe and doe all the words of Gods Law, that so God may be glorified in vs, and his feareful iudg∣ments remooued from vs. And let this serue as a looking glasse for all carnall gospellers, and dissembling hypocrites, which deceiue the world with shewes, and themselues with shadowes. Mat. 4. Satan combating with Christ, thought Mat. 4. 3, 6. all sure enough when he had got Scrip∣tures by the end: so many thinke they are halfe way at heauen, if they can get a Bible vnder their arme, and make an outward shew of zeale to here the word, though they shift ouer the practising of it to others, and themselues sléepe all the Sermon while: but for all their out∣ward zeale and hearing much, the curse of God shall cleaue vnto them, yea, and the greater shalbe their condemnation, if they doe not also kéepe and doe all the wordes of Gods Law. 1. Samu. 28. 14. Saul thought that Satan was Samuel,
when he came in likenesse of Samuel; so some thinke that all are Saints, that seeme in the congregation as Saints: But (alas beloued) there is many a Sa∣tan in life that seemeth a saint in shew, but maketh no conscience to kéepe and doe all the wordes of Gods Law. If then we would haue the punishing An∣gel to hold his hand, and the plagues to cease, wee must not haue Iacobs small voyce, and Esau his rough handes; wee must not be like water-men, who rowe one way, and looke another, talke this way and liue the contrary, curious in other mens liues, and carelesse in our owne: Wée must not bee like foolish proude Merchants, who make a little showe outward, but haue emptie stoorehouses within: Nor like the Pharisees, who seemed excellent men till Christ vncased them: neither must wee thinke that true Religion consi∣steth in a talkatiue shew of a mortified profession vnles wee thinke to goe to heauen only in speculation, but we must kéepe and doe the Law of God, we must be of another temper then hypocrites are: we must not double with God, nor
dissemble in his seruice. Apo. 14. 5. there should be no guile in our mouths; heart, and tongue, and hand should goe toge∣ther, Psalm. 45. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. Esay exhorting the peo∣ple to true repentance for the auoyding of Gods iudgements sayth not, Learne to speake well, to heare much, or to hide a wolfe in a shéepes skinne, or learne to cloke a bad life vnder a good profession: but hee sayeth, Esay 1. 17. Learne to doe well, apply your selues to equity. It was our Sauiours rule, Iohn 10. 25. The workes that I doe, shall testifie of mee. And this should be a rule for euery member of Christ, By their workes you shal know them. Againe, as it is our duety (for the auoyding of Gods iudgements) not on∣ly to here, but also to obserue and do the words of Gods Law: So further the Lord requireth the performing and kée∣ping not of this, or that part, but of All the words of this Law. Iam. 2. 10. Whosoe∣uer shall keepe the whole Law, and yet fai∣leth in one point, he is guiltie of all. Let vs then Clense our selues, 2. Cor. 7. 1. from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit, and growe vp vnto full holinesse in the feare of God.
For wee must bee clensed within and without. 1. Pet. 1. 15. As he which hath called you is holly, so be ye holly in all maner of conuersation. God giueth no man libertie to sinne in the least degrée, the reasons hereof are. First, because all sin  fighteth against the soule. 1. Pet. 2. 11. I beseech you as pilgrims and strangers abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soule. Euery sinne fighteth against the soule, and therefore we must abstaine from all sinne, and not sinne in the least de∣grée. Secondly, because sinne maketh  a separation betwéene God and vs. Esay 59. 2. Your iniquities haue separated be∣tweene you and your God, and your sinnes haue hid his face from you, that he will not heare. Iere. 5. 25. Your iniquities haue tur∣ned away these things, and your sinnes haue hindred good things from you. Thirdly, because euery sinne doth purchase Gods  wrath. Psal. 5. 4, 5. For thou art not a God that loueth wickednesse, neither shall euill dwell with thee. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hatest all them that worke iniquity Rom. 1. 18. The wrath of God is reueiled from heauen against al vn∣righteousnes and vngodlinesse of men, which
withhold the truth in righteousnes. Our sins do bring down Gods wrath and iudge∣ments by famine, sword, plague, & pesti∣lence and therefore if we would be deli∣uered from these iudgments which late∣ly in fearefull manner lye vpon vs, we must make conscience to kéepe and doe All the words of Gods Law. This doctrine also serueth to reproue them that are carelesse in sin, and make no bones to commit sinne euen with gréedinesse, we should pul such as it were out of the fire. Iud. 23. For sin is as dangerous to the soule as fire is to the body. Moreouer, we should auoyd all occasions of sin, and vse all good meanes to kéepe vs vndefi∣led therwith, to frequent good company, and auoyd badde, for if we be carefull to shunne such places and persons as are infected with the plague, and to vse all preseruatiues against it, then much more against sinne, which is the plague and poyson of the soule. Lastly, this serueth to condemne the sinfull shifting which some vse to make from one sinne to another: I haue béene an adulterer (will some man say) but I thanke God, I haue left that sinne, and now I am
but a little couetous, &c. But as one poyson is enough to destroy the bodie, so one sinne is sufficient to condemne the soule. We must not doe as Saul did, who being sent to destroy all the Amalekites. 1. Sam. 15. 3, 9. spared their King Agag, and the better shéepe and oxen, and the fat beasts, and the lambes, and all that was good, that they would not destroy, but all that was vile and nought worth, that they destroyed: So we must not thinke it sufficient to cast away one sinne, or a few sinnes, but we must destroy our fatte sinnes, our profi∣table sinnes, our pleasant sinnes, and all. If we would haue our land clensed from infection of plague and pestilence, we must labour to clense our selues, first, from all filthinesse of flesh and Spirit, we must kéepe and doe not this or that 1. Cor. 7. 1. part, but all the words of Gods Lawe. God giueth no man libertie to commit the least sin: and therefore as we would haue all parts glorified, so we must also first haue all parts sanctified, &c. Finis prioris concionis. Laus Deo.
The second Sermon. YOU haue heard in the former sermon. First a∣gainst whome the Lord here threatneth plagues, and Iudgements, viz. the disobedient, and them that feare not his glorious Name. And secondly, what maner of seruice he re∣quireth, for auoyding of his Iudge∣ments, namely, not onely the hearing, but also the keeping and doing of his Law, and that not of this or that part of it, but of all the words of his Law. Now commeth the third general part to bee handled, which doth shewe the cause of the iudgements of God threat∣ned, and now fallen vpon vs, & that is, sin, or the not kéeping and doing of al the wordes of Gods Law. But first let me answere one obiection which may hence arise. Some man may say, Why doeth
God threaten temporall plagues and punishments in this life, and eternall torments in the life to come against those that doe not obserue and doe all the words of his Law, whereas (Christ onely excepted) no man can, nor euer did performe and doe the whole law so perfectly and absolutly as God requi∣reth at our hands? To this I answere: The Lord requireth nothing but what we are bounden to doe, and that wee might haue done had not Adam sinned: And therefore considering the corrupti∣on of our nature, we ought to acknow∣ledge our frailtie, and to call vpon God by faithful prayer, that he would vouch∣safe by his holy Spirit to direct vs how to frame our liues according to his Law, and accept of vs in Christ and for his sake, who hath fulfilled the Law for vs. And although the best Saints of God be farre short of that perfection which the Lord requireth, yet let it bee our comfort that the Lord accepteth of our willingnesse, and desire to doe that he commandeth: So he accepted of A∣braham, Gen. 22. 10. And so also will hee Gen. 22. 10, 11 12. accept of all Abrahams children: For
though Abraham did not sacrifice his son yet his willingnesse to haue done it at Gods commandement, was accepted as if he had done it: So if thou haue a wil∣ling minde, and vnfained desire to kéepe and doe all the wordes of Gods Lawe, though thou come much too short of it, yet the Lord will accept of thy willing mind & vnfained desire to do it, as if thou haddest done it. Nehem. 1. 11. But will Nehem. 1. 11. a willing minde & vnfained desire serue the turne? Yes, If thou labour to walke in the feare of God, and desirest more faith, when thou hast not so much as thou wouldest haue: If, I say, thou desi∣rest in thine heart, not to offend God, féelest wants in thy selfe, thirstest to doe better, & féelest an inward griefe ye thou canst do no better, thy willing mind be∣ing aboue thine hability, doubtlesse God doth accept of thée as if thou hadest kept and done al ye words of his Law. 2. Cor. 2. Cor. 8. 2, 12. 8. If first there be a willing mind, it is accep∣ted according to that a man hath, and not ac∣cording to that he hath not. If a father wil∣ling to prooue the obedience of his child, should bid him goe, & fetch such a great ston, which he knew wel enough he were
not able to mooue, much lesse to carie, the child should goe and strugle with it, and finding that he could not by any meanes doe it, should returne to his fa∣ther, and tell him, Father, I haue done what I am able, and vsed all my strength, but it will not be: What fa∣ther is it, that will not accept of his chiids willing minde and endeuour, as if he had done it? So our heauenly Fa∣ther accepteth of our willing and obedi∣ent mindes, though we be not able to kéepe and doe all the words of his Law. But to our purpose, What is the cause of Gods iudgements? Sinne, for it doeth kindle the wrath of God as a fire, and brings down his iudgements. Lam. 3. 39. Man suffereth for his sin. Psal. Lam. 3. 39. Psal. 107. 34. 107. 34. A fruitfull land maketh he bar∣ren, Why? for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein. Yea, sinne is so filthy a thing before God, that it is said to defile the earth. Gene. 6. 12. God looked vpon the earth, and behold, It was corrupt, for all Gen. 6. 12. 1. Reg. 8. 35. flesh had corrupt his way vpon the earth. 2. Pet. 2. God created the Angels in singu∣lar 2. Pet. 1. 4. perfection, yet when they committed sinne against God, all his loue was tur∣ned
vengeance, he cast them downe in∣to hell, and deliuered them into chaines of darknesse to be kept vnto damnation. Gen. 1▪ 26. God created Adam and He∣uah, Gen. 1. 26, 27 placed them in paradise, subiected all creatures vnto them, ioyned them in mariage, blessed them, and performed all tokenes of loue vnto them; Adam commited but one sinne, and that by his wiues procurement, no sooner had he done it, but frendship was broken be∣twéene God and him, God cursed him, and cast him out of Paradise. Num. 20. Num. 20. 12, 24. Moses and Aaron men highly in Gods fauour, yet when as at the wildernesse of sinne they doubted of the miracle pro∣mised by God, though they repented, yet God answered them, Because you haue dishonoured me before the people, and not beleeued me, to sanctifie me in the pre∣sence of the children of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this people into the land which I haue giuen them. 2. Sam. 11. Dauid a 2. Sam. 11. 4. man after Gods owne heart committed adultery, but what came of it? though he bewayled and repented his sinne all the dayes of his life after, with many a sigh and bitter teare: yet notwithstan∣ding,
as he had brought shame vpon an other mans wife, so he saw shame vpon his own children while he liued: Ammon, one of his sonnes, cōmitted incest with his owne sister Thamar. 2. Sam. 13. 28. Absolon and other of Dauids sonnes kil∣led 2. Sam. 13. 1, 14. 2. Sam. 13. 28, 29, 32. his brother, Ammon for that filthie facte. The same Absolon, not long after droue his father Dauid out of his king∣dome, and most impudently laie with his fathers wiues, whereupon 2. Sam. 15. 7, 8. 2. Sam. 16. 21. followed horrible slaughter among the people, and sharpe battell, wherein Ab∣solon, and many thousands moe were slaine. If God so punished his déerest chil∣dren in this life for sinne, what haue we deserued which doe multiplie our transgressions, and heape one sinne vp∣pon another, how can it bee but God must néedes make our plagues won∣derfull? Nay; sinne doth not onely bring Gods iudgements in generall, but also more particularlie, it is the cause of plague, pestilence, sickenesses and bodilie diseases. Ierem. 21. 6. For Iere. 21. 6. sinne (saith the Lord) I will smite the in∣habitants of Ierusalem, and man and beast Exod. 9. 10.
shall die of a great pestilence. Exodus 9. God brought vpon Egypt botch, blayne, boile, and grieuous diseases vpon the people for their crueltie towards the Leuit. 26. 25. Israelites, and contempt of the Pro∣phets. Leuiticus 26. 25. The Lorde threatneth the sworde, sickenesse, and 2. Reg. 5. 27. pestilence vpon the people for their sins. 2. Reg. 5. 27. Gehesie was plagued with the leprosie of Naaman the Syrian, Psal. 38. 3. for his couetousnesse and bribery. Psal. 38. 3. Dauid confesseth that Gods hand was heauie vpon him for his sinne, and that hee had no rest in his bones by reason of his iniquities. Iohn 5. 14. Christ hauing healed him that Ioh. 5. 14. was diseased thirtie and eight yeeres willed him to sinne no more, least a worse thing happened vnto him: Signifying, that the cause of his sickenesse was his sinne. Let vs not impute this present heauie Iudge∣ment of God vpon vs to any secon∣darie causes, but let vs acknowledge our sinnes to bee the cause of it. Let vs say with Iosephs brethren, Genesis Gen. 42. 21, 2 42. 21. Wee haue sinned, and therefore this trouble is come vppon vs. And let
euery one looke into himselfe, and say, as Micha. 7. 9. It is my sinne that hath procu∣red Micah 7. 9. this. Some say, It is Londons sinnes that hath brought this iudgement vpon them and vs: I say, not they onely, but we as well as they haue sinned, and deserued this and worse then this, and except we repent we shall all likewise perish. There is no sect nor sort of peo∣ple Luc. 13. 2. can excuse themselues: Looke a∣mongst men of worth and wealth, and you shal find many of them contemners of the word, giuen to oppression, prodi∣galitie. 2. Tit. 3. 4. Louers of pleasures Tit. 3. 4. more then louers of God. Looke into the Cleargie, and you shal sée some care∣lesse, some idle, some ignorant. Many Lawiers, more respecting gaiue then Iustice, mayntaining the falsest cause for money, and promising the poore cly∣ents that all shall be well for them, till they haue emptied their purses of coyne and themselues of honestie. Artificers, tradsemen, buyers, and sellers, what is more common among them then fraud, and deceipt, swearing, lying, and for∣swearing, & setting conscience behind the doore, In a word, sinne so aboundeth a∣mong
all sorts of people that Ionas was Ionah. 1. 8, 12. neuer better knowen to be the cause of the tempest, then sinne is knowen to be the occasion of this present iudgement of God vpon vs. If then we would haue Gods wrath pacified, and his plagues turned away from vs, we must first turne from our sinnes, and make conscience to keepe and do all the words of Gods law, els God will not haue done with vs yet, Lam. 3. 40. we must euery one of vs, search and try our owne waies and condemne our selues guiltie of sinne, and be truely conuerted vnto 1. Cor. 11. God, which if we doe, then, Psal. 91. 7. Psal. 91. 7. A thousand shall fall beside vs, and ten thousand on our right hand, but it shall not come nie vs. And thus much con∣cerning the generall cause of this heauie Iudgements of God. The Scriptures doe also mention certaine particular sinnes, for which God threatneth & inflicteth the plague and pestilence vpon the people. And first, I find that the want of worship∣ping and seruing of God is one speciall sinne that bringeth his fearefull iudge∣ment. Exod. 5. 3. Moses and Aaron came Exod. 5. 3.
to Pharao, and required that the people might goe three daies iourney into the wildernesse, and sacrifice to God, least he brought the pestilence or sword. If want of worshiping and seruing of God be one cause of the pestilence, then such prophane wretches amongst vs as had rather doe any thing then come to Church to serue God, are as cartropes to drawe downe the plague vpon this our English nation. And, as the Iewes Esay 5. 18. Mat. 27. 25. cried. Mat. 27. 25. His blood be on vs, and vpon our children: So the sinne of such prophane wretches crieth for ven∣geance vpon themselues, and vpon the whole land. Let vs looke into our selues, and sée what cold and carelesse comming to Church there is no Sabbath daies: some lie in their beds, some about their ordinarie businesses, others follow va∣nities, whooring, & drunkennesse, vpon the Lords day, no threatning will pre∣uaile with some, sometimes not halfe the people in a parish present at holy ex∣ercises vpon the Sabbath day, so hard a thing it is to drawe them to the meanes of their saluatiō. Séeing then that want of worshipping and seruing of God
bringeth the plague, howsoeuer hither∣to wee haue béene negligent, let vs now be diligent in seruing of God, that so the punishing Angel may cease. Exod. 23 25. Thou shalt serue the Lord thy God, Exod. 23. 25. and he shall blesse thy bread, and thy water, and I will take all sicknesses away from the mids of thee. To serue God should bee our chiefest delight, that so we may bee made pertakers of Gods blessings, and haue his iudgements remooued from vs. Hee that serueth God, shall not Mat. 6. 33. loose his reward. It is neuer with God as it is sometimes with men, A young Seruing-man, an olde begger; But it may be our comfort, that if we serue God, hee will neuer forsake vs, nor leaue vs comfortlesse, Nay, though the Deuill turne all his power loose at vs, they shall not be able to hurt vs. Psalme 91. He will deliuer vs from the snare of the hunter, and from the Psal. 91. 3, 6, 7. noysome pestilence: Wee néede not to feare the pestilence that walketh in the darknes▪ nor the plague that destroyeth at the noone day, &c. Let euery hous∣houlder then studie to bee like Cor∣nelius, Act. 10. 2. Actes 10. 2. who serued God
with all his houshold, And say as did Ioshua, Iosh. 24. 15. I and my house will serue the Lord. And let all mistresses Iosh 24. 15. and dames say with Hester. I and my maides will doe the like. And as Ioseph Hest. 4. 16. and Mary went euery yéere to Ierusalem Luk. 2. 4. with all their houshold, to serue God: So let all godly housholders with their whole families euery Sabbath day re∣sort to the Church, to serue God: And as you would haue your owne worke and businesse done vpon the worke dayes, So be as willing, nay, a great deale more willing and forward to fur∣ther, and no way to hinder the Lordes worke on the Sabbath day. But (alas) too many now a dayes are like Pharao, who had something else for the Iewes Exod. 5. 6. to doe when they should haue serued God: So many of our housholders haue one businesse or other for themselues, and seruants when they should goe to Church: Such men are meanes to bring vngeance vpon themselues, and others, whereas on the other side they that serue God haue promises of tempo∣rall blessings in this life, and eternall in the life to come.
An other perticuler sin, and so a cause or meanes to bring the plagues is con∣tempt of the Ministers of the word, the Ministers are named in the Scriptures by name reuerent and high titles, and specially they are called Angels, and Ambassadours of God. Apo. 1. 20. 2. Cor. 5. And therefore it is not a calling Apoc. 1. 20. 2 Cor 5. 20. Gal 4. 14. to be contemned, but an excellent thing to be an Angell or Messenger of God. Christ Iesus was so called, The Angell or Mal. 3. 1. Apo. 10. 1. Apo. 14. 17. Messenger of God to the Church. Mal. 3. 1. Apo. 10. 1. The office of an Ambassa∣dour is an excellent office, euen when they are sent from an earthlie Prince; And therefore howsoeuer the Lordes Ambassadours be lightlie and slightlie estéemed of, nay contemned, and nought set by among the wicked, yet among good men, and such as feare God, and loue God, as Obadia did. 1. Reg. 18. 1. Reg. 18. 3, 4. they are, and euer haue béene highlie accounted of, at least waies for his sake whose message they bring, and vouch∣saffeth to grace them with such high titles. When Obadia saw that wicked Iesabell hated and persecuted Gods Pro∣phets, he, both with daunger, and to
his great charges, found meanes to pre∣serue them, hid them, and fed them, be∣cause they were the Lordes Ambassa∣dours: But now Obadia is dead and gone, and haue left few behind him that haue the like care, but for the most part cary a contrary disposition, and there∣fore no maruel if God make our plagus wonderfull. Few in these sinfull times haue any care to giue or consecrate their sonnes to God, as Anna did, 1. Sam. 1. 1. Sam. 1. 28. 28. and to place them in the seruice of God, because (for the most part) they want both their due mayntenance and reuerence, Nay, many thinke it a dis∣grace if their child or kinseman be a Mi∣nister, but Christ Iesus the Lord of all, Heb. 1. 2. accounted it no disgrace to bee Heb. 1. 2. of this calling, neither the Apostles of Christ, to whom though the Ministers of this age be not comparable in Spiri∣tuall graces, yet in this one thing they are the Lords Ambassadours as well as they, and therefore not so basely to be e∣stéemed of, 1. Cor. 4 1. But as the Myni∣sters of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of 1. Cor. 4. 1. God: Because we are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, Rom. 1. 16. nor of Rom. 1. 16.
his message whose Ambassadour wee are. Though a man be neuer so sim∣ple, yet if hee be admitted to be the Am∣bassadour of an earthlie Prince, euery man will reuerence him, and who dare contemne him? So though a man bee neuer so meane, poore, or beggerly, yet when he is allowed to be the Messen∣ger of Christ Iesus, and able to deli∣uer his Message in any good sort, hee ought not to be contemned, for so Christ is despised in him. If a man for his son or kinseman be preferred to prince∣ly or Lordly state as Ioseph was in E∣gypt, Gen. 41. or as Mordecai was in A∣hasuerosh his Court, Ester 6. or in fa∣uour Gen. 41. 40. Ester 6. 11. Dan. 2. 4. with the King as Daniel was, Dan. 2. 28. All men with cappe and knee will reuerence such a one, and account him happie, yea, a happie father that hath such a sonne, and happy hee that hath such a kinseman: But they see it not that it is a thousand times more happy to bee the Messenger of God: This is such an excellent cal∣ling and profession, that no man is sufficient for it, And therefore the name
of an Apostle and Byshoppe is at tribu∣ted to Christ. Heb. 3. 1. Heb. 8. 1, 2. what a blessed thing is it to be ioyned Heb. 3. 1. Heb. 8. 1, 2. with Christ in such an high preferment? If it were an honour to Iosuah to bring the people into the land of Canaan, what an excellent thing is it to conduct the people of God into the heauenly Gaanan and celestiall Ierusalem. It goeth hard with the poore Ministers of the Gospell, and Messengers of Christ, when for do∣ing good they shall reape contempt at their handes of whom they should bée much set by. Phisitions that cure the sicknesses and diseases of the bodie are honoured; and highly estéemed of. Soul∣diars that defend the land, should be much made of; but the Ministers that cure the sicknesses of mens soules, féed them with the heauenlie Manna, and arme and defend them against Satans assalts, if they be not regarded, they haue the more wrong, and the sharper wll Gods arrowes be against the vnthank∣full people. Xerxes, mourned and wept▪ when he cosidered that of so populous a armie not one should be left aliue, with¦in an hundred yeeres: But if Christ b
condemned and Barabbas deliuered, if good men be contemned, and bad men estéemed of, few good men will shortly be left in the world, and the iudgements of God for such contempt will cause vs to sorrow, mourne, and wéepe, and bring heauie iudgements vpon vs. The contempt of the Ambassadour, is the contempt of the Prince, and to despise or basely to estéeme of Gods Myni∣sters, is to despise God himselfe. Luc. 10. Mat. 10. 40. Luk. 10. 16. He that despiseth you, despiseth me, and hee that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. When the Messengers of King Dauid had their skyrts and beards cut off, 2. Sam. 10. hee tooke it as his owne re∣proch: 2. Sam. 10. 4, 7 And if the Messengers of God be contemptuously or vnreuerently recei∣ued, not man, but God is despised. When the people refused Samuel, 1. Sam. 1. Sam. 8. 7. 8. 7. God said, They haue not cast thee a∣way, but they haue cast me away. If a man should haue tolde the Iewes that they despised God, when they contemned his Prophets and Apostles, they would not haue beleeued it, but men in resisting Gods ordinance, resist God, Ezek. 3. 7. This people will not obey thee, for they will Ezek. 3. 7.
not obey me. This is perpetuall, when God prepared messengers, who so con∣temneth them, contemneth and despiseth him that sent them. 1. Thess. 4. 8. It is 1. Thes. 4. 8. God that speaketh by his Ministers and Messengers. God is the cryer. Heb. 4. 7. Heb. 4. 7. To day if you will heare (his voice) not our voyce, for God speaketh by his Mini∣sters. If King Dauid was angrie when his messengers were shamefully intre∣ted and despised, then how much more will the King of glorie be prouoked to wrath, and to execute his Iudgements vpon such a people as this is, which set at naught both his message and messen∣gers, and often make more account of a minstrell then a Minister. Ier. 29. 18. I Ier. 29. 18, 19. will persecut them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence &c. Because they haue not heard my words, saith the Lord, which I sent vnto them by my seruants the Prophets, rising vp earely and sending them, but yee would not heare, sayeth the Lord. Num. 14. The people would haue Num. 14. 10, 12. stoned Moses and Aaron, but verse 12. the Lord threatned to smite them with the pestilence, and destroy them. I they deserued the plague of God tha
despised Moses and Aaron in the Mes∣sage Numb. 16. 46, 49. of the earthlie Canaan, what plagues doe they deserue which con∣temne and set them at naught which call them to the heauenly Canaan? The Mynisters of the Word were neuer lesse accounted off in any age, euerie base and badde fellowe doeth and may reuile them to their faces, and speake reproachfully of them behinde their backes, Yea, they would stone them, as they threatned Caleb and Iosuah, and dealt with Stephen if there were Acts 7. 59. no Lawes to restrayne them. And as the Iewes iested vpon the Pro∣phets of God Ieremie and Ezechiel, Iere. 20. 7. Ezek. 33. 31. Ierem. 20. 7. Ezeki. 33. 31. So many a∣mongst vs, not onely in their table-talke, but also vpon their ale-benches take pleasure to play vpon the poore Mynisters of the Gospel: But as Ham for his vnreuerent caryage Genes. Gen. 9. 22, 25. 9. 22, 25. towards his Father being Gods Mynister, was accursed in himselfe, in his posteritie, in earth, in heauen, of God and man: So the wicked that contemne and scorne the Lords Ministers are accursed them∣selues,
and a meanes also to bring downe Gods vengeance on others. And if the sinfull Sodomites were by Gods iust iudgement destroyed with fire and brimstone from heauen, and cast to condemnation, because they vex∣ed Gen. 19. 24. the righteous soule of Lot from day to day, can we deny but that this heauie Iud. 6. 7. 2. Pet. 2. 8. iudgement of God by plague and pesti∣lence is iustly and deseruedly fallen vp∣pon vs for contemning and despising the Lords Ministers? A third perticular sinne that brings the plague, is Idolatry. Ezek. 5. 11, 14. Because you haue defiled my Sanctuary, I Ezek. 5. 11, 14, 17. will make you wast and abhorred among the nations: I will send vpon thee famine, and e∣uil beasts, and they shall spoile thee, and pesti∣lence and blood shall passe through thee, and I will bring the sword vpon thee, I the Lord haue spoken it. Though Idolatry be taken out of our Churches, yet secret Idolatry is committed in many places: And besides that, whatsoeuer a man loueth as much or more then God, it is his Idole, and he committeth Idolatry therewith. 2. 2. Sam. 24. 2. 10. Sam. 24. Dauid numbred the people, &c.
To number the people was nothing, but Dauid did it in a brauery and trusted to his power, and respected not God as he should, and therefore God sent a plague to destroy them. If we put our trust in outward things, we commit I∣dolatry, and deserue the plague: But many trust more in earthly things then in the Lorde, as in riches, knowledge, power, and strength of men. If Eng∣land be true within it selfe (some say) wee néede not to feare any nation in Christendome. In déede prouision and preparation against the enemy is neces∣sary, but to séeke to God is most necessa∣ry, and to trust in strength, or other out∣ward meanes, is to commit Idolatry, and a meane to bring the iudgement of God vpon vs by plague and pestilence. Pride also is another sinne that brin∣geth  the pestilence, and maketh our plagues wonderfull. Soph. 1. 8. In the day Soph. 1. 8. of the Lords sacrifice (that is, in the day of his vengeance) hee threatneth to visit the Princes and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparell. How strangely is the fashion of our apparell altered within one thrée score or foure
score yeares, That which is in fashion this yeare is out of fashion the next. Psal. 119. 21. Psal. 119. 21. Thou hast destroyed the proud, and cursed are they that doe erre from thy commandements. Pro. 16. 18. Prou. 16. 18. Pride goeth before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. 2. Sam. 18. 9. Ab∣solon 2. Sam. 18. 9. in the pride of his heart, seeking to leape into his fathers seate, was hanged in an oke, and slayne, his ruffin-like long heare serued as an halter to hange him withall, his pride had a fall. 2. Reg. 2. Reg. 9. 30, 35, 37. 9. Iesabell, that filthie, proud, wicked Quéene, who in her pride painted her face, to make her seeme beautifull, found that pride had a fall, and her proud car∣kasse had a fall too, when being cast out at a windowe, and trampled vnder foot of horses, the dogs licked vp her blood, & eate her flesh, so as nothing was left of her but the scull of her head, her féet, and palmes of her hands. Mac. 9. 4, 7. An∣tiochus 2. Mac. 9. 4, 7, 9, 10. intending to ouerthrowe Ierusa∣lem, to spoile the Sanctuarie, and Tem∣ple of the Lord, and to kill the people of God, was for his pride, ouerthrowen in his Chariot, ryding thitherward, his belly hurst, lothsome wormes cralled
out, and at last his filthy sauour was such as his owne seruants could not a∣bide it: His pride had a fall. So Herod Actes 12. 21. in the pride of his heart, Act. 12. 21, 22, 23. putting on his royall apparell, and de∣lighting in the applause of the people, was smitten be the Angel of God, be∣cause hee gaue not glory vnto God, so that hee was eaten of wormes, and gaue vp the Ghost, his pride had a fall. In like manner our English people, e∣specially in our chiefest city, hauing vanted themselues to the height of pride haue already tasted the scourge of Gods vengeance by plague and pestilence, and haue found it true by their woefull experience, that pride will haue a fall. For (alas beloued) is there not many a proud hearted Absolon, and many an high minded Herod in England, puffed vp to such exceeding height of pride, that God must needes at last put them in minde of mortalitie. And is there not many a cursed Iesabell, that delight in nothing so much as in paynting their faces, and hiding Gods handy∣worke, spending time (which is so precious) either in sitting and deuising
how to talke with a maiestie, and iesture to deceiue them that deale with them, or practising with their looking glasses to sée if all be well without, but neuer looke into the glasse of Gods word, to sée if all be well within. If pride then goe before destruction, and bee one speciall meane to bring Gods wrath vpon a people, then must we needs confesse that the hande of Gods vengeance is iustly sealed vpon vs, especially vpon our proud sinfull citie London. Let London then repent, whom God in the height of her pride hath pulled downe, And let the whole land repent, knowing that destruction followeth pride. God made man of the dust of the earth, not of the Gen. 2. 7. fire, nor ayre, least hee should be apt to mount or aspire in his owne conceit, but of the earth which hath the lowest place. God clothed Adam and Euah in beastes skinnes: and in nought but thine owne skinne shalt thou be clothed at the day of Iudgement. Why then art thou proude, O earth and ashes! Ec∣cles. Eccles. 10. 12. 10. 12. Fiftly, Adultery and whoredome is another sinne, for which God punisheth
with plague and pestilence. Numb. 25. Numb. 25. 1, 9 1, 9. The Israelites committed whore∣dome with the daughters of Moab, and 1. Cor. 9. 8. Ios. 5. 6. there died of the plague in one day foure and twentie thousand: yea in the end, there was no moe left of those sixe hun∣dred thousand which came out of Egypt, but onely Iosua and Caleb. If the Lord made such hauocke by pestilence, among his owne people, for this sinne of whor∣dome: what should wée looke for but plagues and feareful iudgements to de∣stroy vs, who for the most part make no conscience of this sinne, but many a∣mongst vs neye after ther neighbours Ier. 5. 8. Ezek. 22. 11. wiues like féed horses, Beniamin, among the twelue sonnes of Iacob, was déerest to his father, and beloued of God, and his Tribe placed in the best of the land, Gen. 42. 38. And yet for whoredome Gen. 42. 38. Iude 19. 20. committed once with one Leuites wife, by certane priuate men among them. Iud. 29. 20. God punished the whole tribe, he made the other eleauen Tribs to warre against them, and to kill men, women, children, and their cattell, and to burne vp ther houses. If then that Tribe were so destroyed by Gods owne
appointment, and so generally plagued for whoredome comitted with one wo∣man: what plagues hath England deser∣ued wherein many are growen impu∣dent in this sinne, and some of them that are in place to see this sinne punished, are most giltie of it themselues. The Lords may say of vs as hee said of the Iewes, Ier. 5. 7. How should I spare Eng∣land? Though I haue fed them to the full, yet they commit adultery, and assemble them∣selues Ier. 5. 7. 8, 9. by companies in the harlots houses, ver. 9. Shall I not visite for these things (saith the Lord) shall not my soule be auen∣ged of such a Nation as this? The stewes in Rome are not more filthie then the secrete whoredomes in England: It ser∣ueth many in stéed of an afternoones re∣creation, and whereas heretofore this sinne hath beene committed in hugger mugger, now it walketh about in the day light, noe man is ashamed of it, nay many bragge and boast of it. A sixt particuler sinne that bringeth the pestilence is, Abuse of the Lords Sup∣per,  1. Cor. 11. 30. Because the Corinthi∣ans Cor. 11. 30. came not prepared to that Sacra∣ment, many were sicke among them,
and many died; It is very likely God sent some plague which swept them a∣way. Many when they come to the Lords supper are like the Iewes, that fasted. Esay 58. They hang downe their Esai. 58. 5. heads a day or two, and then came to their olde by as againe: They care to bring cleanly apparell to the table, but filthy and poluted soules without faith, repentance, or reconsiliation. If God so dealt with the Corinthians for the a∣buse of this Sacrament, wee néede not doubt but our carelesse comming to the supper of the Lord without preparation, without reuerent regarde, or making difference of the Lords body is one cause for which this heauy Iudgement is fal∣len vpon vs. Séeing then that these and such other like sinnes haue long cryed for vengeance from heauen vpon vs, and are iustly fallen on vs, It stands vs now vpon, if euer, to looke about vs, and to make no tarying to turne to the Lord, Ecclus 5. 7. that the Lord in mer∣cie, may spéedely turne away his wrath Ecclus. 5. 7. from vs, and shewe vs the light of his countenance, Psal. 67. 1. and be merci∣full Psal. 67. 1. vnto vs.
Now the fourth generall part of my text sheweth what these Iudgements are, which sinne doeth thus cause, and God doeth heere threaten, and they are plagues and diseases, wonderfull, great, soare, and of long durance. It is a small thing with God in his wrath for sinne either by weake meanes, or without meanes to bring fearefull and strange Iudgements vpon a people, because he Esay 1. 24. Ier. 11. 17. 20. Mal. 1. 6. 2. Reg 19 35. Ioel 2. 25▪ Ecclus 34. 28, 29, 30. Exod. 7 19. Exod. 8. 5, 17, 24. Exod 9. 3, 25. Exod. 10. 14, 15. Acts 12. 23. is the Lord of hostes, and hath all crea∣tures at his becke to execute his will, He hath Angels at his command, Nay, legions of Angels, and deuils too, hee hath men, the Sunne, Moone, starres, earth, water, ayre, fire, and all creatures for his host or army, to execute his ven∣geance: whereas the simplest, and wea∣kest of them are by his appointment, a∣ble to destroy the greatest potentates in the world, as we see in Pharao, Herod, and others. This is to our comfort, If we walke in the wayes of our God, and haue care to kéepe and do all the words of his Law, He can and will defend and deliuer vs from great dangers by his weakest creatures: he will make the verie stones at a league with vs. Iob 5. Iob 5. 23.
If the Lord of hostes be with vs, wee néede not feare what man can doe a∣gainst vs: He will frustrate all the plots and deuilish deuises of papists; and tray∣tors, and by weake meanes bring their purposes to nought, He will deliuer vs from the noysome pestilence, and com∣maund his punishing Angel to passe by vs: But if we serue not God, nor frame our selues to the kéeping and doing of his commandements, we lye open to e∣uery danger: though we be lockt vp in a castle of brasse, or conney our selues vnder the hatches with Ionas, wee can not so hide our selues frō the presence of God, but the pestilence that walketh in the darkenesse, and the swift arrow of Gods vengeance will ouertake vs, and the weakest of Gods creatures will be able to destroy vs, hee will make our plagues wonderfull, soare, and of long durance. The Lorde will make thy plagues wonderfull. Of all the visitations that God layeth vpon man, the plague is most fearefull, and vncomfortable. The Leuit. 3. 2. Num. 12. 15. leprosie was a filthy disease, but not comparable to the plague. It taketh away the precious life of man, it maketh
their garments and their goods odious. It hindreth the Minister from com∣ming to them, to giue them comfort, and it taketh away all worldly comfort too, for what a discomfort is it for men to be imprisoned in their owne houses, as children appoynted vnto death, and to be watched, and kept in at their owne doores? What a griefe is it when the husband is driuen to leaue his wife, or the wife not suffered to come to her hus∣band, children dare not come to their parents, nor parents to their children, but to be shut vp without any worldly comfort. But (were it worse then it is) our sinnes haue deserued it, they are growen to be so wonderful, great, soare, and of long continuance & durance▪ And therefore it is no maruel if God propor∣tion his iudgments to our sinnes: Nay, if we still preseuere in our wickednesse, and doe multiply our transgressions, God will not yet haue done with vs, but he will also multiply his iudgments vpon vs, and make our plagues more wonderfull, Pro. 24. There shall be none Prou. 24. 20. Leuit. 26. 18, 21, 24, 28. end of plagues to the euil man, Leuit. 26. 18. If you will not obey me, I will punish you yet
seuen times more, according to your sinnes, and seuen times more according to your sinnes, &c. If our sinnes continue, Gods Iudgements shall continue, and the Lords hand will be stretched out still agaynst vs. Esay 9. 17. As God made Esay 9. 17. Pharao his plagues wonderfull while he was hardened in his sinne, so will hee also deale with vs. Let vs then (belo∣ued) breake off the course of sinne be∣time, that God in mercie may looke vpon vs, and remooue his iudgements from vs, which are, and haue beene so wonderfull, that the best Phisitions in England can neuer shew the reasons of it, nor afford remedies for it, but are compelled to confesse, it is beyond the reach of their skill, and that it is The fin∣gar of God, Exod. 8. 19. And of such con∣tinuance Exod. 8. 19. and durance it hath bene, that many thousands haue beene consumed therewith. The plague in Dauids time continued but thrée dayes, 2. Samu. 24. 2. Sam. 24. 13, 15. but this (I thinke) hath continued now almost thrice three monethes, and yet the hand of God is stretched out still. Further, here I obserue that God doth
not threaten to bring these iudgements vpon strangers, and reprobates, but vp∣on his owne people. I will (saith hee) make Thy plagues wonderfull. God hath in all ages bene sharpe with his owne people. Consider how hee dealt with the Iewes from time to time, till at last he dispersed them: He suffered them to be in bondage, and slauery in Egypt: when he brought them thence, he puni∣shed them in the wildernesse: after∣wards in Iosuah his time, how did God giue them ouer to the vncircumcised, and so continued afflicting them, till at last he brake off his couenāt with them? He threatned sword, famine, and pesti∣lence against them, and performed it. Neuer any people tasted more plente∣ously of outward afflictions then the Iewes. Exod. 12. 37. Sixe hundred thou∣sand of them, besides children came out Exod. 12. 37. of Egypt: but for their sinnes God made hauocke of them: within the citie of Ie∣rusalem in fourteene moneths space the sword, famine, and pestilence consumed eleuen hundred thousand of them, and so lamemtable was their state, that the very enemie entring the citie, pitied
them, and commaunded that no man should be slaine, but that they should be sold, thirtie for a peny, as they had sold Christ before for thirtie pence: So that being once the people of God, they are now no people, yea, the very name of a Iew is become odious, and therefore the Prophet in the person of Ierusalem com∣playned, Lam. 1. 12. Was euer any sorrow Lam. 1. 12. like mine? The reasons why God doeth thus afflict his owne people are many. First, the people of God are tyed to o∣bedience,  and to glorifie Gods Name; but when they sinne, they make his glory and Name to be blasphemed, and their profession to be dishonoured, and therefore God punisheth them more grieuously. 2. Sam. 12. 14. So Dauid by 2. Sam. 12. 14. his sinne made the enemies of God to blaspheme. Rom. 2. 24. The Iewes are re∣prooued Ro. m 2. 24. for not kéeping the Lawe, The Name of God (saith the Apostle) is blas∣phemed among the Gentiles through you: And this also is one speciall cause wher∣fore the Lord thus punisheth vs, we are now Gods people, bounden so obedi∣ence as were the Iewes, but (alas) many among vs dishonour their profession,
and by their badde conuersation make the Gospell to bee blasphemed, and ill spoken of, and therefore he executeth his iudgements vpon vs. A second reason wherefore God so  afflicteth his deerest children is, that as he aduaunceth them highest by his mer∣cies, so if they abuse, or contemne them, it is right that he should cast them down to greatest miseries. So Capernaum Mat. 11. 23. which was lifted vp to heauen (because it had the preaching of the word, and miracles) was brought downe to hell, by corporall punishment. And the sea∣uen Churches in Asia, and those to Reuel. 1. 4. whom Saint Paul writte his Epistles, once had the glorious light of the Gos∣pell, but for their contempt and disobe∣dience their candelsticke was remoued. Neuer nation vnder heauen tasted more plenteously of Gods mercies then we, God hath exalted vs to heauen, by the preaching of his Gospell: but if we continue to abuse his great and many blessinges vpon vs, let vs take héed lest in his Iustice he cast vs downe into an hell of miseries. For if God haue so aflicted his déerest children, and his own
people, how can wee promise impu∣nitie to our selues, or perswade our selues that because wee are his peo∣ple, wee haue the word preached, and Sacraments (according to Christs Institution) administred, therefore hee will not punish vs? Nay, hée will so much the rather afflict vs. This deceiued the Iewes, Ierem. 7. Iere. 7. 4, 6, 8, 9. 4, 6, 8, 9. And let vs take heede it deceiue not vs. Let vs beware of sinne, which stirreth vp God to take vengeance: for, 1. Peter 4. 17. If iudge∣ment beginne at the house of God, what shall 1. Pet. 4. 17. the end be of them which obey not the Gos∣pell of God. Thou seest a childe of God afflicted, thy conscience can witnesse a∣gainst thée that thou hast not liued so godly a life as hee; know then that if God forbeare thee in this life, hee reser∣ueth thee for a further vengeance in the life to come. Secondly, if God haue not spared his déerest seruants, in their sinnes, wée must not spare, nor beare with them that are néere vnto vs, or déere vnto vs, but reprooue them roundly for their sinnes. And that in loue to their soules.
Let not the Minister beare with any for friendshippe or fauoure, but reprooue them, and deale faithfully with all. And let the fearefull example of Elie serue as a looking-glasse to all parentes, not to bolster their children in any bad actions, but sharpely to corect them. Ely, hear∣ing of the wickednesse of his sonnes, re∣prooued them in déed, but with too much lenitie, as good neuer a white, as neuer the better. 1. Sam. 2. 23. Why doe yee 1. Sam. 2. 23, 24. such things? for of all this people I heare euill reportes of you: doe no more my sonnes, for it is no good report that I heare, which is, that yee make the Lordes people to trespasse &c. But because he did not reproue and correct them with more seueritie, 1. Sam. 1. Sam. 4. 18. 4. 18. the iudgements of God ouertooke, him, for, being old, he fell from his seate backeward, and brake his necke, and died. We haue many Elies now a daies, who hearing and knowing of the wic∣kednesse of their children, and seruants, haue learned without booke Ely his ma∣ner of reprouing. Why doe you thus? doe no more so. But let them take héede lest the like or worse Iudgementes fall on them. As God hateth and punisheth
sinne in his owne people, and deerest seruants: so doe thou hate sinne, and condemne it, both in thy self and others. He hateth sinne so much, that if thou were as the signet of his fingar, hee would plucke thée off, if thou sin against him. A godly father will not beare with his childe in wickednesse, because hee loueth him: the husband will not smother vp his wiues faultes, but by gentle perswasions, or (if that will not serue) with sharpe reprehensions re∣proue her, because he loueth her: So God oft times aflicteth his children be∣cause he loueth them. Thirdly, whereas God doeth for the most parte, sharpely correct his owne people in this life, we ought not rashely to iudge, nor condemne those that are here most subiect to crosses and aflicti∣ons, If we sée Gods hand extraordina∣rily heauie vpon any man, let vs not therefore giue sentence vpon him that he is a badde man, or a reprobate: So Iobs frendes dealt with him, when they sawe his strong aflictions, they inferred that hee was an hypocrite, and God Iob 8. 13. Iob 15. 34. Iob 20 4, 5. punished him for his sinnes: but of all
Iobs afflictions none troubled him more then this. So Christ was accounted a badde man because hee had many Esay 53. 3. troubles: Whereas hee was without any spot of sinne, neither was there a∣ny guile found in his mouth. Let vs not then iudge hardly of those that are afflicted, because God will so trie his deerest children; and by many tri∣bulations we must enter into eternall Ioy: We may not looke to goe to hea∣uen on a fether-bedde, but if wee see a notorious badde man afflicted, then we may say, such a man is punished for his sinnes. Lastly, I note that God doeth here threaten to punish disobedience and prophanation of his name euen in a mans posterity. I will make (sayth hee) thy plagues wonderfull, and the plagues of thy seede. The Iewes for their disobe∣dience and contempt of Gods Lawe, did not onely feele and finde in them∣selues the iudgements of God, but al∣so their posterity smarted for it: It was the cause of the ouerthrowe of Ierusa∣lem, and that so many thousands (as I haue shewed you) perished there¦with
sword, famine, plague, and pesti∣lence: It was the cause of the Iewes captiuitie, and that their seede and po∣steritte are made vagabonds vpon the earth. Genes. 9. 25. Cham did no more but discouer the priuie parts of his fa∣ther, Gen. 9. 25. but for his so doing, hee was not onely accursed, but also of a free childe became a bound seruant for euer, both in himselfe, and also in his posterity. Howe much more shall they feele the iudgements of God vpon themselues and their seede, which doe not only diso∣bey Gods cōmandements, but also cast away the feare of his glorious Name, which ought not once to bee spoken of, nor so much as thought vpon, but with reuerence? Iosh. 9. 15. When Ioshuah Ios. 9. 15. 2. Sam. 21. 1. and the Princes of Israel had made a faithfull oath to the Gibeonites, Saul afterward violated it, Almighty God in the dayes of Dauid punished it with three yeeres famine thoroughout Isra∣el, till the seuen sonnes of Saul were giuen to the Gibeonites to bee slayne. When Mataniah named by Nabu∣chodonosor Zedichiah had sworne sub∣iection 2. Reg. 24. 17. 2. reg. 25. 6, 7, 8. to the King, but afterward
forswearing himselfe, and rebelling, was periured: The Lord punished his perinry by the King of Babylon, who tooke him prisoner, slewe his sonnes, be∣fore his face, then put out both his eyes, and caryed him bound into Babylon, where he was kept in misery. Edward the fourth tooke a solemne oath at Yorke, Edward 4. to hold him contented with his owne Duke-dome, and to yeelde obedience to King Henry, but (casting away the feare of Gods glorious Name) he soone brake that oath, and God punished his periu∣ry, euen in his séed, for none of his poste∣rity came euer to possesse the Crowne. Take heede then howe thou kindlest Gods wrath: It is as a fire, it wil burne euen to a mans posterity. Though the anger of a King be as the roaring of a Lyon, Pro. 19. 12. yet thou mayest flee Prou. 19. 12. Prou. 20. 2. Mat. 2. 14, 15. Amos 9. 3. from it, as Ioseph did, Mat. 2. 14. but not from the wrath of God. Amos 9. 3. The wrath of a King may be pacified, but Gods anger may be such, that though Moses and Samuel stood before the Lord, he will not be intreated, but execute his vengeance vpon the wicked, and their vngodly posterity.
The last part sheweth vs the author of these plagues, namely, The Lord. Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderfull. Prophane and ignorant men thinke that the plague commeth by the infecti∣on of the ayre, and that they are safe e∣nough if they come not into such places as are infected. But the Spirit of God here teacheth vs that God is the author of all plagues and afflictions, he punish∣eth where he will, and whom he will: they beginne, continue, and increase by his appointment, neither doe they cease (though man and Angels do what they can) till the punishing Angel, by Gods appoyntment stay his hand. Gen. 19. 24 Gen. 19. 24 The Lord rayned fire and brimstone from heauen. When the land sinneth against me (sayeth the Lord) Ezek. 14. 13, 17, 19. Ezek. 14. 13, 17, 19. I will breake the staffe of bread, I will send famine vpon it, I will destroy man and beast forth of it, ver. 7. if I bring a sword vpon the land, verse 9. if I send a pestilence into the land. It is the Lord then you sée that rained fire and brimstone vpon Sodoma, It is he that bringeth famine, sword, and pestilence into a land. When the people were vnthanfull to God for his Deut. 32. 23.
benefits, he saith, Deut. 32. 23. I will spend plagues vpon them, I will bestow mine arrows Deut. 32. 23. vpon them. Dauid being troubled with sicknesse, though he might haue imputed it to the disorder of diet, or to other secon∣dary meanes, yet hée directeth his spée∣ches to God, and saith, Psal. 32. 4. Thine hand is heauie vpon me day and night. Psal. Psal. 32. 4. Psal. 38. 2. 38. Thine arrowes sticke fast in me, and thy hand presseth me soare. When the Lord by his Prophet Gad bad Dauid make his choice of three plagues, &c. 2. Sam. 24. We will (said he) fall into the hands of the Lord, 2. Sam. 24. 13. and not into the hands of men. The plague then is Gods hand, and his prouidence is in it: Who then dare say, that this fearefull iudgment of God is fallen vp∣on our land by chance, or other externall meanes? but it is the Lord that hath sent it: It is a blowe of his hand, and it is one of Gods Arrowes, It hittes where it pleaseth God to leuell it: God that sent it, must stay it, else it will goe thorough the land; there is no complete armour can beare off the dint of it: If thou flee into the vttermost part of the earth, thou art not free from this Ar∣row of God.
Seeing then that the plague is Gods hand, and Gods Arrow: they that are wounded with it, must beare it patient∣ly, and know that God will not afflict them further then for his owne glorie, and their good, and let them say with Iob Iob 1. 21. The Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh away, &c. And with Ely, 1. Sam. 3. Iob 1. 21. 1. Sam. 3. 1. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good. Secondly, the cōsideration hereof may worke humility in vs. It is the hand of God, let vs therfore humble our selues vnder it: let vs not murmur nor grudge, but rather be humbled, considering that whatsoeuer commeth, cōmeth worthily, our sinnes haue deserued worse. Thirdly, it serueth for our comfort, for howsoeuer the wicked thinke that sick∣nesses & diseases come by il diet, by heat, cold, &c. yet the godly do know yt God layeth them vpon them: & therefore we are to comfort our selues, considering it is the hand of our mercifull God, who correcteth vs for our good, and amend∣ment, not for our destruction. Consider moreouer the afflictions of Christ, who neuer sinned, comfort thy selfe, & know
that what thou sufferest is but as a flea-biting to that which Christ suffered for thée. And lastly, that the more God af∣flicts thee, the more he loueth thee; Let these and the like considerations com∣fort them that are afflicted. Fourthly, it serueth not only against the papists, but also against the wicked, who in sickenesse, losse of goodes, and such like, séeke to wytches, or vse secon∣darie meanes, and forget God, whose hand it is that presseth them. Such a one was Ahazia. 2. Reg. 1. 2. who in his sicknes sent to Baal-zebub the god of Ek∣non, 2. Reg. 1. 2. for the recouery of his health. But when Gods Arrow sticketh fast in thée, and when his hand presseth thée sore, thou shouldest rather suffer ten thousand deaths, then séeke remedy in such sort, It is God that hath wounded thée, and none but God can heale thee. If then we would haue the plague stayed or re∣moued, we must séeke to God for it, by earnest prayer: all meanes shall not pre∣uaile vnlesse God put to his helping hand. Let vs then labour the Lord by faithfull prayer. Let vs séeke him while
he may be found, and let vs often and euery day assemble our selues together in earnest prayer, that it would please him to command the punishing Angel to stay his hand and cease. This was Dauids practise, when there died by the hand of God in three dayes three score 2. Sam. 24. 17. 25. and tenne thousand, 2. Sam 24. Dauid consecrated himselfe to the Lorde by faithfull prayer, and so the plague cea∣sed. Let vs not then (brethren) make so light account of prayer as some a∣mong vs doe. Faithfull prayer is of more force then some thinke it is. It hath brought fire from heauen, 2. Reg. 2. Reg. 1. 10, 12 1. Reg. 18. 42. 2. Reg. 4. 3, 34. 1. 10, 12. It hath brought downe raine in time of drought. 1. Reg. 18 42. It hath raised vp the dead. 2. Reg. 4. It hath made the Sunne to stand still in the Ios. 10▪ 12, 13. 2 Reg. 20. 9, 1. Esay. 38 8. Gen. 25. 21. 1 Sam. 1. 0. Exod 1 1. 2. Reg 19 15. 2. Reg 6 18. 2. Reg. 13. . 1 Sam. 7. 8. Exod▪ 3. . mids of heauen, the space of a whole day Iosh. 10. 12, 13. and to goe backeward in his course. 2▪ Reg 20. 9, 11. It hath made the barren fruitfull. Gen▪ 25. 21. 1. Sam. 1. 10. It hath vanquished enemies. Exo. 17▪ 11. 2. Reg. 19. . Chron. 20. 3, 6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Reg. 6 18. 2. Reg 13. 4. 1. Sam. 7. 8▪ Numb. 16 22. It hath stayed the plague and pacified Gods wrath. Exod. 32. 11
Numbe. 14. 12, 13, 17. Numbers 16 48. Psal. 106. 23, 30. Whatsoeuer therfore Numb. 14 12. Numb. 16. 8. Psal. 10. 23. 30. the deuill or deuilish men can say to the disgrace of prayer, let vs practise it, and be earnest with God, who hath sent his plagues vpon vs, that in his good time hee will take them away, which God for his mer∣cies sake grant, &c. FINIS.
