3877 99848309 13394
A Defence of the Booke entitled A Cōcent of Scripture, for amendment of former Athe∣an most grosse, and Iudaique er∣rours, which our translations and notes had: Against the libel, scoffing a Scottish mist: and slaundering that the Iewes Epistle sent from Byzantian Rome, was a forged worke, and not in deed sent thence. By HVGH BROVGHTON. 1609.
A PETITION TO THE KING TO HASTEN ALLOW¦ance for Ebrew INSTITVTION of Ebrevves.
YOVR Majestie, gracious King, being moved the last winter by a letter, for allowance to open the New Testament in Ebrew by Thalmudiques, to satisfy Iewes desire, and Turkes expe¦ctation, sayd readily, as Syr Th. Overbu∣ry told, you would give 500. poundes annuitie that way: that I leaft D. Bilson and your Bishops all. Because my age fleeth, I humbly request so much sone to be performed: and I will bestow eve∣ry sicle upon Moses tabernacle: and af∣ter the first payment, never medle with your BB. Yf Banecroft can kepe him∣self so silent, as doth D. Bilson; who is a thousand times of oftener reading in E¦brew and Grek then he. But yf Bane∣craft his wit, as Phaeton, cannot rule his high seat, your highnes cannot be of¦fended, yf the thunderbolt of a pen strik all his wittes out of his brain. I shew¦ed
in my former Ebrew bookes quietnes for all christians: and so I would goe forwards; but yf Banecroft joyne with Iewes, I will sone tel your LL. of him: & yet go forward with Ebrewes, to satisfy, as hitherto the best learned in the world, & to my power, increase the honour of your Kingdome, to the glory of God, & blessing of your familie. Your Majesties most humble subject Hugh Broughton
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORDS OF HIS MAIESTIES most honorable privey Counsell. I have set forth (Right Honorable) sundry bookes, institutions for  was in our Chri∣stianity. Two, of Epistles, printed afore A. D. 1599. and the one in seaven languages. The other Arch. VVh caused to be transla∣ted. The matter of them I need not to tell. An other work is but part Ebrew: in a com∣mentary vpon Ecclesiastes: & that is transla∣ted so much as in English might be. An o∣ther
is joyned in argument▪ th  family ended in the Kinge and th Na∣thans was afflicted: even unto the afflicting of our Lord: and of Christian . That, I have translated into Greeke: and into Latin for Europe. And I think that no Ro∣mist, or Law of England wil blame any posi∣tion of it. An other is altogeather against the Iewes, for disturbing the holy story wilfully, that the redēption tyme should not appeare. That work neded not to be translated for En¦gland: because I opened every position of it to England afore. All these bookes I made for the honor of the King: that all Iewes and Gentiles bettered by them, should pray for the King and the Kinges children. And them I commend to your Lordshipes care, to be regarded according to the sage honour of his Majesties governement. Your Lordships most humble▪ Hugh Broughton.
