5000 S107731 99843427 8159
FVLFORDO ET FVLFORDAE. A SERMON Preached at Exeter, in the Cathedrall Church, the sixth day of August commonly called Iesus day 1594. in memoriall of the Cities deliuerance in the daies of King EDVVARD the sixt. Wherein is intreated of the good∣nes of God toward Man, and of the ingratitude of Man toward GOD. By IOHN CHARLDON, Doctor of Diuinitie. In which also some fewe thinges are added, then omitted through want of time. Psal. 127.1. Except the Lord keepe the Citie, the keeper watcheth in vaine. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Danter: and are to be sold by VVilliam Barley, at his shop in Gratious streete. 1595.
❧ To the worshipfull Master Thomas Fulford Esquire, loued in the truth, of all that haue known the truth, for the truths sake: Mercie, peace, and loue be multi∣plied in Iesus Christ. YOV had from mee (which you desired) the Sermon preached at Exeter in comme∣moration of the Citties deliue∣rance, or at the least you receiued the very summe & substance there∣of, which I supposed might haue contented you, and the zealous Gentle-woman your wife, with∣out further adoo: but finding you and hir greatly inclined to vulgar profit, and to make common vnto many which was then vttred vnto
fewe, that so the benefit of it might redound also vnto many: & know∣ing you both to bee such as truely, and sincerely loue and fauour the holy Gospell of Iesus Christ and the Ministers thereof, and seeing your request to stand with so good reason and Godly purpose, and that my Office and function bin∣deth mee to doo all the good I can to the Church of God, . Pe. 5, 2 and that willingly & of a ready mind (to sa∣tisfie your honest desire and chari∣table meaning) haue suffred that poore Exercise to bee published which I doe presente vnto you as a simple New-yeares-gift. Of which if any take benefit, let them first praise God, and next thanke you, that (according to the rule of Christ) will haue the meanest ta∣lents and graces of God, bee they fiue, Mat. 25 15. or two, or one; many or few, more or les, deliuered his seruants
for the worke of his seruice, to bee well and profitably employed and occupied, that gaine and increase may come thereby, Luk. 19.10. and not to bee laid vp in a napkin, or hidde in the earth to the good of none. And so beseeching the Lorde to kindle daily more and more in you and in your good wife many such holy motions of his blessed spirit, and to establish you in euery worde and good worke, I wil commend you vnto him and to his might, who is able both to fulfill whatsoeuer wā∣teth in you throgh his riches with glorie in Iesu Christ, and also of power to keepe you that you fall not, to the very day that you shall be presented faultles and without blame before the presence of his Maiestie with ioy. In the meane while, quench not the Spirit, grieue not that holy of God by whome you are sealed
to the day of redemption. I will pray alwaies for you that GOD may settle and confirme you, and make you worthy of his calling, that the name of the Lorde Iesus may be glorified in you, and you in him. Pray you also for mee: for I trust that through your praiers I shall the sooner be giuen vnto you againe. The Lorde bee with you, London the first of Ianuarie: 1594. Yours in Christ, Iohn Charldon.
AD D. THOMAM FVLFORDVM, . Non mea sunt quae nune mitto tibi, sed tua: quare, Ne tua detineam, quae tua mitto tibi. Quae mea si dicas; tua tanta modestia fulget, Vt, cum parua feram, magna dedisse putes. AD EVNDEM TOTIVS CONCIONIS . Die mihi; corda virum quae sic dementat Erinnys, Vt. spernant magni iusta colenda Dei? Si poteris, narra; quali furor incitet oestro Pectora, quae perhibent nos ratione regi? Bos possessorem nouit, cognouit asellus Praesepe et Domini (bestia tarda) sui. Fuste nimis rigido quanuis pulcetur asellus, Bosque sub immenso pondere pressa cadat, Terga grauata tamen praebent fericuda: magistri Vtráque seruitium bellua victa subit. Ast genus electum Christi, diuina propago, Dura negat tenero colla premenda iugo. Aspectant coeli fastum tellusque fatiscens, Quae nostrae testes proditionis erunt. Aethereae volucres, eluti Grus, Turtur, Hirundo, Brumales norunt annumerare dies. At nos quos docuit patris Sapientia summi, Quos nutrit, pascit, sustinet, ornat, amat.
Quos & ab immani Jethalis fauce Leonis Seruat, & hostiles dat superare manus: Nos (inquam) Domini praesagia non meditamut, Temnimus (ah) potius tradita scita Dei. Obtusasaures praecludimus Aspidis instar, Ne feriant sophiae ferrea corda soni. Vastorum solito bellamus more Gigantum, Déque sua volumus pellere sede Iouem. Nunc vbi turgescit nimiá pinguedine corpus, Obruit & nostrum nulla procella caput, Bella damus superis: ventosus pectora fastus (Obliti veteris conditionis) agi. Tu tamen (alme parens) hominum qui fecta gubernas, Suscipe quas moesto fundimus ore preces. Tu gemitus nostros, nostri suspiria cordis Exaudi solitâ pro bonitate, Deus. Pristina (chare pater) nobis peccata remitte, Postmodo dáque tuis carnea corda, pater. Nou caperis fuso vitulorum sanguine centum, Nec caperis longo thuris honore, pater. Te placare solet quoniam compunctio cordis, En: compuncta damus corda, benigne pater. Ne nos abijceas igitur quos dextra creauit, Sit nobis charitum candida iuncta cohors. Conseruet ma nos miseratio magna misellos: Inde tibi nomen mite parentis erit. AD EVNDEM. Discito (Fulford) Sit tibi Christus. Iussa Iehouae; Mens tua gestit Fronte Serena, Scire laboras? Pectore puro Quomodo possis Discito Christum. Viuere sanctè, Anchora vitae, Sanctáque tandem Prora salutis, Tecta Superni Fons bonitatis, Cernere coeli? Vita perennis Voluito libri
Dogmata sacri: Itur ad arces. Consule Christi (andide homa) Dicta magistri: Temnito mundum, Consule Christum, Dilige Christum, Is tibi pandet Dilige Christos: Voce paterna, Praemia Christi Qua ratione Sunt diuturna, Cuncta gubernes: Praemia mundi Ille docebit Sunt peritura: Te pederecto Nunc tibi multa, Claudere cursum: Nunc tibi paucae Alta Sionis Singula nostra, Moenia saluo Singula nulla: Scandere gressu: Mors truculenta, Claustra onantis, Mors fuibunda Sydera laeto Auferet vno Visere vultu. Tempore, duro Est via Christus Parta labore. Vera salutis, Omne caducum. Est via salua, Quicquid habetur, Tuta, quieta: Concidit omne: Hâc licet ire, Floris Imago. Hâc penetrare Sole micante, Coelica magni Fulua recedit. Castra parentis. Vt fugit vmbre, Haec via munda, Lubrica transit Haec via sana, Gloria secli. Haec via certa, Vna manebit Haec via pastus Arx paradisi: Diriget omnes, Caetera fumus. Hâcque beatas
AD VRSVLAM THOMAE Fulfordiconiugem Orthodoxam. Vrsula, funesto flerem tua carmina fata, Biblia si scirem te coluise parum. Ast munit contra falsi praeludia mundi, Messiae pectus pagina sancta tuum. AD EANDEM. Lesbia cantabat lasciua poemata Sappho, Vrsula coelestis clara trophęa Dei. Lesbis amica chelyn Phoebo dedit: Vrsula Phoebo, Vota feret fido pectore clausa suo. Vrsula, Sola Deo tua sit seruire voluptas, Gaudia vera putes: gloria sinis erit. AD EANDEM. Vrsula, collectos cernis flaccescere flores, Et verno nitdas deperisse rosas? Anglorum spectas marcescere lilia peste, Quae fuerant oculis lilia digna tuis? Hinc subolere potes quaenam sit gloria mundi, Quae tacitè tenues soluitur in cineres.
IT IS VVRITTEN IN the first Chapter of the Prophet Esaie. 2. & 3. Heare, O heauens, and hearken, O earth, for the Lord hath saide, I haue nourished and brought vp children, but they haue re∣belled against me. The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his Masters Crib, but Israel hath not knowne: my people hath not vnderstand. OF these you expect the in∣terpretation and meaning: but first let vs pray together that God, of whome is euery good giuing, and euery perfect gift, may giue vnto you, eares to heare his worde with frut, & may open vnto me the dore of vtterance, Coll. 4.3. to speake the misterie of Christ: that I may vtter it, as it becommeth mee; to his glorie, to your comfort, & to the increase of his church.
O Eternall GOD and mercifull father, wee thy poore seruaunts present our selues be∣fore the throne of thy Diuine Ma∣iestie, entirely desiring thy fatherly goodnes to graunt that thy worde may take such deepe roote in our hearts, that it may fructifie & bring forth an hundreth, sixtie, or thirtie folde, so much as shall seeme best to thy heauenly wisedome. And next vnto this, we pray thee (O Fa∣ther) to bee gratious and mercifull to thy whole militant Church, dis∣persed farre and wide vppon the face of this earth; especially to the two principall members of the same, 1. Tim. 2.1.2. England and Ireland. And whereas by thy holy Apostle Paul, we are willed to make praiers and supplications for all men, for Kings and Princes, and for all that are in authoritie, we humbly and hartily
pray and beseeche thee to blesse and preserue thy chosen seruaunt our dread Soueraigne Elizabeth, by thy grace, of England, France and Ireland Queene, defendresse of the true, auncient and Aposto∣like faith; and in all causes, and ouer all persons within these hir Maie∣sties Dominions, next and immedi∣atly on earth, vnder thee, supreame Gouernesse. Blesse (O Lord) we beseech thee, both hir and all hir most Honourable Councellors a∣gainst all domesticall and forren foes, that thy Church so prospe∣rously begunne, may bee builded and fullie finished according to the platforme of thy most sacred and holy word. And to this ende wee pray thee also (O Lorde) to visite, comfort and cherrish with the spi∣rit of thy grace, the Archbishops, Bishops, and all other inferior Mi∣nisters to whom thou hast assigned
the preaching of thy Law, and the charge of thy chosen, that they may bee found good Stewards o thy will, and true disposers of thy secretes; and that by their labours sanctified of thee, thy poore sheep which wander and goe astray in the vale of darkenes and shadow of death, may bee brought home to thy sheepe sold vnder one shep∣heard, thy sonne Christ, the great shepheard of the sheepe, and Bi∣shop of our soules. Wee recommende likewise to thy fauour and goodnes (O Lord) all the Rulers and Commons of this Realme; that the Rulers with courage and in a reuerent feare of thee (according to the trust com∣mitted vnto them) may carefully and truely iudge thy people at all seasons; and that the Commons in their seuerall degrees may liue and abide in Christian duety and
obedience toward their superiors, and in Godly loue and charitie one towards another. We beseech thee (O Lord) that (in like measure of thy grace) thou wilt vouchsafe to water with the dewe of thy blessing the two no∣table Vniuersities of this Lande, Oxford & Cambridge; that from age to age they may send forth Be∣zaleels and Aholiabs filled with the spirit of wisedome, vnderstanding, and knowledge to worke toge∣ther, with all the wise hearted, all maner workemanship for the ser∣uice of the Sanctuary, for the vni∣ting of the Saints, for the worke of the Ministery, and for the edifi∣cation of the body. And here (O Lord) for as much as we are all thy children, & sheep of thy pasture, we call vppon thee for all our poore and afflicted bre∣thren, which by any meanes, any
where, do grone vnder the Crosse for the testimony of thy eternall truth, that according to thy pro∣mise it woulde please thee to giue them the fulnes of consolation, pa∣tience and constancie, that they may chearfully abide whatsoeuer fierie tryall it shall please thy hea∣uenly wisdome to put them vnto; that both by their life and by their death, thy truth may be sealed, An∣tichrist that man of sinne ashamed, and the Kingdome enlarged of thy deare sonne Iesus Christ. For these and all other thy graces what so euer, which thou knowest to be needfull and necessary for vs and thy whole Church, we make our humble & hearty praier vnto thee our God and father, which art the father of mercies and the God of all comfort, according to that ma∣ner and forme which Christ thy sonne our Master in his Gospell hath taught vs. Our Father, &c.
A SERMON PREACHED AT EXETER. Esaie, 1. verse, 2. & 3. Heare, O heauens, and hearken, O earth, for the Lord hath saide, I haue nourished and brought vp children, but they haue re∣belled against me. The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his Masters Crib, but Israel hath not knowne: my people hath not vnderstand. THese words which I haue read vnto you (Men, Fathers, and Brethrē, beloued in the Lord) diuide themselues into two parts: an exclamation, and a complaint. The exclamation is conteined in the first part of this second verse, and is made not vnto men, but vnto the heauens aboue, and vnto the earth beneath. Heare O heauens, (saieth the Prophet) and hearken O earth. For because the Iewes refused to
tread the paths of the Lord, and to walke in his waies: because they were like vnto the serpent, the deafe Adder, that stoppeth his eare at the voice of the charme, rcharme he neuer so wiselie, Psal. 58.4.5. Therefore now (by the Lords appointment) hee spea∣keth vnto deafe and dumbe creatures, and saith, Heare O heauens, and hearken O earth. As if he should haue saide, because the in∣gratitude and impietie of men is such, that they will not heare, nor hearken vnto the voice of the Lorde, I will speake vnto the heauens and earth, and the heauens (though they bee farre off) shall heare, and the earth (though it be stonie) shall hearken: for the eares of men that should heare and hearken indeede are out of course. The Prophet doth not this, as though the heauens and earth did vnderstande: but to signifie and expresse the abhominable wic∣kednes & impiety of the Iewes, he speaketh vnto these insensible creatures, which did more obay the will of their Creatour, than did they whom he had blessed with reason and vnderstanding. Wherein the Prophet (as in this place) so in many other followeth the example of the true & trustlie seruant of God Moses:
who in the 4. of Deutronomie, against the Israelites, calleth heauen and earth to wit∣nes in these wordes: I call heauen and earth to record against you this daie. Meaning, that if they would defile themselues with strange Gods, that then (if men would not condemn them) the very insensible creatures of God woulde beare testimonie against them and their idolatrie. So in the 32. of the same booke, hee maketh them witnesses against them of their ingratitude, and saith: Hearken (ye heauens) and I will speak, and let the earth heare the words of my mouth. In like manner, the man of God in the first of Kings and 13 when he saw King Ieroboam to stand by the Altar in Bethel to offer incense, cried out by the commandement of the Lord, not against the Prince, or people, but against the Altar, and saide, O Altar, Altar, thus saith the Lord: 1. Kings, 13.2.5. and immediately the Altar claue asunder, and the ashes fell out from the Altar, according to the signe which the man of God had giuen by the mouth of the Lord. So that our Prophet Esaie in this place intendeth no new thing, for he taketh Moses and others for example, who were wont to doo the like: A kinde of speech then most vsuall, when as iniquitie hath got∣ten
the vpper hand, when it is grown to that fulnes of measure, that it astonieth not onely creatures sensible, but also insensible, and when the hearts of the vngodly are so hard∣ned, that they cannot be softned, be the ad∣monition neuer so gentle, or the correction neuer so fearefull. But what doth the Prophet require of the heauens and earth? verily to heare and to hearken. Heare (saith hee) O heauens, and hearken O earth. The Prophet requireth not a slack or a negligent hearing, but a dili∣gent and careful hearing, fit and conuenient for so great a cause. But wherefore would the Lord haue the Prophet thus to exclaim and crie out to the heauens and earth? Doubtles for two spe∣ciall causes. The one was, that the heauens and earth might be astonished at the ingra∣titude and rebellion of his people. So in the second of Ieremiah: because they were vn∣thankfull, because they made the Lords he∣ritage an abhomination, because the Priests taught not the people to seeke the Lorde, because the Prophets prophesied in Baal, and went after thinges that did not profite, because they had changed their glorie, euen their God which was their glorie, and who
had made them glorious aboue all other people, and to bee short, because all estates were corrupt and out of course, the Prophet inferreth hereupon, O ye heauens, be astonied at this: hee afraide and vtterlie confounded, saith the Lord, Iere. 2.12. Hereby declaring, that the very insensible creatures of God did detest and abhorre the sinne of ingrati∣tude & vnkindnes, and as it were did trem∣ble at Gods most seuere and bitter iudge∣ments against the same. The other was, that the heauens and earth (hearing the com∣plaints of the Lord against his people) might iudge and determine between him & them. So in the Prophet Micah, 6.2. the high hills and mountaines, the hard rocks, and mighty foundations of the earth are taken to witnes, and to decide betwixt him and his in this sort. Heare ye (O mountains) the Lords quar∣rell, and ye mightie foundations of the earth, for the Lord hath a quarrell against his people, and he will pleade with Israell. The summe whereof is this: that of the one part, the wickednes of the people was such and so notorious, and of the other, the cause and quarrell of the Lorde so iust, that if the case were to be decided of the heauens & earth, of the hills and mountaines, of the rocks &
mighty foundations of the earth, they wold stand all together on the Lords part against his people, they would giue sentence with him against them, and (not without astoni∣ednes) would iudge and condemne them of extreamest madnes and impietie. But alas, that the heauens and earth, that the hills and mountaines, that the rocks and mightie foundations of the earth, that such senseles creatures should condemne man∣kinde of ingratitude and vnkindnes? That they should condemne Man, the most ex∣celent creature of God, indued with reason & vnderstanding? That the heauens should be summoned to testifie against him, which are the Lords seate, and the earth to witnes against him, which is his footestoole. That dull and dumme creatures should be more prompt and readie to follow and obey the Lords will, than they his people, vnto whō he had giuen eyes to see, eares to heare, and an heart to perceiue. But so it is; they that should haue liued best in order, are found to liue most out of course. For if the worlde be considered together with the partes and portions thereof in order and as they lie, we by searching shall see, and by seeing shal confesse euerie member thereof Man only
excepted) diligentlie and truely to doe his dutie. (Saith Dauid). The heauens declare the glorie of God, and the firmament sheweth the workes of his hands. Psa. 19.1. The Sun, Moone and Starres do keepe their courses, the earth bringeth forth frute, the Sea pass∣eth not his appointed bounds, & in all other things a singular dutie and obedience to∣ward their creatour, and yet they all with∣out vnderstanding: But Man for whose sake all thinges were created, and whome God hath inriched with singular gifts, farre beyond any other of his creatures, and vn∣to whom he hath giuen the vse of his word, a lanterne vnto his feete, and a light vnto his pathes; Psa. 119.105. this Man will not be reclaimed; but walketh on still in the stif∣nes & stoutnes of heart; that now the pro∣phet is forced to appeale vnto deafe and dumme creatures, and saith; Heare, O Hea∣uens, and harken, O earth. But what? Doth the prophet make this exclamation and outcrie to the heauens & earth of his own mind? Not so; for he saith, Quoniam Dominus locutus est, for the Lorde hath saide. As who should say; I speake not this of mine owne minde, I doe not this of mine owne authoritie, I came not before I
was sent, I vtter nothing of my selfe, but what the Lord did first reueale vnto me, & which yee are bound to heare and hearken, beleeue, and obey; And therefore, Heare, O heauens, and hearken O earth. It might haue seemed more methodically done, and fitter for manner and order of teaching, if the prophet straight way vpon this his vehement exclamation and outcrie vnto the heauens and earth, had shewed thē first, what they should heare, than whome they should heare. But it was more forci∣ble and pearcing, yea and more requisite too, that the prophet shuld first shew them whome they should heare, than what they should heare. VVhen Man doth speake, the word is not so wel accepted & receiued as when the Lorde doth speake. The mes∣sage that is done from a Prince is more high∣ly esteemed, than that which cometh from a Subiect. VVhen the Prince speketh, let the Subiect hold his peace; but when the Lord speaketh, let all flesh giue eare. The Lion hath roared (saith Amos) who will not bee a fraide? the Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesie? Amos. 3.8. worthie is his Maie∣stie to bee reuerenced and obeyed of all his creatures which are in earth, whose voice
nothing, whether aboue or beneath, whe∣ther in heauen or in earth, sensible or insen∣sible ought to disobey. Heare then, O hea∣uens, and hearken, O earth: for the Lord hath saide. In which latter words, for the Lord hath saide) the Prophet commendeth vnto vs three speciall points. 1 First the excellencie and worthines of the word of God, which Dauid preferreth before gold, before much fine gold; which hee counteth sweeter than hony & the hony comb, Psal. 19.10. For it is that honye, whose sweetnes doth both delight the soule, and also temper the troubles of this life, that they become tollerable and easie. It is that fire which burneth vp and consumeth the figge leaues of vanitie, and wickednesse of mans hart whatsoeuer. It is that which drop∣eth as the rain, which stilleth as the dew, as the shower vpon the hearbes, and as the great raine vpon the grasse. Deut. 2.2. It is the sword of the spirit, Eph. 6.17. Sharper than any two edged sword, entring through, euen to the deuiding a sunder of the soule and the spirit, and of the ioyntes, and marowe. Heb. 4.12. It is that graine of mustard seede Math. 13.31. which at the first is verie small, but taking roote &
increasing in the children of God, groweth to such an height, that it reacheth the verie hart & minde of man. It is that seed, whose rootes take such deepe hold, & are so firme∣lie fastned, that it neuer ceaseth from grow∣ing, till it bring the whole man into the quiet possession of the kingdome of God. It is the forcible seede of regeneration, by which (through the working of the spirite of God) all must be regenerate and borne a new, as many as desire to bee made parta∣kers of the eternall inheritance. It is that word of truth, by which God the father, the fountaine and welspring of all goodnes, ac∣cording to his free mercie, euen of his owne will begate vs, that we should be as the first frutes of his creatures. Ia. 1.18. So wri∣teth Saint Peter in his 1. Epistle 1. Chapter & verse 23. Borne a new, not of mortall seed, but of immortall, by the word of God, who li∣ueth for euer. If I might stand vpon this point, I could bring many most excellent places of Scripture for the worthines here∣of, and for the great benefits which Salomon describeth, and which Dauid confesseth to haue receiued by the same, as namely, that hee had perished in the multitude of his sor∣rowes, if the comforts thereof had not re∣freshed
his soule. Pro. 4. Psa. 94.19. Secondarilie, the prophet in these words (For the Lord hath saide) declareth in what estimation and reuerence his word is to bee had, & the ministers thereof: that his word is to be receiued, not as the word of men, but as it is indeede the word of God, which also worketh in them that beleeue; 1. Thes. 2.13. & that the Ministers thereof are to bee estee∣med, as the Ministers of Christ, & disposers of the secrets of God: 1. Cor. 4.1. whome hee that contemneth, contemneth God him∣selfe. For as Moses saide vnto the Isralites; The Lord hath heard your murmurings which ye murmur against him: for what are we? Your murmurings are not against vs, but against the Lord. Ex. 16.8. Againe (concerning them) the Lord from his owne mouth saith vnto Samuell: they haue not cast thee away, but they haue cast mee awaie, that I shoulde not reigne ouer them. 1. Sa. 8.7. Our Sauiour to the Disciples; he that heareth you heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent mee. Lu. 10.16. And the Apostle vnto the Thes∣salonians, he that despiseth vs, despiseth not man but God, who hath sent his holie spirite a∣mong vs. 1. Thes. 4.8.
3 Thirdly, out of these wordes (For the Lord hath said) we learne; that the Prophets of God were wont, as often as they publi∣shed any thing worthy admiration, whether it were to set forth Gods iustice, or to recō∣mend his mercie) to say; This saith the Lord or the Lord hath spoken it; thereby decla∣ring that they vttred nothing of their own minde, but that which they had receiued from the mouth of the Lord. Which prac∣tise was vsuall not only with the prophets, but also with Christ and his Apostles. For Christ said vnto the Iewes: I doe nothing of my selfe, but as my Father hath taught me, so I speake these things. Io. 8.28. Againe, I haue not spoken of my selfe; but the Father which sent me, he gaue me a commandement what I should saie, & what I should speake. Io. 12.49. S. Iohn his Apostle likewise: That which we haue seene and hearde, declare wee vnto you. 1. Io. 1.3. S. Paul in like sort: That which I de∣liuered vnto you, I receiued of the Lord. 1. Co. 11, 23, So in his Epistle to the Romanes (in∣treating of the manner and order of Iusti∣fication) he putteth this queston: for what saieth the scripture. Rom. 4.3. And in sundry other places, when hee laboureth to proue what he had saide, he citeth the Scriptures;
giuen by inspiration of God, & therefore pro∣fitable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God, may bee perfect and prepared vnto euerie good worke. 2. Tim. 3.16. VVhich diuine and heauenly practise of the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, would God the Papists of our daies: would once endeuour to imitate and followe. But they (still like vnto their forefathers) plun∣ged with them in the bottomles pit of ig∣norance, or rather giuen in the haughtines and mallice of hart to deceiue, preferre the Popes holines before the Scriptures: and the Scriptures which our Sauiour Christ vsed and confirmed with so manie miracles, and at last sealed vpp with the effusion of his precious blood; which came by inspiration of God; 2. Tim. 3.19. which the Prophets, Apostles, & Fathers (as often as was need∣full) alleged for testimonie and proofe these men haue vsed, and yet vse to call a bare, dumme, vnprofitable, and deade Letter, They tell vs not what the Lorde hath saide, but what men haue saide, as Pardoners, Priests, Friers, and Popes them selues; as Alexander, Gregorie, Iohn, Clement, and others like.
They note vnto vs what Counsells haue decreed, what custome hath confirmed, and what the Pope his vnlawfull soueraignetie hath established; which seemeth to vs all one, as if he had said, The Scriptures are to no purpose; or as good as nothing. Of which opinion was Cardinall Hosius: who in his booke. De expresso Ʋerbo Dei, Fol. 242. in lit. F. writeth thus: Ʋanus est labor qui scrip∣turis impenditur. It is but lost labour that is spent in the scriptures. Nos Dei de caelo sen∣tentiam potius expectabimus: VVee will ra∣ther expect Gods pleasure from heauen. Scriptura enim creatura est, & egenum quod∣dam elementum. For the Scripture is a crea∣ture, and a certaine needy element. And in conclusion he pronounceth Sentence defi∣nitiue in this wise: in Epilogo ad Sigismun∣dum regem Poloniae. Quod Ecclesia docet, ex∣pressum Dei verbum est: quod contra sensum, et consensum Ecclesiae docetur, expressum Di∣aboli verbum est. That which the Church teacheth (by the Church I trow, meaning the Pope and his Cardinalls) is the expresse worde of God: what is taught against the meaning and consent of the Church, is the expresse word of the Deuil. And long be∣fore him Guido (editus, An. 1495.) hee
which compiled that sottish booke, Mani∣pulus curatorum, (to iustifie the whole mat∣ter & stuffe of Confirmation) putteth this downe for a Maxime & infallable truth: In Tract. 3.1. Par. 2. de mat. confir. Licet non inueniatur in canonicis epistolis Diui Petri, tamen Dominus Papa habet in decretis Ro∣manae ecclesiae &c. That though it bee not found in the canonicall Epistles of S. Peter; yet our Lord the Pope hath it in the decrees of the Church of Rome; & this mounteth farre aboue and beyond all other authoritie whatsoeuer. Thus Christ must Surrender to Beliall; the Spouse must giue place to Babilon: Truth to falsehood, and the writ∣ten worde to vnwritten verities: humane traditions must be hote and liuelie letters, and the scriptures, cold & dead Elements; if wee hunger, our meate must bee chaffe in steed of wheate; and if we call for drinke, it must come from their broken and puddle∣pits, full of mire and filth, Ier. 2.13. which neither haue nor are able to hold the water of power to refreshe the withered soule of man: for the veines of the fresh and cleare springing waters they haue stopped vp: that by this drift, the sayings both of Ieremy and Esaie, verified in the Iewes, as well pore
as rich, haue beene brought on vs. The Elders of the Iewes (saith Ieremie) sent their little ones to the wells, and they finding no wa∣ter, with shame and confusion returned with their vessels emptie. The poore and the needye (saith Esaie. 41.17.) sought water, but no where found they any: their tongue was euen withered with thirst. Euen so these men, by breaking in peeces the pipes and conduits, and by damming and choaking the foun∣taines of liuing waters with dirte and mire, haue brought the people of God into a pit∣tifull thirst, and this was a misery and a rufull state: we haue felt it, let vs beware. We are counselled, if we will follow counsell, and we are warned, if we will take warning, to beware of such deceiuers, least otherwise it come to passe, that as the Serpent beguiled Eue through his subtiltie, so our minds should be corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2. Cor. 11.3. If they bring with them Esaies commission and crie as he doth: Heare and hearken, for the Lord hath said: Let vs re∣ceiue them as embassadours sent vs from God, and let vs beleeue them. Otherwise, if they breed suspition, let vs make proofe, as did those noble men of Beroea, noble not so much for birth, as for courage in embra∣cing
the word of God with all readinesse, and as they did, Act. 17.11. let vs searche thr scriptures daylie and diligentlye, whe∣ther the thinges which they teach be so or not. And then if (vpon due trial & proofe) wee finde that they bring vs counterfet coyne, that they come with the Reuelations of men which flow not from the mouth of the Lorde, what countenance soeuer they carry (where they Angells from heauen, that did vs the message) by the commandement of Saint Paul to the Galathians, 1.8. let vs hold them accursed. And yet there are that say, and will say; The Lord hath said it, when the Lord neuer spake the worde. Such are the Prophets of Antichrist, not vnlike vnto those of Israel, which Prophesied after their own fantasie, and said; the Lord saith it, albeit the Lorde had not spoken. Eze. 13.7. But beholde, what the worde of the Lorde is against such Prophets, which follow their owne spirite, and teach the people the counsailes of their own hearts. I am against them, mine hand shalbe vpon the Prophets that see vanitie, & diuine lies: they shall not be in the assemblie of my people, neither shall they bee written in the writing of Israel, (Verse. 8.9.) to wit, in the
booke of life in which the true Israelites are written; neither shall they enter into the land of Israell: and that because they haue deceiued my people saying peace; which Iere∣mie 6, 14. calleth a sweet word, but it was not so, for there was no peace: & one built vp a wall and others daubed it with vntempe∣red morter. Eze. 13.10. But saith the Lord, Ʋer. 13.14. I will destroy the wall which they haue daubed with vntempered morter, and bring it downe to the ground, by a stormy wind which shall breake forth in my wrath, and by a greate shower in mine anger, and hailestones in mine indignation, so that the foundation thereof shall be discouered, and it shall fall & they shall be consumed in the midst therof, and shall know that I am the Lord. Thus will the Lorde accomplish his wrath vpon the wall and vpon them that daubed it with vntem∣pered morter, euen with their own deuises, vnder the authoritie of Gods word. If then the Lord will thus deale with the wall, and with the daubers that daubed it with vn∣tempered morter, let the builders take heed how they build the wall, and the daubers howe they daube it, least the Lorde pull downe both wall and morter; Ʋer 15. and they say, the wall is no more, neither the
daubers thereof. And this much of the first part; namely, how Esaie (by way of excla∣mation) hath inioyned (by the commaun∣dement of God) the heauens to heare, and the earth to hearken, vnto the message which hee is willed to doe vnto them from the mouth of the Lord. Nowe the Prophet goeth onward with the Lords most lamentable complaint con∣cerning the ingratitude of his people, for whome he had done many and great good turnes. The complaint is this: I haue nou∣rished and brought vp children, but they haue rebelled against me. A most grieuous com∣plaint, which consisteth of two partes. In the first, he expresseth his benefits bestow∣ed vpon them. In the second, hee decla∣reth their ingratitude and rebellion against him. Hee expresseth his benefits towardes them in these wordes; I haue nourished and brought vp children. He declareth their in∣gratitude & rebellion against him in these; but they haue rebelled against me. This their ingratitude and rebellion hee amplifieth in the verse following by way of comparison, or example of brute and dul beasts. The Ox knoweth his owner, and the Asse his Masters Cribbe, but Israel hath not knowne: my peo∣ple
hath not vnderstand. Thus you haue the summe of the com∣plaint; by which almighty God, as a most vnhappie father, with lamentable voice doth deplore and bewaile the vnkindnes of his people, and withall doth recite what & how great benifits hee had bestowed vp∣on them, but to no purpose. The complaint is verie short if we marke the words, but ve∣rie haynous and weightie if wee diligentlie weygh and examine the thing it selfe. For the Lord seemeth thus to say; Oh what an vnhappy father am I to haue such vnthank∣full children, whome I neither could, nor ought more to haue loued, than if they had come forth of mine owne loynes. For be∣hold; he brought them out of the iron fur∣nace of Egipt, Deu. 4.20, where their liues were bitter vnto them by sore labor in clay and bricke. Ex. 1.14. He went before them by day in a piller of a cloude to lead them the way; and by night in a piller of fire to giue them light, that they might goe both by day and by night. Exod. 13.21. He de∣uided the red sea in two parts, and made Is∣raell to passe through the midst of it, which when the Egyptians attempted to do, they were drowned, Exod. 14.21. Psa. 136.13.
At their desire he brought Quailes, and fil∣led them with the bread of heauen; Ps. 105.40. in so much that (as Dauid saith.) Man did eate the bread of Angels. Psal. 78.25. When they were thirstie and had no water to drinke, Psal. 105.41. he opened the rocke, and the waters flowed out, and ran in the drie places like a riuer. For their sakes he smote diuers nations, Psal. 135.10. and slew mightie kings, Psal. 136.19. as Sihon king of the Amorites, & Og king of Basan, and all the kingdomes of Canaan, Num. 21.33. and gaue their land to be an heritage, e∣uen an heritage vnto Israel his people. He made them a mightie nation, a fearfull, and a terrible to all the princes and potentates of the earth, Deut. 32.10. He found them in the land of the wildernesse, in a waste, & roaring wildernesse: he led them about, he taught them, and kept them as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle stirreth vp her nest, fluttereth ouer her birdes, stretcheth out her winges, taketh them, and beareth them on her wings; So the Lord alone led them, and caried them vp to the high places of the earth, that they might eate the fruits of the fields, and suck honie out of the stone, and oile out of the harde rock; Butter of
kine, and milke of sheepe, with fat of the Lambes, and Rams fed in Bashan, and goats, with the fat of the graines of wheate, and drinke the licour of the red grape. So in the second of Ieremie, the Lorde ringeth in the eares of Ierusalem the summe of his bene∣fits in this sort; Iere. 2.2. I remember thee, with the kindenesse of thy youth; and the Ioue of thy marriage, when thou wentest after me in the wildernesse, in a land that was not sowne. Israel was a thing halowed vnto the Lord, and his first fruites, chosen aboue all other to serue the Lorde onely, and the first offered to the Lord of all other nations. And by Ezekiel (amongst other his benefites towarde Ierusalem) thus saith the Lorde: Ezech. 16.6. When thou wast polluted in thy owne bloud: to wit, when thou wast in thy filthinesse and forsaken of all men, I tooke thee and gaue thee life, for I saide vnto thee, thou shalt liue. I caused thee to multiplie as the budde of the fielde, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou hast gotten excellent orna∣ments: thy breasts are fashioned, thine haire is growne. verse. 11. I decked thee vvith ornaments, and I put bracelets vppon thine handes, and a chaine on thy necke. I
put a frontlet vppon thy face, and earings in thine eares, and a beautifull crowne vppon thine head. Thus wast thou deckt vvith golde and siluer, and thy raymnt was of fine linnen, and silke, and broidered worke: thou diddest eate fine flowre, and Honie: and Oile, and thou vvast verie beauti∣full and thou diddest growe vp into a king∣dome. And to bee shorte; what benefite was there, which the Lorde bestowed not vppon his people? What could hee haue doone more vnto his Vineyarde, Esay. 5.4. which he did not doe vnto it? He planted it in a very fruitfull hill, he hed∣ged it, and gathered out the sones of it; he planted it with the best plantes, hee built a tower in the middest thereof, and made a wine presse therein. This did the Lorde for his Vineyard. Surelye the Vineyarde of the Lorde of hoasts, was the house of Israell, and the men of Iudah were his pleasant plante. verse. 4. Then the Lorde looked that his Vineyarde shoulde bring foorth sweete Grpes, but it brought foorth wilde and sowre grapes: hee looked for iudgement, but beholde oppression, verse. 7. for righ∣teousnesse, but beholde a dolefull crying:
for obedience, but behold a rebellion. I haue nourished & brought vp chillldren (saith he) but they haue rebelled against me. I haue nourished and brought them vp; I haue done the duty of a father, I haue performed what was required of my part; I haue caried them out of all danger, I haue made them the lot and portion of mine inheritance, I haue fed them with the best and cheefest things of the earth, I haue bestowed many and infinite good turnes vpon them (as be∣fore expressed) and yet see: this is the re∣compence which they yeeld vnto me for all that I haue done; They haue rebelled a∣gainst me. But it may seeme that the Lord doth not iustly charge his people with ingratitude and disobedience; for they offered many sacrifices: Esa. 1.11. they offered the burnt offrings of rammes, the fat of fed beasts, the bloud of bullocks, of Lambes, and of goats; They did what the law could require. They obserued the new moones, vers. 13. Sab∣baths and solemne dayes. They had their assemblies, and appointed feasts: they stret∣ched out their hands, and made many prai∣ers. And yet for all these (which they did, or could do) they are counted a sinfull na∣tion,
a people laden with iniquitie, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children, which had forsaken the Lord, & prouoked the holy one of Israel to anger; ver. 4. and in such sort, as that he hated & abhord their feast daies, & would not smel in their solemne assemblies, Amo. 5.21. nor accept their burnt offrings, meate offrings, nor regarde the peace offe∣rings of their fat beasts: and all was, because they did these and such like without faith and mercie, euen in the full measure of hy∣pocrisie and dissimulation. King Vzziah himself, called also Azariah 2. Kin. 15.1 (in whose time this our prophet begā to prophesie) after that God had bles∣sed him maruellously, & had giuen him ma∣ny notable victories, & thereby was grown to be strong, lifted vp his heart, and vsurped the priests office, and went into the temple of the Lord to burne incense vpon the altar of incense, and when he was willed to leaue off, would not, but waxed wroth, as it is in the second of Chronicles and 26. chap. v. 19. Ierusalem a faithfull citie, and which had promised fidelitie vnto God, as a wife to her husband, is now become a common harlot, and a filthie strumpet, Esa. 1.21. She was once full of iudgement, and iustice was
lodged within her brest: but now she is full of rauen, crueltie and deceit. verse. 22. Her siluer is become drosse, and her wine is mixt with water. The testimonies of the Lord which sometime were pure and with∣out drosse, like vnto siluer that is tried with fire, are now defiled with pharisaicall tradi∣tions and doctrines of men. The comman∣dements of the Lord which were like vnto pure wine reioycing the heart, through watery dregs, haue lost their strength, co∣lour and beautie, verse. 23. The princes of the people were rebellious and compani∣ons of theeues: they loued giftes, and fol∣lowed after rewardes, they iudged not the fatherlesse, neither did the widowes cause come before them. Ierem. 2.8. The Priests said not so much as, where is the Lorde? and they that should minister the lawe, knew not God. Deut. 32.15. He that should haue beene vpright, when he waxed fatte, and grose, and was laden with fatnesse, spurned with his heele, and forsooke the Lorde that made him, & regarded not the strong God of his saluation. And therefore the state and condition of Iudah & Ierusalem being thus corrupt, whom neither the benefits of God could win, nor his punishments amend, the
Lord by his Prophet, dooth iustly charge them with ingratitude and disobedience in this sort: They haue rebelled against me. Wherein they did rightly imitate and follow their forefathers, Psal. 78.8. a stub∣borne and rebellious generation: a genera∣tion whose heart was not aright, and whose spirit was not faithfull vnto God. For no sooner had God brought thē out of Egipt, out of the house of bondage, with a mighty hand and stretched out arme, Psal. 106.7. but they forgate his great goodnesse, and rebelled at the Sea, euen at the red Sea. Exo. 16.3. In the wildernesse of Sin they grud∣ged for bread and flesh, Exod. 17.2. and in Rephidim for water. They made a calfe in Horeb, Exod. 32.4. & worshipped the mol∣ten image. Psa. 106.19. They maliced Mo∣ses & Aaron, the holy one of the Lord. v. 16. They would haue stoned Caleb and Ioshua. Nom. 14.10. They ioined themselues vnto Baal peor, & did eat the offrings of the dead Psa. 106.28. They sacrificed their sonnes and daughters vnto deuils, & shed innocent bloud, euen the bloud of their sonnes and daughters, whom they offred vnto the idols of Canaan; Deut. 32.17. gods whom they knew not, new gods that came newly vp, &
forsooke the Lorde God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of E∣gipt, and followed other gods, as Baal and Ashtaroth, the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed vnto them. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was hote against Israel, and he deliuered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and solde them into the hands of their enemies round about them. Notwithstanding, the Lord raised vp Iudges, which deliuered them out of the hands of their oppressours, ve. 16. but they would not obey their Iud∣ges, for they wet a whoring after other gods and worshipped thē: Iudg. 10.6. as the gods of Aram, Zidon, and Moab, the gods of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistins, & forsooke the Lorde God, and serued not him. And thus they rebelled and their po∣steritie to the dayes of Iohn the fore-runner, & of Christ and his Apostles, insomuch that of Christ, & (before him) of Iohn the Baptist they are called, Progenies viperarum, the ge∣nerations of vipers Mat. 3.7. And because they were the children of them which mur∣thred the prophets, & fulfilled the measure of their fathers Mat. 23.31, the lord vpbrai∣deth & casteth in their teeth not onely their
owne, but also their fathers malice. Many a time would the Lord haue gathered them together, Matt. 23 37. as the hen doth her chickens vnder her wings, but they would not: And therefore did Stephan to their fa∣ces charge them with stubbornesse and re∣bellion, calling them Act. 7.51. stifnecked and of vncircumcised hearts, and eares al∣waies resisting the holy Ghost, as their fathers did. So that, though Israel and Iudah, after a sort, could colour their rebellion and stif∣nesse of heart against the Lord, and against his annointed, with the multitude of sacri∣fices, Esa. 1.11. with the burnt offerings of Rams, and fat of fed beasts, with the bloud of bullockes, of Lambes, and of goates, with the obseruation of new moones, Sabbaths, and solemne daies: with the stretching out of hands, and making many praiers: yet, we see what they are, and the Lord (who alone looketh into the harts of all) by the prophet here chargeth the very Rulers to be rebel∣lious & companions of theeues: ve. 23, yea, and the whole packe of them (for their im∣pietie and wickednesse) to be like vnto the princes of Sodoma and people of Gomorah. The application. And now (to applie these former points
vnto our selues, before we come to the ex∣aggeration of this peoples ingratitude and vnkindnesse) let vs take some short view, whether our condition be the same with the condition of Israel and Iudah, or whe∣ther ours be better than theirs was. The Lorde our God (as yee all know) hath nourished and brought vp vs his chil∣dren, in as good and ample manner as euer he did the Iewes his elect and chosen peo∣ple. He hath giuen vs for our comfort, Psa. 8.7.8. the beasts of the field, the foules of the ayre, and the fishes of the sea. He brought vs out of the yron fornace of Ro∣mish Egipt, at what time the Egyptian ty∣rants made vs wearie of our liues, with sore labourin the clay and bricke of hellish su∣perstition, and with all maner of bondage, which they laide vpon vs most cruelly. He∣therto, the Lorde hath gone before vs by day, in a pillar of a cloude, and by night in a pillar of fire, to lead vs the way, and to giue vs light, that we might go both by day and by night, out of all danger. He hath giuen vs Manna frō heauen: not Manna, of which the Fathers did eate in the wildernesse, and are dead; but a liuing Manna, a Manna that giueth life vnto the world; a Manna,
of which he that truly eateth, shall liue for euer. Ioh. 6 38. The Israelites (after they had drunke of the water out of the rocke) thirsted againe: but of the water, which he shall giue vs, if we once drinke, we shall ne∣uer be more a thirst; Joh 4.14. for it is the water of life, euen the grace and loue of God in his sonne Christ, shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, vnto eternall life. This our God (for our peace) hath smit∣ten of late yeares Sihon of Rome; and Og of Spaine, who sought to make the Lords he∣ritage an abhomination: that so (to this ve∣ry day) the heritage standeth as it did, it is as it was, and in as good plight, if not bet∣ter; it remaineth in the hand of the right owner, & we trust that it shall still remaine, euen in the hand and possession of Israel his seruant; for which we do, and shall praise his holy & blessed name for euer. This our God the lord God of hosts, hath made vs a migh∣ty nation, a fearefull, and a terrible to all the Princes & Potentates of the earth. He con∣ducteth vs, not by Iosua, but by a Iesus: not to a terrestrial, but to a celestial Canaan, the lād of eternall felicitie, whose brightnesse is God, whose light is the lambe: the lot of the faithfull, and the possession of the saued.
The Lord finding vs in this vale of miserie (as he found Iaacob in the land of a roa∣ring wildernesse, Deuteronomie 23.9.10.) hath ledde vs by his spirite, taught vs by his worde, gouerned vs by his grace, and kept vs as the Apple of his eye. As the Eagle, he stirreth vp his nest, he fluttereth ouer vs his young ones, stretcheth out the winges of his mercie, taketh and beareth vs on the same to the best and surest places of the earth: that so we eate the fruites of the fields, and sucke honie, not from the stone, as did the Iewes, but from the Bee: and oile not from the rocke (as they) but from the Oliue: we eate the butter of kine, and the milke of sheepe, with the fat of Lambes and Rams; fed, not in Bashan, but in England, with the fat of the graines of wheate, and for good and perfect digestion, we drawe from the enemy the licour of the red grape. This our good and gratious God hath cau∣sed vs to multiply as the bud of the field. We are (to the knowledge of the nations round about vs) increased and waxen great: many of vs haue gotten many goodly and excellent ornaments. Our breasts are fashi∣oned, our haire is growne. The Lorde hath giuen vs riche and precious iewels: brace∣lets
for our hands, chaines for our necks, frontlets for our faces, earings for our eares, beautifull things for our heads; in which, would God we did not delight and reioyce so much as we do. The Lord hath decked vs with gold and siluer: our raiment is of the finest linnen, and silke, and broidered worke: we eate fine floure, and honie, and oile: yea, better things than euer did the Iewes; and thus wee become beautifull, more than the sonnes and daughters of Zion; and we are growne into a kingdom, God graunt not into pride. The Iewes in the first of Haggei, vers. 8. are commanded to go vp to the hill Lebanon, which was not within the borders of Iewry, but of Zidon & Tyrus, Ezra. 3.7. & frō thence to bring home Cedarwood for the building of the Temple. Truly a figure of the Lordes a∣boundant mercie, and most comfortable for vs Gentiles; that albeit wee bee not borne of Iewes: yet we are trees meete to builde Gods house with, and God willeth vs to bee brought home vnto him by the preaching of his worde, that wee may be plankes or boardes, bases or props, sides or postes, pillars or beames, rafters or tenons, one thing or other of that house, wherein
himselfe will dwell, and he delighted with vs, and among whome he will declare his glorie. Beside all these (which hath beene al∣readie obserued for a blessing vpon Isra∣ell and Iudah) Esa. 5.1.2. the Lord hath planted his vineyard in a very frutful soile; he hath giuen it a skilfull vinitor, one in∣dued with all gifts and qualities necessarie for regiment; euen a learned, religious, gentle, mercifull, gracious and louing Prince, by name Elizabeth, the rest of God, the seauenth of God, and fulnes of the othe of God: a great blessing, the Lorde conti∣nue it, and make vs thankfull for it. This skilfull vinitor (our gracious Soue∣raigne) comparable for fortitude with Io∣sua, for magnanimitie with Gedeon, for victories with Macchabeus, for wisedome with Salomon, for zeale with Hezekiah, for deutoion with Dauid; hath caused the stones that pestered the vineyard to bee gathered out; the briers and thornes to be grubbed vp; rubbidge and whatsoeuer was noysome to be remooued; 2. Thes. 2.3. Antichrist the man of sin with his trash and traditions, to bee exiled: that nowe the fielde is cleared, the vineyard clen∣sed,
the Church purged, and all this con∣cluded and more, without any great sedi∣on or tumult at all. It was the Lordes do∣ing, and it is wonderfull in the eyes of as manie as doe truely behold it. No viney∣ard, no Church, no people vnder the hea∣uens more inriched with the blessings of God: so that the Lord may iustly say vnto vs, as he did vnto his people of old, Es. 4.5. what more could I haue done vnto my vi∣neyard which I haue not done vnto it? The Lord haue the glorie for it: and he in his mercie, preserue, keepe and maintaine the vinitor our gracious queene, in health, wealth, peace and prosperitie, that (to the ioy and comfort of all her loyall, heartie true & trustie subiects) she may long con∣tinue, liue and reigne an old mother in Is∣rael; & he that from the verie bottome of his heart doth not so wish and praie, and say Amen, the rauens of the valley pick out his eyes, and the young Eagles eate them vp. Pro. 30.17. This vineyard so planted in a most fruit∣ful ground, cleansed from stone, thorne, & brier, watered with the dew of Gods truth, cherished with his Sacramentes, pruned with the two edged sword of his most holy
spirit, vnder propped with the authoritie of zealous magistrates, fortified with good and godly lawes, to keepe both roote and braunche in order; hath brought foorth many a goodly and pleasaunt grape: a∣mongst others, peace spirituall and peace ciuill: peace toward God, peace amongst men, and amongst our selues; and so the peace of conscience, which passeth all wis∣dome and vnderstanding: pleasant grapes, and a riche blessing. He that hath felt the euill of warre, can best speake of the good of peace. Warre, as a Locust, maketh scar∣citie; but peace, like vnto the morning and euening dew, worketh plenty, as Eras. Apo. lib. 6. noteth; Croesus king of Lydia by this onely argument preferred peace before warre; Quòd pacis tempore filii sepelirent patres, in bello contrà patres sepelirent libe∣ros; that in the time of peace, children did burie their fathers; contrariwise in warre, fathers did burie their children. So contra∣rie is the fruite of warre to the fruite of peace; which we (through the benefit of God vnder his Anointed) haue enioyed long time without any effusion of bloud to speake of, except of a sort of Archtraitors, who receiued but the rewarde they deser∣ued,
and which I pray God all traitours with their adherents may receiue here∣after, if they practise, conspire, and rebell as they did. This florishing peace hath made not on∣ly this Citie, but also the whole lande to flowe, like another Canaan, with milke and honie. The God of peace hath done this for vs; he be praised therefore, and prosper her maiestie, by whom it is gouerned and maintained. Whereas the Nations about vs struggle in the field, tumble in warre, and wallow in bloud, expecting no end of their miseries, but vtter ruine and desolation; we in the meane while sit at home by our fires in our furred gownes, corked slippers, trimmed buskins, and warme mittons. Am. 4.6. We lie vpon our costly beds, and stretch out our selues vpon them; we eate the Lambes of the flocke, and the Calues out of the stall. verse. 5. We sing to the sound of the Ʋioll, the Harpe and Pipe, and wine are in our feasts, and the wine we drinke in bowles: Esa. 5.12. Am. 6.6. In which great peace and plentifulnesse, God make vs worthily to consider the workes of his handes, and to be sory for the affliction of Ioseph and his bretheren,
Ʋers. 6. of which now many are slaine in Fraunce, Flanders, and els wheare, in de∣fence of the Gospel, propagation of the truth, and safetie of this Land. Moreo∣uer (whereas the nations & people about vs do eate in feare, and drinke in dread, and like fearefull hares doe flee awaye at the wagging of euerie leafe) we sit quiet and safe, as did Israel and Iudab, 1. King. 4.20. like vnto the sand of the Sea in number, eating, drinking & making me∣ry; euery man vnder his vine, and vnder his Boothe, from Dan to Beer-sheba; to wit, from the one end of this land to the other. For God hath made the bars of the gates of our Ierusalem strong, Psa. 147.5. and hath blessed our children within hir. He hath set peace in hir borders, and satis∣fied hir poore with the floure of wheate. His worde is come from Iaacob, and his statutes from Israel vnto vs; the best and greatest blessing that may be. He hath not dealt thus with euerie Nation, vers. 20. as hee hath dealt with vs, the least Nation of all: Our punishment and fall will bee the greater, if we be not thankefull. It must be confessed that some stonnes haue bin rai∣sed in hir Maiesties daies; & before time
in the daies of hir deare brother King Ed∣ward the sixt, which somwhat disturbed our happy rest. But the Prince of peace, & soueraigne Lord of our tranquillitie, soone ceased the waues of the sea, stilled the fury & madnes of those heathen, miraculously preuented their wicked deuises, and con∣founded the deuisers of them. Thus was the Lorde of Hoasts iealous for his Zion, with great iealouzie, he was iealous for hir with great wrath, Zach. 8.2. Hee was not vnmindfull of his people, nor forgetfull of his inheritance. A mother may forget hir childe, and take no compassion on the son of hir wombe; Esay, 49.15. such stepmo∣thers there are. But though such (vnna∣turally giuen) forget, yet will not the Lord forget Zion: for he hath grauen hir vppon the palme of his hands, and hir walls are e∣uer in his sight. Christ the shipmaster (our saluation) Matth 8.24. slept in the shipp on a pillow, the ship couered with waues: the Disciples, Mar. 4.38. with no litle dif∣fidence and distrust awoke him, they put him out of his napp: A faithles and need∣les labour. For hee that keepeth Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleepe: Psal. 121 4. wee haue felt the experiment. For the
Lorde in our Cities distresse, in the time of Commotion, (as we call it) or insurrection, awaked as one out of sleepe, and as a Giant refreshed with wine. Psal. 78.65. He smote his enemies and ours in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetuall shame, verse, 66. They ran about vs like Bees; but they were extinct sodainly as a fire of thornes. Psal. 12. Our soule escaped, euen as a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare was broken, and we deliuered, Psal. 124.7. The Plowers would haue plowed vpon our backs, and made long furrowes at their pleasure, Psal. 129.3. But the righteous Lord tooke in hand the two edged sword of his iustice, and hewed the snares and cordes of those wicked in pieces: (vers. 4.5.) He in like measure reward as many as haue euill will at Sion. This was the Lords worke, and it is maruellous in our eies. Psal. 118.23. This is the day which the Lord made. we will reioice and bee glad in it, verse, 24. This is the day which you call Iesus daie, whether because it is so fixed in the Calender I knowe not; but sure I am, that it was Iesus day vnto you, a day of sal∣uation. For if Iesus the Lord had not been on our side, Psal. 114.1. (may not Israal, but Exeter now say) if the Lorde had not
bin on our side, when men rose vp against vs, they had swallowed vs vp quicke (so vnable wer we to resist) when their wrath was kindled against vs. The waters had drowned vs, the streame and swelling wa∣ters had gone ouer our soule, verse, 4. But praised be the Lord, who gaue vs not ouer for a pray vnto their teeth. And thus hath our good & gratious God continued his fauor toward vs to this pre∣sent day, that there is no leading into cap∣tiuitie, nor any complaining in our streets. Psal. 144.14. Blessed are wee that bee in such a case: yea blessed are we which haue the Lorde for our God. For this great calme, for this miraculous peace, let vs thanke the Lord. But what? are we thankefull vnto him for these and other his blessinges? or liue we as children obedient to a father? If we do not, would we did; all doo not. For be∣hold, how many of vs (like vnto Israel & Iudah) are turned backe, and started aside like a broken bowe? Psal. 78.57. The Lorde looketh that we should bring forth sweete grapes, but wee bring forth sowre ones. There are at this very day in our streets, vsury, deceit, crueltie, and oppres∣sion.
Wee haue (as the Iewes had) our Sabbaths and solemne dayes, our assem∣blies and appointed feasts; we stretch out our hands and make manie praiers as they did: and yet see (as theirs were) our harts (if not our hands) are full of blood. Esa. 1.13.15. Nowe that wee are waxen fatte and grose; nowe that wee haue what wee would haue (as did Israel) we spurne with the heele, we forsake the Lord that made vs, and regard not the mightie and strong God of our saluation. Deu. 32.15. We be∣ginne to loath Manna, and to long for the flesh pots of Egipt. Num. 11.6. Wee pro∣fesse that wee know God; but our workes testifie, that we denie him. Exo. 19.3. As for the word of the Lorde, wee count it vaine: Tit. 1.19. we can be content to say to the Sers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophesie errours. Esa. 36.10. Like vnto the mē of Anathoth we desire to bee flat∣tered and soothed in our sins. Ier, 11.17. The Lord hath set watchmē ouer vs that crie take heed of the sound of the Trum∣pet; but we say, we will not take heed. Ier. 6.17. He hath commanded vs to aske for the old waie, which is the good way; the waie wherein the patriarks and prophets
haue walked, directed by the worde of God: ver. 16. but we say we wil not walke therein; we will go rather the broad way that leadeth to destruction. Mat. 7.13. we drinke iniquitie like water: wee haue as great a desire to sin, as they that are thir∣stie haue a desire to drinke. Iob. 15.16. We draw wickednes vnto vs with cordes, and sin (as it were) with cart ropes; Esa. 5.18. wee vse all the allurements and prouoca∣tions that canbe, to freese together the conscience in sin and impietie. And yet we can speake of truth and of veritie, of iu∣stice and mercie, of the knowledge of God and his lawes, and of sundrie other high points: but when we are brought vn∣to the ballance, we are found too light, & when we are drawen vnto the touchstone for trial, we proue drosse. For what do the Sunnes of men find in our shops & shop-houses, in our wares and ware-houses, but fraud and deceit, if not worse? Truely said Tertullian, Lib. de patientia, pag. 13. sect. 7 Lata atque diffusa est operatio mali. The operation, or handicrafte of mischiefe is wide and diffused all abroad; more nowe than euer it was.
Iohn the Apostle left written many yeares past, that the vvhole vvorld lieth in vvickednes: First Iohn, 5. Chapter and 19. verse, which if it lay buried in wickednes then, how may wee thinke it to lie buried in wickednesse, now being old, bowing and winding it selfe euen for age to the pit of destruction? Hosea must bee iust, and his Prophe∣sie commeth homeward to our dores, and the Lorde as then with the inhabitants in Israell, so nowe with vs in England, hath a controuersie, because in Hos. 4.1.2. there is no truth, nor mercie, nor knovvledge of God in the land; but svvearing, and lying, & killing, and stealing, and vvhoring, they break out, and blood toucheth blood; mischiefe vp∣pon mischiefe, one still falling on the neck of another; and all these with many moe committed without any dreade, or feare of God at all. For so man dooth not see vs, we passe not; fearing more the face of man, than the wrath of God; insem∣blance the very sonnes of Ammon, who coueting to force his sister Tamar, 2. Sam. 13. caused euery man to go out from him, as ashamed to worke that villanie before men, which hee feared not to commit in
the sight of his God. This Ammon (wic∣ked Ammon) hath left Ammons in great store behinde him, as much forgetfull of God and his lawes as euer himselfe was, if not more. For as he feared, so do we the eyes of men: and thus, and thus, we think in our hearts, Eccle. 23.18. Who seeth vs? wee are compassed about with darkenes; the walls couer vs; no body marketh vs; whome neede wee to feare? the most High will not remember our sinnes; albeit hee remembreth them well inough, and still looketh downe vppon them from his holie Mountaine, and beholdeth them in the most secret parts; his eies beeing ten thou∣sand times brighter than the sunne beames, beholding all the vvaies of men, and the ground of the deepe. And therefore such i∣maginations of the thoughts of mens hearts shall perish, and they in them: such shifts and turning of deuises shall be estee∣med as the Potters clay, Esay, 29.16. For (notwithstanding all their craft) they shal bee able to escape the Lordes wrath no more than the clay that is in the Potters hand of power to deliuer itself. But so long as men will dwell in this minde and opini∣on that he that planted the eare doth not
heare, and that hee that formed the eye, doth not see; what merueile is it, if they giue themselues vnto wantonnes, to work all vncleannes, euen with greedines? Eph. 4.19. But there is another sort of vs, who thogh we perceiue and will confesse that there is nothing so hid which God seeth not; that hee knoweth our downe sitting and our vprising, Psa. 159.2.3.4. that he vnder∣standeth all our thoughtes long before, that he is about our pathes and about our beddes, and spieth out all our waies, that there is not a worde in our tongues, which he knoweth not altogether: yet wee rest perswaded that God hath feete of woll, and will punish slowly, or neuer. As for the deserued tokens of his wrath, nowe hanging ouer our heades, and readie to be powred vpon vs, for our manifold sinnes and damnable iniquities, what of them? We count them as buggs; bugges to fray children. The Lorde our God hath gone by vs in a mightie strong winde: but we say the Lord was not in the winde. After the minde came an earthquake: but wee say the Lord was not in the Earthquake. After the Earthquake came fire: but we say, the Lorde
was not in the fire. After the fire came a still and soft voice: and yet wee will not o∣bey. If God withdraw his heauy hand for a time, to trie if we wil amend with a gen∣tle correction before hee lay on vs a shar∣per: we fall to our old fashions, we forget God, his rodde, our dutie, and his reue∣rence, attributing his plagues to vnseaso∣nable weather, pestilent aires, or to some vnhappie chaunce, as though they were not sent of God to nurture vs rightly in the dutie and obedience of Children to a father. So in the daies of most cruell Poperie and bloodie persecution, wee cried; O Lord our God, deliuer vp this once, and wee will euer take heede hereafter howe wee fall to Apostasie and offende thy diuine Maie∣stie. But nowe beeing deliuered, wee are worse; more vnthankefull and disobedi∣ent than euer before; which apparant wickednesse, surely the righteous God in his due time, will not suffer to escape without some manifest token of his high indignation and most heauie displea∣sure.
When Prince Edvvard the sixt, was ta∣ken away for our vnthankefulnes, there ensued Mariana tempora, Lamentable times: and then too, this was the wish of many one, bounded with a vowe: O that the Masse Booke were burnt, & the Com∣munion booke restored againe. O that these mitred Bishops were sent packing, & zealous Pastors placed in their roomes; for then (said they) We vvill enter into the house of the Lord, and in his feare vvill vve vvorship tovvard his holie Temple. The Lord in his great mercie pitied their desire and heard their mone. Queene Marie died: Our gracious Ladie and Queene Eli∣zabeth succeeded, (whom almightie God long preserue, with all health, wealth and peace to gouerne) and the booke, in bet∣ter sort than in former daies through Gods goodnes and hit Maiesties carefulnes (was restored againe. But of it now? A booke (saith one) blowen vp (like vnto a blad∣der) with the wind of confusion and pro∣fanation. The orders (saith another) pre∣scribed earthly, beggarly, dungie, drossie, lousie, Antichristian. The frequenting of the Lordes house, and worshipping in his holy temple in his feare, vowed with the
lips and promised with the mouth; what of it? Christ if hee were here on earth, should not neede so much a whip to driue them out of the Church (so fewe come there) as hee should neede a great sort of whips, and that good ones to driue them thither. As for the Bishops which they wished to be remoued; mitred ones were thrust out of their holdes sooner than they thought; and exiles and other very zealous men placed in their steads. But what of those then, and of their successors now? Euen as of the Bishops and Elders of the Churches in saint Pauls time: Reuiled, euill spoken off; made, Os perica∣tharmata tou cosmon, as the filth of the world, 1. Cor. 4.13. Panton peripsema the of∣scowring of all thinges; vnto this time the very practise of auntient Sectaries, who by dispraising and reuiling others, sought to purchase fame and glorie to themselues. But this is not all; for Captaine Cuffe of the boun∣cing band of all Surebies, the olde sheep ebi∣ter, (which pricketh at the bodie and spa∣reth not the fleece) will haue their Man∣nors and landes to make his brats Gentle∣men. Their houses must goe downe their li∣uings must be clipped, or clean taken away, and they set to petrie pensions. The Cap∣taine
with the helpe of his surebies (like an other Xerxes) will suppe vp whole countries before him, and snatch vp houses and woods dales and mountaines, vallies and hills, peo∣ple and all into the budget of his wrath. Ha∣uocke must be made of the Churches inhe∣ritance, without contradiction either of Prince or people: els the trumpet soundeth à stylo ad macheram; Tertul. de prescrip. pag. 110. Sect. 15. Sirs, no more words but blows and al for Church patrimony, vnder the co∣lour of religion. Captaine Cuffe (belike in his Itinerario, or Kalender of miles) smelt that Abbey lands, &c. so well pretended to be employed to the inriching of the King, maintaining of schooles, and releeuing the poore, were vnto some very sweete, and the best feather of their taile; who perhaps ha∣uing spent the better part (if not the totall) vppon backe and belly, himselfe could bee content to consume in like proportion the remnants that are left. Heare ye this (O Elders) and hearken ye all inhabitants of this Citie, whether such a thing hath beene in your daies, or yet in the dares of your fathers. The Palmer worme hath his part, and so hath the Grashopper, and canker worme; and now residuum erucae
the residue of the canker worme  the Caterpiller eate if hee may. Such is the thankefulnes which these and others yeeld both to the Lorde, and also to them, who haue ministred and to this day doo minister in his sanctified labours. It is presupposed that some Clergie men haue too little, some too much, and some nothing at all to liue by; and therefore very requisite that iust and equall diuision were made, that all might bee sufficiently proui∣ded for. A deepe charity, dipped in as deep hypocrisie. But (Sirs of the corporation of Mal-contents) who shall make the di∣uision? There is iust cause, why we may stagger at putting the Church patrimony to arbi∣trement; lest (while diuision bee preten∣ded) some Quintus Fabius adiudge the bet∣ter part thereof to the Senate of Rome, Ci∣cero Offic li. 10. Et ita erit nouissimus error peior priore; And so shall the last errour bee worse than the first, Matthew Chapter 27. verse, 64. But all this is the wicked working of Sa∣tan the moulder of mischief, whose drift hath been euermore to decay learning that there should be none learned in the Scriptures, to
commit the flockes vnto, which hee attemp∣ted to accomplish; First by seducing spirits; Secondarily, by force of tyrants; and now lastly, by impayring the liuings of the Mi∣nisters of the worde to the intent that they (oppressed with pouertie) should forsake the Ministerie, & so the little & miserable flocke of Iesus Christ (left destitute of the foode of life) should become in time, like vnto the horse and mule which haue no vn∣derstanding, Psal. 32.9. In regard whereof, what good Christian is there, which may not (vpon so iust occasion) iustly cry out in the bitternesse of his heart? O tempora! O mores! O times! O manners! seeing the times so dangerous, and men in their man∣ners so monstrous, whome the Lorde not∣withstanding hath nourished and brought vp as his children, and yet doth, but they rebell. For in what one point can they more signi∣ficantly expresse and make knowen their rebellion against the Lorde, than by batte∣ring the walls, and shaking the foundations of his Church? than by annoying his ser∣uaunts the Prophets, contrary to his com∣maundement; touch not mine annointed, and do my Prophets no harme? Psal. 105.15 than by diuiding, mangling and impairing
the portions of the Leuites, as in the das of Nehemiah? cap. 13. vers. 10. which caused them (for that they receiued not according to the Lawe prouided in that case) to for∣sake the house of God, as not able to exe∣cute the worke any longer, and to flee eue∣ry one away to his owne Land. This it was and will be when the Lords portion is pin∣ched, & the mouth of the Oxe musled that treadeth out the corne; it must needs breed and bring Anarchy and confusion, euen the riune & vtter ouerthrow of all good learn∣ing and true religion. For take away once the patrimonie and maintenance of the Church (at which that Axe of theirs stri∣keth especially, as at a sweete and pleasant roote) and intreate the Lords Ambassadors as Hanun did Dauids messengers, 2. Sam. 10.4. & ye take away learning; take away lear∣ning & ye take away teaching. Dauids mes∣sengers sent to comfort Hanun, must of forc tarry at Iericho with shame inough, vers. 5. vntill their garments bee lengthened and their beards growen; & when will that be? when the children of Ammon, vers. 6. band themselues, and hire other to worke them (if they may) some further despite? And so you may lightly coniecture what will be∣come
of the Church of Christ. For, where no vision is, the people decay, Pro. twentie nine Chap. and 18. verse. Howbeit (beloued) we hope better & trust that the Lord of Hoasts in his accustomed mercye will continue a strength vnto Israel, and a defence for Iudah, yea, wee trust that Iehouah will so blesse vs out of Zion, Psal. 128.5. that we shall see our Ierusalem to flow with prospe∣rity, peace, plenteousnes, and true religion all the daies of our life; & that the destroy∣ers of the vineyard Psal. 80.13. and young Vine which the Lord hath made so mightie and strong for himselfe, shall perish in their appointed time, at the rebuke of the coun∣tenance of our God, But if so be the Lords arme bee stretched out toward vs, if his wrath be kindled against vs; if matters fall out in the ende otherwise than well, let vs burden and blame no man but our selues; for wee are a crooked and rebellious nation, as badd as euer were the Iewes, if not worse; and looke what sinnes raigned among them Ezec. 16.49.50. and we haue exceeded them; yea, and haue iu∣stified them, as did Ierusalem hir two sisters Sodom and Samaria, verse, 51. in all the ab∣hominations which we haue done.
The pietie and godlines which many of vs pretend, when it is at best, is but Iewish hipocrisie, or some sodaine passion of the minde, or violent motion, and therefore en∣dureth but a while; soone hote and soone cold, as was Esaus to Iaakob, Ge. 33.4 27.41. 32.6.36.6. Sauls to Dauid, 1. Sam. 24.5.17.18. 1. Sam. 26.2. and the peoples to Christ, which spread their garments in the way that hee went, which cut downe branches from the trees, which greeted him with Hosanna, Mat. 21.8.9. and shortly after cried, Crucifige, crucifige eum; Crucifie him, crucifie him, Luke, 23.21. So inconstancy in brotherly loue, gentle∣nes, tender mercy, kindnes, humblenes of minde, meeknes, and other such liuely fruits of faith (which S. Paule biddeth vs, Coll. 3.12. as the elect of God, to put on) betrayed these, and so it betrayeth vs. Wee (as these men and people were) like vnto Clouds with∣out water, Iude. verse, 12. are carried about of windes, hauing no continuance in that which is good. Wee thinke that wee haue done God good and great seruice, when wee haue left some pretty shewes of Christiani∣tie; though within a while after, with the Dogge we returne to the vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.
VVe deale with the Lorde, as Israel did with Ioshua. How was that say you? Surely thus. VVe giue out many faire and large promises; as that all shalbe amended which is amisse; that we will do so and so no more; that wee will waxe better and better euery day. God forbid (say we) that we should for∣sake the Lord our God, who deliuered vs when we were in miserie, and scattered our enemies round about vs: therefore the Lord our God will we serue, and his voice will we obay. This was Israels vowe and promise then, Ios. 24.16.24. and the same is ours nowe; though quickly forgotten, as theirs was. For as they (not long after that the couenant was made, and written by Ioshua in the booke of the law of God, and a great stone pitched in the remembrance and testimonie thereof) pro∣uoked the Lord to anger, so do we. And as did Israel, we haue said and sworne that we will serue the Lord onely, but yet marke & behold, there are of vs that serue and follow other Gods as bad in effect, as the Gods of Aram & the Gods of Zidon, & the Gods of Moab, and the Gods of the children of Ammon, and the Gods of the Philistines, Iudg. 10.6. VVherefore, as Ioshua saide vnto the Israelites, so giue mee leaue to say vnto
you, that say and doo such things: Yee are witnesses against your selues, Ios. 24.22. The stones of the streete, which the Pauier pitched shall testifie against you; for by trampling & treading on them with your feete, they are wakened, & haue hard the words which ye haue spoken concerning the Lord. So that rather than mans dissimulation, mans ingratitude, mans vnkindnes, mans rebellion and Apostasie shall escape vnpu∣nished, the verie stones of the street (deafe and dumbe creatures) shall call and cry for vengeaunce against it: and who so is wise, will ponder this in his heart. Brethren, with the Apostle I will shewe you this secret, of which I would not that ye should be ignorant, least ye should bee arrogant. Although it hath pleased God in his abundant mercie to make vs his peo∣ple, which in time past were not a people; 1. Pet. 2.10. to graffe vs, a wilde oliue tree, wilde by nature, contrarie to nature in the right oliue tree, Roman. 11.17. let not the wilde oliue (though some of the braunches be broken off) graft in for them, and made partaker of the roote, and fathes of the o∣liue tree, boast it selfe against the branches. For if God spared not the naturall branch∣es,
take heede least hee also spare not vs. Wherefore, let vs not be high minded, but feare: let vs behold the boundtifulnes & se∣ueritie of God, and ponder well the one & the other: toward the Iewes (which haue fallen) seueritie; but toward vs, bountiful∣nes, vers. 22. if we continue & abide therin. Beloued, these and such like are written to warne vs, that wee should beware of the like sinnes, least we feele the like plagues. Let vs remember then what manner of peo∣ple we were in time past, and what wee are now in Christ Iesus. Let vs consider that we haue had & yet haue, a God that is gra∣cious and mercifull, long suffering and of great compassion, no otherwise affected to∣ward vs than a father toward his owne children; for he hath nourished and broght vs vp, thogh we haue rebelled against him, and yet doo. But if wee continue and goe onward, walking in the wayes of our hearts, hee will call vs to a sharpe account, euen to the ballaunce of his iudgement Ec∣cles. 11.9. and because hee will make due and iust proofe of our guiltinesse, hee wyll summon the heauens and earth to witnes a∣gainst vs, and the brute and dumbe crea∣tures of the world to condemne vs. For so
doth the Lord heere against his owne peo∣ple the Iewes; calling to recorde agaynst them, first the heauens and earth; and now (to aggrauate their ingratitude and rebelli∣on against him, their father) the oxe & the asse, in this forme and manner of speaking. The oxe knoweth his owner, and the asse his masters cribbe; but Israel hath not knowen, my people hath not vnderstand. By which kinde of comparison, or example demon∣stratiue, the most iust God (so iustly prouo∣ked) dooth declare, that the most brute and dul beasts did more acknowledge their dutie toward their masters (which notwith∣standing pressed them downe with sore & heauie burdens) than did his people toward him, of whom they had receiued benefits without comparison. In like sort, the Lord in the eight chap∣ter of the prophet Ieremie and the sixt verse complaineth of the Iewes that turned back by a perpetuall rebellion, and saith. I hearkened and heard, but none spake a∣right, no man repented him of his wickednes, saying, What haue I done? euerie one tour∣ned to their race, as the Horse rusheth into the battell.
Ʋerse 7. Euen the storke in the aire know∣eth her appointed times, and the turtle and the crane and the swallow obserue the time of their comming, but my people knoweth not the iudgement of the Lord. Hee accuseth the Iewes, because they were more ignoraunt of the iudgements of their God, than were these birds of their appointed seasons to discerne the cold and heate. But a strange thing and a wonderful. They that shuld haue been like the Angels in heauen, that should haue expressed, and that most liuely, the similitude and likenes of God, are not to be preferred to the brute creatures of the earth. Israel the Lords peo∣ple, Israel the Lords inheritance, Israel the lot of his inheritance, Deu. 32.9. Israel the Lords seruant, Esa. 44.21. Israel the Lords portion, Israel a thing halowed to the lord, Ier. 2.3. Israel the first fruites of the Lord, Israel the first offered to the Lord of all o∣ther Nations, Israel the beloued of the Lord, Esa. 5.1. is rebellious, and as an vnru∣ly heyfar; nay more than the storke and the turtle, than the crane and the swallow: yea than the oxe and the asse: for the one sort knoweth the appointed times, and the o∣ther his owner, and his masters cribbe; but
Israel hath not knowen, his people hath not vnderstand. The oxe and asse are loued, e∣steemed and praised, not as children, but as beasts: for beasts they are, brute and dull. They are not preferred to anie dignitie or promotion, but laden and pressed downe with great and waightie burdens: and yet see, the oxe knoweth his owner, and the asse his masters cribbe; but Israel, vnto whome pertained the adoption, Rom. 9.4. and the glorie, and the couenants, and the giuing of the law, and the seruice of God, and the promises; of whom were the Fathers, and of whome (concerning the flesh) Christe came, who is God ouer all, blessed for e∣uer: this Israel hath not knowen, his peo∣ple hath not vnderstand. If it had been a strange people, ano∣ther people, a bastard people, a people vnknowen, a people none of his; it had not been so great a matter: but (sai∣eth the Lorde) Populus meus, my people: a people proper and peculiar vnto my selfe, mine owne people hath not vnderstand. Mine owne people, which I haue chosen of old, precious in my sight and honorable in my eyes, Esa. 43.8. whom I haue tenderlie cherished & brought vp, not for their sakes
but for mine holie Names sake, Ezek. 36.22. whose fathers I led by the shaddow of death, Ier. 2.6. by a land that no man passed through, to a pleasant and plentifull coun∣trey, which I gaue vnto them and their po∣steritie: euen the glorious heritage of the Armies of the heathen, Ier. 3.19. This my people hath played this pranke; It will not heare nor hearken, but rebell. As a woman rebelleth against her husband, so hath my people rebelled against mee, Ier. 3.20. My people knoweth nothing, it hath not vn∣derstand my righteousnesse, nor walked in the waies of my commandements, nor en∣tred into the pathes of discipline, through my righteousnes. Therefore now the Lord sendeth Iuda his chosen and Israel his inhe∣ritance, to the brute and dull beasts of the earth, to the Oxe and Asse to learne of them knowledge, dutie, gratitude, and o∣bedience; which yet had the lawe of God to teach them, but would not learne; and his Prophets to call them, but would not come; and his watchmen to blow the trū∣pet in Zion, Ier. 6.17. but they would not heare. Which vnreasonable, brute and dul creatures of God, as the Oxe and Asse in this chapter of Esay; and the Storke & the
Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallowe in the eight of Ieremie, shall one day giue sen∣tence not onely against them, but also a∣gainst vs and our blindnes, except wee a∣mend; which hauing not the benefite of reason (but guided and gouerned onely by the instinct of nature) doo that which wee that haue the law of God, and teaching, & discipline, and vnderstanding, and reason, and memorie, to conceiue, iudge and beare away, will not doo. We are therefore earnestly and heartely to praye and beseech the Lord our God to banish farre from vs the sinnes of ingrati∣tude and vnkindnes. For (beloued) the onely recompence which the Lord dooth require at our hands for his sundrie giftes & manifold blessings bestowed on vs, is this: to bee thankfull vnto him for the same, to feare him, to walke in his wayes, to loue & to serue him, with all the heart, and with all the soule, Deu. 10.12. This is the very true & perfect way to make our selues thankful. This hath been, is, & must be the sacrifice of al true & perfect Christians, the sacrifice of thanksgiuing, & in al things to be thank∣ful, & such is the will of God in Christ Iesus toward vs; which wil of his we ought & are
bound in al dutie and reuerence to imbrace & obey. For let vs mortall men & wormes meate, weigh well and consider with our selues what God hath done for vs, as Cas∣siodus noteth vpon the Psalms, & how great and good things he hath giuen vs for susten∣tation, preseruation, erudition, consolation and delight; & al these & more than these in his free mercie without merite: & quid ni gratias agamus? and what may wee doo but giue him thankes? Thankes-giuing is named of Bernard (sermon 54 super cant.) Balsamum purissimum, the purest balme, and sweetest sauour in the nosthrills of our God. The Prophet Ose cap. 14. ver. 2. cal∣leth it Vitulos labiorum nostrorum, the calues of our lips: which, by the spirite of God Heb. 13. we are exhorted to offer alwaies vnto God; the sacrifice of praise, the frute the lips, which confesse his name. Now then (as Hugo exhorteth) Si sentis benefici∣um, redde debitum: si accipis benignitatem, redde charitatem. If thou feele a benefit, pay thy debt: if thou receiue liberalitie, deliuer home charitie. This we ought to doo, and this we may doo. For (as S. Austine in ps. 27. saith, Gratias agere Deo possumus, refer∣re non possumus, Wee can giue thankes to
God, but we cannot recompence him. If we might die (saith Chrisostome) a thousand deaths, and powre out all the faculties and powers of the soule, wee can doo nothing worthie of such and so great benifence, fa∣uour and grace, which we haue receiued of God; and therefore it only remaineth that we be thankful. Let vs not flatter our selues least we deceiue our selues: let vs not (vn∣der the veyle of hypocrisie) aske with the Iew Micah. 6.6. the manner and waye to please the Lord? which was contēt to offer sacrifice, but wold not change the custome of his life. Let vs not contend with him, whether God will be worshipped with bare ceremonies, without the heart? Let vs not grieue the Lord with that Iewish motiue: wherewith shall I come before the Lord, & bow my selfe before the high God? Mic. 6.6, 7. Shall I come before him with Calues of a yere old? Wil he be pleased with thou∣sands of rammes, or with streames of oyle? Thou foole, all these are his, both of the forrest, mountaines, and field, Psal. 50.10, 11, 12. If he be hungrie, he wil not tell thee: for the world is his, and all that therein is. Offer then vnto God with Dauid Psa. 116 17. the sacrifice of thankes-giuing. For
who so offereth him thankes and praise, hee honoureth him, Psalm. 50.23. Israel (to please God) would sacrifice the first borne for his transgression, euen the fruite of hys bodie for the sinne of his soule, Mich. 6.7. But the Lords voice by his seruant the pro∣phet Micah, calleth and cryeth better than so, and sheweth thee (ô man) what is good and what he requireth of thee, vers. & surely to doo iustly, and to loue mercie, and to humble thy selfe, and to walke with thy God, in truth, and in a perfect heart, in du∣tie and obedience without hypocrisie: for the Lord hath not as great pleasure in sacri∣fices, as when his voyce is obeyed, 1. Sam. 15.22. To obey with him is better than sacrifice, and to hearken is better than the fat of rammes. Rebellion (in his sight) is as the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression is wickednesse and idolatrie. Whereby wee are taught, that the Lorde hateth nothing more than the sinnes of ingratitude & dis∣obedience; which in his owne people hee punished diuers and sundrie waies, that they might knowe and acknowledge the God that had made them, and the mightie one of Israel that had redeemed them.
The Lord giue vs grace to amend the like faults by the correction and punishment of them. Happie were we, if by their harmes we could learne to beware. For (beloued) the workings of God, whether in blessing or afflicting, present or past, to our selues or others particularly, well and carefully examined, would learne vs manie a fruitefull lesson, if wee had the grace to consider them. S. Paul feared the Corinthians (in his first Epistle written to them, the tenth chapter and the sixt verse) with the examples of the Iewes past long before, that they should not vse the like vi∣ces which they did, least they should be de∣stroyed as they were. Now let vs make those examples ours: for (as the same apostle saith in the eleuenth verse of the forementioned chapter) they are written to admonish vs also, whom the ends of the world are more nighly come vp∣on: that we lust not as they lusted; that we be not idolaters, as were some of them; that we commit not fornication, as some of them committed fornication; that we tempt not Christ, as some of them tempted him; that we murmur not, as some of them murmu∣red; & to be short, that we rebel not, as some
of them also rebelled, least following the like impieties wee incurre the like punnish∣ments; and (to our manifest and iust con∣demnation) cause and procure the heauens and earth, the hils and mountaines, the rocks and mightie foundations; yea, and the beasts of the land and the foules of the aire (before mentioned) to testifie against vs and our obstinacie. As for the heauens and earth, they in great measure haue already witnessed Gods most heauie wrath and indignation against vs, & that in regard of the violating of his law, & contempt of his word. If these maye not serue, yet then greater tokens of his wrath than these, in his creatures about and vn∣der vs, shall appeare toward vs: and final∣nally, (vnles we repent) we shall perish in his iustice vtterly, that in his mercie refused to embrace him and his truth obediently. For if wee regard not the bountifulnes and loue of God our Sauiour toward vs; if wee despise the riches of his goodnes, patience and long suffrance, Rom. 2.4. if we contemn his word, the word of saluation; if the seed thereof shall not fructifie in our hearts; if the peace which we haue with God, ingen∣der impietie; if our ciuill peace breed no∣thing
than beastly securitie; if plentie work pride if with Israel, Num. 1.6. wee loathe Manna; if we fall a lusting after flesh, and set a nought the food of angels; if we tempt God, as wearie of our profession; i we be waterlesse clowdes, carried about of winds Iude ver. 12. if we be corrupt trees without frute; if we despise gouernment, and speak euil of them that are in authoritie, Iude 8. if wee liue as a people caring neither for God, law nor religion; if we forsake Christ, and bid him farewell; if we sit downe and fall asleepe in the seate of the scornefull, Psal. 1.1. if with the deafe adder we stoppe our eares at the voyce of the charmer, Psa. 58 4.5. then shall all the blessings of God bee turned into curses: the message of life shalbe vnto vs a sauor of death vnto death: our vineyard shalbe laid wast Esa. 5.5 6. the hedge thereof shalbe eaten vp, and the wall broken and troden downe; it shall not bee cut nor digged, but briers and thornes shal growe vp, and the cloudes shall not rayne vpon it. Deutronom. 28.37. wee shall bee a wonder, a prouerbe, a common talke, a re∣proach, an astonishment, an hissing, Ier. 24 9. a curse in all places, Ieremie the fiue and twentieth, and the ninth & tenth verses: a
iust reward of our vnkindnesse and rebelli∣on against the Lord, ther shalbe taken from vs the voyce of mirth, and the voyce of gladnes: our laughter shall be turned into mourning, and our ioy into sorrow: our for∣mer wealth and pleasure shall but adde a greater burden vnto our woe. Thus shall all the curses of God come vpon vs, & shall pursue vs, and ouertake vs, till we be con∣sumed; and that because wee would not obey the voyce of our God, to keepe his commaun∣dements and his ordinaunces, which hee com∣maunded vs, Deuter, 28.45. For, would the Lord plague the Citie, where his Name was called vppon, Ierem. 25.29. and should we goe free? But (ô Lord God, and Father of mercies) this bee farre from vs and our po∣steritie for euer. And so (brethren) I will commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, Act. 20.32. which is able to builde further, and to finish his woorke in you, and to giue you an inheritance among all them that are san∣ctified. And withall, I giue you that ex∣hortation which Ioshua gaue to the Chil∣dren of Israel, in the three and twentieth chapter and eleuenth verse, Take good heed vnto your selues that ye loue the Lord your
God. And in the seauenth vearse, Ioyne not your selues to the Gentiles; companie not with the Nations, which wander in and out among you. I meane not Perizzites, but Papists; not Iebusites, but Iesuites: for, as did the Scribes and Pharises, Matth. 23.15. they compasse sea and land, to make one of their profession; and when he is made, they make him two-fold more the childe of hell, than they themselues are. Wherefore (deare Brethren) beware of them: for as Saint Paul warned the Galathians in the fourth chapter and seauenteenth verse, of the like sort of men) Depereunt vos non benè, they are iealous ouer you amisse, euen to serue their owne turne; they would exclude you from the loue that you beare to GOD & his truth, from the loue that ye beare to his Ministers, who preach not themselues, 2. Corinth. 4.5. but Christ Iesus the Lord, and themselues your seruaunts for Iesus sake; to this end, that ye shuld altogether loue them and follow them. But beloued, doo not so. Sticke fast vn∣to the Lord your God, as ye haue done vn∣to this day. Ios. 23.8. Yee know in all your hearts, and in all your soules what and how great things the Lord hath done for ye.
Now therefore feare the Lord, and serue him in vprightnes and in truth, and awaye with those Gods, which your fathers serued beyond the floud and in Egypt, and serue ye the Lord, Ios. 24.14. Be not vnequally yo∣ked with the infidels. 2. Cor. 6.14. the match is vnequall. Come out from among them, vers. 17. and seperate your selues, & touch no vncleane thing. The frute will be this: You shall eate your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in your Citie safely, Leuit. 26.5, 6. God will send peace in the land, and ye shall sleepe, and none shall make you a∣fraid. He will couer you vnder his wings, Psal. 91.4. and you shall bee safe vnder hys feathers: his truth shall be your shield and buckler. You shall not be afraid of the feare of the night, nor of the arrowe that flyeth by day: for he shall giue his Angels charge ouer you, vers. 11. to keepe you in all your wayes. And this will the Lord doo for you and much more, if you feare, loue, serue & obey him. For he will receiue you, he will be a father vnto you, and you shall bee hys sonnes and daughters, 2. Corinth. 6.17, 18. hee will dwell with you, and walke among ou; he will be your God, and you shall be s people, Leu. 26.12.
Finally (that I may conclude with the Pro∣phet, with whom I began) if ye consent and o∣bay, ye shall eate the good things of the lande, Esaie. 1.19.20. But if ye refuse and bee rebelli∣ous, yee shall be deuoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. This same our Lord & God, who alone pon∣dereth, 2. Chron. 6.30. trieth & ruleth the harts of the sonnes of men, Pro. 21.2. guide vs & our harts to the loue of him, 1. Thess. 2.4. mollifie and soften vs, Act. 1.34. and them by the grati∣ous and mighty working of his holy and blessed spirit, 2. Thess. 3.5. that we may sensibly feele & perceiue how good and louing a God and mer∣cifull father hee hath beene and is vnto vs, and that we may shew our selues thankfull and obe∣dient vnto him, liuing vnto his lawes, and em∣bracing his word, and obeying his commande∣ments? so dooing, wee shall be the Lords chiefe treasure aboue all people; he will fight for vs as he did for the Israelites his elect & chosen chil∣dren; he will carrie vs on Eagles wings as he did them, throughout the dangers and troubles of this wofull Egypt, till wee come to the hauen of perfect rest, to the land of the celestiall Canaan, where we shal haue the fruition of endles ioyes 1. Cor. 2.6. which eye hath not seen, neither ere hath heard, neither haue entred into the hart of
man prepared of God for them that loue him. Of which ioyes God of his infinite mercie grant vs all to be partakers, through the merites and death of Iesus Christ his sonne, our Lord and sa∣uiour; to whome with the holy Ghost, triple in person, but one in substance, be praise and glo∣ry, and wisedome, and thankes, honour, and power, and might, for euermore, Apoc. 7.12. Now let vs pray. O Lord, thou that liuest for euer, which be∣holdest from thy holy hill the things that are done vpon earth, heare and hearken we beseech thee, vnto the Prayers of thy ser∣uants, and receiue into thine eares the petiti∣ons of thy creatures. Looke not (O Lord) vp∣on the multitude of our iniquities, and haue no respect to the number of our sinnes: let it not bee thy will to destroy vs which appeare worse before thee than the Oxe and Asse; for
the Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his Masters Cribbe: but we thy children (whom thou hast nourished and brought vp as a most louing father) haue not knowne: and wee that in time past were not a people, but nowe thine owne people, haue not vnderstand. VVe must acknowledge and confesse vnto thee our Lord and God, that euen the byrdes of the Ayre, as the Storke, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow doo better knowe and obserue the times of their comming, then we the iudg∣ments of thee our God. Our misdeedes are great, and they presse vs downe as an heauy burden: Our iniquities are as the sand of the sea in number before thee. Thou hast (O Lord) many and iust causes to doe with vs according to our offences, because wee haue not kept thy commandements, neither haue walked in duty and obedience before thee, but haue rebelled as did thy people the Iewes. VVee haue the sickenesse of our Fathers, wee haue done a∣misse, and dealt wickedly. Notwithstanding (O Lord) wee trust that thou wilt be fauoura∣ble and gracious vnto vs. In a contrite heart and an humble spirite let vs be receiued.
Deale with vs thy seruants which put their trust in thee, after thy louing kindnes, and ac∣cording to the multitude of thy mercies: so shalt thou be called mercifull, and we shall haue great cause to praise and glorifie thee, both for this and all other thy former benefits: specially for that (as vpon this day) thou diddest deliuer vs and our Citie out of the handes of our wic∣ked enemies and hatefull foes; which sayd, that they would burne our dwelling places, and kill our yong men with the sword, & dash our suc∣king children against the ground, and make our infants as a pray, & our virgins a spoyle: which also sayd, we will diuide the booty, our lust shall be satisfied vpon them, and then wee will draw the weapon, and our hand shall destroy them. But thou the Lord of Hoasts, which art great and glorious, maruelous and inuincible in pow∣er, whose voyce no creature can abide, diddest soone bring them and their deuises to naught. Thy right hande was glorious in power; thy right arme brused the enemy. In thy great glory thou diddest ouerthrow them that rose a∣gainst thee: thou diddest send forth thy wrath, which consumed them as the stubble, and by the
blast of thy nostrels the waters came, which ran mightily through the channels of our streets, & so drowned the labours of their hands. And so from that day to this (as the Egle doth her yong ones) thou hast carried vs vppon the winges of thy mercy out of all dangers: for which and all other thy blessinges (most gracious and louing father) we shall from age to age remember thee and thy goodnes; this shall bee a feast day vnto vs and our posterity; we that are now, and they that are to come shall sing prayses vnto thee & exalt thy name. Thou (O Lord) wast and art our strength and power, thou wast and art our saluation; thou hast beene and art our refuge, our defence, our castle, and the rocke of our might: thou art our God; thou art the God of our fathers, we will magnifie thee. And here al∣so wee are bolde to make our deuout and harty prayers vnto thee Lord almighty and father of vs al, that thou (after thine accustomed mercy) wilt vouchsafe continually to remember vs, & from thy holy mount to looke downe vppon vs. Keep vs (Lord) as the apple of thine eye: graue vs as another Zion, vppon the palme of thine handes, and let our walls bee euer in thy sight.
VVhen men shall rise vp against vs, and shall be wrathfully displeased at vs; if wee turne to thee with all our hearts, and with all our soules and confesse thy name, and pray and make sup∣plication before thee in this house, heare thou then (O Lord) in heauen, in the dwelling place of thy habitation, what prayer and supplicati∣on so euer shall bee made of any man, or of all thy people, and pardon the sinne of thy seruants and bee mercifull to the transgressions of thy children; punish vs not according to our de∣serts; deliuer vs not whom thou hast purcha∣sed, for a spoile vnto captiuity and death; sell vs not into the hands of our enemies round a∣about vs; giue vs not ouer for a pray vnto their teeth; make vs not for a Prouerbe of reproch to the Nations farre and neere, lest they aske, where is now their God? Let not the Heathen say which haue heard the fame of thee; because the Lorde was not able to saue this people in the land that he gaue them, or be∣cause hee hated them, therefore hee hath left them in the handes of spoilers to spoile them, and of the Nations to raigne as Lordes ouer them. (Lord) we are thy people and thine inhe∣ritance,
which thou deliueredst of olde by thy mighty power, and preseruedst by thy stretched out arme, Let this greatnes of thy power conti∣nue; withdraw not thy accustomed fauor from vs; hide not thou thy face from vs in the time of troble, but be thou mercifull vnto vs, accor∣ding to thy great mercies: Let all the earth be filled with the brightnesse of thy glory; let all such that beare euill will at Zion, which seeke to lay thy vineyard wast which thou so graci∣ously hast planted & fortified on euery part, & to bring thine heritage to confusion, be confoū∣ded by thy great force and power, and let their strength bee broken, that they may knowe that thou, which art called Iehouah, art alone, euen the most High ouer all the earth. Finally, (O Lorde) carry vs thy people by thy great mercie, whom thou deliueredst; bring vs (we beseech thee) in thy strength vnto thy holy ha∣bitation; plant vs in the mountaine of thine inheritance, which is the place that thou hast prepared for to dwell in, euen in the Sanctua∣rie (O Lorde) which thine handes shall stablish; make vs ioyfull Citizens of thy holy Citie Hierusalem, which is aboue; goe before
vs both by day and by night in the pillar of thy fauour and goodnesse to leade vs the way, that we may safely passe through this vale of misery and wretchednesse, and finish this our pilgri∣mage with ioy: And lastly, that (through the ayde and assistance of our true Ioshua, thy son Iesus Christ) we thy children hauing passed all difficulties, may rest and dwell with thee our father in the Kingdome of all happines and fe∣licitie: Euen so Lord Iesus. Nomb. 6.24. The Lord blesse you, and keep you; the Lord make his face to shine vpon you, and be merci∣full vnto you; the Lord lift vp his countenance vpon you, and giue you peace to your City and your selues now and euer, Amen. Soli Deo Gloria. FINIS.
