5833 99849135 14271
A SHORT DISCO∣VERIE OF THE VN¦OBSERVED DANGERS OF seuerall sorts of ignorant and vnconsiderate Practisers of Physicke in England: Profitable not onely for the deceiued mul∣titude, and easie for their meane capacities, but raising reformed and more aduised thoughts in the best vnderstandings: With Direction for the safest election of a Physition in necessitie: BY IOHN COTTA of Northampton Doctor in Physicke. LONDON, Imprinted for WILLIAM IONES, and RICHARD BOYLE dwelling in the Blacke-Friers. 1612.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND WORTHY Gentlemen, my desired friends and deseruing Pati∣ents of Northamptonshire, honour, health and happinesse of life. RIght noble and renowned Gentlemen, it is now the tenth yeares since the singular fauors, loue, merite and tried worth of my thriceSir William Tate. honored friend hath first here detained mee in the eye of your vse. In this short space of quick time, as my pub∣licke office hath bene truly deuoted vnto you all the common right, so many your noble peculiar deserts haue worthily challenged their speciall claime. In pledge therefore of my loue and dutie vnto you all, and in memorie of my trauels amongst you▪ (when former vowes shall haply hence reall me) what my time here passed hath brought forth, most rare or wor∣thy vnto choice obseruation, I freely publish, and re∣ciprocally here present vnto the countries good, and together with generall caution and rule for safe and wholesome medication, repay and dedicate. The mat∣ter and subiect it selfe, vnto common reading, is of a
virgine fresh and as yet vndiuulged view, and no lesse of necessarie and serious vse. The stile can neither be so farre in loue with it selfe as to forget the matter, nor altogether sauoureth of his oft interrupted & vn∣setled leisure; and breuity doth not suffer the reading to be any burthen. The paines and losse of secured safetieNamque ta∣cere Tutum semper erit. Scalig. Constare gratis quin silentium possit. Martial. in silence are mine own, and the opportunity euery mans that lusteth to censure, or to satisfie any other more honest end: I haue thus freely exposed my selfe in a proposed hope, that the hence deriued good of many may make good my good desire vnto all. Since thē this small sacrifise of my selfe to all your happy healths (a mite answerable to my might) doth therwith include a needful vse vnto a common good, that after succeeding participation may enlarge the benefite vnto all, or at least my poore paines awake more ample merite in some others worth, vouchsafe my free & honest labor in your friendly acceptance, shrowded by the true splendor of your generose and noble worthes, may dazle the narrow sight of base obtrectation. Thus shal your euer deseruing loues and now desired patronages, make both so much more deserued loue your desirous seruant, and religiously euer oblige my selfe in all true rights vnto your daig∣ned fauours, perpetuall solicitor of humble, officious and thankfull memorie. IOHN COTTA.
TO THE READER. THe Sunne doth rise and fall, and returneth euerie day: but when the short day of mans life once goeth downe, it neuerSoles occide∣re & redire pos∣sunt: Nobis cum se∣mel occidit breuis lux, Nox est perpe∣tua vna dormi∣enda. Catull. dawneth. Life is deare, and too deare (being lost) for all inestimable valewes to redeeme: and health is the sweetnesse of life, and the verie life ofNon est viue∣re sed valere vita. Martial. liuing, without which, men while they liue are alreadie dead. Thou therefore that louest thy life, and for thy life thy health, take counsell of a Physition without a fee. So many and so infinitely do the numbers of barbarous and vnlearned counsellours of health at this time ouerspread all corners of this kingdome, that their confused swarmes do not onely euery where couer and e∣clipse the Sun-shine of all true learning & vnderstanding but generally darken and extinguish the very light of cō∣mon sense and reason. It is euery mans office to do good for goodnesse sake, and both my generall duty vnto a common good, and my speciall bond vnto my friends, do earnestly solicite me hereto, since no man (that as yet I heare) hath hitherto vndertaken this taske. For their sakes therefore, for whose harmes by vnskilfull hands I haue oft hereto∣fore sorrowed, and for their loues, whose life and health I wish heareafter preserued, and for their good who will take paines to know it, I here commend (leauing the com∣mon mischiefe to the common care) vnto euerie particu∣lar for himselfe this needfull detection of harmefullCui malus est nemo, quis bo∣nus esse potest. suc∣cours,
and necessarie counsell for safe supplie (necessitie be∣ing neuer more distractedly miserable in hard choyce of good) in so common and confused multitudes of ill. For the meanest readers sake (whom in this whole worke I labour equally to obserue) I haue suited the plainnes and simplicitie of a familiar style: and for facilitie of com∣mon reading haue also smoothed and cleared the streame and current of this little volume, from the stops and in∣terruptions of vnusuall sounds and language (as farre as the subiect will permit) refreshing onely the learned in the margine. Neither haue I esteemed it any indecorum for the meanest vnderstanding sake, together with gene∣rall cautions and rules to insert particular cases and re∣ports, which may be both an inducement to reade, and an enticement to continue, example being neither least plea∣sing nor least profitable vnto the vulgar. There shall ap∣peare in this following treatise described, first, such insuf∣ficient workemen and practitioners, as this time doth ge∣nerally set forth, with their seuerall manners, defects and dangers: and after shall succeed a plaine patterne of that sufficient Artist, vnto whom with iudgement and bet∣ter satisfaction vnto thy owne vnderstanding, thou maist commend thy health, and whom the Ancients, right rea∣son, and experience haue euer allowed. I labour not in this plaine discouerie with words to feast prodigalitie, nor hope altogether for want of correspondence vnto satisfa∣ction to macerate frugall satietie. Few words do best hold Citò dicta Percipiunt do∣ciles animi, re∣tinentque fideles. Horat. memorie, and a short taste doth breede more eager ap∣petite. I will therefore onely briefly point the common forgetfulnesse by bare aduertisement to better memorie, which after may better thence guide it selfe to more
large and accurate consideration. This plaine endeauour begotten of succisiue houres by good desire, thy proposed benefite (deseruing Reader) hath here brought forth into this common light. Enioy therefore therein what seemeth liking, or of vse: the rest thy wiser thoughts may either in reading, abstract, or thy ingenuous mind compare with that is better, or by it selfe censure as a cipher. Farewell. Thy weale-aduising friend, IOHN COTTA.
THE SEVERALL TRACTATES of the Treatise following. In the first Booke. Chap. 1. The Introduction. 2. The Empericke his defects and danger. 3. Women their custome and practise about the sicke, common∣uisiting counsellours, and commenders of medicines. 4. Fugitiues, workers of iugling wonders, Quacksaluers. 5. Surgeons. 6. Apothecaries. 7. Practisers by spels. 8. The explication of the true discouerie of witchcraft in the sicke, together with many and wondered instances in that kind. 9. Wisards. 10. Seruants of Physitions, ministring helpers. In the second booke. Chap. 1. The methodian learned deceiuer or hereticke Physition. 2. Benificed Practisers. 3. Astrologers, Ephemerides-maisters. 4. Coniectors by vrine. 5. Trauellers. In the third Booke. The true Artist his right description and election.
THE FIRST BOOKE. CHAP. I. The Introduction. THE dignitie and worth of Physicks skill consisteth not (as is imagined commonly) in the excellence and preheminence of re∣medies, but in their wise and prudent vse. It is an ancient true saying, that whole∣some medicines by the hands of the iudi∣cious dispenser, are asRemedia si ab indoctis Medi∣cis vsurpentur sunt venena, si verò à doctis & exercitatis, De∣orum sunt auxi∣liares manus. Herophil. Angels of God sent for the good of men; but in the hands of the vnlearned, are messengers of death vnto their farther euill. Good medicines are in themselues excellent instruments of health and life, but re∣quire a learned workeman iudiciously to guide them vnto their destined end. It is order and not confusion, that is euer safe and happie; and knowledge (which worketh by election, and. Aristot: true reason, and not rash boldnesse, which doth good by chanceHomo incon∣sultus & teme∣rarius futura non videt. Cicero. and vncertaine euent) that is the light and safe guide of vnderstanding mindes. Who know∣eth not how muchId solum be∣ne fit quod fit opportunè. Plato. opportunity aduanceth in all per∣formances? how descreete obseruation of smallestin alijs  in alijs . cir∣cumstances aduantageth? how wise and learnedOmnes intelle∣ctus mentisq́ue habitus ad vnius prudētiae com∣plementum de∣siderantur, , &c. Aristot. cuncta∣tion, and sometimes anticipation, make fortunate an acti∣on? Who seeth not in euerie dayes experience, how ne∣cessarie it is by a mature and iudicious eye to foresee in all attemps the after vnauoydableFronte capillata, post est occasio calua. hinderances? Who discer∣neth not that without prudent circumspection and proui∣dent forecast, blinde rashnesse and ignorance do alwaies
hazard, & oft vnrecouerably ouerthrow all good successe. Through want of knowledge to mistake. Aristot. time, is losse of labor and of time. Ignorant slownesse doth come too late, and rash haste doth stumble: he that knoweth not the dan∣ger, doth easily runne vpon the rocke. Thus is it easie for the vnlearned to erre, and those that want vnderstanding to fall into the snare. If then all enterprises prosper by wise aduice, & it is wisedome in matters of meanest moment to consult with a wise and iudicious friend, in cases of health and life certainly euery man is not a sufficient counsellor. He that considereth the multitude of causes in diseases, their infinite kindes, manners, and natures, the varietie of accidents, their sodaine and variable mutations, the soone lost occasions, and hardly gained. &c. Hippoc. Aph 1. opportunities, the wise∣dome which circumstances require, the care and vigilance which the subiect exacteth, the doubts which repugnan∣ces bring, the resolutions which necessities vrge; shall find the most exquisite powers of vnderstanding, iudgement, wit, discretion, and learning herein exactly sifted. From the varietie ofPrincipium medendi cog∣nitio morbi, minimusq́ue er∣ror in illius ig∣noratione com∣missus est max∣imus in fine. Galen. de Meth. med. causes of diseases, what varying differences arise in the manner, quantity, qualitie, and times of reme∣dies: euery one requiring a separate and distinct respect and dispensation, euen in the same disease and person? The immediate cause from the mediate, the antecedent from the continent, the necessarie from the casuall and contin∣gent, require both a diuers handling, and also a distinction in order of handling: neither is there a like consideration of the externall and internall, the positiue, the priuatiue, the materiall, the immateriall, those that are single and alone, and those that are ioyntly and with others. Some∣times many causes are coincident in one effect, sometimes many diseases from one cause. Sometimes the same cause receiueth a difference from it selfe, and exacteth an exact difference in his owne remedies. Sometime the same cause is so farre vnlike it selfe that it seemeth not it selfe, being either more then it selfe in quantity, or a monster toAccessu quali∣tatis pestiferae & deleteriae. it selfe in malignant quality. As causes & diseases (according
to their causes:) so no lesse materiall are accidents to be distinctly knowne and considered. Some of them bring Hinc alia  in qui∣bus , alia . &c. certaine knowledge, some artificiall coniecture, some matter of presumption and probability. Some are mani∣fest, some anxious and ambiguous, some significant by themselues, some consignificant with others. Some are of vertue in singularitie, some in multitude: some are conside∣red as signes and causes, some as neither, some as both. Some accidents go before the disease, some accompany, some follow after. Ordinarily the disease doth draw all at∣tendance vnto it selfe, sometimes theSymptoma crudeliter saeui∣ens à morbo a∣uocat. Hinc cu∣ratio duplex ha∣betur, haec re∣gularis, illa co∣acta. accident doth ob∣scure the disease. Some accidents alone are ciphers, but ad∣ded vnto other make vp a iust account; some prognosti∣cate, some iudicate, some are idle: some iudicate the con∣stitution of the sicke, some the humour, some the diseased part, some the disease it selfe, and some the issue. Some∣times diseases are discouered by no signes at all, but by an exact and exquisiteHaec est illa  acerrime con∣iectans,  intuēs summa ingenij sagacia. disquisition of a sound andAEgritudines aliae manifestae, aliae occultae, aliae difficiles cognitu, aliae fa∣ciles, aliae incō∣prehensae nisi exquisita & sub∣tili aestimatione. Auicenna tract. de horis AEgrit. solert iudgement. So that according to the kindes, places, cour∣ses, changes and courses of accidents, varie significations, iudications and prognostications, and follow safe admini∣stration and application of apt remedies, vnto the more speedySummè haec spectanda in Medico vt tutè, iucundè, celeri∣tèr salutem ex∣pediat. benefite of the sicke, facilitie of cure, and securitie of after health. Diseases, their causes and circumstances wisely distinguished and knowne, do point a discreete knowing workman to a more certaine issue; without which as the beginning of cure must necessarily be rash, so must the end be doubtlesly vncertaine. Hence it must needs be apparent, that by the common neglect and igno∣rance herein, the monopolizing of cures vnto the prero∣gatiue of this or that secret, and thereby the contempt of the due permutation of medicines, according to requisite circumstances and necessities, and the omission & reiecti∣on of the wholesome administratiō of the generallQuemadmo∣dum duae sunt primae & com∣munissimae morborum causae, Plethora & Cacochymia, sic totidem oportet esse communissima re∣media purgationem debitam, & idoneam opportunamq́ue sanguinis missionem, &c. reme∣dies (without which the particular are vaine and preposte∣rous)
do commonly turne to the common perdition of most valetudinary men. From hence also it doth come to passe, that many diseaes, beyond their owne nature, and besides the constitution of the sicke, grow so commonly, so easily rooted, and vnobseruedly confirmed in mens bo∣dies, that oft they can neuer haue end, which by due or∣dering should neuer haue had beginning. Hence grow so frequent the multitude of strange and vnnaturall chan∣ges, and new fashions of fits, euen through the too com∣mon vse of wholesome remedies in vulgar and prophane hands. For through this presumption, either by idle tri∣fling and vaine flattery of ease, dangerous diseases quick∣ly & in short time grow too proud for any medication: or else in the otherAegritudines in alias aliae facilè mutantur. Auicen. de dis∣pos. Aegrit, extreme, by too much haste and violence are hunted out of their owne course,. Hippoc. Aphor. l. 2. and so metamor∣phize themselues into wilde and vnaccustomed shapes. Hence likewise it cometh to passe, that diseases in their owne kind easie and of small continuance, by the wrong and iniury of remedies (without aduice admitted and ce∣lebrated) are not onely extended, to a lingring age of ma∣ny daies: but from daies to weekes, from weekes to yeares, yea oft vnto a longer life then the sicke himselfe, after him inheriting his children and posteritie. It is a verified and true saying, Worse are the bad after-consequences of ill applied medicines, then diseases themselues. Although this be often apparent, euen vnto the common sence of vulgar sight, yet much more infinite are the impeachments and ruines of health by the learned seene and discouered dai∣ly, whereof a common eye is not. Non est cuiusuis ma∣lum in initio ex∣oiens dignos∣cere. Astot. in Polit. capable; while vnper∣ceiued mischiefes stealingly. Latet cor∣ruptio quia non tota simul fit, decipiturque mens ab illa. Aristot. in Polit. & insensibly enter with vn∣priuiledged remedies, and by some present benefite or ease for a time, gayning credit and entertainement, by litle and litle secretly vndermine the verie frame and foundation of life. We may instance in Tobacco: with what high fame and great renowne was it at his first arriuall here in Eng∣land entertained as an incomparable iewell of health, and an vniuersall antidote and supersedeas against the force,
and capias of all diseases, euery man with the smoke there∣of in his nosthrils, breathing the prayles and excellencies thereof in his mouth? But now hath not time and many a mans wofull experience giuen testimonie to right reason and iudgement, from the first suspecting, and vntill this prouing time suspending the too great name thereof? Is not now this high blased remedy manifestly discouered▪ through intemperance and custome, to be a monster of many diseases? Since the riotous vse of this strange Indi∣an, let it be noted how many strange & before vnknowne diseases haue crept in vnnaturally, besides the former cu∣stome and nature of the nation, prouing now naturall and customary to the follies of the nation. Is it not apparent that the aire of this vapor and smoke by the subtility ther∣of, doth sodainly search all parts with a generall distresse oft times to nature? And is it not thence probable, that by aduantage in the weakest, it may oft leaue behinde it (es∣pecially where it is any time vsed) such impression and print, besides painefull distention through his inclosed va∣pour, that no time of life, no remedies, oft times, are euer after able to blotA vaporosae & aereae substātiae occulto subtili∣q́ue seminario imperceptibili∣ter nouos & in∣auditos obepe∣e humano generi affectus ignotum nō est. Hinc Galenus lib. 1. praedicti∣onum interpre∣tatur illud  Hippocratis, ambientis aeris efficaciā▪ quod insensibili rati∣one, ideoq́ue miris modis corpora immu∣tare soleat. Hoc non modo in aere pestilenti conspicuum, sed & in pluribus exhalationum generibus per aerem diffusis clam, & celeri∣ter quasi syde∣rantibus. out? And frō this Nicotian fume grow now adaies, doubtlesly, many our frequent complaints, and euerie day new descriptions ofHinc febres catarrhosae, & ab his latentes , cachex∣iae etiam occul∣t obrepentes, tota aepe san∣guinis massa à catarrho conta∣minata dum in venas delabitur, saepe diuersis corporis partibus imperceptibiliter lacessitis, saepe manifesto maleficio oppressis, prout per arterias, musculos, neruos, aut occultos & latentes meatus praecipitata à capite fertur pituita. paines, according haply to the diuersitie and difference of the parts it chief∣ly affecteth, or the more or lesse extreme vse thereof. And men haply led by some present bewitching feeling of ease, or momentarie imagined release from paine at some time, hereby vnaduisedly with such meanes of their ease, drinke into some weake parts, such seede of future poison, as hauing giuen them for a time supposed pleasing ease, doth for time to come secretly and vnfelt settle in their bones and solid parts, a neuer dying disease (while they liue.) How many famous patrons and admirers of this simple, haue senselesly died in the very time of the idle vse
thereof, while it yet smoked in their teeth? and others li∣uing in the immoderateI condemne not a plentifull and liberall vse thereof when a∣ny necessitie or neede with rea∣son and iudge∣ment conduct thereto, but the ordinary, fond and needelesse custome therof, led by no per∣swasion of any foreseene good or benefite, must needes fall into the cō∣mon errors and harmes of vseles and needelesse actions. burning loue therein, haue with the fierie zealous gluttonie thereof (as the badge of his mastership in thē) sensibly stupefied & dried vp their euer after, foolish and besotted braines? I might giue other in∣stance in these well knowne and vulgar remedies of the named French disease, which by a present benumming of the sense, cousining, and easing of paine, do withall, for after time, inure and leaue behinde them such a rottennes, and weaknesse ofttimes of the bones and sinewes, as suffe∣reth few of our Mercurials to liue, to knowRato antece∣dentem scelestū Deseruit pede poena claudo. Horat. their age in health, especially who throughly knew the siluer-salue in their youth. Hence toward declining age (if not before) some fall into consumptions and marasmes, some lose their teeth, some haue the palate of the mouth rotted, some the very bones of their head eaten, some by conuulsions their mouthes and faces set awry. And it is ordinary with most of this sort, long before haruest to leaue no grasse grow vpon their paued tops. I do not altogether condēne these smoakes, but feare their fire, and with the Ancients sparingly commend their kinde of remedies, knowing their pernicious danger in their ignorant and rash ouervse, with their singular seruice in some rare exigents, God and nature haply leauing a sting and poyson in them, for their too common vitious neede and custome. I might here yet farther insist in all other diseases, how the vse of the most excellent, proper, and apt remedies being vnaptly appli∣ed, either too little or tooQuot sunt qui solo victu com∣petenti citra vllum discrimen ab affectibus li∣berari possint, qui praeter rem pharmacis con∣tunduntur? Brudus de vict. febricit. much, too soone or too late, before their season or after, in some cases at any time, or in any maner, bring in corrigible and helpeles harmes, being in their owne natureVidi quos in pemiciem trax∣erit solum sim∣plex apozema ex numaria cum senae folijs temerè exhibitis: nam corpus totum in colliquantem fluxum traxit. Heurnius in Aphor. Hippocr. harmeles, but in their vnskilfull vse pernicious and mortall. It is apparent in all mysteries and faculties whatsoeuer, that the excellencie of the toole without the excellencie of the workeman, doth not bring forth excellencie in the workmanship. Hence it must
needes come to passe, that medicines though wholesome in themselues, and of a sauing and soueraigne power, with∣out any touch of harmefull quality at all, yet being igno∣rantly or indiscreetly out of time or place disposed or dis∣pensed, must likewise bring forth mischiefe, in steade of expected good. And although many hardened by custome vnto a boldnes of trāsgressing in this kind, prouoke oft re∣uenge of their follie, (for a time without harme or punish∣ment) yet do they not alwayes escape: for though happe oft passe by, it lights atQuem saepe transit casus, ali∣quando inuenit, Senec. last, and not seldome heauily. Cassia is esteemed for a delicate, wholesome and harmelesse lenitiue vnto old men, children, babes, women with child, and the weakest amongst the sicke; yet the learned know it in someGraues affert mutationes & perniciosas saepe Cassia, pertur∣bat, distendit, di∣storquet cum molestis deli∣quijs in naturis & temperamē∣tis biliosis. Quercit. de tot. capit. Affectib. cases not onely vnprofitable, but of maine mis∣chiefe. Rhabarb is said to be the life of the liuer, yet in some conditions thereof it is anIn lienteria, in ventriculi imbe∣cillitate in flati∣bus, in renum vlceribus & ve∣sicae notissima sunt mala. enemie; And for the generall remedies, phlebotomy, purging, vomite, sweating, bathing and the like, reason and experience daily giue demonstra∣tion, that oft in the same body, and the same disease, they are variablie, sometime necessary, sometimes profitable not necessary, sometimes neither profitable nor necessary, but accursed. Sometimes bleeding doth ventilate and re∣fresh the spirits aboue, and beyond all other remedies, and is the onely key vnto health; sometimes againe it doth ex∣haust and spend their vigour, sometime being both profi∣table and necessary, yet vsed out of time or quantity doth no good, or vsed vnseasonably doth much hurt. Purgatiōs in some estates withSiccis corpori∣bus non parum nocet. preparatiues, and in some without In humoris turgescentia, ni∣mia tenuitate▪ ichore susque deque fluido. preparatiues are harmefull: in some either. Hippoc. Apho∣ris. with prepa∣ratiues, or withoutHaec sunt . Communem materiem edu∣centia. preparatiues they are necessary and neuer to be omitted. And as there is infinite danger in er∣rour and ignorant dispensation, so is there vnspeakable good in the prudent prescription according to the nature, quality and seate of each humor; according to which it is wisdome sometimes to quicken, sometimes to alay, some∣times to hasten, sometimes to moderate their effects, dis∣creete stayes oft making more speedy iourneys.Aph. 18. lib. 4. Aph. 17. lib. 4. Vomits
in some diseases are altogether banished and not admit∣ted, and in some contrariwise they haue onely priuiledge. The like may be said of outward remedies, plaisters, vn∣guents, cereclothes, fomentations, and baths, which also according to wise and discreete administration, or a rash and heedlesse abuse, are good or euill. And this is the rea∣son, that so many famous and renowned remedies now a∣daies bring forth effects vnworthy themselues; for (being with such dissolute licenciousnesse euery where and in all places permitted to breake forth, out of the prudent awe of vnderstandings guidance) how shall they choose but become wild and irregular in the hands of vnskilfull raines that want true art, and the methode of their right dispen∣sation? There is no place nor person ignorant with what confusion of good order (either by abuse of immunities, or impunitie, ill prouision, or ill execution of good lawes) through all parts of this kingdome, all sorts of vile people and vnskilfull persons without restraint, make gainefull traffique by botching in physicke; and hereby (besides ma∣ny wicked practises, iuglings, cousinages & impostures, which maske vnespied vnder the colour and pretence of medicining) numbers of vnwotting innocents daily in thrall, and betray themselues, their liues and safetie, to su∣staine the riot, lusts and lawlesse liuing of their enemies & common homicides. It is a world to see what swarmes a∣bound in this kinde, not onely of Taylors, Shoemakers, Weauers, Midwiues, Cookes, and Priests, but Witches, Coniurers, Iuglers, and Fortune-tellers. It were a wrong to exempt any that want wit or honestie in a whole coun∣try, yea and many that haue too much of either, must be priuiledged by an old prouerbe, to be Physitions, because it is no manners to call them fooles. And hereby not one∣ly the simple and vnlettered, but oft times men of better sort and qualitie, casting their eyes vpon some attempts of these barbarous medicine-mongers, (good oft in their e∣uent) and not considering the dangerousnesse of such ha∣bite and custome, desirously oft times entertaine the mes∣sengers
and ministers of vnrecouerablePerdere quos vult Iupiter, hos dementat. Senec. miserie vnto their after life. For as in militarie designes, oft times a bold and foole-hardy enterprise aboue and besides reason, and beyond expectation, produceth an excellent and admired good in the happie issue, yet is it not commended, or in any case permitted (as being verie dangerous) in ordinarie practise or custome of warfare: so likewise diuers euents of medicines proue good, whose bold vse and rash pre∣scription is dangerous and vnskilfull. I do not onely here∣in pittie the meane capacitie, but wonder also at the mad∣nesse of men in their wits, who in other kinds of know∣ledge reuerend, yet herein, with desire of life, seeme oft to haue so little care of their liues. It is strange to obserue how few in these dayes know, and how none almost la∣bour to know with election and according to reason, or reasonable likelihood, to bestow in cases of their liues the trust and care of their crased healths, but for the most part wanting a right notice of a iudicious choice, take counsel either of common report which is a common lier, or of priuate commendations, which are euer partiall. The vnmindfulnesse hereof, and the more minde of mindlesse things, do steale from men the minds of men. Hence eue∣ry where preposterous intrusion doth disorder the right and propriety of euery thing, and the generall forgetfulnes of that which to euerie one is most pertinent, doth beget an itching businesse in that which to euerie one is most impertinent; and selfe conceited and presuming ignorance doth pricke forward rash spirits to become more bold & busie, then modestie doth permit discreete mindes, sober∣ly limited within their owne bounds. This is the cause, that vnwottingly to the poore patient, vnwittingly to the vn∣skilfull workeman, and generally for the most part vnob∣serued of all, is the thread of many a mans life ordinarily, by vnskilfull hands intangled in such inextricable knots of sicknesse, paines and death, as no time nor art are euer able to vnfold. Vnproper remedies are for the most part worse then diseases, and vnlearned Physitions of all bad causes
of diseases themselues the worst. That therefore men con∣tinue not in this generall confusion (through voluntarie ignorance, euer ignorantly vnfortunate) it is not a need∣lesse learning, more studiously to know and discerne , Euripid. good from ill, and ill from good, beginning with the last first. CHAP. II. Of the Empericke. RIghtQuae sub sen∣sum non cadunt mentis vis & ra∣tio percipit. Gal. reason and trueMente per∣specta & ratio∣ne generatim comprehensa, sensuum fide cognoscimus magis & stabi∣limus. Gal. de sect. experience are two the sole inseparable instruments of all humane knowledge: the Empericke tru∣sting vnto experience alone without rea∣son, and the Methodian vnto the abuse of right reason; the Ancients haue deuided all sorts of erronious Physitions into these twoDuplex igno∣rantium medi∣corum genus. Alterum eorum qui sola experi∣entia nitun∣tur, aiuntq́ue nullius rei natu∣ram posse ratio∣ne inueniri. Al∣terum eorum qui sibi nomen sapientiae vindicant, & licet parem habeant cum prioribus ignorantiam, opinionem tamen scientiae sunt aucupati. Sed eorum inscitia inde habet initium quòd in rationalibus scientijs nequaquam sunt exercitati, quae nos ritè distinguere & secernere do∣cent as propositiones quae demonstrandi vim habent, ab ijs quae probabilitatem quidem continent, nihil autē veri possunt aut demonstrare aut inuenire. Gal. lib. 1. de different. febr.. For ignorant experience and without reason, is a falseIdeo impositum est iudicium tanquam praetor quidam ad inuentorum & obiectorum perpensionem. Sensus enim apprehensio est simplex, non iungit aut disiungit, neque iudicat, sed aliavis interna per sensum intellectum promouet. Scalig. de Sbutil. sense, and mistaking reason is deniall of reason. As therefore vn∣to these two, other ages before, so we now may reduce all the faultie practitioners of our time, beginning with the Empericke. The Empericke is he who reiectethEmpiricir ati∣nem negant, sensum recipiunt. Galen libr. de Sectis. the dis∣quisition of diseases and remedies, their causes, natures & qualities according to iudgement and vnderstanding, and the carefull perpension and ballancing of his action and practise vnto a iust proportion with reason; but onely in∣formeth himselfe by such things as oft appeare euident & manifest vnto sense and experimentall proofe, carrying his heart and vnderstanding (for the most part) in his hands and eyes, taking nothing sure but what he sees or handles;
and from the differing maners of experience, are numbred seuerall and diuers kindsHinc . &c. of experience. The defect in the Empericke hence appeareth to be want of true methode & the habite of right operation and practise according to reason, (which is art) through which defect his actions must needs oft be reasonlesse,Ars vsus rerū incertos certis legibus coercet, Scalig. de Subt. and by consequent as blind in their intention, so likely to be foolish in their issue and execution. For there must needs be in all actions want of much more necessary knowledge then sense and experi∣ence canne aduance vnto: and experience must needes witnesse against it selfe, that the longest age of experience doth nothing so fully furnish and instruct in many things, as much more speedily doth prudent inuention; which though occasioned and helped by bookes and reading, which are both keyes vnto all knowledge, and also rich storehouses of experiences, not onely of one age and countrie, but of all times & nations; yet do they only glut the sense with stories of experiences past, but reason and iudgement truly enrich the mind, and giue daily new in∣crease and light in before vntried & vnexperienced truths. Indeede particular experience, if it be accompanied with vnderstandingOmnibus in rebus prudenter agendis ratio pro suasore ha∣benda, vsus pro duce. Scalig. and right reason (which is the touch∣stone of truth and right in nature) establisheth and confir∣meth knowledge; but if experience be no more but expe∣rience, it must needes proue in many cases a slow guide to lame instruction. For as it is with the souldier in the field, let his owne speciall experience in armes be neuer so anci∣ent, so true, so sound, yet without a more generallPrudentia est habitus qui de∣ducit omnia sua facta è rationi∣bus ad fines suos sine offensione. Dicimus enim prudenter factū ab Imperatore vbi rectè partes exercitus dis∣posuerit, tamet∣si similes ordi∣nes acierum nunquam antea notos habuerit. Scalig. in Poet. vnder∣standing or theorie, and a more enlarged knowledge then his particular and limited experience can bring forth, he must be lamely fitted vnto many suddaine and oft before vnseene occurrents, which the perpetuall mutabilitie and change of circumstances in warfare must needes pro∣duce. The field, the enemie, the time (not alwaies the same) require a diuers and oft a contrarie consultation, designe and manner, wherein one particular experience by it selfe cannot but be much wanting, because the same
thing or actiō seldome or neuer happens againe the same in all circumstances; & one circumstanceAd eundem modu non potest quidquā saepe videri. Aslepiad. alone cōmonly altereth the whole cōdition. As it is in military affaires, so is it in the assaults of diseases, where the fight & wrestling of nature is not alway in the same part, nor in the same forme or maner, nor with the same disease, nor of the same period: all which circumstances in the same subiect cannot happen alwaies to anie sight or sense the same, (which maketh experience) yet are euer present in the generall notions of the vnderstanding, whereby the prudent and wise man doth make supplie though experience faile. Besides the differences which circumstances make, many diseases in themselues and their owne kinde are such as are scarce seene in a mansGalenus mor∣borum saepe meminit quos à se nunquam visos profitetur, alios quos se∣mel autbis. life, some in many yeares, some in an age, some in many generations; & therein how can experience giue prescription for those things whereof it hath not had experience? for experience is of things. Arist. in Eth. oft seene. If then the same things be in all circumstances seldome or neuer seene, and some at sometime seene which a life or age shall not see againe, and there can be no true experience where there is not sight and sense, how blinde an helpe must oft experience be? Doth not euerie day bring forth somewhat new or strange vnto the day, and worthy denomination of the day? The French, Spanish, Neapolitane, Italian disease was a stranger sometime in old Albion, which now is an English denison. The Scorbut not maine yeares since was vnnamed of writers; now commonly knowne vnto a common eye. The English sweatingSudor Angli∣cus tam laethalis vt vix cētisimus quisque correp∣tus euaderet. Qui euadebant in morbum bis ter{que} relabebā∣tur, & tandem concidebant. Correpti intra 24. horas animo deficiebant & moriebantur. Hollerius ex Polydoro Vir∣gilio. sicknesse very sel∣dome (if more then once) here seene, nor at all, or at least not oft elsewhere. To wander yet farther into some more wonder, Ruland with other reporteth a tooth of gold na∣turally Rulandus de Dente aureo. growing with the common ranke in the mouth of a child: HolleriusHollerius in ratis obseruati∣onibus. witnesseth a child in the wombe to thrust forth the hand at the nauill of the mother, and so continuing the space of fifteene daies, in the end the child borne liuing, and the mother saued. BrasauolusBrasauol. in Aph. Hipp. 18. s. 6. mē∣tioneth his cure of a soludier who liued after 3 yeares, ha∣uing
almost halfe his head cut away with a portion of his braines, onely thereby losing his sense and memory, neuer eating nor hauing memorie to require at any time to eate, but as it was put into him; nor redeliuerage at the po∣sternes, but insensiblie. Albucasis knew in his time a womā carrying one dead child in her wombe, notwithstanding to conceiue and quicken of another, the dead child in the meane season rotting and falling away by parcels at seueral times. But to passe these and many the like infinite recei∣ued vpon credite and report, my selfe haue met some acci∣dents in my owne practise, & for the most part within the space of these eight last yeares, worth their memorie. In the yeare 1608. an ancient gentlemanOf Thingede in Northamp∣tonshire. being neither sicke nor much pained, and onely molested with a cough and shortnesse of wind (from which his health was neuer free) requested my aduice for the preuention of the in∣crease of the former accidents (in which also he found, vn∣to the generall seeming vnto his owne sense and some o∣ther learned counsaile, very chearfull and comfortable a∣mendement) my selfe onely suspecting and signifying vnto his friends my despaire. Betweene his pulses on the right side and the left in generall manifestly appeared a wonde∣red ods, so continuing the space of 12. or 14. daies toge∣ther. On the left side no positionPulsibus ma∣num applicand tres modos tra∣dit Galenus lib. de Pulsib. palpa∣tionem, com∣pression, modum mediū. of touch, no search could finde any pulse at all. On the right side the pulses were con∣stantly & continually, as in his best health, manifest, strong, equall, in good order, with full distentiō vnto all the dimē∣sions. In the same parts where the pulses on the other side seemed dead, all other faculties perfectly liued in naturall heate, color, vigour, sense & motiō. This was thē witnessed by certaine honorable gentle women present, whō well vn∣derstanding & more then sufficiēt for such a taske, I therto intreated, & it cold by no sense be denied. It was imagined by some learned dissenting frō my first howres dislike, that it was no other but an imperceptibilitieTale quiddam narrat Struthius in arte Sphyg∣mica, propter vulnus acceptū, in brachij arte∣ria pulsationem fieri posse im∣perceptibilem. of his pulse, and without danger, as supposed vsuall vnto him in his health by reason of diuers deepe wounds tenne yeares before re∣ceiued
vpon that side. My experience of the contrarie oft in his former health, and also in diuers other his sicknesses, confirmed by owne doubt, & death which determineth all things, sodainly and vnexspectedly determined this, in so faire a visard so many dayes deceiuing many. In the yeare 1604. my paines was solicited vnto a vertuous Lady ho∣norably both in her Knight, and her selfe allied, and no lesse eminent in their owne worth, then lying neare Graf∣ton in Northampton shire. I found her left by a former A Parson-Physition. Physition to verifie his prediction by her death. She was miserably perplexed with the doubtfull deliuery of a dan∣gerously begunne abortion, her owne strength failing, and the ordinarie assistance of women in those cases shrinking from her, and a deepe die of a mixt and diuers coloured iaundies, with extreme paines of her stomacke (giuing no rest nor intermission) adding feare and sorrow; the sub∣stance also of her vrine continually troubled, confusedly thicke, the colour altogether resembling the strained iuice of the grenest hearbe. In the terrour of her abortion my indeuour proued vnto her speedily happy and succesfull. Afterward according vnto the second indication from the iaundies (necessity vrging, and her strength then fauouring the worke) I commanded her to bleede in the arme; which done with good ease and felicitie, nature, in spite of all in∣deuour to the contrarie, kept the orifice after still open, running daily and continually the space of three weekes together, and then healing and closingHollerius in∣ter raras obser∣uationes virum memorat cui è regione Hepa∣tis vena per in∣terualla dehis∣cebat, quae san∣guinem funde∣bat, posteà san∣guine sponte restitante vesti∣gium nullum apparebat. it selfe with her perfect amendment. At the same time (a sodaine sharpe paine giuing a speciall distinct sense thereof) she disbur∣thened of a round white hard stone full of little holes, that part which giueth the name and seate vnto the Co∣like. In the yeare 1607. a youngOf Hacleton in Northampton shire. woman of 30 yeares age, with another graue gentlewoman accompanying her, came vnto me requiring aduice in her wondered estate and condition. The skin or membrane of her belly (from the nauill downeward withered, dead, and gathered toge∣ther, in likenesse of a rotten bladder or a wet leather bag,
and in that forme falling flagge from the former close set∣ting vnto the guts and bellie) lay continually loose vnto the one side. In the yeare 1601. a barbersApprentis vnto one Iohn Frende. boy of North∣hamptō auoided wormes, besides other ordinary passages, bySimile quid∣dam inter raras obseruationes arrat Holleri∣us, & Medicus Argentoratensis Didymus Ob∣rechtus de se ip∣so idem refert. vrine. In the yeare 1600. a shoomaker of Northamp∣ton sometime a bayliffe of the towne, falling dangerously sick, called my counsell together with an Empericke. The other accused the hypochondriaca passio, my selfe made knowne my suspition of an abscession in the bulke: vaine hope gaue credite to that it rather desired, and the patient trusted himselfe with the other. Shortly after he was sur∣prised with sodaine frequent swoundings & feare of im∣minent suffocation, but by cough and spitting escaped, and with wonder in short space filled diuers largeSimile quid∣dam narrat Re∣olanus de ae∣gro qui simili materia plures pelues impleue∣rit, & expurga∣tus perfectè, li∣beratus est. Ad∣dit praeterea hu∣iusmodi ab∣scessus prima∣rios nō esse sed epigenemati∣cos, nec verum aut legitimum pus, sed potius , dum pi∣tuita in thoraeis capacitatem de∣stillatione lap∣sa morâ coqui∣tur, & fit puri si∣mile. basins with foule purulent stuffe (one paroxysme at once, some∣time before intermission, making vp the said measure.) In this feare and terrour vnto himselfe and the beholders, he earnestly sued, and againe obtained my aduice. He perfect∣ly recouered (the purulent collection after theA Principio saniei expurge∣tionis numeran∣do, non genera∣tionis. 40 day exhaust) and he yet liueth freeNon praeclsè necessarium est intra 40 dies vel expurgari, velin pthisin transire, nam & post 40 diem & expurgari & liberari quis potest proculdubio, modò 40 diem non multum ex∣cedat. Brasauol. in Aph. Hipp. from the sequeles of any other manifest disease or danger. In the yeare 1607. a womanWife vnto Maister Langham of Thornby in Northamp∣tonshire. vexed with a palpitation of her heart, to∣gether with an oft intermission of her pulse, by an in∣ward presention mouing from a so daine troubled agitati∣on of her minde, would vsually vnto my selfe (with others present) foretell when her pulse should stand and intermit, sometimes two, sometimes three or foure pulsations, be∣fore the intermission. The pulse in theiust knowne number and time did euer keepe time with her prediction, her∣selfe nor then nor euer wotting how to feele a pulse by her hand or touching. She in this manner continued by vncertaine fits and times the space of 2 months or thereabouts, while sometime myselfe resorted vnto her,
being for that and other accidents by her husband called & consulted. It is reported vnto me by diuers well know∣ing gentlewomen, and others of good worth, that aWife vnto one Tiplar of Har∣ding stone in Northampton∣shire. wo∣man dwelling within a mile of Northamptō was brought to bed first of one childe, and within twenty weekes after of another, quickening of the latter the same day shee was churched of the first. It is testified by many now inhabi∣tants of Northampton, that from within the wombe of a woman with child (then dwelling in the towne) her child was audibly heard to cry, vnto her owne amazement, and the wonder of diuers hearers of credite & vnderstanding. Anno 1610 a woman of NorthamptonOf Woolaston in Northamp∣tonshire. shire being with child and growing neare the time of her deliuery, was extraordinarily diuers dayes pained in the bellie an inch distant from the nauill, vntill at length diuers wormes, each equalling in length a quarter of an ell, sodainly at two distant places did eate themselues a passage through the skinne of her bellie; and so came forth and gaue her ease. A gentlewoman my late patient, and now dwelling in Northampton, reporteth vnto me frō her owne sight with many other eye witnesses; that among her owne children a male child, being then fiue weekes of age, a fortnight to∣gether had the breasts full of milke, as readily & plentiful∣ly flowing and spouting out milke as the breasts of a suck-giuing nurse. These few instances are sufficient to proue the like contingence of other the like, which other times in other manner, may and do oft bring forth. Neither is euer nature so great a niggard (though not to euery eye alike bountifull) but euery day almost may pose bare and naked experience. He therefore that seeth not but with his eyes of his owne experience; where he hath no experience, hath no eyesPer artis exer∣citationem cō∣peri eam reme∣diorum inuenti∣onem quae ex vera demon∣stratione proce∣dit in his quae rarò accidunt longè praestare: vnde multos curaui morbos medicamentis ab experientia alienis., and therefore there is blind and cannot see. Since then many things fall out beyond the compasse of experience, which by experience make experince blind, how then where are no eyes shall an Empericke borrow eyes?Galende Locis affect. It is againe answered, Though the Empericke haply haue not seene the same with that which seldome, or once
onely doth happe, yet very seldome hath he, not oft, or at least sometime seene theHinc ille En∣piricorum tran∣situs ad simile . like, and thence vnto the like he fits the like disposing. But with the wise the like is much vnlike theSimilitudo nō affert identitatē. same. Their confusion is onely proper vnto the foole, and the dangerous issue his deserued punish∣ment. It is a chiefe point in all learnings truly to discene Vnum est ex Principijs hu∣manae sapientiae rerum differen∣tium similitudi∣nes & similium differentias ritè dignoscere. Aristot in Top. betweene differing similitudes and like differences. Ma∣ny accidents commonly fall out seeming like, yet haue no affinitie; and againe in shew the same, yet indeede contra∣rie. Contraries haue oft in many things likenesse, and like∣nesse contrarieties easilie deceiuing the vnwotting and vnleamed. It is therefore of no small moment or conse∣quence for a Physition truly by a discerning eye to put iust difference. This he that cannot do, must either through the deceiuablenesse of likenesses confound repugnant re∣medies, (which cannot be without great harme and ha∣zard of life and health) or by mistaking parities for impa∣rities disioyne helpes better vnited, which cannot be with∣out both hinderance and hurt vnto the sicke, their safetie and securitie. Many diseases ofttimes so liuely mocke one the other, that a good eye may easily deceiue it selfe. The vlcers of the baldder and the reynes, a mole and a true conception, a ruptue and a relaxation, plurisies and some kindes of inflammations of the liuer; the Colike and some other kinde of the same inflammations, diuers kinds ofHinc Hectici pulmonarij & hectici à iecore retorrido. &c. consumptions according to diuersPauci febrem spuriam dupli∣cem à quotidi∣ana distinguunt; nam licet facilè sit febrem cog∣noscere, difficile est hanc ab illa distinguere Sy∣nochus putris & non putris fa∣cilè decipiūt ab eadem materia antecedente na∣tae, cum mate∣riae similitudo similia producat accidentia vt & partium vicini∣tas, continuitas, situs. feauers with infinite more in their intricate ambiguities, dissemble themselues and deceitfully resemble one the other, much thereby oft times perplexing the best vnderstanding. Som∣times the most vnlike will put on likenesse, and the most like weare contrarietie. What more vnlike then death and life, death to life, and life to death? Yet sometimes life ap∣peareth in the shape of death, terrifying the beholders with frightfull shewes of inquietude & anxietie, deliqua∣tion, sodaine and violent euacuations and exagitations Aegri febriunt, vehementius vigilant, grauiter se habent quando sunt propinqui crisi. Galen. of the whole body,Semper grauia symp∣tomata crisim antecedunt. Hippo. doctr. Aphor. when the healthfull crisis is at hand,
and the victorie of nature in the masterie of her enemie the disease. And sometimes death cometh smiling in a visar of life with cheerefulnesse and ouer-pleasing lightsome∣nesse, when the last houre is now already runne,Vigor morbi est vehementis∣simum totius aegritudiois tē∣pus, quod sequi∣tur crisis. and the Sun for euer setting. Hence the vnconsiderate and vnlear∣ned to distinguish, are easily induced, sometimes by vaine hope deceiued to physicke death, sometime too fearefully despairing with exequious offices to comber life and the recouerie of death.Gal. de Cris. lib. 1. Hence are oft sound parts vexed with needelesse remedïes, and the comforts of lifeCogimur à gratis animum suspendere re∣bus, atque vt vi∣uamus, viuere desinimus. Maximian. Historia. imprisoned for an vntimely death. It is now the sixth yeare since I was solicited for a woman by the opinion of the dysenterie or abrasion of her guts, miserably held for the space almost of a quarter of an yeare vnto the continuall vse of euery∣day-glysters and other astringent medicines, vntill it was my fortune coming vnto her, by good reason to discouer the supposed membranous deiections to be nothing else but skinnes of wormes, which first dead, after putrified & dissolued into small parcels descended with some torment in the similitude of little skinnes. The skinnes being found it was an easie matter by a new warrant to fetch the skin∣ners, whose thereto appearance confessed the euidence, & gaue the suspition of the dysentery for euer after free dis∣charge and perfect deliuery. In this one instance he that is wise may conceiue many more without number, which therfore as vnnecessary and troublesome I will not farther here trouble or awake now sleeping with time past. In these like cases, sometimes the best perfectionSimilitudines non modò vul∣gares sed etiam Mdicos erudi∣tosa iquando decipiunt. Galen. in Apho. 2. lib. 4. Hippo., the ri∣pest vnderstanding doth and may mistake. And therefore the ignorant Empericke who professeth confusion and vseth no light, or helpe of iudgment or reason at all, but the onely. Sensu∣um nullum ex∣istimamus sapi∣entiam. Aristot. Metaph. 1. sense of his owne experience, how shall he do otherwise, but oft and continually mistake manifoldly much more? And thus we haue briefly discouered the Empericke in matters requiring extraordinarie counsell, ignorant, in cases of his best experienced knowledge yet vnto some circumstances vnfurnished, in many matters
of substance altogether vnexpert, in rare accidents and be∣fore vnseene at a maze, in true & right discerning wanting the eye of right reason, in confounding things differing, & in separating things in their owne nature inseparable, dā∣gerous. Now as we haue pointed out the Empericke him∣selfe, so it remaineth that with him and in him, we note all that by institution, educatiō, tradition, instruction, or stolne obseruatiō deriue their rule, example & custome from him. In this number are all that vsually professe thēselues in con∣fidence of their choyce secrets and excellent medicines, commanders & maisters of all diseases. Such also are they who in all places proclaime open defiance against all mala∣dies, & with vehement remedies vpon euery light occasi∣sion needelesly, & vnprouoked (if diseases presently cānot away) either fire them out or pull their hold about their eares, with the fall of the disease needelesly hazarding the diseased. Oft times a good euent may authoritse it for skill, & their friendly offer call it good will; but their kinde care is too oft seene and proued a keene weapon to wound their friend, and the sicke are nor seldome oppressed with being so loued. I would it were a slander in these dayes, that good will and excellent medicines put to death more liues then open murther. For as the most complete ar∣mour, engins, and forts of warre, the excellent munition and rich prouision vnto a man without knowledge to mannage them, are but instruments without life, vntill some better skill put life into them: so good medicines being the Physitions instruments and weapons, either de∣fensiue for nature, or offensiue against the forces of disea∣ses, in other hands then his must needes proue as but dead in themselues, so ofttimes deadly vnto others. To square and leuill their right vse requireth more vnderstanding then is to be found in reasonlesse medicines, or yet their senselesse maisters. For as in all other affaires, where knowledge, prudence, and discretionSapientis con∣silium vnum multorum ma∣nus superat. Gal. in Suasor. ad Artes. haue prerogatiue, the attempt is commendable, and the issue likely to be happy; so also in cases of health, wherin wise & iudicious
dispensation, or in rash & erroneous, the vertue and effica∣cy of medicines doth liue, or die in vse and power. It is strange notwithstanding in these dayes to behold, with what senselesse madnesse, men are become worshippers of medicines: and so great ofttimes is their idolatrous folly herein, that (as if they had gotten some rare good in a boxe, I meane some rare secret) they presently inflamed with the furie and opinion thereof, dare vpon the consused notice of a disease commend with as sacred secrecie and in∣tolerable vsurped titles of infallible, absolute, and irresi∣stable vertue & force, as if any particular excellencie were able to coniure the generall casualty whereunto all earth∣ly things must needesCasus & tem∣pus omnibus rebus accidunt. Ecclesiase 9. 11. be subiect. For God hath set downe a law of mutability and changeablenesse to all things;Galen. lib. 1. de Aliment. facult. created according to diuersitie of circumstances, by which all things vnder heauen are continually altered, changed, and gouernedConsiium do∣cto res{que} locus∣ue dabunt. Ouid.. There is no creature, medicine or &c. Affectuū cog nitio est materia remediorum, non ipsorum re∣mediorum cog∣nitio. herbe that hath any such boundles or infinite power as to keepe the same inchangeable or infallibe, but there shall be a di∣uers and manifold consideration andOccasio est Domina rerum agendar. coaptation of the same thing. There can be no endeauor, meanes, way, or in∣strument of neuer so complete perfection or tried proofe directed to what effect, issue or end soeuer, that receiueth not ordinarilyNeque do∣ctorum homi∣num sed Empi∣ricorum sunt singulares illae quae circumfe∣runtur egulae. Fetrerius de lue Vener. impediment, opposition, and contradicti∣on, whereby those things which in themselues might hap∣ly seeme certaine and good by accident and circumstance, are againe very vncertaineExhibenda re∣media pro re nata & semper pro circunstan∣tijs variare ali∣quid oportet. Galen de puero epilept. and euill. All ignorants there∣fore whatsoeuer (such are whosoeuer are not Artists) had they for all diseases the most choyce and excellent medi∣cines knowne euen vnto God and nature, aboue and be∣yond all knowledge of men, yet except therewith they know their due dispensation, they cannot but peruert their right vse, be they neuer so soueraigne. The generallGeneralia re∣media semper praemittonda particularibus. Galen. de Loc. affect. 4. re∣medies against the common causes of diseases ordained, except first rightly administred, shall continually and ne∣cessarily forestall and hinder the good and benefite from any particular. There are no materiall diseases wherein
the common remedies are not requisite. Such are phlebo∣tomy, purgation, vomite, and the like. And wheresoeuer these are requisite, if they be not rightly administred, all other medicines be they neuer so excellent and incompa∣rable, must needs lose their excellent and incomparable vse. And none can rightly dispence the generall remedies, but those that are more generally learned then the best acquaintance and familiarity which particular medicines can afforde. From hence it cannot but be manifest, how infinitely blinde good will and zeale do herein daily erre to the destruction of many. It were happy if at length the common inconuenience and publike scandall might beget a law, and law bring forth restraint. For illustration of that which hath bin said, it were indifferent to instance in any disease, but I will make choyce of some few onely, to satisfie for all. It is an ordinarie custome in those daies with women to giue medicines for the greene sicknesse; & other stoppages in young women. In which practise if it so happen that no inward impediment frustrate the inde∣uour, they casually ofttimes do seeming present good, and blaze the excellencie of their medicine: but if ofttimes (which they cannot distinguish or obserue) the generall cause of the obstruction be not first by the generall reme∣dy remoued or diminished, or the immediate cause setled within the stopped parts, be not first fitted and prepared to yeeld, all their medicines of neuer so great force, yea though commonly as strong as steele or iron, do not onely no good or small good, but ofttimes incorrigible hurt and mischiefes neuer after able to be reformed, or by the most learned counsell to be redressed; while from the plenty or ill disposition of humors in the body these searching and piercing medicines carry with them into the stopped parts either more or worse matter then was before, and thereby there leaue a disease which shall neuer after die except by exchange for a more pernicious. In the common knowne disease of the stone likewise many and famous medicines are at this day in many common hands, and perhaps truly
celebrated; yet if sometimes bleedingSi metus sit in∣flammationis, sanguis mittitur tum è basilica partis affectae ad minuendam plenitudinem, tum de vena po∣plitis ratione partis & mate∣rie coniunctae. haue not a first place, (namely where is present or imminent danger of inflamation of the reines) sometimes if vomit be omitted (namely where the stomacke is stopt and full, & vnto eue∣ry thing impenitrable,) sometimes if glysters or lenitiues be not premised, (namely where the fulnesse of the belly doth presse the passages, the bladder and the vreters) all o∣ther excellent medicines whatsoeuer for the stone do not onely in vaine exasperate the disease, but hazard the party much more then the omission of meanes. Likewise in a continuall feauer, if sometimes present and immediate o∣pening of theVbi in synocho ob ebullientis sanguinis copi∣am, ex leui oc∣casione irrita∣tam adest suf∣focationis peri∣culum. veine without delay or intermission haue not precedence, all other meanes are not onely preposte∣rous but pernicious. Likewise in the small pocks, a disease so well knowne and common to children and other: what∣soeuer other fit and good medicines and Cordinals be ad∣ministred, sometimes if bloud-letting go not beforePerpetuum nō est abstinere phlebotomia cū iam papulae in superficie cor∣poris extitere. Etenim fit ali∣quando prae co∣pia vitij vt pluri∣mum reliquum sit in corpore, vrgeat vehemē∣ter difficultas spirandi, grauis sit febris, quo tempore vena secanda est. Hollerius de Morbillis. their breaking out, sometimes if not vsedVbi iam malū in habitum cor∣poris euasetit, periculosa est plebotomia. Hollerius. after, all other good meanes are frustrate. And at another time if there be any bleeding at all, it is hazard, danger, and death it selfe. There are no medicines so commonly well knowne as such as are euery where in vse, and at euery mans hand prouided for the paines and diseases of the stomacke, and for that vse haply speciall good; yet ofttimes we see how long and vainely those meanes without benefite are applied, vntill the true cause by a generall remedy be haply remoued, and that remedy perhaps the most vnlikely in a common iudgement, and seldome in common practise, prescript or custome vsed for that purpose. When all other trials are waste and lost in this case, and paine doth nothing stoupe, sometime the opening onely of a veineMulier in vehementissimo dolo∣re stomachi nullis luta remedijs ducto tandem sanguine ex vtraque basilica seruata est. Hippocrat. Epidemion 5. in the arme,In magno dolore ventris, secanda interna vtriusque brachij, & hoc magis si dolor grauis, si repentinus, si difficilis ructus & spiritus, si febris est, si dolor in dorsum & scapulas extenditur. Hollerius de compos. Medic. tractat. de stomachicis. be∣ing reckoned amonst the most vnusuall and commonly harmefull for that vse, doth prooue the sole helpfull re∣fuge
and author of case. And as in this case is sometime said of bleeding, so at another time may be said of purging and vomite. In the apoplexie sometime bleedingIn Apoplexia pituitosa cere∣brum magis magisue san∣gunis priuatio∣ne refrigescit. is pre∣sent death, sometime the onelyIn Apoplexia sanguinea vincū & singulare re∣medium à phle∣botomia expe∣ctandum. hope of life. In pestilent feauers and in the plague it selfe, all the most choyce Cor∣dials and Antidotes are made frustrate, sometime by Si pestis cum ephemera aut hectica analogi∣am habeat. bleeding, sometime forSi pestis sit synocho putri similis, & corpus plethoricum. want of bleeding. And from hence growe our so great disputes & differences amongst Physitions themselues, some chiefly and aboue all magni∣fying it, some with execrations detesting it: which grow∣eth in them for want of right distinction of the seuerall causes, and differences of the pestilence. In the same dis∣ease the like may be said of vomite, if at sometimeVbi magnae cacoethiae rati∣one si conturba∣ueris naturam, praecipitas. vsed at all, at another time ifVbi humor qui venenum aut contagium conceperit in primis venis substiterit aut in ventriculo. omitted. The common generall re∣medies vsed against the dropsie are purging, vomiting, sweating, and the like; yet sometime the mostSi hydropis origo à mensi∣um suppressione aut sanguinis multitudine ca∣lidum innatum suffocante manifestò ducatur, à sanguine detracto curandi ratio necessariò est auspicanda. vnusuall and seldomest safe, is onely necessary and helpfull vnto it. Sometime if a woman with child be let bloud she suffereth . Hippocrat. Aph. lib. 5. abortion, saith Hippocrates. Sometime if she omitNoui quam plurimas quarum aliae abortiunt, aliae foetus edunt parum firmos aut vitales nisi intermedijs mensibus phlebotomia plenitudo minuatur Reolanus. let∣ting bloud she cannot escape abortion,Multae nisi▪ 4. mense releretur vena abortiunt. Foetus enim copia obtuitur. Ferneius de Meth. Med. saith Fernelius.Mulieri grauidae si menses fluxerint liberius sanguinem mittas. Hollerius. Many and innumerable more might instances by, but these may suffise for light and illustration to all the rest, as also for sufficient caueat for putting any trust or confidence in the excèllencie of any particular remedies without ad∣uice, for right dispensation of the generall. And here by may be iudged and discouered the indiscreete thoughts of light braines and vnderstandings in these dayes, of men, that so preposterously diuulge in all places so many bookes and paper-Apothecary-shoppes of secrets and medicines, better iudgment and learned soath teaching the wise and discreete, that things without reason in them∣selues are by reason and wisedome to be guided and orde∣red;
lest in ignorant handling and vnwotting abuse their faire promising seemings proue gilded poysons. If any man want wit to see or know this or knowing will not consider, let the danger proue it selfe vnto him, and let such experience be euer the mother of fooles. And for those that herein make mercy and commiseration apologie for their rash violating the rules of wisedome, sobrietie and safe discretion in ignorant intermedling, I wish them consider how dangerous are the harmes and consequences of good intentions, and charitable indea∣uors, where they runne before knowledge and proprietie in the agent. Euery honest function is not euery honest mans, but vnto euery man is distributed and allorted the action of his owne calling: which also must be made his and appropriate, not onely by approued sufficiencie in himselfe, but authorized approbation in others: whereby the action being good in it selfe, lawfull in the doer, fit∣ting and accommodate vnto the circumstance, it is blessed of God, commended of men, seasonable in it selfe, harme∣lesly profitable, and euery way without reproch. CHAP. III. Women their custome and practise about the sicke, com∣mon-uisiting counsellors, and commenders of Medicines. OVR common offenders in the former kinds are generally all such,Women counsel∣lours. Common∣uisiting counsel∣lour's and com∣menders of medi∣cines. as are knowne to want institution in arts and sciences; are not educated in pertinent precepts, not studied nor brought vp in places of good libertie: without which good. Aristot. meanes or∣dinarily there cā accrew to mē no perfectiō in any faculty.Bona institutio triū opus habet, naturae, doctri∣nae, exercitatio∣ is. For althogh it be possible that there may grow in some few an allowable mediocrity in some sort sufficient to informe themselues, and profit others by a fitnesse in nature ioyned with industrie, (though the ordinarie course of instruction
by readers, teachers and schooles, be not so plentifully sup∣plied) yet is it no safe discretion ordinarily to trust a suffi∣ciency so very rarely found, so hardly, so seldome, and in so few truly gained. Here therefore are men warned of ad∣uising with women counsellours. We cannot but acknow∣ledge and with honor mention the graces of womanhood, wherein by their destined property, they are right and true soueraignes of affection; but yet, seeing their autho∣rity in learned knowledge cannot be authenticall, neither hath God and nature made them commissioners in the ses∣sions of learned reason and vnderstanding (without which in cases of life and death, there ought to be no daring or attempt at all,) it is rash cruelty in them euen there to do well, where, vnto the not iudiciously foreseeing, that well might haue proued ill, and that ill is oft no lesse then death, or else at least the way to death, which is the hazard of health. Their counsels for this cause in matters of so great and dangerous consequent, modestie, nature, law, and their owne sexeMulieribus nemo nunquam Lycaeum aedifi∣cauerit, aut Se∣naculum statu∣erit. hath euer exempted. We may iustly here taxe their dangerous whisperings about the sicke, wherein their preualence oft being too great, they abuse the weake sense of the diseased, while they are not themselues; and make iust and wise proceedings suspected, and with danger suspended.Scalig. de Subtil. For it is not sufficient for the Physition to do his office, except both the sicke, &c. Sed & aegrotum, & astantes. himselfe, and also all that are about him, be prudently and aduisedly carefull and obedi∣ent vnto good reason: without which, loue it selfe may be dangerously officious, the error of friendship a deed vnto death,Hippoc. Aph. 1. and a kind worke in intention the wound of an ene∣my in issue and execution. Among those that are wise, a good conscience doth stay all rash commission: and con∣firmation of all necessary offices by such as are learned, doth preuent the accusation of carelesse omission: and in this meane for the vnlearned to consist, is onely harmelesse pie∣ty. Betweene the vnconsiderate hast of abundant affecti∣on, and the lame and carelesse pace of want of loue and duty: betweene too busie medling, and too curious for∣bearance,
are conspicuous the excellent vertues of pru∣dence, discretion and knowledge, vpon which are safely founded wise moderation and temperate vse of meanes, vnto which euer and onely God hath blessed all actions, their ends and issues. In whom therefore these are not, how vnwarranted are their actiōs vnto their owne hearts, and how dangerous also must they be to others harmes? If women then professe no arts, nor as maisters of sciences can proue their rules, let them with sobrietie gouerne the great rule of themselues, and so shall they be most harme∣lesly happy in being freed from the vnhappinesse of ha∣uing their hands so commonly in others mishaps, vnto the dishonour of womanhood,Historiae. A gentlewoman lately falling grieuously sicke, through the frights of bloud-letting (wherewith womens counsell by many ill reports thereof had confounded her) refused the only safe rescue of her life thereby. Whereupon very shortly after, her bloud grew so furious, that breaking the wonted bounds and limits of her veines, with violence it gushed out not onely at her mouth and nose with diuerse other passages of her bo∣dy besides, but also made a diruption in the veines of one of her legs, from whence issuing in great abundance it speedily dispatched her, euen vnto the end and last breath still making her choyce, that rather her bloud should thus kill her then she cōsent to part with any part thereof other∣wise. Thus she miserably died. Cōtrariwise another gentle∣woman Wife vnto one Maister Mercer of Northampton an ancient Al∣derman. in the yeare 1602. and of her age the 74. (as shee her selfe numbred) vexed many yeares with a continuall issue of bloud, after she had bene long left in hopeles care & despaire, required and expected of me her last doome. I found (oft obseruing her pulse) a manifest, equall and constant magnitude, altitude, and vehemence, the habite of her body well liking; and by these assured my selfe as of the cause of her disease, so also of the strength of na∣ture. Many other remedies before in vaine iterated and varied, and none preuailing or profiting, contrary to the iudgement of some former Physitions, as also her owne
liking in regard of her age and supposed weakenesse, and contrary to the generall disclaime and wonderment of her friends, herDistinguendae vires grauatae & oppressae à languidis & at∣tritis. Hae ma∣iora remedia postulant, illae nullo modo fe∣runt. strength in the former indication fa∣uouring it, necessity vrging, and therefore her age dis∣pensing, I commanded her to be sparingly let bloudFirmus puer, robustus senex tuto sanguinis missionem fe∣runt. Fernel. in the arme; whereupon without any farther other helpe she immediately recouered her strength, and was freed the space of eight yeares together from the issue, which had continually vexed her many yeares before. I deliuer these familiar examples of mine owne for better satisfaction, whereby vnto the meanest eye and simple vnderstanding it is apparent, that bloud-letting or not bloud-letting (as all other remedies) are either good or euill, or neither good nor euill, in seuerall seasons and circumstances; whereby the perswasion or disswasion thereof by such as want iudgement,In decrepita aetate sanguinē mittit Rhazes vrgente valde necessitate. is euer casually also good or euill in it selfe, but euer vniustifiable in the ignorant counsellor. The iust will not herein offend, but the foole will be babling, whereof to beware vnto many had bene sauing physicke, that now are dead. Many times haue many by perswading without reason or iudgement drawne their friend vnto death, con∣trarie to their better meaning, troubling them with feare of death in the remedy, while they run themselues to death for want of remedie. Ill counsell for the most part produ∣ceth ill euent. Ignorant counsell is neuer good counsell. And therefore it is honest for it selfe, and safe for the sicke, that ignorance be euer silent, or neuer presumptuous. It is oft occasion of mirth to see, how euen after sicke men are sometime perfectly recouered, the very ill opinion of re∣medies past (laboured into the conceite by the wauing of idle tongues) holdeth them still needlesly sicke, vntill their wiser thoughts draw their minds to forget their imagina∣tion, or to remember themselues: and thus vnawares they sometime ease themselues of their owne imposition, which was first the vaine supposition of a friend. Such friendship is oft simplicity, and haply sometimes knauery; but let the patient that desireth his owne good, be impa∣tient
of such folly, and not enlarge his kinde heart vnto so vnkinde hurt vnto himselfe, remembring (though it be humanity to heare a friendly voice) that the attendant of wisedome is slow beliefe. Oft and much babling inculca∣tion in the weake braines of the sicke may easily preuaile with them, to forget both that which their owne good hath taught them, and also by a borrowed opinion from others indiscreete words, to corrupt their owne sense. It is the common custome of most common people thus ordi∣narily to molest and trouble the sicke. Their presence therfore is dangerous, & carefully to be either prohibited, or better gouerned. Common & vulgar mouthes easily in∣cline scandalously to preiudice the things they know not. Hence it is in these daies a customary worke to disswade physicke, while mē not making right choyce of their Phy∣sition, or perueting good counsell by their owne peeuish frowardnes, and thereby multiplying vnto thēselues con∣tinuall occasion of complaint, vniustly therfore accuse art, which they neuer duly sought, nor found, nor vsed, & ther∣fore neuer knew. The offences that men iustly take, are the faults, the blots, the staines of vnperfect workemen, not of art; whereof art is as guiltlesse as they are void of art. Many because they may haply obserue some others by the too much & immoderate vse of physicke, sometime too hardly to keepe vnder their owne strēgth, sometime haply to tire nature, or too cōtinually to interrupt & perturbe her quiet fruition of herselfe, & the true sense of her owne power & strēght in her selfe; therefore in the other extreme they also with a nice and foolish morosity altogether contemne and reiect the temperate and moderateIn vitium du∣cit culpae fuga si caret arte. Horat. vse thereof, denying vnto God & nature their care, & duty to thēselues, restrai∣ning nature from the priuiledge of remedies which God hath giuen vnto her, and iniuriously suffering her to liue within them imprisoned, oppressed, and oft needlesly rui∣ned. Physicke it selfe is honored by the mouth and menti∣on of God himselfe, and in it selfe hath demonstration of it selfe, vnto them whose vnderstanding doth giue them
eyes; but the ignorant and the excessiue vse, the abuse therof, & no lesse the peruerse contempt & neglect there∣of, are the curse of God, and the sinne of men. They there∣fore that perswade the sicke that they haue no neede of the Physition, call God a lyar, who expresly saithNon est opus valentibus Me∣dico, sed malè habentibus. Mathaei cap. 9. otherwise; and make themselues wiser then their Creator, who hath ordainedEst enim à Supremo me∣dicus, & à Rege stipendium ac∣cipiet. the Physition for the good of man. Let men therefore flie and take heede of such foolish calumnie, and in their necessities let them remember their Maker, and thankfully embrace his blessing and benefite of ease and health, which thereby he hath commended and giuen vnto them; lest vnthankfull to him, and accessarie to their owne hurt,Ecclesiast. 38. 2. they perish in a double sinne. Beside the ordinary & meane sort of visiting people,Dominus è terra condidit medicamenta, & prudens ho∣mo non contē∣nit ea. doing in the former kinds very scandalously and continually much hurt, it is too or∣dinary vse and manner generally with all orders of men: for since most men are not capable, worthy, nor vnderstan∣dingly able to discerne a true good; it is no wonder that the fewest speake truly good of good.Ecclesiast. 38. 4. Some of these sorts do not simply or absolutely disswade physicke, but (as an inducement vnto their owne practise and admittance) such physicke onely as cometh vnknowne vnto them, out of Apothecaries shops, or from Physitions hands and dire∣ctions: thereby preferring their owne priuate ointments, plaisters, ceareclothes, drinkes, potions, glysters, and di∣ets, because by time and custome they are become famili∣arly knowne vnto them, and now are of their owne do∣mesticall preparation, & therefore are by their knowledge, acquaintance, and auouching of them, growne into some credite and reputation with them. With this insinuation & officious promise of their knowne, gentle and pleasant medicines, and of vndoubted good from this their owne protested proofe and experience, many allureSpes laqueo volucres, spes captat arundine pisces, Cum te∣nues hamos abdidit antè ci∣bus. the sicke miserably to beguile themselues; to exchange reasonable likelihood, for personall confidence; the knowledge of the right and safe vse of medicines, for the knowledge of the composition of their medicines;Tibull. the preciousnesse of
time and oportunity of health. For the partiall expectati∣on of vncertaine triall, these knowne defects as the perpe∣tuall consequences of this ignorance and want of know∣ledge, as they are ordinarily admitted, so are they continu∣ally manifestly obserued and noted by others harmes, and ofttimes too late repentance: for since want of knowledge doth euer lamely giue supply to any want, what safe ex∣pectation or probable hope can the diseased haue of igno∣rant persons in their distressed wants? Old Eue will neuer be worne out of Adams children. Alas an apple can do no great hurt. It is faire and beautifull vnto the eye, pleasant to taste, and but a trifle, a small matter, a little quantity, and of excellent quality; Adam must needs taste. It is good for his eyes, it will cleare his sight, an excellent medicine to make him see. What is more faire, more easie, more gentle, more harmelesse, more cordiall, more daintie then an apple? Eue in good will offered it, and so Adam tooke it. It made him also see; but Adam had bene better still blind. A dangerous and incurable leprosie and infection thence seised vpon him, which after none but the great Physition of heauen and earth could cure. Many medi∣cines are small, harmelesse, gentle, pleasant, and in them∣selues do not hurt. But by accident, by consequent, by cir∣cumstance, death oft followeth them at the heeles. Milke, broth, butter, and many other wholesome meates, iuices and fruits in themselues, are of common harmelesse vse, milde, nourishing and comfortable, some of them some∣times soueraigne antidotes against many poysons, mitiga∣tors of diuers paines; yet because sometimes against some circumstancesIn horadolo∣ris vehementis clou quicunq peoulo non ca∣ret. Gal. de victu Febricit. against art or reason vsed, they proue a destruction vnto the vser: and as sometime a smaller dam∣mage, sometime a greater, so therefore sometime more and sometime lesse, obserued. Who almost suspecteth a messe of milke or a cup of beere,Data tempora prosunt: Et data non apto tempore vina nocent. Ouid. things so familiar and customa∣ry in daily vse and diet? yet permitted in someIjs qui in mor∣bi acumine e∣uacuatione in∣digent, si quis cibum dederit, magnum ope∣ratur malum. Galen. de vict. Febricit. conditions, in some manner with some error,Si quis dolo∣rem alui sub∣ductione vel in∣secta vena sol∣uerit, pro hu∣moris exigen∣tia, & vel paux∣illum ita affectis ptisanam dede∣rit, praecipites aget in mor∣tem. Galen. de vict. Febricit.Si Phlegmone vel redundantia adsit, cauenda ante accessionē cibatio seu res maximè noxia. Gal. de vict. Febricit. the messengersLenissimum saepe erratum in victus ratione irreparabilis damni causa. Galen de vict. Feb. of
death attend them, oft faintings, swoundings, sodaine ex∣tinction of the naturall heate, anxietie and vexation, with other accidents of easie corruption and putrifaction in the one, as of stupefaction and mortification in the other. This did witnesse a late Sommers sodaine heates, wherein the vnaduised hasty satisfying of thirst with cold drinke, by heapes in diuers places in Northamptonshire sent la∣bourers & haruest people into their graues. With these for farther illustration, I might number without number many more; but vnto the wise and worthy, a word is sufficient intimation. And thought many ignorants may speake faire and pleasing, and commend things that looke smooth, and smiling vpon the liking of the sicke; yet prouident neces∣sitie will hence be warned to be wise for it selfe, not rashly admiting so dangerousImpia sub dulci melle ve∣nena latent. Ouid. flattery, nor too swiftly trusting Syrens for their songs, nor Crocodiles for their teares: but in matters so nearly concerning life and death, duly and carefully inquiring, and according to the verdict of vnder∣standing and reason, trying and examining, and not for∣geting beside the hazard in vnsafe error by vnsufficient Counsellors, the losse of time and oportunitie for better helpe, which ofttimes is neuerSerò medici∣ā , Cum mala per longas inualuêre mo∣ras. Ouid. regained. And for enter∣tayning so meane counsell in the vse of such meanes as car∣ry a manifest danger and malignity in their nature and vse, I could thinke no man so voide of counsell, as to neede therein counsell: yet because experience of some errors herein past is argument of other remaining possible to come, I will onely by one example aduertise, and from that example it will be easie for euery one to raise a rule and cautionFoelix qui∣cunque dolore Alterius disces posse carere. tuo. Tibull. to himselfe. It is ordinary with many vn∣skilfull busie-bodies vnder colour and pretext of gentle and safe dealing, to make familiar and ordinary the vse of perillous medicines, which haply also they do not so distin∣guish or repute, and therefore cannot be said to lye, (be∣cause they speake their thought,) yet tell not truth, be∣cause they thinke not right.Historia. I was sometime solicited by a carefull mother for her child, whom I found by a sharpe
and acute conuulsion violently distorted, and before time allowed leasure for preparation of remedies, swiftly stran∣gled. In any propension thereto in the constitution or o∣ther disposition of the child, was nothing which might ap∣parently be accused; and therefore making diligent in∣quirie after some outward cause, I found that the suspition of wormes had occasioned the commendations and vse of of the hearbe Bearefoote, which though ordinary and much accustomed for that end among women, and oft by good hap without hurt; yet we could not but with good reason hereof conuince, conferring the present harme (which no presumption could vnto other thing impute) with the danger and maligne nature of that herbe in pro∣duction of such like effects: (although many for the like vse haue in like manner giuen it vnto their children with∣out blame.) Thus sometimes some men haue deuoured mortall poysons, not onely without harme, but with good and commodious effect. By these conueyances & through the like presumption, many vnwotting bodies oft bury in themselues vnbewailed (because vnknowne) Ellebor, Quicksiluer. Precipitate, and the like, coloured with bet∣ter names, and at the present vnperceiued. Desperate tri∣als sometime bring forth strange deliuerances, yet neither is the boldnesse warrant, nor the escape encouragement. There happen oft in these daies many sodaine, maruailed and strange accidents, posing the best Physitions them∣selues, without doubt oft raised from causes by these er∣rors vnknowne, secret, concealed, or haply by time before the effect appeare, forgotten: (for secret mischiefs long time insensibly vndermine before the sensible euent ap∣peare.) For proofe of dangerous customes in ignorant hands,Historia. I will make one example a light vnto many. A wo∣man sometime came to aduise concerning an extraordina∣ry accident in her ordinary vse of spurge-comfits. She gaue (at the same time her selfe, and some others in the same house taking thereof with answerable effect and euacua∣tion) vnto a very aged man eight in number (being her
vsuall dose.) The first day they had no effect with the old man, and in all the rest performed their wont: she there∣fore gaue him as many the next day with the like effect, and as many euery day vnto the 10 day, with the like proofe. It was then her feare he had tasted his owne fune∣rall feast before his death, but he suruiued the feare with∣out sense of change or danger. Is it safe from this good hap, for other in hope still to hazard themselues in such vnsafe handling? Is it not rather manifest how ignorantly and commonly these creatures ouerlooke the danger which iustly wisdome and reason suspend and feare? Dis∣creete feare awaketh vigilance and circumspection, but ignorance of danger is void of feare, and therefore of care. Carelesse attempts draw harmfull and repented issues: and though good haps sometimes flatter vaine security, yet if seldome harmes be not wisely extended as a caution and example vnto many, the custome of neglect will make the rare confusion quickly common. So large a feast of spurge∣comfits hath seldome kept so many holy daies in one bel∣lie, or a banketting likenes so harmelesly priuiledged idle∣nesse in a working quality. The consequent hapned much fairer then could be foreseene or hoped. If for that cause any man will againe aduenture the like, who will not ima∣gine that in the thought he hath already lost his wits, & in the proofe may lose himselfe? If notwithstanding he es∣cape, any man will wonder, but no man, I suppose, imitate. It may be haply deemed incredible, that so common and meane sort of people can attaine acquaintance with so dangerous instruments, as some before mentioned and o∣ther the like; but due exploration oft by the harmes occa∣sioned doth testifie it, and the meanes of their acquaintance discouered doth proue it easie. Quacksaluers, banckrupt∣apothecaries, and fugitiue Surgeons euery where ouer∣trauelling the face of this kingdome, hunted by want of riot from place to place, are oft compelled to insinuate and creepe into the fauour of many meane people; and in their necessity do sell for gaine and entertainement, and in
their prodigality for lust and loue, these generose and noble secrets carrying on the outside the titles of famous medicines, and being within infamous poysons. And by this meanes quicke and desperate experiments, with such as thus like to gaine them, grow vulgar medicaments. CHAP. IIII. Fugitiues, workers of iugling wonders, Quacksaluers. NOW seeing we are cast vpon the menti∣on of the former sort of men,Fugitiues, Quacksaluers. we will here for giuing better knowledge of them, protract their short stay.Empirici, Chy∣mistae, Of this order are they who in townes and villages hang vp their banners and triumphant flags in fields, of broken armes, rotted legs, and halfe faces, and haply also timber for new, displaying at large before the simple amazed multitude, their prouision of shot and wildfire in quintessenses and spirits: scouring vp before them goodly store of harnesse wherewith men of all sorts may arme themselues against all diseases; discoursing Quod si do∣losi spes refulse∣tit nummi, Cor∣uos poetas, & poetridas picas cantare credas Pegacium me∣los. Persius. with what agility they can soudre new grises for old no∣ses, and newly againe infranchise French limbes, and final∣ly making themselues admirable tinkers of all infirmities. Amongst these men credulous mindes may see things in∣uisible; beggers are enabled to sell gold to drinke, that want siluer to make them eate. Aurum potabile, the natu∣turall Balsamum, the Philosophers stone, dissolued Pearle, and the like inestimable glories and pride of Art and na∣ture, are their professed ordinary creatures and the work∣manship of their hands, in whose hands are nothing but idlenesse,Clinicus He∣rodes trullam subduxerat ae∣gro, Deprensus dixit, stulte quid ergo bibis? Martial. theeft, and beggerie. To ingage wonder aboue wonder with admiration vnto the beholders, some of this sort will not seeme nice to cut their owne flesh, that it may be glory within few howres to heale it vp againe, the paine being pleasure which is inuited by consent, and re∣compenced by gaine. It is strange to see how these men leauing their old occupations and mechanicall mysteries
wherein they were educate, sodainely finde themselues inspired with a spirit of reuelation of rare secrets, and thereby promise vnto themselues and others miracu∣lous wonders. And it is indeede true wonder to see with what agility they are able so grosly to deceiue, and in the end like noble Chymists, hauing extracted siluer out of the baser mettall of idle words, in smoke they vanish, leauing behinde them the shadow of death, with those who leauing the day light of clearer vnderstanding neg∣lected, rashly run themselues into the mist of imposture and ignorance. Thus preualent is faire pollicitation and vaine wonderment. If men would consult with reason & iudiciously consider; though their wonders were truly to be wondered, and worthy to exercise the wise and learned in their extrication (as they are the vanities and inanities of argute and subtill cousinages,) yet must it neuer be for∣gotten, that wonders yea and miracles themselues are so∣lie neuer arguments of truth or sufficiencie, but for the most part fruites of vnprofitable curiosity, deceiuing the simple, amazing the multitude, and giuing way and cre∣dite to vntruth, cousinage and iugling. Therefore in this kind the diuell himselfe is excellent, and for the most part it is one chiefe part, a true marke and prerogatiue of his followers, Coniuerers, Sorcerers, Witches, and Iuglers; who wanting true worthinesse in themselues, make vnto themselues these glorious couers. God hath giuen no∣thing vnto man, but for his trauail and paine. And accor∣ding to his studious industrie, care, prudence, prouidence, assiduity and diligence, he dispenseth vnto him euery good thing. He hath not ordained wonders and miracles to giue supply vnto our common needes, nor to an∣swer the ordinary occasions or vses of our life: but our owne needefull discreete indeauors euer depending vpon his prouidence. Truth and sufficiency receiue not their iust triall by rare workes or casuall euents, but by anScientia, in∣tellectus, prudē∣tia, sunt habitus, qui vigili studio, labore, diligen∣tia & assuescen∣do acquiruntur. habi∣tuall and continuall proofe and exercise in their daily, or∣dinary, and proper subiects and occurrents: whereunto
truly and pertinently they apt and fit euery designe and action: whereunto their owne vpright iudgement is a trustie guide, and others eyes vndeceiued witnesses. And thus if men will learne to guide themselues, they shall not so commonly and easily lose their eyes in the gaze of wonders, nor their reason in the maze of such inexplicable and intricate folly. CHAP. V. Surgeons. THAT which hath bene formerly said suf∣fiseth to point out the deceiuers last menti∣oned. Their affinitie giueth occasion to mention in the next place, their next neighbours, diuers our common vnlear∣ned Surgeons, hauing neither letters nor humanity, nor euer acquainted with the dialect and lan∣guage of the learned. These men for the most part estee∣ming themselues deseruing well for the operaryAc si interio∣res affectus sen∣su cognoscātur, aut manus ope∣râ curentur. Riolanus. vses of a skilfull and well exercised hand in wounds, incisions, am∣putations of sphacelate parts and the like, hence take vn∣to themselues an emerited priuiledge in physicke practise. Some also venture farther, and for some rare exeperien∣ces arrogate vnto themselues ability, a power and authori∣tie to educate & institute Physitions, as an vnder-growth vnto themselues, by lying promises, perswading ma∣ny honest simple parents to commit their children, other∣wise perhaps more fortunate and ingenuous, to be their apprentices. Hence it cometh to passe that many in these daies thus traded vp by their example vnto a nimblenesse of deceit, and of aduenturing in all occurrents, so ordina∣rily promise like gods, dare aboue men, and act like diuels crucifying the liues of poore men: while by the grace of one goodQuo fieri possit modo Seuere, vt vir omnium pessi∣mus Charinus, vnam rem bene fecerit, requiris? Dicam, sed citò: Quid Nerone peius? quid thermis melius Neronianis? Maritial. deede of good hap, the oportunity of com∣mitting many tragedies vnspoken is gained. And thus is the world furnished with factors for the graue and the
perdition of mankind. An example of double impudence let here witnesse.Historia. A gentleman of Northamptonshire vexed with an vlcer of the bladder required my aduice. Vnderstanding by the daily abundance of purulent mat∣ter in his vrine (for the space almost of halfe an yeare be∣fore continually obserued) together with some store of bloud ofttimes withall, (neither of which the bladder it selfe and the exility of the veines thereof could so plen∣tifully with so easieA pure longè putidiore quod à vesica sepa∣ratim exit, gra∣uiora solent in∣ter meiendum asturgere acci∣dentia. Pus quod è renibus defluit, substan∣tiae est magis subtilis & ela∣boratae, ideoque cum minore difficultate per∣meat, dolorem∣que minorem creat Renes praeterea sunt partes indolen∣tes magis quā vesica, & par∣tium aliarum consensum mi∣nus ducunt vbi magis compu∣trueint. accidents afford) as also by the more perfect permistion thereof with the substance of the vrine, that it was not onely an affection of the bladder, but a greater and more dangerous in the reines, (about the re∣gion whereof was euer much paine and weaknesse) and coniecturing them past possibility of cure (their substance already so far spent) I refused to promise or meddle farther then by palliatiue cure, wherein accordingly I insisted a long time with good ease and satisfaction vnto the pati∣ent. At length by some friends there was commended highly for a farther and better performance, a Barber Sur∣geon, who thereupon being required and conducted thi∣ther, came vnto the gentleman, and according to the com∣mendatiōs premised promised to cure him in sixeAut facere in∣genui est, aut non promisse pudici. Catull. weekes space. Shortly after the patient complaining of want of sleepe, he gaue vnto him a Ladanum pill of Paracelsus, and after Mercuriall pilles for another supposed end; by the vse whereof in his body, then by the length of his dis∣ease exceedingly before weakened and extenuate, he pre∣sently fell into an amazed staring sleepinesse, or an asto∣nishment betweeneComa vigilās dictum Galeno, lib. 4. de loc. affect. waking and sleeping, wherein after he had continued a naturall day, in the morning following he was sodainely surptised with acute and epilepticall fits and a generall conuulsion, with foming, gnashing his teeth, loud stertors and the like, whereof after in one day he had passed 8 or 9 fits in my sight (being then vpon that new occasion newly required, the SurgeonQui nondum stygias descēde∣re quaerit ad vn∣das, Tonsorem fugiat, si sapit, Antiochum▪ Martial. fled) he was after my coming and meanes vsed partly by Theria∣call glysters, suppositars, and antidotes fitting the present
cause and accidents, through the grace of God vnexpe∣ctedly deliuered, after he had by stoole thus procured, auoyded one whole pill vndissolued (seene by diuers well vnderstanding witnesses present,) as also diuers small fra∣ctions of Quicksiluer fluctuating and floating like white pinnes heads, as the women that saw reported vnto vs. To make the cause of these accidents yet more manifest; it happened that two maid-seruants there attending vpon the gentleman, by their continuall conuersing neare him and the infected sweate of his body, fell strangely and so∣dainely into the same fits one after another by course, and each hauing suffred sixe or seuen apart, were carried forth, and after that time neuer since (as I yet heare) nor euer before had the like, as they both then said. One of these now liueth maried in Towcester in Northamptonshire, the other was lately seruant vnto an honorable Lady. This history is knowne vnto many of note and worth beside. To conclude, the gentleman thus escaped, and grew by little and little vnto his former senses and strength as his first disease would permit. Within a quarter of an yeare after, or thereabout, another Surgeon againe put the gen∣tlemā into a new hope of recouery: & although the report of my iudgement did somewhat (as I heard) shake his confidence, yet not conceiuing my reason nor seeing the cause, and supposing no other but the vlcer in the bladder, he tooke him in hand; and in his hand within few dayes he left his life, according to my prediction vnto diuers his friends concerning this second attempt likewise solicited. By these examples it is manifest, both how bold and confi∣dent ignorance will be, as also how powerfully and be∣witchingly it deceiueth the distressed minde, easily proneQuod nimis miseri volunt hoc facilè cre∣dunt. Senec. to beleeue that which it desirously would. From hence also may be coniectured how commonly such er∣rors by these ignorant persons in likelihood befall, yet for the most part either for want of knowledge vnespied, or by the priuacy smothered. For if they kill, a dead man telleth no tales: or if by chance they saue one life, that
shall be a perpetuallLepidè illud: Sol successus in∣tuetur; errores tellus operit. flag to call more fooles to the same aduenture. This is commonly seene in the vulgar custome of curing the French disease by Barbers and Surgeons, who precipitate commonly euery one alike, and confused∣ly without respect or order thrust all through the purga∣torie of their sweatings; bleeding, vomiting, vnctions, plaisters, and the like. Hereby many needlesly intangle themselues vpon meere supposall and feare, and many take more then necessity vigeth; and others for satisfy∣ing that necessity, neglect a more materiall, and flying too timorously and rashly a knowne inconuenience, run headlong vnknowing into an after too well knowne vn∣recouerableFumum fugi∣entes in ignem incidunt. mischiefe. For if they that fal into such rough handling be strong in themselues, and no way liable to the harmes of such desperate remedies, and be free from the implication of all other diseases besides, (which entring by their breaches may interrupt their smooth passage, and make pernicious their French medication) they may haply escaping the danger, for the hazard attaine their desired deliuerie, as is in some seene. But if nature haply be weake, or the disposition of the sicke subiect to the perils of that cure (which these men seldome do or can consider) or a∣ny other disease lie in waight too prompt to trust with any aduantage, (which these men want knowledge to foresee) the acquaintance with such remedies may easily proue a greater plague vnto the greatest poxe. How can he that considereth the disease and not the, &c. Non cō∣munis homo curatur, sed sin∣gulorum quis∣que. Galen de Meth. Med. person (as is vsuall with these men) because the contrary is not possible with ignorance) how can they I say in curing the one but indan∣ger the other? We see ordinarily, the same medicine in the same force vnto one man is scarce sensible, vnto another is a sting; vnto one fauourable, vnto another cruell; in one wanting edge, in another exceeding. It therefore requi∣reth learned ability to discerne the hidden ods and diffe∣rences, thereby iustly to distribute vnto euery seuerall his proper and fitHabenda e∣nim ratio non manifestae mo∣do qualitatis, sed & occultae, tum vniuscu∣iusque . proportion of the same thing. Neither is it safe to accommodate so harmefull helps as belong to
so cautelous a cure without a iudicious view, not onely of this strange disease it selfe, but also of the mixture or Morbi è du∣orum humorū putredine in ea∣dem sede non∣nunquam fiunt confusi, non∣nunquam in di∣uersa impliciti, nonnunquam ab eadem ma∣teria in diuersis partibus, diuer∣simodè dispo∣siti. In omnibus secundum vari∣as, diuersas aut contrarias indi∣cationes, ab vr∣gentiore auspi∣catur prudens Medicus, singu∣los perlustrat, leuissimos ver∣sat. coniunction of any other maladies and respects there∣with, whose necessities may and do oft forbid and prohi∣bite his remedies (that being a medicine to one disease which is a mischiefe to another, and an ease to one which is a sorrow vnto another.) It is therefore no maruaile, that while these men contemne order and method, and the lear∣ned examination of these and such like circumstances, and blindly prosecute issues vnknowne to foreseeing reason, they therefore (though sometime they remoue a mis∣chiefe) yet either equall it againe with the like, or exceed it with a greater, or else ofttimes not profiting nor satis∣fying the vtmost patience and painefull expectation with the smallest good, effectually double the greatest euill. This for that all men see not, few consider, many forget, & some ioyously escaping defend. The hurt is oft vnespied the harmes vnheeded, the shamefull wrongers and homi∣cides with the dead buried, and the good haps by many foolish liuing idly admired, vnto the increase and continu∣ance of multiplied mischiefe. Hereof solie for the most part wofull experience is capable, neither reason, nor ex∣ample, nor any aduice warning or moderating,Morbus con∣iunctus exigit curam coniun∣ctam vt sim∣plex simplicem, in coniunctis verò quae poti∣or potiorem exigit non neg∣lecta altera. Galen in Aph. Hippoc. though the ordinary batteries from hence euery where almost leaue rotten and mangled monuments of remedilesse cures, if not present with the cause, yet neuer farre of, and though sometime long, yet euer certaine. For though where the body is strong, ofttimes many grosse errors may be by the ignorant committed, and yet not espied, (because where is strength there is lesse sense and esteeme of harmes, (weaknesse being only vnable to beare or endure without complaint) yet the insensible sting doth oft breede the most festered poyson, in the latest sensible smart. The er∣rors of the vnskilfull Pilote though great and many, in the calme are notPlurimi me∣dici similes vi dentur nauium rectoribus. In tranquillo mari regendo si quid errent peccentve, error non patet. In aduersa tempestate errore aut ignorantia facilè nauem perditam in omnibus liquidò constat. Brud. de vict. Feb. considered, but in the dangerous sea the
least error offereth the ougly shape of his owne foulnesse. In bodies not easily harmed many rash harmes are hardly discouered, but in dangerous cōditions the least lapses are heauie loades. Ignorance therefore is onely good when it doth no hurt, whereunto it is neuer wanting in her proper∣tie, but onely sometimes in power. It is obiected, that wise and learned men do oft mistake. It is true: where is the greatest wisedome the most incomparable, yet there is, and euer must be sometimes mistaking and infirmities. The rea∣son is, for that absolute perfection is aboue the nature of mortality. He therefore that in his art or faculty doth neuer erre, is. more then a man. He that most seldomeIdeo theore. ma describit Galen. lib. de Fi∣nit. Med. cuius contrarium ra∣rò euenit., nor grosly, nor easily erreth, and for the mostVbi plura ni∣tent non ego paucis offendar maculis. Horat. part and com∣monly frameth all his iudgements and actions vnto right reason, he is onely a right andArs est eorū quae ordinariò & plerunque non aliter fiunt, . complete Artist. He that grosly or easily or commonly erreth and mistaketh, iustly meriteth the name of an ignorant and idiot. This is the plaine and vncontrolled difference betweene the learned and vnlearned. It is yet farther obiected, that oft as good happe smileth vpon these ignorants as vpon more learned. It is sometime true, but it is wisedome to distinguish how. Al things that happen vnto the vnderstanding and notion of the mind (which is the guide of all actions) are either Rerum quae cognoscuntur species sunt 4. Aut enim appa∣rent sensui vel statim per se vt colores, vel ex alijs seu signis, vt ignīs ex fu∣mo. Aut sensui quidem occul∣tae sunt, rationi verò manifestae, eaeue vel sta∣tim euidentes vt bis duo 4. vel per demon∣strationem dis∣cendae. Incipit autem demon∣stratio ex ali∣qua praecedentium, id est, ex apparentibus, vel euidentibus aut certè ex demonstratis an∣tea; primam speciem sensus indicat, secundam , tertiam : quar∣tam consensus ad confesta siue ea apparentia sint, siue euidentia, siue antea demonstra∣ta. Galen. lib. de Opt. Sect. in themselues certaine and demonstrate, or necessary by consequent, or probable and of likelihood, or of contin∣gence and good hap. In the first the truly learned cannot erre; in the second not oft nor easily. But, in both the vnlearned is euer subiect to error, as vnable to distin∣guish plaine truth from seeming appearance. In the third the learned may beNeque idem vnquam aequè est beatus. Neque est quis∣quam quem non aliquando videre Suffenum possis, Catull. deceiued, but not so commonly and easily as the vnlearned. In the fourth good hap and blind fortune is indifferent vnto both, and therein the foole hath
oft as good hap as the wise man. But he that hath com∣mon sense may discerne great ods. The learned hath a prerogatiue in three parts vnto himselfe, and an equall part with the vnlearned, in the fourth. The learned hath for his light and guide either knowledge, whereof isScientia est habitus demōstratiuus, habet∣ue principia nota & aeterna. de∣monstration, and thereby are his actions more certaine; or reason and iudgement, and thereby are they more tried vnto right and truth; or right probability and artificiall Artificialis cōiectura quàm propè accedit ad veritatem. Galen passim. coniecture, and thereby are they more seldome found er∣ring. The vnlearned wanteth all these helps,Insipiens mo∣uetur falsa finis specie, non fine. and is led onely by bold aduenture in hope of good hap, which after long expectation is but seldomeQuod casu fit, inexpectatò fit, & tarò & incerta mora fit; vt quod natura sit, expectatò fit, ferè semper fit, vel vt pluri∣mùm sit. seene, and then soone gone. For the bounty of good hap is not euery day, and when it sodainely like a wanton sheweth it selfe, her smiles are obuious to any one, and therein hath the learned with the vnlearnedQuippe deest finis cuius gratia agatur, vbi casu aliquid fit. Ne∣gatio finis ponit caum. Positio finis negat ca∣sum. Sapiens verò sine pro∣posito fine ni∣hil agit. equall interest. It breedeth yet farther doubt, that is sometime seene. The Empericke and vn∣learned Surgeon do sometimes cure where the learned hath long trauailled, and at length hath giuen place vnto the disease. It cannot be denied, in many desperate cases these men are the onely fit instruments. Where the lear∣ned foreseeing the slippery hope of meanes, and the nota∣tion and staggering of nature, doth make warieTutus & intra spem veniae cautus. Horat. procee∣ding (vnwilling where the caution is so nice that the acti∣on cannot be safe, to vndertake so hardSemper metu∣it quem saeua pudebunt. Lucan. Historia. an office) there these men (who thinke nothing hard though impossible) being euer ready to giue bold aduenture, may hap luckily to ouersute the danger, and thereby the cure must needs be a mightyHinc illa Empiricorum miranda gesta & vulgata miracula, Riolanus. deliuerance. An ancient gentleman of Northamptonshire, being then my patient, related vnto me among our merriments his medicine for a continuall head-ach and giddinesse, which in time past had long vexed him, and solicited diuers good Physitions in vaine. By chance he met with an angry Surgeon, who being by him in some words prouoked, and finding the gentleman alone and far from companie or rescue, with a staffe vnto
the vtmost perill of life soundly brake his head, and plen∣tifully let him bloud in diuers places; but life escaping, he thereby deliueredAb istiusir o∣di errore nasci∣tur expeenta . Galen. de Sect. him of his diseases, whereof more wise and deliberate counsell could neuer with much labour and long time free him. It was a great ouersight in his learned Physitions, that they could not foresee, nor would not prescribe so fortunate a remedy. Thus malice was as hap∣py as an Empericks bold attempt, yet herein was some∣what better, that it was freely bestowed.Historia. In like manner, vnto another so far ingaged in the Neapolitan disease, that discreete counsell durst not oppose equipollent re∣medies, a woman (purposing to poyson him) gaue an vnknowne dose of rats-bane; and thereby nature driuen vnto her vtmost and last shift, setting open all the passages of his body, at once with the poyson wholly expelled the former disease. Thus issueth wondered good out of di∣uellish and dangerous acts. I condemne not sharpe and ex∣treme remedies, when as extremeSaepe misera auxilia tolerabi∣liora faciunt mala miseriora. Leuin. Lemn. neede requireth them; neither do I commend a trembling and timorous iudge∣ment in prescription and accommodation there of where isDabiturue licentia sumpta pudenter. needefull. But I admit not hard or sodaine, Plurimùm atq repentè quo∣uis modo cor∣pus mouere pe∣riculosum. Hippocrat. lib 2. Aph. attempts, but onely in extreme necessities, where also theIn extremis morbis extre∣ma exquisitè re∣media optima sunt, vt Hippo∣crates. Sed a∣gendi iudicatio semper sumen∣da à viribus, nec deploratos at∣tingat Medicus. , in ascite vtilis, sed plerunque lethalis. Ideo frustra tentatur fractis viribus aut vbi hydrops succedit shirrho aut febribus ardentibus. In extractione calculi vesicae cauendum etiam à longo dolore fractis viribus. In partim etiam principum vehementiore affectu diacrydiatis atendum cautè, &c. strength of nature hath by the iudicious and learned bene careful∣ly foreballanced betweene hope and hazard: without these respects the vse of hard and vehement remedies by the hands of vnlearned Practitioners are growne too com∣mon. It is therefore good for men to take heede, how they too boldly walke in the common tract of Empericks and vnlearned, whose waies oft troden grow slippery, and therefore not varied prooe dangerous. It is sometime nearest way to go out of the common way, many times the fairest way, and not seldome the safest way. For though diseases may be of easie note and well knowne, and the vulgar medication no lesse otherwise apt vnto the necessi∣tie;
yet may one small circumstance onely by it selfe ma∣king the disease different, once escaping an vnskilfull and blind eye, for euer after ouerrun the hopefull vse of any other meanes, and frustrate the happinesse of after-health by better counsell. This is the reason that so many sodaine∣ly and vnexpectedly perish not without wonder in the vn∣skilfull practitioners hand, who casting his eye vpon no∣thing but that which is common, taketh for a great stranger what is otherwise, and therefore not foreseeing, his coming is not prepared to entertaine or intercept him with best aduantage; nor giueth nor taketh warning of him, and therefore is so sodainely oft surprised by him.Historiae. I may hereof giue a rare instance in an esteemed friend sometimes a learned Diuine, who by some rash ad∣uice, his estate at that time not duly considered, requi∣red of an Apothecary a strong medicine against the stone (wherewith from his childhood he had bene euer here∣ditarily Qui calculi non diu con∣creeriut ij medicamentis aptis dissolui possunt; qui ve∣rò diutiùs exic∣cati & indurati difficillim aut nunquam enrā tur, ideoue pe∣riculosè irritan∣tur. Rondeletius de vrin. molested. The one prepared it, the other tooke it, both expecting no other vse or consequent, then that which was vsuall to such a medicine. But the same night that potion violently descending brake through hisLapillis in ve sica subsistenti∣bus crabrones irritant quicun∣que saxitragis deturbant te∣mere. Reolan. bladder, making therein two issues, where by the v∣rine came from him immediately then, and continually af∣ter by those two breaches, before it could attaine the v∣suall passage or conduit. Hereof was then witnesse a graue & learned gentleman an ancient Doctor of Physike vnto whom this patient did slie for his iudicious aduice in this sodaine mischiefe, and with whom my selfe had seri∣ous conference about that accident, both of vs lamenting his so vnhappy distresse and misery.
CHAP. VI. Apothecaries. HERE so faire occasion offering their me∣mory, we may not forget our Apotheca∣ries. Among them also some to do a friend an vnlicenced friendship, or to keepe their wares in motion for feare of corruption, will haply sometimes offer a casuall good turne, to any that like the venture. I must needs say for the priuiledge of Apothecaries, that if any may haue pre∣rogatiue to be Physitions, by the excellence and rare choice of medicines, it is most proper vnto them; who haue with them registred and inrolled the priuie choice, trust and command of all the best remedies, and haue the best light to gesse at their best vse. Nay I may commend them farther; that for the excellent preparation and know∣ledge of medicines they sometimes may excell some Phy∣sitions themselues: but aboue and beyond the preparation, the right and iudicious dispensation is truly worthy, com∣manding and directing their safe and prudent vse. This skill requireth an vnderstanding able to raise itselfe aboue both the medicine and theQuam enim proportionem Architectu er∣ga coementari∣os lignariosq́ue fabros & alios quibus imperat gerit, eandem Medicus erga ministros suos, herbarios, ve∣nam scindentes, cucurbitulas admouentes & Clysteres im∣mitentes. Galen in lib 6. Hipp. de Morb. vulgar. maker, vnto the great Maker of them both, and from his generallNaturae legi∣bus Medicinae leges semper consentaneae. Fernel. decree and counsell in the administration of all things in nature, to leuie and limite circumstances,Vt medici cu∣iusque auxilij quantitatem, oc∣casionem & v∣tendi modum cognoscimus, vt ministri verò venam secamus & reliqua ma∣nibus opera∣mur. Galen. in lib. 6. Hipp. de Morb. vulgar. proportion, time, place, quantity and quality, according to the manifold seuerall purposes and infinite vses for the preseruation, conseruation, and continuance of health and life vnto mankind. And herein how far it behoueth the erected mind of higher contem∣plation, to exalt it selfe in consultation aboue the elemen∣tary consideration and composition of a medicine and the vulgar and common sense, the continuall exquisite vse and exercise of the most incomparable prudence and learning in the ordinary and daily difficulties that befall the health, do plainely proue and demonstrate. It is not the medicine
it selfe, but the iudgement and knowledge of the learned, and right accommodation annexed vnto the wholesome medicine, that addeth vnto it a worth aboue it selfe; where∣by it doth far exceede it selfe in excellency, in variety of greater good, in distinction of more proper vse, according to art and reason thereto conducting it, which is the life of euery application and accommodation in all things. Hence euen the greatest clerkes with this sufficiency pro∣uided, haue not blushed to borrow or learne a good medi∣cine at a simple and vulgarNeque enim turpe est per vulgus & anicu∣las profecisse. Non enim pu∣duit maiores nostros in mul∣tis remedijs brutorum disci∣pulos se profite∣ri. Quin & ac∣ceptis à vulgo remedijs adhi∣benda ratio & rectus vsus, in quo summa ar∣tis posita est. Holler. Instit. Chirurg. hand, yea from fooles and brute beasts, in their owne more excellent adaptation as the soule vnto the body, conferring the full and true per∣fection. The Ancients themselues haue not shamed so to do, as Galen in diuers places professeth of himselfe. Vnto Apothecaries therefore that faithfully and truly apply themselues and their whole indeauor, that haue tried and experienced skill, and vse faithfull industrie in fitting wholesome and incorrupt remedies to attend each honest need and necessity without fucation, adulteration or de∣ceit, and containe themselues within themselues, no man can deny a worthy esteeme both in priuate thoughts and publike estimate; but if the pride and maister-ship of the medicine stirre once in them the ambition of medica∣tion, as in the former men commēd them, so in the second they shall iustly condemne them: and as in the one safely vse them, so in the other with safe discretion refuse them, fearing lest with Salomons fly being taken in the Apothe∣caries boxe, they also in like manner make a stinke of the medicine,Historia. & an end of themselues. Valleriola mentioneth an Apothecary who with the imprudent vse of quicksil∣uer poysoned himselfe. I knew sometime an honest and ap∣proued good Apothecary in Warwickshire, who imitating a prescription of precipitate against an inueterate disease which he supposed in himselfe, exulcerated his guts, and therefore died. These experiments in other then them∣selues had bene bloudy and vnhonest, and in themselues rather then in other argue their strong confidence, (which
therefore might easily seduce them to be in time bold with others.) Example and imitation (which are the rules of an Apothecaries practise) are but patterns of anothers sufficiencie. Sufficience therfore being not their owne, it is sufficient to put them in mind of their owne. It is good for euery one to be contented and contained within his owne lists, and of his owne store with liberality to lend, and of anothers with loue and licence to borrow. This vpholdeth societies and good orders in common weales, maintaineth mutuall neighbourhood and humanity, friendly and iust commerce with loue and loyall reciprocation, and distri∣bution of euery right to euery owner, with good to the ge∣nerall and common, and without hurt to euery priuate and particular. I say nothing of banckrupt Apothecaries, who hauing left their owne standing become walking merchants, and with a few pedlarie wares remaining keepe shop in their owne hose, or else in their guts, who (wanting other vse) imagine them sufficiēt to make cleane the kitchin. Let thē that desire their meate in the stomacke should long finde good cookerie, take heede who put herbs into the pot. It hath bene required and by some im∣posed, that a Physition should be both Surgeon and Apo∣thecary himselfe. It is easily decided. In iudgement, skill, knowledge, and ability of direction, it is very requisite and necessary, and the contrary is not tollerable in a true ar∣chitect: but euery particular executionEi qui praesi∣det, scire opera∣ri necessarium non est, sed po∣tius aliorum ministerio vti. Aristot. polit. 3. or manuall paines and trauell is neuer vniustly, sometime necessarily, and oft more conueniently distributed and deuided vnto others, whose vicissitude, assistance, and oft more ready handling thereof, is as sufficient, nothing inferiour, yea for opera∣ry proofe and cunning handworke far without enuy. Nonnulli nescientes quàm aliqui sci∣entes ad opera sunt magis ido nei. Aristot. eth. 6. su∣perior, because the maine and continuall exercise therein, doth therein also make the meaner iudgement better ap∣ted and more prompt. Galen indeed himselfe in necessity, & want of other (whose better and more speciall practise and exercise therein might make it their more proper per∣formance) put his owne hand vntoPrimi medi∣cinae parentes & veteres Graeci Medici ferè omnes huma∣nitte ducti (v∣bi ita res postu∣lauerit) suis ma∣nibus operabā∣tur in ciuitati∣bus nondum populosis. At vbi hominum multitudo in∣creuerit, aliò res delegata est. Hinc etiam Principum edi∣ctis distincta ex∣tant Medicorū & Chirurgorū ministeria & officia. chirurgie: but when
he found it another distinct office, as an ease vnto himselfe and a commodious liberty & inlarged helpe to his other imploiments, studies and care, he thereunto referred hand-operation, though euer haply conferred his mind & iudgement. In like maner Hippocrates refuseth byNec verò cal∣culo laborantes secabo, sed viris Chirurgiae ope∣rarijs eius rei fa∣ciendi locum dabo. Hippoc. iurc iurando. oath to meddle in Chirurgerie, & expresly in the extraction of the stone of the bladder, and leaueth it vnto those that are therein exercised: The fewer offices the lesse distraction, & where lesse distraction, there is the better bent vnto the more maine and proper scope. Where therefore with as sufficient supply by others, the suffection or deputation may ease of a burthen (as indifferently else were imposed) there (the businesse lesse, and the diligence and incum∣bence equall) the remaining taske must needes be com∣pletely and absolutely attended & perfected. Concerning the Apothecarie included in the Physition: indeed the first Ancients were Apothecaries vnto themselues, because in themselues onely was then newly sprouting in the infan∣cie, the inchoation of that skill, and therefore as yet they could notOmnes artes rudiores primū, tractu deinde temporis absol∣uuntur. Scal. Poet 3. communicate perfection vnto others. But now time and age haue accomplished it, the Physitions eye and skill hath vsed anothers hand both as a needfull and re∣quisite Medico mul∣rae artes aptam materiam prae∣parant, ipse na∣turae per mini∣stros suppeditat Galen. in lib. 6. Hippo. de morb vulgar. helpe in the mechanicall ministery, and also as an aduantage and ease to the more necessary, laborious, and studious trauels of his mind. In ordinarie dispatches ther∣fore it is vnauoidably necessary an Apothecarie be euer at hand, as faithfull as his owne right hand, and in extraor∣dinarie the Physitions owne heart must onely trust his owne hand, and his owne eye witnesse their consent. This equitie may satisfie curiositie.
CHAP. VII. Of Practisers by Spels. NOw to leaue both Surgeon and Apothe∣carie, the opposition against the vse or need of either, doth put in mind in the next place not to forget those, who pro∣fesse the performances, vses, and end both of Surgeon & Apothecary, yea and Phy∣sition himselfe without their helpe or need: such are such as cure by spels and words. If men beleeue as reason would and as reasonable men should (for men are noNec credere possis Hunc ho∣minem, huma∣na qui ratione caret Maximiā. vel vt alij, Cor∣nel Gall. men if vn∣reasonable) of any effects from spels, among the wise is no true reason or cause, and without reason can be no right perswasion. Betweene a true cause and hisCausa imme∣diata protinus per se cohaeret cum effectu. Scaig. de subt. proper effect, there is an immediate necessity; betweene a cause by acci∣dent and his effect, there is aCausam per accidens sequi∣tur per accidens effectum. mediate consequution: but this cause being onely ni opinion, can be no more then o∣pinion, and in opinion is no truth. Some finding spels to do no good, obiect as a good, they do no hurt. This hurt I am assured they do; while men haue gaped after such sha∣dowes, they oft in the meane season haue lost the sub∣stance, their life and health: which while due season offe∣red vnto them that had learned to know oportunitie, bad scholers were still at spelling schoole. To speak more se∣riously of such a toy: If the faithfull and deuout prayer of holy men (vnto which the promise of God, and the bles∣sings of men are annexed) hath no such assurance or suc∣cesse of necessarie consequent, without laborious industry and the vse of good meanes, how can religionQuod neque religio praecipit nec oritur ex causis naturali∣bus est supersti∣tio. Melanth. or reason suffer men that are not voyd of both, to giue such impious credite vnto an vnsignificant and senslesse.Scripta, verba annuli, characte¦res, signa, nihil valent ad pro∣fligandos mor∣bos, si nulla su∣perior potestas diuina vel ma∣gica accesserit. Inania itaque sunt vereq́ue a∣nilia credētium animos super∣stitione occu∣pante. Fernel. de Abd. rer. causis. mumbling of idle words, contrarie to reason, without president of any truly wiseVide Galenū lib. 6. & 10. de simpl. Med. facultat. Theophrast. in hist. plant. l. 9. Aug. tract. 7. in Euan. Ioānis. or learned, and iustly suspected of all sensible men? It shall be no error to insert a merrie historie of an approued famous spell for sore eyes. By many honest
testimonies, it was a long time worne as a iewell about many necks, written in paper, and inclosed in silke, neuer failing to do soueraigne good when all other helps were helplesse. No sight might dare to reade or open. At length a curious mind while the patient slept, by stealth ripped o∣pen the mystical couer, and found the powerful characters Latin, which Englished were these: TheDiabolus effo∣diat tibi oculos, impleat forami∣na stercoribus. Wierus de prae∣stig. cap. 4. diuell digge out thine eyes, and fill vp their holes with his dung. Words without meaning are nothing, and yet so here are best. Of nothing can come nothing (much lesse good:) yet soIn thought. it was, and yet it wasIn deed. not so) oathes and testimonies auou∣ching the one religion, & truthNeque enim verum est ho∣minem ab ho∣mine noceri posse verbis. Sed demon cre∣dulitate decipit hominem vt socium habeat, tum impietatis, tum aeterni exi∣tij. Scal. de subt. denying the othes. Thus ofttimes things haply begun in sport and ieast, with light minds, by vaine opinion grow to sooth and earnest. It is strange in these daies to behold how this follie doth laugh euen wise men to scorne, while their vnreasonable parts of imagination and fancie, so iuggle with their iudge∣ments and vnderstanding, that they can scarce containe themselues from beleeuing and consulting with such ri∣diculous folly. Thus able is fancie, not onely to deceiue sense, but to obscure our reason. If there be any good or vse vnto the health by spels, they haue that prerogatiue by accident, and by the power and vertue ofPhantasia im∣perium habet in spiitus & humores, qui sunt morborum parentes. fancie; wherein is neither certaintie nor continuance. Fancie, ac∣cording vnto the nature thereof, can seldome be long fi∣xed vpon any thing; because naturally being euer full of fiction, it must needs easily and continually beSensus interi∣oris motus per∣petuus. Aristot. de insomn. transpor∣ted. Fancie therefore can be no ordinarie or common re∣medie, being but rarely fixedly detained; and where it is most earnestly bent, yet hardly of long continuance. If fancie then be the foundation whereupon buildeth the good of spels, spels must needs be as fancies are, vncer∣taine andGalen. lib. 6 & 10. de simp. med facultat. Confi∣dere doctos & bonos Midicos medicamento∣rum substantiae praecipit, non verbis aut car∣minibus. vaine: so must also by consequent be their vse and helpe, and no lesse all they that trust vnto them. I speake not of inchanted spels, but of that superstitious babling, by tradition of idle words and sentences, which all that haue sense, know to be voide of sense, as the other
diuellish. The one (if there be no remedie) we must per∣mit vnto fooles, in the other we cannot denie the diuell. CHAP. VIII. The explication of the true discouerie of Witchcraft in the sicke, together with many and wondered instances in that kind. MAny things of great power and wonder,Witcheraft. aboue reason and beyond the power of nature, haue bene effected through the imprecation, stimulation and ministerie of wicked men the associates of diuels, whose commerce with spirits hath bene oft plaine and manifest. But it is good before we enter into the consideration thereof, that we be warie and cau∣telously wise, how we make a true difference betweene a true worke of the diuell, and the strange likenesse which phantasmes (oft countenanced by casualties and euents) strongly worke in the opinion and conceit. For as the ma∣chinations of spirits are certainly oft inserted into the acti∣ons of men;Historia. so by the iuglings of the imaginarie, are so liuely framed resemblances and counterfets of them oft times, that they can hardly be distinguished. That it may therefore the better first appeare what fancie and imagi∣nation are able to do, I will not here omit an historie worth good eare: Anno 1607. a Parsons wife of North∣hamptonshire, dwelling within three miles of the towne, came vnto a Physition, complaining of a tumor in one of her breasts. He demanded her among many other things concerning the Sciatica, which heNarrata ab aegrotante prae∣ter totius ple∣thorā lassitudo partium omniū inferiorum cū mensium reten∣tione, coxarum grauitate in motu, torpore dum quiesceret, paratum affectū monstrabant. I∣deo neque prae∣dixisse difficile, neque re ipsa affectum subse∣qui miraculi lo∣co haberi de∣bet. coniectured to vexe her. She denied any acquaintance or notion thereof in all her former life. The same night (being returned home) so∣dainly about midnight the Sciatica seized painfully and grieuously vpon her. Some few daies after, it happened a∣nother of her neighbours came also vnto the same Phy∣sition, whom (beside the disease which she her selfe made
knowne) he guessed to be troubled with thePraeter ple∣thoram tum infra tum supra diaphragma conspicuam, tu∣mor venarum molestus circa crura & in po∣plitibus, de quo conquesta est aegra, de spas∣mo & distenti∣one illarum partium faci∣lem inde dant coniecturam. Vbi igitur aegrae imprudentia praesatur cau∣sam, facilis est prudentia pro∣babilem pòst fari effectum. crampe, and cursorily questioned her thereof. She neuer before sensibly knowing any such paine, after her returne also that night suffered thereby exceeding torment. These two accidents compared together by the first partie, (the one in her selfe, and the other in her neighbour) and the ap∣prehension being whet by her exceeding paine continu∣ed, caused in her a strong and resolute opinion of bewit∣ching, which she presently vnremoueably imputed vnto the Physition. Her outcries and impatience through her paine, made such forcible impression in her husband, that to satisfie his wiues vnreasonable importunacie, he was contented to come vnto the Physition from her to expo∣stulate. He, before he could vtter his message, blushing at the folly, and yet desirous to satisfie his wiues iniunction, because she would not otherwise giue him rest, at length related vnto him the cause of his coming, desiring him for his sake (being much ashamed thereof) to conceale the folly of his wife. This done, he returned home, and found his wife nothing better, but assuring her selfe and him, that if he would but once more come vnto the Phy∣sition, and (as I coniecture) gaine him to forgiue her, she should presently be well. Accordingly the next day he came vnto him, and (then concealing the reason and cause of his coming) desired him to forgiue and pardon his wife. This easily granted (as such a toy) he presently demanded the houre of the day, which instantly the clocke gaue two, being afternoone. He hastened homeward, and before he could speake vnto his wife, she ioyously entertained him, and with preuention told him that she was perfectly well, and that iust atShe was assu∣red late the night before of the Physitions being at home that same day; she knew the length of the way, her hus∣bāds vsuali pace, and nw direct sped. She might easily compare the time of his going forth, with a competent time for his attaining the Physition, and with all these might well hope of the Physitions facilitie by his friendly entertainment the day before. From hence her i∣magination satisfying itselfe with the confidence thereof, she might thereby, setling and quiet∣ing her spirits, minde and humors, for a time thus appease and mitigate her paines. As for her so true and iust coniecture at the time which was two of the clocke, the circumstances before men∣tioned, and likelihood it selfe did guide her to suppose it. If this reason satisfie not, religion and reasons giue leaue farther to suspect, that the diuell to aduance errour and illusion, might conuey into her imagi∣nation an in∣ward and secret sence of the time. The power that the diuell doth exercise in this kind, might be made cleare by many exam∣ples. two of the clock her paine left her, which
she (it seemed) imagined (as it also hapned) to haue bene the same time and moment that the Physition had giuen her desired pardon. The next morning her husband did write vnto him, discouering with this newes the reason of his last coming vnto him the day before, together with this strange euent following it. Within halfe a yeare after, she fell sicke againe, andAfter the pen∣ning of this hi∣story, the cause and maner of her death by her neighbours of worth and cre∣dit, was thus re∣ported. Her hus∣band, at her ear∣nest sute, consul∣ted with a wan∣dring Surgeon, whom fame, it seemeth, had magnified for charmed and potent cures of such as were be∣witched. The Surgeon deliue∣red a medicine vnto the hus∣band, promising a miraculous cure thereby, and charged him withall, by no meanes to be feared, though haply there might fall out some strange and fearfull operations vnto the seeming. The medicine with this stile coming vnto the patient, was gladly receiued; and after she had receiued it into her bo∣die, she died. The glorious name of the medicine, together with a confidence that this was onely the strange operation of the medicine foretold by the Surgeon, caused the friends about her still to expect some admirable euent of recouerie, and therefore they still gaped after her rprising: but in the end necessitie called for a graue: and thus their hope with her was buried. died. This strong imagination, with this strange euent, might haue intangled many a poore spinster in a thicker string then her cunning could vntwist, to saue the cracking of her neck. But if mē wold more duly oft examine and weigh these cases, they shall many times find the Witch in a foolish sconce; and greater and more dangerous are the bewitchings of a mans owne folly, and more effectuall oft times vnto his owne hurt and others, then any witch, yea or diuell whatsoeuer. Without doubt chance may flatter and countenance the imagination with vnwonted, yea and iustly wondered euents, and yet is that no demonstration of ought about nature or reason. Casu∣altie doth so apt oft times consequences vnto dreames, as if there were some secret power or influence in them pro∣ceeding vnto such effects, yet is it no proof of truth or trust in them. Women oft times out of theirAelianus lib. 4. scribit Aspasiam concubinam Cyri posterioris admonitam fuisse in somno de medicamento quo sanauit vitium oris, quod venustatem priùs valdè deforma∣uerat. sleepes haue fore∣seene and foretold many things, which according to time and place haue iustly come to passe, but this doth make their dreames no oracles. Many vain mē out of the presage of their owne minds, haue confidently made prediction of such things as haue assuredly hapned, yet is this no induce∣ment to take them for prophets. In like maner some that
haue possessed themselues with witchcraft, and the opi∣nion thereof, haue seemed to know things aboue their knowledge, and that knowledge aboue and beyond all reason hath bene true: yet neither is this any dispossession of themselues of this spirit of folly, nor no iust proofe or accusation of any one to be a witch. I cannot therfore take it for an ingenuous course, vpō such grounds to draw sim∣ple people vnto confusion. It is an easie matter for any im∣pression to worke it selfe into the imagination of a vaine mind. And why may it not seeme as easie for the diuell who is the author of lyingHinc illa  diabolica. wonders, to credite it with wonderfull euents aboue the weake eye of our reason? Therefore ineptly and iniuriously may the illusion of fan∣cie, and the practise of the diuell therewith ioyned, be made snares for the innocent, whose destruction is his in∣tention who reioyceth in the perdition of mankind. Nei∣ther can I beleeue (I speake it with reuerence vnto grauer iudgements) that the forcedNon absimilis vis compellendi motus tum ani∣mi tum corpo∣ris etiam phil∣tris & carmini bus attribuitur. Philtra nocent animis vimq́ue furoris habent. Ouid. Carmina de coelo possunt deducere lunam Virgil. coming of men or women to the burning of bewitched cattell, or to the burning of the dung or vrine of such as are bewitched, or floating of bodies aboue the water, or the like, are any trial of a witch. I see no reason why I may not thinke, that the diuell by the permission of God, hath power indifferently to worke these effects vpon any man, whether a witch or no. For if he had power for his owne malitious purpose vpon the bodie of our blessed Sauiour, to transport it through the aire, and to set it vpon a pinnacle of the temple; and vpon the body of righteous Iob, with hope and desire of his o∣uerthrow: by what prerogatiue dare any other man what∣soeuer presume to free himselfe from his power, but by a speciall grace and mercie of God? Or why is it any impu∣tation vnto any man to be knowne to be subiect thereto, since God doth permit it in diuers his deareData est Dia∣bolo potestas non modò vt fallat malos, sed vt exerceat bo∣nos. Augussin. seruants? If men shall grant the diuels exercising his power vpon any man a sufficient euidence to conuince him a witch,Diabolus im∣perium exercet in impios. In pi∣os etiā in multis casibus particu∣laribus potesta∣tem habet, qua & vulnerantur & concidunt. Caluin. lib. instit. there shall thereby be allowed vnto the diuell a largeQuid Angeli mali possunt, quid nō possunt facere per na∣turae suae con∣ditionem, homini explo∣rare difficile immo impos∣sibile, Augustin. de Trinit. commis∣sion, which his malice will easily extend beyond the lati∣tude:
as by right obseruation of many learned in their own experiences hath ben and may be oft truly noted. I do not deny nor patronage witches or witchcraft, but wish that the proofes and triall thereof may be more carefully and with better circumspection viewed and considered: that rash determination beguile not the wise, nor con∣demne the innocent, vpon whom the diuell can with more nimblenesse and agilitie transferre his owne euill workes, then either they can auoide it, or others easily espie it. E∣uerie thing whereof euerie man cannot giue a reason, is not therefore a miracle. There are many things whereof fewSoli viri inge∣niosi & subtilis mentis acici dif¦ficilia cognitu facilè compre∣hendere valent. Aristot. men, many whereof no man can attaine the reason, yet euerieMulta sunt quorum cum veritas certa sit, tamē causae nos latent. Plutarch. de Sympol. man knoweth to haue a reason in nature. Be∣hold a toy for an example. There is seene in the hand of a iugler a thing as it is indeed; sodainly in a moment without perceptible motion, it is againe seeneInter praesti∣giatoris manus quod est video. Mutatur species vel propter ce∣leritatem vel propter aliud. Quare verò mutetur latet me. Scalig. de Subt. as it is not. That there is a cause of the change who knoweth not? what it is, who knoweth except to whom it hath bene made known? With great wonder andIn natura plu∣rima fiunt mi∣randa & singu∣laria, inquit A∣ristoles, ideo{que} naturam ipsam appellat . admiration haue diuers in this age shewed mercenarie spectacles, incredible. Camerarius de diuinat. euen vn∣to the beholding eye, and yet in the actors by meane vnderstandings deprehended to be nothing but agilitie and nimble cunning, by continuall practise and custome working desperatenesse into facilitie. Thus with common wonder haue some walked and danced voon cords. Some are written to haue leaped and danced vpon the edges of sharp swords without hurt vnto thēselues, & with pleasure vnto the beholders. Some haue credibly bene supposed to deuoure daggers and other sharpe and dangerous wea∣pons. That naturally the loadstone draweth iron the mea∣nest know: the reasō or cause the wisest neuer knew. There are wonders in nature, & wonders aboue nature; these are subtilties, the other miracles. That fire and aire, contrary to their owneA forma vniuersali mouentur sponte ignis & aër deorsum, ne eueniret vacuum. Forma particularis obedit vniuersali ad conseruationem totius entitatis & vnitatis. Scalig. de Subt. particular nature of the owne accord de∣scend,
and waters ascend: that the heauie mettals of iron and lead, contrary to their owne naturall motion, should with such admirable swiftnesse, in so short aQuia nequit tam citò rate∣fieri ad implen∣dum vacuum, quod reliquum potest facere facit, atque tam citò abit. Scalig. de subt. moment passe so large a distance through the aire, from a small flash of a little flame: these and such like are subtilties, be∣cause the cause and reason thereof doth vnfold it selfe to few, or not to all, yet vnto the learned. That the Sunne should stand still in the firmament, the Moone be ecclip∣sed in no interposition, the bodies of men should flie in the aire, or walke vpon the face of the water; these and the like are miracles, because hereof is neither power nor reason in nature. And as in the former to be easily drawne to admiration, and to ascribe naturall effects to supernatu∣rall causes, is grosse ignorance, so in the latter to enquire naturall causes inFrustra de metaphysicis quaeruntur phy∣sicae rationes. supernaturall effects, is profane curio∣sitie. In both these extremes men too commonly erre, the learned for the most part in the latter, the vnlearned in the first; the one tooSapientia ve∣ra, Nolle nimis sapere. wise, the other starke fooles. None truly learned, or that truly know the face of nature (whose scho∣lers the learned euer professe themselues) can be vpon the vaine flashes of seeming wonders lightly moued to denie or call into questionHoc nomine Cardanum ta∣xat Scaliger lib. de subtilit. Quae consultò natura in orbe molita est suo, is prae∣stigiae nomine denotandum putat. the power and force of nature. With therfore the common amazed thoughts of vulgar people, to be blasted by the stupiditie of euery idle feare, to gape after witchcraft, or to make nature a diuell or a bugbeare, must needs be base procliuitie and vnlearned lightnesse. To admit also nothing aboue or beside nature, no witch∣craft, no association with diuels at all, is no lesse madnesse of the opposite and extreame. But those whom true lear∣ning and wisedome hath well instructed, know how to stay themselues, and to consist in a temperate mediocritie betweene both these. The actions of the diuell are disco∣uered by the proper notes and difference. First they are e∣uer Hoc à diuini∣tatis excellentia separat. omnis enim potestas supra naturam est vel diuina vel diabolica, haec voique & semper bona, illa nusquam non mala. euill, either in themselues or in their end. Secondly, they are aboueQuorum dae∣mones authores sunt eorum ra∣tio est trans na∣turam. Fernel. de abd. rer. caus. the power and course of nature and rea∣son. This appeareth manifestly in his violent cariage of so many heards of swine headlong into the sea, mentioned in
the Gospell: in his bringing fire from aboue so sodainly to deuoure so many thousands of Iobs sheepe. These, with other such like, carry in their mischiefe and hurt the stamp of such an author, and in the transcendentDaemoniaci nonnulli oblo∣quuntur sum∣mè ardua, ar∣cana reserant & occulta re∣nunciant. Edunt verba & senten∣tias graecas & latinas, cum ipsi vtriusque linguae omnina ignari sunt. Fernel. de Abd. rer. caus. and supernatu∣rall power thereof, the testimonie of a spirit. This is plaine, and by these notes men may learne to distinguish between an imaginarie and a reall diuellish practise. Now the doubt remaineth, how we may in these workes and practi∣ses of the diuell, detect the conuersation and commerce of men. I do not conceiue how any markes in the flesh or bo∣die of any one, may be any triall or manifest proofe: for be∣sides the grant, thatMany and strange haue bene the formes of diuers excres∣cencies, or grow∣ings in the flesh through all parts almost of the bo∣die, whose na∣ture, forme and cause are well knowne vnto the Physition, though to his eye oft times strange and wondered. Scaliger in his booke of Subtil∣ties, mentioneth a Waterman, knowne vnto himselfe, who had a horne growing vpon his backe. The like haue others since and before knowne and written. Some men haue bene borne with parts proper vnto the other sexe, and women with parts or re∣semblances of parts naturally giuen to the malekind alone. The errors of nature in monstrous births, are not obscure, and feede varietie of wonder; nor are nor can be tied from the counter∣feit of any shape, likenesse, marke or figure, sometimes superfluously cast vpon one part, some∣times vpon another. likenesse may deceiue, who can as∣sure me that the diuell may not as easily, secretly and in∣sensibly marke the flesh of men as their soules vnto destru∣ction? If the diuell may marke them without their know∣ledge and consent, shall his malice be their offence? or how shall I be assured he cannot so do? He that can do the greater, can do the lesse. He that could giue vnto the Son of God a view of all the kingdomes of the world in one instant (which was no doubt a speciall straine of his vtmost spirituall cunning, considering he was then to deale with wisedome it selfe) can that cunning finde no meanes to make a small scarre, impresse or tumor in flesh? Who dare presume to say, God will not suffer him? Who euer so farre entred into the counsell of God, or measured what therein he doth permit? If no holy writ, no reason manifest it, proud and blasphemously daring is obseruation in so infinite and vnmeasurable a subiect. I denie not that the diuell by couenant may sucke the bodies and bloud of wit∣ches, in witnesse of their homage vnto him; but I denie a∣ny marke (of neuer so true likenesse or perfect similitude) sufficient condemnation vnto any man; and beside and a∣boue
all other notes or marks whatsoeuer, iudge it chiefly and principally and first to be required, that both the di∣uelsThe diuels pro∣pertie is knowne by actions, deeds or workes first found sustained by a supernatu∣rall power, and next bent vnto an euill end. Thus for diuel∣lish ends haue Witches and sor∣cerers bene knowne to ride vpon the seas in vessels vncapable of such cariage, or of any defence. Thus haue some haunted men and other crea∣tures, in maners, meanes and cir∣cumstances more then any way reasonable or possible vnto hu¦manitie or the nature of man alone. Thus haue some also declared the secret words and actions of men, then absent in farre distant places, and foretold particular things to come. These with their diuellish affection, end, and intention are certaine proofes of diabolicall power and witchraft. propertie therein, & also the partiesConsent and cooperation may be manifested first by proofe of any incantation, inuocation, spels, and other performances of o∣ther diabolicall rites and ceremonies: secondly by their vse of such instruments as are vsuall or proper vnto such diuellish workes Of this kind are pictures of waxe or other matter, by which they secretly worke wasting and consuming paines vnto the liuing persons of those dead resem∣blances. Of this kind are also charmed knos, characters and figures. Of this kinde also are diuers sorts of poisonsome matters, by them knowne to be solemnly sought, and carefully hidden or kept. These found or detected, are certaine conuictions of witches and witchcraft, ioyned with other due presumptions and circumstances, and a manifest detection of the assistance of any tra scendent force. consent thereto may be iustly and truly euicted, which is oft too lightly weighed. It may be with good reason iudged, that the di∣uell doth not blush to be both bold and cunning, there to set his marke, yea and make his claime where he hath no interest. But when the diuell doth appeare in workes and signes proper to himselfe, and therewith shall be euident either directly or by good consequent the act of any man consenting or cooperating, there law may iustly take hold to censure; and there also the former presumptions and markes (denied sufficiencie while alone and single) may now concurring be admitted and allowed. I speake not this in contradiction of other learned iudgements, but re∣taining the libertie of mine owne, and leauing the like e∣quanimitie to euery one. Nor do I denie or defend diuel∣lish practises of men or women, but desire onely to mode∣rate the generall madnesse of this age, which ascribeth vn∣to witchcraft whatsoeuer falleth out vnknowne or strange vnto a vulgar sense. Concerning diseases therefore, it will not here also be impertinent or vnprofitable to deliuer many their strange seeming formes from the too ordinarie iniurious imputation in this kind. It is manifest and appa∣rent, that the mixture and implication of diuers and diffe∣ring diseases in the same subiect, may and do oft bring forth a wild and confused concourse of accidents seeming ther∣fore
of monstrous and wondered shapes, and therefore in their deceiuing appearance coming very neare vnto the similitude of bewitching. But because euery eye is not able in so various a chaos toQuippe vbi nec causas nec apertos cerni∣mus ictus, Vnde ergo ve∣niant tot mala, caeca via est. Propert. analyse and reduce them vnto their seuerall heads, and proper diseases, (so intricately confounded one within another) it is not therefore suffi∣cient for reputing them as things without causes in na∣ture. Many diseases single, alone and apart by themselues, seeme strange and wondered, which therefore in their strange formes vnited, and in their mixture one with an∣other, must needs arise much more monstrous and Hydra∣like. For example, in one kindIn  vel . Gal. de loc aff. of disease, the whole body as it were in a minute is sodainly taken in the middestIn this maner Ann. 1598. my selfe being pre∣sent, a child of one M. Barker of Couentry was afflicted, and in the end these fits changing into conuulsions of his face, mouth, and eyes, he therein died. of some ordinary gesture or action, and therein is continued some space together as if frozen generally, starke and stiffe in all parts, without sense or motion, yet with eyes wide open, and. Gal. de loc. aff. breathing freely, as if it were a mouing image or a liuing carcasse. In another, the sicke are also sodainly taken or surprised with a senslesseIn Apoplexia vel morbo at∣tonito. Gal. de loc. affect. trance and generall astonishment or sideration, voide of all sense or mouing many houres together, onely the breath sometimes stri∣ueth and laboureth `against the danger of suffocation, and the pulse continueth. In another, the sicke are swiftly sur∣prised with so profound and deadly a sleepe,An. Dom. 1602 In this maner a former wife of one M. Roson of Northampton continued the space of two daies and nights, being then my patient. that no call, no crie, no noise, noIn Caro. Carum verò distinguit à Catalepsi. Galen. lib. de loc. affect. quòd in hac oculi aegrotorum clausi permanent, in illa aperti. stimulation can in many houres a∣wake and raise them. In another, the sicke are doubtfully held, in some partHoc genus coma vigilans Galeno dicitur tract. de comate, quod & insomne vocat, & Phreneticis attribuit. Iuxta hoc coma pigrum & somnolentum statuit quod è contra Le∣thargicis ascribit. waking, and in other part sleeping, in some respects, maners and parts expressing wakefull moti∣ons, sense, speech, right apprehension, memory and imagi∣nation; in other respects, parts and maners (as men slee∣ping) voide of the libertie or vse of sense, motion, or any the other faculties. The forme of this disease, Hippocrates
hath very fitly assimilated to the shapeHippocrates in Prorheticis, & Epidemior. 5. and fashion of drunkennesse, whose ordinarily knowne effects are in some things busie wakefulnesse, in other some at the same time dull sleepinesse; in some imaginations, apprehensi∣ons, senses and motions quicke and readie, in some with as apparent vrgence, yet senslesse and dead. Contrary to these formes, in some other diseases there arise continuall stirrings and depraued motions through all the partsDeprauati motus sunt plu∣rimi tremuli, conuulsiui, pal∣pitantes, vibran∣tes, qui prout in toto corpore vagantur, diuer∣sam appellatio nem sortiuntur. Galen. de sympt differ. of the bodie, contrary to the will, and beside the sense and power of the sicke. This is seene commonly in &c. Epi epsia vel morbus cadu∣cus vniuerso corpori motus affert depraua∣tos. Gal. de diff. sympt. falling sick∣nesses, diuers kinds of conuulsions, and the like. In these diseases,Conuulsio si∣mulat omnem motus volunta∣rij speciem, & hac sola ratione à motu naturali differt quod praetor volunta∣tem fit. Galen. de loc. affect. some bite their tongues and flesh, some make fearfull and frightfull shrinkings and outcries, some are vio∣lently tossed and tumbled from one place vnto another, some spit, some froth, some guash their teeth, some haue their faces continually deformed and drawne awrie, some haue all parts wrested and writhed intoMotiua actio laesa pro parti∣cularium instru∣mentorum ratione ita variantur, vt varias habere species videantur, cum illius motionis ra∣tio fit vna. Galen de sympt. diff. infinite vgly shapes. Some haue their heads violently wrested forward, and their faces behind. Some haue their eyes with inordi∣nate twincklings, rauings, and rollingsConuulsis musculis, oculos mouentibus. disfigured. Some haue their mouthes distorted into diuers formes, grin∣ning, mowing,Musculorum masticatoriorum & eorum qui peculiariter lati appellantur conuulsione, contractione, resolutione, fit spasmus cynicus, tortura oris, risus Sardonius &c. laughing, sometimes gaping wideCon∣uulsis musculis temporalibus contrahuntur dentes, & strident, resolutis fit hiatus oris. open, sometimes close shutting. Some haue their limbes and di∣uers members sodainly with violence snatched vp and ca∣ried aloft, and after suffered by their owne weight to fall againe. Some haue an inordinate leapingGeneralis haec palpitatio dicitur ab Auicenna, ab alijs membrorum subsultus & ia∣ctatio. and hopping of the flesh, through euery part of the body. In some dis∣eases the mind is as strangely transported into admirable visions and miraculous apparitions, as the body is meta∣morphosed into the former strange shapes. In many ordi∣nary diseases, in the oppressions of the braine, in feauers,
the sicke vsually thinke themselues to see thingsHistoria The∣ophili, Medici aegrotantis le∣ctu dignissima est, libr. Galeni de diff. sympt. sect. 3. that are not, but in their owne abused imaginarie and false con∣ceit. Sometimes with their fingers they hunt for flockes and flies, and with narrow eyes prie for puppets and toyes, working in the consistory of their owne braines. Some∣times they complaine of their friends and others to lie vpon them, to creepe or sit vpon them, to stop their winds, to endeuour to cut their throates, and the like. Sometimes they complaine ofVide Hollerij historiam de Pharmacopoeo incubo correp∣to, scholijs in tractat. de incu∣bo. Auicenam in Cant. de sig∣nis Melancho∣liae. diuels or witches, liuely describing their seeming shapes and gestures toward them. Some in sicknesses so farre forget themselues, that they haue not so much memorie as of their owneThucydides de in peste ser∣uatis scribit, in∣de factos esse fatuis similes tantaq́ue igno∣rantia & fatui∣tate imbutos vt se ipsos & fa∣miliares planè ignorarent. Ga∣len. in 1 Porrhet. Hippocrat. names, or their most familiar friends. Some aboue all perswasion or reason to the contrary, strongly imagine themselues vnreasonable In  Actuar. lib. 1. . creatures. Some crie out and flie fromIn . Galen. in Pro∣ret. Hipp. Historia pulcher∣rima. waters when none are neare: some from fire, and likewise from many other supposed feares, in their vanitie infinite, as in their present and sodaine appearance vnto the beholder full of amazement. How can these like accidents, or any of them euen single and alone in their seuerall peculiar shapes a∣part, but seeme wondered? Much more when diuers of them, most or many of them, as it sometimes falleth out, are confusedly together so compounded, that at once in the sicke, a man may see a part of one and a part of ano∣ther, a shew of many, and a perfect shape of none; must they needes not onely affright a common beholder, but sometimes also exercise the better iudgements. I saw hereof in the yeare 1608. a rare example, which both for illustration of that which hath bene said, and the instru∣ction of other that may hereafter hap to behold the like, and especially for the contentment of many eye witnesses (both worthy and desirous therein to be satisfied) I may not omit. A gentleman of ancient name and seare in War∣wickshire, in the time of the late memorable long frost, cal∣led me vnto his daughter afflicted in an vnknowne and strange sodaine manner, both vnto her parents, friends, & neighbours, and also someBeneficed Phy∣sitions. Physitions therein consulted.
A vehement shaking and violent casting forward of her head, euery day in a much maruelled fashion surprised her about three or foure of the clocke each afternoone, and so vsually continued vntill the twelfth houre of the night: e∣uery such shaking or casting of her head, ending with a loud and shrill inarticulate sound of these two sillables, ipha, ipha. After my first sight, I discouered these before wondered motiues to be nothing else but sneesings and sternutations, which in all men haue their different and , Sonat sternutatio quia per angustum illi est ex itus. Hippocrat. Aph. 7. l b. diuers noyses, and in her were more then ordinarily vio∣lent. To confirme and settle this iudgement, I gaue both by writing and speech prediction of a sequele, either of the falling sicknesseIngens sternu∣tatio affinitatem habet cum epi∣lepsia, tū quod ab eadem cau∣sa nasci potest, tum quod in ea∣dem sede sita est. Ideo Hip∣pocrates sternu tationem cum rheumate malū nuntiat; quin & indesinens ster∣nutatio anima∣lem facultatem validè saepe fa∣tigat, nec non & sternutantes saepe mortui conciderunt. or some other spice or species of conuul∣sion, so grounding vpon the continuall violence and vehe∣mence of the sternutation, and the great oppression of the braine, together with some obscure contractions of some parts alreadie begunne, though haply of others vnobser∣ued. In the meane season before my departure at that time in few dayes the grieuousnesse, length, and frequence of the former fits was much mitigated and grew more easie, and so continued the space of a fortnight after my returne from thence. This time last mentioned expired, sodainly the parents againe sent for me: from them I learned that their daughter after diuers tortures of her mouth and face, with staring and rolling of her eyes, scrawling and tum∣bling vpon the ground, grating and gnashing her teeth, was now newly fallen intoEpilepsiam sequitur plerun∣que grauis so∣por. Andernac. de med. et. & noua. a deadly trance, wherein she had continued a whole day, representing the verie shape and image of death, without all sense or motion: her pulse or breathing onely witnessing a remainder of life. With these fits (oft in the meane season first frequenting) at length she againeCompositus e∣nim morbus vi∣detur, ex coma∣te, caro, Apo∣plexia, Epilep∣sia. In nonnullis enim accessio∣nibus sopitis motu & sensu libera erat respiratio, in alijs graui cum difficultate spirandi & stertore peri∣clitabatur, quae duo Apoplecticos à veternosis & catalepticis distinguunt authore Gale∣rio lib. de loc. affect. Epileptici verò motus vix vnquam desiere. interchanged new, and then awa∣king out of her astonished sleepe, wistly casting her eyes as looking sometime behind her, sometime to the one
Deprauato omni genere motus volunta∣rij tum capitis tum oculotum. side, sometime to the other; sometime ouer her head (as if she had fearefully or frightfully espied somewhat hag∣ging about her) with her eyes staring open, her mouth wide gaping, and her hands and armes strongly distent & carried aloft aboue her head, together with a generall starknesse & stifnesse of al these parts, she spent many daies in this maner, both day and night iterating these fits, and each seuerall fit continuing the space sometimes of halfe an houre, sometimes a quarter of an houre. While these fits at any time discontinued, she either slept, or (at least all her outward senses slumbring) her imagination still led her hands vnto many and diuers continuall actions and mo∣tiues, which argued in their folly great fatuitie andEpilensia est totius corporis conuulsio cum rectricis partis actionum cohi∣bitione. Galen. de Symp. diffe∣rentijs. de∣fect of reason and vnderstanding, yet manifested the busi∣nesse and depraued motion of her oppressed imagination, which therefore continuallySingularium praeter sensum exteriorem est sensus internus. Aristot. eth. 6. imployed her fingers to i∣mitate many vsuall exercises of her health (as dressing and attiring the heads of such women as came neare vnto her. In all these actions and motions she neither had nor vsed the helpe of any other sense but onely the feeling Saepe morbo laeditur ratio salua imagina∣tione, saepe de∣prauata imagi∣natio ne integra perstat ratio sae∣pe deficit vtra∣que, saepe defi∣ciunt sensus ex∣teriores seruatis internis, & è contra. Gal. de Loc. Affect. with her hand, whereof she seemed also altogether de∣priued inComa est motus imagi∣natricis defici∣ens & imbecil∣lus. Galen. de Sympt. differ▪ all other things, except onely those whereto her imagination (which is mistresse and great comman∣der of all the senses) leadCommunis facultas & po∣tentia à cerebro per neruos in singula sensoria penetrans alterationes omnes ipsorum persentit. Gal. lib. 7. de Plat & Hip∣poc. dogmat. her feeling. Hereof was oft made triall by pinching and the like, whereof she tooke no care, nor was therby moued, except onely when there∣by haply they intercepted or interposed her feeling and the imagined obiect, whereof she was euer for the most part very sensible. After I had with much assiduitie and di∣ligence by some quicke medicines solicited nature to a better remembrance of her selfe, at length vpon a sharpe prouocation she immediatly answered our desired hope, and we then first gained her sense of her selfe with some comfortable words, and with a perfect returneIn Caro & intelligere & excitari aegrotus potest. Auicennna de sign. spec. Subeth. of her vn∣derstanding
the distinct vtterance of diuers short, but de∣uout inuocations of God, vnto the singular comfort of her parents, hauing before beheld her three weekes together bothLaesa septima neruorum à cè∣rebro ortorum coniugatione loquela immi∣nuitur, depraua∣tur aut ad tem∣pus tollitur ne∣cessariò. Galen. de loc. Affect. speechlesse and senslesse. Her speech shortly againe (after the operation of the medicine had taken the vsuall effect) departed, but her better sense and vnderstanding still remained, which by herThe words which by wri∣ting she expres∣sed, were these: God is a won∣derfull God, The Lord can doe maruellous things; and when the skill of man hath done what it can, God will shew himselfe a wonderfull God. pen she signified, and there∣withall an holy mind and thoughts rare in such an impe (being then vnder the thirteenth yeare of her age) with an inward feeling of her agony and affliction, oft blessing God, and therein honouring her vertuous and carefull e∣ducation. Thus after much labour by the grace of God, and good means (for so they proued thēselues euer by the im∣mediate sequele of good vnto them) we at length obtai∣ned the continuance of all her senses. Her tongQuomodo lingua, nunc motum nunc sensum amittat separatim aut coniunctim, magis vel mi∣nus, perq́ue vi∣cissitudines ra∣tione cerebri laesi aut proces∣sus neruorum. vide Galen. de loc. aff. remained stillRefert Guintherius Andernacus aliquos sibi natos, qui ex ingenti refrigeratione, & inde nata destillatione muti per aliquot dies perstitere, liquore verò absumpto vocem recepere. Andernac. lib. de Med. vet. & noua. vnperfect, yet continually moued it selfe to force a certaine imitation of speech, with a mumbling, which (though no plaine articulate sound of words) yet vnto those that were thereto accustomed, oft intelligible and well perceiued. Sometimes perfect speechThe very same accident, about the same time, in the same maner, befell a gentlewoman then lying at Cotesbrooke in Northamptonshire, and some∣times daughter vnto M. Reade, while he liued there dwelling. She oft diuers dayes together lost her speech, and againe by fits sodainly recouered it, being besides vexed with diuers maners of conuulsions. sodainly and vnexpectedly would come vnto her, but staied not con∣stant nor long. In this meane season I imparted vnto her parents my doubt of a hard condition, namely a palsie or maime in some part likely to be annexed vnto her recoue∣rie, if she suruiued her conuulsiue fits which still remained as before mentioned. Betweene hope and this feare we continued endeuour, and in the end by the infinite good∣nes of God, her fits before mentioned (namely of gaping and carying her armes distent aboue her head) with the rest decreased, now discontinuing all day, onely foure or fiue short fits euery night when she first lay downe in
bed continued, and with the decrease of the former ve∣hemence and fearefull continuall frequence of the said fits, succeeded (as was before feared) a palsie, which pos∣sessed both her legs with a senslesse deadnesse, and a gene∣rall stupiditie of one side of her bodie, being the ordinarie terminations of an Apoplexie, and therfore foredoubted. After she had continued in this hopefull forwardnesse the space of two moneths or thereabout, she was then com∣mended vnto the Bath, with my report and description of her former passed accidents vnto her Physition there, where after much and long feare and doubt, she began at length to yeeld better hope, finding by little and little the vse of her legs, onely the former small fits did still hand fast, and her speech as yet remainedEx faciei par∣tibus sola lingua saepenumerò afficitur. Gal. de loc. affect. vnperfected. Her legges being at Bath, began there to recouer; her speech shortly afterSaepe medica∣mentorū com∣moda non sunt cum vsu prae∣sentia sed post emergentia. her returne home from thence also followed, and all her former fits and complaints vanished before that Compensante procul dubio aestate ad tem∣pus insigniter feruida incom∣moda praece∣dentis hyemis insigniter geli∣dae. Ab insigni verò refrigera∣tione ortum & originem mali factum esse, a∣pud me satis constat. Frigus verò cum humi∣ditate intensum soporem, stupo∣rem, omne con∣uulsionis genus, Epilepsiam, A∣poplexiam con∣stituere, author est Galenus lib. de loc. affect. 4. sommer passed. It hath bene and is still a great doubt and question, not onely among the common and vulgar sort, but diuers also learned, whether this gentlewoman (in maner aforesaid afflicted) shall iustly be ranked among those vpon whom (by the permission of God) diuels and witches haue had a power, or whom nature and the course of naturall diseases haue thus in maner aforesaid afflicted. My owne iudgement must needs incline vnto the latter, for that I could behold in the gentlewoman nothing (most continually conuersing with her) which either my eies had not before shewed me in others, or perfect notion from reading both ancient writings and later neotericall descriptions, had not before made the sameQui vniuersale cognoscit quo∣quo pacto cog∣noscit & parti∣culare. Aristor. vnto my vn∣derstanding, which they then presented themselues vnto my sight. The first is in part testified in the margine of the page 59. 60. and 64. The second, any man may witnesse true who can compare the report of all the fits and accidents which befell this gentlewoman (which as truly and nearly as I could, and I suppose fully, by the testimony of any that saw her, I haue related) with the seuerall shapes of some
diseases before mentioned, pages 59. 60. 61. 62. which are truly set downe according to the common consent of most writers. The mixture of diuers of them one with another, must needs make some difference in them from them∣selues, where they are each alone and seuerall: but he that with that iust allowance of that oddes onely, can consider the particular accidents in the speciall example, with the true notion of the diseases before it generally described, must needs grant them to be the same in kind and nature. It may farther perswade, that my selfe with reason from the knowne custome and nature of such diseases, gaue both by speech and writing, prediction of the conuulsion which after followed, and also of the termination of herSaepius enim deprehendeba∣tur repentino lapsu aut depri∣uatione omnis sensus & mo∣tus, comitante difficultate spi∣ritus & stertote nec non rectri∣cis facultatis functionibus omnino cohibi∣tis. Hanc Apo∣plexiam veram distinguit Gale∣nus praedictis notis, lib. de loc. affect. quam eti∣am generalem paralysim aliàs appellat. Apo∣plexiam verò vel generalem paralysim ter∣minari parti∣culari, nemo non norit, gra∣uem scilicet  ple∣runque, leuem  vel vnius tan∣tùm membri. Apo∣plecticke accessions in the lamenesse and palsie of some parts, which also came to passe, and cannot now be denied testimonie of many. It maketh yet farther against the opi∣nion of witchcraft, that such medicines as were ministred vnto her, in reason good for her, according to that reason and expectation for the most part euer profited, some∣times immediately with their vse reducing her vnderstan∣ding before lost, sometime recouering her speech when she had diuers weekes together before continued speech∣lesse, and by litle and litle euermore repairing continually some decayes, notwithstanding many and diuers relapses; which both her parents themselues, and the seruants, and all that ministred vnto her, must needs vnto God and truth with thankes acknowledge. It farther confirmeth the ne∣gatiue of witchcraft, and is not the least, that while the o∣pinion thereof most hotly possessed most hearers and be∣holders, the parents of the gentlewoman at no time in the height of their daughters affliction, or a good space after, could resolue vpon whom with any iust shew of reason to cast the suspition of bewitching, as they oft auouched vn∣to me both then and since. The most certaine and chiefe proofesVide Wierum de praestigijs daemonum. Consule Langi∣um in epist. Me∣dicin. tract. de Daemoniac. Ioann. Hucherū Bellouacum de Maleficijs. Ioan. Baptistam Codronchium de morbis veneficiatis. of witchcraft & diuellish practises vpon the sick, among the learned esteemed are generally reputed three:
First, a true and iudicious manifestation in the sicke of some reall power, act or deed, in, aboue and beyond rea∣son and naturall cause. Secondly, annihilation and frustra∣tion of wholesome and proper remedies, with discretion and art administred, without any iust reason or cause thereof. Thirdly, ought either in the knowledge or speech of the diseased, discouering a rauishment, possession or ob∣session of their minds or spirits by any infernall inspiration. Hence the sicke oft speake strange languagesFernelius de Abditis rerum causis, lib. 2. vnto them∣selues vnknowne, and prophecie things to come, aboue humane capacitie. To the first doth satisfie the former ma∣nifest reference of all accidents befalling the gentlewo∣man mentioned, vnto the preualence and power of disea∣ses before related. The second is negatiuely answered by plaine testimonies. Of the third and last was neuer men∣tion, nor question, nor reason of either. There can nothing be required more vnto ample satisfaction: and as I there∣in rest and stay my selfe, so I doubt not the consent and content of all that affect truth and embrace reason. I will notwithstanding for the better exercising and stirring vp of diligence, circumspection and vigilance, generally in this so hard and deceiuable point of witchcraft, and also for their sakes, whose weaknesse may as yet be vncapable of satisfaction in the former particular, answer some ob∣iections therein made. The forenamed conuulsiue fits, of lifting vp her hands aboue her head,Obiect. which were the last remaining fits, toward their decay and latter end, neuer came vnto her but onely when prepared at the night for bed, and vnclothed into her night-weeds, she began to yeeld and decline her body to lie downe. In that instant, each night without failing, euer and neuer before began her fits. When she at any time lay her selfe downe to rest vpon her bed in her clothes (whether by day or night) her fits notwithstanding appeared not. Some haue imagined some coniuration or witchcraft vpon or in her nightcloths or sheets; but to them that seek reason, I suppose it found. The power of voluntary motion, which is the animall fa∣cultie,
and the disease it selfe both possessing the same parts, namely the sinewes and muscles, while the disease was in his vigor and strength in the beginning, it therfore mastered the facultie and mouing power, and continually ruled, so that the fits then neuer almost ceassed by day or night. Now in the declination and weaknesse of the dis∣sease, and toward the end, the facultie grew strong, re∣strained and commanded ouer the disease, whereby all the day there appeared no fits at all. But when the mo∣uing power or facultie composed it selfe to a true and generall cessation and rest, then in that instant the disease tooke his aduantage and libertie to stirre.Obiect. But why was it not thus also when she slept in her clothes? The sense and incumbrance of the day-habite is euer an hinderance of perfect sleepes. Therefore to them that sleepe in their clothes, or vpon their beds, commonly there is not so true a ligation of their senses, neither are their sleepes so sound, nor of the like continuance. While therefore she lay or composed her selfe to rest in her clothes, the sense thereof both interrupted the facultie from the true and sound disposing it selfe to rest, and also thereby put it in mind of the disease which had so lately sharply visited it, with tart remembrance; and the disease being now too weake to resist or to prouoke the facultie, could not vpon that vnperfect aduantage stirre, vntill by a more sound and true dispose to rest and sleepe, the spirits and naturall heate more truly retiring inward, had more perfectly left the outward parts, and thereby the disease there still re∣maining might haue more libertie and power to stirre, which notwithstanding also soone after of the owne ac∣cord desisted, because it wanted the former strength to maintain continuance.Obiect. That which breedeth other doubts, is that at such time when she wanted all her senses, and al∣together seemed senslesse of any obiect offered vnto her, or of it selfe occurring, yet had she a curious feeling of such things as her minde and liking sought or seemed to hunt after. This is no wonder to them that know where
the imagination intently and earnestly worketh, it there giueth sense to thosePrimum sen∣sorium omniū sensuum com∣mune est. Galen de sympt. differ. parts it exerciseth, though all other parts be stupified or asleepe. This is oft seene in many who in their dreames walke, talk, and do seriously many works, distinguishing and feeling those things whereabout the fancie occupieth them, of other obiects, though haply more neare hand and of quicker remembrance, taking no notice at all. The disease or accident which most oft and frequently possessed this gentlewoman, was a kinde of Apoplexiam, carū, catalepsin altos sopores nominat om∣nes. Galen lib 13 de Meth. Med vt & aliis, Lethar∣gum etiā inter sopores recenset sed cum febre incidentē prop∣ter humoris pu∣tredinem. Obiect. heaue sleepe, in degree onely exceeding the ordinarie resolution and ligation of the senses by sleepe, and there∣fore the same reason may indifferently serue both. It is farther obiected, that the gentlewoman oft pointed, some∣time this way, sometime that, as seeing the appearance of a woman of such and such forme and colours, which also according vnto her maner of vnperfect speech, she after described, as some say. It is not vnusuall with the sicke oft to imagine indifferently, as well things inconsiderate andSicut in som∣nis decipimur insomnijs, ita vigilantes in ae∣gritudinibus, , &c. Arist. de insomnijs. incomposed as truths, and therefore are their imagi∣nations of noEgregiè hac in re satisfacit Theophili Me∣dici aegrotantis historia, memo∣rata à Galeno lib. de sympt. different. validitie without better proofe or reason, which I thinke before sufficiently satisfied. And in this gentlewoman (hauing her head, where her disease had so manifestly deeply seated it selfe, therefore so mightily op∣pressed) it was more easie for any faculitie therein to mis∣take and erre, then to conceiue aright. And therefore though it might haply manifestly appeare (which may be and is ordinarily rather the abusiue impression of some in∣discreete The mention of her supposed sight of the witch, came after the returne of all her senses, and when onely the conuul∣sions of her armes and face were re∣maining accidēts Obiect. whispering about the sicke) that she of her selfe primarily and without suggestion conceiued the forme or shape of a witch, yet is that no sound proofe or clearing of the question of witchcraft in generall, nor any reasona∣ble euidence against one particular, since the trials of truth are not sterred by imaginations. It is lastly obiected, that certaine witches lately dying for sorcerie, haue confessed themselues to haue bewitched this gentlewoman. I grant the voluntary and vncompelled, or duly and truly euicted confession of a witch, to be sufficient condemnation of her
selfe, and therefore iustly hath the law laid their bloud vpon their owne heads, but their confession I cannot con∣ceiue sufficient euiction of the witchcraft it selfe. It is knowne euidently vnto men learned, that the subtill ser∣pent and deceiuer the diuell doth vsually beguile, delude and deceiue those that trust in him by his iugling collusi∣ons, perswading oft times those actions and euents to be his gratification of their malicious affections, which are indeed the very workes of nature, and oft times the rare effects onely of hidden causes in nature. A witches con∣fession therefore being onely grounded vpon his credite, information and suggestion, whose nature, custome and propertie is and euer hath bene to lie and deceiue, is a meane, poore and vncertaine proofe of witchcraft, though a iust condemnation vnto the witch, her selfe being pro∣ued an associate with the diuell in any sort. Her death therefore doth satisfie the law for her offence, but is no sound information of the iudgement of the witchcraft. Thus according to that whereof my selfe could take no∣tice in this gentlewoman (if more full information of o∣thers obseruations in those things that by my selfe were not seene or noted, faile me not) I haue truly and fully de∣scribed euery materiall accident and circumstance; and to all the knowne or conceiued likely doubts and difficul∣ties therein haue carefully and directly answered, and therein also haue (I suppose) satisfied the ingenuous and reasonable with breuitie at full. Now to conclude the former explication of the question of witchcraft in gene∣rall, I intreate the Reader to call vnto mind the formerly mentioned feares and doubts of witchcraft, which vn∣knowne accidents and diseases easily impose vpon mindes herein vnacquainted and not discerning their cause and reason, and in them farther for future good to consider the possible contingence of many more of like nature and sort in other the like cases elsewhere hapning, and here vn∣mentioned. In both and with both let also be recalculate and cast the strange and slie suggestions of the fancie and
imagination, sometimes countenanced by admired casuall euents and chances, sometimes applauded by ignorant credulitie, and sometimes aduanced by superstition in all and euery of these still with the vulgar sort, aduantaging the same error and opinion of witchcraft. I haue so much the rather thus farre laboured, for that ordinarily herein I see truth and iudgement too much peruerted, the disea∣sed their health and life thereby neglected, and many times simple ideots and fooles oppressed, whose weaknes doth oft seeme guiltie, because euer vnable to defend it selfe. Euery one in these cases is not fit or competent arbi∣ter: it requireth the learned, and not learned in word and superficiall seeming, but indeed truly iudicious and wise, whom euer to preconsult in these occasions is onely safe, is right, expedient, and euer necessary. CHAP. IX. Wisards. THe mentione of witchcraft doth now occa∣sion the remembrance in the next place of a sort of practitioners,Wisards. whom our custome and country doth call wisemen and wise∣women, reputed a kind of good & honest harmles witches or wisards, who by good words, by hallowed herbes and salues, and other supersti∣tious ceremonies promise to allay and calme diuels, pra∣ctises of other witches, and the forces of many diseases. But these being of the same nature with those before men∣tioned to vse spels, and as they before, so these now some∣times onely superstitiously vaine, sometimes diuellishly as∣sisted, I will referre these vnto them, and onely dismisse them both with a short historie. Anno 1602. a poore boy of Pychley in Northamptonshire, was sodainly surprised with a vehement conuulsion, drawing his head and heeles violentlyNam in auer∣sam partem ae∣grotantis recli∣nationem opis∣thotonon voca∣mus, neruis qui eò loci sunt ma∣lè affectis. Em∣prosthotonon autem si in prio∣rem partem ho∣mo deflectitur, neruis anteriùs positis laboran∣tibus. Aret. lib. 1. . backward, and in that sort carrying his whole body into a roundnesse, tumbling vp and downe with
much paine and inward groning. The parents of the child posed with the strangenesse, presently accusedHic hominum ineptorum mos est, in malis sua ignorantia vel acquisitis vel cōmorantibus cum anu Aeso∣pica semper dae∣monem accusa∣re. witchcraft, sent for a wisewoman, & her wisedome came vnto them. At the same time it fortuned my selfe to be in the towne with a patient of mine, a worthy and vertuous Lady there inhabiting, who moued me to see the bewitched child, and vpon the motion together with her Preacher then liuing in her house, I went vnto the place where the child lay. There among other standing silent and vnknowne, I be∣held the fits, & heard also the wisewoman wisely discour∣sing, and among other things of the like nature, declaring vnto the cōpany, that the lungs of the child were as white asAn possit ocu∣los tantum con∣tendere Lyn∣ceus? her kercher. With this and some other such like ker∣cher learning, IDolebā me∣herculè quòd pugillares & sti∣lum non habe∣rem qui tam bellas fabellas pernotarem. silenty departed. When I was returned vnto my patient, I there professed my opinion concerning the manner and nature of conuulsions with their seuerall causes, amongst the rest not omitting the strange accidents which did oft fall out in such diseases by wormes. Not long after, when the cunning of the wisard was now growne without profite, stale and forsaken, the child a∣uoyded a great and long worme, and immediatly after re∣couered without other helpe or meanes, and so hath con∣tinued euer since. Thus the serpent beguiled the woman, and the woman beguiled (though not Adam) many foo∣lish sonnes of Adam. At length a poore worme gaue them demonstration of their ridiculous folly. Such teachers are fittest for such schollers, whose grosse ignorance is euer so farre in loue with it owne preiudicate conceite, that though they were brayed in a mortar, yet cannot this loue be beaten out of them for any loue of truth or rea∣son. I did not therefore trouble them with my patience to instruct them, nor they molest me with their impatience to heare.
CHAP. X. Seruants of Physitions. Ministring helpers. NoW to fulfill our iust computation of Em∣perickes, and therewith to conclude their mention and number: the last (but not the least) that offer themselues ordinarily in this kind and name, are suchas either by oft seruing Physitions,Seruants of Phy∣sitians. Mini∣string helpers. or by continuall conuersing with them and viewing their custome and pra∣ctise, or by their owne imploymentIdeo olim Clinici & le∣cticularij dicti & Diaetarij. from their directions in applications and administrations vnto the sicke, or by some speciall trust and attendance about the necessities of the diseased, ingrosse vnto themselues supposed speciall obseruations, and choice and select remedies, and with such small wares thus taken vp vpon credite, setHâc ab origi∣ne Experientia nata est  & imitatoria. vp for themselues, presuming it good rhetoricke (because an old figure) to take a part for the whole. Thus seeing too much honesty would not suffer them to rob their teachers of a more sufficient portion of generall methode and art, they thinke it sufficient to be able to supply the same particular meanes with the like desire and goodwill. But apish imita∣tion and resembling shew can neuer expresse the life of reason in her natiue vse. Although therefore sometimes some of this sort, by subtiltie, a good wit, officious dili∣gence, and thereby pleasing fortunatenesse, do angle a good report and estimation, and thereby catch many sim∣ple Parua leues capiunt animos people (who hoodwinkt with good opinion discerne not the baite) yet doth their commonly obserued daring those things which they know they know not, and their ordinary raising themselues by the ladder of boasting, ma∣nifestly detect, both their cloaked defect, and their choa∣ked guilt. For what expectation can be of them who for the most part build their whole worth vpon the meanest proofe of anothers sufficiencie, and all the skill which they are able to expend, is but that little which another without
enuy or ielousie could spare? Timely and well growne per∣fection is neuer to be attained either by seruice or bare obseruation. It is necessary that man be in himselfe a mai∣ster of knowledge and of sincere iudgement, that shall be able truly to make right vse of anothers experience. Ex∣periece therefore alone, and the benefite of a Physitions seruice or admission vnto the view of practise, without the benefite of sufficient generall theorie and learning going before, can in it selfe be no true benefite. It is reason and knowledge that doth guide men wise vntoQuoniam ars circa particula∣ria versatur quae insinita sunt, qui non redigit ad vniuersalem methodum, cae∣co & incerto modo agit & o∣pera fortunae committit. Gal. de puero Epi∣lept. all their par∣ticular actions and experiences, and those actions succee∣ding in triall and proofe according to that reason com∣mend and confirme that reason, and made good that ex∣perience. For that which experience hath once or ofttimes knowne and found to do good, must not therefore in ne∣cessitie still doMedicina sex∣ies vel septies probata non fa∣cit vniuersalem propositionem. Galen. the same good, except the same reason of the good do in each circumstance againe commend and command it, which onely they can iudge and examine that are wise and learned. That experience therefore is onely certainly and truly allowed trust, which prouing it selfe good doth therein also iustifie. Aequè mutila ratio si∣ne experientia, & experientia sine ratione Nazianz. the knoweldge and reason which directed it vnto that good. They therefore that without methode, art, reason andQui se artem acquisiuisse sine Methodo arbi∣tratur sciat se vmbram habere non artem. Plato in Phileb. knowledge, take care to spend their time in gaping after others experien∣ces, do set the cart to draw the horses, and euery one that goeth vnto plough, knoweth they either neuer went to schoole, or beginne their lesson at the wrong end. By this preposterous defect therefore, and therein want of know∣ledge to foresce the likely issues of their actions, since these Emperickes themselues know not, not truly forsee what they indeauour or do, how shall others that trust them know what thereby they shall suffer? Prouident foresight is farre from blind ignorance, and wise preuention from imprudent temeritie, and the experiment made without ait or reason dothPer se natura∣q́ue sua fallax est experientia & periculosa. . Hipp. Aph. 1. more commonly reproue and chastise, then instruct and establish. Neither can any man make a true rule or vse of his experience, that truly knoweth not
the particular nature and estate of those things whereof he hath experience, together with all circumstances that may alter the considerations. They therefore that will learne more safely to informe themselues, let them know assuredly, that sufficiency is neuer found in the vtmost ob∣seruation or Empericall tradition, but in a setled and it∣selfe confirming knowledge and vnderstanding. Neither can this true knowledge be duly or competently attained, but by early begunne, and late continuing education thereto, instituted in places fit and free for true grounds, for the groweth and seed of pure and good knowledge, instilled into the minde by littleHabitus om∣nis intellecti∣uus, actiuus, fa∣ctiuus sensim acquiruntur nec sine assiduita∣te, tempore, di∣ligentia stabili∣untur vnquam. and little, by daily reading, contemplation, meditation, and assiduitie in both, watered with the dew and sweate of painfull studie, hastened to maturitie by carefull and continuall good cul∣ture Doctrina nam vim promouet insitam. Horat. of ancient counsell and direction, and lastly confir∣med and strengthned in the good and perfect groweth vnto a firme age and time there in by choyce example and experience, withall these possessing anNaturae sequi∣tur semina quis∣que su Propert. aptnesse in nature as the ground of all. The end of the first Booke.
THE SECOND BOOKE. CHAP. I. The Methodian learned deceiuer or he∣reticke Physition. THus farre haue bene remembred the ignorant practitiones that in∣fost this age. Now it followeth we come vnto another erronions kind of such as haue a name and portion among the learned: such are they that haue a taste of good arts and science, but are not truly earned, nor haue sincerely drawne the naturall and liuely sap of true science and vnderstanding. Of this kinde among the Ancients, were reputed those they termedQuales Pro∣clus, Antipater, Dionysius, Thessalus, The∣mison, de quo nomine Iuue∣nalis sic habet: Quot Themi∣son aegros au∣tumno occide∣derit vno. Methodians, either by an Ironie or Antiphrasis, as hauing no true & omnium ma∣ximè  appellat Gale∣nus. me∣thod, but a compēdium or a method of their own making; or else because they arrogated this name vnto themselues in the best sence, as onely in their owne supposall meriting the title of true Art and Method. These had their peculiar and proper errors in those times in which they liued, then especially noted; but we will make bold more generally vnder this name to comprehend all who carry a name and visar of learning, but are not able to expresse the power thereof, either by their distinct and truly digested vnder∣standing, or by right performance in action and practise according thereunto. These men, any man may note to be of three sorts: First, such as may commonly be obserued to beare naturall defects and impediments within them∣selues:
secondly, such as want time in nature or their stu∣dies: thirdly, such as haue spent most part of their life o∣therwise distracted, and haue not had entire emploiment in their callings. The first ranke nature her selfe doth note vnto euery one by their imperfect parts stamped and ex∣pressed in their daily conuersation. Such are they who ar∣gue in themselues want of wit, of common capacitie, of or∣dinarie gouernment: or are disposed to lunacies, to inor∣dinate affections and customes in the continuall course and practise of their life. The second are youths, yong men, and all wanting discreet yeares in their faces orInconsideratio cognatum & perpetuum iu∣uentutis vitium. Scalig. de subt. manners, with all such as deriue their knowledge no further then grammar schooles, or in Vniuersities haue made short stay and too sodaine departure. Both these are easily diseoue∣red, and therefore cannot so vsually deceiue, or else can but deceiue such as deserue no better. The third, are all such aside fraud their callings of their whose endeuour, and deuide themselues between two professions. Their neutralitie in both doth proue their nullitie in either. Per∣fection in any facultie requireth more then aQui si quid homo sit seias facile te nihil esse intelligas. Ego vero ne∣quaquam nos homines esse dicere consueui sed partes ho∣minis. Ex om∣nibus enim ali∣quid fieri posse, idque non magi∣num, ex singulis pene minus quam nihil. Schilg. de subtil. man,Nemo no∣strûm satis esse potest ad attem vel constituenda vel absolunda: sed sat superque videri debet si quae multorum annorum spacio priores inuene∣rint posteri ac∣cipiamus, atque his addentes ali∣quid illa ali∣quando com∣pleamus & per∣ficiamus. Galen. in Aph. Hipp. and Competit quod par est, par est quod sufficit, sufficit quod nullius indiget . Arist. Eth. 1. competence a whole man nor euer was any in an excel∣lent whom one calling could not  deserue and em∣ploy. Within this compasse also stand such, as hauing spent a good part, or most part of their time in one art or sci∣ence, towards the end  in them iddel course exchange. These from the  flowing and wanting of their minds in a former streame,  arriuing in a new  cannot so∣dainly lauch vnto any depth or profoundnesse of iudge∣ment (which onely time by stealing steps by little and litle doth mature and ripeth as a timely fruiteNam mora dat vires, teneras mora percoquit vuas. Et validas segetes quae fuit herba facit. Ouid.) and therefore they may in hast and greatily swallow vpon hole sentences, yea & volumes vnche wed, yet can they neuer truly digest them but with. Tempus inuentor & adiutor bonus, vnde & artium sunt facta incrementa. Arist. Eth. 1. many dayes and much leisure. Euery Art
is an habit: an habit is by small degrees and length of time and custome acquired, and thence riseth by little and little to perfection and full growth. There is to euery facultie belonging, first an habit of right iudging therein, and di∣stinct knowing: secondly an habite according to iudge∣ment and knowledge of right action and. &c. Omnes mentis habitus sunt extremo∣rum, &c. disposing. A double habite in euery facultie, requireth a double time in euery facultie, which therefore cannot but with long pa∣tience and carefull assiduitie therein be inuited. The too common want hereof in these dayes, is the cause that ma∣ny reputed great clearks & scholers, haue in their mouthes and discourse, the phrase, the language and sentences of wisedom, but want the. Alia est enim dicacitas, alia doctorum ele∣gans & erudita ratio: haec con∣sistit in verborū virtute, illa in idearum quae rerum sunt spe∣cies. soule, the substance and the sense. Hence it cometh to passe, that tongues ouerflow with a∣phorismes, maximes, and rules of ancient truth, but for the most part confusedly, not rightly distinguished, mistaken or supposed. Neither cau excellence in one facultie giue prerogatiue in another. Therefore those that are perfect and absolued artists in their owne facultie, and will impaire their dignitie by engaging it in another, (where neither their time nor proofe can equall it) let wise men cuate∣lously and with suspition admit their counsell or trust their practise. I sometime knew a learned Diuine, batchelar in that facultie,Historiae. a great clearke, of much reading and studie therein, whose busie and ambitious braine not contenting it selfe within so infinite an ocean of sufficient sacred and sweete imploiment, would needs breake out into other bounds, and from some borowed houres and time for stu∣die in physicke, grew to affect therein more then a com∣mon name and vnderstanding. In the end his pride and conceit of his knowledge transported him so farre, that a∣mong other ridiculous paradoxes, he both in schooles and common profession defended an indifferencie in the natures, qualities and vse of Stibium and Ratsbane: to conclude, his confidence herein so farre bewitched him that he made triall thereof in himselfe, and as a iust exe∣cution vpon himselfe, was the same day poisoned. Ano∣ther
of my knowledge and acquaintance, a man in the Greeke, Latine, Hebrew, Chaldey, and other languages much studied, and in the iudgement and theory of Diuini∣tie of approued worthinesse and vnderstanding, hauing therein bestowed the best part of his time, sodainly inter∣changed with an vnaduised course of practise in Physicke; he spent some time in trauell beyond the sea, and returned againe thence dignified; but his former studies were so well and soundly foresetled, that they admitted not so true and right after-setling of the second. Hence as his braine ouerflowed with vnconstant propositions, and his tongue with paradoxes, his actions also thereto suited. In the end he made vpon himselfe an experiment of the force of O∣pium in a more then ordinary dose, and so composing him∣selfe vnto a desired sleepe, neuer returned to view the issue of his experiment, but descending into the graue, left this memory behind him. If any man wonder at these grand lapses in men learned, let him stay and satisfie his doubt with admiration of the multitude of sects in all ages, swar∣ming with grosse errors and opinions, euen amongst the learned of all faculties and professions. This vndoubted∣ly groweth from no other ground but want of entire vn∣derstanding of those things men studie and reade, through imperfect and distracted imploiment of their mindes, seri∣ously and wholy required vnto any measure of perfection. Therefore Galen in his learned treatise of the method of right cure (as also in other places) doth oft times witnes, that where sects and sectaries abound, there is infallibly mistaking and vnsound apprehension of truth, and there∣fore lamely, defectiuely, and in part attained, becausePrim & prae∣cipua delictorū & errotū causa in aegrotantium curatione, Diui∣sionum praui∣tas, vt & in alijs haeresibus. Qui∣dam in primis & supremis di∣uisionum gene∣ribus consistunt contenti illis in∣dicationibus quae ab illis su∣muntur. Quidā verò vsque ad aliquid diuidūt non tamē vsque ad finem perue∣niunt. Nonnulli verò vitiosis v∣tuntur diuisio∣nibus. Qui verò omnia quae sunt secundùm natu∣ram & praeter naturam recto diuisionis artifi∣cio complecti∣tur, atque ab omnibus sumit sufficientes indi∣cationes, hic so∣lùm medendo non errabit, quantum hu∣manis concedi∣tur viribus. Ga∣len. de ratione Meden. ad Glaucon. so onely sought. If any man require a more speciall proofe or triall hereof, let him with me here cull and examine any few Aphorismes of Hippocrates, and in them (though commonly and orderly read and auouched by euery mouth) ye shall he find how easie and ordinarie it is for any man in any one to be inconsiderately deceiued and mis∣taken, if he do not with all possible diligence, indistracted
vigilance and circumspection, continually, wholy and in∣defatigably Puta appre∣hensio simplex saepe caret rati∣one, nondum excitata ratione, aut suae cogni∣tionis non inita ratione. Scalig. de subt. exercise all his powers in seeking out their hidden truth, which doth neuer freely reueale it selfe to those that carelesly or in part, or for sinister & triflingHinc paucissi∣mi sapientissi∣mā Hippocratis  ritè sapiunt. ends labour after it. For example, in his sixt booke of aphorismes and 52. aphorisme, Hippocrates doth nominate a mortall signe in the diseased, the appearance of the white of the eye in sleepe, and sleeping with vnclosed eyes. In many diseased, this oft is found vntrue, but with Hippocrates vnderstanding it is neuerVide Galenū in praedictum Aphoris. & Bra∣sauolum in vtrosque. false. He that simply and ver∣bally onely vnderstandeth, and without meditated diffe∣rences and exceptions, or maketh not more narrow search, shall hardly truly find the certaine and true limita∣tion of this truth. For if this maner of sleeping fall out from any outward cause, or besides reason or cause thereof in the inward disposition, it is not simply or altogether bad, much lesse mortall. For where the sicke are thus ac∣customed to sleepe in health, or so sleep by reason of fumes and vapors ascending vnto the head, and thence distilling into the eye-lids, and so hindering their right closure, (as it is oft seene in great drinkers) or where it proceedeth onely from wormes in children, and the like, the incaute∣lous and superficiall vnderstanding is readily deceiued. In like maner the 51. aphorisme of the same booke doth pro∣mise by the coming of a feauer thereto, the profligation of the apoplexie. But this is not true, confusedly interpreted, and therefore beyond the first view requireth further stu∣dious inquisition to find out the quantitieOportet fe∣brem neque le∣uiorem esse quā quae morbi ma∣teriam discu∣tiat, neque gra∣uiorem quàm aegri virtus fe∣rat. Holler. tract. de Apoplex. Galen. in dictū Aphoris. of the feauer, with the degree of the apoplexie. Great wounds and cuts of the head (saith the 50. aphorisme of the same booke) procure and incurre feauers: but he that doth no further search to know theNecesse est febrem super∣uenire sed non simul. Nam pu∣tredo cum vul∣nere accelerat febrem, vulnus sine putredine tardigradam producit febrē. Brasauol. in prae∣dict. aph. times that feauers may differently in swiftnesse or slownesse of their coming take, nor vnder∣standeth the causes slackning or quickning the feauers speed, may easily too hastily before iust time accuse the truth hereof. The 3. aphorisme of the fift booke threat∣neth danger in conuulsions vpon great issues and losses
of bloud; but in what quantitie thou shalt esteeme them Magnus ille est fluxus qui∣cunque re∣pente indesi∣nenter & cele∣riter profluit. Gal. in dictum aph. great, or with what conditions, thou must vse diligence, and elsewhere enquire. Many haue lost great measures of bloud at once, and yet haue escaped both with and with∣out conuulsions, if 8. 9. 10. or 12.Ponderauit Brasauolus li∣bras 18. ex sini∣stra nare foe∣minae nobilis fusas simul & semel, praeter 4. libras aut plu∣res per lintea & mappas sparsas, nec aderat in∣terea aliquod vitae discrimen, sed conualuit. Brasauol. in aph. pounds at once from the nose may be called much or great. The first aphorisme of the fift booke, doth pronounce the conuulsion procured in assumption of Hellebore mortall. It is notwithstan∣ding seene, that conuulsions so raised, ceasse againe with∣out death or other danger. To vnderstand therfore aright, we must know to distinguish the diuers wayes andConuulsio quam affert Hellebori as∣sumptio ex oris ventriculi velli∣catione plerun∣que sine discri∣mine, quam verò ex immo∣dica euacuatio∣ne, illa maximè lethalis. Galen. in aph dictum. ma∣ners whereby Hellebore doth produce conuulsions. The 31. aphorisme of the fift booke, menaceth vnto a woman with child being let bloud, abortion. But whether we shall vnderstand it simply necessarie, or onely as an hazard or periclitation, or with what conditions, more certaine in∣formation doth aske further search. The 40. aphorisme of the second booke, threatneth vnto old men surprised with murhes and distillations, the end of their disease with the end of their dayes. But vnto perfect conceiuing, is further requisite the consideration of the degrees of old men, in whom is apparent either age alone (which is one∣ly the number of yeares) or oldnesseHinc senectus & senium, sene∣ctus prima & vltima, viridis & decrepita. with age, which is a decay and wearing of nature together with yeares. Infinite might we be in these and the like, euery triuiall and vulgarly receiued rule requiring a more circumspect and considerate vnderstanding, then the first view or light reading doth offer or present. It is a common well known and commendable caution, to suspect phlebotomy in children vnto the foureteenth yeare, and in old men after fiftie or sixtie yeares. But with what restraints and limita∣tions these rules are to be bounded, fully and truly to con∣ceiue, besides their hearing or reading is required a view and reuiew of differing reason and expositiō, diligent and carefull scrutiny, oft comparing and conferring oddes and differences of circumstances. None truly learned will or can be so inconsiderate or rash to take bloud from age,
whose veines are exhaust or spent, blood dried vp, or from infancie crop the first hopefull sprouting or spring therof; yet with deserued fame and honour to themselues, and incomparable benefite vnto the sicke, haue right learned worthy and excellent Physitians vsed and prescribed phle∣botomy both vnder fiueAuenzoar fi∣lio suo trimo venam secuit., and after sixtieRhases aetati decrepitae in pleuritide ve∣nam secuit. yeares. Dili∣gence will not rest vntill it haue foundInterest enim non quae aetas sit, neque quid in corpore ge∣ratur intus, sed quae vires sint. Firmus puer, ro∣bustus senex, & grauida mulier valentes sangui∣nis missione tu∣tò curantur. er∣nel. de sang. miss out reconciliation to these doubts, and confirmation to more perfect know∣ledge, which serious labour must buy, studie continually attend, and thence time gaine, free from other impertinent implication. The common want hereof suffereth so many vnprofitable questions amongst the the learned, maintai∣neth contentions and pride of words, multitude of sects and schismes from truth: and while men at other leisure, for other shifts, ends, and supplies, and not for the owne worthinesse, or for it selfe seeke knowledge, they cōmon∣ly lose the true end, and therfore true perfection. The in∣numerable dissentions amongst the learned concerning the Arabicke and Chymicke remedies at this day infinite∣ly, with opposite and contradictorie writings, and inue∣ctiues, burthen the whole world. Some learned Phisitians and writers extoll and magnifie them as of incomparable vse and diuine efficacie. Some with execration accuse and curse them as damned and hellish poysons. Some because they find not these remedies in the common & vulgar rea∣dings of the Ancients (the famous and learned Grecians) with feare and horror endure their very mention, farre therein vnlike and differing from that ingenuous spirit of the thrise worthy and renowmed Pergamene Claudius Galen, who in brightnesse of vnderstanding, sharpnesse of apprehension, and inuention ouershining al the precedent wits that were before him, yet did he with humble and daigning desire search & entertaine from any sort ofVersatus sū & inotui celeber∣rimis in vna qua∣que secta prae∣ceptionibus & pai studio om∣nibus dedi ope∣ram. Galen. de Loc. Affectis. peo∣ple, yea from the most vnlearned Empericke himselfe, any their particular remedies or medicines, which after by his purer and more eminent iudgement, and clearer light of vnderstanding, refining, he reduced to more proper worth,
and thereby gaue admired presidents of their wondered ods in his learned prescription and accommodation. Some contrarily contemning the learning and knowledge of the Grecian, and with horrid superstition, deifying an abso∣lute sufficiencie in Chymicke remedies, reiect the care or respect of discreet and prudent dispensation. A third and more commendable sort differeth from both these, and leauing in the one his learned morositie and disdainfull impatience of different hearing, and in the other his igno∣rant and peruerse Hermeticall monopoly, with impartiall and ingenuous desire free from sectarie affectation, doth from both draw whatsoeuer may in either seeme good or profitable vnto health or physicke vse: from the Grecian deriuing the sound & ancient truth, & from both Greek, Chymicke, or Arabian, borrowing with thankfull dili∣gence any helpfull good to needfull vse. Antiquitie hath giuen vs our firstMaiores no∣stri ad veritatis indagationem & conuentionē cum magno a∣nimo atque ex∣celo per sae∣bras atque tene∣bras iter suum contulerint, vt quo possint mo¦do praelucerent nobis, quare nō erunt illorum manes (prope dixerim) Deo∣rum cultu cele∣brandi? Scal. de Subt. lights in all knowledges, succeeding times haue added their seuerall lustres, and our latestAtque iniquū decreti genus est quod omnē laudis fructum & gloriae vni Graeciae detulit, vt Arabum & posteritais stu∣dia perpetuis tenebris obru∣antur. Quaedam posteritas addi∣dit non iraudā∣da laude. Vixe∣runt Graeci in media luce lite∣rarū, exiterunt Arabes, & inde ductae familiae iam desertis & scpultis melio∣ribus disciplinis digna tamen lu∣ce aeternaue memoria nobis reliquerunt. Hollerius instit. Chirurg. po∣sterity hath yeelded also many things not vnworthy their worthy praise. Chiefly to honour the ancient worthies, yet toEtiam hispidis, etiam qui erra∣runt habendam esse gratiam censeo. Scalig. de Subt. contemne none, and to view all, is the rarest growth, but truest perfection. And thus by the examples before for many innumerable more, it is manifest that men learned, knowing and reading much, may notwithstanding either through distraction or negligence be esteemed and found in complete perfect and distinct knowing, ignorant and vnwotting. And as their vnderstandings are hence corrup∣ted and depraued, so necessarily by consequent must their actions be answerable thereto, since thence deriued, bad principles euer producing bad practise. This is not ob∣scure nor dainty in many common practisers of imperfect knowledge, to be daily instanced almost euery where, whereby that man whose owne iudgement cannot giue him dispensation to swarue and differ sometimes from the common vnderstanding, vse, and custome of vulgar pra∣ctise,
shall oft times dangerously erre. In aboue 40. yeares being, I haue now twenty yeares bene an vnderstanding obseruer and partaker of diuers and different medicinall practise, and therein haue oft noted how that which som∣time hath opposed common receiued rule, in the peculiar proofe of some other learned, hath giuen good occasion of new disquisition of before vnconsidered reason or di∣stinction in the rule. For a briefe taste of many, I will parti∣cularize some few. I haue obserued in some kind of Palsies bloud taken frō the paralytike side, when all other meanes haue proued vaine, to haue bene the sole present succesful remedie, yea beyond all hope hath oft rescued the latest hope out of the iawes of death. This much experience doth testifie, yet is it contrary vnto receiued ancient edict. In like manner in some diseased plethoricall bodies, I haue obserued and seene, that their generall numnesse,Torpor leuis quaedam Paraly∣sis. Galen. de Sympt. causis. torpor and stupidity raised in them from the distention, compres∣sion and obstruction of their full vessels, hath immediatly on the same side that was let bloud, found present and sen∣sible deliuery from those accidents with great lightsom∣nesse and alleuiation, the opposite side still continuing in the former manner oppressed and greeued, vntill the same remedy of phlebotomy hath bene thereto likewise ap∣plied. In cōmon stoppages of the wombe I haue oft seene when the vsuall bleeding in the foote hath nothing at all profited, but in vaine wearied the parts thereby fruitlesly vexed, that the incision of a veine in the arme hath imme∣diatly opened the stoppage, and the former current hath freely streamed. In some kind of dropsies, cachexiaes, or greene sicknesses. I haue obserued that letting bloud by excellent fruite and benefite, hath proued the succesfull remedie, aboue, beyond, and after all remedies. These things are witnessed by many worthy testimonies, and yet are generally esteemed violations of rule. I will not here dispute the causes and reasons of these things, nor disquire how iudgement did guide vnto these trials, nor how ne∣cessarily or probably the effects and consequent followed,
or cohered with the iudgement. I will leaue it indifferent vnto euery one learned, and vnto right perpension in iust occasion of due consideration hereof. I giue not these in∣stances (as rash supposall may imagine) to encourage Empericall boldnesse, vnto common imitation hereof, nor do hereby allow (as some not distinguishing may imagine) bloud-thirstie phlebotomy to suck mens liues in rash trial hereof▪ but to proue and manifest how necessary it is for a iudicious and orthodox Physition, diligently and prudent∣ly in his facultie exercised according to art, to retaine and enioy a reserued power and warranted sufficiency within himselfe, to varie and differ sometimes from too strict & superstitious imitation of a common rule and receiued cu∣stome. And from this worth and vertue hath it come to passe, that many learned & famous men, in their seuerall a∣ges haue left so many worthy additamēts vnto knowledg and the common good, by their owne speciall proofes & trials of rules, in their peculiar practise oft different from vulgar conceit, vse and custome; vnto whom may not be denied beyond the ordinary bounds, a libertie and dispen∣sation contained within the latitude of safe discretion and art. And thus briefly both by the vse of common distracted reading, and thence indigested vnderstanding, and also by the former particular proofes of easie deception in accep∣tion of common rules, and lastly by examples of practise, it is manifested that men otherwise, and in other respects, esteemed iustly learned, may inconsiderately & easily erre, whē distractedly & deuidedly they employ their thoughts and cogitations, or want that sole or solide possession of their whole minds and meditations by their owne proper faculties and functions. This is the reason, that though comparably to these times no age hath euer affoorded writings more prodigally obuious, nor shew of know∣ledge with greater affluence, yet in Authors neuer hath bene either lesse true meaning, or lesse right vnder∣standing. Hence as seeming vnderstanding did neuer more abound, so neuer was it of worse report, the gooseCapit insana∣bile cunctos scribendi caco∣ethes. Scalig. so libe∣rally
giuing wings and feathers vnto fantasticke thoughts, but the eagle-eye of cleare &Prepauci ali∣quid bene sci∣ut Ad apicem plura aspirant magis ingenia quàm perueni∣t. Scalig. sincere iudgement, seldome vndazedly, or without winking, fixed vpon the perfect brightnesse and puritie of serene and clearly distinguisht truth. And thus much touching those that are of best pro∣ficience and most learned note in deuided studies and callings, distraction necessarily leauing a remisnesse and neglect in many things both of minde and action. As for those that are of meane literature in their owne professi∣ons, their intrusion in others, and desperate esteeme and qualitie in their owne, must needs preach their insufficien∣cie in the latter by their mediocritie in the first. CHAP. II. Of beneficed Practisers. THE grand and most common offenders in those kinds before remembred, and in these dayes, are diuers Astrologers, but e∣specially Ecclesiasticall persons, Vicars and Parsons, who now ouerflow this king∣dome with this alienation of their owne proper offices and duties, and vsurpation of others, making their holy calling a linsey wolsey, too narrow for their minds, and therefore making themselues roome in others affaires, vnder pretence of loue and mercie. Besides, their profane intrusion into inhibited lists, their vnlimited breach of law, and want of reuerence and respect of order and distinction of callings, (which true Diuinitie doth teach holy men) reason and experience do dayly witnesse, that by the necessarie coincidence oft times of both cal∣lings requiring them at the same moment in distant pla∣ces, without conscience they impose vpon themselues a necessary neglect of both by an vnnecessaryElige quid velis, qu enim pudor omnia velle? Martial. as∣sumption of the one. This the poore patients necessitie and need must oft complaine, though haply more seldome ob∣serued: and therefore of few is that which herein is lamen∣table,
at all lamented. Many times many poore people (and sometimes men of better worth) in their necessities, and oft last extremities, through this voluntarie ouermea∣sure of emploiment in these enlarged spirits, are not onely deferred, procrastinated and neglected, but oft times euen to death illuded. For from report and information by others vnto the Physition, and from the indication by vrine (which are borrowed, and therefore slipperie grounds) many diseases conceale themselues: oft for want of the presence of the Physitions owne view, the chiefest opportunitie and hopefull houre steale away vnespied, and death maketh many blind, because they had not their Phy∣sitions eyes. In these difficulties therefore (wherein con∣sist the greatest vses and benefites of a Physition) these men by their double and both-hand emploiment, compell themselues commonly to a double crueltie, either for the most part to denie their presence, or else not to performe the promise of their presence, being euer subiect to a coun∣termaund, by their voluntarie subiection to a double com∣mand. If therefore they would consider the shortnesse of their liues, with the immensitie of their owne taske, they would not allow so large a vacancie to succisiue houres and workes, which now for the most part are most part of their time vnto the great hurt and iniurie of others, and the increase of scandall vnto theirPersona nam∣que venustat stu¦dium dum suo insistit officio, nec praeripit alienum. owne vocations. I know the learned and reuerend Diuine is herein for the most part free, or if some few be iustly taxed, their modest minds will easily moderate and reduce them; and for the rest, whose dispositions are shamelesse and incorrigible, that may haply still become the foole, which is a reproach vnto the wise, andNam quod turpe bonis Seio Titioque decebit, Cris∣pinum. befit the vnhonest that defames the iust. I do not dislike the deuout and charitable deeds of their holy minds, nor reall compassion and contribution vnto the sicke and needie, nor yet their medicinall aduice with incorrupt hands free from implication of priuate gaine, and vnobserued and concealed merchandizing in charitable deeds; but I abhorre and wish repented (which
in many of them is abhominable and sacrilegious) their pecuniarie trafficke and trading by vsurped erecting in their houses Apothecarie shops by manumission of base wares that are not allowed, nor haue obtained freedome elsewhere, whereby vnlawfully they exenterate and eate out the bowels of poore mens purses. Neither is it any way to be iustified, that they ordinarily trauel vp & downe to spoile the more worthy of his fee, and the proper labo∣rer of his hire: nor yet is it lesse shame, that without shame or blushing their bils in many places inhabite ordinarily A∣pothecaries files and shoppes, as if their owne vndoubted right. Their maister Saint Paul teacheth euery man to walk within his1. Cor. 7. vers. 20. 24. owne calling, and not to be busilyVnicū ab vno optimè perfici∣tur opus. Arist. Polit. 2. stragling in others: so shall they honour their calling, and their cal∣lings honour them, and both honour God that sent them. I know the gift of healing in the Apostles was the gift of God his grace and speciall fauor and allowance vnto them for those times; but it was in them a miraculous and diuin power conserated vnto an holy end: but in these times it is an acquired facultie, and in these men vnto a mercenarie vse. It is indeed a deede of mercie to saue and helpe the sicke, and a worke of charitie to aduise them for their health & ease: but the common good and publicke weale, & the law for both doth inhibite the doing of euery good by euery man, and doth limit and restraine it vnto some speciall and select sort of men, for necessary causes, and re∣spects vnto good gouernment and policie, and for auoi∣ding confusion, which is the ruine of publicke weales. Shal then Diuinitie teach and allow for priuate deedes, ends and respects of charitie and mercie, to breakeFuit haec sa∣pientia quondā, Publica priuatis praeponere, sa∣cra prophanis. Sic honor & nomen diuinis vatibus, atque Carminibus ve∣nit. Horat. publicke edicts, to transgresse lawes, to contemne magistracie, to confound and disturbe good order? Good order forbid∣deth, that for pretence of any necessitie whatsoeuer, cause or reason, one man presume to breake into anothers bounds, yea and Diuinitie teacheth the same. God him∣selfe tieth men in all things, in all necessities, vnto certaine and appointed ends. He ordained a select number of Apo∣stles
and Disciples, and vnto them onely annexed the di∣uine worke and calling of nations and people vnto salua∣tion, commanding all men vpon paine of damnation to seeke out and follow that meanes wheresoeuer or howso∣euer distant, and did not ordaine the meanes confusedly in euery person to waite vpon euery priuate necessitie. In like maner in a commonweale, lawes and policie ordaine (preferring the common good before eueryOmne publi∣cum cōmodum habet aliquid ex iniquo: quod in singulos pec∣catur, vtilitate publica repen∣ditur. Tacitus. priuate ease and benefite) that euery man haue his distinct calling, vn∣to which all other mens necessitie therein may and ought to repaire. For if euery man might be of euery calling, con∣fusion of callings would in the end leaue no calling. Ther∣fore euery mans need or necessitie is not sufficient to make euery one capable of giuing supply needfull thereto, but God, and nature, and law haue tied and allotted men to seeke meanes, and those meanes confirmed to certaine set bounds and limits, that men may still in all things accor∣ding to the law of mortalitie, be euer in this life subiect vnto casualties, oft for their triall, sometime for their pu∣nishment, or else for a further decree and secret purpose of the Diuine prouidence, so and to such ends thus orde∣ring. Thus by cleare truth ouershining the mists & clouds of false pretexts to the contrary, it is manifest, that this flu∣ctuation of these men betweene two callings is offensiue to God, scandalous vnto religion and good men, and in∣iurious vnto commonweales, and but presumption bor∣rowing the face of Diuinitie. What encouragement their example hath giuen vnto drones and idle persons, aboun∣ding by their example infinitely in the same wrong, he hath no eies that doth not consider. Their many, ordinarie, rash, ignorant and vnskilfull errors and commissions against the health and life of many, besides their forenamed omissi∣ons, intrusions, procrastinations, and neglects of one cal∣ling by another, I could by many too true instances con∣firme, but for reuerēce of the callings I spare the men. I wil onely giue two knowne instances, wherein (as in a glasse) men may view the diuers faces of many more of the like
sort.Historia. A gentleman in Bedfordshire not long since was so∣dainly surprised by a continuall feauer, accompanied with a generall lassitude and wearinesse of the whole bodie, and together with heate and burning, delirations and lightnes of braine. The habit of his bodie and his flesh were muscu∣lous and well liking, the season warme, his age firme, and constitution sanguin, his pulse high, full, large, and in the vehemence and strength of motion manifest euen vnto the beholders eye. A Parson or Vicar comming vnto him, ma∣keth many feares and seeming-graue discourses of the danger and imminence of aIn principio morbi, firmis viribus, habitu pulchro, exina∣nitione nulla, plenitudinis & suffocationis pericula non sine ratione sae∣pe obuia fiunt, quo tempore & modo si ma∣rasmus coutin∣geret, prodigio∣sum planè foret. Spectatum ad∣missi risum te∣neatis? Marasme, and from this sup∣posed grand perill stoutly withstandeth the needfull vse of due phlebotomie. The allies and friends of the patient ob∣seruing the dayly decrease of hope and health, diligently enquire after another Physition, and by happe found me where then employed. When I came vnto the patient, the Parson entertaineth vs with confident discourses and dis∣putes concerning a Marasme, whom when I found after long patience and calme conference in the presence and hearing of diuers worthy knights and gentlemen still end∣lesly and reasonaleslyMarasmum Trallianus li. 12 describit, in quo humiditas sub∣stantialis in totū consumpta fue∣rit aut torre∣facta, vel ▪ Quod in cor∣pore  & succulento nunquam quis∣quam praete∣rea inuenerit. . inquit Galenus de Bonhabit. vaine, and yet possessed with an in∣incible spirit of open and obstinate contradiction, I in the end with their common consents contemned and re∣iected him. The patient I found free from any particular which might inhibiteVires, habitus, aetas intrepid ferunt, morbus, calor sitis, deliria, plethora exigunt, anni tempus, constitutio aegri annunt. phlebotomie, and manifestly saw the danger of the delay thereof, (both which may appeare by the description of his estate) and therefore seeing the indication so plaine, and the necessitie so vrgent, contrarie to the babling opposition and causesse predication of needlesse danger, I caused him to bleed; whereupon with∣in few houres after, besides immediate alleuiation, nature Natura vel vis quae i potentijs naturalibus aliena excernit, vehementiùs operans magnum & violentum arte∣riarum efficit motum, appetens illa quae molesta sunt expellere, atque ita profluuium san∣guinis facit. Galen. in aph. 21. lib. 7. Hipp. seconding the worke, expelled at his nose diuers quanti∣ties
of bloud at seuerall times; and thus wasLeuata quae corpus nostrum regit natura ex∣onerataue eo quo velut sarci∣na premitur, haud aegrè quod reliquū est vin∣cet & expellet. Galen. de Meth. Med lib. 11. enabled to performe her Crisis, being before detained by the oppres∣sion of the former quantitie of bloud, whereunto her strength was not equall. The life of man vnto God and men is deare & pretious, yet behold how presumptuous∣ly glorious ignorance, and the lawlesse breach of the due lists of distinct and proper callings, doth licentiously hazard the vtmost price and date thereof. And how likely may it seeme, that the memorie of this wrong had bene in the same graue buried, if it had not bene preuented, and by the preuention solely obserued. I will now annexe another example of secret betwitching flatterie by close whispering of the sicke, ordinarily pra∣ctised by these kind of men, vnto the vnobserued and stoln perdition of many. Anno 1611. a gentleman in this ma∣ner falleth sicke. He was sodainly surprised by a continuall feauer, with burning, thirst, troublesome heate in the soles of the feete, and palmes of the hands, frequent delirations and perturbations of the mind, fulnesse of the stomacke, loathing, painfull distentions and ructuations, drinesse and yeallownesse of the tongue, bitternesse and heate of the mouth, paines about the short ribs, loynes, backe and shoulders, ill sleeps & confused dreams. There entertained these accidents the vsuall fulnesse of his body vnto the cō∣mon outward view, & accōpanied a pulse swift, vehement and large, an vrine high coloured, red, and thicke: al which many witnesses of vnderstanding confirme. According vnto the former indication, the patient was twise let Maxima re∣media continu∣arum febrium haec duo sunt Detractio san∣guinis & potio frigida, Gal. lib. 9. de Meth. Med h Saluberrimū autem est febri∣bus venam inci∣dere, non conti∣nentibus modo sed etiam alijs omnibus quas purtrelcens hu∣mor concitane∣rit. Gal. lib. 11. de Meth. Med. Ideo missus est sanguis ex he∣patica ad sangui¦nis hepatisue refrigerium & ventilationem, è mediana etiā ad minuendam plenitudinem. bloud, the quantitie lost the first time, coming short the second time, not exceeding ten ounces, as the Surgeon doth witnesse. He was onceSi ad os ventriculi materia febrilis quae putruerit sua sponte impetum faciat, per vomi∣tum expellatur. Galen. de Meth. Med. lib 11. vomited, by due respites twiceBilis abundantia & turgescentia manifesta hoc exigebat, secundum intentionem Hippocrat. Aphoris. 22. lib. 1. & aph. 10. lib. 4. Curandae autem non sunt omnes febres eodem tenore, nec eae quae sunt sine acci∣dentibus ac illae quae cum accidentibus tractandae sunt, vt testatur Gal. de Arte curat. ad Gla∣conem lib. 1. In alijs igitur eadem remedia iteranda, in alijs non omnino vsurpanda. purged with good effect and alleuiation, oft by
glistersIn febribus Galenus saepe injicit mulsam per clysterem fi aliuus sponte non ducitur▪ vi∣de de Method. Med. lib. 11. & lib. 9. de arte cu∣rat. ad Glaucon. gently moued, his diet prescribed, cooling, ope∣ning, and altering the euill qualitie of humors. After these things done, within few daies the vrine in colour, sub∣stance and residence manifestethQuippe misso in febribus in i∣nitio sanguine non solùm pau∣peribus sed di∣uitumetia ser∣uis, plurimis quidem quinto pòst, aliquibus septimo Crisis contigit. Galen. de Meth. Med. lib. 11. concoction, and there∣with follow some disquiets and anxieties, notVigilant aegri magna ex parte grauiter se ha∣bent & febriunt vehementiùs, quanto propius crisim accedūt. Gal. in aph. 71. lib. 4. Hippoc. b , &c. Circa initia & ines omnia im∣becilliora, circa statum omnia fortiora. Hipp. aph. 30. & 29. lib. 2. vnhope∣ful forerunners of the approch of the expected Crisis of the disease, by the vrine soSi velociter morbus moueatur, etiam coloris & substantiae vrinae mutatio snt sufficientia signa futurae Crisis. Gal. in Aph. 71. lib 4. Hipp. fairely promised. In this faire hope (though by vnbeleefe of sense denied) a Parson-Physition led by a secret ambition of stealing the praise of such a cure, (if fortune might haply fauour the patient with ease, and himselfe therein with the opinion of the merit (as was verie likely) in this hope taking opportunitie of the pa∣tients impatience, he whispereth vnto him the excellen∣cies of Aurum potabile, farre beyond all other remedies. After the patient had from him receiued it, within short time good hap gaue ease. Ease being gained, begetteth in the patient an euer after incorrigible consultation with his owne sense, and now measuring his good by his ease, and setling in his thoughts an assurance of his recourie, he studiously and continually defameth his Physition, and with euill clamours filleth all corners of the countrey, as farre as his agents, his owne tongue or credite could ex∣tend. In this interim likewise he reiects the former begun methode of discreete euacuations and alterations of the offensiue humours of his body, and in steed therof he che∣risheth and cheareth vp himselfe with daily magnifying and worshipping Aurum potabile as the God and sole author of his supposed recouery. In this meane season and intermission of former courses, the forward signes of faire concoction, so hopefully before appearing diuers dayes together, now retire and vanish, and painfull swellings fall intoSic lib. 11. Galen. de Meth▪ Medendi, Diuites qui prop∣ter delicias debita praetermisere remedia, phlegmonas contrahunt vel in iecinore, vel in ventriculo, vel in aliquo alio viscere. his legs and neather parts: and then compelled he sendeth for other learned Physitions, but vseth them by
vncertaine fits, as his owne conceit induced, and with a reseruation of his sole happinesse and best securitie in Au∣rum potabile. To conclude, he escaped the present perils of the former sharpe accidents, butQucunque morbi imper∣fectè iudicati sunt, deinde ser∣uantur in sequē∣tium iudicatori∣orum dierum a∣liquem vsque ad 40. diem, nō simpliciteracuti sed acuti ex transmutatione vel decidentia nominantur. Gal. in aph 23. lib. 2. Hipp. continued lingringly and languishingly sicke from about the middle of March, vnto the the latter end ofQuadragesi∣mus diesprimus est morborum diutinorū, qui∣cunque hunc transcendunt ad septenarij ratio∣nem habent Crisim, non septenarij quo∣ad dies, sed quo∣ad menses, dein∣de annos. Gal. aph. 28. l▪ 3. Hip. August next following. About that time he first beganne to find some reasonable satisfa∣ction in ease, and the recouery of some better strength, but a secret remainder or impression of the former delira∣tions continued, and some suspitious signes of a Scorbut seemed to increase, which before likewise did obscurely show. Beside the shamefull wrong vnto Physitions and patients, and the iniurie of Arts and truth it selfe, in men that are professors of diuine and holy callings, behold the vsuall insidiation of Death and Danger, by the spirit of flattering intrusion and secret lenocination of false hopes and ease possessing the distraction of the distressed sicke. What man learned and iudicious cannot determine, whether this dangerous long continuance of this Gen∣tlemans disease may not iustly and in good reason be ascribed vnto the sodaineSi integrè, si plenè, si perfe∣ctè Natura iu∣dicat, nihil noui moliatur Medi∣cus: si verò in quopiam defi∣cia Natura, quod deficit de∣bet Medicus adiungere. Gal. in Aph. 20. lib. 1. Hippoc. discontinuance of his first meanes, & to the neglect thereby of perfecting the hope∣full Crisis so fairelySignum concoctionis nullum vnquam prauum fuit, ed omnia optima semper, & tanto citiùs aegrum conualiturum otendunt quanto citiùs ap∣paruint. Gal. in aph. 12. lib. 1. Hippoc. promised and intended? Or vnto whō doth it not appeare palpably grosse, that Aurum potabile can containe in it selfe any such golden sufficiency, as soly to remoue or preuent all the former accidents in this gen∣tleman described, which God, and nature, and reason haue euer denied vnto any one particular or speciall medicine whatsoeuer? Let al men then vnto whom God hath giuen eares or eyes, aduisedly behold and consider how dange∣rous and iniurious these ordinary and ignorant intrusions in reason proue vnto poore patients, who thus beguiled with opinion, and blinded with deceitfull hope, or ase, or sense, ioyously oft giue thankes for their owne hurt,
magnifie the authors, and not seldome perish in the praise of their own harms. The vnlimited expatiation of so foule wrongs, do challenge all men, not onely the learned, but all honest or ingenuous, vnto the vendication of art and truth from oppression by so grosse and harmfull igno∣rance. These examples are sufficient to admonish the offen∣ders of their impieti, and others of their owne perill in trusting vnto them. CHAP. III. Of Astrologers, Ephemerides-masters. NOw concerning Astrologers-practisers:Astrologi, . There is a sort of men, who beside and beyond that is sufficient and profitable vnto Physicke, vse in Astronomicall sci∣ence, (hauing vnaduisedly, prodigally or vnrecouerably spent too much paines and time in the too curious or superstitious, or supposed ex∣cellence in the vanities of Astrologie, or else finding by their other defects in themselues the want and insuffi∣ciencie of knowledge more proper and essentiall vnto a Physition) do therefore (which now is all the hopefull re∣mainder of their time so farre spent) fish for a name and fame amongst the common and easie deceiued vulgars, with the glorious baites of prodigious precepts. Thus they hook simple credulitie to worship and admire their lying reuelations, prescribe fortunes and fates, and limit the dayes and dates of mens liues and deaths vnto the darke points of their Kalēdars. Neither do they blush to promise and professe that they take counsel of heauen (when heauē Vide Isai. cap. 47. vers. 13. Stent & saluent te Au∣gures coeli qui contemplaban∣tur sydera & sup¦putabant men∣ses, vt ex ijs an∣nuntiarent ven∣tura tibi. Ecce facti sunt quasi stipula & ignis combussit eos, Deuterō. cap. 18 Nec inueniatur in te qui ariolos sciscitetur, aut obseruet som∣nia, aut auguria, aut pythones cōsulat. Omnia enim haec abo∣minatur Dom. & propter isti∣usmodi scelera deleuit eos in introitu tuo. denieth them) thereby gaining to themselues glorie in the slander of heauen and the scandall of truth. Thus vsually they peruert the right vse of Astronomicall science vnto deceit, imposture, and iugling merchandizing for vniust and iniurious gaine, and perswade the voluntarie motions and arbitrary actions of men, their consequences and issues
to be driuen by the heauens vnto ends and destinies there inrolled, and themselues (as if the onely true sons of hea∣uen forsooth) there onely admitted to reade and view. In∣deed the will of man hath not power in it selfe to will or moue it selfe to any good pleasing vnto God, or sauing to it selfe, but by the speciall grace of God, drawing, guiding, or mouing his will thereto, yet doth the generall concor∣dant consent of most Diuines grant as vncontrouersed, a libertie and freedome of mans will vnto anyDeus nos do∣cet, irradiat, assi∣stit, etiam suo modo trahit vt Saulem. Quod autem in nobis sit nullum in∣ternum princi∣pium potestatis, eorum est voci∣ferari qui nihil intelligunt. Sca∣lig. de subt. morall, na∣turall, ciuill or politicke good. And in these kinds all Di∣uines both ancient and neotericke, haue both acknowled∣ged and admired the worthy examples of vertue in Phi∣losophers and heathen men, whose infinite studious paines and voluntarie laborious industrie in atchieuing so many incomparable excellencies, no ingratitude can denie, or without honour mention. Vertue is not. Virtus morali est habitus ele∣ctiuus. Aristot. Eth. 6. forced, but free in whom it is, and therefore not to be ascribed vnto the heauens or any other outward. Arist. Eth. 3. cause, but vnto the free and voluntary agent of it selfe, and by the owne inward power in it selfe, mouing it selfe thereto, from his owne , &c. Ea quae secundùm vir∣tutem aguntur, non iustè agun∣tur si sint iusta, sed si agens, sci∣ns, eligensue propter virtu∣tem ipsam agat, animoue stabili & firmo agat. Aristot. Eth. 2. purpose therein. This all men, Diuinitie, Philosophie, reason, experience, with an vnitie of consent confirme. If then a mans action be his owne, if the end his owne, the effectuall prosecution thereof vnto the end his owne; if God himselfe haue granted this priuiledge vnto all men, as indifferent and common vnto all whom he hath created vnder the condition of men, what creature shall intercept thePost Adamae lapsum (inquit Cal∣uinus) supernaturalia dona in homine extincta sunt nisi quatenus per regenerationem re∣cuperentur▪ at intelligentia, iudicium, cum voluntate, quia inseparabilia ab hominis natura, omnino perire non poture, Caluin. instit. lib. 2. endowment of the Creator? what shall take the ho∣nour of this gift from him that gaue it, or the right thereof from him that thence receiueth it? The heauens cannot so blaspheme their Maker, though men thus dare belie the heuens to iustifie their owne impietie. All things depend vpon the prouidence of God, and from him and by him
are ordained second causes, which indeed in nature haue their necessitie, but in the will of man haue a power onely to moue or incline, and not to force. This is the reason, that though man by his starres be borne to infinite miseries, di∣uersly mouing and affecting him continually, from the earth, from the sea, from the land, from the aire, from the fire, from his owne affections, infirmities, diseases, from di∣uers haps and casualties; yet vnto him that knoweth the free gift of his Maker, and the good that he hath done for him, none of all these things by any necessitie in them∣selues therto, can touch him or onceAstrologorū decreta non sunt praetoria. Ptolomaeus. come neare him. For whether calamitie approch from aboue or below, from maligne constellation, or other inferior or terrestriall in∣cumbrances, man by his spirit of vnderstanding, by pru∣dence and circumspect prouidence, hath a large immuni∣tie, whereby he may and oft doth auoide these violences, and delude their forces. The wise man (saith Salomon) foreseeth the plague, and hideth himselfe, neither can any euill befall the wise, which he may not and doth not, either being to come by prouident foresight preuent, or present by carefull industrie allay, or past by diligence redeeme, no influence or destinie being able to bring mans will and en∣deuour to an higher point then wisedome and goodnesse. This is the reason that common calamities befall not all men alike, yea rather to euery one vnlike. This is also the reason that many borne vnder the same constellation, haue different fortunes from each other, and farre vnlike their like constellation: nay it is oft seene, and cannot be denied, that many men by their owne industrie haue contradicted their starres, whereby vnfortunately marked in their nati∣uities, they haue triumphed ouer the heauens in the felici∣tie of their owne wisedome and vertue. Of this sort haue bene not onely one Socrates and the great Philosophers, but many common men SocraticallySapiens assues∣cit futuris malis & quae alij diu∣patiendo leuia faciunt, hic leuia facit diu cogi∣tando. disposed and ende∣uouring. Contrariwise also diuers borne vnder good starres vnto good destinies, in their growth haue either ouerunne, orSi ingenia pri∣mitiùs vtiliter salubriterue ficta sint, omnē illam vim quae de facto extrin∣secùs ingruit in∣offensiùs tracta∣biliusue trans∣mittunt. Sin cō∣tra, licet paruo aut nullo fatalis incōmodi con∣flictu vrgean∣tur, sua tamen leuitate & vo∣luntario impetu in assidua deli∣cta & errores facilè ruunt. Gellius. come short of their destinie. For although
the heauens doe worke by their hidden power and in∣fluence, secret impressions, procliuities and inclinati∣ons, as in all things vnder heauen, so in the consti∣tutions and tempers of men in their generation, con∣ception and birth: yet are their effectuall productions thereof in menSecundae cau∣sae in natura quidem necessa¦riae, in voluntate inclinantes, non cogentes. Scal. de Subt. themselues variously alterable according to education, inclination, occasion, and circumstance, and therefore as touching the absolute power of the hea∣uens euer varying. There is no man that can so farreSi homines nil sponte, nil motu arbitraio faciunt, non e∣runt  sed ludicra & ri∣denda . Gellius. Noct. Att. deny himselfe a man, as to make doubt of free arbitrarie choice in himselfe to do or not to do, to like or dislike, to do that he will, to refuse that he nill. For if heauenly influences compell or force mens actions, and their wils be led and not free, vniustly any man shall be vniust, neither can the lawes of God or men be iust ordained against wilfull Non contingit quempiam ea velle quae im∣possibilia sunt aliter fieri. Arist Eth. 6. of∣fenders: but God is iust, and lawes are righteous, and ther∣fore mens actions are their owne, moued from an inward power and essence peculiar vnto themselues, and from an end and intention which is their owne. Touching those therefore that from the heauens promise to tell fortunes, to cast figures, to turne Ephemerides for natiuities, for good haps, for ill haps, successes, losses, fortunate, infortu∣nate euents, he that hath but common sense and reason, and can thinke but worthily of himselfe, mayCalliditas ne∣que comprensa neque percepta loquitur sed am¦bagiosa, inter falsa atque vera pedetentim quasi per tene∣bras ingrediens & multa tentā∣do incidit ali∣quando repent in veritatem. Gellius. easily discouer their falshood, imposture, deceit and cousenage, howsoe∣uer sometimes euents may countenance; for hoodwinked happe may sometimes light vpon truth, and craft working vpon credulitie, may make any truth of any falshood. Thus farre briefly concerning the powers of the heauens ouer the minds and willes of men, their voluntary actions, their consequences and issues. Now concerning their vertue ouer the bodies and humours of the sicke and diseased: No man can deny the heauens as generallSunt enim su∣periora formae conseruatrices inferiorum, quia causa causarum tuetur ea quae fecit. Scalig. de Subtil. and superiour causes to haue power ouer all things created vnder hea∣uen, by whose influence and radiation all things increase, grow, liue, and are conserued, and by whose recesse all
things mourne, wither, fall and droupe. This doth witnesse the sommer and the winter, & all other seasons, which the heauens by their motion varying, bring vnto all things vi∣cissitudes, changes, and alterations, and by their secret in∣fluence imperceptibly distill different and contrary incli∣nations, tempers, and affections. Hence winter, sommer, spring, and autumne, breed their peculiar diseases. Euill and maligne constellations beget plagues, pestilences, and other epidemiall contagions, which the aire as the great mother of all things breathing doth fruitfully conceiue, and plentifully bring forth. Vnto what sight or sense hath euer bene vnknowne, either the pride or splendor of the Sunne, mounting in his glorious altitude, or his eclipsed force and light somnesse opposed and abased? Who is ig∣norant of the monethly metamorphosis of the Moone? What thing is or can be insensible of the Cynosure, and the nipping frosts? Is not the glorie of the heauens ouer all, and are not his forces in all? Notwithstanding generall causes produce not particular effects, and the heauens are but generallPendent no∣stratia haec à su∣perioribus propter aequi∣uocam conne∣xionem, non propter vniuo∣cam effectio∣nm commu∣nionem. Scalig. de Subt. causes, second causes, outward causes, re∣mote causes, mediate causes, vnto those things which im∣mediatly fall out in the bodies of men from inward cau∣ses contained within themselues, and therfore soly hauing by their inseparate nearenesse an ineuitable and vnauoi∣ded necessitie in themselues. The inward causes of diseases are the humors of the body, which can neuer be separated from the body, because in them consisteth the life and be∣ing of the body. Therefore when either they corrupted frō their kind, or offending in qualitie or quantitie, raise dis∣eases in the body, how or by what meanes can the body choose but be therewith affected, except it could leaue it selfe? From any outward cause which is without, and of a∣nother deuided and separate nature, separation doth free from immediate necessitie or consecution. Since then the heauens are outward causes, and remoued causes, & there∣fore neuer necessarily or simply of themselues affect, and the inward causes of diseases sticke nearer, and so closely
touch in their effects, that they suffer no interposition, it is manifest, that the heauens haue no certaine or absolute h power in the diseased,Communes causae com∣munes ha∣bent effectus, nec vires aut actiones parti∣cularium fle∣ctunt simplici∣ter aut prima∣riò. Causas verò immediatas ne∣cessariò sequun¦tur effectus. nor can match or equall the im∣mediate force appropriate onely vnto the disease. The heauens indeed do oft and much also preuaile in raising, allaying, increasing, diminishing, enraging and calming the inward causes, but euer by a proportion, either with the temper and constitution of the sicke, or the humours of their bodies, whether originally bred, or after by time acquired. Saturne is therefore said a great Lord ouer me∣lancholy bodies, in like manner the Moone ouer phlegma∣ticke, Iupiter and the Sunne in sanguine, Mars in chole∣ricke, (whether in their seuerall reuolutions apart, or their coniunctions and combinations) and according to the greater or lesse proportion of their peculiar humors in the bodie, and the dispositions of the particular parts of the body, they more or lesse exercise their rule. Therefore also according as meanes more or lesse accrew to lessen or in∣crease their proportion: so more or lesse manifestly are their effects and operations weakned or quickned. If the wise Physition foreseeing the euill approach of a maligne and Saturnine aspect, by discreete preuention abate and withdraw the melancholy humor from the body, Saturne shall thereby want a part of hisCausae effici∣entis opus au∣getur eius au∣cta substantia. Gal. in aph. 5. lib. 6. Hipp. proportion, and as the greater abundance thereof doth necessarily more aduance and promote his efficacie, so the exiguitie there of must needs abridge and obscure it. The like may be said of all o∣ther aspects in their seuerall destined and appropriate hu∣mours. For the constellation of it selfe simplyAstra vim non necessitatem inferunt. Ptolo∣maeus. cannot ef∣fect anything, nor can build or ruine any being, which first hath not the seminarie and prime foundation thereof in it self, both as his subiect and his meanes. And this is the true cause, that the body either by Physick reduced to iust tem∣per in it selfe, or to an equall contemper of all the humors, or of it selfe strong and healthfull, in the most different constellations doth commonly find indifference of altera∣tion. And this is the reason that many in the most Satur∣nine
and deadly constellations liue, as the contrary also cause that many in the most faire and Iouiall die. From this vncontrouersed ground, Astronomers generally them∣selues aduise and prescribe meanes, both to preuent the harmes of influences to come, and also to redresse them present, and giue vnto the Physitions hand powers and remedies to command, countermand, delay, allay, and a∣bolish. And from this reason Polomy himselfe, the Prince and father of Astrologie, in vnfortunate aspects doth ad∣uise to consult the prudent Physition, and by his counsell and helpe to decline the maligne constellation. For right remedies rightly administred vnto the diseases and their inward causes, by the decree of God and Nature necessa∣rily oppugne, allay, preuent and expell diseases, and there∣fore are not prescribed vnto outwardExternis causis nihil praescribi∣tur, summa ta∣men diligentia perquirendae praecognoscen∣daeue sunt vt deducant in in∣teriorum cog∣nitionem Gal. de Meth. Med. causes, but onely vnto the inward. And although the outward cause haply first raised or impoed the disease, yet in the cure is not that cause so much respected, but his effect (which is the disease it selfe) or the inward causes by which, and through which, the outward had admission to their effects. If the inward causes (the antecedent and the immediate) be re∣moued, it is a miracle, and a thing supernaturall, that there should remaine hisCum efficien∣tibus causis ne∣cesse est acci∣dentia tolli Gal. in aph. 22. lib. 2. effect, the disease; but the outward cause may be remoued, and yet hisSi in vna re¦qualibet leui causae ratio claudicet, simul in reliquis vbi videtur abunda∣re meritò titu∣babit, vbique ∣nim sibi con∣stare debet cau∣sa si quidē vera est. Gal. de dign. Pulsib. effect therein not follow him. Thus corrupt and hote constitutions of the aire, and constellations from the heauen, breed pestilent and hote diseases in the body, and the diseases still remain▪ when the constitutions or constellations are changed; but when the pestilent & hote humors, and dispositions within the body, which are inward causes, are throughly remo∣ued, there can no such effects continue, be farther fed, or maintained. The outward cause may also be continually present, yet particular subiects or bodies, feele orQui quidem ex Solis incen∣dio febcitat ab agentis cau∣sae caliditate af∣fici Natura ap∣tus est. Gal de dis. febr. partici∣pate no effect: but if the inward cause grow in quantity or quality vnto the excesse, it is impossible it should not in the same moment produce the like sensible effect. For ex∣ample, in some heauenly coniunctions or combinations there may arise an hydropicall constellation, though many
particulars be nothing therwith affected, or therto therby inclined; but if hydropical humors or causes abound with∣in the body, it is impossible they should there be without not only the imminence, but present cōsecutiō of the drop∣sy. By these examples it is not obscure, that the heauens are a forreine inuasion, and therefore more easily admitCausa nulla siue aetherea, siue syderalis, ne patientis aptitudine age∣te potest. Galen de di. Febr. 1. in∣terception, and that diseases are euer to be suspected, be∣cause euer present. Where there is an vnproportioned con∣gruitie or susceptibilitie in the bodie and humors with the heauenly inclination, there the heauens haue no edge. Where the disease hath once taken possession in the body, the necessitie of his effect is absolute andCausas imme∣diatas necessa∣riò sequuntur effectus. Ideo∣que effectus immediatus est signum  suae causae. vnauoidable, Quoties vehe∣mentiores mor∣bi premunt aut instabunt, vt in suffocante pleu∣ritide, angina, sanguinis im∣moderato fluo∣re, extrema va∣sorum plenitu∣dine, in alijs de∣nique morbis qui nimiū prae∣cipites sunt, nul∣lus astrorum delectus habendus aut cura. Fernel. de hora Phlebot. howsoeuer the heauens or any outward causes are dispo∣sed. He therefore that finding the inward disposition, shall for the superstitious feare of starres delay with speed to seeke present remedie, or in hope of forrein supply from constellations, neglect certaine rescue more neare hand, is a foole, a mad man, or worse then either. The first is con∣tinually acted by common simple deluded people, the o∣ther patronaged by obstinate defendants of vaine para∣doxes; and the third by our impudent Astrologers prosti∣tute for gaine. I commend not senslesse morositie in the peruerse reiection of true Astronomie, so farre as is com∣modious for Physicke vse (which reason it selfe, experience and all the Ancients worthily extoll) but with reason and authoritie, I dislike superstitious and needlesseOptimi qui{que} astronomi iudi∣ciariā astrono∣miam tanquam vnam & futilē & nullo funda∣mento subnixā postquā multū. diuue versarūt, repudiarunt. Mornae. de verit. relig. curositie in the ouer-religious esteeme thereof. He that obserueth the wind, shall not sow: and he that regardeth the clouds, shall not reape, saith Salomon, Ecclesiastes 114. And I cannot but detest the shamelesse dayly cousenage and im∣posture, heathenishly practised by many, vnder the colour, pretext and falseIn praeclarissima arte Astronomica curiosa vanitate in obseruationes veras se implicāte, superstitiosa & aliena inculcata reperiūtur. Camer. de diuin. shadowes of true Astronomy. An exam∣ple here of may not impertinently for better illustration be here proposed. A gentleman of Northampotonshire dis∣eased by an immedicable vlcer of the reines, was moued by his friends (after my despaire of his recouerie signified
priuatly vnto them) to call the aduice of a famous Ephe∣merides-master, who coming vnto him, and not knowing (and therefore not considering his disease) from the coun∣sel table of his Ephemerides pronounced, that if the patient suruiued 3. or 4. daies (which we must suppose were of an il aspect) vntill the next ensuing Tuesday (which was, it see∣meth, a fairer influence) he made no doubt of his recouerie and life. But he suruiued three moneths or thereabout, and in the interim neither did the aforesaid ill disposed starres any apparent hurt, nor the wel disposed any eminent good: but after the forenamed three moneths, the starres brake promise, the disease kept touch, the gentlemanAstrologi dum coeli scru∣tantur plagas, quod ante pe∣des est, nemo eorum spectat. Cicero. died. The reason in the disease was manifest: without a new creation or generation, a part in it selfe radically, and in the whole substance perished, can neuer be restored. The disease ther∣fore could not lie, nor all the heauens could performe ei∣ther a new generation (because the patient could not again enter into his mothers womb) nor a new creation (because the world could not againe returne into the old chaos.) How vainly then did here the Astrologer gape and gaze after vncertaine starres, when the true knowledge of the disease, the cause and nature thereof (wherein consisteth an infallible ground) manifested the certaine issue? How foolishly and ignorantly (or shamelesly and impudently) did Astrologicall simple folly or intollerable imposture, either cunningly and wittingly seeme to looke aloft for that which lay neare hand below, or simply stumble ouer so plaine truth, and tumble into so ridiculous and grosse er∣ror? And thus it is apparent, both how vncertaintly Astro∣logers . Leonid. Transtulit sic quidam: Vatum sidereos quisquis scru∣tare meatus Dispereas, men∣dax non nisi vana sonas. Obstetrix tibi stultitia est, au∣dacia mater. O miser & pro∣prij non bene¦gnare probri. fable, and how certainly diseases do not lie: and who comparing the one with the other, cannot see, in which truth hath more euidence, and trust securitie? There is a sober andSyderum occasus & ortus cognoscendi à Medico artis perito, ratione morborū vulgariū & epidemiorum, quia hi temporum mutationae, tempestatumue vi suscitantur. Hippocr. lib de Loc. aere, aqu. lib. Epid. lib. aph. 3. modest vse of Astronomie,In vnaquaque regione vbi obire artem Medicam instituimus, cuiusque syderis emersus occasusue perspexisse necessarium est, quia tempora ab his anni circunscribuntur. Galen. in lib. 1. Hippocr. de Morb. vulg. either for gene∣rall
prediction, or particular accommodation vnto parti∣cular ends: both these (thereby putting a difference be∣tweene the honest vse and false abuse thereof) Ptolomey himselfe hath bounded within that which is either mani∣festly naturall and according to. nature, or in reason. pos∣sible or contingent. Wha with these conditions Astro∣nomie doth affoord vnto the benefite of the sicke, is to be esteemed and guided by the prudent Physition, according to particular necessities, circumstances and considerations, as either the heauenly inclinations shall seeme, &c. Hippoc. proportio∣ned vnto them, or they liable to those generall and com∣mon causes. Whatsoeuer doth wander further, or is exten∣ded vnto other vses then these, is not ingenuous nor pro∣per vnto a Physition, but is abuse of time, himselfe and o∣thers, trifling vaine idlenesse, foule & vnlearned falshood. CHAP. IIII. Of Coniectors by vrine. AS the heauens themselues are not free from the insinuation of imposture and deceit (thus cunningly doth euill winde it selfe into the likenesse & shape of good∣nes::) so is nothing almost vnder the hea∣uen created, which is not made an instru∣ment, a visar and bad vnto adulterate seeming, lying and cousenage. The aire, the fire, the waters, the fowle, the fish, and infinite otherHinc , &c. creatures, yea their definite and single Hinc Extispicia , Magia , &c. parts apart, are all made prodigious inchantments▪ and snares of ignorant minds, begetting faith vnto falshood, and trust and credit vnto vntruth. As Art vpon true and proued grounds doth promise according to good reason faire likelihood, so imposture vpon wondered and vn∣knowne conclusions professeth assurance in falshood, and certaintie in impossibilitie; which while wise men con∣temne, credulous fooles admire and follow. Amongst ma∣ny
other, the inspection of the vrine is in this kinde too commonly most palpably abused by many that carrie the name and badge of learning. It is a common practise in these dayes, by a colourable deriuation of supposed cun∣ning from the vrine, to foretell casualties, and the ordina∣rie euents of life, conceptions of women with child, and definite distinctions of the male and female in the wombe; which while impudence doth gloriously set forth, the common simplicitie doth worship and reuere. It is vn∣knowne to none learned, that the vrine is truly of it selfe and properlyVrina primò & per se verè & propriè antece∣dentes morbo rum causas, affe∣ctus partium naturalium se∣cundaq́ue re∣gionis indicat, tum venarum, renum & vesi∣cae. Galen. in Prorrhet. Hipp. comment. 2. indication of no other immediate disposi∣tions, but such as are of the veines and liuer, the bloud and humors; the antecedent causes of diseases, and the naturall facultie giuing onelyConiunctas morborum cau¦sas extra venas, affectus tertiae regionis, pul∣monis, cerebri ex accidente & incertò vrina monstat: affe∣ctus hepatis, ve∣narum, renum manifestè & si∣ne dubio de∣monstrat. Ga∣len. in Prorrh. Hipp. coniecture at the diseases of other parts by consequent, by the knowledge of thePlethorae sci∣licet & Caco∣chymiae à qui∣bus omnes morbi primum fiunt, deinde fo∣uentur. common and antecedent causes of all diseases. Erroneously therfore the common sort imagine, that in the vrine is contained the ample vnderstanding of all things necessary to informe a Physition, and from thence common expectation doth generally deceiue it selfe in the proofe of a Physition by his iudgement of the vrine. Vnto the satisfaction of a Phy∣sitions knowledge, are many wayes and helpes besides the vrine, as materiall, and in many cases of more speciall mo∣ment, necessitie and vse. In the pulse are properly and soly apparent manifold medications, which in the vrine Lyn∣ceus himselfe could neuer see. This is the cause that many euen vnto the last moment of a languishing life, continue in their vrine not onely no shadow of danger, but faire and flattering formes of lying safely, the pulsePrognostica quibus praeui∣demus fitne moriturus aeger, aut conualiturus, certa sumuntur à pulsu, qui vitalium & spiri∣tualium partium affectus arteriae pulsatione monstrat euidenter. Galen. lib. de decret. Hipp. & Plat. onely by it selfe-forewarning the mischiefe. The animall facultie, the affections of the third region, and habite of the bodie, and many other particular parts haue their peculiarOmnes quae nutriuntur particulae excrementum aliquod creant, vtique non negamus. Galen lib. 1. de nat. facult. excreti∣ons, which onely keepe the propertie of their indication
vnto themselues, communicating no partSic sudor suc∣corum qui in toto corpore abundant nota est: vrina verò succorum qui in vasis. Gal. de sanit. tuend. lib. 4. vnto the vrine: neither is the iudgement by the vrine euer infallible, or Nos autem ingenu fate∣mur ferè totam partem semei∣oticen in vrinis esse coniectu∣ralem, sed con∣iecturae in mul∣tis sunt artificia∣les, quae proxi∣mè accedunt ad veritatem. Ron∣delet. de vrin. not deceiuable, euen there where it is properly and soly allowed chiefe esteeme, diuers impediments both positiue∣ly and priuatiuely forestalling his right estimate: positiuely either by assumption of diuers meates,Alteratur sae∣pissimè vrina nouissimè sum∣ptis Rhabarba∣ro, Terebinthi∣na, Violis, &c. drinkes orVrina immo∣derato potu fa∣cilè diluitur, & aliena permisti∣one conspergi∣tur. Fernel. de vrin. me∣dicines, or when diuers diseasesIn eodem corpore saepe plutes occur∣runt morbi, compositi, impliciti, connexi, congeneres, degeneres, contrarij, varij. concurring in the bodie, together send downe their seuerall or contrary recrements into the vrine, and thereby confound the true iudgement of any of them therein; or thereby priuatiuely, when ei∣ther by stoppages (which diuersly happen in the tortuous windings and turnings betweene the liuer and the veines, and conduits thence descending vnto the reines and blad∣der) the substance, colour and contents of the vrine are Hoc indicatur in , in valida renum obstructione à grumo, calculo, lenta & viscida pituita, in generali etiam obstructione à crapula, ebrietate, plethora. intercepted, and the thinne aquositie oft onely issueth by so straight a percolation, as can carrie no signe, no sight or shew of the naturall estate of the vrine in it selfe; or else when the naturall heate withdraweth it selfe vnto some interiorHinc in apostematibus internis vrinae apparent saepe tenues & vix coloratae. intention of nature within. When therefore the vrine descendeth in his owne substance, quantitie, qualitie and contents, without impediment or hinderance, it is a certaine, proper and true demonstration of the true affects of the liuer, veines, the second conco∣ction, and of the diseases of those parts which in his descent it washeth, and giueth vnto the wise Physition an vninter∣rupted certaine iudgement of it selfe, as when it descen∣deth in borrowedIn aegris saepe trans∣mittitur aliena materia ad vrinas tum criticè tum symptomaticè, in sanis per proportionem correspondet bibitis & assumptis vrina. Actuar. lib. 1. de iud. vrin. liquor and colours, it reporteth rather his rubs and interception by the way. Hence the learned Physition, either by the first immediatly instructeth him∣selfe to a direct opposition vnto the discouered disease; or by the other, finding the impediment that hindered the
right vnderstanding and discouerie, he thereby informeth himselfe to remoue that impediment, or else finding it thereby vndiscouerable, searcheth it by another disquisi∣tion or inuestigation, by another way or method, vntill he haue attained the right end of a true Physition, which is the prudent rescue of the distressed life and health, and not the false trumpe of his owne vndeserued praise, promo∣ting vnworthinesse to gaine & lucre. Thus he neither de∣ceiueth himselfe with vaine expectation, nor others with lying profession, but diuersly in both maketh a prudent and good vse of both, according to the indication, whe∣ther certaine and vndeceiuing, or doubting & ambiguous. And as the ends are diuers, of those that view the vrine to coniure vp wonders, and those that esteeme the vrine to detect the disease for the good of the diseased: so are their vnderstandings differing, the one trulyArts impro∣bae apparens bonum, verae verum bonum comparant. Galen. directed by reason and iudgement, the other by nimblenesse of couse∣nage and circumuention of simplicity and ignorance; whereof the chiefe vse is not the benefite of the sicke, but the colour of fraud and comodity by deceit. Touching the oracles of Fortune pretended in the vrine, and their floa∣ting fauours in so low an ebbe, those that too commonly in their owne experience find good drinke to steale their wit out of their braine, may haply imagine it thence de∣scended into the vrine. I leaue them there to seeke it, that want it so much, and deserue it so litle. The mention is vn∣worthie mention. Concerning the looking of vnborne babes in an vrinarie glasse, and the making of old fooles in loue with their owne reflexion: to vnmaske the common illusion in this kind, I will briefly point vnto the discoue∣rie of the folly, whereinto entring their serious cogitation & due recognition, they may more amply after exercise & satisfie themselues, whom their owne fatall stupidity doth not detaine, or resolute obstinacie preoccupate. The con∣ceptions of women, together with the accidents accompa∣nying the same, do necessarily bring forth generall altera∣tions vnto the whole body, partly by the consequent stop∣pages
of the body, and partly by distracting the naturall heate and spirits from other parts vnto that new intentiō, whereby is added either quantitie or qualitie, or both vn∣to the bloud and humors, and from thence the vrine re∣ceiuing different tincture & substance doth manifestly re∣port the ods. Yet for that this sodain productiō of change in the body issueth from conceptiō only by accident, ther∣of being truly and immediatly no cause it selfe, but an oc∣casion onely mouing other causes, as commonly or more cōmonly moued, both by diuerse kind of other obstructiōs beside, & also by other distractions of the naturall heate & spirits, by criticall intentions, concoctions, & maturations of diseases; therfore is the confused alteration of the vrine found vpon conceptiō indefinite, & can be no special note of cōception. This is also further manifested by the altera∣tions and effects themselues following conception, which not onely in differing bodies, but in the verie same, are sel∣dome the same, but cōmonly farre vnlike, yea and oft con∣trary at one time from themselues at another. This women themselues in their owne experience must needs witnesse, seldome obseruing the changes of bodies after cōception in all alike, & oft each in themselues finding the particular manners of their owne alteration farre discrepant. This their oft deceit in themselues, mistaking, and vncertaintie in themselues commonly doth testifie, sometimes suspe∣cting thēselues with child when they proue diseased, som∣times doubting diseases being only with child. Since then conception is neither in it selfe a sole, nor a separate cause, nor any true immediate cause of the alterations of the bo∣dy following therupon, but onely the occasion mouing o∣ther causes, and those causes are as indifferently also mo∣ued by many other occasions besides vnto the same ef∣fects, their generalitie doth discharge their proprietie in this particular, and the common indication in the vrine a∣ny speciall signification proper vnto conception alone. This demonstratiuely proueth the vncertainty of the signs of conception that are common with other in the vrine.
Now concerning the small certaintie of the signes that are therto supposed peculiar: the inward dispositions and affe∣ctiōs of inward parts, which by the outward sense cānot be deprehended, are by threePartem inte∣tiorem affctā dicant Actio aea, Dolor vel ametria in ex∣etis aut reten∣ris. waies or meanes soly to be de∣tected. The first is the action or function properEa pars per se aut per consen∣lum laborat cu∣us functio est laesa. and in∣inherent in the partie. The second is the properExceta natu∣ralis oeconomiae fideles nuntij. excre∣tions proceeding fromht he partie. The third is a distinct feeling orVbi dolor ibi morbus. paine in the part. The proper functions of any part can neuer be disioyned from the part, and therefore appeare not in the vrine. Paine or other sense & feeling are euer vnseparable companions with their patient parts, whereof the vrine hauing no sense, can haue no part, and therefore therein also is vnsignificant. It onely then remai∣neth, that the affection and conception of the wombe soly doth discouer it selfe by the determinate excretions ther∣to peculiar. The peculiar excretiōs of any part do bring te∣stimony vnto the truth of their indicatiō, either by theQuicquid è corpore excer∣nitur vel est to∣to genere prae∣ter naturam, vel de substantia partis affectae, vel parti adna∣tum, vel coctio∣nis excremen∣tum. cō∣comitance of part of the substance of the part, or of part of some substance either naturally, orby some il dispositiō ad∣herent to the part, or of the ordinary recrements of conco∣ctions, or other preparatiōs, or operations of nature in the part. Whether excretions in al these kinds proceed frō the womb, & how & with what differences & distinction, it is not here necessary to determine. It is sufficiēt that the pro∣per indicatiō of the dispositiōs of that part must necessarily be deriued from the excretions therto appropriate: which therfore proueth the vrine no right prognosticator of any affectiō therof issuing frō other & different vessels. It may be obiected, that by the contiguity of the wombe & blad∣der, and the neare termination of their extremities, the ex∣pulsiue facultie of the seminarie vessels, mouing sometimes with the vrinarie, may thereby mixing their recrements connexe their indications. This is true, yet not alwaies, but rarely and seldome true, and therfore vncertainly hapning doth doubtfully promise or signifie. The expulsiue motiōs and offices of the seminarie parts are not so ordinarie, so frequent, so common, as the vrinarie, neither doth their
raritie in their motion alwaies then meete or consent with the vrine, and sometimes also meeting therewith, it giueth notwithstanding impertinent indication vnto the inquisi∣tion of conception, other commonIndican mē∣ses albi graui∣darum qui saepe in bonis haben∣tur, rubri etiam qui saepissimè per anastomo∣sin venarum ex∣teriorum cerui∣cis vteri & cru∣rales dicuntur fluidi sunt. recrements after con∣ception, no lesse or rather more descending then those which are onely consequents of conception. And thus is made apparent the falshood and deceit of the ordinarie profession of the prediction of conception by the inspe∣ction of vrine, which also the mostVeteres Graeci omnes omnino praetermiserunt mentionem sig∣norum concep∣tus in vrina. Mongius & Costaeus in an∣not in tract. A∣uicen de vrinis. ingenuous and iudi∣cious writers and authours from their owne long proofe & experiēce haue euer generally exploded as impious im∣posture. The true Artist doth promise nothing beyōd that which reason doth demōstrate, & art habitually performe: the deceiuer by faire pollicitations bewitcheth simple cre∣dulitie, ridiculously to delight in his owne wrong and grosse collusion. It is verie worthy note and memorie, that a great and learned clearke Cornelius Agrippa, retracting his former wont therein, doth ingenuously confesse of his affectation and circumuention of common admiration by his supposed magicke and Astrologicall skill,Vrinarum in∣spectione abuti ad praesentien∣dum an mulier conceperit vel non, impostorū est, non medi∣corum, licet permulti nugas inid genus cog∣nitionis & cau∣tiones scripse∣rint. Ioannes ebon. de the∣rap. puerp. and it doth well fit and settle instruction and satisfaction in this our particular also, though of another kind I haue bene (Ego quoque hanc arem à parentibus puer imbibi, deinde non modicum temporis & laboris in ea amisi, &c. Vide reliqua ex au∣thore tractatu de Astrologia. Vide in marg. c. 3. p. 101. saith he) from my childhood by my parents carefully iustituted in Astrologie, and in riper age and vnderstanding after∣wards spent therein no small time. At length by long and certaine proofe I found it wholly compound and founded of meere fictions, and toyes of vaine imaginations: wea∣ried therefore and grieued with my time and study so long and so idlely spent, I laboured to cast away the irkesome and vnpleasing memorie thereof out of my mind, and ne∣uer in my thoughts to entertaine it.Vrinam de impraegnatione nil certi signifi∣care omnes antiqui crediderunt, ideo de hac re nullas notas reliquerunt. Nam cum foetus sit extra venas & de venoso genere tantùm indicet vrina, non potest aliquid certò indicare, nisi adiunctis alijs. Rondeletius de vrinis. But the violent and forcible importunacie of great and mightie Potentates,
(who vsually preuaile to abuse great and worthie wits vn∣to base arts and offices) againe compelled me vpon the fame rocke, and my owne priuate profite againe inticed me to thinke it dutie and honestie to make profitable vse of wilfull folly, and with toyes to please these that so much desired toyes. The same Apologie for the exercise of vri∣narie Praestigiaturae opinionem me∣ritò referūt, qui non ex specula∣tione medica, sed ex diuinandi quapiam arte in morbis praedi∣cunt. Gal. lib. 10. de simp. Med. facultat. Historia. diuination, their owne consciences vnto them∣selues do make that vse it, but they loath the example, and truth is hatefull because incommodious. It was sometimes my happe to witnesse the free profession of a dying Phy∣sition vnto this point. He inhabited Northampton many yeares, was in nation Irish, in manners homely, in learning of me diocrity, but in the auguration by vrine of conceptiō was generally reputed excelling, and in a fortunatenesse therein oft posing some better learned. Three or foure daies before his death (expected and knowne vnto him∣selfe) while by his owne earnest request then (as oft be∣fore) I was present, motion was made vnto him that he would commend vnto posteritie that skill by which hee liued with many so much esteemed and admired. His answer was free and ingenuous, to this effect: It is vnworthy posteritie, vnworthy the name of Art. I haue long with the felicitie of a good opinion exercised it, and with tried certaintie know it vncertaintie, and certaine de∣ceit. Simplicitie is euer ready vnwittingly to betray it self, and it is easie to him (that is therein much and continually exercised) in common people palpably to see their simple hearts, in their eyes, in their gesture, in their countenances, and other circumstances, of themselues vnobserued and vnconsidered. I haue sometime by good hap bene fortu∣nate in my predictions by vrine, of conceptions, which because when it sometime happened, it seemed a wonder; it therefore was euer largely transported many waies, and much busied and employed common talke. I haue pro∣ued therein an hundreth fold more often and more com∣monly in mine owne knowledgeTemerè, calli∣dè, & astutè di∣cta aliquando incidunt in veri∣tatem. sed quae vera dicunt prae caeteris quae mē∣tiuntur non est pas millesima. Gellij dictum de Astrologis. false, yet because to erre was no wonder, (and therefore not so much worth
either relating or obseruing) as also for that it was for the most part but priuatly to some sew knowne, and oft times also the shame of illusion in the most put the report there∣of vnto silence, the contradictorie instances still died vn∣remembred, but fame and opinion suruiued and prospe∣red. It euer excused my deceitfull custome vnto my selfe, that I deceiued none but such as either desired or deserued it, who by their insidiation of the proofe of my skill either prouoked it, or by their vnreasonable earnestnesse extor∣ted it. In this and other the like, some few dayes before his death, he thusVixit qua vo∣luit viuere parte magis. died vnto his former life, and liued vnto his soule and sauing health. And thus it is manifested, both by reason and also by the last testimonie of dying experi∣ence, how the vrinary diuining for prediction of concepti∣on, forsaking the brighter streames and clearer fountaines of detecting truth, doth hide it selfe in the puddle water, there laying shining baites for dazeled fish. The more si∣lence, the better fishing; lest therefore I may haply too much preiudice the pleasing spoile of willing fooles, I will thinke that which hath bene alreadie said vnto any other, sufficient intimation, aduising honest minds from the iudi∣cious Physition, by the plainest information to draw the Incertam & plerunque du∣biam mercedē referet qui peri∣clitatione Me∣dicos tanquam vates augurari coget. Consul∣tor verò prudēs & fidelis sani consilij fructū percipiet. Fern. de vrin. directest counsell, lest by the vaine proofe of a deceiuing worth, seeking that is not, they lose that might be more proper and pertinent vnto their health. CHAP. V. Of Trauellers. AS from all parts of the world true know∣ledge doth fetch home his substantiall grounds to enrich it selfe; so falshood and lying imitation doth likewise deriue de∣ceiuable colours to beguile the impru∣dent. Hence vnder the name of Trauellers supposed much knowing, by much seeing of things wor∣thy to be knowne (the common expectation of wonder
giuing glad entertainment, and desire of noueltie ioyous welcome) insufficiencie clothed with this outward figure of sufficiencie, doth oft enter into the rights of better de∣sert, and by casuall pofiting some few, deceiueth most, and ruineth many. Trauell is required in a Physition, not as any part of his essence, but as an ornament, receiuing the es∣sence and perfecting of it selfe from the essence and per∣fection of a foresetled and continuing vnderstanding. The generall theory and speculation of any knowledge or sci∣ence whatsoeuer, is in no soile or countrie a stranger to them that duly and truly seeke it, nor doth vnderstanding meete, or is taken vp in high waies; but to the most secret retired thoughts reflecteth the brightnesse of his true worth, and from the perfect fulnesse of time, and thence accomplished brightnesse of his beames doth seasonably breake forth, and soly giue the rectified perspectiue of particular obiects. In the occurrents of trauell, it is in∣deed the sense that conducteth the obiect to the vnder∣standing, but it is a pre-existing power and abilitie in the . Scientia est, in∣tellectus instru∣mentum. Aristot. vnderstanding it selfe that rightly iudgeth and disposeth theRes ipsae saepe aut praeposterae, aut confusae, aut falsa specie solēt sese offerre. obiect. If therefore the vnderstanding be either in it selfe originally defectiue, or by want of time vnsetled, or by precept and doctrine not habitually formed; the sense may truly, rightly and continually present, but the vnder∣standing shall either falsly or not fully apprehend, distin∣guish, digest or dispose, whereby disorder in want of right method, doth rather multiply confusion then increase right vse. Hence many things worthy notice escape igno∣rance, vniust reductions are commonly miscarried to im∣proper subiects, good vses are vnseasonably or vnreasona∣bly wrested, mistaking obuious, right estimates either for the most part vnobseruedly ouerpassed, or casually well hapning. For where wisedome doth not leade trauel forth, knowledge guide it on, prudence accompanie it, good de∣sire vphold it, the true end perswade and call it forth; folly easily seduceth, and depraued ends peruert the right fruiti∣on. Hence we see commonly many trauell farre, and bring
home litle. Some make swift aduenture, and slow returne, with late repentance. Some bring home more then they would, some more then they should; and all that begin trauell with raw iudgement, for the most part come home perpetually after drunken with opinion. Different coun∣tries, aires, people, customes, manners, zones and climates, do fruitfully expose commodious consideration vnto those whose iudicious view and exchange doth know rightly to entertaine them in the way, and in many examples of ma∣ny worthy Physitions, the benefits thereby haue euer bene conspicuous. Amongst the rest, Galens industrious com∣mutation of distant regions, by his owne writings are not obscure. But he that entreth into Galens trauels without GalensCoelum non animū mutant qui trans mare currunt. Horat. mind, may exceed him in the paines, but shall ne∣uer come neare vnto him in the fruite and worth. This is the reason that our common trauelling Physitions for the most part (the learned onely in all places and countries worthily purchasing vnto themselues due reuerence) do oft from beyond the sea bring home strange preparations and medicines, but litle wit and discretion safely to vse them; by the great opinion of farre fetched wondes distra∣cting and cousening the needfull inquisition of a more in∣ward worth in themselues to warrant their accommoda∣tion, without which, both heedlesse proofe and needlesse vse, do oft find in the best excellence a harmfull goodnes: and howsoeuer haply commending it selfe in his owne propertie and vertue, yet oft stinging vnto the heart busie, vnnecessarie and vnaduised medling. It is growne so com∣mon in these daies to entertaineQuia inopes sunt & indocti in patrijs suis viuere non pos∣sunt bene noti. Galen. de sui temporis pseu∣domedicis, lib. praedict. fugitiues vnder the for∣mer pretexts, that it shall ease my paines to report the mis∣chiefes, being growne too common to need any other no∣tice then their owne vglinesse, each post proclaiming their woodden worth, and their painted clouts euery where hanging vp their raggedCyclopum crudele genus, Visceribus mi∣scrorum & san∣guine vescitur atro. executions. It is vsual with these men, mouing their wandring and vncertaine steps from place to place and from towne to towne, by faire deluding promises and pollicitations to draw theHoc solo à la∣tronibus diffe∣rentes quod in vrbe non mon∣tibus scelera perpetrant. Gal. lib. praedict. liues of simple
credulous men, for their owne gaine, into their owne hands; and after they haue by their common desperate courses prouoked and drawne foorth vnwilling death (when they see him coming) to runne away, and to leaue the miserable beguiled innocent in his angrie iawes, to an∣swer their rash and needlesse chalenge. The wiser sort haue better learned to know them, but the simple are stillQuod non cognoscantur ab omnibus, hoc ipsum ma∣litiam naturae ipsorum auget, & vsque ijs in∣sidiantur qui ea quae versutè semper perpe∣trant non no∣runt. Galen. lib. praedict. their prey. It necessarily now followeth vnto the generall con∣clusion of all that hath bene before said, that both the tra∣uels of the mind, and contemplation in the former tractates mentioned, and also the change of places and countries here specified, with all other sense-informing meanes and inquisitions of knowledge and science, without precedent right institution, and setled incorrupt seeds of select vn∣derstanding, shall all euer doubtfully, and for the most part lamely succeed vnto timely growth or ripe perfection. For knowledge must euer go before industrie as a guide, and particular practise follow generall rule, which he that hath not first in mind fully and truly conceiued, must needs want the idea that formeth an vnderstanding action. And thus hath it hitherto appeared negatiuely, now it follow∣eth affirmatiuely, where true election may make right choice of a good Physition. The end of the second Booke.
THE THIRD BOOKE. CHAP. I. The true Artist his right description and election. THe corruptible condition of all things inHaec  illa . substance, & perpetuall mutabilitie and alteration in a ac∣cidents, doth euery moment beget such diuers oddes and differences in the same things, that their for∣mer considerations and respects, can neuer constantly, truly, and in∣deed long continue them to be the same. Hence by vicissi∣tude it ordinarily cometh to passe, that of those things whereof lately seeemed certaintie, thereof by continuall accesse of different accidents and circumstances, is againe begottenQuin res, aetas vsus, semper ali∣quid apporret noui, vt quae te scire credas ne∣scias, & quae pu∣taris prima in experiundo re∣pudies. Terent. vncertainties. That which late seemed necessa∣rie, in an instant becometh casuall; that which was true, now false; that which was good, now euill, and that which was possible, oft impossible. Necessity & this vncertainty of all things, doth driue men that desire with more likely certaintie, through prudence to guide their actions vnto the schoole of contemplation of the world, and of the ge∣nerall reuolution of all things therein, (which is true Phi∣losophy) that thence by long study and diligence obser∣uing to know and distinguish what is in nature, and the ordinarie vicissitude of all things, according to seuerall seasons, circumstances and subiects, meanes, measures, and manners variously, now true, then false; now necessarie,
then casuall, now absolute in it selfe, now conditionall, with supposition, and by accident, now possible, now im∣possible; they may informe themselues from tried and ap∣proued knowledge, where with certaintie is safe toBona consul∣tatio è summa atione eruit consilia, & haec est rectitudo consilij. Aristot. Eth. 6. re∣solue, how in vncertaintie neither to. Qui consultat quaerit & ratio∣nem subducit. Aristot, eth. 6. neglect the least hope, nor to ouer-weene the best good happe: how to endeauour in that is possible, how to obserue necessitie in that is impossible, prouidently how in cases of vrgence and serious counsell, to forecast and husband occasion and opportunitie, that ill hapsharme not, vaine hope de∣ceiue not, time beguile not, aduantage escape not, vn∣certaintie preiudice not, occurrents preuent not that good which according to reason and the destined issue in nature, diligent endeauout may otherwise effect. This is the summe of art and prudence. This is the vse and per∣fection of reason in man, without which man must needs be as the brute beast, voide of vnderstanding, dwelling in perpetuall blindnesse, darknesse and confusion, with∣out distinction of good and euill, true and false, without consultation or election of the one or other. Without the knowledge of nature our life is death, our sight blind, our light darkenesse, and all our waies vncertaine. He that knoweth not the qualitie of the fire, can neither seeke comfort by the warmth, nor feare the scorching. He that hath not obserued nature in the water cold and moist, shall neither needing their contemper thinke of their vse, nor subiect to their danger decline their hurt. Who hath euer bene so blind, that hath not claymed reasonIdeo Plutarch.  consundit , Ra∣tionem & Disci∣plinam. , &c. for euerie action, both as natures common light and rule in all things, as also his owne eye andRatio manus intellectus. Scal. hand to guide him vnto the vnderstanding thereof? For there isQuae vitus mouet or, quae mutat succum in cibos, quae distribuit, quis dicat id sine ratione age∣re? Sine ratiocinatione quidem non sine ratione. Scalig. de Subtil. reason in na∣ture, and reason of vnderstanding. Reason in nature is the constant course andNatura est ratio Vniuersi. Scalig. order of nature according to which she gouerneth and ordereth all things. Reason of vnder∣standing
is thatRatio est vis animae quae mouet se ab ef∣fectibus ad cau∣sas inuestigan∣das & vicissim à causis ad ea quorum illae causae sunt. Scal. de Subtil. light and eye of the mind, whereby is discouered what is according to reason in nature, good & euill, true and false. Thus the reason of man hath his ex∣cellence and perfection, consisting in finding out and vn∣derstanding the excellence and perfection ofQuid est Ra∣tio nisi Naturae imitatio? Senec. reason in nature. This is the top and heigth of all humane wise∣dome, knowledge and learning. Hereby is distinguished the subtileSolertia est acerrima conie∣ctatio ex iudicij summi adytis penitius eruta. Aristot. eth. 6. and wise from the meane vnderstanding, from the foole and idiote; the counsell of the prudent, from the rash and vnaduised; the sharpnesse of wit and discerning vnderstanding, frō sottish amazement & stupiditie. Hence are onely setled and cleared all doubts, difficulties, and ambiguities, by which otherwise for euer men remaine voide of counsell and of truth. Hence it cometh to passe, that as men more or lesse earnestly seeke the wisedome, or∣der, and reason of nature in her dispensation of the whole world, and therein more or lesse dispend their studious paines, so they diuersly obtaine answerable measures and proportions therein, growing in wisedome more or lesse according as they are more or lesse of generose de∣sire and ingenuous, &c. Qui rerum causas & Naturas maxi∣mè dijudicat & docet maximè sapientem iudi∣camus Aristot. metaph. 1. exercise therein. The order of na∣ture in all her works is. Nihil eo∣rum quae Natu∣ra fiunt aliter assuescit. Ari∣stot. eth. 2. constant, full of wonder, and vn∣changed truth in the continuallEst enim na∣turalis ordo  omnium rerum, ex aeterno alijs ad alia consequentibus incommutabili ma∣nente eiusmodi complicatione. Gellius. Noct. Attic. cohesion, sequence and fatall necessitie of all things, their causes and effects: where∣in therefore how the Almightie Deitie hath commanded all things by an vnchangeable law to be ordered, is both true and necessarie wisedome to vnderstand, and the true Natura dux optima. Naturam ducem si sequamur, nunquam aberrabimus. Cicero. patterne, rule, and square of euerie discreete, sober, and wise designe and consultation. Hence vpon the principles of nature stand euerlastingly founded all arts & sciences. For science is the faithfull and truly studied apprehension of the mind, of the neuerScientia est conueniens, firma, & nunquam à ratione declinans cognitio. Galen. in Medico. opt. deceiuing generall grounds in the generall dispensation in the nature of all things: and
art is the learned and skilfull habiteArs est habitus cum ratione fa∣ctiuus. Eth. 4. of imitation there∣of in humane action. And all true arts thus founded vpon the vndeceiuing grounds of nature, in themselues are euer∣certaine Ars medica quoad naturam propriam theo∣remata & prae∣cepta Artis in∣dubitatae est fi dei vera, firma, stabilis, Naturae principijs sem∣per cōsentanea, solùm quoad subiecta varia, medentium o∣peras, & inde e∣uentus instabi∣les coniectura∣lis. Galen de Sect. opt. and infallible, whose rules although discretion according to circumstance may continually diuersly vary, yet can noIn medicina perpetuum est quod sequi de∣beat, non sem∣per perpetuum quod sequi con¦uenit. Celsus. time nor circūstance euer or at any time abro∣gate. Hence aboue all other arts & sciences the art of Phy∣sick must needs be most excellent and true, because it most continually conuerseth with nature, as her prime & proper subiect, and beyond all other most immediatly dependeth vpon the perpetuall study, view, & obseruatiō of nature, & the continual consultatiō with nature in euery actiō. For it is requisite in a cōpetent Physition, that he be truly able & fully furnished to be vnto nature a gouernor & moderator to preserue her, to conserue her, behoofefully to dispose & Haec est  sanitatis tu∣endae consilum, &  guide her in her best and rightest way, not only of being, but of being well, & well continuing. It is also requisite he be able as a prudent minister with knowledge to prouide & reach vnto herMedicina est adiectio neces∣sariorum, detra∣ctio inutilium. Hippocrat. all needfull helps, and to remoue from her all harmefull impediments. Lastly, he must be a faith∣full friend in her necessitie, needfully assisting, helping, and comforting her. And how can he duly performe these things vnto nature, that truly and perfectly knowethPhysiologiae necessitas per∣petua medico non ad discen∣dam modò sed ad exercendam quoque artem. Galen. de Med. opt. not nature? Aboue therefore and beyond all other Artists the Physition immediatly hath need & vse of exquisite know∣ledge of nature. For since he is deputed to be helper and restorer of particular nature, how can he for that end but become scholler and imitator of the generall? For as all particulars do euer participate the nature and kind of the generall, and are therein comprehended, so besides that which vnto euerie indiuiduall nature is specially proper, there is an essentiallSpecies generis, indiuiduum vtriusque naturam par∣ticipat, vtrunque & indiuiduum & speciem genus & facit & comprehendit. propertie in it belonging vnto the ge∣nerall: without which as the particular cannot be at all, so therefore is euer an eye, a respect and reference to be had, that those things which for the good of the particular are
considered or consulted, may neuer be disproportioned frō the generall: which he that knoweth not, cannot consi∣der. He therefore that shall rightly and prudently dispose for the good of any man, ought as well to know and ad∣uise what and how he participateth with the generall con∣dition, as not to be ignorant what is peculiarHuc spectat  specificae diffe∣rentiae, & pro∣prietates rerum occultae. vnto him∣selfe. For if he know not theSed & Medi∣cus & exercen∣dorum corpo∣rum magister optimè singu∣lorum curam rationemq́ue habuerit, si ge∣nus vniuersum cognouerit. Nā qui bonus arti∣fex & ad res per∣cipiendas & cō∣templandas i∣doneus effici velit, ad genus vniuersum illi progrediendū est, atque in illo cognoscendo elaborandum. In hoc enim sci∣entias positas esse scimus. A∣ristot. Eth. 10. generall kinds and natures of things, what powers, faculties, priuiledges, preroga∣tiues, properties, indowments, belong indifferently to all, as well as differently to the speciall, he shall oft omit and ouerslip a larger portion offered in the common good, then any specialtie shall after recompence or counteruaile in it selfe. Contrariwise also, if he onely know the general, and vnderstand not to compare, consider, apt and fitly sute it vnto theVniuersè e∣nim ei qui fe∣bre afflictatur inedia & quies vtilis est, alicui autem fortassis inutilis. Ari∣stot. Eth 10. , &c. particular, he shall neuer from the common deriue thereto ought pertinent or truly accommodate. It is necessarie therefore a Physition vnderstand both what nature hath allowed man in vniuersall, with all other things, and also no lesse what proper to himselfe, and in∣closed in his owne. For if he know not nature in her spe∣cial kind,Qui ignorat corporis affectum secundùm naturam à quo actio producitur, prorsus cog∣noscere non potest affectum praeter naturam à quo actio laeditur. Galen. de meth. med. when her self is separate and free from other im∣plications, how shall he iudge or know her iust reduction thereto, when he findeth her oppression requiring his as∣sistance to bring her home vnto her selfe? Neither must he here onely consist, but must farther view and consider, what God either in heauen or in earth, in the whole world, or the wide occan, from all the elements or ele∣mentary things hath ordained for any good or vse of man. For as God hath created all things for the good of man, so hath he appointed the Physition to fit and accommodate all things vnto the necessitie and need of man, and hath farther also deputed him to supply vnto man euen those things whichNatura non potest aratro boues iungere, nec illorum opera terram scindere, arte vtrun∣que fit. Scalig. nature her selfe oft times cannot. Nature
cannot either open the necessarie veine, or ventilate or e∣uacuate the corrupt bloud from the bruised part, or in the right and behouefull quantitie. Nature cannot with ele∣ction or regularly purge the right and proper humor, fit∣ting the cause and necessitie. Nature cannot fetch home from the fields and mountaines her medicinall herbes, fruit, wood and plants vnto her owne necessitie; but Art transporteth them vnto her at seuerall seasons, and for se∣uerall needs. Nature cannot decoct, infuse, compound, mixe or prepare her rootes, mettals, or other drugs and simples, in number and nature infinite; but Art is vnto her benefite and seruice therein accurate. As therefore the Physition must euer haue Nature for his chiefeQuo natura vergit tendendū medico natu∣rae ministro. , &c. Hippocrat. counsel∣lor, so must he euer againe be sufficient and able substitute andVt natura re∣ctè operans imi tanda, ita aber∣rans reducenda & adiuuanda. Natura enim aliàs agit satis, aliàs parum, aliàs nihil. Galen. de venae sect. contra Era∣sistrat. helper vnto her. Not to speake of his excellent sub∣iect (which is the life and health of mankind) his diuine direction in his calling (led by the vnchanged order and wisedome of God himselfe, manifested and set forth vnto him in the structure and great frame of heauen and earth) doth exact and require in him all possible perfection to sound and fadome the depth and height thereof. For as it is manifoldly and vnmeasurably infolded and wrapped vp in the intricate wisedome of his vniuersall workmanship, so must long dayes and time carefully spent, indefatigable studie, paines and meditation, restlesse vigilance, a cleare eye of vnderstanding, and sincere affection worke and la∣bour it out, and thence must his prudent and wise action deriue the ground of all his counsels and consultations. And thus must the true Physition euer behold God as his guide, and be gouerned and directed by his hand. For God is nature. Est enim Deus omnium causa∣rum causa & principium. Arist. metaph. 1. aboue nature, and nature is his handNatura est or∣dinaria Dei po∣testas. Scalig de subtil. and sub∣ordinate power:Natura quid a∣liud quàm Deus & diuina ratio toti mundo & partibus eius inserta? Senec. lib. de benef. God being therefore the cause of causes in nature, he is the giuer of health and life in nature, and the Physition is hisSanitas opus Dei, opera verò nostra. Scalig. seruant & minister therein. To learne of such a teacher, to imitate so absolute a patterne, what wisedome is sufficient, what sufficiency worthy? If any man thinke it a light labour to finde out the order and reason
of so infinite a workman in the immense worke of all things, or but an easie difficultie to imitate his example in infinite actions, he knoweth not what is the height of hu∣mane wisedome, which being to know most. Qui maximè homini dissici∣lia cognitu po∣tis est cognos∣cendo assequi, ille sapiens. A∣ristot. metaph. 1. among men, (although what in that knowledge is nearest vnto God, is the least shadow of himselfe) yet is it so much as is able to make men iustly admired, and happie that obtaine it; as all other that want it, worthily as vnhappie and infortunate as ignorance can make man. Ignorance is euer blind, blind∣nesse continually stumbleth and oftAnimus lu∣mine mentis & intelligentiae orbatus, igno∣rantiaeq́ue tene∣bris & caligine demersus, sibi ipsi mentitur, se ipsum perpe∣tuo fallit, & in capitales frau∣des facilè im∣pellit vndique. Osor. de reg. instit. infortunately falleth; but knowledge giueth eyes, and the happinesse of sight declineth the vnhappinesse of our liues perpetuall groping error, and the miserable confusion of the darknes of mind. Since then knowledge is the eye and sight of the mind, and all knowledge cometh either by the ordinarie light of nature, or the extraordinarie illumination of the Creator of nature, whence shall the ordinary dispensation of mens wayes and actions borrow counsell and light, but from na∣ture? And then how necessarie is the knowledge, learning and studie of nature, not onely vnto the accomplishment and ornament of our better being, but vnto the establish∣ment of prudence and discretion, and the happie conse∣quences thereof in all our liues and actions? If prudence and wisedome flow from hence, and the miserable condi∣tion of man perpetually craue their supply, and the neuer∣ceasing mutable vncertaintie of circumstances continu∣ally multiply occasion of consultation from thence, how can any action or purpose of man be rightly tried, appro∣ued and assured vnto him, but by the complement and per∣fection of this knowledge? And if knowledge onely re∣ctifie and make happie mens workes, endeuours and acti∣ons in all things, how is it much more chiefly and abso∣lutely requisite and necessarie in a Physition? His subiect, which is the safeguard of lifeMorbus cum sit vitae humanae capitalis hostis, Medicus vnicè natura duce est morbicida. Pul∣chrè Riolanus. and succour of nature, ex∣acteth the most exquisite wise and warie working. His rule in working (which is the prudent obseruation and imita∣tion of his Creator in the created order and reason of all
things) challengeth the helpe and assistance of all possi∣ble worthinesse and excellence, the highest perfection of counsell, and most incomparable sagacitie of vnderstan∣ding. For what wisedome, learning and knowledge, can be more then needfull vnto his vse and helpe, whose con∣tinuall emploiment and exercise consisteth in executing the perpetuall decrees and counsels of. Morborum medici naturae unt, naturae ve∣rò minister medicus. Hippocrat. creation, in resto∣ring the ruines and decayes of generation, in rectifying, reforming and moderating the errors of continuall muta∣tion and alteration, in opposing death, and enlarging life; lastly, in arming the seuerall true trials and iust estimates of the natiue vses and properties of all things, substances, quantities, qualities, formes, seasons, and circumstances, according to the command of the generall commander of heauen and earth, and the edicts of nature, for the good of man? What humane science can affoord more ample mat∣ter and occasion of diuine cogitation? what emploiments are more continuall workes of charitie? what vertue com∣meth nearer vnto God in goodnesse and mercie? God createth man, the healthfull and helpfull hand of the Phy∣sition restoreth and repaireth his daily lapses. What wise∣dome more inwardly conuerseth with the hidden and se∣cret workes of God and nature? And though his better and more erected thoughts oft humble themselues vnto the necessities of miserable men, (which proud and foo∣lish minds contemne) yet hath the example of the sauing Deitie herein most exalted him whom vertue instructeth, wisedome formeth, prudence counselleth, and Art firmly guideth; without the competent concurrence of all which, the necessitie of their hourely vse doth altogether denie sufficience in a Physition. How worthy reuerence in them∣selues, and how happie for others were it, if more wonted∣ly and vsually our Physitions would first labour for this set∣led perfection andOperatio est finis syllogismi practici. Arist. Eth. 6. generall idea of prudent deliberation, before they so readily rush vnto particular practise and a∣ction? For although it be experience that indeed giueth vnto reason the true reflexion of it selfe, yet is it the rule
of reason that firstPrudentia rei futurae consul∣tum curat ex disciplina non ex antegressis actionibus. Quare hic habi∣tus omnibus ar∣tibus commu∣nis sit necesse est. Scalig. Po∣et. 3. guideth experience forth vnto likely proofe. But now in these dayes this excellent knowledge, so worthy in it selfe, how vnworthily is it esteemed by o∣thers, because so slightly sought and found in Physitions themselues, euery man hastening to run before his know∣ledge either ofHuiusmodi turbam vulgò videmus à pri∣mis literarum rudimentis con¦tinuo se ipsam Medici nomine iactitantem, & venditantem, inuidam, male∣dicam, obtre∣ctatricem, no∣uam speciem Cynicorum, a∣uaram, supinam ignauam, simul atque ignaram. Scal. Poet. 3. himselfe or his action, vnto particular tri∣als of confused conceit and confidence in opinionate grounds? Hence as mechanicall offices and administrati∣ons are rather more commonly conspicuous in our ordina∣rie practitioners, then any weight of prudent perpension or liuely stampe of iudicious disposition or ordering; so doth the generall slightnesse and lightnesse herein of most, sprinkle a common disgrace and ignomie vpon all, casting the excellent facultie it selfe inestimate almost behind the most inferiour science. To leaue therefore the proud and disdainfull contemners herein vnto the iust contempt of God and nature in his greatest need, that others deserue not so ill, and all may learne rather to chuse the good from the ill, then to despise the better for the worse, I will here point the inquisition of the best, who though haply rarely found, yet may the patterne commend the nearest thereto, and draw the well deseruing vnto his safest choise. In all cases and subiects of election, it is wisedome chiefly first to seeke that is most excellent; next, where excellence is not, prudently to accept mediocritie, but euer knowingly to auoide euill. The patterne of perfection doth shew the more and lesse perfect, and manifesteth the more or lesse imperfect, frō which the farthest distance is the greatest de∣fect, and the nearest affinitie the best excellence. Of medi∣ocritie are many degrees. There is mediocritie ascending b from it selfe toward perfection or excellence, and medi∣ocritie descendingMediocritas in confinio bo∣ni maliq́ue po∣sita est. Col. lib. 4. from it selfe vnto the lowest step of meanes. All that are contained within the latitude of me∣diocritie, participate the same true rules and grounds with those that consist in the highest top of excellence, onely herein differing, that the latter with a more piercing eye searcheth the marrow of the same truth, the other more
shallowly soundeth the same prosunditie. This difference of mediocrities distinguisheth onely the seuerall measures of the same perfection, whereby they differ, not in kind but in degrees of comparison. Thus are men termed Alius alio sapientior, alius alio ; good, better, and best of all; all considered in the same qualitie, euery one an Artist, euery one rightly vnder∣standing, but some more clearly, readily and fully, o∣ther lesse, and all truly. Vnto whom therefore either ex∣cellence doth giue true splendor and eminence, or me∣diocritie maintaineth within different bounds of true Art and science, he is either in the one worthy, or in the o∣ther intollerable. He whom farther vnworthinesse hath exempted out of both these, is in himselfe vnprofitable, and in others vse. Eurip. Malus nihil ali∣ud praeterquam malus. harmfull. The first and second, and the second by the first thou mayst here view in the following description of this latter booke, and the third and last in the first and second going before. CHAP. II. AS all ages haue deriued and acknowledg∣ed the foundation of Arts from the prin∣ciples of nature,Artes omnes ratione & me∣thodo acqui∣tuntur. Aristot. metaph. 7. reason, prudence, and knowledge or science; and experience hath euer confirmed their profite and ne∣cessarie vse vnto constitutionSine generali methodo nulla ars discitur, ne∣que disci potest. Galen. de meth. Med. of Arts by daily proofe: so vnto the complement and atchieuing first of knowledge, and after of the right composing of Art, fromArtes institu∣untur & accipi∣unt principia ex scientijs. Scalig. de Subt. thence all times and men haue with one generall decree and consent determined a necessitie of seuen euer presupposed conductiue helpes thereto, without which neither knowledge nor science can preexist, nor art from thenceIntellectus speculatiuus, actiuus, factiuus, habent principia vniuersalia commun. Scalig. de Subt. exist or haue firme being. These seuen Hippocra∣tes with consent of his owne time, and assent of since suc∣ceeding
times, hath in this order numbred.Naturam. Nature,Praeceptionē. pre∣cept, fitLocum stu∣dijs aptum. place for studie,Studium. studie,Institutionem à puero. institution,Industriam. industry, Tempus. time. Aristotle with some others haue named only three, nature, precept, industrie; but in these three by conse∣quent hath included all the rest. For studie and contem∣plation must necessarily attend precept and industry both. Studie without fit place and some certaine seate, can neuer deepely settle, vncertaine motion distracting and inter∣rupting serious cogitation and assiduitie; and time is ne∣cessarie to be supposed in all. By nature we must not ge∣nerally vnderstand the first mouing and being power which is in allOmnis sub∣stantia Natura dicitur. . Aristot. in Metaph. things in vniuersall, but more specially for this subiect, procliuity, naturall aptnes or fitnesse, peculiar Natura etiam pro peculiari in∣dole, ingenio, more accipitur. Sic apud Virgi∣lium. Nunc age, natu∣ras apibus quas Iuppiter ipse Addidit, expe∣diam. disposition in the helpes and gifts of nature, ripenesse of wit, capacitie, reason and docilitie. By precept are vn∣derstood the maximes, axiomes, andAxiō. proposi∣tiones sunt per se fidem facien∣tes, omnibus do∣ctis in confesso & perpetuae. Gal de Meth. Med. ancient golden rules of truth, which many ages and aged obseruation from time to time for common good and case haue commended, compiled and summed methodically into generall orders heads and numbers. By place fit for studie, are not onely vnderstood the narrow inclosures of retired silence, and abdication vnto priuate contemplation, but also the pla∣ces of the societies and common assemblies of the learned, where both by priuateGrata collo∣quia & iucundi dialogi opulen∣tiora quàm per∣petui libri. Scal. conference, and also by publike . Conuersatio artes peperit. Eurip hearing the daily readings, teachings, and exercises of logicallEtenim ficuti lapidum collisi∣one ignis: ita ex disceptationibus elicitur veritas. Scalig. de Subt. disceptations of schooles allotted euerie facultie by it selfe,Optima illa est do∣cendi ratio quae viua voce traditur. Neque enim quenquam ex libro nauclerum vel alterius artis artificem euadere licet. Libri enim sunt ijs qui antea eruditi fuerunt monimenta, non rudium & indoctorum doctrina perfecta. Galen. de Alim. fac▪ lib. 1. the mind may vsually receiue redoubled me∣morie of the maximes, axiomes and rules of euery art and science, whereby continuallQui sapiens & doctus euadere cupit,  oportet, Plato. de Rep. inculcation may both more firmely settle them, and occasion their more frequent and better laboured examination and rumination. That in
whose admission two senses beare testimonie, and by two waies doth enter, hath firmer possession. The weaknesse or wearinesse of the sight or eye in priuate reading some∣times mistaketh, oft omitteth, and not seldome ouer∣slippeth; but the vnderstanding standeth readie at the Animus habi∣tat in auribus. Herod. gates of the eares, euer giuing easie entrance, and with readie attention more dueVox scripturâ ad audiendum longe praestan∣tior & disertior, aurium{que} sensus potior magi∣ster. Plato. perpension, the most faithfull remembrance by the eare conducted vnto the inward seats and selles of the soule and contemplation. By studie is ge∣nerally conceiued the continuall occupation and imploy∣ment of allStudium est vehemens ani∣mi applicatio ad aliquid. Pe∣rot. in Epigr. Martial. the faculties of the mind in serious disquisi∣tion, prompt apprehension and reception of generall rules and precept, and frequent oft after reuiew of their former seuerall notions, reflecting the vnderstanding vpon it selfe in the recognition of his passed intellection, and in due ru∣mination vnto right digestion; from whence by long exer∣cise and vse therein gaining an habite and true methode thereof, the firme knowledge and science of assured infal∣lible rule and principle, doth beget art, and art bring forth the end and perfection of art, which is the honour of the Artificer, the euer-reasonable satisfaction of need∣full vse and necessitie, and for the. Infirmos om∣nes sanos facere est impossibile. Hippocrat. most part desired issue. By institution is conceiued education, early beginning, & inchoation fromEducatio est nutritio & pro∣uectio à tene∣rioribus annis. Sic Terent. Eduxi è paruu∣lo, &c. Et Virgil. Nascentes edu∣cat vuas. Nonius Mar∣cellus de pro∣prietat. Serm. sic habet: Alere est vitam victu temporali su∣stentare, educa∣re autem ad sa∣tietatem perpe∣tuam educere. young and tender yeares, whereby the grounds and rules of knowledg growing vp with age, become in shorter time more naturall, permanent, fami∣liar, easie, more cleare and free of difficulties, which vnto sodaine apprehension bring confusion and impediment. By industrie is vnderstoodIndustrij homines ijdem qui laboriosi, amantes laboris, agendi pulchra studiosi. Cicer. Tusc. Quaest. 2. continuall care, exercise, and paines to make euerie benefite and vtmost vse of natures bountie, of precepts worthie of place and euerie other be∣hoofefull circumstance, to perfect institution, to saue, pre∣uent, and redeeme time and opportunitie, with serious af∣fection and desire to whet, vphold, and maintaine alacri∣tie, constancie, and perseuerance through labour and di∣ligence vnto perfection. By time is vnderstood the seue∣rall
competence of yeares to euerie single vse, and due in all. The necessitie of the helpefull concurrence of all these vnto any one perfection is easily manifest. The want of na∣turall helps of wit and other reasonable parts of man, must needs beQuod natu∣ra negat redde∣re nemo potest. vncapable of precept. Without precept (being the rich compiled treasure of the excellent knowledges of many ages and generations) how shall any single liues sufficiencie otherwise truly attaine the precious worth and benefite of due perfection in any art? Without studie also precept is neuer daigned, because not deserued, God and nature perpetually blessing and proportioning seuerall measures of knowledge and vnderstanding, to some equa∣litie of thoughtfull. Dij labore ven∣dunt bona mor∣talibus. search and assiduitie. Where is not place fitting studie, and allowing the prompt concourse Scholae . Basil of learned conference, studie must needs want those rea∣die helpes which mutuall speech,Tantam enim vim habet pue∣rilis institutio, vt sine ill nemo ad vllum decus eniti possit. O∣sorius. speciall example, and many common reciprocall auxiliarie assistances in learned societie, do manifestly, profitably, and continually supply. Where wanteth. Non parum igitur sed plurimum quin potius to∣tum refert, sic vel non sic ho∣mines ab ado∣lescentia assue∣factos esse. A∣ristot. Eth. 2. timely institution, either later springs bring slower growth, or too sodaine sproutes soone wa∣sted springs. Where industrious affection and exercise ei∣ther fainting waneth, or is not euer in the full, eclipsed care must needs proue dull, and paines slow, and without pains shall euer succeed but meane profite. Lastly, where full time is scant,Veritas filia temporis: . defect is large, and where seasonEmuntur artes tempore & dili∣gentia. Lact. short, no goodNon potest in eo succus esse diuturnus, quod nimis celeriter est maturitatem assequutum Cicer. proofe long. And thus it is apparent, that none, and no one of these may be wanting, where is desired a¦ny reasonable perfection; and this is the same infallible truth in all faculties and professions. For many instances, behold but one, and see by common consent of all lear∣ned, by testimonie of reason and experience, how pro∣gresse of knowledge doth in euery part answer the nature and custome of husbanding seed. Compare. Analogiam habet na∣tura cum tellure, agricola cum eo qui praeceptis instituit & instruit, semen cum salubribus praeceptis▪ Plutarchus. . the fecilitie
of soyle with capacitie in nature, the seed with wholesome precept, the countrey neighbourhood of readinesse and plentie (whereby need with common benefite may mutually both lend and borrow) vnto the like helpes of learning in learned societie. Compare carefull gathering together and storing of good seed, vnto daily study; indu∣strie and paines to toyle and labour; vsuall early bringing vp, and prudent timely countrie education, to necessitie of institution, and the yearely seasons to studious times. Are not all in both, and both in all alike? The seeds of vertue and knowledge are euer fitly sowed in childhoodPueritia ad 14 annum nume∣ratur. the age of institutionVenaticus ex quo Tempore ceinam pel∣lem latrauit in aula, Militat in syluis catulus. Nunc adbibe puro Pectore verba puer, nunc te melioribus of∣fer. Horat., in whose vniudging youth their hidden vertue stealeth roote, in yearesAdolescentia haec est, ab an∣nis pueritiae du∣rans ad 20. & 25. annum, huic succedit iuuen∣tus & progre∣ditur ad 35. of discretion growth, in Iuuenilis haec est aetas. confirmed age gathereth ripenesse, and in consistingConsistit aetas à 35. ad 50. aut circiter, & vel paulo magis vel minus pro temperaturarū differentijs. age bringeth forth ripeStudia in Ado∣lescentia sunt tanquam in her∣bis, quae annis post maturiori∣bus pulchrae fruges sunt futurae, nam quae seminauerit in iuuentute metet cum senuerit. Plutarch. . fruie in practise and proofe, therein continuing euer vntill declining autumne, the fall of age, and the winter of this mortall life. And this is that span of mans life, and ought be his reckoning of his dayes well di∣spent in any vertuous or noble facultie. These things are manifest vnto all, and need not so much proofe as better consideration. And thus the necessary concurrence of the knowledge of nature vnto perfection in any worthie fa∣culty, hath briefly and sufficiently appeared, and more spe∣cially the vse thereof vnto a Physition hath bene plainly instanced and manifest, and his primacie in the counsell and consultation of nature, the necessities of life haue am∣ply proued. It hath bene likewise farther considered, that as in all other arts and sciences, so especially in Physicke, no man euer attained the meanest satisfying worth, with∣out the assistance of a seuenfold furtherance, without na∣ture eitherTu nihil inuita dices faciesue Minerua. disposing or fauouring, hath bene declared the vanitie of vtmost endeauour. Without. Innatam virtutem ignauia & desidia destruit, & cor∣rumpit, naturalem ineptitudinem rusticitatemuc corrigit & emendat doctrina. Plutarch . precept where
hath euer bene any right subiect, rule, or measure vnto wandring confused thought and contemplation? Without studie and, &c. Quae facilia sunt cognitu fu∣giunt incuriam, quae verò diffi∣cilima elegan∣tia concinna ca∣piuntur. Plutarc. industrie was neuer gained worth, nor with∣out institution euer purchased assurance of any perpetui∣tie. In want of fit and setled place, the most desirous in∣deauour doth find wearisome losse of so faire and helpe∣full opportunitie, and there is no goodnesse byAnnus in a∣pricis maturat collibus vuas. Ouid. time vn∣setled hath euer bene after wellIllud ingenio∣rum velut prae∣cox genus, non temerè vnquam peruenit ad fru∣gem. Quintil. confirmed. From hence it must necessarily follow as a certaine conclusion, that according as mē are more or lesse wanting in any of these, so do the number of the wants truly measure the quantity of their defects. And since these are seuen so inseparable companions & guides vnto sufficiencie in those by whom it is truly acquired, they must needs therefore by necessa∣rie consequent be therein faire likelihoods and proofes of that sufficiencie vnto others also whom it shall concerne to know and enquire it for their owne direction and satis∣faction. And as these are thus necessarie to be enquired, so is it as easie for the meanest to trace and discouer them in any particular knowledge.Festinata ma∣turitas occidit celeriùs. Idem. Nature doth expresse her selfe in her owne indowments open to euery eye in common conuersation. The hope and opinion of good precept, doth vnto the most ignorant giue prudent guesse, either by the particular knowledge, or at least in∣quisition of precedent timely institution and likely insti∣tutors. Good and pertinent institution, deriueth probabi∣litie of it selfe, from the testimonie of conuenient time and fit place of institution. Industrie cannot be hid, and studie by hisIn omni lite∣rarum profectu stylo, libello  perpetuo est opus. Isocrat. assiduitie doth euer proue it selfe, and by conti∣nuall exercise of it selfe, as it first giueth, so it after perpe∣tually Literae mar∣supium non se∣quuntur: sudo∣ris comites sunt & laboris, sociae ieiuniorum, non satietatis, conti∣nentiae, non luxuriae. Hieronym. holdeth sufficiencie, and manifesteth it selfe there∣by, both past and present, vnto any one. And as education it selfe is of all learned esteemed and iudged absolutely be∣yond Recta institutio caput omnis virtutis. Plat. de Leg. exception or dispensation necessarie, so are his places common, and therefore not obscure. Lastly time well dispent doth point his proofe vnto examination of
his seuerall degrees of groweth, both how inEradenda cu∣pidinis praui unt elementa, & teneae nimis mentes asperio ribus formandae studijs. Horat. childhood and youth, vnto the yeares of discretion, disposed, and how also after that time in manhood and confirmed age vnto consistence, disposing himselfe. These are those easie notes, whereby from the necessitie, partly of their continu∣all presence, and partly precedence in euerie facultie, the meanest capacitie together with the best may con∣firme and better satisfie their prudent hope or feare in choyce. These markes though common and indifferent vnto all, yet do they bring more or lesse different behoof∣full vse, according to different iudgings andFoelices essent artes si de ijs so∣ludicarent ar∣tifices. Aristot. vnderstan∣dings. Such as are learned in the same facultie, beside these outward and common informations are farther enabled to assure this inquisition by the presence and knowledge of the same sufficience in themselues, when they find it re∣presented vnto them in another, Such as are learned in dif∣ferent faculties, or are generall readers or schollers onely, by the signes cōmon vnto all kinds of learning may better iudge of a common facultie in generall knowledge, but vnproperly determine of aArtis cuiusti∣bet iudicatio∣nes primae om∣nibus homini∣bus sunt notae, sequentes soli artiici. Gal. lib. 6. de Meth. Med. speciall worth. The first haue therefore more certaine vnderstanding, the second some∣what more aduantaged coniecture. He onely that is al∣together vnlettered and vnlearned, for that he cannot help his iudgement frō any of these two former inward lights, or intelligence of his owne vnderstanding, must therefore chiefly deriue his information frō without, and from these outward signes, from whence it is also better to raise Eurip. Bene qui con∣jiciet vatem hunc perhibe∣bo optimum. Cicero de Di∣uin. pro∣bable reason and coniecture to resolue himselfe, then alto∣gether to trust report and others faith. For that which is probable comethArtificialis coniectura è probabili erui∣tur ratione & proximè ēper accedit ad veri∣tatem. Galen. neare vnto truth, and he that industri∣ously exerciseth himselfe in discerning rightly true proba∣bilitie, shall alway more wisely walke, and most seldome erre or be deceiued.
CHAP. III. ANd thus with a plaine sensiblenesse vnto vulgar capacitie, I haue deliuered the sen∣tentious summe of those things which the learned in the largenesse of many vo∣lumes haue widely scattered and con∣founded: which as according to the first promise and purpose, it giueth vnto the meanest a light vnto a larger field of prudent consideration, so doth it also vnto the yonger student yeeld a profitable taste of that true way and method which prosperously guideth vnto perfection. And although sharpe witted folly in the am∣bition of proud conceit hath oft times deuised and ima∣gined easier and shorter wayes andHuiusmodi uere illi Thes∣salij asini & ipse ipsorum parens Thessalus, qui in sex mensium spacio totam medicinae ar∣tem non modo vorabant ipsi, sed & alios do∣cere profite∣bantur. cuts vnto an higher pitch, yet after-time hath still otherwise proued it vnto erroneous men, when for the most part their eyes and time are almost out, and folly hath alreadie too sufficiently fat∣ted it selfe to glut repentance. I will not spend time in blaming this our time herein, dayly experience is iust re∣proofe. From that which hath formerly bene discoursed, there seemeth yet remaining a doubt demanding answer: whether non but men, as before, knowne learned, may proue of safe or commendable vse? Where the causes and diseases are both common and vulgar, and no circumstance requireth more then ordinarie consult, there without doubt ordinary harmlesse remedies without deeper coun∣sell or aduice, may by themselues sufficientlySed & me∣dicus optimè singulorum na∣turā rationem∣q́ue habuerit qui genus vni∣uersum cogno∣uerit. Verunta men nihil pro∣hibet quo mi∣nus etiam is qui sit nescius vni alicui pulchrè consulat, dum∣modo experi∣endo quae cui∣que accidunt accuratè pro∣spexerit: quem∣admodum mul∣tos sibi ipsis op∣timos medicos videmus, cùm alteri subuenire atque opitulari non possint. Aristot. Eth. 10. satisfie an vsuall need. For this cause the Emperick is iustly to be pre∣ferred before all other sects, for that (for the most part) neuer changing his approued ordinary good remedies, he thereby in ordinary cases doth more commonly benefite; while other sectaries from the wildeMethodici debitae pharmacorum com∣positionis ignari opera Artis inuertunt. Galen. de Sect. composition of their confused and deceiued minds (euer therefore vainly con∣tinually
varying the mixture of their medicines) must needs thereby both peruert the ordinary benefite of vsuall and tried medicines in common diseases, and in all other also by their misgouerned rules, and mistaking reason, euer either ouerrunne or come short of that happie and safe issue, which more distinct, iudicious and truly vnderstan∣ding accommodation from more prudent right delibera∣tion doth more certainly and assuredly bring forth. This is the reason thatGalen. lib. de sectis in Suasor. ad artes. lib Isa∣goges Med. Galen instituting and counselling a yong Physition, doth chiefly instruct him first to bend all his whole labour and endeuour to aime at that vnstained pu∣ritie of sight and discerning sagacitie, which is onely pro∣per vnto the truly learned and soly orthodoxe Physition, whereunto if his power and meanes wil not aduance him, he then aduiseth him to make choise of the Empericke soly toEaedem in jdem affecti∣bus medelae ab ijs qui rationem profitentur & Empiricis me∣dicis trahuntur. De ratione in∣ueniendi eas in∣ter eosdem dis∣sentio est. Galen de Sect. imitate before all other sects; because his plaine con∣stant course in ordinary diseases doth most oft good, and in other most cōmonly least hurt, though with the rest neuer sure, and not euer safe. And thus farre (deseruing reader) I haue pointed thy better remembrance into the right way of the most likely inquisition. Vertue is likewise a needfull companion vnto sufficience of vnderstanding, a grace and ornament vnto a Physition, and in him a benefite and ad∣uantage vnto the patient; by the one well gained, discreet∣ly and iustly steering his sufficience, by the other well knowne,Natura siqui∣dem vtraque haec largita est nobis, & ipsa judicia & sidem. Naturalia iudi∣cia sunt sensus & ratio. Ordi∣untur haec à ma∣ximè facilimis vsu & cognitio∣ne. Fides & per uasio sine vlla isciplina natu∣ra de idcijs adhibentur. Galen▪ lib 9 de dog. Hipp. & Plat. assuring his confidence: but being euery mans common dutie to learne, the Philosophers subiect, and be∣side my promised performance, I will commend it vnto easie obseruation in euery man his owne triall and proofe, the ordinary iudgement more easily knowing vertue in theNatura siqui∣dem vtraque haec largita est nobis, & ipsa judicia & sidem. Naturalia iudi∣cia sunt sensus & ratio. Ordi∣untur haec à ma∣ximè facilimis vsu & cognitio∣ne. Fides & per uasio sine vlla isciplina natu∣ra de idcijs adhibentur. Galen▪ lib 9 de dog. Hipp. & Plat. outward shape of faire action, then readily concei∣uing or examining it by the generallNon omnes ita sunt olees vt ex solo vni∣uersali ipsi par∣ticularia inue∣niant. Galen. lib. 5. de san. uend. idea or large descri∣ption. It onely now remaineth thou call once againe re∣membrance vnto remembrance, by recouering in our pas∣sed discouery in few words the generall briefe summe for better impression and continuance. It hath bene manife∣sted how senslesse common vse doth draw fond custome
vnto mechanicall counsel. Reason and prudence haue also giuen thee a taste and better sense of the vnobserued mis∣chiefe therein, and hath taught thee a more wise feare. Nor hath it bene the least wisedome, to know to hold sus∣pected among those whom learning hath exempted out of the vnlearned multitude, such as make profession of double perfection in twoSua ipsius propria agere & alienis nego∣tijs non impli∣cari, est iustitia, . Plato de Rep. faculties, where one in true rea∣son is neuer sufficiently or aboue needfull measure fulfilled in the most excellent, beside the perfection and right habit of vnderstanding, the attendance in care and circumspect action requiring neuer lesse then the whole and vtmost endeuour;Qui omnes in arte aliqua mi∣nutias & subtili∣tates persequi∣tur, exitum nul∣lum inueniet: si vero in illis mo∣dum vtilitate terminauerit, non mediocre fructum ex illis capiet. Non e∣nim omnia ex singulis discipli∣nis, sed necessa∣ria, & ad vsum magis accom∣modata sunt addiscenda. Osor. de Reg. instit. which he that thinketh too much for his owne calling, profession or facultie whatsoeuer, is the least of all worthy of it, or well deseruing in it. It hath bene likewise farther noted vnto prudent obseruation, that among men honestly limited within one calling, notwithstanding im∣moderate, extrauagant and impertinent curiositie too pro∣digally dispent in things of least moment, least pertinent or profitable vnto necessary vse, doth vainely sometimes e diuert the more serious and chiefly fixed study and respect vpon the more maine ends and offices therein, (as hath bene before noted of curious Astrologers and superstitious Ephemerides-masters) whereby that which is most neces∣sary, is dangerously oft neglected, and that which is least needfull, fondly more preferred and esteemed. Lastly hath bene pointed the man whom thou maist most discreetly and with most likely safetie chuse to trust with thy life and health. First thou art aduised to consider that he be a man free from the former imputations; and secondly that he be commended vnto thee by the seuen forementioned testi∣monies: one whom naturePraeclara autē studia non om∣nibus ornamēto esse possunt, sed ijs tantùm qui praeclaro inge∣nio & egregia virtutis indole praediti sunt. Osor. de Reg. instit. hath fitted and set foorth by common good parts expressed in open and apert, iust and discreet word and action, and also in speciall proofe and vse, the same in all occasions, capable, sensible, wise tempe∣rate, and vnderstanding; in his profession carrying credited assurance by his former times, place, institution, study and industry well knowne, commendably formerly, and euer
dispent. If thou make this carefull and likely good election of thy Physition, thou shalt not so vsually find so many lucklesse euents of after-repented choices, nor so cōmonly heedlesly draw vpon thy selfe so many miserable calamities as daily fall out in want of more reasonable fore considered care thereof. Happie is he who doth conuerse with the prudent,Prudentia ad rationis normā quae cogitat quae que agit v∣niuersa dirigit, & nihil praeter rectum & lau∣dabile facit. Macrob. consulteth the wise, trusteth the iust and honest, and imploreth skilfull helpe. God hath promised his bles∣sing vnto the prudent, in his vnaltered decree destining vnto prouidence both more certaine preuention of euill, and also more likely forestalling of otherwise more casuall good. In the wise (with caution and difficultie euer admit∣ting any suspected or doubted trust) succeedeth euer for the sometimesAtem in ple∣risque certam subuertere non debet paucorū vel in paucis er∣ror. Galen. de Med. opt. deceiued issue, ordinarily redoubled re∣compence, of fooles vngusted, but vnto the, &c. Omnia secuu∣dùm rationem facienti licet nō succedat secun∣dùm rationem non est ad aliud transeundum dum manet quod à princi∣pio visum est. Hipp. Aph. lib. 2. end deseruing it, repaying the vnknowne inexplicable nectar of infte acquiescence of mind, and ample content of rich ioy of heart vnto it selfe. In the skilfull, errour is barred frequence, and folly common or ordinarie a admittance. These things common experience doth rarely know, be∣cause seldome regarded: follie for euer possessing this world of fooles, and a. Solertia est dexteritas in ve∣rum scopum seu finem colli∣mandi. Aristot. Eth. 6. mite of wisedome being euer more rare e then ten mines of gold.Vir bonus & sapiens,  repperit vnum Millibus è cunctis hominum consultus Apollo, ipse sui, &c.  Know thou therefore the best patterne, aime euer to attaine his nearest affinitie, with discreete coertion of that desire in want of so plenti∣full supply, contentedly also accepting reasonable medio∣critie, but euer eschuing the hated name and inured note of knowne ignorance & adulterateTantume otij est à re tua tibi, aliena vt cures quae nihil ad te per∣tinent. Tere bigamie of two cal∣lings, the one in common vse wholy insufficient, the other for the most part, but in partable to supply either outward presence or inward worth. Commit thy life into his hand that esteemeth it worth his whole studie and endeauor, that vnderstandeth the causes in nature, wherein consisteth life, and is skilfully able to draw foorth thy destined line
vnto the most length and date in nature: that knoweth and opportunity of life,, &c. Medicū vti prouidentia vt mihi videtur optimum est. Hipp. lib. 1. prae∣not. that feareth God, & lo∣ man: vnto whom knowne danger giueth carefull caution, safetie securitie, iudgement resolution, variable circumstance more warie circumspection, and generall In medico nulla potest esse perfectio sine illa encyclope∣dia quae homi∣ni viam munit ad foelicitatem. Scalig. knowledge vnscanted counsell in all occurrents. Thus shalt thou not betray thy life to follie, nor by thy blame hall others. st & hoc vile & miserm cum stultis & fatuis insipere. Eurip. ignorance deseruedly punish and interrupt thy quiet ease.Foelix qui potuit tran∣uillam ducere vitam, Et laetas stabili claudere fine dies. Maximian. Thus maist thou both liue in more free con∣ent, and oft more happie daies,Quasi poma ex rboribus cruda si sint vi auelluntur, si matura & cocta, decidunt: sic vitam adolescentibus is aufert, senibus maturitas. Cicero. and die in thy full time by a ripe and mature death, in the blessing of God, and ight of nature, yeelding thy life vnto the common law wrod of mortalitie, not falling vnder the heauie burthen of thy owne guilt in rash exposall, or carelesse neglect. FINIS.
Gentle Reader, I pray thee to correct these faults, escaped partly by reason of the difficultie of the copie, and partly by ab∣sence of the Author. Epist. p. 2. l. 6. r. any long burthen. Epist. 2. p. . r. this necessary plane talke. compare r. compute. Pag. 3. lin. 20. for courses read chaunces. ibid, l 26. known certaine p. 6. l. 6. r. the as well. ibid. l. 19. grow, r. growing. these. pag. 10   iteretur. p. 13. l. 4. deliuerage▪ r. deliuering. r. my. p. 17. l. 26. r. to diuers parts diuers feauers. ib. l. 34 delivation. r. l. 9. death. r. health p. 19. l. 14. cannot, r▪ runnot p. 21. l. 8. which r. with, ib. l. r. these, p. 24. l 30. libertie r. literature. p. 25. in marg. r. sole. p. 39. l. 35. r. content. p. 43. in marg. l. 37. r.  p 45. privie 4. l. 14. r. be more completely. p. 56. l. 29. r. the other opposite. p. 62. l. 8. motiōs. p. 63. l. 13, motiues, r. motioōs. p. 69. l. 32. on, r. any one. p. 74. p. 79 orderly, r ordinarily. p. 82. l. 36. eminent, r. emunct. p. 85. marg. Scalig. p. 88. l. vlt. ends, r. meanes. pag. 94. l. 21 precepts, r. pretexts. Ib. first note . p. 97. last note in marg after, ea quae fecit, r, per ea quae 103. the third note, . p. 104. l. 25. r. indications. Ib. l. 29. p. 106. l. 21. their, r, her p. 111. l. 3 r. the illulion. ib. l. 14. diuining, r diuing continuing, r. confirmed. Ib l. 4. pofiting, r. profiting. p. 113. l. 21. wondes, r. pa. 124, l. 10. different, r, indifferent. p 127. l. 24. meane, r, meagre. Ib. l. vlt. fertilitie. pag 130. himselfe, read it selfe.
