6934.5 99847202 12225
THE DOCTRINE of the Masse booke, cō∣cerning the making of holye Water, Salt, Breade, Candels, Ashes, Fyre, Insence, Pascal, Pascal Lābe, Egges, and Herbes, the Marying kynge, the Pilgrimes Wallet, Staffe. & Crosse, truly translated into Englyshe. Anno. Domi, M. D. LIIII. the xx. of May. ¶ From Wyttonburge by Ni∣cholas Dorcastor. Lord increase our faith.
To the Christian Reader. HEre hast thou (gentle Reader) the making of holy water, and suche other of theyr superstici∣ous trumpery, faythfully trās∣lated into thy mother tong, whereby thou maiest see, what a derogacion it is against our onlye Sauiour Iesus Christ. They haue, & do yet make me beleue, that they do it in remēbraūce of the shedding of Christes bloude, but when they make it vpon Son∣daies, then they can say, they make it to dryue Deuils away. If this be not blasphemy against Christ, & hys pre∣cious blud, I know not what is blas∣phemy. They say to Salt, I  the, yu creature of Salt. &c. that al such as receaue the, thou may est be to thē health both of soule and body. Came Christ into this world, and tooke out nature vpon hym for any other pur∣pose, but to heale both our bodyes & soules: Ye a, hathe he not done it in ede. If the scripture be true (as it is most true) what riede hath our shamē
nation to desyre God that Salt may be health both of soule and bodi, whē Christ hath done it already, for al such as beleue in him: Haue we nede of an other Sauiour: Hath not God the fa¦ther geuen vs him to be our sufficien∣ic, to be our atonement maker, ours buckler, our shield, our strong fortres and helper in all needes▪ Doth he not make daylye intercession for vs vnto God his father: Yea, hathe not he de∣clared vnto vs, that whatsoeuer we aske the Father in hys name, he wyll giue it vs, meaning for our healp and comfort, in al our troubles and neces∣sities: Ther is no name vnder he auen wherin we must besaued, but onli by the name of Iesu. It is no maruayl (Christen Reader) that they be so loth that theyr seruice shuld be in English, for whose hart would not melt (if he had ani sparke of knowledge in gods truth) to heare such charming against God and his truth. For god hath cō∣maunded, whatsoeuer he biddeth vs do, that obserue and do, and not oute own imaginations, contrarye to hys
worde. But O you Priestes that be learned, with what conscience can ye say these shameful blaspemies euerye Sondaye? Do ye beleue that that ye say is true? then haue you no parte in Christe. For if ye may make at your pleasure such chinges to driue diuels away, & to heale both body and soule, what neede haue ye of Christ, of hys death, of hys resurrection, in whyche consist our whole saluation. And you that are vnlearned priestes, that vnderstande not what ye reade, whan ye make your holy water, this is partly setfurth for you, yt ye should take hede what ye do, for ignoraunce shal not excuse you, nor yet your Or∣dinaries commaundement, which ye∣ane so much to. You haue bene tau∣ght Gods truthe, ye haue consented vnto it, ye nede say for feare (for than∣kes be to God) in the tyme of the gos¦pel, ye were handled gētly, almeane possible sought to brynge you to the truth. You were not turmoyled and persecuted, as nowe the most part of you, seke al meanes possible o hurte
your pore brethren, that do but onc loke a wrye vpon your Teremonies, If he speake one worde of the Scrip∣ture to you, Lord what rage at ye in? how swel ye then? then out goth your two arguments Fyre & halter, strai∣ght to chapiter corte with him, & how pore mē are shamfulli hādled there, it shalbe in another boke (god willing) openly shewed. In Christes Church, there was no tiranny vsed, as is now in England among the stoute sturdy byshops, & charmyng priestes. There is no stone but is remoued of them to set vp them selues agayne▪ But they daube in vain. Whā God shal pour downe his showers of rayne vppon their daubed walles, it wil fall spite of thē all. Yet on ye other syde, I am not ignoraunt, but that a great sort of pri∣stes yt be simple mē for whose cause (I sai) thy is partly set surth, forasmuch as thei cānot vnderstāde it in Latine, that whā thei rede it in English, they may be a frayd of Gods vengeaunce to do yt his holy worde doth not war∣rant. For without dought, God hath
blessed all his creatures, and possible it is not to make them better than he hath made them. He hath made them to serue vs, for our necessaries, and we ought to geue him al the thankes for them, and not to make Gods of them For God sayth, I will geue my glo∣ry to none other. Therfor let vs leaue the abusynge of Gods good creatu∣res, and vse them to his honor & glo∣ry. In al our troubls and necessities let vs cal vpon God the Father, that is able and wyl helpe, euen for Iesus Christes sake, who euer kepe the and al those that loue the Lorde vnfainedli, and those that be ignoraunt to bring them to his truth, that as me haue one shepherd: so we maye be one flocke to his prayse and honour. Amen.
The benediction of the salt and Water. ¶ Euery Sondaye throughout the yeare, let there be a benediction of Salt and Water after the fyrst Cha¦piter, made by the Priest at the step of the Chauncell, after this maner. I Coniure the, thou creature of Salt by the ✚ liuyng god: by the ✚ true God: by the ✚ holy God: euen by the God that through yt Prophet Elizeus cōmaunded the to be caste in the water, that the barronnesse of the Water myghte be healed: To the in∣tent that thou mayest be made a con∣iured Salt to the saluation of theym that beleue: and that vnto all suche as receiue the, thou maiest bee health of Health bothe of body and soule, by oniured Salt. soule and bodye: and that from out of the place, wherin thou shalt be spren∣kled, may flye away and departe, all phantasy and wickednes, or craftines of the deuyls soteltie, and euerye vn∣cleane spirit beyng coniured, by him Diuils dri¦uen away bi cōiured Salt. that shal come to iudge the quick and the dead, and the world through fyre. Amen
Then foloweth the prayer without Dominus vobiscum. (The Lord be with you) but onely with Oremus (Let vs praye.) ALmightie eternal God, we hum¦bly be seche thy infinit goodnes vouchesafe of thy gratious be∣nyngnitie, to blesse and ✚ sanc∣tifie this creature of Salt, which thou hast graunted to the vse mankynde: that vnto al such as receiue it, it maye He pray∣eth ye con∣iured salt may saue bothe mynde & body. be saluation, of mynd and bodye: that whasoeuer shalbe touched or spren∣kled by it, may be voyde of al vnclen∣nes, and of euery assaulte of spirituall wickednes: by our Lord Iesus Christ thy sonne Amen. ¶ Here foloweth the coniurynge of the Water. I Coniure the, thou creature of Wa∣ter, in the name ✚ of God the fa∣ther almyghtie, and in the name of ✚ Iesu Christ his sōne our Lord and in the vertue ✚ of the holy goste: that thou be a coniured Water, to ex∣pel all power of the enemye, and that thou mayest be able to roote out and
vtterly to displace the enemy himselfe with his Angels of Apostasie: By the Holy wa∣ter displa∣ceth & hū∣teth awai ye Diuels. vertue of the same oure Lorde Iesu Christe, who shall come to iudge the quicke and the deade, and the worlde thorowe fyre. Amen. ¶ Then foloweth a Prayer wythout Dominus vobiscū, but wt oremus. O God, which for the saluacion of mankinde hast ordeyned al the greatest Sacramentes in Yet ye wil tel vs that your bread god is ye grea∣test sacra∣ment. the substaunce of Waters: be thou mercifully present at our inuoca¦cions, and vnto this Element prepa∣red for manifold purificatiōs. Poure thou out the vertue of thy ✚ benedi∣tiō, that thy creature seruing thy mi∣steries, to the casting out of Diuels, & driuing forth of diseases, mai take ef∣fect of the diuine grace: That whatso∣euer thys water shal sprinkle in hou∣ses or in places of the faythfull, maye If thys medisyne be true, then lette your mai¦den Prie. be voyde of al uncleannes, deliuered frō harme, that no noisome spirit re∣maine ther, no corrupt ayre: that al y• layinges awayte of the priuy enemie may auoide▪ and that if there be anye
thyng that is contrarye either to the health or quietnes of ye inhabitours, stes wash thē selues withal, to keepe thē chaste. it may thorow the sprinkling of thys water depart awaye: that wholesom∣nes optained by the inuocatiō of thy holy name, may be defended frō al as¦saults: thorow our lord Iesus Christ. ¶ Here let the Priest put the Salte into the Water crossewyse, say∣ing thus without note: LEt there be made a cōmition (or minglyng) of Salt and water to∣gether: in the name of the Father, & of the Sonne, and of the holy Gost. Amē. The Lord be wt you. Let vs prai. The Prayer. O God, the Author of such strē∣gthe as neuer is ouercome, & iing of an inuincible power, thou that also art euer an ex∣cellent Triumpher: whiche repressest the violēce of the contrary Lordshyp: which preuailest against the crueltye of the roaryng enemy: which might∣ly beatest down the wickednes of the aduersary: We reuerently and hūbly beseche and pray thee (O Lorde) that
thou wilt graciously accept this crea∣ture of Salt and Water, fauourably cause it to be had in estimaciō, and of thy accustomed goodnes ✚ sanctifye Oh blas∣phemy a∣gaynste Christe & his death it, that whersoeuer it shalbe sprinkled by the inuocation of thy holy name, al noisomnes of the uncleane spirite, mai be cast out, and the terrour of the venimous scrpent expelled far away: and the presence of the holye Ghoste vouchsafe euery where to be with us, requiring thy mercy: Thorowe oure Lorde Iesus Christ thy Sonne, who raigneth God with the in the vnitye of yt same spirit world wtout end. Amē ¶ Whyle the Water is sprinkled, let this Anteme be song, Asperges me Domine. &c. (that is to saye: Thou shalt sprinkle me (O Lord) with Is∣sope, & I shal be cleansed: thou shalt wash me, and I shalbe whyter thē Snowe.) The Psalme Miserere mei Deus. &c. (That is: haue mercy on me (O God) after thi great mer¦cie.) Asperges. The verse, Et secun∣dum multitudinem. &c. (that is to say: and according to the multitude
of thy tēder mercy, biotte thou ou mine iniquity.) The ansror, spe∣ges. The verse, Gloria patri. &c Si∣cut crat. auabis (y• shall wash. &c.) AFter the sprinkling of the water, let the Priest say at the sep of the Chaūcel, the verse Ostende bis. &c. Shew vs, O Lorde, thy mercye. The answer. And graunt vs thy saluaciō. ¶ Then foloweth a Prayer wythout Dominus vobisum, but oli with Oremus. The Prayer. HEar vs, O holi father almigh∣ty eternal God, and vouchsafe to send frō heauē thy holy An∣gel, which may preserue, chea∣tysh, defend, visit and epc a y• dwell in this habit acion, thorow Christ our Lorde. Amen. The making of their holy Bread. ¶The blessing of the Bread. Benedi∣cite (that is, blesse ye) Dominus. Let vs praye.
The Prayer. BLesse ✚ thou, O orde, this crea∣ture of Breade, as thou dyddest Holye bread hea¦leth bothe body and soule, so yt Christ di∣ed in vain blesse the fyue loaues in the wil∣dernes: that as many as taste of it, may recaue health, both of boye and soule: In the name of the father, & of the sōne, & of the holy gost, Amē. And let holye water be sprinkled vpon it. ¶ Another blessing of the Bread. A Diutorium nostrum. &c. (that is, oure helpe is in the name of the Lord, who hath made heauen & earth. The Lord be wt you, & with thy spirit. The Prayer. O Lord holy father almighty e∣ternall God, vouchsafe ✚ to blesse this Breade wyth thy holy spiritual benedictiō: that vnto al those which receiue it, it maie Holye Breade a salue for al sores. be saluaion of mynde and body, and a safegarde against al diseases, and a layings awaite of the enemies. Tho∣row our Lord Iesus Christ thi sonn, the Bread that came downe feō hea∣uen, and geueth lyfe and saluacion
vnto the worlde, and that lyueth and raygneth God wyth thee, worlde wythout ende. Amen. The halovving of Cā∣dels vpon Candelmas day. IN the purificatiō of the blessed Hir∣gin Marye, when the sixt houre is song, let there be made solemply a ha∣lowing of lighte, by the Bishoppe or Priost, hauing upō hun a Cope, with other priestly vestimētes, at the high∣est step of the altare, turnyng hym t the South beginning thus: The Lor be wyth you. And wyth thy spirit, Let vs praye. The Prayer. O Lord Iesu Christ ✚ blesse tho this creature of a waxen taper at our humble supplicacion, & by the vertue of ye holy crosse, poure thou into it, an heauenly bene∣diction: that as thou hast graunted it vnto mās vse for ye expelling of dar∣nes, it may receaue such a strength  blessing, thorow the token of thy h∣ly
crosse: that in what places soeuer it be lighted or set, the diuel may auoid Now thei pray that waxe mai dooe as muche as holy wa∣ter. out of those habitaciōs, and tremble for feare, and flye away discouraged, and presume no more to vnquiete thē that serue thee: who wt God ye father and the holy Gost lyuest & raygnest God, world without end. Amen. ¶ And al the Praiers are said wyth Oremus vnder the same tune. Dominus vobiscū is not saide, saue only before the first praier. Let vs praye. The Prayer. O Lord holy father almightye e∣ternal God, who hast created al thinges of naught, & by thy commaundement thorow the workes of Bees haste caused this ly∣cour to come to the perfection of Ta∣pers, and that thys day diddest fulfil the peticion of iust Simeon: We hū∣bly besech thee, that thou wilt vouch∣safe to ✚ blesse and ✚ sanctifie these Candels, prepared vnto the vses of men, and health of bodies and soules, aswel on the land, as in the waters, bi
the inuocation of thy holy name, and by the intercession of the holy mother Our lady said, what soeuer christ byd ye do, that do. Tho. iii and perpetual Pirgin (whose solemp∣uities we this dai deuoutly celebrate) and by the prayer of all thy saintes: That out of thy holy heauen, and frō the seate of thy maiesty, thou mayest hear ye voice of this thy people, whose desyre is to beare them solemplye in Where hath God cōman̄ded to prayse him in ca∣rying of a Candell. Gloriaur theyr handes, and to reioyce in pray∣sing the: and that thou maiest be mer∣ciful to al such as cry vnto the, whom thou hast redemed with the precious bloud of thy Sonne: Who wyth thee and wyth the holy Ghost, lyueth and triumpheth God, worlde wyth out ende, Amen. Let vs pray. The praier. O Almighty eternal God, who thys day hast willed thy only begotten sonne to be receiued in the armes of holy Suneō, & preseted in thi holi tēple: we hūbly be sech thi gracious goodnes, that yu wil vouchsafe ✚ to blesse & ✚ sanctifye, and with the candle of heauēly bene∣diction, to lightē these Tapers: which
we thy seruauntes takyng in the ho∣nour of thy name (whan they ar ligh∣ted) desire to beare: So as we worthe∣lye offering them vnto thee, the Lord God hath cōmaūded vs to offer our hartes vnto hym, & ye desyre y• Candels may be of∣sted. our God, and being kindled with the holy fyre of thy most swete loue, may deserue to be presented in the holye temple of thy glory, thorow our Lord Iesus Christ thy sonne, who lyueth & reigneth God with thee, in the vnitie of the holy Ghoste; worlde wythout ende. Amen. The Lorde be with you. And with thy spirit. Lest vs lift vp our hartes. We lift them vp vnto ye Lord. Let vs geue thanckes vnto the Lorde our God. It is mete & right so to do. Truly mete and iust, right & whol∣som is it, that we alway, and in al pla∣ces geue thankes vnto thee, O Lord, holy father almighty eternall God, y• wel spring of original of al light: who with the clearnes of thy glorye, haste illuminated the world, in sending vn∣to vs thy onely begotten sonne, tho∣row the wombe of the chaste Virgin, euen him whō y• diddest promise long afore in the scriptures of ye prophetes▪
haste thou at the last sent to be y• ligh vnto the people that sate in darknes. Wherfore Lord we besech the, y• thou with thy benediction wylt vouchsafe ✚ to blesse these Candels prepared vnto thy name: thou that hast transla¦ted vs from the power of darckenes, into the lyghte and kingdome of thy beloued sonne, by whom vnto those that are true of hart, ther arose vp euē in darknes, the light and ioye of eter∣nal saluation. Thou also, who diddest accomplish the expectacion of iust Si∣meon, that he should not se deathe, a∣fore he did see the visible incarnation of the same Christ thy sonne, the light & saluation of the whole worlde. Re∣plenish vs so, with ye light of thy clear¦nes, that thou dryue away from vs al darckenes of infidelitye. And as thou thys day didst let thy seruaūt depart in peace, so vouchsafe to gouerne vs in the peace of thy holy churche, that we may be able to enter the hauen of euerlasting quietnes: So as we being endewed with the beames of the true light, may ther in the daye of iudge∣ment,
with the thankul queres of the Aungels reioye to behold the presece of the euer shinyng Sunne. Indefessi solis. ¶ Here let him chaunge his voice as itwere in readyng Qui te. &c. Per omnia. &c. Amen. Here let the Can∣dels be sprinkled with holy water, and senced. Then is said, Dominus vobiscum: The Lord be wyth you. Let vs praye. The Prayer. O Lorde holy father almightye, thou vnfailyng lyght, whych art the maker of all lyghtes: ✚ blesse this light that is to be brne of thy faithful to the honour of thy name, so as we being sanctified & blessed by the, may be kyndled wyth the light of thy clearenes, and be illu∣minated. Vouchsafe also mercifully to graunt, that as thou sometyme wyth the same syre, diddest shew light vnto Moyses thy seruaunt, so thou illumi∣nate our hartes and mindes, that we may merite to come to the vision of e∣ternall clearnes, thorow Christe our Lorde. Amen.
A praier. ALmighti euerlasting God, who into the worlde hast sent thyne only sonne, begotten of the be∣fore all tymes, but incarnate in tyme of Mary the Virgin, euen hym that is the true & neuer fayling light, to driue away the darckenes of man∣kinde, and to kindle the light of fayth & truth: Graūt mercifully, yt we may deserue to be shined vpon, aswell in∣wardly, with the spiritual lyghte, as outwardlye wyth the corporall, tho∣row yt same our Lord. &c. ¶ When the halowyng of the Can∣dels is done, let the Cādels be ligh∣ted, and distributed: & in the meane while, let ther be song the Antee, Lumen ad reuelationē. &c. (that is to say: A light to lighten the Gen∣tils, and the glori of thy people Is∣rael.) Then al the Psalme Nunc di mittis, with Gloria patri, and after euery verse let y• Antem be repeted. Thus endeth the halowyng of the Candels.
The halovving of the Ashes. ¶ The Masse booke saith, that vpon Ashedensdaye, when the Prieste hathe absolued the people. &c. then must there be made a blessynge of the Ashes (without Dominus vo∣biscum, and wythout Oremus) by the Prieste, beyng turned towards the East. ALmightye eternall God, who hast mercy vpon al, and hatest nothyng of those thinges that thou hast made, forbearīg mēs sinnes because of repentaūce, who al∣so in dede helpest those that are in di∣stresse: vouchsafe to ✚ besse & ✚ sanc∣tifie these Ashes, which because of hu∣militie, and of holy religion for ye clen∣syng out of our trespaces, thou haste appointed vs to cary vpō our heades after the maner of the Niniuites: And graunt, that thorow the inuocaciō of thy holy name, al they that beare thē vpon theyr heades for the optaining of thy mercy, may merite of the to re∣ceaue
forgiuenes of al their trespaces? Bearyng of Ashes merite fo¦geuenes. and so thys day to begin their holye fastinges, that in the day of the resur∣rection they may deserue with pury∣fied mindes, to approch to the holye Easter, and receaue eternal glorye in y• world to comet, horow our lord. &c. ¶ Here let holye water be sprinkled vpon the Ashes, and then is sayde, Dominus vobiscum and Oremus The Prayer. O God which requirest not the death but the repentaunce of sinners: beholde most graci∣ously the frailty of mans con¦dicion. And these Ashes (which we to declare humility, and to deserue for∣geuenes, haue appointed to lay vpon our heades) vouchsafe thou accordīg to thy goodnes, to ✚ blesse & ✚ sanc∣tify: to the intent that we, whom thou, hast aduertised to be Ashes, & whiche know that for our frowardnes sake, we shal turne againe vnto dust, maye deserue mercyfully to optain remissi∣on of al our sins, & the rewards promi¦sed to those yt repent. Per dominū. &c▪ Then
¶ Thē let them distribute the Ashes vpon the heades of the Clarckes, & of the lay people: the worthier per∣sons makyng a sygne of the crosse with the Ashes, saying thus: Me∣mento homo quod cinis. &c. Remē∣ber man that thou art Ashes, and into Ashes shalt thou retourne. In nomine patris t filii. &c. ANd in the meane while let the An¦themes folowing be song Exau∣di nos Domine. &c. Here vs (O Lord) for louing is thy mercy: according to the multitude of thy tender mercyes, behold vs O Lord. The psalme. Saue me O God, for ther ar waters entred in euē vnto my soule. Ther is said no more, saue only the firste verse of the Psalme, but immediately let ther fo∣low Gloria patri, and then let the An∣theme Eraudi be repeted. Another Antheme. I xta vestibulum. &c. that is to say: Neare vnto the porche and the al∣tre, wepte the priestes and Leuites the ministers of the Lord, saying: Spare O Lord, spare thy people, and destroi
not the mouthes of them that cry vn∣to thee O Lorde. Another Antheme. IMmutemur habitu. &c. Let vs chā∣ge our apparel in Ashes and heyry cloth. Let vs fast and lamēt before the Lord, for our God is verye mercyfull If god be mercyfull to forgiue sines, why desyre ye that salt & water ma do it. to forgiue our sinnes. ¶ When this ministration is done, let the Priest at y• step of the chaū∣cel, saye Dominus vobiscum, and Oremus. &c. The halovving of Palmes. VVhen the gospel is ended, let ther folow the halowing of flouers & braunches, by the priest, being araied with a redde Cope, vpon the thyrde step of the altare, turnīg him toward the South: the Palmes wyth y• flou∣ers being fyrst laied aside vpō the al∣tere for the Clarkes: and for the other vpon the steppe of the altere on the Southe syde.
I Coniure the thou creature of flo¦ers and braunches in the name of God the father almighty, & in the name of Iesu Christ hys sōne our Lord, & in the vertue of the holy Gost. Therfore be thou rooted out & displa∣ted from this creature of flouers and braunches, al thou strength of the ad ersary, al thou host of the diuell, and al thou power of the enemy, euē eue∣ry assault of Diuels: That thou ouer∣take not the foote steps of them that haste vnto the grace of god. Thorow him that shal come to iudge ye quicke & the dead, & the world by fyre. Amē. ¶ Then are prayers sayd wythout Dominus vobiscum, but onelye wyth Oremus. A Prayer. ALmightye eternal God, who at the pouring out of the floude, diddest declare to thy seruaunt Noe by the mouthe of a Doue bearing an Oliue braunch, that peace was restored agayne vpon earth: we humblye bescche the, that thy truthe may ✚ sanctisie this creature of flou∣ers
and braunches & slips of Palme or bowes of trees, which we offer be fore the presence of thy glory: that the deuoute people bearing them in their handes, may meryte to optayne the grace of thy benediccion: Thorowe Chrise. &c. ¶ And al the prayers are saide vn∣der the tune of a lēsson, and with Oremus. A Praier. O God, whose sonne for the sal naciō of mankinde descēded downe from heauen into the earth, and when the houre of his passion drew neare, wolde come to Hierusalem, sitting vpon an Asse, and be called king and praised of the people: Increace yt faith of those that trust in the, and graciously heare the prayers of the humble. Let thy mercy (O Lord) come vpon vs, we beseeche thee, and vouchsafe to ✚ blesse these braūches of Palme and other trees: that al they which shall beare them, may be replenished with the gyfte of thy benediction. Graunt therfore O
Lorde, that as the children of the He∣brues crying Osanna in the highest, did mete the same thy sōne our Lord Iesu Christ wyth braunches of Pal∣mes: euen so we lykewyse bearyng bowes of trees, may with good wor∣kes mete Christ, and come to eternal ioy, through the same Christ. A Praier. O God which gatherest things that are dispersed, and preser∣vest suche as are gathered to∣gether: thou that dydst blesse the people whiche caryed Braun∣ches of Palme trees to meete Christ Iesu: Blesse also these braunches of Palmes and other trees, whych thy Sruauntes at the benediction of thi name do faythfullye take: that into what place so euer thei be brought, al the inhabitours of ye same place, maye optaine thy blessing, so as al sickenes being chaced away, thy ryght hande may defend them whō it hathe rede∣med, thorow the same Christ. ¶ Here let the floures and braūches be sprinkled with holy water, and
censed. Thē saith the Prest Domi∣nus vobiscum, & Oremus. The Praier. O Lord Iesu christ, thou maker and redemer of y• world, wh for our delyueraunce and sal∣uatiō hast vouchsafed to com down from the highest tower of hea∣uen, to be incarnate, and to suffer pas∣sion: who also of thine accord appro∣chyng and cōming to the place of the same passion, wouldest (of the people that met the with braūches of Palme trees) be praysed and cōmended, and with loude voice to be called the bles∣sed king tha cōmeth in the name of the Lorde: vouchsafe thou nowe to ac∣cept the praise of our confession, and to ✚ blesse and ✚ sanctifie, these braū¦ches of Palmes and other trees and flouers, that who soeuer in the seruice of thy vertue shal take any thing ther of, being sanctified with the benedic∣tion of heauen, may deserue to enioy remissiō of sinnes, and the rewardes of eternal life, thorow the Iesu Christ thou sauiour of the world, who with
the father and the holy Gost liuest & reignest god world wtout end. Amen. ¶ So whan these thinges are fyny∣shed, let the Palmes immediately be distributed, & in ye meane whyle let these Anthemes folowynge be song, the Chaunter begīning: Pu∣eri Hebreorum. &c. The Chyldren of the Hebreues taking Oliue braun∣ches, met the Lord, crying and say∣ing: Osanna in the heigth. Another Antheme. The Children of the Hebrues stro∣wed their garmentes in the way, and cried saying: Osanna to the sonne of Dauid: Blessed is he that commetl in the name of the Lord. The halovving of the fyre on Easter Euen. ¶ This wyse let there be a station vnto the fyre: LEt the priest stand by the fyre, tur¦nyng himselfe eastward, and let ye deacon stand on his lefte hand, the subdeacon at the leaft hande of the
deacon: Let one taper bearer stand against the priest: At the ryghthād of the taper bearer, let there stande a childe, holding the boke nerer vn¦to the priest. And let the other taper bearer stande behynde the Priest. At the ryght hande of the same ta∣per bearer, let him stand that cari∣eth the water nerer vnto the priest. And in the last place behind all on the west side, let him stand that be∣reth the long staffe with the taper, Beside ye fyre, namely on the south side, let him stand that must cast in cense, to take fyre into the Censor after the benediction. At these mi∣nisters being turned towardes the priest, the quire in the meane seasō standyng round about, namely on the northside, a hereafter appea∣reth, Let there folowe a blessyng of the fyre solemply, the priest sayng thus, Dominus vobiscum, and O∣remus. A Prayer. O Lord our God almighti, thou lyght that neuer faylest, thou maker of all lyght: Heare s
thy seruauntes and ✚ blesse this fire, which thorow thy sanctifying & bene diction is consecrated. Thou that ge∣uest light vnto euery man cōming in to this world, illuminate the consciē∣ces of our harte, wyth the fyre of thy charity, that we being kindled wyth thy fyre illuminated with thy lyght, the darknes of synnes beyng dryuen away from our hartes, maye merite to come vnto eternal lyfe, thou being the light geuer, Per Dominum. &c. ¶ And al the praiers are saide wyth Oremns vnder the tune of a les∣son. Holy wa∣ter muste be at y• end of al theyr doynges. Here let holy water be sprink∣led vpon the fire. Then is said Do∣minus vobiscum. Oremus. A Praier. O Lord holy father almighty e∣ternall God, vouchsafe thou to ✚ blesse and ✚ sanctifi this fyre, whiche wee vnworthye thorow the inuocation of thy only be gotten sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, presume to ✚ blesse: Sanctify thou it most gracious father wyth thy ✚ be∣nediction, and graunt it to come for∣ward
to the profit of mankynde. th∣row the same. &c. A Praier. PReuent vs O Lorde, we beseche the alway here and euery where with the light of heauen that the misterie wherof thou hast wyl∣led vs to be partakers, we may bothe behold with a pure syght, and enioye with a worthye affection. Thorowe our Lorde. &c. The halovving of the Insence. I Coniure the thou moste vncleane spirite, and euery fantasye of the enemy in the name of God the fa∣ther almighty, and in the name of of Iesu Christ hys sonne, and in the vertue of the holi gost: that thou with al thy false sotiltie and wickednes, go forth and depart frō thys creature of perfume or insence, that this thy crea¦ture may be ✚ sanctified in the name of our Lord Iesu Christ: that all they which taste, touch or smel it, maye en∣ioye
the vertue and helpe of the holye gost, so that whersoeuer thys insence or perfume shalbe, thou in no wise be bold to approche neare there, nor pre∣sume to trouble: But what foule spi∣rit soeuer thou art, thou wyth all thy crafty falshoode, fiye and depart farre frō thence, being straightlye charged by the name and vertue of God the father almighty, and of his sonne ou Lord Iesu Christe, who in the holye Gost shal come to iudge the quicke & dead, and the thou traiterous offen∣der, and the worlde thorowe fyre, A∣men. Let vs pray. The Prayer. O Lord holy father almighty e∣ternal God, we besech thy e∣uerlasting & moste rightuous goodnes: that thou vouchsafe to blesse this kinde of perfume or in∣sence, that it may be an insence accep∣ted vnto thy Maiestye for an doure of swetenes: Let this kinde be ✚ bles∣sed of the, let it be ✚ sanctified by the inuocation of thy holiname: So that where soeuer the smoke thereof shall
come, alkinde of diuels may be expel∣led and driuen awaye, as the insence of the fishes Liuer, which saphael the Archaūgel taught thy seruant Tobi∣as, when he went vp to deliuer Sara, Per Christ. &c. LEt thy blessing (O Lorde) come downe vpō this kinde of insēce and persume, like as in it wher∣of Dauid thy prophet hath song (sayinge: Let my praier be directed as insence in thy sight) Let it be vnto the sauoure of consolacion, swetenes and grace, that thorow thys smoke euery fantasy of the enemy of minde and of body, may be driuen awaye, that we after the voyce of the Apostle Paule may be a good odour vnto God. Le euery assaulte of diuels fly awaye frō the preséce of thys insence or perfume as the dust from before the wynde, & smoke from the face of the fyre. And graunt O most gracious father thys insence of good odour, to the worcke of thy church because of Religion cō∣tinually to remaine, that by the misti∣cal signification, the pleasaunt sauour▪
may declare vnto vs the swetenes of spiritual vertues. We besech the ther¦fore O almighty god, vouchsafe with thy right hand of thy infinite maiesty to ✚ blesse thys creature, made toge∣ther of the cōmirtiō of diuers things. that whersoeuer the perfume of y• spi∣ces therof shal breathe, it may be able wonderfully in the vertue of thy holy name, to driue away al fantastical as∣saults of vncleane sprites, and (health being restored) to expel al diseses, and in most pleasaūt odour to smell vnto the wyth perpetuall sweetenes. Per Dominum nostrum. &c. AFter the halowing of the insence let the Censor be filled ful of coles with insence, and let the newe fyre be sēced. Afterward let the taper vp on the long staffe be lighted out of the newe fyre, the other lightes of the Churche beinge fyrst put out, and let it be borne in procession, vnto the place wher the Pascall is halowed, and let the procession cōe agayne after the accustomate ma∣ner in the quyre. In returninge, let
two Clarkes of the second fourme in Surpleses sing Inuentor. &c. let the uyre repeate the same after euerye verse. The halovving of the Pascall. AFterward let follow the halow∣yng of the Pascal by the Deacon himselfe (haing on apparel to the procession) after he hath taken be∣sing of him that executeth, turning him Northward at the stepp of the priestes seate: the taper bearers stā¦dyng by the deacon, the one on the right hand, the other on the left, be¦ing tourned vnto hym, and the ta∣pers beyng put out, sauyng that on¦ly vpon the long staffe. Ouer aga∣ynste hym let stand the subdeacon by whom let hym stande that cari∣eth the Longe staffe. Lykewyse be∣hynde the deacō let him turne him¦selfe and stande that muste cast in∣cense, the deacon saiyng: Exulteth iam angelica. &c. That is to saye:
NOw let the angelical compa∣ny of heauens reioyce: Let the deuine misierye reioyce, & for the victory ofso great a kyng let the trumpe of saluation blow. Let the earth be glad, that it is shined vp∣pois with so great lyghtnynges, and bewtified with the brightnes of the e¦ternal king: let it pereciue, that it hath lost the dark myst of the whole world Let the mother the church also reioice beyng adourned with the cleare shi∣nynges of so noble a lyght, and wyth great voices of yt people, let this court triumph agayn: Wherfore most dere brethren, seing ye stand by at the won¦derful cleartiles of this holy lyghte. I beseche you ral vpon the mercye of almyghtie God with me: that he who with oute my merites hathe vouched safe to take me within the noumber of Leuites, mai through the inspiring grace of his light, accōplithe to make plentiful the praise of this taper. Th rowe our Lord Iesus Christ his sōne, who liueth and reigneth God with him in the vnitie of the holye ghost,
worlde without ende. Amen. The Lorde be with you. And with the spirit. Lift vp your heartes. We lift them vp vnto the Lorde. Let vs geue thankes to our Lord God. It is mete and ryght. VErely, for incte & right it is, with whole affection of the hearte and mynde, and with the ministration of the voyce, to prayse the inuisible god, the father almyghtie, and his only be gotten sonne our Lorde Iesus Christ (with the holy ghost.) Who vnto his father, payde Adams debt for vs, and with his gracious bloud wiped awa the obligacion of the olde offence. For these are the solemnities of Ea∣ster, in the which that true lambe is slayne, & the postes consecrated with his bloude. This is the nighte, in the which whan our fathers the children of Iscael were fyrst brought out of E∣gipt, thou madest theim to passe tho∣row the redde sea dry shod. This ther¦fore is the night, which with the illu∣mination
of the cloude, hath pourged the darcknes of synnes. This is the night, which this day thorow out the whole wourlde, restoreth vnto grace, knitteth vnto holines, such as beleue in Christ, being seperated from the vi¦ces of the worlde, and from the darke mist of sines. This is the night, in the which the bandes of death beyng de∣stroied, Christ came vp from beneth a couquerour. For nothinge hath it profited vs to be borne, except it had bene ourwelth to be redemed. O the wōderful grace of thy fauourable be∣ningnitie aboute vs. O the inestima∣ble affectiō of loue, that thou hast ge∣uen ouer thy sonne, to redeme thy ser¦uaunt. O the necessari sinne of Adam & ours, verely, whiche with the death of Christ is put out. O happy faulte, whiche deserued to haue suche and so noble a redemer. O blessed myght ve¦rely, which onely deserued to knowe the time and hour, wherin Christ rose again from beneth. This is the night whereof it is written: And the nighte shalbe as cleare as the daye, yea the
night is my lyght in my pleasaunt de¦lightes. Therfore the sanctifiynge of this night, expelleth hainous sinnes, washeth faultes, and restoreth inno∣cencie to them that are fallen, & glad∣nes to the sorowful: it driueth awaye hatreds, prepareth concorde, and brin¦geth downe dominions. Wherefore in the grace of this night, receiue thou (here let the deaco put incence v∣pon the taper or vppon the candle∣sticke Rubricke in maner of a crosse. O holy father the euening sacrifice of this incense, whych holy church from out of the workes of Bees, doth ren∣dre vnto the in this solemne oblation of the taper, by the handes of myni∣sters. But now we know the cōmen∣dations of this piller, whych ye cleare fyre doth light to the honour of God. Here let the taper be lighted out of the newe fyre, and not put out be∣fore Rubricke Compline be ended the day so lowinge: Here let the taper bearers light theyr tapers, throughout the Church. Which though it be denied in∣to
partes, cannot hurte the borowed light. Norished it is with meltig waxe which the Bee hath brought forth in to substaunce of this precious lyghte O blessed iiyghte, whiche spoyled the Egiptiās, enriched the hebrues: The nyght, wherein heauenly thyngs are ioyned vnto earthly. We pray the O Lord, that this tapr consecrated to y• honor of thy name, may not fayle to continue, to destroye the dare mys of this night: Beyng accepted for an odour of swetenes, let it be mixt with lightes from aboue. Let the day sprig of the mornyng fynde out the flames therof: the same daye springe (I saye) which knoweth of no goyng downe: euen he, who whan he returned from beneth, shone bright vnto mankynd. We besech the therfore O Lorde, that the quietnes of tymes beyng graun∣ted, thou wylte vouch safe in these so∣lemnities of Easter, to preserue v thi seruauntes al the Cleargy and moste They must prai for theyr father. deuour people wt our father the Pope N. and our kyng, N. and also our by∣shop, N. Thou that alway liuest, reig∣nest,
rulest and triumphest only God onely the highest Iesu Christ, with ye holy gost in the glory of God the fa∣ther. Amen. The halovving of the Pascal lambe, egges, and herbes, on Easter daye. Dominus vobiscum. Oremus. ¶ The Prayer. God, thou gouernor of heauē and earth, which geuest foode vnto al flesh, & replenishest eue¦ry liuing thing with blessyng ✚ blesse, & ✚ sanctifie this creature of the pascal lambe, & vnto  receiuing the giftes, graunt health of soule and body. Thorow Christ our Lord Amē. O God, who are ye maker of al flesh who gauest cōman̄demēts vnto No & his sons cōcerning cleane & vn cleane beastes, who hast also permit∣ed mankind to care clean. iiii. footed beastes, euē as egges, & grene herbes: Moreouer, yu that vpon Easter euen didst cōman̄d Moses & thy people in Egipt to eate the pascal lambe, in fy∣gure
of the lāve our Lord Iesus Christ thorow whose bloud yu hast redermed vnto thi self out of the worlde al fyrst borne, & gauest commaundement, the same night to smits euery fyrst borne fir Egipt, preseruyng people that was marked afore with the bloude of the lābe: Vouchsafe O Lord God almigh¦tie to ✚ blesse and ✚ sāctify this Pas∣cal lambe, that al such of thi people as faithfully shal eate therof, beynge fil∣led wt  heauenly benediction & with thi grate, may be replenished in good¦s: thou O Lord by whom al things  made, & created at the beginning  sauior of the world, who liuest & iglest god world wtout end. Amen. Afterward, let al be sprinkled with  holye water, & censed by the priest. The halovving of the womans Ring at wedding. THou maker & cōseruer of man∣kinde, geuer of spiritual geace, and graūter of eternal saluaci  Lord send thy ✚ blessing vpon Is not here wyse eare. this Ring, that she which shall weare
it, may be armed wyth the vertue of heauenly defence, & that it maye pro∣fit her to eternall saluation, Thorowe Christ. &c. Amen. Let vs pray. A Prayer. ✚ Halow thou Lord this ring, whi∣che we blesse in thy holye name: that what womā soeuer shal weare it, mai stand stast in thy peace, and continu in thy wyl, & liue and gro and we old in thy loue, & be multiplied into yt length of daies, thorow our Lord. &c. ¶ Then let holy water be sprinkled vpon the flyng. The halovving of the Pilgrems Walet & Staffe. AFter the rehersal of certaine psal∣mes & praiers in Latine ouer the Pilgrem lying flat afore the altare, he must rise vp, and then must folow the halowing of his Walet & Staffe, af∣ter thys maner. The Lord be wt you. Let vs pray. The Prayer. O Lord Iesu Christe, who of thy vnspeakeable mercye & by the cōmaundemēt of the father, and
cooperatiō of y• holy Gost, woldes come downe from heauen, & seke the shepe yt thorow the disceitfulnes of the diuel was lost, & bring it againe vpon thine own shulders vnto ye flocke of ye heauēly coūtry: who also hast char∣ged the Chyldren of the Mother the Church, in praying, to aske: in liuing wel, to seke: and in knocking, to cōti∣nue, yt. they may the rather find the re∣wards of the life of saluation: we hum¦bly cal vpō the, yt thou wilt vouchsafe to ✚ blesse thys Wallet & Saffe, That whosoeuer for the loue of thy name doth endeuer him selfe to take yt same by hys syde as an armour of humily∣tye, & to hang it about theyr neckes, Is not here ioly geare, it was a me¦ry worlde whē thys was vsed saye oure Priestes. or to cary in their handes, & so going on pilgremage (hauing meke deuoti on for a cōpaniō of their iourney) to seke the helpes of saintes, they being preserued with the defēce of thy right hand, may merit to come to the ioyes of the eternal visiō, thorow thee thou sauiour of ye world, who liuest. &c. Here let holy water be sprinkled, & let the Priest put a Wallet about the Pilgrems necke saying:
In ye name of our Lord Iesu Christ take thou this Wallet, the habite of thy pilgremage, that being well cha∣stcned and saued, thou maiest merite to come to the places of the Saintes, thither as thou desyrest to go: & that when thy iourney is done, thou mai∣est returue vnto vs safe & soūd. Tho∣row the same our Lord. &c. And so let it be done vnto others, if there be mo. Here let him deliuer a Staffe to one, saying: Take thys Staffe to hold the Thei ar mad Dy∣uels that wyll lette pilgrems go to sain¦tes. by, in the iurney and trauaile of thy pilgremage: that thou maiest be able to ouercome al the rables of the ene∣mye, and come withoute feare to the places of the Saintes whither thou desyrst to go, & that when the course of obedience is finished, thou mayest returne to vs againe with ioye, Tho∣row Christ the Lord. And so let hym sai to the other, if ther be mo. The halovving of the Crosse, of him that goeth to Ie∣rusalem, with Dominus vobiscum, & Oremus.
O Thou God of inuincible power, of infinit goodnes, and help of al consolation of such as goo on pilgre∣mage, thou that vnto thy seruauntes geuest most inuincible weapons: we besech the vouchsafe to ✚ blesse thys crosse of deuoute humilitie. That the banner of the reuerend crosse, the fy∣gure wherof is marked in it, maye be the moost inuincible strength, of thy seruaunt against the most wicked tē∣acions of the old enemye. Let it be in the way a defēce, let it be in thi house a protectiō, let it be euery wher a help vnto vs, thorow our Lord. &c. Here let holye water be sprynkled vpō the vesture. Afterward if anye of thē be for to go to Ierusalem, let ther be geuē him a cote (or vesture) marked wt a crosse, ye priest saying: ¶ Take the vesture marked wyth the crosse of the Lord our sauiour yt to go forth prosperously vnto his sepulcher ther may thorow it, accōpany the, sal∣uatiō, blessing & vertue. Qui cū De patre. &c. And so let him do vnto the other, if they be mo. FINIS.
