A1521 99868038 120375
AN EPHEMERIS for the yeer 1651. Amplified with Rational Predictions from the Book of the Creatures. 1. Of the State of the Yeer. 2. What may probably be the effects of the Con∣junction of Saturn and Mars, Iuly 9. 1650. in Scotland, Holland, Zealand, York, Amsterdam, &c. and about what time they may probably happen. By Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Astrology and Physick, in Spittle-fields, next Door to the Red Lyon. Psal. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Fir∣mament sheweth forth his Handy-work. Printed by Peter Cole, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1651.
A brief Discription of the parti∣lar things contained in this ALMANACK. IN the Almanack are Four Rowes or Colums, divided several¦ly by black Lines in each Month: The First is the Number of Days; The Second is the Days of the Week set down in se¦veral Letters, and E for Sunday; In the Third are the Holy-days and other both fixt and moveable: In the Fourth is the Sun Rising.
To the Reader. I Know no great reason any hath to trifle out much time in admiration, that I peep out in print in this nature, I account it as lawful for me as for another, and for a third, as for me; and for any that can as wel as any of us all: let time witness whether my Predictions be true or false, mean season wise men will suspend, and the vain glorious only carp: I am not sen∣sible I have given just occasion of offence to any body, I was born a Gentleman, and brought up a Scholler, I hate a Sycophantick course of life, or to flatter any body, and can patiently pass by the Scandals cast upon me by such who keep Mendacium as a constant page to their tongues, I am sorry wise men should be so credulous to beleeve things they know no more of then I know what language is spoken in the Moon. The Planets places did then Aspects are calculated for the Meridian of London, there is no harm in that; There is such dif∣ference amongst Ancient writers in this art, (almost as much as is between Episcopales, Presbyterians, and Independants) about the General Figure of the world, which I take to be the reason of their difference in calculating the Planets places, Ptolomy held his own, Copernicus derides and detrudes him, and sets up ano∣other, Ticho had a third, and Argol a fourth. I hold to Coper∣nicus as the truest, quot homines tot sententiae, and I durst, (si utriusque disceptator aequus adesset) maintain in dispute. I give my reasons for most of my Predictions, and if any ask the reason why I do not always tell them, the reason is want of paper, not of good will, let young Students heed what I have written if they prove true, they may know how to do the like, if not true, they may know how to avoyd my errors; I scorn to assume any bodyes name to my writings, much more to fetch one from Utopia, or to write any thing that I am afraid or ashamed to set my own to, therefore take notice that the Author of the book is called August 3. 1650 Nich. Culpeper.
To Mr Simpson, who Pretends he Preacheth at Alhallows in Thames-street. SIR, WHilst such as fear God and admire at his Works in the Creation, beholding the lustre of the Creatures magnifying the Glory of the Creator, you spend your study and time in Railing at Astrologers (which although I can bear, yet let him of your Coat that hath no sin, throw the first stone at them) and against Astrology it self, and the won∣derful Works of God in the harmony of the Creation, & this is something intollerable: Let your MODERATION be made known to all men: You know who it was said so; but your Moderation herein was
so small, that it was not discernable by a Perspective-glass. I beseech you Consider with me in the Spirit of Meekness (if you know but what it means) The Spirit of God is Humble and Meek; Was yours so? The Spirit of Satan is Proud and Presum∣ptuous; Was not yours so? The Spirit of God is Peaceable & Loving; Was yours so? The Spirit of Satan is Rash and Fu∣rious; Was not yours so? The Spirit of Christ comes out of a sight of Weakness; Did yours so? The Spirit of Satan comes with Hatred & Disdain, speaking evil of what it knows not; Did not yours so? The Spirit of Christ is still Enquiring; Was yours so? The Spirit of Antichrist is Con∣fident & Raging; Was not yours so? And yet (forsooth) you would have the States to be your Boyes, as Pilate was your fore∣fathers, to act what you desire: You mistake Sir, they have more Wit, more Honesty: Be pleased to look your Face in a Glass, be
it the Glass of the Sanctuary if you please: Do not you look like a pretty Fellow to rule the State? but in truth it is not insolent [unusual] for men of your Iacket to be in∣solent (Bold) My Desire to you, which I Publish to the World, is this, That you would be pleased to Print your Sermons; I promise you in the word of a Christian to Answer them, that so the Vulgar may be no longer Bewitched by a subtiler Spirit then had the WITCH OF ENDOR, and the World may no longer Halt between two Opinions; but if God be God, they may Serve him: but if Baal, then Follow him. I rest Yours, so far as you are Christs, Nicholas Culpeper. From my House in Spittle-Fields next Door to the Red-Lyon.  Aug. 3. 1650.
The Apo∣gaeum of Anno. 1651.   D M S   ♄ 27 36 6 ♐ ♃ 8 27 57 ♎ ♂ 29 56 27 ♌ ☉ 6 35 32 ♋ ♀ 0 46 0 ♋ ☿ 2 11 26 ♐ The Sun ingress into the Cardinal Points.     D H M S   ♈ March 10 2 5 6 P. M. ♋ June 11 5 30 9 P. M. ♎ Septemb. 12 20 45 34 P. M. ♑ Decemb. 11 7 59 49 P. M.
January 1651. February 1651
March 1651. April 1651.
May 1651. June 1651.
July 1651. August 1651.
September 1651. October 1651.
November 1651. December 1651.
Ianuary 1651. The dayly motions of the planets and ☊
Ianuary 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
Febr. 1651. The places of the Planets and ☊ at Noon.
February. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
March. 1651. The Planets places at noon.
March. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
April. 1651. The Places of the Planets and ☊ at Noon.
April 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
May. 1651. The Planets places at Noon.
May. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
Iune. 1651 The places of the Planets and ☊ at Noon.
Iune 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
Iuly 1651. The places of the Planets and ☊ at Noon.
Iuly. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
August. 1651. The dayly motion of the Planets and ☊
August. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
September. 1651. The places of the Planets at noon.
September. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
October. 1651. The dayly motions of the planets and ☊
October 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
Novemb. 1651 The places of the Planets and ☊ at Noon.
November. 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
Decemb. 1651. The Places of the Planets and ☊ at Noon.
December 1651. The Lunar Aspects.
The Diurnal Latitude of the Moon.
The Moons Latitude. Of Eclipses hapning this yeer. THere happens but two Eclip∣ses this yeer, and therefore both of them must needs be of the Sun, but neither being visi∣ble in our Horizon, I forbear further discourse of them. The next yeer 1652 appears a most formidable Eclips of the ☉ in ♈ 19. d. 15. m. 20. s. upon the 28. of March neer noon. ♂ upon the cusp of M. C. ♄ upon the cusp of the Ascendent, ♂ is lord of the Eclips, & coelum Mars so∣lus habet. The Princes of Europe shall almost all drink deeply of the ef∣fects of this Eclips, and the Che∣marims (ask Sr. Iohn Presbiter the meaning of the word) shall before hand like the three frogs mentioned in the Revelation go to gather them together to the battel of the Great God: Rejoyce ô ye Saints, in whom God dwels who are moved and guided by his Spirit, for a short work will your God make upon the face of the earth, & the days shalbe shor∣tened for mine & your sakes. The Effects of this Eclips will begin speedily, because the an∣gles are moveable, and operate violently, torrenti similes, as dreadfull will the effects of it be to Kings, as wel as Cōmon-people. Man that is in honor and under∣standeth not, is like the beasts that perish. For my part I have not so learned Christ to be afraid of the signs of Heaven, let them look to it that lead a beastial life. If what I write now please, I shall hereafter write more of this Eclips.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Aries.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Taurus
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Gimini.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Cancer.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Leo.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Virgo.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Libra.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Scorpio.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Sagitary,
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Capricorn.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Aquary.
A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51. degr. 34. min. Sol in Pisces.
A TABLE of the Essential DIGNITIES of the PLANETS.
I Hope I may crave Pardon, and as easily obtain it, for beginning my Prognisticks a little before the Year begins, it being the first time that ever I wrote in this nature: I shall but entreat you to look back to the 19 of Iuly, on which Day was a ☌ of ♄ and ♂ in 8. 34. of ♋, the Effects of which will do those Nations and People upon whom its Influence falls as much good to the full, as Sampson's Foxes with their Fire-brands at their tayls did in the Philistims Corn. I here present you the Scheam for Lat. 57. where the Inhabitants shall find the Effects most forcibly operate: The reason why I Calculated it not by the Tables of Regio Montanus, was, 1 Tis needless. 2 Not want of Skill, but want of Time.
In this Figure I shall mind but briefly, 1 The part of Heaven afflicted. 2 The Planets afflicting. 3 The Houses they are Lords of. 4 The Simpathy or Antipathy they bear to the former ☌ of ♄ and ♃. 1 The Sign afflicted is ♋, thence we may partly guess what Places are subject to the Influence of this ☌, viz. Scotland, Hol∣land, Zealand, Prussia, Algiers, Tunis, Constantinople, Venus, Millan, York, Amsterdam, &c. The sign is absolutely a Sea-sign, and therefore signifies all Towns taken out of, or environed with the Sea. The part of Heaven afflicted is the Ninth House, which signifies Voyages beyond Sea, Clergy-men of all sorts, even from the Pope to the Journey-man-Priest, Church-Livings and Bene∣fices, Anglice, Gleabland and Tythes, all Authors hold it signi∣fies, Religion, and I beleeve it signifies that Monster which People call Religion, viz. The Ordinances of men and the like; as also the predominant Religion of the Times and Countries, the States Religion be it what it will, Turkish, Iewish, or Popish, for it is at present my Opinion, That the true Religion will scarse e∣ver flourish by publick Authority, till Jesus Christ be set upon his holy hill of Zyon; in the mean season I look to see the beginning of the 2d Psalm accomplished: At present, I know not what be∣longs to that Religion Presbytery would establish; all the Reli∣gion I know, is Iesus-Christ and him Crucified, and the indwel∣ling of the Spirit of God in me: this I am sure is real Gospel, and Supernatural, (the influence of the Heavens is purely natural, therefore their operation upon natural things; and if my present Prognosticks be but heeded by the eye of Reason, you may see who they be that call natural parts divine) as for the Practical part
(as it is so called) I am as yet ignorant of; I have as much Faith in the Synods Directory, as I have in the History of Bel and the Dragon, or the Fable of Arion and the Dolphin; I dare not Dei∣fie humane Learning, though my self have been an Accademick, nor make a little god-almighty of the present Clergy; a few, a very few Months will shew they are but men, and perhaps none of the best of men neither. 2 The Planets afflicting are ♄ and ♂, both bad, and therefore not like to do good, they doth hate one another, both hate the Sign and House they are in; of this, see more is the writings of Mr Lilly upon the year, 1650. 3 They are Lords of the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 Houses. 4 In the Conjunction of ♄ and ♃ it is in the 7 House; the profection of ♄ and ♃ being in the 9 from the ☌ as this is in the Ninth of the Heavens. My Iudgment I shall deliver, 1 Generally, 2 Particularly: 1 Generally, It sets hard on the Clergy, and before the Effects of it be half over, Sr Iohn will find it wisdom to pawn his JUS DIVINUM for a SUPERSEDEAS DE NON MOLESTANDO. The Sea will be exceeding dangerous, both by Pyrates and Shipwarck; Holland and Zealand, look well to thy Dams, I fear the Sea will break in upon thee: God preserve York from Fire and Faction: And thou o Scotland (ingrateful Scotland) art now come into remembrance, thou couldest never find in thy heart to love thy Friends, therfore shalt thou now be forced to fear thy Enemies; for let whoever reads my writings, take notice what I say, If the Stars did ever in their courses fight against Sisera, so will they now against Scotland: The first is Scripture proof, and a little time will prove I am no Lyar in the second: In Scotland had Presbytery its beginning, there shall it expire; and very speedily may that saying that Vege∣tius
of the Chariots armed with Sythes and Hooks be applyed to Presbytery, At first they were a Terror, and afterwards a Scorn. The dreadful Effects threatned by this Conjunction, which al∣mighty God by the Book of the Creatures gives you fair warning of, according to Guido Bonatus are these, It signifies killing of Kings (for want of them take Supream Magistrates in their stead) subversion of Kingdoms, terrible Strifes, Contentions and wran∣glings, ill Disposition in Creatures, Slaughters Captivities, bur∣ning of Towns, much effusion of Blood, Famine, Mortality, Pe∣stilence; thus honest Guido: And intruth the Conjunction hap∣ning in the Ninth House, I shrewdly suspect the Clergy wil have a great hand in this, and for ever defile their Ecclesiastical garb, with a purple stain. I told you before what Places were by the course of Nature sub∣ject to the Effects of this Conjunction, and which of them God may in mercy be pleased to spare is unknown to me, or whether a∣ny: this I am confident, They are all threatned: God promiseth because he would perform: He threatens because he would not perform; And therefore O York, Scotland, Holland, Zealand, Amsterdam, &c. Let my Counsel be acceptable to you, Break off your sins by repentance, and your iniquities by shewing mercy to the Poor, it may be a lengthning of your tranquility; be sure ye prepare to meet your God: And thou O Presbyter, Thou hast seen what God hath done to thy fathers the Bishops, how for their Pride and Ambition he laid their Honor in the dust, yet hast not thou humbled thy self for all thou knowest all this; I assure thee two years will not pass (for so long the Effects of this Conjunction will last) before thy name will be Odious to men (except thou make thy peace with God, for the angry Angel hath drawn his SWORD a∣gainst thee) You would be Statesmen, nay State-Rulers (for∣sooth) would you not? Indeed it is denyed you, Repent, repent, I and that quickly before the dreadful writing, Mene, mene, tekel upharfin (you know the meaning of the words) be verified upon you also: I have delivered my own mind candidly, and drawn from rules of Nature: Look to your selves, or if you will not, I cannot help it.
Whether this Conjunction should be the fore-runner of some new and Monstrous Tenents in Religion, worse then the Ran∣ters, if worse can be; or whether monstrous Pride and saucy A∣ctions, in our present Clergy I leave for time to determine, sure I am there will be much striving, contending, controverting a∣bout Religion, and such Principles as shall bring neither con∣tent nor felicity, but only vast expence of brain and time. Thus much for the general. As for Paariculars, I desire you to take them as in respect of Time, not in respect of particular Actions, which Ptolomy Cent. Aph. 1. affirms none but mad men ([Qui furore incitantur] which Mr Lilly so learnedly translates men inspired (not with the spirit Python) but with the Spirit of God) will undertake to do. SEPTEMBER, 1650. EIther upon the very latter end of August, or very beginning of September, 1650. ♂ transists the place of ☉ at the ☌; I assure you gentle Clergy the Magistrate begins to smell out your knavery, why will not you give Caesar his due? Caesar hath gi∣ven you more then yours, and if you be not the wiser, he will give you a Rope to boot; tis wisdom and honesty, not Sophismes must save you: Now I expect a Rout in Scotland, prehaps great Guns and little Guns, together with all their Oatmeal and Salt lost: If our Ships be Northward, a hundred to one if they meet not with a Prize. The States of Holland this Month begin to smell a great RAT, Are you not all wise enough to make a Trap big e∣nough for him? The 8. 16. 22. and 29. dayes of this Month, or either of them, may prove Fatal both to Scotland and the rest of the Places subject to the Effects of this Conjunction. The truth is, It was my Opinion divers years before the last ☌ of ♄ and ♃, that that Conjunction was the fore-runner of an alteration both in Church and Common-wealth; and it is some∣thing observable, That the Sun in this Conjunction is upon the very degree of the 8 House in that; it may signifie the time at
hand, of a strange Epidemical, nay mortal Disease to the Clergy; I would they would learn to be wise, but they (say Astrologers) are under ♃, and I beleeve they have more of ♃ in them then of ♀, Anglice, more Money then Wit, that I may not say Honesty. OCTOBER, 1650. I expect more wonders this Month to be either agitated or tran∣sacted, or prepared for transaction by our State, then either our eyes or the eyes of our Fathers, grand-Fathers, or great-grand-Fathers ever saw, ever dreamt of: I hope for, (and indeed the Heavens promise no less) a Rectification of the Law, I never looked for it before, there is need enough of it: Tis a sad thing men must trot up from the remotest parts of the Nation to Lon∣don about every trivial Suit in Law: be quiet brother Commo∣ner, this Month promiseth thee much Redress that way; I doubt if the State should fall a Rectifying the Clergy, they would Re∣ctifie the greatest part of them away, and set them to Preach a∣gaist Astrology to the Posts. NOVEMBER, 1650. THere was a small Eclips of the Moon the last Month, and but a very small one neither, and that small one according to Ptolomy, will be a great while ere it begin to operate: Origanus he questions Ptolomy, in this particular, and so indeed do I; The Angles being fixed may indeed seem somewhat to retard its Ope∣ration; yet is the Eclipse Angular, and the Luminary Eclipsed in her exaltation; Must the glory of a Queen be Eclipsed? The Figure of the Eclipse is almost the same with that of the Conjun∣ction of ♄ and ♂, the which ☌ shall according Guido Bonatus operate speedily because they are Oriental, and therefore tis pro∣bable they are more like to help forwards the Effects of the E∣clips, then the Eclips is to retard theirs: The Commonalty lack Mony, and such an evil Spirit as entered into the Herd of Swin, possesseth the Presbyterian with a madness to undo himself.
The beginning of this Month seems to speak fair for an Ac∣commodation between us and the Scots; I fear the News is too good to be true; and tis very probable their yong King being a CHIP of the old BLOCK, may prove as good an Alchymist as his Father, viz. To sublimate all Treaties into Air: I wish from my heart Venice were so wise to make Agreement with the Otto∣man Family. Scotland ♄ is Retrograde, and so art thou; take heed of the 6. 13. 26 dayes of October: the 2. 16. and 29 of this Month; it is time for thee to enter into those few poor Garri∣sons thou hast, thou by this time findest by experience, That the Field conduceth not to thy health, but troubles thee with a Ver∣tigo, viz. To turn thy Face where thy Arse was. Farwel Irish Rebel. DECEMBER, 1650. IF the season of the year were sutable, this would be a Month of grand Action in the Field; Well, let it be as it is, we shall make it up in grand Consultations at home: I expect many Fo∣menters of the Scotch Divisions to be found out here, and they no small Fools neither: Who ere loseth the Hangman gets; tis an ill wind blows no body to profit: Bitter Divisions at home, bitter Weather abroad; let a Plaister of Patience mixed with a little Oyl of Contentment salve up our Sores. The 11 day ☉ enters ♑, the latter end of ♉ ascends, ♑ 28. mediates the Heaven, ☿ is weak, the ☽ applies to him, he is ☿ still, and my Brethren of the Commonalty lack no Wit this quarter, though they may happily want Money. This having premised, I come to this present Year, 1651. A general Judgment on which I shall give you when I come to March.
JANUARY, 1651. NOw Mars hath newly left the Square of Saturn, and his Square to the place he was in at the Conjunction; now Mars marches through the Ninth House of the Conjunction of Saturn and Iupiter, it is something strange that so many Influences should threaten the Clergy; who knows but that is the reason they rail so at Astro∣logy? we use to do so when we were School-boyes against those that told tales of us. The propinquity of this Month to the for∣mer or latter of the last year (if you will conclude the year at Christmass, which perhaps was first invented because they would end it merrily) is such, that this Month cannot chuse but partici∣pate of the evil Influence of the former; I find Mars in his de∣triment, though with Spica Virginis, a benevolent fixed Star, as if some honest minded People should labor to pacifie his fury; but he is in the Ninth of the Conjunction of Saturn and Iupi∣ter, in the Twelfth of the Conjunction of himself and Saturn, in the Seventh of the inition of this present Parliament, as if the Clergy should go about to Oppose the State; nay, to set the World together by the ears: Oh Heavens! What the Pigmies assault Hercules again! Learn your duty (Clergy) from an A∣strologer, it is not allotted you to be Statesmen, your Office is to teach Jesus Christ, and he was, he is the Prince of Peace, your Commission reaches no further, if you go beyond your Com∣mission, look to suffer for breach of it; if you be pressed in Spirit, then teach that Jesus is THE Christ, meddle with your Charge, but 'twas the Costome of your Fathers before you, go on in your Sins, they will be the sooner full, and your Judgment the sooner come; beleeve me, the time hastens when People will be Priest-ridden no longer. I had forgotten that the last Month threatens great Dissention in Scotland, great ones against great ones: Do! fall out, and Fight to, it shall not trouble me.
The Sea is extream dangerous, the Merchant loseth much, who can help it? we have much ado to crush those, who make Fancy, Lust and Apetite a Religion, because they have no better, and yet beleeve me this Month is in probability like to end better then it began. I would willingly have ended this Month, but when I remem∣ber Charls the First lost his head on the latter end of this Month let me give a timely Admonition to his Son; Oh! that he would be but so wise to hear: I question not, but some will have the Honesty to him, or the Malice against me, to tell him of it. It is only, Ier. 45. 4, 5. alittle applyed to his Person; Iehovan hath said thus, That which I have built will I destroy, and that which I have planted will I pluck up, even thy whole Family; and seekest thou great things to thy self? seek them not. If I speak to wise men, this is enough. FEBRUARY, 1651. HOw merrily doth this Month begin with my brother Com∣moner? The Nation smiles, every one is merry with his Mistriss, and think the worst is past; I wish it were from my heart, Latet hoc sub melle venenum: Our Souldiers and our E∣nemies plot Mischief one against another, when we poor Com∣monors know it not, neither is it fit we should, it is not our pla∣ces; and if every one had kept the place God set him in, this Na∣tion had not been in the picle tis in; let me mind my Physick, let the Plow-man mind his Plow, and the Clergy-man mind his Bible; we know not, neither was ever any man able to tell us, what Sin it was the Devils first Committed, only, Iude 6. God spared not the Angels that left their station: Let not us leave ours to turn Statesmen: I am confident, were it Pride, or Am∣bition as Priests tels us, some of themselves are as deeply guilty of it Qucad posse, as Lucifer could be. Mars falls Retrograde: Treaties break off: 'Tis the SWORD must end the Difference when all's done: The Magistrate out∣wits both the Scot, and Iack Presbyter his Son: Our neighbor
Kingdoms are afraid of us, they have cause enough; we fear nei∣ther what they, nor the Devil can do against us: Once more, Presbyterian, let me advise thee to be wise; why shouldest thou bring thy self into a Premunire, and fall before thy time? Be wise, or else thy Motto shall be, Miserum est suisse. MARCH, 1651. ☉ enters ♈ TIs a thousand pound to a penny, if there be not some diffe∣rence in this Annual Scheam between me and others; if
they would be loth to be denyed their own Judgments, why should they be loth to deny me mine? Be it, Sol entring Aries, or Ceres entring Libra, tis all one. The very Degree of M. C. in the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars is Ascendent in the Revolution; ☋ on the Cusp of I. C. jupiter in the latter end of the House, who is Lord of the year the Moon combust in the Eight, in Pisces. The degree of the Eight House in the Conjunction of Saturn and Iupiter, is not far off from the Ascendent in the Revolution, nor the place of the Sun in that Conjunction from the Eigth House in the Re∣volution: I want Paper and Time to make all these speak En∣glish; let the great ones whom it concerns beware. ☋ in the Fourth, shews much search after hid Treasure, and to as much purpose as to go about to piss down Pauls: vast ex∣pence of Money that way, and incuring much displeasure by over curious Inventions; Inventions did I say? I would have said Searchings. I cannot but conclude some, nay much good to the Commo∣nalty this year, for if the Lord of the year be well seated, as here he is, he signifies a good fruitful year, Prosperity and good for∣tune: Surely Justice will this year come down again from Hea∣ven to visit the Earth: Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity seems to attend the English Nation, I aspire to no Kingdom; I am a∣fraid to take a Publick Office for fear I should turn Knave as o∣thers have done. Iupiter being Lord of the year, Oriental, shew a hot and moist Spring, a wholsom Air, inclining generally to cleerness, gentle Northren blasts, by which, both Seeds and living Creatures are comforted. I will not deny but the Sun is very neer approaching to the Quartile of Saturn from Cardinal Signs, which according to Guldo Bonatus threatens such Places as are under the Sun & Leo, viz. Room, Italy, Gallia Togata, &c. If the Pestilence rage in those Places this year, I cannot help it. My own Opinion is, That the year will be far more plentiful then healthful; mens bodies will be vexed exceedingly with Coughs, Catharrs, Asthmaes, and other Diseases proceeding of cold and moysture, will be Epidemical, and of long continuance.
Much Contention concerning Lands, perhaps Deceits and Conycatching betwixt Father and Son about some such business: It signifies death of Women, and Queens be no other Creatures: indeed in all probability there may die three Women for one Man this year. I shall weave in the rest of my Judgments Monthly. When Saturn passeth by Transit the degree of his Conjuncti∣on with Mars, he unhapily meets with the Quartile of the Sun: On this pass without memorable Action? It happens in the Twelfth House of the Revolution: but the Ninth of that Con∣junction: Sol being in the Ninth of the Revolution, tis but a scurvy Trade to be a Pyrate, and in truth not much beter to be a Presbyterian, both suffer deeply; So let all thine Enemies perish, o Lord: For the Sun hath no sooner left the Square of Saturn, but he applyes to the Trine of Iupiter: Justice will speedily take place, which is the hearty prayer of all true English-men: At the time of the Square of Sol and Saturn, the Moon is just in the place of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars; sure without a Miracle, I shall hardly fail: About this time shall our Parliament find out who hath Cheated them and us all this time: A faithful Friend may now be discerned from a Flatterer: When Achan is taken away, the Children of Israel may expect to prosper: About this time our Parliament shall want no Enemies, nor scarce get a good word among the vulgar; Oppression will make a wise man mad: How happy might our States be, if they would but ease the Commonalty alittle of their extream Taxes: And my Advice to my Brethren of the Commonalty is, That they would be quiet; tis quietness and not Tumults best beseems them: He that strives against the Parliament shall find (as some about this time will) that he strives against the stream: Must the latter end of this Month produce a Sea fight? Well! If it do, look to it France, for thou wilt suffer: Beware Portugale: There's not a Nation under the Moon shall offend us, and escape unpunished.
APRIL, 1651. THe Sun is Eclipsed this Month upon the very last degree of Aries, but it is in the night, therefore not to be seen of us, unless we could see through the Earth, which is impossible; and that's the reason so few rich and learned men see Christ, because the Devil hath dawbed up their eyes with the World: This may be beheld by such as sayl through Mare Pacificum, and those that inhabit the parts Adjacent. It is probable many of my Prognosticks last Month, may come to maturity, or be visible this Month, and towards the middle of it; at which time the Sun passeth the Tenth House in the Revo∣lution: Much rainy weather, not without some sharp winds, are like to begin this Month, Thunder and Storms end it: Adulte∣ries enough may be found out, and the Statute against such Mis∣demeanors executed. Take heed Pope, thou art but a man. MAY, 1651. ME thinks this Month begins merrily as it should do; and yet it being Cookoo-time, Citizens Servants will be subject to run away apace; beleeve me, they will find but an untoward time with them, untoward dealings by them: Beware France, thy turn comes next; let but us alone this year, if thou wantest Employments at home, or canst find time to molest us next year, do it and spare not: I think our STATE will lack Money to Eter∣nity. Robbing abroad, scurrilous seditious Libels at home, with as many Lies as Lines in them conclude the Month; Men are Phrenitick, or as the Vulgar call it, Frantick: Miserable is that mans life that lives by inventing Lies. JUNE, 1651. SOL enters ♋ in the Seventh House, the Moon being in ♌ in reception with him; ♂ corrupts the Tenth by his pre∣sence: The ☽ having left the ✶ of ♂ applyes to the □ of ♀ who
is in ✶ to ☿ as though the beginning of the Summer should be molested with Wind and Rain, unseasonable weather hath the Country Farmer cause enough to fear, to the prejudice of his Hay, Let him stay till the Sun shines; yet if this were the worst it might be born Majus opus moveo: This Month ☉ cuts the de∣gree of the ☌ of ♄ and ♂, ♄ comes to another □ of ♂, and ☉ to the body of ♄; and the two Fortunes when they should be helping are at ods one with another. Hei mihi qui strepitus quique tumultus adest. Surely the Devil or Robin Goodfellow is in the Scots: Scot∣land! Scotland! Doest not thou see how thy Clergy cheats thee! If ever mortal men were mad to be undone, you are of that num∣ber: And you Clergy-men of my Country England, You have already smarted for medling with that you had nothing to do with: And those moderate Souls in the Countries, of which are some of your Trade, have smarted for your sakes: And now, be∣cause no warning would serve your turn, your House is left to you desolate: How osten hath Mr Lilly warned you of yonr downfal, and you would take none? Now you may sing Lacrymae instead of a Psalm: Algier and Tunis smart for their Piracy: Holland and Zealand thrive not what ere the matter is: And Amsterdam (which Town I exceedingly love and respect) might have been wiser then to have lost the wit she so dearly bought: The Acti∣ons of the latter end of this Month and the beginning of the next amaze all Europe, I had almost said, The World: If any hap∣pen to be Headless about this time, they will fall the lighter. JULY, 1651. IF any ask how this Month will begin, the Answer is ready, viz. Just as the last ended, finding out Knaves, such as set the Nation together by the ears, such as sowed the seed of Sedition in stead of the Truth; such as Wdidows and Fatherless Chil∣dren daily pray against; such as one day shall dearly answer for the Blood that hath bin spilt in this Civil War; such as have en∣deavored to Make themselves by Marring others; such as thought Justice had taken Opium, and would never awake more: and the
Answer is as ready if you ask how the Month shall continue and end? for unless the Sixth, Fourtenth, or Twentieth dayes cause a Batel Northward, to crown our Friends and Armies with Lau∣rel, it will both Continue and End in Execution of Justice upon Malefactors. If we have no Enemies about this time, which I can hardly be brought to beleeve, I am vilely afraid we shall fall out amongst our selves (which the Lord defend us from) Let the Army score their Valor upon the heads of their Enemies in the name of God, but let Peace and quietness be amongst themselves, for though Discord make a Harmony in Musick, yet it doth not so in an Army. AUGUST, 1651. ON the very beginning of this Month, the Sun cuts the As∣cendent of the year, and the mid-Heaven of the Conjun∣ction of Saturn and Mars; and sure the honest Commoner be∣gins to love the Parliament: Many see now who hath done them good, and preserved them and theirs from Egiptian Bondage: the Winds are high, and not without Thunder and Lightning about the 14 or 15 dayes of this Month: Mars cuts the degree ascen∣ding at his Conjunction, threatning some Epidemical Disease of his own Nature, I pray God it be easie to be cured; Head-ach and Feavers are very rife, I could almost afford to be afraid of a scurvy fashion called poysoning of men about this time, the Lord grant my fears to be in vain; the Month ends with Luxurious living amongst too too many, which will cause virulency, and so make work for the Chyrurgians. The latter end of the Month looks as though the Heavens promised a Reconciliation of some Differences between the Commonalty and their Masters, or Ser∣vants, which you will. SEPTEMBER, 1651. SOL enters Libra, at which time he is in the Southern Angle, Venus upon the cusp of the Tenth, both of them weak, and
old Saturn is in the Ninth, all this doth not much trouble me, were not Iupiter and Mars in Conjunction in the Ascendent, any body that pleaseth may set the Figure, I gave you the time at the beginning of the Ephemeris; and as I was thinking what the Effects of this Conjunction might be, I concluded to be a little Critical; and first to consider what Sign they meet in, which I find to be Sagittary. I suppose the sign to be violent, I know Origanus, and from him Mr Lilly hold the contrary, and that Aries, Scorpio, Capricorn Aquary and Libra, are the only violent signs: I admire how they, or any body for them, can make Libra, which is the Emblem of Equity, to be Violent! It is as strange to me, as how they can take on to make Mars and Venus friends, whose Houses, Na∣tures, and qualities, and what not, are opposite. Again, I am loth to be altogether so led by the Nose by Pto∣lomy, as not consider a little the Summer, and Autumnal, and Winter quarters though the sign Ascending in the Spring were fixed, it is possible they may not be so efficacious, yet my mind gives me, That there is some heed to be taken of them. Taurus descends upon the Sixth House at Sol his entrance in∣to Libra, and Venus is in Trine to it from the Tenth, and there∣fore Sickness is not very like to be the Effects of it, and yet some Effects out of question twill have: Haly saith, It signifies Strife, War, Mortality, and the Death of some King in that part signi∣fied by the sign in which they are joyned. I think Spain is under Sagittary. I pray God it stir not up a new War this Quarter a∣bout the Eastern parts of this Nation; Have not Kent & Essex had enough of it yet, they say Iupiter signifies the Clergy, if he do, then are they in ill Case, head-aches are very rife, and mens heads full of Consultations; some smart deeply in Estate. OCTOBER, 1651. THe last day of last Month, Sol transists the degree of Mars, in the Revolution; God send us Peace: 'tis pitty Brethren
should not agree; certainly the worlds mad, and therefore 'twill not live long: On the fourth day the Sun is Eclipsed, 'tis above the Earth, yet they say not visible to us, but to those about Bra∣sil, &c. It may be though we see it not, yet we may feel the Ef∣fects of it in some measure: the truth is, were it not for the things before mentioned, this Month would look with a pretty quiet face, and seems to promise some fair accord amongst our selves, which the Lord grant us, and then let Men and Divels be our Opposers. NOVEMBER, 1651. THis Month begins serenely, tis pitty tis not likely to hold; I hope my Brother Commoner will like the Law a little better then he was wont to do; if not, (which is not likely) let but Neighbors live quietly, and there will be the less need of it. This Month cannot, nor wil not leave us till it have set Saturn and Mars together by the ears: Is not Scotland quiet yet? or have they not been beaten enough? Iockey, Iockey, if God gives thee Physick once more, he will give thee such as shall ei∣ther Mend thee, or End thee. The Islands Orkades seem now to suffer, which till this time have been pretty quiet: old Matters are rubbed up in Scotland: neither is Oxford free from wrangling. DECEMBER, 1651. THe Sun begins to shine on the beginning of this Month, affording us seasonable weather, temperate Actions, but sud∣dainly the wind riseth high, and mens brains are entoxicated; they sit by the Fire and ponder in the Winter what they will do next Spring; invent Tales and Lies, by a second kind of Tran∣substantiation convert Fictions and Fables into Truth: neither can Women agree well with their Husbands, who can help it? if the Sheets cannot make them, Friends, I cannot: bitter cold weather ends this year, and begins the next.
An Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the Human Vertues in the Body of MAN: Both—Principal. Administring. Human Vertues are either Principal for Procreation. Conservation. Administring Attractive. Digestive. Retentive. Expulsive. Vertues Conservative—Vital, Natural, Animal. By the Natural are bred—Blood, Choller, Flegm, Melancholly. The Animal Vertue is—Intelective, Sensitive.
The Intellective is—Imagination, Judgment, Memory. The Sensitive is—Common, Particular. The Particular is—Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting. Feeling. THe Scope of this Treatise is, To preserve in soundness, vigor and acuity, the Mind and Understanding of Man, to strengthen the Brain, preserve the Body in health, to teach a man to be an able co-artificer, or helper of Nature, to with∣stand and expel Diseases. I shall touch only the principal Faculties, both of Body and Mind, which being kept in a due decorum, preserve the Body in health, and the Mind in vigor. I shall in this place speak of them only in the general, as they are laid down to your view in the Synopsis, in the former Pages, and in the same order. Vertue Procreative.] The first in order, is the Vertue Procreative; for Nature regards not only the conservation of its self, but to beget its like, and conserve its Species. The Seat of this is in the members of Generation, and is go∣verned principally by the influence of Venus. It is augmented and encreased by the strength of Venus, by her Herbs, Roots, Trees, Minerals, &c. It is diminished and purged by those of Mars, and quite ex∣tinguished by those of Saturn. Observe the Hour and Medicins of Venus, to Fortifie; of Mars, to Clense this Vertue; of Saturn, to Extinguish it. Conservative.] The Conservative Vertue is, Vital, Natural, Animal. Vital.] The Vital spirit hath its residence in the Heart,
and is dispersed from it by the Arteries; and is governed by the influence of the Sun. And it is so to the Body, as the Sun is to the Creation, as the Heart is in the Microcosm, so is the Sun in the Megacosm: for as the Sun gives Life, Light, and Motion to the Creation, so doth the Heart to the Body; therefore it is called, Sol Corporis, as the Sun is called, Cor Coeli, because their Operations are so like. Inimical and destructive to this Vertue, are Saturn and Mars. The Herbs and Plants of Sol, wonderfully fortifie it. Natural.] The Natural Faculty or Vertue, resides in the Liver, and is generally governed by Iupiter, Quasi juvans pater; its Office is to nourish the Body, and is dispersed through the Body by the Veins. From this are bred Four particular Humors, Blood, Choller, Flegm, Melancholly. Blood is made of Meat perfectly Concocted, in quality hot and moist, governed by Iupiter: It is by a third Concoction tran∣smuted into Flesh, the superfluity of it into Seed, and its recept∣acle is the Veins, by which it is dispersed throughout the Body. Choller is made of Meat more then perfectly Concocted; it is the spume or froth of Blood: it clarifies all the Humors, heats the Body, nourisheth the Apprehension, as Blood doth the Judg∣ment: It is in quality hot and dry; fortifieth the atractive Fa∣culty, as Blood doth the disgestive; moves man to Activity and Valor: its receptacle is the Gall, and it is under the influence of Mars. Flegm is made of Meat not perfectly digested; it fortifies the Vertue Expulsive, makes the Body slippery, fit for Ejection; it fortifies the Brain by its consimilitude with it; yet it spoyles Apprehension by its Antipathy with it: It qualifies Choller, cools and moistens the Heart, therby sustaining it, and the whole Body, from the fiery Effects, which continual motion would produce: its receptacle is the Lungues, and is governed by Ve∣nus, some say by the Moon, perhaps it may be governed by them both; it is cold and moist in quality. Melancholly, is the sedement of Blood, cold and dry in quality, fortifying the Retentive Faculty, and Memory; makes men so∣ber, solid and staid, fit for study; staies the unbridled toyes and
sooleries of lustful blood, stays the wandring thoughts, and re∣duceth them home to the Centre: it is like a grave Counsellor to the whole Body: its receptacle is in the Spleen, and it is go∣verned by Saturn. Of all these Humors, Blood is the chief, all the rest are but su∣perfluities of Blood; yet are they necessary superfluities, for without any of them, man cannot live. Namely, Choller is the Fiery superfluity; Flegm, the Watery; Melancholly the Earthly. Animal.] The third principal Vertue remains, which is Animal; its residence is in the Brain, and Mercury is the gene∣ral Significator of it. Ptolomy held the Moon signified the Ani∣mal Vertue; and I am of an Opinion, both Mercury and the Moon dispose it: And my Reason is, 1 Because both of them in Nativities, either fortifie, or impedite it. 2 Ill directions to ei∣ther, or from either, afflict it, as good ones help it: Indeed the Moon rules the Bulk of it, as also the Sensitive part of it: Mer∣cury the Rational part; and that's the reason if in a Nativity the Moon be stronger then Mercury, Sence many times over-po∣wers Reason; but if Mercury be strong, and the Moon weak, Reason will be master ordinarily in despite of Sence. It is divided into Intellective, and Sensitive: 1. Intellective.] The Intellective resides in the Brain, within the Pia mater, is governed generally by Mercury. It is divided into Imagination, Judgment and Memory. Imagination is seated in the fore-part of the Brain, it is hot and dry in quality, quick, active, alwayes working, it receives vapors from the Heart, and coyns them into Thoughts; it never sleeps, but alwayes is working, both when the man is sleeping and wa∣king; only when Judgment is awake it regulates the Imaginati∣on which runs at random when Judgment is asleep, and forms any Thought according to the nature of the vapor sent up to it, Mercury is out of question the disposer of it. A man may easily perceive his Judgment asleep, before him∣self many times, and then he shall perceive his Thoughts run at random. Judgment alwayes sleeps when men doth, Imagination never
sleeps, Memory somtimes sleeps when men sleeps, and sometimes it doth not; so then, when Memory is awake, and the man a∣asleep, then Memory remembers, what Apprehension coyns, and that is a Dream: The Thoughts would have been the same, if Memory had not been awake to remember it. These Thoughts are commonly (I mean in sleep, when they are purely natural) framed according to the nature of the Humor called Complexion which is predominate in the Body; and if the Humor be peccant, it is alwayes so. So that it is one of the surest rules to know a mans own Com∣plexion, by his Dreams, I mean a man void of Distractions, or deep Studies: (this most assuredly shews Mercury to dispose the Imagination, as also because it is mutable applying it self to any object, as Mercury's nature is to do) for then the Imagination will follow its old bend; for if a man be bent upon a business, his Apprehension will work as much when he is asleep, and find out as many truths by study, as when the man is awake; and per∣haps more too, because then it is not impedited by ocular ob∣jects. For the notion of the predominate Complexion, by the dreams, I have read some most excellent Verses, made by Thomas May, Esq which I shall here insert, by which, if the Complexion be not altered much in quantity nor quallity, you may know, by your most usual Dreams, not only your own Complexion, but also what every Complexion, is most prone and inclinable to: (I suppose, and really beleeve, That many Men and Women may know strange truths by their Dreams if their Nativities be accor∣dingly either by Nature, or perhaps if the business be rectified by Art, of which I may happen to write somthing hereafter.) They are these: Sanguine Complexion. There altogether fly in Companies, Of different Colors, Shapes and Qualities, Bright sanguine Dreams, that seem to cheer the night, With beautious Shapes, and rosy wings as bright,
As in the Morning, or those Flowers that grace In midst of Spring the painted Flora's face, Within the Temple merrily do sport, To whom the little Cupids oft resort: The little Cupids, from fair Venus Grove, Stealing by night, do thither come and love With those bright sanguine Dreams, to pass away The hours of night, in sport and amorous play. Chollerick Complexion. There Dreams of Choller in a flamelike hue, Through th' Aire, like little fiery Meteors flue, With swift and angry motion, to and fro, As if they sought within that place, a foe. Sometimes up to the Temples roof, on high, They soar, as if they meant to scale the sky: Or some impossible Atchievment sought, T' allay the thirst of an aspiring Thought. Melancholick Complexion. But down below, with sad and heavy cheer, On dead mens Tombs, and every Sepulcher, The dusky Dreams of Melancholy light, With sable wings, like Bats or birds of night, Fluttering in darkest corners, here and there, But all alone, and still each other fear: Courting dead Skuls, and seeming to invite The dismal Ghosts, for Company by night. Phlegmatick Complexion. There all along the Temples whited Wall, Phlegmatick lazy Dreams, not wing'd at all,
But slow, like slimy Snails, about do crawl, And evermore, are thence afraid to fall, And so be drown'd, for on the floor below, They do suppose, great Pools of water flow. And thus much for Imagination, which is governed by Mer∣cury, and fortified by his Influence; and is also strong or weak in man, according as Mercury is strong or weak in the Nati∣vity. Judgment is seated in the midst of the Brain, to shew that it ought to bear rule over all the other Faculties; it is the Judge of the little world, to approve of what is good, and reject what is bad; it is the seat of Reason, and the guide of Actions; so that all failings are committed through its infirmity, it not rightly judging between a real and an apparent good. It is hot and moist in quality, and under the influence of Iupiter. Memory is seated in the hinder cell of the Brain, it is the great Register to the little World; and its Office is to Record things either done and past, or to be done. It is in quality cold and dry, Melancholick, and therefore ge∣nerally Melancholick men have best Memories, and most tena∣cious every way. It is under the dominion of Saturn, and is for∣tified by his Influence, but purged by the Luminaries. 2. Sensitive.] The second part of the Animal Vertue, is Sensitive, and it is divided into two Darts, Common and Parti∣cular. Common Sence is an imaginary term, and that which gives Vertue to all the particular Sences, and knits or unites them to∣gether within the pia Mater. It is Regulated by Mercury, (per∣haps this is one Reason why men are so fickle-headed) and its Office is to preserve a harmony among the Sences. Particular Sences are Five, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling. These Sences are united in one, in the Brain, by the Common Sence, but are operatively distinguished into their several seates, and places of Residence.
The Sight resides in the Eyes, and particularly in the Christal∣line Humor; It is in quality cold and moist, and governed by the Luminaries: They who have them weak in their genesis, have alwayes weak sights; if one of them be so, the weakness possesseth but one Eye. The Hearing resides in the Ears; is in quality, cold and dry, Melancholly, and under the dominion of Saturn. The Smelling resides in the Nose, is in quality hot and dry, Chollerick, and that is the reason Chollerick Creatures have so good Smels, as Doggs. It is under the Influence of Mars. The Taste resides in the Pallat which is placed at the root of the Tongue on purpose to discern what food is congruous for the Stomack, and what not; as the Meseraik Veins are placed to dis∣cern what nourishment is proper for the Liver to convert into Blood; in some very few men, and but a few, and in those few, but in a very few Meats these two Tasters agree not; and that is the reason some men cover Meats that make them sick, viz. The Taste craves them, and the Meseraik Veins reject them: In qua∣lity hot and moist, and is ruled by Iupiter. The Feeling is deputed to no particular Organ, but is spread a∣broad, over the whole Body; is of all qualities, hot, cold, dry, and moist, and is the Index of all tangible things; for if it were only hot, alone, it could not feel a quality contrary, viz. cold; and so might be spoken of other qualities. It is under the domi∣nion of Venus, some say, Mercury: A thousand to one, but tis under Mercury. The Four Administring Vertues are, Attractive, Digestive, Retentive, Expulsive. The Attractive Vertue is hot and dry, hot by quality active, or principal, and that appears because the fountain of all heat is Attractive, viz. the Sun. Dry by a quality pasive, or an effect of its heat; its Office is to remain in the Body, and call for what Nature wants. It is under the Influence of the Sun, say Authors, and not un∣der Mars, because he is of a corrupting nature, (Experience is more worth then Tradition ten thousand times told over) yet if we cast an impartial Eye upon Experience, we shall find, That
Martial men, call for Meat, none of the least; and for Drink the most of all other men, although many times they corrupt the Body by it; and therefore I see no reason why Mars being of the same quality with the Sun, should not have a share in the do∣minion. It is in vain to Object, That the Influence of Mars is Evil, and therefore he should have no dominion over this Vertue; for then, 1 By the same rule, he should have no dominion at all in the Body of man. 2 All the Vertues in man are naturall Evil, and corrupted by Adams fall. This Attractive Vertue ought to be fortified when the Moon is in fiery Signs, viz. Aries and Sagitary, but not in Leo, for the sign is so violent, that no Physick ought to be given when the Moon is there: (and why not Leo, seeing that is the most Attractive sign af all? and that's the reason such as have it ascen∣ding in their Genesis, are such greedy eaters) If you cannot stay till the Moon be in one of them, let one of them ascend when you administer the Medicine. The Digestive Vertue is hot and moist, and is the principal of them all, the other like handmaids attend it. The Attractive Vertue draws that, which it should digest, and serves continually, to feed and supply it. The Retentive Vertue, retains the substance with it, till it be perfectly digested. The Expulsive Vertue casteth out and expelleth, what is super∣fluous by digestion. It is under the influence of Iupiter, and fortified by his Herbs and Plants, &c. In fortifying it, let your Moon be in Geminis, Aquary, or the first half of Libra, or if matters be come to that extremity, that you cannot stay till that time, let one of them ascend, but both of them together would do better, alwayes provided that the Moon be not in the Ascendent. I cannot beleeve the Moon afflicts the Ascendent so much as they talk of, if she be well dignified and in a sign she delights in. The Retentive Vertue is in quality cold and dry; cold, because
the nature of cold is to compress, witness the Ice; dry, because the nature of driness, is to keep and hold what is compressed. It is under the Influence of Saturn, and that is the reason why usually Saturnine men are so covetous and tenacious. In fortifying of it, make use of the Herbs and Plants, &c. of Saturn, and let the Moon be in Taurus or Virgo, Capricorn is not so good, say Authors, (I can give no Reason for that neither) let not Saturn nor his ill Aspect molest the Ascendent. The Expulsive Faculty is cold and moist; cold, because that compresseth the Superfluities; moist, because that makes the Body slippery and fit for Ejection, and disposeth it to it. It is under the dominion of Luna, with whom you may joyn Venus, because she is of the same nature. Also in whatsoever is before written, of the Nature of the Planets, take notice, That fixed Stars of the same Nature, work the same effects. In fortifying this, (which ought to be done in all Purgations) let the Moon be in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pises, or let one of these signs Ascend. COurteous Reader, if thou ever intendest to study Physick, and turn neither Fool nor Knave in that famous Science, be well skilled in this foregoing Discourse; here's enough for thee to whet thy Wits upon: Sympathy and Antypathy are the two Hinges up∣on which the whole Body of Physick turns: Thou hast the Radix of them here. Here's a Foundation for thee to erect the whole Fa∣brick upon, if thou beest wise; if not, thou art unfit to make a Physitian: I love well, and am as willing to help all ingenious men, though their parts be never so weak: but I hate Pride in whomsoever I find it: I now bid thee Farewel for this time, only take Notice, in all this Treatise I have not spoken one Word of the Colledge of Physitians. Aug. 4. 1650. Spittle-fields. Nich. Culpeper. FINIS.
The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, neer the Exchange, LONDON. A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY; or, a Translation of the Lon∣don DISPENSATORY. Whereunto is added, The Vertues of the Simples and Compounds. And in the Second Edition are 784 Additions, the general Heads whereof are these, Viz. 1 The Dose (or quantity to be taken at one time) and Use, both of Simples and Compounds. 2 The Method of ordering the Bo∣dy after Sweating and Purging Medicines. 3 Cautions (to all ignorant People) upon all Simples and Compounds that are dan∣gerous. With many Additions in every Page, marked with the letter A. Seven Books of M. Jer. Burroughs, lately Published: 1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. 2 Gospel-Worship, on Levit. 10.3. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1.27. 4 A Treatise of Earthly-mindedness, on Phil. 3. part of vers. 19. 5 An Exposition, with Practical Observations, on the 4th, 5th 6th & 7th Chapters of the Prophesie of Hosea. 6 On the 8th 9th & 10th Chapters, &c. 7 On the 11th 12th & 13th Chapters, &c. Twelve several Books of Mr Will. Bridge, in one Volumn. 1 The great Gospel-Mysterie of the Saints Comfort and Holi∣ness, opened and applyed from Christ's Priestly-Office. 2 Satan's power to tempt; and Christ's love to, and care of his People under temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, The overflowings of Christ's Fulness received by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual acting of Faith, through natural Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being of Christ in all Beleevers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 A Vindication of Ordinances under the Gospel. 10 Grace and Love beyond Gifts. 11 The Saints Hiding-place in time of God's Anger. 12 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. Six several Books of Dr Hill's, in one Volumn. FINIS.
