B3593 R24212 8076164 40795
THE Arraignment and Conviction OF ATHEISM: OR, An Exact and Clear Demonstration by Natural Arguments, that there is a GOD. Presented to the View of All, but especially the LEARNED. By JOSHƲA BONHOME, Rector of Calstock in the County of Cornwall: And Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Jnes for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey. 1679.
IMPRIMATUR. GƲIL. JANE. 14 Aug. 1677.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, By the Providence of God, Lord Bishop of LONDON. My Lord, THese Arguments and Reasons were the Shield wherewith Derodon Publick Pro∣fessor in Philosophy, in the Academy of Aurange withstood the Assaults of A∣theists, which swarmed in several places of Europe, about the time that this Land was full of them; which they themselves made plain and evident to all the World, when by an Example, without example, they made a mock at Laws, Justice, Religion, and God himself, by Embruing their prophane hands in the never enough lamented blood of the true Protector of Laws, Justice and Subjects, the Pat∣tern of Religion and Piety, and Gods true and lawful Vicegerent in these Three great King∣doms. He delivered first in his School Disputa∣tions, the Objections of Atheists, and furnished his Auditory with Mediums wherewith they might in a Syllogistical way Encounter these
Monsters; and afterwards Imparted them to his Countrey in his own Tongue: In the which, be∣ing fallen into my hands, I looked upon them as a Jewel, which I have since kept close by me, both be∣yond Sea, and here at home. And now seeing we live in an Age wherein we may very well take up the Prophets complaint, The wicked walk on every side, Ps. 12. v. 8. and say of most men in this our Bitish Israel, what the Apostle of the Gentiles said concerning the Cretians, That they are unru∣ly, vain Talkers, and Deceivers, who subvert whole houses, (and if they could whole King∣doms) teaching things which they ought not; and that they profess to know God, but in works deny him; being abominable and dis∣obedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Titus 1. v. 10, 11, 16. I have thought it my Duty to frame these Arguments in a known Tongue, to the People of this Land, that first both they and my self, may use them against this wicked brood, as Phinehas did his Javelin against the wicked and prophane Zimri, and impudent and brazen faced Cozbi, Numbers 25. v. 7, 14. And secondly, that both all debauched and ignorant persons, if they will take the pains to read over this small Tract, being convinced by the truth and solidity of these Rea∣sons; the one, that there is a glorious God, be∣fore whose Judgment-Seat they must (one day) all appear, and in whose hands it is a fearful thing to fall, they may receive Instruction rather than Sil∣ver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold, Prov. 8. v. 10. and so grow in grace and in the knowledge of God and our Lord Jesus Christ. And the other, that they may no more look upon the
Heavens and the Elements, as bodies of eternal du∣ration and continuance; nor live in this present world as if there were no death to cut off the thr of their sensual Lives; no Graves wherein the pampered Carcasses must be turned into dust a ashes, and become the meat of worms; nor  Judgment-day, wherein they must all stand befor the Throne of that God, who is a consuming fire Hebr. 12. v. 20. but have grace, whereby they ma serve God acceptably with reverence and god∣ly fear: and like the Thessalonians, from their I dols they may be turned to God, and from their Errors and wilful blindness, to serve and adore the true and living God, 1 Thess. 1. v. 9, 10. If these two sorts of men, who dote and rely too much upon Nature, may be convinced of their Er∣rours, ignorance and lewd life, by casting their eyes upon, and seriously considering the weight of these Natural Reasons: like Galen, who was wrought upon by an Anatomical Observation, I have attained half the end I intended in this Work: But if these Arguments, with the blessing of him whose Being they demonstrate, may dis-thronize out of the hearts of others (I mean the refined and professed Atheists) that grand Impiety of theirs; so that (whether publickly or privately) they may fall down before the Throne of God, and trem∣bling and astonished, cry out with Saul, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do, Acts 9.4, 6. Then shall I have reaped the fruit I expect of this Labour. My Lord, I hope this small Tract will be useful to all sorts of persons, but especially to the young
Plants, in the two famous Nurseries of this King∣dom, OXFORD and CAMBRIDGE, wo are every day fitting themselves for the Work of the Sanctuary. For if they will seriously consider the necessary Conclusions of these Arguments, they shall clearly see the invisible things of God, even hs eternal Power and Godhead, and understand tem from the Creation of the world, Rom. 1.20. and so be brought to remember their Creator in the days of their youth, Eccl. 12.1. and withal shall be furnished with such weapons as will conquer both Scepticisme, sometimes too too much enter∣tained in the Schools; and the foulest of all Im∣pieties Atheism: which though not taught and de∣fended openly, yet by a subtle pretended way of ar∣guing, Cognitionis causa, and sometimes by a cunning railing at the holiest things, is unhappily instilled in the hearts of young people. My Lord, I will not excuse my self for the un∣dertaking of this small Work, for I have learned this true Position, among other Axiomes in the Universities, both here and beyond Sea, Non nobis solum nati sumus, We are not born for our selves alone, but our Countrey challengeth an Inte∣rest in us, our Friends and our Posterity, do lay claim to us: Yet such wicked days are come upon us, though a man for glory to God, love to his Posterity, good will to his Countrey, or other honest motives, makes private things publick, for the common good of the Church and State, he is seldom praised of any, but reproved of many, and condemned or censured of all malicious persons. Bonum quo communius, eo melius, hath been
and will be a true Moral Principle, though some scorn to put it in execution: We know the best Master that ever man served did reprove and con∣demn him for an evil and ungracious Servant, that hid his Talent in a Napkin, refusing to put it forth to his Masters use and advan∣tage. My Lord, I humbly beg your Lordships par∣don for assuming perhaps more liberty than is fit, in presenting this short Treatise to your view, and to your Lordships patronage, yet trusting upon your Lordships goodness for a liberal acceptance. Nature and your Noble Birth, hath tought you. that to be generous is to be vertuous: but sure it is, that Wisdom, Learning and Piety have per∣fected Natural Disposition in you; so that I may say, the slenderer the Present, and the meaner the Giver is, the more will it commend the favourable Acceptance, and the noble Receiver. To such Eminent persons as your Lordship is, both by Birth, Dignity, and Vertue, men do not so much give the Thing it self which they present, as in it make tender of their hearts, love, duty and dearest regards. All which I here humbly present to your ships goodness, Commending you to the good∣ness of Him that so highly hath honoured you, and besceeching Him to heap up more and more all his Blessings upon your Person, Place and Re∣lations, to the glory of his Name, the good of our Church, and the encouragement of Learn∣ing and Piety; the Joy and Comfort of your heart in this life: which I earnestly pray may be
long and happy, and to the Eternal peace and joy of your Soul, in the day of the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. Thus prays Your Lordships Most humble. Most obedient, & Most obliged Servant, Joshua Bonhome.
TO THE Christian READER. BEfore I proceed to the main Matter of this Treatise, I hold it necessary to dis∣abuse some Pious and Religious Persons, who having never met nor medled with the prophane and ungodly Men (confuted and convinced in this Book) do verily think and imagine that there is never a Man so despe∣rately Wicked, at to deny and dis-affirm a God∣head. Inorder to that, let these godly Persons know, that there are in the World three sorts of Athiests; viz. 1. The subtle and wilely, 2. The lewd and debauched; and 3. The ignorant. The first of these, are they who having got∣ten a way of discoursing cunningly, with the help of their empty knowledge of natural Phi∣losophy, do undertake to frame Arguments a∣gainst the God-head, endeavour to answer the Reasons which prove its Existency and Being; and conversing with good and honest men, con∣vey subtilly into their minds, the Vennom them∣selves were insected and corrupted withal. I have spoken with one that had written a Dia∣logue against all Religions, who objected to me the first and sixth Reason or Answer, con∣futed in this Book, but soon after he grew Frantick, and dyed in a sad and lamentable con∣dition.
I met once with another, who urged very fiercely the second Reason they use to justifie their Impiety (which reason is propounded and fully answered in this Treatise) and disdainfully scoffed at my reply; this also a while after fought a Duel, and died upon the place. I have disputed against another, who made use of the first and fifth Arguments of theirs (in this Tract propounded and overthrown:) This on a day of fearful Thunder and Lightnings, made it his Bravado to speak Execrable Blas∣phemies against the Divinity; but in a short time he died (fearfully mad) with the Plague. I have seen several others that would Alledge all the pretended Reasons, which in this Book will appear to be full of Absurdities, and they for the most part have died very strangely, and the rest have suffered violent Death. It will not be amiss to Associate with these Monsters, a certain other dangerous sort of Men; who protest themselves to be Scepticks, and hold it lawful to doubt of all things, that they may also speak dubiously of the Divinity; against such Men, it were well if an Inquisition of Spain were set up all the World over. The Lewd and Debauched Atheists, are for the most part young Men of great and Rich Fa∣milies, who having had a bad Education, are easily drawn away, both by the frequenting and keeping company with the subtle and cunning Atheists; and by giving place to all the Charms of Sport, and Play, Drunkenness and Women: do insensibly abandon themselves to the most abo∣minable Vices that Hell and the Devil can De∣vise.
These are in greater number than there∣sined Athiests (as some call them) seeing they swarm in great number in the Courts of most Princes, and the greatest Cities in Europe. The ignorant Athiests, which exceed in num∣ber the two former sorts, are they who profes∣sing indeed that there is a God; have notwith∣standing but a light Opinion of the same: ground∣ed only either upon the Hear-say of their Pa∣rents, or the General Consent of them that are daily conversant withal: Neither are they per∣swaded of this truth by the Creation of the World, nor by the admirable and wonderful Disposition and Symmetry of the parts of it; nor by any of the Reasons and Arguments which are to be seen in this Book. These are of the vulgar and common sort of People, who being loath to give themselves the trouble to be instructed in the wayes of Salvation, never be∣lieve that there is a God, but because they are born and bred among those that believe it. Such are they also, who being drawn away of their own Lusts, and Entised, fall into grievous and horrible sins, without the least sorrow, or re∣luctancy. For I cannot be perswaded, that a man who believes that there is a God Almigh∣ty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and who is within him, without him, and about him, and every where; and who can cast him for ever in∣to the bottomless Pit of Hell for his sins: I can∣not be perswaded, I say, that such a man will sin willingly and wittingly, against a God so great, and so puissant, without horrour and resistance. For if the presence of a King, a Lord, or a
Judge, will keep back the most wicked from Committing their Villanies; much more, if one were perswaded there is a God Almighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and Judge of all the Earth; his presence would keep Man back from Committing Adulterses, Robberies, Murthers, Buggeries, and all other abominable Crimes, which are so frequent in the World. Therefore let the Devout and Religious Per∣sons, who think well of all Men, never find fault with me; if my zeal to the glory of God hath caused me to present the World with the Ar∣guments here contained against this prophane and ungodly Brood the Athiests. And I hear∣tily wish that all young People may so Arme and Fortifie themselves with these my Reasons, that they may keep themselves from being se∣duced by such Devils.
A TABLE of the Principal Matters contained in this BOOK. CHAP. I. 1. THat the World not being from all E∣ternity, one must necessarily conclude there is a God that Created it. 2. That the Sun hath not been from all E∣ternity. 3. That the Earth hath not been from all Eternity. 4. That the Day hath not been from all Eternity. 5. That neither Day nor Night have been from all Eternity. 6. That the Moon hath not been from all Eternity. 7. That the Sea hath not been from all Eternity. 8. That Men have not been from all Eternity. 9. The First Confirma∣tion. 10. The Second Confirmation. 11. The Third Confirmation. 12. That Alteration, Ge∣neration, and Corruption, are not from all Eternity. 13. That neither Movable Things, nor Time, have been from all Eternity. 14. A General Proof that the Bodies have nor been from all Eternity, nor (con∣sequently) the World. CHAP. II. 1 THE first Answer of Athiests, that Succes∣sive Things may have been from all Eternity, collectively & not distributively. 2. How many ways
a Thing may be related to, or agree with, another Distributively, or Collectively. 3. That Successive Things cannot be from all Eternity Collectively. 4. That Old Men, Young Men, and Children, Col∣lectively, or taken together, cannot have been from all Eternity. 5. That the Dead have not been from all Eternity. 6. That all men Collectively, having been begotten, cannot have been from all Eter∣nity. That the right understanding and apprehension of the destinction of Athiests, is a sufficient refuta∣tion of the same. CHAP. III. 1. THE second Answer of Atheists, viz. That as in the After-Eternity, that is to say, in the Future, there will be no last or furthermost; so in the Fore-Eternity, that is is to say, in time past, there hath been no first or foremost. 2. That Athe∣ists compare unlike things, and the disparity ex∣plained. 3. That re-ascending towards the time past, one may run through it; and so 'tis not Infi∣nite. 4. That the Succession of things cannot be E∣ternal, and why. CHAP. IV. 1. THE third Answer of Atheists, concerning the Infinite Number. 2. Three Arguments of Athiests, whereby they strive and endeavour to prove that one Infinite is greater than another. 3. That those men which have been in time past, make up some number. 4. That in whatsoever num∣ber of Men, there is as much, or more, or less. 5. The Refutation of the Athiests Argument, That one
Infinite, is greater than another, Materially, and not Formally. 6. That it is a Contradiction to grant or make one Infinite to be greater than the other. 7. That the Answer of Atheists doth not at at all hurt or touch our choice and indissoluble Rea∣son, drawn from the distance of Men. 8. What the space is not, and what it is proved. 9. The Answer to the Atheists First Argument, drawn from the infiniteness of the Oriental and Occidental space. 10. Another Answer to their Second Argument, drawn from the infiniteness of the thoughts both of Men and Angels. 11. Another to their third Argu∣ment, drawn from the pretended infiniteness of Men and Lyons possible, that is to say, that God may pro∣duce and create. CHAP. V. 1. THE Fourth Answer of Athiests, saying, That from all Eternity there was a Chaos. 2. That the Heavens and the Elements did not by degrees dis-intangle, and resolve themselves from all Eter∣nity. 3. That they did not remain a finite time to resolve or clear themselves. 4. That they did not remain an infinite time to clear and resolve them∣selves. 5. A Digression, wherein the two first Verses of the first Chapter of Genesis are explained; and shewed that there is no mention made of a Chaos, and that they do not contain a Proposition of all those things God Created in Six dayes; and that light was not the first Creature. CHAP. VI. 1. THE Fifth Answer of Athiests, saying, That there hath been, from all Eternity, Mat∣ter without Form. 2. The Proof, That there hath
not been from all Eternity a Matter without Form; and that the Matter could not produce the Forms. 3. That the Eternal Atomes, by a casual concourse, have not made and disposed the World. 4. That the Forms cannot have been produced, but by God. CHAP. VII. 1. THE Sixth Answer of Athiests, saying, That men have their Original and beginning from the Tritons and Sirens, commonly called Mair∣maids. 2. The Refutation of this Answer. CAHP. VIII. 1. THE Seventh Answer of Atheists, saying That men have been produced by, or proceeded from, the Eternal Earth, or from all the Elements together. 2. Reasons alledged, or Evidence produ∣ced against the falshood of this Answer. 3. That the Earth, nor the other Elements, cannot have been naturally disposed to produce Men. 4. Other Rea∣sons, proving, That Men have not been produced by the Earth, nor the other Elements. CHAP. IX. Other Reasons proving that there is a God. 1. THE First Reason drawn from the Order of the Ʋniverse. 2. The Second from the Ge∣neral Consent of all People and Nations, whoever acknowledged a God-head. 3. The Third from the fear of the Judgments of God, because of Sin. 4. The Fourth from the Existency of Devils. 5. The Fifth is drawn from the First Mover and the First Cause. 6. The Sixth from the Novelty of Histories. 7. And the Seventh from the Consideration that the Sea hath not submerged the Earth.
CHAP. I. 1. That the World not being from all E∣ternity, one must necessarily conclude there is a God that Created it. 2. That the Sun hath not been from all Eter∣nity. 3. That the Earth hath not been from all Eternity. 4. That the day hath not been from all Eternity. 5. That neither Day nor Night have been from all Eternity. 6. That the Moon hath not been from all Eternity. 7. That the Sea hath not been from all Eternity. 8. That Men have not been from all Eternity. 9. The first Confirmation. 10. The second Confirmation. 11. The third Confirmation. 12. That Altera∣tion, Generation, and Corruption, are not from all Eternity. 13. That neither moveable Things, nor Time, have been from all Eternity. 14. A general proof that the Bodies have not been from all Eternity, nor (consequently) the World. THe Knowledge of Causes by their Effects, is the best and most cer∣tain part of Philosophy. Fire is known by Burning, Water by its Moi∣stening and Cooling quality; Men are known by Reasoning and Discoursing,
Lions by their Roaring; and all other Things by their Operations. Now if se∣cond Causes, which for the most part may be apprehended by humane sense, cannot be better known than by their Effects; much more the first Cause dwelling in an inaccessible Light, is to be known by his Works. The Holy Apostle of Christ, St. Paul, teaches this very clearly in his Epistle to the Roman, Chap. 1. v. 20. when he says, That the invisible Things of God, even his Eternal Power and God-head, are clearly seen, being under∣stood by the things that are made. Shewing thereby, that Naturally, by the Con∣templation of the Creatures, a man may attain to the Knowledge of the Creator; and by the consideration of the glory of this beautiful Universe, may be led and induced to the admiration of its Creator. Following the steps of this Holy Doctor, I will demonstrate by the Creation of the World the Existence of the God-head, against those whom Debauchery, ill Company, and want of Learning, hath so horribly corrupted, that they dare publick∣ly deny him, in whom even they move and live, and have their being. I reason thus: 1. If the World hath not been from all Eternity, it follows it hath had a be∣ginning; and having not had that begin∣ning
of it self, seeing nothing can pro∣duce it self, it must needs be granted necessarily that another hath given it that beginning, and consequently hath crea∣ted it. But the Creator of the Universe and God, are one and the same thing. That the World hath not been from all Eternity, will appear, in running through the chiefest parts of the same. I will be∣gin with the Sun, the most glorious of all Soul-less Creatures, and which A∣stronomers hold to be one hundred and sixty times bigger than the whole Earth. 2. The Sun was never without Light∣ing the Earth, as the Atheists themselves grant, who say that the World hath been from all Eternity in the same being and case it is now; but the Sun hath not Lightened the Earth from all Eternity; therefore the Sun hath not been from all Eternity. The Assumption or second Proposition is demonstrated thus: If the Sun hath Enlightened the Earth from all Eternity, either it hath Enlightened from all Eternity our Hemisphere onely; or that of our Antipodes onely, or both, Now the Sun hath not Enlightned from all Eternity our Hemisphere only, nor that of our Antipodes only, nor both, which is proved thus: If the Sun from all Eternity hath Lightened our Hemi∣sphere
onely, it follows that the Hemi∣sphere of our Antipodes hath not been Lightened by the Sun from all Eternity, though there have been wanting but very few hours; seeing the Sun having Ligh∣tened our Hemisphere, goes and Enligh∣tens that of our Antipodes some few hours after: just so, If the Sun hath Enlightened from all Eternity the Hemisphere of our Antipodes onely, it follows that our Hemisphere hath not been Lightened by the Sun from all Eternity, though not∣withstanding there have been wanting but a very few hours; seeing the Sun having Lightened the Hemisphere of our Antipodes, comes and Enlightens ours some few hours after. Now was there ever a man so void of reason and understanding, to believe, that betwixt that which is from all Eternity, and that which is not from all Eternity, the difference is onely of few hours; and that there is but half a days distance be∣twixt that which is finite, and that which is infinite, Time and Eternity? Finally, If both the Hemispheres have been En∣lightened by the Sun from all Eternity, either it was all at once, or one after another; not all at once, else it would have been Day every where at once, and the Sun would have been in two places
at the same time, which is impossible: nor one after another, because that which hath been Lightened from all Eternity, cannot have been Lightened after ano∣ther, nothing having been before that which is from all Eternity. But Atheists do hold that our Hemisphere hath been Enlightened from all Eternity; then our Hemisphere hath not been Lightened af∣ter another: and so consequently not after that of our Antipodes. They hold also that the Hemisphere of our Anti∣podes hath been Lightened from all Eter∣nity, then it hath not been Enlightened af∣ter another, and consequently not after our Hemisphere; from whence one may infallibly conclude that both the Hemi∣spheres have not been Lightened from all Eternity one after another. Finally, Two Eternal Things cannot be but to∣gether, and consequently one cannot be after another; there being nothing be∣fore that which is Eternal. Therefore if the two Illuminations, to wit, that of ours and that of our Antipodes Hemi∣sphere, have been Eternal, they necessa∣rily must have been together, and not one after another; which is impossible, as above I have proved I conclude then that the Sun, not having Enlightened our Hemisphere from all Eternity onely, nor
that of our Antipodes onely, nor both, either at once, or one after another; that the Sun (I say) hath by no means Enlightened the Earth from all Eternity; And seeing that the Sun (as Atheists them∣selves say) never was without Lighten∣ing the Earth, it follows that Illumina∣tion not being from all Eternity, the Sun also is not from all Eternity, but hath had a beginning; and having not that beginning of it self, seeing nothing is the cause of it self, it follows, that another hath given it a beginning, and consequently hath created it: Now the Creator of the Sun, and God are the same. As to that as is objected by A∣theists, concerning the Eternal Collecti∣on of all Illuminations, or their Eternal Succession, shall be fully confuted here∣after in our Replies to their Answers. 3. The same reason that proves that the Sun hath not been from all Eternity, proves also that the Earth hath not been from all Eternity, thus: The Earth (as Atheists say) never was without being Enlightened by the Sun; now I have shewed already that the Earth hath not been Enlightened by the Sun from all E∣ternity, therefore it hath not been from all Eternity. If you observe the last Pa∣renthesis, you will see that this Argu∣ment
is formed from the Atheists own Doctrine; for should I reason according to Holy Scripture, which is infallible, the very first verse of Genesis would prove to them that the Earth was Created be∣fore the Sun, and consequently was not always Enlightened by the Sun. 4. The same reason may also be con∣firmed thus, Either there hath been some Day from all Eternity or not; if not, it follows that all Days have had a begin∣ning, and therefore that the Day hath not been from all Eternity. If the Day hath not been from all Eternity, neither the Sun hath been from all Eternity, see∣ing the Sun never was without Light and Day. If there hath been some Day from all Eternity, either there hath been one onely or many; if one onely, it will follow that all other Days have had a be∣ginning, and that there wants but one Day to the Eternity of the second Day, which is most absurd: Seeing betwixt that which is finite and that which is in∣finite; betwixt Time and Eternity; be∣twixt that which hath had a Beginning, and that which never had a Beginning, there is more than a Days distance. If there have been many Days from all E∣ternity, either it were all at once, which is repugnant to the common sense; seeing
Days succeed one the other, or one af∣ter another, which is repugnant to E∣ternity; for that which is from all Eter∣nity and without Beginning, is not after another; as I have proved already. 5. This Reason may be confirmed a∣gain, thus: When two Men have been at some place, suppose a Town or City, they must needs have been there, either at the same time, or one after another; so, seeing that Day and Night have been in our Hemisphere, they must needs have been in it, either at the same time, and at once, or one after another, not at the same time and at once; else it would have been Day and Night in the same place at once, which is impossible; not also one after another, for it would have been the Day after the Night, or the Night after the Day: If the Day hath been after the Night, it follows that it hath not been from all Eternity, seeing that which is Eternal is not after another; and moreover, there will have been very little wanting to the Eternity of the Day; seeing the Day is few hours after Night, which is said to be Eternal by Atheists: If the Night hath been after the Day, it follows that it hath not been from all Eternity (that is in our Hemi∣sphere) seeing that which is Eternal, is
not after another; and moreover there will have been very little wanting to the Eternity of the Night, seeing the Night is few hours after the Day, which is said to be Eternal by Atheists: Therefore I conclude that the Day hath not been from all Eternity, nor consequently the Sun, which never was without the Day. Finally, Two Eternal Things cannot be but together, and consequently one can∣not be after another; there being no∣thing before that which is Eternal: But the Day and the Night cannot be to∣gether, therefore the Day and the Night are not Eternal Things. 6. By the like reason one may prove that the Moon hath not been from all Eternity, thus: If the Moon hath been from all Eternity, either it hath been from all Eternity, onely Full, or onely New, or both. If it hath been from all Eternity onely Full, it follows it hath not been New from all Eternity, though notwithstanding there have been but few days wanting; seeing the New Moon is few days after the Full Moon. And so if the Moon hath been from all Eternity onely New, it follows it hath not been Full from all Eternity, though notwith∣standing there have been but few days wanting; seeing that the Full Moon is
few days after the New Moon. And if it hath been both New and Full from all Eternity, it were either at once, which is repugnant to common sense and expe∣rience, or one after another, which is opposite to Eternity; for that which is Eternal, cannot be after another; as a∣bove I said: Therefore the Moon having never been without being either Full or New, or wanting but very little, and having been neither Full nor New from all Eternity, it is evident it hath not been from all Eternity; for two Eternal Things cannot be but together, as above I have proved. Now the Full Moon and the New Moon cannot be together; there∣fore the Full Moon nor the New Moon can be Eternal. 7. The same way of arguing may be used against the Eternity of the Sea, If the Sea hath been from all Eternity, either it hath been from all Eternity with the Flowing onely, or with the Ebbing one∣ly, or with both: If it hath been from all Eternity with the Flowing onely, it follows that it hath not been from all E∣ternity with the Ebbing, though there have been but very few hours wanting; seeing the Ebbing of the Sea is six hours or well near, after it hath began Flow∣ing: So if it hath been from all Eternity
with the Ebbing onely, it follows it hath not been from all Eternity with the Flowing, though there have been but very few hours wanting; seeing the Sea hath its Flowing six hours or thereabouts, af∣ter the beginning of its Ebbing. And if it hath been from all Eternity with its Flowing and Ebbing, it must be all at once, which is impossible; seeing it can∣not go backwards and forwards, Flow and Ebbe at the same time, or one after another, which is opposite to Eternity: for as I have said above, two things E∣ternal cannot be but together, and con∣sequently cannot be one after another; there being nothing before that which is Eternal. But the Flowing and Ebbing cannot be together, therefore not Eter∣nal. And so seeing the Sea never was without Flowing or Ebbing, and that neither the Flowing nor Ebbing have been from all Eternity, it is evident that the Sea is not from all Eternity. As for the Eternal Collection of all Flowings and Ebbings, or the Eternal Succession of the same, it will be confuted hereaf∣ter. 8. Now let us come to the Considera∣tion of other Creatures, and let us shew that Men have not been from all Eternity, and that they never succeeded one ano∣ther
by an Eternal Generation; my rea∣son is this: If Men had been from all E∣ternity, and had been one after another by an Eternal Succession of Generations, it would follow that the number of those Men which have been in time past till now, should be infinite; for it is evi∣dent that if the number of them were finite and determined in it self, there would have have been some first and some second, &c. and at this day some last; and where some may be said to be first, there is a beginning, and consequently no Eternity; but the number of Men which have been in time past till now, is not infinite; therefore Men have not been from all Eternity. The second Propo∣sition is proved thus, An infinite number admits no greater number, but a greater number then that of Men which have been in times past till now can be given; seeing there have been more Hands, more Fingers, more Hairs, and more Beasts than Men; therefore the number of Men which have been in times past till now, is not infinite. The first Proposition of this last Syllo∣gisme, to wit, that an infinite number admits no greater number, is made good thus: If the infinite number could admit a greater number, or a greater number than the infinite could be given, it would
follow that an infinite number should be exceeded by a greater number; seeing that of two numbers the greater exceeds the other: But the infinite number can∣not be exceeded, seeing that which is exceeded is finite or termined, where it is exceeded; and the infinite cannot be finite; therefore the infinite number cannot admit a greater number. 9. Moreover, Either there hath been some Man from all Eternity or not; if not, it is evident that Men have not been from all Eternity; if any was from all Eternity, it follows that he shall not have been made or begotten by another; seeing that which is made or begotten of another, is after another: But that which is Eternal is not after another, there be∣ing nothing before that which is Eternal. 10. Again, Men which are said (false∣ly) to have Lived from all Eternity, did not yet Live an Eternity, else they had Lived longer than a thousand times one hundred millions of thousands of years, which is against the common sense; and therefore they have Lived but a finite time, that is on hundred or a thousand years onely; from whence I reason thus: Betwixt that which is from all Eternity, and that which is not from all Eternity, there is a greater distance than of some
few years; but betwixt the Life of Men, which are falsely said to have Lived from all Eternity, and their Death, which is not from all Eternity, there is but a few years distance; therefore their Death, not being from all Eternity, it is impossible their Life should have been from all Eternity. 11. Besides, The Men which have Lived in time past till now, are distant one from another, with an infinite di∣stance of time onely, or with a finite distance onely; or some are distant with a finite distance, and others with an infinite distance: If they are all di∣stant with an infinite distance of time, it will follow, that betwixt Jesus Christ as Man, and we that Live at present, there will be an infinite distance, and consequently an infinite space of time, which is false; seeing there is but one thousand six hundred seventy seven years, according to the common supputation: It will follow also, that betwixt K. Charles the First and K. Charles the Second, there will be an infinite distance of time; which is absurd. If they are all distant with a finite distance of time onely, it follows that their duration contains a finite time onely, and consequently are not Eternal, which is most true: If some are distant with a finite distance, and
others with an infinite distance; and that of all them which are onely distant, with a finite distance, one takes the two remotest: For example, Peter who Liveth at this day, and then remounts towards them, that have preceded Peter, and from whom he is descended; if one takes (I say) him who in a finite distance is the farthest, tow it, John; I say that if one remounts a little higher, that is unto William the Father of John, it will fol∣low that Peter and William, will be di∣stant one from another, with an infinite distance of time; seeing they are more distant and farther removed in a finite distance: so that it will follow, that be∣twixt the finite distance, which is be∣tween Peter and John, and the infinite distance between Peter and William, there will be but very few years diffe∣rence, that is so many years (and no more) as are betwixt William the Fa∣ther and John his Son; which is altoge∣ther absurd. 12. Add hereto, That every Gene∣ration presupposeth some Alteration, that is some convenient Disposition of the Matter, for the introduction of the Form, and Generation of the Composed: From whence I dispute thus, That which is Eternal is not preceded, but Generati∣on
is preceded by Alteration, since it presupposes it necessarily: thefore Gene∣ration is not Eternal; and consequently Men have not succeeded one another by an Eternal Generation. By the same reason one proves that Corruption is not Eternal, thus: That which is Eternal is not after another, seeing nothing is before, or precedes that which is Eternal; but Corruption is af∣ter Generation: Seeing one and the same thing cannot be at the same time begot∣ten and corrupted, produced and de∣stroyed; therefore Corruption is not E∣ternal. In one word, Eternal Things cannot be but together, and cannot be one after another; seeing nothing pre∣cedes, or is before that which is Eternal: But Alteration, Generation, and Cor∣ruption, cannot be together, but are necessarily one after another; that is, Corruption after Generation, and Gene∣ration after Alteration: Therefere Al∣teration, Generation and Corruption are not Eternal; and consequently Men have not been begotten from all Eternity, nor have succeeded the one the others, by an Eternal Generation. Moreover, The Generation of the Thing, and the Thing begotten, cannot be but together: But the Thing begotten is not Eternal, seeing
it is after another; to wit, the beget∣ting, at least in the Generations of Men, of whom we speak: Therefore Genera∣tion is not Eternal. 13. Another general reason may be added to what hath been said hitherto, proving that all Moveable Things have had a Beginning, and that there is none which may have been from all Eternity: Thus, If Time is not Eternal, it follows that Motion is not Eternal, seeing that Time is nothing else but the duration of Motion; but Time is not Eternal, there∣fore Motion is not Eternal; nor conse∣quently the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which never were without Motion, that is with∣out moving from East to West; nor the Sea, which never was without Motion, that is, without Flowing or Ebbing; nor Men which never were without motion, that is without pulse or respiration, nor without some Motion of the Vital or Ani∣mal Spirits. That Time hath not been Eternal, appears, because Time Eternal is a Time infinite; Seeing the Time fi∣nite hath a beginning and an end, and the Eternal hath neither beginning nor end. Now Time hath not been infinite; Therefore it hath not been Eternal. That Time hath not been infinite, is clear, be∣cause time infinite comprises a number in∣finite
of years; Seeing a finite number of years, cannot make an infinite time: but there is not an infinite number of years, therefore Time hath not been in∣finite. That there have not been an in∣finite number of years, is clear also; be∣cause there cannot be a greater number, than an infinite number: else the infi∣nite number should be exceeded by this greater number: Seeing that of two numbers, the greatest exceeds the other. And if an infinite number were exceed∣ed, it would be finite and terminate, where it is exceeded, which is impossi∣ble; Seeing that to be infinite and finite are contradictories: But a greater num∣ber may be given than that of the Years which have been, seeing there have been more Moneths and Days than Years. Moreover the Year is always after the Moneth, the Moneth after the Day, the Day after the Hour, and the Hour after the Minute, and consequently the Year, the Moneth, the Day, the Hour, in the whole, are not from all Eternity; seeing that which is Eternal is not after another. Moreover, We may say of Years, what we have said of Men; viz. That the Years that have been in time past, either are all distant, with an infinite distance of time, or are all distant with a finite di∣stance:
If they are all distant with an in∣finite distance, it will follow that be∣twixt the Year One thousand six hun∣dred and seventy, and the Year One thousand six hundred seventy seven, there is an infinite distance, and consequently an infinite time, which is absurd: If they are distant with a finite distance, it follows that they comprize but a finite time, and consequently are not Eternal. Again, If some Years be distant with a finite distance, and others with an infinite distance, and that of all the Years which are only distant with a finite distance, one takes the two remotest: for example, This Year One thousand six hundred se∣venty seven, marked A, and reascending with a finite distance to the remotest Year from the same, and that Year be marked B; I say that if one remounts a Year high∣er marked C; it will follow that the Years C and A, will be distant with an infinite distance, seeing they are more distant and remote than B and A; which are the remotest in a finite distance: so that it will follow that betwixt the finite di∣stance B and A, and the infinite distance C and A, there will be but a years dif∣ference; and that the year C which is a finite time, added to the distance of B and A, which is also a finite time, will
be an infinite time; such as is the distance of C and A, and that the time infinite, viz. the distance of C and A, by the de∣traction of a finite time, viz. the year C, will become finite; which is absurd and contradictory. Lastly, All things pretended to be E∣ternal, as well permanent as successive, either have been from all Eternity with∣out action, or with action: If they have been from all Eternity without action, it will follow that the Sun hath been from all Eternity, without lighting, the Fire without burning, and Men without breathing, &c. which most part of Athe∣ists themselves deny, seeing they say, that the World hath been from all Eternity in the same case it is now. Besides, all things pretended to be Eternal, either have been from all Eternity without action, during a finite time or during an infinite time. If they have been with∣out action during a finite time only, it will follow that betwixt that thing which hath been from all Eternity, without action, and its action which is not from all Eternity; the difference will be only of a time limited and finite; and conse∣quently that betwixt that which is Eter∣nal, viz. the thing without action, and that which is not Eternal, to wit, its
action, there will be but a finite time: and that to make its action Eternal, which is not Eternal, there will be want∣ing but a finite and determined time; and also that there will be but very lit∣tle lacking, lest that which is finite, viz. the time since the action of the thing, ad∣ded to the finite, viz. the time the thing hath been without action, will make up an infinite time, such as is the Eternity of a thing; which is absurd and contra∣dictory. If all things have remained without action during an infinite time, it will follow that the Sun, the Moon, and other Stars, have been longer than a hundred thousand millions of thou∣sands of years, without moving and gi∣ving any light; Men and Beasts have li∣ved longer than a hundred thousand mil∣lions of thousands of years, without see∣ing, breathing, &c. which Atheists them∣selves deny, when they affirm that the World hath been from all Eternity in the same case it is at present. Moroever, it is a Maxime received of all men, That Idem quâ Idem, semper facit Idem. For example, Fire that burns wood, coals, straw, &c. will always burn, if it be constantly supplied with fuel. There∣fore if the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, have been without action
during an infinite time, from whence did it come to pass, that they have acted af∣terwards? Certainly it cannot be of them∣selves, no new thing being come to pass, and having always remained in the same state: and if it be of some other, it cannot be but of God If all things have been from all Eternity with action; for example, the Sun with motion and illumination, Men with ratiocination, Oxen with bel∣lowing, Lions with roaring, &c. they must needs necessarily have acted with∣out ceasing, during a finite, or an infinite time: If they have acted during a finite time only, it will follow that betwixt their action which is from all Eternity, and the cessation of their action, which is not from all Eternity, the difference will be of a finite and limited time on∣ly. And consequently that betwixt that which is Eternal, and that which is not Eternal, betwixt that which is infinite, and that which is finite, the difference or distance will be of a finite and limited time, only; and that there will be want∣ing, but a certain finite time, lest the ces∣sation of their action, which is not Eter∣nal, be Eternal; and that the finite time, to wit, the time since the cessation of their action, added to the finite time of the duration of the action, will make
up an infinite time, such as is the Eter∣nity of a thing; which is absurd and contradictory. If they have acted with∣out ceasing during an infinite time, it will follow that a man hath spoken, an Oxe bellowed, a Lion roared, longer than a hundred thousand millions of thousands of years, which is ridiculous, and Atheists themselves deny, when they affirm that the world hath been from all Eternity in the same case it is now. Besides all this, The motion of the Sun, the word of Man, the roaring of a Lion, &c. have certain parts which cannot be Eternal; because those things that are Eternal cannot be but together, as hath been proved al∣ready: But the parts of the motion of the Sun cannot be together, because they succeed one another; therefore they cannot be Eternal. Neither can the parts of the speech of a Man be together; for when he pronounces one word, he doth not pronounce another; and when he ut∣ters a Syllable, he doth not utter ano∣ther. For Example, If one supposes that a man from all Eternity hath pronoun∣ced this word (glory) it is evident that the Syllable (ry) was uttered after the Syllable (glo) and consequently that the prolation of the Syllable (ry) is not Eter∣nal, seeing that which is Eternal is not
after another, though there have been wanting but very little, to wit, as much time only, as one needs to utter the Syl∣lable (glo) which is absurd and contradi∣ctory. CHAP. II. 1. Wherin one may see the first Answer of Atheists, saying, That Successive things may have been from all Eter∣nity collectively, and not distributive∣ly. 2. How many ways one thing may be related to, or agree with another, distributively or collectively. 3. That Successive things cannot be from all E∣ternity collectively. 4. That old men, young men, and children collectively or taken together, cannot have been from all Eternity. 5. That the dead have not been from all Eternity. 6. That all men collectively having been begot∣ten, cannot have been from all Eterni∣ty. 7. That the right derstanding and apprehension of the distinction of Atheists, is a sufficient refutation of the same. 1. THe first Answer of Atheists to all our former Arguments, is to be seen in Oviedo his Natu∣ral
Philosophy, in the Nineteenth Con∣troversie, in the second and third Propo∣sitions; where having said, That Time, Motion, and all Successive Things may have been from all Eternity; and having cited for his warranters, Thomas Vasquez, and Pererius, and several others, at last he Answers our Arguments and Rea∣sons thus: All Generations and Cor∣ruptions (saith he) all Days and all Nights, all the Flowings and Ebbings of the Sea, all the Full Moons and the New Moons, all Men and all Beasts, &c. if they be taken and considered particu∣larly, have had a beginning, and none of these things in particular is from all Eternity. But all Generations taken together, or the Collection of all the Generations that have been in time past, all Days ta∣ken together, or the Collection of all the Days that have been in time past, all Men taken together, or the Collection of all the Men that have been in time past, &c. all these Collections (saith he) may have been from all Eternity. The Reply. 2. Against this Answer, I say, That one thing may be related to, and affirmed
of another, four ways chiefly: First, When it agrees with, or belongs to all together, and to every one in particular: in this manner one may say that all men are rational; because all Men taken to∣gether are so, and every man taken in particular is rational. Secondly, One thing may be related to and affirmed of another, when it agrees with, or be∣longs to every one in particular; and not to all together: and in this manner one may say that all men do occupy a certain place, and are not in several places at once, because every man in particular is in a certain determined place, and cannot be in divers places at once; but all men taken together are in divers places at once, viz. In England, France, Spain, Italy, &c. Thirdly, One thing is related to, or affirmed of a∣nother, when it agrees with it because of some one, but yet not with every one in particular. In this manner one may say that the Kings of France are from the year Four hundred and twenty, or thereabouts; because Pharamond, who is thought to have been the first King of France, began to reign about that time; but every King of France is not from the year Four hundred and twenty: Likewise, One may say that
the Romans did sometime Conquer the Gauls, because Julius Caesar a Roman, with the help of some Roman Legions did subdue the same; but every Roman Souldier did not do that Exploit or At∣chievement. Fourthly, One thing a∣grees with, or is related to another, when it belongs to all taken together; but neither to some one, nor to every one in particular. Thus one may say that the Kings of France have reigned above Twelve hundred years; which is onely to be affirmed of all the Kings of France taken together in their succession, but not of some one King, nor of every King of France in particular. So it may be said that the Apostles have preached the Gospel throughout the whole World, which must be said of all the Apostles taken together, yet dispersed, seeing every Apostle did not Preach the Gospel in every part of the World. 3. This being granted (as it must needs be) let us see which of these four ways, Atheists may understand the Pro∣position in question, viz. That Gene∣rations and Corruptions, Days and Nights, Men and Beasts have been from all Eternity. And first, I say, that it cannot be understood, according to the two first wayes, which require that one
thing be related to, and agree with a∣nother in respect to every one in parti∣cular, as hath been said: for every Ge∣neration, every Day, every Man in par∣ticular, hath not been from all Eternity; else we that live at this Day should have been from all Eternity; which is absurd. Secondly, I say, It cannot be understood in the fourth manner; for when one thing is related to, or agrees with all taken together, onely, and not with every one in particular, nor because of some one; then all are so necessary to establish the truth of the Proposition, that if you except or take one away, the Propositi∣on will be false: For Example in this Pro∣position, The Kings of France have reigned twelve hundred fifty six years; the Reign of twelve hundred fifty six years are so to be applied to, and affirm∣ed of all the Kings of France taken toge∣ther, that if one or two were not num∣bred with the rest, they would not have reigned so long, and consequently the Proposition should be false. Thus in this Proposition, The Apostles are in num∣ber twelve, the number twelve belongs to all the Apostles taken together so ne∣cessarily, that if one should be taken a∣way, or deducted out of that number, the Apostles should not be in number
twelve, and consequently the Propositi∣on should be false. Therefore in this Proposition, Men have been from all E∣ternity; If to have been from all Eterni∣ty, is proper to, and to be affirmed of all men taken together, only, and not of every man in particular, nor because of some one that hath been from all Eter∣nity; it follows that all men are so ne∣cessary to establish the truth of the said Proposition, that if one or two are ta∣ken away, men shall not have been from all Eternity, and consequently the Pro∣position will be false: but according to the confession of Atheists, Though one should take away all the men that have been four thousand years since, yet ne∣vertheless they might have been from all Eternity and without beginning. There∣fore in this Proposition, Men have been from all Eternity; to have been from all Eternity, doth not belong to, nor is to be affirmed of all men taken together, on∣ly. Finally, since all men taken toge∣ther, or the collection of all men, is not only two days since, much less from all E∣nity and without beginning: It must then be concluded, that the Proposition in hand, viz. That Generations and Cor∣ruptions, Days and Nights, Men and Beasts have been from all Eternity; must
be understood by Atheists, in the third way or manner; that is to say, because of some Generation, some Day, some Man, &c. that may have been from all Eternity: But I have proved already, that there hath been no Generation, no Day, no Man, &c. from all Eternity; and Atheists themselves confess it in their first Answer Therefore it must be concluded, that Ge∣nerations and Corruptions, Days and Nights, Men and Beasts, &c. have by no means been from all Eternity. 4. Moreover, All the Old men which have been in time past, taken together, either have been from all Eternity, or not: if they have been from all Eterni∣ty, it follows that their Old age is Eter∣nal, which is impossible: Seeing that which is Eternal, is not after another, there being nothing before that which is Eternal: But their Old age is after ano∣ther; to wit, after their Youth: There∣fore their Old age is not Eternal. A man's Young age may well be with the Young age, or after the Old age of another man; but the Youth of a Man, can∣not be with, or after the Old age of the same Man, and Old age must neces∣sarily be after: Now we speak here of the same Men, that is, the same Old men; and consequently the Old age of
all Old men, ought necessarily to be af∣ter the Young age of the self-same Old men that have been Young: If they have not been from all Eternity, it will follow that men will have been from all Eterni∣ty without Old age, or Old men; which is denied by Atheists themselves, who af∣firm the World to have been from all E∣ternity in the same state it is now, and consequently with Old men. And more∣over, Either men have been from all E∣ternity without Old men, during a finite time, or during an infinite time: If du∣ring a finite time, it will follow that be∣twixt that which is not from all Eternity, viz. Old men, and that which is not from all Eternity, viz. other men taken toge∣ther, there is but a finite and limited time; and that the finite time, such as is the time, since the which there are Old men, added to the finite time, such as is the duration of Men, without Old men, will make up an infinite time, such as is the pretended Eternity of Men; which is absurd: If they have been from all Eter∣nity without Old men, during an infinite time, it will follow, that Men will have been without Old men above a thou∣sand thousands millions of thousands of years; which is ridiculous, and denied by these prophane Atheists themselves.
By the same Reason one may prove, that all young men taken together, which have been in time past, have not been from all Eternity; seeing their Young age is after their Infancy: and one may prove also that all Children taken toge∣ther, which have been in time past, have not been from all Eternity: Seeing their Infancy, is after their Birth and Concep∣tion. But if the Collection of all Children that have been, the Collection of all Young men that have been, and the Collection of all Old men that have been; If (I say) all these Collections have not been from all Eternity, it is evident that the Colle∣ction of all men which have been in time past, is not from all Eternity; since it comprises only the Collection of Chil∣dren, of Young and Old Men that have been. 5. Again, either all men which have been dead in time past, being taken together, have been dead from all Eternity, or not: If they have been dead from all Eternity, it follows that their death is Eternal, which is impossible; seeing that which is Eternal is not after another, there be∣ing nothing before that which is Eter∣nal, and without beginning: but their death is after another, viz. their life; seeing the death and life of the same men
cannot be together; but their death ought to be necessarily after their life; therefore their death is not Eternal: If all men which have been dead taken to∣gether, have not been dead from all E∣ternity, it will follow, that men have been from all Eternity, without having any dead men; which is denied by A∣theists, who affirm, That the World hath been from all Eternity, in the same state it is now; and consequently with dead men. And moreover, either men have been from all Eternity, without dead men, during a finite time, or during an infinite time: If during a finite time, it will follow that betwixt that which is not from all Eternity, to wit, dead men, and that which is from all Eternity, viz. the living Men taken together, there is but a finite and limited time; and that the finite time, that is to say, the time since the which there have been dead men, added to the finite time, such as is the duration of living men only, will make up an infinite time, such as is the pretended Eternity of men; which is con∣tradictory. If during an infinite time, it will follow, that men will have been above an hundred thousand millions of thousands of years without dying, which is ridiculous, and denied by Atheists themselves.
6. To this may be added this Argu∣men, That which is begotten, is be∣gotten of another, seeing nothing begets or produces it self: But all men which have been in time past taken together, have been begotten; seeing that accord∣ing to the opinion of Atheists, in the Col∣lection of all men which have been in time past, there is never a man not be∣gotten: Therefore all men which have been in time past taken together, have been begotten of another. From this Argument I form another, thus, What∣soever is begotten of another, is after that other; seeing that a man who be∣gets another man, did exist before he begat him: But all men taken together have been begotten of another, as I have proved: Therefore all men taken toge∣ther have been after another. From this last Syllogisme, I will also form this, That which hath been from all Eternity, hath not been after another, seeing there is nothing before that which is Eternal: But all men taken together have been af∣ter another, as I have proved; There∣fore all men taken together have not been from all Eternity. 7. Lastly, The serious consideration of the very terms of this distinction of Ovi∣edo, will cause any rational men to re∣ject
it as ridiculous: Men (saith he) have been from all Eternity; but no man hath been from all Eternity; the collection of men which have been in time past, is from all Eternity; but there is never a a man in all this Collection, from all Eter∣nity: The Collection of Dayes is with∣out beginning; but there is never a Day in all this Collection without beginning: as if one should say the Kings Successors of William the Conqueror have been e∣ver since the year One thousand fourscore and seven, but there was never a King in that year. CHAP. III. 1. The second Answer of Atheists, viz. that as in the After-Eternity, that is to say, in the future, there will be no last or farthermost; so in the Fore-Eternity, that is to say, in time past, there hath been no first or formost. 2. That Atheists compare unlike things, and the disparity explained. 3. That reascending towards the time past, one may run through it, and so 'tis not in∣finite. 4. That the Succession of Things cannot be Eternal; and why?
1. BEfore I proceed any farther, one must take notice, that for the right understanding of these unu∣sal words, the Fore-Eternity and the Af∣ter-Eternity; one must conceive that this day is the tie that knits and joyns them both together; so that the Fore-Eternity is a duration, from this day reascending upwards or through the time past, even to the infinite; and the After-Eternity is a duration from this day toward the fu∣ture, even to the infinite. This kind of Riddle being now clear, let us come to their Answer. As in the After-Eternity (say they) the Day shall Eternally be after the Night, and the Night after the Day, so that there shall never be a later Day, nor a later Night; our Hemisphere will be Eternally light∣ned, after that of our Antipodes, and the Hemisphere of our Antipodes after ours; so that there shall never be a la∣ter illumination: The Flowing of t Sea will be Eternally after the Ebbing; and the Ebbing after the Flowing; so that there will never be a later Flowing or Ebbing: The New Moon will be Eter∣nally after the Full Moon, and the Full Moon after the New Moon, without e∣ver being a later New Moon, or a later Full Moon; one part of Time or Moti∣on
will be Eternally after the other, without ever being a later part of Time and Motion, &c. So in the Fore-Eter∣nity, the Day hath been Eternally be∣fore the Night, and the Night before the Day; so that there was never a first Day or a first Night: and consequently the Day and the Night have been from all Eternity, one before another, as they will be Eternally one after another: Likewise our Hemisphere hath been En∣lightened Eternally before the Hemi∣sphere of our Antipodes, and that of our Antipodes before ours, without ever having been a first illumination; and con∣sequently illumination is Eternal succes∣sively, and the two Hemispheres have been Enlightened from all Eternity, one before the other, as they shall be En∣lightened Eternally one after another: So the New Moon hath been Eternally before the Full Moon, and the Full Moon bere the New Moon, without ever having been a first New, or Full Moon; and consequently the Full and the New Moon have been from all Eternity, one before the other, as they shall be Eter∣nally one after another. Item, The Flow∣ing of the Sea, hath been Eternally before the Ebbing, and the Ebbing before the Flowing, without ever having been a
first Flowing or Ebbing; and consequent∣ly the Flowing and the Ebbing have been from all Eternity, one before the other, as they shall be Eternally one after after the other, Finally, Every Day, every Illumination, every Flowing, every Man, have indeed had a Beginning, so that there is none of these in particular, that ever hath been without Beginning, and from all Eternity: But the Succession of Days, Illuminations, Flowings, and Men, &c. is without Beginning and from all Eternity. The Reply. 2. Against this Answer I say, That the comparison is to no purpose, because things altogether unlike are compared in it, viz. that which hath been and that which never shall be totally; that which is totally past, and that which never shall pass away: For the Full and the New Moon, the Day and the Night, the Flow∣ing and Ebbing of the Sea, the Illumina∣tion of both Hemispheres, Men, and such∣like Successive things, that are pretended to have been from all Eternity, have been indeed, but are no more, and conse∣quently are past; and therefore the pre∣tended Fore-Eternity, being of this na∣ture,
is certainly past. To make then a true and even comparison of Equal things, one should suppose of the After-Eternity, that which is most certain of the Fore-Eternity, to wit, that it is altogether past. Now if the After-Eternity should come to pass away, and have an end, it would be finite, and consequently there would be a later Day, and a later Night, a later Flowing and Ebbing, &c. and which is more than that, the After-Eternity should be limited on every side, that is to say, by this Day, and by the later Day, because it should be past as the Fore-Eternity: Sith then, that the pretended Fore-Eternity is past, it must be also finite, and consequently there hath been a first Day, a first Flowing, a First Man, &c. and which is more, it is limited on every side, to wit, by this Day, and by the first Day as well as the After-Eternity would be, if it were past. 3. From this Reply it is evident, That though one descending towards the fu∣ture, might go or reach to the infinite; yet re-ascending towards that which is past, one could notreach to the infinite: be∣cause in every progression to the infinite, there is always something to be taken in, so that one cannot run through such an
infinite: Now re-ascending from this Day to the time past, there is not always something to be taken in, but one must stop at a first thing, and so by ascending to the time past, all the time past must be taken in: Therefore in ascending to the time past, there is no infinite to be reach∣ed unto. That there is not always something to be taken in, in ascending to the time past; and that from this Day, ascending to the time past, all that time past may be ta∣ken in, it is evident; because to de∣scend by the time past to this Day, and ascend from this Day towards the time past, are one and the same thing, or at least are things alike; as the way from Thebes to Athens, and from Athens to Thebes, is one and the same way, and all the time past either in ascending, or de∣scending, is always the same. There∣fore since that descending by the time past to this Day, all the time past is ta∣ken in; it is evident that ascending from this Day towards the time past, all the time past may be taken in, and consequently there is no progression to the infinite that way. 4. Finally, One cannot conceive, that there was never a Man, a Day, a Flow∣ing of the Sea, &c. from all Eternity, and
that notwithstanding, the succession of Men, Days, and Flowings, be from all Eternity, and without Beginning; for if there be no Men, no Days, from all Eter∣nity and without Beginning, it is impossi∣ble the succession of the same should be from all Eternity, and without Beginning. Seeing the Succession of things cannot be without the things, whereof it is Succes∣sion: And moreover it is certain and un∣doubtable (and in this case is very consi∣derable) that every Succession comprises Essentially many things, whereof one is after another; so that Succession, not only, cannot have a Being, but which is more cannot be conceived, without such things as are one after another: Now that which is after another cannot be E∣ternal: there being nothing before that which is Eternal, and without Beginning: Seeing then that Succession comprehends Essentially such a thing as is after ano∣ther, it follows necessarily that Succession in it self cannot be Eternal; for if it be said to be Eternal, it must be in relation to some one thing which is not after a∣nother, but without Beginning and from all Eternity, which is denied by A∣theists themselves; for they profess to believe, That there was never a Man, never a Day, &c. but they have been af∣ter
another (and by consequence cannot have been without Beginning) lest they be forced to confess that there hath been a first Man, a first Day, a first Flowing, &c. and consequently a Beginning, and so no Eternity of Men, Days, and Flow∣ings, &c. CHAP. IV. 1. The third Answer of Atheists concern∣ing the infinite number. 2. Three Arguments of Atheists, whereby they strive and endeavour to prove, that one infinite is greater than another. 3. That those Men which have been in time past, make up some number. 4. That in whatsoever number of Men, there is as much, or more, or less. 5. The refutation of the Atheists Ar∣gument, that one infinite is greater than another, materially, and not formally. 6. That it is a contradicti∣on to grant, or make, one infinite to be greater than the other. 7. That the Answer of Atheists, doth not at all hit or touch our chief and indissoluble Reason, drawn from the distance of Men. 8. What the Space is not, and what it is proved. 9. The Answer to
the Atheists first Argument, drawn from the infiniteness of the Oriental and Occidental Space. 10. Another Answer to their second Argument, drawn from the infiniteness of the Thoughts, both of Men and Angels. 11. Another to their third Argument, drawn from the pretended infiniteness of Men and Lions possible, that is to say, that God may produce and create. 1. THe third Answer of Atheists is, that there having been in time past an infiniteness of Men, Dayes, and Generations, &c. one cannot say that there hath been a number of them, either finite or infinite, seeing every number is called number, because it may be numbred: Now the infiniteness of Men, Days, &c. can∣not be numbred, and therefore these terms, number infinte, are contradicto∣ry; that is, one must confess, that Men, Days, &c. are in some number; they say that number is an infinite number; but that in the infinite number there is neither as much, nor more, nor less; seeing these particles, as much, more, and less. belong onely, and are solely re∣lated to finite numbers. And that if they be compelled by force of Reason to
acknowledge that these particles belong to all numbers, either finite or infinite: they Answer that in the infinite number of Men (for Example) that have been in time past, there have been so many Men as Hands and Fingers; and that all infinite Numbers are equal. And if they be forced to confess that one infinite number is greater than the other, they understand it materially, that is in re∣ference to the parts of it, and not for∣mally, that is to say, in reference to the infiniteness of the same. And finally, if they be constrained to grant, that one infinite is greater than the other, both materially and formally; they say there is no absurdity to grant one infi∣nite to be greater than the other; and they endeavour to prove it by these three Reasons. The first is drawn from the infinitenss of the space in this man∣ner: If from the City of London, draw∣ing perpetually East-ward, or to the O∣rient, there is no end to be attained un∣to, and consequently the Oriental space is infinite, and so are the parts of the same in infinite number; for as to have an end and to be finite, is one and the same thing; so not to have an end and to be infinite is one and the same thing. Item from the City of London, drawing
perpetually Westward, or to the Occi∣dent, there is no end, and consequent∣ly the Occidental space is infinite, and so are the parts of the same in infinite num∣ber, by the same reason: Now the Ori∣ental and Occidental space together are greater than the Oriental space alone; seeing the Oriental and Occidental space together, is as an All, whereof the O∣riental space is but one part, and totum est Majus sua parte. Therefore one in∣finite, such as is the Oriental and Occi∣dental space together, is greater than another infinite, such as is the Oriental space alone; and an infinite number, such as is that of the parts of the Ori∣ental and Occidental space together, is greater than another infinite, such as is that of the parts of the Occidental space alone. 2. Their second Reason is drawn from the infiniteness of the Thoughts of Men and Angels, thus: The Thoughts Men shall have hereafter, in the after-Eterni∣ty, whether in Earth or in Heaven, are in number infinite; for if they were in number finite, it would follow that Men being come unto that finite and limitted number of Thoughts, would think no more, and so would no more know God, nor any other Thing; seeing one cannot
think on something without knowing the same in some manner: Item, The Thoughts Angels shall have hereafter in the After-Eternity, are in number infi∣nite, else at least there would be a time wherein the Angels should think no more: Now the Thoughts of Men and Angels together are in greater number than the Thoughts of Men alone: There∣fore a number infinite, such as is that of the Thoughts of Men and Angels to∣gether, in the After-Eternity, is greater than another infinite, such as is that of the Thoughts of Men alone, in the same Eternity. Their third reason is drawn from Men and Lions possible; and thus they argue. Men possible, that is to say, that God may produce, are in number infinite; for if they were in number finite, for Example, One hundred thousand mil∣lions, it would follow that God could not produce one more, seeing that one Man would be over and above all Men possible: Item Lions possible, or that God may produce and create, are in num∣ber infinite for the same reason: Now the number of Men and Lions possible is greater than the sole number of Men possible: Therefore a number infinite, such as is that of Men and Lions possible
together, is greater than another infinite, such as is that of Men possible onely. The Reply. 3. Against this Answer, I say first, That all Men which have been in time past are many, that is to say, are more than one, and consequently make up a multitude, which in it self is either nu∣merable and finite, or innumerable and infinite: If it be numerable and finite, it follows that there hath been a certain number finite and determined in it self; and so that there have been some first, some second, &c. And therefore that they have not been from all Eternity: If it be innumerable and infinite, my argument is entire and sirm: which is thus: One cannot give a greater multi∣tude than an innumerable or infinite mul∣titude, else it should be exceeded, by this greater multitude: Seeing that of two multitudes the greater exceeds the lesser, and consequently should be finite and limited; seeing that which is ex∣ceeded is finite and determined, where it is exceeded: But one can give a greater multitude than that of Men, which have been in time past; to wit, the multitude of Eyes, Fingers, Hairs, and
Beasts: Therefore the multitude of Men, which have been in time past, is not in∣finite, but finite and termined, and con∣sequently hath not been from all Eternity, And here observe that in this place I use the words of multitude and number for one and the same thing. 4. Secondly, It is false, That in an in∣finite multitude, or an infinite number, there is neither as much, nor more, nor less; for in whatsoever multitude of Men, either finite or infinite, it is cer∣tain that there are as many Noses as Mouths, as many Hearts as Heads, as many Hands as Feet; and it is undoub∣table that in the multitude of Men, which have been in time past, there have been more Hands and Fingers than Men; see∣ing there is no Man in the Collection of all Men, which have been in time past (Monsters excepted) but he hath had two Hands and ten Fingers; and no Man can deny that the Collection of all Ani∣mals which have been in time past, is greater than the sole Collection of all Men which have been in time past; seeing the Collections of all Animals contains the Collection of all Men, and of all Beasts. But the Collection of all Men and of all Beasts, is greater than the Collection of all Men only; else the whole, to wit,
the Collection of all Men and of all Beasts, should not be greater than the Parts; to wit, the Collection of all Men onely. By the same reason one may prove that the Collection of all Days, and of all Nights, is greater than the Collection of all Days onely: and that the Col∣lection of all Generations and Corrupti∣ons is greater than the Collection of all Generations onely; and consequently, that the Collections of Days and Gene∣rations which have been in time past, are exceeded, and so finite and determi∣ned, where they are exceeded; and therefore are not from all Eternity, but have had a Beginning: Finally, In what∣soever greater multitude, or whatsoever great number, either finite or infinite, there are more binaries than quarterna∣ries, seeing every quarternary contains two binaries. 5. Thirdly, It is in vain to say that one infinite is not greater than another formally, that is to say, in respect to the infiniteness; but that it is so materially, that is to say, in respect to the Parts; because it is evident that the parts proper∣ly make the infinite; and therefore if one infinite hath more parts than another in∣finite, it will be greater than that, e∣ven as an infinite; and moreover, though
one infinite should be greater than ano∣ther materially, that is to say, in re∣spect to the parts, it will follow that the lesser shall not be truly infinite; seeing it will finish and be determi∣ned, where the other will begin to ex∣ceed it. 6. Fourthly, it is false, there is no absurdity of two infinites to make one greater than the other: for from thence will follow an apparent contradiction, to wit, that one and the same thing, will be finite and will not be finite; seeing the lesser infinite will be exceeded by the greater infinite, and consequently will be finite; seeing that which is exceeded, is finite and determined where it is ex∣ceeded: And it will not be finite, see∣ing it is supposed infinite, and that which is infinite is not finite: Therefore the same thing, to wit, the lesser infinite, will be finite and not finite, which things are contradictory. Fifthly, The Answer of Atheists doth not at all hit or touch our chief and indisso∣luble Reason, drawn from the distance of men, thus: The men which have lived in time past till now, are all distant one from another with an infinite distance of time only, or with a finite distance on∣ly; or some are distant with a finite di∣stance,
and others with an infinite di∣stance; if they are all distant with an infinite distance of time, it will follow, that betwixt King Charles the First, and King Charles the Second, there will be an infinite distance of time; which is al∣together absurd: if they are all distant with a finite distance of time only, it fol∣lows that their duration contains a finite time only, and consequently are not E∣ternal, which is most true: If some are distant with a finite distance, and others with an infinite distance, and that of all them which are only distant with a finite distance, one takes the two re∣motest; for Example, Peter who liveth at this day, and then remounts towards them that have preceded Peter, and from whom he is descended, if one takes him (I say) who in a finite distance is the remotest, to wit, John, I say, that if one remounts a little higher, that is to say, unto William, the father of John; it will follow that Peter and William will be distant one from another, with an infinite distance of time; seeing they are more distant and farther removed than Peter and John, which are the farther removed in a finite distance: So that it will follow, that betwixt the finite di∣stance, which is between Peter and
John, and the infinite distance which is between Peter and William, there will be but a very few years difference, that is to say, so many years (and no more) as are between William the father, and John the son; which is altogether absurd. This Reason may be confirmed thus: Every multitude actually existing, or ha∣ving actually existed, if it be actually fi∣nite, it may be told; seeing that which cannot be told is necessarily infinite: therefore if from this day, remounting towards the time past, one begins to tell those men which have been successively one before another; the whole finite multitude of those men, will at last be told and numbred; so that beyond that multitude there will remain never a man to be numbred, that may with the said multitude, make a finite number: There∣fore if to the finite multitude of all men, which have been in time past, one adds only a man, the result of it will be an in∣finite multitude; seeing the precedent multitude, without that man added, was the greatest of all finite multitudes past; nay, even the whole finite multitude of men which have been in time past; and so that man added to the whole fi∣nite multitude of those man, making the same greater, it must necessarily be infi∣nite:
Moreover, it cannot be infinite, seeing a finite thing, to wit, a man ad∣ded to another finite thing, as the whole finite multitude of men, cannot make an infinite: and though never one man should be added to the said multitude, there would follow an evident contradi∣ction; for there being as many more feet as men, it will follow that the feet will be finite, and not finite in number; they will be finite, because one finite, to wit, the whole finite multitude of men, and the double of this finite, to wit, the feet of these men, do not make one infi∣nite; Also they will not be finite, be∣cause the number of feet is greater than the whole finite multitude of men, which is supposed to be the greatest number of all finite things. And it is no strong Argument, to say, as Oviedo in his Natural Philosophy, Controv. the 14th. Propos. 3. Paragraff 9th. There is never so great a finite number, but a greater may be always given, in infinitum; so that one cannot cannot properly say, the greater of finite numbers: for though it be true in things possible, that is to say, that God may produce and create, seeing God having created, for Example, a great number of men, may create and produce still a
greater number, and always, a greater; but also always finite in infinitum; ne∣vertheless in things actually existing, or having actually existed, as the Question is now, it is certain that there is a finite number, which is the greatest of all fi∣nite numbers; and it is false that in a multitude actually present or past, there is no number finite, but will always admit of a greater number, and always greater, in infinitum; seeing if there were always a greater, and always a greater finite number, it would follow that the actu∣al finite number could never be told, and consequently should be infinite; for that which is finite only cannot be told. Further, All men which have been in time past are not distant one from another, with an infinite distance of time, else my Father and I should be infinitely distant one from another; therefore all men must be distant one from another, with a finite distance, and consequently must have lasted but a finite time, and must have made up but a finite multitude, or some must be distant with a finite di∣stance, and others with an infinite di∣stance; in which case those that are di∣stant with a finite distance only, taken together, will have lasted but a finite time,
and will make up but a finite multitude, and will make up the whole multitude finite, so that there will be no greater mul∣titude, as I have shewed already. And it sig∣nifies but little, to say with Oviedo in the above-cited place, that all these things are true of a finite number, when it is determined and specified; as for Exam∣ple, of the number of an hundred thou∣sand, or an hundred thousand millions, or a thousand times an hundred thousand millions, &c. but are not true of a finite number uncertain, undetermined, and not specified; for in those things which actually exist, or have actually existed, as the Question is at present, the number is always certain and determined; and if it be uncertain and undetermined, it is not in it self, but in respect of our selves who cannot determine it, because it is too great. To this you may add this considerati∣on, That that which is Eternal and with∣out Beginning, is not after another; there being nothing before that which is Eternal: Now the Sons have been after the Fathers, Death after Life, Old Age after Young Age, Young Age after In∣fancy, Infancy after Birth, and Birth after Conception: Therefore Sons, Dead Men, Old Men, Young Men, Children; all Men
Born are not from all Eternity and with∣out Beginning. 8. Now I must answer at large the three Objection; mentioned in the third Answer of Atheists, by which they pretend to prove, not onely that there is an infinite, but that an infinite is greater than ano∣ther; for at first sight they appear so strong, that they must needs be exa∣mined narrowly, to take away the of∣fence they might otherwise give to the weak. The first Objection drawn from the in∣finiteness of the Oriental and Occidental space cannot be well resolved, until we have first taken a view, and attained to some knowledge of the essence of place or space: Therefore I shall shew first of all, what the space is not, and what it is, then I shall answer the objection. For the first, I say, That the place or space must of all necessity be something or nothing at all: Now one cannot truly say that the space is nothing at all, or a meer nothing; therefore it must be some∣thing. That the space is not a meer no∣thing, appears, because a meer nothing is capable of nothing, and can do no∣thing; because a meer nothing and an im∣possibility do not differ: Now the space is capable of something and can do some∣thing;
seeing it is capable to receive the Bodies, and truly it is the receptacle of all Bodies; since that all Bodies occupy some space: therefore the space is not a meer nothing. Moreover, Betwixt two nothings there is no difference; but the space and that which is between two Bo∣dies, touching one another, do differ greatly: therefore the space and that which is between two Bodies touching one another, are not two nothings; and since that which is between two Bodies touching one another, is a meer nothing; the space ought necessarily not to be a meer nothing: Now that the space and that which is between two Bodies touch∣ing one another, do greatly differ, ap∣pears, because a Body cannot be put be∣tween two Bodies touching one another, but a Body may be put in the space. Having shewed that the space is not a meer nothing, but that it is some∣thing; it must necessarily be something real, or something fained and imaginary; but the space is not something fained and forged by humane wit, seeing that the space hath existed, and hath been occu∣pied by the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, before ever Man was; so far it is from being fained and forged by Humane Wit; and all Bodies occupy a space,
though we do not observe it, or think of it: Therefore the space is something real. Again, Every real being is either a substance or an accident; because every real being is either inherent to some sub∣ject, and depending of the same, that is to say, so tied and fastened to the sub∣ject, that it cannot be without it, and so is an accident, or is not inherent, and tyed to some subject, and depending on the same, but may exist alone, and so is a substance: But the space is not in∣herent and tied to some subject, and consequently is not an accident: There∣fore the space is a substance. That the space is not inherent to some subject, for Example, to some Body, appears, because that which is inherent and tied to the Body, moves with the Body, or according to the motion of the Body: So the Colour of a Horse moves according to the motion of the Horse; the Black∣ness of a Crow moves according to the motion of the Crow; and the Figure of a Man, moves according to the motion of a Man, &c. But the space occupied by the Body, doth not move with the Body; or according to the motion of the Body: Therefore the space occupied by the Body, is not inherent and tied to the Body.
That the space does not move accor∣ding to the motion of the Body, appears, because a Body by its motion, leaves one place and takes another, and having occupied one place, occupies another pre∣sently; besides if place or the space should move according to the motion of the Body, it would follow that a Body going from London to Oxford, should not stir nor budge from its place, and would always be in the same place; see∣ing the place or space would alwayes ac∣company him. Nay, Aristotle and all other Philosophers before and after him, did all confess that place or the space was altogether immoveable. And it is in vain to say, that in the same time that a Body leaves the place or space, it did occupie; another Body succeeds, to which the space is inherent and tied: for be∣sides that the general Maxime received of all, should be destroyed: That an ac∣cident never passes from one subject to another, and that it cannot be separated from its subject, but by perishing; it is evident that the place or space is no more inherent to the Body, than a Chamber to those Men that are in it; than the Ocean to Fishes, the Air to Birds, and the Fir∣mament to the Stars; all which not∣withstanding are substances: It is evi∣dent
that the Bodies leave places, and tend to places, and that place or space is indifferent to all sorts of Bodies, and never ties it self to any. Add hereto, that the place or space was before the Body, and that if there had not been a space before the World, it would have been impossible to make the World; and if there were no spaces beyond the World, it should be impossi∣ble to put a Body there: and therefore seeing the space was before the Body, one cannot say it is an accident of the Body; for an accident is never before its subject. If any one say that God created the space with the World; and if he would create some other Worlds, he would also create other Spaces with them; and that beyond the World there is no space: Against that I say that where there is nothing at all, one cannot cre∣ate neither Body nor Space: For Exam∣ple, Between two Bodies touching one another, there is nothing at all; so that neither Body nor space can be created there: therefore, if beyond the World there is nothing at all, God cannot cre∣ate there, neither Body nor Space; and if before the Creation of the World, there was nothing at all where the World is, God could not have created there
neither Body nor Space; because that be∣twixt two meer nothings there is no dif∣ference; and we are to judge alike of things that do not differ: Therefore if the meer nothing that is between two Bodies touching one another, is capable of nothing, and neither Body nor Space can be created there; neither the meer nothing, that these Men say is be∣yond the World, and the meer no∣thing, that they say was where the World is before the Creation of the same, will be capable of nothing, and one cannotcreate there neither Body nor Space. Moreover, God is not in a meer nothing, and one cannot say, that God is where there is nothing at all; for Example, God is not between two Bodies touching one the other totally, because between such Bodies there is nothing at all: But God is beyond the World, and before the World, he was where the World is: Therefore one cannot say, that beyond the World there is nothing at all; and that where the World is before the Crea∣tion of the same, there was nothing at all; so that there was something, which can be no other than the space. That God is beyond the World, and that before the Creation, he was where the World is;
appears, because nothing can act, where it is not, neither by it self, nor by its virtue and power: But God did act where the world is, in creating the same there, and God can act beyond the World, creating there other Bo∣dies, and other Worlds: Therefore God is beyond the World, and before the World was where the World is, both by himself and by his power; Seeing the Power of God is nothing else but God himself. For God being most simple, all that is in God, or can be conceived to be in God, ought necessarily to be God him∣self. And certainly, if God were only in the World, he should be finite, as well as the World, and so should not be God; for by the word, GOD, Men have al∣ways understood an infinite Being. Finally, To speak absolutely, and without any respect to God's will to cre∣ate but one world; I think God may cre∣ate another World, distant from this; in which case there would be an interval or space between the two Worlds, in which space God should be, else he would be divided from himself, seeing that he should exist in the two Worlds, without existing between both. Having proved that place or space is not an Accident, it is easie to shew, that it
is not the Superficies, or Surface of such a Body as compasses another. First, Be∣cause according to the common opinion of Philosophers, the Superficies is an Ac∣cident: But we have sufficiently proved, that place or space is not an Accident; therefore it is not a Superficies. Second∣ly, The higher Heaven occupies a place and a space, and the World is necessarily in one place, and occupies and fills necessarily some space, and yet the World and the higher Heavens are compassed with no Superficies nor any other Body. Thirdly, The Superficies or Surface of that Body that compasses another, is im∣moveable, as it may be seen in a Tower, agitated with great Winds, in a Tree in the midst of a River, &c. But place or space is wholly immoveable, as I have proved already; which may be confirm∣ed thus: If place were an external Su∣perficies, it would follow, that a Body that stirs not, yet should move, and that a Body that moves, should not stir from its place: That it would follow, that a Body that stirs not, yet should move lo∣cally, appears; because a Tower, a Ca∣stle that stirs not, changes its external Superficies when it is agitated with great winds; and a Tree, that is in the midst of a River, without budging, changes its
external Superficies; and therefore if place is an external Superficies, to wit, the Surface of a Body that compasses ano∣ther; It is evident, that a Body that budges not, receiving any change or al∣teration of Surface or Superficies, will al∣so change its place, and move it self lo∣cally, which is altogether absurd: That it would follow also, that a Body which should move it self locally, should not budge out of its place, appears, because a Body which moves it self locally, may retain the Superficies of the Body that compasseth it, and consequently may retain its very place; but that which is in one and the same place, do's not budge at all out of it. Fourthly, It is certain that by local motion, one leaves one place, and passes unto another, since, a local mo∣tion, is nothing else, but a motion to∣wards another place: now by the local motion, a Body do's not necessarily leave a Superficies, and necessarily acquire ano∣ther; for Example, If God should move a Body beyond the World, in the inani∣ty, or in an empty place, that he should have made, that Body should not be com∣passed with any Superficies: Therefore, the Superficies of a Body that compasses another, is not a true place to speak
Finally, The Superficies of a Body is a kind of quantity, and quantity is a pro∣perty of the Body, or the Body it self; and therefore since a Body is in a place, the quantity and consequently the Su∣perficies also, must be in a place, and not place it self; else place should be in ano∣ther place, and this other place in ano∣ther place, in infinitum; which is absurd. They being not able to obtund the edge and force of these Arguments, their re∣fuge is to say, that place is not simply the Superficies of a Body that compasses another; but that it is such a Superficies, as is joyned with order and relation to certain fixed Points of the World, as are the Center of the World, and the Four Cardinal Points of it, to wit, the East, and the West, the North, and the South: for the Superficies retaining the said or∣der and relation to these fixed Points, is said to be immoveable: and by this means they pretend to explain the manner in the which a Body changes place, to wit, whether it draws near to, or leaves, that is to say, departs from these fixed Points of the World: For Example, If a Body ascends, they say it moves, because it departs from the Center of the World; if it descends, it moves, because it draws near to the Center of the World, which
is the Center of the Earth; if it goes to∣wards the Pole Artick, it moves, because it draws near to the North, and departs from the South. Against this Answer, I say, first, That a thing which should not move nor stir from its place, would nevertheless change place; for if God should move the Hea∣vens with a direct Motion, the Earth remaining immoveable, it would follow that the Earth which should not move, would change the Order and Relation (according to these Mens Doctrine) it hath to those fixed Points of the World, and should be either nearer or farther from them; Seeing these fixed Points be∣ing in the Heavens, should move with the Heavens: and therefore if place should consist and reside in such a rela∣tion to the fixed Points of the World, the Earth having no more the said rela∣tion, should have the said place no more; and consequently would change place, without budging and stirring from the same place, and without moving locally; all which is absurd. Secondly, It would follow that a Body should move locally, without ever chang∣ing place; for if God should move locally the whole World, with a direct motion, and that all the parts of the World should
remain in their proper situation, it would follow that the Earth should move local∣ly, with the whole World, and yet re∣tain the same order and relation it hath, to the fixed Points of the World; and therefore if place should reside and con∣sist in such a relation, the Earth retain∣ing the same relation, should also retain the same place, and consequently would not change place in moving locally; all which is impossible. Thirdly, If God should reduce or bring back all things to nothing, one stone excepted, it is certain this stone should exist in a place, and occupy a space; and yet it would have neither order nor relation, to these fixed Points of the World, seeing there would be none, and consequently place and space, do not consist in a certain order or relation, to the fixed Points of the World, seeing that place and space may be without them. Finally, This superficies and relation to the fixed Points of the World, accor∣ding to the opinion of Atheists, is an ac∣cident: but I have fully proved above, that place or space is not an accident: from all which it do appear, that place or space being not an accident, it must ne∣cessarily be a substance: Now all Sub∣stance,
according to the common Opini∣on of Philosophers, is either Corporal or Uncorporal, that is, either a Body or a Spirit: Seeing then that place or space is not a Body, it must necessarily be a Spirit: That place or space is not a Body, appears; because a Body is im∣penetrable with another Body; but the place or space is penetrable, with all sorts of Bodies: Moreover, Every Body may move, for moveableness is the property of the Body; but the place or space is immoveable, as I have proved already. In one word, Every Body is in a place, and occupies a space: but place is not in a place, else there would be progressus in infinitum, and a space doth not occupy another place by the same reason; there∣fore place or space is not a Body. Since that place or space, is not an accident, but a substance, and that 'tis not a Body as I have proved just now, it must ne∣cessarily be a Spirit: Now every Spirit is either Humane, or Angelical, or Di∣vine; that is to say, it is either a reason∣able Soul, or an Angel, or a God. There∣fore place or space being a Spirit, must be one of the three: But it is easie to shew, that place or space, is neither a reasonable Soul nor an Angel; because reasonable Souls and Angels are in some
sort moveable, for they are sometimes in a place, and sometimes in another; but the space is wholly immoveable. Moreover, Souls and Angels are finite, and are onely in the World, but Space is infinite, and is beyond the World; as I have proved above. Besides, There being never a drop of the Ocean, never so small parcel of the Air, Fire, or Earth, but it doth occu∣py a place: And there being never a part of the World, let it be never so small, but it does occupy a space, it would follow, that there would be ne∣ver a bit of Sand, never a Drop of the Ocean, never a Leaf of a Tree, never so small a parcel of the Air, and Earth, but therein would be a reasonable Soul, or an Angel, and all the World would be filled, with Angels or reasonable Souls, which is altogether absurd. Upon this ground, some conclude that place or space is nothing else but the Immensity and Infiniteness of GOD, and conse∣quently GOD Himself; and so pro∣ceed to answer the Arguments of Athe∣ists drawn from the infiniteness of the Oriental and Occidental Space: thus: One must argue and discourse of the Immensity of God in respect to Bodies, as of his Eternity, in respect to Times
and Ages. Therefore as Eternity, which is the Divinity it self, being indivisible, and without parts, is always the same, be∣fore Ages, with Ages, and after Ages, if they come to pass away: So that the Eternity, which was before time, and that which is with time, the Eternity which was in the time of Adam, of No∣ah, and of Jesus Christ, and that which is in this present time, are not many E∣ternities, nor many parts of Eternity, but one and the same Eternity of God, which is as the receptacle of all Ages and Times; So that the Age of Adam, the Age of Noah, the Age of Jesus Christ, and all other Ages and Times whatsoe∣ver, are in the same Eternity, and do not differ in duration, in respect to Eternity, which remaining always immutable, cor∣responds to all things and to all Ages; but they do differ in themselves, in that Times and Ages being necessarily and es∣sentially Successive, cannot be together, So Immensity, which is the Divinity it self being also indivisible and without parts, remains always the same, before the Bodies, with the Bodies, and after the Bodies, if they should happen to be destroyed; So that the Immensity which is beyond the World, and that which is where the World is; the Immensity
wherein the Sun is, and the Immensity wherein the Earth is, are not many Im∣mensities, nor many parts of the Immen∣sity, but one and the same Immensity, which is the receptacle of all Bodies: So that Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all other Bodies whatsoever, are in the same Immensity, and do not differ in internal place, in respect to Immensity, which is the true and proper place of all Bodies; but differ in external place in themselves, in that being necessarily extended and im∣penetrable, they cannot be together, and cannot be compassed of the same Su∣perficies. And though Philosophers (for the most part) do attribute to the Eternity and Im∣mensity of God, Virtual Parts, and a Vir∣tual Extension, as well to distinguish the Eternity from the moment of time, and the Immensity from the indivisible Point, as because they hold the frailty of hu∣mane Spirit to be so great, that it can∣not conceive so long a duration as Eter∣nity is, nor so long a space as Immensity is, without parts and extension: Never∣theless it is most certain, that God knows all things as they are, and he that knows perfectly his Eternity and Immensity, conceives them without parts and exten∣sion; and yet he knows Eternity distant
from the moment of time, and Immensi∣ty distinct from the invisible Point. And it is to no purpose to say, That by these Virtual Parts, Philosophers meant not true parts; but only somewhat equi∣valent to these parts: So that Eternity hath somewhat equivalent to the actual parts of time, which have or may have run during Eternity; and Immensity hath somewhat equivalent to the Bodies or parts of the Bodies, which are in the Im∣mensity: For as it cannot be truly said, that a Rock standing in the midst of a Ri∣ver, hath so many virtual parts, as there are actual parts of waters, that run and beat it, whilest the Rock stands and re∣mains always the same, in its firmness and unmoveableness: So it cannot be tru∣ly said, that the Eternity of God, hath so many virtual parts, as there are actual parts, which run and as it were slide a∣way, whilest Eternity remains always the same in its Immutability: neither can it be said that the Immensity of God hath so many Virtual parts, as there are actual parts of the Bodies, that are in this Immensity. It is safer then to call things by their own name, and not give them that, which they have not; and therefore parts must not be attributed to the Eternity
and Immensity of God, seeing they can have none: but one must say only, that the Eternity of God, being indivisible and without parts, was necessarily before time, and is now with time, and shall ever be the same, with or without time. So that the whole single Eternity corre∣sponds to all times; and that the Immen∣sity of God, being also indivisible and without parts, was necessarily before the Bodies, and is now with the Bodies, and shall ever be the same with or without Bodies; so that the whole single Immen∣sity, corresponds to all the parts of all the Bodies, that are in this Immensity. They do not absolutely deny, That humane Spirit, because of its great weak∣ness, in so high mysteries, cannot conceive the Eternity and Immensity of God, with∣out attributing to them somewhat equi∣valent to the actual parts of Times and Bodies: That it cannot conceive the du∣ration of God, since six thousand years and very near that the World lasteth, without attributing to thesame somewhat equiva∣lent, to the six thousand years; and that it cannot conceive the Divinity co-exi∣stent with all the Bodies of the World, without attributing to the same some∣what equivalent to the actual extension of all Bodies.
If God should abolish and reduce this World to nothing, and should also cre∣ate another, but not immediately after, they assure that the Spirit of Man cannot conceive the duration betwixt the two Worlds, without conceiving some space of time, or somewhat eqvivalent to the space of time: And if God should create another World, which would not touch this, they think that the Spirit of Man, cannot conceive the interval, that would be between the two Worlds, without con∣ceiving some corporal extension, or some∣what equivalent to this extension. But they think also, that God conceiving the duration or interval, that should be be∣tween the two Worlds, would conceive them otherwise, without space of time or corporal extension. And that if any will attribute to the Eternity and Im∣mensity of God, some virtual parts, that is to say, equivalent and correspondent to the actual parts of Times and Bodies; They say, that the same is so far from blunting the edge and force of their Ar∣guments, that it favours them greatly, as will appear anon. And so answering the Objection pre∣cisely, they say, That the Oriental space, and the Occidental space, are nothing else, than Oriental Immensity, and the
Occidental Immensity: and therefore as the Oriental Immensity, and the Occicidental Immensity, really and in themselves, are not two Immensities, nor two parts of Immensity, but are really one and the same Immensity, which is called Orien∣tal and Occidental, only in respect to the Oriental and Occidental Bodies, that are or may be in this Immensity. So the O∣riental space, and the Occidental space, are not really and in themselves two dif∣ferent things, but one and the same thing, which is called Oriental space, and Occidental space, in respect to the Oriental and Occidental Bodies, that are or may be in the same. Moreover, as Immensity, though Infi∣nite, is Indivisible, and without Parts, as the Divinity from which it it is not di∣stinct. So Space being nothing than the Immensity of God, though it be infinite, is also Indivisible and without Parts. Finally, Even as a man, and a rational Animal, are not greater, and have no more parts than man alone; because a man and a rational Animal are one and the same thing: So the Oriental and Oc∣cidental Immensity, or the Oriental and Occidental Space, are not greater, and have no more parts, than the Oriental Immensity alone, or the Oriental Space
alone, because the Oriental and Oc∣cidental Immensity, or the Oriental and Occidental Space, are one and the same thing. And if one will allow, or suppose some virtual parts in the Eternity and Immen∣sity of God, and says that the Eternity and Immensity of God have some virtual Replications, according to the multitudes of Times and Bodies, to the which the Eternity and Immensity of God corre∣spond. They say, that as the Age of Adam was in a part or virtual Replica∣tion of Eternity, and the Age of Noah in another: So Heaven is in one part, or virtual Replication of Immensity, and the Earth in another; and that we are thus to argue of other Times and Bo∣dies. And if any say, That all things pro∣pounded hitherto, are incomprehensible, and altogether incredible: They answer, That God dwelling in an Inaccessible Light, one must not wonder, if Incomprehensi∣bility is one of his Properties and Attri∣butes; And seeing the Eternity and Im∣mensity of God are nothing else than God himself, one must not think it strange, that they are incomprehensible, and can∣not be perfectly conceived by humane Spirit. Therefore (say they) all things
propounded hitherto, concerning the E∣ternity, the Space, or Immensity of God, are indeed incomprehensible; but they have this advantage, that they are not contradictory: whereas all other ways of Arguing, concerning Eternity, Space, or Immensity, seem to involve many ab∣surdities and contradictions, alleadged in this Tract. For my part, I think this Answer ought to satisfie any one that is not contentious; but because it is not common, and may be accused of Novel∣ty; and indeed is not without difficulty, I submit to the Judgment of my Betters and Superiours. But if this Answer does not satisfie, one must say, That space or the place of Bo∣dies is the Eternal, without action, and infinite Inanity of Ancient Philosophers, which is neither Body or Spirit, nor Ac∣cident, nor active Substance; but only such a thing as is capable to receive all Bodies, and which having them, is al∣ways infinitely beyond them. And yet this Inanity must necessarily be supposed without parts really different; Else the Objection of our Adversaries will remain in its full force: for the Oriental and Oc∣cidental Inanity being infinite and great∣er than the sole Oriental Inanity, it would follow, that an infinite should be
greater than another; which is absurd. And because such an Inanity, without parts, will hardly please, and receive admittance amongst sober, judicious, learned Men; I return to the first An∣swer, and ground my Arguing upon it, yet submiting it to the judgment and censure of those that have attained to a deeper knowledge of these matters. 10. Their second Objection, drawn from the pretended infiniteness of the thoughts, both of Men and Angels, for the time to come may be resolved two ways: First, In saying that God will give to every Man, and to every Angel in particular, one onely light and bright∣ness of Glory, by which he shall possess and enjoy God Eternally; and conse∣quently that every Man and every An∣gel, shall have but one onely thought, by which he shall be fastened as it were, upon God Eternally: Therefore seeing that all Men and all Angels will be in number finite; so the thoughts of Men and Angels will be in number finite. Secondly, Since I think that the thoughts, or the repetition of the same thoughts, shall always be divers in num∣ber; I answer that the thoughts of Men and Angels for the time to come, shall
be finite to the infinite, that is to say, shall increase alwayes, and perpetually be in greater number, and alwayes in greater number, but alwayes also in fi∣nite number: And though to every Day, to every Moneth, to every Year: to every Age, and to every Time whatso∣ever in particular, this finite number of Thoughts be definite and determined, so that God may assign and determine the number of the Thoughts of Men and Angels, which have been in time past to that Day, that Moneth, that Year, that Age, and that time inclusive∣ly: nevertheless if one speaks indefinite∣ly, without specifying, neither Day, nor Moneth, nor Year, nor Age, nor any other Time in particular, but asks simply, in what number will the Thoughts of Men and Angels be for the time to come? No other answer can be given, but that the number of their Thoughts, shall be finite to the infinite, or that their number, is finite indefinitely, and un∣determinedly; for, because of the per∣petuity of Thoughts one cannot assign or determine a certain number, beyond which one shall have no more Thoughts. And if one demands further, The Collection of all the Thoughts which shall be for the time to come, supposed
they have never an end, what number is it of? I answer, That Collection is impossible, and consequently a meer no∣thing, because all future Thoughts, taken distributively, are future, but not taken collectively, seeing they shall ne∣ver be collected and gathered, and that there will be still some to come to pass; and consequently to be collected and ga∣thered: One may also demand whether the number of the future Thoughts of Men and Angels, which God knows is finite or infinite? To which I answer, That God knows Things as they are in themselves, and that he knows future Things no otherwise then they shall be in themselves; for the knowledge of God is alwayes true, and consequently alwayes conformable to the things known. Therefore seeing that the Thoughts of Men and Angels, shall always be finite to the infinite, and that their number shall always be finite indefinitely; it is evident that God knows them no other∣wise, then as finite to the infinite, and that he knows certainly, that their num∣ber is finite and indefinitely, which will appear more plainly in our Answer to the third Objection. 11. Their third Objection drawn from the pretended infiniteness of Men and
Lions possible, that is to say, that God may produce and create, may be resolved the same way as the first; to wit, saying that Men and Lions possible are finite to the infinite, and that the number of them is finite, not definitely and determined∣ly, so that one may assign a certain num∣ber, beyond which none will be possible; but is infinite indefinitely, because there is never so great a nmmber of Men and Lions, but God may produce and create a greater, and always a greater, and still a greater, but notwithstanding always finite. If it be objected that the Col∣lection of all Men possible, comprehends an infinite number: I answer, That such a Collection is impossible, and conse∣quently a meer nothing; because all Men taken distributively, are indeed possible, but taken collectively are a meer impossible, and consequently a meer nothing; because God can never produce so great a number of Men, but he may always produce a greater, and agreater again; so that it is impossible that God may not always produce some Men; and consequently the Collection of all Men possible is impossible, and a meer nothing. If it be farther objected, That there are as many Men possible, as God knows are possible; and that God knows a number
infinite of possible; seeing that if he should know onely a finite number of Men, he should see the last Man possible, and should know he could not create any more, and should see the end of his Power, and consequently his Power should be finite: I Answer, That the number of Men possible, that God knows, is not infinite, nor also finite definitely and determinedly: So that one may as∣sign and determine a certain number, be∣yond which God knows no more; for there is never so great a number but God may see and know a greater, and always a greater, and still a greater, but not∣withstanding always finite; because God knows things no otherwise than they are in themselves: And therefore seeing that Men possible are in number finite indefinitely; God also knows cer∣tainly, that the number of Men possible is finite indefinitely, and from thence it doth not follow, that the power of God is finite and limited in it self, or that he sees the end of his power, since he may always produce and create other Men, though always in a finite number; but at the most it may be said to be finite, in respect to its objects, or its effects, which cannot be but finite; as the know∣ledge God hath of this World, though
infinite in it self; because it is not di∣stinct from the Divinity, may be said to be finite, in respect to its objects, to wit, the World that is finite. And now I will conclude this Chap∣ter, desiring the Reader to take no∣tice that when I have spoken of the E∣ternity of God, of his Immensity, of his Power, and of his Knowledge, he must not imagine, nor conceive, that I put or suppose, divers things, or divers qua∣lities in God; but he must believe with me, that there is one and the same thing, to wit, one and rhe same Divi∣nity, to which divers names are given and attributed, according to the divers respects, to which it is considered. For the same Divinity, in as much as it contains all Ages, and corresponds to every one of them, and is infinitely before them, is called Eternity: Seeing that it is the receptacle of all Bodies, corresponds to every one of them, and is insinitely be∣yond all the Creatures of the World, is called Immensity; as it gives being to every thing, and protects and preserves them; is called Omnipotency; as it pla∣ces and disposes them together, accor∣ding to the dignity of each of them, is called Wisdom: as it bestows all sorts of good things upon the Creatures, is called
Goodness. And for as much it decrees, foresees, and rules all the Events in the World, is called Providence. And thus must we speak of all his other Attri∣butes. The Answer of Julius Scaliger, in his Exercitations against Cardanus, to Algazel his Argument, and which the Affrican maintained to be most sound and solid, hath been sufficiently refuted, when I have proved that an infinite is not greater than another; neither material∣ly nor formally. CHAP. V. 1. The fourth Answer of Atheists, say∣ing, that from all Eternity there was a Chaos. 2. That the Heavens and the Elements did not by degrees disintangle and resolve themselves from all Eternity. 3. That they did not remain a finite time, to resolve or clear themselves. 4. That they did not remain an infinite time, to clear and resolve themselves. A Digression wherein the two first Verses of the first Chapter of Ge∣nesis are explained, and is shew∣ed that there is no mention made of a
Chaos, and that they do not contain a proposition of all those things, God created in six days, and that Light was not the first Creature. 1. The fourth Answer of Atheists is, That the World hath not been from all Eternity in the state it is now; but that from all Eternity there was a Chaos; that is to say, that the Heavens, the Stars, the Elements, and all other things, have been from all Eternity, pell-melled and confused together; and that having resolved themselves, they have framed and disposed the World in the state it is now; that it was the opi∣nion of Euripides, and divers Ancient Philosophers; as of Drodorus in the First Book of his History. The Reply. 2. Against this Objection or Answer, I say that if the Chaos, that is to say, the Heavens, the Stars, and the Ele∣ments, pell-melled and confused toge∣ther, had been from all Eternity, it would follow, that either by degrees they had resolved themselves from all Eternity, or that a time finite or infinite would have passed before they had re∣solved themselves: But they did not re∣solve
themselves by degrees from all E∣ternity, and a time finite or infinite did not pass, before they did resolve them∣selves: Therefore they have not been confused from all Eternity, and conse∣quently the Chaos was not from all E∣ternity. The Minor or second Proposi∣tion, which is the onely one that may be questioned, is verified thus: First, That the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, pell-melled toge∣thar, did not by degrees resolve and se∣parate themselves from all Eternity, appears; because the separation of cor∣poral things, mixed together, is not made without the local motion of some of them: But nothing did move locally from all Eternity, as I have shewed in the first Chapter; where I have proved that time and motion have not been from all Eternity. Secondly, Those things which did by degrees separate themselves from others, from all Eternity by local motion, they have remained, either a finite time, to separate themselves, or an infinite time; if a finite time, it will follow, that betwixt the mixture, and the per∣fect separation, the difference and in∣terval will be but a finite and limited time; and consequently that betwixt
that which is from all Eternity; to wit, the mixture and that which is not from all Eternity, to wit, the perfect sepa∣ration, the difference will be but a finite and limited time, which is impossible. And moreover, It would follow that a finite time, such as the duration of those things, since their perfect separation, added to a finite, such as is the time that passed in their separation, would make up an infinite time, such as is the pretended Eternity of the mixture; all which is against this true Maxime, that one finite added to another finite, does not make up an infinite. If they have remained an infinite time to separate themselves, it will follow that they will have run, through an in∣finite space in their separation; seeing that a finite space may be run through in a finite time: and truly, since time is the measure or duration of motion, it will follow, that if time be infinite, the motion will be also infinite; and if the motion is infinite, the place or space wherein things did move, will be infinite, either really or equivalently. But they have not run through an infinite space, either really or equivalently; else they would have run through a space, an hun∣dred thousand millions of thousands of
times, and a space a thousand millions of times greater than this World, really or equivalently; which is absurd. And besides, It would follow that an infinite, would be greater than another; seeing the space that they would have run through; until their perfect separation, and that which they would have run through since their perfect separation, should be greater than the sole space, they should have run through until their separation: For a farther confirmation, look back upon the first Chapter, where∣in I have proved that time and motion cannot be infinite. 3. Secondly, That the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, have not re∣mained a finite time, before they have re∣solved and separated themselves; ap∣pears, because it would follow, that betwixt the mixture, and the beginning of their separation, the difference would be but of a finite time; and consequent∣ly that betwixt that which is from all Eternity, as their pretended mixture; and that which is not from all Eternity, as their separation, or the beginning thereof, the difference would be but of some limited time; and there would be wanting but a finite and limited time, lest that their separation, which had a
Beginning, should be Eternal; and that one finite added to the other finite, should make up an infinite, which is impossible. 4. Thirdly, That the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, have not re∣mained an infinite time before they have resolved and separated themselves, appears, because it is a Maxime received of all, that Idem qua Idem, semper facit Idem, at least when 'tis not a free and intellectual Agent. Therefore, If the Heavens, the Stars, and the Ele∣ments, have been confused and pell-mel∣led together, during an infinite time, or during Eternity; how came it to pass that they have resolved and disin∣tricated themselves at last? certainly it cannot be of themselves, having re∣mained in the same case and condition, above an hundred thousand millions of thousands of years: and if another has thus separated them (as it is most true) it cannot be ought else but God. 5. It will not be out of purpose to add to this Reply, The true sense of the two first verses of the first Chapter of Genesis, which are conceived in these words: In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth; and the Earth was without form and void, and dark∣ness
was upon the face of the Deep; and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. Because, out of these words some Christians have imagined a Chaos, say∣ing, That God created first a Chaos, that is to say, the Heavens and the Ele∣ments mixed confusedly together; and afterwards in six days did draw all Crea∣tures out of the same; and others in greater number, say, that in the two alleadged verses, Moses makes a general Proposition of all things created, in these two words, Heaven and Earth; and that in the following verses, he specifies the Creatures as God created them every day. Against that I say, That the true sense of the words of Moses, is, that in the beginning of the first Day, which was the beginning of the first Evening, and the beginning of Time, God created the Imperial Heaven, which should be the Mansion and Dwelling Place of God and the Blessed; the Earth which should be the residence of Men during this mo∣mentary life, and the Waters which did then cover the whole face of the Earth. The chief reasons of my Assertions are these: First, It is certain that the first day
of the Creation, as well as the five o∣thers, is divided in Evening and Morn∣ing, and that the Evening is put before the Morning: For Moses saith, And the Evening and the Morning were the first Day; and from thence it is that the Jews ever began their Natural Day, with the Evening. From which Con∣sideration I frame these two Argu∣ments: That which is part of the part, is also part of the whole: For Example, The Finger which it part of the Hand, is also part of the Arm, and of the whole Body; but the Evening is part of the Day, which is also part of Time: Therefore the Evening is also part of Time; and so when the Evening was, Time was also, or began to be. From this Argument I frame another thus: Time never was without some Corporal Creatures; seeing that Time is the dura∣tion of Corporal Things, or of their Motion; but in the Evening of the first Day, Time was or began to be; for the Evening, being part of the Natural Day, is also part of Time: Therefore in the Evening of the first Day, there were some Corporal Creatures: Now what other Corporal Creatures were in the Evening of the first Day, but the
Heaven, the Earth, and the Waters, whereof mention is made in these two first verses of the first Chapter of Genesis. Wherefore it appears evidently that in these words, In the Beginning God Created the Heaven and the Earth; these two words (in the Beginning) are to be explained thus: In the beginning of Time, in the beginning of the first Day, in the beginning of the Evening of the first Day, God Created the Heaven and the Earth. Secondly, After that Moses hath said, In the beginning God Created Heaven and Earth; he adds immediately, and the Earth was without form and void, that is to say, the Earth that God created with the Heavens, was then without an external form or appearance of Earth, because then it was all covered with Water, and was void of the Ornaments, which now inrich and adorn it; for then the Earth had neither Flowers nor Fruits, nor Herbs, nor Corn, nor Trees, nor Living Creatures, &c. Now when was it that the Earth was covered with Wa∣ter, without appearance of Earth, with∣out Beauty, and without Ornaments, but onely during the two first Days, unto the third exclusively; in which God separated the Waters from the Earth,
and beautified it with all sorts of Plants. Thirdly, I say that in all the History of the Creation, described by Moses, no mention at all is made of the Creati∣on of the Imperial Heaven, of the Earth, and of the Waters, but in the two first verses alleadged. For though the Fir∣mament, which was Created the second Day, be called Heaven, v. 8. yet it must not be understood of the Imperial Heaven, which is the Throne of God, and the Dwelling place of the Blessed; because it is said of this Firmament, v. 7. That God divided the Waters which were under the Firmament, from the Waters which were above the Firmament; that is to say, this Firmament divides the Earthly and the Heavenly Waters; and at verse the 14. that in this Firmament God placed the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; and at v. 20. that Fowls were appointed to flie towards it; all which cannot be understood of the Imperial Heaven, which is above all other Cor∣poral Creatures, but onely of the Ele∣ment of the Air. Moreover, Though in the work of the third day, mention is made of the Se∣paration of the Earth, and of the Sea; yet there is no mention made of their Creation; an evident proof that they
had been Created before. And indeed Moses describing the work of the second Day, speaks in this manner: And God said, Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, and let divide the Wa∣ters from the Waters: and God made the Firmament, and divided the Waters which were under the Firmament, from the Waters which were above the Fir∣mament. Now how would God have divided the Waters, if they had not been before? and how would he have created a Firmament between the Wa∣ters, if there had been no Water be∣before? Therefore let us conclude that in these two first verses, and no where else, mention is made of the Creation of the Imperial Heaven, of the Earth, and of the Water, that God made be∣fore the Light, whereof it is spoken in the third verse. Fourthly, Immediately after these words, In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, and the Earth was without form and void; it is added, And Darkness was upon the face of the Deep; as if he should have said, when God created the Heaven and the Earth, and the Earth was covered with Water, without Beauty or Orna∣ments; then the vast and spacious Waters,
or the spaces between Heaven and Earth, were covered with Darkness, because there was yet no Light, as appears by the Text; and God had not yet created that great body of Light, which he created afterwards; to wit, in the Morning of the same first Day; and whereof proba∣bly, in the fourth Day he made the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, which may be very well thought to be the Element of Fire, seeing it hath all the effects and properties of it; and that in the whole History of the Creation, mention is made no where else of the Element of Fire; but when God said, Let there be Light. Moreover, It is certain that Darkness is nothing else but the privati∣on of Light: now privation differs from a meer negation; in that privation sup∣poses a subject capable to receive that whereof it is privation; and a meer ne∣gation supposes none: For Example, Blindness is the privation of Sight, which supposes a Creature capable to receive Sight, Death is a privation of Life, that supposes a Body susceptible of Life, &c. Now seeing that Darkness which was before Light, as appears by the Text, is nothing else but a privation of Light, it is evident that Darkness supposes some Bodies susceptible of Light, which
as well as Darkness have been before the Light; but these Bodies can be no others, but those mentioned in the two first verses, to wit, the Heaven, the Earth, and the Waters, which were created the Evening of the first Day. But I suppose it will be objected, that the form ought always to be before the privation: For Example, The Sight be∣fore Blindness, Life before Death; and that consequently the Light was before Darkness: But I answer, first, That all Philosophers agree, that all Physical Pri∣vations, are before the Forms, whereof they are privations; because they are privations of future forms, as logical privations, are privations of forms past. And thus the seminal matter hath the privation of the Soul, before it hath the Soul it self; and every physical matter hath the privation of the essential form, before it hath such a form; and in the Example alleadged above, it may hap∣pen that Blindness is before the Sight, Deafness before Hearing, and the pri∣vation of Life before Life. So the Born Blind and Deaf Man that Jesus Christ healed, were Blind and Deaf, before they received either Sight or Hearing. And the Embryo, that is to say, the Infant in the Mothers Womb, before it
hath got perfect shape, hath the priva∣tion of rational Life, before ever he re∣ceives the said rational Life. Secondly, It is must true, that when a Subject is equally susceptible of the Form and the privation of it, if the A∣gent may produce the Subject and the Form, it is then in the power of the Agent, if it be a free Agent, to pro∣duce the Subject with the Form, or with the Privation thereof: But the Earth, and the Waters are Bodies equally sus∣ceptible of Light and Darkness: There∣fore God who is a most free Agent, and who hath created the Earth, the Waters, and the Light, may have produced the Earth, and the Waters, with, or with∣out Light. So then seeing that by the Text it appears, that Darkness was be∣fore Light, we must conclude, that the Earth and the Waters were produced tenebrous. Finally, It is most true, that the Light God created, is a most bright and shining Body, and not an accident, as I might make it appear, were not the Digression too long already. Now who seeth not, that God may have created the Earth, and the Waters before this bright and shining Body, seeing he can create one Body before another. By the consideration of these things,
it is clear, that in the two alleadged verses, Moses doth not set down a ge∣neral Proposition, of all those things God was to create afterwards; but that he describes particularly, the creation of Heaven, of the Earth, and of the Waters, which were produced the Even∣ing of the first Day. Moreover, It is e∣vident, that in the said verses, Moses speaks not one word of a Chaos, con∣taining all Creatures, pell-melled and confused together; seeing there is no mention made of the Firmament, nor of the Element of Fire, nor of the Stars, nor Plants, nor Living Creatures, but onely of the Imperial Heaven, of the Earth, and of the Waters; and yet there is never a word of the Heaven and the Earth being mixed together; and in the whole History of the Creation, there is no mention made of the separation of Heaven from the Earth, as there is of the separation of the Earth, from the Waters that covered it. But enough of this matter, it is time to come to the Consutation of other Objections and Answers of Atheists.
CHAP. VI. 1. The Fifth Answer of Atheists, say∣ing, That there has been from all Eternity a Matter without Form. 2. The proof that there hath not been from all Eternity a Matter without Form, and that the Matter could not produce the Forms. 3. That the E∣ternal Atomes, by a casual concourse, have not made and disposed the World. 4. That the Forms cannot have been produced but by God. 1. THe Fifth Answer of Atheists is, That indeed the World has not been from all Eternity in the case and state it is now; and that from all Eternity there hath been no Chaos, but that there hath been from all Eternity a Matter without Form, and that afterwards out of this Matter, all Forms have been produced, which be∣ing joyned with the Matter, have fram∣ed all Corporal Creatures, and made the World in the case and state it is now. The Epicures following the Opinion of their Masters Democritus and Epicurus, have specified and determined what that
Matter was, to wit, the Atomes, which in time by a casual and accidental con∣course have made up the World in the state it is now. The Reply. 2. Against this Answer, I say, That if there had been from all Eternity a Matter without Form, it would follow, that the pretended Forms of Heaven, the Stars, and the Elements, as well as the Forms of Plants and Living Creatures, should have been after the Matter, and consequently would have had a beginning; and having not had beginning of them∣selves, seeing that nothing produces it self, they would have been necessarily produced in time by another, and that other would be necessarily, either the the Matter or some other thing, differing from the Matter. Now these Forms can∣not have been produced in time, neither by the Matter nor by any other thing differing from the Matter, unless it be by God himself; which I prove thus: If any Eternal Matter had produced these Forms in time, it would follow necessarily, that before the product of the same, a time either finite or in¦nite, should have passed: not a
time, because betwixt that which is from all Eternity, as the Matter (is sup∣posed by them to be) and that which is not from all Eternity, as these Forms or the Productions of the same, the dif∣ference is greater than of a finite time And Moreover, It would follow, that a finite time, such as that which should have passed since the productions of these Forms, added to a finite time, such as that which should have passed before the production of these Forms, would make up an infinite time, or an infinite duration, such as the Eternity of the Matter would be; which is im∣possible. Neither did an infinite time pass before the production of these Forms; for how should it come to pass, that the Matter having been an infinite time all alone without acting, would pro∣duce them afterwards? Is it not a con∣stant and true Maxime, that, Idem qua Idem semper facit Idem; when it is not a free and intellectual Agent, when there is no impedement, and the sub∣jects which it works about are not dif∣ferent. Now Matter being not a free and intellectual Agent, and finding no im∣pediment nor different subjects, seeing it is supposed to be all alone, before the productions of these Forms; it follows
necessarily it hath always done the same thing; and consequently that it hath not remained a time, either finite or infinite to produce these Forms, if it may have produced them. Moreover, All Men know that Causa naturaliis agit a dex∣tremum suae potentiae; that is to say, Na∣tural Causes act and work as much as they can: For Example, The Sun shines as much as it can, the Fire heats with all its strength; and 'tis most true, that, Causa necessaria, positis omnibus requisitis ad agendum, & sublatis impedimentis, ne∣cessario agit. That is to say, Necessary Causes, all things required, granted, and having no impediments, act and work necessarily, and cannot keep back, nor suspend their action. Now then, seeing that Matter is a Natural and not a Volun∣tary Cause, a necessary and not a free Cause, and that there is no impediment, being supposed all alone; it follows that if it may have produced these Forms, it must necessarily have produced them before (or without remaining) an infinite time. 3. Against the Epicures, teaching that the Eternal Atomes by a casual concourse, have made and disposed the World, in the same case and state it is at present; I say that this concourse of Atomes, to frame and fashion the World,
cannot have happened without the local motion of some of them: From whence I argue thus, If the Atomes or the parts of the Matter had concurred, and con∣sequently had moved themselves locally to frame and fashion the World in the case and state it is at present, it would follow that they would have moved themselves locally from all Eternity, or that they would have remained, either a finite or an infinite time without mov∣ing, and then afterwards would have framed and fashioned the World in the case and state it is at present: but they have not moved themselves locally from all Eternity, neither have they remained a finite or an infinite time without mov∣ing; as I have sufficiently proved in the precedent Chapter, Num. 2, 3, 4. for the same things I have said there of the Heaven and the Elements, may be said likewise of the Atomes. 4. Finally, That these Forms have not been produced by any thing differing from the Matters, but by God himself, ap∣pears; because the Agent who should have produced them, would have been Eternal or not: if not Eternal he would have had a Beginning, and consequently, would have been produced of another; of whom I would ask, Whether he be E∣ternal
or not, and so always inquire, un∣til one should come to such an Agent, as would not have been produced by another, and consequently would be Eternal. If Eternal, he should be either a necessary and natural Agent, or a free and volun∣tary Agent: If a natural and necessary Agent, he would have forthwith produ∣ced these Forms; for a natural and ne∣cessary Agent, acts, and works, as much as it can, and cannot suspend his action; and consequently these Forms would have been from all Eternity, and consequently the World in the case and state it is at pre∣sent; which I have demonstrated alrea∣dy to be altogether impossible: And if a free and intellectual Agent, it can be no other but God; sceing that by the word GOD, we mean and conceive nothing else, but a free and intellectual Agent, who hath produced the world, in the state and case it is at present. CHAP. VII. 1 The Sixth Answer of Atheists, saying, That men have their Original and Be∣ginning from the Tritons and Sirens, commonly called Mairmaids. 2. The Confutation of this Answer.
1. THe Sixth Answer of Atheists is, That though men had not been from all Eternity, it would not follow, that they had been produced by some Di∣vine and Superiour Cause; for one might say, That their Original is from some Tritons and Sirens, who after the Uni∣versal Floods, lived both in the Waters, and on the Land, and so in time became terrestrial. And they say, that some Hi∣storiographers relate several things, which seem to justifie their allegation. Herodotus in the Fourth Book of his Hi∣story relates that Jason being carried a∣way by a storm into Libia, in the Coun∣trey of the Lotophages, in the dangerous places of the Tritonide Fenns and Marsh∣es, there appeared to him a Triton, who demanded of him a Trevet, promising to reward him, with the discovery of the means, whereby he might come out of that place; which being performed by Jason, the Triton shewed him the way, and saved him. Lewis Guicharden writes, that in the year 1403 they brought to Harbem in Holland, a Siren, commonly called a Mair maid, which by degrees learned to eat bread, milk and other meat, to spin, and to make the Sign of the Cross. Acosta in the Third Book, Chapter the 18th of his Relations,
describes the Ʋros as a kind of men li∣ving in the waters, and observes that they themselves said they were no men. Nicolo Conti in Ramnusio, relates, That in the River of Cochin, there are Fishes to be found with a humane Form and Resemblance, that being taken, the difference of Sex is to be seen both in Male and Female, altogether like ours; and further he saith, that they are so in∣dustrious, as to come out of the water at night, to strike fire with flints they find there, to make a fire with wood, at the light whereof they catch all other fishes that come near them. The Reply. 2. Against this Answer, I say, First, That there is no Author, let him be ne∣ver so fabulous, that ever dreamed or writ, that men have their Original from the Tritons and Sirens. And Besides, my reason respecting all terrestrial Creatures, it would follow that Elephants, Lions, Bears, Oxen, and other terrestrial Crea∣tures, would have had their Original from the like Marine Creatures. Secondly, It is a Moral Maxime, That every thing seeks and endeavours to bet∣ter its Condition: Now either it is better
for waterish Creatures, to become ter∣restrial, or not: If it be better for them? how came it to pass that they do not seek after it? And if it be not better for them, why have they done it in time past. Finally, If they are become terrestri∣al in times past, why do they not do the same now? And if such a thing has hap∣pened heretofore, some where, why does it not come to pass again, either there or in seme other place of the World? Thirdly, Histories make mention but of three Floods onely, to wit, that of Noah, that of Ogyges, and that of Deucalion; now these two last have not been universal, for they happened onely in one part of Greece; so that it was an easie thing to furnish it again, with neighbouring People. And as for the first, it cannot be believed, except one believes a Divinity, whether we re∣spect the Miracles that went along with it, or the Holy Man that writ the Hi∣story of it; who saith positively that God sent it, and commanded Noah to build the Ark, to save in it all kinds of Terrestrial Creatures; so that it is need∣less to have recourse to Waterish Crea∣tures Fourthly, The Examples of Herodotus,
Guicharden, and others, prove indeed that there are Tritons and Sirens, but they speak never a word, concerning Men having had their original from them. And as for the strange things they write of them, it is certain they had them by hear-say from others, who might have been deceived in the Narration, and by the Declarer, as well as themselves. And this will soon appear to be true, if we judge impartially of the Writings of Herodotus; for most part of what he writes from others, is so far from be∣ing a true History, that it savours the Ro∣mance altogether: As when he saith in his Second Book, That Rampsinitus King of Egypt, went down into Hell, and there played at Dice with Ceres; That the Sun did rise twice in the West, and did sit twice in the East: That Sen∣nacherib King of Assiria and Araba, being in his March towards Egypt to War against Setho King of that Country, his Bows and Quivers were gnawed by Cats, so that he was fain to go back a∣gain into his own Country with shame. That the Daughter of Cheopes King of Egypt, did prostitute her self to every Man that would give her but a Stone, whereof was made one of the Pyra∣mides, which made one of the seven
Wonders of the World. That Phero became blind for having shot an Arrow in the River Nilus; and ten years after recovered his sight by Washing his Eyes with the Urine of a Woman, that ne∣ver lay with any Man but her Husband: And truly Diodorus in the Fourth Book of his History, observes, That Triton who shewed Jason and the other Argonauts, the way to avoid the Quick∣sands of the Sea, was a King of Lybia and not a Fish. Acosta speaking of the Ʋros, does not affirm that they are Wa∣terish Creatures, but onely a rude and unpolished People. These are are his very words, These, Uros (saith he) are so rude and blockish a People, that they do not repute themselves to be Men. And as for the Fishes of the River of Cochin whereof Nicolo Conti speaks, I say that in matter of Narrations and Histories, we ought not to believe whatsoever every one relates, who for to humour himself, writes the Imagi∣nations of his own Brain, or the Stories of others that deceived him; but we must believe onely, that which is re∣lated to us by such Men as have travel∣led in those Countreys. Now many Hollanders, and Portugals, that have been at Cochin; and have seen the River
and the Fishes in it, make no mention of such Fishes, and hold it as a Lie and a Fable, whatsoever Nicolo Conti writes of this matter. Finally, If whatsoever is written con∣cerning the Tritons, should be true, and that Men should be originary of the pretended Eternal Tritons; yet my Rea∣son would remain whole and entire; and my Arguments against the Eternity of Men, may be applied to the Tritons: And I may argue thus again, If the Tri∣tons have been from all Eternity, the number of these Tritons which have been in time past is infinite: That the Tritons which are pretended to have Lived from all Eternity, yet have not Lived an Eternity, but onely a certain limited time: And that the Tritons which have been in time past unto this very day, are all distant with a finite distant of time, or all with an infinite distance, or some with a finite, and others with an infinite di∣stance: And so applying to the Tritons what I have said of Men in the First Chapter, it will clearly appear that the same absurdities do follow.
CHAP. VIII. 1. The Seventh Answer of Atheists, saying, That Men have been pro∣duced by, or proceeded from the Eter∣nal Earth, or from all the Elements together. 2. Reasons alleadged, or Evidence produced against the Fal∣shood of this Answer. 3. That the Earth, nor the other Elements can∣not have been naturally disposed to produce Men. 4. Other Reasons prov∣ing that Men have not been produced by the Earth, nor by the other Ele∣ments. 1. THe Seventh Reason of Atheists is, That Men have been pro∣duced by, or proceeded from the Eternal Earth, or from all the Ele∣ments together, which have been Eter∣nal, and in time have produced the first Men, by which all others have had their original by way of Generati∣on; in a manner as Rats, Frogs, Flies, and other Creatures of this kind are formed at this time, out of a Terrestrial Matter.
The Reply. 2. Against this Answer, I say, That if the Eternal Earth had produced in time, the first Men, or if the Sun, or a∣ny other Eternal Agent, had produced them out of the Eternal Earth; it would follow that the Eternal Earth would have remained, either a finite or an in∣finite time, before their production; but neither can be said without absurdi∣ty: not a finite time, else it would fol∣low that betwixt the Earth and the Pro∣duction of the first Men, the difference would be onely of a finite and limited time; and consequently that betwixt that which is from all Eternity, as the Earth, and that which is not from all Eternity, as the Production of the first Men, the difference would be only of a finite and limited time, which is impos∣sible. And besides, it would follow, That a finite time, such as should be that which should have passed, since the the Production of the first Men unto this day, added to a finite time, such as should be that which should have passed since the existence of the Earth, unto the Production of the first Men, would make up an infinite time, such as is
the pretended Eternity of the Earth; all which is against this true Maxime: That a finite added to another finite, doth not make up an infinite. And further, That there would be wanting but a finite and limited time, lest that the production of the first Men, which hath had a Beginning should be Eternal, to wit, that finite and limited time that would have passed, since the exist∣ing of the Earth, unto their producti∣on. Not an infinite time also, else it would follow, that the Earth would have remained above an hundred thou∣sand times, a hundred millions of years, without having produced Men; and that after an infiniteness of years, it would have produced them; which is absurd: because natural and necessary causes, such as the Earth is, all things remain∣ing in the same state, do act al∣ways the same thing. Now what I say concerning the Earth, may be said of all Elements together. 3. And it is to no purpose, to say, That after an infiniteness of time, the Eternal Earth is (as it were) become apt, and disposed to produce Men; and so con∣sequently hath produced them; but be∣fore was not disposed, and consequently could not produce them. For against
that I say, That such an aptness or dis∣position of the Earth, must needs have come to pass, either by degrees, from all Eternity; so that after an infinite∣ness of time, it hath been perfected and accomplished; or that after an infinite∣ness of time, it is come to pass, either all at once, or successively: now neither of these can be said without absurdity. Not that it is come to pass by de∣grees, from all Eternity, else that dispo∣sition or alteration of the Earth, would have had parts succeeding one another, from all Eternity; and so succession, motion, and time, would have been from all Eternity: which I have shewed above to be altogether impossible. Not also that after an infiniteness of time, it is come to pass, either all at once, or successively; for if it were so, it would have been the act and work, either of the Earth it self, or of another na∣tural and necessary cause, such as are the other Elements; or of a free and in∣tellectual Agent. Not of the Earth, or of any other natural and necessary cause; because natural and necessary causes, all things remaining in the same state, act and work always the same things, and act as much as they can, without having power to suspend their
action; and consequently would not have remained more than an hundred thousand times an hundred thousand millions of years, to produce this apt∣ness and disposition, much less an in∣finiteness of time. If this Disposition hath been produced by a free and in∣tellectual Agent, it cannot be but by the Creator of the Universe, who is the great and glorious God whom we adore. 4. Now add to what hath been said, this true Maxime of Philosophers, Na∣tura progreditur ab imperfectionibus ad perfectiora. Nature proceeds from things more imperfect, to the more perfect: That is to say, Natural causes in their o∣perations, produce first imperfect things, which afterwards become more perfect in time: So the Earth breeds first Shrubs, which in time become great Trees; and produces Frogs, and Worms, and Flies, and other small and weak insects, which in time become great and strong. There∣fore, If the first Men have been produ∣ced by the Earth, or the other Elements, they cannot have been produced but ve∣ry little and most weak, as they that are newly born, and do but come out of the Mothers Womb; in which case Men would have been almost Dead as soon as
Born, there being no succour nor help for them, and so there would be never a Man left at this time. For it were to overthrow the order of Nature, to ima∣gine that the Earth, or the other Ele∣ments, should have produced the first Men, as perfect as they are at this time, at Five and twenty, or thirty years of Age. And besides, Our Reason extends it self to all sorts of Animals, as well Terrestrial, as them that live in the Wa∣ters; so that it would necessarily follow, that the Earth, the Air, the Water, and the Fire, or all the Elements together, should have produced, not onely the first Men, but also the first Lions, the first Elephants, the first Whales, the first Dolphins, and the like, in their per∣fection, Male and Female, for the pro∣pagation of the same; which is altoge∣ther against the Order of Nature. Moreover, If the Earth, or the o∣ther Elements, have heretofore produced some Men, why do not they produce no more at this time? and if they have produced Lions, Whales, and other A∣nimals, how comes it to pass that they produce none at this time, in some parts of the World? Surely, Mens Wits must be strangely perverted and overturned, to suppose such Extravagances and
Dreams. Therefore since for the propa∣gation of the humane kind, the first Men must necessarily have been in a perfect Age and State, and that Na∣ture could not make them such; one must believe that as it is related by Moses in the Book of Genesis, to wit, that there is a God, who out of the Earth, mixed with the other Elements, hath framed end fashioned a perfect humane Body, and having breathed in his No∣strils the breath of Life, he became a living Soul. Finally, It is an undoubt∣ed Truth, That none can give that which he hath not: Therefore, Seeing that the Earth, and the other Elements, distitute of understanding, and much more imperfect than Men, neither con∣tain, nor enjoy, either formally, or in eminency and vertue the excellent per∣fections of the reasonable Soul; it is evident they cannot produce it, nor consequently Man, whose chiefest and noblest part is the reasonable Soul.
CHAP. IX. 1. The Eighth Answer of Atheists, say∣ing, That there have been many Worlds, which have been produced the one by the other, and not by a Superior Spirit. 2. The Confutation of this Answer. 1. THe Eighth Answer of Atheists is, That this World hath not been from all Eternity, and yet hath not been created by any Supe∣rior and Almighty Spirit; but that it hath been produced out of the Matter of another World, which was before, and that that other hath been produced out of the Matter of another, which was also before it, and so there have been many Worlds which have suc∣ceeded one another; the World that perished being the Matter of the Gene∣rations of the new produced World; and that this World which we see now, shall perish one day, and out of the Mat∣ter of it another shall be produced, and out of the Matter of that another shall be produced again, and so consequently.
2. Against this Answer, I say, That the Worlds which are pretended to have been in time past, are either finite or infinite in number; if finite in number, it follows that there hath been a first World, which was never produced out of the Matter of another World, else it would not have been first; nor out of a∣ny Chaos or Eternal Matter, as I have sufficiently proved, in the Fifth and Sixth Chapters; and consequently the first World must needs have been created by a Superior and Almighty Spirit, who is the great God whom we adore. If in∣finite in number, the same absurdities which follow the infiniteness of Men, which we have shewed heretofore, will also follow of the infiniteness of Worlds; for there is no greater number than an infinite number; else the less infinite number would be exceeded by the grea∣ter, and consequently should be finite and termined, seeing that which is ex∣ceeded is termined where it is exceeded. Now there is a greater number than that of the Worlds, which are pretended to have been in time past; to wit, the number of Stars, the number of Plants, the number of Animals, or the num∣ber of all Things in particular, which
have been in all those pretended Worlds. Therefore the number of those Worlds (pretended to have been in time past) is not infinite. Moreover, All those pretended Worlds were distant one from another, with a finite distance of time onely, or with an infinite distance onely, or some were distant with a finite di∣stance, and others with an infinite di∣stance: If they all have been distant with a finite distance of time onely; and since a finite distance of time cannot comprehend Eternity, or infiniteness; it follows necessarily, that they have not been from all Eternity, that they have been in a finite number, and that there hath been one first, which having not produced it self, nor having been pro∣duced by a Chaos, or an Eternal Matter, as I have shewed above, it must have been created of God, necessarily. If they have been all distant, with an in∣finite distance of time onely, it follows that there hath been an infinite time, betwixt the two nearest Worlds, as well as betwixt the two remotest, which is contradictory: And if some have been distant with a finite distance of time, and others with an infinite, and one takes the two remotest Worlds in the finite distance, it will follow that one
onely World, to wit, the nearest, be∣yond one of them two, being removed from them, but with a finite distance of time, will make up an infinite distance of time, and that one finite added to another finite, will make up an infinite; which is absurd. I might use several other Arguments to refute this Answer of Atheists, were it not that it is sufficiently confuted in the first and second Chapters; where I have shewed that Men have not been from all Eternity. I will add onely, That every thing follows its natural in∣clination, and that which is best for it: Now if the natural inclination of Bodies, is to make a World, and that it is best for them; the World having been made, cannot have been destroyed naturally; and the Bodies did never reduce, nor resolve themselves into a Chaos: but if their inclination, and the best for them, is, not to make a World, and to remain in a Chaos; it is evident that the World cannot have been produced naturally, and that the Bodies would have remained always se∣parate or in confusion. And besides, I have sufficiently demonstrated already, that no succession is Eternal, and con∣sequently that of the pretended Worlds and Chaos cannot be Eternal.
CHAP. X. 1. The Ninth Answer of Atheists, say∣ing, That Christians confess that the World may have been from all Eter∣nity. 2. Their Reasons to prove that the World may have been from all E∣ternity. 3. The Confutation of their Answer. 4. An Answer to the Rea∣sons alleadged for the possibility of the Eternity of the World. 1. THe Ninth and last Reason of A∣theists, is, That Christians con∣fess that God may have created the World from all Eternity, though they believe he hath created it but in time. Now (say they) it is a true Axiom, that Posito possibili, nihil se∣quitur absurdi. That is, If one lays or supposes actually a thing possible, there follows no absurdity. And therefore see∣ing that the World may have been from all Eternity, there is no inconvenience nor contradiction, to suppose it actually from all Eternity. 2. Their Reasons to prove that the World may have been from all Eternity are these. 1. All things are possible to God,
Matth. 10. Therefore the Eternity of the World is possible to him. 2. God hath never been without power to create the World, but God hath been from all Eternity; therefore he may have created the World from all Eternity. 3. One ought not to deprive God of any of the perfections, which belong to the Crea∣ture, when this perfection is not ac∣companied of any imperfection, as is the power of Acting. Now if the Crea∣ture, for Example, the Sun, were from all Eternity, it would act and work from all Eternity, in Lightening and sending forth its Beams: Therefore God having been from all Eternity, hath acted, or may have acted from all E∣ternity, and consequently hath created, or may have created the World from all Eternity. 4. That which is once im∣possible, cannot be made possible, but always remains impossible: For Exam∣ple, It is impossible that a Man should be a Beast; so it hath been and ever will be impossible for a Man to be a Beast. Therefore, If the World hath been sometimes impossible, to wit, from all Eternity, it follows that it never hath, nor never will be possible, and conse∣quently hath not been created. 5. If the World hath been impossible from all E∣ternity,
either it nath been impossible during a finite time or during an infinite time; if impossible during a finite time onely, it will follow that betwixt that which hath been from all Eternity, as the impossibility of the World, and that which is not from all Eternity, as the possibility of it; the difference will be but of a finite and limited time: and besides it will follow that a finite time, such as that as is past, since the possibi∣lity of the World, added to another fi∣nite time, such as is the duration of its im∣possibility; will make up an infinite time, such as is the Eternity of the same im∣possibility; which is contradictory. And if the World hath been impossible, du∣ring an infinite time, seeing that an in∣finite Time, and Eternity are one and the same thing, and have neither begin∣ning nor end, it is evident that the World shall have been Eternally impossi∣ble, and never could be produced. 6. One must reason of the Fore-Eterni∣ty, as of the After-Eternity, seeing that of things alike the same judgment is to be made. But the World may be Eternal of the After-Eternity, seeing that God may preserve, and cause it to be and ex∣ist Eternally: therefore it may have been Eternal of the Fore-Eternity, and con∣sequently
may have been from all Eter∣nity. 7. God might create the World before the time he created it, and be∣fore again, and always before to the in∣finite: therefore he may have created it from all Eternity, for to go forward to the infinite, or to Eternity, is the same thing. The Reply. 3. Against this Answer, I say, That very few Christians say that the World may have been created from all Eternity, in the state it is now, because of the contradictions that would follow, the which (I hope) I have sufficiently noted already: for the same contradictions and absurdities, which follow from the ex∣istence of the World, do also follow from its creation from all Eternity. Therefore when some Christians by rea∣son of a pious zeal, being willing to exalt the Omnipotency of God, have written, that God may have created the World from all Eternity; that is under∣stood by the Learned of the World in another state, to wit, in a state of im∣mobility. For Example, If God had created the Sun from all Eternity, it would have remained infinitely without
motion; if God had created the Sea from all Eternity, it would have re∣mained infinitely, without Flowing and Ebbing. If God had created Men from all Eternity, they would have remained from all Eternity, without Pulse, with∣out Breath, and without Motion of the Animal and Vital Spirit; and without Dying; and if God had produced all o∣ther Creatures from all Eternity, they would have remained infinitely without Motion, and without being capable to be Destroyed; and during this infinite∣ness of time, God would not have had an obsolute Dominion and Sovereignty over them, seeing that during this in∣finite time he could not have destroyed them. But seeing such an Answer is repugnant to right Reason, and neither favours nor countenances A∣theists; seeing it grants a Godhead, and supposes the World in another state than Atheists do; I will insist upon it no longer, but will come to the Answer of their Reasons alleadged in their Answer. 4. To their first Reason, Drawn from that excellent Truth, That all Things are possible to God: I Answer, That God may do all Things possible; but he cannot do those Things that are im∣possible and contridictory. For Exam∣ple,
God cannot Die, nor Lie; because to be God, and to be a Lier, or Mortal, are things contradictory. But the Eter∣nity of the World is a thing impossible, and that involves and implies many ab∣surdities and contradictories; as I have shewed heretofore. I Answer again, That all Things are possible to God, but that the Eternity of the World is not a Thing, because it is impossible, and that which is impossible is nothing, and consequently may not be called a Thing. To the Second Reason, to wit, That God hath never been without Power to create the World, and that having been from all Eternity, he may have created the World from all Eternity: I Answer, That God hath never been without Power to create the World, when it may have been created; but the World can∣not have been created from all Eternity, but onely in time: Therefore God hath never been without Power to create the World in time, but he hath been from all Eternity, without having power to create the World from all Eternity. It is most true that God hath never been without his Omnipotency, and conse∣quently hath never been without the Power to create the World; but he could
not exercise and execute from all Eter∣nity, the Act of his Omnipotency, to wit, the Creation; but onely in time: Not that this proceeds from any Defect or any Impotency in God; but because the Creature cannot concurre and agree with Eternity, because of the contra∣dictions that would follow, and which I have set down already in this Tract. And as the Soul of an Infant, which is still in the Mothers Womb, hath the power to reason, in that he hath the principle of ratiocination, that is the understanding, but cannot exercise the act of that power; to wit, ratiocina∣tion; but onely after his Birth and Child∣hood: not that such a thing proceeds from any defect in the Soul; but be∣cause the Organ, whereby ratiocination is exercised, is not yet disposed as it ought: So God hath had indeed from all Eternity the Power whereby he hath created the World, but he could not exercise from all Eternity the act of this Power; that is the Creation of the World: Not that it proceeds from any Defect in God, but because the World cannot be Eternal; as I have already sufficiently demonstrated. To the Third Reason drawn from this Example, That if the Sun had been
from all Eternity, it would have acted, that is Enlightened from all Eternity; and likewise that God being from all E∣ternity, hath acted, or may have acted from all Eternity, and consequently hath created or may have created the World from all Eternity. I Answer, That to suppose the Sun-Eternal is to suppose a thing impossible. Now one must not wonder, if supposing a thing impossible, to wit, the Sun Eternal; one supposes another impossible also, viz. the Eternal illumination: For if one Creature be Eternal, the other must also be the same. But in supposing God Eternal, one supposes a thing, not onely possible, but which is so actually; and from thence they infer and conclude, without ground or reason, that he may create the World from all Eternity, seeing that Eternity of this World is im∣possible, as (I hope) I have sufficiently proved. Therefore as God, though he be infinite, cannot produce an infinite effect; and though he be immutable, cannot produce an immutable effect; so though God be Eternal, he cannot pro∣duce an Eternal effect: because Eternity as well as infinity and immutability, are attributes incommunicable to the Crea∣ture.
To the Fourth Reason, That if the World hath been sometimes impossible, to wit, from all Eternity, it will have been alw possible; and consequent∣ly will not have been created. I Answer, That in the same manner, it hath been impossible, it will always be impossible; now it hath been impossible from all E∣ternity: therefore it will be impossible to all Eternity. And as it is not abso∣lutely impossible, that Man should be; but it is impossible that Man should be a Beast: So it is not absolutely impossible that the World should be; but it is im∣possible that the World should be Eternal: and as Man never was, nor never will be a Beast; so the World never was, nor never will be Eternal. To the Fifth Reason, That if the World hath been impossible from all E∣ternity, it hath been impossible, du∣ring a finite time, or during an infi∣nite time; which is absurd, &c. I an∣swer, That Time and the World are al∣ways necessarily together; seeing that Time is nothing else but the continu∣ance of Corporal Things, whereof the VVorld is made, or the continuance of their Motion. And therefore, Since that Eternity is before Time, it is e∣vident that, that which is from all E∣ternity,
is before whatsoever Time, be it finite or infinite. Now it is ridiculous to ask, whether that which hath been before Time, whilst it hath been before time, hath continued and lasted, a finite or infinite Time. Moreover, I Answer as before, viz. That the VVorld hath not been absolutely impossible, seeing it hath been possible in time, but that it hath been impossible from all Eternity; and that this impossibility of the VVorld from all Eternity, hath been; is, and shall be to all Eternity. To the Sixth Reason, That the World may be Eternal of the After-Eternity, and consequently that it may have been Eternal of the Fore-Eternity, and so from all Eternity. I Answer, That E∣ternity being an attribute of the God∣head, incommunicable to the Creature, is not different from the God-head: and therefore as the God-head is always the same, indivisible and without parts, though its immensity, which is not dif∣ferent from it, be without Limits, and cannot be measured, by any greatness; all Bodies being but a point of this Im∣mensity; So Eternity hath been, is, and always shall be the same, indivisible and without parts; though it cannot be mea∣sured by Ages, which always will be no
more than a point of this Eternity. From whence it follows, That those Men, which divide it, in the Fore and After-Eternity, do not at all understand the nature of Eternity; seeing that these words, Before and After, belong onely to such things, as are subject to Time, Motion, and Succession, and whereof the Parts perish one after another; and not to Eternity, which is before Time, and without Parts, and whereof nothing can perish. Besides, There is a vast difference betwixt these two pretended Eternities, as I have amply demonstra∣ted, in my Reply to their second An∣swer; chiefly in that the Fore-Eternity is all past; and that the After-Eternity shall never pass, nor end. And if one should suppose of the After-Eternity, that which is most true of the Fore-E∣ternity, to wit, that it is all past; it is evident it should be finite and limited on all sides, viz. By this Day, and by the last time of this Eternity, which should pass, and end. And if it be finite, it cannot be a true Eternity; for a true Eternity is an infinite continuance. To the Seventh Reason, That God might create the World before the time he created it, and before again, and always before, to the infinite, and con∣sequently
from all Eternity. I Answer, That though the World in its total, may have been created in less time; seeing that God who created it in six days, might have created it in one day, yea, in a moment. Nevertheless it is most true, That the World, if we have a re∣gard to the first Creatures, which are the chiefest parts of the same, to wit, the Heavens and the Earth, could not be made sooner than it hath been made, and could not be created, before the time it hath been created; because before the time, that the World hath been created, there was no other continu∣ance than Eternity: but the World can∣not have been from all Eternity, as I have demonstrated: Therefore the World cannot have been before the time it hath been created. And indeed these words of Before and After, Sooner and Later, cannot belong but to time, that hath Parts, whereof some are Soon∣er, some Later, some Before, and some After. But Eternity being indivisible, and without Parts (as I have proved) can have neither Before nor After; and consequently, though Eternity, may have been before the World and before Time, nevertheless there was in it neither Be∣fore nor After. Therefore one cannot
say, That the World may have been Before, and Before again, and always Before to the infinite: because where there is a Before, and again another Before, and always a Before, to in∣finite, there are many Befores (if I may so speak) whereof one is Before, and the other After; but in the Eternity before the World, and before Time, there have been neither Before nor Af∣ter. And if any one objects. That the Heaven and the Earth which have been the first Creatures, may have been created later; and consequently may have been created sooner: I Answer, That Heaven and Earth may be consi∣dered, either as Creatures, or as the first Creatures. If they be considered as Creatures, I say that they might have been created later, seeing that God, who created them the first day, might have created them the second day, and some others the first day: But if they be considered as the first Creatures, I say they could not be created later; because they could not be created later, but in creating them after some others. Now if they had been created after o∣thers, they should not have been the first Creatures. Moreover, Though the
Heaven and the Earth, which have been the first Creatures, might have been created later, in the manner a∣foresaid; yet it doth not follow that they may have been sooner than they have been: because that before the Time, or before the first Creatures, there have not been, nor could have been any continuance, but Eternity. Now the first Creatures, and so conse∣quently the World, cannot have been from all Eternity, as I have sufficient∣ly proved. Therefore the World, or the Creatures, cannot have been before the time they have been; and conse∣quently cannot have been sooner than they have been. Finally, According to the common Opinion, one might say, That though the World might have been created be∣fore, and before again; and always before to the infinite; yet it would not follow that the World might have been from all Eternity. For though a Body may be supposed greater than another, to the infinite, yet it does not follow, that there is a Body actually infinite; seeing that this progression to the in∣finite, doth not reach farther, than to an infinite in power (i.e. Potentia; as they speak in the School) which is
always actually finite: So though the World might have been before, and always before, to the infinite; it does not follow that the World may have been from all Eternity; seeing that this progression to the infinite, does not reach further than to all infinite in power, which is also actually finite, and comprehended, and included in the temporal continuance. And now Courteous Reader, I shall end this Chapter, together with this long, but (I hope) solid Dis∣putation, against the most prophane and ungrateful Men that ever were, I mean the Atheists, with this ad∣vice, That if ever thou chancest to dispute with them, to make use of the Reasons set down in this Chap∣ter, especially the first in the Reply, as being the chief that proves de∣monstratively that there is a GOD; and so forcibly convinces Atheists, that they are not onely without Answer, but even without Evasion.
CHAP. XI. Other Reasons proving that there is a God. 1. The First Reason is drawn from the Order of the Ʋniverse. 2. The Se∣cond, From the general Consent of all People and Nations, who ever ac∣knowledged a God-head. 3. The Third, From the fear of the Judgments of God, because of Sin. 4. The Fourth, From the existence of Devils. 5. The Fifth, Is drawn from the first Mover, and the first Cause. 6. The Sixth, From the Novelty of Histories. 7. And the Seventh, From the Consideration that the Sea hath not submerged the Earth. First Reason. THe First Reason that proves a God∣head, Is drawn from the Dis∣position and admirable Order of the Universal World: thus, Order ad∣mits and presupposes Intelligence and
Wisdom; for Order being a convenient Disposition of Things, according to the dignity of each; that they may be con∣veniently disposed, they ought to be first compared among themselves, and one must know their Dignity, which is proper to Intelligence. And Secondly, They must be placed and disposed, ac∣cording to their Rank and Dignity, which is proper to Wisdom. There∣fore seeing that Order presupposes In∣telligence and Wisdom; a most excellent and most perfect Order, presupposes a Sovereign and most perfect Intelligence and Wisdom; but the Order and Dis∣position of all the parts of the World, is most perfect and most excellent: There∣fore there must needs be a most Sove∣reign Intelligence, and a most perfect Wisdom; that may have given this ad∣mirable Order and Disposition: Now this sovereign Intelligence, and this per∣fect Wisdom, we call Divinity. Now that the Order and Disposition of the Universe is most perfect and most excellent, appears, if one takes a view of all the Parts thereof: In the Heavens you see the Stars of the Firma∣ment twinkling and sparkling as so many petty Suns, and always keeping the same distance among themselves:
The Sun that never goes beyond the Tropikes, and other Stars, having their Motion so excellently regulated, that they were never seen out of their ordi∣nary course, but by a Miracle. Now from whence may come this uniformi∣ty of Motion, but from the first Mover; who always remaining firm and im∣moveable, moves all things according to his will? From whence comes it to pass, That the Motions of the Sun is so moderate, that it rules and directs all other Motions here below? Why does it rather move from East to West, rather than from the North to the South? And why, being come to a certain Point, it never goes any farther? but because there is a Sovereign Moderator of this Universe, who hath assigned to all Things Bounds and Limits, beyond which they cannot go? Descend from the Heavens to the Elements, and you shall see that though they be totally con∣trary one to the other, yet they all enter in the composition of all Bodies: and as sometimes a sweet Harmony is caused by different Sounds, so from the contrariety of the Elements, is made up that Temper and Proportion which is to be seen in all mixt Bodies. Now from whence may proceed this mutual
Agreement of Countraries, whose pro∣perty it is (if we believe Philosophers) to destroy one another, or expel one another; but from a superior Spirit, who hath made them subject to his Will? Consider the Earth in particular, you shall find it almost every where differing and unlike: Here it is Slimy and Muddy, in another sort Dry and Sandy; in some places it will breed Fruits onely, in a∣nother Vines and Corn: Hic segetes il∣lic veniunt felicius uvae, Arborei faetus alibi, &c. In Peru there are Mines of Silver and Gold; in Swedeland Mines of Iron and Copper; in Cornwall are the Mines of Tynn; and in other Coun∣tries of other Minerals. Egypt and Sicily are fruitful in Corns; Numidia in Dates, Tunis in Olive-trees; the Island Madera in Sugar; and most part of the Countries in Europe in Wines. In Arabia are Flying Serpents; in Egypt Crocodiles, in England Coursing Horses, fierce Mastiffes, &c. In Scotland Tracing Dogs, in Affrica are Lions, in Asia Elephants; and in other Countries are sundry sorts of divers Animals. Now from whence comes this diversity and va∣riety of Lands and Soils, but from him who created and produced them? Who gave to so many differing and unlike
Creatures, those Verrues and Proper∣ties which they have, but him, who communicated them unto them when he created and gave them their Beings? Cast your Eyes upon the Waters, and consider the sweet Fountains springing out of the Salt Sea, the Springs and Sources of several Rivers bubbling out of the Tops of the highest Mountains, and yet proceed from the Sea, a great deal lower than they. The Rivers, Nilus, Miger, and Paraguez, which at their appointed time, never fail to overflow the Lands to fatten them: Some Waters will presently congeal and kill them that drink of them, and some others are Healthful, and will cure the most inve∣terate Maladies. There are some Springs Hot and Scalding Water; others whose Waters are turned into Flints: But a∣bove all other Things, admire that so well ordered Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea, whereof the certain cause is unknown to this very day; the great Whales and others Marine Monsters that are in it; and so many other Won∣derful Things, that point out (as it were with the Finger) the infinite Power, and the Eternal Wisdom of a Divini∣ty. Finally, Let us consider our selves,
and observe the Frame of our Bodies, so admirably ordered, that the best un∣derstanding Men do greatly wonder at it: Nay look upon the wonder of our Eyes and Ears, the Ability and Nimble∣ness of our Hands, the Dispensation of Spirits, for the Motions of our Mem∣bers, and the Functions of our Senses, the Light of our Understanding, its Prompt and Nimble Actions, its Con∣duct and Guiding so excellent, its great Capacity to Reason of all Things: And after all that we will be worse than the Beasts of the Fields, and all Creeping Things upon the Earth, if we do not confess and acknowledge that there is a GOD, in whom we Live, and Move, and have our Being; and all these things, that the more clear sighted Fathers, must acknowledge, they can in no ways com∣municate to their Children. The Second Reason. The Second Reason, Which proves a Divinity, is drawn from the general Con∣sent of all People and Nations of the Earth, who ever acknowledged a Di∣vinity. For a Tully saith in the First Book of his Laws, There is never a People so Rude and Barbarous but con∣fesses
that a God must be said (that is ac∣knowledged.) Seneca in 117. Epistle saith, That there is no People so per∣verted but believes there are Gods: And Aristotle in the Third Chapter of the First Book of Heaven, writes, That all Men one way or other acknow∣ledge a Divinity. Now seeing that as Tul∣ly saith, in the First Book of his Question. Tusc.) The Consent of all People is to be esteemed a Law of Nature: One must believe that Naturally some Know∣ledge and Apprehension of a Divinity is (as it were) printed and stampt in the Heart of every Man; and certainly the belief Men have of a Divinity, is most considerable in this, That no Man can bring any solid Reasons against it; that it is spread all the World over; that it hath been received in all Ages; that it hath constantly maintained it self a∣midst all the Revolutions of Humane Sensuality; that it hath been found in the remotest Islands, and in those Lands which are separated from us by such a most unconceiveable vastness of Seas; that they have been discovered but in later Ages. And it is a wonderful thing, that those Men, which have almost, if not altogether, lost the knowledge of their Original, and of the streights
through which the Colonies they are de∣ded from; and have almost lost all Humity  and Devouring one another,  this belief, That there is some, Superior Spirit over them. Not that there is not always some Fools, which say, There is  as it is said in the Psalms: But they commonly are Men abandoned to their Pleasures, and devoted to all Wickedness, who endea∣vour to perswade themselves against their own Light and Conscience, that there is no Judge to punish their Impie∣ty and Ungodliness; or they are Men of a mean Learning, who yet will go un∣der the Notions of Wits, in receding as much as they can from the universal Belief of the World, assaulting (if one may so speak) him who so glorioufly appears by his Works, and Shews him∣self to all Eyes in the World; or lastly, they are poor simple and ignorant Fel∣lows, who are seduced to Atheism by their frequenting with these Impious and Prophane Men. And if any Rude and Savage Nation is guilty of some strange and monstrous Mis-apprehensi∣ons of the Divinity, that I say is no more to be inferred against the general Consent of all Nations, than Monsters and Prodigies, which are Born against
the Natural course of Nature, and the ordinary way it follows in the producti∣on of its works. The Third Reason. The Third Reason, Is drawn from the terrors of Conscience, because of Sin, for those Fears and Terrors which Men feel after the Commission of some Wicked∣ness, shew evidently that there is a God that terrifies them by the inward threats of his Vengeance: and it is to no pur∣pose to say that the fears of the Penalties of the Laws breeds these Terrors within them; seeing that Supream Magistrates, to wit, Princes and Kings, who are not subject to these Laws, are troubled with these Terrors as well as others: witness, Emperor Caligula, the most furious and raging of all Men, against God; who yet when it thundred, as if the Living God had spoken from Heaven, would hide himself under his Bed, as if he would have made with it a shield against the Thunder-bolts. And though in some Men, the Pleasures and Sensualities wherein they drown themselves, do for a time blunt the sense of these Ter∣rors; yet it is to be believed certainly, that in that case it is with them as with
those Prisoners. Which will be Drunk and Merry for all their Shackles and Fetters; but when once the fumes are puffed out, and they begin to reflect upon their Crimes and their Judge; the very Idea and Representation of a Gibbet, will make them shake and tremble: so I say it is with these Impious Men; for be∣ing forced to leave their Pleasures and Sensualities, and particularly when Death draws near unto them, they re∣flect upon the Justice of God, and trem∣ble at the Idea and Horrours of Hell, which is prepared for them. The Fourth Reason. The Fourth Reason, Is drawn from the existence of Devils, who being Mens Mortal Enemies and mightier than they, would have already destroyed them were there not a God, who holds their Bridle so fast, that they can do no∣thing without his permission. Now that there are Devils, appears by the woful confession and condition of so many Witches and Magicians Condemned to Death; for having given themselves to the Devil, and committed a world of Wickedness by his Instigation; as also by so many Men, who by the just Per∣mission
of God, and that for their Sins, have been possest with the Devil. And by so many true Histories, received by the most excellent Wits; which tell us that very prodigious things have been acted by Devils, which exceeded the strength of all other Creatures: See d' Assigni in the Preface Porphir. &c. The Fifth Reason. The Fifth Reason, Is drawn from the first Mover, and grounded upon this Principle, That whatsoever Moves, is moved by another, and that other is moved again by another, and so conse∣quently till one stays at last to a first im∣moveable Mover of all Things, which is God; else one would proceed to the infinite, and consequently there would be an infiniteness of Movers, which is impossible. The same may be said of the First Cause, and may be grounded upon this Principle, That whatsoever is produced, is produced by a Cause, and this Cause is again produced by another, and so consequently till one comes to a first Cause of all Things, which is God; else one would proceed to the infinite, and there would be an infiniteness of Causes, which is impossible.
Another Reason may be drawn from the independency of the first Being, thus: Either all Things that have a Being, have their Being of another, or there is some one which hath not, its Being of another, but of it self: Now all Things have not their Being of another; else it would follow, that that other Thing should have its Being of it self; seeing it is comprized under this Word, All Things: Therefore there is something which hath not its Being of another but of it self; and that Thing cannot be no other but God. Thus again, I may reason from the necessity of the first Being, Either all Things are contingent, or there is one necessary: Now all Things are not con∣tingent; else they might not have been; and suppose they had not been, it would have been impossible that they should have been afterwards; seeing that nothing produces it self, and that there would never have been any Agent, that might have produced them, every A∣gent being comprized and included, un∣der this word, All Things: therefore there hath been a necessary Thing which hath produced all contingent Things; and that Thing can't be no other but God.
Lastly, I may make use here of another Reason, drawn from the excellency of the first Being; in this manner: The Things which are more or less, such, or like, are related to one that is chiefly and principally such: For Example, Things more or less hot, are related to that which is most hot, viz. to the Fire; Things more or less white, are related to that which is most white, viz. to Snow, or any other whiter Thing, if there is any; and Things more or less Bright are related to that which is most Bright and Shining, viz. to the Sun: There are Things more or less perfect and excellent, therefore they are related to a thing most perfect and most excel∣lent, viz. to GOD; seeing that by the word GOD, we conceive, mean, and understand the most excellent, and the most perfect of all Things. The Sixth Reason. The Sixth Reason may be deduced from the Novelty of Histories, for it is most true that the most Ancient pro∣fane Histories, reach very little be∣yond the War of Troy, that is about Three thousand years; seeing that since the Destruction of Troy, unto the Foun∣dation
of Rome, Men reckon but Four hundred thirty two years; and since the Foundation of Rome to the Nativity of Christ,  be is but Seven hundred and fifty years: and from Jesus Christ unto this day, we commonly reckon but One thousand six hundred seventy eight years; and the Holy History written by Moses, the most Ancient of all Histories, dos not go beyond Five or six thousand years. Now it is not likely that if Men had been from all Eternity, we should have the Histories but of Five or sixthousand years. For as if the World should still continue, Two or three hundred thousand years, Men would surely have all that time the Histories of above Six thousand years: So if Men had been from all Eternity, and that there were above an Hundred thou∣sand times, an Hundred millions of years since they had had a Being, certainly we should reckon above Six thousand years; and the Memory of all Men would not onely extend it self to so few years as it does. If any object, That some Nations have reckoned Twenty thousand years, and others Fifty thousand, or more; I say that those Books which relate these Things are fabulous, and their Authors had no ground for what they writ; or one may say, That those Nations which have reckoned Twenty thousand years,
did reckon their years by the seasons of each year; and those that have reckoned Fifty, did reckon the years according to the course of the Moon, and did reckon moneths for years. Therefore one must say, That Men have had a Beginning, and that not having had it of themselves, seeing that nothing pro∣duces it self; they have had it of another, to wit, of God, the most wise Creator of the Universe, as I have proved sufficiently. Add to this reason that the invention or finding out of Arts and Sciences, is since five or six thousand years, which doth evidently shew a Beginning, being not likely that Men would have remain∣ed an infiniteness of time, before the finding out of the same. The Seventh Reason. The Seventh Reason is drawn from the Con∣sideration, That the Sea hath not submerged the Earth: I reason thus, If the Earth and the Sea had been from all Eternity, it would follow that the Channels of the Sea should have been filled long ago; and consequently that the Sea would have covered the face of the whole Earth. which yet is not come to pass. To verifie and make that good, one must suppose a thing, which I hold to be most true, and which can∣not be denied, to wit, that Rain and Floods troubling and thickening in Rivers, by the Earth they carry away with them; and these Rivers carrying again these troubled Waters into the Sea, do bring in it more Earth than comes out of it. From whence I frame this Argu∣ment: If by reason of Rain or Floods, a lit∣tle
quantity of Earth enters into the Sea, without coming out of it again, it follows that within an infinite time, such as Eternity is, the Channels of the Sea should be filled: for if but one Corn of Sand or Earth should enter into the Sea every year, Eternity com∣prehending an infiniteness of years, it is evi∣dent that an infiniteness of Earth should have entered into the Sea, and would have filled not onely the Channels of the Sea, but an hun∣dred millions of others, if there were so many; and so the Sea would have covered the face of the Earth. But by reason of Rain and Floods, a little quantity of Earth enters into the Ri∣vers, and from thence into the Sea, without ever coming out of it again. Therefore with∣in an infinite time, such as Eternity is, the Channels of the Sea would be filled; and con∣sequently if the Earth and the Sea had been from all Eternity, the Channels of the Sea being filled, the Sea would have covered the whole Earth. By this Reason, Polybius in the Fourth Book of his History, proves that the Euxine Sea, and other places, shall be filled at last: And Herodotus in the Second Book, uses the same Reason, to prove, that sometimes E∣gypt was a Sea. Seeing then that the Sea hath not covered the Earth, Let us conclude that neither Sea nor Earth have been from all E∣ternity, but have had a Beginning; and having not had it of themselves, seeing that nothing is the cause of it self, they must necessarily have had it of another, and that is the great and glorious God, whom we adore; to him be Praise, Honour, and Glory, from Ever∣lasting to Everlasting. Amen. FINIS.
