B3850 10802478 45966
A WARNING from the LORD GOD to the Inhabitants of the Town and County of WARWICK, That they may Repent and Turn to the Lord with their whole hearts, before it be too late. YE Inhabitants of the Town and County of Warwick, prepare to meet the Lord by speedy Repentance, lest the over-flowing scourge come and sweep you into the Pit from whence there will be none to deliver your Souls; Therefore mind what the Lord requireth from you, Who is Merciful, and Gracious, and full of Compassions let such as have lived in Drunkenness refrain from it, and do so no more; and such as have lived in Cheating and Cozning, and Deceiving, let them do so no more; and such as have lived in Malice, and Envy, and Wrath, let them refrain from those things and do so no more; and such as have Hated, and Persecuted, and Imprisoned the Servants of the Lord, let them do so no more; that so you may find Mercy and Forgiveness with the Lord, who is to be feared. There∣fore turn ye to the Light within which shineth in your Hearts, which lets you see your sins, that so by it you may be led unto God, that His Salvation you may know. For this is the Grace which hath appeared, even to all, which Grace will teach you, as you it love and obey, to deny ungodliness, and to live soberly righteously and godly, while you have a time in this World; This Grace will teach you to Love your Enemies, and to do good to them that hate you; This Grace will teach you to pray for them that despitefully use and intreat you; And also it will teach you to do to others as you would be done unto, and to seek others welfare as your own. And be ye warned to take heed of Malice, and Wrath and Envy, that you harbor no such thing in your hearts against any; For know ye, that wheresoever this appears, that the Devil is the Author thereof, who was a Lyar and a Murtherer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, and it was him that stirred up Cain to slay his Brother Abel, because his own works were evil and his brothers good; and said the Apostle, Him that hateth his bro∣ther is a Murtherer, and we know, said he, that no murtherer hath Eternal Life abiding in him. And it is said in the Holy Scriptures, The Innocent and Upright slay thou not, whose Cause the Mighty God will plead, and save them whose hearts are upright before Him, whose trust is onely in the Lord; But it will go ill with those that gainsay the Truth. Therefore while you have time prize it, and bring forth fruits unto God, for all fruitless Trees, that Cumber the ground, must be be heen down and cast into the fire. And though you have been often warned already from the Spirit of the Lord in his Servants, yet the Lord hath put it in my heart once more to warn you, that so you may repent and find Mercy with Him who is to be feared: But if you shall still refuse to hear∣ken to the Counsel of the holy One, and shall run on in Rebellion and Trans∣gression against the Lord, by adding Sin unto Sin, and Transgression unto Transgression still for all this, then ye will surely perish, and wo and misery will come upon you, The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Therefore prize your time, and obey the Light of Christ in your Consciences, that so you may know Him to save you from the Evil to come. From a lover of Peace and Righteousness, who wisheth Peace and Good Will unto all men. Edward Bourne. Worcester the Third of the Second Moneth. 1661.
