B4236 11694102 48224
THE SERPENT SALVE, OR, A REMEDIE For the Biting of an ASPE: WHEREIN, The Observators Grounds are dis∣cussed and plainly discovered to be un∣sound, Seditious, not warranted by the Laws of God, of Nature, or of Nations, and most repugnant to the known Laws and customs of this Realm. For the reducing of such of His Majesties well-meaning Subjects into the right Way who have been mis-led by that Ignis fatuus. Printed in the year 1643.
To the READER. WHen that Signe or rather Mteor called Castor and Polinx appeares single to the Sea-faring Men, it portends a dangerous Tempest, because of the density or toughnesse of the matter which is not easily dissolved: And when it appeares double divided into two, it presageth Serenity and a good Voyage. But it is otherwise in the Body Politick. When the King and Parliament are united, it promiseth Happy and Halcionian Dayes to the Subject; and when they appeare divided, it threatens Ruine and Dissipation to the whole Kingdome. This is our present condition, the Heads are drenched with the oyle of Discord, and it runs down to the skirts of the Garment. Of all Hereticks in Theo∣logy, they were the worst who made two be∣ginnings,
a God of Good and a God of Evill: Of all Hereticks in Policy, they are the most dangerous, which make the Common-wealth an Amphisbena, a Serpent with two heads, who make two Supreames without subordination one to another, the King and the Parliament. That is to leave a Seminary of Discord, to lay a Trappe for the Subject to set up a Rack for the Conscience, when Superiours sends out contrary Commands (as the Commission of Array, and the Order for the Milita.) If they were subordinate one to another, we had a safe way both to discharge our Conscience to∣wards God, and secure our Estates to the World, that is by obeying the Higher Power according to that golden Rule, in presentia Ma∣joris cessat authoritas Minoris. But whilest they make them coordinate one with another, the Estate, the Liberty, the Life, the Soule of eve∣ry Subject lies at Stake: what passage can poor Conscience find between this Scilla and Cha∣rybdis, between the two hornes of this Dilem∣ma? No Man can serve two Masters. All great and sudden Changes are dange∣rous to the Body Naturall, but much more to the Body Politick. Time and Custome beget
Reverence and Admiration in the minds of all men; frequent Alterations produce nothing but Contempt, Break ice in one place, it will crack in more. Mountebankes, Projectors, and Innovators, alwayes promise golden Moun∣tains, but their performance is seldome worth a cracked Groat. The credulous Asse in the Fable believed, that the Wolf (his counterfeit Phisiitian) would cure him of all his Infirmi∣ties, and lost his skin for his labour. When the Devill tempted our first Parents, he assured them of a more happy Estate, then they had in Paradise: but what saith our common Pro∣verbe seldome comes the better. It is the Or∣dinance of God, that nothing should be per∣fectly blessed in this World, yet it is our weak∣nesse to impute all our sufferings to our present condition, and to believe a change would free us from all Imcombrances. So thought the Ro∣manes, when they changed their Consulls into Consulary Tribunes: So thought the Floren∣tines when they cashiered their Decem-Viri; both found the disadvantage of their Novel∣ties; both were forced to shake hands again with their old Friends. Other Nations have used to picture an English man with a paire of
sheares in his hand, thus deriding our newfan∣glednesse in attire: But it is farr worse to be shaping new Creeds every Day, and new forms of Government, according to each mans pri∣vate humour. When a sick man tosseth from one side of his bed to another, yet his Distem∣per followes him. They say our Countryman never knowes when he is well, but if God Al∣mighty be graciously pleased once again to send us Peace, I trust we shall know better how to value it. In the mean time, let us take heed of credulity and newfanglednesse. Those States are most durable, which are most con∣stant to their own Rules. The glory of Venice is perpetuated not so much by the strong Situa∣tion, as by that Sanction or Constitution, that it is not lawfull for any man to make mention of a new Law to the grand Counsell, before it have been first discussed and allowed by a se∣lected Company, of their most intelligent most experienced Citizens. Among the Locrians no man might propose a new Law, but with an halter about his neck, that if he did not speed in his suite, he might presently be strangled. The Lacedemonians did so farr abhorre from all study of change, that they banished a skil∣full
Musition, onely for adding one string  to the Harp. I desire that no man will interpret what I say in this Discourse as intended to the Preju∣dice of the lawfull Rights, and just priviledges of Parliament. The very name of a Parliament was Musick in our eares; at the Summons thereof our hearts danced for joy. It is rather to be feared that we idollized Parliaments, and trusted more in them then in God for out temporall well being. God who gave the Isra∣elites a King in his anger, may at his pleasure give us a Parliament in his anger. That we reap not the expected fruit (next to our sins) we may thank the Observator, and such In∣cendiaries. I confesse my selfe the most unfit of thousands to descend into this Theater, as one who have lived hitherto a Mute; but to see the Father of our Country threatned and villified by a common Souldier, is able to make a dumb man speak, as it did sometimes the Sonne of Craesus. Quando doler est in capite (saith Saint Bernard) when the head akes the tongue cries for assistence, and the very least members, the Toe, or the litle Finger is affect∣ed. We are commanded to be wise as Ser∣pents.
Math. 10. 16. A chief wisdome of the Serpent is in time of Danger to wrap and fold his head in the circles of his body, to save that from blowes. I pretend not to skill in Poli∣ticks, the Observator may have read more Bookes and more Men, but let him not de∣spise a weak Adversary who comes armed with evident truth, I know I have the better cause, the better second. The Birds in Aristophanes fancying an all-sufficiency to themselves, did attempt for a while to build a City walled up to Heaven, not much unlike such another Fi∣ction of the Apes in Hermogenes, but at length the one for feare of Iupiters Thunder, and the other for want of convenient tooles, gave over the Enterprise. Believe it, the frame of an an∣cient, glorious, well-temper'd, and setled Mo∣narchy, though it may be shaken for a time, will not, cannot be blown upside down, with a few windy Exhalations, or an handfull of Sophisticall squibbes. The World begins to see something through the holes of these mens cloakes, and to espye Day through the midst of the Milstone. And now that men may bor∣row a word edgeway with them, it will be pealed into their eares dayly.
I shall deale more ingenuously with the Ob∣server, then he hath done with his Soveraigne, to catch here and there at a piece of a Sen∣tence, and passe by that as mute as a Fish, to which he had nothing to say. If His Majesties cleare. Demonstrations (which to a strong judgement seeme to be written with a beam of the Sun, and like the principles of Geo∣metry doe rather compell then perswade) did leave any place for further confirmation, the Observers silence were sufficient to proclaime them unanswerable. There needs no other proofe of His Majestyes Lenity and Goodnesse then this, That a Subject dare publish such ob∣servations in a Monarchy, and maintain argu∣ment with his Liege Lord, Multa donanda inge∣niis, sed donanda vitia, non portenta sunt. He de∣serveth small pitty, who priseth his word more then his Head. King Lewes said of some se∣ditious Preachers in France, If they tax me in their Pulpits I will send them to preach in another Climate. Pollio said of Angustus, Non est facile in eum scribere, qui potest proscribere. The King of the Bees, though he want a sting, yet is he sufficiently armed with Majesty. So should King Charles be to the Observer and his pew∣fellowes
if they were profitable Bees, as they are a nest of Waspes and Hornets. I find two branches of this Family (I can∣not call them the Family of Love) as a verse one to another as Sampsons Foxes. It is hard to say whether is the ancient House; for they both sprung up, the one in Spaine, the other at Geneva, about the same time, the yeare 1536. The Captaines of the one are Bellarmine, Simancha, Mariana, &c. The chieftains of the other, are Beza (if it be his Book de jure Magi∣stratus, as is believed,) Buchanan, Stephanus Iu∣nius, &c. The former in favour of the Pope, the latter in hatred of the Pope; yet both former and latter may rise up in Judgement with our Incendiaries and condemne them; for if they had had as gracious a Prince as King Charles; they had never broached such tenets to the World, I have busied my selfe to find out the Progenitors of these two different Parties: and for the former, I cannot in probabillity derive them from any other then Pope Zachary, Who it seemes (as the Oestridge) left an egge in the Sand, which after a long revolu∣tion of time, was found and hatched by the care of some Loyolists, for thus he in Aventine, A
Prince is subject to the People, by whose benefit he reignes; whatsoever Power, Riches, Glory, Dig∣nity he hath, he received it from the People, Re∣gem Plebs constituit, eundem destituere potest. As for the latter (because I know they will scorn to ascribe their Originall to a Pope) I cannot fine one of their Ancestors in all the Church of Christ, for fifteen hundred yeares, untill I come as high as Saint Iudes dreamers, or the Pharisees of whom Iosephus saith, that they were a Sect, cunning, arrogant, and opposite to Kings. And they have one Pharasaicall virtue in great eminency, that is, self-love and partiallity, to make their own case different from all other mens, as may appeare by these particulars. First, a question is moved concerning the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiasticall Affaires. They give Power to Kings to reforme the Church, just as Bellarmine gives to the Pope to depose Princes, not certainly, but contin∣gently, in the case of an ungodly Clergy (that is in their sense, all other but themselves:) but if they be once introduced, neither King nor Parliament have any more to doe, but execute their Decrees, then the whole Regiment of the Church, is committed by Christ to Pastors, Elders,
and Deacons, so Cartwright; then Magistrates must remember to subject themselves, submit their Scepters, thrw down their Crownes to the Church, and as the Prophet speaketh, to lick the dust of the feet of the Church, that is, of the Presbitery, what is this but kissing of the Presbiters toes? Secondly, where they have hope of the King, there the Supreame Magistrate may, nay he ought to reforme the Church, yea though the Statutes of the Kingdome be against it, so say the Authors of the Protestation printed 1605. But what if the King favour them not? then he is but a conditionall trustee, it belongeth to the States and representative body of the Kingdom: but what if the Nobility will not joyne? then the People must, so said Field, since we cannot bring this to passe by Suite, or Dispute, the People and Multitude must doe it, yea, though it be with blood, as Martin threatens in his Protestation. The People (saith Buchanan) have as much pow∣er over Kings, as Kings have over particular Persons. Nobility (saith the Book of Obedi∣ence) is the Bounty of the People to some Persons, for delivering them from Tyrants, which preroga∣tive, the Children kept, by the Peoples negligence. And of late, have not the Peers been exhorted
to mingle themselves with the meanest of the Peo∣ple, and for the procuring a parity in the Church, to consent to a parity in the State, and for the sub∣duing of the pride of Kings, for a time, to part with the power of Noblemen. For a time, what's that? that is, according to the former Doctrine, till the People be pleased out of their Bounty to advance them according to their severall Talents, for their zeale to shed the blood of the ungodly. The Misery beginns now to open itselfe, and I trust will shortly appeare in its right colours. By these reverend. Fathers (I mean the Rab∣ble) the Discipline was brought into Genevah it self, against the will of the Syndicks, and two Councels. In illa promiscua colluvie suffragiis fui∣mus superiores, saith Calvin. Thus these men make Kings and Nobles, but as Counters which stand somtimes for a pound, somtimes for a penny pro arbitrio supputantis, just like Chawcers Frier, he knew how to impose an easy Pennance, where he looked for a good Pit∣tance. Thirdly, the wheele of Heaven, hath not yet wound up one thred more of the lew of our Life, since we heard nothing but Encomiums of the Law, Treason against the Fundamen∣tall
Laws, and Declarations against Arbitrary Government. Now the Law is become a For∣mallity, a Lesbian Rule, Arbitrary Government is turned to necessity of State. It is not exami∣ned what is just or unjust, but how the party is affected or disaffected, whether the thing be conducible or not conducible to the cause; we are governed not by the known Laws and Customs of this Realme, but by certain farr∣fetched, dear-bought Conclusions, or rather Collusions, drawn by unskilfull Empericks, without Art or Judgement from the Law of Nature and of Nations, which may be good for Ladyes by the Proverbe, but not for Eng∣lish Subjects. Now are we taught down-right, that the Laws of the Land are but mans-inventi∣ons, morall precepts, fitter for Heathens then Chri∣stians; that we must lead our Lifes according to Gods word, (as if Gods word and the Law of the Land, were opposite one to another) and that notwithstanding the Law, men must not thinke that Gods Children in doing the work of their Heavenly Father (that is, reform∣ing Religion) will faint in their Duty (that is, in raising Arms.) So, farewell Magna Charta, and the Laws of England for ever, if this man may
have his will: and welcome the judiciall Law of Moses. Now I see the reason, why they have taught so long, that the King cannot pardon any crime condemned by the judiciall Law; because no Man can dispence with the Law of God, But how many▪ thousands have been drawn into this action which never Dreamed of such a bottomlesse Gulfe of Mischief, and when they doe see it will abhominate it, and the Contrivers of it. Fourthly, they have cryed Bishops out of Parliament, because no man that warreth must intangle himself with the affaires of this Life: yet they themselves have been humble Moti∣oners, both in England and in Scotland, to have a number of wise and grave Ministers admit∣ted into Parliament, in stead of Bishops. It was the men then, not the thing they misliked. Fifthly, they say, to be a Clergy-man and a Privie-Councellour, are incompatible: yet Calvin and Bezae were of the Councell of Sixty at Genevah▪ and the Syndicks and Councellours there of the Ecclesiasticall Senate: yea,  home in a great Treaty of late, and in a Com∣mission now on foo, we have seen a  a prime Commission and their greate P∣vie-Councellers
are of their Lay-Elders, which by their new Learning are a part of their Ec∣clesiasticall Hierarchy. Sixthly we have heard a great noise lately about an Oath decreed in the Convocation; about another Oath called Ex officio, as if it were against the Law of Nature, for a man to accuse himselfe, Nemo tenetur prodere sseipsum▪ and lastly abut the Subscription which is e∣quired to o Articles of Religion: yet for the first, the Citizens of Genevah tooke the like Oath f their new Discipline (which the Sun had ner beheld before) that we prescri∣bed here fo our old Discipline. There every Minister at his Admission takes an Oath in these words I doe promise and sweare to keep the  Ordinances, which are passed by the smll, great, d Generall Councells of this City. This is a nte higher then ours. And of late we know wo they were, that tooke an Oath to stand toose  and Decisions, which should be mde in an Assembly to come. For the second, at is, the Oath Ex Officio, it is al∣lowed in thr Presbiteries; Calvin in an Epistle to Favellus cknowledged, that he himself ad∣minired it▪ And for Subscriptions they are so
miliar among them, that there is not a Mini∣ster admitted to a harge, nay not a Boy me∣triculated in a Colledge, but he knowes it. Is not this Partiality? Seventhly, they complaine, that the Eccle∣siasticall Courts did extend their Jurisdiction to Civill Causes: yet there is not that offence in the World, from Dancing and Feasting to Treason and murder, which is either a viola∣tion of our piety towards God, or Charity to∣wards Man, which they doe not question in their Presbiteries: And which is worse, their Determinations are not Regulated by any known Law, but are merely arbitrary, secundum sanas Conscientias. Neither doth there lye any appeale from them (as their did from Ecclesi∣asticall Courts,) he that durst but bring a pro∣hibition to one of their Elderships, he would quickly feele, what it was to pull the Scepter of Christ out of his hands. Eightly, they groaned hard under the bur∣then of the High Commission: yet themselves would erect an high Commission in every Pa∣rish; I doe not know whether all their Presbi∣eries be indowed with the like Power, but re I am, some of them have had both their
Prisons and their Pursevants▪ And where the High Commission here was confessed to be a temporary Institution, they plead for the other as a Divine Institution. Yet fearing this Par∣rochiall Jurisdiction might not produce an uni∣forme Reformation, some of them have desi∣red, others accepted generall Commissions; for Nationall-Superintendency. Ninthly, they sieght all old Councells, and new Convocations, and call their Can∣nons in scorn, the precepts of Men: yet where they have power to call a Synod or Assembly, every man must submit at his uttermost pe∣rill, as if themselves were not men, but a Com∣pany of Angells. Lastly, they call for Liberty of Conscience; yet no Men impose a heavier yoake upon the Conscience. They cry out against Martiall Law in others, and approve it in themselves. They hate Monopolists, but love Monopoli, They condemn an implicit Faith, yet no Men more coniding and implicit; grounding their actions neither upon Reason, Law, no Reli∣gion, but upon the authority of their Leaders and Teachers. They magnifie the obligation of an Oath, yet in their own case, dispence with all Oathes, Civill, Military, Religios,
(witnesse Master Marshall and Master ) we are now taught that the Oa we have taken, must not be examined according to the interpretation of Men, no? How then? surely according to the Interpretation of . They complained that Excommunication was used for triviall Causes, yet themselves stick not to cast abroad this thunderbolt, for Feasting, or Dancing, or any the least . They complaine of severity against their Pastors; yet themselves do teach in their own case, that they are more rigorously to be dealt withall, who poyson the Soule of Men with false Doctrine, then they that infect their Bodyes with poyson. A false Principle I confesse, and repugnant to the practise of all the world: men are willingly perved, but not willingly poisoned: The Poison knowes the power of his Poisons, the false Teacher doth not alwayes know his own Error: Repen∣tance may be a Remedy for the one, but there is no Cure for the other. The Diseases of the Soule, are indeed, greater then the Diseases of the Body, if you consider them in the same Degree; otherwise, a sullen it of Melancholy (though an infirmity of the Mind) is not o
terrible as a raging it of the Stone, yet is it but an infirmity of the Body. They cry out against the Disorders of our Ecclesiasticall Courts, but will not see the beame in their own Eye, that in their Consistories the same man is both President and Register, the same Parties both Accusers, Witnesses, and Judges; the proof sometimes upon Oath, sometimes without Oath, sometimes taken publikely, sometimes privately, so as the Person accused neither knowes who is his Accuser, nor what is proved; sometimes Records are kept, some∣times not kept,: As for matter of lawfull ex∣ception and defence, it is accounted superflu∣ous and superstitious. I plead not for any for∣mer abuses, I desire not to abridge the lawfull power of any other Church, but onely shew the extreame Partiality of these Men: Yea, what is that which themselves have condemned in o∣thers, that themselves do not practise where▪ they have power in a much higher Degree? Is not this fine hocas poas? a Man and no Man, hit a bird and no bird, with a stone and no stone, on a Tree and no Tree. In this Riddle there may be▪ something in Nature which seems to be inter∣medious, to salve the contradiction in shew,
but in their case no manner of Difference to make the same thing just and unjust, but Self-love and Partiality. Was it Treason in the Northern Rebells to make an Insurre∣ction, and is it now become Pty▪ I delight not in Domesticall Examples, let us rather cast our eyes beyond Sea, and see where ever Protestants were accused for Rebellion, but where either Anabaptisme, or this Discipline did take place, and yet none of them (I except onely Anabaptists) were halfe so criminous as ours: They had sundry pleas, which we can∣not make for our selves. As first, that they did not rise up against their lawful Prince, but one∣ly against a Protector to whom they did owe no Allegiance, but an honorable Acknow∣ledgement; but our Laws binds us not one∣ly to owe Allegiance, but to swear it: Or se∣condly, that they did not rise up against the Person of their Prince, but against some en∣raged Minister of his, reserving still their Obedience to their Soveraigne inviolate; but we have not onely resisted, but invaded the Kings Person: There were more great shot made at the very place where the King was at Edge-hill, then the same proportion of
Ground throughout the Field▪ the ery li Cuesy was offered to the Queen at urling∣ton, to welcome her into England: Or thirdly▪ their Princes did go abot to force their Con∣sciences, withot Law or, against Law; and by an Arbitrary Power set up an Inquisition among them; but good King Charles is so far from this, that for the ase of his Subjects▪ he hath taken away an High-Commission esta∣blished by Statute, and is still ready to condis∣cend to any thing that can be reasonably pro∣posed for the ease of tender Consciences. What is it then? Hath His Majesty been a hard Master? No. Heare a Witnesse that will not violate his Conscience to doe Hi Majestie service. I see many hre, the most tori∣ously obliged, indeed as much as Servs can be to a Master, in this good Cause hve stered those vulgar Considerations, and had the Courage to de∣spise him (that is the King) to His Face. A good Panegyricke, and His Majesty may live to requite them, as Caus did  the Traytor, when his Sonne had slain  Ironside, and he saluted the King with A Rex solus, his Reward was a Good▪ Gib∣bet, Ego te bodie ob nti Obsequii meritum▪
cunctis Regni . These Seditious and Schismaticall Princi∣pl, were not the esults of a , , and uningaged Judgemen, but rather the excuse of criminous, or the  o ne∣ssitated Persons, whe  produ∣ceth new Opinions; and  followeth the Dictates of the Will, there is small hope of T▪ When Men o Belial, Factious Persons, had shaken off  yoake of a just Government, being neither Pretenders themselves in point of Right, nor capable of Soveraignity by reason of their ob∣curity, that they might retaine that i part, which they could not graspe in the whole; they broached these desperate Devises of the Omnipotency of the People: whe others, o the same Men, either having expelled Bishops to gaine their Revenues, upon pretence of Superstition, or living under a Soveraigne of another Communion, could not have Bishop of their own, and yet did find the necessity of Discipline; then they fancyed the new form of Presbiteries, in imitation of the Jewish Syne∣driums throughout their Synagogues, though that be most uncertaine and all Men know
this for certain, that the Synagogues were but humane Institutions, Acts 15. 21. not from the Law, but from old Time. Which new form of Discipline, was so adapted and acco∣modated to the Politicke State of the Citty of Genevah, that (as it was there established) it cannot possibly it any other place, except it have fower Syndicks, a greater & a lesser Coun∣cell: Then (as all Sects are modest in their beginnings) they desired their Neighbour Churches onely to certifie that their Disci∣pline was not repugnant to the word of God; yet now they would obtrude it on the world as the Eternall Gospell. So our new upstart Inde∣pendents, which run gadding about the World like Lapwings with their shels upon their Heads, having been kept under the hatches here in old England, performing their divine Offices in Holes and Corners, and having no Assemblyes but such as did of their own ac∣cord associate themselves to them, now deny the name of true Churches to all Societies but such blind Conventicles: And shall we make their excuses to be our grounds? shall we that live in the most temperate part of the tempe∣rate Zone, & injoy a Government as tempe∣rate
as the Climate it selfe, we who cannot complain either of too much Sun, or too little Sun, where the Beames of Soveraignty are neither too perpendicular to scorch us, nor yet so oblique but that they may warm us, shall we goe about in a madding humour, to dis∣solve a frame of Government, which made our fore-Fathers happy at home, and famous abroad? shall we whose Church was the Envy and Admiration of Christendome, neither too garish, nor too sluttish, excelling some as far in Purity, as it did others in Decency, now learn Religion out of Tubbs, as if the little toes could see further then the eyes? If they have an extraordinary calling, where are their Mi∣racles? mendaia video miracula non video, we heare there lyes, not see their wonders. Saint Paul became all things to all Men, but that was compatiendo non mentiendo, as St. Augustine saith. Shall we without need put our lifes into the hands of crackbrain'd unskilfull Empericks? which have taught us already to our losse, that a new Phisitian must have a new Church-yard: rather mutemus clipeos, let us leafe them old England, and content our selves with new England. It will be better to live in hollow
Trees, among Savages and Wild Beasts, then here, to be chopping and changing our Reli∣gion every new Moon. Be not deceived, as if these men did desire no more, then onely the rectifying of some former Obliquities and Irregularities: we are now told in plain En∣glish, that it is to subdue the pride of Kings, Mo∣narchy it selfe is the onely Object worthy of these men Wrath. May not one here exclaime (as the great Turk did to his Councell, when the Templers and Hospitaliers advised him by letter, how Fredericke the Christian Em∣perour might be taken) Ecce fidelitas Christi∣anorum, behold the Loyalty of our great Refor∣mers! But what is this pride of Kings? If we will believe one of their Authors in his appli∣cation of the Story of Cleomedes his Daugh∣ter, to the Domestick Custome of the Spar∣tan Kings, (pater hoses, manus non habet,) it is a one piece of their pride to have a man to pull off their shooes, and yet they say the Author had one to brush his Cloathes. Now they stick not to let us know why they maligned Epis∣copacy; whilest Bishops stood, they could not fill all the Pulpits of the Kingdome with their Seditious Oratours, who might incite
the people that their zeal to God may not be in∣terrupted by their Duty to the King, that by the Christian Labours of their painfull Preachers, they may not want hands to bring their wishes to passe, (they are their own words.) Is this the reason we have not a word of Peace and Cha∣rity from that Party, but all Incentives to Warr, and to joyn in making that great Sacrifice to the Lord. Yet whilest they are so busy in in getting hands, (too many of them perjured hands,) let them remember Rodolphus the Duke of Sweveland his hand in Cuspinian, who being drawn into a rebellious Warre against the Emperour, and in the Battell having his right Hand cut off, held out the Stump to those that were about him, saying, I have a just reward of my Perjury, with this same Hand I swore Allegiance to my Soveraigne Lord. Yet the good Emperour buried him Honourably, which being disliked by some of his Friends, he replied, utinam omnes mei Adversarit eo ornatu sepulti jacerent. We have sworn Allegiance as well ashe, and God is the same he was, a severe Avenger of Perjury. Onely Zedekia of all the Kings of Iudah (a perjured Person to Nebuchadnezzar) had his eyes put out, be∣cause
(saith one) he had not that God by whom he sware before his eyes. Another in∣stance of Perjury we have in Uladislaus, when Huniades had made Truce with Amurath for ten yeares, the King by the incitement of Cardi∣nali Iulian, did break it; the Turk in distresse, spreads the Articles towards Heaven, saying, O Iesus, if thou be a God, be avenged of these false Christians; presently the Battell turned, Ula∣dislaus was slaine in the Fight, the Cardinall in flight. When God had justly punished Co∣rah and his rebellious Company, the Com∣mon People murmured against Moses and Aa∣ron, saying, Ye have killed the Lords People. Numb. 16. 49. What was the Issue? the Lord sent a Plague which swept away four∣teen thousand and seven hundred of them: So dangerous a thing it is onely to justify Traytors. Dost thou desire to serve God pure∣ly according to his word? So thou mayest without being a Traytour to thy Prince, if our practise were but conformable to the truth of our Profession, we might challenge all the Churches in the World. God Almighty ligh∣ten the eyes of all those that mean well, that we may no longer shed one anothers blood,
to effect the frantick Designes of Fanaticall Persons, and by our contentions, pull down what we all desire to build up, even the Prote∣stant Religion, the Law of the Land, and the Liberty of the Subject. Treason never yet wanted a cloake, we are not to judge of Rebells by their Words, but by their deeds; their voice is Iacobs voice, but their hands are the hands of Esau. The Adulterous woman eateth and wipeth her mouth, and saith, what have I done? yet sometimes God suffers the contrivers of these Distra∣ctions, unwittingly to discover themselves, that unlesse we doe willfully hoodwinke our eyes, we cannot but see their aimes. Among others, that Speech which exhorts us to sub∣due the pride of Kings; to purchase a Parity in the Church with a parity in the State; to shed the blood of the ungodly; that sleights all former Oaths and Obligations, and vili∣fies the Laws of the Land as the inventi∣ons of men: may be a sufficient Warning-Piece to all Loyall Subjects and good Christians. And so may the late Petition be, though from meaner Hands to a Common Councell, wherein they doe nakedly and professedly fall
upon His Majesties Person without any Mask, and sawcily and traytorously propose the al∣teration of the Civill Government, which every true-hearted English Man will detest. Say not these are poor vulgar Fellowes: These have been the Intelligences that have of late turned the Orbe of our State about, or at least the visible Actors. And who sees not that this is cast abroad thus by the cun∣ning of their sublimated and Mercuriall Prompters, to try how it will rellish with the palate of the People, as an Introduction to their actuall Designe, that when it comes to passe, the World may not wonder at it as a Prodigie. So was it given out among the People by Ri∣chard the third, that his Wife was dead, when she was in good health: but she wisely conclu∣ded what was intended by her kind Husband to be her next part. Where are our English Hearts? why doe we not at last all joyn to∣gether, to take a severe account of them who have blemished our Parliament, subjected our Persons and Estates to their arbitrary Power; who have sought to de-throne our Soveraigne, and to robbe us of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties? But now to the Observator.
Observer. IN this Contestation between Regall and Parlia∣mentary power, for method sake, it is requisite to consider, first of Regall, then of Parliamentary Power, and in both to consider the efficient and finall Causes, and the meanes by which they are supported. Answer Stay, Sir before we enter into these Considerati∣tions, let us remember the Rule in Rhetorick, cui bono, what advantage will this inquiry bring us? Doe you desire to be one of the Tribunes or Ephori of England to controule your King? or would you have the great Oke cut down, that you might gather some sticks for your selfe? Thus we are told lately, the wisest men will not thinke thems elves uncapable of future For∣tunes, if they use their uttermost power to reduce him (that is the King) to a necessity of granting. Or would you have us play the Guelphes and Gibellines, to cut one ano∣thers throats for your pastime? Pardon us Sir, we cannot thinke it seasonable now when poore Ire∣land is at the last gaspe, and England it selfe lies a
bleeding, when mens minds are exasperated by such Trumpeters of Sedition, to plunge our selves yet deepe in these Domestick Contestations; what could the Irish Rebells desire more? Comparisons are alwayes odious, but Contestations are worse, and this be∣tween a King and His Parliament worst of all. This dismall question did never yet appeare in this King∣dom, but like a fatall Screech-owle, portending blood, Death, and publique Ruine. This was the Subject of the Barons Warre; the consequent of this in the wrong offered to a lawfull Prince, was the fountain of those horrid Dissentions between the red Rose and the White, which purpled all our English Soile with na∣tive Blood, we have had too much of this already. Halfe of that Money which of late hath been spent, of that blood which hath been shed about this accursed Controversie; would have regained Ireland, and disin∣gaged England; whereas now the sore festers dayly more and more under the Chirurgeons Hands. Our Fore fathers have setled this question for us, we desire to see what they have done, before we goe to blind∣mans buffet one with another: If it hath been compo∣sed well, or but indifferently, it is better then Civill Warr: And though it had not, when the jarring strings of mens minds are turned again, it is probable it may sleep for eve. It were much better to pur it off as the Areopagites did knotty questions to a very long Day; or with the Jews for Elias to resolve when he comes. But good Sir, if it may be without offence satisfie me in one doubt, what Sect you are of? whether some newly sprung up Mushrome, or you derive your self from those Non Conformists, which were in the
Dayes of Queen Elizabeth and King Iames. They have solemnly Protested in Print, that In the face. no Christians under Heaven, doe give more to the Regall Supremacy then they; yea, Pag. without Limitation or qualification, that for the King Pag. not to assume such a power, or for the Churches within his Dominions to deny it, is damnable Sinne (mark it) although the Statutes of the Kingdom should deny it him (and Statutes are more then bare Votes.) That it is not tyed to their Christianity, but their Crown, from which no Subject or Subjects have power to seperate it. If no Subjects collectively, then not one or both Houses. But they goe further, and I pray you make it one of your Observations; that pag. though the King command any thing contrary to the Word of God, yet we ought not to resist, but peaceably forbear Obedience and sue for Grace, and when that cannot be obtained meekly submit our selves to punishment. How you have practised this of late, the World sees, and this King∣dom feels. They declare, That pag. it is utterly unlawfull for any Christian Churches by armed Power against the will of the Civill Magistrate, to set up in publique the true worship of God, or suppresse any Superstition, or Ido∣latry. They abjure all Doctrines repugnant to these as pag. Anabaptisticall and Antichristian. They condemne all practises contrary to these, as pag. Seditious and sinfull. I forbear sundry other things avouched by them in the same Protestation, as that pag▪ the King onely hath power within his Dominions to convene Synods of Ministers, and by his Authority Royall, to ratifie their Canons, yea, that if it should please the King and Civill State to continue Bishops, pag. they could be content without envy, to suffer them to injoy their State and Dignity, and to
live as Brethren with those Ministers that should ac∣knowledge homage unto them. By this time I suppose you hve enough of the Protestation, my quaere is but short, whether you can change your Doctrine as the Chaelion her colours, according to the present exi∣gence of Affaires? or will acknowledge your opi∣nions to be Anabaptisticall and Antichristian, your practise Seditious and Sinnefull, in the Judgement of your Predecessors. And yet I am not ignorant, that both before, and after, and about the time of this Protestation, a Cockatrice Egge was hatching; when a Subject durst stile the great Senate under which e lved, tumultuosa erditorum hominum sactio, a tumultuous Faction of . Ep. 40, p. 10. desperate Men; and the Judges discordiaram Duces: then the Mistery began to work closely, but shortly after it shewed it selfe openly, when his Successor did publish to the world, that if Kings observe not those pactions to which they were sworn, subordinate Magi∣strates jure ist. pag.  95. have power to oppose them, and the Orders of the Kingdom to punish them if it be needfull, till all things be restored to their former Estate. That what power ae Generall Councell hath to depose a Pope for Heresy, the same the People have over Kings, that are turned Ty∣rants. A wofull Argument drawn from an elective Pope, to an hereditary King, from a free and oecu∣menicall Councell, to a Company of limited and sworne Subjects, from an action grounded on known Law to an Arbitrary Proceeding. The Kings Crown sits closer, The Councells Power is greater, The like Law is wanting. Others teach that the People must bridle Princes if the Nobility will not. Our Coun∣tryman de in∣ni, p. 57.
Cartwright speakes very suspitiously, To think the Church must be framed according to the Common-wealth, and the Church Government according to the Reply Whitg pag. 181. Civill Government, is as if a man should fashion his house according to his hangings; whereas indeed it is cleane contrary; that as the hanging are made fit for the house, so the Common-wealth must be made to agree with the Church, and the Government thereof with her Go∣vernment. Adde to this their other tenet; that the Government of the Church with them is Democrati∣call, or at best bur Aristocraticall, and what will follow? that the Civill Government must be the same, or at the least if it be inconsistent with the form of Discipline which they fancy, it must be regulated and conformed thereunto. I omit the Trayterous Opinions of Good∣man, Gilby, Whitingham, teaching Sheriffes and Jai∣lers to let loose them whom they call Saints; teaching Subjects to reduce their Soveraignes into order by force, yea, to depose them, or put them to Death. But these seditious principles were suppressed then by the Learning and Authority of Grindall, Sands, Park∣burst, Iewell, Beacon, Nowell, Coxe, Barlow, &c. who being exiled for Religion, at Franckford accused Knoxe of High Treason about them, and put him to make use of his heeles. Let this very Confusion of them in this matter be a warning to us, how we have the the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ in respect of Persons, James▪ or be so glued to the Persons of our Teachers, that we suck up their errors as greedily as their good Lessons, forgetting that they were but men, and that particu∣lar Relations and Ingagements, have an insensible in∣fluence upon the best temper'd minds.
Observer The King attributes, the originall of his Royalty to God and the Law, making no mention of the grant, con∣sent, or trust of Man therein; but the the truth is, God is no more the Author of Regall, then of Aristocrati∣call Power, nor of Supreme, more then of Subordinate Command. Nay, that Dominion which is usurped and not just, yet while it remaines Dominion, and till it be again legally divested, refers to God, is to the Authour and Donor, as much as that which is hereditary. Answer That Royalty and all lawfull Dominion conside∣red in the abstract, is from God, no Man can make any doubt, but he who will oppose the Apostle, the 13. 1. powers that be are ordeined of God; and God himselfe who saith, by me Kings raigne and Princes decree Iu∣stice. 8. 15. But the right and application of this Power and Interest in the concrete to this particular man, is many times from the grant and consent of the People. So God is the principall Agent, man the Instrumentall; God is the Root, the Fountain of Power; Mn the Stream, the Bough by which it is derived; the Essence of Power is alwayes from God, the Existence some∣times from God, sometimes from Man: yet Grant and Consent differ much, and Consent it selfe is of severall kinds, explicite or implicite, antecedent or subsequent, a long continued Prescription or Posses∣sion of Soveraignty, without Opposition or Relucta∣tation,
implies a full Consent, and derives a good title of Inheritance, both before God and Man. These grounds being laid, take notice of fower grosse Errors, which the Observer runns into in this Se∣ction. First he supposeth that all Dominion, is from the grant or consent of the People; whereas in truth all Dominion in the abstract is from God. The People could not give what they never had, that is, power of Life and Death: But true it is, that Magistrates in the concrete, are stiled the Ordinance of Man; subjectively because they are Men, objectively because 1 Pet. 2. 13. they raigne over Men, and many times effectively, be∣cause they are created or elected by Men. But this last holds not in all cases, I say nothing of such Kings as were named immediately by God: Those whose Predecessors or themselves have attained to Sove∣raignty by the Sword, by Conquest in a just Warre, claime immediately from God. Those also who were the first Owners or Occupants of waste Lands, might admit Tenents or Subjects upon such Conditions as they themselves would prescribe. Thirdly, those who plant at excessive Charge in remote parts of America, will give and not take Laws from their Colonies. Fourthly, upon the spreading of a numerous Family, or the great increase of Slaves and Servants, ditis ex∣amen domus, how often have the Fatherly or Ma∣gistrall power been turned into Royalty? And though these were but petty Kingdoms at the first; yet as great Rivers grow from the Confluence of many little Brooks; so by Warrs, Marriages, and Treaties, they might be enlarged. In all these Cases there is
no Grant of the people. This i one Error. His Scond Error rests in the Hypothesis; His Ma∣jesties originall Title to this Kingdome was not E∣lection, either of the Person, or of the Family, but Conquest, or rather a Multitude of Conquests, the very last whereof is confirmed by a long Succession of foure and twenty royall Progenitors and Predecessors, glorious both at home and abroad, in Peace and War, except hen this dismall and disasterous question, did eclipse teir lustre, and hinder the happinesse of this Nation, n the Dyes of King Iohn, Henry the third, Edward and Richard the second, or in the bloody Warres between the two Houses of Yorke and Lan∣canster, which were nothing else but the fruits and con∣sequents thereof. Neither can the Observer collect from hee, that this is to enslave our Nation as Con∣quered Vassalls. It is a grosse fallacy to dispute ae dic∣to simpliter ad dictum secundum quid, from the right of absole Conquerers, to His Majesty now, as if so many good Lawes, so mny free Charters, so many acts of Grace in so long a succession had operated no∣thing. This is a second Error. Thirdly, the Observer teacheth, that subordinate Commmnd is as much from God as Supreme. His Majesty i much bound unto him, to make his Royall Commands of no more force by Gods Institution then a Pety Constables. We have hitherto learned otherwise, that Kings hold their Crowns and Scepters from God, and subordinate Magistrates have their places by Commission from them. But it is fa∣miliar with these men, to leap over the backs of inter∣medious
Causes, and derive all their fancyes from God as the Heathens did their Genealogies; whereby they destroy the Beauty and Order of the World, and make many superfluous Creatures, which God and Na∣ture never made. In summe, Subordinate Com∣mands are from God, yet neither so immediately, nor so firmely as supreme: but as a row of iron rings touch∣ching one another, and the first touching the Load-stone, Philo. in their severall degrees, some more loosely, some more re∣motely then others; The case is not altogether like for Regall and Aristocraticall Power: One God in the World, one Soule in the Body, one Master in a Fa∣mily, one Sun in the Heaven, and anciently one Mo∣narch in each Society. All the first Governours were Kings. Both Forms are warranted by the Law of Na∣ture, but not both in the same Degree of Eminency. If an old Man had the eye of a young Man, he would see as well as a young Man (said the Philosopher) the Soule of an Ideot is as rationall, as the Soule of a States man, the difference is in the Organ: So the Soule of Soveraign Power, which is infused by God into Democracy or Aristocracy, is the same that it is in Monarchy: but seeing the Organ is not so apt to attain to the end, and seeing that God and Nature do alwayes intend what is best; and lastly, seeing that in some Cases the existence of Government as well as the essence is from God, who never insttuted any form but Monarchicall, the Observer might well have omitted his comparison. The fourth aand last Error is worst of all, [That usurped and unjust Dominion is referred to God as its Authour and Doner, as much as hereditary.] This is
right, we have been taught otherwise, before a se vaine upstart Empericks, in Policy troubled the world, that Dominion in a tyranicall Hereditary Gover∣nour, is from God even in the concrete, (I mean the po∣wer not the abuse) that such an one may not be resiste without Sinne, that his Person is sacred: But contra∣rywise, that Dominion in a tyranicall Usurper or In∣truder is indeed from God permitting, wheras he coul restrain it, if it pleased him; or from God concurring by a generall influence, as the Earth giveth nourish∣ment to Hemlocks, as well as Wheate, in him w live, we move, and have our being, or from God orde∣ring and disposing it as he doth all other accidents and events to his own glory; but that it is not from God as Author, Donor, or Instituter of it. Neither dar we give to a Tyranicall Usurper the essentiall Privi∣ledges of Soveraignty; we deny not that any Sub∣ject may lawfully kill him as a publicke Enemy, without legall eviction. Much lesse dare we say wit the Observer, that Power usurped and unlawfull, is as much from God, as Power Hereditary and lawfull. If it be so, cough out man, and tell us plainly, that, God is the Author of Sinne. Observer And the Law which the King mentioneth, is not to b understood to be any speciall Ordinance sent from Heaven, by the Ministery of Angells or Prophets,  amongst the Iews it sometimes was. It can be nothing else among Christians, but the pactions and agreements, o such an such Corporations.
Answer. There is a double right considerable; the right to the Crown, and the right of the Crown: the right and title to the Crown is with us undoubted, there needs no Angell from Heaven to confirme it, where no man can pretend against it. The Right of the crown is the onely subject in question. This is from the Law of God, the Law of Nature, and the Law of Nations. That this Power in an absolute Conquerer may be limited by Statutes, Charters, or municipall Laws, in Court of Conscience, in Court of Justice, to God, to his People, I grant, without communicating So∣veraigne Power to subordinate or inferiour Subjects, or subjecting Majesty to censure: Which Limita∣tion doth no proceed from mutuall pactions, but from acts of Grace and Bounty. I would know to what purpose▪ the Observer urgeth this distinction of Laws, will it er he State of the question, or the obliga∣tion of Subjects? Nothing lesse. Whether the calling of the Prince, be ordinary or extraordinary, mediate or immediate, the title of the Prince, the tye of the Subject is still the same. Those Ministers who were immediately ordeined by Christ or his Apostles, did farre exceed ours in personall perfections: but as for the Ministeriall Power, no tract of time can bring the least diminution to it. God was the first Institu∣ter of Marriage; yet he never brought any couple to∣gether but Adam and Eve; other marriages are made by free election: yet for as much as it is made by vertue and in pursuance of Divine Institution, we doe not
doubt to say and truely, those whom God hath joyned together. His Majesties title is as strong, the obliga∣tion and relation between him and his Subjects is the very same, as if God should say from Heaven, take this Man to be your King. Again, if the Libertie of the Subject be from Grace, not from pactions or agree∣ments, is it therefore the lesse? or the lesse to be regar∣ded? what is freer then gift? if a Nobleman shall give his Servant a Farme, to pay a Rose or Pepper∣corn for an acknowledgement, his title is as strong as if he bought it with his Money. But the Observer deales with his Majesty, as some others doe with God Al∣mighty in point of merit; they will not take Heaven as a free gift, but challenge it as Purchasers. In a word, the Authour of these Observations, would insinuate some difference betwixt our Kings and the Kings of Israell, or some of them who had immediate vocation, wherein he would deceive us or deceiveth himselfe, for their request to Samuell was make us a King to judge us like all other Nations. am. 8. 5. Observer. Power is originally inherent in the People, and it is nothing else but that might and vigour, which such or such a society of Men containes in it selfe; and when by such or such a Law of common consent and agreement, it is derived into such and such hands, God con∣firmes that Law: and so Man is the free and voluntary Author, the Law is the Instrument, and God is the Establisher of both: and we see, not that Prince, which is most potent over his Subjects, but that Prince which is
most potent in his Subjects, is indeed most truely potent  for a King of one small Citty, if he be intrusted with a large Prerogative, may be said to be more potent over his Sub∣jects, then a King of many great Regions, whose Prero∣gative is more limited: and yet in true reality of Power, that King is most great and glorious, which hath the most and strongest Subjects, and not he which tramples upon the most contemptible Vassalls. This is therefore a great and fond error in some Princes, to strive more to be great over their People, then in their People▪ and to Eclipse themselves by impoverishing, rather then to magnifie themselves by infranchising their Subjects. This we see in France at this Day, for were the Peasants there more free, they would be more rich and magnanimous, and were they so, their King were more puissant; but now by affecting an adulterate power over his Subjects, the King there loses a true power in his Subject, embracing a Cloud in stead of Juno. Answer. It hath ever been the wisdome of Governours, to Sect. 4 conceal from the promiscuous multitude its own strength, and that rather for the behoof of themselves then of their Rulers. Those Beasts which are of a gentle and tractable Disposition, live sociably among themselves, and are cherished by Man; whereas those that are of a more wild and untameable nature live in continuall Persecution and Feare of others, of themselves; but of late it is become the Master-piece of our Modern Incendiaries, to magnifie the power of the People, to break open this Cabinet of State, to
prick forward, the headie and raging multitude, with fictitious Devises of Bulls and Minotaurs. And all this with as much sincerity, as Corah, Dathan, and Abi∣ram said to Moses, and Aaron, you take too much on you mb. 16.  10. to, lib. 6. Repub. ing 18. & . 5. 2. seeing all the Congregation are holy. I desire the Ob∣server at his leisure, to reade Platoes description of an Athenian Sophister, and he shall find himselfe per∣sonated to the life, that one egge is not liker another: if the Coate fit him, let him put it on. The Scrip∣ture phraseth this to be troubling of a Church, or of a State: It is a Mtaphor taken from a Vessell wherein is Liquour of severall parts, some more thick, others more subtile, which by shaking together is dis∣ordered, and the dreggs and residence is lifted up from the bottome to the toppe. The Observer hath learned how to take Eeles; It is their own Rule, they that would alter the Government, must first trouble the State. Secondly, posito sed non concesso, admitting, but not granting, that Power is originally inherent in the People, what is this to us who have an excellent forme of Government established, and have divested our selves of this Power? can we play fast and loose and resume it again at our pleasures? Lesbia was free to choose her selfe an Husband when she was a Maide, may she therefore doe it when she is a Wife? Ad∣mitting that His Majesty were elected in His Pre∣decessors, yea or in His own Person for him and His Heires, is this Power therefore either the lesse absolute or lesse perpetuall? Admitting that before election, we had power to covenant, yea, or condition by what Laws we would be governed, had we therefore power
to condition that they should be no longer Laws, then they listed us? This were to make our Soveraigne not a great and glorious King, but a plain Christmasse Lord: or have we therefore Power still to raise Arms to alter the Laws by force, without Soveraigne Au∣thority? This seems to be the Observers main Scope, but the conclusion is so odious, (as which hath ever been confessed Treason) and the consequence so misera∣bly weak, that he is glad to deale altogether Entheme∣matically. Thirdly, admitting and granting that the last exer∣cise or execution of Power, that is the posse commita∣tus, or Regni, is in the People, is the right also in the People, or from the People? Excuse us if we rather give credit to our Saviour, Thou could'st have no Power at all against me, except it were given thee from John 19. above. If Pilate had his Power from Heaven, we may conclude strongly for King Charles; Nil dat quod non habet, some power the People qua talis never had, as power of Life and Death, it is the peculiar right of God and his Vicegerents. Put the case the King grants to a Corporation such and such Magistrates, with power also to them to elect new magistrates (which yet holds but somtimes) from whom do those Magi∣strates hold their power? not from the People who elect them, but from the King who creates them. Fourthly, you tell us that the Power of a King, is to have powerfull Subjects, and to be powerfull in his Subjects, not to be powerfull over his Subjects. Your reason halts, because it wants a caeteris paribus: several Kings may have severall advantages of greatnesse. The truth is, neither many powerfull Subjects without obedience, nor forced
obedience without powerfull and loving Subjects, d make a great and glorious King: But the concatena∣tion of Superiours and Inferiours in the Adaman tine bonds of Love and Duty. When Subjects are affected, as Scillurus would have his Sonns for concord as Scipio had his Souldiers for obedience, which they prised above their lifes, being ready to throw them selves from a Tower into the Sea at their Generall command: this is both to be great in Subjects, and over them. The greatest Victoryes, the greate Monarchyes, are indebted for themselves to this lowly beginning of obedience. It is not to be a King of Kings, nor a King of slaves, nor a King of Devills, (you may remember to whom that was applied,) but to be the King of Hearts, and Hands, and Subjects, of many rich, loving, and dutifull Subjects, that makes a powerfull Prince. As for the present puis∣sance of France, can you tell in what Kings Reigne it was greater since Charlemaine? Neverthelesse admitting that the Peasants in France (as you are pleased to call them) suffer much: yet nothing neare so much as they have done in seditious times, when Civill Warr raged among them, (when their Kings had lesse po∣wer over them,) which is our case now. God blesse us from Tvrany, but more from Sedition. If the Subjects of France be Peasants, and the Subjects of Germany be Princes, God send us Englishmen to keep a mean; between both extremes, which our Fore-Fathers found most expedient for all parties.
Observer. But thus we see that Power is but secondary and deri∣vative in Princes the Fountain and efficient cause is the People, and from hence the inference is just, the King though he be singulis Major, yet is he universis Minor, for if the People be the true efficient cause of Power, it is a Rule in Nature, quicquid efficit tale est magis tale. And hence it appears that at the founding of autho∣rities, when the consent of Societies conveyes rule into such and such Hands, it may ordaine what conditions, and prefix what bounds it pleases, and that no dissolu∣tion ought to be thereof, but by the same power by which it had its Constitution. Answer. Thus we see your Premisses are weake and naught, Sect. 5. your argument proceeds from the staffe to the corner, and your whole discourse is a Rope of Sand. First, your ground-work (that the People is the Fountain and efficient of Power) totters, and is not universally true. Power in the abstract is not at all; Power in the con∣crete is but sometimes from the People, which is ra∣ther the application of power then Power itselfe. Next, your inference from hence which in this place you call just, and a little after say, that nothing is more known or assented unto, that the King is singulis major but universis minor, greater then any of his Subjects singly considered, but lesse then the whole collected Body, is neither just, nor known, nor assented unto unlesse in
that Body, you include His Majesty as a principall Member. And yet if that should be granted you, before it would doe you any good, these universi, or this whole Body, must be reduced to the Major or greater part, and this diffused and essentiall Body must be contracted to a representative Body (unlesse we may believe your new Learning, that the Essentiall and Representative Body are both one.) But waving all these advantages, tell me Sir, might you be per∣swaded to follow Licurgus his advise, to try this Discipline at home, before you offer it to the Com∣monwealth? could you be contented that all your Servants together, or the Major part of them had power to turne you out of your Mastership, and place your Steward in your roome; or your Children in like case depose you from your Fatherhood? No I warrant you, the case would soone be altered. And when the greatest part of the sheep dislike their Sheep∣heard, must be presently put up his Pipes and be packing? Take heed what you doe, for if the Peo∣ple be greater then the King, it is no more a Monar∣chy but a Democracy. Hitherto the Christian World hath believed, that the King is post Deum se∣cundus the next to God, solo Deo minor, onely lesse then God, no Person, no Body Politick between; that he is Vicarius Dei, Gods Vicegerent. The Scriptures say, that Kings reigne not over Per∣sons, but Nations; that Kings were anointed over Is∣raell, not Israelites onely. Saul is called the head of the Tribes of Israell. Our Laws are plain, we have am 15. 17 all sworn that the Kings Highnesse is the onely Su∣preme head, if Supreme, then not subordinate; if onely
Supreme, then not coordinate; and Governour of this Realme, His Highnesse is Supreame Governour, that is, in his Person, in his Chamber, as well as in his Court. The ancient Courts of England, were no other then the Kings very Chamber and moveable with him from place to place, whence they have their name of Courts. Supreme Governour of this Realme collectively, and not onely of particular and individu∣all Subjects. In all causes and over all Persons, then in Parliament and out of Parliament. Parliaments doe not alwayes sit, many Causes are heard, many Persons questioned, many Oaths of Allegiance admi∣nistred between Parliament and Parliament. The same Oath binds us to defend him against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his Per∣son or Crown; to defend him, much more therefore not to offend him; against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, that Oath which binds us to defend him against all attempts whatsoever, presupposeth that no attempt against him can be justified by Law, whether these attempts be against his Person or his Crown. It will not serve the turn to distinguish between his Person and his Office, for both the Person and the Office are included in the Oath. Let every Subject lay his hand upon his heart, and compare his Actions with this Oath in the fear of God. When the great representative Body of Parliament are assem∣bled, they are yet but his great Councell, not Com∣manders. He calls them, he dissolves them; they doe not choose so much as a Speaker without his approbati∣on: and when he is chosen he prayes His Majesty to interpose his Authority, and command them to pro∣ceed
to a second choise; plane propter modestiam, sed nunquid contra veritatem? The Speakers first request is, for the Liberties and Priviledges of the House: His Majesty is the fountain from which they flow. When they, even both Houses do speak to him, it is not by way of mandate, but humble Petition as thus, most humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, your faith∣full and obedient Subjects, the Lords spirituall and tem∣porall and Commons, in Parliament assembled; or thus, ab. 30. We Your Majesties loving, faithfull, and obedient Sub∣jects representing the three Estates of Your Realme of England &c. except we should overmuch forget our Du∣ties to Your Highnesse &c. do most humbly beseech &c. Here the three Estates of the Kingdom assembled in Parliament doe acknowledge their subjection and their duty, do beseech Her Majesty. Where by the way I desire to know of the Observer, whether that of the three Estates were a Fundamentall Constitution of this Kingdom, and who were the three Estates at this time, and whether a third Estate have not been since excluded? Howsoever, we see they doe but rogore le∣gem pray a Law, the King enacts it, and as he wills or takes time to advise, so their Acts are binding or not binding. They challenge no dispensative Power above the Law: he doth. In a word, He is the Head not onely of the Hand or of the Foot, but of the whole Body. These things are so evident, that all our Laws must be burned, before this truth can be doubted of. But to stop the Observers mouth for ever take an Authentick Testimony, in the very case point blanck, By divers old Authentick Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared, that this Realme of England is an
Empire, and so hath been accepted in the World, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and royall Estate of the Imperiall Crown of the same, unto 24. He cap. 12 whom a Body Politick compact of all sorts and degrees of people, divided into terms, and by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty, being bounden and owen next to God a naturall and humble obedience, he being instituted and furnished by the goodnesse and sufferance of Almighty God with plenary, whole, and entire Power, Preeminence, Authority &c. Now Sir observe, first that not onely individuall Persons, but the whole compacted Body Politicke of the Kingdome, are not onely lesse then His Majesty, but doe owe unto him a naturall and humble obedience, (how farr is this from that Ma∣jesty which you ascribe to the representative Body?) Secondly, that the Spiritualty were ever an essentiall part of this Body Politick. Thirdly that His Ma∣jesties Power is plenary. Fourthly, that he derives it not from inferiour compacts, but from the good∣nesse of God. It is true, were His Majesty as the Prince of Orange is, or you would have him to be, not a true Possessor of Soveraigne Power, but a Keeper onely, as the Roman Dictator or an arbitrary Proctor for the People, your rule had some more shew of rea∣son: but against such evident light of truth to ground a contrary assertion, derogatory to His Majesty, upon the private authority of Bracton and Fle (no Au∣thentick Authors) were a strange degree of weaknesse or wilfulnesse, especially if we consider, first, upon what a trifling silly Homonomie it is grounded, quia comites dicuntur quasi socii Reqis, et qui habent soci∣um habent Magistrum. If he had called them the
Kings Attendents, or subordinate Governours of some certain Province or County, as the Sheriffe Vice Comes was their Deputy, there had been some∣thing reall in it. Secondly, if we consider, that this as∣sertion is as contrary to the Observers own grounds, as it is to truth, for what they (Bracton and Fleta) doe appropriate to the House of Lords curiae Comitum & Baronum, he attributes to the collective Body of the whole Kingdom, or at the least to both Houses of Par∣liament: that is farr from the Observers meaning and nothing to the purpose. This Catachresticall and ex∣travigant expression, with the amphibologicall ground of it, is either confuted or expounded by the Authors themselves, as saying, the King hath no Peere, therefore no Companion; that he is Vicarius Dei Gods Vice∣gerent, that he is not sub homina, under Man. And if the words have any graine of truth in them, they must be undestood not of an Authorative, but onely of a Consultive Power to advise him, or at the most ap∣probative, to give their assent to Laws propounded, he having limited himselfe to make no Laws without them. So we may say a Mans promise is his Master; as if a man should say that the Judges in the House of Peers, who have no Votes, but are meere assistents, yet in determining controversies in point of Law, are in some sort superiour to the Lords, not in Power which they have none, but in skill and respect of that dependence, which the Lords may have upon their Judgement and integrity. Neither will your logicall Axiom, quicquid efficit ale est magis tale, helpe you any thing at all, for first your quicquid efficit must be quando efficit. If a cause
have sufficient vigour and efficacy at such time as he effect is produced, it is not necessary that it should eteine it for ever after, or that the People should re∣ein that power which they have divested themselves of by election of another. To take your case at the est, they have put the staffe out of their own hands, and cannot without Rebellion and sinne against God, doe what they have done. Secondly, for your magic tale, there is a caution in this Canon, that the same quality must be both in the cause and in the effect, which yet is not alwayes, not in this very case, it must be in causes totall essentiall and univocall, such as this is not. The Sun is the cause of heat, yet it is not hot it selfe, Sol & homo generant hominem viventem, yet the Sun lives not. If two Litigants consent to license a third Person to name another for Arbitrator be∣tween them, he may elect a Judge, not be a Judge. Yet I shall not deny you any truth, when and where the antecedent consent of free societies not preinga∣ged, doth instrumentally conferr and convey, or rather applie power and authority into the hands of one or more, they may limit it to what terme they please, by what covenants they please, to what conditions they please, at such time as they make their election: yet Covenants and Conditions differ much which you seem to confound, breach of Covenant will not forfeit a Lease, (much lesse an Empire.) I have seen many Covenants between Kings and their People, sometimes of Debt, and many times of Grace, but I doe not remember that ever I read any Conditions, but with some old elective Kings of Arragon (if they were Kings) long since antiquated, and one onely King of Polonia.
You adde and truely, that there ought to be no dis∣solution of Soveraignty, but by the same power by which it had its Constitution, wherein God had his share at least: but this will not serve your turn, if you dare speak out plainly, tell us, when a King is constituted by right of Conquest and long Succession, yea or by the election of a free people, without any condition of forfeiture, or power of revocation reserved (as the Capuans gave themselves to the Romans,) and so ac∣cording to your position it is established by God, can the People, or the Major part without grosse Treason at∣tempt to dethrone this King, or send him a writ of ease? They that are so zealous in Religion, to have every thing ordered according to the expresse word of God, let them shew but one Text, where ever God did give this Power to Subjects, to reduce their So∣veraignes to order by Arms. If this were so, Kings were in a miserable condition. Consider the present Estate of Christendome, what King hath not Sub∣jects of sundry Communions and Professions in point of Religion? upon these mens grounds he must be a Tyrant to one party or more. Moses seemed a Tyrant to Korah and his rebellious Company; Queen Eli∣zabeth and King Iames did seem Tyrants to Squire, Parry, Sommervill, and the Powder-Traytors. Licur∣gus of whom Apollo once doubted whether he should be numbred among the Gods or Men, was well neere stoned, and had his eyes put out in a popular tumult. Thus Barabbas may be absolved, and the King of Kings condemned. What Divellish Plots would this Do∣ctrine presently raise, if it were received? what mur∣thers and assassinates? would it sher into the World?
especially considering that the worst men are most commonly active in this kind, to whom nothing doth more discommend a King then his Justice. Observer. As for the finall Cause of Regall Authority, I doe not find any thing in the Kings papers denying, that the same people is the finall which is the efficient cause of it, & indeed it were strange if the People in subjecting it selfe to command, should aime at any thing but their own good in the first and last place. Tis true according to Macha∣vills Politicks, Princes ought to aime at greatnesse, not in but ver their Subjects, and for the atchieving of the same, they ought to propose to themselves no greater good then the spoyling and breaking the spirits of their subjects, nor no greater mischiefe then common Freedome, neither ought they to promote and cherish any servants, but such as are most fit for rapine and oppression, nor depresse and prosecute any as Enemies, but such as are gracious with the populacy for noble and gallant acts, And a little af∣ter, His Dignity was erected to preserve the Commo∣nalty, the Commonalty was not created for his Service, and that which is the end, is farre more valuable in Na∣ture and Policy, then that which is the means. Answer. Still this Discourse runs upon elective King∣doms: Sect. 6. As for those which have had other originalls, here is a deep silence, sis tu simule upressum, quid hoc? you can paint a Cypresse Tree, but what is this
to the purpose? Let it be admitted that in such Mo∣narchies, the aime of the People is their own Pro∣tection, Concord, and Tranquillity, Rulers are the Ministers of God for our good; so on the other side, . 13. 4. Soveraigne Princes have their ends also, who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milke thereof? So there are Cor. 9. 7. mutuall ends, and these ends on both sides are lawfull and good, so long as they are consonant to the rules of Justice. And though Prince and People doe princi∣pally intend their own respective good, yet it were folly to imagine to atteine to such high ends of such conse∣quence and concernment, without the mixture of some Dangers, Difficulties, Troubles, and Inconveniences: as Saint Ambrose saith, that since the fall of A∣dam, thornes often grow without roses, but no true ro∣ses without thorns: we must take the rose with the thorn, the one with the other in good part, for better for worse, fructus transit cum onere the benefit passeth with the burthen. If we can purchase tranquillity which we intend, with Obedience and Subjection which we must undergoe; we have no cause to complain of the bar∣gain. It is a most wretched Government, where one reall suffering, is not compensated with ten benefits and blessings. Again, this publicke good of the people, is (to use your own phrase) either singulorum or universorum, publicke or private, of particular Subjects, or of the whole Common-wealth: howsoever the actuall intentions of individuall Members of a Society may aime at the private, yet when these two are inconsi∣stent (as sometimes it falls ou) a good Governour must preferr the publick; and particular Members
must not grumble to suffer for the generall good of the Body Politick. But you say the end is farr more honourable then the meanes, and the Preservation of the Commo∣nalty is the end of Regall Dignity. True, but this preservation must be understood, sub modo, according to Law, which is not alterable at the discretion of hu∣morous Men, but with the concurrence both of King and Subjects. Likewise this is to be understood, where the ends are not mutuall (as here they are) the King for the People, and the People for the King: and where the end is not partiall but adaequate (as this is not.) Lastly, the end is more valuable, how? qua finis as it is the end in the intention of the efficient, not alwayes in the nture of the thing. If the Ob∣server had argued thus, the publicke Tranquillity of King and People is the end of Government, therefore more valuable, hi inference had been good, but as he argues now, it is a meere Paralogisme, which I will clear by some instances. The Tutor is elected for the preservation of his Pupll, yet the Pupill qua talis is lesse honourable: The Angells are Ministring Spirits for the good of Man-kinde, are men therefore more honourable then Angells? The Redemption of the World is the end of Christs In∣carnation, is the World therefore more excellent then Christ? Whether the Observer cite Machiavell true or false, I neither know nor regard? Such a Character might fit Caesar Borgias a new Intruder, but not King Charles, who derives his Royalty from above an hundred Kingly Predecessors, whom Malice itselfe
cannot charge with one drop of guiltlesse Blood, nor with the teare of an innocent, such a Prince as Vespaian, of whom it is said, that justis suppliciis il∣lchrimavit & ingemuit. But I offer two issues to the Observer, out of these words of Machiavell, if he please to accept the challenge. First, that more Noble Worthies have been cruhed to nothing by the insolency of the People, (proportion for pro∣portion) then by the Power of Kings. As in Athens for instance, Socrates, Aristides, Themistocles, Alci∣biades, and many more. The Second, that gallant and veruous Actios doe not more often ingratiate men with the People, then a rouling tongue, a pre∣cipitate head, vain glorious Profusion, oily Insinu∣ations, feined Devotions, Sufferings (though deser∣ved) from Superirs, and above all opposition to the present Sta. So that he that is a Fa∣vorite to the King, is ipso facto, hated by the People or the major Part: nd to be sleighted by the Prince, is frequently a rey way to be honoured by the People. Iudas of lilee was a great Favorite of the s 5. 37. Commons, how did he indeare himselfe? by sediti∣ous Orations. Wh more popular then Simon Ma∣gus?  8. 10. Tis megas so great one, and this onely with jugling. When Absom sought to ingratiate himselfe m. 5. with the vulgar, wh course did he take? to be more eminent in vertue? No such thing; but ostentation, lying, flattery and ucing the present State. Who hath not heard, ho stratus and Dionisius two execra∣ble Tyrants, did cut d slsh themselves, and perswa∣ the credulous titude, how it was done by the
Malignants for their zeal to the Commonwealth, till by these Arts they had first gotten a guard allowed for themselves, and after invaded the Government. Observer. To be deliciae humani generis is grown fordid with Princes, to be publicke torments and Carnificines, and to plot against those Subjects, whom by nature they ought to protect, is held Caesar-like, and therefore bloody Borgias by meere treachery and cruelty hath gotten room in the Calen∣der of witty and of spirited Heroes. And our English Court of late yeares hath drunke too much of this State-poyson, for either we have seen Favorites raised to poll the Peo∣ple, and razed again to paifie the People; or else (which is worse for King and People too) we have seen engines of Mischiefe preserved against the People, and upheld against Law, merely that mischief might not want incou∣ragement. Answer. Curse not the King (saith the Wise-man) no not in thy thought. Thou shalt not revile the Gods, nor speak Sect, 7. Eccl. 10. Exo. 22. & Act 5. 2. Pet. 2 & Ju evill of the Ruler of thy People. Two Apostles bear record that there cannot be a surer note of a Schis∣matick, then to despise Dominion, and speak evill of Dignities. Evill language against a Soveraign Prince, hath ever been reputed an Injury to al his Subjects: but this age hath hatched such Vipers, which dare not only like some Rabshakeh, aile against some forrein Prince, but cast durt in the face of their naturall Lord;
as if they were the colls of a wild Asse in the Wildernesse, subject to no man, accountable to no Man: and that not onely in thought, which Solomon disliked, or in a word, which God did forbid, but even to make the Presse grone under dayly bundles of Lies and slanders and fictitious Fables. I say the Presse, which hath been ever esteemed a peculiar Priveledge of Supreme Majesty, Ny, one King is not an object worthy of their wrath, but as it is said of Iulian, that he sought to destroy both Presbyteros and Presbyterium, not Priests onely, but Priest-hood it selfe: So it is not one or two Monarchs, but the destruction of Monarchy it self which these Men aime at; witnesse our Observer here, to be pub∣lick torments and Carnificines, is held Caesar-like with Princes, and one of his Friends lately, He errs not much who saith, that there is an inbred hatred of the Gos∣pell in all Kings, they doe not willingly suffer the King eiae adelphi of Kings to rule in their Kingdomes, the Lord hath his among Kings, but very few, one perhaps of an hundred. Increpet te Deus Satan. The Lord himselfe will one day call them to an account for these Blasphemies against his anoynted. Is this a Coale taken from the Altar, or rather from the fire of Hell? There is hope our Countrymen will robbe the Jesuits shortly of their reputation: Anabaptisme hath got it loose to be the Liers and the Rebells Catechisme. Sir, lay aside your eye of envy, which cannot endure the beams of Majesty, and tell us what it is in King Charles which doth so much offend you? take Diogenes his lan∣thorn, and look at Noone-Day among all his Opposers throughout your Classes and Forms, if you can find one to match or parallell him, for piety towards God,
justice towards Man, Temperance in His Diet, truth in His Word, Chastity in His Life, Mercy towards the oppressed; yea take your multiplying glasse and looke through His Government from end to end, if you can find His Crown sprinkled with one drop of innocent blood. He needs not with Caius the Emperour assume Mercuries Rod, Apolloes bowe and arrows, Mrs his sword and shield, to make himself resemble God, He hath better ensignes of the Diety. Unhappy we onely because we do not know our own good, that might enjoy a temperate and sweet Govern∣ment, Sun-shine dayes under our own Vines and Fig∣trees, the free Profession of true Religion, equall administration of Justice, Peace and Plenty, with a dayly growth of all arts that may enrich or civilize a Nation, under the radicated succession of a Princly Family. If the Observers eyes had not been like the old Lamiaes, to take out and put in at his pleasure, he might have seen a Titus at Home, a Darling of Mankind. But what is the ground of all this great cry? for∣sooth we have had Favorites. I doe not yet know any hurt in a good Favorite, such an one as Ioshua was to Moses, or Daniell to Darius, or Maecenas and Agrippa to Augustus, or Craterus and (for any thing I know) Ephestion also to Alexander. Wise men think a well∣chosen Favorite may bring great advantage both to King and People. But I leave the discourse: it is well known, His Majesty is as opposite to Favou∣rites as the Observer, and never raised any to th height, but they might be opposed and questioned y their Fellow-Councellers. But if the Observer have
a mind to see some of those Favourites, (whom he call Pollers, engines of Mischiefe, or Monopolists) he may find them moving in another Sphere: To side with His Majesty is no ready way to impunity. Observer. But our King here doth acknowledge it a great busi∣nesse of His Coronation Oath to protect us: and I hope under this word protect, he intends not onely to shield us from all kind of evill, but to promote us to all kind of Politicall happinesse, according to his utmost Devoir: and I hope he holds himselfe bound thereunto, not onely by his Oath, but also by his very Office and by the end of his Sove∣raigne Dignity. And though all single Persons ought to looke upon the late bills passed by the King, as mat∣ters of Grace with all Thankfulnesse and Humility: yet the King himselfe looking upon the whole State, ought to acknowledge, that he cannot merit of it, and that whatsoeven he hath granted, if it be for the prosperity of his Peo∣ple, (but much more for their ease) it hath proceeded but from meere duty. If Ship-money, if Star-Chamber, if the High Commission, if the Votes of Bishops and Popish Lords in the upper House be inconsistent with the well∣fare of the Kingdom, not onely Honour, but Iustice it∣selfe challenges that they be abolish't. The King ought not to account that a Profit or Strength to him, which is a losse or wasting to the People, nor ought he to thinke that perish't to him, which is gained to the People: The word Grace sounds better in the Peoples mouth then in His.
Answer. His Majesty is bound in Conscience both by his Sect. 8. Oath and Office, not onely to protect his People committed to his charge in Wealth, Peace and God∣linesse, but also to promote their Good: But this Protection must be according to Law, this Promotion according to Law. Now if a good King at seasona∣ble and opportune times, (so it may not be like the borrowing of a shaft for the Hatchet to cut down the great Oake, nor like the plucking off one or more feathers out of the Eagles wings, wherewith to feather an arrow to pierce through that King of Birds,) shall freely according to the dictates of his own Reason, part with any of those Jewells which do adorn his Royall Diadem, for the behoofe of his Subjects, it is an act of Grace, not onely to individuall Persons, but to the collected Body of his People, & so both Houses have acknowledged it: yet you say it is meere duty, that both Honour and Justice do challenge it from him. It is a strange and unheard of piece of Justice and Duty, which is without and beyond all Law. You say the word Grace sounds better in the Peoples mouth then in His, O Partiallity how dost thou blind mens eyes! The Observer sees that Grace sounds ill in the Kings mouth, and yet he doth not or will not see how ill duty and meere duty sounds in his own mouth, be∣ing a Subject towards his Soveraigne. The truth is, it is most civill for Receivers to relate benefits, suffi∣cit unus huit operi, si vis me loqui, ipse tace: But where the Receivers forget themselves, yea deny the favours
received (as this Observer doth) it is very comely for the Bestowers to supply their defect. Next, to your taking away of Ship-Money, Star∣chamber, High Commission, &c. It is an easy thing to take away, but difficult to build up, both in nature and in respect of mens minds, which commonly agree sooner in the destructive part then in the constructive. All the danger is either in exceeding the golden mean (by falling from one extreme to another) or in ta∣king that away, which by correcting and good ordering skill, might have been of great use to the Body Po∣litick. We are glad to be eased of our former Bur∣thens, yet we wish with all our hearts, that our present ease may not produce greater mischiefes, that in true reall necessities and suddaine dangerous Exigences, the Common-wealth may not be left without a speedy Re∣medy. That if the Laws have not sufficiently provided for the suppressing of riots and tumultuous disorders in great men? yet the ordinary Subject may nor be left without a Sanctuary whither to fly from oppression. That in this inundation of Sects, which doe ex∣tremely deforme our Church, and disturbe the Com∣mon-wealth, there may be a proper and sure Remedy provided before it be too late, and we be forced in vaine to digge up Antigonus again out of his Grave. As for the taking away of Bishops Votes at this time. I doe not doubt but that great Councell of the King∣dom had reasons for it, and may have other Reasons (when it pleaseth God) to restore them again: There is much difference betwixt a coercive and a Consul∣tive Power: No Nation yet that ever I read of, did exclude their Religious from their Consultati∣ons:
To make a Law perfectly good, Piety must con∣curre, and who shall judge what i piou? shall they first be excluded from all other Professions, and then from their owne? Brittish Bishop have been of noe in great Councells Forrein and Domestique these one thousand four hundred and thirty years. It is your own Rule, quod omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari debet: All other Professions in the Kingdome are capable oth of electing and being elected; but for this I doe submit, and leave it to time to discover what is good for the Kingdome. Observer. This directs us then to the transcendent achme of all Politicks, to the Pramount Law, which shall give Law to all Humane Laws whatsoever, and that is salus Po∣puli. The Law of Prerogative it selfe is subservient to this Law, and were it not conducing thereunto, it were not necessary nor expedient. Answer. If this Author could commit the Law of Prero∣gative, and this Supreme Law of salus Populi to∣gether, Sect. 9. as opposite one to another, he had said some∣thing; but he cannot see Wood for Trees: the same transcendent achme which he magnifies, is the Law of Prerogative it selfe: because a generall Law cannot take notice of the equity of all particular circumstan∣ces, nor of the necessity of all particular Occurrences; therefore the supreme Prince is trusted with this
Power Paramount. That which the Law of Nature warrants in a private Man, as in a scathfire, to pull down a Neighbours House to prevent the burning of a Citty; to cast another mans corne overboord in a Tempest; to defend himselfe from Thiefes, in cases where he cannot have recoarse to the Magistrate, or the suddainesse of the Danger will admit no for∣mall Proceeding in Law: So publicke necessity doth justifie the like Actions in a King, where the exi∣gence of the State is apptant. If this Power be at any time misimployed, if this Trust be violated; yet the abuse of a thing cannot take away the use and law∣full and necessary right, which is grounded upon the universall and perpetuall Law of salus Populi, which comprehends the good of the Soveraigne, as well as of the Subject. But it is now grown into fashion for Subjects without Authority, Equity, or Necessity, to urge this Law upon all occasions. Salus Populi, is like the Foxe in AEsops Fables, it is in at every end. Mens Persons are imprisoned, their Houses plunde∣red, there Lands sequestred, their Rights violated with∣out the Judgement of their Peeres, contrary to the known Law, contrary to the great Charter; and no∣thing pretended for this, but the Law Paramount, Truely Sir, if this be salus Populi, ua salus sanis nul∣lam sperare salutem. A remote Jealousie or Suppo∣fition is no good ground for the exercise of this Law: as to pull down another Mans House, for fear of a Scathfire to come, God knows how or when, perhaps foretold in a Prognostication. The Dangers must be very visible, before this Rule take place, not taken upon Trust or an implicit Faith, like Seoggins fiery
Draggons in the aire. All true Englishmen will de∣sire to be governed by their known Laws, and nor to hear too often of this Paramount Law, the application or misapplication whereof, hath been the cause of the past and present Distempers of this Kingdom. Extraordinary Remedyes like hot Waters, may helpe at a Pang, but being too often used, spoyle the Sto∣mack. Sir H. Observer. Neither can the Right of Conquest be pleaded to ac∣quit Princes of that which is due to the People, as the Authours and ends of all Power, for meere Force cannot altar the course of Nature, or frustrate the tenour of the Law, and if it could, there were more reason why the People might justifie force, to regaine due Liberty, then the Prince might to subvert the same. And it is a shamefull Stupidity in any Man, to think that our An∣cestors did not fight more nbly for their free Customes, and Laws, of which the Conquerer and his Successors had in part disinherited them by violence and perjury, then they which put them to such conflicts; for it seems unna∣turall to me, that any Nation should be bound to con∣tribute its own inherent puissance, meerely to abet Ty∣ranny, and support Slavery; and to make that which is more excellent; a prey to that which is of lesse worth. And questionlesse a native Prince if meere force be right, may disfranchise His Subject as well as a Stran∣ger, if he can frame a sufficient party, and yet we see that this was the foolish Sinne of Rehoboam, who ha∣ving deserted and rejected out of an intollerable Inso∣lence
the Strength of ten Tribes, ridiculously sough to reduce them againe with the Strength of two. Answer. This Author intends not to halt on one side onely in this Discourse, qui smel verecundiae limites transi∣verit, ct. 10. guavit  esse oportet. First, That just Conquest in a lawfull Warr, acquireth good right of Dominion, as well as Possession, is so conso∣nant to the universall Opinion and Practise of all Nations, yea, to he infallible and undoubted Testi∣mony of holy Scriptures, that he that denyes it, may as well affirme, Nil intra est leam, nil extra est in nu∣e durum. Force is not meere Force, where Justice goes hand in hand ith it, Omnia dat qui justa negat. Neither is this to alter the course of Nature, or frustrate the enour of Law, but it selfe is the Law of Nature and of Nations, Secondly, Tha Subjects who have not the power of the Sword committed to them, after a long time of Obedience and lawfull Succession, after Oaths of Allegiance, may use force to recover their former Li∣berty, or raise Ams to change the Laws established, is without all ontradiction boh false and Re∣belliou. They tat are overcome (saith Iosephus most truely) and have long obeyed, if they seek to shake off the yoke, they do the part of desperate Men not of Lovers of Liberty▪ Surely, if any Liberty might warrant such Foce, it is the Liberty of Religion, but Christ never planted his Religion in blood: He cooled his Discples heat with a sharpe Redargu∣tion,
yee know not of what spirit yee are of. It is better Luke 9. 5 o dye innocent then live nocent, as the Thebaean Legion, (all Christans of approved valour) answe∣red the bloody Emperour Maximian, Cognosce Im∣perator, know O Emperour that we are all Christians, we submit our Bodies to thy Power, but our free Soules fly to our Saviour, neither our known Courage nor Despe∣ration it selfe hath armed us against thee, because we had rather dye inncent, then live guilty; thou shalt find our Hands empty of Weapons, but our Brests amed with the Catholick Faith. So having power to resist, yet they suffered themselves to be cut all in pieces. The Observer is still harping upon Tyranny and sla∣very, to little purpose; he is not presently a Tyrant, who hath more Power then Nature did comm to him, nor he a Slve who hath subjected himselfe to the Dominion of another: That which is done to gain Protection or Sustenance, or to avoide the evills of Sedition, or to performe a lawfull Ingage∣ment, is not meerely done to abet Tyranny and sup∣port Slavery. Thirdly, to the Observers instance of our Ance∣stours in the Barons Warrs, I know not whether Warrs he intends, the former or the latter, or both: This is certain, no party gained by them. They po∣ved fatall and destructive sometimes to the King, some∣times to the Barons, sometimes to both, and ever∣more to the People. And howsoever the name of free Customs and Laws was mae use of as a plausible pre∣tence, yet it is evident, that Envy, Reenge, Cove∣teousnesse, Ambition, Lust, Jealousie, did all act their severall parts in them. And if there were any
(as I doubt not there were many) who did solely and sincerely aime at the publicke good, yet it cannot be denyed there was too much stiffenesse, and animosity on both side: a little yielding and bending is better then breaking outright, and more especially Con∣science requires it of them who are Subjects, and of them who contend for an alteration. Pliny relates a Story of two Goats that met in the midst of a nar∣row planke, over a swift current, there was no room for one to psse by another, neither could turn back∣ward, they could not fight it ou for the way, but with certain perill of droning them both; that which one∣ly remained, was that the one couching on the planke made a Bridge for the other to goe over, and so both were saved. But the Subject is so direfull and tra∣gicall, and the remembrance of those times so odious to all good Men, that I passe by it, as ot much ma∣teriall to the Question in hand: Both Parties are dead and have made their accounts to God, and know long since whether they did well or ill: neither can their example either justifie or condemne our actions. It is probable there were some Shebahs, Trumpet∣ters of Sedition in those dayes, as this Author proves himselfe now: yet none so apt as these Catalines to cry out against Incendiares. It is a good wish of Saraviah, that such seditious Authors might ever be placed in the front of the battle. Yet thus farre the Authors ingenuity doth lead him, to distinguish the Barons then, from His Majesties Opposites now. The Barons then fought for their Laws▪ not to change the Laws and alter the Government both in Church and Common-wealth, which was the very case of
the Lincolnshire, Yorkeshire, and Northren Re∣bells in the Dayes of Henry the eight, and Queene Elizabeth. I wish none of His Majesties Subjects were involved in it at this present. Fourthly, whereas he urgeth that a native Prince may disfranchise His Subjects by Force, if He can make a Party, as well as Strangers: either he intends that he may doe it de facto, that is true; so may a Thiefe take away an honest mans purse▪ or else that he may doe it de jure, lawfully and conscionably; that is most untrue: There is a vast difference betwixt a just Warre and an unjust Oppression. His instance of Rehoboam is quite beside the Cushion, his error was threatning and indiscretion, the fault they found was with Solomon, thy Father hath made our yoke grievous: And yet it is most certain, they never had so gracious so happy a Reigne as Solomons was for Peace & Plenty, who made Silver as plentifull as stones, and Cedars 1. King. 27. as Sicamores in Ierusalem. So unthankfull we are naturally, so soone troubled with triviall matters as Haman was, and like flyes feed upon sores, leaving the whole Body which is ound. This is sure, that against Rehoboam, was a meditated Rebellion, wit∣nesse the place chosen Shechem, in the midst of the Fa∣ction; witnesse their Prolocutor Ieroboam, a seditious Fugitive, and ungratefull Servant of Solomons, by 1 King 3. whom he had been preferred; they sent for him out of AEgipt. And howsoever the Author makes Rehobo∣ams attempt ridiculous, yet it proved not so shortly 2. Chr 13. 1 after, His Sonne Abijah discomfied Ieroboam, and lew of his Souldiers five hundred thousand men; the the greatest number that we have read of slaine at
once; yet had Ieroboam all the advantages in the World, of numbers, Stratagems, and every thing except the justice of the Cause. And that which is moe for our learning, the House of Iudah had many pious and virtuous Kings after this Revolt, but the House of Israel not one but Tyrants and Idolaters. Observer. I come now from the cause which conveyes Royalty, and that or which it is conveyed, to the nature of the con∣veyance. The word trust is frequent in the Kings papers, and therefore I conceive the King oes admit that His Interest in the  is not absolute, or by a meere Dona∣tion of the People, t in part conditionate and duciary. And indeed all good Princes, without any expresse con∣tract betwixt them and their Subjects, have acknowled∣ged, that there did  a great and high trust upon them; nay Heathen Pries that have been absolute, have ac∣knowledged themseles Servants to the publick, and born for that service, ad professed that they would mannage the publick Weale, s being well satised populi em esse non suam: And we cannot immagie in the fury o Warr (when Laws have the least vigour) that any Generalis∣simo can be so uncrcumscribed in Power, ut that if he should turn hi ons on his own Souldiers, they were ipso facto absol of all Obedience, and of, all Oaths, and tyes of Allegie whatsoever for that time, and bound by a higher Duty to seek their own preservation by Resi∣stence and Dee▪ Wherefore if there be such tacite trusts and reservtions in all publicke Commands, though of most  nature that can be supposed, we
cannot but admit, that in all well formed Monarchies, where Kingly Prerogative has any Limits set, this must needes be one necessary condition, that the Subject may live safe and free. The Charter of Nature inti∣tles all Subjects of all Countryes whatsoever to safety by its supreme Law. Answer. The Observer needs not bring any confessions of Sect. 11 Princes, Christian or Heathen, to prove that good Kings account themselves great, though glorious ser∣vants to their Subjects, like a Candle burning away it∣selfe to give light to others; which a Germane Prince stamped on His Coyne with this inscription aliis serviens meipsum contero: Whilest other men lept Ahasuerosh waked, and thoughts troubled Ne∣buchadnezars Head. They have many Causes of care, which private Persons want, & patet in cura a  sus: Queen Mary said, they would find Callic written in her heart. He is very incredulous who will not believe readily, that these Distractions have pierced deeper into the brest of King Charles, then of this Observer; and this because he knows & populi rem esse & suam: Yet further, His Majesty will ac∣knowledge a trust from His People, a subsequent and implicit consent implyes a trust but not a guift: But the inference which this good Man (I can neither call him good Subject nor good Logician) makes fom hence, that the King hereby admits that His Interest in the Crowne is not absolute but a meere Donation, yea a conditionall donation from the People, is such
a pretty treasonable (I should say topicall) Argument, drawn just from Teerden Steeple to Goodwin Sands, confounding Gods rst with mans trust, and in mans trust a trust of  with a trust of dependence, a trust recoverable with a trust irrecoverable, a trust absolute with a trust conditionall, a trust antecedent with a trust consequent: I hope the Author trusts in God, will he therefore make God his Donee, yea his conditionate Donee? In plaine termes, Sir, your col∣lection is foundred of all four, and will not passe cur∣rent in Smithfield, and man well take your Generalis∣simo by the hand: But good Sir, without offence may I aske you, what Countryman your Generalis∣simo was? For no man that I meet with, will believe that there ever was such a Creature in the World: But certainly if there was, he was starke mad. Now Sir in the first place, he that shall goe about to shake in pieces an healthfull and beneficiall Institution, for fear of such a Danger, as was never yet produced in∣to act, since the Creation of the World; deserves the next Roome in Bedlam to your Generalissimo. These groundlesse panicall Feares, these ifs and sup∣positions of incredible Dangers, have been the Rai∣sers and Fomenters of these present Distractions: Dic mihi si sius tu leo qualis eris? If the Sky should fall, what price will Larkes beare? Secondly, it is a piece both of incivillity and knavery, for a Servant first to withdraw his Obedience from His Master undutifully, and then to plead sawcily that some Ma∣sters have been mad. Thirdly, hath a Generalissimo as large an extent of Power in all respects, as unli∣mited for time as a Soveraigne King? When a Ge∣neralissimo
runnes into such a francke Error, it is si he should lose his place: but when a Hereditary King falls into it, it is just he should have a Proex named, a Deputy or Protector (which you will) du∣ring his Distraction, alwayes saving the right both to himselfe and his Posterity. I have read such re∣bellious suppositions as this in late Pamphlets, as of a Pilot seeking to split his Ship upon the rocks: of a Patient calling to his Phisitian for poison; but never read one of them urged in a Classicke Author. Put the case a man is to saile by Sea, the Pilot may runn mad, and seeke to split the Ship upon rocks; shall we therefore make an Ordinance, that it shall not be lawfull for a Pilot to move his rudder according to the alterable face of Heaven, or different disposition of Wind and Weather, before he have consulted and gained the consent of all the Passengers, or at the least of every inferiour Marriner, or of the Major part of them? Interea perit Nauagus, before this can be done the Ship may be cast away: howsoever it leaves small hope of a prosperous Voyage. If you will prescribe Limits and Bounds and Conditions to Kings, you must find them written in plainer Chara∣cters then any you produce hitherto. The Charter of Nature, Lex nata non data, is indeed to preserve our selves, as Water contracts it selfe into a Globe or Circle in a dusty place; an Embleme of Association, which cannot be without Nerves, Bonds, Ligaments, Laws, and Kings. What is this against the Magi∣strate, who is the Minister of God for our preserva∣tion and safety? The Subject never finds more safe∣ty or more Liberty, then under a gracious King,
neque unquam Libert gratior aut tutior extat quam  Ree pio. But because the Observer doth so often presse the Charter of Nature, even to the dissolving of all Oaths and es of Allegiance and all mutuall Compacts and Agreements: as also to animate Subjects to raise Arms against their Soveraignes, as a thing that is not onely lawfull but necessary, to which they are bound by a higher duty, unlesse they will be fellonious to themselves and rebellious to Nature: That it is not just nor possible for any Nation so far to enslave them∣selves, & that there are tacite trusts & reservations in all publicke Commands. To give him an answer once for all in this point of Resistence. First, I affirme though it be nothing to us, (who are free Subjects and might well have been omitted by him, as making nought to his purpose) that even by the Laws of Nature, of Na∣tions, and of God, one Man, or a Society of Men might enslave themselves to another for sustenance or protection. All Histories both sacred and profaine are full of Examples, and the Law of God is plaine Exod. 21. 6. Levit, 25. 47. &c. And it seems strange, that the Observer should so farr over-reach or beat the aire to no end at all: this confessed truth quite overthrowes his whole structure of tacite trusts and conditions and rebellions against Nature. Secondly, to come nearer our own case, I answer, that though the Law of Nature cannot be destroyed or contradicted, yet it may be limited by the posi∣tive Laws of the Land. And so it is; the Observer will not deny it in his own case, though he mete with another measure to his Soveraigne. The
Charter of Nature intitles man-kind indefinitely to e whole Earth, will the Observer therefore give is Neighbour leave to enter as a Coparcener into his Freehold? I beleive, not; but would tell him readily here is a new Charter made by which he holds it; that is, the Law of the Land. It is usuall with these Men to divest Men of all due relations, as if it were he same to be a Subject and a Man. A Man qua alis, might doe many things, which in a Subject is lat Treason, notwithstanding the Charter of Na∣ture. Thirdly, beyond and above both these, there is the Law of God, there is the last Will and Testament of our Saviour, by which we hold our hopes of hap∣pinesse, which to Christians must be as the Pillar of Fire to the Israelites, a direction when to go, where to stay. Here we read of Tyrants, and of the sufferings of the Saints, but not a word of any tacite trusts and re∣servations, or of any such rebellion against Nature, or dispensation with Oaths, nor of any resistence by Arms. Certainly there is no one duty more pressed upon Christians by Christ and his Apostles then Obedience to Superiours. Give unto Caesar that which is Caesars, saith our Saviour. Submit your selves to eve∣ry Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake, saith Saint Peter. Put them in mind to be subject to Principallities and Powers, saith Saint Paul: and in that well known place to the Romans, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, whosoever resisteth the Powers, resisteth the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. To this evidence of Holy Scripture for want of one good answer, the Observer
hath devised three bad ones, ut quae non valent singu multa juvent, the clearing of which will helpe to  an end to the Controversy. First, they say, The Apostle tells us not which Po Observ. de∣ended pag. 7. is highest, but that that Power which is the highest  to be obeyed. A strange Evasion, the Apostle els where names these two together, Principallities  Powers: yea in this very Text he expresseth him∣selfe, that by the higher Powers, he understands th Magistrate vers. 3. him that beareth the Sword, verse 4. him to whom tribute is payed verse 7. none of all these will agree either to the People or to the Senat but to the supreme Magistrate onely, which Saint Peter tells us, is the King, whether it be to the King  Supreme. Pet. 2. 13. A second Evasion is this, Saint Paul speakes to  few particular dispersed Men, and those in a primi∣tive Obs. defen∣ed. pag. 8. condition, who had no meanes to provide for their own preservation. It skills not whether he borrowed this from the Jesuits defuerunt vires, they wanted strength; or of Buchanan, Finge aliquem e nostris Doctoribus, Imagine one of our Doctors did write to ucha. the Christians which live under the Tunke, to poor faint-hearted and unarmed Men, what other Counsails could he give, then Saint Paul did to the Romans, Thus they transforme a Precept into a Counsaile, I had thought they had allowed no Evangelicall or Apostolicall Counsails: and what the Apostle en∣joynes to be do for Conscience sake verse 5. under paine of Damnation verse 2. they say is to be done for discretion sake, under pain of plundering. Doe not these Men deserve well of Christian Religion to
infuse such prejudicate conceits into the bre of Monarchs? that Christians are like the frozen snake, which if they take into their bosome, so soone as he is warmed and inlived, they shall be sure to feele er sting for their favours. Let Christians be guilt∣esse, and let the Mischief fall upon the heads of the editious Contrivers. That it was not weaknesse or want of Courage, but strength of Faith that kept the Primitive Christians quiet under the persecutions of he Heathen Emperours, Tertullian and the Ancients oe abundantly witnesse, and it hath been sufficiently cleared by our Divines against the Jesuits. This is vers. 16. s Saint Iude saith, to have mens persons in admira∣ion, because of advantage. The third answer whereupon they doe most insist,  that this subjection is due to the Authority of the ing, not to the Person of the King, that this Au∣thority resideth in his Courts and in his Laws, that he Power which Saint Paul treateth of, is in truth the Kingly Office, that to levie Force or to raise Arms against the Personall commands of a King, ac∣companied with his presence, is not levying Warr against the King: but Warr against his Authority, residing in his Courts, is warr against the King. Yet et me give the Observer his due, he is more favou∣rable to Princes then many of his Fellowes in this, that he would have the Person of his Prince inviolable. And good reason, for what can the poor Kingdome expect, where the Person of the Prince is not held sacred? but Combustion and confusion: witnesse our owne Civill Warres; witnesse the Histories of the Gothish Kings, and the Romane Emperours
from Iulius Caesar to Constantine the great, b ing five and sorty, whereof thirty perished by u timely deaths, diverse of them good Princes: and a that while the Common-wealth sympathized in th common Calamity. No offence can be so great  that it deserves to be punished by parricide. B this is a greater Courtesy in shew then in deed: if a arrow shot at adventure, did wound the King of I rael  King 22. 34. mortally between the joynts of his harnesse, wh shall secure King Charles from a bullet? so all thi moderation ends in this, to give the King wa ning to avoide the field, or otherwise to take what fall at his perill. But that I may not denye truth to an Ad versary, I grant three truths in this Answer. First, that the Person and Office of a King at distinguishable: a good man may be a bad King, an a bad man a good King. Alexander the great ha his two friends Ephestion and Craterus; the one wa Alexanders Friend, the other was the Kings Friend the one honoured his person, the other his Office▪ But yet he that loved Alexander did not hate th King, and he that loved the King, was no enemy t Alexander. Secondly, I grant in active Obedience, if th King command any thing which is repugnant to the Law of God or Nature, we ought rather to obe God then Men. The Guard of Saul refused justl to slay the Priests of the Lord; and Hanania Act. 5. 29.  Sam. 22. 17 Mishael and Azariah to worship Nebuchadnezar golden Image; it is better to dye then to doe tha which is worse then Death: Da veniam Imperato pardon me, O Soveraigne, thou threatnest me wit Austin.
prison, but God with Hell. In this case it is not lawfull to yeeld active obedience to the King. Again if the King command any thing which is contrary to the known Laws of the Land, if it be by an injury to a third Person, we may not doe it: as for a Judge to deliver an unjust sentence, for every Judge ought to take an Oath at his admission, that he will doe right to every person, notwithstanding the Kings letters Anno 18. Ed. 3. Stat or any other persons; there is danger from others as well as from the King: And generally we owe service to the King, but innocency to Christ. But if this com∣mand intrench onely upon our own private Interest, we may either forbear active Obedience, or in dis∣cretion remit of our own right, for avoiding further evill: So said Saint Ambrose, If the Emperour de∣mand our fields, let him take them if he please, I doe not give them, but withall I doe not deny them. Provi∣ded alwayes, that this is to be understood in plain ca∣ses onely, where the Law of God, of Nature, or the Land is evident to every mans capacity: otherwise if it be doubtfull, it is a Rule in Case Divinity, Sub∣diti tenentur in favorem Regis & Legis judicare: It is better to obey God then Man, but to disobey the King upon Surmises, or probable pretence, or an im∣plicit dependence upon other Mens judgements, is to disobey both God and Man: and this duty (as the Protesters say truely) is not tyed to a Kings Christia∣nity, but his Crown. Tiberius was no Saint when Christ bid give unto Caesar that which was Caesars. Thus for active obedience, now for passive. If a So∣veraigne shall persecute his Subjects, for not doing his unjust Commands; yet it is not lawfull to resist
by raising Arms against him: They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. But they aske, i there no limitation? I answer, ubi lex non distingui nec nos distinguere debemus, how shall we limit where God hath not limited, or distinguish where he hath not distinguished? But is there no remedy for  Christian in this case? yes, three remedies. The first is to cease from sinne, Rex bonus est dex∣tra, malus sinistra Dei, a good King is Gods right hand, a bad his left hand, a scourge for our sinnes: as we suffer with patience an unfruitfull yeare, so we must doe an evill Prince as sent by God. Tollatu culpa ut cesset Tyrannorum plaga, (said Aquinas,) re∣move our sinne, and God will take away his rod. The second remedy is prayers and tears, In that day you shall cry unto the Lord because of your King. Sam. 7. 18. Saint Nazianzen lived under five persecutions and ne∣ver knew other Remedy: he ascribed the death of Iu∣lian to the prayers and teares of the Christians. Ie∣remy armed the Iews with prayers for Nebuchadne∣zar, not with daggs and daggers against Nebuchad∣nezar. Saint Paul commands to make prayers and supplications for Kings, not to give poison to them. Saint Peter could have taken vengeance with a word as well on Herod as Ananias, but that he knew that God reserves Kings for his own Tribunall. For this cause Saint Ambrose a Man of known courage, refu∣sed to make use of the forwardnesse of the People against Valenian the Emperour. And when Saul had slayne the Priests of God and persecuted David, yet saith David, who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be guiltlesse? It was Duty Sam. 26. 9.
and not a singular desire of perfection that held Da∣vids hands; who can stretch out his Hand? No Man can doe it. The third remedy is flight, this is the uttermost which our Master hath allowed, when they perse∣cute you in one City fly to another. But a whole Mat. 10. Kingdome cannot fly, neither was a whole Kingdome ever persecuted by a lawfull Prince: private men ta∣sted of Domitians cruelty, but the Provinces were well governed: The raging desires of one Man can∣not possibly extend to the ruine of all. Nor is this condition so hard for Subjects, This is thankworthy 1 Pet. 2. if a man for Conscience towards God indure grief, and if a man suffer as a Christian let him glorifie God on 1 Pet. 4. this behalfe. This way hath ever proved successefull to Christian Religion: the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church; caedebantur, torquebantur, nrebantur, & tamen multiplicabantur. But all these Remedies are not sufficient, they are nothing, and they that thinke otherwise are stupid fel∣lowes in the judgement of the Observer; unlesse the People have right to preserve themselves by force of Arms, yea notwithstanding any contracts that they have made to the contrary; for every private man may desend himselfe by force if assaulted, though by the force of a Ma∣gistrate, Pag. 17. or his own Father, &c. First I observe how the Observer enterferes in his Discourse, for in the forty fourth page he telleth us quite contrary, that the King as to his own Person is not forcibly to be re∣pelled in any ill doing. But passing by this contradi∣ction, I aske two questions of him, by his good leave, The first is, if a Father should goe about onely to
correct his Child and not to kill him or maime him, whether he might in such a case cry Murther Murther, and trie Msteries with his Father, and allege his own judgement against his Fathers to prove his inno∣cency? My second question is, if an inraged Father should offer extreme violence to his Sonne, how far he might resist his Father in this case, whether to give blow for blow, and stabbe for stabbe, or onely to hold his Fathers hands? For if it be a meere resi∣stence without any further active violence, (which is allowable,) if it be onely in extream perills where the life is indngered, and against manifest rage and fury; what the Observer gets by this, he may put in his eye and see never the worse. But to give his re∣medy and his instance for it a positive answer, I say further, that this which he calls a Remedy is ten times worse then the disease itselfe, even such a Re∣medy, as the luke-warm blood of Infants newly slain is for the Leprosy: and in this respect worse, that a Leprosy is a disease indeed, but where shall a Man almost read in story of a Father slaughtering his Son (except perhaps some franticke Anabaptist in imi∣tion of Abraham:) it will not be difficult to find two Sons that have made away their Fathers, for one Father that hath made away his Sonne, notwithstanding the Fathers Authority. So this case is inter raro aut nun∣quam contingentia, and may be reckoned amongst the rest of the Observers incredible suppositions, which are answered before in the beginning of this Section. But if the Observers Doctrine were once received in∣to the world throughly, for one instance of a Parracide now, we should hear of an hundred. A Mischief is better
then an inconvenience; a Mischief that happens once in an Age, then an inconvenience which is apt to produce a World of Mischiefes every day: as where the King is able to make good his Party, res facile redeunt ad pristinum statum; or where Forrein Prin∣ces shall engage themselves, on the behalfe of Monar∣chy it selfe, or perhaps doe but watch for an opportu∣nity to seise upon both parties, as the Kite did on the Frog and the Mouse; and howsoever, where Am∣bition, Covetousnesse, Envy, Newfanglednesse, Schisme shal gain an opportunity to act their mischie∣vous intentions, under the cloake of Justice, and zeal to the Common-wealth. We are now God knowes in this way of Cure which the Observer prescribes. I may say it safely, This Kingdom hath suffered more in the tryall of this remedy in one year, then it hath done under all the Kings and Queenes of England, since the union of the two roses, I think I may inlarge it, since the Conquest (except onely such seditious times.) Leave a right to the Multitude to rise in Arms, as often as they may be perswaded there is Danger, by the Observer or some such seditious Ora∣tours for their own ends; and every English Subject may write on his doore, Lord have mercy upon us. Thirdly, I doe grant, that to levy Arms against the authority of the King, in the absence of his Person is to warre against the King; otherwise we should, have few Treasons. Some desperate Ruffian or two or three Raggamuffins sometimes (but rarely) out of revenge, most commonly upon seditious princi∣ples, and misled by some factious Teachers, may at∣tempt upon the Person of the Prince: but all grand
conspiracies are veiled under the maske of Refor∣mation, of removing greivances and evill Councel∣lours, Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis & umbra▪ I goe yet further, that when a Kings Person is hld captive by force and his commands are meerely extor∣ted from him by duresse and fear of further Mischief▪ contrary to the dictate of his own reason, (as it was in the case of Henry the sixth) there his commands are to be esteemed a nullity of no moment, as a forced marriage or a bond sealed per minas. But where the King hath Dominion of his own Actions, though he be actually misled, and much more though he be said to be misled; the case is far otherwise. These three truths with these Cautions I doe admit in this di∣stinction of the Kings Person and Office. But yet further here are sundry rocks to be avoided in it. The first is not onely to distinguish in reason but actually and in deed to divide the Kings Person from His Authority; that is, to make the King a Platonicall Idea wiout personall subsistence, or as the Familists doe make their Christ, a Quality and not a Man: as if the King of England were nothing but Carolus Rex written in Court hand, without flesh blood or bones. To what purpose then are those significant solemnities used, at the Coronation of our Kings? Why are they crowned? but to shew their personall and Imperiall Power in Military Af∣faires: why inthroned? but to shew their judiciary Supremacy: why inoled? but to expresse their Su∣premacy in matters of Religion. That the Kings Authority may be where His Person is not, is most true: that His person may be without Authority, is
most false. That his Office and Authority may be limited by Law, is true: but a King without per∣sonall Authority, is a contradiction rather then a King; such a King as the Souldiers made of Christ, with a scarlet Robe, a Crown of Thornes, a Scepter of Mat. 27. 2 a Reed, and a few Courtesies and Formallities. The Person of a bad King is to be honoured for his Of∣fice sake, to what purpose? if his Person and his Of∣fice my be divided: How dull were the Primitive , that suffered so much, because they were not capble of this distinction. By this distinction S. Paul ight have justified his calling Ananias whited Wall, without pleading that he knew not that he was Gods High-Priest, Acts 23. and have told him plainly that be reverenced his Office, but for his Person and illegall commands, e did  respect them. When Maximian commanded he Christian Souldiers to sacrifice to Idols, this as an unlawfull command; yet they cose rather to e cut in pieces then to resist. When the same Maximian and Dioclesian, published a cruell Edict t Nicomedia aginst Christians; That their Chur∣hes should be demolished, their Scriptures burned, heir Apostate Servants infranchised, (this was but a Personall Arbitrary Edict) A principall Professor ore it in pieces, and suffered death for it (even in the judgement of his Fellow Christian▪) deservedly. A second Danger is to leave too great a Latitude of Judgement uto Subjects to censure the doing of their Soveraigne, and too great a Liberty, not onely to suspend their obedience, but also to oppose his commands, till they be satisfied of the legallity thereof. A miserable a condition for Princes, as it
is pernicious for Subjects, and destructive to all S cieties. A Master commands the Servant an unju act in the opinion of the Servant; yet the Serva must submit or be beaten: Doth not the Master hi selfe owe the same Subjection to his Prince? t Master denyes the act is unjust; so doth the Prince who shall be Arbiter? it were too much sawcines for a Servant to arrogate it to himselfe; what is then for a Subject? will a Judge give leave to an E ecutioner to reprive the Prisoner, till he be satisfie of the Legallity of the Judges sence? A Sup riour may have a just ground for his Command, whic he is not alwaes bound to discover to his Subjects nor is a Subject bound to sift the grounds  his Superiour Commands. In summe a Subje should neither be tanquam scipio in manu, like staffe in a mans hand, alike apt to all motions; read to obey his Prince, though the act to be done be e dently against the Law of God or Nature: nor ye on the other side, so scrupulou as to demurre upon a his commands, untill he understand the legallity an expedience of each circumstance, which perhaps he  not capable of, perhaps reason of State will not pe mit him to know it. The House of Commons hav a close Committee, which shews their allowance o an implicit confidence in some cases; yet are the but Proctors for the Commonalty, whereas the Kin is a Possessor of Soveraignty. But it is alleged, tha of two evills the lesse is to be chosen, it is better to disobe Man then God; Rather of two evills neither is to b chosen: but it is granted that when two evills ar feared, a Man should incline to the safer part: No
if the Kings Command be certain, and the other dan∣ger but doubtfull or disputable▪ to disobey the cer∣tain command for feare of an uncertain or surmised evill, is (as Saint Austin saith of some Virgins, who drowned themselves for feare of being defloured,) to fall into a certain crime for fear of an uncertain. A third error in this distinction is to limit the Kings Authority to his Courts. All Courts are not of the same Antiquity, but some erected long after others▪ as the Court of Requests: Neither are all Justices of the same nature, some were more eminent then others, that were resident with the King as his Councell in points of Law; these are now the Judges: Others did justice abroad for the ease of the Subject; as Iustices of Assise, Iustices in Eire, Iustices of Oi∣er and Terminer, Iustices of Peace. The Barons of the Exchequer were anciently Peeres of the Realme, and doe still continue their name: but to exclude the King out of his Courts is worse, a strange Paradox, and against the grounds of our Laws, The King alone Bract. 3. cap. 9. and no other may and ought to doe justice, if he alone were sufficient, as he is bound by his Oath. And again, If our Lord the King be not sufficient himselfe to de∣termine every cause, that his labour may be the lighter, Cap. 10. by dividing the burden among more Persons, he ought to choose of his own Kingdome, wise Men and fearing God, and of them to make Iustices. These Justices have power by Deputation, as Delegates to the King. The Kings did use to sit personally in their Courts: We reade of Henry the fourth and Henry the fift, that they used every day for an houre after dinner to receive bills and and heare causes: Edward the fourth
sate ordinarily in the Kings Bench: Richard the third (one who knew well enough what belonged to his part) did assume the Crown sitting in the same Court, saying, He would take the Honour there where the chiefest part of his duty did lye; to minister the Laws: And Henry the eight sate personally in we. Guild-Hall. The Writs of Appearance did un coram me vel Iusticiariis meis, before me or my Justices; rtin. Hence is the name of the Kings Bench, and the teste of that Court is still teste meipso, witnesse our selfe. If the King be not learned in the Laws, he may have learned Assistents, as the Peeres have in Parliament. A clear and rationall head is as requisite to the doing of Justice, as the profound knowledge of Law: It is a part of his Oath, to doe, to be kept in all his judg∣ments, Right Iustice, in Mercy, and Truth; was this intended onely by Substitutes, or by Substitutes not accountable to him for injustice? we have sworne that he is supreme Governour in all causes, over all Persons within his Dominions, is it all one to be a Governour, and to name Governours? David exhorts be wise now therefore O yee Kings. Moses requires that the King read in the booke of the Law all the dayes of his ut. 17. Life. Quorsum peritio haec? what needs all this ex∣pence of time, if all must be done by Substitutes, if he have no Authority out of his Courts, nor in his Courts but by delegation? When Moses by the ad∣vise of Iethro deputed subordinate Governours under him; when Iehosophat placed Judges Citty by Citty throughout Iudah: It was to ease themselves and the hron. 19. People, not to disingage and exinanite themselves of Power. It is requisite that His Majesty should be
eased of lesser burthens, that he may be conversant circa ardua Reipublicae, about great affaires of State, but so as not to divest his Person of his royall Au∣thority in the least matters. Where the King is, there is the Court, and where the Kings Authority is pre∣sent in His Person or in his Delegates, there is his Court of Justice. The reason is plain then, why the King may not controule his Courts; because they are himselfe: yet he may command a review, and call his Justices to an account. How the Obser∣ver will apply this to a Court, where neither His Ma∣jesty is present in Person, nor by his Delegates I doe not understand. The fourth and last error is to tie the hands of the King absolutely to his Laws. First in matters of Grace, the King is above his Laws, he may grant especiall Privileges by Charter to what Persons, to what Corporations e pleaseth, of his abundant Grace and meere motion; he may pardon all crimes committed against the Law of the Land, and all pe∣naltyes and irregularityes imposed by the same: the perpetuall Custome of this Kingdome doth warrant it. All wise men desire to live under such a Govern∣ment, where the Prince may with a good Conscience dispence with the rigour of the Laws. As for those that are otherwise minded, I wish them no other pu∣nishment then this, that the paenall Laws may be executed on them strictly, till they reforme their Judgements. Secondly, In the Acts of Regall Power and Justice, His Majesty may goe besides or beyond the ordinary course of Law, by his Prerogative. New Laws
for the most part (especially when the King stands in need of Subsidies) are an abatement of Royall Power. The Soveraignty of a just Conquerer, who comes in without pactions, is absolute, and bounded onely by the Laws of God, of Nature, and of Na∣tions; but after he hath confirmed old Laws and Customes, or by his Charter granted new Liberties and Immunities, to the collective Body of His Sub∣jects or to any of them; he hath so farr remitted of his own right, and cannot in Conscience recede from it. I say in Conscience, for though humane Laws as they are humane, cannot bind the Conscience of a Subject, and therefore a fortiore not of a King who is the Law-giver, yet by consequence and virtue of the Law of God, (which saith submit your selves to every ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, and again Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe) they doe bind, or to speak more properly, Gods Law doth bind the Conscience to the Observation of them. This is that which Divines doe use to expresse thus; That they have power to bind the Conscience in se d of the rch. sed non a se, in themselves but not from themselves; non ex authoritate Legislatoris, sed ex aequitate Legis, not from the authority of the Law-giver, but from the equity of the Law: many who doe not grant that to violate the Law of Man is sinne universally, yet in case of contempt or scandall doe admit that it is sinnefull. So then the Laws and Customes of the Kingdome, are Limits and bounds to His Ma∣jestyes Power; but there are not precise Laws for each particular Occurrence, And even the Laws themselves, doe ofen leave a latitude and a prehemi∣nence
to His Majesty, not onely for circumstances d forms of Justice, but even in great and high Pri∣vileges. These we call the Prerogative Royall, as to e the fountain of Nobility, To coyne Money, To eate Magistrates, To grant Protection to his Deb∣rs against their Creditours, To present to a Bene∣ce in the right of his Ward being the youngest Co∣arcener before the eldest, Not to be sued upon an or∣inary writ, but by Petition, and very many others hich are beyond the ordinary course of Common-Law, being either branches of absolute power or Pre∣ogatives left by the Laws themselves. Thirdly, in the cse of evident necessity, where the whoe Commonwealth lye at stake; for the safety of King and Kingdome, His Majesty may go against parti∣ular Laws. For howsoever fancyed & pretended invi∣sible dangers have thrust us into reall dangers and un∣seasonable Remedyes, have produced our present Calamityes: yet this is certaine, that all humane Laws and particular proprietyes, must veile and strike top-sayle to a true publick necessity. This is confessed by the Observer himselfe every where in this Treatise, that Salus Populi is the transcendent achme of all Politicks, the Law Paramount that gives Obs. defe ded pag. Law to all humane Laws, and particular Laws cannot act contrary to the legislative intent to be a violation of some more soveraigne good introducible, or some extreme and generall evill avoidable, which otherwise might swal∣low up both Statutes and all other Sanctions. This preservative Power the Observer ascribes to the people, that is to say in his sense, to the Parliament in case the King will not joyn with them. Though we
all know a Parliament is not ever ready, nor can be s suddenly called as is requisite to meet with a sudde Mischief. And he thinks it strange that th King should no allow to the Subject a right to rise i Arms for their on necessary defence, without his consent, and that he should assume or challenge such a share i the Legislative ewer to himselfe, as that without hi concurrence the Lords and Commons should have no right to make temporay orders for putting the Kingdo into a posture of Defence. Strange Phrases and unheard of by English eares, that the King should joyn with the People, or assume a share in the legislative Power, Our Laws give this honour to the King, that he can joyn or be a sharer with no man. Let not the Obser∣ver trouble himselfe about this division; The King like Solomons true Mother challengeth the whole Child, not a divisible share, but the very Life of the Legislative Power: The Commons present and pray, The Lords advise and consent, The King enacts. It would be much for the credit of the Observers desperate cause, if he were able but to shew one such president of an Ordinance made by Parliament without the Kings consent, that was binding to the Kingdome in the nature of a Law. It is a part of the Kings oath to protect the Laws, to preserve Peace to His Peo∣ple: this he cannot doe without the Power of the Kingdome, which he challengeth not as a Partner, but solely as his own, by virtue of his Seigniory. So Edv. pri∣i the Parliament it selfe acknowledged, It belongs to the King and his part it is, through his royall seigniory straitly to desend sorce of armour, and all other force against his peace, at all times when it shall please him, and to pu∣nish
them which shall doe contrary according to the Laws nd usages of the Realme, and that the Prelates, Earles, arons, and Commonalty, are bound to aide him as their overaigne Lord, at all seasons when need shall be. Here is a Parliament for the King even in the point. The Argument is not drawn as the Observator sets it own negatively from Authority, or from a maimed nd imperfect induction, or from prticular premis∣es to a generall conclusion; (every one of which is Obs. defen∣ded pag. 4. ophisticall:) is thus, Such or suh a Parliament did ot or durst not doe, this or that, therefore no Parlia∣ents may doe it, or thus, Some Parliaments not com∣arable to the Worthies of this, have omitted some good t of supinesse or difficulty, therefore all Parliaments ust doe the same: but it runns thus, no parliaments did ever assume or pretend to any such Power, some Parliaments have expressely disclaimed it, and ac∣nowledged, that by the Law of the Land, it is a ewell or a Flower which belongs to the Crown, Therefore it is His Majesties undoubted right, and ay not be invaded by any Parliament. Yet further, t were well the Observer would expresse himselfe, hat he meanes by some more Soveraigne good intro∣ducible; the necessity of avoiding rune, and intro∣ducing greater good is not the same: Dangers often come like torrents suddainly, but good may be in∣roduced at more leisure, and ought not to be brought in but in a lawfull manner; we may not doe evill that good may come of it. Take the Observers two in∣stances, When the Sea breakes in upon a County, a bank may be made on any Mans ground without his consent: but may they cut away another mans Land, to
make an Harbour more safe or commodious with the owners consent? No. A Neighbours Ho may be pulled down to stop the fury of a Scath-fire: b may they pull it down to get a better prospect,  gaine a more convenient high way? No. We des to know what this Soveraigne good introduci meanes, and are not willing to be brought into Fooles Paradise with generall insinuations. Let it a pear to be so Soveraigne and we will all become su ters for it: but if it be to alter our Religion, or our fo of Government, we hope that was not the end of th Militia. Lastly, when necessity dispenseth with pa∣ticular Laws, the danger must be evident to all, t concurrence generall, or as it were generall; one o two opponents are no opponents: but where th danger is neither to be seen not to be named, so u certaine that it must be voted whether there be an danger or not, or perhaps be created by one or tw odde Votes; this is no warrant for the practise o that Paramount Law of salus Populi. By this which hath been said we may gather a re solution, whether the King be under the Law an how farr, I mean not the Law of God or Nature but his own Nationall Laws. First by a voluntar submission of himselfe, & quod sub Lege esse debet evidenter apparet, cum sit Dei Vicarius ad similitu dinem Bract lib. 1. ap. 8. Iesu Christi cujus vices gerit in terris: bu Christ was under the Law no otherwise then by vo∣luntary submission. Secondly, the Law hath a di∣rective Power over Kings, and all good Kings wil follow it for example sake to their Subjects, for Conscience sake to themselves. Tacitus saith of Ves∣pasian
that being antiquo cultu victuque observing the old customes in his Diet and his apparrell, he was unto the Romans, praecipuus adstricti moris Au∣thor, an excellent pattern of Frugalitie. But the Law hath no coercive Power over him. This (besides his Power of pardoning and dispensing) may appear by these two reasons. First that no writ lyes against him in Law, but the party grieved hath his remedy by Petition or supplication. Secondly, that if upon petition he doth not right the wronged party, there is o course in Law to compell him, satis sufficit ei d paenam quod Dominum expectet ultorem, and else∣where, incidit in manus Dei viventis he falls into the Bracton hands of the living God, which the Scripture saith is a fearfull thing; winesse Pharaoh, Senacherib, Ne∣ro, Domitian, Dioclesian, Decis, Aurelian, Iulian, &c. Some slain by themselves, some by others, some drowned, some smitten with Thunder, some eaten with Worm. how seldome Tyrants escape punish∣ment even in this World I see not why the Obser∣er should be so angry, that this Doctrine should be pulpitted (as he phraseth it,) or why he should ac∣cuse it of flattery; whether is the greater curbe to restreine Princes, the fear of Man or of God; of temporll onely, or of temporall and eternall punish∣ment? Si genus humanum & mortalia temnitis arma, At sperate Deosmemores fandi atque nesandi. The Observer acknowledgeth as much in effect, The King is not accountable for ill done, Law hath only
a directive no coercive force upon his Person. There is a fourth answer to this Text, by distinguishing between private Persons and subordte Magistrates, . 44. but because the Observer makes no use of it, I passe by it. Observer. But Freedome indeed hath diverse degrees of La∣tude, and all Countries there in d not participate al but positive Laws must every where assigne those  The Charter of England s not strait in Privileg  us, ther is the Kings Oath of small strength to  Charter, o that though it be more precise in the care  Canonicall Privileges, and of Bishops and Clergy-me (is having been penned by Popish Bishops) then of th Commonalty, yet it confirmes all Laws and rightfull. Cu∣stomes, amongst which we most highly esteeme Parliamen∣tary Privileges▪ and as for the word eligerit whether it be future or past it skills not much, or if by th Oath, Law, Iustice, and Discretion be executed among us, in all judgements, (as well in s out of Parliaments) and if Peace and godly agreement be  kept a∣mongst us all, and if the King defend and uphold all ou Laws and Customes, we need not eare but the King  bound to consent to new Laws, if they be necessary, a well as defend old, for both beig of the same necessity the publike trust must needs equally extend to both; an we conceive it one Parliamentary Right and Custome that nothing necessary ought to be denied. And th word eligerit if it be in the perfect tense, yet shews tha the Peoples election had been the ground of ancien
Lawes, and Customes, and why the Peopls Eleion in arliament, should not be now of as great moment as ever I canot discover. Answer. omento fit cinis, diu silva, The Observer hath Sect 12.  long weaving a Spiders Webbe, and now he selfe sweepes it away in an instant: for if  Laws must every where assigne the degrees of li∣ what will become of those tacite trusts and re∣ions, of those secret and implicite, but yet ne∣ry limits and conditions of Soveraignty, which if the Prince exceed, the Subject is left free, nay  is bound by a higher duty then Oathes and all▪ Ties of Allegiance whatsoever, to seek his own preservation and defence. Calvin ws of another mind, Superior si p∣testate su abutitu, rationem quidem olim redet Deo, In 1 Pet▪ non tamen in presentia jus suum amitit. Admitting this Doctrine that there are such secret reservations and condition, and these as generall as afety Liberty and Necessi, and make the People their own udg∣es wen necessiy i; what is a violation of Liberty, and what doth indanger their safet: and all that great and glorious Power, which we give unto Prin∣ces, will become but like the Popes infallibility, and his temporall Dominion, which his Flatterers doe give unto him with so many cautions and reservations, that they may take it away when they please: Take nothing and hold it fast. But leaving these flegmaticke speculations, I doe readily joyn hands with the Observer herein, That
the positive Laws of a Kingdome are the just mea∣sure and standard of the Lberty of the Subject. To say nothing of the great distance that is between ou Euroaean Pnces in extent of Power over their , o come ome to our selves▪ we see some Cor∣porons are indowed with more liberties and Privi∣leges then others (thanks to a favourable Charter, not to any anecedaneous Pctions;) we see what diffe∣rence of Tenures is amongst u, some are Coppy-hol∣ders, some are Free-holders; some hold in Ville  some in Knight service, some in free soccage,  in Franke Almaine: whence springs this diver but from custome and the pleasure of the Do who freely imposed what conditions he liked at such time as he indowed the ancestor of the present Pos∣sessors with such and such Lands. We have a surer Charter then that of Nature to hold by, Magna Charta, the English Mans jewell and Treasure, the fountain and foundation of our Freedome, the Walls and Bulwarke, yea the very life and soule of our se∣curity: He that goes about to violate it, much more to subvert it in whole or in part, I dare not curse him; but I say for my selfe, and let the Observer do the like, let him prove the shame and abject of Men, and his Posterity slaves. But doe you think it was penned by Popish Bishops? faire fall them for it: certainly they did that as English Bishops, and as Christian Bishops, not as Popish Bishops: long may their reformed Successors injoy the fruit of their Labours, if they doe not, others may looke to them∣selves.
Jam tua res agitur paries oum proximus ardet. It is no new thing to beginne with Bishops and end with Nobles. It troubles you that they were so recise in the care of Canoicall Privileges. Tis pro∣bable they did it out of Dotion  call instinct, as foreseeing or fering  Times. Yet you confesse withall, that it confirmes  Laws and rightfull Customs to all Subjects . Now Sir we are come to a fair Issue, hold  foote there: your next taske must be to shew at part of Magna Charta is violated by His Ma∣jesty; what Liberties there granted, are by him de∣tened from the Subject: if you doe not this, you have made us a very long discourse to little purpose. Your Argument consists of a Proposition and an Assumtion; The Proposition is this, All Laws and lawfull Cu∣stoms are confirmed to the Subject by Magna Char∣ta, and His Majesties Oath for observation thereof. Your Assumtion stands thus, But to have nothing necessary denyed us is a lawfull Custome, a Parlia∣mentary Right and Privilege: you amplifie your Proposition (as the blind Senatour commended the fish) at dextra jacebat piscis; It is your assumtion Sir which is denyed, bend your selfe the other way; and shew us in what particular words of Magna Charta or any other Charter, or any Statute this Privilege is comprehended, or by what prescription or president it may be proved: if you can doe none of these, sitte down and hold your peace for ever; The Charter of Nature will be in danger to be torn in
pieces, if you stretch it to this also. To be denyed nothing?  is a Privilege indeed, as good as Fona∣tus his purse, or as that old Law which one found ou for the King of Persia, that he might doe what he would. But you limit it, he ought to deny them no∣thing which is necessary: what necessity doe yo meane, a simple and absolute necessity? that hath no Law indeed; or a necessity onely of convenience  but conveniences are often attended with greater in∣conveniences. A cup of cold Water to one who  a feverish distempr, is convenient to assge  sent thirst, but pernicious to the future habit  of his body. Many things may produce prsent  yet prove destructive to a State in their consequents. These things therefore must be carefully ballan∣ced, and by whom? will you be your own Judge? or will ou permit His Majesty to follow the Dictate of his own reason? so it is meet and just if you will have him supersede from his own Right. Lay your hand upon your heart, if you have any Te∣nents who hold of you in Knight-service, and they shall desire to have their tenure changed to free Soccage, as being more convenient & conducible for them, re you bound to condiscend? It is well known to all this Kingdome that the Kings thereof have ever had a ne∣gative voice, (otherwise they had lesse power then a Master of a College or a Major of a Corporation,) That no Act is binding to the Subject without the Royall Assent, That to say the King will advise was evermore a sufficient stop to any Bill. Yet the ground of this bold demand is but the Authors con∣ceit, We conceive it to be one Parliamentary right;
and his reasons are such as may make a shew, but want weight to beget a very conceit. The former is, that new Laws and old being of the same necessity, the pub∣like tr must equally extend to both. How often must he be told that the publicke trust is onely a trust of dependence, which begets no such Obligation as he Lord. Ver lam. conceits, Offices of inheritance are rather maters that ound in interest then in confidence. Neither is there, neither can there be the same necesity of observing  old Law, to which a King is bound both by His ter and by His Oath, and of a new Law to hich he hath not given his Royall Assent. If Mag∣ Charta did extend to this, it were Charta maxim the greatest Charter  ever was granted▪ If the Kings Oath did extend to this it were an unlawfull Oath and not binding▪ To sweare to confirme all Laws that should be presented to him, though con∣trary to the Rule of Justice, contrary to the Dictate of his own reason. Among so many improbable suppositions, give leave to the other party to make one; The Author is not infallible, nor any Soci∣ety of Men whatsoever. Put the case a Law should be presented for introducing or  of Socini∣anisme or Anabaptisme, or the new upstart indepen∣denc; is His Majesty bound to give his Assent? Surel no, Not to assume his just power of Supremacy (as your late new Masters confesse) were damnable sinne. His other Reason is this, it kills not whether the word eligerit (he should say elegerit) in the Kings Oath be in the future tense or in the perfect tense, whether he sweares to all such Customes as the People have chosen, or shall choose; for it shews
that the Peoples election was the ground of anci Laws, and that ought to be of as great moment no as ever. It is a rare dexterity which the Observe hath, with Midas to turn all he toucheth into Gold, whatsoever he finds, is to his purpose, past or o come all is one, but he would deceive us or deceives himselfe; for the Peoples election never was, nor now is the sole cause of a Law or binding Custome▪ but the Peoples election was the Sociall or Subordinate Cause, and the Royall Assent concurring with i they were ever joyntly the adaequate ground of  and still are of the same moment that they we joyntly and severally, which the Observer migh have discovered with halfe an eye. But because His Majesties oath at his Coronation, is so much insisted upon, as obliging him to passe all  Kings th. Bills that are tendred unto him by His Parliament, it will not be amisse to take this into further con∣sideration, which I shall doe with all due Submis∣sion. First, It must be acknowledged by all Men, that the King of England in the eye of the Law never dyes. Watson and Clarke (two Priest)  that they could not be guilty of Treason, because King Iames was not crowned: The Resolution was, that the Coronation was but a Ceremony to declare the King to the People, so they were adjudged Tray∣tours. The like measure in the like case suffered the Duke of Northumberland in Queen Maryes daes, onely with this difference; Watsons and Clarks Treason was before the Coronation, but the Dukes before the very Proclamation. Cosensus expressu
per verba de presenti facit matrimonium, a contract in words of the present tense, is a true Marriage and indissolvable: and yet for Solemnity sake, when the partyes come to receive the Benediction of the Church, The Minister though he knew of the con∣tact, yet he askes wilt thou have this Woman to thy Wedded Wife? There is no duty which our Kings do not receive; as Oaths of Fealty, of Allegiance; no Acts of Royall Power which they doe not exercise, as amply before their Coronation as after. And therefore M. Dolman (otherwise Parsons the Jesuit, from whom these Men have borrowed all their grounds) erred most pittifully in this, (as he did in many other of your Tenets,) that a King is no more a King be∣fore his Coronation, then a Major of a Corporation is a true Major after his Election, before he have ta∣ken his Oath. To thinke a few scattered People, as∣sembled without any procuration have the power of the Commonalty of England, is an Error fitter to be laught at then to be confuted. Secondly, the words of the Oath (which beares markes enough in it selfe, of the time when it was made) are not to be pressed further then Custome and practice (the best Interpreters of the Law) doe warrant, otherwise the Words quas vulgus elegerit, cannot without much forcing be applied to the Par∣liament. But admit the word vulgus might be drawn with some violence to signifie the House of Coons, by virtue of their representation: yet ho have the House of Lords lost their interest, if the King be bond to confirme whatsoever the House of Commons shall present?
Thirdly, it cannot be denyed, that if the King  bound by a lawfull Oth to passe all Blls; it is not the form of denying it, but the not doing it, which makes the prjury. Therefore the form of the King answer Le Roy Savisera, can excuse the perjury in not doing. Neher doth it prove that the King had no power to deny, but that e is tender of a flat dnyall, and attributes so much to the judgement of His great Councell, that he will take further advice. This would be strange Doctrin, (indeed incredible) that all the Kings of England who have given this answer have been for∣sworn, and neither Parliament nor Convocation to take notice of it, in so many Ages, nor in the nt succeeding Parliament after so long advise to cl for a further answer. Fourthly, it is confessed that in Acts of Gra, the King is not bound to assent (it is well f he have not been restreined of this Right,) That in all Acts where His Majesty is to deprt from the particular Right and Interest of His Crown, he is not obliged to assent (and was not that of the Mili∣tia such a case?) Lastly, that though he be bound by oath to consent, yet if he doe not consent, they are not binding Laws to the Subject. Thus farre-well But then comes a handfull of Gourds that poisons the pottage▪ except in cases of necessi. Give to any per∣son o Sociey a Legislative power without the King in case of necessity; permit them withall to be sole Judges of necessity, when it is, how long it lasts: and it is more then probble the necessity will not de∣termine till they have their own desires, which is the
same in effect as if they had a Legislative Power. Necessity excuseth whatsoever it doth, but first the necessity must be evident: there needs no such great stirre who shall be Judge of necessity, when it comes indeed, it will shew it selfe; when extreme neces∣sity is disputable, it is a signe it is not reall. Second∣ly, the Agent must be proper, otherwise it cuts in under the very sinews of Government, to make two Supremes in a Society, and to subject the People to contrary commands: If the Trumpet give an uncer∣tain sound, who shall prepare him selfe to Battell? 1 Cor. 1 There can be no necessity so pernicious as this very Remedy. Fifthly, the great variety of Forms and presidents seems to prove that one precise form is not sim∣ply necessary: and the words adjiciantur quae justa erint, and King Henry the eights enterlining it with his own hand, do prove that it is arbitrary at least in part. To interline it, to interline it with his own hand, to leave it so interlined upon Record, O stange▪ If this clause had been of such consequence, we should have heard of some question about it, eiter then or in some succeeding Parliament; but we find a deep silence. Thomas  Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in Parliament chargeth Hen∣ry Stow p. the fourth with his Oath which he did volunta∣rily make. But to the forms. First, the Oath which King Iames and King Charles did take runns thus. Sir will you to grant to hold and keep the Lawes and rightfull Customes which the Commonalty of this Kingdom have. Here is neither have chosen, nor shall choose. The Oath of Edward the sixth was
this, Doe you grant to make no new Laws, but such a shall be to the Honour and glory of God, and to the good of the Common-lth, and tat the same shall be made by the consent of your People, as hath been accu∣stomed. Here is o gerit still, yet is Age freed him from the very thught of improving His Pre∣rogative. King Henry the eight corrected the form then presented to Hi thus, And affirme them which the Nobles and Peple have chosen with my consent. Here is have chosen ad the Kings Consent added to boote. Doctor Cow in his Interpreter, recites the Kings Oath out of t old abridgement of Statues set out in Henry t eights Dayes much different from this, as that the King should keep all the Lands Honours &c. of the rown whole without diminution and reassume those whh had been made away. And this clause in questin runnes thus, He shall grant to hold the Laws and Customs of the Realme, and to his Power keep them ad affirme them, which the Folke and People have made nd chosen; and this seems to have been the Oath of His Predecessors. But perhaps if we looke up highe we shall find a perfect agree∣ment in thi point. Our next step must be to Henry the fourth and Richard the second, a Tragicall Time when the State run contrary waves like a whirli∣gigge, fiter for the honour of the Nation to be buried in oblivion then drawn into president. But this Oath being no Innovation, it may serve well e∣nough. Yet the Oaths of these two Kings do not agree so exactly as to settle a certain forme, as to in∣stance onely in the clause in question: Henry the ourths Oath runs thus, concedis justas Leges & con∣studines
esse tenendas, & promittis pro te eas esse pro∣gendas & ad honorem Dei corroborad quas vulgus gerit: which last word signifies indifferently either ave chosen or shall choose. Neither doth the Re∣ord say that this was the very  taken by Henry e fourth, but that it was the usuall for taken by e Kings of England, and twice by Richard the econd, and for proof of what it saith, referres us o the Registers of the Arch-Bishops or Bishops pro∣t in libris ponticalium Archiepis. et Episc. plenius ontinetur This prout is a clear evidence that this pre∣se Form had no ground in Statute or in Common aw, but was a Pontificall rite. The Oath of Ri∣hard the second, related in the close Rolls of the first Year of his Raigne, even in this very clause differs n two materiall things: one is, that to justas Leges & Consuetudines, there is added Ecclesiae: the other is, that to elegerit is added juste & rationabiliter▪ which the People have chosen or shall choose justly and reasonably: which limitation, if the Oath look forward to future Laws, must of necessity be either expressed or understood, otherwise the Oath is un∣lawfull and doth not bind, jusjurandum non debet esse vinculum iniquitatis. Here also the word elegerit is doubtfull whether past or future. If it be urged that to corroborate must de understood of such Laws as have not passed the Royall Assent; the answer is easy, that the best confirmation of Laws is the due execution of them. Now from our English and La∣tin Formes, our last step is to the French, which was taken by Edward the second and Edward the third, (as it is said) and runnes thus. Sire grantes vo a te∣nir
& garder lesleys & ls custumes droiture les les q els la communante de vostre Royaume aur esu & les de fenderer & afforcerer al honnur de dieu a vostre po First how it shall appear that this Oath was take by Edward the second and Edward the third, we are ye to seek. A Bishops Pontificall, and much more  Heraulds notes taken cursorily at a Coronation, do not seem to be sufficient Records nor convincing proofe in our Law: And Bracton who lived abou the same times sets down the Oath otherwise. Deb Rex in Coronatione sua in nomine Iesu Christi pr∣stito Bracton lib.  cap. 9. Sacramento, haec tria promittere populo sibi Sub∣dito; primo se praecepturum & pro viribus impenu∣rum, ut Pax Ecclesiae & omni populo Christiano omni suo tempore observetur: Secundo ut omnes rapacitate & omnes iniquitates omnibus gradibus interdicat, Tertio ut in omnibus judiciis aequitatem praecipiat & misericordiam. Here is neither have chosen nor shall choose. Secondly, though the French doe agree with the Latin much for Sense and substance, yet it is not the same Forme. Thirdly the King grants to defend the Laws and Customes, but it is no Law till it hath received Royall Assent, it i no Cu∣stome till it be confirmed by a lawfull prescription. Fourthly, that the word Elect is joyned immediately to Customes, which seems not so proper if reddendo singula singulis, it ought to be referred to Laws ad not to Custome. Fiftly, what the Norman French may differ from the Parisian, or both of them then from what they are now, or both then and now from our Law French, I cannot determine: But take it at the worst, the words in question aur eslu make
lesse for the Observer then  it selfe, and do gnifie have chosen, or in the most Grammticall Pe∣nticall construction that can be mde shall have ; whereas if it were shall choose, it should be  or . If the Herauld did take his notes as l as he translates, his remembrances are but of small oment. Before all these Formes I reade of others  late Authors (for I have not opportunity to see e originall Records,) as that of King Richard the rst, agreeing much with Bracton. To orve eace onour & Reverence to Almighty God, to his Church nd to the Ministers of the same, To administer Law nd justice equally to all, To abrogate evill Laws and ustoms and to mintein good. Here is indeed a refe∣ence to future Law, but no depndence on other ens judgements. And to this King Iohns Oath ame nearest of any Form yet mentioned, though ot exactly the same as differing in the first clause in his, To love and defend the Catholicke Church. To summe up all thn in a word, First, here is no cer∣ain forme to be found. Secondly, for those Formes hat are, the Parliament Rolls referre us to the Bi∣hops Register. Thirdly, few of those Formes have e word elegerit or hoose in them, and those that ave it, haveit doubtfully, either have chosen or shall choose. Fourthly, admitting the signification to be fu∣ure, yet the Limitation which is expressed in the Oath of Richard the second juste & rationabiliter, justly & easonably, must of necessity be understood in all, other∣wise the oath is unlawfull in it selfe, to oblige the King to prform unjust and unreasonable Propositions, and binds not: Whether it be expressed or understood,
it leaves to the King a latitude of Judgement,  examine what is just and reasonable, and to follow th Dictate of his own understanding; the practise of a Parliaments in all Ages confirmes this expositio Lastly, admitting, but not granting, the word eleger to be future, and admitting that the limitation o juste & rationabilier could be suspended, yet it woul not bind the King to confirme all Laws that are ten∣dred, but only exclsively to impose no other Laws o his Subjects, but sch as shall be presented & approve in Parliament. I hath been questioned by some  whom the Legislive Power did rest by Law, whe∣ther in the King (lone as some old Forms doe see to insinuate,) Cossimus, Rex concedit, Rex ordina Rex statuit, Dinus Rex de communi suo concil statuit, Dominus ex in Parliamento statuit,) or i the King and Pliament joyntly▪ And what is th power of Parliaents in Legisltion, Receptiv Consultive, Apobative, or Cooperative. An whether the mag of Laws by Parliament be (a some have said)  mercyfull Policy to prevent co∣plaints not alterle without great perill; or (as  seemes rather) a absolute requisite in Law and  matter of necessity, there being sundry Acts infer our to Law-makg, which our Lawyers declare i∣valid, unlesse the be done by King and Parliamen Yet howsoever it be, abundans Cautela non nocet, fo greater Caution it yeelds more satisfaction to th People to give sch an Oath, that if the King ha no such power he would ot usurpe it, if he had suc a Power, yet he would not assume it. And this  clearly the sense of that oath of Edward the six
That he would make no new Laws but by the con∣sent of His People, as had been accustomed. And this may be the meaning of the clause in the Statute, Sith the Law of the Realme is such, that upon the Mis∣chiefes 25 Edv. 3. and Dammages which happen to this Realme, He is bound by his Oath with the accord of His People in His Parliament, thereof to make Remedy and Law. Though it is very true, that this being admitted (as then it was) to be a Law in Act, the King is bound by another clause in his Oath, and even by this word elegerit in the perfect tense hath chosen, as well or ra∣ther more then if it were in the future shall choose. And so it follows in that Statute plainly, that there was a Statute Law, a Remedy then in force not repea∣led, which the King was bound by his Oath to cause to e kept, though by sufferance and negligence it hath been sinc attempted to the contrary. So the Obliga∣tion there intended, is to the execution of an old Law not the making of a new. Richard the second con∣fesseth that he was bound by his oath to passe a new grant to the Justices of Peace. But first it appears not that this was a new Bill: Secondly, if it did, yet Richard the second was then but fourteen yeares old: And thirdly, if his age had been more mature, yet if the thing was just and beneficiall to the People, without prejudice to the rights of his Crown, and if his own reason did dictate so to him, he might truely say that he was bound to doe it both by His Oath and his Office. Yet his Grand-Father Ed∣ward the third revoked a Statute, because it wa pre∣judiciall anno 15. E∣ward. 3. to the rights of his Crown, and was made without his free consent.
Observer. That which results from hence is, if our Kings receive all Royalty from the People, and for the be∣hoofe of the People, and that by a speciall trust of safety and Liberty expresly by the people limited, and by their own grants and Oaths ratified, then ur Kings cannot b said to have so inconditionate and high a propriety in all our Lifes, Libertyes and Possessions, or in any thing else to the Crown apperteining, as we have in their dig∣nity or in our selves, and indeed if they had, they were ot born for the People, but meerely for themselve, neither were it lawfull or naturall for them to expose their Lifes and Fortunes for their Country, as they have been bound hitherto to doe according to that of our Sa∣viour, Bonus Pastor ponit vitam pro oibus, Answer. Ex his praemissis necessario sequitur collusio. All your main Pillars are broken reeds, and your Building ct. 13. must needs fall: For our Kings doe not receive all Royalty from the People, nor onely for the behoofe of the People, but partly for the People, partly for themselves and theirs, and principally for Gods glo∣ry: Those conditionate reservations and limitation which you fancy, are but your own drowsy dreames; neither doth His Majesties Charter, nor can His Oath extend to any such fictitious privilege as you devise: The propriety which His Majesty hath in our Lifes, Libertyes, and Estates, is of publicke Do∣minion
not of private Possession: His interest in things apperteining to the Crown is both of Domi∣nion and Possssion: the right which we have in him is not a right of Dominion over him, but a right of Protection from him and under him: and this very right of Protection which he owes to us, and we may expect from him, shews clearely that he is born in  for his People, and is a sufficient ground for him to expose his Life and Fortunes to the extremest perills for his Country. The Authours inference, that it is not lawfull or naturall according to these grounds, is a silly and ridiculous collection, not un∣like unto his similitude from the Shepheard whom all men know to have an absolute and inconditionate Dominion over his Sheep, yet is he bound to expose his Life for them. Observer. But now of Parliaments. Parliaments have the same efficient cause as Monarchies, if not higher: For in truth the whole Kingdome is not so properly the Au∣thour as the essence it selfe of Parliaments, and by the former Rule it is magis tale, because we see ipsum quid quod efficit tale. And it is I think beyond all Contro∣versy, that God and the Law operate as the same causes both in Kings and Parliaments, for God favours both, and the Law establishes both, and the act of Men still concurres in the sustentation of both. And not to stay longer on this, Parliaments have also the same finall use as Monarchyes, if not greater, for indeed pub∣licke
Safety and Liberty could not be so effectually pro∣vided for by Monarchs, till Parliaments were consti∣tuted, for supplying of all defects in that Govern∣ment. Answer. The Observer having shewed his teeth to Monarchs, ct. 14. now he comes to fawn upon Parliaments: the Italians have a proverbe, He that speakes me fairer then he useth to doe, either hath deceived me or he would deceive me. Queen Elizabeth is now a Saint with our Schismaticall Mar-Prelates; but when she was alive, those rayling Rabshekehs did match her with Ahab and Ieroboam: now their tongues are silver Trumpets to sound out the praises of Parliaments; it is not long since they reviled them as fast, calling them Courts without Conscience or Equity. God blesse Parliaments, and grant they may doe nothing unworthy of themselves or of their name, which was Senatus Sapientum: The commendation of bad men, was the just ground of a wise mans fear. But let us examine the par∣culars. Parliaments (you say) have the same efficient cause as Monarchyes, if not higher, (it seemes you are not resolved whether) Higher? How should that be? unlesse you have devised some Hierarchy of Angells in Heaven to overtoppe God, as you have found out a Court Paramount over his Vicegerent in Earth. But you build upon your old sandy Foundation, that all Kings derive their power from the People. I must once more tell you, the Monarchy of this King∣dome is not from the People as the efficient, but from
the King of Kings. The onely Argument which I have seen pressed with any shew of probability (which yet the Observer hath not met with) is this, That upon deficiency of the Royall Line, the Do∣minion escheats to the People as the Lord Para∣mount. A meere mistake, they might even as well say, that because the Wife upon the death of her Husband is loosed from her former obligation, and is free either to continue a Widdow, or to elect a new Husband, that therefore her Husband in his Life time did derive his Dominion from Her, and that by his Death, Dominion did escheat to Her as to the Lady Paramount: yet if all this were admitted it proves but a respective Equallity. Yes, you adde that the Parliament is the very essence of the Kingdome, that is to say, the cause of the King, and therefore by your Lesbian Rule of quod efficit tale it is in it selfe more worthy and more powerfull. Though the Rule be nothing to the purpose, yet I will admit it and joyne issue with the Observer; whether the King or the Parliament be the cause of the other, let that be more worthy. That the King is the cause of the Parliament, is as evident as the Noon-day light; He calls them, He dissolves them, they are His Councell, by virtue of His writ they doe (otherwise they cannot) sit: That the Parlia∣ment should be the cause of the King, is as impos∣sible as it is for Shem to be Noahs Father. How many Kings in the World have never known Parli∣ament, neither the name, nor the thing? Thus the Observer, In the infancy of the World most Nations did choose rather to submit themselves to the discretion
of their Lords, then to relye upon any Limits; And▪ litle after, yet long it was ere the bounds and condi∣tions of Supreme Lords, were so wisely determined,  quietly conserved as now they are. It is apparent then, Kings were before Parliaments even in time: Ou Frech Authours doe affirme, that their Kingdom was governed for many Ages by Kings without Par∣liaments happily and prosperously; Phillip the fair was the first Erecter of their Parliaments of Paris and Mountpelliers. As for ours in England, will you hea Master Stow our Annalist; thus he in the sixteenth of Henry the first, in the name of our Historiogra∣phers, not as his own private opinion, This doe the Historiographers note, to be the first Parliament i England, and that the Kings before that time were ne∣ver wont to call any of their Commons or People  Councell or Law making. It may be the first held by the Norman Kings, or the first held after the Nor∣man manner, or the first where the people appeared by Proctors, yet we find the name of Parliament before this, either so called then indeed, or by a Po∣lepsis as Lavinia Littora. And not to contend abou the name, this is certain, that long before in the dayes of the Saxon Kings, there was the Assembly of Wise Men or Mickle Synod, having an Analogy with our Parliaments, but differing from them in many things. So doth that Parliament in Henry the first his time differ from ours now: Then the Bishops had their votes in the House of Lords, now they have none; Then Proctors of the Clergy had their Suf∣frages in the House of Commons, now they are ex∣cluded; Then there were many more Barons then
there are now Burgesses, every Lord of a Mannour ho had a Court Baron was a Parliament man natus y right; Then they came on generall summons, af∣er upon speciall Writ. But both the one and the ther were posteriour to Kings, both in the order f nature and of time: How should it be otherwise? he end of Parliaments is to temper the violence of overaigne Power, the Remedy must needs be later then e Disease, much more then the right Temper. egenerate Monarchy becomes Tyranny, and the cure f Tyranny is the mixture of Governments; Parli∣ments are proper adjuments to Kings; Parliaments ere constituted to supply the defects in that Govern∣ent, saith the Observer himselfe; here you may ap∣ply your Rule to purpose, that the end is more xcellent then the meanes. I deny therefore that the ingdome is the essence of Parliaments: there is a hreefold Body of the State, the essentiall Body, he representative Body, and the virtuall Body: the ssentiall Body is the diffused company of the whole Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty throughout the King∣ome; the representative Body are the Lords, Cit∣yzens and Burgesses in Parliament assembled and in∣rusted: the Virtuall Body is His Majesty, in whom ests the life of Authority and power legislative, exe∣utive virtually: yet so as in the excercise of some rts of it, there are necessary requisites, the consent and concurrence of the representative Body. From this mistaken ground the Observer draws fundry er∣roneous conclusions, Posito uno absurdo sequuntur mille. Hence proceeds his Complaint, That severance
hath been made betwixt the Parties chosen and the Par∣ties choosing, and so that that great privilege of all pri∣vileges, that unmoveable Basis of all Honour and power, whereby the House of Commons claimes the intire right of all the Gentry and Commonalty of England, hath been attempted to be shaken. A power of representation we grant respective to some ends, as to consent to new laws, to grant Subsidies, to impeach Offenders, to find out and present grievances, and whatsoever else is warranted by lawfull Customes; but an intire right to all intents and purposes against Law and lawfull Custome we deny. An intire right, what to out Wifes and Children, to our Lands and Possessions? this is not tollerable. Hence also he tells Magistrally enough, of an arbi∣trary Power in the Parliament, That there is an ar∣bitrary Power in every State somewhere, it is true, is necessary and no inconvenience followes upon it, every man hath an arbitrary power over him selfe, so every State hath an arbitrary power over it selfe, and there is no Danger in it; for the same reason, if the State intrust this to one Man, or few there may be danger, but the Parliament is neither one nor few, it is in∣deed the State it selfe. Now the Maske is off, you have spunne a fair threed, is this the end of all your goodly pretences? if this be your new Learning, God deliver all true English men from it: Wee chose you to be our Proctors not to be our Lords: We challenge the Laws of England as our Birthright and Inheritance, and dislike Arbitrary Government much in one, but twenty times worse in more. There is no Tyranny like many-headed Tyranny: when was ver so much Blood shed and Rapine under one
Tyrant, as under three in the Triumvirate? And the more they are, still of necessity there will be more ngagements of Love and Hatred and Covetousnesse and Ambition, the more packing and conniving one with another, the more Danger of Factious and Se∣ditious tumults, as if the evills of one Forme of Go∣vernment were not sufficient, except we were over∣whelmed with the deluge of them all; and he that is most popular (who is most commonly the worst) will give Laws to the rest. Therefore it hath ever been accounted safer to live under one Tyrant then many: The Lust, Covetousnesse, Ambition, Cruelty, of one, may be sooner satisfied then of many, and especially when the power is but temporary and not hereditary nor of continuance: We see Farmers which have a long terme, will husband their grounds well; but they that are but Tenents at will, plough out the very heart of it. No Sir (I thanke you) we will none of your Arbitrary Government. And suppo∣sing, but no way granting, that the Parliament were the essentiall Body of this Kingdome, or (which is all one) were indowed with all the power and Pri∣vileges thereof to all intents and purposes; yet it had no Arbitrary Power over it selfe, in such things as are contrary to the Allegiance which it owes to His Majesty, and contrary to its Obligation to the re∣ceived Laws and Customs of this Land. Hence be ascribes to Parliaments a power to call Kings to an account, heare himselfe, That Princes may not be now beyond all Limits and Lawes by any pri∣vate Persons, the whole community in its underived Majesty shall convene to doe iustice. Here we have it
expresly, that the Parliament is the whole Commu∣nty, that it hath a Majesty, that this Majsty  un∣derived, that it hath power o ry Princs, e  doe justice upon them. Hiterto we have misunder∣stood Saint Peter, Submit your selfes to every Ordi∣nance of Man for the Lor sake, whether it be to t Pet. 12. 3. King as Supreme. It seems the Parliament whic passed the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, did no understand their own right, till  third Cato drop∣pd from Heaven to inform them: And above all, o Non-Conformist Ministers in their sole Pro∣testation are deepst in this guilt, wo affirme so con∣fidently, that for the King ot to assume  or for the Church to deny it, were  Yea, though the Statutes of the Kingdome should de it unto Him. What ma his fellow Subject expe from the Oserver, who is o sawcy with his Sove∣raigne? But before I leave thi poit, I desire to be informed  this new Doctrin agrees with that un∣deniable principle of our Law, The King can do  wrong? The Observer glosseth it thus. That He can doe no wrong de jure, but de facto he may; which is the drowsist dreaming devise, that ver dropped from any Man pen in his right Witts: Iudas or the Devill himselfe can doe no wrong de jure, unlesse both  of a contradiction can be true: A fair Privi∣lege to give a Prince, which a high way Thiefe may challenge. It may with more probabillity be ex∣pounded thus, That the King is to discharge the pub∣lick Affires of the Kingdome, not by himselfe, but by His Officer and Ministers▪ therefore if any thing be amisse or unjust, they are faulty, they are accoun∣countable
for it, not He. But there seems to be something more in this principle then thus: For first  the same reason a man might say the King can doe no right, if he can doe nothing by himselfe, he s not capable of such thanks as Tertull gave to Acts. 24. 2 elix: Secondly, it would be very strange, that a King should be excluded from the personall discharge of all manner of dutyes belonging to his high calling, nd might occasion the renewing of the Womans complaint against Philip of Medon, why then art hou King? this were to make His Majesty ano∣er Childerick, one of the old Ciphers or titulary Kings of France, and put all the power into the hands of a Major of the Pallace, or a Marshall, or some other Subjects. What is it then? there ust be something more in this old Maxime of ur Law, that The King can doe no wrong. And it s thi doubtlesse, that in the intendment of Law his Person is sacred, he is freed from all defects, (as though he be a Mino or an Infant, yet in the eye of he Law he is alwayes of full age,) he owes account of his doings to God alone, the Law hath no coer∣cive power over him. This is that which Samuel cals The Law of the Kingdom, not to shew what a King may lawfully doe, but what a Subject ought to bear from a lawfull King. To the alone have I sinned, said David; he had trespassed against Uriah and Bath∣sheba, yet he saith to thee onely have I sinned, quia Rx erat, because he was a King, and accountable to none but God, as Clemens Alexandrinus, Arnoius, Saint Ierome, Saint Ambrose, Venerable Bede, Eu∣thymius, and sundry others do all affirme upon this one
place: and Gregory of Towers, Si quis de nobis, If anyone of us O King, doe passe the bounds of justice, you have power to correct him, but if you exceed your limits who shall chastise you? We may speake to you, if you list not hearken, who can condemne you, but that great God, who hath pronounced himselfe to be Righteousnesse. And even Antoninus whom the Observer so much com∣mends for a renowned and moderate Prince, yet is positive in this, Solus Deus Iudex Principis esse potest, God alone can be Judge of a Soveraigne Prince. In the Parliament at Lincolne, under Edward the first, the Lords and Commons unanimously affirme the same, with a wonder that any Man should conceive otherwise, That the King of England neither hath answered, nor ought to answer for his Right, before any Iudge Ecclesiasticall or Secular, ex praeeminentia status sui, by reason of the preheminence of His Regall Dignity, and Custome at all times inviolably ob∣served. To try Princes and to doe justice; Some man would desire to know how farre this Justice may be extended? whether peradventure to depose them and dethrone them, to exalt them & depresse them, Consti∣tuere destituere, construere destruere, fingere diffingere? But for this they must expect an Answer from the Observer by the next post, when he sees how the people will dance after his pipe, and whether his misled Partners will goe along the whole journy or leave his Company in the mid way; when he hath sufficient strength, then it is time and not before to declare himselfe: Till then he will be a good child, and follow Saint Pauls advice in part; Stoppage is
no payment in our Law. Suppose the Prince faile n his duty, are the Subjects therefore free from that bligation which is imposed upon them by the Law of God and Nature? When His Majesty objects hat a deposition is threatned, at least intimted, what doth the Observer answer? he doth not disclaime the power but onely deny the fact: Thus he saith, It may truely be denied that ever free Parliament, did truely consent to the dethroning of any King of England, for that Act whereby Richard the second was dethroned, was rather the Act of Henry the fourth and His victorious Army, then of the whole Kingdome. Marke these words, that any free Parliament. So, it seemes that some Parlia∣ments are not free: And again did truely consent, there may be much in that word also; First, whether they who are overawed with power of unruly Mermidons, may be said to consent truely and ex animo? Second∣ly, whether they who consent meerely for hope of impunity to escape questioning for their former op∣pressions and extortions, may be said to consent truely? Thirdly whether they who consent out of hope to divide the spoyle, may be said to consent truely? Fourthly, whereas by the Law of Nations, the rights and voices of Absentees, do devolve to those that are present; if they be driven away by a just and pro∣bable fear, whether they may be said to consent true∣ly? Lastly, they that follow the Collier in his Creed by an an implicit Faith without discussion resolving themselves into the Authority of a Committee or some noted Members, may they be said to consent truely? That which followes of Henry the fourth and his victorious Army, shews the Observer to be as great an
Heritick in olicy as Machiavell himselfe: he  better have said the Usurper and his rebellious A∣my. For a Subject o raise A against his Sove∣raigne, to dethrone him (as Bullenbrooke did,) and b violence to snatch the Crown to him selfe in preju of the right Heire, is Treason confessed by all men▪ His acquisition is meere usurpation, & for any Perso or Society of Men to joyn with him, or to confirm him is to be partakers of his sin. But Gods judgemen pursue such disloyall Subjects and their posterity, as it did them. The greatest Contrivers and Actors in that Rebellion, for a just Reward of their Treason, did first feele the edge of Henryes victorious Sword, and after them Henries Posterity, and the whole En∣glish Nation smrted for Richards blood. It is o∣served that all the Conspirators against Iulius Caesar, perished within three yeares, some by judgement of Law, others by Ship-wracke upon the Sea, others by battail under the sword of their conquering Enemyes, others with the fame bok in wherewith they had stab∣bed their Emperour; one way or other vengeance o ertooke them every Man. What others say of Richards resignation, is as weake, which was done by duresse and imprisonment, or at the best for fear of imminent Mischief. To conclude this Section; God and the Law ope∣rate both in Kings and Parliaments: but not in both alike. God is the immediate cause of Kings, the re∣mote of Parliaments. Kings and Parliaments have the same ultimate and Architectonicall end, that is, the tranquillity of the whole Body Politicke: but not the same proper and next ends, which in the Par∣liament
is to advise the King, supply the King, and  the constituion of new Laws to concurre with the ng: I grant (to speke in his Majestyes own words s more full then the Observers,) That Parliaments are so essentiall a part of the constitution of this King∣dome, that we can aein o happinesse without them. But to conclude from hence their Supriority above Kings, or equality with Kings, is to subject the prin∣cipall efficient to every secundry cause, subordinate, istrumentall, or sine quaon. Observer. Two things are aimed at in Parliaments, not to be at∣eined to by oter meanes. First, that the interest of the People might be satisfied, Secondly, that Kings might e better counsailed. In the summons of Edward the first (claus. 7. 111. 3. dors.) we see the first end of Parli∣aments expressed: for he inserts in the writ, that what∣soever affaire is of publick concernment, ought to receive ublicke approbation, quod omnes tang , ab omnibus approbai debet or tractri. And in the same writ he sith, this is Lex notissima & provida circumspecti∣one stabilita, there is not a word here but it is obser∣vable, publicke approbation, consent or treaty is necessary in all publicke expedients, and this is not a meere usage in England but a Law, and this Law is not subject to any doubt or dispe, there is nothing more known, neither is this known Law extorted from Kings, by the violece and injustice of the people, it is duely and formally esta∣blish't, and that  a great deal of eason, not with∣t the providence and circumspection of all the States.
Were there no further Antiquity then the Raigne d Edward the first to recommend this to us, certainly s there ought to be no reverence with-held from it, fo this Prince was Wise, Fortunate, just and valiant b∣yond all his Predecessors, if not Successors also, and there∣fore it is more glory to our Freedomes that as weake and peevish Princes have most opposed them, so that he first repaired the breaches, which the conquest had made upon them. And yet it is very probable, that this La was farr ancienter then his Raigne, and the words Le stabilita & notissima seemes to intimate, that the Con∣quest it selfe had never wholly buried this in the publicke ruine and confusion of the State. It should seem at this time Llewellins troubles in Wales were not quite suppressed, and the French King was upon a designe  invade some pieces of ours in France, and ther∣fore he sends out his summons, ad trctandum, ordinan∣dum, faciendum, cum prelatis  & aliis inco∣lis Regni, for the prevention of these dangers. Thes words tractandum, ordinandum, faciendum, doe fully prove that the people in those dayes were summoned ad consensum as well as consilium, and this Law quod omnes tangit &c. shews the reason and ground upon which that consent and approbation is founded. Answer. The Observer is just like a winter Brooke, which ct. 15. swells with water when there is no need, but in sum∣mer when it should be usefull, is dried up: for all the absurd Paradoxes which he brings in this trea∣tise, he produceth not one Authority but his own;
and here to confirme a known truth which no man de∣es, he cites Rolls and adornes them with his glosses. r my part I know no man that did ever eny or aligne the honour of Edward the first, except Io∣nnes Major, who was angry with him for his Nor∣ren Expedition, Edvardus Longshankes cm longs biis suis venit in Scotiam. But what is this to your rpose? yes, it makes for the glory of our Freedomes, at as weake and peevish Princes opposed them, so he re∣ired the breaches of them: How doe you know that?  this summons also? I see you are dextrous, and n soone make an ell of an inch: but in truth you are ry unfortunate in your instances, Edward the first as a much greater Improver of the Royalty then y of his Predecessours, in which respect he is stiled y our Chroniclers, the first Conquerer after the Con∣erer. That which was urged to his Fathers, was ever that I read of tendred to him, for the Parlia∣ent to have the nomination of the chiefe Justice, hancellour, and Treasurer, but onely once in his hole time, and then being rejected with a frown as never moved more. It is more probable or rather pparent, that the Lenity, irresolution, and mutable isposition of Princes, have been that which hath im∣oldened Subjects to make insolent and presumptu∣us demands to their Soveraignes. Thus for the Man, you are as ample for the Law, hat it is Lex notissima, & not only notissima but stabi∣lita, lastly stabilita provida circumspectione. A trimme gradation, quid tanto dignum feret Observator hiatu? who reads this and believes not that some great moun∣tain is travelling? yet in very deed it is with no∣thing
but a ridiculous mouse: postquam incruduit p na, after the fray grows hot, dishes and trenchers a turned to weapons, said Erasmus. Let your La speake itselfe, That which conerns all Men ought to  approved or handled by all Men. Who denyes it?  shall easily grant you that this Law is not onely a cienter then the first Edward, but even as ancient  the first Adam; a part of the Law of Nature,  least in the grounds of it. But that you may not s away in a mist of Generalities, (as it is your use) o word of your tangit, another of your approbari debe That which concerns all Men, Sir all Men may be sai to be concerned two wayes, either in the consequen of affairs, or in the management thereof. This latt concernment gives a right sometimes to counsell only sometimes both to counsell and approve, sometime both to counsell approve and act according to the pri∣vate constitutions of Societyes, but the former im∣plyes no right, neither ad approbandum nor yet ad tra∣ctandum. As for example, the meanest Freshmen ar concerned in the Statures and Orders of the Univer∣sity; yet are none admitted to debae them but the Visiters, Heads, and at the lowest the Regent Ma∣sters. And this exception holds in all cases, wher either Inferiours or their Predecessours have legally divested themselves of this power by their proper act, or where this trust is committed to Superiours, by the Laws divine, naturall, or nationall. Secondly the Counsell, Consent, or act of Pro∣ctors, Atturnyes, and generally of all Trustees, whe∣ther one or more, whether rightfully elected or im∣posed, according to the latitude of their trust ought
to be interpreted as the counsell, consent, act of thos ersons by whom, or over whom, or for whom they e so trusted, and whose power virtually they doe re∣ine. So as a present and posteriour consent, is not cessary to His Majesty, for the excercise of any anch of that Imperiall power, which by Law or wfull custome, is annexed to his Crown. And erefore Edward the first his Summons ad tractandum, dinandum, faciendum, which is the same in effect ith all summons since, will doe your cause no good  the world, unlesse you may have leave to doe as e Devill did with Christ, leave out in viis tuis:  you may put out in quibus dam and thrust in place ereof in omnibus, as you doe in the next page, In ll things perteining to the People. Leave these fri∣olous these false suggestions; your own-Conscience nnot but tell you, that reddendo singula singulis, in omethings the Houses of Parliament have power o consent, in somethings to order, in somethings to ct, but in all things they have neither power to act, or order, nor consent, and that will appear by your ext Section. Observer. It is true we find in the Raigne of Edward the third, that the Commons did desire that they might forbear coun∣selling in things, de queux ils nount ps cognizance; the matters in debate were concerning some intestine com∣motions, the guarding of the Marches of Scotland, and the Seas; and therein they renounce not their right of consent, they onely excuse themselves in point of coun∣sell,
referring it rather to the King and his Councell How this shall derogate from Parliaments either in poi of consent or counsell, I doe not know, for at last th they did give both, and the King would not be satisfie without them. And the passage evinces no more but this that the King was very wise & warlike, & had a very wis Councell of Warre, so that in those particulars, the Com∣mons thought them most fit to be consulted, as perhaps the more knowing men. Answer. This is the first time that the Observer is pleased to ect. 16. honour his adverse Party, with the mention of one Ob∣jection; and that with so ill successe, that he cannot unty the knot again with all his teeth, I will put it in∣to form for him thus; That which the Parliament in the raigne of Edward the third had not, that no suc∣ceeding Parliament hath, but that Parliament had no universall cognizance, Therefore the same Rule holds in this and all other Parliaments. The Propo∣sition is infallibly true, grounded upon an undeniable Maxime, that quod competit tali qua tali, competit omni tali, that which is true of one Parliament not by accident, but essentially as it is a Parliament, must of necessity be true of every Parliament. The Assum∣tion is as evident, confessed by the Parliament it∣selfe, who best knew the extent of their own power, that there was somethings of which ils nount pas cog∣nizance, they had no cognizance. And if we will be∣lieve the Observer, these things which did not belong to their cognizanc, were the appeasing some intestine
or Civill Commotions, and the guarding of the Seas and Marches: why, these are the very case now in que∣stion concerning the Militia. And doth a Parlia∣ment here confesse that they have no cognizance of these? yes, what saith the Observer to this? he saith they doe not renounce their right, but onely excuse themselves in point of Counsell; Most absurdly, as if there were either consent or counsell without cogni∣zance. But he saith they did give both consent and counsell, and the King could not be satisfied without them. It may be so: but there is a vast difference be∣tween giving counsell when the King licenseth, yea and requireth it; and intruding into Counsell with∣out calling: between an approbative consent such as the Saints give to God Almighty, the onely Autho∣ritative Judge of Heaven and Earth; and an active consent, without which the Kings hands should be so tied that he could do just nothing. The former all good Kings doe desire, so farre as the exigence of the ser∣vice will give way to have their Counsells commu∣nicated: But the latter makes a great King a Cipher and transformes an Emperour into a Christmasse Lord. You tell us, that King had a very wise Councell of Warre, and perhaps more knowing in these things then the Commons. It were strange if they should not be so, if the Commons who are Srangers to the affaires & ingagements of State, should understand them bet∣ter then those who have served sundry Apprentiships in that way: qui pauca considerat facile pronunciat, he that knows not or regards not the circumstances, gives sentence easily, but for the most part is mista∣ken. Ignorance of the true state of things, begets
Iealousies and Fees where there are no Dangers, and confidence whe the Perill is nearest: It makes a field of thistles  Army of pikes, and an Army of pikes a field of thiles. Let old States-Men sitte at the Helme still, a steere the Ship of the Common∣wealth. The Coons are the best Councell in the World for redreng of grievances, for making of new Lawes, for inteining the publike interest of the Kingdome abd, and private interest of the Sub∣ject at home; et this be their Worke and their Honour. Observer. Now upon a d comparing of these passages, with some of the Kings lae papers, let the World judge whether Parliaments have ot been of late much lesned and in∣jured. The King in one of his late Answers alledge, that his Writs may teach the Lords and Commons the ex∣tent of their Commission and Trust, which is to be Counsellours not Commanders, and that not in all things, but in quibusdam arduis, and the case of Wentworth is cited, who was by Qeen Elizabeth committed (sit∣ting the Parliament) for proposing that they might ad∣vise the Queen in some things, which she thought beyond their cognizance, although Wentworth ws then of the House of Commons. And in other places, the King de∣nyes the Assembly of the Lords & Commons, to be rightly named a Parliament, or to have any power of any Court,
and consequently to be any thing but a meer convention of private Men. Many things are here assrted utterly destructive to the Honour, Right and being of Parliaments. For first because the Law hath trusted the King with a Preroga∣tive to discontinus Parliaments &c. Answer. Having laid these former ground, the Observer Sect. 17 proceeds to some exceptions, against some passages in his Majestyes Papers, (that's his phrase) as if they were old Almanacks out of date, fit for nothing but to cover Mustard pots, metuentia carmina scombros aut thus. His first exception is, that His Majesty is trusted by the Law, (which the Observer calls now a formallity of Law, with a Prerogative to discontinue Parliaments, leaving no remedy to the People in such a case, which he saith is destructive to the Honour, Right nd being of Parliaments, and may yet be mischi∣vous in the future dissolution of them, and make our Trienniall Parliaments of litle service, if it be not exploded now. What is this to the Observers grounds or His Majestyes Declaration? This is rather an exception against the Law it selfe then the King: So the Observer and his pewfellowes deal with Laws and Law-makers; if they make for them, suscipiunt ut Aquilas, they admire them as Eagles, if they make against them despicint ut graculos, they despise them as Dawes, the Fundamentall Constitutions of the Kingdome, must be streight exploded, the Law is become a Formallity. Are you in earnest Sir, that this
is destructive to Parliaments? you might have said more truely the productive cause of all Parliaments, that ever were in England, or of any Assembly that had an Analogy with Parliaments, I tooke you only for a Reformer of some abuses newly crept in: but it is plain, you intend to be another Licurgus, to alter the whole frame of Government. Truely Sir you beginne very high, and jumpe over the backs of a great many Generations at once: Doubtlesse you are either very wise, or have a great opinion of your owne Wisdome. But to the point, It is confessed that sometimes some evills doe flow from inconside∣rate trust, but many more from needlesse Jealousy. incommoda non solvunt Regulam, Inconveniences doe not abrogate a Law. Restraint commonly makes pssion more violent. When you have done what you can, there must be a trust either reposed in one or many; and better in one then many. Doe but looke home a little, without trust a Man knows not his owne Father; without trust a man knowes not his own Children. Some trust there must be, and who fitter to be trusted then he that hath the Su∣premacy of power: unlesse you will make two Su∣premes. You confesse that Parliaments ought to be used as Phisick, not as constant Diet. And the Law hath ow set down a faire terme for the continuance of an ordinary Parliament, unlesse you would be con∣tinually in a course of Phisick. The second exception is, His Majesty declares, that the Parliament hath no universall power to ad∣vise in all things, but in quibusdam arduis, according to the Writ, and cites the president of Wentworth, a
Member of the House of Commons, committed by Queen Elizabeth, (the Parliament sitting,) for propo∣sing to advise Her, in a matter She thought they had nothing to doe with. The Observer magnifies Queen Elizabeth, for Her Goodnesse and Clemency, but withall he addes, But we must not be presidented in ap∣parent violation of Law by Queen Elizabeth. A grave Historiographer tells us of a close and dangerous kind of Enemies, tacitum inimicorum genus, such as make a mans praises an introduction to their venemous inve∣ctives, as if it were not malice but pure love of truth that even forced them to speak so much: such an one is a good Man, but &c. So Queen Elizabeth was a good Queen, but in this particular she played the Tyrant. To violate Laws, to violate them apparently, therefore wilfully, to have no respect to the House of Commons (whereof Wentworth was a Member,) was no signe of Grace and Clemency. Cer∣tainly Queen Elizabeth (a wise and mercifull Princesse, one that so much courted Her People) would not have done it, but that She thought She had just grounds: or if She might erre in her judgement, yet She had as wise a Councell as any Prince in Eu∣rope, and a businesse of this consequence could not be done without their advice, who doubtlesse were some of them Members of the same House, or if both She and they should be mistaken, yet why were the House of Commons themselves silent, whilest such a known Privilege was apparently invaded? why did they not at least in an humble Petition represent this apparent violation of their Libertyes that it might remaine as a memoriall to plead for them to Poste∣rity,
that they were not the betrayers of the Rights of Parliaments? She that was so gracious as he Observer acknowledgeth, and whose goodnesse was so perfect and undissembled, could not choose but take it well, and thanke them for it. Neither will it suffice to say She gained upon them by Courtesy: such an appa∣rent violation, so prejudiciall to the Highest Court of the Kingdome, passed over in deep silence, shews as litle Courtesy on the one side, as Discretion on the other. In brief, as I cannot conceive that these words in quibusdam arduis, are so restrictive that the House may consult of nothing but what shall be proposed, or was intended at the time of the Summons: so on the other side I doe not see, how either the Commission or Prescription, doe give them such an universall Cognizance or Jurisdiction. Queen Elizabeth de∣clared Herselfe oftner then once in this point; in Her first Parliament (when in reason She should be most tender) to the Speaker and the Body of the House of Commons, out of their Loves humbly moving Her to Marriage, She answered that She tooke it well, because it was without limitation of Place or Person, if it had been otherwise, She must needs have misliked it, and thought it a great presumption, for those to take upon them to bind and limit, whose duties were to obey. The third exception is, the King saith, they must meerely counsell and not command, (a strange charge if you marke it) For it is impossible that the same trust should be irrevocably committed to the King and His Heires for ever, and yet that very trust, and a power above that trust be committed to others. The Observer answers first (little to the purpose) that though there cannot be
two Supremes yet the King is universis minor, lesse thn the collective Body of His Subjects, as we see in all con∣ditionate Princes, such as the Prince of Orenge &c. His Maxime that the King is singulis Major, univer∣versis Minor (except the King himselfe be included in the universi) hath been shaken in pieces before. The Law is plain, The Kings Most Royall Majesty of meer droit & very Right, is very Head, King, Lord and 26 Hen. 20. Ruler of this Realm. And doth he now intend to in∣clude the King of England in his, &c. among condi∣onate Princes. Take heed Sir, this will prove a worse &c. then that in the late Canons. Secondly, he answers that though the Kings power be irrevocable, yet it is not universall, the people have reserved something to themselves out of Parliament, and some∣thing in Parliament. It were to be wished that he would distinctly set down the particular reservations; a deceitfull Man walkes in Generallityes. Still the Observer dreams of Elective Kingdoms, where the peo∣ple have made choise either of a Person or a Family: To us it is nothing, they that give nothing can reserve nothing. Trusted and yet reserved? How the Observer joynes Gryphins and Horses together? if trusted how reserved? if reserved how trusted? but how doth the Observer prove either his trust or reservation? nay it is a tacite trust; in good time, so he proves his inten∣tion by a Company of dumbe witnesses. In conclusion his proofe is, that it is a part of the Law of Nature. A trimme Law of Nature indeed, which is Diame∣trally opposite to the Law of God and of Nations. The Observer deales in this just as if he had a Kins∣man died testate, and he should sue for a part of his
goods, and neither allege the Will nor Codicill, not Custome of the Country, but the Law of Nature onely for a Legacy. Next the Observer raiseth a new Argument out of His Majestyes words, A temporary Power ought not to be greater then that which is lasting. This is first to make Draggons and then to kill them; or as Boyes first make bubbles in a shell, and then blow them away without difficulty. The Sinewes and Strength of His Majestyes Argument did lye in the words to Him and to His Heires, and not in the word above: but if he will put the word above to the tryall, if he reduce it into right Form it is above his answer. To give a power above His Majesty, sufficient to censure His Majesty, to a Body dissolvable at His Majestyes pleasure, is absurd and ridiculous: as if the King should delegate Judges, to examine and sentence the Observers seditious passages in this Treatise, and yet withall give power to the Observer to disjustice them at his pleasure; in such a case he need not much fear the Sentence. The Observer pleads two things in answer to his own shadow. First, that then the Ro∣mans had done unpolitickly, to give greater power to a Temporary Dictator then to the ordinary Consulls. Se∣condly, that it was very prosperous to them sometimes to change the Form of Government, neither alwayes living under circumscribed Consulls nor under uncircumsibed Dictators. We see what his Teeth water at; he would have His Majesty a circumscribed Consull, and gain an Arbitrary Dictatorian Power to himselfe and some other of his Friends. But in the meane time he forgets himselfe very farre in his History: for first
the power of the Dictator and of the Consulls was ot consistent together; but the power of the King and the Parliament is consistent. Secondly the change of Government was so farre from being prosperous o the Romans, that every change brought that State even to Deaths doore. To instance onely in the ex∣ulsion of their Kings as most to the purpose; How ear was that Citty to utter Ruine, which owes its sub∣sistence to the valour of a single Man, Horatius Coles: if he had not after an incredible manner held a whole Army play upon a Bridge, they had payed for their new fanglednesse, with the sacking of their Citty. Thirdly, the choosing of a Dictator was not a change of their Government, but a branch of it, a piece reser∣ved for extremest perills, their last Anchor and Re∣fuge either against Forre in Enemyes, or the Domestick Seditions of the Patricii and Plebei: and is so farr from yeelding an Argument against Kings, that in the judgement of that Politick Nation, it shewes the advantage of Monarchy above all other Formes of Government. The Observer still continues His Majestyes Obje∣ction, To make the Parliament more then Counsel∣lers, is to make them His Commanders and Control∣lers. To which he answers, To consent is more then to counsell, and yet not alwayes so much as to command, for in inferiour Courts, the Iudges are so Counsellours for the King, that he may not countermand their judgement, yet it were a harsh thing to say that therefore they are His Controllers, much more in Parliament, where the Lords and Commons represent the whole Kingdome. If there were no other Arguments to prove the Superio∣rity
of Parliament above the other Courts then this that it represents the Kingdome as they doe the King; it would get little advantage by it. To consent is more then to counsell, and yet not alwayes so much as to com∣mand. True, not alwayes: but to cousell so s the pty counselled hath no Liberty left of dissenting, is al∣wayes either as much as to command or more: a man may command and goe without; but here is onely advise, and yet they must not goe without. What a stirre is here about consent? If he understnd consen in no other notion then Laws and lawfull Customes doe allow; it is readily yeelded, but makes nothing to his purpose. One said of Aristotle, that he writ waking, but Plato dreaming, The one had his eyes open and considered Men as they were indeed, the other as he would have them to be: but if ever Man writt dreaming, it was this Observer; his notes may serve rather for the Meridian of new England then old England, and of Eutopia rather then them both. He calls the Judges the Kings Counsellers, as if they were not also his Delegates, Deputies, and Comis∣sioners, what they doe is in His name and His Act: yet if they swerve from justice, he may grant a review and call them to account for any misdemeanour by them committed, in the excercise of their places; and this either in Parliament or out of Parliament. But the inference hence, That because the Parliament may take an account of what is done by His Majesty in His inferiour Courts, therefore much more of what is done by him without the Authority of any Court, seemes very weake. It is one thing to take an account of Himselfe, another to take an account of
His Commissioners. His Majesty hath communi∣cated a part of his judiciary power to his Judges, but ot the Flowers of his Crown nor his intire prero∣ative, whereof this is a principall , to be free from all account in point of ustice except to Go and His own Conscience. The last exception is, That the King makes the Parliament without his consent, A livelesse conven∣tion without all virtue and power, saying that the very name of Parliament is not du unto them. Which Allegation (saith the Observer) at one blow confounds all Parliaments and subjects us to as unbounden a Re∣giment of the Kings meere Will, as any Nation under Heaven ever suffered under▪ For by the same Reason, that the Kings dissertion of them makes Parliaments virtuelesse and void Courts, He may make other Courts voide likewise. Here is a great cry for a little Wooll: if he proves not what he aimes at, yet one thing he proves sufficiently, that himselfe is one of the greatest Calumniators in the World, in such grosse manner o slander the Footsteps of Gods Anointed, Agnos∣as primogenitum Sathanae. Where did ever the King say that Parliaments without his presence are virtue∣lesse and void Courts? but he denieth them the name of Parliaments which is all one? yes▪ if a Goose and a Feather be all one. The name Parliament with us signifies most properly, the Pary of the King and his People, in a secondary sense it signifies a Parly of the Subjects among themselves, neither of these virtuelesse, but the one more vigorous then the other So the Body is sometimes contradistinguished to the Soule, and includes both Head and Members, some∣times
it is contradistinguished to the Head, and in∣cludes the Members onely. It is one thing to be  True Parliament, and another to be a Com∣plete Parliament, Complete to all intents and purposes, and particularly in respect of the Legisla∣tive power. In this latter sense onely His Majesty denyes it, and in this sence the Observer dares not af∣firme it. To dispute about the name is a meere Lo∣gomachy, and from the name to inferre this height of Power is a trifling Homonomy. But the Observer will either be Caesar or no body, either all power o no power: just like a little Child who if he wants some one thing he desires, throwes away all he hath and falls a crying. To his fear of his Majestie deserting his other Courts; he may as well fear hi deserting of himselfe. This may goe amongst th rest of his improbable possibilities, which never were, never will be deduced into Act. If he will admit no institution which is subject to any abuse, he must seeke for presidents in the new World of the Moone. Here he takes occasion to declaime against ou new Masters of Division, whose Founder is Ma∣chiavell, their rule divide & impera, their first ere∣ction was since the third of November 1640. Hi Majesty is the Principall of the College whose paper (saith the Observer) are freighted scarce with any thing else but such Doctrine of Division, tending to the sub∣version of our Fundamentall Constitutions, yet find such applause in the World. His plea against them consists of a fourefold charge; first, they have divided between the King and the Parliament. Secondly betwixt the Parliament and the Kingdom withdrawing themselves from their representatives, Yet there is nothing under
Heaven (if we may trust him) next to the renoun∣ing of God, can be more perfidious and more pernicious to the people then this. Thirdly, by dividing between the Parliament and a part of the Parliament. And fowerthly, in the Major part between a Faction mis∣leading and a party misled. Who reads this and would not take the Observer for another Cal or Constantine for peacemaking, whereas in truth all this is but a personated passage of Demetrius, or one of his crafts∣men, rayling against the Towne Clarke of Ephesus, as a Ringleader of Division, and a Disturber of them in their service to Diana, the Idoll of their own braines, and an Hinderer of them in doing Gods owne Worke, that is, shedding the blood of the ungodly A∣postles, and is done with the very same grace that A∣thaliah cryed out Treason, Treason. Sic oculos, sic illa manus, sic ora ferebat. He is ever snarling at His Majestyes Papers, and and I doe not much blame him: for where these Pa∣pers have had free passage, they have sweyed down the scale of mens judgements with the weight of unan∣swerable reason, that this Observer and all his Fel∣lowes may compare their notes, and put their hands and heads and shoulders and all together, and never be able to lift it up again to an equilibrium. If they could have purchased every paper of them at the same price that the Romanes gave for the Sybills Bookes, it would have been well bestowed for their cause, to have them suppressed. I plead not for Masters of Di∣vision, Gods abhomination, the Devills Factors, th
baine of the Common-wealth; Da unum & habeb populum, tolle unum & habebis turbam. It was not Phil∣lip, but the dissentions of Athens, Thebes, Sparta, that destroyed Greece. It was not Scipio, but the Facti∣ons of Hanniball and Hao that destroyed Carthage: we have had too many such Masters of Division, indeed. Our Schismes in the Church proclaime it, the question is not now of round or square, or black or white, or sitting or kneeling: our burying and marry∣ing, our christening, our communicating are all questi∣oned; our Churches, our holy Orders, our publick Litur∣gy, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, our Scriptures, the Godhead of Christ, the doctrin of the Trinity, all our Fundamentalls are questioned. It is not twins but litters of Hereticks that struggle in the wombe of the Church; Disciplinarias, Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, Socinians, &c. —pudet haec opprobria nobis, Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli. Our Sedition in the State proclaimes it, whilest some are for the King, some for the Parliament, some for the Law, some for Arbitrary Government, some for a Monarchy, some for Democracy. The Superiority of the King or Parliament is questioned, the Kings ne∣gative voice is questione the right of the Militia is questioned, the privileges our Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, ery thing is questioned. Thus to use the Observers words, Those rock Foundations are razed, upon which this State hath been so happily setled, for so many ages now past, The Pillars of Law and Policy (and Religion,) are taken away, and the State (and Church)
set upon a new Basis: each day produceth new opini∣ons, new presidents, new questions; and woe be to those Men who are not onely occasionally, but inten∣tionally the Authors of these Divisions: They are guilty before God of all that blood which is powred out like water upon the face of the Earth, of all that Spoyle which is committed: better were it for them that a Millstone were hanged about their necks, and they cast into the bottome of the Sea. How deep the Observers share is herein, I leave it to his own Conscience. This is certaine, a Man may keep his Possession by Force, but he that shall goe about to thrust another out of his lawfull Possession, is the true Authour of the tumult, and whatsoever he suffers, he can blame no man but himselfe. Now to your foure Charges. First, who divided the King and Parliament. There may be a quaere of others, but it is beyond all question that those base tumults and disorders at Westminster and upon the Thames tending to the danger of His Majestyes Per∣son, but much more as they were unsufferable affronts to Sacred Majesty, and all those who are accessary to them, as Contrivers, Fomenters, or Connivers, are the principall grounds of this cursed Division: they that make two Supremes coordinate one with ano∣ther, make a division with a witnesse. Next, for your seperation between the Parliament and the Kingdome. First your mouth runnes over extremely when you call it the most pernicious thing that can be, next to the renouncing God: we have stricter ob∣ligations to others then to our Proctors. Secondly, to regulate their trust, according to their first inten∣tions
and former Presidents, is not to withdraw e∣presentation; if it were who taught it them, but those who first practised the same to their King? But that you may clearly discern who are the Authours of this seperation, heare a neare Friend of yours in his plain English or rather plaine Sedition, thus he, If ever the Parliament should agree to the making up of an unsafe unsatisfying Accomodation, this will beget a new que∣stion, whether in case the representative Body can not r will not discharge their trust, to the satisfaction not of fancy, but of reason in the People, they may resume if ever yet they parted with a power to their manifest undo∣ing, and use their power so farr as conduceth to their safety? You see the high ad ultimate Judicature is neither now the Kings, nor the Parliaments. Your third division is between the Parliament and a part of it. Of this charge they are guilty who made the distinction, of good and bd Lords, of well affected and ill affected Members. The votes of Absentees doubtlesse by the Law of Nations devolve to those that are present: but if the place of the Assembly be not free, if the absence be necessitated by unjust force or just fear, the case is otherwise. Your fourth divi∣sion is between the Major part misled, and a Faction in the major part misleading. I wonder you should thinke this so impossible. Neere instances may be dangerous; let us looke upon the great Councell of Aiminum, the question was of no lesse consequence then the Diety of Christ, the Major part of the Coucell voted for the Arrians, and in the major part the misleading Faction were but few, the well meaning party were farre the more, but misled by
the subtle manner of proposing the question, whe∣her they would have Christ or Homoousio? which either being discussed, nor understood as it ought to ave been, they voted wrong and repented at lei∣ure. In the last place you distinguish between deserting nd being deserted, If the Wife leave her Husbands ed and become an Adulteresse, tis good reason she ose her dowry, but if her Husband caselesly reject er, it is injustice she should suffer any detriment, Your case is true as you propose it: but suppose the Adul∣tresse should stay at home and outbrave her Husband, or by her power in the Family thrust him good Man out of doores; suppose she should re∣fuse to cohabite with him, except she may be Mastr and do what she will without controllment, and forget her Matrimoniall Vow of Obedience. This alters the case. Observer. Now of that Right, which the Parliament may doe the King by Counsell, i the King could be more wisely or faithfully advised by any other Court, or if his single judgement were to be preferred before all advise what∣soever, it were not onely vaine, but extreamly inconve∣nient, that the whole Kingdom should be troubled to make elections, and that the Parties elected should at∣tend the publick businesse.
Answer. We have had both Counsell and Consent befo but now we must have them again. The questio ect. 18. raised by the Observer are of such an odious natur that no good Subject can take delight in them, whos duty is to pray for the like concent among the sev∣rall orders of this Kingdome, that is supposed t be among the severall orbes of Heaven. His Ma∣jesty is undoubtedly the primum mobile, (whatsoeve the Observer in sundry parts of this Treatise prattl to the contrary,) The two Houses of Parliament, t great and privy Councell are the lower Spheres, whic by their transverse yet vincible motions ought to allay the violence of the highest Orbe for the good an preservation of the universe. Where there are no such helps and means of temper and moderation, there Liberty is in danger to be often trodden under Foot by Tyranny. And where these adjuments by the un∣skilfulnesse or sinister ends of some young or ambi∣tious Phaetons become impediments, by a stiffe fro∣ward and unseasonable opposition, in stead of a gentle vincible reluctation, it sets the whole body Poli∣tick in a miserable combustion, as dayly experience shews. But I must trace the Observer. The calling of Parliaments is not vaine and inconvenient, but his inference is vain and inconsequent; there are other ends of Parliaments besides Counsell, as consenting to new Laws, furnishing the publick with Money, (the nerves and sinews of great actions,) maintei∣ning the interest of the Kingdome, and liberty of the
Subject. From removing one sociall end to inferre at an action is superfluous, deserves no answer but  and contempt. Secondly, even in point of advise, there is more re∣uired in a good Counseller then naturall wisdome nd fidelity; our fancyes are not determined by na∣ure to every thing that is fit for us, as in Birds and Beasts: but we must serve apprentiships o ble us to erve one another. There is a thing called experience, of igh concernment in the managery of publick affaires. He that will steere one Kingdome right, must know he right constitution of all others; their strength, their ffections, their councels and resolutions, that upon each different face of the skye, he may alter his rud∣der. The best Governments have more Councells hen one, one for the publick interest of the King∣dome, another for the affaires of State; a Councell for Warre, and a Councell for Peace: and it were strange if it were not as requisite to have a Councell for the Church. Every Man deserves trust in his own Profession: many are fittest for resolving, few for ma∣naging. The exigence of things require, sometimes se∣crecy, sometime speed. We see the House of Com∣mons, though they be but deputed by the People (and a Delegate cannot make a delegate, where their right is in confidence rather then in interest) yet they have their Committees and a Councell in a Counsell. Neither are all Parliaments of the same temper, if we may believe Sir Henry Wotton (one that was no Foole,) thus he, in the eighteenth of King James, ma∣ny young ones being chosen into the House of Commons, more then had been usuall in great Councells (who though
of the weakest winges, are the highest flyers,) there  a certain unfortunate unfruitfull Spirit in some places not sowing but picking at every stone in the field rath then tending to the generall harvest. Thirdly, let them be as wise and as faithfull Coun∣cellers as the Observer pleaseth, onely let them be but Councellers. Let their conclusions have as much credit as the premises deserve; and if they can neces∣sitate t rince to assent by weight of reason, an convincing evidence of expedience, let them doe it o Gods name, necesse est ut lancem in libra ponderib impositis deprimi, sic animum perspicuis cedere: But  hope they will never desire to doe it out of the autho∣rity of their votes, or obtrude a conclusion on His Majesty, before he understand how it is grounde upon the Premises. This seemes to be the same, which the Disciplinarians would impose upon the King in the Government of the Church, to be the Executor of their decrees, His Re∣spect to their judgement ought to make him tnder in denying, but inferres no necessity of gran∣ting. Fourthly, I wonder the Observer is not ashamed to tell of His Majestyes preferring his single judgement before all advise whatsoever, when the Observer char∣geth him with following the advice of his Cabinet Councell, when he hath his Privy Councell with him, when in the great Councell, if they might meet free∣ly, he believes that two third parts approve of his do∣ings. Are the most part of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdome, no Body? Are the flower of the Clergy and Universities, no Body? are so many grave
Solid Lawyers, no Body? So many of the Loyall Commons, no Body? Sir, you doe see, and you will see dayly more, That His Majesty is not single in His Course. Lastly, It is the part of good Counsellers, to pre∣sent their whole advise together, what they desire to remove, and what they desire to introduce; as well what they desire to build up, as what the esire to pull down. So the Observer himselfe peth in another case, Before we demolish old structures, we ought First obse vat. pag. to be advised of the fashion of new. His Majesty hath required one intire full view of their demands, that He might judge more perfectly what to assent to, and what to advise further upon. This is a sure way not to be over-reached, not to cut down an old Tree, be∣fore there be a new one ready to be planted in its place: many Men will agree in the destructive, which will never agree in the constructive part. The old Senators first of Capua and after of Florence, found this to be true by experience; the People did not a∣gree so well in taking them away, but they disagreed ten times as much in the choise of new: and they that were voted down whilest they looked upon them positively, were voted to stand when they looked upon them comparatively, they were not so worthy as they desired, but much more worthy then those that should be subintroduced. To instance in the case of the Church, there are many Schismaticall Factions at this day, never an one of these can have their own ends, except the present government be taken away; so farre they agree: yet if it should be taken away, not one of six should have his own ends; here of ne∣cessity
they must fall in pieces, and in probability will cry out with the Capuans and the Florentines, The old is the better of the two. If every Mans sin∣gle suffrage were ascertained to his proper object, as it is in the election of our Knights and Burgesses, we should soone see who would have most voices: and perhaps the old (in a free meeting) might have more then all the new put together. Observer. But little need to be said, I thinke every mans hear tells him, that in publick Consultation, the many eyes of so many choise Gentlemen of all parts see more then fewer. Answer. Tis not sufficient for an adviser to see, unlesse he t. 19. can let another see by the light of Reason. A Man ought not implicitly to ground his actions upon the authority of other Mens eyes, whether many or few; but of his own. Many see more then few; True caeteris pa∣ribus if all things be alike: Or otherwise one Phisitian may see more into the state of a Mans Body then many Empericks, one experienced Commander may know more in Military Affaires, then ten Fresh-water Soul∣diers, and one old States-Man in his own Element is worth many new Practitioners, one Man upon an Hill may see more then an hundred in a Valley. But yet if all things be alike, you will say many eyes see more then one? They doe so commonly, but not al∣wayes:
one Paphnutius did see more in the Councell of Nice, then many greater Clerks. How often have you seen one or two Men in the Parliament change the Votes of the House? certainly the Eyes of so many choise Gentlemen see the Grievances of the Kingdome, better then any other Councell; That is their proper object. Observer. And the great interest the Parliament has in com∣mon Iustice and tranquillity, and the few private ends they can have to deprave them, must needs render their Counsell more faithfull, impartiall, and religious then any other. Answer. The interest is the Kingdoms and each Subjects; To be Parliament Men adds to their trust not to their Sect. 2. interest. The Observers grounds are presumptuous, and tend onely to beget an implicit confidence: what Mens private ends are, is not known to us but to God above. This we know, that good ends cannot justi∣fie bad meanes, nor bad actions. Men may have good ends, and yet be led hoodwinked by others whose ends are worse: and private ends will steal upon well affected Men. Discontent works strongly upon some, vain glory upon others; Delinquents may aime at their own impunity, and timorous Persons at pri∣vate Security. But this is to be left to God that is the searcher of hearts.
Obsever. That dislike which the Court has ever conceived a∣gainst Parliaments, without dispute is a pregnant proofe of the integrity and salubrity of publick advise, and is no disparagement thereof, for we have ever ound Enmity and Antipathy betwixt the Court and the Coun∣try. Answer. If you make a strict survey of the Parliaments ct. 21. party, I believe you will find as many Courtiers as Countrymen (proportion for proportion). To see the Revenues of the Crown be not diminished by needlesse profusion, to see His Majesty be not pre∣judiced in the accounts of his Officers, To take away Monopolyes, and the like, are the proper Workes of Parliaments, and in probability cannot be so pleasing to some Courtiers: but this is farre from a fancyed Omnipotence. Here he falls into his old Complaint of the Peoples not adhering to the Parliament, but we have had this Dish oft enough upon the Ta∣ble. Observer. The King sayes, Tis improbable and impossible that His Cabinet Counsellers, or His Bishops, or Souldiers, who must have so great a share in the mi∣sery, should take such paines in the procuring thereof,
and spend so much time, and run so many hazards, to make themselves Slaves and to ruine the Freedome of this Nation. How strange is this? we have had al∣most forty yeares experience that the Courtway of prefer∣ment, has been by doing publick ill offices, and we can no∣minate what Dukes, what Earles, what Lords, what Knights, have been made great and rich by base disser∣vices to the State, and except Master Hollis his rich Widdow, I never heard that promotion came to any man by serving in Parliament: but I have heard of trouble and imprisonment: but now see the traverse of Fortune; the Court is now turned honest, and there is no fear now but that a few Hipocrites in Parliament will be∣guile the Major part. And pag. 23. The whole King∣dome is not to be mastered against consent by the traine Bands, nor the Traine Bands by the Lords or Deputy Lieutenants, nor they by the Major part in Parlia∣ment, nor the Major part in Parliament by I know not what Septemvirat. There is some mistery in this which seemes yet above, if not contrary to nature, but since the King hath promised to open it, we will suspend our opinion and expect it as the finall issue of all our dis∣putes. And pag. 22. We are now at last fallen upon an issue fit to put an end to all other invectives whatsoever, let us stick close to it. The King promiseth very shortly a full and satisfactory narration of those few Persons in Parliament, whose designe is and alwayes was to alter the whole frame of Government both in Church and State, and subject both King and People to their own Arbitrary power and Government; a little of this Lo∣gick is better then a great deale of Rethorick as the case now stands. If the King will please now to publish the
particular Crimes of such as he hath formerly impea∣ched of Treason, and the particular names of suh as now he sets forth in those characters, & will therein referre himselfe to the strength of his proofes, and evidences of his matter, it is impossible that any jealousie can cloud his integrity, or check his power any longer. Et eadem pagina. By the performance of this promise, he shall not onely do right to himselfe but also to the whole Kingdom, for the distracted Multitude being at last by this meanes undeceived, shall prostrate themselves and all their power presently at his feete. Answer. There is no dealing with the Observer without a Notary publick and good store of Witnesses. The t. 22 King sayes, So he: the Contrivers of the Declaration say, so the King. It is nothing to mistake an objection for a position: but it is something more to thrust in Cabinet Counsellers, Bishops and Souldiers; though I suppose never an one of these will love their Pro∣fession the worse for a dash of his Tongue or Pen. Are there none for the King but those whom he terms in disgrace Cabinet ouncellers Bishops & Souldiers? he will find many as eminent for piety, virtue, wisdome, Courage, Nobility, Estate, as our Brittish World affords, such as want no Titles, no meanes that the condition of a Subject is capable of: or if they did, need not make use of such oyly wayes to flippe into preerment. Admit some few have raised themselves by sinister course, what are they in comparison of such a cloud of worthies, but as the gleanings to the vintage?
Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. He saith he can name Dukes, and Earles, and ords, and Knights: if he can, let him look where he finds them now; they that can serve the time dextrou∣y, will apply themselves to one as well as another. I m not so wilfully blind as not to see that some have gratiated themselves by dissembled goodnesse, or y such services as are not warrantable by Law, though hen they were justified by the Professors of the aw: much lesse am I so childishly credulou, to be∣eve all those hideous Lyes, which Envy or Selfe∣ve hath cast upon Favorites or publick Ministers of tate. Now to let us see he can shoot short as well s over, he tells us that he never heard that promotion ame to any Man by serving in Parliament. If he d not, it is because he hath stopped his ears &  his eyes when he looked that way: otherwise e might have seen both in this Parliament and for∣er Parliaments within forty yeares, honours offi∣es and estates, gained either by service in Parlia∣ent, or disservice, or both; though I doe not love o particularise as the Observer doth. Some Mens advancements doe shew it is a good way to get prefer∣ment, to put the King to a necessiy of granting. Good Woodmen say that some have used Dea-stea∣ling as an introduction to a Keepers place, and I have seen a Non-Conformists mouth stopped with a good benefice, as if he did but shew them before that if he were not satisfied he could ape as wide as his Neighbours.
Next, he makes it neare a prodigy, a mistery above if not contrary to Nature, that a few Hipocrites should beguile the Parliament, or the Major part be mastered by a Septemvirate. I will nor argue with the Observer utrum sit whether it be so; my Reve∣rence to the great Councell of the Kingdome pull me by the eare: but utrum possit whether it may be so. Then for the present we will change the Scene to Grece or Italy. And I wonder why the Observer should think it so strange that few should have an in∣fluence upon many, or that affections & passions, love, hatred, fear, hope, grief, &c. should betray Mens judgements. Let him peruse all Historyes, and take a view of all Free States and Senates, as Rome, Are∣opagus, Delphos &c. Consular, Tribunitian, Preto∣rian, &c. of all kinds: and he shall find siding and faction and packing and conniving and an implicit de∣pendence of many Followers upon few Leaders. H may be pleased to remember the bragge of an Athe∣nian boy, that his Father ruled all Athens, his Mo∣ther ruled his Father, and he ruled his Mother. There are many Dames in the World that woul thinke much not to have as great an influence eithe upon their Husbands or the State, as Madam Themi∣stocles had. Even say Sir, doe you thinke that pri∣vate quarrells and the memory of former suffering did never worke upon any Man? That disconten and envy at other Mens preferment, (whom the conceived to be lse deserving then themselves) di never transport some others further then the bias o judgement did draw them? That fear of the las and a desire to sere themselves, hath never force
any men to personate a part from the teeth outwards? That great Offices and Honours have never been a∣pearle in any Mens eyes to hinder their sight (though like Lapwings they made least noise when they were nearest their nests?) That others have never been like organ pipes to whom the wind of popular ap∣plause hath onely given a sound? Is it never possible for a party who have premeditated their parts, and before their designe be discovered, to exclude or vote out those whom they conceive to be their opposites, upon some pretences or others, (suppose of an unlawfull election, or being Mo∣nopolists or the like?) I say nothing of the bewit∣ching power of Oratory, nor of that sheepish Hu∣mour of following the Drove, nor of the vehement impression that fancyed dangers make in some men, as of him that died in an innocent Bath, when the By∣standers onely told him, that his hearts blood was comming out now. But you may say these will never hold on to the journyes end: Though we often see that when Men are too farr ingaged, have passed the Waters of Rubicon and cannot retire with safe∣ty, they grow desperate and run head long upon the mouth of the Cannon: yet considering the gracious disposition of our Dread Soveraigne, whose joy it is as it was his Saviours to find the sheep that was lost, I doe verily believe they will not hold on to the last indeed; why should they lose themselve to be laught at for their labours by them that had other ends then they? But yet till this departure be, they make one body visibly. When the Body naturall is infested with contrary distempers, that which is
used as a good cure or the one, may be poyson to the other: So in the Body Politick, they who are aptly chosen for the emedy of one Grievance, sup∣pose the violation of Liberty, may be most unfit and never would have ben chosen for the settlement of Religion. In summe, the Observers Argument may be thus paralelled, It s not discernable how the whole Citty and State of Athens could be mastered by a Militia consisting but of three thousand, or those three thousand by the Major part of thirty Tyrants, or the Major prt of thirty by Critias and one or two more: Or thu, It is not discernable, how the World should be mastered by Italy, or Italy by Rome, or Rome by I know not what Triumvirate. A very poor Mercury may reconcile the Observers understanding in this, if he be pleased. A trayned Band of eighty or an hundred thousand fighting men, well armed; well exercised, are able to master a greater Kingdom then England; Armyes are not so soone raised, armed, dis∣ciplined; he that is ready for the Field may easily suppresse another, upon his first motion, or but offe∣ring to stirre. It is as easy to conceive how the traine Bands may be at the disposition of their Comman∣ders, who pay them, reward them, punish them: and it is certain that they who have the naming of them will chuse such as they may confide in. The Obser∣ver talkes much of Nature, what Arms hath Na∣ture given but teeth and nailes? these will doe lit∣tle service at push of pike or against a volly of mus∣kes. This brings us to the issue which is propounded by the Observer, and is accepted by His Majesty, which
may put an end to all other invectives: God grant it ay prove true, we see no signes of it yet. The Ob∣erver saith, Let us stick close to it; and I say, he that tarts from it, let him be reputed guilty of all the nnocent blood that is shed. He addes, which will ring the distracted multitude to prostrate them∣elves at His Majesties Feet. Alas the countenance s not alwayes to be credited, but speech is the Arch-Deceiver. If this be not a vaine flourish, an empty aiery offer, but meant in good earnest, there is hope we may be happy. His Majesty hath satisfied this demand long since, by His Declaration of the 12. of August 1642. and yet we find not these fruits here promised with so much confidence; He hath na∣med the partyes, He hath specified the crimes. Take the accusation in his owne words, 1. Of entring into a solomne Combination for altering of the Government of Church and State, 2. Of designing Offices to them∣selves and other Men, 3. Of soliciting and drawing down the Tumults to Westminster, 4. Of bidding the people in the height of their rage and fury goe to Whitehall, 5. Of their scornfull and odious mention of His Majesties Person, 6. Of a designe to get the Prince into their hands, 7. Of treating with Forreine Power to assist them. He is willing also to referre himselfe to the strength of his proofes, and evidence of the matter, which is all the Observer desires. Heare Him for that also, We desire that the L. K. M. H. M. P. M. H. Sir A. H. M. St. M. M. Sir H. L. A. P. and C. V. may be delivered into the hands of Iu∣stice, to be tryed by their Peers, according to the known Law of the Land. If we doe not prove them guilty of
High Treason, they will be acquitted and their inno∣cence will justly triumph over Vs. Now if they desire to shew themselves great Patriots and Lovers of their Country indeed, here is a faire opportunity offered, if they have as much courage as Codrus had to leape into the gaping gulfe of Division, and to reduce the Kingdom to its former continuity and unity, if they dare trust to the touchstone of Justice, and if the bird in their brest sing sweetly to them that they are in∣nocent: here is a course provided whereby they may vindicate their good names, and out of the feined reports of malignant Sycophants make themselves a triumphant Garland or Crown of lasting Honour. But we see no hast, I know not mens hearts. There is an unhappy story in Plutarch, (but I dare not apply it,) of Pericles a Stickler in the Athenian Commonwealth, who being busy and private in his study to make his account to the State, was advised by his Nephew Alciliades (it was pestilent Counsell) rather to stu∣dy low to make no accounts: which he did effect by ingaging the Commonwealth in a Warre, so as they had no leisure to call for his accounts after that. There can be nothing pleaded in bare to the performance of this Proposition, but the privilege of Parliament. A great plea indeed; so the Observer, That none of the Members of the Parliament may be apprehended in case of suspition, where no information or Witnesses ap∣pear to make good the prosecution, without acquainting the Parliament, if leave may be conveniently obteined. He addes that by the same Act the whole House might have been surprised. And in another place, that by this meanes, the meere imputation of Treason shall sweep
away a whole Parliament. And his reason is thus groun∣ded, That if way be given to this, so many Members of either House may be taken away at any time, upon groundlesse pretences, as may make a Major part of whom they will: And then farewell to the Freedome of Parliaments. Which truely seemes to be urged with great shew of equity, where the par∣tyes are taken away by dozens or greater numbers, and the tryall is long deferred to serve a turne. You shall find the same Argument used & pressed after the same manner by Steven Gardiner to the Parliament, alle∣ging that nothing could be of worse Example then to Auno 154 allow such a president, that by that meanes it shall be at the pleasure of him that ruleth to doe the same in more. But for all that we doe not find that either the Parliament did afford him relief, or were sensible of any such danger: doubtlesse it stands both with natu∣rall equity & the known Law of the Land, that they who have the honour to be the great Councell of the King & Kingdome, should have all such Privileges & immunityes as are conducible to the furtherance of those ends for which they are convocated; such are free accesse and recesse, to be exempted from attendence upon Inferiour Courts, so long as they are in that imployment, To have their Servants free from arrests, that whilest themselves are busy about the great Af∣faires of the Common-wealth, their Estates and oc∣casions may not suffer in their absence, and that uni∣versall privilege of all Councellers, that whilest their intentions are reall, they should not be questioned for a slippe of the tongue, or a mistake in their judge∣ments. We see ordinary Courts doe not onely pro∣tect their Ministers of Justice in the excercise of
their places, but even those Witnesses which a summoned to appeare before them. A Clerke o the Chancery cannot be called to any other Cou to answer in any Cause that is cogniscible in tha Court. But here are sundry things considerable, as fir that His Majesty is the true fountain of these Pri∣vileges, not any mutuall compacts. This is plaine by that petition, which Sir Thomas Moore (then Spea∣ker for the House of Commons) made in his Ora∣tion to King Henry the eight, which I thinke hath been observed by all Speakers that ever were since, That if in communication, or reasoning, any Man in th Commons House should speake more largely then of du∣ty they ought to doe, that all such offences should be pardoned. Secondly, these Privileges ought not to be destru∣ctive to the essence or Fundamentall Ends or righ Constitution of Parliaments: and such a Privilege i that the Observer claimes, to be denyed nothing. For whereas our Parliament is so sweetly tempered an composed of all estates, to secure this Nation from the evills which are incident to all Formes of Go∣vernment: he that shall quite take His Majestyes ne∣gative voice away secures us from Tyranny, but leaves us open and starke naked to all those popular evil or Epidemicall diseases which flow from Ochlocracy; as Tumults, Seditions, Civill Warres, and that Ilias of Evills which attends them; and seemes to re∣duce the King (be it spoken with reverence) to the ase of the old Woman in the Epigrammatist, when she had coughed out her two last teeth,
Iam libere possis totis tussire diebus Nil isthic quod agat tertia tussis habet. From hence appeares a ready answer to that que∣stion so often moved, what great virtue is in the Kings single vote to avert evills from us, that an ordinance of both Houses may not be binding to the whole Kingdom without His consent? The case is plain, it is of no great virtue against the evills of Tyranny, but is a Soveraigne Remedy against the greater Mischiefes which flow from Ochlocracy: and I trust God will ever preserve it to us. Thirdly, these Privileges must not transcend the condition or capacity of Subjects by making destru∣ctive reservations, or so as to deck the Temples of inferiour Persons with the flowers of the Crowne. Such a Privilege seemes this to be which the Obser∣ver here claimes, a Dictatorian Immunity from all que∣stion, to owe no account but to God and their own Consciences: and yet by this new Learning they may take an account of the King. What is this but to make Kings of Subjects and Subjects of Kings? When some Ancients more skilfull in Theology then in Philosophy or Geography, did heare of the Antipodes, they reasoned against it (as they thought) strongly, that then there were pensiles homines and pensiles arbo∣res, men that did goe with their heads downwards, and Trees that did grow with their tops downwards; they forgot that Heaven is still above, and the Cen∣ter below: but what they did but imagine the Ob∣server really laboureth to introduce, to make whole
Kingdomes to walke with their Heads downwards and their heeles upwards. Fourthly, the just measure or standard, whereby all Privileges ought to be examined and tryed, is not now the Law of Nature, which is applyable (though not equally) to all Formes of Government; this were to put the shoe of Hercules upon an Infants foote. The Law of Nature may be limited, though not contraried by the known Laws and Customs of this Realme, as they shall appear by Charters, Sta∣tutes, Presidents, Rolls, Records, Witnesses. His Majesty cites a confession of the Parliament it selfe, to prove that their Privileges extend not to the cases of Treason, Felony, or breach of Peace, which hereto∣fore hath been the common beliefe of all Men. And it seemes no satisctory Answer to say, that therefore they extend not to these Cases be∣cause the Houses do usually give way in these cases for them to come to tryall, either in Parlia∣ment if it be proper, or otherwise in other Courts. For it is a great doubt how a Commoner in case of Treason can be tryed in Parliament per pares by his Peeres: and if it be in their own power to give way or not to give way, the Privilege extends to these cases as well as others. The case being thus, why doe we quarrell one with another? why doe no we all repair to the common Standard (that is the Law of the Land,) and crave the resolution or information of those that are Professors in that study? This will determine the doubt without par∣tiali or blood, and he that refuseth it, let him be accounted as one that desires not to uphold but subvert the Fundamentall Laws of the Land, upon
a supposition of Feares and such cases as never hap∣pened in the World. Now it appeares how the former objection is not applicable to the case in question, where the Partyes are Commoners and ought to be tryed by their Peers; where His Sa∣cred Majesty is the Informer; where the crimes are specified; where a speedy tryall according to the known Law is desired: where the Partyes them∣selves out of a love to their Country, out of a care to prevent the effusion of Christian and of English blood, out of a desire to vindicate their own reputa∣tions, should themselves become Suiters for a lawfull hearing, that they might not still suffer under such a hea∣vy charge: at which tryall they may legally plead the Privilege of Parliament, if there be any such Lw∣full Privilege. Observer. But let us consider the Lords and Commons as meer Counsellers, without any power or right of counsailing or consenting, yet we shall see if they be not lesse know∣ing and faithfull then other Men, they ought not to be deserted, unlesse we will allow that the King may choose whether he will admit of any Counsell at all or no, in the disposing of our Lives, Lands, and Libertyes. But the King sayes, that He is not bound to renounce His owne understanding, or to contradict His own Conscience for any Counsellers ske whatsoever. Tis granted in things visible and certain, That Iudge which is a sole Iudge, and has competent power to see his own judgement executed, ought not to determine a∣gainst the light of nature or evidence of fact. The Sin
of Pilae was, that when he might have saved our Sa∣viour from an unjust Death, yet upon accusations con∣tradictory in themselves, contrary to srange Revelati∣ons from Heaven, he would suffer innocence to fall and passe sentence of Death, meerely to satisfie a blood-thir∣sy Multitude. But otherwise it was in my Lord of  case, for the King was not sole Iudge, nay He ws uncapale o sitting Iudge at all &c. And therefoe the King might therein with a clear Consci∣ence have signed a Warrant for his Death, though He had dissented from the judgement. So if one Iudge on the same Bench dissent from three, or one Iuror at the Barre from eleven, they may submitt to the major number, though perhaps lesse skilfull then themselves, without imputation of guilt: and if it be thus in mat∣ters of Law a fortiori, tis so in matters of State, where the very satisfying of a Multitude sometimes in things not otherwise expedient, may prove not only expedient but necessary for the setling of Peace and ceasing of strife &c. Where the People by publick Authority will seek any inconvenience to themselves, and the King is not so much interested i it as themselves, tis more inconve∣niene and injuice to deny then grant it; what blame is it the  Prines, when they will pretend reluctance of Conscience and Reason, in things behvefull for the People? Answer. That which His Majesty saith that a Man may not goe against the Dictte of Hi own Conscience, . 23. is so certain, that no Man that hath his eyes in his
head can deny it. The Scripture is plain, he that doubteth is damned if he eate, because he eateth not of Rom. 14. Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sinne. Reason is as evident, that all circumstances must concurre to make an action good, but one single defect doth make it evill. Now seeing the approbation of Consci∣ence is required to every good action, the want there∣of makes it unlawfull, nor simply in it selfe, but rela∣tively, huic, hic, nunc, to this Person, at this time, in this place. Therefore all Divines doe agree in the case of a scrupulous Conscience, that where a Man is bound by positive Law to doe any Act, and yet is forbidden by the Dictates of his own Conscience to do it, he must first reform his understanding, and then perform obedience. And this in case where a thing already is determined by positive Law: but in His Majestyes case where the question is not of Obedience to a Law already constituted and established, but of the free election or assenting to a new Law before it be enacted, it holds much more strongly. But yet this is not all, there is a third obligation (& a threefold cord is not easily broken.) Take one instance, the King i nd by His Coronation oath to defend the Church, to pre∣serve to the Clergy all Canonicall Privileges & the free franchises granted to them by the glorious King Saint Edward and other Kings. Now suppose such a Bill should be tendred to His Majesty to deprive them of their temporall goods, as was tendred to Henry the fourth in that Parliament called the Lay Parliament; suppose that His Majesty is very sensible of the obliga∣on of His Oath, but sees no ground of dispensation with his oath.; the Clergy (as then Thomas Arun∣dell,
Arch-Bishop of Canterbury) are his Remem∣brancers and consent not to any alteration; what should a King doe in this case? in the one cale there is Law, Conscience, and Oath, in the other the ten∣der respect which he beares to a great part (yet but a part) of his people. I presume not to determine: but our Chroniclers tell us what was the event then, That his Majesty resolved to leave the Church in as good State or better then he found it, That the Knights confessed their error, and desired forgivenesse of the same Arch-Bishop, That when the same motion was renewed after in the same year of his Raigne, the King commanded them that from thenceforth, they should not presume to move any such matter. Even as his Predecessor Richard the second in the very like case had commanded the same Bill to be cancelled: Kings then did conceive themselves to have a nega∣tive voice, and that they were not bound by the votes of their great Councell. These grounds being laid, the Observers instances will melt away like Winter ice. First the Oath and obligation is visible and certain, but the dispen∣sation or necessityof alteration, is invisible and un∣certain. Secondly the rule that a man may not con∣tradict his own Conscience for the advise of any Counseller, is universall, and holds not onely in acti∣ons judiciary whether sole or sociall, but generally in all the actions of a Mans Life. Thirdly the un∣derstanding is the sole Judge or Directer of the will: the sin of Pilate was not to contradict Revelations (which he never had,) but for fear of complaints, and out of a desire to apply himselfe to an inraged
Multitude, to condemne an innocent Person. The bservers instance in the Earle of Strafford, might well ave been omitted, as tending to no purpose, unlesse  be to shew his inhumanity and despight to the dead shes of a Man, who whilest he was living might ave answered a wole Legion of Observers: and at is death by his voluntary submission, and his owne etition to His Majesty, did endeavour to clear this oubt and remove these scruples. Take the case as he Observer states it, yet justice is satisfied by his eath: and if it were otherwise, yet it is not meet for im or me for to argue of what is done by His Majesty r the great Councell of the Kingdom; That rancour s deep which pursues a Man into another World. But where the Observer addes, That His Majesty was not the sole Judge and that he was uncapble of sitting Judge at all: I conceive he is much mistaken. His Majesty may be Authoritative Judge where he doth not personally sit: and the naming of a Delegate or High Steward to be a pronunciative Judge, doth not exclude the principall. The instance of a Judge giving sentence according to the major number of his Fellow Judges though contrary to his own opinion, is altogether impertinent: for this is the judgement of the whole Court not of the Person, and might be declared by any one of the Bench as well as another. Such a Judge is not an Authori∣tative Judge, but prounciative onely: neither can he make Law but declare it, without any negative voice. The other instance of a Juror concurring with the greater number of his Fellow Jurors, con∣trary to his Conscience, is altogether false and di∣rect
Perjury. Neither of them are applicble to Hi Majesty, who  powr both to execue and pardon▪ It is true, necessiy of Stte justifies many thing which otherwise were inexcusable: and it is as tru that it is not lawfull to doe evill that good may com of it. His last assertion, that where the People by publick authority will seek any inconvenience to themselves, an the King is not as much interessed as themselves, it  more injustice to deny then grant it, i repugnant to wha he saith a little after, that if the People should be s unnaturall as to oppose their own prservation, the Kin might use all possible meanes for their safety, and muc more repugnant to the truth. The King i the Father o his People; he is a bad Father that if his Sonne ask him a stone in stead of bread, or a Scorpion in stea of a Fish, will give it him. That Heathen was muc wiser who prayed to Iupiter to give him good thing though he never opened his lippes for them, and to withhold such things as were bad or prejudiciall, though he petitioned never so earnestly for them. Sup∣pose the People should desire Liberty of Religio for all Sects; should the King grant it, who is con∣stituted by God the Keeper of the two Tables? Sup∣pose they should desire the free exportation of Arms, Monyes, Sheep, (which they say Edward the fourth for a present private end granted to the Kings of Castile and Arragon) and that this should be assen∣ted to by the Observers advise; would not the pre∣sent or succeeding Ages give him many a black bles∣sing for his labour?
God helpe the Man so wrapt in errors endlesse traine. First to say that the People my seek to obtein heir desires of the Prince by publick Authority,  too Mgistrall or flt no , a prase inu∣ to English eares. Heary the sixt ws no Fy∣ht nor awefull Soverigne,  when th  and  presented a just reqst unto , ey  kling upon their knee, (no si of Authory .) Secondly the King oes a strict  God of his Government, and is boud by his Of∣ce to promote the good of His  To  A  may be impeditive to this end,  isfaction of an humorous , is no  with this Obligation. Thirdly, His Mjesty con∣eive the thing now desired, to be moe then a ple  single inconvenience, that selfe is deeply inte∣essed in it, and not himselfe onely, but his  and all succeeding Kings, and that it is not the desire of all His Subjects, not ye of the greater art, much lesse of the sounder art who  it: and therefore even upon the Observers grounds,  is ot bound to give his assent. Observer. So much for the ends of  Power, I come now to the true Nature of it, publick Connt &c.
Answer. We had done with Consent before, but now we mee  4. with it again: such Windings and Meaders there a in this Treatise. But though Consent be like the titl set upon the outside of an Apothecaryes box, yet i we look into the subsequent Discourse, we shall find little or nothing of it. The Observer tells us a long st∣ry, that after the fall of Adam the Law written  Mans brest was not sufficient to make him a socia ble Creature, that without Society Men could  live, and without Laws Men could not be sociabl that without Magistrtes Law was a voide and va thing: it was therefore quickly provided that Law agble to the Dictates of Reason, should be rat∣fied by common consent, and that the execution a interpretation of those Laws should be intrusted  some Magistrate. To all which I readily assen wit this animadversion, that the rule is not cat pantos or universally true. A for the order of Law or Magistrate, it is confessed on the one side tha sometimes the People did choose their Magistrat and Law both together, and sometime the Law be∣fore the Magistrate, especially upon the extinctio of a Royall Family: but o he other side it canno be denyed that many times, very many times, Ma∣gises did either assume Soveraignty by just Con∣, o were absoluely elected without any suc restriction. So much the Observer cofesseth a li after, that in the infancy of the World, most Nation did choose rather to submit themselves to the meere dis∣discretion
of their Lords, then rely upon any limits, and be ruled by Arbitrary Edicts, rather then written Sta∣tutes, In which case it is plaine, that the Law is po∣steriour to the King, both in order of Nature and of Time. The Observer proceeds to shew; That intrusted Magistrates did sometimes tyrannize over their Peo∣ple; that it was difficult to invent a Remedy for this mischief. First because it was held unnaturall to place a Superiour above a Supreme. Secondly, because the restraint of Princes from doing evill, by diminu∣ion of Soveraigne Power, doth disable them also from doing good, which may be as mischievous as the other; That the World was long troubled between these extremityes; That most Nations did choose ab∣solute Governours; That others placed Supervisors over their Princes, Ephori, Tribuni, Curatores, (which remedy the Observer confesseth to have proved worse then the disease, and that the issue of it commonly was to imbroile the State in blood;) That in all great distresses the Body of the People was con∣streined to rise and by the force of a Major party to put an end to all intestine Strifes; That this way was too slow to prevent suddain Mischiefes; That it pro∣duced much spoile and effusion of blood, often exchan∣ging one Tyranny for another; That at last a way was found out to regulate the moliminous Body of the People by Parliament, where the People may assume their own power to doe themselves Right, where by virtue of Election and Representation, a few act for many, the wise for the simple: That the Parliament is more regularly formed now then when it was cal∣called
the Mickle Synod, or where the reall Body of the People did throng together; That the Parlia∣ment yet perhaps labours with some defects that might be amended, & that there are yet some differen∣ces and difficultyes concerning it, especially the Pri∣vileges of it, which would be resolved. This is the summe of his Discourse here, and a little after in the 21. page and the three pages following, he falls into a needlesse commendation of the Constitution of Parliaments, of their Wisdome and Justice, how void they are of danger, how full of advantage to the King and People, how Princes may have sinister ends, but that it was never till this Parliament withstoo that a Community can have no private ends to mislea it. In all which there are not many things to be muc misliked, saving some results of his former false an seditious Principles; as that the People are the Pri∣mogenious Subject of Power, that the essentiall an representative Body of the Kingdome are all one (he might as well say that a whole County and  Grand Jury are convertible terms.) To place a Su∣periour above a Supreme is monstrous, and opens  ready way to an infinite progresse, which both A and Nature abhorre. I joyne with him in this tha to limit a Prince too far is often the cause o much mischief to a State. But the Observer havin given a good meale casts it down with his Foot: fo after in the 40 page he tels us that the People had bet∣ter want some right, then have too much wrong done them▪ It may be so, it may be otherwise: but ordinaril the sufferings of one year in a time of Sedition, a
more burthensome to the Subject, then the pressures they sustein from a hard Soveraigne in a whole Age. A limited Commission may now and then bring ease to a Society, but an unsufficient Protection exposeth them to an hundred hazards and blowes, from Supe∣riours, Inferiours, Equalls, Forreiners, Domesticks. The Observer would have such a Prerogative as hath great power of Protection and little of oppression. Can you blame him? he would have his fire able to warm him, but not accidentally to burn him. Protection is the use, oppression the abuse of power. To take away power for fear of the abuse, is with Lycurgus to cut down all the vines of Sparta, roote and branch, for fear of Drunkennesse. By the same reason he will leave neither a Sunne in Heaven, nor any Crea∣ture of eminency on Earth. If he will have no Bees but such as have no stings, he may catch Drones, and want his honny for his labour. To limit Prin∣ces too farr is as if a Man should cut his Hawkes ings that she might not fly away from him: so he may be sure she shall never make a good flight for im. Saint Bernard tells us a Story of a King who eing wounded with an arrow, the Chirurgeons de∣ired Liberty to bind him, because the lightest mo∣ion might procure his Death: his answer was non ecet vinciri Regem, it is not meet that a King should e bound, and the Father concludes Libera sit Regis & semper salva potestas. In two particulars this third Cato is pleased to expresse himselfe, he would have the disposition of great offices, &
power of calling and dissolving Parliaments, shared be∣twen the King and the People. Yesthe great Offices of the Kingdome and the Revenues of the Church have been the great wheeles of the Clock, which have set many little wheeles  going; doubt you not the Ob∣server meant to lick  own fingers. These speculati∣ons might be seasonabe in the first framing of a Mo∣narchy: Now when a Power is invested in the Crown by Law and lawful Custome, they are sawcy and se∣ditious. Howsoever his bolt is soone shot, He that is wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of a Foole then of such a Man. Other s much wiser then he is, almost as he conceives himlfe to transcend them, are abso∣luely of another mi; that this were to open a sluce to Faction and Sedion, to rolle the Apple of Con∣tenion up and down both Houses of Parliament and each County and Burrough in the Kingdom, to make labouring for places & packing for votes, & in a word to disunite and dissolve the contignation of this Kingdom; This in Policy. They say further, that in Iustice, If the King be bound by His Office and sworn by His Oath, to cause Law, Iustice, and Dis∣cretion, in mercy and truth to be executed to His Peo∣ple, If he be accountable to God for the Misgo∣vernment of his great Charge, that it is all the reason in the World why he should choose his own Offi∣cers and Ministers. Kings are shadowed by those brazen Pillars which Hiram made for Solomon, ha∣ving Chapiters upon their heads adorned with Chaines and Pomgranates. If these Sonnes of Belial may strip Majesty by Degrees of its due Ornaments, first of the chaines, that is the power to punish evill
Doers, and then of the Pomegranates, the ability to reward good deserts, and so insensibly to robbe them of the dependence of their Subjects; the next steppe is to strike the Chapiters or Crownes from of their heads. But how can this be, except all Parliaments were ta∣ken as deadly Enemyes to Royalty? Still when the Observer comes to a piece of hot Service, he makes sure to hold the Parliament before him, which de∣vise hath saved him many a blow. They that are not haters of Kings may be Lovers of themselves: We are all Children of Adam and Eve: He would be a God and she a Goddesse. His instance that this is no more then for the King to choose a Chancellour or a Treasurer upon the recommendation of such or such a Courtier, is ridiculous; there His Majesty is free to dissent, here is a necessity imposed upon him to grant. Yet saith he, the Venetians live more happily under their conditionate Dukes, then the Turks under their absolute Emperours. The Trophees which Rome gained under conditionate Commanders, argue that there could be no defect in this popular and mixt Govern∣ment. Our Neighbours in the Netherlands being to cope with the most puissant Prince in Christendom, put themselves under the conduct of a much limited Generall, which streigthned Commissions have yeelded no∣thing but victoryes to the States, and solid honour to the Prince of Orange. Were Hanniball, Scipio &c. the lesse honoured or beloved because they were not in∣dependent? was Caesar the private Man lesse succes∣full or lesse beloved then Caesar the perpetuall Dicta∣tor? Whatsoever is more then this, he calls the pain∣ted rayes of spurious Majesty, and the filling of a phan∣tasticall
humour with imaginary grandour. Whose heart doth not burn within him to heare such audacious expressions? yet still he protests for Monarchy, A fine Monarchy indeed, a great and glorius Monarchy, an Aristo-Democracy nicknamed Monarchy, a cir∣cumscribed, conditionate, dependent Monarchy, a Mock-Monarchy, a Monarchy without coercive Po∣wer, able to protect, not to punish; that is in effect neither to protect nor punish, a Monarch subordi∣nate to a Superiour and accountable to Subjects, that may deny nothing, a Monarchy in the Rights where∣of another challengeth an interest Paramount. Quor∣sum haec? he is more blind then a Beetle that sees not whither all this tends, To advance King Charles to the high and mighty Dignity of a Duke of Ve∣nice or a Roman Consull: whilest this Gentleman might sit like one of the Tribunes of the Com∣mon People to be his Supervisor. It were to be wi∣shed that the Observer would first make tryall of this modell of Government in his own House for a yeare or two and then tell us how he likes it. That Form may fit the Citty of Venice that will not fit the Kingdome of England. I beleeve he hath not carefully read over the History of that State; Though now they injoy their Sun-shines and have their Lu∣cida intervalla; yet heretofore they have suffered as much misery, from their own Civill and Intestine Dissentions as any People under Heaven: and so have their Neighbour States of Genoah, Florence, &c. And of Florence particularly it is remarkeable, that though ngtons y of ny their Prince huband his Territory with as much advantage to himselfe and pressure to his People, as
any Prince in Europe: yet they live ten times more happily now, then they did before in a Republick; when a bare legged Fellow out of the Scumme of the People could raise Tumults, surprise the Senate, and domineere more then two great Dukes; so that now they are freer then when they did injoy those painted rayes of spurious Liberty. If th Romans had not found a defect in their popular Government, they had never fled to the choise of a Dictator or absolute Prince, as a sacred Anchour in all their greatest ex∣tremityes. And for the Netherlands; it is one thing for a free People to elect their owne forme of Go∣vernment; another for a People obliged to shake off that Forme which they have elected. It is yet but earely of the day to determine precisely whether they have done well or ill. The danger of a Popular Go∣vernment is Sedition; a common Enemy hath hither∣to kept them at unity; and the King of Spaine hath been their best Friend. Scipioes opinion that Carthage should not be destroyed was more solid and weighty then Catoes, (as experience plainly shewed.) Those Forrein Warres preserved Peace at home, and were a Nursery of Souldiers to secure that State. When the United States come to have peace a while, then let them take heed of falling in pieces. The condi∣tion of the English Subject when it was at the worst under King Charles (before these unhappy broiles) was much more secure and free from excises and other burdens and impositions, then our Neighbours the Ne∣therlanders under their States. If His Majesty should use such an Arbitrary Power as they doe, it would smart indeed. I wonder the Observer is not ashamed
to instance in Hanniball: he knows the Factions of Hanno and Hannibal did ruine themselves and Car∣thage: whereas if Hannibal had been independent, Rome had run that fortune which Carthage did. How near was Scipioes Conquest of Affricke to be disapoin∣ted, by the groundlesse suggestions of his Adversaryes in the Roman Senate? When he had redeemed that Citty from ruine, how was he rewarded? Sleighted, called to the Barre by a factious Plebeian, and in ef∣fect banished from that Citty whereof he had been (in a kind) a second Romulus or Founder: but if he had been independent, he had been a nobler gallanter Sci∣pio then he was. And if Caesars Dictatorship had not preserved him from the like snuffles, he might have tasted of the same sawce that Scipio did and many others. It is true he was butchered by some of the Observers Sect, (a Rebell is a civill Schismatick, and a Schismatick an Ecclesiasticall Rebell, the one is to∣gata, the other is armata seditio,) and some of them as notoriously obliged as Servants could be to a Master: but revenge pursued them at the heeles as it did Ko∣rah and his Rebellious Crew, Zimri, Absalom, Adonijah, Achitophel, Iudas &c. Frost and falshood have alwayes a foule ending. Neither is it true altogether, That Parliaments are so late an invention. What was the Mickle Synod here but a Parliament? what were the Roman Senates and Comitia, but Parliaments? what were the Grae∣cian Assemblies, Amphictionian, Achaian, Boetian, Pan-AEtolian, but Parliaments? what other was that then a Parliament, Moses commanded us a Law, even tr. 33. 4. the inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob. And he
was King in Jesurum, when the Heads of the People and Tribes of Israell were gathered together? Here is the King and both Houses with a legislative power. Non de possessione sed de terminis est contentio; the dif∣ference is not about the being of Parliaments, but the bounds of Parliamentary Power. As Parliaments in this latitude of signification have been both very an∣cient, and very common: so if he take the name strict∣ly, according to the present constitution of our Par∣liament, he will not find it so very ancient here at home, nor a Policy common to us with many Na∣tions; yea, if the parts of the comparison be precise∣ly urged, with none, not so much as our Neighbour Nation. I pray God it be not some Mens aime to re∣duce our setled Form to a conformity with some for∣rein Exemplars. But if it be understood to have such a fulnesse of power, as he pretends, according to his late found out art, to regulate the moliminous body of the People; it is neither ancient, nor common, nor ours. He may seek such presidents in republicks, but shall never find so much as one of them in any true Monar∣chy under Heaven. I honour Parliaments as truely as the Observer, yet not so as to make the name of Parliament a Me∣dsaes head, to transform reasonable Men into stones. I acknowledge that a compleat Parliament is that Panchreston, or Soveraigne salve, for all the Sores of the Common-wealth. I doe admire the presumption of this Observer, that dare find holes and defects in the very constitution of the Government by King and Parliament, (which he should rather adore at a distance,) as if he were of the posterity of Iack Cade,
who called himselfe Iohn Aead all. It is lwfull for these Men onely to cry out against innovations, whilest themselve labour with might and maine to change and innovate the whole fram of Government both in Church and . We reade of Philip of Macedn, that he gthered all the naughty seditiou fellowes in his Kingome together, and put the ll into  Cy by themslves, which he called  or  Cheer. I wish King Charles would doe the like (if a Citty would contein them,) and make the Observer the head of the Corporation, where he might molde his Governmnt according to hi prvate conceit. And yet it cannot be denyed, but the greatest and most eminent Councells in the World, my be ei∣ther made or wrought by their Major Part to serve private end. I omit the Lay Parliament 1404, and Sir Henry Wottons younge Parliament 18. Iacobi: our Historians tell us of a Mad Parliament 1258, and the Parliament of Btts or Bttownes 1426; a kind of Weapon fitter for Cavleers then peaceable As∣semblyes. The Statues of Oxford were confirmed by the Parliament at Weminster 1259, and ratified by a course against the breakers of them: shortly after the King and Prince were both taken Prisoners: yet in the Parliament following at Winchester 1255, all the said Acts were rescinded and disnulled, and the King cryed quittance with his Adversaryes. In the raigne of Edward the second after the Battell at Burton, we see how the tydes of the Parliament were turned, untill the comming of Qeen Izabell and then the Floods grew higher then ever. In the dayes
of Richard the second, how did the Parliament change their Sanctions? as the Cmaelion her colours, or as Platina writeth of the Popes, after Stephen had taken up the body of Formosus out of his grave, It be∣came an usual thing for the Successors either to infringe or altogether to abrogate the Acts of their Predecessors. The Parliaments of 1386. and 1388. were contra∣dicted and revoked by the subsequent Parliaments of 1397. and 1398, and these again condemned and dis∣anulled by the two following Parliaments in 1399. and 1400: yea though the Lords were sworn to the inviolable observance of that of 1397, and Henry Bullenbrooke who was a great Stickler for the King in that Parliament, of 1397. against the Appealants; yet in that of 1399, was elected King by the Trayterous deposition of Richard, and the unjust preterition of the right Heires. Parliaments are sublunary Courts, and mutable as well as all other Societyes. If we descend a little lower to the times of Henry the sixt, we shall find Richard Duke of Yorke, declared the Lord Protector in Parliament, yet without Title to the Crown in 1455. Shortly after we find both him and his Adherents by Parliament likewise attain∣ted of High Treason in 1459. The yeare following 1460, he was again by Parliament declared not only Lord Protector, but also Prince of Wales and right Heire to the Crown, and all Acts to the contrary made voide, and the Lords sweare to the observance thereof. It rests not here, the very next year 1461. his Sonne Edward the fourth not contented to be an Heire in reversion, assumes the Imperiall Diadem, and in Parliament is received actuall King. The
end is not yet, ten yeares after this 1471, King Hen∣ry is admitted King by Parliament again, and King Edward attainted of High Treason, declared an Usur∣per, and the Crown intailed upon King Henry and his Heires Males, and for want of such issue, to George of Clarence and his Heires. But this lasted but a while; disinherited Edward and Clarence are reconci∣led, and the very next Yeare, Edward is Crowned again, and received King in Parliament. You see here, Signa pares aquilas & peila minantia peilis, Parliaments against Parliaments: and this in that very question which you say is properly to be judged by Parliament, who is the right King? When the ele∣ction is not of a particular person and his Heires, but of a Person and his Family, so as the People have li∣berty to elect whom they please of that stock, (as it was long since in Scotland, till it was rescinded by Act of Parliament to take away those storms of dis∣cord and Faction which it raised,) The Parliament was the most proper Judge who should succeed: but where the Crown is hereditary, there needs little question of the right Heire, which for the most part every Country Man knows as well as the great Coun∣cell of the Kingdome. How easily were Queens rai∣sed and deposed in Henry the eights time by Autho∣rity of Parliament? Adde to this with what facillity Religion was reformed in part by Henry the eight, more by Edward the sixt, altered by Queeen Mary, & restored again by Queen Elizabeth, & all this by Au∣thority
of Parliament within the compasse of a few yeares; and it will evidently appear out of all that hath been said, that Parliaments are not excepted from the defects of all humane Societyes, Nescience, Ignorance, Feare, Hope, Favour, Envy, Selfe-love, and the like, That they may erre both in matters of Fact, and in point of Right, That it is the incom∣municable property of God alone, to be the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Ever, That though we owe a tender respect to Parliaments, yet we may not follow their directions as infallible, nor resolve our reason into their meere Authority, as if their sole advice or command were a sufficient ground for our actions, which is the maine scope which this Iehu our Obser∣ver doth so furiously drive at in all his writings, That no evill is to be presumed of the representative Body of the Kingdom. And so farre he is right; it ought not indeed to be presumed without proofe. But he goes further that it may not be supposed or admitted, It is of dangerous consequence to suppose that Parliaments will do any injustice, it looseth one of the firmest sinews first ob. p 7. of Law to admit it. But such Communities can have no private ends. What had the Shechemites by the suggestion of a wor∣thy Member of their Citty? Or the Brethren of Io∣seph? Gen. 34 Gen. 37. If any Man boggle at it, may he not be overvo∣ted or overawed, as Reuben was? What ends had the Romans when they made that arbitriment, quod in medio est, populo Romano adjudicetur? What had the whole Citty of Ephes, being perswaded by Deme∣trius and his Craftsmen, that there was a strange plot against Diana? The High Priests, and Scribes, and
Elders, and if you adde to these, Pilate, Iudas, the Souldiers and the Divell, all had their private ends. The High Priests and Elders to satisfy their envy, Pilate to keep his place, Iudas to get the thirty piece, the Souldiers for Christs Garments: yet all these concurred in a generall designe to take away Crist. Which shews us thus much, That a Community may have private ends, yea, and contrary ends, all te∣ding to mischief, though upon contrary grounds: and yet all agree well enough so long as they keep themselves in a negative or destructive way. I intend these instances no further then to shew the weaknesse of the Observers grounds; Parliaments are more ve∣nerable: yet till this corruptible have put on incorrup∣tion, private ends will seek to crowde into the best Societyes. When a Bill was tendred to Richard the se∣cond to take away the temporalties of the Clergy, there was old sharing: And Thomas Walsingham saith, he himselfe did heare one of the Knights sweare deeply, that he would have a thousand marks by year, out of the Abby of Saint Albons. The very like Bill was put up to King Henry the fowerth, with this motive or addition, That those temporall Possessions would suffice to find an hundred and fifty Earles, fifteen hun∣dred Knights, six thousand and two hundred Esquires, and an hundred Hospitalls more then there was in the Kingdome, (it had been a great oversight if they had not stuck down a few feathers.) Do you not see private ends in those dayes? but even then they found themselves mistaken in their accounts. And now when the Lord Verulam and sundry others of our most eminent Countrymen
have acknowledged (I have heard the very same fro Sir Ed Sands) that all the Parliament since the 27. and 31. of King Henry the eight, seem in some sort Considerati∣ons dedica∣ted to Kin James o stand obnoxious and obliged to God in Conscie to  somewhat for the Church, to reduce the Patrimony thereof to a competency. Now I say when the Tempo∣raltyes of the Clergy are so inconsiderable in comparison of the Honour of the Nation and the Order of the Church, and so unable to satisfy the appetite and expectation of ; in so much as I dare speak it confidently, that all the Temporaltyes of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch-Deacons, Deanes and Chapers, Pre∣ben, Petty Canons, Vicars Chorall, (which are re∣cited in folio to make a shew,) and of all the Ecclesi∣asticall Dignitayes and Corporation whatsoever, let them take Masters of Hospitalls in to boo, (ex∣cept the two Universityes and  of Benefices with cure,) do not all amount in penny rent to the Revenues of some two Earles: Such a proposition seems now to be much more unseasonable then it was then, yet even then the Bill was commanded by the King to be cancelled. I confesse the true and utter∣most value, may be double or triple to this, but what is redundant above the rent is in the hands of the Gen∣try and Commons, who will think much to lose ei∣ther their Interest or Tenent-right. I confesse like∣wise that besides their Temporaltyes, they have Spi∣ritualtyes consisting of Tithes and Oblations: but to think of taking these away also, will highly dis∣please their Leaders of the old Edition. Heare the humble , It is the duty of the Commonwealth
to convert those things which by their foundation were meant to the service of God to that very use, that Refor∣mation be not rather thought a baite to feed our bellyes, then to proceed of godly zeal. He calls it a plaine moc∣kery of God, a scorn of Godlinesse, the most Divellish Policy in the World, that upon pretence to further Gods Ser∣vice, Men should rob and ransack the Church. To the same purpose Mr. Cartwright, This is our meaning, not that these goods should be turned from the Possession of the Church, to the filling of the bottomlesse sacks of their greedy appetites, who gape after this prey, and would thereby to their perpetall shame purchase to themselves a field of blood. After he calls them Cormorants and protests against it as plaine Sacrilege. A supply from hence, As it is Sacrilegious in the opinion of their greatest Reformers: so it would be inconside∣rable either to inrich the Crown, or to disingage the Kingdom, or to satisfy the appetites or private ends of necessitous Persons. Observer. Having now premised these things, I come to the maine difficulties lying at this time in dispute before us, &c. Answer. We have now done with all the Observers grounds; The remainder of his Treatise is either a repetition . 25. of the same matter in a new and diverse dresse; as the Hoast of Chalcis served Titus Flaminius, when he gave
him severall services of a tame Hogge, and yet by Cookery made him believe he fed upon choise varie∣ty of Venison; Faire fall a good Cooke: or else it is but superstructions builded upon the former Grounds, which (the foundations being substracted) remain as Castles in the aire, ready to fall of themselves without any further battery: or else it is matter of fact, which howsoever it be disguised by fictions in this feculent Age, when the Father of lyes is let loose; yet it is well enough known to the greater and better part of the Kingdome. Such is the question of the Militia, so often iterated by the Observer, both in point of right and in point of fact: such is the case of the impeached Members: and that of the Tumults and Commoti∣ons at London and Westminster: and that of those in∣famous Libells and invectives against his Majestyes Government, both out of the Pulpit and Presse, if not with incouragement yet without any restraint; and some of them not onely against his Government, but against Monarchicall Government in generall, as this very Treatise of the Observers. Concerning the first, His Majesty hath set forth an expresse Decla∣ration of the first of Iuly, yet unanswered: to say more in this were to bring Owles to Athens. Concerning the latter, His Majesty passing by ordinary and misled Persons, chargeth the Heads and Contrivers of these Distractions and Libellous Invectives, in his Decla∣tions of the 12 of August &c. so as it seemes needlesse to take any further notice of them. Such others are that of the Scotch Army, and the surprising of New∣castle, and the Earle of Straffords case: whereas the Observer knows well enough that for the two former
there is an Act of Oblivion, and for the latter a pro∣viso that it shall not be drawne into president, which in effect is as much. He cannot choose but know, that otherwise something might be said in these cases which perhaps would trouble him to untwist: To in∣sult over one that hath his hands tyed, or to brave one who i bound to the peace, argues a degenerous Ad∣versary. Therefore to omit these and the like, and to insist upon such onely as afford us either new matter, or have more weigt of Reason added to them. Whereof the principall without comparison is the Hull and Iohn ham. businesse o Hull or Sr Iohn Hotham, which runs so much in the Observs mind, that he falls upon it nine or ten times in thi little Treatise, and after he professeth to have done with it pag. 30; yet he relap∣seth into it again thri in the 33. 35. and 43. pa∣ges. I shall not omit any thing that hath the least, scruple of weight or moment to advantage Sir Iohn Hothams cause. First it is confessed b the Observer, That to possesse a Towne and shut the ges against the King is Trea∣son. A liberall concessio e had an hard forehead that should deny it. To din one of the Kings ships or Castles onely, witht danger to His Person, is Treason: what is it then, rst to inrude forcibly, and then to detein injuriousl not a Pinnace or little To∣wer, but one of the pri Ports and Strengths of the Kingdom, and in it t Kings whole Magazine or provision of Warre, a to raise His Majestyes own Subjects to keep it with Muskes bent against His Royall Brest? They ha need to be very saving Cir∣cumstances that can alte the nature of such an act, or
have virtue to transubstantiate Cataline into Camillus, and change Treason into Loyalty. Who made the Ob∣server a Distinguisher where the Law doth not distin∣guish? But let us view his Reasons without preju∣dice. Three things are alledged, first the circumstances of the action, Secondly, the intention of the Actors, Thirdly the Authority of the Commanders. For the first he saith, The King was meerely denyed entrance for the time, his generall Right was not denyed. I doe easily beleeve, that Sir Iohn meant not to hold Hull for ever: If he did, he is not such a Child to say so. When the Lord Gray and his Complices had plotted to surprise the Tower or Dover Castle, and to possesse themselves of the Persons of King Iames & his Councell, it was not their designe to hold those Forts, or detein them Prisoners for ever: but untill they had gained their own conditions, which were the alte∣ration of Religion, and the distribution of the great Offices of the Kingdome among themselves; yet it was never the lesse adjudged Treason, and they con∣demned for it. He addes, No defying language was given to the King. No more did Iudas give the King of Kings when he cryed, Hail Master & kissed him. The Prophet complaineth, of some that the words of their mouth were softer then butter, but Warre was in their hearts. It was as true as tarta censure, which Iohannes Ca∣pocius a noble Romane, gave of Innocent the third, who did privately blow the coales betwixt Otho and Frede∣rick, O Holy Father, your words are the words of God
(peaceable & pious) bu your deeds are the deeds of the Devill. He proceeds, No act of violence was used, though the King for diverse houres together did stand within musket shot, and did use trms of defyance, and this makes the act meerely defensive o rather passive. Passive! how can that be? notwithstanding the intrusion of Sir Iohn, the King is still the Possessor, and the deteining is forcible in the eye of the Law. This very plea ar∣gues a rotten and a trayterous heart: To kill an inno∣cent and an anoynted King in the sight of the Sun, requires an height of impiety, a longer preparation of Partners, and instruments fleshed in Blood and Mischiefe. He that should have commanded such a shot, had need to have given his charge in ambiguous terms, as Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est, or otherwise might have been thrown over the walls for his Labour. If such a shot had fayled, it had been destructive to the Actor and all his Partakers: if it had taken it would have made them stinke in the  of all good Men; but for my part I doe not beleeve there was any such intention. Howsoever we have been told that in the place of the Barons Wars, we should expect the Commons Warres: yet generally the English Nation delights not so much in Demo∣cracy as the Observer doth; and a more gracions King they could not have, whose death would have dissol∣ved many mens hopes. Howsoever as King Alphon∣ss answered his Phisitian, when he perswaded him not to handle the works of Livy (which were sent unto him by a great Florentine) for fear of poyson, The s Syl∣ Lifes and Soules of Kings are secure under the provi∣dence
and protection of God: or as a Traytour answe∣red the King of the Danes, That he wanted neither Saxo. mind nor sufficient meanes to have effected his intentions, but the assistence and concurrence of God was alwayes wanting. Which was verified in a conspiracy against King James, when the Murderer smitten into an amazement by Gods just judgement, could neither stirre hand nor foot. It follows, How should this administer to the King any grounds to levy guards at Yorke? &c. Did the King without fear treat with Sir Iohn Hotham as a Traytour in the face of his Artillery, and offer to enter Hull with twenty horse unarmed, and continue such a harsh Parley so many houres; and yet when he was in Yorke, in a County of so great assurance, could nothing but so many Bands of Horse and Foot secure him from the same Sir Iohn Hotham? I wonder the Observer doth not blush to be His Majestyes Remembrancer how much he descended from his Royall State that day, in his attendence so many houres, and his cour∣teous proffers. Is it because he thinks good Subjects take delight to hear of such an audacious affront put upon their Soveraigne? Or of that base scandalous picture so much gazed at in Forrein parts, of Sir Iohn Hotham standing aloft armed Cap ape, incircled with Gallants and great Ordinance, like another Achil∣les, Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer; Whilest His Sacred Majesty was pictured be∣low like a Chancery Petitioner with his hat in his
hand, pittyfully complaining and suing to Sir Iohn for admission? But the King called Sir Iohn Traytour, and gave him harsh language. Did he so? you may remember what Philip answered for the Macedonians, when some of his own wicked instru∣ments complained they called them Traytours; that his Countrymen were plain dealing men to call things by their right names, and could not for their lifes think one thing and say another. If Philip a Prince benefited by those Creatures, pleaded so for his Subjects; why might not King Charles who was injuried, and a loser, have leave to speak for himselfe to his own Subjects? But if the King were so confident there, why did he raise Forces at Yorke, a place of more assurance? First shew us your Commission to take his Maje∣sties answer, or at least tell us why Sir Iohn began to raise Forces first? His Majesty is authorized by God and the Law to raise Forces, and owes no account to the Observer. And to His Majestyes confidence then, and diffidence after, I can say nothing positively: if it were in another case, there might be sundry rea∣sons given. Perhaps the second cogitations are the sounder; or Men may hope for better measure then they find; or the latter day is a Scholler to the former; or a Man may desire to surprise him and cannot, whom he hath no desire to kill if he could; or Mischiefe growes not to maturity in an instant, but by De∣grees. But, The King might have prevented this repulse, by sending a Messenger before hand, or by comming with∣out such considerable Forces in so unexpected a manner. How considerable His Majestyes Forces were, and
what was His manner of comming to Hull, Him∣elfe hath published in a true satisfactory. Declara∣ion long since: if it had been otherwise, how could is Majesty imagine or expect such a repulse against ll Laws, beyond all presidents. An impartiall man ould rather thinke that Sir Iohn Hotham should ave taken it to heart, that His Majesty should so arre suspect his Loyalty as to send such a Message efore him. This is certain, if there were an omis∣ion in point of discretion or good manners, it was n Sir Iohn Hothams part, who was privy to his own esolutions: and though he hd forgotten his Allegi∣ance, yet in point of Courtesy, he ought to have given His Majesty a fair advertisement. It is very hard the Observer should goe about to reduce his King to the condition of an ordinary Passenger, that must send his Harbinger before to try whether he may have en∣terteinment at his Inne or nor. Nondum finitus Orestes, His circumstances are not yet done; He addes, the things remaining at Hull in the Kings trust for the use of the Kingdom were Arms, & by consequence of more danger then other kind of Chattells. If I intrust my cloake to anothers custody, I may not take it again by force, but if it be my sword, and there is strong presumption that it may be drawn upon me, I may use any meanes to secure it. I wish all the Observers Faction had been of his opinion in one point; His Majesty and many of His good Subjects have been plundered deepely, and have had both their Cloaks and their Coates &c. taken away by force, wherein they challenged a right of interest, which is more then trust. Still the Observer builds upon his former ex∣travigants:
His Majesty is not Rex ad placitum one that hath meerely the custody of Regall power, as the Lord Keeper hath of the great Seale, or as the Observer may give his Cloake to his Neighbour to hold: but he is the very owner and Possessor of So∣veraignty to him and to his Heires; and this not by the antecedent trust, nor by the guift of the People, but by the goodnesse of God. It would be known what presumptions the Observer had that the sword should be drawn upon him; except he that hath gi∣ven his Superiour a boxe on the eare may lawfully disarm him when he hath done, for fear least being provoked he should strike again. The Observer inti∣mates no lesse, Whether is more probable at this time, ag 43. that the King is incensed against the Parliament or the Parliament against the King? That very Argument which he useth here is sufficient to convince him∣selfe. What is the thing deteined? The Magazine. To whom doth the right of Armour belong? To the King alone and not to the Parliament; witnesse a Parlia∣ment it selfe 7. Edvardi primi: much lesse to the Observer or Sir Iohn Hothm. Uzza was smitten Sam. 16. dead for presuming but to take hold of the Arke of God: God will rather have the Arke of the Church or Commonwealth to shake and totter under his own immediate protection, then to have such men presume to lay hold on it, who have no calling from him. There is onely one saving circumstance left behind, Heare it, The Kings interest in Hull is not such an in terest as in other movables, neither is the Kings inte∣est taken away, the same things are reserved for him in better hands: and if it were the same, yet the State
hath an interest Paramount in cases of publicke extre∣mity. The State hath an interest Paramount; what State? have we any State in England without the King? the Observer is still in his old dreames. Well, what is the interest of this imaginary State? an ima∣ginary interest. An interest Paramount in cases of ex∣tremity. What a mixture of pleas is here? extremity is the plea of private Persons. In case of extremity where a Man can not have recourse to the Magistrate, every Man becomes a Magistate to himselfe: an In∣terest Paramount is the right of Superiour Lords. But first, here was no such extremity, if there had, still his plea is starke naught: necessity doth arme a private Man against a Thiefe, but not authorize a private Man to disarme a lawfull Magistrate. His other plea of an interest Paramount is well worse; If the People (to comply with his own sense,) have an interest Paramount in whatsoever the King holds either jure Coronae, or jure Personae, then they are the Soveraigne, and he but a Subject. But it was reserved for him in better hands. Reserved for the King? how doe you meane? as Tophet is said to be prepared for the King; that is to shoot at the King at Edgehill or elswhere: otherwise I do not see how it was reserved for the King. This plea or the like, might serve a highway Robber or any Oppressor, to say it is taken into more needfull hands, or into their hands that knew better how to use it; or that it was but borrowed, and should be repayed (at the Greek Calends.) None so fit to judge in what hands a thing should be kept as the true owner of it. But the Kings right is not the same in Hull that it is in other moveables. True he hath
not the same right of property or possession to sell it, or give it, but he hath a right of Dominion, and Soveraign∣ty, & protection, which is altogether inconsistent with his exclusion or shutting out of Hull. If he be held out of it by force, he is a King de jure, but not de facto, even as he is King of France, or at least of Normandy Aquitaine &c. or as the King of the Romans is King of Rome. The King hath another interest in Hull be∣side that of Dominion: other Townes are indebted to the King for their Protection, but this Town for its very Foundation. The Crown purchased it when it was capable of nothing but heards of Cattell and flocks Camden. of sheepe, The Crown builded it, the Crown indo∣wed it with Privileges & Possessions, made it a distinct County and able to support such a Dignity, the Crown fortified it and made it so strong as it is: and was all this done with an intent to be thrust out of it? O that Edward the third who builded it, or Henry the eight who fortified it with Blockhouses, were but in it for a day or two, with a Regiment of their old Cava∣leers to try who should be King of Hull and Humber. The proper name of it is not Hull, but Kingston upon Hull. The Observer doth well to decline the right name, for according to his notions, it may be called Kingston per Antiphrasin, because it is none of the Kings Town. If the circumstances will not justify the action, the Observer flyes to the Common Sanctuary of Trans∣gressours; a good intention: so he goes on, The next thing considerable is the Parliaments intention. If the Parliament have hereupon turned any of the Townes Men out of their estates, or claimed any interest
in it themselves, or have  the King, utterly de∣nying his right for the future, or have made any other use of their possession, but meerly to prevent Civill War, and to disfurnish the Kings Souldiers of Arms and Am∣munition, Let the State be branded with Treason: but if none of these things be by any credit, though their Enemies should be Iudges, the essentiall property of Treason must needs here be absent in this Act. There needs no Enemies to be made Judges; if it were before a Court of Are∣opagites, this plea would be laughed at or hissed out of Court. How shall we judge of Mens intenti∣ons best, by their words or by their actions? Who Tully. ever Proclaimed in the Streets that he had rotten Wares to sell? Who ever confessed that his meaning was naught? Mens intentions may be pleaded at the Barre of Conscience before God for mitigation, not at the Barre of Justice before Man for Justification. Nei∣s it likely that Sir Iohn and his Partners had all the same Intentions; their Actions speak their Intentions sufficiently. And admitting their Intentions were good, yet that cannot justifie an unlawfull Action; They Iohn 16. 2. shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea, whosoever killeth you, will think he doth God service: Those Persecuters had good Intentions, but their Actions were starke naught. You sa, they claimed no Interest, yet your selfe claime an Interest Paramount for them. You say they disseised not the King, because they denyed not His Right for the future; as if there might no be a disseisure without such a deniall. You say they made no other use of the possession: The Inhabitants say, they mde oher use of their Houses and dwelt in them; They made other use of their Victuals and payd
not for them: The Merchants say, they made other uses of their Wines, Spices, and Wares, and sold them, and tooke Money for them: The Countrymen say they made other use of themselves, and their Servants, and their Goods, and disposed them as freely as if they had been their own: The whole Country complains, That Hull hath been used as a Nest and Refuge for se∣ditious Persons, A Seminary of Warre, to the great dammage of the Subject thereabouts, besides all the blood that hath been spilt upon that occasion; Whom shall a Man trust, the Townesmen, or the Observer? But you say, They turned none of the Townesmen out of their Estates; Perhaps not so soon as you Writ; Either there are Lyars, or some Mens eyes were more upon Yorkminster and Cawood-Castle, then upon Hull or any Houses in Hull: But since, that Faction hath turned out whomsoever they either disliked or suspected, and have seised Mens Estates at their pleasure, and sent out their Emissary Legions roming and Plundring about the Country, as if Sathan were sent out from the face of the Lord, to scourge the World; Trojan or Tyrian, Papist or Protestant, all was fish that came to their Netts. And if there can be no forgivenesse of sinne without restitution, some of them have a great account to make either in this World, or in the World to come. He tells us, this was the onely means to pre∣vent Civill Warre, and to disfurnish the Kings seducers of Arms and Ammunition: But the truth is, this hath been the onely Source and Fountain from whence all our Civill Warres have sprung. Whether the King or Kingdome have been seduced, and by whom, the God of Heaven will discover? I would every Eng∣lishman
had it ingraven in his forehead, how he stands affected to the Commonwealth. We Beetles did see no signes of civill Warre, but all of Peace and Tranquillity: but the Observer and his Confederates being privy to their own plots, to introduce by the sword a new form of Government both into State and Church, might easily foresee, that they should stand in need of all the strength, both in Hull and Hell and Hallifax to second them: whereof yet all true En∣glishmen do acquit the Parliament in their hearts de∣sires; though the Observer be still at his old ward, shuf∣fling Sir Iohn Hotham out, and the Parliament in, so changing the state of the question. But what weight that consideration hath, follows in his next and last Al∣legation. Sir John Hotham is to be looked on as the Actor, the Parliament as the Author, in holding Hull. And there∣fore it is much wondred at, that the King seems more violent against the Actor, then the Author, but through the Actor, the Author must needs be pierced, &c. And if the Parliament be not virtually the whole Kingdome it selfe, If it be not the Supreme Iudicature as well in matters of State, is matters of Law: If it be not the great Councell of the Kingdome as well as of the King, to whom it belongeth by the consent of all Nations to provide in extraordinary cases, Ne quid detrimenti capiat Respub∣lica; Let the brand of Treason stick upon it: Nay if the Parliament would have used this forcible means, unlesse petitioning would not have prevailed, or if the grounds of their Iealousie were meerly vain, or if the Iealousie of a whole Kingdome can be counted vain; Let the reward of Treason be their guierdon. Hitherto the Observer
like the wily Fox, hath used all his sleights to frustrate the pursuit of the Hounds: but seeing all his fetches prove in vain, he now begins to act the Catte, and flyes to his one great helpe, to leape up into a Tree, that is, the Authority of Parliament, ut lapsu graviore ruat, that he may catch a greater fall. By the way the Ob∣server forgets how the King is pierced through the sides of Malignant Counsellers. Three things are principally here considerble. First whether Sir Iohn Hotham had any such Command or Commission from the Parliament. Secondly, if he had, whether he ought to have produced it? Thirdly, supposing he both had it, and produced it, whether it be valid against His Majesty, or whether an illegall Command do justifie a Rebellious Act. To the first of these. I take it for granted, That a Commission, or an Ordinance for Sir Iohn to be a meer Governour of Hull, doth not extend to the Ex∣clusion of His Majesty ou of Hull, nor Warrant Sir John to shut the Gares against His Soveraign; if it did, every Governour might do the same, and subordi∣nate Command might trample upon Supreme. Nei∣ther can a posteriour approbation warrant a prece∣dent excesse; for this is not to authorise, but to par∣don, the sole power whereof is acknowledged to be in His Majesty, without any sharers. To the first questi∣on therefore, the answer is, Sir John Hotham had no such Warrant or Commission from the Parliament: He himselfe confessed, That he had no positive or par∣ticular Order. How should he know of His Majesties comming by instinct, or a Propheticall Spirit? A ne∣gative can not, ought not to be proved; the proofe rests
whollyon Sir Johns side, and can be no other then by producing the Ordinance it selfe, or his instrument whereby he can receive the sense of the House from Westminster to Hull in an instant: If he have not a pre∣cedent Ordinance to shew, it is in vain to pretend the Authority of Parliament. To the second question. Admitting, but not gran∣ting, that he had such an Ordinance, whether could it be availeable to him, being not produced, when it was called for and demanded so often by His Majesty? De non apparentibus, & non existentibus eadem est ratio, Whether there was no such Ordinance, or no such Or∣dinance did appeare, is all one both in Law and rea∣son; He that can reade and will not make use of his Clergy suffers justly: He that hath a Warrant and will not produce it, may cry, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, No Man is hurt but by himselfe. A known Officer so long as he keeps himselfe within the sphere of his own activity, is a Warrant of himselfe: But he that it imployed extraordinarily, or transcends the bounds of Common Power, must produce his Authority, or take what falls. Sir John hath not yet gained so much credit, that his ipse dixit, his word should be a suffici∣ent proofe, or his Testimony in his own case taken for an Oracle. Thirdly, admitting that Sir John had such an Ordi∣nance, and likewise that he did produce it, (for if we admit neither, he can prove neither,) yet the que∣stion is how valid this Ordinance may be as to this act. I doubt not at all of the Power of Parliament, that is, a compleat Parliament, where the King and both Houses doe concurre: but an ordinance without
the King, against the King, alters the case; this may have the Authority of both Houses perhaps, but not of a complete Parliament. Secondly the Power of both Houses is great, especially of the Lords as they are the Kings Great Councell, and in that relation are the Supreme Judicature of the Kingdome: but before the Observer said it, I never thought the Com∣mons did challenge any share of this Judicature, ex∣cept over their own Members, or preparatory to the Lords: or that they had power to administer an Oath, which the Apostle saith is the end of all strife; who eb. 6. 19. ever knew any Judicature without power to give an Oath? This makes the Observers new devise, of the people meeting in their underived Majesty to doe justice, a transparent fiction. It is not the Commons, but the Lords or the Kings Councell that challenge Su∣preme Judicature. But take both Houses with that latitude of Power, which they have either joyntly or severally, yet His Majesty saith they have no power over the Militia of the Kingdome, or over his Forts or Magazines: he avoucheth for it the Common Law, Statute Law, Presidents, Prescriptions; we have not yet heard them answered, nor so much as one instance, since the beginning of this Monarchy given for a pre∣sident of such an Ordinance, or of any new Ordinance binding to the Kingdom, without his Majestyes con∣currence, in Person or by Commission. If the Ob∣server have any Law, or President, or Case, he may do well to produce it: if he have none, he may sit down & hold his peace; his remote inconsequent consequen∣ces drawn from the Law of Nature are neither true nor pertinent. Yet I never heard that Sir Iohn did
allege any authority from the House of the Lords; but from the House of Commons onely. This brings the Parliament still into a straiter roome; as if it were totum homogeneum, every part to bear the same name with the whole: so he may give the Au∣thority of Parliament to a particular Committee, or perhaps to a particular Member. He saith it is vir∣tually the Kingdome. Not so, it is virtually the Com∣mons of the Kingdom: not to all intents neither, but to some purposes. He addes, that it is the great Councell of the Kingdom, to which it belongs to provide that the Commonwealth receive no prejudice. It is a part of the Great Councell, and should provide for its safety, as the grand inquest doth for the whole County; by finding out the dangers and grievances, and proposing remedyes: but to prattle of a Maje∣sty or plenitude of Soveraigne Power, derived now at this time of the day from the People, is to draw water out of a Pumice, or to be mad with reason. I have now answered all that the Observer hath brought throughout his Booke, either concerning Hull or Sir John Hotham. Now will he heare with patience what Hull Men say? They say that Sir John hath been a prime occasion of these Distempers, as the most severe and zealous Collector of 1634. and 1635. Ship-mony that ever was, in his Sheivealty, a pre∣sident to the rest of the Kingdome, not onely an Ex∣ecutor of the commands of others, but also a Plotter and Contriver of this businesse: That he hath had, not  Moneths mind, but sixteen yeares mind to the Go∣vernment of Hull, (ever since the Wars with Spain)
upon all occasions, and as an introduction to his de∣signes hath gotten the Traine bands of Hull added to his Regiment: That his Friends have been the Rai∣sers and Fomenters of these Feares and Jealousies, of the surprising of Hull, sometimes by the Lord of Dunbarres Men that were trained under ground, (surely they were not men, but Serpents Teeth that should be turned into armed Men,) sometimes by Mr. Terret a Lincolnshire Gentleman and his Troopes of Horse; a fine devise indeed to have surprised Hull on a suddain, with horse, and with horse from Lin∣colnshire, who knows how they should have got over Humber, unlesse they were winged? They say that before ever the Kngdome took any notice of a breach between the King and the Parliament, Master Hotham openly divided them at Hull, They that are for the King stand there, and they that are for the Par∣liament stand here; did he know nothing then? judge you. They tell who it was that threw away His Majestyes Letter in scorn, and told the Major of Hull it was worth nothing: who it was that com∣manded the Burgesses upon pain of Death to keep in their Houses, and not to appeare when His Maje∣sty repaired to Hull: who it was that caused the bone∣fires to be put out upon the day of His Majestyes inau∣guration upon pretended fear of the Magazine; where∣as at the same time his Souldiers had a great fire under the very Walls of it: who it was that desired of the Townes Men of Hull a certificate to the Par∣liament, that His Majesty came against Hull in an Hostle manner, with greater numbers then he had; which was refused by the greater and sounder part, as
good reason they had, both because it was untrue, and also because during all the same time they were confi∣ned to their Houses upon pain of Death: who it was that administred an Oath or Protestation to the Townes Men of Hull, so directly opposite both to their Oath of Allegiance, and to the Oath which they take when they are admitted Burgesses or Free∣men of that Corporation. They say Mr. Hothams Moto of his Cornet is, For the publick liberty but that it was not for the publick Liberty either for him to promise the Townes men that none should be trou∣bled with billeting Souldiers against their wills, and so soon as he was gotten into Hull to fill their hou∣ses with Billiters, and tell them it was Policy of State to promise fair till they were in possession; or for his Father to hold a Pistoll to the brest of the Kings Lieutenant, to beate and imprison their Per∣sons, to banish them from their habitations, to drown their Corne and Meddow, to burn their Houses, to robbe them of their goods, and allow the owner but ten pounds out of a thousand, for the maintenance of himselfe, his wife, and Children; to suffer his Officers to charge an honest Woman with fellony, for com∣ming into her own house, because her Husband was a Delinquent, and Sir Iohn had disposed his goods. If you desire to know where was the first forcing of bil∣lets? it was at Hull: where was the first plundering of goods? at Hull: the first drowning of Grounds? at July 5. Hull: where was the first burning of Houses? at July 9. Myton neare Hull: where was the first shedding of blood? at July 27. Anlaby near Hull; and to aggravate the matter in a time of Treaty and expectation of Peace.
They say the first men banished from their Habitati∣ons, were Mr. Thornton, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Per∣kins, Mr. Faireburne, Mr. Kerny, Mr. Topham, M. Watson, Mr. Dobson of Hull. They say the first Im∣positionof four pound a Tunne upon some kind of Commodityes was at Hull: and wish that the Father had been translated into Lincolnshire with the Sonne, that Yorkeshire might have sung, Laetentur Caeli &c. You have seen what they say, whereof I am bu the Relater, if it seem too sharp, blame the Pellica and not me. Now I must crave a word with the Towne. Besides the oath of Allegiance which every good Subject hath taken or ought to take, every Bur∣gesse of that Town takes another Oath at his admis∣sion, to keep that Towne and the Blockhouses to the use of the King and his Heires, (not of the King and Parliament.) I cannot now procure the Copy to a word: but I shall set down the like Oath for Yorke; and of the two, the oath of Hull is stricter. I desire the Londoners and all the strong Townes in the Kingdom, who I conceive have taken the same form of Oath, to take it into serious consideration for their Soules health. This heare ye my Lord Major, Mr. Chamberlen, and good Men that I from hence forth shall be tru∣sty and true to Our Soveraigne Lord the King and to this Citty. And this same Citty I shall save and maintein to our said Soveraigne Lord the King His Heires and Successors &c. So helpe me God. The Oath beginnes as solemnely as that of the Ro∣mane
Faeciall, Heare O Iupiter, and thou Iu, Quirinus thou &c. And being affirmative, though it bind not a Townes-man ad semper, to be alwayes upon the Walls in Arms; yet it binds him semper, to be ready upon all necessityes, it binds him never to doe any thing that may be contrary to his Oath. And was not that Protestation contrary, which was by Sir Iohn Hotham imposed upon the Inhabitants of Hull and by them taken? Forasmuch as the King being seduced by wicked and evill Counsell, intends to make Warre against this Towne of Hull, who have done nothing but by Order of Parliament: We therefore whose names are here under written, doe protest before Almighty God and all good Christians, to be ready with all cheerfullnesse and willingnesse to our powers with our Lifes and Estates, to defend the same against all opposition whatsoever. Observe first what Gudgeons he makes them swal∣low. How doe they know that the King is seduced? Sir Iohn tells them so: Or that His Majesty intended to make Warre against Hull, unlesse because their Consciences told them they had given him just grounds to doe so? It was Sir John Hotham, not the Town of Hull, which was accused by His Majesty. Observe how he makes his act, the act of the whole Town, who have done nothing: and yet they poore men were mued up in their Houses whilest it was a doing. Lastly how they affirme that he hath done nothing but by order of Parliament: yet it is certain many
who were require to protest, and were banished for not proesting, I believe not one of them all did ever yet see this Order: (how could they see that which never was?) for these men to know that he had an Order, to know that he did not exceed his Order, is miraculous. Upon these feined grounds they build their solemne Protestation; what to doe? To defend Hull against all opposition whatsoever, His Majesty is not excepted: and the first words, For as much as th King being seduced &c. shews that His Majesty is prin∣cipally intended. To save and defend the Town to Our Soveraigne Lord the King and His Heires; So saith the Oath: To defend it against all opposition whatso∣ever, yea of the King seduced; so saith the Pro∣testation. Now if these two be not repugnant dire∣ctly one to another, if every man that hath taken this Protestation, be not directly perjured; Reddat mihi mi∣nam Diogenes, Let him that taught me Logique give my mony again. What is this but to intangle and ingage God in Rebellion, and to put his broad Seale to Letters counterfeited by themselves? They suffered much who were banished for not protesting: but they more who stayed at home with such hazard of their Soules. Some men may be so silly as to aske whether of these two ingagements, the Oath or the Protestation ought to be kept? The case is clear the former Obligation doth alwayes prejudge the latter: the latter Will is best, but the first Oath: The Protestation is plaine perjury, and to persevere in it, is to double the sinne: Dura promissio, aecerbior solutio, to make the Protestation was ill, to keep it nbr. is worse; David protested as much against Naball,
yet upon better consideration, ensem in vagina revo∣cavit, he retracted it. Secondly, an Oath made by one that is not sui ju∣ris, who hath not power over him selfe, in that which he sweares, is voide even when it is made: As for a Child or a Wife to sweare against their Filiall or Conjugall Duty, or for a Subject to swea against his Allegiance, (and such an one was that Protesta∣tion,) this is sufficient to make it voide. To which much more might be added, as that the former Oaths were grounded both upon a naturall and a civill Ob∣ligation, were freely assumed, but this Protestation was meerely forced: the former were taken before a lawfull Magistrate, the latter before an Intruder, who had no power to administer such a Protestation. But I have dwelt long enough on this point: I wish our great Citties who have taken the like Oath may lay it to heart. In the close of this point, the Observer tells us, that if Faux had fallen by a private mans sword in the very instant when he would have given fire to his train, that act had not been punishable. What then? will he compare the Soveraigne Magistrate to a Powder Traytour; or his undermining the Parliament House with the Kings repairing to his own Town; or his blo∣wing up His Majesty and the Peeres, with the Kings requiring his own goods. This is false and painted fire, the traine was laide the other way, Quicquid ostendat mihi sic, incredulus odi. The next considerable Observation is concerning Irish Reb ion
Ireland: A Tragicall Subject which may justly chal∣lenge our teares and prayers. The Observer falls upon this in the 17. 29. and 36. pages of this Treatise, and likewise in his Observator defended, and other Discourses lately published, either without a name or under another name. The condition of Ireland is so much the more to be deplored, by how much the lesse it could then be expected: when Religion began to shew its beames over the face of that Kingdom, yea without any pressure to the Conscience of any man, except such as were introducers of innovations into the publike service of the Church; when the Law had obteined a free current throughout the whole Island; when the scale of equity gave the same weight to Gold and Lead, and the equall administration of Justice to Rich and Poore, did secure the inferiour Subjects from oppression; when there was a dayly growth of all Arts and Trades and Civility; when that which was formerly so great a burthen to this Crown in the ordinary accounts every year, was now become able not onely to defray its own charge, but also make a large supply to His Majestyes Revenue; when all the orders of that Kingdom had so lately given an unanimous expression of their Zeal and Devotion to His Majestyes Service: That on a suddain the Sky should be so totally overcast, with a pitchy cloud of Rebellion, That all our fairest hopes should be so unexpectedly nipped in the bud; deserves a little inqui∣sition into the true reason of it. Some who have long since learned, that a dead man cannot bite, are bold to cast it on the Earle of Straffords score; how justly let these two considerations wit∣nesse.
First that the prime Actors in this Warre, were as great opposers and Prosecutors of the Earle: Members of the same Faction may feine quarrells among themselves in publike, only to gain upon a cre∣dulous party, and to inable themselves to doe more mis∣chief, but this never proceeds so far as blood. Se∣condly, looke who they are in Ireland whose Heroi∣call actions, in such a scarcity of necessary supplyes, have mainteined the English and the Protestant cause, and you shall find very many of them the intimate Friends of the Earl of Strafford, and principall Com∣manders in the Irish Army called the Popish Ar∣my, which was said to be intended against England: if you inquire further into the long Robe for Coun∣sell, you will find the same observation made good. Then let the Earles ashes rest in peace for this. Others bred out of the excrements of those Gi∣ants who made Warre against Heaven, cast this upon his sacred Majesty. (To use the Observers words) An absurd, unreasonable, incredible supposition, That he who may boast more truely then Pericles could up∣on his deathbed, that never one Athenian did wear black for his sake: Now, as if all his former goodnesse were but personated, or Neroes Soule had transmigrated into his Body, should delight in the blood and slaugh∣ter of his Subjects. To what end? to exhaust his Treasure, lose his Revenues, weaken his Friends, & deprive himselfe of the certain assistence of his Sub∣jects, at a time when he conceives it to be so usefull for his affaires. They had need be strong proofes indeed, that can incline the judgement of any rationall Man, to such a senselesse Paradox. Let us view them.
First, The Rebells said so, They pleaded the Kings Authority, They called themselves the Queenes Army. Is not this a doughty Argument? By the same reason we may accuse Christ, as the Patron of all Schisma∣ticall Conventicles, because they say, here is Christ, and there is Christ, some out of a credulous simplicity, others out of a deep subtlety: or ascribe the Primi∣tive Haeresies to the Apostles, because the false Tea∣chers did use their names, to make their Haeresies more current: So Sir Iohn Hotham and Serjeant Ma∣jor Skippon, doe pretend the Authority of King and Parliament; the King disclaimes both the one and the other: many who are now in Arms against the King, do verily beleeve they fight for the King, against some bad Counsellers, whom they cannot name. The same Rebells sometimes pleaded an Ordinance of Parliament. Nothing is more usuall with Pirates then to hang out a counterfeit Flagge. A second reason is, Sundry Commanders of note were passed over into Ireland, by his Majestyes warrant, who were seen presently after in the head of the Re∣bells. His Majesty hath long since answered this, and demanded reparation of such a groundlesse Calumny. I onely adde two things. The one how ignorant our intelligencers are of the State of Ireland, to fein such a devise of a Brother of Sir George Hamletons: yet Sir George hath no Brother there but Sir Fredericke, who was then and long after in Manour Hamleton, as opposite to the Irish Rebells as the Observer him∣selfe. The other is, if this were true, yet it were but a poor collection; There are many who have had not onely Warrants under the Kings hand, but Let∣ters
Patents under his Broad Seale, who owe their very subsistence to His Majestyes bounty; yet have made a shift to creepe from his bosome, out at his sleeve. If such a thing had been, (as it is an impudent Fiction;) yet these are neither the first nor the last, that have betrayed the trust of a Gracious King. The third and last reason is, because His Majesty was not so active to represse this insurrection, nor so ready to proclaime them Traytours: so the Observer, He that will not accuse the King of zeal against the Irish Rebells, yet he may truely say, there is not the same 1. Obser pag. 11. zeal expressed that was against the Scots &c. The prof∣fered supplyes of the English and Scottish Nation are retarded, opportunityes neglected, nice exceptions framed. This plea is pertinent to make the King, though not the Contriver, yet the Conserver of that Rebellion: but is as false as the Father of Lyes, from whom it pro∣ceeds Hear His Majesty himselfe, The Irish Rebells pra∣ctise Declarati upon the R monstran pag. 21. such unhumane and unheard of outrages upon our mi∣serable People, that no Christian care can hear without horrour, nor Story paralell. And as we looke upon this, as the greatest affliction it hath pleased God to lay upon us, so our unhappinesse is increased in that by the distem∣pers at home, so early remedyes have not beene applyed to those growing evills, as the necessity there requires. And we acknowledge it a high Crime against Almighty God, and inexcusable to our good Subjects, if we did not to the utmost imploy all our powers and faculties, to the speediest and most effectuall assistence and protection of that distressed People. He conjures all His loving Subjects to joyne with him in that Worke, He of∣fers
to hazard his sacred Person in that Warre, To ingge the revenues of his Crowne; what can the Observer desire more? perhaps he may say these Of∣fers came late and unseasonably. Then let us looke backward to His Majestyes Proclamation of the first of Ianuary 1641, soon after his return from Scot∣land, in a time of so great Distractions here at home, when that Remonstrance which ushered in all our Feares and Troubles, was ready to be published. Let them shew, that any Course was presented to His Ma∣jesty before this, either by his great Councell to whom he had committed the care of it, or by his Lords Justices and Councell of Ireland, who were upon the place? We abhorring the wicked Disloyalty and horrible Acts committed by those Persons, do here∣by not onely declare our just indignation thereof, but also do declare them and their Adherents and Abetters, and all those who shall hereafter joyne with them, or com∣mit the like acts on any of our good Subjects in that Kingdome, to be Rebells and Traytours against our Roy∣all Person, and Enemyes to our Royall Crown of Eng∣land and Ireland, &c. Commanding them to lay down Arms without delay, or otherwise authorizing and requiring his Lord Iustices there, and the Generall of His Majesties Army, to prosecute them as Tray∣tours and Rebells with fire and sword. But if we look further still; when the first tydings of this cursed Re∣bellion came to His Majesty in Scotland, he did not sleep upon it, but presently acquainted both His Parli∣aments with it, required their assistence, recommended it to their care, promised to joyn in any course that should be thought fit. Neither did His Majestyes care
rest there, but at the same time he named six or seven olonels in the North of Ireland, to raise Forces instant∣ly to suppresse that insurrection, which was done accor∣dingly: and they say, if some had been as active then, as they were made powerfull by the confluence of that part of the Kingdome, in all probability that Cocka∣trice egge had been broken sooner then hatched; before that ever any of the old English, and many of the meer Natives had declared themselves. In pursuance of these premises, when the Act for Undertakers was tendered to His Majesty, he condiscended freely to give away all his Escheats to this Worke (an Act not to be paralelled among all his Predecessors:) yea though some clauses in that Statute, (especially for the limitation of His Majestyes Grace,) might seem to require a further discussion. The wants of Ireland and the present condition of England doe speak abun∣dantly, whether those great Summes of Mony, or those great Forces raised for that end, have been im∣ployed to the use for which they were solely desig∣ned: yet Rabshekeh will not want a pretext to raile a good Hezekiah, though Spider like, he suck poison out of the sweetest Flowers. Surely there must be some fire whence all this smoake hath risen. Per∣haps they conceive that His Majesty was not willing without good advise, upon the first motion to put all his strong Forts in the North of Ireland, into the hands of the Scotch Army; can you blame him, con∣sidering the present State of Affaires there? I dare referre it to any mans judgement that is not wholy prepossessed with prejudice, whether it was expedi∣ent at that time, or conducible to the speedy settle∣ment
of Ireland, for them to make that demand To divide a little Army, sixty miles one part from another, as farre as betwixt London Derry, and Carig∣fergus or the Newry, where impassable Rivers and Mountaines, and an uncertain passage by Sea would not permit one part to assist another; was a ready way either to a long Warre, or certain overthrow, and not to bring it to a quick conclusion. Neither did these places stand in need of any addition of Forces to se∣cure themselves, whose Service and Victories against the Rebells, may compare with any Forces in the North of Ireland: all their desire was that this Ar∣my would but shew themselves the Masters in the Field, to carry the Warre home to the Rebells own doores. Or if they had desired more Garrisons, Dun∣gannon or Charlemount in the heart of Tyrone, had been much more convenient to distresse the Enemy, then to have all their Forces lye scattered up and down the Sea coast. But these things were accorded quickly, and weeke after weeke, and Moneth after Moneth passed before any Forces moved out of Scotland for the Reliefe of Ireland. Or perhaps His Majesty was not willing in a pre∣amble of a Bill to Presse Souldiers for Ireland, to di∣vest Himselfe altogether of the power of the Militia here in England: We cannot be contented of late to gather the fruit, unlesse we may break the bough that did beare it, or to quench our present thirst, unlesse we may alter the property of the Fountain. Howsoever to exstinguish all questions, His Majesty did freely offer to raise with speed 10000 English Volunteers
for that Service; or to passe a Bill without any menti∣on of the right, which might do the Work without prejudice to any Person. What is it then which may in probability be thought the ground of this Rebellion? It requires not so long a search as the head of Nilus; for though I deny not, but that the Hen might be sitting, and some Irish have been long plotting such a thing in forreine Parts; yet they sate so farre from their Nests, that they Guiccardine could never have hatched it, without some extraordi∣nary helps. Some say that by weak management, So∣veraigne Authority was grown contemptible; or that desperate Estates or crying Debts, did ingage the Ringleaders both in Ireland and elswhere, into such courses; or that Personall quarrells and Revenge might challenge a share. Some say that there was a generall desire to shake off the English Government: but omitting these and the like, there are two grounds visible enough. The one is the Example of the late Covenant of their Neighbour Nation: As the Load∣stone drawes Iron to it; so Examples especially if they be successefull, have an attractive virtue and in∣fluence. I doubt not but the one went upon much safer grounds then the other in point of Policy, nei∣ther doe I desire to argue the Lawfulnesse in point of Justice, being a meer Stranger to their Nationall Laws. This is certain, there was a vast difference in the manner of prosecution, the one being more bloody then the other: which whether it be to be ascribed to their severall Principles, or to some particular and accidentall reasons I leave every man to his own Judgement. This is all I say, That if the one had not
piped, in probability the other had not dan A second reason was a generall apprehension  Jealousie and Feares at that time, That the Liberty both Civill and Religious, of the Subject and o Conscience, and the exercise of their Religion should be quie taken away from them; occasioned by some indiscreet threatnings, and some high-flying Petiti∣ons, and nourished and augmented by turbulent and seditious Persons, who perswaded the Common People that there was no security, to be expected, ei∣ther for Life or for Religion, Soule or Body, with∣out such a generall insurrection. Thus Men plunge themselves into reall dangers, out of fancyed and ima∣ginary Jealousies and Feares. The next thing in the Observer concerning Ireland, is the disparity between the proceedings of the true Rebells in Ireland, and the misnamed Rebells here in England. Their actions are all Blood, Rapine, Tor∣ture; All Ages, Sexes, Conditions, have tasted of their infernall Cruelty; Their intentions were to extirpate Religion, &c. to massacre the English Nation; their chief Leaders, are Iesuits and meere Bandettos, &c. Farre be it from me to justify, or so much as qualify those barbarous Acts, which have been committed in Ireland. Cruelty is an Argument of a Coward, not of an Heroicall Nature. But it ill becomes the Ob∣server to inveigh against the Iesuits, untill he have first taken the beame our of his own eye. He that shall compare Dolman or Parsons the Iesuit with this Observer, either for dangerous positions or viru∣lent detractions, may say aut Philo Platonizat,  Plato Philonizat, Good Wits jumpe. The Observer
doth but suppe up what Parsons and some others had disgorged before, that he might vomit it up again. When once the Bankes are broken, it is hard for him that was the cause of the inundation to prescribe li∣mits to it. Had the Observer and his Partners been as much the Major part of England as the Papists were of Ireland, wee should have seen what men they were. In the mean time the Observer hath given a Caution, that whilest Christians remaine in a Pri∣mitive condition, that is, are the weaker part and want strength, it is discretion (not duty) to conceale them∣selves. The Irish Rebellion is against the Authority of the King, not against his Person, this both against his Person and Authority: the Irish seek a Liberty of Conscience to themselves, these not onely a Liberty, but to impose a necessity upon all others: the Irish desire a capacity of Preferment, yet at his Majesties discretion to cull out whom he pleaseth; these Men will be their own Carvers and not leave the King such a latitude: The Irish fight against Men of another Religion, of another Nation; We like wild Beasts fight Protestant against Protestant, Englishman against Englishman, Brother against Brother, Parent against Child: they fight for to recover what they had lost; we fight to lose what we have: they know what they fight for; the greatest part of us fight for we know not what: like the two Paduan Brethren the one supposing he had as many Oxen as there were Starres, and the other supposing that he had a Pasture as large as the Heavens; the mortall quarrell be∣tween them was, whether the ones conceited Oxen might feed in the others supposed ground. But be∣lieve
it, they that cannot make rationall Men un∣derstand, why they put them by the eares together, have secret reasons to themselves, that they dare not manifest to others. The last passage concerning Ireland, is an Answer to His Majestyes Objection, That if the Major part of both Houses in Ireland, should vote a danger to their Religion, or that Kingdome, and thereupon by Or∣dinance settle the Militia, in the hands of such Persons as they may confide in, of the Romane Communion; they had the same grounds and pretences that our Men have. The Observer answers, That this is improperly urged, for England and Ireland are the same Domi∣nion. That there is as true and intimate an Union betwixt them, as between England and Wales. And though they doe not meet in one Parliament, yet their Parliaments to some purposes, are not to be held severall: And therefore if the Papists in Ireland were Stron∣ger and had more Votes, yet they would want. Autho∣rity to overrule any thing voted and established here in England. The reason why the minor Part in all Suffra∣ges subscribes to the Major, is that blood may not be shed,  in probability the Major part will prevaile,  Strife and Bloodshed would be endlesse, wherefore the Major part in Ireland ought to sit down and acquiesce, because Ireland is not a severall Monarchy from Eng∣land. Nor is that a Major part of Ireland and Eng∣land too, for if it were, it would give Law to us, as we now give Law there, and their Statutes would be of as much virtue here as ours are there, &c. Such Doctrin as this, hath helped to bring poore Ireland, to that miserable condition wherein now it
is. Will you heare with Patience, what the Irish themselves say of this? If any Ordinance may be im∣posed upon us, without an approbative, or so much as a receptive power in our selves, where is our Li∣berty then? Our Government is meerely Arbitra∣ry, our condition is slavish. We had Magna Char∣ta granted to us as well as England, and since that time, all other Liberties and Privileges of the English Subject: Shall that which is ours be taken from us without our own Act, or our owne Fault; and we never heard either in our Persons or by our Proctors? We desire the Observer to remember what he said before, That which concerns all, ought to be approved by all; We have no Burgesses nor representatives there: and that it is unnaturall for any Nation to contribute its own inherent puissance, meerely to support Slavery. Let the Definition be according to the Major Part of the Votes; but shall the Minor Part be denyed a Liberty to discusse or vote at all? As we deny not but the Kingdome of Ireland is united and incor∣porated to the Crown of England: So we un∣derstand not, by what right any power derived from the English Subject, can extend it selfe over us. That power which they have over us is relative, as they are the Kings Councell, wherein he confides: or by virtue of his Delegation to his Judges representing his own Person. Thus they. For further Answer. First, this is a meere trifling and declining of the Force of His Majestyes Ar∣gument, which lyes not in this, whether Ireland be  distinct Kingdome: but supposing it to be a di∣stinct Kingdome, (as without doubt it either is or
might be,) whether that in such a case as is propoun∣ded by His Majesty, it were lawfull for them to assume such a Power contrary to the Law of God and of Nations; or if Ireland were as much bigger then England as France is, (it is no strange thing for a greater Kingdome to be conquered by a lesser,) whether in such a case they might give Law to us, or their Statutes be of as great virtue here, as ours are there, meerely because it is so voted, by the Major part of the representative Body. An absurd incre∣dible Assertion. Secondly, there is not the like reason of Ireland and Wales. Wales is incircled with the same Sea, a part of the same Island, and originally in the Dayes of the Brittaines, a branch of the same Kingdome. Wales was incorporated to the Realme of England by Act of Parliament 27. Henrici 8. cap. 26: so was not Ireland. Wales have their Peers and Bur∣gesses sitting in the English Parliament: so hath not Ireland. Wales hath no distinct Parliaments of its own: but Ireland hath. Thirdly, as the Irish readily grant, that their Common Law is the same with ours: so they will not easily believe, that the English Statutes are all of force in Ireland. What all? even to an Act of Subsidies? who ever heard that. It is true, there hath been a question moved among some Lawyers, and those perhaps who were not the most concerned or versed in it, of the English Statutes, what Statutes and in what cases, and how farre they are binding to the Irish Subject? but I have not heard their opinion was so high as the Observers, or that ever the Bell
was rung out yet. If all English Statutes be of force in Ireland, what need was there for Henry the seventh to make an expresse Statute in Ireland, to authorize and introduce all the English Statutes before his time to be of force in that Kingdome? this Act had been supervacaneous and superfluous. And since that time we see many Statutes of force in England, that are of no force at all in Ireland: and many both before and since that time of force in Ireland, that have no power in England. Lastly, this Observer might be well one of Father Garnets Disciples; when he was asked about the Powder-Treason, whether it was lawfull to take away some Innocents with many Nocents? he answered yes; so it was compensated by a greater benefit or profit, which may perhaps be true sometimes (as in time of Warre) accidentally, in publique and neces∣sary, but not in private and voluntary Agents. So the Observer makes profit and strength, to be the onely rule and measure, of all actions of State: Justice and Piety are banished by an Ostracisme out of his Eu∣topia. This is to inslave Reason, and Crown bodily strength; to silence Law and Justice, and to Deifie Force and Power. The Observer is every where girding at the Cler∣gy; it is well that his new superstition reversed, will allow them that name. Have they not great cause to thank him, as the poor Persians did their King, when they were condemned, That he was pleased to remem∣ber them? Sometimes he scoffes at the Tribe; There were seditious Schismaticks of all Tribes. Sometimes he derides their Pulpetting, (it may be he likes a
Chaire better) because they teach a Divine Preroga∣tive, which none understand but these ghostly Counsellers who alwaies expresse sufficient enmity and antipathy,  Publique Acts and Pacts of Men. He that accuseth another, should first examine himselfe. I doe not be∣leeve that ever there was any Divine in the World, that made Kings such unlimited Creatures, as this Ob∣server doth the People. I have read some discourses of this subject, but I did never see any one so pernitious to a setled society of men, or so destructive to all hu∣mane compacts, as this seditious bundle of Observations; which makes the Law of Salus Populi, to be a dis∣pensation from Heaven, for the breach of all Oathes of Allegiance, and all other Obligations whatsoever; which measures Justice by the major part, and makes strength and power the rule of what is lawfull; which gives the People the last Judgement of necessity, and upon this Judgement a power to rise in Arms. If any Divine have unwittingly slipped into any such er∣rours, in not distinguishing between an absolute and respective Soveraignty, (which I can hardly beleeve,) yet the Observer might have held his peace for shame; The one is so intent upon the Law of God, the other upon the Law of Nature, that they both forget the known Laws of the Land. Especially he shews his spleen against Bishop, sometimes calling them Popish Bishops. If Popery he Calling  Bishops t Popish. were as ancient as Episcopacy, the Observer might shake his Eares at it to small purpose. Sometimes he stiles them the Praelaticall Faction. If that be a Facti∣on which is established by the Fundamentall Law of the Land, and hath ever been a radicated Order of
the Kingdom, What may a man think, of hi Rev∣rend Cohmen and Buton makers, and the rest of that diversified Schismaticall ie? Sometimes he makes Levi and Simn, Hierarchists and Papists, the heads of the maine Malignants. I ope the Observer will al∣low some Government in the Church, either of Coun∣cells, or Synods, or Assemblyes, or Consistoryes, or Se∣nates, or Presbyteryes either  as it is at Gene∣vah, or Parochiall as it is in the Low-Countries; either of Presidents, or Moderators, or Visiters, Pastors, Doctors Curate or not Curate, Elders perpetuall or Annuall, Deacons, Widow, or some of them for they are not yet well agreed about any of these: In one place Elders are Commissioners to the Seigniory, are placed and displaced by the Magistrate, take an Oath of Obedience to the Magistrate▪ in other places the King hath not so much as the place of a Lay-Elder, except he be chosen. Or perhaps the Observer is for none of all these wayes, but as errant an Independent in the Church, as he desires to be in the Common-wealth. Here are many things very considerable in this businesse. First, That in doubtfull cases, Melior est conditio vossident is, Possession is a strong plea, especially if it be of long continuance, as this of Episcopcy is; ever since Christianity was planted in this Kingdome. This is certain, Brittish Bishops have been of Note in For∣rein Councells, since the second Councell of Arles, which is above thirteen hundred yeares; to say nothing of Aristobulus, mentioned in the Epistle to the Ro∣mans, whom some good Authors make a Bishop in this Island. They that shall goe about to shake in pieces
such an ancient Institution, which was brought into the Church, either by the Authority, or at least, by the approbation of the Apostles, had need to bring cleare proofes, not blind conjectures, about which they themselves cannot agree one with another. Bishops flourished long in this Kingdom, even when the Brit∣tish Church enjoyed the Cyprian privilege, and ac∣knowledged no subjection to any forrein See what∣soever. Secondly, That which the Observer saith of Monar∣chy, that our Laws are locked and Cabinetted in it, in such manner, that the wounding of the one, is the blee∣ding of the other, (though he forget it throughout his Discourse,) is likewise true of Episcopacy, that it is woven and riveted into the body of our Law. Heare a Witnesse beyond exception, For the Government of Bishops, I for my part not prejudging the presidents of ord Vern∣ams Consi∣lerations. other Reformed Churches, doe hold it warranted by the Word of God, and by the practise of the ancient Church in the better times, and much more convenient for King∣doms, then parity of Ministers or Government by Sy∣nods. And presently after, It is worth noting that the Scripture saith, Translato Sacerdotio, necesse est ut & legis fiat Translatio: It is not possible in respect of the great and neere sympathy between the State Civill, and the State Ecclesiasticall, to make so maine an alte∣ration in the Church, but it would have a perillous ope∣ration upon the Kingdome. And therefore it is fit that Controversie be in Peace and Silence. It would not be forgotten what was cited before, out of Cartwright, That as the hangings must be shaped according to the House; so must the Civill Government, be conformed
to the Government of the Church. The Anabaptis egan with Bishops, but at length the Emperour was ith them but Carolus a Gandavo, Charles of Gant▪  leave it to others to Judge by what fate or fortune it omes to psse, beyond the Sea, That wheresoever any ther Regiment of the Church takes place, if the fa∣ourers of it be the Major part, and have power in their ands, it either finds or makes a popular State; every ans own imaginion will supply him with instances. And this may be the reason why Calvin (a wise man)  an Epistle to the King of Polonia, doth represent, ot the Disciplinarian, but Episcopall Government as tter for Monarchyes. Having shewed the Regiment f the Primitive Church by Patriarkes, Primates, and ishops, he proceeds thus: As if at this Day one Arch-ishop Epst. 100. should be over the illustrious Kingdom of Polonia, t to domineere over the rest, or arrogate their right unto imselfe, but for orders cause, &c. And further, there ould be a Bishop in each Citty or Province, to attend pe∣uliarly to the preservation of Order, (marke his Rea∣on,) even as Nature it selfe doth dictate to us, that in very College one ought to be chosen, upon whom the prin∣ipall care of the College should rest. Thirdly, Episcopacy is not onely ancient and ce∣ented into our Laws, but also was universally re∣eived, without any opposition, or so much as a que∣tion throughout the whole Christian World, among ll sorts of Christians of what Communion or rofession soever they were, Graecian, Latin, Rus∣an, Armenian, Abissine &c: yea even among those ho by reason of the great distance and remotenesse f their Countryes, never heard of the Pope, nor of
the name of Rome, ever since the Apostles did tread upon the face of the Earth untill this last Century of Yeares; so farre is it from being a Relick of Po∣pery. And the Observer is challenged to name but one Church, or so much as one poor Village, through∣out the whole World, from the Dayes of the Apo∣stles, till the year of Christ 1500, that ever was go∣verned without a Bishop; (I except the Acepali or such disordered Persons that had no Governmen at all:) or to name but one Lay-Elder, or one Ambu∣latory Bishop that governed by turne or course in th Primitive times, in the whole Catholike Church before the year 1536, when Calvine came to Gene∣uah. We find the proper and particular names of A∣postles, Evangelists, Bishop, Presbiters and Deacons in the Scriptures, in Councells, in Ecclesiastical Historyes, in the Fathers: if he and all his Friend be not able out of all these Authorities, to name on particular Lay-Elder or ambulatory Bishop; th reason must be, because there never was such a Crea∣ture in rerum natura. And his Elders in Saint Am∣brose and Saint Ierome, are much mistaken; ho should they be otherwise, the one Authour being  Bishop himselfe, and the other deducing Bishops i Alexandria from Saint Marke, and telling us plainl (that which we find to be true,) that without Episco∣pall pist. ad E∣ Authoriy, there will be as many Schismes as Pries in the Church? The Hierarchists (as he calls them▪ will be contented o wave all other Authors, and  ed by either of these. The seven Angells in th Revelation cap. 2. & 3, cannot be the seven Chu∣ches, for the Angells and the Churches are
distinguished, Rev. 1. 20: but it must be the seven Bishops of the Churches. These were not Parochi∣all Churches, each of them had many Pastors, and many particular Flocks. Beza confesseth that these Angell were Presidents over the other Presbiters: but Answ to S ravia p. 160▪ he believes not they had a priority: of Power, or that this Presidency was permanent, but went by course. If the Government went by turnes, I would gladly know, why one of them is called an Angell more then the other. Surely he that shall reade the seven Epistles, how some of them are commended for their constancy and perseverance in their Govern∣ment, and others reprehended for suffering Heretick to continue in their Churches: will find sufficient ground in every one of these Epistles to believe, that they were not changeable every weeke, or Moneth, or quarter of a Yeare: but constant and permanent Governours, having power of Jurisdiction to represse abuses; other∣wise why are they taxed for the abuses done in their Diocesses, if it were not in their power to remedy them? And if he will give credit to the Testimony of the Primitive Fathers, he may find both who sun∣dry of these Angells or Bishops were, and also who were their Successors. Fourthly, though in such variety of new Forms of Church Regiment, he hath not expressed himselfe to what Forme he inclines, saving that in one place e speakes of a Iancto of Divines, (I cannot think but himselfe would have the naming of them:) yet we will suppose that which we are farre from believing, that a few green Heads see more then all the Fa∣thers, and Councells, and Schoolemen; and that the
Observers busy working braine, could molde a Church better then all the Apostles. Notwithstanding all this, Saint Austins rule to Ianuarius is very conside∣rable, if you will not erre, doe that which I use to do, to whatsoever Church I come, I apply my selfe to the Ce∣remonies thereof: He would have added the Disci∣pline also, if there had been sundry Formes, but there was none but Episcopy then in the world. God is a mercifull God, and lookes upon his Crea∣tures with all prejudices of Education, Habitation, &c. Faction is more offensive to him, and breach of Cha∣rity more dangerous to the Soule, then any unknown errour in Discpline; much more where the errour is but supposed or feined, and the Schisme apparent. Now for the Discipline of the Church of England, all Men know and grant that it hath ever been Epis∣copall. In the publick Liturgy of our Church, con∣firmed by Act of Parliament, we pray for Bishops. In our Booke of Ordination confirmed by the same Authority, it is directly affirmed, as evident by Scrip∣tures and ancient Authours, that from the time of the Apostles there have ever been these Orders of Ministers in Christs Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and that these Orders are appointed by the Holy Ghost. In our Booke o Articles, which conteins the received doctrin of our Church, (and therefore without doubt comes within the compasse of our late Protestation,) the same Book of Ordination is mainteined, and it is plainely affirmed, That there is nothing contei∣ned in it, which s either superstitious or ungodly. In the Artic. 37. Apolgy of our Church, published to the whole Christian World, and by all Protestant Churches
approved and applauded, We declare that e beleeve that there be diverse degrees of Ministers in the Church, whereof some be Deacons, some be Priests, some Bishops. Which being so it deserves some consideration, which King Iames saith in the latter end of his Proclama∣tion for Uniformity, Such is the unquietnesse and un∣stedfastnesse of some dispositions, affecting every yeare new forms of things, as if they should be followed in their unconstancy, would make all actions of States ridiculous and contemptible; whereas the stedfast mainteining of things by good advise established, is the weale of the Commonwealth. I should not inlarge my selfe any further about this Consideration, but for two reasons. The one is, I find it said by some, that scarce any but Bishops have hitherto mainteined Bishops. Take only three Testimonies of many; they were all Members of the English Church, yet all Strangers, and all had lived in places opposite to Episcopall Government, none of them either Bishops, or their Chapleins, or Expectants. The first is King Iames, the most lear∣ned Preface t Christian Moua c of Kings, I have alwayes thought that there ought to be Bishops in the Church, according to the Aposto∣licall institution, and by consequence Divine Ordina∣tion. The second is Learned Bucer, a Germane, and imployed in the first Reformation of this Church, to read Divinity in Cambridge: one that was so op∣posite to Popery, that after his Death, his very bones were taken out of his Grave and burned by the Pa∣pists. He is full in many places, take one. From De reg Christ cap.  the perpetuall observation of the Churches, from the very Apostles themselves, we see that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, that among the Ministers, to whom the
charge of the Church was especially committed, one should undergoe a singular care of the Churches and the whole Ministery, and in that care and sollicitude was before all the rest: for which cause the name of a Bishop was peculiarly attributed to these highest Procurators of the Church. The third is Peter Martyr, at the same time imployed to reade Divinity at Oxford; having expres∣sed his consent & concurrence with Saint erome con∣cerning Episcopacy, he proceeds. So far it is from us to sp. ad rd. ad 50. ject. bring confusion into the Church, that rather we follow the same way: for there is no Diocesse with us, or Citty, where of many Pastors, there is not some one chosen ex∣celling in Learning and Experience, whom they call the Superintendent of the Church. He convocates all the rest, he admonisheth them, he governs them according to the Word of God, as the State of things requires. The second reason is, that I see it lately published to the World in Print, that Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Reynolds, were all Oppugners of Epis∣copacy. Perhaps of Popish Episcopacy, that is, the face to r. Ba. abuse not the thing, or of an absolute necessity by Divine Right of such and such an Episcopacy indo∣wed with such or such degrees of Power or Prehe∣minence, or of such an Episcopacy as is held to dif∣fer from Presbiterate in the very power of Order: but surely not of Episcopacy it selfe. I wondred at the impudence of the Man. It is a bad cause which stands in need to be underpropped with such pious im∣pious frauds, & is onely fortified with hideous & palpa∣ble Lyes: if he fable in this, let him have the just reward of a Lyar not to be trusted in other matters. And first for Doctor Whitakers; Bellarmine objects against the Protestants, that they take away Bishops: He
answers, Neq  totm Episcopo or , Cont. 2. de Eccles. qu.  cap. 3. t ille falso lumniatur, sed Pseud Episcop tantum Pontificios. We doe not condemne all the or∣der of Bishops, as he (that is Bellarmine: we may say the Prefacer,) falsly slanders us, but onely  fals Bishops of the Church of Rome. And about the same place, speaking of that ancient constitution, that three Bishop should be present at the Ordination of a Bishop, he affirmes that it was a good and a godly sanction, and fit for those good times. Doctor Fulke ex∣presseth upon Titus cap. 1. himselfe home, That among the Clergy for order and seemely Government, there was alwayes one Principall to whom the name of Bishop or Superintendent hath been applyed, by long use of the Church: which roome Titus exercised in Crete, Timothy in Ephe∣su, others in other places. That though a Bishop and n Elr is of one Order and Authority in preaching the Word and administring the Sacraments: yet in Govern∣ment, by ancient use of Speech, he is onely called a Bi∣shop, who in Scripture is called proestaenos, proests, egoumenos, Rom. 12. 8. 1 Tim. 5. 7. Heb. 13. 17. that is, the chiefe in Government, to whom the Ordina∣tion or Consecration by imposition of Hands, was alwayes principally committed. So according to Doctor Fulke, the name is from Man, but the Office from God. I I beseech thee Reader view the three places cited by him at leisure, and thou shalt see who are the Rulers nd Governours and Ruling Elders mentioned in Hoy Scripures, in the judgement of Doctor Fulke. Lastly, Doctor Reynolds is of the same minde, That the El∣ders Reynold. ad Hart. p. 53 ordeined by the Apostles, did choose one among them to be President of their Company, and Mode∣rator
of their actions, as of the Church of Ephesus though it had sundry Elders and Pastors to guide it: yet among these sundry, was there one chief, whom our Savi∣our calleth the Angell of the Church, &c. And this is he whom afterwards in the Primitive Church, the Fa∣thers called Bishop, &c. So that by Doctor Reynolds, though not for the name, yet for the thing Episco∣pacy was in the Church, even when Saint Iohn writ the Revelation, and was approved by our blessed Sa∣viour from Heaven. Fifthly, In a difference of Wayes, every pious and peaceable Christian, out of his discretion and care of his own salvation, will inquire which is via tutissima, the safest way. Now the Separatists themselves (such as have either Wisedome or Learning,) doe acknow∣ledge that Holy Orders are truely (that is validly,) given by the Ordination used in our Church, (I meane not such as either hold no outward calling to be needfull, as the Anabaptists, or make the Church a meere De∣mocracy, as the Independents:) but on the other side, a very great part of the Christian World, and among them many Protestants, doe allow no Ordination to be right, but from Bishops. And even Saint Ierome, who of all the Fathers makes the least difference be∣tween a Bishop and a Presbiter, yet saith, VVhat can a Bishop doe, which a Presbiter doth not, except Ordina∣tion? And seeing there is required to the essence of a Church, 1. a Pastor, 2. a Flock, 3. a Subordination of this Flock to this Pastor; where we are not sure that there is right Ordination, what assurance have we that there is a Church? I write not this to prejudge our Neighbour Churches, I dare not limit the ex∣traordinary
operation of Gods Spirit, where ordinary meanes are wanting without the default of the Per∣sons; he gave his People Manna for food whilest they were in the Wildernesse. Necessity is a strong plea▪ Many Protestant Churches lived under Kings and Bishops of another Communion; others had parti∣cular reasons, why they could not continue or intro∣duce Bishops: but it is not so with us. It was as wisely as charitably said of Saint Cyprian, If any of my Pre∣decessours through ignorance or simplicity have not hol∣den that which our Lord hath taught, the mercy of the Lord might pardon them, &c: So if any Churches through necessity, or ignorance, or newfanglednesse, or Covetousnesse, or Practise of some Persons, have swerved from the Apostolicall rule, or Primi∣tive institution, the Lord may pardon them, or sup∣ply the defect of Man; but we must not therefore pre∣sume. It is Charity to thinke well of our Neighbours, and good Divinity to looke well to our selves. But the chief reason is, because I do not make this way to be simply necessary, but onely shew, what is safest where so many Christians are of another mind. I know that there is great difference between a valid and a regular Ordination, and what some choise Di∣vines do write of case of Necessity: and for my part am apt to believe, that God looks upon his People in mercy, with all their Prejudices, and that there is a great Latitude left to particular Churches, in the constitution of their Ecclesiasticall Regiment, accor∣ding to the exigence of Time and Place and Per∣sons, So as Order and his own Institution be observed. Sixtly, those Blessings which the English Nation
have received from that Order, do deserve an ac∣knowledgement. By them the Gospell was first plan∣ted in the most parts of England: By their Doctrine and Blood, Religion was reformed and restored to us: By the learned writings of them and their Successors, it hath been principally defended; Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, were all Bishops, Coverdale excer∣cised Episcopall Jurisdiction. With what indigna∣tion doe all good Protestants see those blessed Men, stiled now in Print by a younge novice, halting and wo Books  Reforma∣on. time-serving Prelates, and common stales to countenance with their prostituted gravities every Politick fetch. It was truely said by Seneca, that the most contempti∣ble Persons ever have the loosest tongues. The Ob∣server confesseth that Magna Charta was penned by Bishops; (no ill service.) Morton a Bishop of Ely was the Contriver and Procuer of the Union of the two Roses; (a great blessing to this Nation.) Bishop Fox was the instrument imployed to negoti∣ate and effect the union of the two Kingdomes. In former Distractions of this State, Bishops have beene Composers and Peace-makers, according to their Office: now they are contemned, and in their roomes such Persons are graced, whose Tongues are like that cursed Bay-Tree which caused brawling and . contention wheresoever it came. England owes ma∣ny of her Churches, Colleges, Hospitalls and other Monuments of Piety and Charity, to Bishops. It requires good advise before we expell that Order which of Infidells made us Christians, and that the the reasons should appear to the World. An Act of any Society how eminent soever, wherein are none
of the Clergy, may sooner produce submission then satisfaction to the Conscience. Seventhly, we have had long experience of Episcopall Government: if it have been accidentally subject to some abuses; I desire to know what Government in the World is free from abuses: yet late and deare experience hath taught us, that much of that rigour which we complained of, was in some sort necessary. If the Independents should prevail, who are now so busy breaking down the Walls of the Church, to bring in the Trojan Horse of their Democracy, or rather Anarchy▪ doe but imagine what a confused mixture of Religions we should have: Affricke ne∣ver produced such store of diversified Monsters. But to passe by them as unworthy of our stay, and to in∣sist onely in that Forme of Church Regiment, which of all new Forms is most received. I intend not ac∣cidentall abuses, which from ignorant and unexpe∣rienced Governours must needs be many: but some of those many Grievances which flow essentially from the Doctrin it selfe. First for one High Com∣mission, we shall have a Presbytery or younge High Commission in every Parish. Our Bishops are bound to proceed according to Law: but this new Go∣vernment is meerely Arbitrary, bounded by no Law but their own Consciences. If the Bishops did us wrong we had our Remedy by way of appeale or pro∣hibition: but they admit no appeale, except to a Synod, which in a short Session cannot heare the twentieth part of just grievances. Our Law allowes not a Judge to ride a Circuit in his own Country, least Kindred, or Hatred, or Favour might draw him
to injustice: what may we then expect from so many Domesticall Judges, whose affections are so much stronger then their reasons, but siding and Partiality▪ yet they blush not to tell us, that this is the Tribunall of Christ: Chst hath but one Tribunall in Heaven, his Kingdom is not of this World. That these are the Laws of Christ: the Laws of Christ are immuta∣ble, They alter theirs every Synod. That their Sen∣tence is the Sentence of Christ: alas, there is too much Faction, and Passion, and Ignorance. Heretofore we accused the Pope, for saying that he had one Con∣sistory with Christ: doe we now goe about to set up Petty Popes in every Parish? and are they also become infallible in their Consistoryes, at least in their conclusion, not onely in matters of Faith, but also of Fact? These are generall Grievances. In particular, His Majesty shall lose His Supre∣macy in Causes Ecclesiasticall, His Patronages, His first Fruits, Hs Tenths, and worse then all these, the dependence of His Subjects, He shall be subjected to Excommunication, by which Engine the Popes advanced themselves above Emperours: The Nobility and Gentry shall be subjected to the censures of a raw rude Cato▪ and and a few Artificers, They shall lose their Advowsons (the People must elect their own Ministers,) They shall hazard their impropria∣tions: The two eyes of the Kingdome, the Univer∣sities, shall be put out: The Clergy shall have their straw taken away, and the number of their bricks doubled: The People shall groane under the De∣crees of a Multitude of ignorant unexperienced Go∣vernours, be divided into Factions about the choise
of their Pastors, be subject to censure in sundry Courts for the same offence, be burthened with Lay-El∣ders, who if they please may expect, according to the Apostolicall institution (upon their grounds,) double onour, that is, maintenance: If there arise a private arre between the Parent and the Child, the Hus∣band and the Wife, they must know it and censure it, Scire volunt secreta domus atque inde timeri: All men must undergoe the danger of contrary Commands, from coordinate Judges; then which no∣thing can be more pernicious to the Consciences or Estates of Men, Nulla hic arcana revelo. These are a part of the Fruits, of their most received Govern∣ment who oppose Bishops: if they doe not all shew themselves in all places, remember the Observers Cau∣tion, They wanted power to introduce them as yet. As some Plants thrive best in the shade: so if this Form of Regiment shall agree best with the constitution of some lesser Commonwealths, much good may it doe them, so they will let us injoy the like favour, Petimus damusque vicissim. Eightly, those Arguments which they urge out of Scripture against Episcopacy, are meere mistakes, con∣founding the power of Superiority itselfe, with the vitious affectation or Tyrannicall abuse of it; and are none of them to the purpose. As those two Texts that are most hotly urged, The Kings of the Luke 22. Gentiles excercise Dominion over them, but ye shall not be so: and that of Saint Peter, Neither as being Lords 1 Pet. 5.
over Gods Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock; do admit as many Answers almost as there are words in each of them, but they are not needfull. For no man that ever I read of, did say that Bishops had any such Despoticall or Lordly Dominion annexed to their Of∣fice, but onely a Fatherly power. And if these Pla∣ces be to be understood in that sense which they would have them, they doe as much overthrow all their new Presidents, and Moderators, and Visiters, and their whole Presbytery, as they would have them to doe E∣piscopacy. Neither Christ nor Saint Peter did ever distinguish between temporary and perpetuall Gover∣nours: between the Regiment of a single Person, and a Society or Corporation. They like not the name of Lord, but that of Master they love dearely: yet that is forbidden as much as the other, Neither be ye called Master, for one is your Master, even Christ. at. 23. 10. And whilest they reject the Government of a Pre∣sident or chief Pastour, yet they stile their own new devised Elders, Ruling Elders: and understand them still in the Scripture by name of Governours. Ninthly, waving all these and all other advanta∣ges of Scriptures, Fathers, Councells, Historyes, Schoolemen: because it is alledged that all other Pro∣testant Churches are against Episcopacy, I am con∣tented to joyn the issue, whether Bishops, or no Bi∣shops have the major number of Protestant Votes. First the practise of all the Protestant Churches in the Dominions of the King of Sweden and Denwarke, and the most of them in High Germany, doe plainly prove it; each of which three singly, is almost as much as all the Protestant Churches which want Bishops,
hut together, (to say nothing of His Majesties Do∣minions;) all these have their Bishops or Superin∣tendents, which is all one. But for the point of practise, heare Reverend Zanchy, a Favourer of the Disciplinarian way, In Ecclesiis Protestanti∣um non desunt reipsa Episcopi, &c. In the Churches of the Protestants, Bishops, and Arch-Bishops are not really wanting, (whom changing the good Greek Names into bad Latine Names) they call Superinten∣dents, and generall Superintendents. Where neither the good Greek names, nor bad Latine names take place, yet there also there use to be some principall Persons, in whose hands almost all the authority doth rest. Neither is their practise disagreeing from their Doctrin. To be∣gin with those who first were honoured with the name of Protestants, who subscribed the Augustane Confes∣sion, among whom were two Dukes of Saxony, two Dukes of Luneburge, the Marquesse of Brandburge, the Prince of Anhalt, and many other Princes, Re∣publicks, and Divines: Thus they, Facile possent Epis∣copi legitimam obedientiam retinere, &c. Bishops might easily retein lawfull obedience, if they did not urge us to keep Traditions, which with a good Conscience cannot be kept. Again, Nunc non id agitnr, &c. It is not now Cap. sept. potest Eccl sought that the Government be taken away from Bishops but this one thing is desired, That they will suffe the Gos∣pel to be purely taught, and release some few Observances, which cannot be kept without sinne. This generall Con∣fession may stand for a thousand Witnesses, under which all the Protestants in Germany did shelter them∣selves. To this I may adde the Apology for the same Confession, Hac de re in hoc conventu, &c. We have often Cap. de n & us S
testified of this matter in this meeting, that we desire wi all our hearts, to conserve the Ecclesiasticall Policy, an the degrees made in the Church by Humane Authorit Againe, This our Will, shall excuse us both before God an all the World, that it may not be imputed to us, that th Authority of Bishops was weakned by our means. Th confession of Saxony is subscribed by seventeen Super∣intendents of Bishops. The Suevick Confession i Harm. con∣fe Sect. 19. p. 290. Harm. con∣fes. Sect. 11. p. 65. so farre from opposing the spirituall power of the Prae∣lates, that they doe not exclude them from secular Go∣vernment; and complaineth of great wrong done t their Churches, as if they did seek to reduce the powe of Ecclesiasticall Praelates to nothing: And most plain ly they declare for the Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction o Bishops, in the 33. Chapter of the secular Magistrat I might produce the Articles of the Protestants, and more Confessions, and many Witnesses to this pur∣pose, if it were needfull. But perhaps some may say That these are all Lutherans, and no good Protestant That were strange indeed, that they who made th Protestation, and from thence were called Protestants keeping themselves to the same grounds, should be∣come no Protestants; and they who made no Prote∣station, nor have right to the name, but by communio with them, should become the onely Protestants. Bu to satisfie them in this also. Upon the Words of the Augustane Confession before recited, the Observations set forth in the nam of the French and Belgicke Churches, at the latte end of the Harmony of Confessions, doe divide Bishops into three kinds; 1 Apostolicall, of Orde . 1. not of Degree, common to all the Ministers of the
word; 2. Humane, both of Order and of Degree, which they confesse to e ancient, and defined, and circum∣scribed with many old Canons; 3. Tyrannicall, in the Church of Rome, wandring not onely without the word of God, but also extra Canones aequissimos, with∣out those most equall or just Canons: which last they abhominate; but of this more in the next Considera∣tion. They say further, that it is the Office of god∣y Obs. 3. Magistrates, to see how farre it may be expedi∣ent for Bishops, to have some kind of Civill Domi∣nion: and upon the Saxonick confession they acknow∣ledge, that Bishops may make Laws belonging to Order Obs. 1. nd Decency, so it be not done Arbitrarily, but by the judgement of a lawfull Synod; and what doe we say more? You have also seen the confession of the Church of England, directly for Episcopacy; which neverthe∣esse was so approved and applauded by the Tigurine Divines, That they made no end of praising of it, that hey judged nothing to have been published more perfect Pet. Mart. Ep. ad Jew∣ellum. in those dayes, that they promise themselves that the Pro∣testant Church shall never want a Champion, so long as the Authour thereof did live: yet it was both for Bi∣shops, and by a Bishop. Calvine was no Lutherane, yet he subscribed the Augustane Confession, o the A∣pology for it, or both. And in his Institutions, he describeth at large the Regiment of the Primitive Church, after the dayes of the Apostles, That though the Bishops of those times, expressed more in their Canons Lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. then was expressed in the word of God, yet they composed the whole Oeconomy of the Church with that caution, that it may easily appear that it had almost nothing strange from the word of God, That in each Citty the Presbyters did choose one of their number to whom they gave the Title
of Bishop, specially least dissention might spring from equallity as commonly it comes to passe. He shews out of Saint Ierome, that this institution was as ancient in Alexandria as from Saint Marke. He proceeds to shew the end of Arch-Bishops, and the Constitutio of Patriarkes: and concludes, That this kind of Go∣vernment some called an Hierarchy, by a name impro∣per, at least not used in the Scriptures: but if we pass by the name and looke upon the thing it selfe, we sha find that the Ancient Bishops did goe about to devise no other Forme of governing the Church, then that which God hath prescribed in his word. There might be sundry other places alleged out of his Epistle, and his Answer to Sadolet, to the same purpose; but I omit them only with this note, that one of the most conspicuous place in his Epistle to Sadolet, Talem nobis Hierarchiam, &c. (against those that shall reject Episcopacy, being redu∣ced to its due submission to Christ, and Society with their Brethren,) is purged out in the two latter Edition of Beza and Gallasius; to let us see, that the Romanist are not the onely men, who cut out the Tongues o their own Witnesses. Zanchy delivers the very same grounds, and addes, That nothing is more certain De Relig. Christ. c. 25. Sect. 10. 11. & Observat. in eundem lo∣cum. then this, That Episcopacy was received into the Church communi consensu totius Reipublicae Christianae with the common consent of the whole Christian Com∣monwealth, That it was free for them to doe so, Tha it was done for honest or just causes, That it cannot b misliked, That those things which are defined and re∣ceived by the Godly Fathers, congregated in the nam of the Lord, by the common consent of all, without an contradiction to the Holy Scriptures, though they be no of the same Authority with the Scriptures, yet they ar
from the Holy Ghost. Quae hujusmodi sunt, ea eo probare nec velim, nec audeam bona Conscientia, uch as he had neither Will, nor Confidence, nor  to disallow. Which very place being rged by arraviah against Beza, he closeth with it, A quo ma∣ime Resp. pag. 116. certe dissentimus, cum Episcopatum illum mere di∣inum & Apostolicum, ab humano non quasi sint illa nter se repugnantia, sed tantum ut diversa & imparis uctoritatis discernimus. From which opinion of Zan∣y we doe not dissent, nor distinguish between that Apostolicall and meerely Divine Episcopacy, from this other which is humane, as if they were re∣ugnant one to another, but onely diverse and of un∣equall Authority. The same Booke is full of such places, Quod si nunc Ecclesiae Anglicanae instauratae, &c. Pag. 3. If the English reformed Churches doe now stand under∣propped with the authority of Bishops and Arch-Bishops, as it hath come to passe in our memoryes, that they have had Men of that order, not onely notable Martyrs, but most excellent Pastors and Doctors; let them injoy that singular Blessing, which I pray God may be perpetuall to them. And elswhere speaking of humane Episco∣pacy (as he is pleased to call it,) he addes, Quo sane fru∣antur, &c. Which let them injoy who perswade themselves Pag. 177. that the right use of it may be observed by them. And again, Absit ut hun ordinem, &c. Farre be it from me to reprehend this Order as rashly or proudly erected, though Pag. 144. it be not a Divine or meerely Apostolicall Constitution: whereof rather no man can deny that there may be great use, as long as good and holy Bishops are over the Church; Let them injoy it therefore that will and can. This & poterint, and can, was well put in: it was not the un∣lawfulnesse
of the order, but the inconsistency with the present State of Genevah, which excluded it thence. And having spoken of the Apostolicall Canon, and the Superiority of the Arch-Bishop above his Fellow Bishops, he concludes, quid aliud hic statuitur, &c. g. 116. What else is here decreed, but that order which we desire to be restored in all Churches? It appeares then plainly, by the confessions of Pro∣testant Churches, by the Testimonyes of the most learned Divines, yea, even of those that lived under another Government, that if Bishops be not neces∣sary, yet at the least they are lawfull. It appeares that three parts of fower of the Protestant Churches, have either Bishops or Superintendents, which is all one: and that those Churches which have neither, yet they have some principall Men, Primarios, which have as much power as Bishops, viis & modis. But if we should be contented to leave three parts of Protestants to joyn with the the fourth, shall we find them unanimous in this? No such thing. The Hel∣vetian and other Churches ascribe the Government of the Church to the Magistrate and allow no Lay-Elders: But Genevah and her Daughters to their Pre byteries, yet neither the Mother is like the Daugh∣ters, nor the Daughters very like one another; as hath been shewed in part before in this Treatise: and the Independents are for neither of these wayes: And all learned men doe acknowledge our English Episco∣pacy to be lawfull, yea even the present President and Pastors of Genevah do the same. So if we de∣sire consent either of Protestants in particular, or of Christians in generall, yea of the whole Catholicke
Symbolicall Church; it is best for us to keepe us where we are. My tenth and last Consideration riseth higher, That according to their grounds, who have been the greatest Oppugners of Episcopacy, the Government of our English Bishops is not onely lawfull, but for the most part necessary, nor onely necessary but even an Apostolicall and Divine Institution. This see∣ming Paradox is yet most certain, and their opposi∣tion hath been but beating the aire. For the clearer manifestation whereof, we must know. First that the greatest impugners of Episcopacy, do not seek to bring such a Parity into the Church: but that by the Ordinance of God and Dictate of Na∣ture, one Presbyter ought to be President above the rest, Ex Dei ordinatione perpetua, necesse fuit, est & rit, ut in Presbyterio quispiam & loco & dignitate Bezae defens. pag. 153. primus, actioni gubernandae praesit, cum eo quod ipsi Di∣vinitus attributum est   was, it is, it ever shall be necessary, by the perpuall Ordinance of God, that some one in the Presbytery as chief both in place and Dignity, be set over the Action to govern it. He saith that even then, whilest the appellation of Bi∣shops and Presbyters was common: yet the Presbytery had suum aliquem primum & proest Presbyterum, Some one to be their ruling or Presidentiall Presby∣ter. Pag. 140. He saith Saint Ierome did not so dote as to dream that no one of the Presbytery was set over the whole com∣pany in the Apostolique times: and takes it as a great injury, that any Man should thinke that they did goe about to abolish omnem unius Episcopen, in vel supra Pag. 160. caeteros compresbyteros, All Superspection or Superin∣tendency
of one above his Compresbyters. To the same purpose saith Calvine, it is no mervaile that the nst. lib. 4. c. 6. Sect. 8. twelve Apostles had one among them to govern the rest; this we have from Nature, the disposition of Men requires it, that in every Company though they be equall in power, yet one should be as Modera∣tor. Secondly, they teach (notwithstanding their drow∣sie, groundlesse, new-hatched conceit, that this Presiden∣cy went successively by turnes among the Presbyters,) that either in the dayes of the Apostles, or immediate∣ly from them, this Episcope or office of Superinten∣dency, became Elective and perpetuall to e man, Quod certe, reprehendi nec potest nec debet, which cer∣tainly neither can, nor ought to be blamed; especially seeing this ancient Custome was observed in the famou  defens. pag. 141. 142. 43. Church of Alexandria; I am inde a Marco Evangelist Even from Saint Mark the Evangelist. So as the Of∣fice is of Divine Institution, the forme of Applica∣tion onely is Humane: yet not meerly humane nei∣ther; Humanum non simpliciter tamen sed comparate, lla cum Patrum & tot Ecclesiarum injuria appella∣vero, I may caell it humane not simply, but comparative∣ly, without injury to the Fathers, or so many Churches; In∣deed all the Churches in the World, and all the Fa∣thers that ever were. Thirdly, This Presidency of Order, which they give to one man, even upon their own grounds is not desti∣tute of all kind of Command and power. He hath jus regendae communis actionis, a right to moderate the Pag. ii4. 887. Action of the College, or to govern the common Action, and that cert is lgibus, according to certain
Laws. First, a right to moderate the Action, that is, to  the Presbyters, to appoint the time and place, to propose matters, to collect the Suffrages either by himselfe or by such as he appoints, to pronounce Sentence. Secondly, certis legibus, according to cer∣tain Laws; this brings us to the true question where the water sticks: The Law of God and the lawfull Constitutions of the Church, must be the just mea∣sure and limits of this Presidents commands, of his Compresbyters obedience. So that Tyrannicall ab∣solute Arbitrary power which is usurped by the Bi∣shop of Rome and his Instruments, is rejected by all Partyes on the one side, and all Anarchy, Ataxy and Disorder on the other side; yet this is not all. Fourthly, this President hath another power by Divine Right, or at least by Divine Right is capable of another power: that is, not onely to moderate the whole Action by his Authority, but also to execute Calv. J lib. 4. cap Sect. 2. that which is decreed by common consent. Neither can this executive Power in reason be limited to the meer execution of Personall Decrees, concerning particu∣lar Persons: but every where it extends it selfe to pre∣paratory Actions and matters of Forme. Neither doth it rest here, but admits, or at least may admit a greater latitude, even to the execution of Laws; especially where the Law is cleare, the Fact noto∣rious or evidently proved, where Succession and the publicke are not concerned, where the presence of the whole College is not so usefull or convenient, and might rather incomber then expedite the businesse: and all this more or lesse according to their certain Laws, the severall constitutions of severall Churches:
alwayes reserving to the whole Body of the Clergy, or those who by election or prescription do represent them, the power of making and altering Laws and Canons Ecclesiasticall, and to His Majesty His Roy∣all power of assenting and confirming, and to the re∣presentative Body of the Kingdome their power of receiving, principally in cases of moment: and like∣wise reserving to the Clergy, either Rurall or Cathe∣drall, according to their distinct capacityes, their re∣spective power of counselling, consenting, or concur∣ring, according to the constitutions of the Church, and Laws and Customes of the Realme, which as they are grounded upon naturall reason and equity, so they are no way repugnant to the Law of God, whereof there are yet some Footsteppes to be seen in our Or∣dinations, our Deanes and Chapiters, our Semestriall Synods, &c. And if these old neglected Observations, were a little quickned and reduced to their primoge∣nious temper and constitution,: perhaps it might re∣medy sundry inconveniences, and adde a greater de∣gree of Moderation and Authority to the Govern∣ment of the Church. Who can be so stupid a to imagine, that the State, and Church, and People of Genevah at this day, do not, or may not give to the President of their Ecclesiasticall Senate a perpetu∣ity of Government for his Life: or inable him to execute some Ecclesiasticall Laws, so farre as they shall see it to be expedient for the good of that Church and Commonwealth, without swerving from the in∣stitution of Christ? This might yet further be made plain, by those comparisons and representations which  and  do bring of this Episcopall or Pre∣sidentiary
power, of a Consull in the Senate, of a Praetor in the Court, of a Provost in a College, of a Steward in a Family: They ought to looke upon him as their Superiour and Governor, and be upon them as Brethren and Fellow-Elders. This is that which our English Bishops claime, whereunto they are in∣titled by the Fundamentall Laws of the Land. How farre the power of the keyes, of Ordination or Jurisdiction, is appropriated or committed to them, singly or joyntly by Divine Ordinance, (of which Subject great Authors upon great reasons have decla∣red themselves:) yet in our case it is not so questio∣nable, where another Lawfull Right is certain: and this clear satisfaction of Conscience they want, who are so busy seeking after new devised forms of Ecclesi∣asticall Regiment. And herein I may as justly admire the excellent temper of our Church Government, as∣the Observer doth of the Civill; I hope it is not in ei∣ther of us, ut Pueri Iunonis avem, As Boyes praise the Peacock, with a desire to pluck his feathers. The Clergy present, the Bishops approve, His Majesty confirmes, the Parliament receives: all parties have their concurrence, so as no Man can be prejudiced without his own act. If we alter this Frame, we shall have a better in Heaven; I fear not upon Earth. So then we see that upon these very grounds, which have been laide by the greatest Opposers of Bishops in this Age, 1 there is a subordination of many Pa∣stors to one President by Divine Ordinance, 2 This Presidency, or Superintendency, or Episcopacy, (all is one,) may without violation of Divine Ordinance be setled upon one Man for his life, 3 This Person
so qualified, hath a power essentially belonging to his place, to rule and moderate the publick meetings and Actions of the Church; yea to execute the decrees of the whole College, 4 This executive power may re∣ceive a further latitude or extent, from the positive Laws of Men. What is the result of all this? but that as Presbyterate or the Office of a Priest, Presby∣ter, or Minister, (I shall wrangle with no man about a name, whilest we agree upon the thing) is of Divine in∣stitution, yet neverthelesse there is something Humane annexed to it; as for instance the Assignation of a sin∣gle Pastor to a particular Parish, (which custome was first introduced by Evaristus, long after Bishops were spread over the World:) so likewise Episcopacy it selfe is of Divine Right, yet something may be added to it, some extent of Power which is humane, and yet very lawfull and expedient; wherein every Church is to be its owne Judge. If to this which hath been said of the Antiquity, Universality, Aptitude, Security, of this way, &c, we shall adde that Ambrose, Austin, Chri∣sostome, Cyprian, Basile, Athanasius, and very many others, the lights of their times, were not onely Defenders of Episcopacy, but Bishops themselves; there can re∣main no scruple to us of this Nation what Church Re∣giment is to be desired. But some do say, why then doe sundry eminent Protestant Authors inveigh so much against Bishops? I answer, It is not simply against, their Function, but against the sloth of some for not preaching, or the pride and Tyranny of some particular Persons; and more especially it is against the Romish Bishops. I might cite many Witnesses to make this as clear as
the Sun; take one of many: Neque vero cum hoc dico, Beza resp. pag. 1589. jus Tyrannidis eos Episcopos veram Christi Religio∣ prositontes & docentes intend, absit a me tam im∣dens arrogantia. Neither while I say these things, doe ccuse those Bishops of Tyranny, which professe and teach e true Religion of Christ, Far be such impudent Arro∣nce from me. And further he saith, that they are to be Pag. 126. knowledged, observed, reverenced, as faithfull Pastors the Christian Church. And in an Epistle to the en Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, he expresseth him∣fe, that such invectives were never intended against e Government of the English Church, but against ti-Christian Tyranny. Secondly, it is objected that they did put away Bi∣shops. I answer, that some Reformed Churches were der Bishops, who were out of their Territories; as e Helvetian Churches under the Bishops of Con∣e: others were under Bishops of another Com∣union; as the French Churches: others could not both ntinue Bishops and bring in the Reformation of Re∣ion; as the Church of Genevah: others did retein shops under the name of Superintendents, because e old name had been abused by the Psudo Episcopi or se Bishops, in the Church of Rome; by the same son we should neither use the name of Christ, nor postle, nor Gospell, nor Sacrament, because there ve been false Christs, false Apostles, false Gospels, se Sacraments: lastly, many reteined both the name d the thing; as the Churches of England Sweden, . And generally all Reformed Churche were de∣ous to have reteined Episcopacy, if the Bishops that en were, would have joyned with them in the Refor∣mation.
This is evident for the Germane Churches by the Augustane confession, and Apology, That Bi∣shops might easily have reteined their places, if they would, they protest that they are not guilty of the di∣minution of Episcopall Authority. And for the Hel∣vetian Churches, it appeares by that letter of Zui∣glius and ten others of their principall Divines, to th Bishop of Constance; in all humility and observanc beseeching him, To favour and helpe forward their be∣ginnings as an excellent Worke and worthy of a Bishop they call him Father, Renowned Prelate, Bishop; the implore his Clemency, Wisdome, Learning, that  would be the first Fruits of the Germaine Bishops, favour true Christianity springing up againe, to hea the wounded Conscience; They beseech him by the co∣mon Christ, by our Christian Liberty, by that Father affection which he owes unto them, by whatsoever was  vine and humane, to looke graciously upon them: or he would not grant their desires, yet to connive at the So he should make his Family yet more illustrious, a have the perpetuall Tribute of their Prayses, so would but shew himselfe a Father, and gr he request of his obedient Sonnes; They co∣clude, God Almighty long preserve your Excellen Thirdly, for the French Churches, it is plain Epist. 73. Calvine in one of his Epistles, touching a Reform Bishop, that should turne from Popery: that he m retein His Bishoppricke, his Diocesse, yea even  Revennues and his Iurisdiction. Lastly, it is objected, that Bishops have been  troducers of Anti-Christian Tyranny, and all ot abuses into the Church. One said of Phisitians t they were happy Men, for the Sunne revealed their Cure, and the Earth buried all their in∣mities:
contrarywise we may say of Governours that in this respect they are most unhappy Men, for the Sun reveales all their infirmities: nay more, all the Ennormities of the Times, and the aberrations of their Inferiours, are imputed to them; but the Earth buries all their cures. Episcopacy hath been so farre from being an adjument to the Pope, in his Tyrannicall invasion of the Libertyes of the Church, that on the other side it was a principall meanes to stay and retard his usurpation; as did well appeare at the Councell of Treat, how little he was pro∣pitious to that Order, and by the Example of Grodsted Bishop of Lincolne, who was malleus Romano∣rum, and many others. And now much the rather when Bishops acknowledge no dependency upon him. No Forme of Government was ever so absolute as to keep out all abuses. Errors in Religion, are not presently to be imputed to the Government of the Church; Arrius, Pelagius, &c. were no Bishops: but on the other side if Bishops had not been, God knows what Churches, what Religion, what Sacraments, what Christ we should have had at this Day. And wee may easily conjecture by that inundation of Sects, which hath almost quite overwhelmed our poor Church on a suddain, since the Authority of Bishops was suspended. The present condition of England doth plead more powerfully for Bishops, then all that have writ for Episcopacy since the Re∣formation of our Church. I have made this digression by occasion of the Ob∣servers so often girding at Bishops; he may either passe by it or take notice of it at his pleasure. There are some small remainders of his worke, but of no great moment; as this, That there is a disparity be∣tween
naturall Fathers, Lords, Heads, &c. and Po∣liticall. Most true, (though the Observer hath not met with the most apposite instances) otherwise they should be the very same thing; every like is also dislike. He conceives that there is onely some sleight resemblance between them: but our Law saith ex∣presly otherwise, That His Majesty is very Head, King, Lord, and Ruler of this Realme, and that of meer droit and very right. First very Head and Lord, and then of meer droit and very right: It is impossi∣ble the Law should speake more fully. But the maine difference which may come near the question is this, that the Power which is in a Father, Lord, &c. moderately and distinctly, is joyntly and more emi∣nently in a Soveraigne Prince; as was long since de∣clared at Rome, in the case between Fabius Maximus and his Sonne. No Father could deserve more re∣verence from a Sonne: yet he knew that Domestick command, must veile and submit to Politicall, and that the Authority of a Father of a Family, doth disappear in the presence of the Father of a Coun∣try, as lesser Starres do at the rising of the Sun. But his maine ground is, that the King is the Father, Lord, Head, &c. of His Subjects divisim, but not conjunctim, if you take them singly one by one, but not of an intire collective Body. So it seemes His Majesty is the King of Peter, and Andrew, not of England, nor yet so much as of a whole Towne or Village: yet the Observer himselfe can be contented to be the Lord of a whole Manour. I conceive he learned this doctrine out of Schola Salerni, Anglo∣rum Regi, &c. If this assertion were true, how ex∣trmely
hath the World been deceived hitherto? and we have all forsworne our selves in our Oaths of Su∣premacy and Allegiance. His Majesty is much bound to him for making him King of so many pretty lit∣tle Kingdoms: but as Titus Quinctius said of Antio∣chus his Souldiers, when their Friends did set them out by parcells, for Armies of Medes, Elemites, Cadusi∣ans, &c; That all these in one word were but Syrians. So His Majesty is well contented to reduce all these Kingdoms of Microcosmes, into one Kingdome of England, if he may hold that in peace. Such another Paradox is that which follows, that Pag. 19. Treason or Rebellion in Subjects is not so horrid in na∣ture, as oppression in Superiours. One of the most ab∣surd opinions, and most destructive to all Societies, that ever was devised. By this new learning, when the Master shall correct his Servant, without suffi∣cient ground in the Servants conceit; he may take the Rod by the other end, give His Master some re∣membrances, to teach him his Office better: If it be a little irregular, yet it is the lesse fault upon these grounds. Doth any Man think that the Observer instructs his Family with this doctrin, at home out of his chaire? beleeve it not. By the very equity of this conclusion it should be a greater sinne, for a Man to mispend what is his owne, then to robbe or steale that which is not his own. The Superiour though he abuse his power, yet hath a right to it, but the inferiour hath none. How discrepant is this from the judgement of former times? they thought no crime could be so great, as that it ought to be pu∣nished with Parracide: or that for discovery thereof,
a Servant should be examined against his Master, or a Child against his Parent. The Law of Parricides denyed, lucem vivo, fluctuanti mare, naufrago portum, morienti terram, defuncto Sepulchrum. Tully saith, they were to be sowed up quick in a Sack, and so cast in∣to the River: not to the wild Beasts, least the ve∣ry Beasts should become more inhumane by such nou∣rishment, not naked least they should pollute that E∣lement which purgeth all things. Our Saviour cal∣leth Judas a Devill, Have not I chosen you twelve and one of you is a Devill? why a Devill? because he was a Traytour. Let the Observer find out a worse name if he can. Such another is his comparison, between the thirty Tyrants at Athens and the Cavaleers at Yorke. Com∣parisons are odious, I desire not to meddle with them. But it is well known what the thirty Tyrants were. 1 They were a Company packed together by Lysan∣der for his purpose. 2 They were called Optimi, good Patriots, and Administratores Reipublicae, the Ad∣ministrators of the Commonwealth. 3 They had the placing and disposing of the Senators or Coun∣cells. 4 They made the Magistrates of Athens out of their own Faction and Clients. 5 They were great Profaners of Temples and Contemners of Religion, as appeared by their command to pull Theramenes from the Altar. 6 They armed 3000 of their own party, and disarmed all others. 7 They filled all Greece with Athenian Exiles. 8 They killed more in eight Moneths, then the Spartan Warres had done in ten yeares. 9 Condebant Leges, They usurped both the le∣gislative power; and more then that, an Arbitrary po∣wer
without Law,: so as there was need of a Law, that no Man whose name was written in such a Cata∣logue, should be slain sine judicio without lawfull triall; other Men might. And yet as if both these were not sufficient, they assumed an absolute Power over the Law and against the Law: ego vero ne lege hac se tueri possit, nomen ejus deleo & morte condemno, to depriye him of the benefit of this Law, I blotte out his name and condemne him to dye. Lastly, they had their turnes, according to that Prophetick Praediction of Theramenes, when he had drunke up the cuppe of poison and cast the snuffe upon the ground, saying, propino hoc Critiae pulchro, a health to gallant Critias the Arch-Tyrant; (which Story saith Tully in his Tusculas no Man can reade without teares;) and shortly after Critias followed him into another world to give an account of his bloody Administration. Such flowers as these we find strawed here and Pag. 35. there in his Book. And so he concludes abruptly, I find my reason already captivated, I can no further—. Whether it were done to amuse the World, as if he had much more matter, but that the Presse preven∣ted him; or that all this while he hath been uttering, his misterious Enthusiasmes and Oracles, and now (propiore Deo,) he is rapt into an extasie or trance: or lastly, because he was as confident of the successe of his Observations, as the Spaniards of their Invin∣cible Armado. Zeno sometimes wanted opinions, but Anti- never wanted Arguments: What weighty reasons did the Franciscans urge on both side, pro & contra, and with what fervour, even about the Colour and fa∣shion
of their Habits? I have heard of a like stirre at Amsterdam about Starch: When Men stretch and ten∣ter their Witts to uphold a party, They will find some∣thing to say, though it be in prayse of Hellen, or com∣mendation of Folly. It is dangerous to leave old recei∣ved ov. 22. 28. rules, upon probable and specious pretences: Re∣move not thou the ancient bounds, which thy Fathers have set. It is the Wisedome of the Serpent, to stop her ears, against the Voice of the Charmer: It is the Wise∣dome al. 58. 5. of a good Christian, a good Subject, to preserve his Faith to God, and his Loyalty to his Prince, and to blesse himselfe from the Magicall Spells of all such Charmers and Observers. FINIS.
GOod Reader, whereas an Anabaptisticall Speech is ked in the Epistle which some say is of dubious Faith, bemoane with me the licenciousnesse of the times, when the Presse hath brought the just reward of a Lyar upon it selfe, and an Acade∣micall uncertainty upon us; but know that in this case it is not materiall, nothing being cited but what agrees with the very grounds of the Anabaptists. Errata. EPist. page 2. line 11. for Milita reade Militia. p. 9. l. 7. for fine r. find. p. 19. l. 4. after insurrection adde for Religion. p. 23. l. 3 for leafe r. leave. Lib. Pag. 2. l. 25. for turned r. tuned. p. 22. l. 18. for anthorative, r. authoritative. p. 35. l. 6. for foure hundred, r. three hundred. p. 44. l. 5. for recoverable irrecoverable, r. revo∣cable irrevocable. p. 84. l. 4. for oxibus r. ovibus. p 142. l. 12. for same yeare, r. eleventh yeare. p. 156. l. 24. for course r. curse. p. 158. l. 11. for peila peilis, r. pila pilis. p. 178. for Heb. 6. 19. r. Heb. 6. 16. And such like as sends for send. presentia for praesentia. Phistian for Phisitian. Cataline, for Catiline. ahe or he for the. Idollised for Idolised. psuedopiescopi, for pseudoepiscopi ennormities for enormities, conjacture, for conjecture, Jesurum for Jesurun. And the like.
