B4764 12924818 95492
The Effigies of the Lord Digby Son and Heyre to the Right Honble Iohn Earle of Bristoll
ELVIRA: OR, The worst not always true. A COMEDY. Written by a Person of Quality. Licens'd May 15. 1667. Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Brome in Little-Brittain. 1667.
PERSONS. Don Julio Rocca. Don Pedro de Mendoca. Don Fernando Solis: In love with Donna Elvira. Don Zancho de Menezes: In love with Donna Blanca. Fabio: Servant to Don Fernando. Fulvio: Servant to Don Pedro. Chichon: Servant to Don Zancho. A Page. WOMEN. Donna Elvira: A beautiful Lady, Don Pedro's Daughter. Donna Blanca: A Lady of a high Spirit Don Julio's Sister. Silvia: Elvira's disguised Name, when she was put to wait upon Donna Blanca. Francisca: Donna Blanca's VVoman. SCAENE VALENCIA.
ELVIRA, OR, The Worst not always True. ACT. I. SCAENE. I. The Room in the Inn. Enter Don Fernando, and at another door his servant Fabio, both in Riding Cloathes, Booted. Don Fer. HAve you been with him Fabio, and given him The Note? Fabio. I found him newly got out of his bed, (pris' He seem'd much satisfied, though much sur- With your arrival, and as soon as possibly He can get ready, hee'l be with you heer. He says, he hopes some good occasion brings you To Valencia, and that he shall not be At quiet, till he know it. 'Twas not fit For me, without your Orders, to give him Any more light, then what your Ticket did. Don Fer. 'Tis well, go now and see if Donna Elvira Be stirring yet, for I would gladly have her A witness, even at first, to what shall pass Betwixt my friend and me, in her concernments: If she be still a sleep Fabio, make bold
To knock, and wake her, w'have no time to loose. O heer she comes, wait you Don Julio. Enter Donna Elvira. Exit Fabio. Don. Elv. Ah, can you think my cares and sleep consistent? Slumber and tears, have sometimes met in dreams, But hearts with such a weight as mine opprest, Find still the heaviest sleep too light a Guest. Don Fer. Madam, though such, least pity do deserve, Who by their own unsteadiness, have drawn Misfortune on themselves; Yet truly Elvira Such is my sense of Yours, and my compassion, To see a Lady of your Quality, Brought to such sad extreams, in what is dearest, As makes me even forgit my own resentments, Granting to Pity, the whole place of Love, And at that rate I'le serve you. Yet thus far You must allow th' eruption of a heart So highly injur'd, as to tell you franckly, 'Tis to comply with my own Principles Of Honour, now, without the least relation To former passion, or to former favours. Don. Elv. Those you have found a ready way to cancel; Your sullen silence, during all our journy, Might well have spared you these superfluous words, That had sufficiently instructed me What power, meer appearances, have had Without examination to destroy With an umbragious nature, all that Love VVas ever able on the solid'st grounds To found and to establish. Yet me thinks, A man that boast such pinciples of Honour, And of such force to sway him in his Actions In spight of all resentments, should reflect, That Honour does oblige to a suspense
At least, of judgement, when surprising chances Yet unenquired into, tempt gallant men To prejudicial thoughts of those, with whom They had setled friendship, upon vertuous grounds. But 'tis from heaven I see, and not from you, Elvira must expect her vindication; And until then submit to th' hardest fate, That ever can befal a generous spirit, Of being oblig'd by him that injures her. Fer. Nay, speak Elvira, speak, You have me attentive, With a kind of scornful accent. It were a wonder worthy of your wit, To make me trust my Ears, before my Eyes. Don. Elv. Those are the witnesses indeed, Fernando, To whose true testimonies false Inference, You owe my moderation, and my silence, And that I leave it to the gods and time, To make appear both to the world and you, The Maxime false, That still the worst proves true. Enter Fabio. Fabio. Don Julio is without. Fer. VVait on him in, Exit Fabio. And now Elvira If you'l be pleas'd to rest your self a while VVithin that Closet, you may hear what passes Betwixt my friend and me, until such time As I by some discourse having prevented Too great surprise, you shall think fit t'appear; He is the man, (as I have often told you During my happy days) for whom alone I have no reserves, and 'tis to his assistance, That I must owe the means of serving you, In the concernments of your safety and honour; And therefore, Madam, 'twill be no offence I hope, to trust him with the true occasion That brings me hither, to employ his friendship,
Observing that respect in the relation, (Colset. VVhich I shall always pay you. Elvira retiring as into the Don. Elv. There needs no management in the Relation, I am indifferent what others think, Since those who ought, t'have thought the best, have fail'd me: Sir, I obey, resign'd up to your conduct, Till Mistriss of my own. Exit. Enter Don Julio, and Fernando, and he Embrace. Don. Jul. My joy to have my dear Fernando heer So unexpectedly, as great as 'tis Cannot make Jullo unsensible Of th' injury you have done him, t'have alighted And past a night-within Valencia, At any other place than at his house, Donna Blanca her self, will scarce forgive it VVhen she shall know it. Don. Fer. I hope she's well. Jul. She is so, thanks to heaven, But I must bid you expect a chiding from her. Fer. You both, might well accuse me of a failure, Did not th' occasion of my coming hither Bring with it an excuse, alass too just, As you will quickly find. Don Jul. Nay, then you raise disquiet, ease me quickly, By telling me what 'tis; of this be sure Heart, hand, and fortune, are entirely yours At all Essays. Fer. It is not new t'ee, that I was a Lover After pawsing a while. Ingaged in all the passion, that e're Beauty, In heigth of it's perfection, could produce, And that confirm'd by reason, from her wit, Her Quality, and most unblemish't conduct; Nor was there more, to justifie my love, Then to perswade my happiness, in her
Just correspondance to it, by all the ways Of honourable admission, that might serve To make esteem transcend the pitch of Love. Don Jul. Of all this I have not only had knowledge But great participation in your joys; Than which, I thought nothing more permanent, Since founded on such virtue as Elvira's. Don Fer. Ah, Julio, how fond a creature is the man, That founds his bliss, upon a womans firmness, Even that Elvira, when I thought my self Securest in my happiness, nothing wanting To make her mine, but those exterior forms, VVithout which, men of honour that pretend In way of Marriage, would be loath to find Greater concession, where the love is greatest. As I was sitting with her, late at night, By usual admittance to her Chamber, As two whose hearts in VVed-lock Bands were joyn'd, And seem'd above all other care but how Best to disguise things, to a wayward Father, Till time, and art, might compass his consent; A suddain noise was heard in th' inner Room Belonging to her Chamber, she starts up In manifest disorder, and runs in, Desiring me to stay, till she had seen What caus'd it; I impatient, follow, As fearing for her, had it been her Father: My head no sooner was within the Room, But straight I spied behind a Curtain shrinking A goodly Gallant, but not known to me. Don. Jul. Heavens what can this be? Fer. You will not think that there, and at that hour, I stay'd to ask his Name, he, ready as I, To make his Sword th'expresser of his mind,
We soon determin'd what we sought; I hurt But slightly in the arm, he fell as slain Run through the body: What Elvira did, My rage allow'd me not to marke; But straight I got away, more wounded to the heart, Then he I left for dead. Jul. Prodigious accident! Where can it end? Fer. I got safe home, where carefully conceal'd, I sought by Fabio's diligence to learn Who my slain Rival was, and what became Of my unhappy Mistriss, and what course Don Pedro de Mendoza took to right The honour of his house. Don Jul. You long'd not more to know it then, then I Do now. Don. Fer. All could be learn't was this. That my Rival Whom I thought dead, was likely to recover, And that he was a stranger lately come Up to the Court, to follow some pretensions. His name he either learn't not perfectly, Or did not well retain; As for Elvira, That none knew where she was, and that Don Pedro Had set a stop to prosecution In any publick way, with what reserves Was not yet known. Don Jul. More and more Intricate. Don Fer. I must now come to that, you least would look for. I had but few days past, in my Concealment (Resentment and Revenge still boyling in me) When late one evening, as I buried was In deepest thought, I suddainly was rows'd By a surprising Apparition, Julio, Elvira in my Chamber, speaking to me With rare assurance, Thus—Don Fernando
I come not heer to justifie my self, That were below Elvira, towards one Whose action in deserting me hath shown So disobligingly, his rash judgement of me. I come to mind you of Honour, not of Love: Mine, can protection seek, from none but yours, I've hitherto been shelter'd from the Fury Of my enrag'd Father, by my Cousin Camilla, But that's no place you easily may judge For longer stay, I do expect from you To be convey'd, where free from violence And from new hazards of my wounded Fame, I may attend my righting from the gods. Don Jul. Can guilt maintain such confidence in a Maid? Yet how to think her Innocent, I know not. Don. Fer. 'Twere loss of time to dwell on circumstances, Either of my wonder, or reply; In short, What I found honour dictated, I did, Within two hours I put her in a Coach, And favour'd by the night, convey'd her safe Out of Madrid to Ocana, and thence In three days, hither to Valencia, The only place where by your generous aide, I could have hopes to settle and secure Her Person and her honour: That once done Farewell to Spain; I'le to the Wars of Millan And there soon put a Noble end to cares. Don Jul. Let us first think how to dispose of Her, Since heer you say she is; That done which presses, You will have time to weigh all other things. Don Fer. My thoughts can pitch upon no other way Decent or safe for her, but in a Convent, If you have any Abbess heer to friend. Don Jul. I have an Aunt, ruling the Usulins,
With whom I have full power, and she is wise, In case that course were to be fix't upon; But that's not my opinion. Don Fer. What can your reason be? Don Jul. Last remedios, in my judgement Are not to be used, till easier have been try'd; Had this strange accident, been thoroughly Examin'd, in all it's Circumstances, And that from thence, she were convicted guilty, Nought else were to be thought on, but a Cloister, But as things stand, imperfectly discover'd Although appearances, condemn her strongly, I cannot yet conclude a person guilty Of what throughout so contradictory seems To the whole tenor of her former life, As well as to her Quality, and VVit, And therefore lets avoide precipitation. Let my house be her shelter for a while, You know my sister Blanca is discreet, And may be trusted, she shall there be serv'd By her and me, with care and secrecy. Don Fer. The offer's kind but no-wise practicable, And might prove Hazardous to Blanca's honour, VVhen it should once break out, (as needs it must) From servants seeing such a Guest so treated. Don Jul. That I confess I know not how to answer, But could Elvira's mind, submit unto it, I could propose a course without objection. Don Fer. That she can soon resolve, VVhat is it Julio? Don Jul. A Gentlewoman who waited on my sister, Hath newly left her servise for a husband, And it is known, she means to take another, I have a ready way to recommend one, By Violante of whose love and mine
You are not ignorant, since that e're this We had been Married, had not kindred forc't us To wait a Dispensation for't from Rome; Blanca I'me sure will readily imbrace, Any occasion of obliging her. Don Fer. That were a right expedient indeed, Could but Elvira's spirit brook it. Enter Elvira as from the Closet. Elv. You have ill measures of Elvira's spirit, Mistaken Don Fernando: Till heaven's justice Shall her entirely to her self restore, The lowlyer shape, her fate shall hide her under The more t'will fit her humor. Julio starts back as it were amazed Don Julio, aside. O heavens can guilt with such perfection And put on such assurance! It cannot be. (dwell! Don Julio addressing himself to her, and beginning. Don Jul. Madam! She holding out her hand and interrupting him. Elv. Spare complements, and let your actions speak, Those may oblige both him, and me, your words Cannot comply with both. Julio aside, ——Did ever yet Such Majesty with misery combine! But in this Woman. To her, ———Madam, I obey, And since you are pleas'd t'approve what I proposed, No moment shall be lost in th'execution. Exit Julio. Fernando accompanying him and Fabio. Elvira Sola. O how unkindly have the heavens dealt With Woman kind, above all other creatures! Our pleasure, and our glory! to have placed All on the brink of Precipices, such, As every breath, can blow the least light of us Headlong into, past all hopes of Redemption: Nor can our wit, or vertue, give exemption. 'Tis true I lov'd; But justifi'd therein
By spotless thoughts, and by the objects merit, I deem'd my self above the reach of malice, When in an instant by anothers folly, I am more lost then any by her own. Accurst Don Zancho, what occasion E're gave Elvira to thy mad Intrusion? Unless disdain, and scorn, Incentives are, To make men's passions more irregular. Ah, matchless Rigor, of the Powers above; Not only to submit our honours fate, Unto the vanity of those we love, But to the rashness even of those we hate. Exit. Enter Donna Blanca at one door reading a paper with great marks of Passion and Dissturbance, and her Waiting-wo∣man Francisca at another, observing her. Blan. Ah, the Traitor! Francis. Aside, —What can this mean? Blan. continuing, VVas this thy sweet Pretension at Madrid, Drawn out in length, and hindring thy return? Thy fair pretence, thou should'st have said false man. Fran. For loves sake Madam, what can move you thus? Blan. For hates sake say, and for revenge Francisca, And so thou mai'st perswade me to discover My shame unto thee; Read, read, that Letter: 'Tis from your favourite Chichon. Francisca takes the Letter and reads it. The Letter. MAdam, To make good my engagements of concealing nothing from you, during this absence of my Master; I am bound to tell you, that some ten days since, late at night, he was left for dead, run through the body by another unknown Gallant, in the Chamber of a famed Beauty of the Court. Whilst the danger continued, I thought it not fit to let you know either the accident, or the occasion; which now he is recover'd and thinking of his return to Valencia I must no longer forbear, I hope you will have a care not to undo
me for being more faithful to you, then to the Master you gave me, Your Creature Chichon. Blan. Have I not a worthy Gallant think you! Fran. Madam, this comes of being over curious, And gaining servants to betray their Masters; How quiet might you have slept, and never felt VVhat past with your Don Zancho at Madrid! His pale and dismal looks, at his return Though caus'd by loss of blood, in the hot service Of other Dames, might fairly have been thought Effets of care, and want of sleep for you; And taken so, have past for new Indeerments. Who ever pryed into anothers Letter? Or slyly hearkn'd to anothers whisper? But saw, or heard, somewhat that did not please him; 'Twas Eves curiosity, undid us all. Blan. Away with thy moralities dull Creature, I'le make thee see, and false Don Zancho feel, That Blanca's not a Dame, to be so treated. But who are those I hear without, who e're They be, they come at an unwell-come hour. Fran. looks out. Fran. Madam, it is a Page of Violantes Ushering a handsome Maid. Enter a Page with a Letter and Elvira, the Page presents the letter to Blanca, she adresses her self to Elvira, and she throws up her Vail. Blan. This Letter is in your behalf fair Maid, Having read the Letter. There's no denying such a Recomender, But such a face as yours is, needed none. Page, tell your Lady as much; And you Silvia Turning (For so she says you are call'd) be confident Y'are fallen into the hands of one, that knows How to be kind, more as your friend then Mistriss,
If your demeanour, and good nature, answer But what your looks do promise. Elv. Madam, it is the Noble charity By the name of Silvia Of those you cast upon me, not mine own, To which I must acknowledge any advantage I ever can pretend to, more then what Fair Violantes mediation gives me. to Francisca Blan. Shee's strangely handsom, and how well she speaks. Aside Fran. So, so, Methinks, you know new comers, Madam, Set still the best foot forward. Blan. And know as well that you decaying Stagers Are always jealous of new comers, Young, And handsome. Fran. You may be as sharp upon me, as you please, I know to what t'attribute your ill humour. Blan. Francisca entertain her, I'le go write To Violante, and then rest a while In hopes to ease the headach that hath seized me; That done, sweet Silvia we shall talk at leisure. Exit Blanca. Fran. Sweet Silvia, kind Epithites are for new faces. Aside. Silv. Now comes the hard part of my task indeed, Aside. To act the fellow Waiting-woman right. But since the Gods already have conform'd My mind to my Condition, I do hope They'l teach me words, and gestures sutable. Fran. embraces Silv. Fran. Let me embrace thee my sweet Sister, and beg you To be no Nigard of a little kindness: A very little serves with such a face, To gain what heart you please. Silv. If it can help to gain me yours, I'le take it For the best office, that it ever did me, And love it much the better. Fran. Make much on't then, for that 't has done already. Silv. If you will have me vain enough to think it,
You must confirm it, by the proof of being My kind Instructer how to please my Lady, For I am very rawe in service. Fran. ——O that I were so too, and had thy Youth t'excuse it; But my experience, sister, shall be yours, By free communication. Come, let's in And rest us in my Chamber, there I'le give you First handsell of the frankness of my Nature. Exeunt Sil. & Fran. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon his man, in riding habit. Don Zan. I must confess Chichon the very smell Of sweet Valencia, has even revived my spirits. There is no such pleasure, as to suck and breath One's Native air. Chich. Chiefly after being in so fair a way As you, of never breathing any more. Don. Zanc. Prithy no more of that, since I have forgot it, Methinks thou easily may'st. Chich. Faith hardly Sir, whilst still your ghastly face Doth bear, such dismal Memorandums of it, Apter to raise inquisitiveness in those Know nothing of the matter, then t'allay Remembrance in Partakers. Don Zanc. Heaven shield us from Donna Blanca's queries, No matter for the rest. Chich. You would not wish to find her so unconcern'd, I'me sure you would not; Faith, I long to hear Th'ingenious defeats, I make account You are prepared to give to her suspicions. Don Zanch. Let me alone for that: but on thy life Be sure that nothing be scrued out of thee, Neither by her, nor by her sly Francisca. Chich. Be you Sir, sure, that from your true Chichon, They'l know no more to day, then yesterday,
They did, nor thence, more to the worlds end, Then what they did, before we left Madrid. Don Zanc. Truly Chichon, we needs must find the means To get a sight of her this very night; I die if I should miss it. Chich. Last week left gasping for Elvira's love, And scarce revived, when presently expiring For Blanca's again; I did not think Don Cupid Had been a Merchant, of such quick returns. Don Zanch. Thou art an Ass, and want'st distinctiveness T'wixt love and love; that was a love of sport, To keep the serious one in breath. Chich. Faith Sir, I must confess my ignorance, That when I saw you groveling in your blood, I thought your Love had been in sober sadness. Don Zanch. Prithy leave fooling, and let's carefully Gain the back way into my house unseen, That none may know of my return, till Blanca Find me at her feet: and be you industrious T'observe Don Julio's going forth this evening, Doubtless hee'l keep his usual hours abroad At Violantes, since not married yet. Chich. I shall observe your orders punctually. Exeunt. Enter Don Julio and knocks as at Blanca's door. Don Jul. What Sister! at your Siesta already? if so You must have patience to be wak'd out of it, For I have news to tell you. Enter Blanca. Blan. No Brother, I was much more pleasingly Employ'd, in serving you; that is, making My Court to Violante; by receiving To wait upon me in Lucilla's place, A Gentlewoman of her recomending. Don. Jul. Where is she? let me see her. Blan. ——, T'were not safe,
She is too handsome; You think now I jest; But without Rallery, she is so lovely, That were not Violante very assured Of her own Beauty, and the strong Idaeas That still upholds within you, one might question Her wit, to have set her in her Gallant's way. But what's the news you mean! Jul. That our dear friend and kinsman Don Fernando Is come to Town, and going for Italy: The secret of it, doth so much import him, It forc't him to forbear alighting here, And lodging with us as he used to do; But yet he says, nothing shall hinder him From waiting on you in the dusk of th' evening: I hope you'l find wherewith to Regalar him. Blan. As well as you have drain'd my Cabinets, Of late in presents to your Mistriss, some Perfumes will yet be found, such as at Rome It self, shall not disgrace Valencia. Don Jul. I know your humour, and that the best present Can be given you, is to give you the occasion Of presenting; But I am come in now Only to advertise you, and must be gone; Yet not I hope without a sight of One So recommend, and commended so. Blan. I should have thought you strangely chang'd in humour Should you have gone away so uncuriously. Fran. Ho. She knocks. Enter Francisca. Fran. —What please you Madam. Blan. (to Jul.) Prithy tell Silvia I would speak with her. Exit Fran. Well, cleer your Eyes, and say I have no skill If she appears not t'ye exceeding handsome.
Enter Francisco with Silvia, Julio salutes her. D. Jul. Welcome fair Maid into this Family, Where whilst you take a servants name upon you To do my Sister honour, you must allow It's Master to be yours, and that by strongest Tyes Knowing who plac't you here, and having Eyes. Silv. I wish my service Sir, to her and you, May merit such a happy Introduction. D. Jul. Farewell Sister, till anon, Accompanied As now you are, I think you'l miss me little. Exit Julio. Blan. I must confess I ne'er could better spare you Aside. Then at this time, but not for any reason That you I hope can guess at. Francisca, you and Silvia may retire (To them. Exeunt Silvia and Francisca. And entertain your selves; I'le to my Closet And try to rest. —Or rather to vent freely My restless thoughts. O the self-torturing part! Aside. To force complaisance from a jealous heart. Exeunt. ACT. II. SCAENE changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Julio, and Don Fernando. Don Jul. ALbricias friend, for the good news I bring you, All has fallen out as well as we could wish. As to Elvira's setling with my Sister, So lucky a success, in our first aims Concerning her, I trust does boad good fortune
Beyond our hopes; yet, in the further progress Of this Affair. Don Fer. There's no such thing in Nature left as better, Julio, The worst proves always always true with me, Yet prithy tell, how does that Noble beauty (Wherein high Quallity is so richly stamp't) Comport her servile Metamorphosis. D. Jul. As one, whose body, as Divine as 'tis, Seems bound to obey exactly such a mind, And gently take, what ere shape that imposes. D. Fer. Ah, let us mention her no more, my Julio Idaeas flow upon me too abstracted From her unfaithfulness, and may corrupt The firmest reason; Above all be sure I do not see her so transform'd, least that Transform me too, I'le rather pass with Blanca, Both for unkind and rude, And leave Valencia Without seeing her. D. Jul. —Leave that to me Fernando, But if you intend the honour to my Sister It will be time, the night draws on a pace. Fer. Come let's be gone then, As they are going out, Enter Fabio hastily. Fab. Stay Sir, for heaven's sake stay D. Fer. —Why what's the matter? Fab. That will surprise you both, as much me Don Pedro de Mendoca is below Newly alighted. D. Fer. —Ha, what say'st thou Sirrah? Elvira's father? Fab. —Sir, the very same, And he had scarcely set one foot to ground When he enquired, where lives Don Julio Rocca? D. Jul. For my house Fabio? It cannot be, I never knew the man.
D. Fer. The thing does speak it self, and my hard fate What else can bring him hither, but pursuite Of me, and of his Daughter, having learn't The way we took; And what so easie Julio Here at Valencia, as to know our friendship And then of consequence, your house to be My likeliest retreat. D. Jul. —'Tis surely so, Let us apply our thoughts to best preventives. D. Fer. Whil'st we retire into the inner Room T'advise together, Fabio be you sure (Since unknown to him) to observe his motions. Exeunt omnes. Scene changes to the Prospects of Valencia. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon as in the street neer Don Julio's house. D. Zanc. —Newly gone out say you? That is as luckey as we could have wished, And see but how invitingly the door Stands open still. Chich. An open door may lead to a face of wood, Aside To Don Zancho. But mean you Sir, to go abruptly in Without more ceremony D. Zanc. Surprize redoubles (sool) the joys of Lovers; But stay Chichon let's walk aside a while Till yonder Coach be past. Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Julio and Don Fernando. D. Jul. There is no safty in any other way, You must not stir from hence, until w'have got Some further light, what course he means to steer,
Let Fabio be vigllant, I'le get home, Down that back stairs, and take such order there Not to be found, in case he come to enquire, As for this Night at least, shall break his measures, And in the morning w'eel resolve together Whether you ought, to quit Valencia or no. D. Fer. Farewell then for to night, I'le be alerte, But see y'excuse me fairely to my Cozen. Exeunt. Scene changes to Blanca's Antechamber. Enter Donna Blanca and Francisca. D. Blan. As well as Silvia pleases me Francisca, I'me glad at present that she is not well, She would constraine me else, she has wit enough To descant on my humour, and from thence To make perhaps discoveries, not fit For such new Comers. Fran. If she has wit she keeps it to her self, At least from me, of pride, and Melancholly I see good store. D. Blan. —Still envious and detracting? Enter Don Zancho and Chichon. See who comes there Madam, to stop your mouth. Donna Blanca casting an Eye that way, and Chichon clinging up close behind his Master and making a mouth. Chic. S'has spide us, and it thickens in the cleer, I fear a storm, To his Master. Goes not your heart pit a pat? D. Blan. Ah, the bold Traytour! But I must dissemble, Aside. And give his impudence a little Line, The better to confound him. Donna Blanca advancing to him, and as it were em∣bracing him with an affected cheerfulness. D. Blan. Welcome, as unexpected, my D. Zancho.
D. Zanc. Nay, then we are safe Chichon. Aside to Chichon. Incomparable Maid, heaven bless those Eyes, to Her. From which I find a new life springing in me; Having so long been banish't, from their Rays, How dark the Court appear'd to me without them? Could it have kept me from their Influence, As from their light, I had expired long since. D. Blan. Y'express your love now, in so courtly a Stile I Fear you have acted it in earnest there, And but rehearse, to me, your Country Mistress. Don Zanc. Ah, let Chichon but tell you, how he hath seen me During my absence from you. Chic. I vow I have seen him even dead for Love, You might have found it in his very looks, Before you brought the blood into his Cheeks. D. Blan. E'ne dead you say for Love, but say of whom? Don Zanc. Can Blanca ask a question so Injurious? As well to her own perfections, as my Faith. Don. Blan. I can hold no longer. Aside to Francisca. My faithful Lover, then it is not you. To him scornfully. Chic. She changes tone I like not faith the Key, Aside to his Master. The musick will be jarring. Blan. [continues.] 'Tis not then you, Don Zancho, who having chang'd His sute at Court, into a love Pretension, And his Concurrents, into a Gallant Rival, Fell by his hand, a bloody Sacrifice At his fair Mistress feet, Who was it then? Don Zancho stands a while as amazed with folded Arms. Chichon behind his Master holding up his hands and making a pitiful face, Francisca steals to him, and holding up her hand threatningly. Fran. A Blab Chichon, a Pickthank, Peaching Varlet Aside Nere think to look me in the face again. To Chichon.
Chic. In what part shall I look thee, hast thou a worse? Aside It is the Divel has discover'd it, To Fran. Some Witch dwells here, I've long suspected thee. Fran. I never more shall think thee worth my Charms. D. Blan. What, struck dumb with guilt? Perfidious Man That, happens most, to the most impudent When once detected; Well, get thee hence, And see thou nere presum'st to come again Within these Walls, or I shall let thee see 'Tis not at Court alone, where hands are found, To let such mad men blood. She turns as going away, and Don Zancho holds her gently by the Gown. Don Zancho. Give me but hearing, Madam, and then if— Don Jul. What ho, no lights below stairs? Alowd as below. Fran. O heavens, Madam, here you not your Brother, Into the Chamber quickly, and let them Retire behind that hanging, there's a place Where usually we throw neglected things. I'le take the lights, and meet him certainly His stay will not be long from Violante At this time of the Night; besides you know, He never was suspicious. Don Zancho and Chichon go behind the hanging, and Donna Blanca retiring to her Chamber says. D. Blan. Capricious fate, must I who whilst I lov'd him Nere met with checking Accident, fall now Into extreamest hazards, for a man Whom I begin to hate. Exit. And Francisca at another door with the lights. Francisca re-enters with Don Julio. D. Jul. Where's my Sister? Fran. —In her Chamber, Sir, Not very well, she's taken with a Megrum.
D. Jul. Light me In to her. Exit Don Julio, Francisca lighting him with one of the lights. Chichon peeping out from behind the hanging. Chic. If this be Cupids Prison, 'tis no sweet one, Here are no chains of Roses, Yet I think Y' had rather b'in't, then in Elvira's chamber As gay, and as perfum'd as 'twas. D. Zan. Hold your peace Puppy, is this a time for fooling? Enter Francisca and Chichon start's back. Francisca coming to the hanging. Chichon look out, you may, the Coast is cleer. Chichon looks out. Could I my Lady's neer concerns but fever, From yours in this occasion, both of you Should dearly pay your falshood. Cich. You are jealous too, I see, but help us out This once, and if you catch me here again, Let Chichon pay for all, faithful Chichon. Fran. Y'are both too lucky, in the likelihood Of getting off so soon, stay but a moment Whilst I go down to set the Wicket open, And see that there be no body in the way. Exit Francisca. Chich. It is a cunning Drab, and knows her trade. Re-enter Francisca and coes to the hanging. Fran. There's now some Witch a wing indeed Chichon, Julio, that never till this night, forbore To go to Violantes e're he slept, And pass some hours there, Julio who never Inquired after the shutting of a door, Hath lock't the Gate himself, at's coming In, And bid a servant wait below till midnight, With charge to say, to any that should knock And ask for him, that hee's gone sick to bed; What it can mean I know not. Chic. I would I did not, but, I have too true
An Almanack in my bones, foretell's a beating Far surer then fowl weather, he has us faith Fast in Lobb's Pound; Heaven send him a light hand, To whom my fustigation shall belong, As for my Master, he may have the Honour To be rebuked at sharp. Fran. May terror rack this Varlit; But for you Sir, Be not dismay'd, the hazard's not so great, Yonder Balcon at further end o'the' Room Opens into the Street, and the descent, is Little beyond your height, hung by the Arms: When Julio is asleep, I shall not fail To come and let you out, I keep the Key, In the mean while you must have patience. Chic. It were a nasty hole to stay in long, Aside. Did not my fear correct it's evil savour. Dame, you say well for him, with whom I think To her. Y'have measur'd length, you speak so punctually Of his dimensions; But I see no care For me, your prity, not your proper man, Who does abhor feats of activity. Fran. I'le help, you, with a halter. Exit Francisca and (Chichon retires. Scene changes to Blanca's Bed-Chamber. Enter Blanca, Silvia, and soon after Francisca as in Blanca's Chamber she sitting at her Toylet undressing. Blan. My Brother told me I should see him again, Before he went to rest. Fran. I think, I hear him coming. Blanca to Francisca. Hee'l not stay long I hope, for I am on thorns Till I know they are out, I'th' mean while We must perswade Silvia to go to bed,
Least some odd chance should raise suspicion in her Before I know her fitness for such trusts. Enter Don Julio. Silvia offers to unpin her Gorget. D Blan. I prithy Silvia, leave, and get thee gone To Bed, you ha'nt been well, nor are not yet; Your heavy Eyes betray indisposition: D. Sil. Good Madam, suffer me, t'will make me well To do you service. Blan. [to D. Julio.] —Brother, I ask your help, Take Silvia hence, and see her in her Chamber, This night she must be treated as a stranger, And you must do the honour of your house. Julio goes to Silvia, and taking her by the hand leads her away. Sil. [making a low cursie.] Since you'l not yet let me begin to serve, I will begin to obey. Fran. [bridling.] Quaint in good faith. D. Jul. [to Silvia as he leads her.] My Sister's kinder then she thinks, to give me This opportunity of telling Silvia. How absolutely Mistriss in this place Elvira is. Francisca whispers all this while with Blanca. Silv. Good Sir, forget that Name. Exeunt Julio and Silvia. D. Blan. If that be so, what shall we do Francisca? What way to get them out? Fran. It is a thing so unusual with him, It raises ominous thoughts, Else I make sure To get them off, as well as you can wish, But if already awaken'd by suspition, Nothing can then be sure. D. Blan. O fear not that what you have seen him do
Of unaccustom'd, I dare say relates To quite another business. Fran. Then set your heart at rest, from all disturbance Arising from this accident. D. Blan. —If you are certain, To get them off so clear, from observation, 'Twill out of doubt be best, I tell my Brother Don Zancho is return'd, and had call'd here This evening to have seen him, For my fears Sprange only from the hour, and the surprize, Warm'd as he then had found me, since you know How little apt he is to jealousie. Fran. Madam, Y'have reason, that will make all sure, In case he should be told of's being here The time of's stay, can hardly have been noted. Enter Don Julio. D. Jul. As an obedient Brother I have perform'd What you commanded me. D. Blan. A hard Injunction from a cruel Sister, To wait upon a handsome Maid to her Chamber. D. Jul. You see I've not abused your Indulgence By staying long, nor can I stay indeed With you, I must be abroad so early To morrow morning, therefore Dear good night. Donna Blanca [as he is going.] Stay Brother, stay, I had forgot to tell you Don Zancho de Menezes is return'd And call'd this evening here, t'have kiss'st your hands, Francisca spake with him. D. Jul. I hope he's come successful in his sute, To morrow I'le go see him, Exit D. Julio. D. Blan. You see he's free from Ombrage on that Subject. Fran. I see all's well, and may he sleep profoundly, The sooner Madam, you are a bed, the better. D. Blan. Would once my fears were over, that my Rage Might have it's course.
Fran. —I shall not stop it, But after it has had it's full Careere, 'Twill pawse I hope, and reason find an Ear. Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Fernando and Fabio. D. Fer. Is he gone out? Fab. —No Sir, not as yet, But seeing the servant he had sent abroad Newly return'd, I listen'd at his door, And heard him plainly give him this account. That he had found Don Julio Rocca's house, And having knock'd a good while at the door, Answer was made him without opening it, Don Julio's not at home, where at Don Pedro Impatient rose, and calling for his Cloak And Sword, he swore he'd rather wait himself Till midnight at his door, then loose a night In such a pressing business; This I thought Fit to acquaint you with, and that he spake Doubtfully of his returning to lodge here. D. Fer. You have done well, but must do better yet In following him, and being sure to loose No circumstance of what he does. Fab. To dog him, possibly might be observ'd This Moon light, by his servant, but since Sir, W'are certain whether he goes, my best course I think will be to go out the back way, And place my self before hand in some Porch, Near Julio's house, where I may see and hear What passes, and then do as I shall see cause. D. Fer. 'Tis not ill thought on, but how late soever Your return be, I shall expect to see you Before we go to bed.
Fab. —I shall not fail. Exeunt. Scene changes to Donna Blanca's Ante-Chamber. Enter Francisca and goes to the hanging where Don Zancho and Chichon are hid. Fran. Ho, trusty servant with his faithful Master, Come out, the Balcone's open, loose no time, Julio's a bed, and fast a sleep e're this, There's no body in'the street, it is so light One may discover a mile, therefore be quick. Scene changes to the Pro∣spect of Valencia. Don Zancho and Chichon come out from behind the hanging and follow her as leading them to the Balcone. Exeunt. Enter Fabio as in the street, and setling himself in a Porch. And soon after Don Zancho and Chichon appear as in the Balcone, and Francisca's head as peeping out of the door into it. Fab. Here is a Porch as if 'twere built on purpose. Fabio looking up perceives them in the Balcone. Ha, here's a vision that I little dream't of, Stand close Fabio, and Mumm. Don Zancho get's over the Balcone, and letting himself down at Arms and, leaps gently into the Street, Chichon offers at the like, but takes a fall as he lights, and rising coun∣terfeits lameness. Francisca retires and locks the Balcone. Chic. Curse on the Drab, I think I've broke my leg.
Fab. The Moon has turn'd my brains, or I've seen That person some where, and that very lately. He pawses scratching his head. But sure I'me mad, tothink it can be he. Enter Don Pedro and Fulvio. Exeunt Don Zancho and Chichon as turning down the next Sreet. Fabio [retiring into the Porch.] O now I see my men. D. Ped. This is the Street you say; which is the house? Fulv. That fair one over against the Monastery; Shall I go knock? D. Ped. —What else? Fulvio knocks as at Don Julio's door, and no body answers. D. P. Knock harder. He knocks again, and one asks as from within who's there. D. Ped. A stranger, who must needs speak with Don Julio. Although unknown to him, my business presses. [From Who e're you be, and what so e're your business, You must have patience till to morrow Sir, within. Don Julio went sick to bed, and I dare not Wake him. D. Ped. Fortune takes pleasure sure, in disappointing, When men are prest with most impatience, But since there is no remedy, guide Fulvio, Unto the lodging y'have provided for me, I hope 'tis nere at hand. Fulv. Not above three doors from Don Julio's [Pointing. There where it makes the corner of the Street. Fabio [stealing after them] Here I must follow till I've harbour'd them. Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Fernando alone as in his Chamber. D. Fer. It cannot now be long, ere Fabio come,
And t'were in vaine to go to bed before, For rest I'me sure I should nor. He walks about the Room pensively. Ah, my Elvira, [Mine?] thou do'st infect My very words with falshood when I name thee: Did ever Mistress make a Lover pay So dear as I, for the short bliss she gave? What now I suffer in exchange of that, May make mankind, a fear'd of joyes excessive But here he comes. Enter Fabio. —(To Fabio. Have you learn't any thing, That's worth the knowing? Fab. Two things, I think considerable Sir; The one, that Julio hath found means to gain This night to cast your business in, without Admitting of Don Pedro, whose pressures Might have been troublesome, And urged you To hasty resolutions, whereas now Y'have time to take your measures. The other Sir, Is, that Don Pedro lodges here no more, And consequently hath eased you of constraint Whilst you rest here, and left the way more free, For intercourse betwixt Don Julio and you, This more I must observe t'ee, that Don Pedro Took special care to have his lodging nere Don Julio's house, whereby 'tis evident, That there he makes account his business lies. D. Fer. The news you bring me, hath been worth your pains And thanks t'ee for't, I suppose that is all. Fer. Say Fabio, what is't? Fab. —Pray, Sir, allow me This night to think, whether it be fit or no To tell it you, since 'tis a thing relates not As I conceive to you, nor to your business,
And yet in the concernments of another May trouble you. Fer. Be not overwise, I prithee, I will know What 'tis, since you have raised curiosity By such Grimastos. Fab. You must be obey'd, but pray remember Sir, If afterwards I'am call'd fool, for my pains, Who made me so, but since I do not onely Expect the fool, but ready to be thought A madman too, e're I have done my story In this I will be wilful, not to tell it T'ill y'are a bed, that I may run away So if you long to here it hasten thither. Exit Fabio as to the Chamber within. D. Fer. Content i'faith, you ask no great compliance. Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in Don Zancho's house. Enter Don Zancho, And Chi∣chon as at home halting. D. Zan. W'are well come off from danger, would we were it But half as well, from Blanca's jealousie. Chic. Speak for your self, I never came off worse, Apox upon your Venery, it has made me Another Vulcan. He halts about grumbling. D. Zanc. Go rest, to night, or grumble, as you please, But do not think, limping shall serve your turn To morrow, faith I'le make you stir your stumps, Think you a Lover of my temper likely To sit down by it so? Chic. I'me sure I am only sit to sit down by it, Since I can hardly stand. He makes as if he would sit down, and Don Zancho giving him a kick in the britch. D. Zanc. Coxcomb come away. Chic. To night's, to night, to morrow's a new day. Exeunt.
ACT. III. Enter Don Fernando and Fabio. As in the Room in the Inn. D. Fer. ARe all things ready Tabio? in case Don Julio when he comes conclude with me That I should begon presently. Tab. Horses stand ready for you at the Posthouse. Fer. 'Tis well, attend without. Exit Tabio Enter Don Julio. To Jul. I see you sleep not in your friends concerns, You are so early, and since so, the sooner We fix a Resolution, certainly, 'Twill be the better, 'Twas no small Point gained, To frustrate for a night Don Pedro's aims, As Fabio tells me you have done, for he Nere quitted him an inch last night, until He had harboured him. Jul. What, has he left his lodging? Fer. —That he has, And which is more considerable taken one Close by your house, which evidences cleerly Where his suspicions lie; That being so, I'me confident, you'l be of my opinion For my dislodging from Valencia Immediately, For Elvira being Already so well setled, nothing can So much indanger her discovery, As my remaining longer in these parts. Jul. W'ere I but free as yesterday Fernando, To think of nothing but Elvira and your Concernments, I must confess your absence From hence were to be wished, but Cousin
Ther's fallen out this very night, a thing, Which shews how little I beholding am To fortune, That having so newly lent me The means of serving handsomly my friend, Calls back the debt already, and mak's me As needing of your aide, as you of mine. Fer. Ho, Fabio forbid the horses presently. Fabio looks in. To Jul. The least appearance Julio of my being Useful to you, by staying, puts an end To all deliberation, for my self, Say, what's the accident? You have me ready. Jul. Such, and of such a nature, my Fernando, That as to be communicated to none But you, another self, so I am sure It will astonish you with the Surprisal. Ah! could you think it possible? that Blanca, Should raise disturbance in the heart of Julio, As to the honour of his Family. Fer. Heavens forbid. Jul. Never was Brother so secure as'I, Or so unalterable in his perswasion Of having a Sister, of unmatch't discretion, Nor e're, could less, then evidence it self, Have shaken such a confidence. Fer. —For Gods sake Julio, Hold me no longer in such pain of mind; But sure we shall be better there within, Free from the noise of the Street. Jul. You say well. Exit Julio. Fernando [as he follows him Aside.] This is what Fabio told me he saw last night, Discovered by some accident to Julio, It can be nothing else, O Women! Women! Exit Fernando. Enter Don Pedro and Fulvio, As in their new lodgings. Don Ped. I am glad you have lighted on so fit a place,
For all intend, as this is, Fulvio, I shall repair the last nights disappointment By early care this morning, In the mean while, Fail not of your part in the discovery Where my Enemy dwells, and i'th' observation, Of all his motion's, That's th' important part. Ful. Relie, Sir, on my care and Vigilance. Exeunt Don Pedro and Fulvio. Enter Don Julio and Don Fernando, As in the outward Room of the Inn. Jul. —It is a Quarter, Always reserv'd to my own privacy, There lying unsuspected, if whil'st I Continue late abroad under pretence Of being at Violantes, You keep watch Carefully within, he cannot scape us So you be sure t'observe punctually The sign agreed, and boulting of the doors, When he is once within. Fer. Since you have so resolv'd and laid your business, Dispose of me, and lead the way, whil'st I Give Fabio his instructions what to do During my absence. Exeunt Fernando and Julio. Enter Dona Blanca and Francisca As in Blanca's Ante Chamber. Fran. Since the black Cloud, that threatn'd you last night With such a storm, is luckely blown over, Without a sprinkling; I hope Madam, you Will imitate the fates, and grow Serene, From all those Clouds which so much threatn'd others. Blan. Ah! Francisca cans't thou— She stops seeing Silvia coming. Enter Silvia with a fine Bason of Flowers. Aside ——But here's Silvia, O the sharp thorns, she brings me at this time
With Flowers in her hand, by the Constraint Her presence gives me. Sil. Madam, I wish the ranging of these Flowers May be to your mind; but alass I fear I am too dull for works of Phancy. Blan. 'Tis me you find too dull to relish them, Dryly. Anon they may be wellcomer. Sil. I'le wait that happy hour, ——She's in ill humor. Aside. Exit Silvia. Blan. But tell me now, didst ever see Francisca, So false and bould a Creature? The Impudence He had to cloath his Treachery with new Courtships, Provokes me most of all. Fran. Last night indeed, incens't as you were, Madam, I fain would know what air so soft and Gentle He could have breath'd, would not have blown the flame Higher and Higher! but me thinks your Pillow Should in so many hours have had some power T'allay and mollifie; I then complyed (He present) with your anger, but now, Madam, You must allow me to speak reason t'ee, In his behalf, before you go too far, And put things, in your passion, past Recall, Which that once over, you would give your life, To have again. Blan. —Pray think me not so tame. Fran. So tame say you? I think you wild I swear. To take so much to heart, what at the most Deserves but some such sparkling brisk resentment, As once flash't out, in a few Cholerick words, Ought to expire, in a next Visits Coyness. Blan. Make you so slight of Infidelity? Fran. Cupid forbid; I'de have men true to Love. But, I'de have women too, true to themselves,
And not rebuke their Gallants, by requiring More than the nature of frail flesh will bear. I'de have men true as steel; but steel you know (The purest and best pollish't steel) will ply, Urg'd from it's Rectitude, (forsooth) But then With a smart spring, come to it's place agen. Blan. Come leave your fooling, and speak soberly. Fran. Why then in sober sadness, y'are in the wrong, I do not say, in being angry with him, And netl'd at the thing, That's Natural, We love no Partners, even in what we know We cannot keep all to our selves; But, Madam, To think the worse of him for it, or resolve A breach of friendship for a slight excursion, That were a greater fault then his, who has For one excuse, long absence; And in truth Another, you'd be sorry he wanted, youth. Blan. You talk as if— (Francisca interrupting her. Fran. —Stay Madam I beseech you. And let me make an end, I have not yet Touch'd the main point in his excuse, A Sure At Court, enough I trow for any dog trick. Blan. How like a Goose you talk, A Court protension, What has that to do one way or other With his faith to me? Fran. So, one displeased to find his Crasishes, Shrivel'd within, and empty, said to his Cook, (Who layd the fault upon the Wane o'th' Moon,) What has the Moon, to do with Crasishes? Marry she has, t'is she that governs shell Fish, And t'is as true, in Courts, that love rules business By as Preposterous an Influence. Blan. I prithy make an end, or come to the Point. Fran. Why then I'le tell you, and you may believe me, (Having been train'd up in my youth you know,
In the best School, to learn Court Misteries; An Aunt of mine being Mother of the Maids.) Love holds the Rudder, and Steers all in Courts; How oft, when great Affairs perplex't the Brains Of mighty Politicians, to conjecture, From whence sprung such designs, such revolutions, Such Exaltations, Madam, such depressions, Against the Rules of their Misterious Art, And when, as in suprising works of Nature Reason confounded, Men cry those are secrets Of the high Powers above, that govern all, Grave lookers on, stroking their beards would say, What a transcendant fetch of State is this; These are the things, that wisdom hides and hatches, Under black Cap of weighty jobbernole I mean Count Olivarez, All the while We female Macchiavels, would smile to think, How closely lurking lay the Nick of all, Under our Daughter Doll's white Petticoat. Blan. All this I grant you, may be true; And yet N'ere make a jot, for his excuse; Francisca His sute, had no Relation to such matters. Fran. What e're the thing be, 'tis all one, D'ee think, Sutes be they what they will, can be obtain'd By such as pass for Fopps, as all young men Without a Mistriss or a Confidence Are sure to do there; A sharp pointed Hat, (Now that you see the Gallants all Flat headed,) Appears not so ridiculous, as Yonker, Without a love Intreegue, to Introduce, And sparkefy him there; Madam, in short, Allow me once to be Sententious; It is a thing, that always was, and is, And ever will be, true, to the worlds end; That, as in Courts of Justice, none can Carry
On business well, without a Procurator, So none in Princes Courts, their Sutes make surer, Then those that work them, by the best Procurer. Blanca Well, hast, adone Francisca? [Smiling a little.] Fran. —Madam, I have. D. Blan. —Then letting pass, Thy fine reflections Politique now vented, To shew thy skill in Courts, I'le tell thee freely, I'me not transported in my jealousie So far, beyond the bounds of Reason, as Not to know well, the difference, betwixt Such Escapades of youth, as only spring From warmth of blood, or Gales of Vanity, And such engagements, as do carry with them Dishonour unto those, whose quality, And love have little to the serious Part, Once Embark'd by them, in a Gallentry. Fran. I see the Clouds disperse, ther's no such Art, Aside. Of compassing ones ends, with those above us, As that of working them into good humour, By things brought in by the by, Why surely, Madam, unless anger lend you To her. It's spectacles, to see things, I cannot think You judge Don Zancho's fault to be any other, Then of the first kind; so well stated by you. Blan. Francisca, were I otherwise perswaded, I am not of an humor that could suffer Such Parlies for him, much less Intercession; But since upon reflection, I find cause To think what he has done A sally only, Of Youth and Vanity, when I shall find him Sufficiently mortify'd, I may pardon him. Fran. Heavens bless so sweet a temper, But Madam, Have a care I beseech you of one thing. Blan. What's that?
Fran. —That whil'st your pride of heart Prolongs his readmission, his dispair Urge him not to some precipitate attempt, That may expose your honour, safe as yet; You see what danger the last nights distemper Had like t'have brought you into; Transported Lovers, Like Angels fallen from their bliss grow Devils. D. Blan. What would you have me appear so flexible? ——I'st not enough I tell you I may pardon him in due time? Fran. Good Madam, be advis'd I do not press you For his sake, but your own, Trust my experience, To women nought's so fatal as suspence; Whose smartest actions, ne're did cast such Blot, On honor, as this, shall I? shall I not? D. Blan. I'de rather die, then have him think me Easie. Fran. Your spirit, never can be liable To that suspicion, Madam leave to me The conduct of this matter, I beseech you, If e're you sleep, you do not see the Gallant Sufficiently humbled at your feet, Ne're trust Francisca more. D. Blan. You are so troublesome, do what you will. Blanca turns away and Exit as into her Closet. Fran. —What gone away? I'le do what she would have, but dares not say. Enter Don Julio and Silvia as in Blanca's Chamber. Don Julio [looking about him.] Where is my Sister Silvia? Silv. ——In her Closet, Sir, As yet not ready. Jul. ——And wher's Francisca? Silv. She's with her, dressing her. D. Jul. —Why then Elvira, Let me not Loose this opportunity, Of telling you, how sad a man I am.
To see you in this posture, and to assure you How gladly I would lay down life, and fortune, To serve you in Don Fernando's absence. Silv. Your generosity I make no doubt of: But is Fernando gone? D. Jul. —I cannot say, That he is gon, for he was not himself, With the thought of leaving you, And yet less Himself, when e're he thought of staying near you, Tortur'd by two such contrary passions, As love, and sharp resentment. Silv. [Putting her Hand∣kercher to her Eyes.] He is gone then? She pawses. ——Ah! generous Don Julio? You needs must be Indulgent, to a weakness Which whilst that he was present Indignation, And a just Sence of what I am, had power To keep within my self, but now I find That check remov'd, Nature will have it's tribute, And you must pardon my withdrawing, where She weeps. Such grief, may pay it, with unwitness't tears. Exit Silvia. Jul. Can a demeanour, so composed, so Noble, And yet so tender, want true Innocence? It cannot be, It grieves my heart I swear, T'have given her new affliction, but the Secret Of Don Fernando's close concealment here Is so important, it necessitated My saying what I did, since secrets are E'ver kept best, by those that know them least. Enter Blanca and Francisca. Jul. [To her] Now high dissimulation, play thy Part. Good Morrow Sister have you rested well? And do you rise Serene, as does the Sun, Free from distemper, as the day from Clouds, Your looks perswade it me, they are so clear, And fresh this morning.
Blan. The pleasure of seeing you, puts life into them, Else they'd be dull enough, this ugly Head-ache Having tormented me all night, you might Have heard me call Francisca up at midnight, Fran. That was well thought on, for 'tis possible Aside. He may have heard some Noise. Jul. —How cunning she's! Aside. Faith now you put me in mind of it I think T'wixt sleep and waking, I once heard some stirring. Blan. The worst of my indispotion is, That t'will I fear hinder me again, to day, From visiting Violante, to thank her For Silvia. Jul. I charge my self with all your Complements, For this whole after-noon till late at night I needs must pass with her, to make amends For yesterdays failings, caus'd as you know By Don Fernando's being in Town. Blan. I must not hope to see you then again To day, when once gone out. Jul. Hardly, unless to wait on Violante In case she come to see you, as 'tis likely, When I shall tell her, you are indisposed; And so farewell. Exit Julio Blan. All's well I see Francisca as to him, I wish my heart, were but as much at rest In what concerns Don Zancho. Fran. —It shall be Your own fault, if it be not quickly so, As I'le order the matter. Blan. Take heed, you make him not grow insolent By discovering to him my facillity. Fran. I'me too well vers't, to need instructions. Blan. I leave all t'ee, But how does Silvia This morning?
Fran. —I think she has been crying She looks so dull and moped. Blan. I'le in and see her. Exeunt. Scene Changes to Don Zancho's house. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon limping. Don Zan. What not yet gone, thou lazy trifling Rascal? Chic. What juster excuse Sir, for not going Then is a broken Legg? D. Zanc. If you find not your own Legg quickly Sirrah, I shall find you a wooden one. Chic. Be as angry as you will Sir, I'le not go Till I have maid my conditions; The true time For servants to stand upon points, is when Their Masters stand upon Thorns. D. Zanc. What are they, Owls face? Chic. Assurance Sir, but of free air within, With fair retreat, upon an even Floor, And that it shall not be in a sluts power, After having kept me in a nasty place, To empt' me out at window. Don Zan. —Prithy Chichon Adone and miss not th'oppertunity By fooling, unless you take Francisca Just as she comes from Mass, this day is lost, And I lost with it. Chic. —Come, I'le hobble to her, Expect a sorry account, but yet a true one; Truth always comes, by the lame Messenger. Exeunt. Scene changes to a fine pleasant Apartment. Enter D. Julio and knocks as at the Door of his private Apartment; Fernando opens the door and lets him in. Fer. Y'have given me here a very pleasant Prison: But what news my Julio? Are things disposed For clearing of your doubts? My own concerns
I cannot think on, during your disquiet. Jul. And I come now so strangely moved with yours, I scarce have sence or memory of my own, A heart of Adamant could not be hindred I think, from liquifaction into tears: I'have seen, and heard Elvira as I have done, Upon th'occasion of my telling her That you were gone, A sence so gallant, and so tender both, I never saw in Woman. Fer. Can that high heart, descend to tenderness? Jul. Not, (whilst you present) Noble pride upheld it; But Nature once set free from that constraint, O how pathetique was her very silence! And the restraint of tears, in her swolen Eyes, More eloquent in grief, then others torrents: If she be guilty, all her Sex are Devils. Fer. O say no more, For were there Room but left For self deceit, I might be happy yet; Ah Evidence, too cruell, to deny me that. A noise without. Jul. But what can be the noise, I hear without In the next Room. Fernando peeps through the Key-hole. Fer. —S'life I see Don Pedro Elvira's father, ther's no avoding him, H'eed not a come up so, without being sure You are within. Jul. Further put oft, would be of little use, Since first or last, he must be satisfy'd, Being come hither upon such an Arrant, The sooner now we see what 'tis, he drives at, The sooner we shall take from thence our measures; I'le therefore go out to him, and be sure To entertain him still, so near the door That you may hear what passes.
Fer. I shall be attentive, and expect the Issue With much impatience. Exit Julio. And the Scene changes to Don Julio's Ante-Chamber. Enter Don Pedro and his servant, and Don Julio and a Page. Don Ped. My business, Sir, is to Don Julio Rocca, [Adressing him∣self to D. Julio] If you be he I shall desire the favour Of some few words with you in Private. Don Jul. Sir, I am he to serve you, Page set Chairs. He points to the Page, and makes him set the chairs by the door where Don Fernando is, and then the Page and Don Pedro's man retire. [They sit down.] D. Ped. Having not the honour to be known t'ee Sir, 'Tis fit this Letter make my Introduction; 'Tis from the Duke of Medina. He gives Don Julio the letter, which he receives with great respect; And going a little aside reads it. THE LETTER. DOn Pedro de Mendoca my Kinsman, and most particular Friend goes to Valencia, in pursute of one who hath highly Injur'd his family, whose righting I am so much concern'd in, as could it have been done without too much publication of the thing, I would have accompanied him my self, but my presence will be needless in a place where you have power; I do therefore conjure you, and expect from your regard and kindness to me, that you em∣ploy it throughly in his behalf, and what service you shall do him, put it upon my account, whom you shall always find, Your most affectionate Cousin to serve you The Duke of Medina. Don Julio giving the Letter to Don Pedro and he taking it. Don Jul. Sir, it is sit you see how heartily The Duke hath recommended your concernments, Whose will's a Law to me. Don Pedro having read it, and restoring it. Don Ped. He told me indeed how very sure he was Of your Friendship and dependance.
—I am proud to find he makes, So obliging use of it to my advantage. D. Jul. I do avow my self his Creature Sir; Therefore the sooner you shall let me know In what I may be useful t'ee, the sooner You'l see my readiness to serve you. Don Pedro. Your personal reputation Sir, as well As your relation to the Duke, assured me Before hand, of what I find, and therefore As hard a part as it is for a Gentleman Of my blood and temper, to become Relator of his own shame, unreveng'd On the Authour of it, I shall tell you in short; I live under an affront of th' highest Nature To the Honour of my Family; And the Person Who did it, makes Valencia his retreat, 'Tis against him, Don Julio, That your assistance must support me here, I have already got some notice of him, And when I shall be acertain'd, I'le repair Again unto you for your friendly aide, And for the present trouble you no farther. Don Pedro offers to rise as going away. Don Jul. A little patience I beseech you Sir, I have express'd my readiness, and be sure I am a man never to fail, where once I have engaged my word; but Sir, withall, You must must consider with a fair reflexion That in this place are all my chief Relations, Of blood and friendship; and though neither shall Have power t'exempt me from the serving you In any just pretension; yet you know, That men of Honour, ever ought to seek, How to comply with one duty, without Violating another.
Don Ped. I understand you Sir, and as 'tis that Which well becomes a person of your worth, To have reflected on; so it becomes me, To satisfie before I engage you further, Then give me leave to ask you, whither or no Don Zancho de Menezes be of the number Of those, towards whom y'are under obligation, Either of blood, or friendship? Don Julio shewing some little surprise but presently recovering. Don Jul. Don Zancho de Meneses say you? Don Ped. —Sir, the same, He startled at his Name. Aside. D. Jul. He is a person I have always liv'd In friendly correspondance with, without Any such tye upon me towards him, As ought to hinder my frank serving you. Don Ped. You have reviv'd me; and since I have now nam'd My Enemy, I can conceal no longer The Grounds on which he is so; That Don Zancho About a fourtnight since, was late at night Found in my house, run newly through the body, And weltring in his blood, ready to expire; I by the outcry brought upon the place, Surpriz'd as you may imagine, and enraged, Was yet so far Master of my passion, As to disdain the owing my revenge To an unknown hand, perhaps as guilty Towards me, as was the sufferer; I made Him straight be carried to a Surgeon, where, I thought it generous to give him life Then dead, that living I might give him death; Recover'd sooner then I thought, he Fled, And with him, as I have reason to believe, My only Daughter, who the very night Of the accident was missing; O the Curse
Of men to have their Honours Subjected, To the extravagance of such vile Creatures! Jul. [sighing.] 'Tis our hard fate indeed. D. Ped. I presently employ'd all diligence To know what way he took, and having Learn't 'Twas towards this place, hither I have pursued him; Confirm'd in my pursuit, by information A long the Road, that an unknown Gallant Had with his Servant, guarded all the way A conceal'd Lady in a Coach: And thus Sir, You have the story of my injury, Whereof I doubt not but your generous heart, Will wed the just revenge. Jul. You may rely on't Sir, without reserves, To th'utmost of my power. Don Ped. —May the gods reward you, The life that you Renue to these gray heirs; I'le take my leave at present, and return t'ee As soon as from the diligences used I shall have Clearer lights. Don Jul. Here you shall find me waiting your Commands. Exit Don Pedro, and Don Julio waiting on him out. Scene changes, and Enter Don Julio, and Don Fernando as in the private Apartment. Don Jul. I hope you over heard us. Fer. —All distinctly, And with surprizing joy at his mistake; Did ever blood-hound, in a hot pursute, Run on so readyly upon the change? Jul. I hope it boads good fortune in the Rest. Fer. Were e're two friends engag'd in an adventure So intricate as we, and so Capricious? Jul. Sure never in this world, me thinks it merits A special recapitulation. You at the height of all your happiness
Supplanted with your Mistriss by a Rival, You neither knew nor dream't of; Evidence Anticipating jealousie. Fer. And when that Rival, fallen by my Sword In her own presance, is by miracle Revived, and fitter to serve her then I, That faithless Mistriss, with the same assurance She could have done, had she been true, as fair, And for my sake exposed to fatall hazards, Flys to my Arms for her Protection. Jul. And whil'st that you, refining point of Honour, In spite of Rage expose your self to serve her, She asks, and takes, with a vovved indignation, To be beholding t'ee, new obligations, Fer. I have recourse unto my only Friend, To help me in protecting my false Mistress, And he, at the same time, by heighest Powers Impos'd upon, to be her persecutor. Jul. Whil'st the same friend, and by the self-same Powers, Is urg'd to Act, in their revenge, against The man, on whom you most desire to take it; And then, to heighten all beyond invention, That very friend, is forst, even in that instant, To a dependance on your only Aide, In his Honours nearest and most nice concerns. Fer. Heaven sure delights t'involve us in a kind Of Laberinth, will pose it self to unwind. Exeunt. ACT. IV. Scene changes to the Room at Don Zancho's. Enter D. Zancho, and Chichon at an∣other door, halting still with a staff. D. Zan. VVHat here again already? have you spead? Chichon Lame as I am, you see I have made good speed
In my return, what e're I have had in my Arrant. D. Zan. Leave fool your quibling, and deliver me From the disquiet of uncertainly. Chich. That's quickly done, set Sir your heart at rest From the vain hopes of ever seeing Blanca: Now you are at ease I trow. Don Zanc. You'l be at little, unless you leave your jesting With such edg'd tools; Is banishment from her Matter of Rallery? say Sirrah, and say Quickly, what hopes? —Prithy if thou lov'st me kindly, Hold me no longer in suspence Chichon. Chich. Why, then for fear, the Divel a bit for love, I'le tell you Sir, That luckely I met The Drab Francisca at the Capuchins Lodging, behind her Lady, I think on purpose, For I perceiv'd, her eager Sparrow-Hawks eye With her veil down (near stirs a twinckling while From it's fly peeping hole) had found me straight, I took my time in th' nick, but she out nick't me; For trudging on, her face an other way, With such a voice, as some you have seen, have had The trick to draw, from Caverns of their Belly, And make one think it came from a mile off; She made me hear these words about twilight, Fail not to pass by our door, and ask no more At this time Varlet. And thus Sir, you see, That neither she nor I, have been prolixe, For this is all; You have leave to make your Comment On a brief text. Don Zanc. As sweet me-thinks as short, such words imply Little less then a demy Assignation. D. Zanc. All puddings have two ends, and most short sayings Two handles to their meaning. Don Zan. I'me sure I'le still lay hold upon the pleasing'st
Till it be wrested from me; i'th' mean while If any visitants come this afternoon, Be sure to tell them I am gone abroad, That nothing else embarque us at the time; You shall not go alone. Chic. —I thank you for it Holding up his staff. I cannot go alone. Exeunt Chichon halting. Scene changes to Don Julio's private Apartment. Enter Don Fernando and Julio as in the private Apartment. Don Jul. All things are rightly laid, for Violante Will pass the afternoon with Blanca, and then I waiting on her home in th' evening, Blanca Will be secure from me, till late at night, I shall be where I told you, in full view Of those two windows: If the Gallant come Up the great Stairs, he must pass through that Room And cannot scape your knowledge: If up the back one, You needs must here him passing through the Entry Close by that door. If this latter way, Be sure to set the Candle in that window: Pointing. If up the other, in that; and in either case As soon as he's within, fail not to bolt On th' inside th' Entry door, that so he may Find no retreat that way, I coming up The other. Don Fern. —Be assured I shall be punctuall As you direct. Exeunt. Scene changes to Don Pedro's Lodging. Enter Don Pedro, and his servant Fulvio. Don Ped. Are you sure of what you say? Ful. —As sure, Sir, As my own Eyes can make me of what I saw, You cannot doubt my knowing him, since t'was I (You may remember) fetcht the Surgeon to him, And saw his wounds drest more then once, or twice;
The Tavern where I was, looks into his Garden, And there I left him walking, to come tell you. D. Ped. We are well advanc't then, towards my just Revenge I found Don Julio as ready to comply With all the Dukes desires, as I could wish, And my great fear is over, That Don Zancho Might possibly have been some near Relation Of his own; so that now Fulvio, if you Keep but a careful Eye upon his motions, And give me notice, he can hardly scape us. Ful. Doubt not my diligence. Exeunt. Scene changes to the Garden. Enter Blanca and Francisca as in a fine Gar∣den with Orange-trees and Fountains. Don. Blan. You must have your will, but know Francisca If you expose me to his vanity, I never shall forgive you. Fran. I tell you, Madam, I will bring him t'ee So mortifyed, he shall an object be For pity, not for anger, you'l need employ Kindness to erect the poor dejected Knight. Don. Blan. It fell out luckely that Violante Came hither, for my Brother now engaged With her, w'are safe till ten a Clock at least. Fran. But how shall we dispose of Silvia? It will be hard to scape her observation, For she has wit, and of the dangerous kind, A melancholy wit: O the unlucky Star That leads a Lady, engaged in love intrigues To take a new Attendant near her Person! Don. Blan. 'Twas an unluckiness, but Violante Could not be deny'd, I having told her So often that I wanted one; besides Who could have thought, sh'had one ready at hand, But we must make the best on't for this night: 'Twill not be hard to busle her, till 't be late
In the perfuming Room. This near occasion Well o're, I think it will not be amiss Against another, to say some what to her That may in case she have perceiv'd any thing Perswade her she is not distrusted. Fran. Madam take heed of that, when e're you find It necessary to say any thing, Be sure to say that, that she may think all; Take one Rule more from my experience, Nothing so fatal as a Confidence By halves in amorous transactions; But here she comes. D. Blan. Come Silvia, and take your part of this sweet Place; This is a day indeed, to tast it's freshness. Sil. Madam I needs must say, within a Town I never saw so fine a one. Don. Blan. —In truth I think not many sweeter. Those Fountains Playing among those Orange trees and Mirtles, Have a fine mix't effect on all the senses; But think not Silvia to enjoy the pleasure Without contributing to make it more. Sil. How can I be so happy? D. Blan. Francisca tells me she has over-heard you Warbling alone such Notes unto your self, As have not only a good voice betray'd, But skill to manage it. Sil. —It is Francisca That has betray'd, a very ill one Madam. Don. Blan. Under you Palmtree's shade, there is a seat That yields to none in the advantages It lends to Musick, let's go sit down there, For this first time, one Song shall satisfie. Silv. When you have heard that one, I shall not fear Your asking me another. They go and set down under the Palm∣tree and Silvia sings.
THE SONG. See, O see! How every Tree, Every Bower, Every Flower, A new life gives to others joys, Whilst that I, Grief strucken lie, Nor can meet With any sweet, But what faster mine destroys. What are all the senses pleasures, When the mind has lost all mea∣sures? Hear, O hear! How sweet, and clear The Nightingal, And waters fall, In consort joyn for others Ears, Whilst to me For harmony, Every Air Eccho's despair, And every drop provokes a tear. What are all the senses pleasures, When the mind has lost all mea∣sures? Don. Blan. I thank you Silvia, but I'le not allow One of your youth, to nourish melancholly By tunes and words so flattering to that passion. Silv. The happiness of serving you may fit me In time, for gayer things. Don. Blan. I will not ask another for the present, Not for your reason, but because I'le be More moderate in my pleasures; Now Silvia I have a task to give you. Silv. What e're it be, t'will be a pleasing one Of your imposing. Don. Blan. —'Tis to gather store of Fresh Orange Flowers, and then carefully To shift the Oyls in the perfuming Room, As in the several ranges you shall see The old begin to wither; To do it well Will take you up some hours; But 'tis a work I oft perform my self; And that you may Be sure not to mistake, I'le go thither With you, and shew you the manner of it. Sil. I hope I shall not fail so well instructed. Exeunt.
Scene changes to the Room at Don Zancho's. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon. Chic. Y'are so impatient Sir, you will mar all, I tell you that 'tis yet too light by half, The Sun is hardly set; pray fetch a turn Or two more in the Garden, ear you go. D. Zan. You must be Governour, I see, to night, You are so proud o'th'service you have done; Come away. Exeunt. Scene changes to the Garden again. Silvia appears in the Garden as gathering flowers from the Orange Trees, and then with her Apron full going away says, Silv. The task enjoyn'd me is a sweet one truly, But I smell somewhat more in the imposall; So far I am happy yet in my misfortune That I am lighted into a Lady's service Of an obliging humour; But most of all One that as kind as she is, I see's as glad, To leave me alone as I to be it, somewhat There is, misterious in her looks, and conduct: Such motions just, such inequalities, Such flatteries to those I trusted least, Such pretty employments found, to busie those I would be rid of; And such arts as these To single out her Confident unnoted, I well remember would Elvira use, Whil'st the unquiet joys of Love, possest her, How innocent soever; And besides, Francisca's sitting up so late last night, And going up and down so warily, Whilst others slept, is evidence enough What God raigns here, as well as at the Court. But I forget my self: Let descants cease, Who serves though she observes, must hold her peace. Exit Silvia.
Scene changes to the Pro∣spect of Valencia. Enter Don Zancho with his Cloak o're his face, and Chichon. Don Zanc. Advance Chichon, I'le follow at a distance: 'Tis the right time, just light enough, you see, For warn'd Expectors to know one another; I hope she will not fail you. Chic. —She fail us? No Centinel perdu is half so alerte As she in these occasions. Enter Francisca vailed peeping, as out of the portal of Don Julio's house. Fran. There comes the Varlet, and I'me much deceiv'd, Or that's his Master lagging at a distance, I'le give them a go by, cover'd with my vail. She passes by them heedlesly. Chic. By that light as little as 'tis, 'Tis she, I'le to her. Don Zanc. —And I'le stand close the while, When you have broken the Ice, I'le take my time. Chichon going to Francisca lays hold of her vail, and she turns about. Chic. What signifies a Vail to hide my Doxye? When every motion of a leg or wing Darts round perfuming, and informing Airs, Thou art the very Colly-flower of Women, Fran. And thou the very Cabbidge-stalk of Men, That never stunk to me, as does a Blab. Chic. Curse on thee, hold thy tongue; Do'st thou not see Who stands against that wall. Fran. Away, sawce-Box. She thrusting him off goes on. Don Zancho sets himself just in her way, and makes as if he would lie down in it. D. Zanc. Pass, trample on me, do, trample; But here me. Fran. These shoo's have been my Ladies, and she'd ne're Shewing her foot. Forgive it, should they do you so much Honour.
[Aside turning to Chichon. 'Tis thou hast caus'd all this. Chic. —Fire on thy tongue. Don Zanc. Ah! my Francisca, if their be no hopes Of pardon, nor of pity; Yet at least Let Blanca for her own sake, be so just As not to give me cruel death unheard: Do you your part at least, and do but give her This letter from me. He offers her a Letter, and she starting back. Fran. —Guarda. That's a thing She has forbidden, with such Menaces, I dare as well become another Porcia, And eat red burning coales. I had much rather Consent, that now she's all alone at home, You should transportedly rush in upon her As following me so possibly you might Attain your end, without exposing me; Who in that case, know how to Act my Part So smartly against you, as shall keep her clear From all supition; But I am to blame Thus to forget my duty, I'le stay no longer. He stops her and pulling out a Purse of money, put's it unto her hand. Don Zanc. Spoak like an Angel. Francisca offers to restre the Purse but yet holding it fast. Fran. This is you know superfluous with me, And shock's my humour; But any thing from you: Be sure you follow boisterously. She trudges away, and goes in hastily as to Julio's house and Don Zancho follows her in. Chichon stops at the door. Chic. I'le bring you no ill luck a second time; If for sports sake, you have projected me Another Somerset, from the Balcone, Make your account, that 'tis already done, Here you will find me halting in the street, Exit Chichon.
Scene changes to Donna Blanca's Ante Chamber. Enter Donna Blanca as in her Ante Chamber. Don Blan. How true it is, that Nature cheats mankind, And makes us think our selves the onely Tasters Of pure delight, and bliss; when as indeed, Oppressing us with pains, and griefs, she makes Deliverance from them, pass for solid pleasure: Witness in me those Images of joy Wherewith she flatters now my expectation: What will it's highest satisfaction be, At most, but ease from what tormented me? Enter Francisca hastily. Fran. It now imports, you have affected Rage, As ready at hand as usually you have Anger, in earnest; But above all, be sure You discharge it smartly upon me, for here He presses at my heels. Enter Don Zancho, and goes to cast himself at Donna Blanca's feet, and she starting back from him. Don. Blan. What in'olence is this? —Think not Francisca That I am to be fool'd; This is your work, You shall not stay an hour within these walls; By all that's good you shall not. Fran. For heavens sake Madam, be not so unjust Whining. To an old servant, always full of duty; But can I govern mad men, would y' have had me Make all the Street take notice? There he attacqued me With such transportment, the whole Town had rung on't Had I not run away; Could I imagine A man so wilde as to pursue me hither Into your presence? Don. Blan. —[Severely and scornfully.] It is well Don Zancho Blanca may be thus used; But he that does it Shall find— She turns away as going out he holds her by the sleeve.
Don Zanc. Pardon this rudeness Madam; But a man Made desperate, hath nothing more to menage. Hither I come, to give you satisfaction, And if my reasons can't, my heart blood shall; But you must hear me, or here see me dead. D. Blan. Since to be rid of him Francisca, I see Turning to Francisca.] I must the pennance undergo of hearing him, Keep careful watch, to prevent accidents. Fran. Madam, your Closit will be much more proper For such a Conference; For in case your Brother Should come, Don Zancho has a safe retreat From thence, down the back Stairs. I shall be sure To give you timely notice. Don Zanc. And I know perfectly the passage thorough Th' Entry, I've come up more then once that way, During my happy days. D. Blan. I think y'have reason, since I must have patience Light us in thither. [Francisca takes the lights, and going before them, Exeunt omnes.] Scene changes to the Pro∣spect of Valencia. Enter Don Julio as in the Portal of his own house. D. Jul. The light was in the further window, therefore He went up this way: Now if Fernando Have not forgot to bolt the Entry Door, He cannot scape us sure, who ear he be. —'Tis the only Comfort, In such misfortunes, when a man hath means To right his Honour, without other help Then such a friend, as is another self, And that the shame's even from Domestiques hid Until it be revenged. Exit Don Julio as going into his own house. Enter Chichon as coming out of the Porch before Julio's house. Chic. S'light 'tis Don Julio, that I saw go in, My Master's like to pass his time but ill,
I'le steal in after, and observe, although My courage cannot steed him, thy wit may, As things may possibly fall out Exit Chichon as stealing after Don Julio into his house. Scene changes to Donna Blanca's Closet. Enter Don Zancho and Donna Blanca as in her Closet. D. Blan. As fine a story as may be; No Don Zancho, I Blanca Rocca, am not Carta Blanca, Fit to receive what e're impression Your Art— Enter Francisca hastily. Fran. —Your Brother's in the Hall already, Quick, Quick, and let him find you in your Chamber Before your Glass, I have set it ready there [Pointing (to Don Zancho. Whil'st he retires the way that was resolv'd. Scene changes to Donna Blanca's Bed chamber. Francisca takes the Candle, and Exeunt she, and Donna Blanca and D. Zancho another way. Re-enter Donna Blanca and Francisca as in Blanca's chamber, and she newly seated at her Toilet, and beginning to unpin. Enters Don Julio. Don Jul. Blanca I thought you had been a bed ear this, Have you had company to entertain you, And keep you up beyond your usual hour? D. Blan. What Company can I have, you abroad, As this time of the night? D. Jul. [Ironically] I fain would find out some such as might please you: Francisca take a Candle and light me in To Blanca's Closet. D. Blan. —Good Brother what's the matter? You were not wont to be so curious As thus to pry into my Privacies.
D. Jul. That you shall know anon: Do as I bid you Francisca. Francisca takes one of the Candles, and going be∣fore him stumbles and falling puts out the light. Don Julio taking it up, lights it again at the other on the Table, and going with it himself towards Donna Blanca's Closet. D. Jul. These Tropes are lost on me. Exit. Fran. Let him go, now we have gain'd time enough. D. Blan. Thanks to thy timely fall. Fran. —Persons employ'd In such trusts, must have their wits about them; 'Tis clear that he suspects, but know he cannot, When once you see all safe, 'twill then import you To play the Tyrant over him, with reproaches For this his jealousie. D. Blan. —Let me alone for that, But let us follow him in, that we may mark His whole demeanour. Exeunt. Enter Don Zancho in disorder. D. Zanc. Curse on't, the Entry door's bolted within, What shall I do? He pawses. —I must seek a way Through the Perfuming Room, into the Garden. Exit. Enter Don Julio with a Candle in his hand, and pas∣sing hastily over the Stage. D. Jul. He must be gone this way, there is no other, The Entry door was bolted. Enter Donna Blanca and Francisca, and passes over the Stage as stealing after Don Julio. Fran. All's safe, he takes that way, let him a God's name Follow his Nose, to the Perfuming Room. D. Blan. Hee'l fright poor Silvia out of her wits, But I'le come to her succour, with a peal I'le ring him. Exeunt Donna Blanca and Francisca.
Scene changes to the Laberatory. Here is to open a curious Scene of a Laberatory in perspe∣ctive, with a Fountain in it, some Stills, many Shelves with Pots of Porcelane, and Glasses, with Pictures above them, the Room paved with black and white Marble with a Prospect through Pillars, at the end discovering the full Moon, and by it's light a perspective of Orange Trees, and towards that further end Silvia appears at a Table shifting Flowers, her back turned. Enter Don Zancho hastily, and Silvia, that is, Elvira turn∣ing about they both startle, and stand a while as it were amazed. D. Zan. O heavens! what i'st I see? 'Tis meer Illusion, Or 'tis the Devil in that Angels form, Come here to finish, by another hand The fatall work that she begun upon me By Don Fernando's. Silvia [ Elvira] Good gods Don Zancho here! it cannot be, Or 'tis his Gost come to revenge his death On it's occasioner; For were he alive; He could not but have more humanity Then (having been my ruine at Madrid, And robb'd me of my home, and honour there) To envy me an obscure shelter here. Whilst they amazed step back from one another. Enter Don Julio who seeing Don Zancho with his back to∣wards him drawing his Sword says. D. Jul. Think not (who ear thou art), by flying thus, From Room to Room, to scape my just Revenge; Should'st thou retire to th'Center of the Earth, This Sword should find thee there, and pierce thy heart. Throwing down the Candle he makes towards Don Zancho, but upon his turning about towards him, he makes a little stop and says. D. Jul. Nay, then if it be you, I'me happy yet
In my my misfortune; since the gods thus give me The means at once, and by the self same stroak, To right my honour, and revenge my friend; And by that action, fully to comply With what the Duke requires in the behalf Of wrong'd Don Pedro. Don Julio makes at Don Zancho, he draws and they begin to fight, Silvia, that is, Elvira crying out help, help, runs to part them, and they stop upon her interposing. Entor Don Fernando hastily over the Stage, as coming from the private Apartment. Don Fer. I hear an out-cry, and clattering of Swords; My friend engag'd, must find me by his side. Exit and re-enters at another door. As Fernando comes as to the door of the Per∣fuming Room, seeing them at a stand, he stops and stands close. Don Fer. They are Parlying, let's hear. Aside. Donna Blanca and Francisca passing over the Stage. D. Blan. 'Twas Silvia's voice, my heart misgives me somewhat. Fran. 'Tis some new accident, or some mistake, Don Zancho cannot but be safe long since. Don Blan. However let us in and see. Exeunt Donna Blanca and Francisca, and re∣enter as at another door of the Perfuming Room, and make a stand as surpris'd with what they see. Don Blan. We are all undone I fear. Fran. A little patience. Chichon stealing over the Stage. Chic. The noise is towards the Perfuming Room, I know the back way to it through the Garden. Exit Chichon, and re-enters at the further end of the Laberatory and stands close. Don Zan. Wit must repair the disadvantages Aside.
I'me under here, and save my Blanca's honour, That once secured, there will be time enough To salve Elvira's. Whilst this passes Elvira holds Julio by the arm, he striving to get from her. Zancho to Julio Since by this Ladies interposing thus, You have thought fit, our Swords should pawse a while, It may I think consist enough with Honour, So far to seek your satisfaction Sir, As to remove mistakes; Know then Don Julio, That though I have presum'd upon your house, I have not wrong'd your honour; It is she With whom you find me, that hath brought me hither, Her I have long adored, and having gor Intelligence, that she was here conceal'd, My Passion I confess transported me Beyond that circumspection and regard, Which men of quality use and ought t'observe, Towards one another's dwellings. D. Jul. Good gods what an adventure's here? Yet all Aside. Is well, so Blanca's honour be but safe. Sir, you surprise me much, can this be true? To D. Zancho Blan. Francisca heard'st thou that, Had everman Aside. So ready a wit, in such an Exigent? Don Julio to Elvira. What say you Madam? Fran. W'are surer lost then ever, unless she Aside. Have wit, and heart, to take the thing upon her. Madam, make signs to her, and earnestly. To Blan. Blanca makes earnest signs. Silvia. To Elvira. Francisca [Aside to Blanca.] She looks this way, as if she comprehended Your meaning. Elv. I understand her, and I know as well Aside. What mischief I may draw upon my self,
But let Elvira still do generously And leave the rest to fate. —Sir, since you press me, To Julio My humour ne're could disavow a truth, Don Zancho's passion, and transportments for me Beyond all Rules of temper, and discression, Have been the cause of all my sad misfortunes, And still I see must be the cause of more. Jul. Unhappy Creature, how thou hast deceiv'd My prone perswasion of thy Innocence. Don Zancho [holding out his Sword.] If that suffice not Sir, you have this ready To give you satisfaction. D. Fer. Hell and Furies, but I will yet contain Aside. My self, and see how far my friend will drive it. Don Jul. Stay Don Zancho, And answer me one question, Is this Night The first of your presuming thus to enter My house by stealth? Zan. [Blanca aside to Francisca.] —The quere is malicious, Aside. But I must thorough, as I have begun There was a question, makes me tremble still. D. Zancho [to Julio.] No Sir, it is not I'le keep nothing from you; Last Night upon the same occasion. Jul. —Hold it suffices. Francisca [aside hastily to Blanca.] All's safe, you see, for Godsake lets away E're Julio perceive us, Your presence here, can serve for nothing Madam, But to beget new chances, and suspicions. Exeunt Blanca and Francisca. Fernando rushes out drawing his Sword. Fer. Yes, it suffices Julio to make This hand strike surer then it did before. Elv. Nothing was wanting to my misery, Aside. But his being here to over-hear; But yet I must not suffer the same hand to kill him
A second time, upon a greater errour Then was the first. Don Fernando making at Don Zancho, Elvira steps be∣tween, and Julio also offers to stay him. Fer. striving to come at Zancho.] Strive to protect your Gallant from me, do, Strive, but in vain; The gods themselves cannot: What you Don Julio too? Chichon running out from the place where he lurck't, strikes out both the lights with his hat. Chic. I have loved to see fighting, but at present, I love to hinder seeing how to fight. Knights brandish now your blades, 'twill make fine work Aloud. Among the Gallipots. You have me by your side Sir, Let them come As to his Master. They are but two to two. Sir follow me, I'le bring you to the Door. [Aside to his Master and pulling him.] Don Zanc. There's no dishonour in a wise Retreat From disadvantages to meet again Ones Enemy upon a fairer score. Chichon pushing his Master before him out of the Door. Chichon [aside to his master.] There 'tis, advance Sir, I'le make good the Rear. Exeunt Don Zancho and Chichon. Don Jul. Ho, who's without? bring lights. He stamps. —They cannot hear us, The Room is so remote from all the rest, What a confusion's this? Recall Fernando, To Fernando. Your usuall temper, and let's leave this place, And that unhappy Maid, unto it's darkness, To hide her blushes, since her shame it cannot. Elvira sola. Exit Don Julio groping, and drawing Fernando with him. Darkness and horrour wellcome, since the gods Live in the dark themselves; For had they light Of what's done here below; They would afford
Some Ray to shine on injur'd Innocence, And not instead thereof, thus multiply, Obscuring Clouds upon it, such as the Sun, Should he with all his Beams illuminate Mens understandings scarce could dissipate; I now begin to pardon thee Fernando, Since what thou hast heard, in this inchanted Place, Carries conviction in't against my firmness, Above the power of Nature to suspend My condemnation: Unless wrong'd vertue might Expect in thee, a justice so refin'd As ne're was found in man to woman kind. 'Tis now I must confess, the lost Elvira, Fit only for a Cloister, where secure In her own spotless mind, she may defie All censures; And without Impietie Reproach her Fate, even to the Deitie. Exit groaping her way. ACT. V. Enter Don Julio talking to himself, and at another door Fernando, who perceiving it, stands close. Don. Jul. BLest be the gods, that yet my Honour's safe, Amidst such strange perplexities, from which Fortune, and wit, I think, together joyn'd With all their strength, could hardly an issue find. To temper, comfort, or to serve my friend; What argument? What means? how to assist Don Pedro in his aims, and to comply With what I owe the Duke, I see as little, And less conceive, how to behave my self As ought a Gentleman towards a Lady, With whose Protection he hath charg'd himself, And brought her to his house on that assurance,
Whom to expose, cannot consist with honour, However she may have expos'd her own, And least of all, how to repair to Blanca The injury I have done her, whose high spirit I fear will be implacable. O Heavens! What a condition's mine? He stands pawsing, and startles seeing Fernando. Enter Fernando. D. Fer. Pardon dear Cousin, if to avoid one rudenss I have another unawares committed. Whilst fearing to interrupt, I have overheard, Yet nothing Cousin, but the self same things, My thoughts have been revolving all this night, Concern'd for you, much more then for my self, For I upon reflexion, find I am Much easier then I was; By certainty Free'd from the forest weight, Perplexity. In the first place, You must forgive your friend, The high distemper of last Nights transportments, I hope you'l find me well recover'd from them, And that my morning resolutions are Such, as will make amends. D. Jul. Make no excuse dear friend, such provocations Surprising, are above Philosophy, And 'tis no small experiment of yours, If after them, you can have brought your self So soon, to fix a judgement what to do. Don Fer. I have fix't on that, which I am sure will serve All Interests but my own, as heretofore I understood my happiness, but now I shall no longer place it in any thing Dependant on the wild Capricho of others. —No Julio. I will be happy even in spight of fate,
By carrying generosity up to the height. Elvira shall her dear bliss, owe to me, Not only by desisting, but by making Her lov'd Don Zancho marry her, his refusal Alone, can make me kill him o're again. Don Jul. Since that unhappy Maid, withall her beauty And that high Quality, hath made her self Unworthy of your Marriage, certainly None but Fernando, ever could have pitch't Upon so Noble a thought, but think withal What difficulties are likely to obstruct it. D. Fer. Say what occur's to you. D. Jul. Don Zancho is a man of wit, and courage, And though his passion out of doubt be great, Since it hath made him do so wild an action, As that of coming twice into my house After so strange a manner; Yet Fernando You cannot but imagine, such a One, Likely to have quite different reflexions, Upon Elvira's conduct for a wife, From what he has, upon it for a Mistress, They are two notions very differing: Besides should the proposal but appear In the least kind, to spring from your desire, Whose former commerce with her's not unknown, It were the only way to drive him off, Past all recall, I think few have accepted Wifes recommended to them by their Rival. D. Fer. In that y'have reason I confess; But Julio Think of the way, for marry her he must Or die, and by no other hand but mine. I am thinking of it, and I hope to purpose, Don Julio pawsing. What Interposer can be found so fit As Blanca in this business? since Don Zancho Has long been her particular acquaintance,
And what can be more Natural, then for her To take to heart, Elvira's chief concernment? Whom he finds here retired in her misfortune As to her surest friends. D. Fer. Y'have lighted Cousin on the only way, And lose no time I beg you. D. Jul. The least that may be; but you must consider In what a predicament I am likely To be with Blanca, at present. D. Fer. I understand you (since the jealousie You exprest of her.) But 'tis to be hoped The peace will not be long a making. D. Jul. You little know her spirit, once inflamed, But as I'le lose no time, so I'le omit No Art to bring her to a temper, fit To hear and to advance the Proposition. D. Fer. Heaven give you good success. D. Jul. (Julio turning back to Fernando. I had forgot to tell you, that I think It will be necessary, that as soon As I have weather'd Blanca's storm, I make A visit to Don Pedro, to prevent His coming hither, to disorder us, Before we have set things Right. D. Fer. 'Twas not ill thought on; And till your return I shall keep close in your Apartment; For Blanca has not seen me, and Elvira Has too great cares upon her to be curious. Exeunt. Enter Blanca and Francisca, Blanca with a gay air. As in her Ante-Chamber. D. Blan. Say my Francisca, can Romances equal Our last night's adventure? was there ever Such a come off? Our Sex has used to boast Presence of mind in Exigents of Love, But I believe none of us ever match't
Don Zancho's readiness in an occasion So sudden and so Critical. Fran. Ever give me the man of ready Parts. D. Blan. But prithy, whil'st we give Don Zancho his dues, Let us be just too, to poor Silvia's merit; Was ever any thing so generous? Or so obliging to a Mistress? Fran. So it appears Madam, I must confess, But the excess of it makes it suspicious. Don. Blan. Fye, leave this humour of detracting still, And call her to me, that I may embrace And thank her; That done consider how To bring her off, who has brought us off so well. Offers to go out. Enter Don Julio. Fran. Stay I beseech you, and compose your self To act a part quite of another Nature; Here comes Don Julio, towards whom I hope You'l tune your self, to a far differing Key From that of thanks and kindness. Don Blan. Let me alone for that, I'le play the Dragon. As Julio advances, Blanca turns from him with a furious countenance, and flyes out of the Room, Julio following her. D. Jul. Dear Sister stay, and hear me. D. Blan. Detested Brother leave me. She makes as if she were going, and he holds her. D. Jul. Hear me but Blanca, and then vent your passion Against a Brother, that condemns himself As much as you can do; But hear me speak. D. Blan. Your actions Julio, have spoke loud enough To Eccho through the world, your shame and mine; Has all the tenour of my life been such, With such exactness, of unblemish't conduct,
That malice might have stain'd the noon day Sun More easily, then tarnish't Blanca's honour, And must that Honour, now be prostitute, By the Capricho of an unworthy Brother, Should any other have invaded it, Had not you righted her, She has a heart Would have sound ways to right her self; But you Th'Agressor, What remedy but Rage? She flings from him, and Exit. Fran. She acts it rarely. Aside. D. Jul. Was ever man so unfortunate as I? To Francisca. I must confess she has reason, and the sense She thus expresses of my fault, becomes her, But it must be your work, my dear Francisca, To pacifie; When once you shall but know All that has past these Nights, I am certain You'l say, no humane confidence could ear Be proof against such circumstances. Fran. Alass, my offices can signifie As if she were crying. But little, But I'me sure the occasion Gives me a sad heart, O my dear Lady. D. Jul. I love good Nature, but I prithy leave And come in with me, that I may tell thee all. Exeunt. Enter Don Pedro, and Fulvio as in his lodging. Don Ped. A God's name Fulvio, what has been thy meaning, To make me sit up almost all last night Expecting thee, when such impatience held me? Thou wert not wont to be so negligent In things of so great weight. Fulv. Nor have I been it now, 'Tis over care Of your commands, hath held me so long from you; You know the orders that you gave me Sir, To watch Don Zancho's motions; Accordingly, I sate all day in my observing place Till about twilight; I saw him and's man
Steal as it were abroad; I as warily, Dogg'd them from Street to Street, till Sir, at length He made a stand up close against a Wall, Whilst that his Servant entertain'd a Woman Close Vail'd, who was come out I think on purpose From an adjacent house; soon after he Accosted her himself, their Conference Lasted but little, she made hast away To th'house from whence she came, and he as much To follow her in. Don Ped. Where wast? and why cam'st thou not presently? To give me notice as you were directed. Fulv. At that you will not wonder, when you know Whose house he enter'd; But at this you'l wonder, It was Don Julio's D. Pedro startling.] Ha! Don Julio's say'st thou? He pawses. But now I think on't 'tis no marvel Fulvio, Since newly come to Town, For I remember Don Julio told me, that Don Zancho and he Had always lived in friendly correspondence. Fulv. Visits Sir, only of fair civility After long absence, are not usually Begun by twilight, in such cautious manner; Nor usher'd in, by Female vail'd conducters: But pray Sir, hear the rest. D. Ped. What can this be? To Fulvio. say on then quickly, Aside. Ful. I presently concluded with my self, That since Don Julio was the friend on whose Assistance you relyed against Don Zancho, You near would think Sir, attacquing him As he came out from thence, I judg'd it therefore My wisest course to stay, and mark the issue. And stay I did, till it was after midnight, About which time, walking from side to side, That I might see both Issu's of the house,
It being as light almost as day, I saw The Gallant and his man leap from the wall Of Julio's Garden, and from thence in hast Make home. (Julio's D. Ped. S'death man thou dream'st! Don Zancho from Don In that manner; Awake fool and speak sense. Fulv. I say but what I saw, as I see you. D. Ped. O the Devil, What the same Villain Found the affronter of my friend too, here In the same kind? Give me my Cloak and Sword, I must know the bottom of this. Exeunt. Enter Blanca and Francisca, as in her Ante-Chamber. D. Blan. I come from seeing and caressing Silvia, But with most strange surprise, at her Comportment Towards me. Fran. How! Madam. D. Blan. My words, and Actions both, expressing to her Not only highest gratitude and kindness, But a solicitude in the concerns Of her honor, equal to what she had shown In mine; They were receiv'd with such a coldness, With such an air of Melancholly pride, With half replys, and those not half to th'purpose, As make me with amazment to conclude, That either she has lost her understanding, Or that there's somewhat in't we understand not. Fran. She's a Maid of an odd composition; And besides that, I needs must tell you Madam, That having had my observation freer, Then you perhaps during last nights adventure, I remark'd some what both in her demeanour, And in Don Zancho's, makes me confident They met not there strangers to one another, As you imagine; But there's time enough To think and talk of that: What presses now
Is your right ordering of Don Julio: You have begun, as well as can be wish't. D. Blan. Say did I not do my part? Jollily. Fran. —Beyond imagination, But take heed now, of over doing it, 'Tis time to tack about, to reconcilement. And thought of drawing those advantages From the Embroilment, as may for the future Secure you from like accidents. D. Blan. —You say well, but how? Fran. The first step must attonement be between you, Of which he hath so earnestly conjured me To be an Instrument, that you consenting To give him a hearing, through my mediation, I am made for ever, an setled in the power Of serving you, by better cozenning him: Besides he tell's me, he hath that to say, And to propose unt'ee, as shall not only Excuse him with you, but prevent all danger Of prejudicial rumors, which might rise From last night's accident. D. Blan. —Agreed, let's in And play the second part. Exeunt. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon as in his own house. D. Zan. Were we not born with Cauls upon our heads Jollily. Think'st thou Chichon? to come off twice a row Thus rarely, from such dangerous Adventures. Chich. Rather I think with Combs, so of't to venture. D. Zan. Thou Coxcomb say, had I not my wits about me? Chich. 'Twere too uncomplaizant to deny that, You know I love not to talk seriously; But tell me now in earnest, are you satisfi'd To have come off so, is there no qualm remaining Upon your gentle heart, for leaving i'th' suds A poor distressed Virgin, who she is
I neither know nor care, but I am sure Had generous Chichon, to save his life Play'd a sweet Innocent Lady such a trick, He would have past but for a Recreant Knight, And much the more, she having shown her self So gallant, as to save her Ladies honour T'expose her own: Say true Don Galor, say, Were your part found in a Romance or Play, Whose Character would it not disluster? D. Zanc. How soon a fool's bolt's shot, without distinction Of what's the mark. Thou censurest without knowing Who th'exposed Lady is. Know then Chichon And wonder, 'tis Elvira, that Elvira For whom I sighed, like to have sigh'd my last On her score at Madrid: Don Fedro's Daughter. Chich. You raise enchanted Castles in the Air, But were it as you say, that makes the thing More inexcusable; You had been too blame To have used a stranger so; But so t'have serv'd A Lady whom you had once profest to love, Raises the fault above all heightning. D. Zanc. Nay, then I see I must once play the fool, In answering a fool seriously, The things thou say'st are heightnings indeed, Not of my fault, but merit in the Action Towards my Blanca, since to save her honour, I did not only sacrifice Elvira's, But thus expose mine own: Time may recover Elvira's fame, and mine this quickly shall. Claping his hand on his Sword. Here take this letter, and employ your wit In finding out the means with secrecy To give it Don Fernando unobserv'd, I shall not stir from home, till I have his answer. Chic. You found him Sir, a man of quick dispatch
In your last business with him at Madrid. Exit Don Zancho. How honorable 'tis to serve a Don. What Petit Basque on t'other side the Mountains, Durst have aspired to the high dignity Of carrying a Cartal? A Monsieur Would sooner have put up a twinge by the Nose, Then sent a challenge by a serving man. Exit. Enter Blanca furiously, and running to a Cabinet, takes out thence a Stiletto, and Francisca earnestly after her as in Blanca's Closet. Don. Blan. Villains shall find, I am not unprovided Wrongs to revenge, that cannot be forgiven. Fran. I thought the strange constraint upon her self Aside. Wherewith she heard her Brother, would serve in the end But to make rage, break out with greater fury; Yet it is well she kept it in so long, As to get rid of him. Good Madam, moderate your self a little. To Blanca. D. Blan. Preach temper to the damned souls in hell, 'That they may teach the Traitor moderation, When I have sent him thither with his Devil. Fran. I do confess the provation such, As more then justifies all these transportments; And therefore I beseech you think not, Madam, In what I say, I can the least aim have Of saving him; from the extreamest fury Of your resentment; or preserving her, Who has had the impudence to abuse you so Under pretence of serving: May they perish, But let it be in such away, as may not Draw a more dismal ruine on your self; Let swift destruction seaze them; Yet let not Madam your hand, but head dispence their fate, What can the Issue be, of such an action As that of which I see that shining steel
And flaming Eyes of yours? The threatning Comets, I beg but the reflexion of a moment. Blanca walking upon the Stage with enraged jestures pawses, at length sheathing, and puting her Stiletto in her sleeve with a sober composed tone. Francisca I thank you, for recalling me Don. Blan. Thus to my self, I will be temperate: Aside. But it shall be to make revenge the surer. Fran. Her tone, nor jestures cannot cozen me, Aside. They both seem to disguise a black design, But I shall watch you, 'tis a half gain'd cause In furie's course, to have begot a pawse. D. Blan. Do what I bid you presently Francisca, Send to Don Zancho, and let him know from me, I earnestly desire to speak with him. Fran. Lord Madam, what d'ee mean? D. Blan. To make the pleasing proposition to him, As I told my Brother I would. —Say, am I not moderate? But do without reply, what I command. Fran. Madam, I shall obey. —But observe you so withall, Aside. As to prevent the mischief if I can. Exit Francisca. D. Blan. Ye Gods assist me in my just revenge, Or you will make an Athist; My first work Must be before Don Zanĉho come to speak With his sweet Mistress, and with words and looks As false as her's have been, so to delude her With hopes of what she wishes, that they both May joyntly fall my Honour's sacrifice. Exit. Enter Don Fernando as in Don Julio's private Apartment. D. Fer. Since generosity hath so far got The mastery, as to have made me fix Upon a resolution so unheard of, I long to see it executed.
—But stay, I think, I hear Elvira's voice without, And Blanca's too, here curiosity He makes as if he harkn'd, and then To over here, is pardonable. Exit as to go where he may better hear. Silvia Enter Elvira and Blanca as in the Ante-Chamber, and Fernando peeping as from behind a door. D. Fer. Here not a word can scape me. Silvia Elvira Madam you wrong my zeal, in serving you, Whil'st you attribute to any other motive My yesterdays behaviour. D. Blan. In a tone that may shew what she says to b'forc't. Such niceties Elvira are out of season, I seek your satisfaction in a Love, Wherein it seems you have been long engaged. Donna Elvira looking round, and Fernando starting back. D. Fer. I hope she did not see me. Aside. D. Elv. My satisfaction say you, in my Love, Of whom for heaven's sake? If you mean Don Zancho, Y'are very far from guessing at my thoughts. D. Fer. By heaven S'has seen me, and plays the Devil still. Aside. D. Elv. By all that's good, I am far from loving him, Aside. I say not worse because I know she loves him. D. Fer. Ah Elvira! this is too much, yet not enough To change in me, a Noble resolution. A noise is heard as of people coming up stairs. D. Blan. I hear some coming up stairs, should it be Aside. Don Zancho, I am not yet ready for him, [To Elvira. I see we are likely to be interrupted here Elvira, we shall be better in my Closet. Exit Blanca. D. Elv. Madam, I'le follow you. What can she mean? since that she needs must think,
I know the passion she her self has for him. Elvira having stay'd a while behind, as she is going to fol∣low Blanca. Enter her Father Don Pedro, and Ful∣vio, she starts and stands confounded; He seeing her draws out his Dagger and makes at her. D. Ped. Vile stainer of my blood, have I here found thee? Elvira perceiving the door a little open where Don Fer∣nando is, flies thither and gets in. D. Fer. This makes it clear she saw me. Aside as Elvira thrusts in. Don Pedro seizes the door before it be quite shut, and they struggle, he to pull it open, and Don Fernando to shut it, who after some contest, Don Fernando gets it close, and bolts it within: Don Pedro as an enraged person pulls and bounces at the door. D. Ped. In vain should Mountains interpose, between Her and her punishment. He bounces still as to break down the door. Enter Donna Blanca. D. Blan. What Bedlam have we here? and where's Elvira? D. Ped. You have one here, will know how to revenge Conspiracies to affront him; And you Lady Who ere you are, that seem to take upon you, Y'had best produce the wicked thing you have named, Or by this Steel— Donna Blanca crys out. Don. Blan. Ho! brother, brother, help against a madman. Enter Don Julio. D. Jul. Peace, Blanca, peace, you know not what you say, Don Pedro is Master here. D. Blan. I know not your Don Pedro, but I'me sure One to be tyde in Chains, could do no more Then he has done. D. Jul. Have patience Sister; 'Tis Elvira's Father, With cares enough upon him to justifie Any distemper. Blan. ——Precious Elvira's Father; Nay, then I leave you. Blanca flings out of the Room.
Jul. O the unluckiness of his coming Aside. So unseasonably; 'Twas to prevent that, I went abroad to seek him. D. Ped. What's this Don Julio? can a Gentleman Of Blood, and Honour, use another thus? What after such engagements to the Duke, And to my self, to be my friend and helper, To prove the shelterer of my shame's chief Authour; I do not wonder now, Don Zancho himself, Should have been here at midnight. D. Jul. I am hard put to't, help wit to bring us off. Aside. [To him. Be as distemper'd as you please Don Pedro, It shall not alter me. But yet me-thinks It would not ill become your gravity, To think a while, before you make a judgement, And rashly frame injurious conclusions, From things wherein a friend has merited from you: Do but consider, and then say, what Julio Could do of more advance to what you wish, Then having found your Daughter, to have brought her To his own house, where she might be with honour Accompanied, and serv'd as such, by Blanca, Until such time, as things maturely weigh'd, You should a final resolution take. And since Don Zancho's being here last night, I see's no secrett'ee, me-thinks you ought T' have been so just to me, as to believe That since I admitted him within these walls, It was in order to the serving you. D. Ped. Noble Don Julio, you must pity have Of an old man's distemper in affliction, I see I was in the wrong, pray pardon it. D. Jul. O this is more then needs, and now good Sir, If you'l be pleas'd to walk a turn or two I'th' Garden, I'le there give you a full account,
How I have laid things for your satisfaction. D. Ped. I'le wait on you. D. Jul. —Go Sir, there lies your way: (Turning (to the Page. And you boy fail not when Don Zancho comes To give me notice of it in the Garden. Exeunt. Enter Don Zancho and passes over the Stage with Chichon af∣ter him, and Enter Francisca, and pulling Chichon stays him. Fran. Stay, stay, Chichon, a word w'e, it imports. She whispers (with him. Chic. I hope you are not in earnest. Fran. —By my soul I am; There is no other way, but for us both To get up the back way, and there to watch The time to interpose. Chic. Can she be such a Fury? her looks are All milk and honey. Fran. You cannot fancy any thing so Tragique, But she is capable of executing, When once provok'd in point of Love and Honour, Beyond her bounds of temper. Chic. —Lead the way. [Aside I'le have the pleasure to hold up the fright She's in, since I am sure there is no danger, Knowing as I do my Master's mind towards Blanca; Besides 'tis to be hoped, that these disorders May produce somewhat that may put an end To my Masters Quarrel, or afford me means To give Fernando his Letter. Exeunt. Enter D. Fer. Elvira lying upon the Couch in the private A. D. Fer. This last dissimulation moves me more partment. Then all the rest, but yet it must not alter What honour hath inspired, see how she lies And how scarce brought to life from her dismay, She resumes scorn, to have been sav'd by me; But multiply what injuries thou wilt, Persidious Maid, thou shall't not disappoint
Fernando of the glory that he aims at, Of making thy proud heart Elvira, owe It's happiness to him. —But I hear again A noise without He peeps. —'Tis Don Zancho, And I see Blanca coming towards him; This falls out luckely, that I may hear What passes, for certainly their meeting Avowedly thus, can be no other Subject, But what Don Julio has propos'd to Blanca. Exit as to go harken. Enter Don Julio and Don Pedro as in the Garden. D. Jul. That's all the remedy, that in these cases The wisest can propose unto themselves, His fortun's strait 'tis true. D. Ped. That's what I least regard, in this occasion, So honour be but safe, the less they have, The more will be her pennance for her folly; But should Don Zancho upon any Umbrage, From what has past between them, prove so Insolent As to reject the marriage, Then I trust— Jul. O say no more of that, Rely upon't, Should he be guilty of that horrid Outrage, This Sword should pierce his heart, tho' th' only friend I have i' th' world, should interpose his own; And Sir, to let you see my franck proceeding, Come along with me, I'le bring you to a place Where joyntly over hearing all that passes 'Twixt him and Blanca, should he play the Villain, His life may pay for't, ear he stir from thence. D. Ped. May heaven repay such generous acts of friendship. Exeunt Enter Don Zancho, and Fernando appears as behind the door. D. Zanc. For her so suddenly, and so avow'dly To send for me hither, is very strange, What can it mean?
Enter Blanca. D. Blan. Now lend me temper heaven, but for a moment, Aside Till calmly I have drawn him to pronounce The sentence of his own too noble death For such a Traytor. To him with an affected cheerfulness. I think you come not without some surprize Don Zancho, at my sending for you so, But let's sit down for I have much to say t'ee. She takes him by the hand, and seats him in one Chair, and she sets her self in the other close to him on his right hand, and fumbles in her sleeve. D. Blan. I'me so well plac't I cannot miss the mark. Aside. D. Zanc. Good Madam, what's the matter for I see Disorder in you, put me out of pain. D. Blan. That I shall quickly do. —Know then Don Zancho, In the first place, you must not interrupt me, What ever you shall hear; I'le take it ill else When I have done, then speak your mind at leasure, I come not to argue, but conclude. D. Zanc. Your will's a Law to me, —[Aside. But whither tend's all this? D. Blan. I do for once, allow you to remember, All that has past between us, The folly of my Love, The falshood of yours; That done, And never to be thought on more. D. Zanc. For heavens sake Madam— D. Blan. —Break not the Rule was set. Know I instructed am in all your story, And am so far grown Mistress of my self, That I who th'other day, could scarce o're come The sense of a slight failour at Madrid, Can here at home suffer Indignities: And tell you calmly, and with unconcern'dness, Be you Elvira's, and Elvira yours,
I come to do a part you little look't for From Blanca's spirit, I must make the marriage, All things are ready, and her Father here, Now you may speak Don Zancho, but the thing Admit's of no delay. D. Zanc. Pawsing a while. But can this be in earnest? sure it cannot; What need these trials of so firm a faith? D. Blan. Leave triflng, 'tis no longer time for tricks, It is not in the power of fare to alter The resolutions taken. Don Zancho pawses. D. Fer. —She has put it home. Aside. D. Zan. Madam, you use me hardly, this demeanour Passes my skill, to judge from whence it springs; You say it is not in the power of fate, To change your resolutions; but I'me sure If they be such, 'twill less be in it's power To alter mine; but yet before I die You must be left without excuse, by knowing The truth of all. D. Fer. Here it imports indeed to be attentive. Aside. D. Zanc. Madam, 'tis true, that absent at Madrid, The custom of the Court, and Vanity, Embarqued me lightly in a Gallantry, With the most famed of beauties there Elvira; Those, and no other, the true Motives were, To all my first adresses, till her scorns Which should have stop't them, had engag'd me more And made a Love in jest, a point of honour: I bo all her disdains, without transportment, 'Till having gain'd her waiting Woman's kindness, I learn't from her, that all Elvira's slightings She would have thought, had sprung from severe Maxims, And preciousness of humour, were the effects Of deep engagement in another Love, With a young Gallant Don Fernando Solis,
With whom the cruel Dame, was so far gone; As to admit him almost every night Into her Chamber. D. Fer. —Blest gods what do I hear? Aside. D. Zancho [Continuing.] I scarce believing the thing possible, Urged my Intelligencer, to do for me That which her Lady for another did, And to admit me to her Chamber, where By being Eye witness of her Lady's actions, I might transfer my entire love to her self. She granted my request, and late one Night Somewhat before the Gallant's usual hour, She brought me a back way up into her Chamber, Within Elvira's; my stay had not been long, When having found the truth of what she had told me, Converting rage into appearing kindness To my informer, and expressing it Uncautiously, we made a sudden noise, With which Elvira alarm'd, and coming in, Followed by Don Fernando; That fell out, Which you have heard before. Don Julio beckning Don Pedro after him, pas∣sing over a corner of the Stage. D. Jul. By this time, I suppose, she will have made The proposition to the full, and we Shall come at the just time to hear his answer. Exeunt Don Pedro and Don Julio. Don Zancho [Continuing.] If since that hour, I have ever seen Or thought upon her, till last night's surprise, May I for ever perish; And me-thinks The use I made of that, to your advantage, Might challenge from you, a more just construction. Don. Blan. I told you at first, I came not here to argue
But to conclude; say, will you marry her? Don Julio and Don Pedro peep out as from behind the hanging. Don Jul. W'are come you see, just as we could have wish't. Don Ped. His fate hangs on his Lips. To Blanca. Don Zanc. You are Mistress of your words, and actions Madam, And may use me as you please; But this hand Shall sooner pierce this heart, then ere be given In marriage to Elvira. Don Pedro and Don Julio rush in with their swords and daggers drawn, and Don Zancho draws too. D. Ped. Then Villain die, heaven is too weak to save thee By any other means. Fernando draws and rushing out. Don Fer. —But here is one that shall, Or fall by his side. D. Ped. —O heaven's! what's this? Don Fernando Solis protecting him, Nay, then the whole world conspires against my Honour. Don. Blan. For heavens sake Gentlemen! Donna Blanca runs in between. Chic. Now by my Grandam's Pantable 'tis pritty, From behind. I'le brush their Coats if once it come to fighting, Fernondo's of our side. Francisca and Chichon with a long Broom run out also from behind the hanging. Don Jul. What frensie's this Fernando? was't not you Engaged me to effect the Marriage? sure w'are all Bewitch't.
D. Fer. —Stay my Don Julio, stay, And let Don Pedro have patience but to hear me; 'Tis true, but you know well upon what grounds Those are quite changed, by my having over heard All that hath past; For my Elvira, Julio, Proves spotless in her faith, as in her Beauty, And I the only guilty, to have doubted: What have I then to do, but here to prostrate My self at her offended Father's feet, And beg his pardon? That obtain'd, t'implore His help, to gain me hers, as to a person In whom respect for him, hath always held Proportion with my passion for his Daughter. D. Ped. You know Don Julio, when I spake with you, The terms of estimation, and respect Wherewith I mention'd t'ee this Gentleman, And therefore since in his adress t'Elvira There was no other fault, but making it Unknown to me; And that I see his thoughts Are truly Noble; Honour thus engaged, That ought to be forgot, and I to think My self most happy, in such a Son-in-law: But where's Elvira? D. Fer. She's there within, where I dare not appear Before her, knowing now such guilt upon me, If Blanca would employ her Interest And eloquence, perhaps she might prevail To get her hither, when she shall have told her What changes a few minutes time hath wrought. D. Blan. I never went on a more pleasing Arrant. Exit Don Blanca and Francisca. Fran. As she goes out. I am struck dumb with wonder. D. Fer. Now Blanca is away, I'le take this time To spare her blushes Julio, and tell you
Though I have broak one marriage for Don Zancho, You needs must give me leave to make another, To which unless I'me very much deceiv'd, You'l find on neither part repugnancy. D. Jul. I understand you, and I thank the gods They did not make me understand the wrong, Till they have made it none, since I observe Don Zancho's looks joyning in your desires. D. Zanc. A heart so full of love as mine for Blanca, Does best express it self, when it speaks least. Enter Donna Blanca, Donna Elvira and Francisca. Elvira casts her self at her Fathers feet. D. Elv. Now that the justice of the gods, at length Hath cleer'd me from suspicions, derogatory To th'honour of your blood, I hope a Cloister May expiate my fault as to a Father. Raising her. D. Ped. Rise Child, The Inclosure I condemn you to Is Don Fernando's Arms, give him your hand. D. Elv. 'Tis yours Sir, to dispose of I confess, And if it be your will, I must submit; But let him know, who could suspect Elvira, She never could be his, but by obedience. D. Fer. I am Thunder struck. Elvira giving him her hand. D. Elv. —Be not dismay'd Fernando. Since I profess this a meer act of duty, Another duty may Elvira move, To re-inflame on better grounds her Love. D. Jul. [Ironically.] Blanca I fear you'l hardly be perswaded To give yours to Don Zancho; But a Brother.
For once may play the Tyrant; Give it him, It must be so. They joyn hands. D. Fer. I now renounce old Maxims, having you Elvira, I am sure, The very best proves true. Chic. Hold there, I beg you Sir, That will appear By that time you have Married been a Year. FINIS.
