B5471 14396200 102283
BUMM-FODER OR, VVASTE-PAPER Proper to wipe the Nation's RUMP with, or your Own. FRee quarter in the North is grown so scarce, That Lambert with all his men of Mars Have submitted to kiss the Parliaments Arse, Which no body can deny. If this should prove true, (as we do suppose) Tis such a wipe as the RUMP and all's Foes Could never give to old Olivers nose: Which, &c. Theres a Proverb come to my mind not unfit, When the head shal see the RUMP all be-shit, Sure this must prove a most lucky hit: Which &c. Theres another Proverb which every Noddy Wil jeer the RUMP with, and cry Hoddy Doddy, Here's a Parliament all Arse and no Body. Which &c. Tis a likely matter the world wil mend When so much blood and treasure we spend, And yet begin again at the wrong End: Which &c. We have been round and round about twirl'd, And through much sad confusions hurl'd, And now we are got into the arse of the world: Which &c. But 'tis not all this our courage wil quail, Or make the brave Seamen to the RUMP strike sail, If we can have no head, we wil have no Tail: Which &c. Then let a Free-Parliament be turnd trump, And nere think any longer the Nation to mump With your pocky, perjui 'd, damnd, old Rump: Which &c. But what doth Rebel Rump make here When their proper place (as Will. Pryn doth swear) Is at the Devils arse in Derbyshire: Which &c. Then thither let us send them a tilt, For if they stay longer, they wil us beguilt With a Government that is loose in the Hilt: Which &c. Youl find it set down in Harringtons Moddle, Whose brains a Commonwealth do so coddle, That t'as made a Rotation in his noddle: Which &c. Tis a pitiful pass you men of the Sword Have brought yourselves to, that the Rumps your Lord, And Arsie-Versie, must be the word, Which, &c. Our powder and shot you did freely spend, That the Head you might from the Body rend, And now you are at us with the But-end, VVhich, &c. Old Martin and Scot have still such an itch, That they will with the Rump try to'ther twitch; And Lenthal can grease a fat Sow in the britch: VVhich, &c. Thats a thing that would please the Butchers and Cooks, To see this stinking Rump quite off the hooks, And Jack-Daw go to pot with the Rooks. Which, &c. This forward Sir John (who the Rump did never fail) Against Charles Stuart, in a Speech did rail; But men say it was without head or tail, Which, &c. Just such is the Government wee live under, Of a Parliament thrice cut in sunder; And this hath made us the worlds wonder, Which, &c. Old Noll when we talkt of Magna Charta, Did prophecy well we should all smart-a, And now wee have found his RUMPS Magni Fart-a, Which, &c. But I can't think Monck (though a Souldier and sloven) To be kin to the Fiend, whose feet are cloven, Nor will creep i'th Rumps Arse, to bake in their Oven, Which, &c. Then since he is coming, e'ne let him come From the North to the South, with Sword and Drum, To beat up the quarters of this lewd Bum; Which, &c. And now of this Rump I'le say no more, Nor had I begun, but upon this score, There was something behind, which was not before; Which, &c. FINIS, In English, The RUMP.
