C1522 08454081 41355
Truths Caracter OF PROFESSORS And their TEACHERS. Which by looking through, may bring to their remembrance the dayes of old, and how it was then with them, which may evidently shew unto them what hath befallen them, since they degenerated from the measure of God, which some of them had in them; And it may also put them in mind of Gods Justice and severity towards them. Here is also something in Answer to some remarkable particulars, which were extracted out of above thirty Addresses which were presented to Richard Cromwell when he was Protector, and were published to the Nation in the , as one by Tho Goodwin, by the appointment of the Officers and Mes∣sengers of above a hundred Congregational Churches, And others from some of the Churches of the Baptized people, bt the most of them were from the parochial priests and others that joyned with them, from most of the Counties in the Nation, whereby their hypocrisie and deceit, their folly and flatteries are made palpably manifest, to their shame, and confusion of face. By one that is appointed of the Lord to make war in Righteous∣ness under the banner of the Lamb, in the Truths behalf, both against the Beast and false Prophet, known unto men by the name of William Caton. The dayes of visitation are come, the dayes of recompence are come, Israel shall know it, the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, Hos. 9. 7. For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind, it hath no stalk, the bud shall yiel'd no meal, Hosea 8. 7. Because I have called and ye have, refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would have none of my reproof, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear cometh, Proverbs 1. 24, 25, 26. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate. 1660.
An Epistle to the Reader. Friend, THat which I have here published may give thee to understand (if with a meek spirit thou wilt peruse it) how the Lord several years ago caused his Light in some measure to shine out of the darknesse in the hearts of many of these professing Professors, whereby they came in measure to see the grosse darknesse wherewith people was then covered, and many of the superstitions that were then upheld by such as professed godlinesse; And then a zeal for God did stir in many of them against them, and while they retained their tendernesse and simplicity, and kept in the fear of the Lord, then was the Lord near them; but when they begun to seek and set up themselves more then the Lords glory and his truth, then did the Lord by degrees withdraw from them; when they exalted themselves and begun to persecute the harm∣lesse and innocent people, that were brought (through mercy) to the en∣joyment of what they saw at a distance; And when they got the power into their hands, then their Priests with the help of their power begun to silence others and keep under them, even as they had been silenced and kept under; And they crept into their parsonage-houses, and benefices, & in processe of time became highly guilty of their abominations. Moreover, by that which here followeth thou may see how many of them will change their merchandie to continue their trade & dishonest gain, & are like unto subtil & cunning merchant-men, who observe what mer∣chandize is the most commodious, and will vend the best among those they deal withall, even they will they provide for them, partly for their own advantage, and partly for pleasing of the people, &c. This following Treatise also sheweth how they have cryed for help, and how they have been countenanced, and holpen by the sundry powers that have been in being for these many years; And particularly, how generally from al∣most every County in the Nation they with others made their deceitfull Adresses unto R. Cromwell, by which thou may see their blasphemies, and flatteries, their promises and engagements unto him; And do thou judge how dectful and hypocritical they have proved; And it also ap∣pears by what followeth, what hath happened unto, and befallen those that helped them, who are fallen, split and broken; yet they whom they combined together against stand in as much power, authority, and domi∣nion in Gods eternal Truth as ever, and the Lord hath appeared to their
joy and honour whom they cast out, but to their shame and confusion who have dealt deceitfully both with God and man: And if the Lord shall cause the same measure to be mete to them, which they have measured unto others, it would but be just with him who will in no wise acquit the guilty, nor suffer the wicked to go unpunished. These things are put forth to publick view, not to add grief unto their affliction that are already humbled and cast down, but rather to put them in mind of their former proceedings, which have caused this day of di∣stress and calamity to be hastned upon them, of which they have been often warned & foretold by us (the Lords Servants) who now rejoyceth not be∣cause it is come upon them, for we have rather desired to have seen them have forsaken the evil of their doings, & have returned unto the Lord with all their hearts, that so they might have obtained Mercy from him; neither is this intended to strengthen the hands of their persecutors, for we are as absolutely against the spirit of persecution in their adversaries, as we were against it in them, and our testimony by suffering under it, we ex∣pect and intend to bear against it now, and henceforth, as heretofore if the Lord permit; And we are now as far from siding with these Priests who cast them out, as we were from siding with them in their covetous practises and their abominations which hath long grieved the hearts and spirits of the faithful; Now if thou be one that art concerned in the things herein contained, be not offended with my plain and upright deal∣ing, for a necessity laid upon me to write and publish these things, which I saw in the light of the Lord to be come and coming to passe; And if I be accounted their enemy for telling them the Truth, I shall notwithstanding rest in peace in the Lord, in whose sight I have cleared my conscience con∣cerning them in much love and tendernesse towards the witnesse of God in them, which is now nearer to answer unto the Truth in many of them, then it was when they were high and lifted up; And oh that they would yet lay these things to heart, and return unto him that smiteth them, then should they find favour in his sight, with whom we know there is mercy that he might be feared. W. C.
Truths Caracter of PROFESSORS and of their TEACHERS, &c. HEar Oh ye wise and prudent men of this world, and seriously weigh and consider the things that I have to lay before you; For a necessity lyeth upon me to mind you of what is past, what is present, and what is to come to passe concerning you, or many of you, who have had sundry tender visitations of Gods eternal Love, and many precious opportunities hath he put into your hands, wherein you might have answered his Love, and have perfected his praise in the earth, had you not sought your selves more then the glory of God, and the welfare of others; And therefore is it just with the Lord now to pour out contempt upon you in the sight of those whom you have contemned, and to make you as contemptible in the eyes of others, as his despised people have been in yours; You have had a glorious day of prosperitie, as to the outward,What a day pro∣fessors have had. wherein the Sun of Righteousnesse hath caused his Light to shine forth gloriously, to the illuminating of many of your un∣derstandings beyond your fellow Creatures; but you have not liked to walk in his Light, nor to retain his Counsel, there∣fore is a thick dark mist come upon you, so that you cannot see afar off,Isa▪ 33. 14. and fear that surprizeth many of you, and you are in a strait, not yet well knowing what will be the end of these things that have befallen you; one blaming another for his treachery and deceitful dealing, when he that blames his fel∣low, is as inexcusable as he that is guilty of the thing for which he is blamed; had you been free from the things that heretofore have been laid to your charge, by those whose Te∣stimony you could not then receive, then had not these things come upon you, which the children of Light saw in the light of the Lord would befall you,Pro 1. 24. 25. seeing you hated reproof, and would not chuse the fear of the Lord, notwithstanding all that which he had done for you.
But oh that you would now call to mind the dayes of old, and the years that are past, wherein you groaned under a heavy yoak of bondage, which many of you for some years travelled under, when you were restrained from having the liberty of your Consciences, to serve God in that way which appeared to your understanding to be more agreeable to the Scriptures of Truth, then that publick way of worship which then was esta∣blished in the Nation; which you then saw the emptinesse of by the light of the Lord in your own selves;How it was with Professors in the dayes of old. Do you not yet remember what a tendernesse there was in those daies in your hearts towards the Lord and good people; And were not the meetings that you had in those dayes in your own houses, or in other private places very comfortable and refreshing, and was there not more of the presence and power of God felt and seen amongst you in your meetings in those daies,1 Cor 14. 30. 31. (when any man among you that feared God might have had liberty to speak what was upon his Spirit) then there hath been for sun∣dry years, or is at this day? And was it not better with you then, when you were branded with the name of Puritan and Round-head, and derided (if not stoned) in the streets, as you have past and repst to and from thoseSo they were in the eyes of your persecu∣tors, but precious to you at that time. contemptible meetings, in which you found so much of the presence and goodnesse of God? And could you not in those daies have borne the revilings of the people much better then you could do now? Could you not also have suffered better for that which your soules then thirsted after, then now you could for that which you professe? And was not your love very large to such as in those daies were persecuted for conscience sake? did not you then take part with them (when you durst appear) against such as persecuted them? And was not that the light of the Lord in you, which let you see in those daies the evil of oppression; and the evil of persecu∣tion, wherewith you were persecuted for conscience sake? was not that also the light of the Lord that gave you to see the emptinesse of that worship which you then liked not to be con∣formable unto? And was not that of God in you that made you willing to suffer for conscience sake, rather then you would do that which was contrary to your conscience? And had you not peace, joy, comfort, and refreshment in measure, in your suf∣ferings when you suffered (not as evil doers) but simply for con∣science sake? was not your prayers in those daies offered up
unto the Lord with much tendernesse and many tears? and did you not then feel something in your hearts making intercession unto the Lord with sighes and groans, which were hard to be uttered? And did you not in those daies make many vowes,The Pro∣fessors vowes and promises which they made to the Lord. promises and engagements unto the Lord (even upon your bended knees) that if he would be pleased to appear for you, and by the arme of his power bring deliverance unto you, and set you free from that yoak of bondage which you then groaned under, oh what you would then do in order to the propagating of his Gospel, advancing of his glorious Truth, removing the op∣pressions from off the oppressed, making of his people a free people, to the setting up of righteousnesse in the earth, and to the shewing forth of his praise among the inhabitants of the earth, &c. Do you not yet remember that several years ye were wont to breah forth such things in your prayers to the Lord, who was determined to try you as he hath done, as after∣wards may more fully appear? Is it not well known unto many of you, how that when you were little in your own eyes,When they were low and tender the Lord had respect to them. and few in number in comparison of the multitude that was contrary minded, that even then, and at that time when your hearts were very tender, and you very low and humble before the Lord, then did he appear for you, for then he had respect unto you, and his anger that was kind∣led against those that then would not let you have the liberty of your Consciences, for they sought to quench and extinguish that which he had kindled in your hearts, and their sins and abominations were grown to a very great height, and many things the Lord had against them, so that in processe of time the fire of his jealousie did wax so hot against them,Isa. 33. 14. that they were not able to dwell in it,Hos. 10. 8. but did begin to fly to the moun∣tains, and to the hills, and unto them they cried for help, but these could not save them from the terrible storm which swept them away. Then did your day begin to dawn, and the visitation of Gods eternal Love was then unto you, whose cries had (in the daies of your distresse) entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabboth, and then was he determined to try you, whom he raised even as from the dunghill, and put a very excellent opportunity into your hands; For then many in Authoritie and Power begun to advise with you, and take counsel at you, and put
you into places of preferment, (which you receiving begun to alter from the Lord) and some of them you begot into your own image, and these promoted you, and you flattered them; And by degrees, in processe of time you came to be invested with the supream Authoritie in the Nation; And then you strove to wind out those that were not for your design, though for your own ends you made use of many that were not of your mind, but them you kept under, and by guile caught them in your snare; so that it was so with you for a season, that you might do what seemed good in your own eyes;How evill befell them. And then many begun to sit down at ease, having enriched themselves with the spoil of their enemies, and were not onely gotten into their possessions and estates, but were also plunged into their sins, and were become as proud, as covetous, as self-seeking as their enemies had been; And this many saw in the light of the Lord, that had been one with you in your affliction and di∣stresse, in your sufferings and servitude which you had passed through before you came into the seats of those that the Lord drove out before you. And when those that feared the Lord amongst you beheld your degeneration,Why they that fear∣ed the Lord turn∣ed away from them and saw so little was performed of what was promised by you, they begun to desert you, and many that retained their sinceritie towards God came out volunta∣rily from among you, and others that could not bear your actions, but must reprove you, were turned out by you; And even at that very time when many of you were in Authoritie, did the Lord God of heaven and earth cause his Light to shine out of the darknesse in the hearts of a remnant, even more clearly and more gloriously then it had done in yours; And by this eternal Light (which was the same that had shined in your Consci∣ences, whereby you had seen the evil of those things which you had long groaned under) by this Light I say did the Lord convince many of his everlasting Truth, and of the evil of destroying and devouring one another, so that many came by the arme of Gods power to be gathered into the life of those things which you professed,How o∣thers were brought to that which they had lost. and came again to be brought into that tendernesse which you had lost, and came to be more a∣bundantly sensible of Gods eternall power and presence then you had been before; And though those had been with you, and had hazarded life, liberty, and estate with you, yet you
could not bear them, because they could not bear your hypo∣crisie and deceit, nor suffer it to passe unreproved, therefore did you turn your hand against them that were your dearest friends; and begun to make Leagues and Covenants with such as have now proved your enemies indeed;How they crept into fale rests. And crept into fel∣lowship with them, and so sate down and setled your selves in that which was not your rest; And then by degrees crept into Societies, and some got into one form and some into another; And many became Presbyterians, and strove to draw (if it had been possible) all men after them into that Form, in which there were, (and yet to this day are) some, as bad as those that you suffered under many years ago, so in processe of time many came to see by the light of the Lord, that they were not in the right way; And so left them and went forth from that in them∣selves by which they had seen their covetousnesse, their rigid∣nesse and the emptinesse of their form, and so went too among them called Independants, who in some things had a more shew of godlinesse,How they run from form to form, from the Light of the Lord in them∣selves. (though but in a few) then the Presbyterians had; but in a certain time their ambition and arrogancy ap∣peared, their covetousnesse and self-conceitednesse which be∣came a burthen to such as retained their zeal and tendernesse towards the Lord, and many such honest-hearted and self-de∣nying people came out from among them, and could not be content to keep at a distance from all, till the Lord shewed them who were his flock, and where they did feed and rest;Cant. 1. 7. And therefore did they run to the Anabaptists (so called) who dif∣fered much in judgement from those with whom they had walk∣ed, but in processe of time the light of the Lord manifested the emptinesse of their inventions, as it had done the loosenesse of other Professors, who had lost their tendernesse towards God,How they lost their tendernes and be∣came dry & barren &c. which they seemed to have when they first setled in the forms before mentioned, which many by running into them (from that of God in themselves) lost, and so became dead, dry, barren, and unfruitfull, as many of you are, who are (as it were) scorched and withered as trees of the heath without sap in the desert,Jer. 17▪ 6. where you may behold your figure. And when it came to be thus with you, then many such as were tender among you (and could not find him whom their souls loved,Zach. 3. 2. while they continued in your forms) came by the arm of the Lords Power to be pluckt out from among you, as
fire brands out of the fire, and then many of you came to be offended, and your indignation came to be kindled against them, as the wrath of your adversaries was kindled against you in the dayes of your tendernesse, and then did you (instead of paying your vowes which you made unto the Lord in the day of your distress) add unto the afflictions of the afflcted, and began to augment the oppressions of the oppressed, and did behave your selves so uncharitably towards a suffering people, even as if you your selves had never been acquainted with suffering;How they behaved themselvs towrds the tender harted, when they had lost their ten∣dernesse. so when you had lost the tendernesse that was in your selves you exalted your selves over them that were tender, and made a prey upon them, and cast them out from among you, out of places of authority, out of power, and out of your Church fellowships; And then preferred shallow, selfish prating, and deceitful men that would comply with you for their own ends) above discreet, sober, honest and conscienti∣ous men that feared God, when they could not swear, nor bow to you, nor give you flattering Titles; did you not then and often upon that very account lay them aside, esteemed them unfit to be in any place of office, and so lightly regard your truest friends, who bore much of the heat of the day, and were more noble and valiant then your selves, and for whose sakes (rather then for yours) the Lord often delivered you out of your enemies hands; And some of you did not onely turn them out of power, but gave your power unto their (and your) enemies, for them to make a prey upon, such as were re∣covered again to that state and condition which you were in, when you suffered for conscience sake,Those that suf∣fered by them for consci∣ence-sake did not unto them as they had done unto their Adversa∣ries. by that power that they had joyned with you against; and yet did you do unto them, as your adversaries did unto you, when they had power over you, yet they did not so unto you, as you did unto them by whom you suffered; For against them you plotted, conspi∣red, and sought both their Lives and Estates, as since hath ap∣peared, but these that you cast out from among you, did not so concerning you, but even suffered you to plow (as it were) long furrows upon their backs, and resisted you not, neither would they turn away their cheeks from you, when you pulled off the hair,Psa. 129. 3 neither would they resist you when you sent them to pri∣son, when you spoiled their goods, rifled their houses, drove a∣way their Cattel, because for conscience sake they could not
do, such and such things as you contrary to their conscience injoyned them unto; This sundry that have been one with you in profession, have sustained these things from you with pati∣ence, and have not sought to be avenged so of you, as you have avenged your selves of such as heretofore injured you. But oh let me ask you, are not your promises, ingagements and Vows, which you made unto the Lord in the dayes past (which you have not yet faithfully payed and performed) are not these become a heavy burthen unto many of you, who in this thing are guilty? Or have you thought that it hath been a light thing to make a vow unto the Lord (as some of you have done many) and not to perform it? Surely if you had had so much tendernesse remaining in you, as Iephthah had, Iudg 11. 3c. (Who opened his mouth unto the Lord, and vowed a vow, saying, if thou shalt without fail deliver the Children of Ammon into mine hands, then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, I will offer it up for a burnt offering; And behold his Daughter, his onely Child met him, at the sight of which he rent his cloaths, and said, she had brought him very low; yet he confessed he had opened his mouth to the Lord, & said he could not go back: Now in this thing you are come short of Iephthah under the Law who would not omit performing what he had vowed to the Lord, though it bereaved him of his onely childe) then would not the non-payment of your vows have been so heavy upon you, as (I believe) they are upon many of you at this day; who may call to mind how it was with you, when you were little in your own eyes; Was not your mouths then opened unto the Lord? And had you not a testimony in your selves, that in those dayes the Lord heard your prayers, and did in measure at times grant your requests, but when you once forsook that in your selves (which begat the tendernesse in your hearts towards God) then did you seek your selves more then the Lord;How they came to be undone And the more prosperity you had, the more liberty you took to your selves, until you came to be taken in the snare of voluptuousnesse, when your hearts were adulterated from the Lord, and run after your covetousnesse; And then many of you sat down at ease in a carnal security, little regard∣ing the cries of the poor and needy in your selves, which groan∣ed
unto the Lord for deliverance, but your ears were not len thereunto, but rather to vanity and folly which many of you run into,When they for∣sook the Lord, then did he leavethem to them∣selves. when you had lost your tendernesse, and then when you went on in forsaking the Lord, then did he withdraw from you and left you as it were) to your selves, and yet you tri∣uphed as Conquerers, and gloried too much in your wisdom and strength (not considering the Lord had left you) until the Lord begun to confound your wisdome, and weaken your bow, and bring your understanding to nothing,1 Cor. 1. 19. yet would you not believe this, but supposed your throne had been firmly esta∣blished,Their confi∣dence. and that your party had been even invinceable, and that you knew of none that you thought was able to make war with you, so politickandwise you were▪ so potent and mighty, so strong and valiant, so rich and wealthy, so victorious and dreadful you seemed to be; but all this would not serve, when you had lost your sincerity and integrity, which was more with the Lord then your sword and spear;How they came to be weak∣ened, and then be∣came like other men 1 Tim. 6. 9. then your hearts fainted, and your saith failed, and you became like unto other men, when your hearts run after the Treasures and Riches of your enemies; how suddenly then did you fall into temptation and a snare, and into many hurtful and foolish lusts? And thus it happened unto you, even in the height of your profes∣sion. And now O ye Professors, know you what will be the end of these things that have befallen you, who was once above all other men, invested with the Authority of the Nation, one Professor recommending another to them that then were in power, and one brother speaking in the behalf of another to their superiours,How they came to get swords upon their thighs. in order to the procuring of one another pla∣ces of preferment, till that almost every man that was a profes∣sor, got a sword upon his thigh, & who then were accounted of but professors, or who were to be trusted with places of Office and trust in the Nation but professors; And in those dayes when profession was in such great reputation, then crept many into it hoping thereby to get places of preferment, when they got to Be in fellowship, and of such a Church, or of such an Assembly, for then they came to be in esteem with professors, and some then would speak to their Superior officers who were almost all pro∣fessors) in the behalf of such a man who was become a mem∣ber
of such a Church, and then he was looked upon to be a worthy man to bear rule, or to be put in authority in the Na∣tion; And thus did many of you get up, until you became too high for all reproof; And then such as would not joyn with you in your design, came to be even of almost no Reputation a∣mong you; but oh! how have you instigated those (that fear the Lord, and did not aprove of your proceedings) to joyn with you in your designs? And how fair have your promises and pretences been unto them, who have been not a little tempted and tryed by you in that thing, when you have cryed out unto them,What temptati∣ons they that fear∣ed▪ the Lord had from them saying, Oh now is the time if ever you will stir, stir now, if you will but joyn with us you may do exceeding much good; Oh therefore be erswaded to stand up in your own defence, and in the defence of the Good Old Cause, and receive Commissions now when th y are tendred, &c. Thus have you provoked and tempted the peo∣ple of God from day to day, till that you have wearied your selves and them also, yet still the Lord preserved them (that stood in his Counsel) out of your snares, your preferment and promotion, honour and renown, favour and friendship they little regarded, neither would they at all be perswaded to make any League or Covenant with you; And when that you by your fair perswasions and large promises could not pre∣vail with them, then did you begin to frown upon them; And many of you would chuse rather to strengthen the hands of the wicked against them, then put forth a hand to help them; Though its true there were some amongst you that had it in their hearts (I believe) to do good, but such were kept in a slavish fear of the major party, and so durst not do that which was in their hearts, while they might have done it, and so the oppertunity was taken out of their hands, and instead of get∣ting Honour and Renown by their well doing in their day, they have brought infamy and contempt upon themselves, and this is already come upon many of you, who have joyned hand in hand to augment the sufferings of the afflcted;How they became pesecu∣tors of the Innocent. As witnesse the many Independants and Presbiterian Justices Warrants and Mitimus which they have made, whereby they have caused the innocent to suffer, in the sundry Counties of the Nation; Insomuch, that I confidently believe there is never a County in the Nation but You Professors (to wit Presbyterians, Inde∣pendants,
(so called) with others, have had Your hands in Persecution, You have been principally the men for several Years, that have hailed the innocent before your Iudgement SeatsSo I call hem be∣cause you have sit∣ten in judgment upon them, that have committed them to Prison, that have caused them to be whipt, that have caused them to be set in the Stocks, that have fined them, that have given out Warrants for the spoiling of their goods; You and your Teachers have been the men that have been chiefly accssary to these things; Therefore doth it lye much upon me at this time to lay these things upon You, in the light of the Lord and before men, and know assuredly that if You come to be dealt withal, as You have dealt with others, then shall those things which You have done unto the innocent, become Your heavy burthen,A prophe∣si con∣cerning them. and as it was hard for them to escape Your hands, so will it be hard for You to escape the hands of others; For Your Professing Magistrates have most frequently set to their hands and Seals (when they were in Commission) unto the Warrants that have been granted out against the innocent, whereby such Priests have been authorized to make a prey up∣on the People of God, as they themselves little regarded, nor peradventure would very scarcely hear them, Yet often have they given up the innocent into the hands of such mercilesse men, as gloried in making a prey upon them. Moreover it hath been observed,Note. how that in sundry parts of the Nation professing Magistrates, or such as made a great profession, were the very first men that began with a pretence of a Law to perscute them that feared the Lord, to the great dishonour of their profession, though they were at that time in such a zeal against the appearance of Truth,Joh. 16. 2. that they thought they did God good service, by their imprisoning and shameful∣ly intreating such as the Truth appeared in: And certainly the people that God by his eternal power hath raised up in this NationThis is spoke of them that in scorn re called Quakers., have had more opposition from them that have been in profession in many parts of the Nation, then they have had from the vulgar sort of people. True it is when they were first raised up by the Power of God, both professor and prophane did with much bitternesse of Spirit oppose them, and often branded them with many ridiculous names and scurrelous titles, thinking thereby to make them odious to all, if it had been possible, and when they saw they
could not prevail against them, but wearied themselves with their own folly, then they begun to withdraw, not with re∣nown in triumph, but rather with shame in contempt, which is justly come upon them, so that some are ready to enuire af∣ter them as the Apostle did after the wise, and after the Di∣sputer of this world,1 Cor. 1. 20. saying, where are they, &c. even so, where are the chief Disputing Priests, and the high contentious pro∣fessors? seeing they do so little appear to what they have done formerly; What do they want their Goals? Their Houses of Correction, their Stocks and Commssiions now? And doth their hearts therefore fail them? What is the power taken from them, and given into their hands that they have had po∣wer over,Serious questions concern∣ing them. and are they therefore cast down? What are the places of honour taken from them, and they turned out of their fat benefices; and is that the case, wherefore they are cast down? What must they become as poor, miserable and contemp∣table as they have been; And is this the cause of their heavi∣nesse? Must their wisdome be confounded, and their under∣standing brought to nothing? Must the Weapons that they have been forming against others, be turned into their own bowels? And must the like prejudice (as they have sought to beget in others against the innocent) be begotten in others a∣gainst them? And as they have done, and would have had o∣thers to have done unto the innocent, even so must they be done unto; & must not now the same measure be met unto them that they have measured unto others? Even by such as will have no more pitty in their hearts towards them, then they have had towards the innocent; And what must not jealousie be stirred up in the powers of the earth against them, as they have stirred up jealousie in the powers of the earth against o∣thers, that were much more harmlesse and innocent then themselves; And as they have sought to make others redicu∣lous,As they have done to others, so shall they be done unto even so shall they become contemptable in the eyes of those which they by their flatteries fawned upon, who may for a season suffer them for their own ends, as they suffered others for their own advantage; And as they have sought to remove others out of their way, so shall they be removed out of the way of others; And their honour which they have sought one of another shall be laid in the dust, and their glory shall fade
like the flower of the field: And when the Lord brings things upon you (O ye persecuting (yet professing) Priests and Professors, which of you shall dare in that day to say un∣to the Lord, Why dost thou thus? Shall you not rather be made to confesse that it will be the just hand of God upon you, when you come to be dealt withal, as you have dealt with o∣thers whom you have cast out; saying, (deceitfully) let the Lord be glorified, but behold hath he not appeared for them, and is it not You now (that cast them out) that hated them and persecuted them,Isa. 66. 5. that begins to be ashamed and astonished? And oh that You would but observe the hand of the Lord in all these things, surely then You would humble Your selves under it, that so You might come to obtain mercy from him,psal. 130 7 with whom there is mercy that he might be feared. Here followeth the Truths Caracter of the Pro∣fessors Teachers. MOreover as concerning the chief Priests and Teachers of this Nation, which You Professors have run after, much I have to say concerning them; Oh that You had an ear open to hear, and a heart to receive and understand the things that I could declare of them, who with fained words and fair pro∣mises and pretences have deceived many of You, they have had their day of visitation, as well as You, & they have also had a day of prosperitie, wherein they have promised Peace to themselves and to You also; several of them have had some ten∣dernesse in their hearts towards God (I do believe) when they saw (by the light of the Lord in their own consciences) the heavy Yoaks and many oppressions that the upright in heart groaned and traveled under, and then there was a zeal in them for God and godlinesse, and after that power came to be overturned, whereby some of them had been silenced, then did they begin to stir themselves, and night and day laboured and endeavoured to induce You into Church Fellowship and so came too get You too under their discipline;Note here the subtilty of the Priests And then began to make their party strong, and so came to prevail against them, that had been authorised by such as had
kept them under; And then they began to silence others with the same power and weapon by which they themselves had been silenced; And then they begun to turn out others by the strength of the same arme by which they themselves been kept under, and then did they draw many after them; And then they came to be highly exalted in the Nation, and began to grow into arrogancy and covetousnesse, and several of them begun then to look after great benefits; And they having the powers of the earth much on their side, could by the help of their order easily get others out that were not of their mind, and so by degrees could wind themselves in; And when they were once setled in their places and livings, and got the name of Parliament-Ministers, few then durst oppose them, or find fault with them, they being setled by order of Parliament. Then did they begin to insult over many of their Parishioners,Mark their authority. How they received the wage, but did not the work. and proved deceitfull and treacherous to many of them, whose Tythe of Corn, Hay, Wool, Lamb, Hemp, Geese, Eggs, Pigs, Apples, Cheries, and Turnups, &c. these have coveted and received, and when they have gotten them of poor men, they have refused to do those things which they were to do, upon whom these benefits were first conferred, and so the poor men have been constrained to hire others to do that which they judged their Priests should have done for them; as bapti∣zed their Infants, churched their Wives, and have administred that they call the Lords Supper to them, which some of your High-Priests would not do to many of their Parishioners, and so the poor men have paid double for that which is little worth; and if any of them desired to have a Funeral Sermon at their Burial, these Priests would not give it them under ten shillings at the least, neither would they admit several of their Congregation into fellowship with them, except they would take on their form, and comply with them in their Traditions, which many simple people could not do; And therefore hath that been with-holden from them by their Priests (that have exercised Lordship over them) which the people did think they had as good right unto, as their Teachers had unto their Tythe, which the poor simple people durst not with-hold from them, though they did not administer bread and wine, nor read the Service Book; But in those daies you and your Priests might do what seemed good in your own eyes, for you had
then the sword in your hand by which you ruled;ow pro∣fessors were a  to some while they had the power in their hand. And so you for a season a dread and a terrour to such as did not fear the Lord more then you, who then had power to make Lawes, and likewise to disanull Lawes; And when your Teachers had got a Law on their sides, by vertue of which they might reco∣ver not onely the Tythe it self, but treble dammage of such as did detain it from them, then did several of them put it in execution, whereby they have caused many deeply to suffer, who (for conscience sake) could not pay them Tythe; yet these men of corrupt minds have pretended they could not do the things before-mentioned for Conscience sake,2 Tim. 3. from the fist to the 10. verse. when their Parishioners required them, as to give them bread and wine, church their Women, and sprinkle their Infants, &c. yet they▪ with their defiled Consciences could receive their Tythes, and did not seem to scruple at the receiving of them, nor yet at going to Law and taking treble dammage of such as (for con∣science sake) could not pay them; And those eminent profes∣sing Priests could spoil mens goods, rifle their houses, drive away their Cattel,High pro∣fessing Priests as cruell and wicked in some things as others, yea and as prophane, as those that were judged to b scanda∣lous. and rail as much against such as feared the Lord in their Pulpits, as any; and many of them have been known at sundry times to threaten us very much, and that especially at such times as they perceived their party prevailed, so that from them the people of God have suffered, and that deply▪ And much more opposition we have had from them, then we have had from them that you (their professing friends) turned out, for them to come in; And those that you secluded were adjudged to be scandalous Ministers; but now let the judicious and upright in heart judge what they were that crept into their places and benefices, and took their livings from them and did not their work, but proved to be more severe towards those that did not put into their mouthes, then they that were thrust out by them,From whence they had their pow∣er. who have often intruded into places by force, having received power and Authoritie from the Powers of the earth, so that they have prevailed, when there hath been scarce twenty in a parish for them, and the rest of the parish hath been against them in their minds and in their hearts,And how they fed poor peo∣ple with their in∣ventions. yet per∣adventure durst scarce appear so to be, being that he that should have been a servant to them all, even exercised Lordship over them all; and they must be contented and satisfied with what he invented and studied and provided for them, when
the people would rather have had that which he with-held from them. And thus (you Professors) when you were but few in a Parish, (while you had the sword upon your thigh, & power in your hand) could keep a number of people under you, who wre dis-satis∣fied and discontented (though they sought to hide and con∣ceal the thing from you) with your discipline, yet must be sub∣ject though by constraint rather then willingly; and thus with a high hand have they exercised Lordship,How they have usur∣ped Au∣thoritie, and over whom. and usurped Authoritie, not onely over tender Consciences, but also over simple ignorant people, who rather would have had their former discipline which they had been educated in, then new inventions. But in those dayes when profession came in fashion and was in estimation, many for their own ends crept into it, and these high professing Priests got many Proselites, and many followed them in their pernicious wayes,2 Pet. 2. 2. and upheld them in their covetous practises, and sided with them in their plots, designs and con∣spiracies; But let people now mark well and observe them, how they stand to their principles, and how they continue, whether constant or inconstant; if constant without shrinking or falling under in the time of trial,A caracter by which their end (in creep∣ing into profes∣sion) may be known. when persecution cometh, then we shall the rather conclude that their end hath been good, simple and honest, in their going into that profession, for which they are willing to suffer, and in walking answerable to which they hope to be saved: But and if they fall by bowing, complying and condescending to that which they have fought against, prayed against, and strongly contended against, then they will appear to be unstable and inconstant, and we may the rather conclude their end was not good, nor single before the Lord, in their aspiring into profession, if that they renounce it for fear of persecution; and this may be a Caracter for many whereby many shall be made manifest to the Nation. But what have we not already observed that many of you Professors (with your Teachers) have already brought much contempt upon your selves,How they have al∣ready brought contempt upon them∣selves. by deviating and falling from your principles, who have appeared to be worse then many that did scarce bear the name of profession; as witnesse your making of bone-fires, and your giving money to others for ringing of the Bells (when you would not take the pains to do it your selves) And your drinking of the Kings health (till he prohi∣bited
it, by his serviceable Proclamation) yea many things were done by some of you some months ago,One great evill of theirs ma∣nifested. whereof severall of you are now ashamed; and among the rest this was one great evil, (to wit) your fury and madnesse, rage and persecution which you run into against us (the people of the Lord) about the time that the King came into the Nation, when you were afraid your selves of being called in question; Oh! what havock did you then in some places make of us, to manifest to all that you were not of us; how then did you side with those that rose up against us; insomuch that had not the Lord been on our side, and appeared for us, in all likelihood, you with those with whom you joyned would even have swallowed us up. For at that time it was the expectation of many,Note. that we should have been given up into the hands of the rude multitude, and so to have become their prey; but hitherto the Lord hath not suffered it to come to passe according to the expectations of many, which the Lord hath frustrated in a great measure, and marvellously did he still the raging of the boisterous Sea, and after a great storm we beheld a sudden calm, which we look upon to be the Lords doing, which indeed was marvellous in our eyes. Though I have here a little digressed from what I have to say further concerning the Caracter of your Teachers, now I pur∣pose to come to it again, for my Spirit is grieved with their treacheries, and the souls of the Righteous are vexed from day to day with their deceitful dealings, and hypocritical flatteries and pretences; and if the Lord should give them up into the hands of their adversaries, as we have been given up into theirs (by such as should have protected us from their crueltie) it would be just with the Lord, who hath a controversie with them, because they have exalted themselves more then him; And therefore will he in processe of time (I believe) throw them by, as he hath done Parliaments, Protectors and Counsels that upheld them, who are now become as withered branches, though once they spread themselves as a green Baytree; How they heltered them∣selves al∣wayes un∣der such as did flourish the most, and what is befallen their friends. & then did these cuning men shelter themselves under them, untill their branches begun to wither, and then they withdrew, and crept towards those that seemed to flourish the most, but many of their friends are departed, and scattered, and con∣tempt is powred out upon them, and their strength is departed
from them, and the power that they once had in their hands it is taken from them and given to their neighbours; And therefore have these Teachers that made so many Addresses to them (with large promises, that they would stand by them to assist them with Lives and Estates against all enemies and disturbers whatsoever, &c.) withdrawn from them, when they saw they could not save themselves nor help them; to what end then was their blessings, wherewith they had blessed them, and their prayers which they had made for them? surely many were deceived by them, who thought they had leaued upon the Lord, and that he had been among them, and that therefore no evil could have come upon them; yet even at that time when they cryed peace,Jer. 6. 14. 15. came sudden ruine and desolation even in one day upon many, whose confidence was more in the arme of flesh then in the Living God. Surely had not these Teachers (of whom I write) renounced them that once were their onely friends, and cryed up those whom before they had detected, they had fallen with them that fell, and they had been split when others were broken to pieces; but what! do they think they stand yet; if so, let them take heed least they fall, for assuredly they stand upon very slippery places. It hath been observed,Note. how that their renowned friends by all their back-sliding, revolting, conforming, submitting and condescending from one thing to another, could not become guiltlesse and inexcusable, neither could they thereby keep their places of preferment, preserve their honour, retain their reputation, and continue in Authoritie, but were by degrees wrought out by a generation of men that were as subtil and politick as themselves, but this was done by degrees, and not all in one day; now such as perceived what things would tend to, that begun to break forth among them in Authoritie, who could not renounce their principles, but would rather throw in their Commissions, surrender their places,Wherein some was more no∣ble then their fel∣lowes. and lay down their Armes, then they would act contrary to their Consciences, such got more honour by their so doing (though then it was contemptible) then they got that continned so long as they could in power, by their becomming all, almost to any thing, till that their inconstancy appeared in almost every thing, and then some would scarce trust them in any thing: And thus it
hath happened unto the Rock of your Teachers (once) defence, which is now broken, and breaking down; Let not them think then totally to escape, for though they may be spared a season as Solomon spared Abiathar the Priest, and Shimei that curst his Father, 1 Kings 2. yet they shall not alwaies go unpunished, though for the present they may yet a little escape that which is decreed to come upon them, even till their measure of iniquitie be as full as the Amorites was. Surely he that executed justice and judgement upon their consorts will not hold them guiltlesse, who have been the instigaters and stirrers up of one party against another, to the bringing the Nation into much dstraction and unsetlednesse, confusion and disorder, yet many of the Rulers have not considered it, nor laid it to heart, but have been generally leavened with their Sprit, and therefore hath their counsell been unto them as Ahithophels was unto David and Absalom, which was unto them in those daies as if a man had enquired at an Oracle of God, even so hath the Counsel of many of the High Priests been unto many in profession that have been in Authoritie, who are at this time laid aside, and (as it were) are removed out of the way; Now behold, have not those men been much cast down since their counsel is come to nought, and since others have been put into their places, have they not been wroth in their minds, and are not their countenances somewhat fallen, and hath not the Lord already begun to abase some of their haugh∣tinesse, and to lay their loftynesse in the dust;Isa. 2. 17. But now observe their deceit and subtiltie in their striving and labouring to curry favour,Note. and to get into reputation and esteem with those that now are in Authoritie, who have not much liking to the ware which they have sold for many years, therefore doth some of them (and it is expected many more may in time) al∣ready begin to traffick again with that which is most vendible,What the expectati∣ons of mny are. and the most pleasing to the major party, which they will strive to keep on their sides. So that already several of them have begun to trade with that again, which for some years have lain by them as a thing that had been old and so grown out of fashion; but now when they perceive that people will buy it rather then that which they trafficked withall, they will willingly lay that aside which people lights, and deal with that which people
do most esteem;They are like unto subtile Merchant-men. so are like unto wary Merchant-men, who observes what Merchandize is the most Commodious, and will vend the best among those they deale withall, even that will they provide for them, partly for their own advantage, and partly for pleasing of the People; even so it is with these Bablonish▪ Merchants, that have made Merchandize of mens souls;2 pet. 2. when they saw that their reading of the Common Prayer Book, and their observing of the things therein required, were not allowed of by the Powers of the earth that then were in being, then did these cunning men begin to study to find out a sort of Merchandize that would be more desired, and more satisfactory, and such as had a finer colour,Observe their craft and poli∣cy. and a better shew then that which many professing peo∣ple could not well away with in those daies; And then did they begin to pray by the spirit (as they pretended) without a con∣stant form, and that they found to be more taking with many then the other, and they began to expound Chapters, which was more taking with many, then reading of Homilies; and kept Lectures, which was more pleasing to Professors, then keeping holy daies; and set daies a part to give thanks in, which they called daies of Thanksgiving, and likewise daies of Humiliation (so called) they had; which had a more shew of godlinesse, then Play daies, which some set apart for Sport and pastime; And they likewise did see, that gathering people into Church Fellowship, and administring that they called the Sacrament, onely unto some (whom they judged to be believers) that this would be more acceptable unto some (who were difficult to please) then to Administer the Sacrament unto all; and to Baptize the children of such as they counted elievers onely, would be more pleasing to some, then to baptize all without making a difference; And to read Chapters, sing Psalms, and to make repetitions of the heads of Sermons, and to make Prayers Evening and Morning in Families,How they changed their Mer∣chandize. that this was more accounted of, then reading a Prayer or two out of the Service Book; And when these Priestly Merchants saw that this Merchan∣dize was more vendible, and that they that could set it out with the most elegancy and curiosity, with the excellentest excel∣lency of speech, such came to be most in esteem with the richer sort, then began abundance of them to get into this confor∣mity, or at least to imitate it for their own ends, when they
saw that he that sold the old ware was not to be tollerated, maintained nor upholden, then did they almost generally strive to get into that way of traffiking,How they strove to pleasesuch as did bear rule. which they deemed would be most commodious, and would bring them in the most gain, and which they knew would be the best pleasing unto professing people which then begun to bear the greatest sway in the Nation. Thus they have done heretofore when there was a great change in the Nation; And behold, what do they now? Is not that becoming old, and growing out of fashion with them which was new about the beginning of the wars? and is not that come and coming again into request and estimation, and so now vendable again, which then was old, and lightly e∣steemed by many?Why they change their Mer∣chandize. And is not that the cause wherefore some of these men leave trading with the wares, which of late were in esteem, but now are not so much regarded, by them that are in power, as they have been by them that have been in authori∣ty; and therefore will they now traffik again with such things as they perceive are most pleasing to peoples fancies, though for many years they have laid them by, and have been as of no reputation with them, but now the powers of the earth allow∣ing them, and seeming to stand by them, and to help and as∣sist them against such as do not allow of their Merchandize, this is a great encouragement to them;What need they have of the help of the powers of the earth, and how they are begun al∣ready to cry unto them. And therefore do ma∣ny of them, even do what in them lies, to get the powers of the earth on their sides, for they know they have as much need of their help now as ever; And therefore have they begun al∣ready (in effect) to cry out unto them, as the Iews did unto the men of Israel, who cryed help, this is the man that teach∣eth all men every where against the people,Act. 21. 28 and the Law, &c. So the Priests they have cryed unto the long Parliament, and they heard their voice, and did in part answer their requests, as appears by an Ordinance of theirs, which they made in No∣vember 8. (so called) 1644. for the true payment of Tythes and other such duties,That was O. C. according to the Laws and Custome of the Realm. So when they were dissolved and broken, they made their addresses unto himWhat the long Par∣liament did for them. that had dissolved those that had holpen them be∣fore,Their lies and blas∣phemies manifest∣. and they made their boast of him, stiling him the most Illusterous Light of these three Nations, the Light of their Ees, and the breath of their Nostrils; their Glorious Sun; the Nations pious
and worthy Patriot, that gave them life and light to their fainting spirits, a Moses that had led them out of the Land of Aegypt, who had given them more then a tast of the clusters of the grapes of Canaan into their cp; Thus did they stile him & write of him in their addresses to his SonWhich are to be sen in te ab∣stract that I have ta∣ken out of their addresses to R. C. after his disease, saying, though their Sun was set, yet no night ensued, &c. So unto him (to wit O. C.) did they lift up their voices, and sent their Petitions, and he heard their cries, and did in a large measure answer their requests, as appears by his reviving of an Ordinance, in the years, 1654. Yea he was so careful and tender over them,This Ordinance was made by the Parlia∣ment for Tithes, Ano. 1647. that he and his Parliament enacted,Vide, An Act made by O. C. and his Parlia∣ment, An. 1656. That if any molested, hindred or disturbed them, when they were officiating and doing their duty, or in their going to or returning from their places of worship, the party so offending was to be commit∣ed to Prison, and there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, until the next General Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for the County, &c. And if upon information, presentment, or Inditement, such person or persons shall at the General Sessions of the peace be found guilty, for maliciously, wilflly or of purpose, molesting, letting disturbing or otherwise troubling such Minister or publique Preacher, or making any disturbance as aforesaid, every person so convicted, shall forfeit the sum of five pounds,Ho O. C. above ma∣ny in his day help∣ed them. The Pro∣phets and Apostles had never such an Act made on their behalf. or at the discretion of the Iustices, shall be sent to the house of Correction to be set to hard labour with such moderate correction as in the discretion of the said Iustices shall be thought sit, &c. Come ye Priests (who say he was the light of these three Nations, and the light of your eyes, and life of your fainting spirits; And a Moses that had led you out of the Land of Aegypt) come tell us where did ever Moses (who wished that all the Lords people had been Prophets) make such an Act or Ordinance as this) to protect the Priest by, in the time of the Law? Had the Prophets and Apostles any such Acts or Ordinan∣ces, thus to deal with such as molested them in their going or coming to, or from their meetings? Surely no, what was this one of the clusters of the grapes he put into your cup, which are indeed more like the Garlick of Aegypt then the fruits of Ca∣naan: And sundry clusters of sower Grapes did he and his Palia∣ments put into your cups, yet would not your mouths be stopt, neither would you ever be satisfied, nor cease clamouring and crying at their judgement seats, being as unsatiable as those men the Prophets spoke of that never have enough; Though
they made Ordinance after Ordinance for you,How tedi∣ous they were, and how diffi∣cult it was for the Magi∣strates to keep them quiet, or to be quiet for them Vide O. C. Ordinance made, An. 1654. yet could they scarce keep you quiet, nor be quiet for you, when they had turned others out to put you in, their great care was to procure you Parsonage-houses, Tythes and other profits, as Salleries and Augmentations, as appears from an Ordinance of Parliament, Entituled, Ministers placed in livings by Authority of Parliament, made in the year 1647. And it likewise appears from another Act of Parliament, made in the year 1649. For the maintenance of Preaching Ministers. And it is manifest, that you had their help and assistance in getting of your Tithes, as the Ordinance it self will shew, which was made by the Parliament, An. 1647. and revived by O. C. Anno. 1654. for the true payment of Tithes and oher duties. Thus it appears, how he and the Parliaments that were in his dayes helped you with their pow∣er;How they were pla∣ced in pla∣ces by the authority of man, and not by Christs Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38. And then did you pray for them, while they put into your mouths, after they had put you into the Parsonage-houses, and given you Tithes, Salleries and Augmentations, and placed you in others Livings by their Authority, and afterwards protected you in them, ordering such to be apprehended by their Authority (as obstructed the payment of Tithes, and other profits due by the Parishoners (as they pretended to you whom they pla∣ced by their Authority,How the Ministers of Christ had no Augmen∣tation al∣lowed them or provided for them by the powers of the earth. and such were to be sent to Prison, there to remain until they made you satisfaction, who were placed by Authority of Parliament; (note) where were any of the Prophets, Apostles, or Ministers of Christ so placed? That had tryal of-cruel mockings and scourging, of bonds and imprisonment, who wandred about in Desarts, in Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the earth; And had no certain dwelling place in any Parsonage-house whatsoever, neither were they placed in other mens livings, by authority of Parl. neither do we read that they had Sallaries and Augmentati∣ons allowed them by the powers of the earth for preaching nei∣ther doth it appear from the Scriptures of Truth, that ever the Magistrates had any trouble with them,How the Magi∣strates hereto∣fre have been trou∣bled with the Priests for providing them Livings, Sallaries and Augmentations, nor yet with making of Acts and Ordinances for the punishing of such as molested, trou∣bled, or disturbed them, and injoyning people to pay them their Tythe, &c. nay, but on the contrary, the Magistrates in their dayes were troubled with such a clamorous generation of men as you are; who cryed out unto them to help; And their eares being open to them, as the powers of the earth hath been unto you, they came to have trouble upon trouble, with exe∣cuting
of their wills upon the innocent: even as the Magi∣strates of this Nation have had, first with you, till they made you Lawes; And secondly, with executing these Lawes upon the innocent, and some like your selves have imputed the case of their trouble to the innocent and harmlesse people, whom you troubled the Magistrates withall,How they have had trouble with them when they could not for Conscience sake pay you Tythe; or if they spoke to you in the time of your worship, or in your going to it or coming from it, then you have cryed out they disturbed you,How Offi∣cers must be trou∣bled  Priests How have  upon Ruler for  years. and then the Mayors Iustices of Peace, and other inferiour Officers must be troubled with you till they execute that Law upon them, which the Parliament was troubled with making for you. And in this very thing you hve been the men that have been chiefly accessary to abundance of the trouble which the Magistrates of the Nation have had for this fouteen or sixteen years, as many can testifie who have had their share in the trouble with you, upon whom trouble now is come, and they can neither deliver themselves nor you. Thus it appears that O. C. your nursing Father, (as you have called him) and the Parliaments that sate when he ruled did much for you, and therefore did you in your Addresses to his Son (for whose Succession in the Government you blessed God, stiling him your most excellent Prince, Soveraign, most serene Highnesse, your Ioshua, and Solomon, &c.)How they flattered R. C. when they sought his help. seemingly much bewail the sad stroke of Providence that took away the breath of your nostrils, and smote your head from off your shoulders, &c. As in your Addresse to R. C. from Coventry City, so when the Lord in his wrath had re∣moved him whom you had so flattered and applauded, then did you begin to crave the help of his Son, (whom you looked upon to be the Lords Ioshua, which he ushered in (as you say) when he took away Moses) and many were your Addresses which you sent from sundry parts of the Nation unto him; an ab∣stract out of which I think good to publish tò the Nation, that both high and low,The end wherefore their fol∣lowing Addresses were published to the Nation. rich and poor, may take notice of your flatteries, and see you to be incontinent, and truce-breakers, hypocrites and dissemblers; And that your folly may appear unto all men, that henceforth the Rulers of the Kingdome may not be deceived by your flatteries, as many have been before them. And seeing you made so many Addresses in so little a time unto R. C. how many then might you make unto his Father.
But first of all I am determined to speak something to the Addresses of some Independants and Anabaptists. As first, Doctor Tho. Goodwin (so called) in the name, and by the appointment of the Offi∣cers and Messengers of above an hundred Congregational Wha did fear begin to possesse you (oh ye Proes∣sors) that you also ust make your ad∣dresse, and  your  by , what ex∣ample for his had you in the holy scrip∣ture. Churches, from several parts of the Nation addressed to R. C. representing their humble acknowledgement and most affectionate dty to him in a speech; wherein they say they have not eaten the bread of adversiy, nor drunk the water of If you have not, many good people in this nati∣on have, to whose bonds you congregational Churches have added afliction. afflction, but have served God in abundance of all things in their Land: All which mercies have been continued to them, through the protection of that greatIf you mean Oli. he was liker Hamon then Mordecai in his self-seeking honour and promotion, more then the weal of Gods people, who stood at his gates like Mordecai, and when he in great pomp hath come by could not bow unto him. Mordecai that sought the weal of the people, &c. Moreover they gave R. C. to understand, that they had shewed their harmony with the most Orthodox, at home and abroad, they expressed their assent to that confession of faith, to which all the Reformed Churches, with the Churches of Scotland and New-England, If your faith be one with theirs in New-England, then we know how far it will extend; yet we have better hopes of many of you, then of them of New-England, whose desperate wickednesse have exen∣ded to the taking away of the lives of the innocent, whose blood continues crying for vengeance upon them who have done that horid wickednsse, which cannot but amaze the simple among you, that yet retain any tendernesse in your hearts towards the Lord and good people. had given their Assent unto; namely, the Articles of Reli∣gion approved and passed by both Houses of Parliament, to which they unanimously without the least contradiction, We have not yet found so many of you in one mind, without contradicting one another, especially in matters pertaining unto Religion. (as he said) assented and agreed: They also committed their faith unto hisOh mi∣rable men had your faith been the faith of Gods Elect, you needed not have been so aithlesse, neither would you have been so foolish, as to have committed your faith to him to countenance and propagate, who could not propagate, defend, and protect his own: Oh you of little faith, who were so suddenly surprized with fear, when you saw you had lost the protection of that great Mordecai, hen you shewed your selves like the Reformed Churches (so called) indeed who run with them for help, from him that then had the power in his hand, for whom you then engaged to pray, but do you now according to your engagement? trust, as their chief Magistrate, to countenance and propagate it, and engaged themselves to pray for his Highnesse both in private and publick Assemblies, &c.
The Independants (so called) did not onely make their Addresse as before mentioned, to R. C but sundry Churches of the BaptizedWhat could not your saith keep you out of E∣gypt nei∣ther, but you must run with Presbyte∣rians and Indepen∣dants into Egypt for help? tell us (that could not go with you) what found you when you came there? did you not rather get shame and reproach thereby, then either help or profit? what did you not know before you went that the Egyptians help was in vain, and to no pur∣pose, would it not have been more honour and advantage to you to have stood still, and in the faith and paience to have waited upon the Lord, then to have run down into Egypt, and to trust in the shadow thereof, which is now become (and that justly) your shame and confusion? people, they also made their Addresses to R. C. wherein they acknowledged the much benefit they had reaped under the Government of his Princely Father of pre∣cious Doh his memory yet remain precious to you, where∣fore then do you not strive to wipe away the reproach that is cast upon him? memory, and that he had been unto them as a nursing Father; And therefore did they lament for his death with the words of the Prophet; My Father,If he was your Father as Elijah wa Elishas; then tll us wheher his spirit of policy do rest upon you since his departure, as Elijahs spirit did rest upon Eisha after they were both parted asunder yea or nay? My Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Hrsemen thereo; Further they declared they would immediately lift up their hearts and hands to God, that he mightBut it seems that you with your listing up your hearts and hands to God could not prevaile with the Lord, (as Iacob did that wrest∣led with him) though you had the help of the prayers of the Officers of the Army, and the help of the prayers of above a hundred congregaional Churches; And likewise you had the help of the prayers of Lord Mayors, Hgh Sheriffs, Aldermen, Lords, Knights, Recorders, Gentlemen Bliffs and Priests, both in the Country and Ciies, as appears by their several Addresses; yet it is manifst (I sa) that you all cold not prevaile with the Lord, for to continue him long, and prosperous in the Government, out of which he was soon excluded; And who of all you Addressers, whether of the Officers of the Army, or of the mbers of above a undred congregational Churches (com∣monly called Independants) or of the members of the baptized Churches, or of the Majors, Aldermen, High Sheiffs, Recorders, Lords, Knights, Baliffs, Gentlemen and Priests;  which of you all have proved true and faithful to him, according to your vowes, promises and ingagements, in using the utmost of your ability fr the preservation of his Person and Government? ave you not rather all proved treache∣rous and deceitful, and so may aume the shame unto your selves, which is very justly come upon you all, Isa. 30 2. 3. 7. 13. long continue prosperous in the Govern∣ment, and they promised to contribute their cordial assistance to their ability, &c. Now shall I come to the Addresses of the Piests to R. C. which they sent or Communicated to him after he was Pro∣claimed, which may somewhat tend to the manifesting of their
foly and treachery, deceit and hypocrisie to such as fear the Lord and hate double dealing, which is not comely nor conve∣nient among Christians. And first, the Priests of the City of London and Southwark (even the eminentest of them) as Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Spurstow, Dr. Seaman, Ash, Calamy, Manton, Ienkins, William Cooper, &c. did for themselves, and in the names of many others of their Brethren, make a very heartyOh ye Doctors and chief Priests, where do you read that ever the Prophets or Apostles made Addresses to men in Authority after this sor? did not fear take hold upon you, and were not many of you afraid that you should have lost your Benefices, and that you should have been turned out of your places, and did you not therefore make your Addresse unto him who was then the supream Ma∣gistrate in the Nation, whose protection you desired, and for a season obtained it, but it would have been more honour to you if you had never craved it, by your Addressing to him whose help was so small; and his time upon the Throne so short, which had you known it in time, I believe you would not have so manifested your folly and weakness to the Nation, as you did in that very thing. Addresse (so called) to R. C. and did confesse they owned him as Prince of these Nations, and Captain-General, and said they would alwaiesBut have you not now ceased pray∣ing for him? And are you not of another mind now, then you were when you thus Addressed to him? pray for him and own him in thoseBut I suppose, you now neither own him as Prince of these Nations, nor yet as Captain-General, and so are fallen from that which you have given under your hands; And therefore is contempt and shame come upon you, you Doctors and chief Priests of the City of London and Southwark. Capacities, &c. The Address of the Priests and others in Hartford County, and in the Burrough of St. Albans. WHerein they speak deceitfully of his Father, and affirms that the Lord had made him as a Ioshua to redeemBut he did not redeem you out of your envy wrath, pride, not covetousnesse, for in that he found you, and in that he left you. his people from their wildernesse estate, and lead them in a good measure unto a CanaansAnd to Canaans rest you are not yet come, but you are further off it, then you were when you first expected Redemption by him that was not able to redeem himself. rest, (yea) it makes them smite upon their thighes, saying, what have we doneOh you have done very , you have preached for hire, you have borne Rule by your means, you have done that to thers yu would not have others to do unto you, you have imprisoned and shamefully in reaed the Lords Servants and Messengers, and the Lord will not hold you guiltless for such things as these.?
They also prayed that the Lord would both cause the mantle and Spirit of their departedIf you mean O. C. I say he was not like Elijah but rather like unto king Ahab who kil∣led and took possession; And did not O. C. the like? Who in his life time, was often reproved for his wickednesse, but the same hatred was in him against some that repro∣ved him, that wa in Ahab against Elijah, 1 Kings 21. 16, 19. And you (who flattered him in his life time, and wrote thus of him when he was dead and gone) have been like unto Ahabs four hundred Prophets, that with one accord declared good-unto that wicked man; but Michaiah the True prophet of the Lord, the King hated him, because he did not prophesie good unto him; So he was committed to prison, and fed with bread and water of affliction, but the lying Prophets, (into whose mouth a lying spirit was en∣tered) they went free and escaped punishment as you have done, when the true and faithful Servants of the Lord have been committed in his name whom you called your E∣lijah, read 1. Kings 22. chap. Elijah to rest upon his head and heart; And with all cordialnesse they did declare their solemn resolutions, with their lives and all that was dear unto them in their hand, toTrue and faithful to him you have not continued, nei∣ther did ye ever hazard life, liberty or estate on his behalf that we know of, neither would you appear with any of those in your hands on his behalf, when he was turned out of that, which you with fained words pretended to stand by him in; but these your lies and fained speeches, are but like unto your brethrens; which will become your shame and your burthen. continue true and faithful to him, as their supream Governour, according to the Humble Petition and Advice, &c. The Addresses of the Priests of Surrey and others, unto R. C. VVHerein they say, They cannot but mourn under that inexpressible lose that these Nations sustained, in the death of so choice and eminent a Servant as his late Fa∣ther, the mostWhat more re∣nowned by you then any King that went be∣fore him? renowned that ever ruled in these Nations: They presumed to present themselves the Real FriendsHad you not been his friends, he would not have had such care of you, to have pla∣ced you in other mens livings, and to make Acts and Ordinances on your behalf, whereby you might get your Tihes, and possesse with quietnesse your Parsonage-houses which he turned others out of, for you to come into. of his late Father, who spent his dayes in the cause of God and his people, till the world was no longerHe was not therefore taken out of it; for many that are more pretious then he was, yet remain in it, witnesses against the wickednesse of it. worthy of him, &c.
The Addresses of the Priests and others of the County of Sssx, to R. C. WHerein they desire him to own and encourage the faith∣fulYou are not the men that have proved faithful for you have been in constan and unfaithful in more things, then in this concerning him. and industerous Preachers of Christs Gospel, and to preserve them fromHow should he preserve you from it, when you bring it so wilfully upon your selves, as you have done in this. very thing. reproach; And they do likewise de∣clare, they will own him with their lives and estates, against all parties and interestsWheefore did you not then appear for him when he was ejected and laid aside, surely you have not meant as you spoke in your Addrsses, so exceeding con∣trarily you have acted, insomuch that it will be hard for you to get the reproach wiped away that is fallen upon you, who have not done according to your ingagements, neither have you fulfilled your promises; and therefore doth the reproach and oblique (which you speak of) lye upon you. whatsoever, who shall presume to di∣sturb his Government upon what colour or pretence what∣soever, &c. The Addresse of the Priests and others of Colchester unto R. C. WHerein they pretend grief andBut was it not much more in words then real∣ly in your hearts. sorrow for the great losse of these three Nations, in the death of his Father of blessedIs his me∣mory yet blessed a∣among you memory; They declare he hath been lawfully nominated and appointed to succeed in the Government of these three Nations; So that they do with unanimous consent acknowledge him to be undoubted Protector, and rightful chief Magistrate of this Common-wealth, and are resolvedbut it is manifest, your resolutions were soon altered, when you perceived another party turn him out and lay him aside, which of you then retained your resolution in adhering unto him, or in assisting of him? but your high swelling and boasting words did him little service, when he had need of your assistance, for then id you withdrw from him, like the rest of your brethren, whom you did not cme behind in Addressing unto him, nor yet in ∣volting from him; so you are like unto them in those things, and therefore must your words become your burthen, as their promises must become thers, and all of you must come to judgement for these things. by the blessing of God, to adher unto and assist him therein.
The Priests and others of Suffolk Addressed to R. C. SAying, the sad thoughts of his Fathers most lamented death filledYet it did but little ap∣pear in some of you other∣wise then in hypo∣criie. all their hearts with sorrow and tears, yet (say they) although our Sun is set, no night hath ensued; And their prayers were that his Government might still be as a morning withoutbut it is clear that your prayers have not prevailed for it never was so clear as a morning without clouds; but might well have been compared unto an early dew, or unto a morning cloud, be∣cause it was so soon vanisht and gone, notwithstanding your prayers and the prayers of your brethren. clouds; and they assured him, they should con∣tinue their chearful submission to his Government, and stand Ready you were not to assist him in the umost capacity, wherein you were able, when others opposed and withstood him, and prevailed against him; where was thre one of you to be found in readinesse to perform what you have proised? If R. C. put confidence in such as you, it is then not so much to be admired, that those things befel him (which unavoidably are come upon him) as it is to be wondred, that yo yet have escaped as you do; but look to your selves, and consider how sundry of the Powers unto which you have addressed, are fallen and overturned; And your standing is on slippery places. ready in the utmost capacitie wherein they are enabled to serve him. The Priests of Norfolk and of the City of Norwich, they Addressed to R. C. ANd professed their deep sense of the loss of their late re¦nowned ProtectorHad he not protected you in your Par∣sonage-houses (which had been other mens livings) and Tythes and Benefices, and allowed you Salleries and Augmen∣tations you would not have renowned him so much as you pretended to do., the Common-wealths most tender Father, and they did solemnly promiseYour Promises and Engagements were to little purpose, for which of you all can come forth, and say, he doth both keep and observe them and engage them∣selves faithfully to serve and obey his most Serenethese fained words that you spoke in hy∣pocrisie you may now be ashamed of, and your spirit of deceit is now manifest, that you have spoke and wrote from. Highness as his Liege people, in the defence of his person andWhen or where did you defend it, either with your lives or estates? Oh ye deceitful men. Go∣vernment with their lives and estates, &c.
The Priests and others of the County of Bedford Addressed to R. C. ANd in their Addresse, they professed their mourningIf you mourned at all, it was so lit∣tle, as that Iudge few or none perceived it, for ma∣ny of you had little affection to him in your hearts, notwithstanding all your flatterie and deceitful expressions, wherewith your Addresses are filled, which savours meerly of hypocrisie and deceit, and not of sin∣cerity & truth. (for his (and his countries renowned) father) was turn∣ed into joy by his happy and peaceable enterance into the Go∣vernment of these Nations, to the astonishment of the enemies and satisfaction of the good peopleThere were many in the Nation that are looked upon to be good people, that had not good satisfaction in the thing; but lies in hypocrisie you could tell him, like the rest of your Brethren. thereof; and they hop∣ed God would make his mountain to stand strong.If it had stood strong, it would have stood longer; but it was not according to your (professed) hope, who begun to cry to it and look for help from it, because it was a Mountain. And they thought it their duty, to give a publick testimonyYou had better have kept your Testimony to your selves, then to have produced it, and not to stand true and constant to it. of their hearty affections, and readinesse in their several places, and ca∣pacities to the utmost of their powers, faithfully and cheerfully to assistBut where id any of you appear to assist him in your capacities, in a needful time when many for∣ook him, then did you also leave him (instead of serving and assisting him) like the rest of your deceitful brethen. and serve him, &c. The Priests and others of Buckingham County Addressed (as others did) unto R. C. ANd in their addresse, they expressed their deep sence of their great losse by the death of his Father, of ever bles∣sed memoryAre you not of nother  now, when his memory begins al∣ready to be deest∣ed by many.; And they hope he will make the exampleDo you mean in his placing you in other mens livings, and in making. Acts and Ordinances on your behalf, by which you might recover your Tythe, Sallaries and Agmentations; or do you mean his suffering the nocent to be committed to pri∣son in his Name, and suffering their goods to be spoiled, their Cattel to be driven away, and they to be made a prey upon in his name? this his Father did, and if he had followed his example according to your hopes, then he might have done the like. of his Father to be his patern; And they also did declare they
would be ready to testifie their affectionsWhile he was in power, and that you expected help from him, then were you seemingly affectionate to him, but when he begun to be opposed, then instead of obeying and assisting him, you desented from him. to him and obe∣dience to his Government. The Priests and others of the County of Northampton Addressed to R. C. ANd in their Addresse they speak of the precious memory of his thrice Renowned Father, who was so in love and tendernesse to the people of GodHad he been as you say, then would he not have suffered so many of them to have lain so long in prison as he did; neither would he have suff∣red such flattering deceitful men as you, to have made a prey upon them as you did, in zeal for Reformation in Church and State, in bounty and compassion to the suffer∣ing SaintsWhen their suffer∣ing was laid before him, he would very seldom put forth his helping hand to assist them, but rather strengthened your hands against them, so their suffering was continued unto his dying day; And at his death he left many of them in prison, which brought Infamy two-fold upon him, rather then thrice Renown. under whose shadow we sate for a time with great safetyYea his care was over you as appears by the Acts and Ordinances before mentioned, which were made on your be∣half, by him and his Parliaments, which being now repealed and nihilated, you are forced to creep under the shadow of these, whom he and you in those dayes called the common enemy, against whom you with him took part: And when you had over∣come them, you got into their Livings and their Parsonage houses, in which you sate under Oivers shadow, with great safety and sweet repose; and sweet repose; And that they were ama∣zed at the divine stroke that took from them in a time so un∣looked for, (mark) the light of our eyesBe not then offendd at us hereafter if we call you blind guides, and say you are Physitians of no value, seeing you have confest that the Light of your eyes, and the breath of your nosti is taken from you: and the breath of our nostrils, whom they declared to be the wisest and most gloriousWhat, was he more glorious then the Lord of Glory, who is called the Prince of peace? if so, how then came his Glory to fade to almost nothing, so that it is now become but as a dead and withered flower of the field. of Princes; And so treadingSo being found speaking lies in hypocrisie, I confesse with you, you are treading in the steps of your Brethren, who have dealt deceitfully like your selves. in the steps of their Brethren that had gone before them, they humbly prayed That his Highnesse would exercise just severity against despi∣sers of dignitiesMany that feared the Lord did as much despise the dignities wherewith O C. was dignified, as Elisha despised the gift of Naaman, 2 Kings 5 16, and revilers of Athoritie, whose unhallowed Your tongues appear to be unhallowed by the many lies that are spoken by them in hypocrisie. tongues spare not to flash out their insolentAnd are not you now become of the number of them that flsh out insolent reproaches against his Government and Sepul∣chre, and so become guilty of that which you would have had others punished for, and therefore are inexcusable your selves? reproaches and impious execrations against your Fathers Sepulchre, and your Highnesse Throne.
That his Highnesse would countenance a faithfulYou have pro∣ved both unfaithful and un∣sound in the sight of God and men. sound, able, and godly Ministry. And that his Highnesse would still own and adhereBut which of you now will ad∣here unto them in their distresse, like as you did in their prosperitie, when they were in power, and able to help you, then for your own ends you could follow them and adhere to them. unto the faithful Friends and Counsel of his Renowned Father; Then shall the people of God be with you, to obeyBut when he injoyned the people of God to pay such deceitful workers as you Tythe, they could not obey him, and therefore did they in his Name suffer by you, as they had done in his Fathers dayes. you, to assist you, to love you, to rejoyce in you, to blesse God with incessantBut what have not you in particular ceased pray∣ing for him? even in the time of his distress, when he hath need of the help of the prayers of the faithful. prayers for you; And as for themselves they unfainedly acknowledge (as falsly they said) themselves obliged to pay unto his Highnesse, all the duties of faithful Subjects to a good and worthy Prince, even to the ut∣most hazardMany fair speeches you have used to him in your sundry Addresses, but where, or at what time, did you hazard either life or estate on his behalf? oh you men∣pleasers and time-servers, the Lord will judge you. of life and estate, &c.
The Priests and others of Berks County Addresse to R. C. VVHerein they say that with much sadnesseAre you not here sound with a lye in your mouth, like the rest of your Brethren, of heart they bewail their great losseIf he was the light of your eyes, and the breath of your nostrils as some of your brethren said, then your losse in loosing of him was great: in the death of his Princely Father; And withall they also declared that they would stand by him with their estatesSurely you speak this as your formallity, in hypocrisie and not in sinceritie, as hath ap∣peared by your not performing your promises, nor much regarding your ingagements which you have so generally made in your Addresses. and hazard of their lives &c. The Priests of Hampshire they also Addressed unto R. C. ANd some things they made mention of that was done by his Father, which (they said) was but the first fruits of far greater blessings desiredWhat could he have done more for you then he did? did he not give you other mens li∣vings? did he not (with his Counsel) cause Salaries and Augmentations to be paid unto you? And did he not give you power to recover trebble dammage of such as could not pay you Tythe? and did he not give you power to spoil honest mens goods, and to cst them into prison if they spoke to you in your going to your worship, or in your coming from i? And could you not be satisfied and contented with these clusters from such a degenerate nt of a strange Vine as he was become, but you must expect and desire more, and that from an ignoble branch that sprung from the plant, that had it's rise from a strange Vine: Oh ye covetous self-seeking men when will you have enough. and expected, and as it were clusters of Canaan to refresh them in their wildernesse condi∣tion. And (flattering of him) said, they observed in him zeal for Gods glory, affectionate actings for the TruthWhat were they? that others did not see them so well as your selves., faithfull execution of Justice,Do you mean in his suffering so many to be com∣mitted to prison for not paying you your Tythe, and for disturbing of you, whom he did more for in endeavouring to procure you your Tythe, then many of you ever did for him, notwithstanding your lying promises in your fained Addresses to him. countenancing of godly Ministers, tendernesse towards such as feared the Lord, a humble frame of Spirit, and a most amiable behaviour towards all, &c. say∣ing they should neverHave you not ceast praying for him already now, when you see he cannot give you such clusters of Salaries and of Augmentations as his Father did? cease to pray, that the God of all their Mercies would be present with him in his person, &c.
The Priests and others of Dorchester and of the County of Dorset they Addressed unto R. C. WHerein they speak of the losse of his Renowned Fa∣ther, of whom (say they) themselves and the three Na∣tions may say they have lost their FatherAs a Father ca∣eth and provideth for his children, so did he provide Livings, Salaries, and Augmentations for you of their Coun∣trey, yet being he is established, his Rightfull Successor in the Government, their sorrow was turned into joyBut will not your joy be turned into sorrow again, if you should loose your Livings as they did that yo got them from, your Sallaries and Augmentations? for I perceive a little thing will turn your sorrow into joy, and your joy into sorrow, who are as inconstant as the wind, and as unstable as the waters.; so to him and his Government they declared they would adhere, &c. The Priests and others of Wilts County made their Ad∣dress to R. C. VVHerein they (pretend) to bewaileSurely he hath been the greatest helper you have had in the earth, see∣ing you so bewail his death. the death of his Father, but with all thankfulnesse acknowledgeth, and admireth as they say, the wonderful workings of God, in preventing their fearsWho pursued you when you thus eared, or what was the cause of your fears? did you fear any thing more then the decay of your trading, and the losse of your Salaries and Augmentations? So when his Son succeeded him in the Government, and continued these thing to you which his Father had provided for you, then your fears were pre∣vented; Oh ye faithlesse generation, how long will you cover after these things which the Gentiles seek? Math. 6. 31. 32. by bringing him legally to succeed him in Government, and do declare their free and cordiall owning of him whom the Lord had set over themIf the Lord had set him over ou, and if then he had continued in the Lords Counsel, then he would have continued longer over you, and with you:, And they also declared their firm resolutionsBut it appears your Resolutions continued not firm and stedfast, seeing you deserted him, and left him, contrary to our promises an engagements: And seeing you did so to him, if you should promise to others as you engaged to him, who do you think would be so foolish as to confide in you, or believe you? to stand by him & assist him in the Administration of his just power, &c.
The Priests of Taunton, and others of the Inhabitants of that Town Addressed to R. C. VVHerein they expressed their deep sence of the heavyBut you are like to feel a hea∣vier stroak yet for your hy∣pocrisie and dis∣sembling stroke of God in taking from them his renowned Father; But since, say they, it was the Will of God this Glorious SunYou that call him a glorious Sun, are in the night of Apostacy yet, are ought to keep silent in the darknesse, least another sun go down upon you in his wrath, whom you had need to kisse, least he be angry with you, for your blasphemy, deceit and flattery., Mark, should set, yet no night hath followed. And they pro∣mised to be wholly at his command, and humbly to submit was their unalterable resolutionYet it appears you can alter and change your Resolutions (notwithstanding your promises and ingagements;) as times, Laws, and Governments alters and change, so can you, as is apparent and evi∣dent at this day, to your shame and confusion; Who can even bow to & comply with, even any Government that is set up to be the supream among you, whose folly is now manifest in a large measure to the Nation, that long hath been deceived by you., as they falsly said, and rea∣dily with all chearfulnesse, assist by their Persons and Estates, &c. The Priests of Chard in the County of Somerset, with others of the Town, addressed to R. C. WHerein they expressed their deep sence of the terri∣ble providence, in taking off from their heads, the joy of their heartsOh you silly men that ever you, (the mayor Magistrates and Priest of Chard) should ut∣ter such things, and that your folly should by the uttering of such things, be thus mani∣fested to the Nation, by setting forth mortal man to be the joy of your hearts; What are your hearts filled with now, when so much infamy is come upon him, (who, as you say) was the joy of them? surely, had you foreseen what is come to psse, you ould not have uttered such frivelous things., his most Illusterous Father; but they blesse God that providence gave them such a IoshuaIf he was your Ioshua, then some of you that followed him were as bad as Achan that coveted the goodly Babylonish gar∣ment, and the shekels of silver, and the wedge of Gold; yea, I believe many of you have stollen and dissembled, and have taken of the spoil of your enemies, and have put it among your own stuff, as some did that followed Ioshua, and therefore could they not stand before their enemies, no more then you and your Ioshua could stand before yours, who fled and none pursued; And then was R. C. in as great a strait I believe, as Ioshua was, when he cryed out, wha shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their ene∣mies, Joshua 7. chap. to con∣duct them into the Land of promise; And as they subscribe their hands, so shall be ready to hang their lives and estates, as Labels to that sincere fealty and most cheerful obedience which God and his Highnesse called for, from them.
The Priests of Tiverton, with others of the Inhabitants of the Town Addressed to R. C. ANd confessed they had had a share in the Priests Astonish∣ments and FearsWe know you had cause to be pos∣est with fears, and to be a∣mazed to think upon the danger you were like to be plunged in, when he that had so mightily holpen you was fallen; And when he that had been as your refuge (from those that did oppose you) w taken away, fearfulnesse and astonishment must then needs sur∣prize you, who had your helper (that helped you) in the earth; So when he was remo∣ved, you addressed to his Successor, and interceded to him that he might become your helper, that so you might alwayes have one in the earth, but our help is in the Lord Ie∣hova, and not in the Arm of flesh. at the sad news of his renowned Fa∣thers death; And they did unfainedly congratulate his High∣nesse, serene pious and prudent beginnings, and they did bless the Lord (as they said) who had laid up un-thought-of provi∣sions, for the good of the People in these Nations, &c. The Priests of Hereford County, and many others Addressed to R. C. SAying, That the great loss in this Common wealth wh hap∣pened by the death of his dear Father, had oppressed their spirits with fear, had not divine providence givenHad divine provi∣dence gi∣ven him; [as you sy] then it had been your duty to have stuck more firmly and faithfully to him, then you did, his prince∣ly person to succeed in the protection of Religion,While he did protect you in your Parsonage houses and Mss-houses (commonly but falsly called Churches) you prayed for him and gave him flattering Titles, but when he could not protect you, you ceased making Addresses to him, and gave over praying for him. Laws and Liberties of the Nations, over which the Lord had placed himThen greater will your judgement be who proved so deceitful to him. as chief Magistrate, and they did declare their firm ResolutionsTo little purpose have your Resolutions been, which have been so changeable and aleable, of which you may now be ashamed. to yield, all Loyalty, fidelity and obedience, and to assist him to the utmostHere you are treading in the steps of your bre∣thren, whose lies, alshoods, and absurdities represents unto the Nation what a Genera∣tion you are. extent of their abilities.
The Priests and others of Warwick County Addressed to R. C. SHewing their sorrow for their late unspeakable loss by the death of his Highnesse incomparable Father, so worthy a nursing FatherOf whose flock you were who sat under his shadow with sweet repose, be∣ing nursed with the Tithes, Salleries and Augmentations, which he procured you out of other mens estates and livings, but not out of his own. to his people, yet they have no more cause of mourning, that they were deprived of him so soon, then of thankfulnesse they enjoyed him so longBut if you had enjoyed him longer, and not the things before mentioned by him, you would not have given hearty thanks for the enjoyment of him., saying, though their Sun was set, yet no night ensued; For no sooner was the most illusterous LightOh you Blasphemers, how durst you say, That he who was but a mortal man, was a more illusterous Light of the three Nations, then he that is the Light of the World, and of every Nation and Dominion in the whole world? Former∣ly you have cryed out of the Quakers blasphemy, but now behold your own and repent of it. of these three Nations extinguished, but it pleased the Father of Lights to set up anotherDo you mean his Son being another Light, when he was set up; However he now is thrown down, what say you then is now their Light, and in what must they now walk, if not in the Light of the Lord?. And they speak of Gods renew∣ing his loving kindnesse unto them, saying, that taking away a MosesIf you mean O. C. I say he was liker Pharaoh then Moses, for Pharaoh oppressed Gods people and afflicted them sore, with the many burthens that he in his cruelty laid upon them, who set such task-masters over them as your selves, that were cruel and hard-hearted; And when Pharaoh saw that they were many, he con∣sulted how they should keep them under, least that it had come to passe, that when there had been war in his Land, the people of God should have joyned with their enemies against him and his Subjects; And thus did O. by his Laws and Impositions oppresse Gods people, and would not suffer them to go free from under the oppression of Tythes which you, cruel task-masters did much af∣flict them with, as you do at this day; Yet the more Pharaoh and the Task-masters afflicted them the mre they grew, and Moses chused rather to suffer affliction with the afflicted, then to injoy the plea∣sures of sin for a season but so did not O. after he was made Pro∣tector. be∣stowed on them
a IoshuaIf you mean R. C. I say he was more like unto A∣haziah Ahabs Son, in that he walked in the way of his Father, who provoked the Lord God of Israel by his strenghening your hands against the innocent, by his not loosing the bands of wickednesse, by his not undoing the heavy brthens, when it was in his power, and by his not suffring the oppressed to go free; and therefore did he provoke the Lord o wrath, whereupon his dayes were short∣ned for the Elects sake., though their go∣vernour be re∣moved, their government re∣mains, But now you cannot say the same, for the Lord doth not onely change Governours, but he hath also changed and is changing Governments, and you as well as other men must be tryed. and their happinesse under it, and for his Highnesse whom next unto their most high, their eyes and hearts were upon and their hopes But in whom are your hopes now? Oh ye vain men, how long will it be before you cease from hoping for salvation from the Mountains and from the Hills?, they should uncessantly pray. The Priests and others of the City of Coventry, Addressed to R. C. ANd in their Addresse they (pretend to) bewail the sad stroke of providence, that took away the breath of their nostrilsIf at that day the Lord had with-holden life and breath from you, then your transgressions would have been few∣er in number then they are at this day; for I perceive that it is as easie for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, as it is for you and your Generation to cease from speaking of lyes i hypocrisie, you are so exceedingly given up to the thing., Mark, and smote their head from off their shoul∣ders, his Highnesse most Gratious renowned Father, &c.
But Gods aim and end, say they, in taking away his Moses, was to usher him in his JoshuaTo these two names I have spo∣ken in my answer to the last Addresses.; And now they desire the zeal of Good Iosiah for a reformationBut he was too much leavened with your priestly spirit, to press after a Reformation. may center in him; they declare they are resolved to stand by and adhere to him in his Person and Government with their lives and estateLarge were the Promises, and fair were the Pretences that you generally made, and as you have appeared to make them unanimously, so have you ma∣nifestly broke them a generally to the shame and dishonour of your profession., &c. The Priests of Leicester County and City, with others Ad∣dressed to R. C. WHerein they do encourage him to endeavour the just li∣berties and freedom of this NationIf he had done so, then he should have done some thing in order to the re∣moving of that grand op∣prssion of Tithe, and not have strengthened your hands by enjoyning people to have payed them to you., from whom God hath taken so eminent a pillarhe was a Pillar to your forced maintenance, Salleries and Augmentations,, who was looked upon both at home and abroad, as the great support and Protector of their peaceHe did not so truly and faithfully protect the peace of the peaceable, as he did you in your parsonage houses and Mass-houses, which you crept into by degrees, and then did you begin to ex∣ercise Lordship over Gods heritage, and to feed upon the fat, and to cloath with the wool, and then your hearts came to be exalted. and joy; And they do declare they will humbly beg at the Throne of Grace that as his renowned Fa∣ther, who as a designed instrument helped them our of Aegypt Nay, though he helped you in ma∣ny things, he never helped you out of that really and truly, for both he and you loved the treasures of it too well, and were not onely unwilling to come out of it your selves, but have also striven to continue the oppressd in it in the affictions under your rigor and cruelty. haveing Canaan in his eye, yet he as another Ioshua with his Fathers Spirit redoubled upon him, may by the efficatious con∣duct of the Captain of the Lords Host, lead them into a more full possessionAre not you blind guides indeed, and unfit to lead others, who said, you will beg at the Throe of grace that R. C. as another Ioshua may lead  into a more full pssession of Truth, Righteousnesse and peace; Oh Hypocrites, well might you cause people to erre by your s and hypocrisie, for which God will ge you. of Truth, Righteousnesse and Peace as their desired Canaan, &c.
The Priests and others of Derby County Addressed to R. C. VVHerein they also expresse sorrow for the death of his Father, yet they had hopes that God had raised him up to promote the same common interest of Zion;In many things he did pro∣mote his own Inte∣rest and yours more then Zions, or her converts, who wept in her, and he did not com∣fort them, but suffered them to be committed to prison in his Name, and there he did not visit them; And that which he suffered to be done unto them, the Lord took it as done unto himself, and he was wroth with him, and removed him in his displeasure And they sincerely, and cordiallyRather fainedly and deceitfully did you promise and engage unto him, whose help herewith he helped you was to little purpose, even so were your flattering and hypo∣itical promises vain, and of no value., as they said, promised to submit to him, and did declare in the strength of Christ, to be assistant to him with whatsoever was precious in their eyes, &c. The Priests and others of the county of Stafford Addressed unto R. C. VVHerein after many lying and flattering expressions of his Father, whom they call their glorious SunSure∣ly you are blind and cannot see afar off, and out of the fear of God, who have not yet seen the day of the Son of man, who ariseth with healing in his wings; And therefore dare you he ra∣ther presume to put mortal men in the place of him who is immortall, And giveth light to these three Nations, (and not R. C.) and likewise to all the Nations upon the face of the earth; And who are you that dare presume to set a mortal ma in his place?, and himself their no lesse glorious shining Sun, by whose light, heat, and influence these three Nations are quicknedIt is the spirit that quickneth, and giveth both light and life unto the Nations that are saved. to a lively hope of enjoying happy times; They desire that in his dayes the Righteous may flourish, and the lying lips put to silence that speak proudlyThe lying lips are your own, who speak blasphemously against the Lord and his Spirit, and many lyes have you and your Brethren uttered with your lying lips. and contemptuously against the faith∣ful Ministers, the Stars of this NationAnd you are like the wandring stars the Apostle Iude speaketh of, who runs from mountain to hill, and from one power to another to get help of them, but the Lord will plead with you in one day., and they do engage to be assistant to him with their lives and estates, against all that shall seek to annoy his sacred Person and Government.
The Priests and others of the Town of Nottingham and County Addressed to R. C. WHerein they pretended to bewaile the stroke of Gods sore displeasure in taking away his Renowned Father, who admirably gotOds the wor honour & wealth, glory and riches he got abundantly, but when the Lord put an end unto his dayes, what did these things then availe him? and never lostWhen he begun to seek himself and his own Interest, then did he begin to loose both the hearts and affections of good people, but left three Nati∣ons in peace; And they do pray that he will vestigate the good foot-stepsWherein do you mean? in upholding and protecting you in your Benfices, in suffering the innocent to be made a prey upon by you, in making fair pretences and large promises like your selves to little purpose? if these things were not the foot-steps in which you would have had him to have vestigated and followed his Father, then declare more plainly what they were. of his dear Father; And they shall to their ut∣most readily and chearfully serve and obeyThough you pretended to do it with cheerfulnesse for a season, were you not soon weary of it? especially when you saw you could have no advantage by it. him. The Priests of Lincoln County, and many others of the same County Addressed to R. C. AFter they have spoken something of his renownedThough he was renowned with you, so was he not with all, be∣cause he did not shew mercy (as mercy was shown him) but suffered the poor and needy to be persecuted, therefore are his children become as vagabonds, and strangers have spoiled his Labour, Psal. 109. 10. 11. Fa∣ther of ever blessed memory say they, their hearts pressed themFor your own ends it was, and that you might be seen to be conformable to your Brethren in their latteries and deceit. forwards to make that humble Addresse to testifie their good affection to his Person and Government, declaring they shall engage their continual prayersAre your prayers yet engaged for him? Do they continue for him to this very day, I suppose nay., sincere affecti∣ons Are your engaged affections yet to his Government? If so, where∣fore did you then so much rejoyce when you were brought under the power of ano∣ther:, and faithful endeavours to seek the preservationwhen or how did you seek his preservation, when he could not preserve you in your Prsonage-houses, glebe Lands, and fa Benfices; did you not then withdraw from him like the rest of your Brethren? Oh you deeitful men. of his Person and Government.
The Priests of York County did also make their Addresse like the rest of their Brethren to R C. but at present I have it not by me; But here followeth a Cpy of one from the Priests and ohers of East Ridding of the County of York to R. C. WHerein they expresse their hearty sorrow for the losse of his Father, the Nations piousHad you said politick, then many would have be∣lieved you For his policy was more ap∣parent to many then his piety and worthy Patriot, and that which gave them Life and Light (mark) to their fainting spiritsHere your tongues have uttered falshood, like the rest of your Brethren; could he give life to you, who could not preserve his own life from death? And have you been without light and life, since life and breath was taken from him? Are you not ashamed of your sayings, who set up that vain man in the room of Christ, who onely gives Light and Life, which is his gift unto the sons of men, which it appeares you have not yet received, who thus blasphemes., And they were confident, that through his Highnesse Religion, the Laws of the Land, and liberties of the people would be preserved and nourished unto a perfectBut in his dayes Religion came not to a perfect growth among you, neither were the Liberties of Gods people in his dayes perfectly preserved by him from your cruelty. growth; And did unanimously offer to contribute to him their utmost services, and to stand by him with their lives and estates against any opposers.In few months after your Addree to him he had many opposers, and where did any of you (either to the hazard of Life or Estare) oppose any of them: so your thus Addressing hath ended to the manifesting of your folly to the Nation. The Priests and others of the City and County of Durham Addressed to R. C. VVHerein they say they bewaile that great losse which them∣selves sustainedYour losse was tollerable for you, while you retained your Tythe, Sallaries and Augmentations which he and his Parliaments procured you. by removall of his most Illustruous and en∣deared Father; and that which remaines as their dutyWhat, did you then neg∣lect your duty, when you declined from him and encouraged and strengthned the hands of his enemies against him? is to en∣courage
and strengthen his hands, not doubting but they shall find him treading in the imitable steps of his FatherIn counte∣nancing you in your making a prey upon the innocent, he imitated his Father in that sin especially, And therefore was not the Lord well pleased with his doings., saying they were perswaded, that God had given him to them as a pldge of his purpose of mch love to be defender of the Faith, Your faith he deended but a very little time, Oh ye earthly-minded men! where do you find that ever the Ministers of Christ Addressed to the powers of the earth as Defenders of the Faith, for the defence of their faith? Did not this custome get up in the Apostacy since the Apostles, whose faith stood in the power of God? And he who was the Authour and fiisher of it was their Defender and Protector in it; now were you in that faith which the Apostles were in, then would you not Addresse and Petition to one power after another, (as your manner is) in order for receiving and obtaining help from them, or the procuring of your Tythe and other prfits, which are looked upon to be your livelihood that you get by your trade of preacing; And by them things you subsist and live, rather then by faith, by which the just do live. Liberties, &c. And in so doing he may with their greatest confidence, and fullest assurance, expect their best ser∣vices, The Provost and Fellwes of Durham Colledge, they also Addressed to R. C. VVHerein they speak very highly of his Father for foun∣ding that Colledge, and proportioning a revenue to itI sup∣pose that was one of the clusters of Canaan which your bre∣thren in∣Hamshire spoke of, when they told of the good things (good in their Account,) done by O. C. &c. And they blesse God for his providing for the continuance of their peace and liberties, by setting him in his Fathers Throne; And they beseched God to make him an heir to all his Fathers matchlesse abilities for war and Government, so of Love, Zeal, and Resolution to promote that workThat you might have your proportionable Revenues, and that your number might be encreased in the Nation, to the filling of every Paronage-house, and to the deceiving of unstable souls, in every Masse-house, for which they become more apt, and in which they became more expert by being at that place, (which your Patriot (as your brethren called him) had founded) then they were before; which he begun in that place, that by the vital beams of his prospicious Aspect, it may be cherished and grow till it bear
much fruitThe fruit of many of those that have pro∣ceeded from such places as it, and Oxford and Cambridge, have been so detestable to many sober minded people, that at this time I judge I need not particularly prescribe it, it hath been so plenteously published to the Nation. for the good and happinesse of those parts of the Land, in which it was planted by a hand (note well) which ne∣ver miscarriedWhat then? was all that ever he did in the time of the late and deploreable warrs, and after he came to be made Protector tell his ding day, right, just, Lawful and unreproveable? seeing you say, his hand never miscarried; but the same flattering tongue which will speak lies in hypocrisie is found in and among you, which I have found all along among your brethren, who like your selves could hold persons in dmiration because of advantage, And that was one of your miscar∣rages (among the many) that is to be found in your Colledges, the Fountains of the Wa∣ters of strife, and among the filthy dreamers that proceed from them, who who are like the raging Waves of the Sea, that foam out their own shame, as you and your brethren have done in these Addresses, Iude 1. in any of its high and magnanimous at∣chievements. The associated Priests and others in the County of Cumber∣land Addressed to R. C. ANd craved his pardon that they payed this debt so lateHad you never payed it, I judge he would never have called you to an account for it, and I know that your shame will be the greater then it would have been if you had kept silent, which might better have become you then thus to have uttered words with∣out knowledge., for they had heard that his eyes and heart had been big and full with tears, for the losse of his most incompa∣rable Father, a losse so individu∣al, that 'tis no marvel the whole Nations LamentationNay, the Nations lamentation was not like Rachels, who wept for her children, and refused to be comforted, because they were not, for the most of the Addresses that came from sundry parts of the Nation did signifie the joy and comfort which the inhabitants pretend they had received by the news of his being proclaimed rightful successor; And there∣fore did they sundry times declare that their sorrow was turned into joy, &c. is like Rachels, that even refused to be comforted; and further they do say, they have lost a Father as well as himself, whose heart and hands they declared to strengthenHave you not now more need to crave pardon for breaking your promise to him, then you had to crave pardon of him for sending this no sooner to him? what in them laid; And though this poor mite can add nothing to his me∣rits Yet it will add to your shame who Who have forged such a bundle of lies and falshoods in your Addresse, what a debt is that that this can pay, which is not worth a mite, yet the desire of
their soules are to go hand in handI believe you very well in this thing that your desire is to go hand in hand with your Brethren, in falshoods, hypocrisie and vain deceit, in cruelty, persecution, and oppression, as witnesse your severe proceeding against the inhabitants of that County, who have sustained as much cruelty and wickedness from you, as any people in the Nation have done from your Bre∣thren. with their Brethren; and they declare they will not let the Lord go It appears plainly that you have not like Iacob prevailed with God, for which of you all dare say that he was blessed o the Lord beyond all his Princely fellows▪ and have you not contrary to your word let the Lord go, and so have given over wrestling with him n his behalf; the day is broken, and the Light of the morning discovers you, whither can you go or where can you hide your selves so as the Light will not find you out, and manifest your folly and nakednesse to your shame, as it is at this day. till he hath blest him above and beyond all his Princely fellows through the Christian world, and that he may live long the De∣fenderHis time of defending you and your faith was very short, but who shall now defend you from the shame and con∣tempt which will come upon you, and be as dung upon your faces, yea so shall your blasphemies, lyes, and flatteries (which your Addresses are stuft withall) be upon you and your Brethren. of the Faith and them &c. The Priests and others of Lancaster, Liverpool, Priston and Wiggan in Lancashire, Addressed likewise to R. C. WHerein they exprest the sadness of their of their hearts at the newes of the death of his RenownedThis is rather ex∣prest by you, as your for∣mality in your stile of writing, then in the simplicitie and sinceritie of your hearts. Father, and do render their most humble acknowledgementsThis was because you would not be behind your Brethren, in Addressing and flattering, what ever you were in practising and Performing. to his High∣nesse, the noblest branch of that Illustrous Stock, and congratulate him as the inheritor of his Fathers spiritBut so large a measure of its policy he had not, and therefore was he lightlier betrayed by such fawning, flattering, deceitful tongued, and lying lipt men as you are, who might have shewed more wisdome by keep∣ing of silence, then you have by uttering what you have writ in your contemptible Addresse, Plsal. 31. 18. as well as dignity.
Further (they say) they look upon him as the preciousHow long did you look upon him to be pre∣cious, and what was it that made him so in your eyes, if not his countenancing you in your dishonest gain, Parsonag-houses, Tthe, and his allowing you to execute your wills upon the innocent and harmlesse people among you▪ per∣son upon whose safety the right interest of establishment both in ChurchIf it have depended upon such as him, then the great unsetlement (that hath been both in Church and Estate for many years) is not to be admred at; but such as you who have been active in contriving, plotting, and conspiring against one power after ano∣ther, have been the chief instruments that have obstructed the establishment of the Nation in pace. and State depend, and under God the repairer of their breachesAnd when you have made breaches and caused distractions in the Nation, then hath your eyes been upon, and your cries they have been unto the powers of the earth▪ who could not make up and repair the breaches so fast as you made them: And therefore hath the Nation been unsetled, and the inhabitants in many parts of it unestablshed in peace, love, and unitie. For when the Lord hath appeared for the throwing down of that which his hand was against, then you have sought to establish and build it again: Ad when he hath manifested his power among his people, in order to the rearing ad setting up again the Tabernacle of David, then you like Rehum, Shimshai, and Haman, have by your words and writing, instigated and  up both Parliaments, Protectors, Counsels and Committees against such a people, even as they before-mentioned did, as you may read at large, in Ezra 4. 9. 12. 13, &c and Ester the 3. 8. 9. and prime preserver of their Rights and Liberties &c. And do promise to uphold him in the supream dignity as their undoubted Prince and Leader, with the utmost hazardSundry of you as It is well known did hazard in part, both your lives and estates with George Booth, but I have not, heard of any of you, that have hazarded ei∣ther with him according to your promise; but I perceive you are of your Brethrens mind in Cumberland, in having a desire to go hand in hand with your brethren, whether it be in plotting, or conspiring, in rising, or insurrections, in flattering or deceiving, in lying or blaspheming, or what else soever; but withall I would you knew this, That if you partake of their sis, so must you also of their plagues. of their lives and estates. The Priests of Cheshire and others of the inhabitants of that County Addressed to R. C. WHerein they twice expressed they cordially, though in the rear of Englands Mourners, joyn in a real deep re∣sentment of their incompara∣ble losseThough many of you counted it losse in your Addresses; Yet did you not count it gain in your hearts, notwithstanding your preten∣ded faining sorrow and mourning. in the decease of his illusterous Father, on whose
shoulder the good hand of providence had laid the Govern∣ment Was that your real faith and belief, or did you not rather dissemble when you spoke or wrote these words. of these Nations, and that their fear of spliting in the fall of his said Highnesse had risen to a higher tide, but that he his serene Highnesse succeeded in his stead as a skilful pilotBut when the winds of your sel∣fish expections came contrary, he with all his kill and serenity could not convoy you into your much desired carnal security; so upon the great deeps of confusion, where he found you rouling, did he leave you, and had much a doe to escape himself the wrath of your indignation which began to kindle against him, notwithstanding all your flatter∣ing addresses and fair pretences and many promises that you and your bretheren made in the same, which at this day will tend to your shame. to guide that Vessel, (wherein their chief concern∣ments were imbarked) into the desired Haven. And they also said, they hoped that God had designed him While you ho∣ped he would carry on your de∣sign, you could unanimously flatter him with your lying tongues; but when you saw he wanted power to encourage and defend you in your shly Liberties, then did you desert him and his Government. in special mercy to the advancement of his Glory, the propagation of the Gospel, the vindication of this Truth against heresie, error, and the encouragement of Magistracy and Ministry, and defence of their Rights, Laws and Liberties, and so promised to yield entire obedience to his Government. The Priests and others of Salop County Addressed to R. C. WHerein they said, happy may that Nation be called of whose late chief magistrate it may be justly said, Glori∣rious things are spoken of theeThat was while his Son bore rule, that such as you spoke deceitfully of him; but what things are now spoken concerning Your Moses even by Your bre∣thren, even things that are not glorious but notorious., &c. a Moses who through the good hand of God with him, not onely led them out of the land of AegyptIf we see You returned again into those things which he brought You ou o, as the Common Prayer Book and other things which many of You came out of in his dayes, may we not then conclude from Your own words, that You are gone back again into Aeypt? But tell me (if You be really come out of it as You pretend, then) wherefore have You sed so long upon ts leeks, onions, and garlick? Have You been so long in the Wildernsse as You pretend, and have gotten no Manna yet which descended freely, but that you are ne∣ceated to continue feeding to this present day upon Your Tithe and forced maintenance, which the Israelites (that were so indeed) have loathed as detestable for many Years., but himself attained to more then a Pisgah fight of the Land of Ca∣nan,
and gave to them more then a tast of the clustersWith clusters he sed You, but not of the Grapes of Canaan which are sweet and pleasent to the tast, but with bitter clusters which he gathered from the vine of Sodom in the fields of Gomorrah, so that your Grapes wherewith he hath sed You, have been as Grapes of Gall, and not of Canaan, Deut. 32. 32. of its grapes into their cup, and they hoped that he would walk with the Lord in the steps of his Father of most happy memory; and they declare their most effectual prayersYour prayers have proved ineffectual and unhelpful to him; And Your thus addressing to him for a very little season, will prove your shame, upon whom the Lord hath begun to power out contempt, which will be Your portion. shall be no wayes wanting, with their faithful en∣endeavours, and ready obedience, &c. Thus it appears how they Addressed from sundry parts of the Nation unto R. C. whom they applauded and extolled, and his help they craved, and he added something to what his Father had done for them, by putting forth his helping hand to support and uphold them by that unconsecrated way of Tythes,How the Priests re∣nouned R. C. and his Go∣vernment, when he could not help them but behold his time was very short, and his help to them was very little; And when he could help them no lon∣ger then did they decline from him, and renounced his Go∣vernment, notwithstanding their many promises which they made in their sundry Addresses unto him. Afterwards when he was laid aside, then did they cry unto the Parliament and the Army for help from them, but in this thing they were not all of one mind,How they flattered the Par∣liament which let in their Spirits, and then they did for them again, as others had done be∣fore. for many of them plot∣ted and conspired both against the Parliament that then was, and against the Army also, and when they were discovered, and they and their party subdued, then their Brethren excu∣sed themselves and flattered the Parliament, who let in their spirits, and gave them thanks with other flattering expressions, beyond what they gave to other petitioners; And that Parlia∣ment did for them as others had done before them, thinking thereby to appease their unruly spirits, and to satisfie their unsatiable desire by their putting into their mouths, yet never∣thelesse they could not thereby quiet them, but they stirred
up and incensed the people against them, and shot their arrows at them, and that was all the thank they gave them for the favour they had shown them: And when they were overturned then was their faith abundantly renewed, and great was their expectations from them that then were the supream, who coun∣tenanced and encouraged them, as others had done before them. Thus all along have they fawned upon, and flattered the supream Authoritie of the Nation,How a lying Sp∣rit in the Priests have ofte prevailed over the Rulers of this kingdome though they have been war∣ned of  and that lying spirit wherewith they were possessed hath mightily prevailed time after time over the Rulers and Magistrates of the Nation; who have been often forewarned by the Servants of the Lord, of that cup of fornication which the Priests have put into their hands; And when they were inflamed with it, then were they easily perswaded that the Lord was with them, when indeed he had left them unto themselves, and then did they begin to turn their backs upon their enemies, and were conquered without shedding of blood either with sword or spear; And then some of them begun to see that those that had flattered them, and had cried Peace unto them, and cried for help unto them against such as could not uphold them, that those were the men that had betrayed them, and those in whom they had reposed confidence, had dealt treacherously with them. Note▪ Now the most of those that they cried and petitioned unto for help,How they that Priests cryed for help a∣gainst, y stand, and how they that they cryed un∣to are fallen and broken How the Lords people have sf∣fered both by pro∣fessors and prophane. are split and broken; And they whom they cried for help against, yet stand in as much dominion, power, and Autho∣ritie in the Truth of God as ever; what then? had not they need that have been holpen to take heed how they stand, see∣ing so many as have holpen them are already fallen and broken to pieces like a potters vessel, surely if that stone upon which they have been broken that have helped them do fall upon these Priests that hae been holpen, it will even grind them to powder; And in that day they shall know that the Lord hath a remnant a∣mong them, for whose sakes he hath reproved many of the mighty, and many of the wise, who have gloried more in their wisedom and strength then in the Lord, who hath formed a people for himself in this Nation, who have been persecuted and withstood both by Professors and prophane Teachers, and have suffered both by Priests & people of almost all sorts, either in one respect or another, yet are they not destroyed, but are more in number
then they were sundry years ago; And many now begin to ear that they shall scaree escape the rod wherewith they have been lashing others, but that they must have the same measure met unto them which they have measured unto others, so that now they begin to adhere much more unto us,ow many are nearer to receie the truth since they were ba∣sed, thn they were when they were ex∣alted. then heretofore, and are much more open to hear and receive the Truth, now when they are dejected and excluded out of their places of prefer∣ment, then they were when they had the power in their hands, and their swords upon their thighes, when they little expected to have seen this dark and gloomy day which is come upon them, wherein they can scarce see to work for the great foggy mist which is arisen. Note. It was much observed, how that when they had enriched themselves with their adversaries riches, and were become guil∣ty of their abominations, and were set down at ease in the flsh, then the pride of their hearts would not endure nor suffer such men among them as were not for their design,How hard it was to find a just man a∣mong them, when they that fear∣ed the Lord were cast out from among them. nor could not suffer their iniquities to go unreproved, then did they thrust out such from among them, until a just and faithful mn that feared God and hated covetousnesse could scarce be found a∣mong them, and when they begun to see how their strength, manhood and courage failed, then would they again have had those to have joyned with them, that before they had cast out from among them, but thereunto they would not be perswaded, for they foresaw in the eternal Light of the Lord, what the Lord was determined to bring upon them; and therefore did they warn them often, but they seemed to them as Lot did unto his sons in Law,Gen. 19. 14. when he told them of the destruction of the City, he seemed unto them as one that mocked. Again it is to be observed,Note. how that shame & contempt with fear and astonishment came upon them, when the generality of Pro∣fessors in the nation were bung & exceeding active,What be∣fell Pro∣fessors when they were at the height of their pride and vain-glory yet they all could not be able to stop the flood-gates which forceably were broke open by a mightystream, which drove many before it even as chae before the wind, and then the Anchors of many Professors would not hold, but their faith failed, and their hope perished, and their honour fell into the dust, and their glory faded like a flower, their feasting soon turned into fasting, their rejoycing was turned into mourning, and their joy into heavinesse even in one day, surely this was the Lords doing, which was indeed marvellous in
our eyes and when these things happened unto them, these that had been their friends became their enemies, and those whom they had looked upon to be their adversaries, proved their harmlessest friends; yet so doleful and terrible was the day that came upon them, that they knew not whom to trust nor whom to believe, nor in whom to confide;How de∣ceitfull they pr∣ved one unto ano∣ther in the day of tryal. many proved so treache∣rous and dceitful, so unstable and inconstant, that they were ready to betray one another to save themselves, and then they begun to perceive where the Iudas spirit was, that was entred into their profest Friends, and with which they were leavened, then did the Lord recompence that into their own bosoms which they had given as a portion unto others. Thus hath the Lord already dealt with many of our Perse∣utors, by whom we have suffered for conscience sake, yet many of them were eminent in profession when it was held in reputa∣tion; but when they became persecutors of the innocent,How the Lords an∣ger was kindled aginst them when they became persecu∣tors. the Lord began to be angry with them, and the fire of his jealou∣sie begun to burn against them, and shame and confusion of face came upon them for their unfaithful dealing with the Lord and with his people; Now oh that others by their fall would take warning and not for the future form weapons against the Lord and against his annointed, least they be turned into their own bowels. And as for us that fear the Lord,Note. who for many years have been a suffering people, by the many powers that have been in being in this Nation; If our sufferings must be prolonged and continued under such now as have little profession of Religion in them, in comparison of what others have had by whom we have already suffered, that they may fill up the measure of their iniquity as others have done, by their persecuting of us with∣out a just case;The peo∣of Gods resolution We do resolve and determine in the Name of the Lord to bear them with patience, and not to resist them no more then we have resisted others, but shall commit our cause unto the Lord, who leaveth us not comfortless in our sufferings, which we have learned to bear with patience, having found them to the furtberance of the Gospel of peace. Yet this we can say in truth to the shame of many professors that we have found more moderation and simplity in many, who make very little profession of Religion, then we have ob∣served in many of them, and in that particular we counted
them more noble then the rigid professors,Wherein some few that are ow in ower ave ap∣eared ore no∣le then any pro∣essors. who have been try∣ing us, but now they must be tryed; yea some of them have tasted already of that cup which they put into our hands, and without doubt many of them must drink of it, except they re∣nounce their Principles, and become conformable again to that which many of them (several years ago) have renounced and rejected, which if they do, their folly will thereby the more appear, and so much the more shame and contempt will be rendrd unto them, and this we have seen already fulfilled upon them, who have added affliction unto the bonds of the afflicted, and they have increased the sufferings of the oppres∣sed, instead of easing them when an opportunity was put into their hands, wherein they might have done good, but their hearts not being right before the Lord their day was shortned;What is oreseen hat will efall hem. And many of them shall be oppressed with a sore oppression, by them that are cruel, and their oppressions shall be a vexation to them, even as they have been to others; And this they shall find to be the word of Truth unto them, by one of those peo∣ple that have suffered by them▪ in whose behalf I can say we do as freely forgive them,ow free∣y they hat have uffered  them, nforgive hem, and nfained  they de∣ire their elfare. as we did desire to be forgiven; And it is not their overthrow and downfall that we can so much rejoyce in, as we did desire to be forgiven; And it is not their overthrow and downfal that we can so much rejoyce in, as we could in their salvation, and restauration unto their first love, that he might come to reign in them and over them, whose right it is, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to whom be infinite Praises, Glory and Dominion over all, henceforth and for ever. Amen. THE END.
