C299 R391 13166464 98250
ON HIS Royal Highness's MIRACULOUS DELIVERY, AND Happy Return. Written by Ca. Calle. SMooth as the Silver Wings of Swans, the Air, Pleas'd as an Hermits Soul, as Angel-Beauties fair; The Am'rous Winds now quite forgot to rave, And Birds of Calm sat brooding on the Wave; The smiling Billows kist the gentle Shore, All sweet, like that Vast, Royal weight they bore; While the blue Tritons on their Trumpets play, And Troops of Dolphins guard it all the way. Ride on Blest Frigate, Englands hopes you bear, Almost as great as Caesar's self is here, A no less Deity, than three Kingdoms Heir. See, see, with what a pleasing, Gen'rous pride, The Ocean stops the Current of her Tides, Whiles on her curled Waves her Royal Adm'ral rides. Neptune saw this, and straight was envious grown, To see himself in his own Court outdone; To see another of his Throne possest, Jealousie fill his Head, and dire Revenge his Breast. But do's as yet no Prodigy appear, To shew the Royal Duke the Danger near? No Dismal Flambeaux, which Heaven seldom burns, But to light Princes to their Gloomy Urns? Ah! See, the Vessel, urg'd by unseen hands, Sticks fast, and long in vain the Waves withstands; The trembling Sailors send Despairing Cryes To th' Wounded, and Rend th' amazed Skies: Now on adoring Knees to Heaven they bend, That some kind Star might on the Prince attend; All Praying for the Prince, Heav'ns Conqu'rours are (So prevalent an Oratour is Prayer.) When lo! A Beauteous Angel from a Cloud Descends, and with a Comely rev'rence bow'd; Thrice thus he bow'd, and grave approach he made, And thus his Sacred message sweetly said: Hail Heav'ns peculiar care! Thy Fate's all White, Thy Glorious Sun sha'n't be Eclipsed quite, Tho' you're expos'd to all the rigid Fate That always do's on wronged Greatness wait; Not Neptunes envy, nor the Treach'rous Sand, Heav'ns wonderful Decree shall Countermand: For it has greater blessings yet behind, Blessings more Large, and Rich, and like your self, Divine.
This said, the Angel bow'd, and then withdrew, Clapping his Wings, to th' Crystal arch he flew, How Can dull Ideots think that Providence Has over human things no Influence? That all things here below disposed are By unseen Atoms roving in the Air? Hence, hence ye Canting Tribe, and learn more wit, In time to injur'd Innocence submit; Say your pray'rs backward, and from henceford Rouz'd up from your dull zealous Lethargy. What e're your pious Vows, and Cantings are, Heav'n made the Royal Prince its tender care. Let all your Incense on his Altars shine, Adore his Name, as you would things Divine; Princes as Gods themselves accounted were, The Gods protecting them protected are. Yet some young Hero's too untimely dy'd, (Victims too great for haughty Neptune's pride.) We read of one who Heav'n did acquire, By mounting upwards in a Coach of fire: For these the Gods found out a Noble? way, Their Souls through Seas, and Waves to bliss convey. But see, he's safe on shore, I hear the noise, I heard the industrious Crouds admiring voice, Their echoing Io's, and their joyful crys, The loyal tear leaps gladly from their eyes; The Bells and Guns are scarcely heard at all, The artificial noise's drown'd by the natural. And now the lovely Prince's returning home: Come mighty James, Albion's desire, come, Great Son of Triumph, Son of Martyrdom, A Name which every wind to Heav'n would bear; Which men to speak, and Angel joy to hear. Welcome, long-lookt for Hero, to our Soil, As rest to Pilgrims after all their toil; Welcome as dearest friends rais'd from the dead: Welcome as Heav'n when the Soul's just fled. Welcome, Illustrious Princess, welcome home With that rich Treasure in your pregnant Womb, The only pledge of all our bliss to come. Observe what joy in ev'ry breast there shines; Thus the bright Gold peeps through the muddy Mines, No narrow bounds, nor rules, our joys endure; In joy, there's none too much an Epicure. Thus the bright Ruler of the day appears, All our thick fogs and gloomy mists he clears, Dispells our griefs, and scatters all our fears. No more let impious faction rule the day, Nor point to Commonwealths th' unhallow'd way; No more let pow'r be given to the rude, Th' unconstant, and unthinking multitude; No more let Peasants rule, while Princes stand Aloof, as Trayt'rous Exiles from their Land; No more let poor distressed Loyalty To Heav'n with her Sister Justice flee; No more let Civil Wars torment our Isle, Let all things with an Halcyon quiet smile; Let all in a true, firm, obedience be, Since all are blest in such a Prince as He. LONDON, Printed for Edward Vize, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDCLXXXII.
