c3159 15345601 103451
His Majesties Most Gracious SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. On Wednesday the 15th of December, 1680. C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms Published by His Majesties Command. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.
His Majesties Most Gracious SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Wednesday the 15th of December, 1680. My Lords and Gentlemen, AT the opening of this Parlia∣ment, I did acquaint you with the Alliances I had made with Spain and Holland, as the best Measures that, could be taken for the Safety of England, and the Repose of Christendom. But I told you withall, that if Our Friendship became unsafe to trust to, it would not be won∣dred at, if Our Neighbours should begin to take new Resolutions, and perhaps such as might be fatal to Us. I must now tell you, That Our Allies cannot
but see, how little has been done since this Meet∣ing, to encourage their Dependance upon Us. And I find by them, that unless We can be so united at home, as to make Our Alliance valua∣ble to them, it will not be possible to hinder them from seeking some other Refuge, and making such new Friendships, as will not be consistent with Our safety. Consider, that a neglect of this Opportunity is never to be repaired. I did likewise lay the matter plainly before you, touching the estate and condition of Tangier. I must now tell you again, That if that Place be thought worth the keeping, you must take such consideration of it, that it may be speedily sup∣pli'd, it being impossible for Me to preserve it at an Expence so far above My power. I did promise you the fullest satisfaction your hearts could wish, for the security of the Prote∣stant Religion, and to concur with you in any Remedies, which might consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in its Due and Legal Course of Descent: I do again, with the same Reservations, renew the same Promises to you. And being thus ready on My part to do all that can reasonably be expected from Me, I should be glad to know from you, as soon as may be, how far I shall be assisted by you, and what it is you desire from Me. FINIS.
