C4412 11747559 48540
A DECLARATION To the English Nation, FROM Fardinando the IVth Emperour of Germany, &c. Lewis the 14th. King of France and NAVARRE. Philip the 5th. King of Spain & Arragon, &c. Christiern the third King of Denmark, Zealand, &c. Lodowick Duke of LORAIN, And Adolphina Queen of Sweden, In detestation of the present proceedings of the Parliament and Army, and of their intentions of comming over into England in behalf of King CHARLS the second. Being Translated out of the true Copy. Printed by heir own appointment, 1649.
WEE, FERDINANDO the Fourth Emperor of Germany, &c. LEWIS the Fourteenth King of France and Navarre, PHILIP King of Spain, Arragon, &c. CHRISTIERN the Third King of Den∣mark, Zealand, &c. LODOWICK Duke of Loraine, And ADOLPHINA Queen of Sweden, To the English NATION send greeting. WHereas a Traiterous Party in your unduteous Par∣liament and their Army-Officers, to carry on the Polonian design against Monarchy (brought thence by Lesley and some other unto that sedicious Earl of Argile in Scotland, and from thence transmitted into England) have by wicked craft, to bring a generall odium upon them, aspersed their Clergy with Innovations in Re∣ligion, and the Privie Councel with too burdenous Taxes, as if the Affairs of a Kingdom could be managed with nothing; And by Petitions framed among themselves for that hellish end, and sent abroad for complyances to exasperate the giddy people, have drawn many well-meaners to joyn with them in the bloud of their Kings faithful subjects, whereby they have winded themselves into the strength of the Kingdom: And since, contrary to their Oathes of Allegeance, their Natio∣nall Covenant, and the Lawes of God and man, most insolently and wickedly (for his place and means) murthered at
his own doors, our Royall brother of happy Memory Charls the First; and done it by a pretended Court, as upon a Male∣factor; thereby to hide, if it were possible, under colour and pretence of Law, that most villainous Act; and to make seem just their most unjust intentions towards his undoubted Heir Charls the Second, in denying him his Fathers Crowns and Fortunes, yeelding no hops at all of his admission into his just Birth right, or of restoring you his good people unto your Religion, Lawes, and Liberties; nor of amendment of your decayed Trade, the only subsistency of your Corporations; nor ending of the numerous and heavie Taxes, wherewith they daily load you, till vanquisht by the sword: We the said Christian Princes thought meet, before our Entrance into your Countrey, to give you notice of our zealous and just in∣tentions for the relief of our young Brother, and your selves, whose hearts were not in the blood of your King; least you should by subtle devices be drawn aside, again to withstand your own and your Princes welfare: We refer the Censure of those Traytors Cause (so much preacht for just) unto your selves; you know to kill your King, is the higest sort of Trea∣son in your Statute-Law. And whereas, there hath been an Originallity of Power in the People, much preached up a∣mongst you, and your Kingdom to be Elective, whereby to usher in, and hide from vulgar view that worst of Acts; Wee ask you one question: What Lord of a Mannor among you gives his servants leave to chuse him a Steward, or to meddle with his accounts? much lesse gives he them leave to kill his Steward, or take his place themselves; yet those two veiles have been hither unto sufficient mask, to keep from your sight, those ugly sins of blood and Usurpation: You might con∣fider you be, or should be Gods Husband-men; and that he (as you) is both worthy, and will chuse his own Deputy, that shall command you in your severall places, and will have you
to be underlings and obey, not preach it up above, and question, much lesse kill him, or take his place: We preach a little to you, and in plainest language; because wee see the fruits of your boasted Reformation, that stupid blindnesse you have contracted from the erroneous Doctrine of Sheep∣cloathed Wolves, that have rent in sunder your Shepheard, and will (if let alone) devour you also. Consider, when your Soveraign is murthered at his own doors, for his place and fortuns, and his children turned out; how think you yours shall bee secure unto you and yours? they'l (as they have done hitherto) be still sending for part, by way of Contribu∣tion, and borrowing the rest by force, till you have nothing left: Do you now get a penny before-hand▪ which they do not streightway send their Plunder masters for? while you stuck unto your King, what wanted you? was your Trade so bad as now? were your Taxes so heavie? was Ship money, and a few Imposts, equivalent to sixty Millions, cheated and spent you in this sevenyears Warre by your good Publicans? or to ninty thousand pounds a Moneth, with Excise, Customs, Free quarter; six hundred thousand pounds now charged upon your Kings Lands, and sixscore thousand pounds upon Loan, now demanded from your City, and likely to be re∣iterated year by year, till the King bee setled? Were your late Kings Offices so corrupt, as these amongst you? yet say the Traytors, what need of a King, that Government is useless and chargeable: We wish you to take your own welfares into more serious consideration: You have been oft, and long enough deluded by them to learn wit now at last, if God have not designed you for utter ruine; how often have you been promised a settlement of your Religion, and your Laws, and a preservation of your (since slaughtred) Kings Person? which now (we hope) you see were but devices to draw you into the blood of your Kings faithfuls, and into a coldnesse of
affecton and neglect of duty towards him, that they might get power by murthering them first, to murther him af∣ter, and to lay a gripe upon his just rights, the only earthly preserver of yours: and we advertise you again of their now tempting you with the Presbyterian interest to draw your thoughts from off your Kings dissundred body on the Scaffold which we desire you to keep in mind till vindicated: and un∣derstand you that upon Our approach they will endeavour to fright you into a new rebellion against your now Prince, with feares of our Forraign forces, and of Popery; by those wilds if it be possible, to continue the Crowne upon their own heads: But what religion is intended you, judge you by their late Votes to shut up your Church doores for a year, by their taking into possession the houses of God in your Land. And by their putting the Turkish ALKARON to the Presse to be your future Common-prayer Book; a trimme Liturgy for Christians: they have made you forsake your King, and now least you should receive his Sonne, you must forsake Christ too: And what Lawes you shall have we leave you to aske the Levellers who have often mett to that purpose, though without this Summers victory, that designe must be yet smothered: as stiffely was that against the King and his Crown denyed a year agoe, and a fained treaty invented to fobbe the people; yet upon the successe of the second War, suddenly acted: We remember you of these things because we will let you know, that when we come we will expect from you the duty which God requires towards his deputy, appointed by a long series of lawfull line to Raigne over you, which where we shall find shall not goe without reward, nor where tis wanting without due punishment: We will not (out of tenderness of the honest among you) because of your growing scarcities invade your Countrey at first with more then a considerable host to ballance the field Armies of the
Rebels, but will try your zeale to vindicate your late Sove∣raignes death, and to enthrone his Son; which if wee find not in you, wee will straine all Christendom but we will lay you waste as a forsaken wildernesse; and we will trust (not as those amongst you, in the arme of flesh, but) in the justice of our cause: And as for the spawne of hell, those salse per∣jured Rakeshames that have slaine the Lords Annointed, the ordinary mulcts of your gentle Lawes shall not satisfie that bloody insolency; we will make their houses as the House of Riviliacke that Murthered his Master HENRY the FOURTH of FRANCE, and their Bodyes will we dragge at our horses heels through the streets where they have triumphed in their wickednesse, and we will after hang them upon comon dunghils, and give them dead to hungry doggs; which we will forthwith hang on the same trees, in the same halters, and bury in the deepest boggards of your Cities; if it be possible to make their future resurrection as abominable, as their present Conversation; and the other Officers and Souldiers which we shall take with weapons drawn against us, we will so use, as that we will make the flesh of those Armes that were lifted up against their late So∣veraign their owners last food: Hereof whosoever shall take notice, and forthwith upon our approach repair unto us, shall be in their severall ranks provided for; who so doth not, we shall take to be, and so deal with as the Enemies of your Kings and Country. Sir, I am commanded to sute this Declaration unto vulgar Capacity, which I have endeavou∣red; that if the people will be any more drawn in∣to
Rebellion by our malicious Enemies, they may be left without all excuse: the juditious we are sure of; keep your courage; Babell again begins to totter; we are ready for them; and where we find best advantage, there we shall begin: as you understand of them, so conclude of our Motion, and get you that way, and you will shortly see, Hague April 28. 1649. Stilo novo. Your faithfull Freind R. CLARE. FINIS.
