C4538 R5310 12499911 62667
SAMUEL CLARK. Nalus Oct: 10. 1599. Denalus Dec: 25▪ 1682. Authoris mentem referunt Satis aurea Scripta; Accede, et veres reverere in Imagine Vullus; Scilicet, Artificis complevit dexlera coeplum. Vivet et in partem jam Vir Reverendus uam{que}. R White delin. et sculpsit. portrait of Samuel Clark
THE LIVES Of sundry Eminent Persons IN THIS LATER AGE. In Two Parts. I. Of DIVINES. II. Of NOBILITY and GENTRY of both Sexes. BY SAMUEL CLARK, Somtimes Pastor of Bennet Fink, London. Printed and Reviewed by himself just before his DEATH. To which is added His own LIFE, and the LIVES of the COUNTESS of SƲF∣FOLK, Sir NATHANIEL BARNARDISTON, Mr. RI∣CHARD BLACKERBY, and Mr. SAMƲEL FAIRCLOƲGH, drawn up by OTHER HANDS. Heb. 17. 1. Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which do's so easily beset us, and let us run with Pati∣ence the Race that is set before us. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgate-street, MDC LXXX III.
THE PREFACE, With the Life of the Author. To the Christian and Candid READER. Christian Reader, I Here present thee with a Third Vo∣lume of Modern Lives, concerning which some may object, and say, That many of them have been Printed alrea∣dy, and in a more large and copious manner than we find them here? To which I answer, 'Tis true, and yet I judge it necessary thus to Print them again. For I have observed, that being generally Printed in little Volumes, few of them come to a se∣cond Impression, but after a little time, are thrown aside and forgotten; whereas, when many excellent Lives are collected into one or more Volumes, they do continue, and will so do, till Printing shall be no more: Witness Plutarchs and Melchior Adams, &c. Lives. And if any except against my contracting of some of them, I answer, That if you please to compare them together, you will find nothing left out that is of special concernment. I have always affected multum in paucis, to include much matter in few words, and yet withal, to avoid obscurity. I have been encouraged to make this Collection, and now to Publish it, finding that my former Labours in this kind, have been accepted with the Saints, and in the Church of Christ; which is apparent, for that they have been Printed four times in a few years space, and yet never less than a Thou∣sand
at a time. I am now in the Eighty third year of my Life, and therefore am never like to do more in this kind: but hope that God will raise up some more able person to carry on this so useful a work; and if my Judgment be of any value, these Lives are generally the best that ever I pub∣lished: From my Study in Isleworth, March 25. 1682. The most unworthy Servant of Jesus Christ SAMƲEL CLARKE. WHen this Volume was almost finisht at the Press, it seemed good to the supream Governour of the World (in whose hands is our Life and Breath, and all things) to dis∣charge this painful, faithful Servant of Christ, from any further work in his Vineyard, and to give him Rest from his La∣bours. Hereupon the Book-seller desired, that his Life might be added to the rest. The motion seemed very reasonable, and sui∣table, That he who had been a means of perpetuating the me∣mory of so many of Gods Worthies, should have his own Life recorded among the rest. The only difficulty was, concerning drawing of it up in such straits of time, as we were limited to by the circumstances of the Press: but this was soon removed by a Narrative I found in his Study, ready drawn up by himself: which, though it was done without any design to have it exposed to publick view; but, partly for the private information and edification of his Children, and partly as a thankful acknow∣ledgment of Gods goodness to him, and to shew his good Pro∣vidence over him, thro'out the whole course of his Life, (as himself expresses it before these Memoirs) yet, not meeting with any prohibition to the contrary, I have adventur'd to communi∣cate it to the publick, thereby to supply that defect, which other∣wise the Reader must have labour'd under. And I hope none will look upon it as a piece of Vanity in him, to commit such things to Writing concerning himself, since it's a bare relation of matters of Fact; which cannot be so fully done by any other, as by a man's self. (And therefore I wish that others, whom God has made eminently instrumental for the Service of his Church, would write after his Copy, and follow his Example herein:) His own account now follows.
A Brief Narrative of my LIFE, and of the most remarkable Acts of Gods Providence in guid∣ing and governing of the same. I Samuel Clarke was Born in Woolston, in the County of Warwick, upon the 10th of October 1599. my Mother, who was a good Wo∣man, died when I was young: my Father was a Godly, Able, Faith∣ful, and Painful Minister, and exercised his Ministry for above forty years in that Parish, with much profit and comfort: under whose wing I was trained up Religiously till I was about thirteen years old; and then I was set to School to Mr. Ja. Cranford, an eminent School-master in Co∣ventry; which City at that time, flourished exceedingly with Religious Ministers and People, though for my own part, falling into the Com∣pany of dissolute Lads, I began to degenerate from the Principles of my first Education, though not without much reluctancy, and frequent checks of Conscience for the same. Having spent about four years in that School, I was by my Father carried to Cambridge; which University was more eminent for Religion at that time, and placed by him under Mr. Tho. Hooker in Emannel Col∣ledge, which was the Puritan Colledge; and Mr. Hooker one of the choicest Tutors in the University: yet, neither there did I answer my Fathers care, nor the means which I did enjoy: for though my carriage was Civil, and in the sight of the world blameless, yet did I not walk with God in my general, nor particular Calling as I ought to have done; neither do I know that the work of Grace was at that time wrought in my heart: When I was Batchelor of Arts, my Father (having small means) took me from the University again: and immediately after my return home, I fell sick of the Small Pox, and was so full of them, not only outwardly, but in my Throat also, that my Father despaired of my Recovery: yet it pleased my heavenly Father to restore me, beyond his expectation: shortly after I was sent for to a Gentlemans in the Wood∣land part of the Country, to teach his Children, and to be assistant to Mr. Slader, Minister of Knowle, a godly and eminent Man: yet the Fa∣mily wherein I lived was very prophane; which not agreeing with my former Education, though it dis-relished at the first, yet by degrees I di∣gested it better; but after I had continued in that Family somewhat more than a year, I was unexpectedly sent for (in the midst of Winter) into Cheshire, to be an assistant to Mr. Byrom, Parson of Thornton, with whom I continued almost two years; and by reason of some Suits in Law where∣in he was intangled, I was put upon Preaching twice a Sabbath a great part of that time. In that Family I was cast upon some great temptations: but it pleased the Lord in mercy to hedge up my way with Thorns, and by striking me with extraordinary fear and terrour (as he did Belshazer by the hand∣writing) he made me to reflect upon my self, humbled me for my sins, and by degrees gave me some comfort in believing, and applying the Promises of free Grace in Christ Jesus: yet still I was dogg'd by Sathan, who often interrupted me in my secret Duties: and one of his Instru∣ments
was also raised up to prosecute me in the Chancellours Court at Chester, for the omission of some Ceremonies: so that receiving divers discouragements, I resolved to leave that place; and being importuned by some Friends at London to come thither, I went to Chester at Micha∣elmas Fair, with a purpose of sending my Trunk to London, and shortly after to have followed my self: But some godly Christians, Inhabitants of Wirrall, a Pemnsula beyond West-Chester, which had been my fre∣quent Hearers at Thornton, meeting me at the Fair, importuned my coming to Shotwick amongst them; and would receive no repulse till I had granted their desires. That Country is about fourteen Miles long, and five broad: there were divers godly, and understanding Christians scattered up and down in it: scarce a constant Preacher besides my self: so that, as my means of maintenance came by a voluntary contribution out of all those Christians Purses, so all of them within six, or seven miles compass, repaired to my Ministry, both Young and Old, Men and Wo∣men, Wet and Dry, Summer and Winter, to their very great pains and labour: spending the time between the Sermons in Repetition, singing of Psalms, and godly conference: and as they took extraordinary pains for the Word, so they highly prized it, and much profited by it. I also set up monthly Sacraments, and we enjoyed much sweet liberty, and Communion in the same. And besides these publick Ordinances, we had once in three Weeks ordinarily a day of Conference, unto which repaired all the Professors, both Men and Women, out of all the Country; and this Meeting was held by turns at all the richer mens Houses: in the Morning when they firstmet, the Master of the Family began with Prayer, then was the question to be conferred of read, and the younger Christi∣ans first gave in their answers, together with their proofs of Scripture for them; and then the more experienced Christians gathered up the other answers which were omitted by the former; and thus they conti∣nued till Dinner time, when having good provision made for them by the Master of the Family, they dined together with much chearfulness; after Dinner, having sung a Psalm, they returned to their Conference upon the other questions (which were three in all) till towards the Evening; at which time, as the Master of the Family began, so he concluded with Prayer, and I gave them three new questions against their next Meeting; which being appointed for time and place, every one repaired to his own home: the benefits which came by these days of Conference, were many and great: First, Hereby knowledge was wonderfully increased, so that I was ne∣ver acquainted with more understanding Christians in all my Life, though the best of them went but in Russet Coats, and followed Husbandry. Secondly, Holy affections by this mutual whetting of them each in other, were exceedingly kindled, and kept alive in them. Thirdly, Love, by frequent Society, was nourished and increased; so that all the Professors, though living ten or twelve miles asunder, were as intimate and familiar, as if they had been all of one houshold. Fourhly, The necessities of the poorer sort being made known, there was plentiful provision made for them. Fifthly, The weak were strengthned, the mourning comfor∣ted, the erring reclaimed, the dejected raised up, and all of them mu∣tually edified in their most holy Faith. Sixthly, Under the pretence of these Meetings, we enjoyed the opportunities, as occasion was offered,
of private Fasts, and days of Thanksgiving, which otherwise would quickly have been taken notice of, and suppressed. In this place I found the first Seal of my Ministry, by being an instru∣ment of the Conversion of many Souls to God: Amongst these persons I had abundance of comfort by their hearty Prayers for me, intire affe∣ctions to me, and care for to provide for me, that I might subsist comfor∣tably amongst them. Whilst I was in this place, God disposed of me in Marriage to an holy, humble, prudent, and sweet natured Yoke-fel∣low, unto which (of all the outward mercies I ever enjoyed from God) none is to be compared; she came of Religious Parents, her Father was a godly and faithful Minister at Bedworth in Warwick-shire. But after I had continued about the space of five years in this place, where we en∣joyed so much comfort and happiness, the Devil envying the same, raised up some of his instruments to complain of, and to prosecute me in the Chancellors Court, who was maliciously bent against God and Goodness, and who so much maligned me for the omission of Ceremonies; and was so violently bent against me, that he would not suffer me to Preach a fare∣well Sermon to my People: But behold the sweet Providence of God! just at the same time when I was thus molested, there came a Letter to me from the Mayor, Aldermen, old Mr. Fenn, and some other godly Peo∣ple in Coventry, importuning me to come to Preach a Lecture in that great City; divers of them having heard me not long before at a pub∣lick Fast, which I kept at Woolston. After I had sought to God and Friends for advice, I resolved to embrace that Call, the Door being shut against me where I was, and another, as I apprehended, opened there: But when I was to leave that People, it caused much grief to them and me, and with abundance of Tears on both sides, we were (as it were) torn asunder. At my coming to Coventry, I was entertained with much love and re∣spect; there for a while, I exercised my Ministry: But neither there would the Devil fuffer me to be quiet long; for at that time there was Dr. Buggs, who had engrossed both the Livings (there being but two Parishes in that great City) he (as it seemed) seeing his Hearers go from him, soon professed himself my Enemy; and having power of both the Pulpits, de∣nied me entrance into either: whereupon the Mayor and Aldermen, ha∣ving another Church at an end of the Town in their disposal, they ap∣pointed my Lecture there: But Dr. Buggs having his spies to watch me, both in my Prayers and Sermons; conceived that he had gotten some ad∣vantages against me, for some expressions used by me in the same. Hereupon he became an eager prosecutor of me before the Bishop of the Diocess (who was Dr. Morton) who inhibited me from Preaching in his Diocess: but having a Licence from the Archbishop of Canterbury [Abbot,] I refused to obey his Inhibition: some of the Aldermen also of the City sticking to me, pretending to spend much money before I should be put down: shortly after the Bishop going to London, caused me to be cited up to the Court of Arches, whither I went, but he put in nothing against me: and when I went to him at his Lodgings, he first by perswasions, and after by menaces, laboured to have me relinquish the place; professing, that he would kneel before the King, but he would have my Licence called in: yet I resolved to keep it as long as I could, and returned to Coventry again; where a new Mayor being chosen, who was
a great Friend to Dr. Buggs, the zeal of the Aldermen in standing for me, and by me, was much cooled; whereupon my Lecture fell to the Ground, and I assisted my Father every Sabbath, who lived within four Miles of the City: the Door being thus shut against me at Coventry, I was by a good Providence of God unexpectedly sent for by Robert Lord Brook, (who was then a young Man, and unmarried) to bestow a Ser∣mon upon him at his House in Wedgnock Park, not far from Warwick; whither (though with much reluctancy, he being a stranger to me) I went, and preached before him, and found such approbation, that he desired me to be his houshould Chaplain; but such a Life not suiting with my estate (being married) nor with my Affections, with humble thanks I refused it, yet found him a fast, and a faithful Friend to me all his Life after. Much about the same time also I was sought for by the Magistrates of Warwick; to Preach a Lecture there on the Sabbaths in the Afternoon, and on Tuesday Mornings; but Mr. Hall the then Vicar of that place, op∣posed it: whereupon the Bailiff and Burgesses made their Address to Ro∣bert Earl of Warwick, who was their Recorder, who sent for me up to London, heard me Preach, gave me his Qualification to be his Chaplain; and wrote so to Mr. Hall, that being over-awed by his Letter, he admit∣ted of me for his assistant: In that place I exercised my Ministry about the space of five years, and the Lord was pleased so to bless my Labours, that I got much room in the hearts of all the godly in the Town, and was the instrument of the conversion of some Souls: as also of much good in the Lord Brooks Family, who being then married, lived for the most part in Warwick Castle: but these things proved the object of Mr. Halls envy, who sought to pick quarrels with me, caused me often to be Pre∣sented for the omission of Ceremonies, yet the Bishop [Dr. Thornbury] being an old Man, and peaceable, dealt so fairly, that still I got off: at length Mr. Hall, being impatient of my continuance, came to pull me out of the Pulpit, and by his clamours and noise, so interrupted me, that I was forced to give over: and Dr. Laud being then made Archbishop of Canterbury, he in his old Age made a Journey to London, complained of me to the Archbishop: and threatened to prosecute me in the high Com∣mission Court: yet it pleased the Lord so to order things, that I heard no more of it: Just about this time the Parson of Alcester dled; and the Lord Brook having formerly of his own accord, proffered that Rectory to me, did now as freely confer it upon me; whither I went, Preached to the People, and was freely and unanimously chosen by them for their Pastor; whereupon I took Institution and Induction into the place; and there exercised my Ministry in peace, and with good success for a time. And whereas the Town was placed in the midst of many great Papists, which made it their Randezvous: and for want of a powerful Ministry, the Inhabitants of the Town were much given to Swearing, Drunkenness, and prophanation of the Sabbath, opening their Shops, and selling Wares (especially Meat) publickly, it pleased God to bless my Ministry, and private Labours for the Reforming of those things: but neither did the Devil suffer me to be long in quiet there: for the Book of sporting upon the Sabbath, came forth about that time, and I was often enjoined the Reading of it, and much threatned for the refusal; and was the more
envied and maligned, because all the Ministers thereabout (whereof some were godly) submitted to the reading of it: yet it pleased God (who had a great work to do in that place) to preserve my Liberty, not∣withstanding my refusal; and the Lord added divers to the Church by my Ministry at that time. Also about that time, I having Preached largely upon the Doctrine of the Sabbath for half a year together, it pleased God to shew a remarkable Judgment upon two of my Neighbours; who encouraged by that Book, and in contempt of my Ministry, dared to prophane that holy day; the one was a Lusty young Woman, Daughter to Jo. Waldren, who said that she would go to such a Green in the next Parish, and there Dance as long as she could stand; which also on the Sabbath in the Afternoon she did; but as she was Dancing, it pleased the Lord to strike her with a sudden, and grievous Disease, whereof she died within three days: the other was a young man, one Charles Bellers, of whom read the story also in my Book of Examples, p. 153. These remarkable Judgments seconding of the Word, struck a great awe in the hearts of many, to the restrain∣ing of them from the like disorders. A while after came on the Arch∣bishops Visitation by Sir Nathanael Brent, unto whom Mr. Hall, and some others, made many and great complaints of me; yet by a Letter from Mr. Ri. Knightly of Fausly to Sir N. Brent in my behalf, it pleased God to deliver me from that Snare also. Thus through Gods mercy, I continued the exercise of my Ministry in that place for about the space of nine years; in which time very many young persons, both Men and Women, were converted, held their Meetings on the Sabbaths in the Evening to repeat Sermons, and perform such Duties; others were edified and built up in their Faith: and the Town, which before was called Drunken Alcester, was now Exemplary, and eminent for Religion all over the Country: and upon all occasions when publick works of mercy were called for, their zeal and forwardness provoked many others. And thus we conti∣nued till the Etcetera Oath came forth; which as a dark and black cloud, threatned new dangers: but that being so gross and palpable, many of the Ministers of that Diocess met, and drew up a Petition to the King against it, and my self, and Mr. Arthur Salwey, were chosen, and request∣ed to carry it: hereupon we went to York, the King being there with his Army, which lay in a Leaguer about the City, the Scots Army being at New-Castle. About this time the King had summoned all the Nobility to come to him to York; and upon their request, had promised to call a Parliament, to debate and determine the difference between him and the Scots: The next day after we came to York, we were present at the Man∣nor▪house, whilst the King was at Supper; and immediately after Sup∣per, I kneeling down, presented the Petition to the King, in the name of the Ministers of the Diocess of Worcester: the King received it without speaking a word, and went into his withdrawing Room; there was pre∣sent Dr. Curle Bishop of Winchester, who frowned extreamly upon me for the Petition: yet I encouraged Mr. Salwey, and we followed the King to expect an answer. At the Door of the Chamber, the Porter told us that we could not be admitted; but I told him, that we had presented a Pe∣tition to the King, and must attend an answer; whereupon he let us pass. When we came into the Room, the King had laid our Petition on the Table, without Reading it, and was standing by the Fire, discoursing about his Army: we pressed just before him, and so stood confidently in
his sight, till he observing that we would have no nay, went to the Ta∣ble, took up our Petition, and read it distinctly over: after which he called Mr. W. Munay of the Bed-chamber, and gave him the Petition, bidding him to give it to the Master of Requests to return us our answer: then did we retire to our Lodgings; and afterwards repairing to the Ma∣ster of Requests, he told us; that the Kings answer was, That we should not be molested about the refusal of the Oath, till the Parliament be∣gan; at which time our Petition should be considered: After this we retired home, though through some dangers by reason of some stragling Soldiers. The Parliament beginning shortly after, the Ministers of our Diocess met again, drew up a Petition to the Parliament for the freeing of us from the snare of the Oath, and some other burthens that lay upon us; and my self and Mr. Salwey, were again requested to present, and prosecute the Petition; which we undertook and effected. At London we met with many Ministers from most parts of the Kingdom; and upon some Meetings and Debates, it was resolved, that a Committee should be chosen to draw up a Remonstrance of our grievances, and to Petition the Parliament for Reformation; which was accordingly done, and a Reformation was begun, though God for our sins, afterwards blasted our hopes, and brought us into the greatest confusion, that ever the Church laboured under since the first Reformation of Religion under Queen Elizabeth. Not long after, the differences between King and Parliament grew so high, that both parties betook themselves to Arms. Whereupon, after a while, upon a special occasion, I went to London, and having been a while there (yet with a purpose of returning) I was one day talking with my Sister Sutton, whom I met about the Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside: and whilst we were talking together, came by Mr. Thomas Clendan, whom I had formerly known, but had now forgotten; my Sister telling me who it was, I desired her to call him back, that I might renew my acquaintance; which she did: and as we were talking together, God by his providence so ordered it, that there came by two of Bennet Fink Parish, honest men; which Mr. Clendan stopping, said to them: You want a Minister, and if you can prevail with this Gen∣tleman, you will be well fitted, &c. Hereupon I was requested to give them a Sermon the Sabbath following; which I assented to, not know∣ing what God intended by it: There had about ten others Preached be∣fore me, for the place: amongst whom Dr. Hoile, old Mr. Carter of the Assembly, and Mr. F. Bellars, &c. and the chiefest in the Parish were for Mr. Carter; and whereas some of the Parish urged to proceed to a choice; the other party put it by till the last Wednesday in May, which was the monthly Fast; against which time they had procured Mr. Carter to Preach in the Afternoon; and so they were immediately to proceed to the choice, whilst his gifts in Prayer and Preaching, had left an impres∣sion upon the Peoples Spirits, that they might the easilier bring him in. Accordingly when they vvere met in the Vestry, the debate vvas, vvho should be put into nomination; and all agreed that Mr. Carter, Mr. Bellars, and my self, should be set dovvn in a paper, to vvhich they vvere to make their marks: Mr. Bellars had but one or tvvo hands; and for Mr. Carter, there vvas Mr. Greene a Parliament man, and some six more of the greatest of the Parish, before any appeared for me: but then a godly man beginning, so many of the rest follovved, that the choice vvent clearly on my side. All this vvhile I knevv nothing hereof, or
what they were about: being not acquainted with any one in the Parish, nor imploying any Friend to speak to them in my behalf: But that day I Preached at Fish-street for Mr. J. Smart; and in the Evening, Sup∣ping there, there came a Committee from Bennet Fink Parish, to ac∣quaint me with my free Election, and to intreat me to accept of the place: taking notice of the concurring Providences of God, I durst not refuse the Call; yet reserved my self free to return to Alcester when the Storm was over, and that I might do it with safety. The Wars being ended, I went into Warwick-shire, and Preached on the Lords-day at Alcester, and many of the People with Tears importu∣ned my return: During the Wars, many of the Inhabitants of the younger sort, had retired to Warwick for safety; where, falling into the Company of Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, they were levened with their Errors; and being now returned home, they had set up pri∣vate Meetings, with the neglect of the publick; and many young Men, whom I looked upon before, as Children begotten by my Ministry to God, were turned Preachers: whereupon, before I would promise to return, I propounded some Articles to them, concerning their owning me for their Pastor, attending upon my Ministry, &c. which they pro∣mised; whereupon I promised to return to them the Spring following (this being at the latter end of Summer) But these Sectaries under-hand wrought against me, and grew higher in the ways of separation; so that finding the love of the People towards me here, the opportunities that I had of being instrumental to the publick good, and the unlikeliness of living comfortably at Alcester, having provided a godly able Minister for them, I resigned to him, and resolved to fix at Bennet Fink. About the year 1646. I published my first Book of Examples; which then contained but 12, or 14 sheets. Anno 1649. I published my first Part of the Marrow of Ecclesiastical History, which contained but 63 sheets. Anno 1650. I published my second Part of the Marrow of Ecclesiasti∣cal History, which contained 44 sheets. Anno 1651. I published my General Martyrology, which contained about 140 sheets. Anno 1652. I published my English Martyrology, which contained above 100 sheets. Anno 1654. I published again my first Part of the Marrow of Eccle∣siastical History, much enlarged, to above 120 sheets in a Pica Letter. Anno 1655. I published my Mirror the second time, enlarged to 42 sheets of large Paper. Anno 1657. I published my Mirror the third time, enlarged to 240 sheets. Anno 1659. I published my first Part of Cases of Consciences, con∣taining 144 Sheets. Anno 1660. I published my General Martyrology, enlarged to above 180 sheets. Besides these greater, I was one of the four Ministers that made the Jus Divinum regiminis Eclesiastici; which was Printed three times, and enlarged. Also Printed a Sermon, which I Preached at our first Warwick-shire Feast.
Another Sermon which I Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Beuley. Another Book against Toleration, which I called Golden Apples. The Life of Tamerlane. A Sheet in defence of Tythes. All these contained above a Thousand Sheets; all which I wrote with my own hand, and was through God's mercy enabled thereunto, not∣withstanding all my Ministerial employments, private and publick, Bles∣sed be his Name for it. I have besides at this time, November 1660. above 300 sheets ready for the Press. The Kings Majesty having published a Declaration concerning Eccle∣siastical affairs, the London Ministers drew up a gratulatory Address to His Majesty for the same, adding a prayer for the removal of Re-ordina∣tion, and Surplices in Colledges, and chose me to present it; which I did at Whitehall, November 16. 1660. and when I began to speak upon my knee, His Majesty bad me twice to rise up; which I did, and spake thus: Your Majesties Loyal Subjects, many of the Ministers in and about the City of London, have commanded us humbly to present this their gratulatory Acknowledgment to your Royal Majesty, for your gracious Condescensions, in your Majesties late Declaration concerning Ecclesi∣astical Affairs. The King took my Paper, and returned this answer: Gentlemen, I will endeavour to give you all satisfaction, and to make you as happy as my self: and something more to the like purpose. March 25. 1661. I was, with others, made a Commissioner for Re∣forming the Common-Prayer Book. Anno 1665. I publish'd the Lives of those that were called Magni, and the Life of our blessed Saviour Jesus Christ: As also the Description of Germany, and History of Hungary. April 24. 1666. I removed from London to Hammersmith. Anno 1671. I published my first Part of Examples, 80 sheets enlarged: and a second Volume containing 204 sheets: Also some Lives of our English Warriours. Anno 1672. I published a Description of the 17 Provinces of the Ne∣therlands. Anno 1662. I published my third Volume of Lives, Printed by W. Miller. Anno 1669. I published the Duty of every one that intends to be sa∣ved: Printed by Sim. Miller. Anno 1670. I Printed my English Dictionary, though under anothers Name. Besides, I have at this time 1673. about 800 Sheets ready for the Press, and about 4 or 500 Sheets of Annotations upon the whole Old Testa∣ment, all written with mine own Hand. I was also seven or eight years a Governour in Sion Colledge, whereof two years I was President. I mention these things, not seeking my own Praise and Glory, (for I am less than the least of all God's Mercies) but to give Glory to God, who enabled and strengthened me to do so much work; wherein (I hope) I was serviceable to him and his Church, without the neglect of my work in the Ministry. Anno 1673. I Printed Gods Judgments upon Persecutors in 9 sheets. Anno 1675. I Printed a great Volume of Lives in Folio, in 270 sheets.
Anno 1667, I Reprinted my Book of Martyrology, and Lives, con∣taining 264 sheets. Anno 1680. I Printed my President for Princes. Anno Christi 1681. I Printed my Book of Apothegms. Thus through Gods mercy, I continued the exercise of my Ministry for the space of forty years, even till the black Act for Conformity took place; which turned me, and almost two Thousand godly and painful Ministers and Schoolmasters out of their places. After which (though I durst not separate from the Church of England, nor was satisfied about gathering a private Church out of a true Church, as I judge the Church of England to be, yet) I intermitted not my private Studies; but spent most of my time in Reading, Writing, and enlarging the Books which I formerly Printed, or Composing new: And if it please God that the remainder of my Cases of Conscience, and my Flores Theologiae, or Com∣mon-place-Book, shall ever be Printed, I doubt not but they will prove as grateful and useful (if not more) than any I have Printed already. Decemb. 20. 1682. When he first came down in the Morn∣ing, he complaining, that he had lain in a Feavor all Night: yet found no great alteration in himself that day: but within two or three days he grew very weak, and was confin'd to his Bed: and then the decays of Nature (like so many Creditors, who had bin put off a great while, so that when once their Debter is seiz'd upon, they lay all their Actions against him, that they may be sure to keep him fast: so these) fell violently upon him, so that his strength was quite gone, and he was unable to help himself, and he began to falter in his Speech, yet the use of his understanding remain'd to the last. And as upon all occasi∣ons, at other times hee'd be speaking of his Change, so now more especially his Communication was savoury, and such as be∣came a dying Person, and one that had a sense of Eternity upon his Spirit; yea, and a comfortable assurance of his own title to a blessed Eternity. And so upon Dec. 25. 1682 having blessed those that were about him, he resign'd up his Soul into the hands of his Father, and fell asleep in the Lord: being aged eighty three years, two months, and fifteen days. The memory of the just is blessed, Prov. 10. 7.
TO THE READER. Christian Reader, WE have disswasives and perswasives to this kind of History, the Lives of Wise and holy Persons: The disswasives are, that it may tempt men to think that such Instances are Rarities, and that Saints are so few, that we may with the Papists, Canonize them, and call only a few extraor∣dinary Votaries, the Religious. Whereas none but true Saints can be saved; And God in wonderful mercy hath raised up so great a number in our days, and of our acquaintance, as makes even this Earth the less grievous to us, which is salted, perfumed and enlightened by their Graces. In this it is with me, as it was about the success of my Ministry: when before my publick Preaching, and two years after, God blessed my endeavours with the Conversion of now and then one Soul, Malignant I mean not turning them to Sects or odd Opinions, but to a holy and heavenly mind and life, from the love of sin and transitory vanity. I used with thankfulness to write them down: But when he turned multitudes, from ignorance, pride and a carnal mind to holy Obedience, I gave over keeping a Catalogue, for it was no rarity: so when my excellent holy Friends dyed, I could have wished that the World for imitation, had known them as I did, and that their Lives had been published; But when I lived in the Acquaintance and Communion of multitudes of such, I saw that it would have been a partial, or an endless work? For Gods Graces are much the same in all his holy ones. O how great a number of holy persons of my Acquaintance, of exemplary Lives could I name, that God hath taken to himself of Bridg∣north, Dudley, Kederminster, Bewdeley, Stourbridge, other parts of Wor∣cester-shire, Coventry, London, &c. When we describe their Humility, Piety, soundness of Judgment, Fidelity, Peaceableness, Concord, secret and open Holiness, Sobriety, &c. we must speak over the same things of all. But yet the Perswasives are not invalidated by this. For 1. Some persons live where prejudice, or the prohibition of Superiours, hath kept them unacquain∣ted with such persons; And they need Information from those that knew them. 2. We live in a time of mental War, when it is the Devils great and daily business to belie the best of men, and make the ignorant believe that they are a Generation of walking Plagues, movers of Sedition, teaching men to Worship God contrary to the Law, enemies to Caesar, Preaching up another King, one Jesus, and turning the World upside down, not keeping the Tradition of the Fa∣thers; The Cry is loud, Away with such Fellows from the Earth; It is not fit that they should live. Most odious Lies are published of them with so great confidence, as that Strangers may think they are bound to believe them, lest they should censure the reporters to be what they are. And so much of God, of Christ, of the Holy Ghost, of the Gospel and of Religion, and of the Church and Souls of men, doth lie upon the true representation of the Faithful, and the vindica∣ting of Gods Image upon them, and confuting Satans lies, as that it is no small part of the Duty of all Christs Servants to endeavour it: especially by their own holy and harmless Lives, which will most effectually plead their cause. Thou∣sands are harden'd in sin, yea in enmity against a holy Life, yea in persecution, by believing serious Godly men, to be as bad as the Carnal World, a humorous,
proud, seditious, hypocritical sort of People! They that dare not accuse God, or Christ or Scripture, dare accuse them that obey it: because the best have faults, and Hypocrites are among them, and their malice hath more matter to work upon. And yet when they grow ripe they will venture to charge the Scrip∣ture it self, of obscurity and insufficiency first, and next of falshood. 3. And God will have the memory of the just to be blessed, and the names of the wicked to rot. Justin, Cyprian, Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Martin, and many such, were men hated and persecuted by Princes and other Prelates, while they lived; yet hath God made their Memories honourable, and the Names of their Persecutors odious to good men: And though their Enemies have been oft and long in greatest power and numbers, they could never turn the stream of Honour. 4. It is the Custom of the Devil to write infamous Lies of the best men when they are dead, which would be believed if those that knew them while they lived, did not say that which should refute the lies. What monstrous Lies have the Pa∣pists written of Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Bucer Martyr, Beza, &c. which a true History of their Lives hath shamed, with all judicious men that read them. The same I may say of many of late times in this Land. I have Cartwrights own answer to Dr. Sutliffe in M. S. which doth so fully con∣fute the shameful story of his Confederacy with Hacket, Coppinger and Ar∣thington's, as will shame the slanderers to any impartial Reader. Rivet was fain to bring Certificates from the Magistrates and Records of the Town in France where Calvin lived, to disprove the lyers that publisht him a stigmatized Sodomite; He that eat but one very little Meal a day, and almost macerated himself (as even Massonius testifies) was by Papists reported to be a Glutton. Bucer was said to be killed and torn in pieces by the Devil, when all his sickness and pious dying is fully testified by Cambridge Doctors. And what do you think those who now in Press and Pulpit make such whose Lives this History recordeth (to be odious Rogues, not fit to live out of a Common Gaol) will say of them when they are dead? But those that knew them are safe from believing it. 5. And this kind of work is of greater benefit and charity to ignorant ungod∣ly men, than to the dead or any other living. The Dead are above it: The Faith∣ful need it not: But as Christ saveth Souls by imprinting on them the Image of holy Love, so Satan damneth Souls by drawing them from such Love, to hate their Brethren, even the best: And he that hateth his Brother is a murderer, and no murderer hath Eternal Life. 6. And Nature is delighted in History. And the World is dolefully abused by false History, specially Ecclesiastick: And the true History of exemplary Lives, is a pleasant and profitable recreation to young persons; and may secretly work them to a liking of Godliness and value of good men, which is the beginning of saving Grace: O how much better work is it, than Cards, Dice, Revels, Stage-Plays, Romances or idle Chat. As to this work, I commend it to the Reader as principally for the foresaid use; so from so much knowledge as I have had of the Author and of the persons and things here recorded. The Author was well known to be a man of great sincerity, a hater of lying, and great lover of truth: And of long experience and great acquaintance in many parts of the Land; especially Cheshire, Warwick-shire and London. My acquaintance with him hath been long, though not much, because of inter∣rupting distances. On October 23. 1642. little knowing what was doing at Edge-hill, I was Preaching in his Pulpit at Alcester, on those words [The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence.] My Voice hindered me, but the Au∣ditors
heard the Canon: That Night was past by us in sad Watching, with the noise of Fugitive Troops: The next day, (such spectacles being rare, and sad) Mr. Clarke and I rode to the Field to see what was done, where we saw the dead Bodies of English Men slain by one another. I after lived in Coventry, where Mr. Clarke oft was: And where his very humble, godly, chearful old Father-in-Law, Mr. Overton, a Minister above 80 years of age, was with many other excellent men, one of my frequent Company: Mr. Clarke went to London, and there was Pastor of a small Parish, Bennet Fink: When the King Commissi∣oned us to treat for Concord with the Bishops, he was daily with us; and had the chief hand in drawing up the Exceptions against the Liturgy (at which I was absent.) In 1662. on September 10, he married me in Bennet Fink Church, in the presence of Alderman Ashhurst and Mrs. Ashhurst: After that; when the Lord Keeper Bridgeman by a favourable Exposition drew twenty Non-con∣forming Ministers to take the Oxford Oath, he resolved to be one, that he might leave the accusers of them as Disloyal, no pretence: But to shew that he did it not for any worldly advantage, presently left London, and lived privately at Thistleworth to his death, bearing not only his own low estate with patience, but his worthy Sons also, who were sufferers with him, Ejected by the Act of Ʋni∣formity. I never saw him since, nor heard that he came to London, but by a Letter from him a year before he died he told me he was 82 years old. He hath done great Service by former History. One Volume of Lives, and an Epitome of Martyrology, and a Volume of God's strange Judgments upon great Sinners. Some Enemies deride him for Writing Lives with no more Art: But I take that to be his Commendation; He did not make the Histories, but take them made by faithful acquaintance of the dead: And he was not to patch or paint the dead, nor to add any thing of his own, but to deliver naked truth: some good men say, that many of the Lives of excellent men in his first Book are short and dry: That's our loss, but none of his fault: If all had done as Mr. Thomas Ball did by his Tutor Dr. Preston, that defect had been fully satisfied: I was going to get from old Sam. Hildersham, some additions to his Father Arthur's Life, but his death frustrated me. Melchior Adam hath done in my judgment very great Service to the Church in his four Volumes, the Lives of the German Divines, Philosophers, Lawyers and Physicians: But some he hath done copiously and excellently, and very many (of the three last sort) so exactly as to be next to nothing: And how could he help it? To have made Stories himself had been unworthy a Historian, so is it in this case. I have not read over this Book, being desired suddenly to write this Preface; and therefore undertake not the Justification of what I have not read: But I knew so many of the Persons and Histories my self, as makes me not doubt but the Reader will have no cause to question the Historical truth: And the rather because I see Mr. Clark is but the reciter of other mens words, and the Collector into one Volume of many mens Lives before published; some more being now newly added, at least which I never saw. Goldastus and abundance such Col∣lectors, have done great Service in keeping many small Tractates from being lost. John Janewaies life, and Joseph Allens I had a hand in Publishing and Presa∣cing heretofore: And O that I could reach that heavenly frame of mind, by which they lived and died in triumphant joy and praise to God! Dr. Sam. Boston, Mr. Vines, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Machin, Dr. Staunton, Mr. Wadsworth, Mr. Stockton, I knew: Dr. Twisse was so well known (whose worthy Daughter
Mrs. Corbet hath lived with me formerly, and this year and half) that the History hath full evidence. Judge Hales and the Countess of Warwick (my great Friends) need no testimony of mine. I knew not of his Epitomizing my Wives life; but the manner of that tells me he is like to be faithful in the rest: His worthy Son addeth his own Life, which he found written by himself. I have desired the Book-seller to Reprint the Life of the Countess of Suffolk, Daughter to the Earl of Holland, written by Bishop Rainbow, yet living, as an excellent pattern to Ladies; the Book being not easily to be got. I have in Funeral Sermons and Epistles described truly many excellent persons, whose Examples would be useful to this depraved Age; were it not for the charge of Printing, I would wish them Bound all together as these be, viz. Mrs. Bakers of Worcester, Mrs. Coxes, Mrs. Hanmers, my Wives Mother, Alderman Ashhursts, Mr. Waddesworth, Mr. Stubbs, Mr. Corbets, &c. It's a great work to learn to die, safely and comfortably; even the work of all our lives: my turn is near, and this preparation is my daily Study: But its the Communication of life, light and love from Heaven, that must make all effe∣ctual, and draw up our Hearts and make us ready: For which I daily wait on God. At the brink of the Grave, and door of Eternity Jan. 16. 1682/3. Richard Baxter.
A Table of the Principal things contained in these Lives. AFflictions sanctified, part 2. page 113, 114, 156. Assurance, 65. part 2. 108. Bible translated, 6. into Welch 205 Blessings given on Death-bed, 80 Charity, 80, 93, 102, 140, 155, 158, 169, 180, 180, b. 204. part 2. 104, 120 121, 131, 142, 147, 176, 194, 204. Childrens Education, 9, 18, 60 Christ preferred above all, 78 Comfort, part 2. 109. in afflictions and death, 39. in temptations, 71 Communion with God, 75 Compassion, part 2. 13 Holy Conference, 122, 168, 171 Conscience, good, 39. tender, part 2. 115, 138, 199 Conversion, 57, 61, 82, 91, 95, 111, 127, part 2. 98, 105, 182 Counsel, good, 99, 103, 149, 151, 152, 153 Courage, 4, 7, 21, 35, 36, 92, 105, 146. part 2. 128 A Diary, 63, 162 Death, Comfort at it, 39, 69, 103. desired, 44, 76, 134. part 2. 124, 147 foreseen, 134. prepared for, 57, 76, 77, 94, 103, 153, 155. part 2. 122, 173 Deliverances strange, 22. 88, 130, 187 Delight Spiritual, 75 A Diary kept, 74, 90, 167. part 2. 170 Diligence, 96, 186 Divisions bewail'd, 74 Envy, 20 Family-government Exemplary, 34, 91, 122, 177, b. part 2. 132, 173 Faith, 36, 58, 103, 182 b. part 2. 117, 118, 148 Fidelity, 19 Friendship, 62, 64 Funeral Sermons, how far allowable, 129 The Genealogies in our Bibles, by whom gather'd. 2 Grace: free Grace admired, 77, 78 Heavenly mindedness. 37, 75, 60, 84, 92, 116. part 2. 115. Humility, 15, 37, 44, 57, 60, 61, 68, 89, 101, 134, 136, 142, 169, 182, 179, b. 203. part 2. 115, 118, 148, 172, 204. Hypocrisie, 14 Industry, 9, 19, 20, 33, 44, 50, 57, 82, 84, 89, 91, 98, 101, 111, 115, 117, 129, 136, 138, 141, 145, 149, 157, 162, 178. b. 193. part 2. 103, 126. Joy unspeakable, 67, 76, 77, 78, 91, 161 Liberality, 102, 41 Love to the Saints, and Souls, 64, 84 Malice of the Churches Enemies, 21 Meditation very profitable, 70. part 2. 109, 110, 179 Memory, 163 Meekness, 103 Ministers painful, 19, 95 96 Ministry successful, 20, 95, 110 Modesty, 203 Mortification: helps, 63, 188. b
Ordinances delighted in, 62 Painfulness. See Industry. Patience in afflictions, 39, 76, 89, 103, 134, 170. part 2. 129 Persecution, 59, 110 Praise, 79 Piety, 11, 16, 34, 82, 181, 187. b. part 2. 92, 96, 104▪ b. 128 Predictions, 2, 63 Prudence, 11, 16, 20, 22, 37, 82, 87, 89, 90, 92, 101, 158, 183, 186. b. part 2 116, 121, 128. Prayer, delighted in. 66, 139. frequent. 135, 166, 168, 183. part 2. 111. fervent. 169. prevalent. 88. 93. 95. 104. 110. 155. 161. part 2. 98, 101. 107. 207. return of Prayer. 63. 167. 209, 210. 215. Preaching frequent and powerful. 104 Providences extraordinary. 17. 22. 110. 112. 130. 208. part 2. 187. 209. 212. 213, 214. 216. 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224. special. 22. 110. 114. 127. 130. 153. 160. 167, 168. part 2. 98. 108. 114. observed 150. Prophetick Speeches. 210. 211. 214. 216 Raptures. 98 Reproof; bold. 7. 176. b. successful. 66. 142. 154. 175. 61 Reformation. 23. 29 Sabbath sanctified. 20. 24. 33. 35. 62. 102. 157. 169. 181. b. 197. part 2. 112. 146 154. 178. Scriptures well studied. 19. 74. loved. 90. part 2. 154. 201 Schism opposed. 23 Self-denial. part 2. 123 Self-examination. 121. 145. 166. 177. b Dying Speeches. 7. part 2. 122 Speeches excellent. 7. 39. 156. 159 Studiousness. 9. 19 Temptations. 83. 90. 112. comforts therein, 71 Testimony of Spirit. part 2. 109 Thanksgiving. 87 Time precious. 34. 102. 148. part 2. 200 Vow gratulatory. 168 Visits to be improved. 74 Visions of Glory. 98. 102 World continued. 37 Zeal. 34, 35, 36. 57. 62. 72. 83, 84. 87. 91, 92. 102. 120. 143. 170. 183. part 2. 104▪ 145. 177.
A Table of the Names of all those Persons whose Lives are contained in this Volume. Part the First. MR. Hugh Broughton. pa. 1. Mr. Robert Boid. 9 Dr. Twiss. 13 Mr. Tho. Wilson. 18 Dr. Sam. Bolton. 42 Mr. Richard Vines. 48 Mr. Richard Blackerby. (57) Mr. Ralph Robinson. 57 Mr. John Janaway. 60 Mr. John Machin. 81 Dr. Sam. Winter. 95 Mr. Tho. Tregoss. 109 Mr. Rich. Mather. 126 Mr. Joseph Allein. 138 Dr. Stanton. 160 Mr. Sam. Fairclough. 153. b Mr. Tho. Wadsworth. 177 Mr. Owen Stockton. 186 Mr. Tho. Gouge. 202 Some remarkable passages in the Lives and Deaths of divers eminent Di∣vines in the Church of Scotland. 207 Part the Second. SIr Philip Sidney. pa. 89 Sir Charles Coot. 97 Mr. John Lamot. 102 Sir Nath. Barnardiston. 105 Mr. John Row. 105 Sir Matt. Hale. 125 Mrs. Mary Gunter. 135 Lady Alice Lucy. 140 Lady Mary Vere. 144 Mrs. Kath. Clark. 152 Le Mary Countess of Warwick. 159 Mrs. Marg. Baxter. 181 Lady Mary Armin. 192 Lady Elizabeth Langham. 197 Lady Susannah Countess of Suffolk. 209 Directions to the Book-binder. THere being some interruption of the Alphabet's, the Binder is desired to take notice: That in the first Alphabet after the Quire G. comes another Quire G. and a half sheet H. being the Life of Mr. Blackerby; and after the sheet Y. comes again the sheets X and Y. In the second Alphabet after B b. the same Alphabet begins again, and goes in single sheets to the Letter M m. which ends the first Part of the Book. The second Part begins with A a. and after B b comes c c and d d. being the Life of Sir N. Barnardiston; and then it goes on with C c again, with∣out any interruption to the end of the Book; but if there arise any doubt as to the placing the Lives, the Table of Names will direct therein.
Errata in the Lives of the Divines. PAge 2. line 49. for then r. them, p. 16. l. 45. for Piscator r. Peter, l. 53. add time, p. 36. l. 26. r. ii was not he, l. 31. r. had they not, p. 53. l. 36. r. stole, l. 21. r. diversions, p. 79. l. 1. add, to take leave, p. 83. l. 23. r. sacred, l. 28. add, face, p. 87. Title, r. Machin, p. 90. l. 15. r. upon, p. 106. l. 45. for Dr. r. Col∣lonel, p. 128. l. 3. r. 1614, p. 129. l. 35. r. Camillus, l. 38. r. mortuos, p. 138. l. 8. r. a godly, p. 139. l. 8. r. are, p. 151. l. 21. r. carnal mirth, p. 164 l. 39. r. remittitur, p. 164. l. 24. r. express, p. 169. l. 6. r. to God. Where, p. 171. l. 48. r. conversation, p. 172. l. 7. add, obijt, p. 179. l. 53. r. Patmos, p. 185. l. 20. r. , p. 186. l. 12. r. when, l. 31. r. do, p. 189. l. 3. r. others, l. 29▪ r. in this, p. 190. l. 8▪ r. breast-plate. l. 31. r. charge, l. 33. r. conversion, l. 50. r. laid aside, p. 196. l. 20. r. therefore, p. 197. l. 17. blot out and, l. 46. r. conform, p. 198. l. 31. r. Owen Stockton, p. 200. l. 7. r. tua quietem, p. 202. l. 2. l. 2. r. where, l. 6. r. 1605. p. 205. l. 28. r. that, p. 210. l. 54. r. iterated. Errata in the Lives of the Nobility. Page 92. line 30. r. imployment, l. 46. r. Emperor; and for there, r. they, p. 95. l. 4. r. did not, p. 101. l. 21. r. without, p. 138. l. 23. r. secresie, p. 148. l. 12 r. place, p. 169. l. 4. r. distastful, p. 178. l. 12. r. Lords-day Diary, p. 193. l. 18. r. notional. Small literal faults the Reader is desired to pass over, the most material ones are taken notice of above.
THE LIVES Of Divers Eminent Divines OF THIS LATER AGE. D{us} HUGO BROUGHTON THEOLOGUS LITERARUM ET LINGUAR: SACRARUM CALLENTISS E. H Van. Houe. Sculp: portrait of Hugh Broughton The Life of Mr. Hugh Broughton who Died Anno Christi 1612. HUgh Broughton was born in Shropshire, in a Town called Oldbury, an Antient Seat, His Birth. upon the very Edge of Wales, towards Mountgomery. The Family from whence he Descended was Antient, and of a very great Rank, Worth, and Estate, and at the same time bred this great Scholar, and a Brother of his, who afterwards was a Judge. This Family gave for its Coat of Arms Two Owls, which is the rather mentioned, be∣cause His Parenta this Hugh would sometimes say merrily, That it was a good Prognostick, that he should be a good Grecian, because his Coat did bear the Bird of Athens. And by this may
be unridled that, for which, it may be, every one is not, or hath not at hand an Oediput ready, which is this; In some Editions of the Genealogies, set before some Bibles, you may find Two Owls pictured, holding either of them a Burning Torch; intimating, That it was Mr. Broughton that gave Light to that Work. In what School he was Educated and brought up, is uncertain, though certain it is, that He goes to Cambridge. he was a good Proficient therein, and from thence was sent to Cambridge, where also he was so diligent, and industrious, and his Progress in Learning so signal, that in time he was chosen Fellow in Christ-Colledge. Here he laid the first Foundation of his Hebrew Studies, under a French-man, who Read, He Studies Hebrew. and Taught the Language in the University to divers Scholars. This himself mentioneth, but nameth not the man, in his Prefatory Speech to his Lectures, which he Read in St. Paul's Church, of which we shall hear afterwards. I (saith he) being requested to Read, thought no place fitter than this, because I was informed that a Learned Man of France, about 23 years ago, did Read here in the Hebrew Tongue. At my first coming to Cambridge, I laid under him my first Foundations of that Study: And after him, it hath pleased God that I should come hither to revive his Studies. He was a very Learned Man, and in Cam∣bridge was accounted Second to none in the Realm. A rare Man he was in that Study; and in Hebrew he would draw such a Study, that Men might Learn more of him in a Month, than others could teach in Ten Years: He, being requested by his Country-men, to return, and Preach the Gospel amongst them; and having gotten Leave of Her Majesty, he went; but being come thither, he was so Persecuted by Wicked Men, that he was driven to fly into the Hills and Woods, and thereby got an Ague, whereof he Died. Mr. Broughton's Parts and Learning here began to be taken notice of; and among others, His Friends. the Earl of Huntington especially cast a favourable Eye upon him, with a Noble Influence and Encouragement of all his Studies and Proceedings. From the University he came to London, where he Preached in Publick, and thereby Comes to London. increased the number of his Friends, and those some of the highest Rank and Degree; and he followed his Studies so close, that when Diversions did not withdraw and interrupt him, he spent twelve, fourteen, nay, very commonly sixteen hours in the four and twenty every Day at his Book. The way of his Preaching was this: He would take a Text out of the Old Testament, and another Parallel in the New, and discourse largely upon them together, and knit up all in a short Application. And thus he went over very many, if not all the Sections in Moses, and conferred them, and the Prophets with the New Testament. And one Passage in one of these Sermons, which he had in his Application, may not be omitted: It was in Eighty Eight, when the Spanish Navy was upon the Sea: All the time of the A Prediction. danger, when mens Hearts were full of fears and doubts what the Event might be, he en∣couraged the People exceedingly, and once particularly thus: Now (saith he) the Papists knees Knock one against another, as the Knees of King Belshazzar did, and News will come that the Lord hath scattered that Invincible Navy. Fear ye not, nor be dismayed at these smoaking Firebrands. But that which made him most known to the World indeed, was the Publishing of his Book called, A Consent of Scripture, which he put forth the same year 1588. himself be∣ing then Thirty nine Years Old. Mr. John Speed (a Man well known) was Overseer of Consent of Scripture. the Press for its Printing; a Taylor he was by Trade: But by acquaintance with Mr. Brough∣ton, he was grown very Studious in the Scriptures, and by his Directions was grown very skilful in them. In the time while the Consent was in Printing, he, by Mr. Broughton's Directions, ga∣thered all the Genealogies of the Bible into one view, and at the last they were Published un∣der Genealogies Printed. his name, in the form we had then before our Bibles. But it was Mr. Broughton that directed, and digested them, and there are yet fair Manuscripts of them to be shewed, some whereof have the Names in Hebrew and Greek, and some in the Latine Letter, and some of them Mr. Broughton's own hand: And one that attended him, Dorman, or Dalman, or such a like Name, had made such a Collection by the Direction of his Master, before Mr. Speed had collected his One View. And yet when the Genealogies came to be Published, be∣cause the Bishops would not endure to have Mr. Broughton's Name to be prefixed, Mr. Speed went away with all the credit and profit; so that he would confess, and it was no more than he had good reason to do; That Mr. Broughton was a means, under God, of great Blessings unto him and his Children for worldly Comforts. And therefore that act of his may be wondred at, which himself confessed to some of Mr. Broughton's Friends; namely, That he had as many Manuscripts of Mr. Broughton's as he could hold in his Arms, and he held his Arms encompassed: But, saith he, I have burnt them all; what reason moved him
so to do, he best knew: But certainly standers by, will hardly be satisfied that it was done like a Friend. No sooner was the Concent published, but it met with opposition by two eminent Men His Con∣cent Oppo∣sed. in the two Universities, Dr. Reynolds in Oxford, and Mr. Lively in Cambridge, who being Professors in those Universities, both of them read publickly against it. The Author of it did usually call it; His Little Book of great pains. And so it was indeed; for it cost him ma∣ny years study, and when he Published it, his Pains was not at an end, but to begin anew. For the Lectures of those two Learned Men against it, put him to writing again in justifi∣cation of what he had published, and what they excepted against. It was some honour to Mr. Broughton to have two Opponents of so great Name, worth, and Learning: But the greater their repute (& that most deservedly) the greater was his dis∣advantage that had to deal with them: And to this was added, that what he held, was Pub∣lick, and in every Mans hand: But what they read to the contrary, was only among their own Auditors, and nothing was published by them, whereby others might judge of the Controversy betwixt them, of a long time. Dr Reynolds indeed sent some Notes of his Readings, privately to Mr. Broughton; but printed nothing of them all his time, what was pub∣lished of them, was done after Mr. Broughtons Death, by Dr. John Burges of Sutton-Cofield, in Warwickshire. Mr. Lively was answered privately by Mr. Thornton a Country Gentleman, and a Friend, and Follower of Mr. Broughton, as he could come to the know∣ledge of his exceptions. And so Mr. Broughton undertook them both himself, as he could come to understand what it was that they opposed, and spent much pains in confirming his own Tenets, and confuting theirs. This opposition of his Concent, as also the intreaties of divers of his Friends, prevailed He explains it. with him to Read in private to them, his Explication of it, and he had Auditors to the number of eighty, ninty, or an hundred: sometimes more, sometimes less, and they kept their meetings weekly. At first indeed he Read in the East end of St. Pauls Church, where afterwards the Lord Mayor and his Brethren used to meet; and this he did with the allow∣ance of the Queen and her Council, and some of the best Learned of the Bishops were his Friends. And the Council had the Names of those which were his Schollars, of what Cal∣ling they were, how Qualified, and where they dwelt. But others of the Bishops would Opposed by the Bishops. not endure this, calling them Dangerous Conventicles, and complaining of them, caused them some trouble: so that at last they could read in Pauls no longer. Afterwards he Read in a large Chamber in Cheapside, but tarried not long there, but re∣moved to Mark-lane, and into some other places. And this was his course when he taught in private. His Auditors had every one of them The Concent before him, and he went on still in the exposition of it all along with the Bible, and bad his Auditors diligently to read the Scriptures, and keep themselves to the Chronology of it: and shewed what and how much they should Read against their next meeting, to be prepared for his discourse then. And withal handled the Geneallogies, as the matters of those Scriptures called for Explication for that time of the Chronology; that they might understand what Scriptures were contained within such a space of time. And still he shewed the Doctrine of Faith, and love of Christ Jesus in every Age; how believed and practised by the Faithful, and who dispised them. And in his Application he would sum up all in a quarter of an hour, or more, as the matter required. Of these his Lectures there are still extant the Notes of four and thirty, and the Notes of nine of his Sermons, in which he Collated, the Sections of Moses and the Prophets, with the New Testament; all which were taken from his Mouth as he delivered them. An Extract out of which (of what is not in his other Writings) had been Printed and Published with his other Works, had not he that had the perusing of them in hand for that purpose, been prevented by a very long, and dangerous Sickness, with which he was seized at the very first setting of the Press on work. Thus he abode in London divers years from his first coming thither, and procured many Friends in the City, and made his residence for a long time, more especially among the Fa∣milies of the Cottons, who tendered and respected him very much, during his abode in En∣gland, Bounty of the Cottons. and forgat him not when he was beyond the Seas, but sent him frequent and large to∣kens of their Love, even sometimes a hundred pounds at a time. There were four Bro∣thers of them; John, Roger, William, and Allen, which Allen was afterward L. Mayor of London; and he it was whom he meaned in those words in his Epistle to the Vice-Chancel∣lor, and Governors of Oxford, saying; A Master of Art of your breeding being at London, and upon the Thames, Anno 1590. in a Boat with Mr. A. Cot: and others, &c. Mr. Roger Cotton, a Draper in Cannon-Street, was a true Schollar of this Master, and so
constantly plyed the sacred Scriptures, according to the Admonitions and directions that he had received from Mr. Broughton, that he Read over the Bible twelve times in one year, and what proficiency he made therein, he gave a Specimen of it in that little Book which he Published, called, Directions to the Waters of Life. In Mr. William Cottons House he made his most constant residence, who also was a Dra∣per, and where his Lodging and Library were. In this Family he undertook the Education of Mr. Cottons eldest Son [Rowland, who was afterward Knighted] in the Hebrew Tongue; which he prosecuted with such good success, that there were few places in the Bible, which he was not able readily to Read, and to render into English when he was but seven or eight years old, and could very well and readily speak the Hebrew Language. The way which he used to bring him on so forwardly was this. First, Himself spake in Hebrew to him constantly, and taught him by heart the passages and speeches, which were most usual in his ordinary converse: As to call for his Food, Cloths, and other necessaries: Also Phrases of salutations, and entertainments: Expressions of his Duty, and Affections to his Parents and Relations. Yea, the very passages which were most usual with Children at their Play. These he taught him to utter readily in that Language, and had a young Man, skilful in that Tongue, who was ever with him to interpret for him. This Noble Knight would oft relate that his Mother would sometimes be ready to weep, when he came to do his Duty to her, or to ask any thing of her, and might not speak it in English to her, that so she might have conferred with him, and talked to him again. To this, Mr. Broughton drew up a Vocabulary in Hebrew and English for him, out of which he was dayly learning words. And he framed it, not in an Alphabetical way, as Dicti∣onaries and Lexicons usually are; But he first pitched upon a place or thing more general, and then named all the particulars in it, or belonging to it: As Heaven Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars, Clouds, &c. So a House, Door, Window, a Parlor, a Celler, &c. A Field, Grass, a Flower, a Tree, Hedge, a Furrow, &c. This Book is yet to be had, and might easily be obtained to be Printed, if it should be judged meet to be done. And to compleat all, he had him constantly with him in his Study, where he instilled in∣to him, first the Grammer, and then Read the Bible to him. And this learned Knight would often speak of one Book that he had in his Study, with which his Childish affection was then much taken, and that only for the Covers-sake. It was an old Manuscript, the whole Cover whereof was of Brass, as ours commonly are of Pastboard and Leather. And when he was come to Judgment, he concluded, that it was very likely to be some Manuscript of great rarity, and would often bemoan, that after Mr. Broughtons death, he could never hear of it. He would also often speak of another Book, which indeed, in the intention of his Master, he should have had. It was a very fair New Testament, either Greek, or Syriack, he remem∣bred not which, noted throughout very largely with Mr. Broughtons own Hand, as to the unfolding of the Language, and Sense, and Collation with the Old Testament. This Book in his later time he would often shew him, and say: This I will leave to you for a Legacy, when I die; and see that you make much of it. But upon his Death it so vanished, that he could never see, nor hear of it more, although he used all the diligent enquiry after it, that possibly he could, and offered a Hundred pounds for it, if that would have purchased it. Mr. Broughton having thus spent several years in London, An. Christi 1589. he went o∣ver He goes into Germany. into Germany, having before he went presented his Concent of Scripture to Queen Eliza∣beths Majesty, to whom he had dedicated it. So he saith in an Epistle to Her Majesty: My pains in opening and declaring the Concent, which the Scripture hath, I humbly present to Your Majesty this, Novemb. 17. 1598. His Companion in his Travels was one Mr. Alexander Top, a young Country Gentleman, who put himself under his Tutorage, and travelled with him that he might be constantly under his Instructions. And afterwards Mr. Broughton married a Neece of his, one Mrs. Lin∣gen, a Gentlewoman that brought a good estate to him. And Mr. Top would oft tell him, that he knew not how otherwise to requite him for all the Love, Pains, and Observance that he had shewed to him in his Journey, and he doubted not, but he would find her such a Wife, as that he would account it a good requital. To this Gentleman it was that he di∣rected his Treatise of Mordecai his Age under this Inscription, To his good Friend Mr. A. T. This Gentleman would oft speak of Mr. Broughtons exceeding great courage and bold∣ness, His Courage. and freedom in inveighing against Popery and Jesuitism among the Papists, and Jesuits, and against Judaism among the Jews. As once more especially at the B. of Mentz his Ta∣ble, where also divers Jesuits were present, with whom he discoursed so freely, and sharply against the Papacy, as Antichristìan, and against the blindness and wickedness of the Roma∣nists,
that the Protestants who were present with him, were afraid that he would have en∣dangered both himself and them. At another time, being in one of the Jews Synagogues, at the time of their Service, where their Publick Minister Read, and Prayed in a strange and uncouth Tone, one of the Jews, as he came out, said unto him; Did not our Minister Sing like an Angel? No (saith he) he Barked like a Dog: And so called for a Dispute with him, where they had long and much tugging. Also Anno Christi 1589. he had a Dispute with Rabbi Elias in Frankford Synagogue, as His Dis∣putes. himself relateth in his Tract, A Require of Consent, &c. Some of the best Learned Jews, (saith he) have greatly desired to be taught our Gospel. One Rabbi Elias of Germany did it whole one and twenty years, with whom in Frankford Synagogue (in the year 1589.) I Disputed, and drew all the Law to Christ; so that he denied nothing, but still desired to hear that matter enlarged. We Disputed under this Oath; That God would strike him pre∣sently that should speak against his own Conscience; whereupon he never denied any thing that I spake, only requested leave to propound his Doubts, and departed with a Desire to be taught by Printing. This our Conference was reported by Jews as far as to Constan∣tinople, and by farther Instigation, Rabbi Abraham Reuben, sent from thence his Epistle in∣to England. Anno Christi 1590. He was still in Germany; so himself saith in an Epistle to the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford. A Dr. (saith he) of yours told Dr. Reynolds, when I was in Ger∣many, in the year 1590. thus; Inibis parvum gratiam à Christianis, qui conatus es hanc Prophetiam Danielis labefactare. Praeterea, qui istic mos est invehi in absentem? Ille cui con∣tradicis, jam est in media Germania. He also mentioneth his being at Worms this year in his Treatise of Melchizedeck. And this same year he wrote his little Tract of Mordecai his Age to Mr. Top, who was then with him in Germany, the young Gentleman desiring satisfaction in that point. Probably they had heard what Dr. Reynolds had said upon it. Anno Christi 1591. He was again in England. Probably he came over, that he might His Return to England. make something of the Controversie betwixt that Dr. and him. They met at London, and referred the Umpirage of their Contest to the A. B. of Canterbury, and to Dr. Elmer, B. B. of London. See his Epistle to them, Dated in London Novemb. 4. 1591. But it seems that Reference came to nothing. Anno Christi 1592. He was again in Germany, and (as it's likely) he continued there Then into Germany. after the Death of Queen Elizabeth. He had some potent Adversary in her Court, who was a means to hinder him from the Preferment which the Queen intended him, and to obstruct her favour to him, and that bred danger and unsettledness to him in England, and this caused him to spend so much of his time in a strange Country. It may easily be gathered out of his Epistle to Queen Elizabeth, (pag. 727. of his Works) that his great Antagonist was the then A. B. of Canterbury, who also had laid wait to apprehend him, and offered a Sum of Money to him who would discover where he was. This year he published the Sinai-sight, which he Dedicated to the Earl of Essex, causing His Sinai's-sight. it wholly to be Engraven in Brass, which cost him about an hundred marks. The Plates are yet to be had in England. In his Travels beyond Sea he was familiarly acquainted with Scaliger, Rephelengius, Ju∣nius, His Ac∣quaintance. Beza, and others the most Eminent for Learning in those Times. His Transactions with Pistorius, Nic. Serrarius, and other Jesuites, from whom he found more respect, than he did from some Protestants, especially from the Scholars of Geneva. His favour with the A. B. of Mentz, to whom he Dedicated his Translation of the Prophets into Greek. His having the offer of a Cardinals Cap in Rome; and his many Disputes with several Rabbins. His Discourse before the Duke of Bovillion about the Descent into Hell, in the Commence∣ment at Mentz, and divers other things, of which it were but superfluous to discourse here at large, and would but anticipate him that hath, or will Read his Works; and our chief intent here, is not to speak of those things which are obvious in his Works, but of those which are known only unto few, the whole stock of his Disciples, being now wholly worn out. Mr. Broughton in his Explication of the Apocalypse, speaketh of some Passages betwixt He is prof∣fered a Car∣dinalship. himself, and some Jesuits at the Towns end of Mentz; and, among other things, saith thus; Upon this we turned to Read the Proselytes Letter; for whose Testimony, I might have had a Cardinalship Principal of Rome, one Mr. Murton of Yorkshire, desired me to go to Mentz with him, to hear what they said of it; where one of them took occasion (as they were speak∣ing about Cardinals) to ask, what mine would have been worth? The other answered, About Eighteen thousand French Crowns. This Mr. Murton, however then written, was no other
than he who afterwards was B. B. Moreton, first of Chester, then of Coventry and Litchfied, and lastly of Durham. He would tell how he was with Mr. Broughton in Germany, and was continually proposing some thing or other to him, wherein he desired to be resolved: And when he understood not some of his Answers, but required farther Explication, Mr. Broughton would be angry, and call him Dullard, and Unlearned, and such like Names; whereupon Dr. More∣ton took up this Custom, that, when he came to propose any Doubt to him, he would plea∣santly say; I pray you, whatsoever Dolts and Dullards I am to be called, call me so before we begin, that your Discourse, and mine Attention be not interrupted thereby. And Mr. Broughton took it as pleasantly from him. Mr. Broughton speaks oft of his Disputations with Rabbi Farrar, and to that which he writeth of it, thus much more may be added: That the same Rabbin wrote a Tract in La∣tine, to have confuted Mr. Brougbton's Opinion about the Fourth Monarchy, which yet Mr. Broughton never answered, either conceiving that he had already said enough upon that Subject in his former Writings, or else because he wanted either health, or leisure. Anno Christi 1596. came the Epistle of Rabbi Abraham Reuben from Constantinople, di∣rected istle  to him in London; but he was then in Germany. It was written in so harsh and stange an Hebrew Character, that, though it went through the Hands of divers Scholars in London, yet none could so much as Read the Endorsement, till at last it came to Mr. Top, who, as afterwards he confessed, could not at first know one Letter of it: But at last, with very much pains he found out the Character, and made a shift to Read it, and so sent it over to him in Germany. At this time of his abode there, Mr. Isaac Genius became his Scholar, who afterwards turned his Concent of Scripture into Latine, which he published Anno Christi 1602. Mr. Broughton himself overseeing the Work all along: And thus much may be observed from those words of his in the Epistle to the Reader, where he writes thus; Translatione hac meâ, meâ inquam, majore ex parte; nam ei plurima Author stilo suo addit. Mr. John Boreel had turned his Exposition upon Daniel into Latine some three years before. Upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth, or shortly after, he returned into England, and was His Return to England. in London at the time when the Plague raged sore there; and Mr. Broughton going to visit Mr. Speed in that sad time, he was astonished to see him there in a time of so much danger. But Mr. Broughton was very chearful, and spake much to his Edification and Comfort con∣cerning God's afflicting hand upon the City. Anno Christi 1603. he Preached at Oatlands before Prince Henry, upon the Lord's Bible trans∣lated. Prayer. Anno Christi 1607. the Translation of the Bible was begun: From which work, how he came to be secluded, whose Abilities that way were known so well, may rather be wondred at than resolved. He had spoken much concerning that Translation, for which he heareth ill of some, as if he shewed Indignation, because he was excluded; whereas Charity and Candour would construe, that what he had written, was in Zeal, and Vindi∣cation of the Truth. And doubtless if his Advertisements concerning some particular Texts had been taken, they had not been useless. He again made another Journey beyond the Seas, and made his abode there for a while, and was for some time a Preacher to the English in Middlebourg: And thither two of his He goes a∣gain into Germany. Followers in London [Mr. Ayre and Mr. Perry] went purposely to give him a visit; whom at first meeting he did a little chide, for taking so long, dangerous, chargeable, and need∣less a Journey. What? said they pleasantly; Is this the Entertainment you give us for our pains and visit? Then did he as pleasantly and lovingly embrace them, and entertained them heartily and affectionately during all the time of their abode with him. Whilst he was now beyond the Seas, he wrote that very sharp and smart Discourse a∣gainst A. B. Bancroft, and sent the whole Impression over to Mr. William Cotton (Younger Brother to Sir Rowland Cotton) then living in London; withal, intreating him, that if he durst adventure, he should deliver one of the said Books into the A. Bishop's own Hands. The Gentleman, though he foresaw the undertaking to be dangerous, because he could deny nothing to Mr. Broughton, undertook it, and made his Apology to the A. B. and told him that Mr. Broughton had engaged him to do it, and therefore he begged his Lordships Pardon and Excuse, which also he obtained, and was fairly dismissed. But some Officers were immediately sent to his Lodging, to seize upon the Impression, which they did accordingly: But Mr. Cotton foreseeing what would come to pass, had con∣veyed a Trunk-full of them out of the way, whereby he escaped. Mr. Broughton having thus spent much of his time in Travels, at last he fell into a Cough His Sickness and Return to England. of the Lungs, which encreasing upon him, caused his Return into England, as being desirous
to die in his own Country; and accordingly in the Month of November, Anno 1611. he came to Graves-end; which being speedily made known to his Friends in London, divers of them went down to him thither, and brought him to the City. He told them, that he was come to die in his own Native Country; and his desire also was, if the Lord had per∣mitted, to die in his own Native County [Shropshire] and so had he oft told Sir Rowland Cotton afore this, that he intended to end his Days with him, if the Lord should permit, and so he told him now again at their meeting in London, that if his strength would give him leave, he would come down to him into Shropshire, and the noble Knight did accor∣dingly accommodate Lodgings for him against his coming, suitable to his weak and sickly condition. But it pleased the Lord to prevent his Journey. He lodged in London, and kept all Winter with an old Friend, Mr. Hill in Cannon-Street, and in the Spring he was removed for fresh air to Totnam-High-Cross, to the House of one Mr. Benet, a Linnen-Draper in Cheapside. Although he had so tedious an infirmity, yet he spake, as he could, at times to his Friends His Spee∣ches. about many things, giving them many pious, and godly exhortations. He used these short Speeches to them very much: Study the Bible. Labour to save one another. Be peaceable. Meddle with your own matters. Some great Judgment will come upon this Kingdom. Never fear Popery: It shall never overflow again: But the course, which the Bishops take, will fill the Land with Atheism. Meddle not with the quarreling. Teach not the unwilling: many other such speeches he used. He went over all the Books of the Old Testament in a brief discourse of the sum of every one of them: But he was now so weak, being near his end, that his strength served him not to do the like by those of the New. When he drew near to Death, he told them that stood by him, that Satan had assaulted His Death. him: But (said he) the Son of God hath rebuked him, and hath spoken comfortable words to my Soul. A little before his Death two Friends came from London to visit him, and he could then speak to them, though very faintly. And after some stay with him, they took their leaves of him, not thinking that his end had been so near. But e're they came half way to London, a Messenger overtook them, and told them that Mr. Broughton was speechless, here∣upon they hasted back again, and found it so; for they could get no words from him, yet when they asked him; Shall one of us pray by you? He, by lifting up his Hands, gave an evident sign of his consent, and fervent desire after it. And so they stayed with him till he Dyed: which was August the 4th, An. Ch. 1612. He being then in his Climacterical year, viz. 63. His Corps was brought to London, accompanied with a great multitude of People, of whom many had put themselves into mourning for his sake. He was interred in St. Antho∣lines Church, August the 7th, Mr. Speght, Minister of the Church in Milk Street, Preached his Funeral Sermon upon those words, John 11. 8. Lord, Behold, he whom thou lovest is sick. It was said that the Bishops would not suffer his Sermon to be Printed. Of Personage he was graceful and comely: of a countenance that spake much studious∣ness, His Chara∣cter. and gravity, and the Picture of him prefixed before his Works, doth much resemble him, as such say who best knew him. He was indefatigably studious, which swayed his temper a little to austerity: and yet among his Friends, he was of a very sweet, affable, and loving carriage; sharp, and severe, and exceeding bold against Error, and Impiety, and would sharply reprove it, whatever it cost him. He was once travelling here in England, and being in his Inn, a Royster, in the room next to him, was swearing horribly, and at no measure: In went he boldly to him, and who art thou (saith he) thou Wretch, who darest His Bold∣ness. thus to Blaspheme, and profane the glorious Name of the Great God? And some other like words, which he set on with so great an awe, and boldness, that the Roarer became calm, and took his sharp reproofs (especially when he came to understand who he was) in very good part. He was free and communicative to any that desired to learn of him: But would withall be very angry with Scholars, if they did not readily understand him in his discourse, as thinking it a shame to them to be ignorant of such things. Among his Friends he would be very pleasant, especially at his Meals, at which time, if any at the Table proposed any serious Question to him, to be resolved on, he would commonly divert it with some other Questions, and that ordinarily, a pleasant one, to find the Table imployment in the discussi∣on of it, till he had Dined, or Sup't, and then he would say: Now come and ask what Question you please: for now I am ready for you: and so would return to his serious discourse again. His stile of writing was curt, and something harsh, and obscure, because he affected His Stile.
to speak much in few words: and besides that his natural Genius inclined him to such a stile, it's probable, that his much conversing with the Judaick Learning, did something mould, and habituate him that way. His rehearsing the same things often over, was occasio∣ned by the writing of his Treatises in several places, and having his discourses with several Persons, where the same things did almost inevitably occur and fall in: It were to be wished, that he had been more sparing in his own Praises, and less bitter in his invectives against his Antagonists: But if it be impartially considered how he was trampled under foot by some of the Bishops, and vilified by others upon their example, how he was by them kept from deserved Preferment, tossed up and down, troubled, disgraced, and endangered, you may very well allow some Grains of transportment, and liberty to so great a Scholar as he was, somewhat to forget himself. Those that read his Writings, which desire to profit by them, will pass over such things without offence, and cover such weaknesses with the Mantle of Charity, the rather because himself took notice of them, and upon his Death-Bed confessed, and acknowledged them to be his infirmities, whereof he repented. And withal he protested then, as he had often before, that they were rather strained from him by his Adversaries provocations, then flowing from his own disposition. In his Writings the serious and impartial Reader will find these two things. First, as much Light given to the Scriptures, especially into the most difficult passages of it, as is to be found in any one Author whatsoever: Nay, it may be, in all Authors together. Secondly, a winning, and inticing enforcement to the reading of the Scriptures, with a greater seri∣ousness, and more then ordinary searching into them. Among those that have studied his Books, many might be named, that have grown to be Proficients, so far as that they have attained to a most singular, and almost incredible skill, and readiness in his way, in the un∣derstanding of the Bible, though otherwise unlearned Men. Yea, some such their were, that be∣ing excited, and stirred up by his Books, applyed themselves to the study of the Hebrew Tongue, and attained to a great measure of skill and knowledge therein. Nay, a Woman might be named that did it. Mr. Broughtons Writings do carry in them a kind of holy and happy Fascination, that the serious Reader of them, is won by a sweet violence, to look into the sacred Scriptures His Wri∣tings. with the greatest diligence and seriousness that is possible, and cannot chuse but do it. Let any one but set himself to read his Books in good earnest, and if he find not, that he sees much more in the Scriptures, then ever formerly he did, and that he is stirred up to search much more narrowly into them then ever he was before, he misseth of that, which was never mis∣sed of before, by any that took that course, if multitude of Experiences may have any Credit.
The Life and Death of Mr. Robert Boyd, who died, An. Chr. 1627. RObert Boid of Trochreg, was descended of Robert Boid, Earl of Arran, and some∣times His Paren∣tage. Protector of Scotland, from whom in the fifth remove descended James Boid, Baron of Trochreg and Barniel, the Father of our Robert. He was born Anno Dom. 1578. and by his Father carefully educated in learning, and having profited in the His Educa∣tion. study of the liberal Arts, he commenced Master of Arts in the University of Edinburgh; where also he was a diligent hearer of Robert Rollock, a famous Preacher in those daies. Anno Christi 1604. or thereabouts, he travell'd into France, and came to Poictiers, where he staid but a while, because he had not the convenience there of frequenting religious exer∣cises, to which he was much addicted: and going from thence, he went to Thoarse, where Dr. Rivet had been Minister for about 10 years; who most willingly entertain'd this learn∣ed young Man, especially when he understood that he was willing to undertake the instruct∣ing of certain noble Youths in a School lately founded in that place by him at the charge of the noble Duke Trumelian. This placc he discharged for a year and half with great pro∣fit, His imploy∣ment in France. and happy success; living all that while in great familiarity with Rivet, approving himself exquisite in learning unblameable in his Conversation, eminent in Piety, and of sin∣gular modesty. He was so diligent and industrious in his studies, that he spent whole nights Industry. and daies, so far as bis School would give him leave, in reading and writing, and borrow∣ing divers Books of Dr. Rivet, especially Greek Authors both in Prose and Verse, he made Proficiency. so good use of the same, gathering out of them whatsoever was worthy observation, that he throughly digested them, and became Master of them, whereby both Latine and Greek grew as familiar to him as his Mother Tongue; He was also no noviee in Hebrew, and in that short space he grew so exact in the French Tongue, that after a few years he might be reckon'd among the most eloquent, whether you respect the elegancies of that Language, or the pronunciation of it (a faculty, which few of his Countrymen use to at∣tain unto) as many could witness, who a while after heard him Preach eloquently in the same. From Thoarse he went to Bourdeaux, where Gilbert Primrose, his Countryman, was Pastor of the Reformed Church; a man deservedly famous; by whose means he lived there a year with a certain Nobleman, who desired to make use of his labours. About this time the University of Mountauban wanting a Professor of Philosophy, sent for At Moun∣tauban. him thither; where, according to the custom of the Academy, he taught and exercised his Scholars four hours every day, running over the whole body of Philosophy, whereby many of the Students took their degree with good approbation. While he was thus busily em∣ployed in the Schools, all the rest of his spare time he spent in other Studies. He slept little, Industry. spending a great part of the night in the study of Divinity, which he propounded as his chie∣fest mark: for he alwaies purposed, if God should give him an opportunity to be a Pastor of a Church, and a Professor of an University. But when certain Students, his hearers, re∣turn'd from Montauban into Xantoin, and Angouleme, and there, to his great commendati∣on, divulged how eloquently he spake the French Tongue, affirming further, that he carri∣ed himself gravely and modestly, was of a most exemplary conversation, and that he had declared that he would embrace a call to the Ministry in the French Church, the Church of Verthole in Angouleme, having first advised with the Provincial Synod, cast their Eyes upon him, and sending delegates to Mountauban, they agreed with him that he should enter into the sacred Ministry, and undertake to be their Pastor: which he assented to, upon condition, that if he should have a call to any University, where he might exercise the Office both of a Pastor and Professor, that Church should be willing to part with him. And thus after due examination and ttial he was ordained by the Synod, and setled in that Church. From thence he wrote often to Dr. Rivet, giving him an account of his Studies, who de∣sired a visit from him; being but a day or two journies off. Dr. Rivet also informed the il∣lustrious Lord Du Plessis of his parts, and excellent indowments, at what time a Professors place was void, William Crag, a learned Scothman. who had long been a Professor of Philoso∣phy there, being now made a Professor of Divinity. When gone, Boíd came to him to Thoarse, Dr. Rivet sent him with his letters of recommendation to Samur to the Lord Du Plessis, who having conferred with him in private, and heard him Preach in publick, com∣municating
counsels with the Synod, he brought it about that Delegates were sent to his Church at Verthole, requesting that for the good of the University, and by the approbation of the Provincial Synod, they'd give way to his dismission; for which end also they wrote Letters to the Synod. This request was very grievous to his Church, which highly prized him; yet looking at the benefit of the University, though very unwillingly, they at last dismissed him, with ample testimonies, both from the Synod and themselves. When he was come to Samur, he was admitted amongst the ordinary Pastors of the At Samur a Pastor, and Professor. Church, and besides, performed publick Lectures, and extraordinary Disputations in the University for some months, till a Synod of the Churches of Anjou, Coenoman and Tours, met together; whom the National Synod had appointed to provide fit Professors of Divinity in that University, and that they should carefully examine them, afore they admitted them. This was performed in Sept. An. 1608. at which time the Pastors of that Province met to∣gether, to whom also were adjoined some Pastors of the neighbouring Provinces, among whom Dr. Rivet was one. There divers Theological points about the Church, and Church-matters, were propounded to be disputed on, and Robert Boid, who was to undergo his Trial, was appointed to answer before the assembly of Pastors and Elders: which place he so discharged, that by the unanimous consent of all, he was judged worthy of that Chair; which for the space of 6 years after, viz. till the year 1614. he supplied with the great applause of all, and to the great profit of the Students, with unwearied labour, and incredi∣ble industry and diligence. So that by his excessive watchings, he contracted a weakness of stomack: yet would he not (though intreated) favour himself, nor be prevail'd with to His weak∣ness. forbear his ordinary Lectures, though he had time most freely allowed him for the recove∣ry of his health. He alwaies observed this Rule, To fetch his Divinity from the fountains of the sacred Scrip∣tures: for which end he made choice of the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, to expound it in his publick Lectures, because he saw that the Apostle had in this Epistle with admira∣ble succinctness comprized all the chief Heads of the Christian Religion, relating both to Faith and Manners, and omitted nothing that was necessary. In all his Disputations, which were many, he was solid and acute, and withal so clear, that he left no scruples remaining in the minds of his hearers. Anno Christi. 1611. When that famous Assembly was held at Samur, in which appear∣ed almost all the Protestant Nobility, and two Pastors delegated out of every Province, Mr. Boìd Preaching in his course among others, had this testimony from all, that so copious and His Ser∣mons. eloquent language was admirable in a Foreigner, who had so lately learned their Tongue. And having a great care to improve his learning, and a desire to settle himself in France, he began to bethink himself of a fit Yoke-fellow, and finding an honest Virgin of the Fa∣mily of Malivern, he sought to her Parents for their consent, who having received a satis∣factory testimony out of Scotland, of the Nobility of his birth, and competency of his Estate, they easily yeilded, and so he took her to Wife, with the great good liking both of the Church and University, who hoped, that by this means he would be fixed among them, so as never to entertain thoughts of returning to Scotland again, to settle there. His Marri∣age. But e're long things fell out otherwife; for King James taking care of the Universities within his Dominions, and hearing of Mr. Boid, what great credit he had at Samur, and being told by some noble Scotchmen, who were of kin to him, that he was most fit to be placed over the Colledge of Glascow, as one that was like to adorn the Divinity Chair there, they fo far prevailed that King James commanded him to return to his own Country; wri∣ting also to the Lord Du Plessis, that with his and the Universities good leave he might come His return to Scotland. away. Thus his former purposes being overpowred, neither himself, nor they in France, to whom he was obliged, being able to resist, with much difficulty getting the consent of his Wife and her Parents, he bid Farewel to the University of Samur, who, sensible of their great loss, dismissed him with much grief. This removal from Samur to Glascow was An. Dom. 1615. where for the first four years space all things went according to his own desire. His exemplary Holiness, singular Learning, admirable Eloquence; his Gravity, Humility, unaffected Modesty, extraordina∣ry Diligence both in his Ecclesiastical and Scholastical Employment, above the rate of ordi∣nary Pastors or Professors, drew all to a Reverence, Love, and Esteem for, and many even to an admiration of, him. Under his conduct, with the assistance of his Colleagues, Mr. His success there. William Blair, Mr. David Dickson, Mr. James Robertson, Mr. James Sharp, and Mr. Robert Blair, the affairs of the University flourisht exceedingly. From the very beginning of the Reformation, the credit and concerns thereof, were in a very good posture, by the care, and
endeavours of Mr. Andrew Melvin, and Mr. Thomas Smeton the Presidents there, who were famous for their dextrous management of all things relating both to Discipline, Man∣ners and learning: but after the coming of Mr. Boid, every thing grew to a far greater heighth. His pains were unparallel'd, and indefatigable; for he sate daily at his studies, from mor∣ning His Indust∣ry. till midnight, and sometime longer, saving only a few hours for the necessary resection of nature, and dispatch of the Exercises of his Place. For his Diet, he was very strict and severe: yet in his private conversation, when at any time he unbended himself thereto (for he was neither a man for all company, nor for any company at all seasons) he was most ob∣ligingly courteous, and among those with whom he was familiar, he was sometimes very pleasant and chearful, In all his publick Lectures, Piety, Learning and Eloquence strove His rare Parts, and Practice. which should get the Mastery. In the exercise of Discipline, whether in private Classes, or publick Assemblies, such was the severity of his Reproofs, the earnestness of his persua∣sions, the authority of his Injunctions, the charity and prudence of his Counsels, and in all such a prevailing persuasiveness, that his looks and words were more powerful to reform what was amiss, than the sharpest corrections of others. And one Engine he had of grea∣ter force than all the rest to work upon the most obstinate minds, and that was his solemn Prayers after the exercise of publick Discipline, and weekly censures, which he utter'd in Latine, with excellent and constant variety of composure, whereby he drew even rivers of tears from, and stir'd up troops of ardent desires in some of his hearers. Samur had abundant experience for six whole years together of his solidity in modera∣ting, and determining in their Disputations, and Glascow had no less trial of his subtilty and profoundness in his extemporary Disputations in the solemn and frequent examination of Students: for, as for the Problematical sporting with Divinity, by young Men, so much used in most Universities, he thought it below the Majesty of that sacred Art: and therefore, though he were a most acute and skilful Master in the art of Disputing, and inferior to none, if not superior to most therein, yet he seem'd to have a peculiar conversation from it, and saw so many things which he thought fit to be reformed in your ordinary Divinity Dispu∣tations, that he resolved wholly to forbear that exercise at Glascow. As for Conference and Discourse, though he condemn'd the practice of some in tri∣fling Prudence. away their golden hours in frivilous chat, and impertinent prattle, yet if any one came to him either for satisfaction in any doubt, or for Counsel, or Comfort, or upon any such serious account, none did entertain them with greater humanity and humility, or more fully and freely open himfelf unto them. But above all, his peculiar Excellency did seem to lie in Practical Divinity, and resolving Piety. Cases of Conscience; as appears not only by the whole contexture of his rare Comment on the Epistle to the Ephesians, but especially by that part of it on the 6th Chapter. His manner of performing his Lectures was this; Twice a week he read for an hour and a half together; but he did not read out of his Papers all that he delivered, as the cu∣stom of most is, but uttered all in a continued Discourse, without any hesitation, and with as much ease and freedom of speech as the most Eloquent Divine is wont to deliver his po∣pular Sermons in his Mother Tongue. One thing especially was admirable and astonish∣ing in him, that all his Quotations out of the Greek Fathers, which were frequent, and some∣times very long, he repeated by heart, and never made use of any Notes in the Chair, ex∣cept for an extraordinary long passage out of Chrysostom once or twice. We come now to the last part of his Life. For the four first years, after his coming to Troubles begin. Glascow, all things ran smoothly, as was said; but afterwards the Clouds began to rise, and the Malice of the Devil did not suffer him to enjoy a much longer time of Peace. In the year 1618. as the Synod of Dort met together, which proved very happy and successful to the Reformed Churches; so there was held an Assembly at Perth, which proved as fatal and mischievous to the British Churches. King James, otherwise a most wise Prince, was fatally mistaken in this, in that he suffered himself; to be influenc'd so far by the Counsels of A. Bishop Bancroft, and other Court-Bishops, as to resolve either by art, or force, to con∣form the Scottish Church to the English in point of Government and Ceremonies: And as a little before he had obtruded some Bishops out of England upon the Scotch Churches sore against their minds; so by means of that mock-counterfeit Synod at Perth, he appointed that five of the Chief English Ceremonies should be brought into use in Scotland. Hence came that train of quarrels, troubles and confusions, which overturned from the very Foun∣dations, that flourishing Church. And though many, some out of one respect, some out of another, did submit their necks to this yoak; yet divers of the most Eminent Ministers, both for Piety and Learning, stood up in defence of the Liberty and Purity of the Scottish
Church, against the Innovation and Violent Attempts of the Bishops and Court-Party: And though Mr. Boid did not publickly intermeddle with these Controversies, yet he did not obsurely favour the Dissenters: But however, he extended his Charity to the Bishops, as hoping well of them, not being as yet thorowly acquainted with their Designs and Pra∣ctices. But as soon as the Bishops perceived that he did favour their Opposers, they lookt upon him with an evil Eye, and by their Emissaries did wrest all his deeds and words to the worst sense. Robert Bruce, the Head of the Anti-Episcopal Party in Scotland, came frequent∣ly to a House of his, which was near Glascow; thither Mr. Boid went once or twice to make him a Visit, they being of Antient Acquaintance. This the Prelatical pick-thanks laid hold on, not only to spread abroad Rumors among the common people, but to write to the King also, That Trochreg was gone over into the Tents of the Puritanes, as they called them. Hereupon, that he might decline the King's displeasure, which he was afraid of, and the Bishops hatred, he entertained thoughts of leaving his publick Employment, and retiring himself to his own Estate which he had in Carick; from which yet he was earnest∣ly dissuaded by all his Friends; but all in vain; for he was fully resolved to lay aside both all his Academical and Ecclesiastical Imployments, which accordingly he did sore against He laid down his imploy∣ments. the mind of all those that were well-wishers to him, notwithstanding all they could say to the contrary: Which course yet he soon after repented of; for he considered that no man ought voluntarily to put himself out of that Station and Employment wherein God by his Providence has plac'd him, except he be by violence forc'd thereto; and therefore he earnestly desired that God would open a Door for his return again to some Employment either in the Church or University, that so his Talent that God had intrusted him with, His trou∣bles. might again be brought forth to publick use for the honour of his Lord and Master. While he lived in this Privacy and Retirement, he kept correspondence with Dr. Rivet (as he had done all along from their first Acquaintance) and communicated all his Affairs to him; and among other things, he acquainted him how that some who had been his fa∣miliars, and pretended friends formerly, now discovered much Enmity against him: Where∣upon he wrote to them modestly and meekly, declaring his Judgment, and beseeching them by the bowels of Christ, to deal tenderly with their Brethren; and to use their best Endea∣vours for procuring them liberty from that intollerable yoak which was imposed upon their consciences: This they took so heinously, and treated him so roughly afterwards, that he said he thought he might have found more favor from the General of the Jesuits, with his four Assessors, than he did from them: He added, that according to the present posture of assairs, he saw little likelyhood of obtaining any further publick employment; though there was fire kindled in his Breast ready to break forth, when as he saw and heard those things which daily occur'd to his Eyes and Ears. While he was thus solicitous what to do, there came Messengers to him from Edinburgh, desiring him to come to them, and undertake the charge of the Presidentship of the Univer∣sity, and of a Pastor of a Church, both which were then void. This wisht-for opportunity which thus unexpectedly offer'd it self, he readily embrac't, and came immediately to Edin∣burgh, preparing himself to a diligent discharge of his undertaking. But the Devil fearing the ruine of his Kingdom by the singular accomplishments of this eminent Servant of God, laid a block in his way at his very entrance; for some of the Ministers of Edinburgh, who were leaven'd with pride and error, fearing the presence of so holy and learned a man, wrote letters to Spotswood A. B. of St. Andrews, and to the English Court, whereby they obtain'd from King James Letters to the Magistrates of Edinburgh, wherein he straitly charged them that they should by no means suffer Mr. Boid the use of either the Chair or the Pulpit in their City. This holy Man had resolved to discourse upon the Gospel of St. John in his Sermons to the People, but being thus stopt at the very beginning, he composed these Verses with a sor∣rowful heart, which he wrote at the end of the first Sermon he had prepared on that Gos∣pel. Caetera ne quaeras, nam haec lumine caepta sub ipso Irati abrupit Regis violentia, qui me Jusmeruum repetitis expulit illâ ubi me concordia vota piorum amna deflent sua) Christo autore locârant. ? Habe; Quia Pontificalis abollae placet, nec fimbria—
Thus he was sent a second time to his uneasy privacy, where he lived a kind of banisht or imprison'd life; though by the diligent endeavours of his Friends he was almost recal'd again to Glascow. At length the charge of the Church at Paslet was committed to him: but here new storms arose: for the Widow of the Earl of Abercorn, Baron of Paslet, who was neat a kin to Mr. Boid, being lately turned Papist, stirred up her Children and Servants to give this Servant of God all the disturbance they could, and so to tire him out, and force him to leave the place; the Baron of Streban, a rash young man, complying too much with his Mothers advice, took the opportunity of Mr. Boid's absence, his Kins∣man, and brake open the doors of his House, and in a tumultuous and reproachful manner, threw out all his Houshold stuff into the Streets: whereupon it was observed that that Fa∣mily never did thrive afterwards, but were in a decaying condition, till they were reduced almost to nothing. Mr. Boid being almost overwhelmed with these troubles, withdrew from all publick imployment, and continued at his own House in Carict, until at length by his continual watching, grief, and excessive studies he contracted a swelling in his Throat: whereupon he went to Edinburgh to consult some Physitians about it: but the distemper pre∣vailing upon him, it put an end to his life. He died Jan. 5. 1627. in the 49th year of his age, in the midst of the sighs and His Death. tears of his dear and neer friends, who were witnesses of those divine joys and consolations wherewith his Soul was filled, even amidst the assaults of Satan, and those other trials that befel him. These following Verses I thought fit to transcribe, as containing in them a brief ac∣count of the several places in which he had his residence from his Birth to his Death. Glascoa te genuit; Titulos Trochoregia Patrum Et Gentilitium stemma decusque dedit; Aira & Edina rudes annos formavit; at aevi Excoluit florem Gallia culta tui; Te Mont-alba Sophum gremio complexa benigno est; Verthulium eloquii Ver tulit inde sacri, Salmura te Verbi Synodo suadente Ministrum Evocat, & Cathedram contulit alma suam; Postmodo te sacri Praeconem Glascoa Verbi Accipit, imperio Rex Iacobe tuo; Hic ubi florentis Doctor, Praesesque Lycaei Parta fuit studiis messis opima tuis Primorum arbitrio tandem selectus Edinam (Praesidis a sacris sede vacante) colis; Hinc pulsum rigido dominantis presulis oestro, Amplexa est gremio Pasleta laeta suo; Inde odiis Strabane tuis vi pulsus, Edinae Finiit aerumnas mors tibi grata tuas. The Life and Death of Dr. Twiss, who dyed Anno Christi 1644. DR. Twiss was an English Man, born of honest Parents, who yet lived but in a mean His Paren∣tage. condition. His Grandfather was a German, who upon some occasion came over into England, and by a gracious Providence of God he left this his Grandson, never to be for∣gotten among the Reverend Fathers of our English Church. When he was a Boy, he was brought up in the famous Shool of Winchester, where were He went to Winchester School. Bred also those eminently learned Men Bilson, Lake, Hanmer, Wotton, Hoskins (who was our Twisses Uncle) and he was familiarly acquainted with the other. When he was eighteen years old, he was sent to Wicham Colledge in Oxford; where he Thence to Oxford. applied himself, first to the Study of Logick, than of Philosophy, and afterwards of Divini∣ty, in which Studies he continued in that University for about the space of twenty years. He was taken notice of in that University for his acute wit, his solid judgment, his integ∣rity, His excel∣lent Parts.
and pleasing behaviour, his pious, and humble mind, and at the last, he took his De∣gree of Doctor, with a general applause. For he had before given a great manifestation both of his Learning, and Industry, in his Lectures, and Disputations; as also in transcri∣bing, and judiciously correcting the Writings of that profound Doctor, Thomas de Brad∣wardine, which were to be Published by Sir Henry Savil. Neither was he less famous for his Sermons which he Preached in the University, though An excel∣lent Prea∣cher. some were not so well pleased with them, saying, that his Gifts were fitter for the Schools than the Pulpit. But how powerful he was in his Ministry, may appear by this instance? There was in Oxford in his time one Joseph Barnet, a Jew both by Nation and Superstition, who read Hebrew to divers young Students, and had cunningly pretended, and held forth, that he embraced, and believed Jesus Christ to be the true Messias: He professed that he was seriously and heartily grieved for his former Blasphemies against him. He mournfully be∣wailed that the Eyes of his Brethren, and Countrymen were so blinded, and their hearts so hardened. He seemed to desire nothing more earnestly, than that he might be judged wor∣thy to be admitted into the Christian Church by the Sacrament of Baptism. By these tricks of Legerdemain he deceived many of the Learned Doctors, especially Dr. Lake, the worthy Provost of New Colledge, and afterwards B. B. of Bath and Wells. And a Sabbath was appointed publickly, wherein Baptism should be administred to this new Disciple in the University Church of St. Maries, Dr. Twiss was commanded to Preach before the administration of this Sacred Ordinance, to add the more lustre to it. But the very day before he was to be Baptized, this dissembling Jew ran away. Jewish Hy∣pocricy. Dr. Lake being informed hereof, sent some on Horseback, others on foot to pursue him, who overtaking him, brought him back, though against his Will, to Oxford, where, on his own accord, he professed that he was returned to his old Judaism, which he had forsworn: he jeared at Christ, and despised Baptism: For he had now filled his Purse. Hereupon our Twiss laid aside the Sermon which he had prepared, and instead thereof Preached an excellent Sermon upon occasion of Barnets revolt, wherein he shewed Gods His great Labours. just Judgment upon that perverse Nation and People, whom he had given up to a repro∣bate sense even to this very day. And this he performed with great applause, and to the ad∣miration of the whole University: For that he had composed this in fewer hours, then the common Wits in the University could make a Sermon in so many weeks, yea months, and yet they consisted more in words then in profitable and useful matter. Hence it was that those Catechistical Lectures, which he read every Thursday in Term time in the Colledge Chappel, and those publick Sermons which he Preached every Lords Day throughout the year, in the Parish Church of Olives, were so much frequented by the Scholars, as well as by the Townsmen. And though he lay hid, as it were, in quiet in his Academical Cel, yet was his Name so celebrated in King James his Court, that that Prudent Prince made choice of him to be Chaplain to his only Daughter the Lady Eliza∣beth His Prefer∣ment. to wait upon her into the Palatinat to Heidleberg. Dr. Twiss being now to leave his Native Country of Great Brittain, before he went, he His Pru∣dence. disposed of his Patrimony (which was about 30 l. per annum) and commended it to his Brother, requiring him, that out of the Rents of it, he should raise Portions for his Sisters. And thus having disposed of his small Estate, he went cheerfully with the Princess into the Palatinat: And to deceive the tediousness of the journy, he faithfully expounded some part of Holy Scriptures daily, whereby he prevailed with his excellent Lady, to moderate her grief, for leaving her dear Brittain, being taught by him, That here we have no abiding City, but we seek for a better in the world to come. By these and such like admonitions, he ar∣med this rare Princess her mind to encounter with the strongest gusts of adversity with an undaunted mind. And ttuly she was put upon great trials, when, after she was Crowned Queen of Bohemia, she was forced not long after to fly out of that Country, being great with Child, and excluded out of the Palatinat, also (her Husbands Paternal Inheritance) and driven to live in exile all the remainder of her days, which sad dispensation of God to∣wards her, she bore with a masculine, and undaunted Spirit, being forewarned, and fore∣armed by Dr. Twiss, whil'st he waited upon her, against such changes, and occurrences: For he had taught her, That Gods Divine Providence doth order all the Estates, and conditions of all Men, whether prosperous or adverse, according to his own good pleasure, and for the Eternal good of those that belong to him, according to that Promise. Rom. 8. 28. We know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the Called according to his purpose. And probably upon this account it was that Prince Rupert, one of the Sons of this Il∣lustrious Queen, in the time of our unhappy Civil War, coming unto Newberry, where
Dr. Twiss was Minister, entertained him courteously, and used him familiarly, making large Promises to him, that he would be of the Antiparliamentarian side, and write in their defence, and live among them, but our Doctor neither could, nor was willing to live among Courtiers, especially when they were in Arms. Before Dr. Twiss had continued two months in that honourable imployment in the Court of that Prince Elector Palatine, he was commanded back into England, not without the grief of that excellent Lady, and her Princely Husband, for the loss of such a Jewel, which the said Prince at the departure of Dr. Twiss, expressed, and professed in a Latine Oration which he made to him. Dr. Twiss being returned into England, did not betake himself to a Court Life; but His return into Eng. wholly applied himself for the good of the Church, and in a Country Village fell more hard to his Scholastick Studies, and in a mean House, laid the foundation of those are works, which all the Reformed embraced, and admired. After some years he was sent for by the Magistrates of the Town of Newberry to be their Pastor, that where he had first seen the Light, he might be a burning and shining Light Goes to Newberry. to go before, and to guide and direct them in the way to Heaven: And there passed his time to the great content, and satisfaction of himself, and to the great profit and edification of the People. He was so far from seeking after Riches, and Ecclesiastical Dignities and Preferments, that he modestly refused them when they were offered to him. Yea, he often pleased, and Humility. congratulated himself in his low, and mean condition, as being therein exposed to fewer Temptations: And he did often solemnly profess, that he was much indebted unto God, for that he had graciously placed him in a low, but far safer condition from such dangers as an Episcopal Dignity might have exposed him to. A great part of the Fellows of New Colledge in the University of Oxford (in whose power it was to chuse a Provost for the Government of the Colledge of Winchester) did earnestly request our Dr. Twiss that he would be pleased to accept of that Place whereunto they had chosen him, and which was equal to the chiefest Ecclesiastical Preferment, at least for matter of pro∣fit: But he as earnestly contended against it, requesting them to confer and bestow it upon some other worthy Person: shewing hereby, that he rather desired to attend his Studies in private, then to wax old and idle in a more honourable Place. And which is more to be wondred at, his Wife, though she was the Daughter of one of the Prebends of Winchester, never repined, or was troubled at his refusing so fat, and plentiful a Place, and Estate. For this excellent Woman did seriously consider, that her Twiss should be nothing enriched thereby, but his Revenues would be spent upon others, and that her Husband would be occasioned to loose much time, which he esteemed most precious, and be impeded in his Studies, which he took so much pleasure in. Not many years after a Prebendary at Winchester was laid at his Feet, which he, with an humble superciliousness kicked from him. And this he did the rather, because he foresaw that it would breed a quarrel between Dr. Moor, and Dr. Neal; the one of them a B. B. and the other a Prebend of Winchester, and Father in Law to our Twiss. And Dr. Moor had Preached freely against B. Neal in a certain Church, and had been forced to give in evi∣dence to the Parliament against him for his innovations, though against his will. The B. B. (by whose counsel it doth not appear) not long after, commanded Dr. Moor to Preach a Visitation Sermon before the Clergy at Winchester. After the Sermon, the B. B. complained that he had often been unworthily abused by Dr. Moor, and he was resol∣ved to carry away a most Christian Victory over him. For now, having better knowledge of him, he would put him into the Catalogue of his chiefest Friends; and that there should be nothing which Moor should not be ashamed to ask, which he would not glory in gran∣ting. Dr. Moor returned great thanks to the B. B. And only begged of him, that himself being now worn out with Age, and labours, he would be pleased to bestow his Prebendship upon one of his Sons in Law, either Dr. Twiss, or Dr. Metkerk, Dr. of Divinity, and some∣times Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of Oxford. The B. B. readily granted this request, and designed Dr. Twiss for to be the Prebend: But he, returning his humble and hearty thanks both to the B. B. and to his Father in-Law, intreated them to give him leave to abide in Newberry to attend that Flock over which God had set him: judging himself unfit for a Cathedral employment, and saying, that it was hard for him, among such eminent Men, as were the Prebends of Winchester, either to sing Musically enough, or to Preach Rhetorically enough to their liking. Not long after, the Right Honourable, Robert Earl of Warwick, designed him to a better Prudence. Rectory, but a smaller Parish than Newberry was; Dr. Twiss (considering that old Age
was now creeping on, and his Strength was not like to hold out long) thankfully accepted Prudence. of it, provided that he would take care that his People of Newberry might be furnished with a godly and faithful Pastor at his leaving of them. Himself also went to the A. B. of Canterbury, with whom he had been familiarly acquainted while they had been Students in Oxford, and requested his favour therein: The Archbishop entertained him courteously and promised to grant all that he requested, adding that he would represent him to the King for a pious and learned man, and no Puritane: Dr. Twiss being of a quick and sagacious Wit, perceived that Snares were laid to entrap him; and therefore without applying him∣self any more to the Bishop he returned to his former place at Newberry, and entertained no more thoughts of leaving it, and there he spent his time in Reading, Meditating, Preach∣ing, Piety. and Writing, to his great Content and Satisfaction. Surely many of the venerable Cathedral Doctors never preached so many Sermons as our Dr. published Books, and some never read so many Books as he composed: For besides what he Printed, he left about Thirty compleated behind him. The reason was, because he re∣created his mind, not with playing at Cards as too many do, but with writing Books. His Recreations were friendly to debate with, and confute the Enemies of Gods Grace, of the Sabbath, and of the Churches Peace. And his abilities always encreased with his work; and by how much difficult the questions were, by so much more they were pleasing to him: But of all his Adversaries none put him to greater trouble then Dr. Jackson, whose sense and meaning he could hardlier find out than confute his Errours: neither could he so easily overthrow his Arguments as he could those of Arminius, Corvinus, yea, and of the Jesuits themselves, all things in him being hidden in such dark Expressions, and deep ob∣scurity. After he had overcome and beaten down this veterane Enemy, who was a man of a greater His Abili∣ties. and no less Industry, (yet who spent most of his time and labour in making clear things doubtful and obscure.) After Jackson there arose one Hord, a young Scholar (as he pre∣tended,) but in truth this Hord was one Mason, a man of about Sixty years old, who in his young days had been well acquainted in the University both with our Twiss and Jackson, him also our Dr. Twiss encountred, whom he did not only weary, but wholly overthrew him. After Mason there arose one Thomas Godwin, a very learned man, both in the antiquities of the Hebrews, Greeks, and Latines, but indeed fitter to instruct Grammarians, than to deal with Logicians, and who had more power as Master of the School in Abingdon, than as Dr. of Divinity: And our Dr. Twiss quickly whipt this old Schoolmaster, and that Fe∣rula which he had used with Pride enough, he wrested it out of his hand, and exposed him to be derided by Boys. After Thomas one John Godwin, the Minister in St. Stephens Coleman-street, London, came upon the Stage, whom Dr. Twiss encountred with, and condemned his Book of Justifica∣tion, and easily discovered that that vainglorious Divine did but sell to his Disciples pomp∣ous trifles, and guilded Coals to be adored by them. Lastly, our Dr. did not abstain from dealing with Mr. Cotton, though his dear Friend, and an eminent Minister, about the Grace of God, (about which Mr. Cotton did somwhat err) with him he dealt gently: And because he knew that the very name of Cotton was more prevalent with the Godly, though otherwise weak, than other mens Arguments, he dealt very candidly and gently with him, as he also did with Piscator du Moulin, and Mr. Mead, all which he reverenced as his Fathers, at leastwise he loved them as his Brethren, and dealt with them accordingly, whilest he examined their Opinions, which he judged less sound. But in defending the cause of God and of his Grace, he feared not to encoun∣ter with any man living. Neither did he less strenuously contend for the Morallity of the Sabbath, and among others he handled Dr. Heylin according to his desert, whom never any other man meddled with with impunity. About this there came forth a Proclamation, wherein the People were allowed to use some sports which they called Innocent, and all Ministers were commanded to read the same in their Churches, upon the pain of Suspension both from Office and Benefice. Dr. Twiss refused to read it, yea, he modestly declared against it; diverse other Ministers did the like, for which that severe Penalty was inflicted upon them: But Dr. Twiss scaped better: for King James being informed of his refusal, secretly commanded the Bishops that they should not presume to meddle with him. The truth is, the King knew very well, that though Dr. Twiss had but a small Estate, and lived meanly at home, yet his Fame was great abroad in all the Reformed Churches,
and that the Bishops could decree nothing hardly against him, but it would redound great∣ly to their own disgrace. And truly it was no small disparagement to them that they suf∣fered so eminently learned a man as Dr. Twiss to live without Preferment, who was so fa∣mous abroad, and yet at home a poor Curate in an obscure Village. And Reverend Dr. Prideaux, upon an occasion, said, The Bishops did little consult their own Credit, for that they had not preferred Dr. Twiss (though against his Will) to some splendid Ecclesiastical Dignity, by which (though they dispaired to draw him to their Party, yet) they might at least have taken off, or mollified the popular Envy, and not have heard themselves to be exposed to scorn by the Curate of Newberry. Anno Christi 1643. In the beginning of the year the Parliament designing to Reform Ecclesiastical Affairs, called an Assembly of learned Divines to advise and assist them there∣in, and when they were met together with an unanimous consent, they chose Dr. Twiss to be the Prolocutor: But he, according to his usual Modesty, often refused it, yet was it in vain; for he was placed in the Chair: But after some Months being broken with labour Prolocutor; and Age, he fell dead in the very Pulpit. For indeed he had long born with much grief the Discord and Divisions between the King His Death. and Parliament, which he foresaw would prove Fatal to both Parties: And he often wish∣ed heartly that that Fire might be quenched, though with his Blood. Neither was it a less Affliction to him to see the Contentions; whilest some would have nothing Reformed, others would have all things changed, and turned uplide down. And this added not a little to his grief, to see whither the evil Counsels of some that were not evil men tended; who under a pretence of purging the Church, would expose her to spoil and Rapine: For he feared that if the Church were robbed of her Patrimony, that Reli∣gion also would be destroyed: And though himself had learned to live chearfully on a small Estate, yet he feared lest many of his Brethren in the Ministry, if they should be brought to the like straits, whilest they were solicitous about their worldly Affairs, would neglect their care of the Church of Christ. And hence first it was that his thoughts were greatly disturbed, and his disturbed thoughts impaired his Health, and his Health being impaired, and his Private Studies and publick Employments not lessened, whilest he spake unto God in the name of the People, and to the People in the name of God, and raised up the hearts of his Hearers into Heaven, he fell down even in the very Pulpit: For his mind, whilest he was too much busied in spiri∣tual Affairs, his weak Body was not able to bear up under it; for though his Constitution was naturally good, and he was of a chearful Disposition, yet Age had now made it heavy and somwhat burdensome. Being carried out of the Church to his Lodging, and laid upon his Bed, there resorted unto him men of all sorts, who regarded either Religion or Learning, to whom for about a year together he gave notable Evidences of his Faith, and was a rare Example of Patience, at the end whereof God translated him from his narrow Lodging to a spatious and blessed Pallace in the Kingdom of Heaven: He seriously used these words, (which were almost his last,) Now at length I shall have leisure to follow my Studies to all Eternity. The whole House of Commons in a certain sad and sorrowful Pomp, followed him to his Funeral. Dr. Harris preached his Funeral Sermon most eloquently upon that Text, Jos. 1. 2. Moses my Servant is dead. He was buried in Westminster-Abby, not far from King Henry the 7th's Chappel, where the Kings and Peers use to be buried. He needed neither Trophies, Marbles, nor Epitaphs. He provided Monuments for himself by every Volume which he wrote, which will be more durable than either Brass or Marble. The day after the Parliament voted a Thousand Pound to be given to his Children out of the publick Treasury, but they never received any part of it, being cheated both of that; and of what else their Father left them, by some crafty Knaves: Yet it pleased God by his good Providence, so to provide for them, that they lived comfortably, and so as be∣came Providence special. the Children of so great and eminent a Man. Yet this excellent man was but a man, as himself oft confessed, and therefore thought nothing that was humane strange unto him. He had his infirmities, whereof the most vi∣sible was this: That he was of a facile Nature, and too prone to be deceived by giving too much credit to those, whom, by Information from others, or in his own Opinion, he judged to be godly. Whence it came to pass that he was often imposed upon, especially by certain crafty Heads, who solemnly professed that their chiefest care was the preservation of the purity of Doctrine, and reformation of Discipline, whereas indeed and truth they sought the utter Subversion of both. Whilest he hearkened to these Dissemblers, who yet pre∣tended that they studied nothing more than a purer Reformation, and gave too casie cre∣dit
to them, and became a Patron to them, he failed too much, and afterwards he was more troubled at it, because it was too late to help it. Good God! How seriously, though too late, did he bewail the sad lot of the Church, which he foresaw to be in danger of Ruine in the very Reformation? How greatly did he grieve that the Reins were let loose to Heresies, whereas he presumed they would have been straitned? How grievously did he sigh for that cursed Liberty granted unto Blasphe∣mers, whereas he thought that all their audaciousness would have been repressed? How heartily did he grieve to see the woful confusions both in Church and State, whenas he hoped that all in both should have been reduced into better order? How holily was he displeased that too much Liberty was indulged to the Pontifician Fooleries, when he had believed that they should have been deservedly hissed out of the Church? How grievously did he bear the neglect, and suspitions, raised against Godly and Orthodox Teachers, when he looked that they should have been more honoured and esteemed? He solemnly professed his Fears, that if he had been advanced to the Episcopal Chair, he should have been insnared with the excesses of unworthy Bishops. And he gave hearty thanks to God, who had kept him, through his meer Grace, from such Honours, and Prelatical Temptations as he might have been exposed to. And in nothing it more appear∣ed with what excellent Graces God had adorned Dr. Twiss, than by his frequent Confessi∣on of the pravity of his Nature, which now he was astonished at. And out of his great hu∣mility, he was still admiring the Gifts and Graces of God in others, and highly prizing and commending them, though they were far inferiour to his own. He reverenced and esteemed all good men, and only thought meanly of himself. He constantly kept a Monthly Fast in his own Family, whereby he endeavoured to quicken his Prayers, by which with great importunity he sought unto God in the behalf of the afflicted Church of Christ, that God would be gracious unto it, and restore it to Peace in his own due time. Every day he applied himself with great Zeal and Fervency of Spirit to the Throne of Gods Grace by Prayer, and always before Dinner and Supper he read a Portion of the sacred Scriptures, expounding the more obscure and difficult pas∣sages therein, for the Edification of his Family. And out of these Scriptures he prudently gathered Arguments, whereby he might the more abase himself and his, and with the greater importunity wrestle with God, for the obtaining of such mercies as he craved of him. He was once sent for by the States of Frizland to be a Professor among them, which, in an Epistle that he wrote to them, he acknowledged with great Thankfulness; but prefer∣red the Country Obscurity before the splendor of the University, which he also did when he was proferred the chief Professors place in Oxford. He never got any thing by the Books which he Printed, besides the applause of the Orthodox, and the Envy of the Inno∣vators. His Pen was a Hammer to beat down the New Pelagians, as Truth was his Buckler. He dyed about the Year 1644. The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Wilson, who dyed Anno Christi 1651. THomas Wilson was born at Catterlen, in the County of Cumberland, Anno Christi, 1601. His Parents were Sober, Honest Persons: His Father had a competent Estate, and was of the best sort of Yeomen in those Parts. When our Thomas was His Birth, Parentage, Education, Prosiciency, fit for it, he was sent to School to Blentow in the aforesaid County, where, under the care of Mr. Wilkinson, his Schoolmaster, he profited even beyond expectation, and far excelled all his Contemporaries. And he was observed in his Youth to have a sharp wit, a firm me∣mory, and to be indefatigable at his Book, which occasioned his Friends to hope that in time, he would prove (as afterwards he did) an Instrument of doing much good. His great Proficiency at School, encouraged his Father (when he was fit for it) to send him to the University of Cambridge, where he was admitted into Christs Colledge, when he He goes to Cambridge. was about seventeen years old; in which place he spent not his time, as too many others did
in evil or idle courses, but devoted himself wholly to his Studies, insomuch as he was taken notice of, both by the Master and Fellows of the Colledge, for his great diligence and stu∣diousness: It might have been written over his Study Door, Nulla Dies sine Linea: No Day passed over his Head without some progress in his Learning: But though he did spend His Studi∣ousness. most of his time in Academical Learning (his acuteness, in which did appear above twen∣ty years after he had left the University) yet did he not this while neglect the Study of Divinity but in order to his serving the Lord, and his Church in the work of the Ministry (if God should see it fit) he read both Positive, and Polemical Authors: But of all Books none was so esteemed, or read so much by him as the Holy Bible. So that it may be said of him as the Holy Apostle Paul saith of Timothy, From a Child he knew the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make us Wise to Salvation. Himself told an intimate Friend, that before Scriptures studied. he was Batchelor of Arts, he had read the whole Bible, with the Annotations of Junius and Tremelius three times over. Some time after he had taken his Degree of Batchelor of Arts, he was removed from the University upon this occasion. Mr. John Bristow, a Reverend Minister, and Pastor of Chau∣swod in the County of Surrey, wrote to Mr. Mead of Christs Colledge (that eminent Per∣son for Learning, who was his Tutor) to send him an able and Religious Scholar, to teach He leaves the Univer∣sity. School in his House, Mr. Mead soon pitched his thoughts upon his Pupil, Mr. Wilson, not knowing how hetter to fit and gratify Mr. Bristow, and glad he was that he could answer his request so well. At Mr. Bristow's he continued about four years, instructing the Youths committed to his charge with great diligence, and faithfulness: He made conscience of improving his time, and trust reposed in him, and gave his Scholars more cause to bless God for their education His Faith∣fulness. under him, then Secrates had for being brought up under such a Master as was Plato. He hath professed that he knew no calling, except that of the Ministry, wherein a Man might be more servicable to God and his Church, than that of teaching Youth, It is noted by some that one chief cause of Julians Apostacy and profaness was, that he was bred under two Heathenish Tutors, Libanius and Iamblicus: But it was the happiness of the Inhabi∣tants of Chawswood that they had their Sons brought up by one who had both a dexterity, and fidelity, to instruct them both in Humane and Divine Learning. Mr. Bristow observing Mr. Wilson's fitness, and Ability for a greater and higher em∣ployment than that of instructing Children, and taking notice that his Heart was set up∣on the work of the Ministry, (to prepare himself for which, he made use of all his vacant hours from the School,) he judged it not convenient to deprive the Church any longer of so able and worthy a Labourer, and therefore though it was a considerable loss to himself and the Parish, to loose so good a man, yet he preferred the publick good of the Church before his private, and advised Mr. Wilson wholly to betake himself to Preaching. The first Candlestick wherein this Light was set, was Capel in Surry, where he conti∣nued He enters upon the Ministry. for some time, directing his People by his holy Example, and judicious, diligent Preaching the way to Eternal Life. And though the Parish gave him little or nothing for his pains, yet was he never the less faithful and laborious for the welfare of their Souls: For he sought not theirs but them; not their Temporal Goods, but the Spiritual and ever∣lasting His Faith∣fulness therein. Welfare of their immortal Souls. Here he had the Love and Esteem of all godly People, both Ministers and private Christians, round about; and indeed by his holy, hea∣venly, and humble Conversation he was such a Loadstone as wherever he came, he drew the Hearts of all sober Christians after him: What Nazianzen said of Athanasius may be truly said of him, that he was Magnes & Adamas; A Loadstone in his sweet, gentle Na∣ture, and yet an Adament in his stout and resolute courage against all Errours and Pro∣faness. His continuance at Capel was not long, but upon some Reasons, by the means of the aforesaid Mr. Bristow, he was removed to Farlington (near unto Portsmouth in Hampshire) His Re∣move. an ignorant, heathenish People, whom he endeavoured (so long as he staid among them) to Instruct and Reform. Though there was little of Religion amongst his Parishoners, nor scarce any savour of Good, yet whilst he abode there, the Church was much frequent∣ed (Christians flocking in to hear him for diverse Miles round about) and when he was called thence, his loss was much bewailed by them. He staid not long in Hampshire; and sure he had very good grounds for his frequent Removals, and afterwards it appeared that God intended so able and useful an Instrument His Re∣move. for more publick and General Service, not thinking good to confine such great Gifts and Graces to such small Parishes. His next Removal was to Tedington near to Kingston upon Thames, in which place he
continued some Years, and (through the Blessing of God) his Ministry had great success, and much acceptance among such as feared God, during his abode at Tedington, he (being then about Twenty six Years old) had a desire to visit his Native Country, where his friends and Relations lived: And it pleased God so to assist him in his Labours among them, that in this journey he became profitable to the conversion of many Souls unto God. While He visits his Country. he was in Cumbarland he was requested to preach in Penroth, a great (if not the greatest) Market Town in the County, where, time out of mind, there had been a considerable Market of all sorts of Food kept every Lords-Day, till Nine a Clock in the Morning. But after he had preached two or three Sermons, he prevailed so far with the Ministers and chief of the Town, that it was proclaimed the Tuesday following, (which was on their Reforma∣tion. Weekly Market-day,) That no Person, for the time to come, should bring any Victu∣als or Ware whatsoever, to be sold on the Lords-day, but that Saturday should be the time for the sale of those Commodities. And for many years after the People did forbear to sell or buy any thing in the Town upon the Sabbath-day. His next Removal was from Tedington to Otham, within two or three Miles of Maid∣stone in Kent; the occasion whereof was this: There were many serious, understanding His Remove into Kent. Christians in Maidston, who were much troubled and dejected for the dulness and dead∣ness of the Ministry under which they lived. The Children craved Bread, and their Spi∣ritual Fathers (by Profession and Office) fed them with Stones, so that their Souls were ready to famish for want of Food: Hereupon Mr. Robert Swinnoch, an active godly per∣son, and one of the Aldermen or Jurats of the Town, procured the Presentation of Otham upon the Death of the Incumbent: After which he consulted with his Friends and Christi∣an Neighbours, how he might procure an able Minister for that place, herein aiming, not only at the Good and Benefit of that Parish, but of the Christians also of Maidston, who, with a little trouble and Travel, might reap the fruit of his Labours at Otham. In pursuance of this Design, some of them repaired to London, where (by Gods Provi∣dence) they heard of Mr. Wilson, to whom they presently took their Journey, and heard him Preach at Darking in Surry to their great satisfaction, After Sermon they acquainted him with the cause of their coming, and the sad condtion of the godly People in those parts where they lived, and requested him to accept of the Presentation of Otham. He who was never hasty and rash, especially in such matters of Weight and Concernment, asked the judgment of his Neighbour Ministers in the Country, and some in the City of London, who, after deliberation, did agree and concur in this, That in regard of the ne∣cessities of those that feared God, in and about Maidston, and the great opportunities that he might now enjoy there, of doing good to many Souls, he ought to embrace this Call. And accordingly upon the Declaration of their Opinion, he was presented to Otham, where His great success. the Lord was pleased wonderfully to bless and prosper his Ministry, for the Conversion and Building up of many of his Hearers. Mr. Wilson was a man that divided the Truth of God aright: A work-man that needed His Pru∣dence. not to be ashamed: A Boanerges: A Son of Thunder in preaching the Law, to awaken se∣cure, sensless Sinners, so that his Hearers might say of him, as one of the Antients said of St. Paul's Epistles, Non tam Verba quam Tonitrua audiebant: That they heard not so much Words as Thunderclaps, when they heard him open the dreadful Curses of the Law, and the terrible Wrath of God against Sin and Sinners. Many an one hath come to him as the Gaoler did to the Apostles, trembling, and crying out, Sir, what shall I do to be sa∣ved? To such he was a Barnabas; A Son of sweet Consolation, and could so display that exceeding Riches of Divine Grace in the Lord Jesus Christ, as to attract and draw their Hearts to a ready and chearful compliance with, and a hearty acceptation of it. He, as a faithful Steward, gave to every one his own Portion: Terrour to whom Terrour belonged, and Comfort to whom Comfort, whereby (the Holy Ghost setting in with the Word) a numerous Issue of New-born Children were begotten, and brought forth to Christ. Here he preached, according to the Apostles Command, in season and out of season; Not only His Indefa∣tigableness. twice every Lords-day, but also every Holy-day, and at diverse Funerals, yea, though the Person interred were so poor that nothing could be expected for his pains. Whilst he was Minister at Otham, many from Maidston, and Seven or Eight Miles round about, did ordinarily repair to his Ministry, and joined in Communion with him at the Lords Supper. But the number of those that flockt to him was so great, that his Church could not contain them, which was a great Eye-sore to the prophane World, and caused several Ministers about him to envy and much to malign him. Envy. Before his coming, there was an evil custom at Otham, for the Fulling Mills thereabouts Sabbath re∣formed. to work every Lords-day; but he convinced the Owners so throughly of the Unlawfness
thereof, that they presently gave over, and suffered their Mills to stand still on those days for many years after he left them. But the only wise God who governeth the World, saw sit for some time, and for Rea∣sons best known to himself, to lay aside this very useful Person: For he had not been ma∣ny years at Otham when the Book for Sports on the Lords-days came forth, and was pre∣sented unto him that he should publickly read it on the next Lords-day in his Church, He is sus∣pended. which he refusing to do (whereof he gave divers Reasons) was suspended ab Officio & Be∣neficio. Upon his Suspension his Cure was committed to such Ministers as he could not with comfort own, nor join with, whereupon he removed his Habitation to Maidston, Removes to Maidston▪ and he was a great help in private to the Christians there, whilst his Suspension continued, and from them he received some supplies towards the maintenance of himself and his Fa∣mily. Whilest he continued at Maidston he was still sollicitous for the good of his People at Otham, and therefore to encourage them to unite among themselves, and to a Gospel Conver∣sation; as also to convince his Adversaries, who had causlesly traduced him to be a Favourer and an Abettor of Schisms and Divisions, he wrote a Letter to his Parishioners, wherein His Letter to his Peo∣ple. he exhorted them to fear the Lord and honour the King, and to walk in Love each to∣ward other, &c. And not to nourish in themselves a dislike of Government, or Contempt of those whom God had set over them, &c. This Letter was publickly read on a Lords∣day to his Congregation, by one Dr. Tuck, which he did that so all his Congregation might know his judgment, and the advice which he thought necessary to give them; yet was it done without the Appointment of Mr. Wilson. The News of this Letter, and the publick Reading of it was quickly carried to London, New trou∣bles. where it gave such distaste to some, that both Mr. Wilson and the Dr. were cited to appear in the High-Commission Court, and to answer for what they had done. Both of them ap∣peared several times to their great trouble and cost, and notwithstanding all they did, and could alleadg in their own Defence, yet were they enforced to continue their Attendance upon the Court for the space of three Years: In this case Dr. Tucks trouble was far the greater, because (his Body being unable to bear riding) he was necessitated to make these long Journeys of Thirty Miles at a time on Foot. During Mr. Wilson's Suspension, a Neighbour Minister being greedy of his Living, com∣menced a Suit against him, to eject him wholly out of Otham; but his Patron [Mr. Swi∣noch] Malice. made good his Title, and so the malicious design of his Adversary was prevented. His Suspension continued to the Year 1639. about which time the Scots entred into Eng∣land, He is absol∣ved. a Parliament was called, and then Archbishop Laud took off his Suspension. But his Troubles and Sufferings were not yet at an end: For Anno Christi 1640. Septemb. 30th, he, and other Ministers, were cited to appear at a Visitation of the Archbishops at Fever∣sham in Kent, to answer for their not reading the Prayer which was made against the Scots, as also to take a new devised Oath, commonly called, The &c. Oath. But when he, and New trou∣bles. his Brethren presented themselves at the place and time appointed, they understood that the Oath should be wholly waved, and the only Question should be, Why they did not read the aforementioned Prayer? Upon this they consulted together, whether it were best for them to appear before the Archbishops Vicar General or no: It was alledged by some, that the Parliament (which they apprehended would be some Relief to them) was to meet November the third following, and therefore they judged it prudential to hold off for the present; and in case they should afterwards be cited to appear at Canterbury, that they should only appear by a Procter, and so protract time so much as might, to see what the Parliament would do in this case. But upon a serious weighing the Arguments on both sides, it was concluded that they should appear, and leave the success to God, however he should please to dispose of them. Hereupon Mr. Edward Bright of Gondhurst, and Mr. Wilson immediately repair∣ed to the Inn, where Sir Nathaniel Brent [the Vicar General] with the Archdeacon, and some inferiour Officers sat. They no sooner appeared, but Mr. Bright was pointed out by one present to the Archdeacon, who thereupon asked him his Name, and whether he had read the Prayer against the Scots or no. Mr. Bright answered No. Whereupon the Arch∣deacon presently suspended him ab Officio & Beneficio, without admonishing, or giving him any time to consider of it, which rash Act was deemed, even by the Favourites of that Court, to be neither Prudential nor Canonical. Though Mr. Wilson stood by, and saw His Cou∣rage. such harsh dealing against his Brother, and perceived the Service much hotter than he ex∣pected, yet did he not fly from his Colours, no, nor so much as make a Retreat; but being called, answered to his Name, and being asked whether he had read the Prayer, he gave a
negative Answer, adding this Reason, because in the Rubrick before the Common-Prayer, it is enjoined, that no Prayer should be publickly read, except those that were in the Book His Pru∣dence. of Common-Prayer, as this Prayer against the Scots was not. This unexpected Answer so puzzled the Archdeacon, (who was not the readiest or acutest to make a Reply) as caused him to have Recourse to Sr. Nathaniel Brent for Advice, who, upon Information of Mr. Wilson's Reasons, very ingenuously left the Archdeacon to him∣self, to do as he should see cause, refusing to meddle therein. Upon this the Archdeacon (the edge of his Fury being somwhat abated) proceeded more deliberately with Mr. Wil∣son than he had done with Mr. Bright, and gave him fourteen days time to consider of it, and then to give in his answer at Canterbury. But notwithstanding this intermission, the Archbishop had not yet done with Mr. Wil∣son: For in March following he was again prosecuted by him. Upon a Holiday in that New trou∣bles. Month Mr. Wilson Preacht in publick, and after Sermon he, with some other Friends, met at the Parsonage House, whereof one Mr. Butcher (a man eminent for Piety) had a part, to repeat the Sermon and to pray. After these Duties were ended, in a room, which was peculiar to Mr. Butcher, one knockt at the Door, to which Mrs. Wilson was about to go, but suddenly started back, fearing that it might be a Messenger sent to apprehend her Hus∣band: But the Messenger immediately came into the Room where Mr. Wilson and his Friends were, and putting off his Hat, enquired which was Mr. Wilson, pretending that he had some private business with him. And though Mr. Wilson was there in his Gown, ha∣ving newly Preached and Prayed, and thereby was easily to be distinguished from all the rest, yet God so ordered it by his good Providence, that the Messenger observed him not. A special Providence Presently after the Messenger came in, Mr. Wilson stepped behind some of his Friends, and Mr. Butcher wisely stepped forward, and told the Messenger that the Room wherein they were was his, and bad him look for Mr. Wilson in his own Rooms. Upon this the Mes∣senger withdrew into the Hall, and in the interim Mr. Wilson went up the Stairs into his Study, where he concealed himself until Night, and then escaped to the House of one Mr. Hall, in the Park of Maidston. The Pursivant looking about in vain, went again into the Parlor, and missing one whom he had seen there before, charged upon all there present that they had conveyed away Mr. Wilson, and told them that they must find him out. He produced also his Warrant, under the Hands of many of the Privy Council, of whom the Archbishop, and the B. B. of London were two, requiring him to attach the Body of Tho∣mas Wilson, Rector of Otham, and bring him before them. The Pursivant having shewed them his Warrant, required and commanded Mr. Butcher and one Mr. Morgsan to assist him in searching the House for Mr. Wilson; but notwithstand∣ing all his diligent search, he missed his Prey: For Mr. Wilson could not be found. The Messenger was very angry that he should see, and yet thus loose him. But when, in some threatnings to the Persons present, he had vented his Choller, he grew somwhat cooler, and after some private Discourse with Mrs. Wilson, he took his leave, saying, that he had been a Messenger to the Council-Table Thirty six Years, and was never served so before. For he confessed that he heard him Preach that day in publick, and yet when he saw him so soon after, and that in his Gown, yet he did not know him. But God (who in the like sort hid Athanasius) had a Hand in it, Whose Kingdom rules over all, Psal. (103. 19.) He hath sundry strange ways for the Preservation of his People. The Circumcellians laid an Ambush in the way where they knew St. Augustine was to go, Strange Provi∣dences. but by a good Providence of God, his Guide, missing his way, led him about another way, whereby he escaped their Hands. In Qu. Maries days, Stephen Gardiner, B. B. of Winchester, sent after Mr. John Fox, who afterwards writ the Acts and Monuments, as far as Ipswich to apprehend him: The Barque in which he was was newly gone out of the Haven when the Messenger came to take him; the next day, by reason of Storms, he was driven back into the same place again; but before his Return, the Messenger (despairing to meet with him) was departed. And since those days Mr. Parker (a very learned and god∣ly man) was prosecuted by Archbishop Bancroft, for his Book against the Cross, &c. On a time the Archbishop having Intelligence that Mr. Parker was in a certain Citizens House in London, thinking that now he was sure of him, sent one presently to watch at the Door of the House, to see that none should stir out, till others came with a Warrant to search it for Mr. Parker. The Person sent, sat him down at the Door, boasting that none should come forth but he would know what and who they were. Mr. Parker and his Friends within, were much troubled what to do, and how Mr. Parker might be secured: At last it was resolved that he should attire himself like a Citi∣zen, and so venture out: by this means he might possibly escape, and if he staid within, he
would certainly be taken: Accordingly he came forth thus cloathed, and Gods Providence so ordered it, that the Waiter espying a Maid which he loved and courted passing by on the other side of the Street, stept over to her just as Mr. Parker came forth, so that though he stayed but a very little while with her, , and immediately returned again, yet the Bird was flown: Mr. Parker was gone: And when the rest came with Power to search the House, the Person whom they sought for was not to be found. Thus Mr. Wilson hid himself in the Country from the Storm till the Parliament was be∣gun; and then he repaired to London, and continued there, sometimes changing his Ap∣parel, that he might not be commonly known, till his Liberty and Freedom was procured by the means of Sir Edward Deering, one of the Knights of the Shire for Kent, who, in one He is resto∣red to his Liberty. of his Speeches which he made in the House, gave this Character of Mr. Wilson. Mr. Wilson, (said he) for so is your Petitioner named, is a Man as Orthodox in his Do∣ctrine, as conformable in his Life, as laborious in Preaching as any we have, or that I do know. He is now separated from his People to both their griefs; for 'tis not with him as with others, who are glad to set a Pursivant on work, that they may have an excuse to be out of the Pulpit. It is his Delight to preach. By this means he obtained his Liberty, and returned to his Charge and wonted pains at Otham. But sometime after he was by the Parliament chosen a Member of that Reverend, He is one of the Assem∣bly. Pious, and Learned Assembly of Divines which sat at Westminster; upon which he sedu∣lously attended for the most part of the Week, and notwithstanding his pains there, sup∣plied his Cure each Lords-day, though it was Thirty five, or Thirty six Miles from Lon∣don. He was much esteemed in the Assembly for his solid, and judicious Discourses upon sundry occasions, and for his meek and humble deportment among them. His last Remove was to Maidston, the Shire Town of Kent. And indeed who was so sit His Remove to Maidston. for so populous a place (where there is but one English Congregation) as one of such vast Parts, exemplary Piety, and of so strong a Constitution of Body as he was? And as soon as the way was open for his admission into Maidston, (through the Ejection of the former Incumbent by the Committee of Plundered Ministers) his old Hearers there, whose Hearts were knit close unto him, longed for his Settlement among them: But the Parliament having made an Order, that plundered Ministers should first be provided for, where any Livings were vacant, they of Maidston could not for the present obtain their de∣sires: For one Mr. Smith (an able and holy man) was by the Committee of Plundered Mi∣nisters sent down to that place, yet Mr. Smith had not been long at Maidston, before news was brought that the most able and eminent Ministers should be removed to Cities and great Towns, that they might be capable of doing the more good, and in particular, that Mr. Wilson should be transplanted from Otham to some more considerable place. Upon this Report the People of Maidston were much startled, fearing that they should lose their beloved Pastor. To prevent which, they applied themselves to Mr. Smith, desiring him to accept of some other Living, that Maidston might be free for Mr. Wilson. Mr. Smith seriously con∣sidering the vehement desires of the good People after Mr. Wilson, yielded to refer the busi∣ness to six judicious Ministers of the Assembly, whereof three should be chosen by him, and three by them of Maidston. The Ministers met accordingly, and having heard what could be said of both sides, and weighed the matter throughly, gave their Advice that it would be best for Mr. Smith to leave Maidston to Mr. Wilson, which he did accordingly, having a considerable place [viz. Harrison] about seven Miles from Maidston provided for him, to which, so soon as he could with convenience, he removed. And thus at last, by Gods good Providence, Mr. Wilson, and the People of Maidston (who at first brought him into Kent, and who were long before joined together in Heart,) were now joined toge∣ther in Relation, and Habitation, among whom he continued with much Love and Faith∣fulness, till God called him out of this World. Although Mr. Wilson now left Otham, yet did he not leave to take care for the Souls of his People there; but still retained his Title to that place, lest (if he had resigned it) the His Pru∣dence and Piety. Patron should put in an insufficient or unworthy Minister, and himself provided for them a pious, learned, and painful man, to whom he gave the whole profits of the Living. For he held not the Title to the place upon any covetous or worldly Respect, but meerly up∣on Respect to the good of the Peoples Souls. When he had been sometime at Maidston, his first care was to promote the Reforma∣tion A Reforma∣tion. of the Church, and to see to the due Administration of the Sacraments, according to the Rule of Gods Word: For which end, in his Ministry, he discovered to them the ne∣cessity of Church-Ordinances, and of Discipline, with the qualifications of the Subjects
thereof, &c. And then (God accompanying his holy Endeavours, notwithstanding the obstructions he met with, not only from the prophane, but also from some that professed the Fear of God,) he in time brought it to a good Issue, and put it in practice, to the great Comfort of them who were truly godly. Upon the Dissolution of the Assembly, he being freed from his Attendance there, applied himself wholly to the work of the Ministry, with as great pains and diligence as a man could possibly do. On Saturday Night he usually continued very late at his Studies, yea, often till Mid∣night, that he might the better prepare himself for his Work on the Lords-day. On Sab∣bath His great pains. Morning he usually arose by two or three a Clock, and was much displeased with himself if he passed that hour. About seven a Clock he came down to his Family, whom he called together, and read some portion of Scripture to them, which also he expounded, and required those that were present to give him an account of what they remembred of his Exposition: Sung some part of a Psalm: Prayed with them, and concluded all be∣tween Eight and Nine a Clock, that they might be all ready to attend the publick Ordi∣nances. About Nine a Clock he went to Church, and commonly began with singing two staves of a Psalm; after which he Prayed briefly for Gods Assistance in, and for Gods Blessing Sabbaths sanctified. upon his own holy Ordinances; Then he read some part of the Old Testament, and ex∣pounded (somtimes three, or four, or more Verses, as more or less matters was contained in them) for the space of an hour; For he had an Hour-Glass in his Desk to guide him therein: He had an excellent faculty and dextery in expounding the Scriptures. His custom was, first to Analize the Book, then the Chapters as he came to them; then he gave the several Readings, and Expositions of the Verses which he handled. He had Junius, Tremelius, Piscator, Calvin, Beza, and several other Comentators ad unguem, in∣somuch that in the Assembly of Divines, if at any time they doubted what was the Opinion of any of the aforenamed Authors, Mr. Wilson was called forth to satisfie them. After he had declared the several Readings, and the Judgments of Expositors, as there was occasi∣on, he drew Observations from the Coherence, Dependance, and matter of the verses which he briefly illustrated and applied. Having ended his Exposition, he spent about an hour in the Pulpit: And when he came home to his Family, he constantly went to Prayer with them before Dinner, where∣in he begged that the Truths delivered out of the Word might be written by the Spirit of God upon all their Hearts, so as to bring forth fruit in their Lives. Then, usually eating little or no Dinner, he went into his Study till his Family had dined: And then coming down he spent some time with them in singing, and other Religious Exercises. In the Af∣ternoon at Church he did as in the Morning, only his Exposition then was upon some part of the New Testament. After the publick Duties were ended, many of his Neighbours came to his House, where he called his Family together, required of them, and of others present, an account of his Sermons preached that day; and most of those that were present would tell him som∣what; one what the Text was, another the Division of it, another the Doctrine, another the Reasons, and others the Explications and Uses, methodically as he had delivered them, all whom he would help and encourage. Hereby their Understandings and Memo∣ries were much improved. For they, knowing before hand his custom, were the more attentive in hearing, and the more careful to remember what they heard, whereas when the Master of the Family repeats all himself, Children and Servants (who naturally have an aversness to, and hatred of all that is good) are usually heedless in hearing, and mindless both in publick and private of what they hear. After Repetition he sung a Psalm, and concluded with Prayer, and so went to Mr. Swinock's to Supper, who had been his quon∣dam Patron. And by that time they had supped, there would be a hundred, or more, ga∣thered together to Mr. Swinocks House, to join with him in the conclusion of the day: And among these were persons of all Ranks, the Mayor, Jurates, and their Wives, who by their Examples encouraged others to the service of the great God. After Supper he came forth amongst them, began with a short Prayer: Then he read the Verses he had expounded in publick in the Fore and After noon, and asked them what Observations were raised from such and such a Verse, till he had gone over all the Verses. Then he enquired what the Texts on which he had preached were, what the Doctrines, Explications, Reasons, and Uses, all in order as he preached them: He seldom named a∣ny one Head himself, but still heartened them to speak, and only assisted them when they were at a loss. Then they sung a Psalm, and he concluded with Prayer about Ten a Clock at Night.
Once a Month he administred the Lords Supper to a considerable number of solid, serious, Christians, which he performed with that Life and Warmth in Prayer, and opening the Scrip∣ture, Monthly Sa∣craments. that some of his Communicants have thought themselves in the Suburbs of Heaven when they have joined with him in that Ordinance; in which he usually spent about an hour and an half. Thus he sanctified the Lords-day, spending Nine or Ten hours in publick and private Worship, besides what time he spent in secret Duties, in which he was no Nig∣gard: So that the Lords-day, which was a day of Rest to others, was a day of the greatest Pains and Labour to him; yet was it easie because delightful to him: And at the end of the day, when those that took not half his Pains, have complained of their weariness, he would be exceeding lively and chearful: Such was his great Love to his Saviour, and to the Souls of those that were committed to his Charge. The Sabbath was to him a Day of Light and Gladness, and a good Day. Yet he thought it not enough thus to instruct his People on the Lords-Days, but the Town being very populous, and the Parish large, whereby he was uncapable of going His great pains. from House to House, in the Week-days he laid out himself in the service of his Lord for the Benefit of his People. For every Thursday (which was their Market day) he preached a Lecture, unto which many Ministers resorted, and sat with delight under his Ministry. On Fridays he met in private with as many of his People as would or could come toge∣ther, unto whom he sometimes expounded the Word, sometimes Preached, and always sung and prayed with them. Also upon Mondays or Thursdays (for he altered his day as he saw occasion) he appoint∣ed Days of Conference. a Conference in the publick Meeting-place, where the Question, which before was made known to them, (as what was the Nature of Repentance, of Faith, &c. and what the Signs, what the Means, and what the Motives, &c.) His People were prepared to give in their Answers, and he so demeaned himself therein, that by his wise and courteous Deportment, and pleasing Language, he won their Hearts, and by this means he drew them to the study of the Scriptures, and other good Books, that so they might be able to speak to the purpose. As they spake, when he saw occasion, he would help and assist them, still taking care to keep them in the way of Truth, and to see that none did go beyond their bounds by en∣croaching upon the work of the Ministry. When they had done speaking, he would gather together their scattered Notions, bring them into an orderly Method, apply to them suita∣ble Texts of Scripture, add of his own what he thought necessary, and so rendered the Meeting exceeding profitable and comfortable to his Flock. Christian Communion mana∣ged with Prudence, is that which keeps our Religion in Breath, and without which it will be ready to die. When he saw fit to lay down this way of Conference, instead thereof he took up Cate∣chising He catechi∣sed. in the Week-days in publick; and this he continued till he had gone through all the Town, except some few out-houses, whom also he intended to have Catechised, but was prevented. He did work the work of the Lord, who sent him into the World for that end: He spent himself, as the Silkworm to cloath, and as the Lamp to give Light, to others: He buried not his Talent in a Napkin of Idleness, like too many Ministers, who will rather suffer their Children (to whom they ought to be Nurses) to cry and starve, than be at the pains to draw forth their Breasts unto them. Mr. Wilson was of a Noble and Communicative Disposition, very free upon all occasions to impart knowledg unto others; not like a Whirl-pool that sucks all to itself, but as a Fountain that disperses its streams for the Refreshment of many. Seldom were any in his His painful∣ness. Company, but they might (if it were not their own fault) receive good by him. He was neither vain in Ostentation, nor niggardly in Reservation: Some may think that he did ill in taking so much pains constantly, both on the Lords-days, and on the Weekdays, and up∣on all occasions, to the shortning of his Life; But he never thought that he could labour too much for his Lord and Master, and that God makes no difference between nequam and nequaquam: An idle and an evil Servant. And for this cause it was, that when he was ad∣vised by his Friends to be mindful of his Body, and not to work it so hard, he was deaf to all such Counsel, and was ready to say with Mr. Calvin, (when he was persuaded by his Friends to take care of his Health) Would you have my Lord when he comes to find me idle? And with Dr. John Reynolds of Oxford, when the Drs. persuaded him non perdere substanti∣am propter accidens, replied, Nec propter Vitam vivendi perdere causas. Coming to a Friends House, when he had travelled neer Forty Miles that day, yet not∣withstanding his great weariness, he would needs spend some time in Expounding a Portion
of Scripture to the Family, besides Singing and Prayer (which he never omitted) before he would go to Bed. St. Augustin's Wish was, That when Christ came to call him hence by Death, he might Time re∣deemed. find him aut Precantem, aut Predicantem, either Preaching or Praying: And truly such seemed to be the desire of Mr. Wilson, by his Indefatigable Labours in his Masters business. He was never given to any Recreations (tho never so innocent,) but he was exceeding spa∣ring in his Expence of time. A little after Dinner he would sometimes sit and discourse a while; but usually, if he was at home, his Study was the constant place of his Abode. He was Helluo Librorum, an Indefatigable Student, stealing time from his Sleep (and that when his Body needed and called for it) to his Book. It is recorded of Mr. Bradford, Martyr, that he slept not above Four Hours in a Night, and that his Book went not out of his Hand till Sleep came: And that Mr. Latimer rose, Summer and Winter, at Two a Clock in the Morning. And of another Martyr its said, he was spare of Meat, sparer of Sleep, but sparest of Time. So Mr. Wilson made much Conscience of his Expence of Time, especially upon the Lords-days. When he was invited to a Feast, his Zeal for God's Glory, and the good of Souls was His Zeal. such, that commonly after Dinner he would call for a Bible, sing a Psalm, expound some Verses of Scripture, and pray with his Friends. Mr. Will. Fenner of Essex (that eminent Servant of Jesus Christ) meeting Mr. Wilson once at Mr. Butcher's House, was so extream∣ly taken with his active, chearful Spirit for God and Godliness, that he said to Mr. Butcher, I am even ashamed of my self to see how Mr. Wilson gallopeth towards Heaven, and I do but creep on a Snails pace. Though he was a good Linguist, and well read, both in ancient and modern Authors, yet (ordinarily) he Preached, though always with Evidence of Reason, yet still in a plain, His manner of Preach∣ing. and clear Stile, by Doctrine, Reason and Use, that so he might be understood by the mean∣est Capacity. His constant Preaching shewed that he was an able workman: His Doctrines were clearly raised from his Text: His Heads pertinent to his Subject, and he had a rare faculty in applying suitable Scriptures (which is the principal way of convincing mens Judgments, for it is the Authority of God that must do the Work) to all his Heads. On the Lords-days in the Afternoon, for some considerable time, he Preached over the Heads of Divinity, and therein he discovered so much Learning and Judgment in his plain Preach∣ing, that if these Sermons had been preached in either of the Universities, they would have been highly approved. He was so much esteemed for his great abilities, that there was scarce any publick Occa∣sion for Sermons in the Country, but he was chosen to preach them. Somtimes he preach∣ed His Family Duties. bfore the Judges of the Assizes, and twice before the Parliament. He was not of the number of them, who are zealous abroad to get themselves a name, but cold and careless at home, not much minding what becomes of their Families: But as David, He walked in the midst of his House with a perfect Heart, and brought up his Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. He was as good within as without Doors. Every Morning and Evening be read some part of the Scriptures, expounded it to them, sung part of a Psalm, and prayed. He used often to ask his Children Questions about the Principles of Re∣ligion: Examined them on the Lords-days about his Sermons, and caused them to learn sundry portions of the Scripture without Book. It is Recorded of B. B Hooper, that he so governed his House that in every Corner of it there was some smell of Virtue, of good Example, honest Conversation, and reading the Scriptures. If it was not so in Mr. Wilsons House, surely the fault was not the want of a good Governour. He Prayed often with his Wife apart from the Family, and himself spent much time in secret Prayer, knowing that of Lactantius to be a great Truth, Non est vera Religio quae cum Templo relinquitur: That's no true Religion, when we leave it behind us at Church. He was very exact and watchful always to set a good Example before his Children and His holy Life. Servants, knowing that such are led and formed more by the Eye than by the Ear; and what their Superiours do, than of what they say: and indeed his whole Conversation was a practical Exposition upon the Gospel; and what he taught on the Lords-day in his Do∣ctrine, he preached over all the Week in his Life. He was exemplary in his Converses with all men, and spake much by his carriage, even when he was silent, and spake not a word. His good works were unanswerable Syllogisms, invincible Demonstrations to con∣vince his Neighbours, whereby he drew their Hearts, and engaged their Affections after the Beauty of Holiness. He practised what he preached, and did what he taught. See 1 Tim. 4. 12. Be thou an Example in words, in Conversation, in Charity, in Purity. Tit. 2. 7. In all things shew thy self a Pattern of good works
Maidston before Mr. Wilson's coming was a very prophane Town: They used to have Morrice-Dancing, Cudgel-playing, Stool-ball, Crickets, and mnay other sports openly, and Sabbath re∣formed. publickly on the Lords-day; yea, they would jeer, and deride such as professed Godliness, and went abroad to hear Sermons on the Lords-days when they had none at home. Com∣monly after the Evening Service, many used to go to the Ale house, others to walk in the Fields: And it was their constant custom to ply the Conduits on the Lords-day, for draw∣ing of Water. Indeed the former vain, and sinful customs of Sports was reformed be∣fore he came; But by his preaching he prevailed with them to forbear vain walking a∣broad, fitting idly at their doors, as also to fetch their Water on Saturday Nights, which they were to use on the Lords-day: Insomuch that though the Town was large and full of People, yet you should hardly see one person in the Streets after the Sermons on the Lords∣day: So that when the Mayor hath searched the Inns, and Ale-houses, he hath scarce found one Townsman there. One of the Judges at an Assize taking notice of it, said publickly, That in all his Circuit he never came to a Town where the Lords-day was observed so strictly. Yea, by his Mi∣nistry he so wrought upon the People, that the very Pot▪hearbs were gathered and made ready on the Saturday, and the provision for their Dinners was fitted for the Fire against that day. He was much of the mind of those Primitive Christians, who when any of them were asked, Servasti Dominicum? Hast thou kept the Lords-day? Answered, Christianus sum, omittere non possum: I am a Christian, I cannot neglect it. The Sanctification of that day is exceeding useful to keep up the power of Godliness in our Hearts and Lives. And as God on that day bestows great Blessings upon them that humbly and reverently wor∣ship him, on that Queen of Days, that Market-day of our Souls, (a. 58. 13, 14.) so he hath inflicted dreadful Judgments on the Prophaners of it, and when men have neglected to punish them, God hath taken the Sword into his own Hand, and done it himself. See sundry Examples of it in my first Vol. of Examples. One Example there was in Maidston before the Reformation wrought by Mr. Wilson. On a Sabbath day as some Children were playing in the Streets, near unto a Wall, against which some Waggon-Wheels were set up, there came a sudden gust of Wind, which blew down a Wheel upon one of the Children, and crushed it to death. Upon the Week-days also (such was the Blessing of God upon his Ministry and holy Reformati∣on in the Town. Example) many Families did set up Religious Exercises both Mornings and Evenings, so that if you had walked through the Great Street about Nine or Ten a Clock in a Morning, you might hear them singing in many Families: For it was their manner, together with Reading and Prayer, to join singing. He was of a couragious and undaunted Spirit, not discouraged by any obstacles, which His Cou∣rage. lay in his way of Duty. He feared God and none else: He was like St. Chrysostom, who, having a threatning Message sent him by the Empress, bid the Messenger return this An∣swer, Nil nisi peccatum timeo: I fear nothing but Sin. And like Dr. Rowland Tailor, who in the time of the Marian Persecution, being persuaded by his Friends to fly, said, I know the Cause to be so good, and the Truth so strong on my side, that I will (by Gods Grace) appear before them, and to their Beards resist their felse doings; for I believe I shall never be able to do God so good Service as now. He shewed his Courage also in his bold reproving of Sin: For as Christ said of the His Zeal. Church of Ephesus, He could not bear those that were evil. Elijah durst reprove Ahab, and Mr. Wilson feared not to reprehend the greatest, when there was cause for it. If men were bold in sinning, he was as bold in telling them of it, and in giving their Sins the due Accents. Yet as a wise Physician, he could distinguish between Pimples and Plague∣sores; between Infirmities and Scandals, and dealt with them accordingly. He was very zealous for God and his Glory, embracing all opportunities of doing him Service, and wherever he came he promoted the strict Observation of the Lords-day; and this he did the rather, because he observed what dishonour was done unto God by the pro∣faness and contempt of Gods Ordinances by some, and by the Errours, and wilful with∣drawings from the Ordinances by others, which he bewailed bitterly to his dying day He opposed Schisms. Some, who it's hoped had the root of the Matter in them, questioned his Call to the Ministry, nay, suspected his Call to be Antichristrian, and so separated from him, though they with∣al acknowledged that he was their spiritual Father, and had begotten them to God through the Gospel, to whom he might say as the Apostle Paul did to the Corinthians: Ye are the Seal of our Ministry: Do we need, as some others, Letters of Commendation to you? Ye are our Epistle, known and read of all men; For as much as you are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ ministred by us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God,
not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart, 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. How frequent∣ly and affectionately did he urge that upon them which separated from him, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. This causless sinful Separation lay near his Heart, even when he lay upon his Death-Bed. The great danger of their immortal Souls, as also of those who did wholly cast off the His Zeal a∣gainst Here∣sies and Schism. care of their eternal good, caused him in the course of his Sermons and Expositions, when the Scriptures led him to it, to reprove their sins sharply, according to the Command of the Holy Ghost, and he could do it , cuttingly, that he might be sound in the Faith, Tit. 1. 13. 'Tis reported of St. Bazil. that one hearing much Commendations of him, had a great desire to know what manner of man he was: Hereupon in a Vsion there was represented to him a Flame of Fire, with this Motto, Talis est Basilius: Such an one is Bazil. And truly such a Man was Mr. Wilson, meek and cold when at any time himself was reproached and abused, but as hot as fire in the Cause of God. The Zeal of God's House did even burn him up. Errours and Heresies were very odious to him, such was his love to the Truth. It might be said of him as it was of St. Austin, that he was Haeretico∣rum Malleus, the Maul of Hereticks: And as of Mr. Arthur Hildersham, that he was Schis∣maticorum Malleus, The Hammer of Schismaticks. He often quoted and commented upon those Scriptures, Heb. 10. 25. 1 John 2. 19. with much warmth and vigour, that, if it were possible, he might reduce and bring back such as went astray. And though such as were touched in their sores were angry, and said it was passion, and that his natural heat was Kitchen-Fire, the effect of his natural Spirit, yet those that were judicious knew it to be otherwise, viz. That it was a Coal from the Altar; true Zeal; the Fruit of Gods Spirit in him; knowing that he was set up for the defence of the Gospel, as Phil. 1. 17. Some of those that separated were very dear unto him, of whom he might say as David, It was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it willingly: Was it he that hated me, that did magnifie himself against me? But it was my Friend and mine Acquaintance; we took sweet Counsel together, and (formerly) walked to the House of God in Company, Psal. 55. 12, 13, 14. But as dear as they were to him, the Truths of the Gospel were much dearer. Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica Veritas. He was a man of such clear convincing Light, and as its said of Apollos, (Act. 18. 24.) , able, strong, mighty in the Scriptures, that had they been wilfully blind, or very weak Ey'd, they must have seen their Errours. It's observed by some as a special Providence, that the same day in which Pelagius the Heretick was born in our Britain, St. Austin, the great Confuter of his Heresie, was born in Africk; God so disposing it that the Poison and the Antidote should come into the World together: So was it a good Pro∣vidence to Maidston, that in a time when so many Errours sprung up, there was such an able and faithful Husbandman to watch them and root them out; Otherwise many more than did, might have faln from their own stedfastness, and been led away with the Errours and Heresies of the Times. He was not only sound in the Faith, and held fast the Form of sound words, (2 Tim. His Faith. 13.) But also, as Abraham, he was strong in the Faith, (Rom. 4. 20.) And in the great∣est dangers and difficulties could rely upon God, and trust him with himself, and all that he had. He met with much opposition (as is before declared) both from open Enemies, and seeming Friends: For Satan knowing him to be so great an Enemy to his Kingdom of dark∣ness, both by his Exemplary Life, and sound Doctrine, raised great Winds and Storms, if it were possible, to put out this burning and shining Light: Yet still he remained un∣daunted in the midst of all, not moved by any of those things, neither counted he his Life dear unto him, so he might finish his course with joy, and the Ministry which he received of the Lord Jesus, (Act. 20. 24.) He minded his own work, consulted his Duty, and left Gods work (the Issues and Events of all) to God himself. He was an immoveable Rock, though the Waters beat sore upon him, and had often His Cou∣rage. that saying of Luther in his Mouth, Mallem rure cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare; I had rather fall with Christ than reign with Cesar. He knew God could and would take care of his own Cause and Interest, whatever became of him and other Instruments. His Spirit could argue as Luther did with Melancthon, Si piam & justam causam defendimus cur Dei Promissis non confidimus? Praeter hanc vitam misellam Satanas & Mundus nihil nobis eri∣pere possunt: At vivit, & in sempiternum regnat Christus, in cujus tutela consistit veritas: Is nobis aderit, is causam hanc, quae non nostra, sed ipsius est, ad optatum producet sinem. If the cause be good that we defend, why do we not trust God, who hath made us such graci∣ous Promises? The Devil and the World can take nothing but our frail and miserable Lives; but Christ lives and reigns for ever, &c.
Mr. Wilson was a Man that had lived much above the World; the great things thereof were little in his Eyes: Though his Habitation was on Earth, his Conversation was in His heaven∣ly-minded∣ness. Heaven. Indeed he had but a small Estate considering his great Charge; but a poor man may be as earthly and covetous as one that is rich: For Covetousness doth not lie in the Chest, or in Bags, or great Mannours, but in the Heart. But he was Master of, not Slave to that little which he had. His Mind was sitted to his Estate, and notwithstanding he had many opportunities and advantages for the getting of Riches, if he had sought after them, yet he never made use of them for that purpose. He was wholly taken up with his Trea∣sure in Heaven, and was so far from minding of earthly things, that he seldom or never meddled with them, but left the management of them to his pious and prudent Yoke-Fel∣low. His indifferency to the things of this Life was admirable. A little before the Insur∣rection in Kent, Anno Christi 1648. there was an Hundred Pounds brought into Mr. Wil∣son's Contempt of the world. House, being a Legacy given to his eldest Daughter, by Mr. Brigg, a gracious man, and one of the Jurats of Maidston, (which was the greatest Portion that any of his Children had,) which Money, in time of the Insurrection, was by the Souldiers (when they search∣ed his House for Arms) discovered, and taken away, (though it was soon restored again) Mr. Wilson being then at London. When afterwards the Country was quiet, and Mr. Wilson was returned to his House again, an intimate Friend asked him whether he was not much troubled when he heard that his Money was gone? He answered, That he was no more troubled when he heard that the Mo∣ney was carried out of his House, than he was when he heard it was brought into his House. The same Friend asked him what frame of Spirit he was in when he went from Maidston? For the Town and County being in Arms, many of the mean and prophane Rabble re∣proached him, when he was going out of the Town, and took his Horse by the Bridle, and twice or thrice led him back again, crying out, Wilson, Wilson, where is your God now? He answered his Friend thus: Truly I thought (when they blasphemously said un∣to me, where is your God?) on that Text, My God is in Heaven and hath done whatsoe∣ver he pleased. Psal. 115. 3. Great were his Gifts as well as his Graces: God was pleased to bestow upon him very His natural Endow∣ments. large natural Endowments, whereby he became much the more capable of doing good. He had a quick apprehension, a clear Understanding, a deep and sound Judgment, and a most tenacious Memory. He was none of those Preachers whose Tongues are galloping, whilest sober Reason and convincing Sense standeth still, or at best doth but creep. He dis∣covered his strong Judgment in few words. His Body was of a strong Constitution, and truly so was his Soul. He would presently find out the meaning of hard Authors, and what∣soever he read was his own: Few have the like strength of Memory. Though he was His Memo∣ry. careful to write down his Sermons, Heads, Proofs, and Explication, yet in the Pulpit he ne∣ver made use of any Notes. He made a good use of his Memory; it was not like a Childs Pocket, stuffed with trash, but as the Ark, wherein the two Tables were laid up. He had scarce his equal for his Remembrance of the sacred Scriptures: He was tried for a good while together: One took a Bible and read a Verse in one Chapter, and another a Verse in another, and so went forwards and backwards, both as to the Books, Chapters, and Verses of the Scripture, and he all along told the Reader the Verse, Chapter, and Book, without mistaking any one Text; and himself said, That he believed he could tell the Book, Chapter, and Verse, which any should read to him all the day long: Much whereof appeared in his Prayers; For on a Fast day he hath prayed an hour together, and most of the time in Scripture Phrases. The Word of God was dear unto him, his daily Delight and Meditation. And that which made all his parts useful, was, that he made Hagar to wait on Sarah; Prudence. and as David consecrated the Spoils taken from the Gentiles to the Temple: So he dedica∣ted his natural accomplishments to his God, and made them serviceable before his own honour. Notwithstanding all his great, natural, and gratious Accomplishments, he was cloathed Humility. with Humility: None thought so meanly of him as he thought of himself: His Face, like Moses's shined, so that all his judicious friends could not but observe and admire it, yet he knew it not: He had not the least affectation or shew of Ostentation in his deportment, Language, or any other way. Empty Vessels make the greatest sound; those which are full are the more silent. Igno∣rance and Pride, Emptiness and Arrogance are usual Concommitants: He knew much, yet the more sensible he was of his Ignorance, Nothingness, and Unworthiness, and walked the more humbly with his God. As a Bough laden with Fruit or an Ear with Corn, the fuller
and weightier, the more they bend downward: He (as a Violet) hung down and hid his Head, though his Fragrancy and Sweetness discovered what he was. In his Apparel he was always grave and sober, never minding the whimsical Modes or Fashions, but ever kept to the same manner of Attire. A Friend standing with him at his door, when a great Gallant antickly habited went by, whereupon he privately said, I have made a Covenant with mine Eyes, why should I behold Vanity? This good Man was surely excellently accomplished, seeing he had such rich natural Gifts, and such great gracious Habits, which, as the Diamond to the Ring, added true His rare Ac∣complish∣ments. value to his Naturals. Alas! What are all natural Abilities without Grace, but as Ci∣phers without a Figure, insignificant, and in Gods account standing for nothing? Nay, usually the greater Parts, the greater profaness: Satan makes much use of such acute Wits, as sharp Swords to do the more mischief: At best they are but as Toads with Pearls in their Heads, and Poison in their whole Bodys. But Mr. Wilson had this happiness to have his great Gifts adorned and enameled with great Graces, whereby he hourly became the greater Instrument of God's Glory. When he was about Twenty six years old he married the Daughter of Sir—Zinzan, who being in a Consumption before she was married to him, (for Love of him, her Parents His Wives, and Chil∣dren. judging him much below her,) died within seven or eight Months after she married him. About a Year after her death, he married Mrs. Damaris Cable (Daughter of Mr. James Cable of London, Merchant,) who was a meet help to him both in his civil and sacred con∣cerns: By her he had Eleven Children: His eldest Son [Samuel,] who feared the Lord in his Youth, died young, the other Ten he left all living at his death with his desolate Wi∣dow. He had little of this worlds Goods to leave to his many Children, not above a hun∣dred pounds a piece, and that after the decease of his Widow; yet he left them much if we consider the many fervent Prayers which night and day he poured out before the Lord in their behalfs. It's recorded of a good and gracious Woman, who, when she lay on her Death-Bed, said thus to her Children; I have little to leave you; but this I must tell you, there is not one room in the House which is not perfumed with Prayers for you. Often did this holy man cry out, O that my Children might live in thy sight! Lord come down by thy Spi∣rit into their Hearts, lest my Children die, lest they die eternally. He had the happiness pro∣mised to the good man, Psal. 128. 3. Thy Wife shall be as a fruitful Vine by the sides of thine House: Thy Children like Olive Plants round about thy Table. That Piety which did shine so brightly in his Life did sparckle wonderfully at his Death. His Sick∣ness. The Messenger which the Lord sent to call him hence (for Morbus est via ad Mortem) was a violent Fever, which he welcomed, as knowing it was sent by a gracious Father, to call him home to his Fathers House. No guest comes at any time amiss to him that keeps a constant Table: No Providence, no nor Death itself can come any time amiss to him that is always ready, and that dieth daily while he lives. Mr. Wilsons Lamps were burning, his Oil was ready in his Vessel, when the Bridegroom came. His Fever had continued but a little while before his Friends did Prognosticate, that it His carri∣age in his Sickness. would prove Mortal, and remove him from them, whom they loved as their own Souls, and under whose Ministry they had sat with so much delight. But what he had been in the course of his Life, the same he continued to be to his Death. Though his Disease was violent, and his Fits often acute and sharp, yet he never complained. Groan he might, yet he did never grumble. His pain might cause him to mourn, but it did not make him murmur: He reverenced the Rod in the Hand of his Father; and that Cup which his Fa∣ther gave him to drink he submitted to. In his extremity his Faith and Patience did emi∣nently shine forth to the Honour and Glory of God, and to the great comfort of those about him, and those that came to visit him. Being sensible of his approaching Death, he was exceeding sollicitous for the Town and His care for his People. Parish whereof he was Minister. It is an excellent Speech of Laelius (in Cicer. de amicit.) Mihi non minori curae est, qualis Respublica post mortem meam futura sit, quam qualis hodie sit: My care is as great what shall become of the Common-Wealth when I am dead, as what it shall do while I live. So this good Man was very sollicitous what should become of his People when God should call him away. As Moses before he died was careful to ap∣point a Successor that might lead Gods People (which he had brought unto the very Bor∣ders) into the Land of Promise, the Earthly Canaan: So Mr. Wilson before he died took care for a Successor that might further that good work that he had begun, through Grace, in many of his People, and to be helpful to conduct them to their heavenly Canaan. And for this end he sent for some of the Town, who were prudent and gratious, and advised them to consider of some able and godly Minister to succeed in his place: And he com∣mended
unto them Mr. John Crump, a worthy Minister, as the fittest that he know, to be their Pastor; and accordingly Mr. Crump did succeed him, not only in his place, but also in his Faithfulness and Diligence, and Serviceableness to the great comfort, and advantage of the People. And as Jacob before his Death called his Children together, to direct and foretel them He blesseth his Wife & Children. what should befall them, so Mr. Wilson called his Wife and Children to him, and desired his Wife not to be discouraged at his Death, nor to sorrow as those that have no hope; but to continue to serve God in Christ, to trust God, and be chearful in him; adding this for her comfort, that though now they must part for a time, yet that there was a time coming when they should be joined again, never to part any more, his Children were most of them young, but those that were capable of Instruction, he exhorted to labour for the Fear of God betimes; and directing his Speech to his elder Daughter, he said, Look you to it that you meet me not at the day of Judgment in an Unregenerate State. And so he commended all his Children to the Lord, and left them with him in much Faith in the Covenant which God had made to him and his. When Christian Friends came to visit him, he always endeavoured to requite their His Counsel to his Friends. kindness by giving them godly Counsel and Exhortation: He advised them to be frequent in reading the holy Scriptures, to prize highly, and to meditate much upon the Promises; to be holy and blameless in their Conversations; by no means to forsake, but stick close to all Gods Ordinances, and to hold on in Communion with Gods People in the Town. 'Tis reported of Epictetus, that when he had broken his Leg, he discoursed with his Friends as if his Soul had been in another mans Body; and when the Bones of Mr. Wilson were fore vexed with the violence of his Disease, he used to discourse in such a composed Heavenly His pati∣ence. manner, as if he had ailed nothing. When one or two of those who had separated from Communion with him came to visit him, he did with much affection bewail their Schism, and prayed that God would bring them back again; and told them that he could willingly lay down his Life, so they might join in Communion with the other godly People in the Town. Schism re∣proved. As Jacob when he was dying worshipped, leaning on his Staff, (Heb. 11. 21.) so he on his Death-Bed was frequent in praying to, and praising God. Two nights before his death (though he was very sick and weak) yet he made his Bed his Pulpit, out of which he preached to some that came to see him, concerning the pretiousness of the Promises, and bad them to look on that Text, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding rich and Promises commend∣ed. pretious Promises, that by these you might be Partakers of the Divine Nature, &c. And con∣cerning the pretiousness of Christ to believers, he desired them to turn to 1 Pet. 2. 7. Un∣to you that believe he is pretious. And Oh, with what affectionate Expressions did this Mi∣nister and Member of Christ commend his Head, the Pearl of inestimable value, and the Promise which he had so dearly purchased, saying to them, That one of those Promises was more pretious than all the World! He kept a pure Conscience while he lived, and through Gods Mercy, had a peaceable Conscience good. Conscience when he died. 'Tis said of Oecolampadius, that being asked on his Death-Bed, whether the Light did not offend him, clapping his Hands on his Breast he said, Hic sat lucis: Here is Light enough within: Mr. Wilson all the time of his sickness manifest∣ed much Calmness and Serenity of Spirit. 'Tis recorded of Dr. Taylor, Martyr, that when he came within two Miles of Hadley, the place where he was to suffer, he fetched a Frisk and said, God be praised, I am almost at my journeys End: I have but two stiles to go over, and then I am at my Fathers House. The Apprehensions that Death drew near were very comfortable to Mr. Wilson. A Gen∣tlewoman of his Society coming to take her leave of him, (being about to remove out of Comfort at Death. Maidston) he pleasantly said to her, What will you say (good Mrs. Crisp) if I get the start of you, and get to Heaven before you get to Dover? When another came to visit him, he ask∣ed her what she thought of him: She answered, Truly Sir, I think you are not far from your Fathers House: To which he replied, That's good News indeed, and is enough to make one laugh for joy. When others spake to him of his Death in a mournful way, he said unto them: I bless God who hath suffered me to live so long, to do him some service: And now I have done the work appointed me, that he is pleased to call me away so soon. Thus in the Breathings of his His death. Faith and Hope, he departed this Life, and commended his Spirit into the Hands of him that redeemed it, and that on the Lords-day, upon which Day he used to work so hard, which now was the day of his Eternal Rest, where he keeps an endless Sabbath, Anno Christi. 1657.
He needeth no Picture nor Monuments to preserve his Memory. His good Works (though transient in themselves, are yet permanent in the Hearts of many) and praise him in the Gate: For as Agesilaus dying said, If I have done good that will be my Monument; if ill, all the Statues you can make will not keep my Good Name alive. When he died he was about Fifty two Years old; of a strang Constitution for strength, and might in the course of Nature (if God had so pleased) have lived much longer: But he brought forth good fruit early, and was ripe when others of his age began but toblossom, and therefore it was no wonder though God gathered him to himself so soon. He was in his Meridian, when others were but just peeping above the Horizon, and therefore might well set before them. It was much desired and prayed for by many that he might have lived longer, but God's time is best, and his time is come: He had fought a good fight, he had finished his Course, he had kept the Faith, and his Master called him to receive his Crown. It may be said of him as one said of B. B. Juel, Diu vixit, etsi non diu fuit: He lived long and much in a little time. He did not waste out with the Rust of Idleness, but did wear out with Labour; yet he was a Light that did not blaze out needlesly and unprofitably, but burnt out for the en∣lightning of many, and directing them in the way of Life; which Life himself now en∣joyeth: And happy are they whom when their Lord comes shall find so doing: Of a truth I say unto you, he shall make them Rulers over all that he hath. Luk. 12. 43, 44. A Testimony given by a Reverend and godly Neighbour Minister concerning Mr. Wilson. MR. Wilson's natural parts (saith he) were generally known to be very high: In depth of Judgment, readiness of Memory, and quickness of Apprehension: He was best His Cha∣racter. at much in a little, with clearness of Judgment, and exactness of Method that I have heard, or am ever like to hear, His spiritual Endowments for Graces and Gifts were an∣swerable. In his Ministerial Abilities, he was taller by the Head and Shoulders than most of his Brethren: His indefatigable pains were answerable to his parts, which wore out his Spirits, and spent him for good, to be the sooner with God: And that which to me adorned all, was the depth of his Humility in the height of his Sanctity. He had well learned that hard Lesson, to receive much from God: and yet to be little in his own Eyes. His Memo∣ry is yet pretious to my Thoughts: The general loss is great, yours in particular at Maid∣ston greater. I shall heartily desire that his indefatigable Labours, and pious exemplary Life may still live in your Lives, in which he, though dead, yet speaketh, &c. On the much lamented Death of Mr. Thomas Wilson, Pastor of Maidston in Kent. IF Grief can help to versifie, And passion Poets make, I'le try, Though long deceas'd, to sigh a Verse To offer at a Kingdoms Hearse, And not sit mute in discontent: Sorrow will kill that hath no vent. I could my Soul in sadness steep: I could whole Floods of Waters weep. I could, as Niobe, bemoan My self, till turn'd into a Stone: I could become an Heraclite, And spend in Tears each day and Night: Or, Hermit lilke, to some close Cell Retire, and say, vain Mirth Farewel. Alas! I'th World what can I view? But what bids me bid joy adieu. I see Monsters of Vice abound, Ev'n Hell appearing above ground,
And Devils of the Humane Race, Daring th' Almighty to his Face: Such as can teach Nero to sin, To whom no age hath equal bin. I see the Shepherds laid to sleep, Who tender were of th' harmless Sheep; Whilst ravenous Wolfs and Bears survive, Who only to devour them strive. I see to▪set the greatest Lights, And hastening on us darksom Nights. All this I see, and cann't prevent, And is't unlawful to lament? What Marble is not wet with Tears, When such a doleful Change appears? The Great Assembly, once renown'd, (Whose Fame in foreign parts did sound) Displac'd on Earth, in haste remove Their Sessions to their House above. Seraphick Twiss went first, 'tis true, As Prolocutor, 'twas his due: Then Burroughs, Marshal, Whitake, Hill, Goug, Gataker, Ash, Vines, White, still Sharp Swords soon'st cut their Sheaths, Pern, Strong, Spurstow, Tuckney, Calamy, they throng The Gate of Bliss, as if their fear That Heaven would fill e're they got there. But why such haste? Death, hast no measure? Dost think't no theft to rob the Treasure Of th' Church? Or art become so wise, To seize first on the richest Prize? Or are thy Laws so strict they cann't The Benefit of th' Clergy grant? Or is't thine aim to cast the Stone Where thou maist kill many in one? Thou need'st not shake the Pulpit-Glass, Look with what haste the Sand doth pass. Their work, though great is quickly done, And too soon out of sight they're gone. They cann't themselves, who others save, No though great Clerks deoline the Grave. Scarce have I fully dri'd mine Eyes For one, but straight another dyes: Now Wilson's gone, that gallant Mind, That lofty Soul that thither enclin'd Whilst here, and always did aspire To join with the Coelestial Quire: Whose Head a living Library: Whose Heart the Ark wherein did lie The Law: whose Prayers could Heaven storm: Whose Preaching Sodoms did reform. Oft did he break the stony Heart, Then bind it up with heavenly Art. His Life the Gospel did expound, And its Comment in the Text was found. Had I as many Mouths to fill With praise, as he in Tongues had skill;
All were unable to set forth His great, his large, his matchless worth. Had I his Grace, his Gifts, I'de vic With a whole Kingdoms Ministry. He's with the rest the praise to sing Of our most loving Lord and King. There no dissenting Brethren be, But all as one in one agree; One Mouth, one Mind, one Heart, one Way; No strife which side shall bear the sway. (All doubts resolv'd, all knots unti'd, All Truths in th' God of Truth espi'd) With hottest love they there embrace Each other full of perfect Grace: Their Glory's great, their Wealth is vast, But O the pleasure they do taste I'th Tree of Life, and in the sight Of that blest Face that's all Delight! What Tongue can tell? what Mind can think What joy 'tis of this Spring to drink? Go fawning World, tempt me no more With thy skin-deep and fading store: Thy best, thy whole is but a Toy To that these happy Souls enjoy. My God invites to Angels fare, To which thy Trash cannot compare. On Swinish Husks why should I feed When I may eat what's Meat indeed. Lord why should I contented be Whilst I am thus absent from thee? Can there be day without the Sun? Or Bodies live when Souls are gone? Thou art my Sun, my Soul, and I Absent from that do daily dye. What do I here when all's above That is deserving of my Love? My God, my Christ, my Friends are there, My Heart, my hopes; what do I here? O let my Heaven-born Soul expire Itself in Salleys, and desire Only to rest and make its stay Where thou art All in All for aye! O come thou down with speed to me, Or take me quickly up to thee. G. S. An Epitaph upon Mr. Thomas Wilson. Lo here of Wilson but a shadow slight, He was a Star of more Illustrious Light: Such Wilson was in Life, such in his death, God grant we so may live, so yield our Breath:
VERA EFFIGIS SAMVELIS BOLTON S.S. THEOL: : NVPER COLL C CANTAB: MAG: Qui Obiit 15 Octbrs: 1654 Aetatis 48. F. H. Van Houe Sculp: portrait of Samuel Bolton A brief account of the latter part of the Life and Death of Dr. Samuel Bolton, who died Anno Christi 1654. I Have no Account of his Parentage, Birth, and Education in his younger Years: About the time that the All-wise God translated him hence, he was pleased, within a little space to take to himself many learned, godly, and able Ministers, which, without doubt, was a presage of the dreadful and terrible Judgments which ensued not long after: And it was the greater Judgment, because most People were so little sensible of it. Isa. 57. 1. The Righteous perisheth (saith the Evangelical Prophet) and no man layeth it to Heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come. The Jewish Rabbins have a saying, Quando Luminaria patiuntur Eclipsin, ma∣lum est signum Mundo: It is an ill sign to the World when the Luminaries of Heaven ar∣eclipsed. God extinguished many glorious Lights about that time, especially in and about London, as Dr. Gouge, Mr. Walker, Mr. Gataker. Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Strong, &c. And in the Uni∣versity of Cambridge Dr. Hill, Dr. Arrowsmith, and Dr. Samuel Bolton, sometimes Mr. of Christ's Colledge there: Upon whose Commendation if we should enter, it may be truly said what Gregory Nazianzen said of his Sister Gorgonia, That there is more fear that we shoul speak too little, than that we should speak too much. He was a Burning and a shining Light in this our Israel: An Interpreter one of a Thousand: A man of excellent Ministerial Abilities: A workman that needed not be ashamed, dividing aright the word of Truth. He was one that did study not only , but  not His Cha∣racter. only to Preach well, but to Live well. His Life was an excellent Commentary upon his Sermons. As Nazianzen said concerning John the Baptist, (who is called, The voice of the Cryer,) that he was All Voice: A Voice in his Habit; a Voice in his Diet; a Voice in his Dwelling; A Voice in his Conversation as well as in his Preaching: So that it may be tru∣ly said of this Man of God, he was Tota Vox, All Voice: A Voice in his Life as well as in his Doctrine. He lived his own Sermons, and preached louder by his good Conversation, than by his Heavenly Doctrine; Nam vita Praedicatorum est vocalissima: The Life of Mi∣nisters is the Life of their Ministry, and Teachers Sins are the teachers of Sins.
What Ruffinus said of Gregory Nazianzen, may fitly be applied to this Reverend and ho∣ly Minister; He did those things himself that he taught to others, neither did he condemn himself by practising contrary to what he preached. He had not only Dona honoraria, but Dona salutifera; Not only Gifts for the good of others, but Graces for the good of his own Soul. There are many Ministers that have rare Gifts, but they are like a Pearl in a Toads Head, a Pearl in the Head, but the Body all Poison, becuse their Lives give a lye to their Doctrines: But this our Brother had not only Gratias gratis datas, but Gratias gra∣tum facientes. He was not only learned, but religious, and (which is the highest commen∣dation) he was an humble Saint. The Applause from others did not make him proud. There are four things (saith Luther) that make a Minister; Prayer, Reading Medita∣tation, What makes a Minister. and Temptation. Our Christian Brother was not only a man of Prayer, Reading, and Meditation, but a man assaulted with manifold Temptations; yea, probably with more than many hundreds of Ministers are. He was often buffeted by Satan, and therefore pro∣ved Hs Temp∣tations. the more able to comfort them that were in trouble, by the Comforts wherewith he was comforted by God. (2 Cor. 1. 4.) And he left a Writing behind him wherein he had re∣corded all the outgoings of God towards him, and all the Experiences of Gods shining with the Light of his Countenance upon him; and also of his withdrawings, and hiding his Face from him. He hath written down both the Apogaum's and Perigaeum's (as I may so say,) both those times wherein God stood at a distance from him, and when he approached His Pru∣dence. nearer to him. His desire of winning Souls to Christ by his Preaching, was so great, that though he was His painful∣ness. Head of a Colledge in Cambridge, and had no Ministerial charge of his own, yet notwith∣standing he preached gratis once every Lords day for many Years together. The like is re∣corded of that Reverend, Godly, and Learned Minister Dr. Hill, somtimes Master of Tri∣nity Colledge. This worthy Dr. Bolton, in the ordinary course of his Ministry, had a little before his Death preached over the third Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Philippians to the latter end of the Twentieth Verse, and was come to Verse the One and Twentieth; Who shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. And it pleased God by his Providence so to order it, that Mr. Edward Calamy preaching at his Funeral, happen∣ed, that he made choice of this very Verse (though he knew nothing of this till after∣wards) for his Text at his Burial. But though Dr. Bolton lived not to preach upon this A special providence. Verse, yet he now lives in Heaven, waiting for that blessed time when his vile Body shall be raised out of his Grave, and be made like unto the glorious Body of our Lord Jesus Christ. Before he was made Master of Christ's Colledge, he preached three or four Years at St. Martin's Ludgate, London: Also six or seven Years at St. Saviour's Southwark; And for some time at St. Andrew's Holborn, in all places to the great satisfaction of all the godly that waited upon his Ministry. And though he be now dead, yet he still speaks, not only by the Holiness of his Life, and graciousness of his Doctrine, but also by the many excellent Books which he hath lest in Print, in which may be beheld a fair Character of his Piety, and Ministerial Abilities. He was very Orthodox and sound in his Judgment: He had no Spiritual Leprosie in his His works. Head, witness those two Books of his, called, The Arraignment of Errour, and A Vindica∣tion of the Rights of the Law, and Liberties of Grace. He was of a publick Spirit, witness that Book of his, called, A Word in Season to a sinking Kingdom. He was very careful in admitting Men and Women to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; witness that Book of his called, The Wedding Garment. The time of his Sickness was long, tedious, and costly: His Diseases many, very many, His Sick∣ness. but his Patience was exceeding great. He would usually say, that though the Providences of God were dark towards him, yet he had Light within. A little before he died, he said to one that was lifting him up, Let me alone, let me lie quietly, for I have as much comfort as my Heart can hold. The last time that Mr. Calimy visitted him, he found him wonder∣ously desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: He said, Oh this vile Carcass of mine! Death desi∣red. When will it give way that my Soul may get out and go to my God? When will this rotten Carcass be consumed, that I may mount up to Heaven? And when he saw any probable Symptoms of Death, (which he called, The little Crevises at which his Soul did peep out,) he was exceeding joyful. It was his desire to be buried without any Funeral Pomp, which may mind us of a saying His humili∣to. recorded by Melchior-Adamus in the Life of Pellitan, of an Uncle of his who would not be
buried in his Scholastick Habit (as the custom in that Country then was) Testamento cavit (saith he) ne aliter sepeliretur quam simplex alius Christianus: He ordered it in his last Will and Testament, to be buried as a private Christian, and not as a Doctor, and the Reason he gave was, because he hoped, Resurrecturum se ad judicium, non ut Sacerdotem & Docto∣rem, sed ut humilem Christianum; That he should rise at the day of Judgment, and appear before God, not as a Presbyter, or a Doctor, but as an humble Christian. This was the desire and hope of our Reverend Brother, and this Text preached upon at his Funeral was matter of great rejoicing unto him, whilest he thought on that day, wherein his vile Body, subject to so many Diseases, should be made like unto the glorious Body of Christ, accord∣ing to the working, the mighty working (as he three times repeated) whereby he is able to sub∣due all things to himself: And so he quietly slept in the Lord, and was honourably buried in His death. the Church of St. Martins Lungate, Octob. the 16th. Anno Christi 1654. An Epitaph on the truly Religious and Learned Dr. Bolton, Master of Christs Colledge in Cambridge. TIr'd with a Body, and the Age, here lies One that was holy, learned, just and wise; Liv'd when the Court seem'd heavy, and the See Grew proud, yet Patience preach'd and Modesty. Though Fears urg'd Fears, and Hope pursued Hope, Pulpits 'gainst Pulpits bandied, yet the Scope Both of his Text and Life, was Peace, fair Peace! Heavens Legacy, the busie world's scorn'd ease! By taking care of Souls he did not mean Providing Lordships for his Heirs; So clean, So spotless were his aimes: His greatest store, Was Love, and Praise; Promotion made him poor. 'Twas not the practice of his Zeal to groan Against Pluralities, and neglect his One. His Matter always did become the place, Diurnals never turn'd the second Glass. Call'd from the City he succeeded one Turn'd out by Death; Fates Sequestration. VVhich place he serv'd with chearful love & care. Firm Justice, open Candour, hearty Prayer. (Free from base shrivl'd Faction, hungry strife) Ev'n to the loss of Riches, Health, and Life. Stay (Reader) and bestow a Tear On this dusty fruitful Bed, The Spring will then dwell always here, And Violets ne're hang the Head. Pray, the Earth may lightly press Her entrusted Urn below; May the same Prayer thy Reliques bless; When they rest as his do now. T. Standish. Ʋpon the Death of the Pious and Learned Samuel Bolton, Dr. of Divinity, and Master of Christs Colledge in Cambridg. NOt that my gadding Muse affects to shew Her courser Beauties to the common view, Not that she thinks such harsh untuned Lays As hers are fit to celebrate thy Praise;
Dares she present these Verses: But as they Who hundreds hold of others, yet do pay Nought but a Pepper-Corn: By this she shows Though she brings little, yet 'tis much she owes To thy dear Memory, and honour'd Name, Immortal Bolton; Heir of lasting Fame. Whose known Deserts, and unreproved worth Needs not her slender skill to blaze it forth: But can commend itself to aftertimes Without the help of Elegiack Rimes. Though others under Brass and Marble plac'd, Kept not their Names and Titles underfac'd; Though Monuments themselves decay and must Confess their Ruines, and resolve to dust; Though all things else be subject to the Laws Of fickle Change, and Times devouring Jaws; Yet Wisdom hath a ne're decaying Root And virtuous pains bring everlasting Fruit: And they that laboured have, and liv'd like thee, Their Names shall live to all Eternity. Nor seems it strange that virtuous men sho'd best Oblivion scape, which oft involves the rest Of Things and Persons, whose Poor low desires Are not affected with such high Aspires. The Principles by which most men do move, Are private Interest, and base Self-Love. So far their Friendship, and their Hate extends. Itself, as serves their own contracted Ends. Hence, as that Earth-begotten Brood, which grew From Teeth which Cadmus in the Furrows threw, Within a while by civil Discord slain. Return'd unto her Mother Earth again, And scarce left any token to appear To tell th' ensuing Age that once they were. So bad Men quickly vanish and are gone, Buried in th' Earth, and dark Oblivion. But those like thee whose more enlarged Breast With better thoughts, and purer Fire's possest; Who make themselves no scope to which they bend Their Actions; but the common good attend; Cannot pass unregarded hence, but Fame Enobles and perpetuates their Name. Whoever did to th'Infant World impart Some signal Benefit, or useful Art, Had Temples built unto him; hence arose Ceres and Bacchus, and such Gods as those. Would Truth dispense, and Piety admit Of such like Deities, 'twere far more fit T'account thee one, than those that taught us how To tread the Wine-Press, and to hold the Plough: Since this grand difference 'twixt thee we find And them; They fed the Body, thou the Mind. Wm. Wobriche.
On the deplored Death of the Reverend Doctor Samuel Bolton, Mr. of Christ's Colledge in Cambridge. TO mourn in Verse, and write an Elegie, Is even grown as common as to die; Poetick Sorrow serves but for a Mask To other Passions; 'twere an easie task For Grief that's feigned, or at best but faint, To boast itself in Eloquent Complaint. But where internal Sorrow hath possest The very Vitals, and corrodes the Breast With inward care, where the oppressed Heart Doth lie in languish with consuming smart, The Soul is choaked, and the Spirit's spent With mutual Conflict e're they find a vent. Such real Anguish, such unfeigned Grief, Doth scarce admit the pittiful Relief Of Sighs and Tears; such dolor scarce affords Imperfect Sentences, and broken words. The case is ours, when Sorrows violence Hath strongly touched with a vigorous sense Of our Calamity: whose deep Distress Our Minds with Grief astonish'd can't express. No wonder then in so just cause of Tears And sad Complaint, so little Pomp appears Of mournful Elegies and Fun'ral Songs; This loss doth more affect our Hearts than Tongues. Our sincere Mourning seeks not after Fame In these just Rites; let others then proclaim Their forced sorrows with exalted cries, Our real Grief makes silent Obsequies. W. Leigh. Ʋpon the Death of the Reverend, his never to be forgotten Friend, Dr. Bolton, Mr. of Christ's Col. Cambr. IS Bolton dead? And shall not England weep, That we no longer such a Saint could keep! Alas! the World not worthy was of thee, The Saints above did want thy Company. Thy Virtues, Graces, Praises, and thy worth, No Tongue alive is able to set forth. Thou wast a burning, and a shining Light In this our Orb; few left which shin'd so bright. Thy Ministerial Gifts, thy Zeal, were rare, Thy Piety, no less thy Gifts in Prayer. And in a Word (blest Soul) thee to commend; Thy Praise knows no beginning, nor no end. John Crofts, Minister, C. C. C.
A brief account of the Life and Death of Mr. Richard Vines, who died Anno Christi 1655. RIchard Vines was born at a Town called Blazon, in the County of Leicester, about His Birth & Education. the Year 1600. His Parents finding his Towardliness and Ingenuity, kept him at School till he was fit for the University, and then sent him to Cambridge, where he was admitted into Magdalen Colledge; In which place he soon discovered much quickness of Wit, and pregnancy of Parts, which, though they were lively and facetious, yet never sinful or prophane. In that Colledge he followed his studies very hard, and profited much in the Arts and His profici∣ency. Tongues: And after he had continued some good time in the University, going into his own Country, he was chosen to be a Schoolmaster at Hinckly, a little Market-Town, bor∣dering upon Warwickshire. There he continued for some good time, training up his Scholars in Religion and Learn∣ing, till the Death of Mr. James Crunford, head Schoolmaster in the Free-School of Co∣ventry, who also was Rector of Weddington in the same County; by whose death that Re∣ctory He is chosen to Wedding∣ton. falling void, Mr. Adderly, a godly and Religious Gentleman, who was Patron of the place, and lived in the Parish, presented Mr. Vines to it. The Parish was very small, and the Ministers means of maintenance answerable, being not above 60 l. per annum, yet Mr. Vines accepted of it, and laboured faithfully in the work of the Ministry, with much Evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and Power, so that many reforted to his Ministry from places adjacent, and Mr. Adderly took such a Love and liking to him, that he bestowed his Daughter upon him, who proved a loving and loyal Wife unto him all his days. His Marri∣age. Having continued some time at Weddington, there was another little Parish within less than a Mile of it, called Cawcot, which falling void by the death of the Incumbent, the To Cawcot. Patron conferred that upon Mr. Vines also, because the Churches being but about half a Mile asunder, he might preach in the Morning at the one, and in the Afternoon at the other; or one Lords-day at one, and another at the other, yet the Profits of both did not amount to 100 l. per annum. His Parts and Pains were so conspicuous that they were not fit to be bounded within so narrow a compass, and therefore at the request of divers Friends, he undertook a Lecture His Lecture at Nun-Ea∣ton. at Nun-Eaton, a large Market-Town near unto him, and about seven Miles from Coven∣try, unto which multitudes resorted, both of the Gentry, Ministry, and private Christi∣ans, whereof many came from places divers Miles off, as I my self was somtimes a Wit∣ness. There he continued till the Civil Wars brake forth, Anno Christi 1642. between the King and the Parliament, at which time, for his safety, he retired with his Family into His remove to Coventry. Coventry, as divers other Ministers did; and considering the heavy Judgments of God up∣on the Nation, and the great danger that they were in, they agreed amongst themselves to set up a Morning Lecture, which began at Seven, and ended about Eight a Clock, which they kept by turns, to the great Comfort and Edification of the Citizens, and others of the Gentry, that were retreated into the City. Mr. Vines was one that kept up this Le∣cture, and preached also somtimes on the Lords-days, with great approbation, and content to his Hearers. There he continued to the year 1643. at which time the Assembly of Divines was cal∣led, Chosen into the Assem∣bly. and he was chosen one of the Ministers for Warwickshire, and it was a Mercy to the Church of God that he was so: For how much good he did there about the matter of Church-Government, may safely be concealed, but scarcely be expressed without offence to some. This occasioned his coming to London, and soon after he was chosen to preach before the House of Commons on one of their solemn Fast-Days, which he performed with much His coming to London. judgment, Masculine and Nervous Oratory, as may be seen in his Sermon, printed by Or∣der of the said House: And he was taken so much notice of, that soon after he was chosen Minister of Clements Danes, a very large, and considerable Parish, wherein, besides Citi∣zens, To Clements Danes. there were some Nobles, and Persons of Eminency. And Essex-House being in that Parish, that Noble Earl was his frequent Hearer, with
whose Ministry he was so pleased and taken, that he became his great Friend to his dying Day, and after his death Mr. Vines was made choice of to preach at his Funeral, which curious and ingenious Sermon is to be seen in Print. He was called often to preach before the Parliament, sometimes before the House of Lords, and sometimes before the House of Commons, all which he performed to the great Satisfaction of his Hearers, especially of the most judicious. And how effectual his Ministry in his own Parish was, some yet li∣ving can, and have testified, not without many Tears, being much troubled for the dry∣ing up of those Breasts, from which, for some years, they had such wholsom, pleasing, and profitable nourishment. After some time spent in that place, by the sollicitation, and procurement of the Earl of Essex, (Clements Danes being so large and unweildy a Parish) he was removed to the Rectory of Watton, in the County of Hertford. The Parsonage was of good value, yet His Remove to Watton. much over-rated in the common Report, (as most Ecclesiastical Living use to be;) but it proved small to him, by reason of his great Charges in repairing a ruinous House; great Taxes (the tenth of all which was laid upon him by his Neighbours, who knew not how to value such a Pearl,) and (as himself told me) being forced to find a Horse and Arms without any other joined with him: Besides, in regard of his necessary absence sometimes, he was fain to maintain an Assistant to supply his room. When the University of Cambridge was reformed by the noble Earl of Manchester, he was chosen, and appointed to be Master of Pembrook Hall: And sew there were more To Cam∣bridge. fit for Learning, or a Spirit of Government, and for such a trust than he. When he came to it, he found the House very empty of Students, and the Buildings much out of Order, by abuse of rude Soldiers that had been quartered in it: But the Fame of Mr. Vines, now made Master, quickly drew Scholars; the Chambers were repaired, and made fit for their Entertainment, & the House flourished with godly, and learned Fellows, and Scholars. There he continued, promoting Religion and Learning to the utmost of his Power, till he was put out for refusing the Engagement, even that Engagement, which, though some did swal∣low, yet to others it proved a stone of sttumbling, and a Rock of Offence to many other tender, Consciencious Heads of Houses, Fellows of Colledges, and Ministers in the King∣dom. From being Pastor of Watton (a place too mean for his Gifts) he had a fair Invitation and Call to the Pastoral Charge of Lawrence Jury, London, and so he returned to the Ci∣ty To Law∣rence Jury. again, where he exercised his choice. Talents to Gods Glory, and the great good of his People, and others that flocked to his Ministry: And God so blessed his Labours, and gave him such room and Interest in the Hearts of his People, that whereas his House was old and incommodious, they pulled it down, built it new, and enlarged it out of their own Purses, which cost them (as I was informed) about Five Hundred Pounds. Whilest he was Minister there, he was chosen to be one of the weekly Lecturers at St. Michaels Cornhill, which Lecture was set up and maintained by some godly and well af∣fected Merchants, who frequented the same, together with multitudes of other Citizens, out of all parts of the City, and it was a means (through Gods Blessing) to edifie many, and to settle and establish others in those giddy times. As he was thus indefatigably spending himself, and labouring in the Lords Harvest work, it pleased God to afflict him with a great distemper, accompanied with much pain in his His Sick∣ness. Head, which suddenly almost took his sight from him, insomuch (as himself told me, with whom I was intimately acquainted for about Fourteen years before his Death) that he could not see to read the largest Print, neither would any Spectacles help him. This occasioned a very great change; for whereas before he was of a lively, chearful, and active Disposi∣tion, now he became dull, and Melancholly: whereas before he was of a strong, and healthful Constitution, now he became weak and crazy, yet would not be taken off from his Labours to the last; but was desirous to spend and be spent in the work of the Lord. On a Sabbath Day he preached his last Sermon, and administred the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not finding any sensible change in himself, till about Ten a Clock at Night, when he was going to Bed, at which time he fell into a great Bleeding at the Nose, probably having over-heat his Blood by the labours of the Day; and having finished his course upon Earth, and faithfully discharged the Work and Errand for which God sent him into the World, between Two and Three a Clock that Night, he quietly and comforta∣bly resigned up his Spirit unto God that gave it, and was honourably buried (multitudes His Death. attending his Corps to the Grave, with much Lamentation and Mourning) at Lawrence-Jury London, Feb. 7. Anno Christi 1655. and of his Age about Fifty Six: And from the Sanctification of the Lords-Day he went to his everlasting Rest.
He was (as John the Baptist) a burning and a shining Light: An Interpreter one of a His Chara∣cter. Thousand: Of very great and eminent Parts: taller by the Head and Shoulders then most of his Brethren. A Man mighty in the Scriptures; Another Apollos in that; excellently and exquisitely accomplished in all parts of Learning. A perfect Master of the Greek Tongue; a good Philologer; an excellent Orator. He was a ready and piercing Disputant, and so he approved himself even to admiration, in those two famous Treaties, the one at Uxbridge, the other at Newport in the Isle of Wight; in both which places, being (with some other Di∣vines) appointed to attend their Commissioners sent from the Parliament, in the former Place to treat with the Kings Commissioners, and in the latter with the King himself, he strenuously enervated the Arguments of those, who asserted the Divine Right of Prelacy, and assertest the Presbyterian Government. He was a solid and judicious Divine, who read much, and concocted what he read; One who was able to give a weighty and pithy Decision in any controverted point: He was a notable confuter of Errours, he seldom spake to them, but hit the Bird in the Eye, and made him die, not a lingring, but a sudden Death. In the course of his Ministry he was highly Orthodox, sound in the Faith, very powerful, very spiritual; His whole design and drift in his Ministry was to clear up that great Doctrine of Justification (in which he was eminently, and throughly studied) to debase Mans Righteousnes, and to exalt the Righteousness of Jesus Christ; He was one that knew how to speak a word in season to wounded and bruised Spirits. There was a great Light, who is now with God, Mr. Angel of Grantham, who, being under a sore and grievous Desertion, did receive much Comfort by discourse with him. His diligence in his Work and Calling was great in Labours much, in Preaching much, His Indu∣stry. and towards his end his great weakness neither did, nor could hinder him from his Masters Work, with St. Austin, he desired, that when Christ should come, he might find him aut Precantem, aut Praedicatm; Either Praying or Preaching. That which would have made some to keep their Beds, could not keep him out of the Pulpit. And as he Preached, so he lived, By his Parts he did ; By his Grace he did : What he Preached to others he practiced himself, and was not like a Mercurial Post, that directs the way to o∣thers, but never stirs it self. For his natural temper, he was a Man of a Heroical and undaunted Spirit, some called Luther∣like. him Luther, not being much unlike him (as it should seem by his Picture) and indeed he was another Luther; he feared not the Faces of any in the discharging of a good Consci∣ence. In his Deportment he was somewhat blunt and inobservant, yet not in the least Proud, or morose, and supercilious. Two things were objected against him by some: First, his frequent removes from place to place, towards his latter end; And secondly, Co∣vetousness, which they inferred from the former. But their is no question but that a Minist∣er may have just and lawful occasion of removing from one place to another, especially in such unsetled times as those were (yet it is confessed that, for the avoyding of Offence, they should be very wary and circumspect therein) but for his particular case, after he had long continued in his Pastoral charge in the Country (tho the Place was obscure, and the means small) in all his latter removes, he can scarce be said to have undertaken a Pastoral Charge in any of them, except in the last of Laurence Jury. As for the charge of Covetousness, I remember that Mr. Calvin had the same aspertion Vindica∣ted. cast upon him, but his last Testament shewed that he dyed a very poor Man: For all his Goods, yea and his Library, being sold very dear (saith Mr. Beza) scarcely amounted to three Hundred Crowns. And Mr. Calvin himself in his life time, hearing of this impudent slander, answered, If I cannot persuademen whilst I am alive to believe that I am no great Monyed Man, yet my Death will shew it. And the Senate at Geneva could testify that his stipend being very small, he was so far from not being contented with it, that when they offered to enlarge his Pensions, he utterly refused the same: By this small estate which he left at his Death, it appeared that either his Gifts were not great, or else that he spent as God sent: So Mr. Vines by what he left at his death; made it abundantly appear, that his Heart was not much set upon the World; For if it had, sure there would have been more of the World in his Purse: for it may be confidently affirmed, that their was not a Minister of any repute in the City of London, for some years, that died with so small an Estate as Mr. Vines did. If we take him as a Christian, he was another Enoch, a true Walker with God, a very Holy Man: more cannot be said of any Man; less cannot be said of him, without wrong∣ing his his memory. His Life was like Enochs Life, and his Death was like Enochs Transla∣tion; for he died suddenly. He went to Bed, slept, and dyed. His Death was a sleep in∣deed:
Being weary and spent with his Work, God took him to Heaven, there to give him a Cordial: From the Pulpit he went to the Throne: As soon as he had ended his Sabbath here, he entred upon his everlasting Sabbath in Glory. He went warm from his Work to his Wages. That's blessed thing for a Minister to be found by Death about his Lords business. Mr. Vines his work was done, he was weary and feeble, and God his good Master took him to himself, crowned him with Life and Immortality, and instead of hard Labour here, called him to that joyful work of singing forth Praises and Hallelujahs to his God and Father. Quod si digna tuâ minus est mea pagina laude, At voluisse sat est— Lucan. Let us also hear what Mr. Simeon Ash, and Mr. Edmund Calamy have left upon Record concerning Mr. Vines. IT hath been (say they) no small Grief unto us, that so many Faithful, Fruitful, Ortho∣dox Ministers, eminent both for Learning and Piety, have been of late removed from us, now in the time when we have most need of their Counsel, Preaching, and Prayers, for our present healing, and the preventing of our future feared dangers. Oh! How sad a sight is it to behold our Pilots, our Steersmen, lying dead upon the Deck, when the Winds rise, the Seas swell, the Clouds blacken, and the Heavens lowre, presaging approaching Storms? How awakening a Providence is this, to have our Quar∣ters beaten up, and at the same time to see our Captain, and Standard-Bearers laid lifeless in the Dust? We cannot without Sorrow remember the Death of many of our Worthies, whose signal Characters of deserved Commendations have already been made publick for the use of succeeding Ages: And this our late blow received in the removal of famous Mr. Vines, doth cause our former Wounds to bleed afresh. Mr. Vines his natural Acumen, together with acquired Abilities were extraordinary. He His Cha∣racter. was a smart Disputant, as it was observed in many places with admiration; Not only in the Assembly of Divines against Diffenting Brethren, but likewise at the Conferences at Ux∣bridge, and in the Isle of Wight, about the Jus divinum of Prelacy, where some of his learned Opposites were very sensible of his strength. He was a well studied Orthodox Divine, his Ministry was solid, pithy, nervous, quick, and searching, as his most judicious Auditors, both in Warwickshire, Cambridge, and Lon∣don, will acknowledg. His Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Earl of Essex, doth prove him to have been an excellent Rhetorician, and an eloquent Orator. The Sermons which he preached before both Houses of Parliament, do not only discover his high parts, but do tell the World, that he was neither a Flatterer, nor a Time-server. As he had a clear Head, and could dive deep into a knotty Controversie, so he had (Luther-like) an undaunted Spirit, and was not afraid of Men, but could and would speak his Mind in any Company, with brave Mettal, and high Magnanimity. The great design of his Ministry (especially towards his latter end) was to drive Man out of himself, and to draw him unto Christ; to discover the cheats of Mans deceitful Heart, and to throw down all sandy Foundations of Hope of Heaven, to encourage an humble dependance upon the Lord Jesus Christ; as also to quicken inside Holiness with the Power of Godliness in a Christian Conversation. And (that which was the Crown of all other his Excellencies) he was a man of a right, gracious, and tender Spirit, whereof this was an evident Demonstration, (to instance in no more) that he resolved rather to suffer, by being turned out of the Mastership of Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge, than to subscribe the Engagement against his Conscience: Yea, he was (out of Knowledge) an hearty Presbyterian, notwithstanding the manifold discouragements, which were from every hand, cast upon that way of God, in those wo∣ful and declining times. Now upon the Death of this worthy man, our much endeared Brother, our words can∣not sufficiently express the grief of our Hearts. And to move others to mourning for such a loss, (besides sundry other Arguments which we will not mention) we may truly apply some of the passages of David's Lamentation over Saul and Jonathan, (2 Sam. 1.) Weep over Saul, who cloathed you with Scarlet, with other delights; who p on Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel. The Bow of Jonathan returned not back: They onger than Lions. How profitable pleasant? How warm in Afflictions? How delightful  Language? And how rich in Notions was pretious Mr. Vines in his Ministry? And with what irresistible
strength was he wont to shoot Arrows of Conviction into the Consciences of his Audi∣tors? But alass, alass! Now this Champion; This Prince of Preachers is laid silent in the Dust (with many other of our Reverend deceased Brethren) never any more to awaken, to warm, to encourage, and to edifie our Souls by his Ministerial Endeavours. He left only two Daughters behind him. Many Elegies were made for him: I shall only present some of them to you. Richardus Vines. Anagramma. Charus Dei sinu. Una deest Anagrammate litera, sed tibi nullus (O dilecte Deo) desideratur Apex. It's true our Anagram doth limp a little, That speaks thy Bliss; but it wants not a tittle. Will. Spurstow, D. D. Richardus Vines. . Hic rarus videns. 1 Sam. 9. 9. Hic est ille Videns, quo non est rarior alter. Assertor Fidei; quo non nervotior alter. Malleus Heresium; quo non solertior alter. Praeco Dei Verbi; quo non divinior alter. Nec Vitae absimilis voci; non sanctior alter. Huic plures, Deus alme, pares concede Videntes. T. D. On his receiving the Lords-Supper, not many Hours before his Death. STrange Miracle! Elijah's blest Repast In Forty days brought him to God at last: But stranger this; our Vines to God does go In some few hours, and without Fasting too. And yet in me it shall no wonder move, A Raven did bring that, but this a Dove. Delicious Fare! He relish'd naught beside; But tasting of it, lik'd it not, and di'd. Yet stay, I'me out; for know he is not dead, But after such a Supper went to Bed. Peter Vinke, Th. B. Ʋpon the Death of so many Ministers of late. STill we do find black Cloth wears out the first; And Fruits tha are the choicest keep the worst. Such Men, so many, and they die so fast, They're precious (Death) Odor make such waste!
Scarce have we dried our Eyes for loss of one, But in comes tidings that another's gone. Oh that I had my former Tears again, (All but those few laid out upon my Sin) Had I an Helicon ine ither Eye, I have occasion now to Verse them dry. Tryumph (Lycentious Age) lift up thy Song, Preshytery sha'nt trouble you ere long; Those that tormented you before your Day, Are now apace removing out o'th' way. Yea rather, tremble (England) stand agast, To see thy glorious Lamps go out so fast; When Death (like Sampson) thus laies hold upon The Pillers of the Church,—the Buildings gon. When we do see so many Stars to fall, Surely it bodes the Worlds great Funeral. London, look to't, and think what Heaven is doing A Predicti∣on. Thy Flames are coming, when thy Lots are going Well may we all fear God intendeth Wars, When he commands home his Ambassadors. That venerable Synod which of late Was made the Object of mens scorn and hate, (For want of Copes and Miters, not of Graces) Are now call'd (with Moses) and their Faces Where they return, shall shine; God sees it fit, Such an Assembly should in Glory sit. The Learned Twiss went first, (it was his right) Then Holy Palmer, Burroughs, Love, Gouge, White, Hill, Whitaker, Grave Gataker, and Strong, Perne, Marshall, Walker, all gone along. I have not nam'd them half: Their only strife, Hath been (of late) who should first part withLife. Those few who yet survive, sick of this Age Long to have done their Parts, and leave the Stage. Our English Luther Vines (whose Death I weep) Sloth away (and said nothing) in a sleep: Sweet (like a Swan) he Preach't that Day he went, And for his Cordial, took a Sacrament: Had it but been suspected—he would Die, His People, sure had stopt him with their Crie. My blear-ey'd Muse ('tis Tears have made them so) Must wash his Marble too before she go. Ʋpon the much Lamented Death of the Reverend Mr. Richard Vines. ART thou gon too (Thou great, and Gallant mind) And must such sneaks as I be left behind? If thus our Horsemen and Commanders Die, What can the Infantry do then but fly i Oh Divine Vines! Tell us, why wouldst thou go, Unless thou could'st have left thy Parts below: If there's a Metempseuchosis indeed, Tell us where we may find thee at our need? Who hath thy Memory? Thy Brain? Thy Heart? Whom didst thou leave thy Tongue (for every part Of thee can make a Man (what if we find, (As I'le not swear this Age wo'nt change her Mind)
Prelacy (tho her Lands are sold) revive? Or Independency (who hopes to thrive, No where suits Trump) should dare dispute at length? Where hast thou left thy Presbyterian strength, With which thou got's the Game, i'th' Isle of Wight, Where the King cri'd, that—Vines was in the right? When Essex di'd (the Honour of our Nation) Thou gav'st him a new Life in thy Oration. But when great Fairfax to hsi Fate shall yield, Whom hast thou left—to fetch from Naisby Field, An Expres∣sion in Mr. Vines his Sermon on my Lord of Essex. Th' Immortal Turf, and dress it with a story, That shall perpetuate his Name and Glory. Where's thy Rich Fancy (Man?) To whom (beneath) Did'st thou thy losty and high strain bequeath? Tell us for thine own sake, for none but he That hath thy wit, can write thine Elegy. Till he be found, let this suffice, which I Leave on thy Stone.—Here lies the Ministry. R. Wilde, Minister of Aynhoe. Upon the Death of the Learned and Pious Mr. Rich. Vines. DEath that was wont the tender Grass to mow, And crop with gentle Syth the Flowers that grow In Broidred Fields, now fells our stoutest Oaks, Tall Sedars, choicest Vines with fatal stroaks; And to compleat our misery at one blow All these in one fierce Death did overthrow. For him in whom the strength of Oaks did rest, Beauty of Cedars, and of Vines the best: By a swift, secret stroke too, envious Death, Out of our sacred Grove removed hath. Thus Vines cut down, and 'cause we for his fall Cannot lament enough, our Children shall. Mat. Newcomen. To the Honourable Memory of Mr. Richard Vines. BUt why so soon? Why mak'st such haste away? Could'st thou not brook a little more delay? And give some warning of so sad a blow; No private but a common overthrow? As when the Fabrick of some stately Tower Comes near the Period of its fatal Hour; Hear shrinks a Rafter, there a Pillar groans, And all the Parts breath out their Farewell moans; That so some just, and seasonable fear, May the Indwellers for the stroke prepare. And was it thine intent to verifie What we thought false, That Seraphims can Die? Sure could they Die, just so they'd lose their Breath, Nor would they pray against a sudden Death. What was the cause thou wa'st so hurried hence, Nor with a moments stay would Death dispence? Was it because that restless Hellish Crew, Did with good Angels their Dispute renew
'Bout Moses Body? And th' Arch-Angel chose Thee for his Second to confound his Foes? Or did those blessed Spirits (who use to pry, And search into the Gospels Mystery) Come to a Riddle, and resolve it thus, To send for thee to be their Oedipus? Were it not heathenish to apprehend Mortals could to a Deity ascend, I should expound thy sudden change to Bliss, A token of thine Apotheosis. As Romulus, when to be Deifi'd, He must to Heaven in a Whirl-wind ride. Or was't because had a more lingring Death Giv'n timely notice of thy passing Breath, Such Rivers would have flown from Mortals Eyes, As might the World with a new Flood surprise. Or else (like Niobe) such had been our moan, That all Mankind had wept into a Stone. But now amazement did our Tears suppress, And made our Grief the more, but danger less. Forraign Geographers did once surmise, That England had three Universities; London was one: But now they'l change their Tone: 'Tis now too true, England hath less by one: Oh you Caligula's, whose monstrous Rage Could wish that all the Levites of this Age Had but one Neck, that so one bloody Sword Might cut off all the Conduits of the Word; Forbear, 'tis done, and here doth bleeding lie As in a Map, all England's Ministry. You brood of Munster, whose prodigious Ire Destines all Libraries unto the Fire: Surcease your barbarous Rage, within one Span Here lies the Ashes of the Vatican. When Lambeth-Sea of Books was to forsake Its ancient Seat, and a new Channel take, Our Senate did espouse those choice Remains To Sion-House, Cambridge forbad the Banes. 'Twas doubtful where that walking Library Would fix: Both places were resolv'd to try Their Titles; but at last did thus agree To send it to the Universitie Upon these tearms, they should with Vines dispense, And send him hither for a Recompence. He was transplanted. Thus our common Mother Found one vast Library, and lost another. Or if you please, you may compound it thus, They got the Shadow, th' Substance came to us. Some blam'd the publick Body of the Nation, Because they did not call a Convocation; They sent for Vines, and what need further cost? In him a whole Assembly was engrost. It could not then be said to Englands shame It hath no Synods: For such was thy Fame, That in thy Head, as in a Common-Hall, The saw, they heard a Council General. Some say that Englands present Ministry Is nothing but an Antichristian Fry; Then sure thou wast the Pope; for 'twas confest Thou hadst all Laws i'th' Cabinet of thy Breast.
But peace, my whining Muse, and say no more, Of unknown worth conceal his hidden Store, Bury the rest, lest Mortals too much prize His sacred Reliques, and Idolatrize. Lest other Student; when his Parts they hear Grow negligent, and sink into despair. Do but name Vines, more needs not be exprest, Tagus and Ganges will report the rest. Each Eccho at the mention of his name Will be a sounding Trumpet of his Fame. Sure that at Uxbridge will speak his Renown Oftner than th' Eccho at Pont-Charetoon. Mat. Pool. On the sudden and unexpected Death of that famous and incomparable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Rich. Vines. I'M pleas'd much more to see a Vine, though weak, Laden with clusters till its Branches break With weight of Grapes, than view a sturdy Tree Barren, though standing to Eternity. A Knife that cuts the Sheath I'le rather chuse, Though't wear apace, than that's not fit for use. A brave Man's gone; but this shall be my strife, Just so to live, though so I end my Life. My Fancy runs too flat; for every Line Should yield a flavour of the sprightly Vine. I would not drop a crabby Tear on's Hearse; Eager Devotion martyrs him in Verse. Yet farewel Mirth. Just reason for complaint, When Vines are dead no wonder though we faint. Nothing but Cypress pensive Heads shall dress; The Vineyard is become a Wilderness. Sour Grapes, I know, there are in every Hedge; But he who eats them sets his Teeth on Edge. Thy Grapes were ripe (Pure Soul) so that the Press Was needless, since the streams of Happiness Ran from thee freely, and thou didst distil The blessed Dictates of thy Makers Will. For Souls inflam'd with Lust, thy Art Divine Afforded Water, when they long'd for Wine: And where a Soul lay prostrate with despair, Thy Wine prov'd Aqua Vitae, cordial, rare: Milk unto Babes, strong Meat to manly Stature, Thy Doctrine Sympathiz'd with every nature. Thus the Vine flourish'd till a soveraign Fate In Paradise did it inoculate. Sa. Jacomb.
Mr Richard Blackerby Dyed in the yeer 1648 in his 74th. year F. H. Van Houe. Sculp. portrait of Richard Blackerby The Life and Death of Mr. Richard Blackerby, who died Anno Christi, 1648. THat eminently holy Divine Mr. Richard Blackerby, was born in the His Birth, Fa∣mily and Edu∣cation. year 1574. at Worlington in Suffolk. He was second Son of Thomas Blackerby, a person of good Estate and Quality, whose Ne∣phew (the Worshipful Thomas Blackerby Esquire) was lately one of the Aldermen of the City of London, and afterward high Sheriff of Suffolk, and is yet living a Justice of Peace in that County; being Honoured by all men for his eminent Service to God and his Country, in all his publick stations; Richards Father had nine Sons and one Daughter; unto all whom he gave Pious Education: who designed his second Son (from the first) for the Ministry, and first put him to the School of St. Edmundsbury in Suffolk, where he profited so much, that at the Age of Fifteen years he was admitted a Student in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, where he lived nine years, and became an eminent Scholar in all parts of Learning, especially in his great skill in the Hebrew, Greek and Latine Tongues, being reckoned one of the best Hebritians in Cambridge in those days. While he was in the University, famous Mr. Perkins was a Preacher and Lectu∣rer in the Town of Cambridge, upon whose Ministry he diligently attended; He is first con∣vinced of sin by the Mini∣stry of Mr. Perkins. whereby his Soul (when he was middle Batchelour of Arts) was deeply wrought upon, and truly converted, but he lay some years in great distress of Conscience, and much perplexity of Spirit, when his Father took him for some time home to Worlington, to see if change of Air might a little relieve him in his Melancholy, which his Friends thought proceeded from temper of body, though it had another cause, which neither Air nor Company could remove. After a short time, he desired to return again to Mr. Perkins, for satisfaction of Soul, and it pleased God (as he was returning to Cambridge, and Riding alone upon New-market Heath, bemoaning his sad condition before the Lord) to reveal his
reconciled face in Christ Jesus to him, and to give him that Peace of Conscience (so well grounded, and so clearly evidenced) that he never lost it to his dying day. From the University he went and lived first in the nature of a Chaplain in the House of Sir Thomas Jermin of Rushbrook in Suffolk, who was Father of the present Earl of St. Albans, in which Family he both Morning and Evening, not only prayed, but opened some Portion of Scripture, during the whole time of his abode there. From thence he removed to live with the Renowned and Pious Knight, Sir Then with Sir Edward Lewk∣nor at Denham, where he mar∣ried the Daughter of a Reverend Di∣vine. Edward Lewknor of Denham in Suffolk, (great Grandfather to the Right Honourable and Virtuous, the late Lady Townsend) with whom he lived till he married Sarah, the eldest Daughter of Mr. Timothy Prick, alias Oldman; which alias Oldman was assumed to the Family in the days of Queen Mary, the Father of the said Timothy, being forced then to abscond, and to change his name, being persecuted for the Protestant Religion. Mr. Blackerby lived two years with his Reverend Father-in-Law, Minister of He was offer∣ed the Living of Feltwell in Norfolk, but seats himself at Ashen in Essex. Denham, and from thence was called to be Minister at Feltwell in Norfolk, where he continued without Institution or Induction for some time, but then by reason of his Non-conformity, he was forced to remove, and hired a House at Ashen, a Vil∣lage in Essex near Clare. Here, not being capable to receive any Ecclesiastical Preferment upon the account aforesaid, he betook himself to the way of Boarding young men, and Educating of Youth, spending three and twenty years in that imployment in part; for du∣ring the whole time, he almost constantly kept Lectures in some Neighbouring Town, Preaching weekly in one place or other; and for the last ten years of the forementioned time, he Preached statedly either at Castle Heningham, Stoke by Clare, or Hunden in Suffolk. In the way of his life, he seemed never to lose one moment of time in idleness, His general course of life. or non-improvement thereof; and herein is wrapt up even all the practical wisdom of mortal man, viz. to improve time for immortality. He rose early in the Morning Winter and Summer, and spent the whole day in Reading, Meditation, Prayer, and teaching of others. After a competent time spent in his Study in the Morning, he would early call his Family (or any other Family in which he was, and wherein he had any influence) together, and as constantly as the Sun rose and set, he failed not Morning and Evening to spend some time in Reading and Ex∣pounding some part of the Scripture and Prayer, unless in very extraordinary cases; and not being capable of a Benefice, because he could not subscribe, he spent much of his time in teaching young Schollars, Boarding in his House always a great number of youths, the Sons of Pious Gentry, Tradesmen, and Yeomen in the Country, whom he daily instructed both in Religion and Learning. They sate round about the Table at his Expositions; and if he saw any behaving themselves as not minding, he would call out to that Youth by name, and ask him what he had said last; by which means he made them continually attentive. He was a great Walker, and, like the old Peripateticks, he would oft call forth He Educated and Instru∣cted many persons after∣wards Famous in their Ge∣neration. his Scholars abroad, and teach them both Natural and Divine knowledge; fitting some for the University, and others for other Callings. He walked continually before them, as the Picture of Jesus among his Disciples, abounding in Wisdom, Heavenliness and Love. Many grew to be excellent persons in Church and State; and indeed, his example was enough to commend Religion to the Head and Heart of every spectator. The observance of his Life did seem immediately to dash all thoughts of Atheism and Irreligion, whenever they arose in the hearts of any spectatators, it was the saying of some of his Scholars, that they were as satisfied that he lived in the virtue of a Divine and holy principle, as that they did ever see men walking on Earth by virtue of a living Soul within. Divers young Students (after they came from the University) betook themselves to him to prepare them for the Ministry, whom he taught the Hebrew Tongue, to whom he opened the Scriptures, and read Divini∣ty, and gave them excellent advice for Learning, Doctrine and Life; and many emi∣nent persons proceeded from this Gamaliel; as Dr. Bernard, afterwards Dean and Bishop in Ireland, whom he commended to Archbishop Ʋsher, with whom he had great acquaintance; Mr. Prosse Minister of two Dutch Congregations, first in Colchester, then in London; Mr. Stone, afterwards famous in New England; holy and learned Mr. Fairclough, and Mr. Burrel, and many others.
He was a man much in Prayer, much in Closet Prayer, much in walking Prayer, Much in Prayer. much in solitary Prayer by himself; much in conjugal Prayer (for he daily prayed with his Wife alone) much in Family Prayer; daily with his own Family, and almost daily with some other Family; very much in Fasting and Prayer; for which he took all occasions that seemed in any measure to require it. The instructing of his Family, and teaching youth, took him not off from his The way of his publick Ministry. publick Ministry: for though he could never have a Benefice, yet he usually Preached some Lecture in some Neighbouring place, as hath been told; and he also Preached frequently occasional Sermons. If he were suspended in one County, he would go and Preach in another; for his Habitation was near to two or three several Counties; he used much to Ride about from Family to Family (when pos∣sibly he could be spared from his Scholars) and only alight and pray with them, and give them some heavenly exhortation, and then away to another Family. And in the next Neighbourhood to his House, where he could walk, he would frequently visit those near Inhabitants, especially the Poor, painfully instructing them, and fervently praying with them; and would give them Catechisms and Bibles, and money, if he had it, and they had need of it; by which his going about and doing good, many backs and bellies praised God in time, and more Souls will to all Eternity. His Preaching was not altogether in the usual manner, but much in opening the The manner of his Preach∣ing. Scripture, and making excellent, spiritual, short observations, and brief and close Applications. He had great skill in the Original Tongues, spent much Study to understand the Scripture, and lived much in Divine Converse; by all which he became a singular Textuary, and famous Divines would frequently send to him for his Opinion in Scripture difficulties. He was a mighty man in wounding Con∣sciences by the Sword of the Spirit, and in healing them by the Blood of Jesus. His Voice used not to be very loud, but his Preaching was accompanied with such an Authority of the Divine presence and power of the Spirit, that Souls fell exceed∣ingly under the Yoke of Christ by his Ministry; so that he has (being urged by some reasons thereto) been constrained to acknowledge to some intimate Friends, (though far from boasting) that he had reason to believe, that God had made him a Spiritual Father to above two Thousand persons. Indeed the Word of God in his Lips was so unmixt with any appearance of any self, or by-respects, and came so pure, as it were immediately from the Holy Ghost, that like the Word of God, Heb. 4. it was very quick and powerful, and men soon became, either Converts to it, or flyers from it; or with all their might fighters against it; The direct rays of Di∣vine Light falling on the Conscience, will have a speedy and great effect; When 'tis mingled and diluted with a Carnal Spirit, or not directly levelled at the heart, it may fall, many years, upon the outward Ear, and may sometimes affect men, but never a piercing drop doth enter the Soul; or if it does, it is quickly choaked there, with the body of death and power of darkness; but his Preaching was such as must be yielded to, fled from, or fought against. Many prophane persons that could both hear other Pious Ministers, and would curse them bitterly when they had done; yet dared neither to hear him, or speak against him if they did. There was so much of God in him and with him, that he left a perpetual dread upon many Souls that would play with others Sermons, and with their names and per∣sons. Multitudes of very prophane persons did fall under the power of the Word Preached by him; a particular instance whereof, happened in or near Castle He∣ningham in Essex, where a Society or Club of young persons, (who used to have their set times to meet, and dance, and frolick it in their youthful sports, sins and vanities) were by his Preaching there, all or most of them converted, and became a company of gracious Christians, and used afterwards to joyn in Prayer, as before they had done in sin and folly. Some whose Consciences were scared, would sometimes rise up against his Preach∣ing Gods ven∣geance on his Persecutors. with rage and violence; but the Wrath of God did often most eminently take hold of such. As in Hunden in Suffolk, where sometime he had a Lecture, he met with great opposition; divers persons of considerable Estate in the Town, joyned together, ond procured his suspension; but all of them were notoriously after∣wards, blasted in their outward Estates; some brought to beggery, and all but one died miserably: One of them the next Lords-day after his Suspension, boasting in the Church-yard, That now they had got Blackerby out of the Pulpit; to which,
a Woman standing by and hearing, replyed, Blackerby will Preach again in Hun∣den Pulpit, when you are crying in Hell; and that very day eight years that man was buried, and the Lords-day after, Mr. Blackerby had liberty to Preach again, and Preached in Hunden Pulpit. The particular acts of his great Religion, the little Piety of the next, and this The eminen∣cy of his Holi∣ness, and Hea∣venly mind∣edness in Ge∣neral. present Age, have suffered many of them to slip out of their memories, and have been much wanting as to the copying of them out in their Lives and Conversati∣ons; but there was yet never any person who had the happiness to converse with him (and some of them are yet living) who did not behold both his Heart and Life, so greatly sanctified, and so generally raised, to such an universality and heighth of true Christian Godliness, as cannot be equalized. Few persons have ever been acquainted with, or scarce ever read or heard of any meer man, that did exceed him, though others might equal him in some corporal severities, and seem more heated in some particular parts of Religion or Obedience, yet for the impartiality, constancy and sweetness of Holiness, very few have came near him, and none since the Primitive times did excel him. He (in good earnest) made it his business to live with God, and to his Glory, not as it is to be feared of too many Profes∣sors, that they satisfie themselves in the frequent motions of their affections in some pangs of indigested resolutions, or some fits of Pious Conversation, as if these were the Life and Power of Godliness, all which are very good and desireable; but yet at best, they are but some seeds and blossoms of the Divine Nature, which is first conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Soul, in a real absolute Consecration of the whole Man to God, and grows in a diligent endeavour of perfect Conformity to this Consecration. He, the business of whose Heart and Life is not in all things (fetching strength from Christ by Faith, who is the careful and faithful Head of his Church) to live to God, is yet no living Child of God, what preparatories soever there may be in him towards it. It would make ones heart tremble to think what multitudes of half Christians drop daily down into everlasting destruction, cheat∣ing themselves with pious sentiments, as if they were the life of Godliness, which cannot be but in an absolute Union with Christ, and living in the virtue of him, and faithful Obedience to him, as this Saint did. He lived not without infirmities, but in the eye of all knowing, impartial, daily spectators, he was free from the allowance of himself in any sinful act in the World, and without the visible acting of any sin of Commission, not so much as speaking of an idle, or an angry word (but in reproving of that which he accounted sin) or losing any moment of time that he could redeem, or that he was sensible he might better spend; and this by the space of above forty years, as by diligent inquiry, and personal acquaintance of many years, will be justified. His deportment was always such, as if at that moment he saw God, and had Gods Law, his own Covenant with God, and the day of account just then before his eye, so that whenever the Lord should come and call him, he would ever have been found so doing. To any understanding converser with him, there always appeared wrote in his face and demeanour, A sense of the Divine Majesty and Holiness a most pleasing consciencious, and full de∣dication of himself to God, a watchfulness upon his own Heart and Life, least he should offend; a great mortification of heart to all the World; a wonderful pu∣rity from sinful pollution; and an admirable transformation of Spirit unto the Divine similitude and converse. Indeed, constant Holiness seemed perfectly natu∣ral to him, when it seems but laboured and endeavoured after by others. That he sinned, his conversers knew not, but by; First, the infinite due of God, and perfection of his Law, to which no depraved Son or Daughter of fallen man can (in his affections and operations) be adequate or exactly correspondent. Secondly, by some mistakes that some might apprehend in his Judgment in some disputable things. Thirdly, by the great complaints usually made of the Plague of his Heart. For with this heighth of Holiness was joyned the depth of Humility. He has Great Humi∣lity. sometimes, walking with his eldest Grand-child, then but a youth, took occasion to say (after other serious discourse) Oh Lad! thou little thinkest what a vile heart I have, how I am plagued with proud thoughts; Child (if thou hast acquaintance with God in Prayer) pray for me, that God would purifie this filthy heart; oh! if God did not enable me in some measure to keep a watch over it, I should act to the shame of my face; which expressions did greatly affect the heart of this young
person, to hear one who lived so like an incarnate Angel, to speak at such a rate of his heart; to hear so grave on Apostle, who never used to speak unbecoming∣ly, so talk to one but a youth, and his Grand-child. And such discourses as these were frequent with him to other persons, when a fitting season offered it self. He seemed to have small sense of any self-excellency, though Satan would sain have defiled him with it (but he walked in continual ad∣miration of the vouchsafements of free Grace unto him) from his Humility came that readiness in him to be perswaded or disposed of by others, much inferiour to him, in any thing (so Religion and Duty suffer not by it) little valuing in what place he was put, or what account was had of him, so he might keep close to his Duty, and enjoy the Light of the Divine Countenance. And that which did set him most high above all others who lived in these later The impartia∣lity of his Conscience. days, was the most impartial universality of his Obedience, joyned with the great∣est Charity and Candour to all others, wherein was the least appearance of good. No hopes of preferment, or smart of suffering, could prevail with him to depart from his Light; he could not so conform to the Church of England, as the Law required, to make him capable of a Living, or secure from the punishment of some Laws; yet wherein he thought it his Duty, or becoming Religion to Conform, no man more exact than he. And therefore being no Enemy to the greatest part of the Common Prayer, he would all days, Lords-days and Week-days, when Divine Service was read in the Parish-Church, go with his Family to the very beginning, and there behave himself with that Reverence and Heavenliness, as I never saw any like him therein. That Religion will never stand before God, that by Zeal in some things thinks to purchase Liberty for transgression in others. It is a single eye that will reach Heaven, that aims only at Divine pleasure wherever he finds it; all the Will of God is amiable to it, unmingled with by ends or selfish concernments. Its true, circumstances of things may impose or discharge from the actual performance of positive commands; that act may be a Duty to day, and to this man, that all things considered, will be a sin to morrow, and to another person; and the heart may have a single eye, when that of the understanding may have a cloud of mi∣stakes upon it; but integrity impartially inquires, chearfully embraces, and dili∣gently pursues all Gods revealed pleasure. And there is nothing more contrary to the Law of Christ, to the Eye of Know∣ledge, His candid and charitable Spi∣rit. and to the Nature of the Gospel, than to set my self down in an Infallible Chair, and pass sentence on the Light and Truth, Knowledge and Grace of all others, by the measure of my own sentiments; herein Pride, Folly and Cruelty are come to the heighth, when I would be a Prince, and judge not only over mens acts, but their heads and hearts, as though I were not fallible and corrupt as well as any of them. Blessed be God, who will in Christ accept of mens faithfulness to their Light, though their Neighbours see it not. This Saint was so far from the crime of censuring, that if any fault were visible in him, it was that of excessive Charity to all others, in whom there was the least appearance to him of good, which charitable credulity of his, some persons did abuse; with which, when he has sometimes been charged, he would usually repeat a saying of his Father in Christ, famous Mr. Perkins; That when a man is once acquainted with his own heart, he will be apt to think every one better than himself; an appearance of the love of God in any, would make him put the best construction on all their words and acts. But he was as far from countenancing any known evil in any: I believe none that His faithful, kind and wise reproving. ever conversed with him, but will bare him witness, that he never suffered, what he thought sin in them, without admonition and reproof; as sure as he observed the evil, they should hear of it from him; but ever with so much evident love as well as seriousness, that at the same time, both their Consciences were awed by the gravity of his advice, and their Affections inflamed with the sweetness of his Spirit. His re∣proofs were truly, as one well expresses, Nailes dipt in Oil, driven with power in∣to the inmost of the heart, and received with all acceptation, because of the over∣coming kindness they were accompanied with. Most mens reproofs by pride, pas∣sion, or imprudence, bar the door against their own entertainment; but his Sun would woo away mens evil, when others violent Storms make them in rage hold
it faster. When he has been in company, and heard great persons swear, or speak prophanely; he would with a sad Countenance (leaving the Table, or departing the Room) rebuke, and afterward privately address the great Person with so much seri∣ousness and respect, that they would be much taken with his dealing with them, greatly thank him for his reproof, and the manner of it; and one told him, had you spoke to me at Table, I had stabb'd you, but now I heartily thank you. He would neither suffer sin in men unreproved, nor provoke to sin by his rebuke. He was very zealous for the holy observation of the Lords-day. On Saturday at Sanctification of the Lords-day. four in the Afternoon, he constantly Preached in his Family, (to which divers Neigh∣bours would resort) preparatory for the next day. Of all Mornings, he would rise most early on the Lords-day Mornings; and wherever he was, and had any power, would call up all the Family, but especially his own, to Prayer and Reading. He usually prayed six times every Lords-day in the Family. First, as soon as he had got them up in the Morning, expounding some part of the Scripture to them. Secondly, when he was going to the publick Congregation, he carried his Family with him, and before they went out of door, would pour out some Petitions for Gods assistance and blessing in the publick Worship of the day. Thirdly, when he returned again from Church in the Morning, he constantly prayed for a blessing on what they had heard. Fourthly, he led them out again in the Afternoon with Prayer. Fifthly, a while after they were returned in the Afternoon, the Sermons were repeated, the Family examined what they remembred; which they concluded with Prayer. Sixthly, after Supper, when the Family was ready to go to Bed, he commended them again to God by Prayer. But this must be observed, he prayed oft, but never (unless upon an ex∣traordinary occasion) very long, neither Lords-days nor Week-days, at home or abroad, in Family or Congregation; nor in Preaching, would he ever be tedious or over-long; but the graciousness of his Spirit in the Ordinance, brought a peculiar de∣light with it to all that joyned with him, and had any love to their God or Souls; so that his Exercises (though frequent) were never burdensome. On the Lords-day he was impatient to hear any idle word, or see any idle action, nor could he endure any worldly word or act, but what was of Charity or Necessity; but after Dinner he would call upon all, especially those that were apt to sleep at Church, to go and take a Nap, as he himself usually did, least they should prophane Gods publick Worship, or should hazard the salvation or edification of their immortal Souls, by sleeping in the Congregation; and therefore also he frequently inveighed against great Dinners on the Lords-day, as apt to make them heavy and dull on those glorious days, set apart for celebration of Divine praises, and edification of mens precious Souls. At a place called Linton in Cambridge-shire, there was a Fair usually kept on the Lords-day once a year; at which time he was once invited to Preach, and he then so plainly convinced the Town of the greatness of the sin, and evil of it, that they would never more keep the Fair on the Lords-day. Though he lived every day as sinless, and as heavenly as if it had been a Sabbath, yet he was very sensible, that our time is then much more to be spent in outward Religious Exercises, than on other days. The bu∣siness of his Life, was all the Week to Obey, Glorifie, and have Communion with God; but on the Lords-day, the object of his acts was all Religious or Charitable performances. He was much free from the stone in the heart, a man of a most tender and con∣trite His tender frame of Spi∣rit. Spirit. Any (greater than the most common) sins or providences, made deep impressions on him; if any such sin were committed in a Neighbour Town, or any Judgment fell out in the Vicinage, or in the Nation, he would be sure to get di∣vers Ministers and Christians together, and keep a day of Fasting and Prayer. In Nights of great Thunder and unusual Tempest, he would call up all his Family to Prayer, and expound some part of the Scripture to them, to affect their hearts with greater Reverence towards God. Any notable Scripture, any eminent Providence deeply entered his Soul, and raised up his Graces into act. As his Life was ever led as in the Divine presence, so his Heart and Tongue were His readiness for, and de∣light in Gods Ordinances. ever ready for Prayer, or any holy Duty; and he so enjoyed God in every Religi∣ous Exercise, that he would almost constantly say when he rose up from Prayer, or came from a Sermon, or any holy Converse, or any Religious Exercise (especially a day of Fasting and Prayer) that he must bless God for ever for such an Ordinance, and would not for many worlds, but have been in it; a frequent expression with
him, and if an Hyperbole, the only one that he observed to use; but this worlds de∣lights were so small, and Heavens so dear to him, that we might believe his ex∣pression to be a truth (in the very Grammatical sense) and spoken from his heart. When he awaked in the Night, he was ever in Meditation or Prayer His Night∣wakings. he would oft at Midnight, make Greek, Latin, or English Verses, exalting the Praise of God, his Attributes, the Acts of Christ, or the Graces of his Spirit, or the like, and give them in the Morning to his Scholars. His Dreams were usually such, as shewed a heart that lived with God, full His Dreams. of gracious Communications from God to him, and of Faith, Love and Obedience to God, and in abhorrence of sin; and he would in the Even∣ing usually pray, that his Dreams might be holy; and usually holy Dreams are certain signs of much love from God, or gracious habits in the man. He oft received immediate answers of Prayer. I heard an eminent Divine Answers to his Prayer. once say, he knew Eighteen Persecutors taken away remarkably upon his Fasting and Prayer. God seemed also to make a covenant for him with the Beasts of the Field: His Daughter Burrel was much affected with a remark∣able Providence, which happened to him when she was waiting on him one day, to visit one afflicted in Conscience; and their way lying through a Field where was a raging Bull, that used to do much mischief; which Beast seeing them, made towards them with great Fury; and being come very near them, he put off his Hat, and prayed in these words, Lord, if our way be of thee, stay the Fury of this Beast; which immediately stopt its way, and Roaring, turned from them. They that believe our Saviour, who saith, Not a hair of our Head, or a Bird in the Air, falls to the Ground but by the Councel of Providence, will think she had cause to be affected with this mercy. He kept three Diaries of his Life, one in Greek, another in Latin, a third His Diaries. in English, where he set down all the remarkable acts of God towards him, and of himself towards God; and had not those some way or other pe∣rished, (it is supposed by a Fire that burned down the House where he lived not long before his death) we had not been so barren of memorable in∣stances of his Life, as now we are; these he would oft read over to affect his Soul, and improve them to Divine Glory. His heart was as Pauls, so crucified to the World, and the World to him, Mortification of inordinate affection. that all Worldly concernments seemed a perfect nothing to him; (but where Duty obliged him) the World seemed to have no temptation to him, and he no taste for the World. His Passions were so much subdued, that though he was one that was most tenderly affected to his Relations, yet their loss discomposed not his Mind, interrupted not his Communion with God. His eldest Daughter was a most excellent person, and one in whom he took great delight; who died a few hours after her last Child was born, and he being present at her death, commended her Spirit to God more affectionate∣ly; but as undisturbedly, as when he gave her Person to her Husband in Marriage. He desired to Preach her Funeral Sermon, which he did; and therein gave her this Testimony, That he believed she had feared the Lord in sincerity, from three years old; yet Preached so, as shewed he had not lost his God, though he had lost his dearest Child. Nothing of Creatures could in the least draw him from his Life with God. Living much in Divine Communion, he had great insight into Scripture His Propheti∣cal Spirit. Prophesies, and had many future events deeply imprest on his Mind. Men know but little of Gods Mind, because they live but little in his Presence and Converse. He was one of the first that convinced men in those parts,
of Gods intent to convert the Nation of the Jews. Famous Mr. Rogers of Dedham, and Mr. Stephen Marshall, and divers others, much opposed that Opinion at first, but were at last (by his Discourses) fully satisfied, and re∣ally perswaded of the truth of it. He lived much in the foresight and de∣light of the Glory and Peace of the Church in the last Ages of the World. He oft said (many years before it came to pass) to divers of his Friends, that they would, (and he believed himself should) live to see never a per∣secuting Bishop in power in England; and so he did. The first time when the Scots Army came into England, in the beginning of our late Troubles, he said to some that were much troubled for it, That that Army should go back again without a stroke struck; and so they did. He said after the Battle of Naseby, that many strict Professors of Religion should have rest for a little time; but afterwards a blacker time would come unto them than ever they had; which was in part fulfilled: but he used to add, the Storm would not last very long. And these were his very last words which he spake at his Death, uttered to his Daughter Burrell, a little before he breath∣ed his last; There is a sharp Storm coming, but it will be but short; the former part is in a considerable measure already proved true, God grant that (in the fulness of Gods time) the other part may also be accomplished, though the wretched decay of powerful Godliness among us may lengthen the Furrows on Professors backs, and put good things farther from them. He used to say, God had two Sieves for the Professors in England, one of a courser make, and that he had used; but there would come a finer one, which all should stand ready for; and this its doubted, is in a great degree to come. He used to say, That it was very probable this Nation would be punished by the French, after whose Fancies they went so much a Whoring. And he much believed Popery would come in, but it would not last; for it could not recover its first strength again in England; which last part of the Prophesie I pray God fulfil. He expressed at his death, great hopes which he had, that there would His hopes of his Posterity. be found many hundreds proceeding out of his Loins, standing at the last day at Christs Right Hand; and in all Charity, every one that have known them, must believe, that all his own Children were Heirs of Eternal Life; and there are great hopes of all his Grand-children, divers of whom are eminent and gracious persons; and some (of his fourth Generation) of his great Grand-children appear already most Consciencious and serious Chri∣stians. There were some particularities in him that may seem of lesser moment, but of good remarque. He could not endure to see any Bible lye contemp∣tuously Some things were peculiar in him. about the House; but would have them carefully and cleanly used, or laid up; he thought there ought a negative Reverence to be given to the out-sides of such sacred Oracles. He was exceeding careful to have none of Gods Creatures lost; he would always have a Fowl or two allowed to come familiarly into his Eating Room, to pick up the lesser Crumbs that would fall from the Table. He was a great Enemy to vain Fashions, and in particular, to over long Hair; and would oft intimate, that excess of Apparel shewed great vanity of mind, and too great Conformity to the World; and it would be a fore∣runner of much wrath from God; had he lived to see the mighty Towers and Mountains of Hair upon professing Men and Womens Heads, with the present decay of Piety, and the dreadful imminent Judgments, he would have greatly lamented it. Oh what amazement of Soul would he have been in, had he lived to see the Professors Garbes (in the best Congregations of Men) in the days wherein we live.
His Conversation was so in Heaven, and the Majesty of Holiness did so shine The awe his presence car∣ried. in him, that that most famous Divine for Learning and Piety, Mr. Daniel Rogers of Wethersfield in Essex, told another Divine, that he could never come into the presence of Mr. Blackerby without some kind of trembling up∣on him; because of the Divine Majesty and Holiness which seemed to shine in him. The heighth and constancy of his holy and heavenly Converse was accom∣panied with a setled peace of Conscience, and good assurance of Eternal Life; His constant and uninter∣rupted assu∣rance. for some years before his death, he would oft (upon seasonable occasions) declare, that for more than forty years he never had a doubting thought of his Salvation. It is our low, loose, unequal walking in Religion, that makes the sense of Gods love, peace with God, and evidence for Eternal Life, so rare a thing among us; Religion lying for the most part so weak among Professors, as if it were in a Swoon, no wonder if it be oft esteem∣ed dead. A Summer glorious Noon-tide, abundantly shews the Sun to be up; but how can they that live far from God, behold the Smiles of his Face, or hear the Whispers of his Voice. This holy Man was indeed an instance sent by God into the World, to shew A living pat∣tern of Piety. to what Life of Holiness and Peace, Christians may on Earth certainly arrive, if hearty sincerity, deep mortification, diligent watchfulness, love of Divine Com∣munion, and an humble and active Faith doth meet and concenter in the heart of any man. When he was about the Age of Fifty five years, his Son-in-Law Mr. Christopher He removes to Great Wrat∣ting with his Son-in-law. Burrell, was Presented to the Rectory of great Wratting in Suffolk; Mr. Burrell had lived some years as a Boarder with Mr. Blackerby, Mr. Blackerby now removes and continues a Boarder with him, and that for divers years; in all which time he continued Preaching the Gospel only occasionally (except at Gastingtherp in Essex, where he maintained a constant Lecture) until towards the close of his Life. When Providence so ordered, that he took upon him a Pastoral charge over the He was chosen Pastor by a People at Thurlow, where he end∣ed his days. Congregation at great Thurlow; And here his Master found him so doing, to wit, very busie in his Masters Service; for as he was Preaching on one Lords-day, he was took with a great weakness and fainting while he was in the Pulpit; so that being carried home, he continued very weak six Weeks, but kept his Bed but two days before he died, which was in the seventy seventh year of his Age. He had seven Children who lived to be Men and Women, (two Sons, and five His Posterity. Daughters) his eldest Son was a gracious young man, and lived sometime a Stu∣dent in Katherine-Hall in Cambridge, but died of a Consumption before he took any Degree. His other Son was also a very good Man, and an excellent Preacher of the Gospel, and died lately Minister of Stow-market in Suffolk. His eldest Daughter, and his third Daughter, were both married to two Divines, in whom Sanctity, Learning and Ingenuity, strove for victory; the eldest was married to Mr. Samuel Fair clough, the other to Mr. Christopher Burrell aforesaid; all his Daughters were also married to Pious persons. And now all his Sons and Daughters, except one, and all his Sons-in-law, and Now all in Heaven with him. Daughters-in-law, are gone with him to Everlasting Rest; and it is most fitting that the World should know and remember, That there was a Man that lived Fifty years after his Conversion, doing good, and walking with God in the Eyes of the most strict Observers, without perceived voluntary actual commission of any known transgression, no, not so much as of an idle or sinfully angry word; but he seemed wholly dead to all the allurements and enticing vanities of this World.
His Countenance and Speech, his Deportment and Behaviour, was perpetually He had always a very plea∣sing and grace∣ful Counte∣nance, con∣joined with a grave and ho∣ly Conversati∣on, through the whole course of his Life. as before the Eye of God, in the Consciencious observance of all his Precepts, with a heart full of Love to him, having his Face awing with a Majesty, and shining with a sweetness and beauty of Holiness; who (to all appearance) spent every mo∣ment of his time in his believed Duty, and in zealous doing of good, always rea∣dy for, and having spiritual Communion with God in all his Ordinances, and all carried on with a deep and contrite sense, of the natural corruption of his heart, in lowest humility and condescension (with most transcendent Charity to all men, yet never suffering sin in his Brother unreproved) one that kept peace of Conscience, and assurance of Eternal Life, inviolate for forty years together; one who convinced all men (both good and bad) that knew him, that the power of God and Religion dwelt assuredly in him, and continually with him; the Divine Spirit and Power, beautifying and adorning him, and assuring both himself, and others, that he was born of God. FINIS.
The Life and Death of Mr. Ralph Robinson, who died Anno Christi, 1655. RAlph Robinson was born at a Town called, Heswall, in Wyrrall, which is one of the His Birth. Hundreds in Cheshire, being a Peninsula beyond West-Chester, of about Fourteen Miles in length, and Five in breadth, stretching it self between Wales and Lanca∣shire. He was born in June, Anno Christi 1614. His Parents seeing his Ingenuity, and that from his Childhood he was disposed to Learn∣ing, His Educa∣tion and In∣dustry. kept him at School till he was fitted for the University, and then sent him to Cam∣bridge, where he was admitted into Katherine-Hall, and made so good improvement of his time, with the helps which he there enjoyed, as that in a few Years he was furnished with good Abilities for the work of the Ministry. In the beginning of our troubles, Anno Christi 1642. He left Cambridge, and came to He comes to London. London, where he exercised his Gifts in several Churches, and gained much respect among the Ministers, and other Citizens, for the rich Gifts and Graces with which God had fur∣nished him: And thus he continued till the Pastoral charge of St. Mary Woolnoth in Lum∣bard street fell void, unto which being called, he accepted of it, and was there ordained Presbyter, with solemn seeking the Lord by Fasting and Prayer, and by Imposition of Is Ordained Presbyter. His Chara∣cter. Hands. In regard of his Vocation: He was an able, Orthodox, and profitable Preacher of the Gospel. As for his Relations, he was a loving Husband, a tender Father, a careful and vigilant Pastor, a good Neighbour, a chearful Companion, and a faithful Friend. In his Judgment, Affection and Practice, he was a thorow, well grounded Presbyterian, and that upon a Scripture account, as deeming that way of Church-Government, to be most agreeable to the mind of God. He was true and steady to his Principles, without warp∣ing and declining either to the Right Hand or to the Left. He was unweariedly laborious in the work of the Ministry, both upon the Lords-days, His painful∣ness and his weekly Lecture-days, which continued half the Year; as also for his Monthly pre∣paration Sermon before the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And truly there was scarce any Minister in London, that appeared more frequently than Mr. Robinson in the Exercises of holy Fasting and Prayer, for which work God had fitted him with Gifts more than or∣dinary. There was scarce any man that ever found him unwilling to make one in ways of And Parts. extraordinary seeking the Lord, according to the necessities of the times. Yet his high parts, great Services, besides many Expressions of Respect in the City, His Humili∣ty. did not puff him up with Pride, but they were crowned with a meek and humble Spirit; For who ever saw him proudly passionate, or contemptuously insulting, either towards his Equals or Inferious? His conversation was holy, and unreproveable, the strength of Gods And unbla∣mableness. His Zeal. Grace, securing him all his Life long, from the least taint of Scandal. Ever since he set forwards in Heavens way, he was upon the Spur, and thence it was that he dispached his Journey so soon. When others supposed that he had not yet seen his Af∣ter-noon, he had finished his Days-work, and went to Rest. He was suddenly and unexpect∣edly taken away. On Saturday, Three weeks before his Death, he came from Islington (where he had a His Sick∣ness. Country House) to London, with a full purpose to preach twice, and to administer the Sa∣crament of the Lords-Supper the day following in his own Church; but Friends and Phy∣sicians disuaded him from it, discerning that he had some Feverish Distempers upon him, which himself was not sensible of. All the time of his sickness he was insensible of any pain, and unapprehensive of any Death-threatening Distemper, or Disease upon him∣self. Yet being moved to make his Will, his Answer was, I will do it with all readiness, though I perceive not in my self any danger of Death. And this he added, I pray you flatter me not, of my Physicians apprehend danger, let me know it; for (I bless God) the thoughts of Death Death not feared. are not dreadful to me. A special Friend coming to visit him, he gave him hearty Thanks for remembring him His Spech∣es. upon a Day of Prayer, adding farther, I have (I thank God) loved Fasting and Prayer with all my Heart. And when this his Friend asked him concerning the present frame of his
Heart, his Answer was; Though I have not ravishing Joys; yet I enjoy an uninterrupted and satisfying Peace; Not questioning in the least, mine everlasting Happiness, through the Grace His Faith. of God in Christ. At the same time also, when he had begged the Pardon of his Ministerial failings, he professed the comfort which he took, upon the Remembrance of his Uprightness and faith∣fulness, notwithstanding his Weaknesses and Imperfections. Being moved to relieve his own Spirit by silent and secret Ejaculations, because (in re∣gard of his weakness) it might prove very prejudicial unto him to have any Friend to pray with him; his Answer was, There is no living without those Exercises. Upon his tossings and turnings upon his Bed, he was put in mind of the Rest in Christs His Death. Bosom: Oh! (said he) true Rest can no where else be enjoyed. And thus quietly he slept in the Lord, June 15. Anno Christi 1655. and about the one and fortieth year of his Age. Upon the Death of that Eminent Servant of God Mr. Ralph Robinson. IF long Existence be Lifes measure, then Thy Life was short, thy years were four times ten: But if that Regular Activity Be Lifes Surveyor, thy Nativity Compar'd with thy Departure makes a date Of years that multiply to Noah's rate. He was a man of Rest, yet did proclaim Gen. 5. 29. 2 Pet. 2. 5. Noah signi∣fies Rest. War with the Old Worlds Lusts, thou didst the same. What Cost, and Pains; and Flouts did he endure Building the Ark, a Remnant to secure? His was a shaddow to that living Frame Which thou wast building to Eternal Fame. Two Worlds he saw of Sin and Misery; The second World is pure Felicity. Roger Drake, M. D. Ʋpon the Death of the much lamented Mr. Ralph Robinson. Raalphe Robinson. Anagram. Non' so able in Praer. VVHo Prays, well, Preaches, Lives well; to Pray, Live, Preach Well, are Three Crowns of Gold to such as Teach. Well didst thou Preach, and Live, but Prayedst so, Non' So able was in Prayer as Robinson. The Three Crowns end in one, a Crown of Praise; Those are Earths work a while, this Heavens always. John Sheffeild. GOds Gifts are various: some for Learning Tall As Anakims, great Scholars, and that's all; No Preachers, Some in Preaching quick, deep, full, Lively, and piercing; in Prayer cool, flat, dull. Some have the Key of Knowledge, some the Keys Of Hearts, and Heaven too, with great skill and ease They open all: These are Men, Men of God, As erst Eliah, or Moses with his Rod.
Such was our Robinson, a man of skill To open Gods whole Counsel and his VVill. He opened Hearts by Preaching, and by Prayer He opened Heaven; There gain'd he first Gods Ear, His Favour next, then Heart, His Presence now: Glory from Grace, Grace doth from Prayer flow. Moses grows faint, when Hur and Aaron fail'd Him on both hands, then Ameleck prevail'd. London grows faint since two Junes have pull'd down Two Praying Pillars, chief Jewels in her Crown. Whittaker's gone, and Robinson gone; How? How are the Mighty faln, and we brought low! The one Elijah was, Elisha th'other, He a grave Father was, this a dear Brotber; Two Mary Mag∣dalen Ber∣mondsey, Mary Wool∣noth Lum∣bard-street. Maries VVidows left, Barnsby the last Years June remembers, Woolnoth June now past. But Barnsby hath a Whittaker again, Another Robinson may Woolnoth gain. Sic flevit & precatur J. S. Ʋpon the much to be lamented Death of Mr. Ralph Robinson. IN pitchy Night when frightful flames break out, Unskilful janglers help to raise the Rout: Gods fiery Flame hath slain a worthy Brother, Which makes me rudely chime an artless Rime with other: May we but thus you to your Engines raise, Faith, Prayers, Tears, to quench these Fires, we have our Bayes. All Israel must lament Levit. 10. The fiery punishment, That dreadfully did fright And fully, sadly light On those rash Aaronites. Surely then London must, The cause is full as just, Much more bewail and weep, Such VVatch-men falln so soon, so fast asleep: Which did your City keep, In these our dangerous Nights. Your Earthly Buildings fired rais'd you to Lamentation, Such Heavenly living Temples falln should raise the Nation. To mourn in lofty Verse, or stately stile, With high rapt Fancies, strain'd Hyperbolies, Over the dead; Grief running low the while, In Soul is t'act a part in Elegies: To wear the Cloth of Mourners, not the smart, This is to mourn in Garb, more than in Heart: Which sinful Mode in these our vainer Times, Is to be reckon'd 'mongst our many Crimes. I shall then, Reader, now the less, My grief in outward words express: Deep Rivers make no noise With drilling, murmuring voice;
Deep mortal wounds bleed most within, Drown, kill the Heart, not break the skin. Oh might thy Death our deadly last wound given Kills us to th' World and Sin, raise us to Heaven! Thou then, Elisha-like, might'st raise Living and dead Souls to thy Praise. But if Elisha's double part be such, That some may grutch; Yet he Elijah's name, Perfume thy Fame And be then thus to thee ascrib'd. Here lies Elijah Robinson, Who had Elijah's Spirit on. A man of Holy, Heavenly Fire In Zeal for Truth, and fervent Prayer: So rapt he liv'd; by Fevers Fire he di'd. John Fuller. Radulphe Robinson. Anagram. On, on, double Praers. PRay much, gain much, but pray more and gain more: On, on, and double you your Prayers therefore. More Hands make lighter work; few Hands work fore: On, double, double on your Prayers therefore. God calls, Church, State, your own wants call for store, On, double on, enforce your Prayers the more. For double Prayers I double Glory gain: Double your Prayers on Earth, and Heaven obtain. John Sheffield. The Life and Death of Mr. John Janeway, who died Anno Christi, 1657. JOhn Janeway was born at Lylly, in the County of Hertford, October 27. Anno Christi His Birth & Parentage. 1633. of Religious Parents, to whom he gave early Hopes of much Comfort, and the Symptomes of somthing more than ordinary, quickly appeared in him, insomuch as some that saw him in his Childhood, much feared that he would not live long: But others thought, that God had somthing more than Ordinary to do for, or by this Child be∣fore he died; And he soon made it to appear that neither of them were much mistaken in their Judgments. When he first set forward he soon outran his Superiours for age in Learning: And some His ripe Parts. that were no incompetent Judges, thought, that for pregnancy of Wit, solidity of Judg∣ment, vastness of Intellectuals, and firmness of Memory, he had no Superiours, and few equals, considering his Age, and means of Education. He was first initiated in the Latine Tongue by his own Father, and then sent for His Educa∣tion. some time to St. Pauls School in London, under the Inspection and Tuition of famous and industrious Mr. Langley, where he made a considerable progress in the Latine and Greek Languages; and when he was about Eleven Years old, he took a great fancy to the Study of Arithmetick, and of the Hebrew Tongue.
About this time his Parents removing into a Village called Aspoden, met with an oppor∣tunity He studies the Mathe∣maticks. of having this their Son to be farther instructed by a Learned Neighbour, who was pleased to esteem it a pleasant Diversion to read the Mathematicks to him, being now about Twelve years Old. And he made so rare a progress in these profound Studies, that he was able to read Oughtred with understanding before he was Thirteen years Old. A Person of quality hearing of the admirable proficiency of this young Youth, sent for His Profici∣ency. him up to London, and kept him in his House for some time to read the Mathematicks to him: And that which made him the more to be admired, was, that what he did, he did it with such great Facility. He had also no small skill in Musick, and in other concomitants of the Mathematicks. Anno Christi 1646. he was, by that Learned Gentleman Mr. Francis Rous, Provost of He is cho∣sen at Eaton. Eaton Colledge, chosen for one of the Foundation of that School, having been first exami∣ned by the Provost and Posers in the Hebrew Tongue, which was beyond president. There he gave no unsuitable returns to those high expectations which were conceived of him. After a little continuance at Eaton, he obtained leave of his Master to go to Oxford for the perfecting of his studies in the Mathematicks, where he was owned by that great Schollar His rare Progress. Dr. Ward, one of the Professors of that University, under whom he attained to a strange exactness in those Studies, their being nothing in them within humane reach, which he would not compass. This Great and Learned Dr. gave him great encouragements and helps, and looked upon him as one of the Wonders of that Age, loved him dearly, and for some time after his Death, could scarce mention his Name without Tears. Having spent about a Quarter of a year with Dr. Ward, he was sent for back to Eaton, where he soon gave proof of his great improvement of that short time of his absence. For he made an Almanack, and therein Calculated the Eclipses for many years before-hand: So that, by this time he had many Eyes upon him as the Glory of that School: and that which put an Accent upon his Real worth, was, that in all this he did not discover the least Affecta∣tion, or self-conceitedness, neither did any discernable Pride appear in these Excellencies; So His Humili∣ty. that many others took more notice of his pregnant Parts than himself did. When he was about seventeen years old he was chosen into Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, He is cho∣sen to Kings-Colledge. at which time the Electors did each of them even contend for the Patronage of this Scholar. He was chosen the First for that year, and an elder Brother which he had for the sixth Place: But he was very willing to change places with his Elder Brother, suffering him to have the First, and himself thankfully to accept of the Sixth Place. Besides his great Learning, he was endowed with many other Ornaments of nature. His His Moral Virtues. deportment candid and amiable: His demeanour courteous and obliging, and that even be∣fore his apparent Conversion, so that many who had little kindness for Morality, and less for Grace, yet could not but speak well of him. His great Prudence and Learning did e∣ven command respect where they did not find it. He had very much power over his Passions, and was in a great measure free from those Vices which commonly attend such an age and Place. Yet probably all this while he understood little of the necessity and worth of Christ, and the pretiousness of his own Soul. He had indeed studied the Heavens, and knew the Moti∣ons of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, but that was his Contemplation. He thought yet but lit∣tle of God, who made all these rare Luminaries. He pried but little into the motions, and turnings of his own deceitful Heart. He did not as yet much busie himself in the serious observation of the wandrings of his His Conver∣sion. Spirit. The Creature had not yet led him to the Creator; But he was still too ready to be taken up with meer speculation. Yet God, who from all Eternity, had chosen him to be one of those who should shine as the Sun in the Firmament for ever with himself in Glory, did (when he was about eighteen years old) shine in upon his Soul with power, convin∣cing him, and letting him see what a poor thing it was to know so much of the Heavens, and yet never to come there: And that the greatest knowledge in the World without Christ, was but an empty dry Business. He now thought that Mr. Robert Bolton had good reason for it when he said, Give me the most Magnificent glorious Worldling that ever trod upon earthly mould, richly Crowned with all the Ornaments and Excellencies of Nature, Art, Policy, and Preferments; Or what Heart can wish besides: yet, without the Life of Grace to animate and ennoble them, he were to the Eye of Heavenly Wisdom, but as a rotten Carkass, stuck over with Flowers: Magnified Dung: Guilded Rottenness; And Golden Damnation. He now began to be of Anaxagoras's mind, That his work on Earth was to study Heaven, and to get thither: And that except a man might be admitted to greater preferments then this World can bestow upon her Fa∣vourites, it were scarce worth the while to be born.
The great and Divine work of Conversion was not carried on in his Soul after that The man∣ner and means of his Conver∣sion. dreadful manner as it is upon some, who precedently have been very bad (as in the case of Mr. Rob. Bolton) or to whom God intends to communicate much, and to make great use of (as in the case of St. Paul) but the Lord was pleased, by gentle Draughts to dissolve the Stone, and sweetly to unlock his Heart by the exemplary Life, and Heavenly and powerful discourse of a young Man in the Colledge, whose Heart God had inflamed with a Love to this pretious Soul, whereupon he took the first opportunity to set upon this hopeful Plant, and Gods Spirit did so set home his wholsom instructions and counsel, with such evidence and power, that they proved effectual for his awakening out of his Spiritual Lethargy. The rather, being accompanied with the profitable, and powerful Preaching of those two able and worthy Divines, Dr. Arrowsmith, and Dr. Hill, together with his reading several Parts of Mr. Baxters Everlasting Rest. Now a strange alteration might easily be discerned in the Man: He now looked quite a∣nother way to what he had done formerly. He was now so much taken up with things a∣bove His strange Change. the Moon and Stars, that he had little leisure, and less pleasure to think of those things, except it was as they pointed higher. He now began not to tast so much sweetness in those kind of studies which formerly he took so much pleasure & delight in. He now beganto pity them who were curious in their enquiries after every thing save that which was most needful to be known, Christ and Themselves: And that which sometimes he esteemed his Gain, he now counted loss for Christ; Yea doubtless he esteemed all things but as Dung and Dross in com∣parison of Christ: And dsired to know nothing but Christ and him Crucified. Not that he looked upon humane Learning as useless: But when fixed upon any thing below Christ, and not improved for Christ, he then looked upon Wisdom but as Folly, and upon learning as madness, and as that which would make one more like unto the Devil; and more fit for his Service, and as upon that which would put a greater Accent upon their misery in another World. Now Mr. Janeway began to cast about how he might best improve what he did already His activity for Christ. know, and to turn all his Studies into the right Channel: Grace did not take him off from, but made him more diligent and spiritual in, his Studies: And now Christ was at the end and bottom of every thing. O how did he plot and contrive how he might most express his Love and Thankfulness to him who had brought him out of darkness into his marvellous Light, and translated him into the Kingdom of his dear Son! To this end he sent up and down Packets of Divine Letters, in which he did discourse so substantially and experimentally of the great things of God that it would not at all have unbecome a Gray-Head to have own∣ed what he wrote. He was very like unto young Elihu, in whose words he used to excuse his freedom with Persons of Gravity whose Souls he did deeply commiserate. He said, Days should speak, and His Zeal. multitude of years should teach Wisdom: But their is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding: I am full of matter; The Spirit within me convin∣ceth me: Behold! My Belly is as Wine which hath no vent; It is ready to burst as new Bottles: I will speak that I may be refreshed, &c. O then how sweet was the Savour of his Graces! How could he not but speak the things which he had seen and heard? And even invite all the World to tast and see how good the Lord was. He began first with his near and dear Relations, wooing and begging of them to mind His Love to his Friends Souls. their pretious and immortal Souls, and speedily to lay in Provisions for a Death-Bed, and Eternity. O with what compassion did he plead the cause of Christ with their Souls! What Pathetical expressions did he use? What vehement Expostulations? How frequent? How particular were his Applications unto them? O, with what Gravity, and Majesty would he speak of the Mysteries of the Gospel! Read what his Language was (when he was between eighteen and nineteen years old) in a Letter to an Antient Minister, neerly related to him, who at that time walked very heavily. Reverend Sir, THere are two things, the want of which I have had experience of in your Family, tho not in every degree, yet in that intenseness of Degree, wherein they ought to be; which His Letter to his Fa∣ther. are, The real power of godliness and Religion: And then that which is the fruit of the former, That chearfulness, delight, spiritual Joy, and serenity of mind which is to be had in Religi∣on and no where else: And that, not in Religion in its weakest Degrees, but in a real vigour, power, and life, and in a more close, constant walking with God, from a tender sense of the worth of Souls, especially those of your Family. And knowing the Duty which my Relation to
it doth lay upon me, and having confidence of their well acceptance of it, I have undertaken to open my Thoughts unto them. In most Families in England, I fear, their is neither the form nor the power of Godliness; where there is no fear of God: No regard of him, no acting under him, or in reference to him: These are (in mine opinion) twice Dead, nay not so much as having the Dead Carkass of Re∣ligion. Objects of pity they are; And O how few are there that spend one compassionate Thought upon them? Others there are who some way or other, it may be from Tradition, from good Parents, It may be from knowing the fashion of those in their Rank; It may be from the frequent inculcating of good Instructions from Christian Friends, or Godly Ministers; Or some stragling eruptions of Conscience, have gotten the outward Husk, and Shell of Religion, without any Kernel or solidi∣ty at all. And this Generation doth usually trust to this their Religion, that it will bring them to a place like a sleeping Place in Heaven or keep them out of Hell, though they live without God in the World. These are poor Creatures too, making hast to their own destruction and know it not; yea, thinking that they are in afair way for Heaven. O that there were never a Family to which we are related, which gave too sad cause of fear, that it were in such a case or neer such a case as this is. A 3d sort of People there are) and but few of these neither) which have the reality of Religion, but yet in much weakness, coldness, faintness, dimness, and intermissions; like Nilus's Brood, above half mud still; beginning to have some life in their Head, a little in their Heart, but the Feet of their Affections and Actions have little o no motion. And where shall we find a Christian that is got higher than this? Yea, that doth in good earnest strive to get higher: Now there are higher attainments to be reached after. There is a having our Conversation in Heaven while we are upon Earth: Neither doth this con∣sist in some weak discourses about God, Heaven, and the things of Religion: It consists not in meer praying twice a Day, and in keeping the Sabbath in a usual manner in its order: it con∣sists not in a few Thoughts of Religious Objects, coming into the Mind in a common way, and as easily lost as got. But true Religion raises the Soul to longings, hungrings, and thirstings, not without some enjoyments. Religion in power is to act for God with strength, vigour, earnestness, intenseness, delight, chearfulness, serenity, and calmness of Mind. The Fruits of the Spirit are Joy in the Holy Ghost, and Peace. Fear, disquiet, and terrors are usually the Introduction to a bette? state, but they are not of the Essentials of Religion: Yea, the contrary frame of Spirit is to be striven for. To speak yet more plainly, and to tell you (Honoured Sir) what fears and what jealousies are, with Reverence to your self, and tender affection to all your Family, I fear that you your self are subject to too many desponding melancholly Thoughts: The Causes whereof give me leave with submission to guess at: The first, I think, may be your reflecting upon your entring upon the Ministry without that reverence, care, and holy zeal for God, Love to Christ, and compassion to Souls, which is required of every one that undertakes that Holy Office. It may be there was ra∣ther a respect to your own living in the World, then of living unto God in the World: Be it thus; Be it not so bad, or be it worse: The remedy is the same. These have a wounding power in them which will be felt to be grievous, when felt as they are in themselves: But continual sor∣row and sad Thoughts do keep this wound open too long, and are not available to the having of it cured. Wounds indeed must be first opened that they may be cleansed; They must be opened that their filth may be discovered in reference to a purging and healing; But no longer than till the Balm of Gilead is to be applied, that they may be healed: And when Christ is made use of aright, he leaveth Joy and Comfort; yet a constant Humility of Spirit is no way inconsistent with this Peace of God. A second cause of your heaviness may be, a sense of the state of the People which God hath committed to you: And indeed who can but mourn over People in such a condition; Objects of pity they are, and the more, because they pity not themselves: I have often wrestled with God that he would direct you in what is your Duty concerning them, which I persuade my self is your earnest request. Now after your serious examining your self what your Conscience doth con∣clude to be your Duty, you do it, and see you do it, you are then to rest upon God for his effectual working. Let not any think to be more merciful then God; For wherein he doth he goes beyond his Bounds: And this is no more cause of heaviness to you, than the Opposition which the A∣postles found at any time, was; who notwithstanding rejoyced in Tribulations. An other cause of heaviness may be what divisions are between your self, and some of your Relations. O that a Spirit of meekness and wisdom might remove all cause of sorrow for that. But were the power of Godliness more in Hearts and Families; all the causes of such trouble wouldsoon be removed: There would be less that would deserve Reprehension, and there would be a fittedness of Spirit to give and bear Reproof: To give in meekness and tenderness, and to bear in Humility, Patience, and Thankfulness.
Some Cares and Thoughts you may have concerning your Family when you are gone: But let Faith and fomer Experiences teach you to drive away all such Thoughts. Your constitution and solitariness may also be some cause of Melancholly; But there is a Duty, which if it were exercised would dispel all, which is Heavenly Meditation, and Contemplation of the things which true Christian Religion tends to. If we did walk closely with God, but one hour in a Day in this Duty, O what influence would it have into the whole Day besides, and if duly perfor∣med, into the whole Life. This Duty with the usefulness, manner, and direction, &c. I knew in some measure before, but had it more pressed upon me by Mr. Baxters Saints Everlasting Rest, that can scarce be over-valued; for which I have cause for ever to bless God: As for your dear Wife, I fear the cares and troubles of the World take off her mind too much from walking with God so closely as she ought to do, and from that earnest endeavour after higher degrees of Grace. I commend God unto her, and unto all, this excellent Duty of Meditation. 'Tis a bitter sweet Duty: Bitter unto corrupt Nature, but sweet to the regenerate part if performed aright. I in∣treat her and your self? Yea, I charge it upon you with humility and tenderness, that God have at least half an hour allowed him in a Day for this Exercise. O this most precious Soul-raising, Soul-ravishing, Soul-perfecting Duty! Take this from your dear Friend as spoken with reve∣rence, and real love and faithfulness. My fear and jealously lest I should speak in vain, maketh me say again, I, or God by me doth charge this upon you. One more direction let me give; That none in your Family satisfy themselves in Family Pray∣er: But let everyone twice a Day (if it may be possible) draw near to God in secret Duty. Here secret wants may be laid open: Here great Mercies may be begged with great earnestness: Here, what wandrings and coldness was in a Family Duty, may be repented of and amended. This is the way to get seriousness, reality, sincerity, and cheerfulness in Religion; And thus the Joy of the Lord may be your strength. Let those which know their Duty do it: If any think it not a necessary Duty, let them fear lest they loose the most excellent help for a Holy, Useful, Joy∣ful Life, under the assistance of Gods Spirit, whil'st they neglect that which they think unne∣cessary. Take some of these directions from sincere affection; some from mine own experience; And all from a real and compassionate desire of your Joy and Comfort. The Lord teach you in this, and in the rest. I intreat you never to rest labouring till you have attained to true spiritual Joy and Peace in the Lord, the God of Peace give you his direction, and the foretasts of his comforts in this Life, and perfection in Eternal Life, in the enjoying of infinite holiness, purity, and excel∣lency through Christ. Thus praying I rest. In another Letter to a Reverend Friend that had the care of many Children, he thus adviseth. Sir, YOur Charge is great upon a Temporal account, but greater upon a Spiritual, many Souls be∣ing Another Letter. committed to your Charge. Out of an earnest desire of the good of Souls, and your own Joy and Peace, I importunately request that you would have a great care of your Children, and be often dropping in some wholsome admonition; And this I humbly, with submission to your Judgment in it, commend to you; Not to admonish them alwayes altogether, but likewise pri∣vately one by one, not letting the rest to know of it; wherein you may please to press upon them their natural corruption, their necessity of Regeneration, the excellency of Christ, and how un∣speakably lovely it is to see young ones setting out for Heaven. This way, I think, may do most good, having had experience of it my self in some small measure. God grant that all may work for the edifying of those which are committed to you. I leave you under the Protection of him who hath loved us, and given himself for us, &c. When he was about Twenty years old, he was made Fellow of the Colledge, which His love to Souls. did not a little advance those noble Projects which he had in his Head, for the promoting of the interest of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now how sweetly would he insinuate into the young ones, desiring to carry as many of them as possibly he could along with himself unto Hea∣ven. Many attempts he made upon some in the same House, that he might season them with Grace, and animate and encourage those which were looking towards Heaven. And as for his own Relations, never was their a more compassionate and tender-hearted Bro∣ther. To his Re∣lations. How many Pathetical Letters did he send to them! And how did he follow them with Prayers and Tears, that they might prove successful! How frequently would he ad∣dress himself to them in private! And how ready to improve Providences, and visits that he might set them home upon them! How excellently would he set forth the Beauty of
Christ! How earnestly would he perswade them to enquire into the state of their Souls! How would he endeavour to bring them off from Sandy Foundations, and resting upon their own Righteousness! In a word, He was scarce content to go to His succes∣ses therein. Heaven without them; and through Mercy, he was very successful among his own Relations, and the whole Family soon savoured of his Spirit. Now were the Chil∣dren put upon getting by Heart choice Scriptures, and Catechisms, and engaged in secret Prayer and Meditation. Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Boarders were the better for his excellent Example, and Holy Exhortations. He was a good Nurse, if not a Spiritual Father to his Natural Father: And some of his Brethren have cause to bless God for ever, that ever they saw his Face, and heard his Words, and observed his Conversation, which had so much of loveliness and beauty in it, that it could not but commend Religion to any that took notice of it. He could speak in St. Paul's words: Brethren, My Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you all, is, that you may be saved. Read what his Heart was in these Words. Distance of place (said he) cannot at all lessen that Natural Bond whereby we are His Letter to his Bre∣thren. conjoyned in Blood, neither ought it to lessen that of Love: Nay, where true Love is, it cannot. For Love towards you I can only say this, That I feel it better then I can express it; as it uses to be with all affections. But Love felt and not expressed, is little worth. I therefore desire to make my Love manifest in the best way I can. Let us look upon one another, not as Brethren only, but as Members of the same Body whereof Christ is the Head. Happy Day will that be where in the Lord will discover that Ʋnion! Let us therefore, Breath and Hunger after this, so that our closest Knot may meet in Christ. If we are in Christ, and Christ in us there we shall be one with another. This I know, that you cannot complain for want of Instruction: God hath not been to us a dry Wilderness, or a barren Heath. You have had Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept. He hath planted you by the Rivers of Waters: It is indeed the Lord alone who maketh fruitful, but yet we are not to stand still and to do nothing. There is a Crown worth seeking for: Seek therefore and that earnestly, O seek by continual Prayer! Keep your Souls in a praying frame; This is a great and necessary Duty; nay, an high and precious Priviledg. If thou canst say nothing, come and lay themselves in an humble manner before the Lord. You may believe me; For I have (through Mercy) experienced what I say: There is more sweetness to be got in one glimps of God's Love, then in all that the World can afford. O do but try! O taste and see how good the Lord is. Get into a corner and throw your self down before the Lord, and beg of God to make you sensible of your loss, undone state by Nature, and of the excellency and necessity of Christ. Say, Lord give me a broken a Heart, soften, melt me: Any thing in the World so I may be but inabled to value Christ, and be perswaded to accept of him as he is tendred in the Gospel. O that I may be delivered from the wrath to come! O, a Blessing for me, even for me; and resolve not to be content till the Lord hath in some measure satisfied you. O my Bowels yern towards you: My Heart works. O that you did but know with what affections I now write to you, and what Prayers and Tears have been mingled with these Lines! The Lord set these things home, and give you true Heart to apply them to your self! The Lord bless all means that you do enjoy, for his Blessing is all in all. Give me leave to deal plainly, and to come yet a little closer to you: For I love your Souls so well, that I cannot bear the Thoughts of the loss of them. Know this that there is such a thing as the New Birth, and except a Man be Born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: God's favour is not to be recovered without it. This New Birth hath it's Foundation laid in a sense of sin, and in a godly Sorrow for it, and an Heart set against it: Without this there can be no Salvation. Look well about you, and see into your selves: and you will see that you are in Hells Mouth without this first step, and nothing but free Grace, and pure Mercy, is between you and the state of the Devils. The Lord deliver us from a secure careless Heart. Hear you see a natural Mans condition? How dare you then lye down in security. O look for your Soul's sake! What shall I say? What shall I do for your poor Soul? I say again, with∣out Repentance there is no Remission; and Repentance it self may loose its labour if it be not in the right manner. So then Prayers, and Tears, and Groans will not do without Christ. Most, when they are convinced of Sin, and are under fears of Hell, run to Duty, and reform somethings, and thus the wound is healed, and by this Thousand fall short of Hea∣ven. For if we be not brougbt off from our selves, and our Righteousness as well as from our Sins, we are never like to be saved. We must see unabsolute need of a Christ, and give our selves up to him, and count all but Dung and Dross in comparison of Cbrist's Righte∣ousness. Look therefore for Mercy only in Christ, For his sake rely upon Gods Mercy.
The tearms of the Gospel are Repent and Believe: Gracious tearms! Mercy for fetching: Nay, mercy for desiring; Nay, for nothing but receiving. Do you desire Mercy and Grace? I know that you do, even this is the Gift of God to desire: Hunger after Christ: Let desires put you upon endeavours; The work it self is sweet. Yea, Repentance, and mourning it self hath more sweetness in it then all the Worlds Comforts. Upon Repentance and Believing comes Justi∣fication; After this Sanctification by the Spirit dwelling in us. By this we come to be the Children of God: To be made partakers of the Divine Nature: To lead new lives: To have a sutableness to God. 'Tis unworthy of a Christian to have such a narrow Spirit as not to act for Christ with all the Heart, and Soul, and Strength, and might. Be not ashamed of Christ; Be not afraid of the srowns and jeers of the Wicked. Be sure to keep a Conscience void of offence; and yield by no means to any known Sin: Be much in Prayer, in secret Prayer, and in reading the Scriptures; Therein are laid up the glorious Mysteries which are hid from many Eyes. My greatest desire is, that God would work his own work in you: I desire to see you, not as former∣ly, but that the Lord would make me an instrument of your Souls good for which I greatly long. Many such Letters he wrote to his Brethren, and took all opportunities of visiting His Pru∣dence. them, at which times he addressed himself particularly to each of them, that he might see what became of his Letters, Prayers and Tears, and he was very watchful over them, ready to reprove and convince them of Sin, and as ready to encourage any beginnings of a good work in them. Once perceiving that one of his Brothers slept at Family Prayer, he presently took oc∣casion His reproof of one of them. to shew him what an high contempt of God it was: What a little sense such an one must needs have of his own danger: What dreadful Hypocrisy: What a miracle of Patience that he was not awaked in Hell Flames. And when he had been a while pleading with him affectionately, it pleased the Lord to strike in with some power, and to melt and soften his Brothers Heart, being about eleven years old, so that it was to be hoped that then the Lord began savingly to work upon the Heart of the Child: For from thence forward The suc∣cess. a considerable alteration might be discerned in him, wherewith he was not a little pleased; and shortly after he took an opportunity to write to him, to mind him of what God had done for his Soul: Begging of him not to rest satisfied till he knew what a thorow change and effectual calling meant. I hope (said he) that God hath a good work to do in you, for you, and by you: Yea, I hope he hath already begun it. But O, take not up with some beginnings, faint desires, lazy seekings. O remember your former Tears! One may weep a little for sin, and yet go to Hell for Sin. Many that are under some such work, shake off the sense of Sin, mur∣ther their Convictions, and return again to folly! O take heed! If any draw back, the Lord will take no pleasure in them: But I hope better things of you, &c. His Manner also was to observe how his Brethren behaved themselves after Duty: Whe∣ther His Dili∣gence over them. they seemed presently to run after the world greedily, as if Duty were a task, or whe∣ther there seemed to be an abiding impression of God, and the things of God upon them. How great his Love and compassion to Souls was, may appear by these expressions used to one of his Relations: Having shewed how infinitely below a Christian it was, greedily His Love to Souls. to pursue the things which will be but as Gravel in the Teeth, if we mind not the rich Provision which is in our Fathers House: O what folly (said he) is it to trisle in the things of God! But I hope better things of you. Did I not hope, why should I not mourn in secret for you, as one cast out among the Dead? O what should I do for you, but pour out my Soul like Wa∣ter! and give my God no rest till he should graciously visit you with his Salvation: Till he cast you down and raise you up: Till he wound you and heal you again. Thus partly with his Holy Example, partly with his Wise and warm Exhortations, joyn∣ed with Prayers, Tears, and secret Groans, somewhat of the beauty of Religion was to be seen in the Family where he lived. He was mighty in Prayer, and his Soul was oft-times so transported in it, that he forgot His delight in Prayer. his own and others weakness. Indeed the acquaintance he had with God was so sweet, and his converse with him so frequent, that when he was engaged in this Duty, he scarce knew how to leave that which was so delightful unto him. His constant course for some years was to pray at least three times a Day in secret, sometimes seven, and twice a Day in the Col∣ledge or Family; and he found the comfort of it beyond imagination, enjoyed wonderful Communion with God in it, and tasted the pleasantness of an Heavenly Life; So that he could experimentally say, That the ways of Wisdom were ways of pleasantness, and all her Paths Peace. In his Prayers he wrestled with God, and would scarce come off of his Knees without his Fathers Blessing. He conversed with God with an holy and humble familiarity as with a Friend, and upon all occasions would run unto him for advice, and found won∣derful success, and oft immediate returns to his Prayers. Take one instance for all.
His Honoured Father, Mr. William Janeway, Minister of Kelshall in Hertfordshire, being sick, and under somewhat dark apprehensions as to the estate of his Soul, he would often say to his Son John: O Son! This passing into Eternity is a great thing: This Dying is a solemn business, and enough to make any ones Heart to ake, that hath not his Pardon sealed, and his E∣vidences for Heaven clear. And truly (Son) I am under no small fears as to my own estate for another World. O that God would clear his Love! O that I could say cheerfully, I can dye, and be able upon good grounds to look Death in the Face, and adventure upon Eternity with well grounded Peace and Comfort! His Son made a sutable Reply for the present; but seing his dear Father still to abide un∣der despondencies (though all Christians that knew him highly esteemed him for his Up∣rightness) he went apart and spent some time in wrestling with God for his Father, earnest∣ly begging of God, that he would sill him with Joy unspeakable in believing, and that he would speedily give him some token for good, that he might joyfully and honourably leave this World to go to a better. Being risen from his Knees he came down to his sick Father asking him how he felt himself? His Father made no answer for the present, but wept ex∣ceedingly, continuing for some considerable time in that Passion, so that he was not able to speak: But after a while, having recovered himself, with unspeakable Joy he burst forth into such Expressions as these. O Son! Now it is come! Now it is come! Now it is come! I bless God I can die: The Spirit of God hath witnessed with my Spirit, that I am his Child, Now I can look up to God as my dear Father, and to Christ as my Redeemer: I can now say, This is my Friend; This is my Beloved. My Heart is full, it is brim full, I can hold no more I know now what that Sentence means, The Peace of God which passeth Understanding. I know now what that White Stone is, wherein a new Name is written, which none know but they which have it: And that fit of weeping which you saw me in, was a fit of everpowering Love and Joy, so great, that I could not for my heart contain my self, neither can I express what glorious discoveries God hath made of himself unto me. And had that Joy been greater, I question whether I could have born it, and whether it would not have separated Soul and Body. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name, that hath pardoned all my Sins, and Sealed the Pardon. He hath healed my Wounds, and caused the Bones which he had broken to rejoice. O help me to bless the Lord! He hath put a new Song into my Mouth. O bless the Lord for his infinite goodness, and rich Mercy! O now I can Die! It is nothing. I bless God I can die. I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. You may well think that his Sons Heart was not a little refreshed to hear such words, and to see such a sight, and to meet the Messenger that he had sent to Heaven returned back a∣gain so speedily. He counted himself a sharer with his Father in this Mercy, and it was welcome upon a double account. 1. As it did so wonderfully satisfy his Father. 2. Asit was so immediate and clear an Answer of his Prayers; As if God from Heaven had said unto him, thy Prayers and Tears for thy Father are heard: Thou like a Prince hast prevail∣did with God: Thou hast got the Blessing thou begedst. Hereupon young Mr. Janeway break forth into Praises, and even into an extasy of Joy Thanksgi∣ving. that God should deal so Fatherly and familiarly with him; And Father and Son were so full of Joy, light, love, and Praise, that there was a little Heaven in the place. And the young Man thus expressed himself: O Blessed and for ever blessed be God for his infinite Grace! O who would not pray unto God, verily he is a God that heareth Prayers, and that our Souls know right well. And then he told his joyful Father how much he was affected with his for∣mer despondings, and what he had been praying for just before, with all the earnestness he could for his Soul, and how the Lord had immediately answered him. The Father presently after, whil'st his Son stood by, fell into another Extasy of Joy, Joy un∣speakable. which his weak Body was ready to sink under: So that he could now say, Now let they Ser∣vant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. He could now walk in the Val∣ley of the Shadow of Death, and fear no evil. O how lovely is the sight of a smiling Jesus where one is dying! How refreshing is it, when Heart and Flesh, and all are failing, to have God for the strength of our Heart, and Portion for ever! After this his Reverend Father had a sweet calm upon his Spirit to his last breath, having all his Graces greatly improved, he shewed such humility, love to, and admiring of God, contempt of the World; such prizing of Christ; such Patience as few Christians attain unto: especially his Faith was much strengthened, by which, with extraordinary confidence he cast his Widdow and Ele∣ven Children upon the care of that God who had fed him with this Heavenly Manna in his Wilderness, state and condition. After the Death of his Father, this young John did what he could to supply his room, exercising the place of an Husband, Son and Brother, so that he was no small comfort to
his afflicted Mother, and to all the rest of his Relations that had any Sense of God upon their Spirits, and to one of them, who had lost a Child, he thus addressed himself: Daily Observation and every Mans Experience gives sufficient Testimony to it, that Comfort upon the Death of a Child. Afflictions of what kind soever, by how much the seldomer they are, the more grievous they seem. We have a long time sailed in the Rivers of Blessings which God hath plentiful∣ly powred out among us: Now if we come where the Waves of Affliction do but a little more then ordinarily arise, we begin to have our Souls almost carried down with fears and griefs; yea, the natural Man, if not counter-powred by the Spirit of God, will be ready to entertain murmuring, and repining Thoughts against God himself: whereas if all our Life had been a Pilgrimage, full of Sorrows and Afflictions (as we deserved) and had but rarely been intermingled with Comforts, we should have been more fitted to bear Af∣flictions. Thus it is naturally: But we ought to counterwork against the Stream of Na∣ture, by a new Principle wrought in us, an a whatsoever Nature doth err in, Grace is to rectifie, And they upon whom Grace is bestowed, ought to set Grace on work. For where∣fore is Grace bestowed unless it should act in us? It hath pleased the Lord to make a breach in your Family; there where the Knot is fastest tyed, when it is disunited the change becomes greater, and the grief is the more encarged: So that herein you who are most moved, are most to be excused and comforted: The strength of Mothers Affection, I believe, none but Mothers know; and the greatest Affections when they are desturbed, breed the greatest Grief. But when Affliction comes up∣on us, what will be our Duty? Shall we then give our selves up to be carried away with the grieving Passion? Shall we because of one Affliction cause our Souls to walk in sadness all our Dayes, drive away all the light of Comfort from our Eyes, by causing our Souls to be obscured under the shades of Melancholly? Shall we quarrel with our Maker, and call the Wise, Righteous Judg to our Bar? Doth he not punish us less then we deserve: Is there not Mercy and Truth in all his Dispensations? Shall we by continual Sorrow add Affliction to Affliction, and so become our own Tormentors, &c. And then (after much other good Counsel) he concludes thus: Let us therefore have a care of so much as mo∣ving, much more of entertaining any unworthy Thoughts against God. But let us submit willingly unto the Yoak which he is pleased to lay upon us, lest he break us with his terri∣ble Judgments. And now it hath seemed good to God to lay this stroak upon you, I pray you rightly to improve it, and let this tryal prepare you for greater: And seeing the un∣certainty of all Worldly things, endeavour with all your might to get your Heart above them; And I beseech the Lord who is the great Physician of Souls, and knows how to ap∣ply a Salve to every Soar, to comfort you with his Spiritual Comforts; that he would fa∣vourably shine upon you, and receive you into a nearer Ʋnion and Communion with him∣self: Into his Hands I commit you: with him I leave you, praying that he would make up all in Himself. He was an excellent Example to his yonger Brethren, and his Prudent Instructi∣ons, His useful∣ness to his Brethren. and Holy Practices did not a little influence them. He was a Wise Counseller, and an Assistant that could not well be spared to his Elder Brother, who was not a little sensible of that Personal worth that was in him, whom he used to preffer before himself, as one whom he judged, God had honoured with far greater Parts, Graces, and Experiences then himself: The younger also did as humbly, and heartily respect and honour him as a serious Christian, Minister, and his Elder Brother, who had obliged him with more then ordinary kindnesses. When he was but young, he began to be taken notice of by Ancient Ministers and His Mode∣sty, and Hu∣mility. Christians, though his Modesty was so great that his vast Parts were much ob∣seured thereby, and his great worth was so balasted with Humility, that he made no great noise in the World, and most were ignorant of his singular worth. A wise Man that was intimately acquainted with him, used to say of him, that he was like unto deep Waters that are most still: A Man he was of hidden Excellency. There were few that knew how close he walked with God, at what and a high rate he lived, and what a great Trade he drave for the Riches of another World. All which he laboured as much as might be to conceal. His Father being dead, he returned unto Kings Colledge, and was one of a private His return to Cam∣bridge, and imploy∣ment there. Society, who began to carry on some notable Projects for God's Glory and the good of Souls, and to design how they might best improve their Gifts and Graces, so as they might be most serviceable unto God, and to their Generation. They used frequently to meet together, to Pray, to communicate their Studies and Experien∣ces,
to handle some Divinity Question in a Scholastick manner, thereby to exercise those Gifts which God had bestowed upon them. Some indeed of this Company de∣generated from their first Principles, but others lived to demonstrate unto the World, that what they did, proceeded from a Vital Seed; amongst whom this young Man was none of the least; who also had a Design upon some of the Juniors, to engage them (if possible) unto God before they were ensnared and corrupted by wicked Company, at their first coming to the University, But after a while most of his Dear and intimate Companions were transplanted either into Gentlemens Fa∣milies, His Indu¦stry. or into Livings, and he, being one of the youngest, was, for a while, lest alone in the Colledge: And he now wanting the diversion of these delightful meet∣ings, fell so close to his Studies that he soon gave such a deadly wound to his Bodily constitution, as he could never throughly be cured of, or freed from. Having thus spent sometime in his hard Studies, it fell out that Dr. Cox sent to the His remore to Dr. Cox. Provest of the Colledge to commend to him a Man of worth that might live in his Family, and be a Tutor to his Son. The Provest hereupon was pleased to commend and sent to him Mr. Jo. Janeway, who was neither a disgrace to him that sent him, nor yet did he frustrate the expectation of him that entertained him. For by his great diligence, profound Learning, and success in his Undertaking, he much obliged the Relations of his Pupil unto him. But here his labour was so great, and his Body so weak, that he could not long bear up under so heavy a burden; insomuch as he was forced to crave leave of the Doctor to try whether the change of the Air might not His Weak∣ness. somewhat contribute to the restoring of his Bodily weakness which now begun sen∣sibly to be in the wain. During his abode in that Family, his deportment was so sweet and obliging, and his His success there. Conversation so spiritual and Heavenly, that it did not a Little indear his presence and company unto them; so that, doubtless, some of that Family will carry a sweet remembrance of him with them to their Graves; and he often owned the goodness of God to him, in the benefit which he got by the Graces and Experiences of some Christians in, and Relating to that Family, whose tender love to him he gratefully resented when he lay on his Death-bed. Having left the Doctors House he retired into the Countrey to his Mother and El∣dest He retires to his Mo∣ther. Brother, who used their utmost diligence and endeavours to recruit and repair the decayes of Nature in him; But hard Study, frequent and fervent Prayers, and intense Meditations had so wounded and ruinated his frail Tabernacle, and Earthly Cottage, that it could not be throughly repaired again: yet, by God's Blessing up∣on their endeavours, and use of means, it was supported and held up for some∣time. Whilst he was in this declining condition, wherein he could have little hopes of Comfort at Death. Life, he was so far from fearing it, that he received the Sentence of Death in him∣self with great joy, and wrote to his nearest and dearest Relations to prepare and dis∣pose them to a willing submission, and ready compliance with the will of God, though they should part with him for a while: And that he might wean their Af∣fections from him, he solemnly professed, that as for himself he was ashamed to de∣sire and pray for Life. For (said he) is there here any thing that is more desirable then is the enjoyment of Christ? Can I expect any thing here below, comparable to that blessed Vision! O that Crown! That Rest that remains for the People of God! And (bles∣sed be God,) I can say, It is mine. I know that when this Tabernacle of Clay shall be dissolved, that I have an House not made with Hands; and I therefore groan, not to be un∣cloathed, but to be cloathed upon with Christ. To me to Live is Christ, and to Die is gain. I can now (through infinite Mercy) speak in the Language of the Apostle: I have sought the good Fight: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown incorruptible which fades not away. Perceiving one of his nearest Relatious much troubled at the Thoughts of his Death, he charged him not to pray for his Life, unless it were purely in respect to the Glory of God: I wish (said he) I beg you to keep your Mind in a submiss frame to the Will of God concerning me. The Lord take you nearer to himself that you may walk with him, to whom, if I go before I hope you will follow after. Yet after this, it pleased God Some reco∣very. that he was finely recovered, and his Friends were not without some hopes that he might recover; and yet be eminently instrumental for God's Glory and the Churches good. Being in some good measure restored to Health he again returned to his former pra∣ctice
of engaging with all his might in the secret, & great Duties of Religion: Besides others, he set apart an hour every day for set, and solemn Meditation, which he found to be an ex∣cellent Meditation very profi∣table. means to improve his Graces, and encrease his Comforts. His time for this Duty was usually in the evening, and his manner was to walk into the Fields if the weather would permit. Or if not, then he would retire into the Church, or into some solitary room, where one of his Brothers once hid himself, that he might take more exact notice of the inter∣course between God and him, but oh (saith he) what a Spectacle did I there see! A Man walking with God: Humbly conversing with his Maker, and maintaining an holy famili∣arity His Deport∣ment there∣in. with the Great Jehovah! Methought I saw one talking with God: Methought I saw a spiritual Merchant in an heavenly Exchange, driving a rich Trade for the Treasures of another world. O what a glorious sight it was! Methinks I see him still; how gloriously did his Face shine! O with what a lovely countenance did he walk up and down, his lips going, his body oft reaching up, as if he would have taken his Flight into Heaven! His looks smiles, and every motion were as if he had been upon the very confines of Glory. Surely he had Meat to cat which the world knew not of? Surely God made him wel∣come when he brought him into his Banqueting-House. His Heart was fed upon the infinite love of God in Christ to the poor lost Sons, and Daughters of Adam. His words to a dear Friend shewed an extraordinary sense of the freeness, fulness, and duration of that Love: God (said he) holds mine Eyes most upon his Goodness, his unmeasurable Goodness, and upon the Promises which are most sure and firm in Christ: His Love to us is greater, surer, fuller than ours to our selves For when we loved our selves, so as to destroy our selves, he loved us so as to save us. That he might engage others in more ardent affections to God, he would put words into their mouths. Let us then (said he) behold him till our Hearts desire, till our very Souls are drawn out after him; Till we are brought to acquaintance, intimacy, and delight in him! Say, O that he would love me; O that I might love him! O Blessed are they that know him, and are known of him! It is good for me to draw near to God: O that I was received into converse with him, that I might hear his voice; and see his Countenance! For his voice is sweet, and his Countenance comely. A Day in his Courts is better than a Thousand elsewhere. My Soul longeth, yea, fainteth for the Courts of the Lord: My Heart and my Flesh cryeth out for the living God: O that I might communicate my self to God, and that he would give himself to me! O that I might love him, and be sick of Love; That I might die in Love! That I might loose my self in his Love, as a small drop in the unfathomed depth of his Love! That I might dwell in his Eternal Love! To a dear Friend that was under some fears as to his Spiritual Estate, he thus wrote: O stand still and wonder: Behold his Love and admire! Now (if never yet, consider what thou canst discover in this pretious Jesus! Canst thou not see so much till thou canst see no more, not because of its shortness, but because of thy darkness? Here is a Sea, fling thy self into it, and thou shalt be compassed with the heigth, & depth, & breadth & length of Love, & be filled with all the fulness of God. Is not this enough? Wouldst thou have more? Fling away all besides God: God is Portion enough, and the only proper Portion of the Soul. Hast thou not tasted, hast thou not known that his Love is better than Wine? Hast thou not smelt the savour of his pretious Ointments, for which the Virgins love him? This, this is he who is altogether lovely. And while I write, my Heart doth burn: My Soul is on fire: I am sick of Love, &c. But now methinks I see you almost drowned in Tears, because thou feelest not such workings of Love towards God: Weep on still; For Love hath Tears as well as Grief: And Tears of Love shall be kept in Gods Bottle as well as the other: Yea, they shall be as pretious Jewels, and an excellent Ornament. Hast thou felt such meltings of Loving-Grief? Know that they are no o∣ther than the streams of Christs Love flowing to thee, and through thee, and from thee to him again, And thus is Christ delighted in beholding of his own Beauties in his Spouses Eye, &c. Yet for all this, he had also his gloomy days, and his Sun was sometimes over-clouded, His sweets were sometimes imbittered with dreadful and horrid Temptations: Satan shot His Temp∣ation. his envenomed Arrows at him; But through the might of the Captain of his Salvation, he went more than a Conqueror out of the Field. He was with St. Paul many times lifted up into the 3d Heavens, and saw and heard things unutterable: But lest he should be exalted above measure, there was a Messenger of Satan sent to buffet him. It would make a Chri∣stians Heart ake to hear and read what strange Temptations this gracious Soul was exerci∣sed with. But he was well Armed for such a conflict, having on the Shield of Faith where∣by he quenched the fiery Darts of that wicked one: yet this fight made his very Body to sweat through the Agonies of his Spirit: and caused him to send up strong Cries with Tears for fresh supplies of Grace.
These Temptations and conflicts with Satan did not a little help him afterwards in his dealing with one who was sorely afflicted with Temptations of the like Nature: And be∣cause it may be of singular use to others in the like case, see what he wrote. Dear Friend, your Letters are bitter in the Mouth, but sweet in the Belly. They con∣tain matter of Joy in a dismal aspect. They are good News brought by a Messenger in Mourning. I had rather hear of that which is matter of substantial, real Joy, though mixed with many sighs, and interrupted with many Groans and Sobs, then in that Laugh∣ter, in the midst of which the Heart is sad. You say that you are troubled with Blasphemous Thoughts: So then though they are Blasphemous, yet they are your trouble; and thoughts they are too, and that neither sent for, nor welcom, and so are not assented to in your mind. What then shall we think of them? If they were of your own Production, your Heart would be delighted in its own issue: But you do nothing less. Sure then they are the Injections of that wick∣ed One, who is the Accuser of the Brethren, and the Disturber of the Peace of of the People of God: But doth Satan use to imploy those Weapons, but against those that he is in some fear of loosing? He is not wont to assault and fight against his surest Friends in this manner. Those that he hath fast in his own Possession, he leads on as softly and quietly as he can, fearing lest such disturbance should make them to look about them, and so they should awake, and see their danger: But as for those who have in some measure escaped his snares, he follows them hard with all the discouragments he can. Surely these things can be no other but a bitter relish of those things, which you know to be bitter after you tasted the Honey, and the Honey Comb: After you have seen how good the Lord is. What then shall I call these Motions of your Mind? They are the Souls loathing the Morsels which Satan would have it  swallow down: Yea, they are the Souls striving with Satan whilst he would Ravish the Spouse of Jesus: And let the Enemies of all goodness know, that he shall e're long pay dear for such attempts. But you will say, If these horrible Thoughts be not your Sin, yet they are your trouble and misery, and you desire to be freed from them, and the most loyal and loving Spouse, had rather be delivered from these assaults. But you will ask, How shall I get freed from them? Ans. First, See that you possess your Soul in Patience: And know this that God hath an over-ruling Hand in all this; and wait upon him: For he can, and will bring forth good out of all this seeming evil. At present you are in the Dark, and see no Light: Yet trust in the Lord, and stay your self upon your God: Can Christ forget the purchase of his own Blood? The price of his Soul? Those whom he hath so intimately endeared to himself? Can a Mother forget her sucking Child? Yet God cannot forget his. God hath loving gracious intents in all this, and his Bowels yearn toward his. Yea, our Saviour suffers with us, through his ardent Love, by Sympathy, as well as he hath suffered for us. But for your being rid of these Thoughts, you know who hath all Power in his Hand; who doth imploy this Power in a way of love toward his: This Power is made yours through the Prayer of Faith: But for your own work do this: First, Let not such Thoughts have any time of abode in your Mind; but turn them all the loathing and abhorrency you can, But not with so much trouble and disturbance of Mind as, (I believe) you do. For by this the Devil is pleased, and he makes you your own Tormentor. 2ly, Alwayes then divert your Thoughts to some good thing, and let those very injections be constantly the occasion of your more Spiritual Meditation. Think the quite contrary, or fall a Praying with earnestness, and the Devil will be a weary if he find his Designs thus broken, and that those Sparks of Hell which he struck in∣to the Soul to kindle and inflame Corruption, do put warmth into Grace, and set Faith and Prayer a working: When he perceives, that what he intended as Water to cool your Love to God, proves like Oyl to make it flame the more vehemently, he will be discouraged. Thus resist him, and he will fly from you. 3ly, Consider that this is no New thing: For we are not in this, ignorant of Sa∣tan's Wiles, that if any Soul hath escaped out of his Chains of Darkness; If he will have Heaven, he shall have it with as much trouble as the Devil can lay on; and if he and his had their Wills, no good Man should have one peaceable Hour. But blessed be God for his everlasting and unchangable Love to his, so that the Devil
cannot pluck us out of those Almighty Arms, where with he doth embrace his dear Children. Dear Heart: My Prayer for thee is, that God would give thee the peaceable Fruit of Righteousnes after all thy Afflictions: And that thou maist come out of these Tryals, refined, and purified, and more fit for thy Master's Use; having this the end of all, to purge away thy Dross, and take away thy Sin. Thus hoping that at length, God will turn thy Mourning into Joy, thy trouble into Triumph, and all thy Sorrows into a sure and stable Peace, I leave you with Him, and rest. Yours in our dear Lord, J. Janeway. He much feared decayes in Grace and Apostacy: Yea, of flatness of Spirit; either in himself or others. And if he suspected any such thing in his nearest Relations, he would do alI that possibly▪ he could to recover them out of these Snares of Satan, and to quicken them to more vigorous spiritual Acts of Religion. He laboured to His Zeal. maintain a constant tenderness upon his Heart, and to take notice of the least depar∣ture of his Soul from God, or of Gods absenting of himself from his Soul. He had a godly Jealousie over his Brother, and desired by all means to carry on the work of Grace, which he had some hopes, was begun in him. He laboured to build sure, and to build up, that he might be rooted and grounded in the Faith, steadfast and unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord. Wherefore he followed him, not only with private warnings, and frequent Pathetical Counsel and Directions, but with Letters also. One of them here follows. You live in a place where strict and close walking with God, hath few or no Ex∣amples; and most are apt to be like their Company: And God's own Children are too apt to forget their first Love. Our Hearts are apt to be careless and to neglect our watch. We are ready to grow formal in Duty, and less Spiritual, and then (it may be) less frequent: And Conscience is put off with some poor excuse: And thus Religion withers, and one that seemed once a Zelot may come to be a Laodi∣cean; and some that looked once as though they were eminent Saints, may fall to to just nothing. It's too common, To have a Name to be alive, and yet to be dead. Read this and tremble lest it should be your Case. When we are lazy and a sleep, our Adversary is awake. When we are slothful and negligent, then he is diligent. I consider your Age; I know where you dwell; I am not unacquainted with your Temptations: Wherefore I cannot but be affraid of you, lest both by inward and outward Fire the Bush be singed, though, if God be in it, it cannot be burnt. Give me leave to be in some measure fearful of you, and Jealous over you, and to mind you of what you know already. Principles of Civility will be but as bro∣ken Reed to stay our Souls upon, without those higher Principles which are planted in the Soul by the working of the Spirit of God: O remember what meltings you have sometimes had? Remember how solicitously you did sometimes enquire after Christ: How earnestly you seemed to ask the way to Zion, with your Face thither∣ward. O take heed of loosing those impressions you once had! Take not up with a slight work! True Conversation is a great thing, and another kind of thing then the most take it to be. O therefore be not satisfied with some Convictions; take them not for Conversion; much less, with resting in a Lifeless formal Profession. There is such a thing as being almost a Christian: Nay, as drawing back to Perditi∣on, and some that are not far from the Kingdom of Heaven may never come there. Beware lest thou lose the Reward. The Promise is made to him holdeth fast, and holdeth out to the End, and overcometh, Labour to forget what is behind, and to press forwards towards what is before. He that is contented with just Grace enough to get to Heaven, and to escape Hell, and desires no more, may be sure that he hath none at all, and is far from being made a partaker of the Divine Nature. Labour to know what it is to Converse with God: Strive to do every thing as in his presence: Design him in all. Act as one that stands within sight of the Grave and Eternity. I say again, do what you do, as if you were sure God stood by and looked on, and exactly recorded every Thought, Word, and Action; and you may very well suppose that which can∣not be otherwise. Let us awake and fall to our work in good earnest. Heaven and Hell are be∣fore us and Death behind us. What do we mean to sleep: Dulness in God's Ser∣vice is very uncomfortable, and at the best will cost us dear; and to be contented
with such a frame, is a certain Symptom of an Hypocrite. O how will such trem∣ble when God shall call them to give an account of their Stewardships, and tell them that they may be no longer Stewards! Should they fall sick, and the Devil, and Con∣science fall upon them, what inconceivable perplexity would they then be in! O live more upon the Invisibles, and let the Thoughts of their excellencies put Life into your Performances. You must be content to be laughed at for your preciseness and singularity. A Christians walking is not with Men but with God: And he hath great cause to suspect his Love to God, who doth not delight more in conversing with God: and being conformed to him, then in conversing with the World, and being conformed unto it. How can the Love of God dwell in that Man who liveth without God in the World? Without both continual walking with him in his whole Conversation, and those more peculiar visits of him in Prayer, Meditation, Spiritual Ejaculations, and other Duties of Religion; and the working of Faith, Love, Holy Desires, Delight, Joy, and Spiritual Sorrow in them. Think not that our walking with God cannot consist with Worldly Business: Yes, but Religion makes us Spiritual in common Actions; and there is not any Action in a Mans Life, in which a Man is not to la∣bour to make it a Religious Act, by looking to the Rule in it, and Eyeing God's Glory; and thus he may be said, To walk with God. To this we must endeavour to rise, and never be content till we attain it: And if this seem tedious (as to de∣generate Nature, it will) we must know that we have so much of Enmity against God still remaining, and are under depravation and Darkness, that we know not our true happiness. Such a Soul is sick, and hath lost its taste which doth not per∣ceive an incomparable sweetness in walking with God, without whom all things else under Heaven are Gall and Bitterness, and to be little valued by every true Christian, &c. Rest not in any condition in which your security is founded upon the sure bottom, the Lord Jesus Christ. Labour to attain to this, To love God for himself, and to have your Heart naturallized, and suited to Spiritual things. O for a Heart to re∣joyce and work Righteousness! O that we could do the Will of God with more activity, delight, and constancy. If we did know more of God, we should love him more; and then God would still reveal more of himself to us; and then we should see more and more cause to love him, and wonder that we love him no more. O this, this is our Happiness, to have a fuller sight of God: To be wrap∣ped up and filled with the Love of Christ. O let my Soul for ever be thus imploid! Lord, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee, and there is none on Earth, that I can de∣sire in comparison of Thee. By this we may perceive what it was that swallowed up his Heart; and where his Delight, Treasure, and Life was. His love to Christ and Souls made him very His en∣trance into the Mini∣stry. desirous to spend and be spent in the work of the Ministry; and accordingly he com∣plied with the first clear Call to Preach the Everlasting Gospel, and though now he was but about Two and twenty Years Old, yet he came to that Work as one that understood what a kind of imployment Preaching was. He was a Workman that need∣ed not to be ashamed; that was thoroughly furnished for every good Word and Work: One that was able to convince gain-sayers: One in whom the Word of God dwelt richly. One full of the Spirit and Power: One that hated Sin with a perfect hatred, and loved Holiness with all his Soul, in whom Religion did shine forth in its Beauty: One that knew the terror of the Lord, and knew how to beseech Sinners in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God: One who was both a Son of Thunder, and a Son of Conso∣lation: So that it might be said of him, as St. Paul spake of Timothy, That he knew none like-minded that did naturally care for Souls. He was one in whom Learning and Holiness did strive which should excell others. He never Preached publickly but twice, and then he came to it as though he had been used to that work Forty Years: He delivered the Word of God with that Power and Majesty; with that tenderness and compassion; with that readiness and freedom, that it made his Hearers almost amazed. He was led into the Mysteries of the Gospel, and spake nothing unto others but what was the Language of his Heart, and the Fruit of great Experience; and which (one might easily perceive) had no small impression first upon his own Spirit. His two Sermons were upon Communion, and intimate converse with God: Out of His Text. that Text, Job 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace: Thereby Good shall come unto thee. A Subject that few were better able to manage then him∣self:
and scarce any could handle so feelingly as he: For he did for some considera∣ble time maintain such an intimate familiarity with God, that he seemed to converse with him, as one Friend converses with another. This Text he made some entrance into whilst he was on Earth; but the perfecting his acquaintance with God was a work fitter for another World. He kept an exact watch over his Thoughts, Words, and Actions, and reviewed all A Diary kept. that passed, at least once a Day in a solemn manner. He kept a Diary in which he wrote down every Evening, what the frame of his Spirit had been all that Day, especially in every Duty: He took notice what in-comes he had: What profit he re∣ceived in his Spiritual Traffique: What returns came from that far Countrey: What answers of Prayer: What deadness and flatness of Spirit: And what Observable Pro∣vidences did present themselves, and the substance of what he had been doing: What wandrings of Thoughts: What inordinate Passions, which though the World could not take notice of, yet he could and did: This made him to retain a Grateful Re∣membrance of God's Mercies, and to live in a constant admiring, and adoring of Divine Goodness. This brought him into a very intimate acquaintance with his own Heart: This kept him Humble, and fitted him for free communications from God: and made him more lively and active: This made him to speak more affectionately and ex∣perimentally to others of the things of God: Yea, this left a sweet calm upon his Spirit, because that every Night he made his accounts even, so that had his Sheet proved his Winding Sheet, it had been all one to him: For he could say, His Work was done, so that Death could not surprise him at unawares. Scripturs Studies. He studied the Scriptures much, and they were sweeter to him then his Food, and he had an excellent dexterity in opening the mind of God in dark places. In the lat∣ter part of his Life he seemed to be wholly taken up with the Thoughts of Christ, Heaven, and Eternity. And the nearer he came to his Journies end, the swifter was his Motion thitherward, and more the unmixed were his Designs for them: And he used much to perswade others to a Universal, and free respect to the Glory of God: in all things, making Religion their Business, and not to mind these great things by the by. Ministers Duty. He was much concerned about Ministers, that they, above all Men, should take heed, that they carried not on poor and low Designs instead of wholly Eyeing the Interest of God, and Souls. He judged that to take up Preaching as a Trade, was alto∣gether inconsistent with the Spirit of a true Gospel Minister. He desired that they which seemed to be devoted to the Ministry, would, first, heartily devote their All to God, and then have a dear Love to Immortal Souls. He was very ready to Humility. debase himself, and humbly to acknowledge what he found amiss in himself: and la∣boured to amend himself and others. He abounded in pitty and compassion to Souls, and yet was greatly grieved and Pitty to Souls. ashamed, that he did no more to express his sense of the worth of them, and that his Bowels did no more yearn over them, whom he had just cause to fear that they were in a Christless Condition. Though there were few of his Kindred, or Relations: Nay, of his Neighbours, and Acquaintance, but he made a particular Application to them, either by Letters or Conference; yet none were so forward to complain, and cry out of want of Love to Souls, and of unprofitableness to others in his Generation: That he was no fuller of compassion; and for that he made no bet∣ter an improvement of all the Visits which he made; in which (said he) we should not make carnal Pleasure, and Recreation our End, but the imparting, and recei∣ving of some Spiritual Gift. Visits to be improved. He was not a little troubled at the barreness of Christians in their Meetings, and Discourses, not improving their Society for the quickning and warming of each others Heart. The expence of precious time, for which an account must be made: The ill managment of Visits, and the impertinency of their talk, he oft reflected up∣on with an Holy Indignation. It was a great Grief to his Soul to see what Prizes were sometimes put into the Hands of Christians, and how little skill and will they had to improve them for the building up one an other in their most Holy Faith: And that they who should be encouraging one an other in the way to Zion, commu∣cating of Experiences, and talking of their Countrey, and of the Glory of that King∣dom of which the Saints are Heirs, could satisfie themselves with vain and empty Stuff, as if Christ, Heaven, and Eternity were not things of as great worth as any thing else, that usually sounds in the Ears, and comes from the Lips of Professors. An other thing that he greatly bewailed was the want of Love among Christians, and thier Divisions: This cost him many Tears, and Groans, and he did what he Divisions bewailed.
could to heal the Breaches by his Prudent and Christian advice and Counsel. He saw so much Pride, Peevishness, and such Divisions among Professors, that it did not a little vex his Righteous Soul, and made him even long to be in a calmer Air, where will be nothing but Union, Joy, and Love. He could not endure to hear Christians to speak reproachfully one of another, because they were of different Judgments and Perswasions. Where he saw most Holiness, Humility and Love, there he let out his Affections most freely. He was of that Holy Man's Mind, who said, That it is pitty that the very Name of Division is not wholly Buried, and that the time may come when we shall pay dearly for our Ʋnbrotherly, nay, Ʋnchristian Animosities. In the latter part of his Life, he lived like a Man that was quite a weary of the His Hea∣venly-min∣dedness. World, and that looked upon himself as a Stranger hear, and that lived in the constant sight of a better World. He plainly declared himself to be a Pilgrim that looked for a better Countrey, for a City that hath Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God: His deportment, his Habit, his Language, all bespake him a Man of another World. His Meditations were of intense, long, and frequent that they ripened him a pace for Heaven, and somewhat with all weakned his Body. Few Christians attain to such a Holy Contempt of the World, and to such clear believing, Joyfull, Con∣stant His Com∣munion with God. apprehensions of the Transcedent Glories of the other World. He made it his whole Business to keep up sensible Communion with God: and to grow into an humble familiarity with him, and so to maintain it: And if by reason of Company, or any other necessary Divisions he was interrupted in his course, he would complain as one out of his Element, till his Spirit was recovered into a more delightfull, and free intercourse with God again. He was never so well satisfied as when he was more immediately engaged in what brought him nearer unto God: and by this means he enjoyed those Comforts more frequently, which other Christians meet with more rarely. His Faith grew up to a full Assurance: His desires into a kind of enjoyment and delight. He was oft brought into the Banqueting House, and there Christ's Banner over him was Love; and he sat down under his Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit was pleasant unto his Taste. He had frequent Visions of Glory, and our John (as that Beloved Disciple) lay in his Master's Bosom. His Lord oft called him up into the Mount to him, and let him see his excellent Glory. O the sweet foretasts that he had of those Pleasures that are at the Right Hand of God! How oft was he Feasted with the Fat things of God's House, and with Wine on the Lees well refined! This made him rejoycingly to Run the Race which was set before him▪ whether of Doing or Suffering. He was even sick of Love, and could feelingly say to the Poor and Unexperienced World, O taste and see that the Lord is good: And to Christians, Come and I will tell you what God hath done for my Soul! He could take off those aspersions which the Devil and Athiest cast upon Godliness in the power of it: He could bring sensible Demonstrations to prove a Deity, and the Reality and Excellency of Invisibles, which there ignorant Fools and Mad-men make the Subject of their Scorn: He was one that would not change his Delights with the greatest Sensualists living, and could vie Pleasures with all the Jovial Gal∣lants in the World: For which of them can say in the midst of their Jollity, This is the Pleasure that shall last for ever? Which of them can say in the midst of their Cups and Whores, I can now look Death in the Face; and this very Mo, I can be content; yea, Glad to leave these Delights, as knowing that I shall enjoy better. This young Man, in the midst of all his Worldly Comforts longed for Death, and the Thoughts of the Day of Judgment made all his enjoyments much the sweeter. O how did he long for the coming of Christ! When some discoursed of that great and ter∣rible The Day of Judgment desired. Day, he would smile, and humbly express his delight in the fore-thoughts of it. He said, What if the Day of Judgment were, as it will certainly come shortly? If I were sure that the Day of Judgment were to begin within an Hour, I should be glad with all my Heart. If at this very instant I should hear such Thundrings, and see such Lightnings as Israel did at Mount Sinai, I am persawded my very Heart would leap for Joy. But this I am confident of (through infinite Mercy) that even the Meditation of that Day hath even ravished my Soul, and the Thoughts of the cer∣tainty and nearness of it, is more refreshing unto me then the Comforts of the whole World. Surely nothing can more revive my Spirits, then to behold the blessed Je∣sus, the Joy, Life, and Beauty of my Soul. Would it not more rejoyce me then Joseph's Wagons did old Jacob? I lately Dreamed that the Day of Judgment was come: Methought that I heard terrible Cracks of Thunder, and saw dreadful
Lightnings: The Foundations of the Earth did shake, and the Heavens were rolled together as a Garment; yea, all things visible were in a Flame. Methought I saw the Graves opened, and the Earth, and the Sea giving up their dead: Methought I saw Millions of Angels, and Jesus Christ coming in the Clouds. Methought I be∣held the Ancient of Dayes fitting upon his Throne, and all other Thrones cast down. Methought I beheld him whose Garments were white as Snow, the Hair of his Head like pure Wool: His Throne was like the fiery Flame, and his Wheels as burning Fire: A fiery Stream issued and came from him: Thousands of Thousands ministred unto him, and Ten Thousand times ten Thousand stood before him; and the Judgment was set, and the Books were opened. O! But with what an Extasie of Joy was I surprized! Me∣thought it was the most Heart-raising, and Soul-ravishing sight that ever mine Eyes beheld; and thereupon I cryed out, I have waited for thy Salvation, O God; and so I mounted up into the Air, to meet my Lord in the Clouds. His Com∣forts. He was in a comfortable condition for about Three Years before he died: Not but that he had some Clouds; but he usually walked in a sweet, even, humble, serenity of Spirit, and his refreshing Joyes were more considerable then his Despondings; and though he daily questioned many of his Actions, yet did he not question his estate, but had his Heart fixed upon that Rock that neither Winds nor Waves could shake. Death de∣sired. His Senses were still so Spiritually exercised, as that he could look upon Heaven as his Countrey and Inheritance; to God as his Father; upon Christ as his Redeemer. And he counted it the highest Act of Patience to be willing to live, and a great pitch of Self-denial to be contented to be in this World, and to dwell on this side a full and eternal enjoyment of that Holy One, whom his Soul was so much in love with: He His Sick∣ness. had vehement, and most earnest desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Now the time drew on wherein his Longings should be satisfied, wherein his De∣portment was such, as those Christians which saw him, could not but admire God in him, and look upon him as one of the most singular instances of rich Grace, and bless God that their Eyes ever saw, and their Ears ever heard him. He fell into a deep Con∣sumption, which Messenger of God did not in the least damp him. Spitting Blood was no gastly sight to one that had his Eye fixed upon the Blood of Jesus. Faint Sweats did not daunt him who had alwayes such reviving Cordials at Hand. It was mat∣ter of Joy to him that he had now some Hopes that his longing desires should be satisfied. He rejoiced at Death approach∣ing. Having been a while sick, a sudden dimness seized upon his Eyes: By and by his Sight quite failed, and there was such a palpable alteration in him that he and others judged that these were Symptoms of his approaching Death; yet was he not in the least surprized hereby, but rather rejoyced to think what a Life he was going to: He looked upon Death as one of his Father's Servants, and his Friend who was sent to conduct him to his Saviour's Glorious Pallace. When he found his Body ready to faint, he called for his Mother, and said, Dear Mother, I am Dying; but I beseech you be not troubled: For I am (through Mercy) quite above the fears of Death; It is no great matter: I have nothing that troubles me but the apprehension of your Grief. I am going unto him whom I love above Life. Out of this fainting fit, the Lord was pleased a little to revive him, having some more work for him to do, before he received his Wages. For though his outward His Pati∣ence. Man decaied, yet his Inward Man was renewed Day by Day. His Graces were never more active, nor his Experiences greater. For forgetting his pains and weakness he was so swallowed up with the Contemplation of the Life to come, that he had scarce leisure to think of his Sickness. For diverse Weeks together he was never heard to speak the least Word savoured of complaint, or weariness under the Hand of God, ex∣cept his eager desire to be with Christ be counted complaining, and his hast to be in Heaven be called Impatience. His Faith grew exceedingly, and his Love was an∣swerable, and his Joyes were equal to both. O the high and Divine expressions that dropped from his Mouth! It was a very Heaven upon Earth to hear a Man admiring God at such a rate. His Soul for the Joy unspea∣kable. Six last Weeks was almost alwayes filled with those Joyes unspeakable and full of Glory, which the Apostle mentioneth. How oft would he cry out, O that I could but let you know what I now feel! O that I could shew you what I see! O that I could express the Thousandth part of that sweetness that now I find in Christ! You would all then think it worth the while to make it your Business to be Religious. O my Dear Friends, you little Life feared. think what a Christ is worth upon a Death-bed! I would not for a World; nay; for a Million of Worlds be now without a Christ, and a Pardon. I would not for a World live any longer: The very Thought of a possibility to recover makes me to tremble.
One that came to visit him, told him, that it might please God to raise him up again, and that he had seen many a weaker Man restored to Health, and that lived many a good year after. And do you think (said he) to please  by such discourse as this? No, Friend, you are much mistaken in me, if you think that the Thoughts of Life and Health, and the World, are pleasing to me. The World hath quite lost its Excellency in my Judgment Contempt of the world. O how poor and contemptible a thing is it in all its Glory, compared with the Glory of that Invisible World which I now live in the sight of! And as for Life, Christ is my Life, Health and Strength, and I know that I shall have another kind of Life when I leave this. I tell you, it would more incomparably please me, if you should say to me, You are no Man for this World: You cannot possibly hold out long: Before to morrow you will be in Eter∣nity. Death long∣ed for. I tell you, I do so long to be with Christ, that I could be content to be cut in pieces, and to be put to the most exquisite Torments, so I might but Die, and be with Christ. Oh how sweet is Jesus! Come Lord Jesus; come quickly. Death, do thy worst. Death hath lost its terribleness. Death, it is nothing: I say, Death is nothing (through Grace) to me. I can as easily Die as shut mine Eyes, or turn my Head and sleep. I long to be with Christ, I long to Die. His Mother and Brethren standing by, he said Dear Mother, I beseech you as earnestly as ever I desired any thing of you in my life, that you would chearfully give me up to Christ: I beseech you do not hinder me now I am going to Rest and Glory. I am afraid of your Prayers, lest they will pull one way, and mine another. Then turning to his Brethren, he thus spake unto them; I charge you all, Do not pray for my life any more; you do me wrong if you do. O the Glory! The unspeakable Glory that I Joy un∣speakable. behold! my Heart is full: my Heart is full. Christ smiles, and I cannot chuse but smile: Can you find, in your Heart to stop me who am now going to the compleat and eternal Enjoyment of Christ? Would you keep me from my Crown? The Arms of my Blessed Saviour are open to embrace me: The Angels stand ready to carry my Soul into his Bosom. O! did you but see what I see, you would all cry out with me, How long (Dear Lord) Come Lord Jesus; Come quickly. O why are his Chariot wheels so long a coming! A Reverend, Godly, and Judicious Minister came often to visit him, discoursing of the Excellency of Christ, and the Glory of the Invisible World: Sir, (said he) I feel something of Tasts of Heaven. it. My Heart is as full as it can hold in this lower State: I can hold no more here. O that I could but let you know what I feel! As this Minister was praying with him, his Soul was ra∣vished with the abundant incomes of Light, Life, and Love, so that he could scarce bear it, nor the thoughts of staying any longer in the World from it; longing to be in such a condition wherein he should yet have more Grace, and more Comfort, and be better able to bear that weight of Glory; some manifestations whereof did even sink his weak Body; and had he not been sustained by God's great Power, his very Joyes would have over∣whelmed him. Whilst he was in these Extasies of Joy and Love, he was wont to cry out: Who am I Lord, Who am I, that thou shouldest be mindful of me! Why me, Lord, Why Free Grace admired. me! And pass by Thousands to look upon such a wretch as I! O what shall I say unto thee, O thou Preserver of Men! O why me, Lord, Why me! O blessed, and for ever blessed be Free Grace! How is it, Lord, that thou shouldest manifest thy self unto me, and not unto others? Even so Father, because it seems good in thine Eyes. Thou wilt have Mercy, because thou wilt have Mercy. And if thou wilt look upon such a poor Worm, who can hinder? Who would not love thee! O blessed Father! O how sweet and gracious hast thou been unto me! O that he should have me in his Thoughts of Love, before the Foundations of the World! And thus he went on admiring and adoring God in a most high and heavenly manner. He was wonderfully taken with God's goodness to him in sending that Aged and Experien∣ced Minister to him, to help him in his last great work upon Earth. Who am I (said he) that God should send to me a Messenger, one of a Thousand to assist me thus! Though he most∣ly was in a Joyful, Triumphant frame of Spirit, yet sometimes he had some small intermis∣sions, in which he would cry out, Hold out Faith and Patience: Yet a little while and your work is done. And when he found not his Heart wound up to the highest pitch of Thank∣fulness, Admiration and Love, he would with great sorrow thus bemoan himself. And what's the matter now (O my Soul!) What, wilt thou; canst thou thus unworthily sleight this admirable and astonishing Condescention of God to thee! Seems it a small matter that the great Jehovah should deal thus familiarly with his Worm? And wilt thou pass this over as a common mercy? What meanest thou, O my Soul, that thou dost not constantly adore and praise this rare, strong, and unspeakable Love! Is it true, O my Soul! doth God deal fa∣miliarly with Man, and are his humble, zealous, and constant Love, Praise and Service too good for God! Why art thou not, O my Soul, swallowed up every moment with this free, unpa∣rallel'd,
everlasting Love! And then he brake out again into an other Triumpant Ex∣tasie of Praise and Joy, thus: Stand astonished ye Heavens, and wonder O ye Angels at this infinite Grace! Was Free Grace admired. ever any under Heaven more beholding to free Grace then I? Doth God use to deal thus with his Creatures? Admire him for ever and ever, O ye Redeemed Ones! O those Joyes of which I have the taste! Those Everlasting Joyes that are at his Right Hand for Ever∣more! Eternity, Eternity it self, is too short to Praise this God in. O bless the Lord with me, and let us shout for Joy, and boast in the God of our Salvation. O help me to Praise the Lord for his Mercy endures for ever. One of his Brethren (that had reaped much good by him) praying with him, and seeing him (as he judged) near to his Dissolution, desired that the Lord would be pleased to continue those astonishing, and Soul-supporting Comforts to the last Mo∣ment of his Breath; and that he might go from one Heaven to another; from Grace and Joy imperfect, to perfect Grace and Glory. And when his work was done here, to give him (if it were his Will) the most easie and Triumphant Passage to Rest; and that he might have an abundant entrance administred into the Everlasting Kingdom of of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. Prayer being ended, he brake out into a wonderful Passion of Joy, crying out, Amen, Amen, Amen: Hallalujah. I (saith mine Authour) do verily believe that it exceeds the highest Rhetorick, to set out to the Life what this Heavenly Person did then deliver. We want words to declare it, and so did he; for he saw things unutterable. He talked as if he had been in the third Heavens, and brake out into such words as these: O He is come! He his come! O how Sweet, How Glorious is the Blessed Jesus! How shall I do to speak o unspea∣kable. the Thousandth part of his Praises! O for Words, to set out a little of that Excellency! But it is unexpressible. O how Excellent, Glorious, and Lovely is the precious Jesus! He is sweet, He is altogether Lovely! And now I am sick of Love; He hath ravished my Soul with his Beauty! I shall Die sick of Love. O my Friends, stand by and wonder: Come look upon a dying Man and Wonder: I cannot my self but wonder: was there ever a greater kindness. Was there ever more sensible manife∣stations of rich Grace! O why me, Lord why me! Sure this is a Kin to Heaven; and if I were never to enjoy more then this, it were well worth all the Torments that Men and Devils could invent, to come through even an Hell to such unspeakable Joyes as these. If this be Dying, Dying is sweet: Let no true Christian ever be afraid of Dying. O Death is sweet to me! This Bed is soft! Christ's Arms and Kisses, his Smiles and Visits, sure they would turn Hell into Heaven. O that you did but see and feel what I do! Come and behold a Dying Man more chearful then you ever saw any Healthful Man in the midst of his sweetest Enjoyments! O Sirs, Worldly Pleasures are poor, pittiful, sorry things, compa∣red with one glimps of this Glory, which shines so strongly into my Soul! O, Why should any of you be so sad, when I am so glad? This, This is the Hour that I have waited for. About Eight and Forty Hours before his Death, his Eyes were dim, and his Sight Death ap∣proaching. much failed; his Jaws trembled, and his Feet were cold, and all the Symptoms of Death were upon him, and his remoat Parts were almost Dead and Sensless; And yet, even then his Joyes (if possible) were greater still. He had so many Fits of Joy unspeakable, that he seemed to be in a continued Act of Love and Praise. He spake as one that was just entering into the Gates of the New Jerusalem: His greatest part was already in Heaven: Not a word dropped from his Mouth but breathed of Instructi∣ons. Christ and Heaven. O, what encouragement did he give to them that stood by to follow hard after God, and to follow Christ in an Humble, Believing, Zealous course of Life, and of adding one Degree of Grace to another, and to use all Dili∣gence to make their Calling and Election sure: Saying, that then they also should find a glorious Passage into Blessed Eternity. But the most of his work was Praise: A Hundred times over he admired the bot∣tomless Love of God to him, Crying, O why me, Lord, Why me? And then he would give Instructions to them that came to see him. He was scarce ever silent, the Love Christ dear∣ly loved. of Christ, and Souls constraining him to do all the good that possibly he could: And that Holy Minister that was so much with him, perswaded him to be content to live a little longer, and patiently to wait Gods leisure, who sure had something for him to do, which was yet undone: Some word of Exhortation to some poor Soul that hi∣therto was forgotten. The Truth is, he was so filled with the Love of Christ that he could scarce bear to be absent from him for a moment. He knew that he could be capable of recei∣ving
greater Glory in Heaven, then he could here. Every Evening he used of his Friends, Hoping that he should see them no more till the Morning of the Resurrecti∣on: And he desired them to be careful to make sure of a comfortable meeting at their Father's House in the other World. When Ministers or private Christians came to him, he would beg of them that His Praises. they would spend all the time that they had with him in Praises. O (said he) Help me to Praise God, I have now now nothing else to do from this time to Eternity, but to praise and love God. I have what my Soul desires upon Earth. I cannot tell what to pray for, but what I have gratiously given in. The wants that are capable of being supplied in this World, are supplied. I want but one thing, and that is, a speedy lift to Heaven. I ex∣pect no more here: I desire no more: I cannot bear more. O Praise, Praise, Praise that infinite boundless Love that hath, to a wonder, looked upon my Soul, and hath done more for me, then for Thousands of his Dear Children. O Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name! O help me, help me, O my Friends, to Praise, and Admire him who hath done such astonishing things, and wonders for my Soul! He hath pardoned all my Sins, and hath filled me with his Goodness: He hath given me Grace and Glory, and no good thing hath he withheld from me. Come, help me with Praises, yet all is too little. Come help me all ye Mighty and Glorious Angels, who are so well skil'd in this Heavenly work of Praise! Praise him, all ye Creatures upon Earth: Let every thing that hath being help me to Praise God: Halla∣lujah, hallalujah, hallalujah! Praise is now my work, and I shall be engaged in this sweet Work forever. Bring the Bible: turn to David's Psalms, and let us sing a Psalm of Praise. Come let us lift up our Voices in the Praises of the Most High. I will Sing with you as long as my Breath doth last; And when I have none I shall do it better. Then turning to some of his Friends that were weeping; he desired them to Re∣joyce, rather then to weep upon his account. It was a wonder that a Man so weak could speak so much: But the Joy of the Lord was his strength. In hi Sickness those Scriptures which he took most delight in were the Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Six∣teenth, and Seventeenth Chapters of St John's Gospel. Also the Fifty fourth of the Prophecy of Isaiah, was very delightful to him: with abundance of Joy he oft re∣peated those Words, With Everlasting Mercies, will I gather you. He commended the study of the Promises to Believers, and desired them that they would be sure to make good their claim to them, and then they might come to the Wells of Consolati∣on, and there drink their fill. According to his desire most of the time was spent in Praises, and he would still be calling, More Praises yet: O help me to Praise God, I have now nothing else to do! I have done with Prayer, and all other Ordinances. I have almost done conversing with Mortals: I shall presently behold Christ himself that died for me, and loved me, and washed me in his own Blood. I shall before a few Hours be over be in Eternity, singing the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb. I shall presently stand upon Mount Sion, with an innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and with Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant: I shall hear the Voice of much People, and be one amongst them, which shall say Hallelujah, Glory, Salvation, Honour, and Power unto the Lord our God: and again we shall say Hallelujah. And yet a very lit∣tle while, and I shall Sing unto the Lamb, a Song of Praise, saying, Worthy art thou to receive Praise, who wast slain, and hast Redeemed us unto God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and hast made us unto our God, Kings, and Priest, and we shall Reign with thee for ever and ever. Methinks I stand, as it were, with one Foot in Heaven, and the other upon Earth Methinks I hear the Mellody of Heaven, and by Faith I see the Angels waiting to car∣ry my Soul to the Bosom of Jesus, and I shall be for ever with the Lord in Glory. And who can choose but rejoyce in all this? Much of this he repeated over and over with greater Affections then can be expressed by Words. The Day before his Death, he looked earnestly upon his Brother James, who stood by very sad, whom he judged to be putting up some Ejaculations unto God upon his account, to whom he said, I thank thee, Dear Brother, for thy Love: Thou art now praying for me: And I know that thou lovest me dearly: But Christ loves me ten Thousand times more then thou doest. Come and kiss me, Dear Brother, before I Die: And so with his cold dying Lips he kissed him, saying, I shall go before, and I hope thou shalt follow after to Glory. Though he slept but very little for some Nights, yet he was not
in the least impaired in his Intellectuals; his Actions were all decent, and his Dis∣course, to a Spiritual understanding, highly rational, solid, and Divine: And so he continued to the last Minute of his Breath. A few Hours before his Death he called all his Relations, and Brethren together, He blesseth his Relati∣ons. that he might give them one solemn warning more, and Bless them, and Pray for them, as his breath and strength would give him leave; which he did with abundance of Authority Affection, and Spirituality, as follows. First, He thanked his Dear Mother for her tender Love to him, and desired that His Mother. she might be in Travel to see Christ formed in the Souls of the rest of her Children, see of the Travel of her Soul, and meet them with Joy in that Great Day. Then be charged all his Brethren and Sisters in general, as they would answer it His Eldest Brother. before God, that they should carry themselves dutifully to their dear Mother. As for his Eldest Brother (at whose House he lay Sick) his Prayer was, that he might be swallowed up of Christ, and with Love to Souls, and be more and more Exem∣plary in his Life, successful in his Ministry, and that he might finish his course with Joy. His next Brother was Andrew, a Citizen of London, whom (though absent) His second Brother. he thus Blessed: The God of Heaven remember my poor Brother in London. The Lord make him truly Rich, in giving him the Pearl of great Price, and make him a Fellow Citizen with the Saints, and of the Houshold of God: the Lord deliver him from the Sins of that City: May the World be kept out of his Heart, and Christ dwell there. O that he may be, as his Name is, A strong Man, and that I may meet him with Joy. Then called he for his Brother James (to whom he hoped that God had made him His third Brother a Spiritual Father) to whom he thus spake, Brother James, I hope that God hath given thee a goodly Heritage: The Lines are fallen to thee in Pleasant Places. The Lord is thy Portion. I hope the Lord hath shewed unto thee the worth of a Christ. Hold on, (dear Brother) Christ, Heaven, and Glory are worth striving for. The Lord give thee more abundance of his Grace. His next Brother Abraham was called, to whom he thus spake: The Blessing of the His fourth Brother. God of Abraham rest upon thee: The Lord make thee a Father of many Spiritual Children. His Fifth Brother was Joseph, whom he thus Blessed: Let him bless thee (O Joseph) who blessed him that was Seperated from his Brethren. O that his Everlasting Arms His fifth Brother. may take hold of thee! It is enough if yet thou maist live in his Sight. My Heart hath been working towards thee, Poor Joseph, and I am not without Hopes, that the Arms of the Almighty will embrace thee. The God of thy Father bless thee with Blessings of Heaven above. The next was his Sister Mary, to whom he said; Poor Sister Mary, thy Body is weak, His first Sister. and thy Daies will be filled with bitterness: Thy Name is Marah: The Lord sweeten all with his Grace and Peace, and give thee Health in thy Soul. Be patient; make sure of Christ, and all is well. Then his Sister Sarah was called, whom he thus blessed: Sister Sarah, thy Body is strong His second Sister. and healthful; O that thy Soul may be so too! The Lord make thee, first a wise Virgin, and then a Mother in Israel: A Pattern of Modesty, Humility and Holiness. Then his Brother Jacob was called, whom he thus blessed: The Lord make thee an His sixth Brother. Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile. O that thou mayest learn to wrestle with God, and like a Prince, prevail, and not go without the Blessing! Lastly, He prayed for his youngest Brother Benjamin, who was but an Infant. Poor His seventh Brother. little Benjamin; O that the Father of the Fatherless would take care of thee, Poor Child, that thou which never sawest thy Father upon Earth, mayest see him with Joy in Heaven! The Lord be thy Father and Portion: Mayest thou prove the Son of thy Mothers Right Hand, and the Joy of her Age. O that none of us all may be found among the unconverted at the Day of Judgment! O that every one of us may appear with our Honoured Father, and Dear Mother, before Christ with Joy, that they may say, Lord, here are we, and the Children which thou hast graciously given us! O that we may live to God here, and live with him hereafter. And now my Dear Mother, Brethren and Sisters, farewel: I leave you for a while, and commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among them which are sanctified. And now Dear Lord, my Work is done; I have finished my course; I have fought the
good Fight, and henceforth there remaineth for me a Crown of Righteousness! Now come Dear Lord Jesus; come quickly. The afore-mentioned godly Minister came now to give him his last Visit; and when he spake to him, his Heart was in a mighty Flame of Love and Joy, which drew Tears of Joy from this Minister, and was amazed to hear a Man just a dying, talk as if he had been with Jesus, and came from the immediate presence of God. O the smiles that were then in his Face, and the unspeakable Joy that was in his Heart! O the Praises, the Triumphant Praises that were in his Mouth! And every one must speak Praises that were about him, or else they made a Jar in his Harmony. A little before his Death in the Prayer, or rather Praises, which were returned for him, he was so wrapped up with Admiration and Joy, that he could scarce forbear shouting for Joy. In the conclusion of that Duty, with abundance of Faith and Fervency, he said aloud, Amen, Amen. And now his longing Desires shall be soon satisfied. He sees Death coming apace to do his office; his Jaws were loosened more and more, and quivered greatly. His Hands and Feet were as cold as Clay. A cold Sweat was upon him. But O! how glad was he when he felt his Spirit just a going! Though the pangs of Death were strong, yet that far more exceeding, and Eternal Weight of Glory, made him bear those bitter pains with much patience and courage. In the extremity of his pains, he desired his Eldest Brother to lay him a little lower, and to take away one Pillow from him, that he might Die with the more ease: His Brother replied, That he durst not for a World do any thing that might hasten his Death a moment. Then he was well satisfied, and resigned up himself wholly unto God's disposal. And after a few minutes, with a sudden motion, gathering up all his strength, he gave himself a little turn on one side, and in the twinkling of an Eye departed to the Lord, sleeping in Jesus. Aged between Twenty Three, and Twenty Four, in the month of June, An. Christi 1657 The Life and Death of Mr. John Machin, who Died Anno Christi 1664. JOhn Machin was the Son of John Machin of Seabridge, near New-Castle, in the County His Paren∣tage. of Stafford. His Mother Katherine was of the Vernons of Audley, in the same County. His Father was a wise man, of a good Estate, and an Antient Free-holder: That Estate of Seabridge having continued in the Name of the Machins, from the 23d of King Henry the Eighth, and our John was the Seventh Generation of the Name that have inherited that Estate. This John was born at Seabridge, Octob. 2. Anno Christi 1624. and Baptized the same Birth. day at New-Castle. He was the only Son of his said Parents, and was therefore carefully brought up by them in his Youth at the best Schools that were thereabout; especially under pious Mr. Orme of New-Castle, and deservedly famous Mr. John Ball of Whitmore, who Education. brought up several Youths in School-Learning, together with his own Sons. Our John was first intended to be sent to the Inns of Court; but his Parents tenderness of him, and unwillingness to part with him to such a distance, was, probably, a hinderance of that design. Whereupon being taken from School, he was imployed about Husbandry for some years, and followed some youthful Recreations. In particular, he was given to Cock-fights, whereupon himself (in some Memoirs) wrote thus: Twenty years did I live the Devil's Bond-slave, which indeed is Time lost, and not Living in a good sense, (Eph. 2. 1, 2, 3.) And he often said to one of his Dear Friends, as they wre walking together about Seabridge, O with what an heart full of vanity have I in daies past gone this way! And at another time. This way have I followed sin, where I now follow Christ: I am now ungoing, and unravelling my sinful Journies: But I that have tryed both, find these the better waies. He was then very ready to hearken to any motion of Marriage made to him, yet did not then close with any. One at Ʋtoxiter he was nearest to a conclusion with, but she dying in the mean time, it proved an occasion of his going to the Ʋniversity He goes to Cambridg. For his Father was induced, by the advice of a Friend to let him go to Cambridge for a Quarter of a Year: Scarce intending that he should be admitted into any Colledge, but to abide there for some short time to learn farther breeding; and he gladly accepted the Motion, and went thither in December, Anno Christi, 1645. And there finding some Kindred and Acquaintance, he was admitted into Jesus Colledge.
The first Year it pleased God to make a gracious change in him, of which he thus His Conver∣sion. saith: The Time of my Conversion was in the Twenty first Year of my Age (as I remem∣ber) The Place was Jesus Colledge in Cambridge. The Texts that most overturned me were, Eph. 6. 12, 13, 14 & 1 Cor. 16. 22. The one Preached on by Dr. Hill, the other by a Stranger. He often shewed some of his Acquaintance the Seat in which he was first wrought upon, and told them early be loved the sight of it, and that ever after he chose to sit in that Seat, rather than in any other, if possibly he could croud into it. This was one evidence, among many others, of the eminent success which God gave to that faithful plain Preaching of that Holy Man of God, Dr. Hill, who went over that whole Epistle to the Ephesians, in a Lecture, ever Lord's Day in the Morning at six of the Clock, which he continued for several Years. Learned Dr. Arrowsmith also about the same time Preached over a succinct Body of Divinity in Aphorisms in St. John's Colledge, in the Evenings of the Lord's Day (part whereof is since published) of which our John hath often said, That he found his Heart so moulded to the Truths delivered, upon the hearing of them, that it was greatly to his Spiritual Joy, and satisfaction. No sooner did he find this blessed change in his own Heart, but his Friends at Sea∣bridg Fruits of it. found it in his Letters, which spake the new frame of his Soul, and were most instant and Pathetical perswasions to his Father and Mother and Sisters to look after their Souls, and to mind the things of Eternity: which also he seconded afterwards by his Holy, and Exemplary conversation, and Society with them; so that he was an Instrument to Convert all his three Sisters and that early, unto God: and to pre∣vail very hopefully with his Parents in like manner, as appeared afterwards. Whilst he was in the Ʋniversity he so followed his Studies, that being of ripe Years, and having very good natural Parts, and religiously making Conscience of his ex∣pence His Indu∣stry. of Time, he made a good progress in Learning, and was not inferior to any in the Colledge of his standing when he left the Ʋniversity. And though, in his Preaching, he made no shew of Learning, as some do: Yet he made good use of it, and understood well the necessity of it for the enabling of him to his work. About the time of his Great Grandfathers Death, which in March, Anno Christi, 1647. he was sick of a dangerous Spotted Feavour at Cambridge, and that unto His Sick∣ness. Death, as himself, and most about conclude, which he thus mentions: That it was in Jesus Colledge, in a middle Chamber, next to the Chappel on the Right Hand: But (saith he) God having some work for me to do, had Mercy on me (Phil. 2. 27.) saved me, and brought me back again: To say with the Psalmist, Thou hast delivered my Soul from Death: Wilt thou not deliver my Feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the Land of the Living? Psal. 56. 13. And again, I shall not Die, but Live, and declare the works of the Lord: The Lord hath chastened me sore, but he hath not given me over unto Death, &c. Psal. 118. 17, 18. In this Sickness the Lord dealt most powerfully with his Soul, planting therein great and firm resolutions, of serving his God eminently in case of Recovery, which accordingly (by the assistance of his Grace) he faithfully performed: And hereup∣on he set up a meeting of some Schollars for Religious purposes, which continued in the Colledge for several Years after his Departure, to the restraining (at least) of Piety. some, and to the great Spiritual advantage of many others; which he managed with such Prudence and Caution, that they could not easily become the Nurserys of Faction, or false Doctrine, what ever the Ignorance, and Malice of sensless frothy Persons did slanderously vent to the contrary, We may see a farther account of him, and of his His Pru∣dence. usefulness in the Colledge in these few Clauses in several Letter that were sent to him from some worthy Members of that Society: Dear Friend, I received your loving Letters, which breath nothing but Piety and good His Com∣mendation. affections. The next Companion to him who is both the Founder, a Fellow and President of the Colledge of Graces, and Comforts of Believers, is he whom God hath warmed with the same Principles to be instrumental for the enlivening them in others—I bless God the So∣ciety you were the Founder of in the Colledge, do grow hoth in Number and Mea∣sure.—And you have here my real Thanks, in that you have been instrumental in set∣ting Religious meetings on Foot, wherein you reap much of the answer of your Prayers, in that they carry it so Prudently yet, as I hear nothing but what Malice and Guilt tax them withal.—In all my serious Thoughts I see yo represented to me, either as a Pattern of strict walking, or of upbraiding my little serviceableness; But alwayes a Blessing and Com∣fort in this, that I have known you, and the manner of your Life, and that I reap the
benefit of your Prayers and best Affections, which is a Treasury I alwayes desired to prize above all the Jewels in the World, &c. And from an other eminent Person thus: My dear and precious Friend: I received yours, and your Lines sweetly refresh me. O that I could hear oftner from you: It glads my Soul to see your constancy. O that your Example might be a Motive and Incentive to me, to be more steady, setled, and fixed up∣on God in the wayes of God, &c. These are but a taste of the many Letters he received from Cambridge, wherein several do bless the Lord that ever they saw his Face. But his Activity in God's Service was not a little disturbed by the Malice of Tempta∣tions. Satan, who frequently after his Recovery from Sickness, disturbed and tormented him dreadfully in his Dreams, so that he hath often, immediatly upon his waking, run in his Wastcoat into his Study, and betaken himself to his earnest and servent Prayers against that subtile and mischievous Fiend. Anno Christi, 1649: he Commenced Bachiler of Arts, after which he went into He is Bat∣cheler of Arts. Ordained. the Countrey, and spent part of a Year among his Friends, and in visiting some Neighbour Congregations where the Ministry of the Word was wanting. The same Year he was Ordained Minister at Whitchurch in Shropshire; before which he en∣gaged all the Prayers that possibly he could, not only of Friends near-hand, but of some that were far distant, for a Blessing upon that Ordinance: And when we con∣sider how Pathetically he engaged them (Thus in one of his Letters: Pray and pre∣vail for us) what a conjuration of Prayers there was in several places upon that Day, and the rich Crop, and Harvest reaped afterwards, surely it deserves the reflection of those Ministers, who never won a Soul to Christ, from what Principles, in what manner, and for what ends they first entred into this surest Function. Though he was not disposed for the present to settle in any place, yet was he un∣willing to go about his work without Ordination; and that which induced him to continue unfixed for a space, was his enlarged desire to do good to Souls, and that not only of his Kindred and Friends, but also of all Neigbours so much, and so far as pos∣sibly Zeal. he could. He even travelled in Birth for such as had not seen his, that Christ might be formed in them: And the largness of his Heart herein was frequently expressed in his most earnest Prayers unto God for the enlarging of his Kingdom in Countys, Towns, and Families, which he would name with the greatest Affections both in his Prayers and Letters, oft crying out, O that all Staffordshire and Cheshire might be saved! By this time he had Acquaintance, yea, and intimacy with all that were eminent for Piety in all places thereabouts, and his great care was to stir up the Grace of God in them. And he was extraordinarily qualified and prepared by the Lord for this work, and that in a special juncture of time when the heat of Controversies were managed by Sword, Pen, and Pulpit, which had sadly prevailed to justle out the lively Sense of the main things wherein all were agreed: And diverse Ministers were so taken off from these greater matters by other work which the Enemy had found them, that to Preach Death and Judgment, of Christ and Conversion were al∣most new things to many of the People. But this good Man was singularily fitted, to recal that great Work back again into the Hearts and Hands of his Brethren, him∣self having never engaged into the Controversies of Church or State: And set out with all his might upon the main things, and did promote and drive on the Work of Conversion where ever he came. And truly his Success was great: For in his Fathers Family in Seabridg, the Lord made him eminently instrumental in the Conversion of his three Sisters. His Parents too greatly favoured the wayes of God: and much furthered him in his work, and were chearful entertainers of such good People as upon sundry Occasions resorted thither: And there was such an habituated course of gracious Converse set up in the Family, by his staying with them the first Year; that an eminent Minister at his first coming thither, beholding their Order, Zeal, and forwardness in Christ, could not forbear to insist the next Day upon those words of Moses, Numb. 11. 29. Enviest thou for my sake? Which was the result of that dealing, he was forced to with his own Heart upon that occasion. And this Oyntment upon Aarons Head, ran down to the Skirts of his Cloathing: For he was a precious Savour to the very poor Ser∣vants of his Father's House, with whom he was unweariedly importunate to labour for Holiness, and he prevailed with some of them, which was a notable presage of the future success of his Ministry upon others. Himself takes occasion to write thus concerning his Father: My Father John Ma∣chin
did more for our Family than his Progenitors, building both the House and Barns from the Ground, &c. But most of all he may be remembred for bringing up me his Son to, and at the Ʋniversity, who was (through grace instrumental to bring the Gospel in its power into our Family, which was more Glory to the same then if the Materials of the House had been all turned into pure Gold, whereof let these Scriptures (upon the Chimny Stone in the Parlour) be Witnesses, where it may be said, Blessed be he and they who brought his Name hither to Record it. To God alone be the whole Glory. The Scriptures upon that Stone were these: Gen. 28. 15-22. 2 Chron. 6. 7-42. 2 Sam. 7. 18.-25. 1 Chron. 29. 10-20. Psal. 116. 1. 12.-19. Psal. 118. 17. Gen. 32. 10. Jer. 30. 21. Ezek. 48. 35. 1 Sam. 7. 12. Exod. 17. 14, 15. Exod. 20. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 34. 1 Chron. 28. 9. His usual way after Preaching was to Repeat, and to assemble together as many as Industry. he could to the Place where he lodged, and their to spend as much time as he was able, in pressing things farther upon them, and in holy and pertinent Discourses, with unspeakable heat and vigour; which made one of his Kindred say, That he liked his Cosin Machin well, but that he made his House a Chapple when he came to him. All this time he was unfixed, as himself wrote to a Friend of his in Cambridge, thus: I am yet placeless, Charities Servant, desired to many Places, but in part resol∣ved Charity to Souls. to fix at Ashburn for every other Sabbath, reserving the other for the service of Ne∣cesity and Charity, which may be found in these Parts. And this he did accordinly, as himself hath left upon Record. In the beginning of the year, 1650. (saith he) I was called to Ashburn in Darby-shire, where God was with me two Years, and though my labours were not in the Town so successful as I desired, yet I had God's presence much comforting my Soul, and the Souls of many Christian Friends there about. During his abode there he was with a Quaker upon his Death-bed (presently af∣ter A Quaker. the springing up of that Sect in Stafford-shire) and the more earnestly he prayed with the sick Person, the more he raged: which was an Argument to him, and to several other of the Company then present that Quakerism was a Degree of Pos∣session. Whilst he continued at Ashburn he was a painful and laborious Preacher, and very useful, and all his spare Dayes he laid out to the utmost advantage of the Gospel, by forecasting for Heavenly work in the Moor-lands, and other dark Corners in Stafford∣shire, where the Gospel in the power of it, had scarce ever come before: So that he might truly say, with St. Paul, that he gloried not in another Mans Line: he sowed where few had effectually sowed before, nor did they then but by his procurement. There was no Man like minded in those Parts, who did so naturally care for the state of Souls: For indeed, he sought not his own, but the things of Jesus Christ. His man∣ner Zeal. was, to engage his Brethren in the Ministry that were intimate with him, and that knew the sincerity of his Heart, and his gracious Design herein, to meet him in those Parts, and to Preach at several places near to each other, sometimes Three or Four Dayes together: And the People were ordinarily so tractable, that they (to his great Joy) would flock from place to place after the means of Grace: and he had the comfortable Testimony of God's approving his Work, in the great good that ma∣ny Souls received thereby. See his heavenly Spirit by this Letter which he wrote to one of the Ministers Wives that thought her Husband too long from her, when he was imployed with him in this work, in July, Anno Christi, 1652. Heavenly-mindedness My dear Friend (saith he) I do heartily bless our God for what he hath done for you and especially for your Soul. I pray you believe that you heard these words following as coming out of the Mouth which first spake them, Psal. 27. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy Heart. Wait, I say, on the Lord: And say in Faith as you may in his Language also, Psal. 138. 8. The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me: Thy mercy, O Lord endureth for ever, &c. It is to me a great sign what the Lord hath done for you, that you are so willing to part with your (I know) dear Husband, for the Lord's sake, and his works sake, but He is, and it is worthy. Think still it is to the Lord: and should a Husband be between a gracious Heart, and Christ our Lord? God forbid that we should think so, who have had already in Hand for every Step, Word, and Thought for him, from him more weight and worth, then a Wedg of Ophir's Gold, besides those Thousands of Years in Glory, which are yet in Reversion, &c. And werein I cannot thank you and him, my Lord shall: For else his Words fail, and I will complain, as Heb. 6. 18. 2 Chron. 25. 9.
After two Years stay at Ashburn, the Lord cut out work for him elsewhere; and he saw no reasons why he might not part from them: Concerning which he thus He goes to Atherston. writes. From Ashburn I was called to Atherston in Warwick-shire, where I spent one Year in a Lecturers place, and the Lord did abundantly Crown my poor pains on a sud∣den with Conversion-work, which made me say, as Cant. 6. 12. Or ever I was aware my Soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadab. But I saw not the Lord's mind, and will to continue me there, in which I saw the Lord's, and for the time was content; for I wanted nothing, having a Seabrig-home for supply: And I had my Hearts desire in Back to Seabridge. oportunities to extend my Labours in Stafford-shire and otherwise, some Lords Dayes, and many Week Dayes, no one gain-saying: which I saw was for the destruction of the De∣vils work, and an aking Tooth he carried against me: But two things stay'd Thought in my Travels from Place to Place, and House to House: My Saviours leading the Way, (Act. 10. 38.) And this: the more the Devil hates me, the more the Lord loves me. This Year was the time wherein he should have Commenced Master of Arts, which also he inclined to do, chiefly to give Testimony of his respect to Learning, and the Schools thereof, in a time wherein too many decryed them: But his Estate being enough to make him a Compounder, whereby some Extraordinary charges would be expected from him; more then he could well spare: And with this con∣sideration he sat down, thinking that he might imploy that money more to the Ho∣nour of God, and the Gospel, then to part with it for the Honour of a Degree, though he could willingly have been at the single charge upon the former account. Concerning his Remove to Astbury in Cheshire, himself thus writes: I was ordered, and To Astbury. and called to Astbury in Cheshire, Novemb. 17. Anno Christi 1652. But exprest not my full consent till the Spring following, at which time I left Atherston. About this time his Father Died, of which he thus saith; He Died March the 12th. An∣no His Fathers Death. Christi 1652. Being the Sabbath Day, about Ten of the Clock at Night, and in the 55th year of his Age, with these words in his mouth, (Psal. 39. 5.) Behold thou hast made my Daies as an hand-breadth, and mine Age is as nothing before thee. Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. And said to his Mother and Sisters, who stood by weeping; Why do you weep? you have a God that will be better to you than Ten Thousand Husbands and Fathers He wisely observed, when such an unthought of loss befel him, how he was employed▪ at that instant; concerning which he saith; At the time when my Father Died I was at Prayer, and that with the most remarkable impressions I ever had, both in pleading for mercy for him, and on a sudden I submitted to the Lord's Determination. Many observable warn∣ings he had from the Lord of this Event before it came to pass: As, his serious and solemn Exposition, and Application of that portion of Scripture, Job 21. 23, 24. in the Family, before any Sickness appeared (March the 9th.) Secondly, His earnestness to know the state of his Fathers Soul before they parted the next morning: As also to thank him for his Love and Care in his behalf, and to understand his Mind and Will concerning himself and his outward Estate, whilst he yet continued in perfect health. Thirdly, The Day fol∣lowing, having occasion to send home, he, by the Messenger, recommended to his Father that Scripture, Isa. 38. 1, 2, 3. These, with several other notable passages, and pious im∣provements he made hereof, which gave him hopes that the sad Providence was in Love to him, and in mercy to his Father, unto whom he could not come time enough to see him in the Land of the Living. Not long after he removed to Astbury, and changed his condition, concerning which himself thus writes: The good Hand of my everloving Father, so disposing it, I had some Ac∣quaintance He Marries. in Derbyshire, and I especially found one forward in the Profession at Mickleaver, near Darby, who might be to me as Rebecca was to Isaac, by Name, Jane Butler (Daughter to John Butler) on whom my Thoughts much settled, with submission to my heavenly Father's Will, and she became my Wife, Septemb. 29. Anno Christi 1653. at Utoxeter; whom God gave to me, and with her what I expected in an humble, gracious Woman, (Prov. 31. 11, 12. & 29. 30, 31.) Her price was above Rubies; her portion of outward Estate very considerable. His managing of this weighty business, was in such an holy and heavenly manner, that all their meetings on that account were improved to the utmost advantage of both their Souls; and their Marriage was fixed upon one of his Lecture-Daies, where two of his Bre∣thren Preached, and joyned in the solemnization thereof. And after two Daies stay with his Wife, he went a long Journey about the work of the Lord for many Daies following, whereby he made it evident how much the greatest worldly comforts were made subordi∣nate to God's Glory and Interest, and were so far from hindering, that he was rather en∣larged, and fitted thereby to walk in the Waies of God.
His first contrivance of setting up a Lecture, was some months before his Fathers Death; A Lecture set up. and no sooner was the Estate fallen into his hands, but he resolved to consecrate a share of it to God, and would not serve the Lord with that which cost him nothing His intentions about it, himself thus expresses; I intend a monthly Lecture to be Preached in these following Towns of greatest concourse; viz. in New-Castle, Leek, Utoxiter, Lichfield, Tamworth, Wal∣fal, Wolverhampton, Pencridge, Stafford, Eccleshall, Stone, Muckleston, in the County of Stafford, the last Friday in each month, allowing (of the Lord's fulness in my hands) thirteen shillings and four pence to the Ministers that Preach, to convert Souls, and one Shilling to be Liberallity. given to twelve of the Poorest People that come to Church: In all eight pounds twelve Shillings a year. This was the resolution of an heart engaged to him; of one that would honour the Lord with his Substance, and is J. M. July 31. Anno Christi 1652. And presently after his Fathers Death he thus wrote concerning this business: I believe that the Lord could have given him more Daies; but yet do will that 8 l. per Annum for Zeal. ever be set apart for the Gospel, out of mine own Estate, that Immortal Souls may be won, and God's Portion in the World be encreased, to be disposed as aforesaid, or as my Brethren, Mr. N. and Mr. S. my Dearest Fellow-Labourers shall judge, and find most abundantly and effectually to accomplish Christ's end and mine, saying, as (Rom. 10. 1.) My heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. This Lecture he set on foot this Summer. The first Day was at New-Castle, Aug. 4. 1653. where his two aforesaid Friends did Preach: As also the third course at Utoxiter Sept. 29. following, being the Day of his Marriage. And this business was so much in his Heart and purpose, that when some scruple was made about it in the settlement of his Land at Marriage, he wrote thus: Whether I change my condition or not, I have cause, and I call to mind my Promise to the Lord and his Gospel in the thing I intended, which I think will now be preferred before the change of my condition. And that the Holiness of his Heart, and bent of his Soul in this business may appear, he inserted these passages into his Will, which he made Novemb. 16. 1653. not two months His Will. after his Marriage, he thus writes: I commit my Soul to God, my God, and my Saviour, that Created, and Redeemed it, even into the Bosom of the Father of Spirits: My Body to my Fa∣ther Corruption, and to the Worms my Mother and Sister, (Job 17. 14.) In hopes that he will make good to me (who with them have sometimes endeavoured to serve him) his Promise of Eternal Life, Rom. 2. 7. As for my Dear Beloved Wife, I freely return (and I pray it may be with advantage) to him who hath lent her, to whom I leave, Joh. 17. 24. Rev. 21. last. Jude 24. Psal. 84. 10, 11. Hoping that I leave her an Heir together with me, or rather with Jesus Christ, of a Kingdom that cannot be removed. If the Lord shall graciously give me Issue (I pray it may be of his Herîtage, and prepared for a Room in Heaven) to it I would leave, 1 Chron. 28. 9. and I pray God see it executed according to my Will. And it is my willconcerning my Heir (if the Lord give one) that he may be a Samuel, lent to the Lord, and his Service in the Ministry: For I can say, he is an Asking of the Lord, as was Samuel: And that he may have mine Inheritance, performing my Will concerning my Lecture, &c. And concludes thus; Praying, that whoever rules here, may keep open House for God and his People, to whom I would in Faith say, as Psal. 31. 5. Into thy Hand I commit my Spirit: Thou hast Redeemed me O Lord God of Truth: Hereto subscribing with my Heart and Hand, J. M. And in a Schedule of the same Date, he writes as followeth: Some particulars concerning the thing that hath long been in my Heart to do for God, written as my last Will, as an occa∣sion of some standing Service when I am not. The Motives are God's Glory; Christ's Kingdoms encrease; and Poor Souls Salvation; an expression of my Thankfulness, for what God hath done for our Family, and for me the least and last of it. And the rather, because I am here, in mine own apprehension so little serviceable in speaking, doing, and suffering for him, and nothing at all advantagious in Writing, as others have been, and I could have desired. These Motives, together with that blessed Experience I have had of its advantage already, through God's sealing work with it, makes me to think my self favoured more of God, if I may do this for him: and I doubt not but he can and will, if need be, give me and mine, much more than this; as is said, 2 Chron. 25. 9. And if I could say as David, 1 Chron. 29. 13, &c. I would think it little betwixt him and me, who hath said; Whosoever shall give a Cup of cold Water to drink in my Name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. And my prayer is, that those which come after me (whose it might have been) may think that it's better bestowed than the rest. 1. The thing is a double Lecture, namely, of two Sermons once a month, chiefly intend∣ing Souls Conversion. 2. The Ministers: The most Orthodox, Able and Powerful, that can be procured for Love to Jesus Christ and his Service, or the Will of the Dead; chosen by my Trustees successively.
3. The Trustees: Four Ministers, and four Laymen. The Ministers I leave in Trust, and question not their faithfulness herein for Christ's sake, are my dearest fellow-Labourers in our Lord's work, Mr. N. Mr. S. Mr. B. and Mr. J. with whom I only leave for their direction, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Mat. 28. 20. The Lay-men whom I put in joint Trust are Mr. B. Mr. M. Mr. B. And plain-hearted T. H. all those Faces I hope to see in Heaven. With them I leave for their refreshment, when they take some steps about it. Mat. 25. 39, 40. For Eternity is the place I would be for, to which when gone, I am but a little before, and you but a little behind. This Lecture by his constant cost and care, he kept up from August the Fourth, Lecture laid down: Anno Christi, 1653. Monthly, until January the Second, 1659. Whereof he kept an exact account in a Catalogue, wherein he took notice of the Day of the Month, the Place, the Persons that Preached, and their Texts, with some hints of the Congre∣gations, their number, and seriousness: And he continued it, until the times would neither encourage, nor bear it, and thereupon it not only fell, but also (wanting Publick Liberty for such an Exercise, according to the purpose of his Heart) he sus∣pended his intensions, and disposed his Land otherwise. In May, Anno Christi, 1654: He began to keep House at Astbury, concerning which, he thus saith: I was intertained without exception, or interruption: And though for some Years we met with troubles, yet did the Lord stand between me, and all my troubles, so that many times I was as a Man wholly free, and was made amends for all my Sufferings of that Nature, by the Lord's Presence, sweet and Lord's Sup∣per admini∣stred. powerful in his Ordinances, especially in that of the Lord's Supper, which was there set on Foot in March, Anno Christi, 1654: and continued without interruption Monthly, or once in six Weeks till, Anno Christi, 1660. The Lord did mightily strengthen his Hands and encourage his Heart in this Ordi∣nance, and he took great care in Preparation for it, spending the Friday before the Sacrament in Publick Prayers and Preaching God's Words, and the Day after the Thanksgi∣ving. Sacrament in Thanksgiving, in his own, or in some Neighbours Family, especially where there fell out in any Communicants Family, any occasion of special Thanks∣giving: As recovery from Sickness, or the like. By the coming of another Incumbent unto Astbury, he had only oportunity of Preaching there each other Lord's Day, and for the other he had liberty to Preach abroad upon Charity, which yet he heartily rejoiced in, and was ready freely to help Fasts. any of his Brethren, so that he was seldom a Day at ease. And now he had oportu∣nity of being acquainted with the Ministers and Congregations in Cheshire, where Prudence. the Lord blessed his labours to the benefit of many Souls. His labours here were much encreased by his assisting in many Fast-days unto which he was very ready, and would gather up such special things as any in or out of his Family desired to be recommended unto God in Prayer upon such days, & would press such as were present to perticularize their special things, that they might not come un∣to God upon an uncertain Errand, which things he would usualy write down in a Paper, that so they which assisted in the duty might read it, and so be the better enabled pertinent∣ly to Pray one for another. He did much desire to make these and all other Ordinances very serious, and to rescue them from that formality which two frequently accom∣panied them, being little satisfied with the work done, unless he found somthing done thereby upon his own, and the Hearts of others. He knew that great benifit and comfort was to be had in these Duties and Ordinances, and he would not rest contented without it. He diligently also observed the success of them, and if God at any time with drew himself from him, he made it his Business to seek his God till he found him again, as also the Cause of his with-drawings. What strong Affections he had in the Duties of God's Worship was manifest to all Zeal. that joined with him, that they might easily see and discern the ardency of them; especially in singing of Psalms, which he did with such apparent intension of of mind, and Heart as is not ordinary, and diverse yet living cannot but remem∣ber with what Faith and fervency he would pronounce Amen, Amen at the end of every Prayer. And after holy Duties usually his Heart was greatly lifted up in the wayes of God: And though he sped never so well in it, yet he had not done with an Ordinance when it was over, but had both Heart and Art of improving it, and would then dexterously put on to holy Discourses: and not only Publickly urg things for fashion sake, but would afterwards follow it with all his might, as if (be∣ing the Lord's Ambassador) he waited for an answer to him that had sent him.
He was most unwearied and indefatigable in holy Duties, and was never observed Prayers ar∣dent. to give out in them, though somtimes upon special Occasions, they continued all Night therein. After one of these Dayes of special Communion with God he, toge∣ther with two or three of his choice Friends, retired into private, and there he urged each of them to name some one thing that they would cheifly beg of God, and so each of them prayed over those particulars, and what impressions and affections were then raised in their Hearts cannot be forgotten: Also to promote and encrease Know∣ledg and Holiness, he help up a Conference, both to his own and his Peoples great Benefit; and that no time might be lost, nor any ones Mite be neglected, he would take the Answers of those that were absent at the appointed times, as occasionaly Confe∣rence. he met with them, and somtimes before the whole Assembly were met together up∣on Dayes of Prayer, so that he was always doing, and designing the best advantage of the Peoples Souls upon all occasions. Whilst he was Minister at Astbury it pleased the Lord to give him four or five Children, concerning whose Birth, he thus writes in his Memorials: The first Will I made was presently after our Marriage, and in it I spake of a Son Samuel, as if I had seen him by Faith, though he was not then in being, and it was full a Quarter of a Year, before we had any sensible hopes of a Child, which was given us about March the 9th. 1653. In May following we began Houskeeping at Astbury, we received the Birth of our asking of God, (1 Sam. 1. 20.) Samuel, who was Born, November the 13th. chiefly called Sa∣muel, because he was asked of God by Father, Mother, and many Christian Friends there and elsewhere, with great Ends propounded at such times of Prayer: Namely, that he might be one to bere God's Name hear in his Church on Earth, and one to take up a Room prepared for him in Glory: The Lord be Surety for thee my Son: The Lord forbid thou should'st come short of these ends: Prayeth thy Father. Thus did he set upon his Head the Remembrance of the Mercy of God in his Birth, as the Servants of God of old did make the very Names of their Children the means of remembring the Signal Mer∣cies Prayer pre∣valent. of God to them: This Child in the first Year of his Life, was, by Sickness, twice under the Sentence of Death, but Prayer that obtained him recovered him. An other great Deliverance to this Child he thus Recordeth: Memorandum (saith he) that July the 10th 1656. the Lord prevented the Death of my Son Samuel, which Providen∣ces special in all probability might have been with my own Hand, bowling a Stone with all my might to∣wards the Child (whether I saw him before it went out of my Hand I know not) But it's motion was directly towards his Face, coming up the steps in the Garden-walk; and the visible means of prevention in God's Hand was an other Stone, that turned it out of the way a few steps before it came to the Child. This was an awakening Providence to me and my Wife, and sent us to God on our Knees, partly for Humi∣liation, partly for Gratulation. This Stone he kept in his Study, and (without Superstition) made it his Remembrancer to continue his Thankfulness to God for this great Deliverance. Some such observations he recorded about his other Chil∣drens Birth and Names. When this Winter was ended, he removed to Whitley, Anno Christi, 1661. May 17th: And of his success there he gives this account: After somtime I found that God was with me in his Ordinances, to make Conversion-work: And in Providences, to prevent evil, and to reach good things to us. Let it be remembred to his Praise, that October the 23d. 1661. my Son John was within a step of drowning, and Provi∣dence ordered me to be within sight at that very time, though I had been from home the Fortnight before, And not an Hour after my Daughter Sarah was almost choked with a Thred, to our great affrightment: But we saw the Lord's Hand very notably in her pre∣servation, as we had done the Spring before from Sickness, in answer to Prayers, Psal. 103. 4. An other merciful Preservation of his Son John he thus Records. Memorandum, that our Son John had a notable escape from drowning as he and his Brother were coming from School, June the 18th. 1664. But Blessed be God who is present when Parents are ab∣sent. At this Place he continued to labour in the Lord's Vineyard till that black Day, August 24. 1662: at which time, he with very many of his Brethren were Civilly slain, being unsatisfied to conform as the Act of Ʋniformity then required. But no Man suffered his Death with less Reflection upon Superiors, or with more grief for so sad a dispensation. Yet there he continued, labouring for the advantage of the
Peoples Souls with all his Strength, and the Lord made him a great Blessing to all the Country round about: And God's Providence so ordered it, that the Neighbouring Gentry (though of a differing Perswasion, yet) offered nor to molest him at all, being convinced of the Innocence and Peaceableness of his Spirit, and of the uprightness of his Ends therein. Before I give an account of the last part of his Life, you may take this just Character of him. His Cha∣racter. 1. He was of an excellent Spirit in Solomons sense, Prov. 17. 27. as slow to passion, as most have been known. One that lived some time with him, gave this testimony, that he Patience. remembred not that he ever saw him transported with Passion; but angry he would be at Sin, yet still after the example of his Lord and Master, Grieved for the hardness of their Hearts, Mark 3. 5. His Reproofs were always so moderated and mixed with Love and Compassion, that the Offender could not but see, that his great aim was at his good. Prudence. 2. He had good Natural Parts, and was no Novice in any of that Learning that might Learning. fit and qualify him for his Work. For tho he was more abundant in publick Preaching than most of his Brethren, which must needs hinder his Private Studies, yet what time of vacancy he had from this Work, he carefully redeemed for his Book, and took in Philosophy, the Tongues, History, Positive, and Practical Divinity in the course of his Studies, being never well unless at his Study, or in secret Duties, or holy Conference, tho (as it was once said of Industry. Plato's Houshold-stuff) it may be truly said of all his studies, there was Nihil in Pompam, Omne in Usum; nothing for Pomp, all for use. And like of one of the Architects in Plu∣tarch, who, when another, had made an Artificial Discourse of his dexterity to contrive a new Building before those who were to make their choice of them; He only said, All that this Man hath said, I can do: So this Holy Man had the knowledge of doing, what others could learnedly Dispute and Discourse of: he could earnedly live in every point as became a Learned Preacher. 3. He had an extraordinary Measure of Holiness and Heavenly mindedness, according Sanctifica∣tion. to the observation which a judicious Divine sometimes made of him; That he had more than ordinary Degrees of Sanctification. He was of a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, and had the Tongue of the Learned to speak a word in Season to the State of all Souls. This indeed was his Master-piece, and was become natural to him. He had a singular In∣genuity in improving Scripture Similitudes, and indeed every thing that did occur, with unimaginable dexterity: every Tree, and Bird, and Stone would be a Text, upon which he would aptly enlarge himself, having an admirable wit to spiritualize every thing, and to ga∣ther occasion of profitable discourse in all companies, and almost upon every Subject, and it did clearly appear, That out of the abundance of his Heart his Mouth spake. He had a great Holy Jealousy and Fear of himself: A dear Friend, that knew him well wrires thus of him. Never was any Man more watchful against Relapses, nor more jealous Holy Jea∣lousie. to maintain his first love to the height, I have (saith he) sometimes told him that it was not u∣sual for converts to retain that Land stood of Comfort, that intension of Zeal, and extension of Affection which flourished so in him, and was preserved in the height: and therefore must he ex∣pect an abatement in time, and the current thereof to be contracted, and setled in a narrower Channel. He is his Letters often reflected on these words, Ore tenus, intimating that he still was what he was before, not without admiring God's Grace to him, whereunto he as∣cribed Humility. all that he was. And indeed he was so habituated to Spiritual Communion with his God, that he could not with Patience endure his withdrawings: And he was far more sensible, and sooner aware of it than many others are, that can, to their great loss and prejudice, entertain other Delights instead of God's Face and Favour: But this holy Man did most eagerly seek, upon all occasions for him whom his Soul loved, and would not be satisfied till he found him. He was a great Observer of the frame, and bent of his Heart at all times. A worthy Christan watchful∣ness. Minister writes thus of him. I (saith he) have admired at the constant frame of his Spirit. He was not subject to that deadness and indisposedness, which other good Men seem to be troubled with: His Heart was continually burning with an holy Zeal. Take a taste of the excellent sweet frame of his Heart in this short passage in a Letter to a Friend: My dear, dear, dear Brother, I pray thee report the loving kindness of the Lord unexpressible, unto a poor, vile, empty, altogether undeserving Worm: For I have found an Answer this Day; this Day more then ever to our Prayers, and can say, The Lord's work Humility. will on, tho Hell, say No: And still Believe, Preach: Pray and Believe (Lam. 3. 25.) I am constrained to say as, Isa. 63. 7. Neither thou, nor any of my Friends can conceive
how good the Lord is to me, even to me. I pray thee and others think and study how good he is to me, to me, to me! He kept a constant watch over his Thoughts, especially over his last Thoughts His watch which slept with him, and his first Thoughts which he awaked with, and usually they were some precious portion of Scripture or other, which he would Discourse of with his Friends, with great content and chearfulness. He kept a Diary of his Life which he wrote in Characters where ever he came, A Diary. wherein he set down what Scriptures he found most sweetness from; what was the state of his Soul towards God; and such other remarkable passages as did occur each Day, from the Year 1650. to the Year wherein he died. His Love to the Word of God was Superlative: It was his Meditation Day and His Love to the Word. Night. Constantly every Morning he used to pitch upon some Verse, which he would endeavour to fix upon his Heart, and was ever unwilling to leave it, till he had sucked some sweetness, and Spiritual nourishment from it: by Meditation he was often chewing up the 119 Psalm, especially in the time of his sickness, daily draw∣ing the Viture of one Verse into his Soul, as appears by his Diary. And this he did, not formally as a Task, but with that effectuall seriousness and relish, that his Fa∣mily at home, and his Friends abroad (by his Letters) might easily perceive what dainties he had been feeding upon. And at every vacant time he would be looking for a Word, and would find out by his casual turning down of a Leaf in his Bible, (which was his way) such passages as were very remakable, and not observed by him before. A Scripture thus met with was as Food to him, exceeding sweet to his Taste: He would make much of it, and usually would not leave it till he had improved it to the good and benefit of others; either by speaking or writing; endeavouring that others might see what he saw, d feel what he felt in the Word of God. An other Practice he had also wh shewed him to be both a good Textuary, and a good Christian, and that was usually to take leave of his Friends and Relations, by leaving some Scriptures with them, and those, such as were most suitable to their condition. Nay, he hardly sent commendations to a Friend but it was accompanied with some pertinent Text of Scripture, so that he seemed, to breath no other Air but that of Scripture. His Bible was his constant Companion in the Day, and usually his Pillow at Night: and many scores of lively, Emphatical Expressions he had found His Pru∣dence. therein, which his constant reading, and diligence of others could never light on. And where ever he came, he would engrave some Scripture or others upon the Chimny-pieces, Walls, and Trees, which was so constant, and peculiar a course with him, that his Acquaintance knew well that he had been in such a Place, by the Marks which he ordinarily thus left behind him: His delign herein being to do good to Souls; that the very novelty of seeing such things might set People upon enquiring and looking on those Texts in their Bibles, not knowing what good one such Verse of the Scripture might do, God setting it on. At least he found this advantage to himself, that when he came to a review of them, he was put in mind of that frame of Heart he had when he wrote those things, and so might taste over again what he before felt in those passages of the Word of God: He sedom wrote a Note or Letter but he concluded with some suitable Text of Scripture (the Word of God dwelling plentifully in him.) And in the Memorials before mentioned, he intermixed them with Scriptures upon every occasion, adding in the Conclusion, The Texts of Scripture herein mentioned, are best worth thy finding, and noteing in thy Life, as they were in mine. His Moderation to all sorts of godly People, though of differing Perswasions, was remarkable: his Heart and heat being wholly taken up with the great and necessary His Mode∣ration. Points in Religion which all true Christians agree in: And, making the Substance of Religion, his work and business, he never had leisure, or pleasure to trouble himself with controverted Circumstances, nor would put his Soul out of tune with such things as had caused such jarrings and discord among Christians. He was never (or very seldom, and then not out of choice) heard to Discourse of the dividing Conrtoversies of the times. He was exercised with a peculiar Tryal soon after his entrance into the Ministry, Temptati∣ons. and that was by strong, and horrible apprehensions in the Night season, as if he were cut in pieces with Knives, or the like, and he was in as real Agonies, and di∣stress as if he had felt the pain of such Torments indeed. This he apprehended to be the Buffetings of Satan: They used to follow Dayes of great pains, or Dayes of great
inward Comforts, and he was often forced by them to leap out of his Bed in the Night, and to betake himself to Prayer for ease and delivery. He would very Pa∣thetically bewail those gloomy Nights, and (what cause so ever they proceeded from) they were great occasions to realize the apprehensions of Hell to him, and to keep him humble. Secondly, In his Relative Duties he was abundantly Diligent and Faithful. First, In his Family; he walked in a perfect way in the midst of his House. There he constantly read the holy Scriptures: A portion of the Old Testament in the Morning, and of the New Testament in the Evening, and sung some Verses of the Psalms in Order. After Reading, he examined every a one what they Remembred and Observed out Family Du∣ties. of the Chapter, and would open and enlarge upon each Portion, and tell them what was most observable and Practical in that Scripture. Neither did he consine Religion to these Family Duties (as too many do, who from Morning to Evening Prayer scarce ever think or speak of Spiritual things) but he familiarized holy Descourse in his House all the Day long as there was any occasion and oportunity. He alwayes re∣peated at home the Sermons which he heard abroad. The Lord's Day Sermon he used to repeat the Saturday in the Afternoon following, or some other Sermon as a preparation to the Sabbath following. Upon the Evening of the Lord's Day he would take his Children in private, and their instruct them and teach them how to pray. He constantly Catechized his Children and Servants twice in the Week, and caused Fasts. them to get some Verses of Scripture by Heart, and also part of their Catechisms every day. He had often private Fasts with his Family alone, and was frequent in secret Humuliation also. His ardent desires aften the Sanctification and Salvation of his Children, and Kindred, was farther evident by a Discourse which he wrote for his Son, upon 1 Chron. 28. 9. And an other which he called A Word to my meer Natural Friends upon Isa. 55. 7. wherein the precious breathings of his Soul after their Spirirtual and Eternal welfare are largly manifested: And upon the same account he gave Twenty of Mr. Baxter's Call to the Ʋnconverted, among his Kindred and Servants, in diverse of which he framed and wrote such pertinent Dialogues as were most suitable to the State of their Souls. 2ly, In his Ministry he was indefatigable. He was in Labours oft: In Jour∣nings His Indu∣stry. oft. So that we may truly apply to him what the Apostle Paul said of Timothy, Phil. 2. 20. We have no Man like minded that doth naturally care for the State of Souls. His great forwardness and earness in this Work: his travelling, and toiling, and pro∣curing all the help he could for the carrying on this Work, could not have been more if he had forseen the shortness of his own Days, or the length of our Night. And the more universal was the influence of his Labours, in that he was strangly stirred up to Preach in several parts of the County. Both Ministers and People generally pro∣moting and accepting his holy and sincere Endeavours, where Envy or Prejudice did not manifestly interpose. When other Ministers, or himself have been imployed in the usual Courses of the His Zeal. Day, he would often choose rather to stay and Repeat the Morning Sermon to the people at Noon, then go to his Dinner, according to the Example of his dear Master before him, Joh. 4. 33, 34. And indeed his Zeal for the work of God would carry him to do more then the strength of his Body, and the convenience of the people could well bear: But as it was sincerely meant by him, so it was generally well taken by them, and God made it answerably beneficial in the event. Father Latimer having sharply reproved some great Offenders in his time, was com∣plained of for lack of Discretion, which he hearing of, said, He was glad they had no∣thing else to charg him with but want of Discretion, it being evident thereby that the sub∣stance of his Reproof was true: So all that could be charged upon this worthy Man of God was, that somtimes he wanted Prudence in the length and frequency of his La∣bours. A thing for which he might be well excused, seeing so few transgress in that kind. This good Man, such was his heavenly Spirit and Way in his work, that though Conversi∣ons. the matter he brought was ordinary, yet the manner that he delivered it in, was not ordinary, and he had great success in the Conversion of many Souls: One that knew him well, and oft accompanied him when he went abroad, saith thus: I cannot for∣get how the People after Sermons would meet him with Tears in their Eyes, some following him, others thanking him for his pain, and shewing by their very Countenances that they
had met with God in the Ordinances: And it's certain, that he that winneth Souls is wise. If that great Man on his Death-bed could profess, That one Soul converted by his means, ministred more Honour and Comfort to him, then all the Honour and Gran∣deur which he had enjoyed; with what Glory is this holy Man gone off the Stage, who was an Instrument in the Hand of God's Spirit, to convert many, and to convince and quicken more. His converse was a continual Sermon (as was old Mr. Dods;) he never went Conferen∣ces. abroad but the Minister and the warm-hearted Christian went along with him. He was the same out of the Pulpit as he was in it, and a lively Comment upon those words of the Apostle: Let your Speech be alwayes seasoned with Salt, that it may mi∣nister Grace to the Hearers. Some that travelled with him many Miles, usually, upon a Religious account, have been almost ravished in their Souls with his holy and heavenly Discourses; and into whatsoever House he came, either publickly in the Family, or privately in his Cham∣ber he would go to Prayer. He was undauntedly bold in reproving Sin: Many that accompanied him in his Journeys, when in the Inn he hath heard any one Swearing, have observed how he Courage. would Thunder against the Swearer, thus: Who was it there that durst abuse the Name of the God of Heaven? And he would ever on purpose as he talked with his Friends on the way, choose some weighty Word to utter as he met with People that passed by, that so it might stick with them; and this Bread of his that was thus cast on the Waters, would somtimes return to him after many Dayes. He had a singular presence and readiness of Heart, and Matter to speak to whom∣soever he met on the way, and great condescention also to explain himself: wherein any Heavenly mintled∣ness. one did not understand him: As once on a Snowy Day, meeting suddenly with a Man driving his Horses before him, who thus saluted him; Well met Sir: I but (said Mr. Machin) we shall be better met, if we met in Heaven. Few poor People ever went from his Door without a powerful spiritual Almes, and he would order them to have larger Relief who were most ready to attend to his heavenly Counsel. He had an excellent faculty in Discoursing with People on the Way, into whom he would handsomly insinuate himself, and would deliver to them very material, and Prudence. yet familiar things of Eternal concernment; he would find out their Ignorance; mightily amaze and convince them, and thereby lay a happy Foundation of farther acquaintance upon this best account. And he framed diverse Dialogues on such occa∣sions, which are dispersed in the hands of several Friends, which (if they were pub∣lished) would shew his excellent Genius this way. One instance hereof is very re∣markable. Riding one Morning to a Lecture, he met with some young Men that were carry∣ing their Cocks to a Cock-fight; he overtaking them, said thus to one of them: Note. Friend, our Lord and Master Jesus Christ never came into the World to set up such Sports as these. These Words, and some further Discourse (though the young Man went on to his Pastimes that day) stuck like an Arrow in his Side, and he could not be quiet till he had learned what Minister this was, after which he gained acquaintance with him, and so laid these and his other Sins to Heart as made a blessed change in his course of Life. He was a Zealous improver of good Society: his ordinary Visits were seldom con∣cluded without Prayer before he parted with his Friends. And when diverse good Zeal. People were all Night together, he would engage them to pray one for another, and one after an other: and he would cause them to produce their several Evidences for Heaven. He would somtimes raise up the Company an hour before Day that they might pray and weep together, that the Fire might not go out upon the Hearth of their Souls, being by these means so constantly blown up and kept alive: yea, the very Crumbs of Piety that fell from him at his Table, were most Heavenly and re∣freshing, and a plain Argument that it was his Meat and Drink to do his Fathers Will, and to finish his work. He had ingenious Devises and witty Artifices (flowing from his rooted affection to God) whereby, after some solemn Dayes, he would engage his Christian Friends to a closer walking with God: Take an Instance of one or two of them, as himself left upon Record.
Articles between Christ and Two Souls. 1. That we be his willing, loving, and obedient Spouses. 2. That we labour by all means to know more of his Mind, and then to tell it one to an other, and draw to the Practice of it. 3. That we be alwayes Jealous, lest each other take his room, and to be indiffe∣rent and moderate in every thing and to every one but to him and his. 4. That whatsoever Creatures are betwixt us, they be improved to the highest advantage betwixt Cerist and our Souls. 5. That we connive not at Sin in each other, but be tender of one anothers Souls and Bodies. 6. That we love and live each Day as the last. 7. That we faithfully endeavour the performance of each others Will whilst living, and when dead, so far as Reason and Religion may bind. 8. That we be in every Condition more willing to go live with Christ, our Hus∣band, then to stay here one with an other for Pleasure-sake. 9. That we endeavour seasonableness and suitableness in every Duty, &c. An other was to this Effect. Seabridg, October 8th, where God's Name was that day recorded. Before the Lord, and in his strength I promise to draw near to God, believing that he will draw near to me. I pass away and part with mine own power to him, that I may be his and not an others. Subscribing with Heart and Hand, Praying and Believing that the Lord will undertake for me, that I never go back in a Thought; or else this will stand in full force against me at that Great day to come, Phil. 4. 13. H. N. Can. 8. 5. J. M. Psal. 119. 106. J. M. Zech. 8. 21. M. M. Psal. 119. 80. N. B. Isa. 38. 10. E. H. 2 Cor. 3. 5, &c. He highly esteemed the prayers of his Friends, and was a very faithful Remem∣brancer of them that desired his prayers; which he used to do with that heartiness, Sympathy, and enlargedness of Heart, that it would work much upon their Hearts, His Pray∣ers. and engage them to more seriousuess in their own business, and in Affection to him, that so kindly concerned himself in their Affairs. And he would plead with God very fervently in their absence, not only to satisfie his Conscience, and to make good his pro∣mise of remembring them, but sought with strong cries to prevail for them. And be∣sides that frequent course which he held, of puting all present to tell him, before Prayer began, what they would have chiefly beg'd for them at the Throne of Grace, by which means they were sent into their own Souls, to study their present, and spi∣ritual Condition. Concerning this a dear Friend saith thus: he gave this Rule touching praying for Friends, which I have ever since endeavoured to make my Directory in that case: Alwayes when you think of your Friends, let it be with a Praying Thought. He would Note. somtimes cause his intimate Friends to write down in his Day-book, what special things they should intercede for in one anothers behalf till their next meeting. His Letters were frequent and very heavenly set: He commonly set time apart for writing such Letters; and he seldom wrote about any business, but Religion was His Let∣ters. interwoven, and such plenty of apt and sweet Scriptures and Postscripts, yea, som∣times some Texts of Scripture would be endorsed on the outside of his Letters, when they were sent by a Friends hand. In this profitable and useful part of friendship he was frequent and abundant. Probably there yet remain many Hundreds of Letters in the hands of his Friends where there was scarce a Word but about Religion. He was eminent in real Charity. He sympathized with those that were in straits and affliction, and had a ready hand to help them. He was liberal according to his His Charity. power, yea, and beyond his power. In his accounts to his Father from Cambridg he seldom found less then Twelvepence a Week to the Poor, besides somtimes half a Crown at a time. After his coming into the Country it was his delight to engage others, and to stir them up by his own Example in his liberal Contributions upon good occasions, giving Twenty-shillings, yea, somtimes five Pounds at a time to Charitable uses. Somtimes he would make a stock for such as were poor and pious; somtimes to help a Minister out of his straits, which hath occcasioned the Bowels of many to bless God in his behalf. To be brief; he was a Star of the first Magnitude in the impartial Judgment of those that knew him throughly. An eminent Divine, writing familiarly to him, saith
thus: Dear Brother I earnestly desire corespondence with thee: Thy Letters are preci∣ous and weighty to my Soul: Thou art more in my Heart, and Eye, and Thoughts than all the Acquaintance I have in the World: I have seen that in thee that hath not a little convinced me of the Reality of Religion. These are not the Words of a Flatterer, but the overflowing of a Sincere Heart, &c. If we view him in his Natural and Moral accomplishments; in his Graces; in his Relations; in his Publick, and Private behaviour, and in his true Humilty and Sin∣cerity, which crowned all the rest, we must needs say, That he feared God above many, and hath left but few such Ministers behind him. He was very apprehensive of his Death long before it came. In a Letter, dated Death fore∣seen. May, 1659: concerning an Old Disciple, he saith: Will he not let me see him before I die? And in an other in November following, he hath these Words, Lam. 3. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 32. To which let Thoughts be directed when no more is to be seen, or heard of me, but that I am Thy Friend in store: Not lost, but laid up, J. M. And in March, 1663. He complained of frequent dejectedness and Melancholly: And this passage he had in a Letter, June 28. 1664. I have been very Melancholy some while by fits, whence this pro∣ceedes I know not: But the All-wise God whose ways are past finding out, knew well that the shadows of the Evening were coming upon him. As he was removing to Seabridg, he took in his way the House of a worthy Gen∣tleman, Death pre∣pared for. where he treated of these Words, Act. 20. 24. Neither count I life dear un∣to my self: So that I might finish my course with Joy, &c. Which he studied, and Preach∣ed as his last farewel to this World, being in a weak and sickly condition: And not long before he had made many Sermons upon Revel. 22. 3, 45. which were a sweat pre∣paration to Life everlasting. At Seabridg he grew worse and worse, and in the issue it proved an high Malig∣nant His Sick∣ness. Feavor. Hereupon his Wife was sent for, who at her coming found him in his Bed, and he told her, that he was ill, but whether it were Life or Death he would not choose, but his Father should for him. The fit season of opening a Vein (by rea∣son of the Physitians absence from home) was missed, and so his Distemper prevailed. Once looking his Face in the Glass, he brake out very affectionatly into these Words: Ah Adam, Adam, What hast thou done? What a beautiful, happy Creature wast thou; but now how Poor, and sorrowful art thou? Ah Adam, What hast thou done? These words greatly affected some that were with him. His Distemper grew higher, and his Spirits lower, which were deadned in him, in∣somuch as when his Wife and Children were about him, and she said to him, Love, thou saist nothing to me, nor to thy Children; he only answered, that he had said to her, and to them too. O how good therefore is it for Wives and Children to ob∣serve and remember what Parents and Husbands say to them in health, not know∣ing which Counsel may be their last, and that must stand for their Death-bed charge to them. September the 4th. being the Lord's-day, though by reason of his Disease he was scarce sensible, yet perceiving it to be the Lord's-day, he would needs be holpen up, and supported by Pillows, that he might kneel, and be in a praying posture, though he was disabled from the performance of the Duty. Upon Tuesday, September the 6th, Anno Christi, 1664: This Holy Man breathed his His Death. last, being the 17th day of his Sickness, and in the Fortieth Year of his Age; and was buried September the 8th at Newcastle, with a particular Eulogy by the Preacher, and with the deep grief of all the Congregation. Scarce any that began no sooner, and lived no longer, hath done so much good in the World, as he did, in his Capacity. A Pious Divine, who at this time is a Dignitary in the Church, gives this Character of him; I am (saith he) so well satisfied, as to his extraordinary Piety in general, which I never yet heard, or believe, that he departed from, that I wish my everlasting Portion may be with him: And afterwards he adds: To conclude, I never knew one more publick spirited, more sensible of Mens spiritual necessities, and more ready (to his abil∣lity) to supply them: More zealous for God's Glory, more delighted, incessant, importu∣nate, and succesful in Prayer, and more thankfully sensible of the Returns thereof, then this Holy Person was; of whom this degenerate World was not worthy, and therefore, ha∣ving been abundant in the work of the Lord, God hath satisfied him with never ending Expe∣riences, that his Labour (from which he now rests) may not be in vain in the Lord. Hallalujah
The Life and Death of Dr. Samuel Winter, who died An. Christi, 1666. SAmuel Winter was Born Anno Christi, 1603 at Balsal, in the Woodland part His Birth, Parentage and Educa∣tion. of Warwickshire, about Seaven Miles from Coventry, of Religious Parents; His Father was a Yeo man of good account. When our Samuel was about twelve Years old, it pleased God, by the Ministry ofone Mr. Slader, then Preacher at the Chappel of Knowl, in Balsal Parish (if I mistake not) who, in a special manner was brought thither by Samuel's Fathers Interest, and industry, to a waken his Conscience, His Conver∣sion. and to make him serious about the things which concerned his everlasting Salvation; As also to stir up in him earnest desires of doing good to the Souls of others; for which end one Day as he came from School, about a Mile from his Fathers house he retired himself under a Hedge to pray; and among other Petitions, he begged of God His Prayer. that he would qualifie and fit him for the work of the Ministry and make his la∣bours effectual, and succesful therein: At which time he (at least thought that he) heard a voice saying to him; God hath heard thy Prayer, and designed thee for that work, and thou shalt be an Instrument of converting many Souls to God: This exceedingly chear∣ed God's an∣swer. up his Heart, insomuch as, coming home, he applied himself to his Father, hum∣bly requesting that he might be trained up for the Ministry. His Father asked him the reason of those desires? He told him, what a Prayer he had made to God, and what return he had from God to it. His Father, being much affected herewith; soon after sent him to the Free-School Is sent to School and University. in Coventry, where, through his extraordinary diligence and industry, he made so good a progress in Grammer-learning, that, though at near Fourteen Years of Age, he understood nothing, or very little of the first Rudiments of Grammer, yet within a few Years he became fit for the University; and accordingly he was sent to Cambridg, and placed in Queens-Colledg, and had, for somtime, that famous Dr. Preston for his Tutor. At the Feet of that Learned Gamiliel, those Natural, and Gracious abilities His prosici∣ency. which he brought along with him, were much improved; and partly by the dire∣ction and help of so excellent a Guid, and partly by God's Blessing upon his unwearied studies, he attained to a great measure of Knowledge, both in the Tongues and Arts, and also in Divinity. When he had Commenced Master of Arts, being as yet unwilling to enter upon that great and dreadful work of the Ministry, he left Cambridg and went to Boston in Goes to Bo∣ston. Lincolnshire, where he lived under the Ministry of Holy and Learned Mr. Jobn Cotton, out of whose Family (somtime after) he married a Wife, one Mrs. Ann Beeston, a Gentlewoman of a good Extraction, and one that had a considerable Portion, that Match being of Mr. Cotton's contrivance. After his Marriage, and his continuance with his Wife, in Mr. Cotton's Family, he fell into a dangerous, and violent Feavor, which, in the judgment of his Physicians, His first Wife. His Sick∣ness. was desperate, and left no hopes of his Recovery. His Wife being much affected and afflicted herewith, he would often comfort her, telling her that he should not Die at this time; for that God had not yet fulfilled his Promise made to him in his Youth, wherein he had assured him that he should be an instrument of converting many Souls unto him. And accordingly he recovered, and then resolved to apply himself to the work of the Ministry. And being more ambitious to do God and his Church-service, then to advance him∣self His rocove∣ry. His first Place. Ministry successful. in the World, he removed from Boston to a small Living, near Nottingham, called Woodborow, where by his painful and powerful preaching (many out of the Neighbouring Towns flocking to his Ministry, as the Doves to their Windows) the Seeds of Grace (through God's blessing upon his Labours) were sown in the Hearts of many, which sprang up, and some of them remain unto this Day. This place he always highly esteemed, and would often call it, His first Born. From Woodborow he was removed to the City of York, in which great and populous City he continued a Lecturer for some time, and as there he had great opportunities His remove to York. for service, so had he great success, receiving there a manifest Seal to his Ministry, in the Conversion and Confirmation of many. But our Civil Wars breaking out about that time, he could stay no longer at York. Yet, though the Door was shut up against him in that place, an other large and effectual Door was opened for him elsewere. For Cottingham (a great Town within three Miles of Hull) being then de∣stitute
of a Pastor, thither he was (by a more than ordinary Providence) brought: And in that place, for about the space of Eight Years, he continued to be a burning and a shining Light, as it was said of John the Baptist: Burning in his Zeal and Doctrine, His Dili∣gence. and shining in his Holy, and Exemplary Life and Conversation. There he was ex∣ceeding Active, and Industrious for God. He thought no pains too great whereby the Peoples Souls might be edified. He His Dili∣gence and Faithful∣ness. preached twice every Lord's day to them in publick: He expounded the Chapters which he read, and Catechised the younger Persons: In the Evening he repeated the Sermons in his own Family, to which many of the Neighbours also resorted. On the Week days he took occasion to go from House to House, instructing the Ignorant, and endeavouring to build up his Parishoners in their most Holy Faith; and God was pleased so to bless his Labours, that he became instrumental of begetting many Sons and Daughters unto God, as also of confirming many, who attained (partly by his publick Ministry, and partly by his private pains) a great measure of Grace and Gifts, so that they made Conscience of the strict Observation of the Lord's day, of Closet and Family Duties, and of other Spiritual Services required by God as fruits of His great success. their Faith. He was so meek and affable in his deportment towards all Men, that his Company was pleasing and delightful, even to many of those that had no relish of his Doctrine. His Affabi∣lity. At Cottingham he buried his loving and dearly beloved Wife, who left him five Sons: which loss yet was (through God's merciful Providence) abundantly repaired in his second Marriage about three Years after) with Mrs Elizabeth Weaver, the Daugh∣ter His second Marriage. of Christepher Weaver, Esq; with whom he had a good Portion, and she proved to be excellently quallified, for the good and comfort both of him and his Children: And God was pleased so to bless her Prudent managment of his outward affairs, that when he died he left a plentiful Estate to his Children, besides all those Acts of more than ordinary Bounty, which, both in his Life, and at the time of his Death he testified his Faith by. Anno Christi 1650. the Powers who were then in Being, resolved to send over four Commissioners into Ireland, for the settlement of that distracted, and almost He is order∣ed for Ire∣land. ruined Kingdom; and judging it necessary to send with them a godly, able, and Or∣thodox Divine, they ordered that Mr. Winter should attend these Commissioners thi∣ther. Which order of theirs, being sent to him to Cottingham where he then lived, he looked upon it as a clear Call from God. Yet for his better satisfaction, he ad∣vised also with his Friends, and begged direction from God in a business of so weigh∣ty concernment; after which he chearfully embraced this Call, hoping that God would bring some Glory to his own Name, by the Labours of him his unworthy Ser∣vant, in that Kingdom. And so, not consulting with Flesh and Blood, which might have suggested to him that it would be an unadvised Act, and disadvantagious to him to part with o tractable, and loving a People, and with so good a Rectory (it being above Four hundred Pounds a Year) and to cast himself upon Strangers, neither knowing, nor capitulating with them what his Salary should be for the maintenance of himself and his Family. And so, Resigning up his Living, he prepared for his Jorney. At his coming over into Ireland, the Commissioners allowed him but One hundred Pounds for the first Year, which yet he chearfully accepted of though it did not de∣fray the charges of his Transportation, with such necessaries as he provided for the He goes in∣to Ireland. comfortable accommodation of himself and Family: Much less did it repair the losses which he sustained shortly after his Landing, when the Irish Army took from him diverse Horses of a good value, which he carried over with him. A great part of his worldly delight consisting in keeping good Horses. In this his first Year he attended the Commissioners in several Journies, which they made into the Four Provinces of Ireland, was their Houshold Chaplain, performed Fa∣mily, His frequent Preaching. Duties, and Preached in publick every Lord's day wherever they came: And in the City of Dublin (where they resided the greatest part of their time) he preached somtimes twice every Lords-day in Christ church before the Commissioners, the Lord Maior, & Aldermen of that City; many Gentlemen & others resorting to his Ministry. Not long after, some other Ministers coming from England to Dublin, the Com∣missioners (for the ease of Mr. Winter) used to request one or other of them to preach in the Morning, reserving Mr. Winter for the Afternoon, at which time was the greatest Auditory. But he, being willing to be out of imployment, set up a Lecture, where he preached every Sabbath Day in the Morning at Seaven a Clock, He sets up a Lecture.
in the Church of St. Nicholas, within the said City: And this Lecture was frequent∣ed by the Commissioners, Civil Magistrates, and many others, so that he had a very frequent Congregation; and to encourage poor People to come to Church, he caused some white Loaves to be distributed among them always when the Sermon was ended at his own cost. About this time the Commissioners taking notice that Trinity Colledge by Dublin, through the iniquity of the Times, and the distractions of that Kingdom, was left de∣solate by the Fellows and Students, and thereby brought almost to ruine, they thought it their Duty, for the advancement of Religion and Learning, to endeavour the restauration of the same: And for that end they appointed the said Mr. Winter, to be the Provost, or Master of it; where also, after a time, he commenced Doctor of Divinity, having with singular Applause and Approbation, performed all Acts and He is made Provost of the Colledg. Exercises belonging thereunto. He also out of his care and zeal to promote so pious and profitable a work, in a short time he encouraged, and procured the return of divers of the Fellows and Students to the Colledge, as also the coming over from England His Pru∣dence and Faithful∣ness. of several hopeful young Schollars, whereby the Colledge was suddenly filled and replenished with many Religious and hopeful young Men, who were likely to prove Instruments of God's Glory in the work of the Ministry and other ways. And by the great pains which he took with them, instructing them, both in Hu∣mane and Divine Learning, Preaching and Expounding the Sacred Scriptures to them, and often Praying with them both in the Colledge Chappel, and somtimes in his own Lodgings, he gave as great Hopes of the flourishing of that Seminary of Learning and Piety, as in any Colledge in Christendom. And there they to retaliate his care and pains, gave him an Honourable Testimonial under the Colledge Seal, which is here inserted. Omnibus Christi Fidelibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem in Christo He is made Doctor. Domino sempiternam. Nos Vicecancellarius Ʋniversitatis, & Socii seniores Collegii San∣ctae & Individuae Trinitatis juxta Dublin, Testanour Virum venerabilem Dominum Sa∣muel Winter, Anglum, Verbi Divini Praedicatorem fidelem, verae Religionis vindicem acerrimum, & de Collegio S. S. Trinitatis in Illustri Academia Cantabrigensi Libera∣lium Artium, & S. Theologiae olim studiosum, adductum fuisse ad nos cum uberrimis Testi∣moniis ingenuitatis, probitatis, Doctrinae, & Scientiae, Theologicae (quorum meritorum suorum & studiorum luculentissimum Documentum jampridem, tam publice quam privatim in cele∣berrima Civitate Dubliniensi laudabiliter & egregie dederit) ad capessendum Gradum Doctoratus in Theologia; & illorum, plurimorumque doctissimorum de meliore not a viro∣rum, optime habilem, idoneum, & dignum testimoniis judicatum fuisse, munere; officio, dignitate, & honore Doctoratus in Theologia. Nos itaque quibus ejus virtutum excel∣lentia, meritorum copia, diuturna studia, pervigilesque labores innotuerunt, habita ra∣tione scientiae, eloquentiae, doctrinae, facultatis Theologicae, peritiae Disputandi, interpre∣tandi, concionandi, & aliarum Viriutum, & morum ejusdem Samuelis Winter, quorum omnium certissimum specimen laudabiliter, egregie, magistraliter, & more Doctoreo dede∣rit publice è suggesto per tres Dies in Collegii sacello. Nos igitur in venerando Ʋniversi∣tatis nostrae consessu, eundem Samuelem Winter unanimiter, omniumque suffragiis in Christi nomine approbamus, & sic approbatum Doctorem in universa Theologia solenniter pronuntiavimus, declaravimus, & fecimus. Quod nostrum Testimonium ut omnibus innotescat, subscriptis singulorum nominibus, & publico Collegii nostri Sigillo corroborari & muniri curavimus: Decimo septimo Die Augusti, Anno Domini Millessimo; sexcentessimo quinquagessimo quarto. Hen. Jones. Pro-Cancellarius. Miles Symmer. Williamson. Nath Hoyle. Johannes Stearne, Adam Cusacke. Whilst Dr. Winter continued Provost of that Colledge, he had occasion to go to a place His great Success. called Monouth, a populous Town, about ten Miles from Dublin; where (according to his custom in most places where he came) he Preached and found the People very atten∣tive to his Ministry, and desirous to be instructed in the way to Heaven: whereupon, at the earnest request, both of the Minister, and of divers others of the Inhabitants he rode over to them every three Weeks, and Preached, which he contied for some Years, and
God was pleased to blessed his Labours for the Conversion of many English and Irish that flocked to hear him. The Reason of his leaving that University and Kingdom is well known unto many, He comes back into England. and he came away to his great outward prejudice, the Colledge being indebted to him in a considerable Summ of Monies, which he had disbursed for the use thereof, some part whereof, since his Death they have paid to his Son. Being returned into England, he and his Wife sojourned with some Friends, som∣times in and about West-Chester: Somtimes at Coventry, and other somtimes with his Wives Relations in Hertfordshire, and Rutlandshire; in which places (through God's blessing) he became an Instrument of much good, not only in the Families wherein he abode, but also to several Neighbours with whom he conversed. His Indu∣stry. Thus we have a brief Narrative of the most remarkable passages of this Holy Mans Life; we are now come to the last Scene, wherein we shall find that saying verified and made good, Vita qualis, Finis talis: His Humble, and Holy Life being conclu∣ded with a Comfortable and Glorious Death. His Sun did not set under a Cloud, but shone out with a more bright and greater lustre then is ordinarily seen. It was his main Design and Business to glorifie God in his Life, and God did highly honour him at his Death, as will appear by that which follows. Whilst he was in Rutlandshire, on Thursday, October the 13th, Anno Christi 1666. he rode to a Neighbouring Town to assist in carrying on a day of Humiliation, where∣in, His sickness. having wearied his Body and spent his Spirits, he was fain to defer his return home till the next day. On the Lord's day following, he exercised twice for the Instructi∣on of the Family wherein he abode; and at his going to be Bed, he found himself not well. On Munday he continued ill, yet arose, came down and performed Family Duties. At Dinner he could eat but little, and at Night went ill to Bed, yet slept pretty well, only both those Nights he complained of a pain in his right side, and he had frequent provocation to Vomit, but without effect. Oft he found himself a cold; yet when he came a little to the Fire, he was too hot in his own sence, insomuch as his Friends about him judged that it would turn to an Ague. Wednesday and Thursday his Distemper continued, and on Friday finding himself still to grow weaker and weaker, he desired his Will might be fairly engrossed, which lay by him written with his own Hand, and withal, he laboured to perswade his Wife to be content and willing to part with him: Adding, That it would not be long e're they should meet again: and then he put up earnest Prayers unto God for her, and for other of his Relations. Upon Friday he sat up all the Day, but still continued under his Bodily Distempers, and finding his strength to decay, he would often repeat that of the Psalmist, The Zeal of thy House hath eaten me up. On Saturday he Sealed and published his Will, complaing all that Day of the Cramp in his left Leg. In the Evening he went to Bed, and in the apprehension of those about him, slept well that Night. About six a Clock on the Lord's day Morning, he raised himself up in his Bed, and with a chearful and loud voice called to his Wife, who lay in a Bed by him, saying, A Vision of Glory. Sweet Heart, I have been this Night conversing with Spirits. And, as in a Rapture, he cryed out, O the Glories that are prepared for the Saints of God! The Lord hath been pleased to shew me this Night, the exceeding weight of Glory which in Heaven is laid up for his Chosen ones. Saying further, That he had studied, and thought that he knew as much what the Glory which in Heaven was, as another Man: But he now saw, that all the Divines on Earth were but Children in the Knowledge of the great Mystery of heavenly Glory, which the Lord that Night had given him a clearer sight of, then ever formerly he had. That it was such a Mystery as could not be comprehended by the Wit of Man, with many other such like Expressions; and he had his Soul so wonderfully elevated, that he could not declare what he found and felt therein. Then he desired that his Relations, and the rest of the Family might be called up, that so he might make known unto them that immense weight of Glory which that Night had been revealed to him. When they were Assembled he did with vehemency and intension of Spirit, endeavour to discover the same unto them in the expressions aforesaid: But he was so swallowed up in the Contemplation thereof that he could not utter what he desired. And so he continued all that day, and even till he died in very high Raptures, and great acclamations by way of Thankfulness unto God for the Lord Jesus Christ, the Raptures.
Fountain of that Glorie, and for those evident Discoveries of the same unto him. Towards the Evening of the Lord's day, an honourable Person, together with his Lady, and some other Friends came to visit him, with whom he discoursed about Heaven and the things of God as understandingly, servently and fluently as if he had enjoyed his best Health: His understanding and Memory continuing as strong and vi∣gorous as ever: In his Discourse he quoted sundry Texts of Scripture, citing the very Chapter, Verse, and Words, and explaining the meaning from the Hebrew and Greek Originals. After this Discourse, which continued about the space of two hours, finding himself weary, he betook himself to Bed, all the Company withdrawing into another Chamber. And after an Hours repose, he desired that the said Honourable Person, with his Lady, and other Friends might be called in again, that he might speak somthing more unto them, and when they, with the rest of the Family were come into his Chamber, he told them that he thought he had but a short time to live. That he was going unto Jesus Christ, with him to partake of the fulness of Joy, and of those Rivers of Pleasure, which God had so lately discovered unto him, and which he had reserved in Heaven for those that love him and keep his Commandments. O (said he) if you had but a thorough sight thereof, it would make you all to love the Lord Jesus Christ and Holiness, which is the only way prescribed by God to attain to this Happiness. And so he went on to magnifie the Riches of free Grace, through which alone the Saints do come to enjoy that exceeding, exceeding eternal weight of Glory, which neither Eye hath seen, nor Ear heard, nor can enter into the Heart of Man to con∣ceive of. He also exhorted them, not so much to trouble themselves in getting assurance of Good Coun∣sel. Salvation, as to examine themselves carefully, diligently whether they were in the way of Sanctification: And for this end, he commended two things to their serious Meditations, about which he advised them dayly to ask their Souls these two Questi∣ons: What am I? And where am I? What am I? Am I a New-Creature? Am I born again? If so, then I have New Thoughts; New Words; New Company; and a New Conversation: All old Thoughts, Words, and Actions will be done away. Secondly, Where am I? Am I in the narrow Path that leads to Life Eternally, or in that Broad Way that leads to Death and Damnation? He told them, that if any there present were still in the Broad Way, it had been better that they had never been Born. And (said he) If you will make this your continual Meditation, you cannot miscarry. And if you find your selves to be in the Narrow Way of Sanctification, let God alone with the Rest, to give you an Assurance of your future happiness, which he will certainly do in his own time. He further declared to them, that as by all his Preaching, through all the course of his Ministry, he had discovered and published this way of Holiness through Christ to be the only way to Heaven, so could he now at his Death set out no other way: And that if he were again to begin his Ministry, he could hold out no other way to attain unto Glory. And so with much weariness of Spirit, looking up towards Heaven, he begged of God that the words of a Dying Man might make a deep impression upon the Hearts of his Hearers; and that as God had made him an Instrument of converting many Souls unto him in his Life, so he would bless what he had now spoken, that some one Soul might be brought to Jesus Christ, by this his last Sermon. Then▪ he further proceeded to other Holy Discourses and Instructions, quoting sundry Texts of Scripture for the proof of what he spake naming the Chapters, Verses, and Words of the Texts, which he opened, and explained out of the Originals, with that accurness and strength of Words, with that Zeal and Fervency of Spirit as was admirable, so that he drew Tears from the Eyes of all that were present, whether Younger or Elder. And lest any there present should think that his Understanding and Memory were grown weak, or that he was overcome through the abundance of Re∣velations which he had the Night before, to let them know that he had spoken un∣to them the words of Truth and Soberness, and that with a perfect understanding of what he spake, he made to them this Narrative following. He told them the manner of his Education in Religion from his Childhood, and of the Vanity which did attend his youthful Dayes; and where and how God did ap∣pear unto him for his Conversion at Twelve Years of Age, and of the assurance which God had given him (as is before related) that he should be an instrument of Convert∣ing many Souls to God: as also of his proficiency in Learning from that very time.
He further declared (with Tears trickling down his Cheeks) that he had many and many a time in private, before he went to Preach, put God in mind of his Promise so made unto him, and earnestly besought him to make good that Promise, by giving a Blessing to that good Word of his, which he was then going to deliver, that some Glory might redound to his Holy Name thereby: To which his Prayers God had often been pleased to give a gracious Answer, and to let him know it by the Conver∣sion of some by those very Sermons. One of his Relations then present, fearing that his Spirits would be weakened and spent by that his continued Discourse, requested him to repose himself for a while; to whom he replied with much earnestness and strength of Voice: No, were I sure that this should be my last Night (as indeed it proved) and the last Sermon that I should Preach, I would continue it two Hours longer: Adding, that he was not afraid of Death: And turning his Head backward, he said, Death is a Coward; he comes be∣hind me: he dares not look me in the Face. And he further said, The Devil hath oft assault∣ed me in my Life time; but God stood by me and gave me strength to resist him, so that he could never hurt me. All the Day following he lay in heavenly Contemplations and Raptures, often break∣ing forth in Praises unto God for Jesus Christ; and would somtimes desire his Wife, and other Friends to tell him whether he were in the Body or out of the Body, for he could not tell. And a Minister being then in the House, he desired that he might be called in, and when he was come, he propounded the same Question unto him, who answered, That he was in Life, and among his Friends on Earth, and therefore in the Body: To this he replied, It is true, and therewith rested satisfied, and desired the Minister to pray with him; which he did accordingly. His Wife told him that some Friends there present hoped that he might yet recover and live: To which he answered, Can a dead Man live? Will God work Miracles? And shortly after he said, God is doing great things in the World: And he much be∣wailed the sad estate and condition of the Church of Christ. In the Afternoon finding Death to approach, he often cryed out, O the Power of Death! not that he feared it: For it shrunk from him: but he found such a Power in Death as none could know but those that were under it. He also wished that his Sons had been present that they might see what the Power of Death was, and what it was to die. He desired also that some Neighbours in the Town might be called in, that he might Preach his last Sermon to them: And indeed, to this very present time his Spirits, Speech, and Memory continued very active and strong. About four a Clock in the Afternoon his Wife, and his Wives Brother and Sister, His Death. standing by his Bedside, asked him how he did? He answered, very weak: adding, That he was going to Jesus Christ; and bad them not to be afraid of Death: with which words he put forth his Hand, and said, Brother, Sister, take Death by the Hand: be not afraid; Death is a Coward; he flyes from me: They found that his Hands were cold and clamy, whereby they perceived that he grew near to his end: and himself not long after, feeling that the dissolution of his Earthly Tabernacle, was now ap∣proching; lifting up his Eyes towards Heaven, he cryed out, Come Lord Jesus: And presently, with a smiling Countenance, he added, Art thou come? And so he breathed out his last, and fell a sleep. Thus Reader, thou hast had a prospect of the more considerable Passages of this bles∣sed Mans Life and Death. Pause hear a while, and take a second view of all again, and then surely thou canst not but wish (though it is desired for thee, that it may be from a better Principle then was in Baalam) Let me die the Death of this blessed Man, and let my last end be like his. But in vain shalt thou wish for this, if the Pattern of his Holy and Exemplary Life be neglected by thee. We read of a Person of a loose Life, that hearing what a comfortable end St. Bernard made, said to his Companions; I would willingly die like St. Bernard, but I would live with and like you: 'Tis too certain that very many are of the same mind: But as it is impossible, but that an Holy Life should have a blessed and happy Death (Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Ʋpright: For the End of that Man is Peace, Psal. 37. 37.) So it is as impossible (in an ordinary way) that a loose and wicked Life, should have other than a miserable and uncomfortable Death, though some delusive, fading flashes of seeming Peace and comfort they may somtimes have which are but as a Blaze of Thorns which is suddenly extinct: For God himself hath said it, There is no Peace to the wicked (Isa. 48. 22.) And again: The wicked are driven away in their
wickedness: but the Righteous hath hope in his Death. Impius dum spirat Sperat: Sed Justus cum expirat sperat. The wicked while they live, hope, but with a vain, and ungrounded hope: But the Righteous hope when they die, with a lively, and well grounded hope that never leaves them till it brings them to the fruition of the thing hoped for. There yet remains somthings to be spoken which could not well be reduced to any one part of the Narrative of this worthy Persons life, because they did (like so many Golden Threads) pass through the whole Web: Or like the Spirits in the Blood, which run through the whole Body; and therefore these were thought fit to be reser∣ved to the close of all, that the Reader may have a view of them altogether. And they are such Gifts and Graces as were very remarkable in this Man of God: For so I call him, not only because he was a Minister, and so God's Servant in a more peculiar sence; but also because of those eminent and excellent Virtues appearing in him, by which God did set his Mark or Seal upon him, as his peculiar Treasure. And these Graces were so conspicuous in him, that all that knew and were acquainted with him, will readily attest to the Truth of them: And they may be thus ranked in Order. 1. His great Humility and Meekness of Spirit. 2. His Diligence and Industry in his Calling. 3. His Zeal and Fervour, manifesting it self in his Praying, Preaching, Conference, and strict Observation of the Lord's Day. 4. His Liberality and Bounty upon all good occasions. 5. His great Candor, and Ingenuity. 6. His Faith and Patience. 7. His Power and Prevalency in Prayer. First, To begin with his Humility: as that excellent Grace which embellished and His Humili∣ty. gave a lustre to all the rest, and is often enjoyned and pressed in the sacred Scriptures, and was most admirable in the Life of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who proposes himself as a Pattern to us in that Grace especially. And surely all that knew this worthy Doctor, will readily acknowledge this to have been very eminent in him; and that, not only in his Words and Garb, and some trivial Actions, which may easily be personated and counterfeited (as they were in that Frier, who always went seemingly dejected, and looking downwards towards the Earth, until he was chosen and made the Abbot of the Monastry, and then he altered his Mode, and gave this Reason of it; That he had long been looking for the Keys of the Abby, and that now, ha∣ving found them, he needed no longer to according to his former custom. But in our Doctor, Humility was of an higher strain, of a more Noble Origi∣nal, and deeplier radicated in his Heart. And truly it was the more admirable and Exemplary in him, having divers singular endowments which might have elevated and puffed up his Heart with Pride; as, a plentiful Estate; was of a considerable Rank in the World, and of great Abilities: But these were poor things in his esteem. He could condescend to Men of the lowest Rank. He used to magnifie the abillities of ohers whilst he thought and speak meanly of his own, and was not offended if others did the like. He could easily bear the Contradictions of others, and stoop to the meanest Of∣fices if thereby he might do good to Souls. It's well known that he would go to the poorest Neighbours Houses in his Parish, and there sit and discourse with them about the great and weighty concernments of their Souls; Qustioning with, and instructing them in the Principles of Religion; and at his Departure would give them some Mo∣ney, that by his Deeds he might add the more weight to his Words, and make his Prudence. next Return the more Welcome. And this he did, not to gain Proselytes to himself, or a Name among Men, but to win them to Christ, and to be a means in furthering the Eternal Salvation of their Souls. Secondly, His Diligence and Sedulity in his Calling was very Great and Exemplary. A hard Student he was all a long, and so he continued to the last. 'Tis scare credible, Industry. but to those that saw and knew it, what a great number of Books were found in his Library, filled with Transcriptions out of the Authors which he read over; Besides, pieces of Controversies, and Observations of his own. And indeed, there were few Books that he Read, but he took Notes out of them, and made Marks in them of what was most considerable. To which if we shall add all his Manuscripts (which had been the Summ of near Twenty Years Study) lost in the time of the late Wars, we cannot but conclude him to have been a most Faithful, and painful Labourer in the Lord's Vineyard. His daily Practice declared him to be a Person very careful to re∣deem time, and as fearful to lose, or mispend and waste it.
As soon as he was up in the Morning, whilst he dressed himself, either his Wife or Time im∣proved. a Servant read to him some Chapters in course, out of the Old and New Testament. When he was drest, he retired himself into his Study, where he ordinarily continued till he was called down to Prayer and Dinner: After which, for better digestion, he intermitted his Studies, and took opportunities of Discourse with Friends and Neigh∣bours that came to visit him, who knew that to be the only time wherein they might find him at leasure: For he used to forbid them coming to him in the Forenoon, that so his Studies might not be interrupted. And then after two or three Hours inter∣mission, he returned into his Study again, where, for the most part, both in Sum∣mer and Winter he continued till about Eight a Clock at Night, seldom eating any Supper, or very sparingly. When in the Evening he was come down, calling his Family together, he read a Chapter in course, gave the Sense of it, went to Prayer, and so to Bed, often grudg∣ing the time that he spent in sleep, and eating. Here also may be added, that as it was his cae to be well prepared before he went to Preach (for he would not offer either to God or Man that which cost him nothing) so did he strive to get his Heart into a right frame for Preaching, that from the Heart he might speak to the Hearts of his Hearers, as he used often to say: And to obtain assistance from God therein, he used by private Prayer to beg God's Blessing upon his Labours. It was his frequent saying, That he was as circumspect and diligent in studying what he was to deliver, as if he expected no assistance from Christ, yet when he came to Preach, disowning his own endeavours, he wholly cast himself upon Jesus Christ for strength and assi∣stance as if he had not studied at all. And that God many times suggested such mat∣ter into his mind in the delivery of his Sermons, as he had not thought on before, which also he observed, God did abundantly bless to the comrt and edification of his Auditory. He would often say, That his Opportunities were his Riches, and he was alwayes careful to improve them; whence it seldom came to pass that he Preached without making some real impression upon his Hearers, which was discovered by the Tears that fell from many of their Eyes. Thirdly, His Zeal and Fervour deserves our serious consideration. It was the Coun∣sel His Zeal. of a Grave and Holy Divine, That Christians should take heed that their Old Judg∣ments did not abate their Youthful Affections: And certainly there was in this our Old Doctor, such warmth of Affections as is seldom seen in so ancient a Man, and yet it was mannaged with such Christian Prudence, that he exercised it, not about light and trivial matters, but about the greater and more substantial Points of Religion, and that through the whole course of his Life. Whether he Preached, Prayed, or Dis∣coursed about Holy and Divine things, all was performed, and accompanied with much Zeal and warmth of Affections: He was Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, Rom. 12. 11. O how glad was he of an Opportunity of Preaching, and if (after the black day) his Liberty could have been purchased by Money, what would he not have gi∣ven for it? He was very affectionate in Prayer, and yet were his Affections so moderated and tempered with Prudence and Judgment, that though upon extraordinary Occasions, he could enlarge and exspatiate himself therein, yet in his Family Prayers he was usu∣ally short, that so he might not make Religious duties a burthen to those that join∣ed with him. And as his Prayers were fervent and mixed with Faith, so he had this Honour from God that he had many signal Returns and Answers to his Prayers, as shall be shewed afterwards, as can be attested by many yet living, who had benefit by them, or were Eye or Ear witnesses of them, and that both for Soul and Bodily Di∣stempers and Afflictions. He was Conscientiously strict and careful in the observation and Sanctification of the Sabbaths Sanctified. Lord's days; not permiting any Discourses in his presence, but such as were suitable to the Day, and to the Duties thereof: And he would Rebuke and Reproove such as took liberty to Discourse about their Worldly businesses upon God's holy Day. Fourthly, His Liberality and Bounty were as Eminent and Exemplary as any other His great Liberality. of his Virtues and Graces. As God gave him a large and plentiful Estate, so he gave him a free and large Heart, which was a double Mercy. He was Rich in Good Works, ready to Distribute willing to Communicate: Laying up in store for himself a good Founda∣tion against the time to come, 1 Tim. 6. 18, 19. He was often heard to say, That he could fare hardly and go meanly, that he might be the better enabled thereby to relieve the ne∣ssities
of them that were in want: And it is believed that few of his Estate and Rank xceeded him herein. Seldom did any necessitous Persons come to him; seldom did he hear of the wants of others, though at a distance from him, but they tasted of his Bounty. He gave large Summs of Money every Year for divers Years together, to Pious and Charitable uses, as his Wife can testifie, who kept an account in Writing of the several Summs so disbursed by him. Towards the relief of the Poor persecuted Prote∣stants in Piemont he gave Thirty Pounds; and as much the same Year to another Charitable use. He gave also several considerable Summs yearly for the maintenance and encouragement of some poor Schollars in the Colledge by Dublin, besides a large Summ of Money disbursed out of his own Purse, towards furnishing the Library there with good Books. As as he had thus sundry ways exercised and declared his Bounty whilst he lived, so at his Death he gave large Legacies to Pious and Charita∣ble uses, and God made good that Promise to him, Isa. 58. 10. If thou draw out thy Soul to the Hungry, and satisfiest the afflicted Soul: Then shall thy Light rise in obscurity, and thy Darkness be as the Noon day. Fifthly, To this Grace of Charity may be added his Candor, and Courteous de∣portment His Candor and Cour∣tesy. in mannaging of it, which gave a great lustre to his Bounty, according to that of the Poet: Dat bene, dat multum, qui dat cum Munere Vultum. His Meekness was such that he was not apt to be offended with others, much less His Meek∣ness. was he apt to offend others. He always interpreted to the best Sence that which might seemingly have ministred occasion of disgust, by which obligingness, and ex∣cellent Temper, he drew Love and Respect to himself where ever he came, and with whom soever he conversed; whether in private Families, or in his more publick im∣ployments. Sixthy, His Faith and Patience calls for our serious consideration, of both which, Faith and Patience. as he had given good proof in the whole course of his Life, so they eminently shone forth when he came to die. In the time of his Sickness he shewed an humble, holy, and chearful resignation of himself to the Wise and Merciful disposal of God, his Hea∣venly Father. Not one repining word was heard to proceed out of his Mouth: He was Dumb and opened not his Mouth, because it was the Lord that did it, Psal. 39. 9. There was not so much as an impatient or uncomly motion seen in him: But being full of Death not feared. Faith and Christian Patience and Courage, he feared not Death, but was well resol∣ved and prepared against the stroke of it: And would often say, O how happy a thing is it, by Death to be above a possibility of sinning. The Heathen Philosophers called Death, The most terrible of all terribles, and the Sa∣cred Scripture calls i, The King of Terrors. It is storied, that one hearing a Person high∣ly commended for his rare and excellent Virtues, said, Let us stay till his Death, and then we shall be the better able to judg of all these things which make such a glittering shew in him for the present. And certainly to be able to look the King of Terrors in the Face, without an appaled Countenance, and to meet the last Enemy [Death] with joy and comfort is no small evidence of a true and strong Faith: And this was evidently dis∣cerned and seen in this worthy Doctor at the time of his Death. He often declared in his Health, that in his younger Days, he had been sorely vexed and perplexed with Satana Temptations; but at last, meeting with a plain, honest Christian (such an other probably as was that Shepherd with whom Junius met) to whom, complaining of his Fears, he first rebuked him, and then instructed him, Good coun∣sel. saying, You look at the Reward without minding and attending your Work, in that you desire and expect assurance, before you have well resolved of doing your Duty. My ad∣vice therefore is, to mind what God requires of you in your present station, and be serious and diligent therein, and assurance will come in God's due time. This advice, he pro∣fessed, was of great use to him all his Life after; so that from that time forward he was not troubled with such perplexing Thoughts as formerly he had been: But he lived and died in Peace both with God and Man in the Great Climaterical Year of his Age, October the 22th. Anno Christi, 1666. 7. And lastly, His power and prevalency in Prayer was very remarkable, and more than ordinary. The wise Solomon tells us (Prov. 12. 2.) That a good Man obtaineth favour of the
Lord, that is, he hath what he will of God. Id quod vult a Deo impetrat▪ quia ejus His Preva∣lency in Prayer. voluntas est ipsissima Dei voluntas, nec aliud vul; as Mercer hath it out of Rabbi Levi. 'Tis written of Luther, Iste vir potuit a Deo quicquid voluit: That by his Prayer he could prevail with God at his pleasure: Melancthon, and Myconius, being sick of de∣sperate Diseases, were both recovered by Luther's Prayers. Sozomon, saith of Apol∣lonius, That he never asked any thing of God in all his Life which he obtained not. Blessed is he that hath what he will, and Wills nothing but what he should. The Persons of Saints (saith a Reverend Divine) are like secret Pledges of common quiet, and their Me∣ditations and Prayers are a Shield to the Earth against the Wrath of Heaven. Faithful Prayer (saith another) is able, after a sort, to alter God's mind, and to transfuse a Dead Palsy into the Hands of Omnipotency, as Exod. 32. 10. where God is fain to be∣speak his own freedom, Let me alone, &c. We have many Examples in Scripture of the Power and Efficacy of Prayer. Jacob would have a Blessing, and therefore by Prayers wrestles with might and slight; Prayer Powerful. and this he doth in the Night, when alone, and God about leaving him, and upon one Leg. He had a hard pull and yet prevailed. The Woman of Canaan (Mat. 15. 23.) came for a cure, and a cure she would have, and she had it at last, with an high com∣mendation of her Horoical Faith in Prayer. God heaps Mercies upon his Suppliants, (as Naaman did upon Gehazi) and blames them for their Modesty in asking: Hitherto (said he) ye have asked nothing, that is, nothing to what you might and should. Ask and have, that your Joy may be full, Joh. 16. 24. Many other Scripture Examples might be produced, but lest any should think that those were extraordinary, and that the like are not to be found in our Days, take notice of these Instances follow∣ing. When Mr. Winter, in his younger Days was cast out of his Living, his first Wife, The first Instance. having many Children, fell into great Grief, and perplexity of Mind, fearing lest she and hers should come to want. Mr. Winter was much troubled to see his Wif's discontents, and thereupon plied the Throne of Grace for cure thereof; and one Day, as he was riding abroad, and crying earnestly unto God about this matter, he thought that he heard a Voice, saying unto him, Because thou hast not spared thine Estate for my Glory, neither thou, nor any of thine shall want. At his return home he told this to his Wife with Joy, saying, That he would not for all he was worth, want that comfortable an∣swer to his Prayers. When an Order was sent to Mr. Winter from the Parliament that then was, to attend A second Instance. their Commissioners into Ireland, his Wife was very unwilling thereunto, and some of their near Relations came on purpose to diswade him from going; himself also was very fearful of the Seas. In this his great strait, he retired into his Study (as his usual manner was in like cases) and there with much earnestness, he spread the matter be∣fore God craving his Guidance, and direction therein. And the Lord was pleased to set it upon his Spirit, that he should go, and be carried in safety thither, and there become an Instrument of converting many Souls to God. When he had declared this to his Wife, and Friends, they acquiesced, and so he resolved upon that Journey: And according to this Gracious Promise of God, though they took Shipping in the midst of Winter, and went with a Master that was not very well acquainted with those Seas, yet they found the Seas calm, and their Passage so speedy, that whereas some other great Persons went out before them, and with a more experienced Master, yet they arrived in safety about four and twenty Hours before them, insomuch as the Captain of the Ship said, That in his whole Life he had never known so calm and speedy a Passage before. Not long after Mr. Winter's coming into Ireland he went with the Commissioners A third Instance. unto Kilkenny, in which place Collonel Jones his VVife fell very sick of the Yellow Jaun∣dise, and some other Distempers; for which cause her Husband invited certain Mi∣nisters, and some other Friends to spend some Hours in Prayer unto God in her be∣half. And Mr. Winter was the last Man that prayed. But before he began, he went to her and asked her, Whether she had Faith to be healed? She answered, She thought she had. Then he went to Prayer, and wrestled exceedingly with God for her reco∣very: And when he had done, he went again unto her, and advised her to be very careful and diligent in the use of all good means for the recovery of her Health; ad∣ding, That she should live, and not die at that time: at this saying of his, his Wife and Sister were much troubled, and told him in private, that they would have given much Money, rather then that he should have spoken so confidently of her recovery,
there being so many Anabaptists present at that time: And they feared that if his Words proved true, they might thereby be confirmed in their Enthusiastical conceits; if otherwise, that then they might take occasion to scandalize his Person and Ministry: But he again told them that she should not die at that time. Yet after this she continued very weak for a Month or more: her Doctors gave her up for a dead Woman, whereupon Mr. Winters Wife again blamed him, for his confi∣dent saying, That she must live; to which he smillingly answered, Well, she is not yet Dead, At length her Disease so prevailed, that she lost the use of her Senses, and her Servants that stood weeping about her, said, Now she is near death indeed. The Sa∣turday following, as Mr. Winter sat at Dinner, a Messenger came to him from Collonel Jones, to tell him, That if he would see his Wife alive, he must come away presently, for that she was now a dying. At this Mrs. Winter was much troubled, because of her Husbands former confidence in Promising her Life: But Mr. Winter made no great hast to be gone, saying, That he knew well when God answered his Prayers, and when not. After he had dined he went to the House, where he found the Collonel sitting by her, ready to close her Eyes so soon as Breath departed out of her Body, for so she had enjoyned him in the time of her Health. She lay speechless and without the use of her Senses, not answering, nor moving her Eyes, though her Husband, and Mr. Winter called unto her, whereupon her Husband judged that she had lost her Hearing. Mr. Winter requested that he might pray with her; but her Husband refused, saying, That she was Sensless, and had been a dying all that Morning. Mr. VVinter urged again that yet he might pray with her: No (said the Collonel) it is to no purpose: She is now a dead VVoman. Yet Mr. VVinter urged the third time, that he might pray, say∣ing, Her Life is yet in her; and whilst there is life, there is hope, and so he went to Prayer, which he performed with much earnestness and importunity, joyned with many Tears. When Prayer was ended, Mr. VVinter, going to her Bed-side, she looked upon him, and with a smiling Countenance, said, O, see the fruit of Prayer! O, see the fruit of Paryer! Set me up, and give me something to eat: I am cured, but not by the Art of Doctors: only Free grace, and fervent Prayers have prevailed with God for me. They asked her, What she could eat? She answered, any thing. They gave her some Bread and Butter, of which she did eat pritty heartily. Then did her Husband send for her Doctors; but she had them not to provide any more Physick for her, saying, That she would take none; for she would not dishonour God: nor wrong prayer so much (by which she was now cured) as to take any more Physick: Nor could she, by any means be perswaded to it. On Munday following in the Afternoon, Mrs. VVinter heard that Mrs. Jones was walking in her Garden, which she wondring at, went to see her, and found her there indeed. So soon as she saw Mrs. VVinter, she went to meet her, and said, O, see the fruit of Prayer! Mrs. VVinter, blessed God for her recovery; whereupon she said, My Doctors would have me take some more Physick of them: but it is God that hath cured me, and he only shall have the praise of it. I will take nothing of them: they shall not boast that they have cured me: For God by Prayer hath done it. It's Prayer alone that hath done it. And indeed hearin God made good that gracious Promise of his, Jam. 5. 15. The Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. Some Months after, Mr. VVinter with his Family, removed to Dublin; and after sometime the aforesaid Mrs. Jones fell sick again, and her Sickness prevailed so far up∣on her, that, growing very weak, she was confined to her Bed; whereupon on a Lord's day, Mr. Winter and his Wife, and her Sister went to visit her: when they came, A fourth Instance. they found an other Minister with her; but she called for Mr. Winter to pray with her. A Lady that was present, coming to Mrs. VVinter's Sister, said, O! do you think this good VVoman will recover, or not? She answered, I know not yet: but when my Brother Winter hath done Prayer, I will tell you more. When Mr. Winter had ended his Prayer, she came to her again, an said, What think you now? She answered, She believed that she would not recover, and so said Mrs. Winter also. The reason whereof was, because they observed that in his Prayer, he was more earnest in Praying for the Spiritual, and Eter∣nal welfare of her Soul, then for her Bodily health. When they were returned home, Mrs. VVinter asked her Husband, what he thought of her? He answered, She will die. And this he said, Because when in prayer he would have begg'd of God to restore her to Health, he could not do it; but could only pray for her Eternal happiness. Faithful Prayer is ordained of God to be a means to obtain what we want and desire, and therefore 'tis never put up in vain, but shall have an
answer, 1 Joh. 5. 14, 15. For where God gives a Tongue to speak, he hath an Ear to hear. 'Tis the Observation of a Reverend Divine of our own: That when God in∣tends not to hear, he lays the Key of Prayer out of the way; as being loth that such pre∣cious Breath as that of Prayer is, should be without it's full and clearest success. After this Mrs. Jones grew worse and worse, and continued in a languishing con∣dition for some Months. She had several Doctors, who sed her with hopes of re∣covery, Mr Winter prayed oft with her, but still after the same manner, insomuch as his Wife told him, that she thought he did not love Mrs Jones as formerly, because he prayed not for her Life: he answered, that his Love was the same, but he was so bound up in his Spirit, that he could not pray for her recovery, and therefore he conceived that she would die. At length Mrs. Jones finding her self very weak, sent for Mr. Winter to pray with her, and after Prayer, she said unto him: Sir, I fear you love me not so much as former∣ly. God heard your Prayers for me when I was dying at Kilkenny, but now you do not Pray so earnestly for my life as you did then. No (said he) I neither do, nor can do it, tho I love you as well as ever: For when I would Pray for your Life, my tongue is turned to Pray for your Eternal Welfare. Therefore I believe that you are not a woman for this World, but will shortly be in a better. Think you so, said she, hereupon she sent for a Collonels Wife, between whom and her self there was some difference, and they were reconciled together. She sent also for her Husband, and imparted her mind to him: Adding, that she saw that she must die, for that Mr. Winter could not Pray for her, as he did in former Sickness: And it pleased God shortly to take her to himself. At an other time Mrs Winters Sister going for England, left her only Son with her; A fifth Instance. And after a while the Child fell into an high Feavour, and one Morning the maid with whom the Child lay, came to her Mrs and told her, she feared the Child had the Plague, for that he had many Spots in his Bosom; And the Plague, at this time, was in Dublin. Mrs. Winter presently sent for a Doctor, who, when he had seen the Child, said, that they were either Plague Spots, or Feavour Spots, and that he much feared the Childs life. Hereupon Mrs Winter went to her Husband in his Study, and acquainted him with these things, requesting him that he would be earnest with God in begging the Childs Life. At Noon, when her Husband came down, we asked him, what he thought of the Child? He bad her not to perplex and trouble her self, for the Child would live: And before the next day the Child began to amend, and within a few dayes was perfectly well. Mrs VVinter herself was somtime under a strong Temptation to become an Ana∣baptist, A sixth Instance. being strongly perswaded that it was the way of God: And she proceed∣ed so far that she had been Dipped, but that she feared it would reflect upon her Husbands credit. Her Husband took much pains with her to reclaim and settle her in the Truth, yet could she not be convinced of her Error, but continued Night and Day in great perplexity of Spirit, only she relyed upon that gracious Promise of Christ. John 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God. And at last she resolved to set a day apart to seek unto God for satis∣faction in this doubtful Case. But it fell out that, that very day, they were earnest∣ly invited to dine wirh Doctor Jones, and Mr. VVinter had promised to go: But his Wife said, she could not go, because she had set that day apart upon such an occa∣sion: Her Husband answered her; Thou must go, for I have been Praying for thee, and God hath assured me that thou shalt be satisfied, and that quickly too: And so ac∣cordingly it came to pass. For she was so resolved, and satisfied from Heaven, that afterwards she was able to Dispute with the Female Anabaptists, yea, and to confute them; Insomuch as some of the Officers who were of that perswasion, would suffer their Wives to come no more unto her. Whilest they were in Dublin Mrs. VVinters Sisters Husband, being upon his oc∣casions A seaventh Instance. in London, he fell very dangerously Sick, Sr. Francis Pridjean, and an other Doctor were his Physitians, who after a time gave him up for Dead. An other of Mrs. VVinters Sisters wrot her word of it; Adding, that she believed before that Letter could come to her Hands he would be Dead and Buried. As soon as they received it, his Wife desired that that afternoon might beset apart to seek God, in her Husbands behalf; and accordingly some Ministers and Christians were in∣vited to meet together for that end: When the time was come, Mrs. VVinter re∣quested her Husband to come away, for that the company were met together: He
bad her go before; For he must endeavour to know of the Lord whether he was yet living or no: For (said he) do you think that I will Pray for a Dead Man? when some of the Ministers had Prayed, Doctor VVinter came in. They Pray'd with submission, that if he where yet in the Land of the Living, the Lord would be pleased to be his Physician, and to direct and bless all good means to him for the recovery of his Health. But in the close of the day, when Doctor VVinter came to Pray, he shewed much confidence, that he was yet alive, to the amazment of all that heard him. But his Sister in Law who knew his manner, and had much experience of the succesfulness of his Prayers, between Hope and Fear could not contain herself from cry∣ing out, when Doctor VVinter had concluded and was risen from his knees, he went to her, and took her by the hand, saying: Be of good comfort, for your Husband is alive, and shall recover, and you shall see him again with Joy. She crying out aloud, said, Ah, Brother, I fear he is Dead: Do you think he is alive? I know (said he) that he is alive, and repeated over his former words again: And accordingly in their next Letters they heard of his recovery. At another time Mrs. VVinters Sister (who was with them in Ireland) fell into a dangerous Relaps after a Feavour, being great with Child, and within two Months An Eight Istance. of her time; At which time she fell into a great bleeding at the Nose. She had three Doctors and Chyrurgions, who used all their Arts, and yet could not stop it. At length she fell into Travel, and two Midwives were sent for to her: She was fain to sit upright in her Bed, and could not ly down because of her violent bleeding. Her Midwives and Doctors gave her up for a dead Woman; And she grew so weak, that her Sister VVinter not enduring to see her die, left her, and went to her own Cham∣ber, were she found that her Sisters Husband had caused Doctor VVinter to arise (it being in the Night) and to Pray for his Wife, which accordingly he did with much earnestness; And it pleased God, that presently after news was brought them, that she was delivered of a dead Child. Hereupon Doctor VVinter and his Wife went to see her, and found her still Bleeding; And the Doctors and Chyrurgians were sent for again, who agreed to open a vain and let her Blood: The Chyrurgion struck her right Arm, but no blood came, the Doctors bid him try the other Arm; He answered, That it was to no purpose, for she had no Pulse for some hours before; Yet the Doctors caused him to do it, and then some few drops of Blood came. But most of this time Doctor VVinter was Praying for her in the next room, and she somtimes over heard him, but could not speak. Afterwards she told them that these thoughts were in her Head; Yonder Good Man would fain have me live, but it will not be. Indeed one of her Midwives bid her prepare for Death; For she could not live: To whom one of the Doctors said, that sure she had forgotten Lazarus: No (replied the Midwife) I have not forgotten him: But God must work as great a Miracle now, as he did then, if she recover. Yet for all this, it pleased God that she did recover, and afterwards one of the Doctors told Mrs VVinter, that he never saw one so near unto Death, to live; And that to him it was a Miracle. Here you see another sweet return to Doctor VVinters Prayers, and his Sister would often acknowledge that it was by the power and prevalency of his Prayers that she was restored to Life; and so others judged also. A Ninth Instance. The last time that the Soldiers pulled the Parliament in Pieces, Doctor Winter and his Friends in Dublin were in great Fears of the Confusions that were like to follow; Whereupon he kept weekly Fasts with his Congregation for a great while together? And one time as he was Praying in imitation of Abrahams praying for Sodom, he used such like expressions: Lord wilt thou also destroy the Righteous with the VVicked? Peradventure there be fifty Thousand Righteous within these three Kingdoms: VVilt thou also destroy, and not spare these Nations for fifty Thousand Righteous tbat are therein, &c. And when he came to the last number of ten Thou∣sand, as he kneeled against a Post in the Room, he saw a great shining Light about him, and heard perfectly a Voice saying: The Nations shall be spared for ten Thou∣sand Righteous Persons sake. Upon this gracious Answer, he turned his Prayer into Praises and Thanksgivings unto God for this speedy return to his earnest Request, insomuch as all the company could not but take notice of it, tho none of them heard the Voice but himself only. Mrs. VVinter upon some occasion was absent at this time; Yet a Gentlewoman that was present told her after, that her Husband that day was so enlarged, and
Elevated in Prayer, that he exceeded himself, and that she never heard him do better as also that his Petitions were answered before he rose from his Knees. Mrs. VVinter, asked her, how she knew that, she answered, by his large Thanksgivings after he had done pleading with the Lord for these Nations. Also a while after, a Gentle∣woman coming to see him, who had been present that day, embraced him, saying, that he was a man greatly beloved of the Lord, for he could no sooner ask but he was answered, and his Petition granted. And the very week after, they heard that the Pride of the Soldiers was abated, having meet with a check. Doctor VVinter afterwards told his Wife, that he perceived that a Voice might be spoken to one in a Room, where many were, and yet none else might hear it. And when he lay upon his Death-Bed, his Wife asked him again about it, and he said that he did as certainly and plainly hear it, as he heard her then speak: She asked, if the Voice were like unto hers? No (said he) It was another manner of Voice. Thus we read, Act. 22. 9 That the men that went with Saul to Damascus, saw indeed the Light, and were afraid: But heard not the Voice that spake to him. At Dublin there was one Mrs Smith, a Merchants Wife, who had been many A Tenth Instance. dayes in Labor, her Child was Dead within her, she had good experienced Midwives, and one Man-Midwife, and yet she could not be delivered. At last, one Morning they sent for Doctor Winter to pray with her, telling him, that she could not live till Night she was so far spent. But it fell out that he was out of Town, when they sent. At Night he came home, and then they sent again for him, her Husband sending him Word that she was not yet Dead, but very neer unto it. Doctor Winter (tho he was very weary) went to the House, and Prayed very earnestly unto God for her. And when his Prayer was ended, he spake to the good Women about her, to raise her up, and to use all good means for her Delivery saying, That say should Live: But they (being hopeless of her Life and Delivery, desired that she might be no more tortured, but be suffered to Die in Peace.) Yet Doctor Winter importuned them to make one tryal more, which at last they consented to, and had good success: For in a short time she was safely delivered of a Dead Child. This Mrs Smith proving afterwards with Child again; a Friend of hers said to her, she hoped now it would be better with her then it was the time before: (said she) Doctor Winter is gone, and I must now Die: which also came to pass, for she could not be Delivered. After Doctor Winter returned into England, he, with his Wife sojourned for a An Eleaventh Instant. Month in Doctor Drakes House, in which time his second Daughter fell sick of the twisting of her Guts: She had two able Physicians, Doctor Trench and Doctor Cox. She lay in very great Torments from Munday till Saturday Night, and the Doctors had very little Hopes of her Life. On Saturday in the Evening Doctor Winter came in, and meeting her Sister, he enquired how she did? Her Sister an∣swered, that now she thought she was very neer unto Death; For that the Doctors haveing perscribed somthing to be given her in a Spoon, her Teeth were so set that her Aunt and she had much ado to open them to put it into her Mouth: But (said she) Sir, what do you think of her. Give me (said he) a Candle that I may go into my Chamber, and anon I will tell you whether she shall Live or Die. When he came down, she meet him at the Foot of the Stairs, and asked him, what he thought of her now? He answered, Your Sister will Live. And so going up into her Chamber, he spake to his Wife, and bid her use all good means possible for her recovery: For (said he) She must not Die at this time. His Wife begged of him not to be so confident, for that she was now very near unto Death, and there were no hopes of her Recovery; Yet he told her Mother and Aunt, that she should recover and live. His wife was much troubled at it, notwithstanding her many experiences. But the next day signes of recovery began to appear, and within a lit∣tle space she was perfectly well. Some other Instances of his Power and Prevalencie in Prayer might be given; But these may suffice, as evidently Demonstrating that the Lord our God is a Prayer-Hearing God: That, Never faith to the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye my Face in Vain. Probably the incredulous World will not believe these things to be true: But Judge them rather to be Romances, and Fancies, then Realities: But there were so many Persons of Quality and Conscience at the first publication hereof, Living, who could, and would attest the Truth of them, that there is no place left of distruct
and doubting to those that are Sober, and Judicious. Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his Secrets to his Servants the Prophets. John 16. 23. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. v. 24. Hitherto you have asked nothing in my Name, Ask and you shall recieve that your Joy may be full. The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Tregoss, who died Anno Christi 1670. THomas Tregross was born at Saint Ives, neer the Lands-end in Cornwal. The Family where of he was a Branch was not without Noble Blood running in His Pa∣rentage. its veines. Some are of opinion that it is more Ancient then the Norman Con∣quest, a Stem of the old Britans driven into and Planted in those parts. Our English History tells us that Duke William, commonly called The Conquerour, created John Tregoss a Baron, who tho he died without Issue, yet Henry Tregoss sat as a Baron in the Parliament in the Thirty Fift year of King Henry the first: And Ro∣bert Tregoss was one of those Lords that sided with Simon Montford Earl of Leicester against King Henry the third. As for the ruines of this Noble Family, the principal cause thereof is very Re∣markable, and ought to be buried in silence. One Mr Roscadden going on Pilgri∣mage, according to the blindness and Superstition of those times, his Wife had in his absence one, if not more Children: whereupon at his return, John Tregoss ad∣vised and perswaded him to settle his Estate upon some Friend, for the use and benefit of his Wife and Children, lest after his Death, the Heir at common Law should turn his Wife and Children out a Doors. Mr. Roscadden entertained, and approved the motion, and intreated him to ac∣cept of the trust, which request John Tregoss readily embraced; But instead of a Perfidi∣ousness: Deed in Trust, he made it absolute to himself and his Heirs for ever. And accord∣ingly so soon as Mr. Roscadden was Dead, he entred upon all his Lands, and turned his Wife and Children out of Doors, who for some time, were sain to lye in an Hogstie, and every Morning went forth to the Dunghil, and there upon their Knees Imprecated and Prayed that the Vengeance of God might fall upon this Tregoss and his Posterity for this so perfidious and merciless dealing. And after this Gods severe, but Righteous Judgments fell upon Tregosses Family. Plagued by God. For his Son Walter one day riding upon a Horse in a fair way, the Horse threw him, and broak his neck: And some of his Issue came to untimly ends, and it is observed that a curss hath remained upon the Estate ever since: And this Mr. Thomas Tregoss of whom we now write, was so sencible of it, that it cost him many fervent Prayers to God for the removal of that dreadfull Curse, as himself assured a bo∣som Friend. Notwithstanding the Judgment of God upon this Family; Yet Thomas Tregosses Parents were Godly Persons, and reputed to be of the number of Old Punitans. And this was much manifested in the Religious Education of this their Son, whose His Edu∣cation. tender years they took care to have timely seasoned with the Principles of Reli∣gion, and good Literature. At first indeed he seemed to be of a dull Capacity, till he was about the Age of seven Years, or somwhat after; But then he began to discover that he was of a quick apprehension and of a firm and tenatious Memo∣ry. And indeed he had from his youth a strong inclination to the Work of the Mi∣nistry, and would often (when he was but a Child) stand up upon a Stool, or Bench and after his manner Preach to his Play-fellows. When he had attained to a compleat measure of Grammer Learning, he was sent He goes to Oxford. to Oxford and admitted into Exeter Colledge, under the Tuition of Mr. Francis Howel, then Fellow of the said Colledge; He soon percieved in him an awakned and quick Spirit, full of vivacity and serious intention, insomuch as he made good the
Character which Aristotle gives of a hopefull young Man, , To act vigorous∣ly, which he shewed in whatever Eercises he was engaged in. And he did not (as too many Youths do) frustrate, and abuse the expectations of his Friends and Re∣lations, by squandering away those pretious oportunities, and encouragements afforded unto him, for the elevating of his Natural Capacity by the acquirement of Liberall Arts, and Philosophicall Sciences, wherein he made a very good Pro∣gress. His Blam∣lesness. Neither was he without a good interest in the Judgment and Esteem of Judicious and Pious Persons, as appeared by the admittance which Reverend Doctor Conant gave him, in accepting him to be a Member of his Congregation. Also whilst he continued in the University, he began to be sensible of some woundings of his Con∣sience. For one day hearing Doctor Conant upon that Text Hos. 6. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? &c. Some passages of that Sermon made so deep an Im∣pression upon him, as that his Conscience was filled with no small Terror. When he went to his Bed, he was not without fears that he should never live to see another day. When in his Study, that he should never come out alive. His Terror. And so long as the terrors of his awakned Conscience, and Sick Nights for Sin continued, he could not endure to hear a vain word, or to be a Spectator of what had but the appearance of Sin in it. Yet by degrees these Lights and heats of Conscience disappeared, and vanished away. Neither did they at that time determine and end in a thorow Conversion, as will be made more clear here∣after. When he had spent some time in the University, he returned to Saint Ives, the place of his Nativity, and haveing there given them some tast of his Ministerial Gifts, His return to St. Ives. the Inhabitants of that place invited him to sit down among them, and to be their Minister. This request he at first modestly refused, but at length being overcome by their importunity, he consented to spend some time amongst them: Where His Ordi∣nation. upon he was August the Seventeenth. Anno Christi 1657. in that Church solem∣ly set apart for the work of the Ministry: And there he continued by the space of two Years: A hard and close Student all the week, and a faithful and constant Preacher twice every Lords Day. His Ma∣riage. Before his departure from this Place he took to Wife one Margret Sparman, who proved a Gracious, Meek, Humble, Affectionate, and equal Yoak-fellow to him. And whilest he continued in this Town, there were two remarkable Providences that ought not to be forgotten. The first was this. The Summer after his abode among them, much of the Fish∣ing A Special Providence season was expired, and no Pilchards appeared, the Sense whereof greatly af∣fected and afflicted the Inhabitants of the Place; That Town depending much up∣on the Pilchard Trade. Hereupon Mr. Tregoss advised, and perswaded them to joyn with him in Keeping a day of Humiliation and Prayer, unto which they con∣senting, and the Duty being performed, the very next day came in a great Shole of these Fishes, whereof a considerable quantity was chaught. The other Providential Dispensation was this. The Summer following the Fisher∣men Another. having taken a great number of Pilchards upon a Saturday, all that Night was spent in ordering of them: And the Sea-men were very intent upon drying their Nets on the Lords day. This Mr. Tregoss rebuked them for: withall, giving them to understand, that they provoked the Lord deservedly to withdraw his Blessing from them, which fell out accordingly. For from that time to the end of the Fishing season they had no occasion, or oportunity of making use of their Nets again. From Saint Ives Mr. Tregose removed in October Anno Christi 1659. To the His remove to Miler, Vicarage of Miler and Mabe where he continued in his constancie of Study, and Preaching till he was Ejected by the Act of Ʋniformity upon that dismal day August the 24th 1662. And then being prohibited, and excluded from the Publick Place of Prayer and Preaching, he ceased not to Preach in his own Family twice every Lords Day: which being known in the Neighbourhood, diverse who had the Comfort of his Ministry in publick, could not but Thirst after it in private. This being divulged and known abroad, the news of it was carried to the Lord His first im∣prisonment Lieutenant of the Country, who for his refusing to take the Oath appointed for the Militia, committed him to the Custody of the Mareschal, with whom he con∣tinued about the space of three Months, yet not ceasing to Preach to his Fellow
Prisoners, hearing others also that came to hear him. But at an he was released by an order from the Deputy-Lieutenant. His indust∣ry. In September Anno Christi 1663. Mr. Tregoss removed his habitation to the Ba∣ron of Kigilliack in the Parish of Badock near unto Penrin: where he still kept up his Lords-days meetings and exercises; unto which many came flocking as Doves to their Windows. And about the beginning of October Anno Christi 1664. He and his Wife lying awake in their Bed, they felt a great Earthquake, which made that Room to tremble and quake under them, as they apprehended. And that which ministred to them great cause of admiration, was, that no one else felt the same. But this was A Strange Providence but a Prognostick and Symbolick Image of that trembling Heart-quake which Mr. Tregos shortly felt in his Conscience. For on the first of January next following, it being a Lord's day, it pleased God to direct him to Preach on that Text Luke 12. 47. And that Servant that knew his His Con∣version. Lords Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many Stripes. Upon which Text he shewed what a dangerous Sin it is to Sin against Knowledge. But when the Duties of the Day were ended, the Lord brought his old Sins into his remembrance, and set them in order before him, especially one aboue the rest. Hereupon he betook himself to Duties, but drove on therein very heavily: Yet did the Lord by his Omnipotent Hand draw him on to persevere in the same. One day among the rest as he was in Duty, he was assaulted with a strong Temp∣tation, grounded upon that Text. Heb. 12. 17. For ye know how that afterwards, Temptati∣on. when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected; For he found no place for Repentance, tho he sought it carefully with Tears. He frequently endeavor'd to shake off the Chains and Cords of the Spirit, grieving that he was bound up from the World: And his performance of Duties s accompanied with deadness and unbe∣liefe: Yet the Lord held him fast to his Work; forceing him to continue and persist in a way of Seeking. Somtimes he feared that the Lord would leave him to run on in his former Sinfull The Spirit of Bondage. Courses; Yea, that he should not persevere to the end of one Day. But the Lord Magnified his Grace and Power above, and beyond his fears. Somtimes in reading the Holy Scriptures the Lord would set home Threatnings, and anon supported him by his Comfortable Promises, to keep him equally ballanced, between Hopes, that so he might not Sink, and Fears, that he might not Presume. Thus for about the space of five Weeks, he was detained, and kept under the Spirit of Bondage and afflicting Terrors, having all this while no discoveries of Gods Gracious disposition towards him, till about the beginning of February following: At which time he took up a resolution to discover some Sins which most burdened his Conscsence: But then, by Gods good Providence he met with a passage in one of our English Divines setting forth the Greatness and Freeness of Gods Love, and of Christs Purchass; Which the Lord setting home unto him, he was somwhat quieted and refreshed in his Soul. The next Day, which fell out to be a Lords-Day, he had a sweet, heart melting frame The Spirit of Adopti∣on. of Spirit wrought in him for his Sins, together with a Lively Contemplation of Christs Sufferings, to which he was directed by an Eye of Faith. And now he, who form∣erly thought it an hard matter to shed one Tear for Sin, had now plenty. The Spirit of the Lord also bringing that Promise to his mind: I will forgive their Iniqui∣ties, and remember their Sins no more. And that of Christ to Thomas, Reach hither thy Finger, and behold my Hands, and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and be not Faithless, but Believeing: And this was much promoted by his Reading the History of Christs Passion Yet was he not without some Fears and Doubtings still: Yea, at many times these Comforts, and Encouragements signified nothing at all to him. Yet after this, he was carried on in the exercise of Duties with more Enlargements, and Affectionate Workings of Spirit then formerly, especially at times. And from this time he dated his Conversion. For albeit his Conversation, for some considerable time before was unreproachable, and his Labours in the Work of the Ministry indefatigable; Yea, and his Zeal for Non-Conformity remarkable, yet he judged the whole of his foregoing Life, Zeal, and Labors in the Ministry, to be no other then Splendida Peccata, Glittering Sins, and a continued series of Formality and Hypocrisie. And because some of his Friends, who well knew his former Con∣versation,
could not but conceive that he had the Truth of Grace before this great Turn; He discoursing with a Friend upon this point, peremtorily affirmed, that he knew certainly that he had nothing of Sincerity before this late and great Work: And withall, he bewailed the Condition of the Church of England, in that generally Men were made Ministers, before they were made Christians. Yea, he was not without many and great Fears, that many who in the Judgment and Esteem of Men, go for good and able Ministers, will one Day be found to be, when they come to be weighed in the Ballance of the Sanctuary, not so much as good and sincere Christians. These his Fears we may presume, he grounded upon his own Ex∣perience of himself (besides other common observations) who had the repute and esteem of, good and faithful Minister, before he was a sound and faithful Christian. And that which yet added further weight in his Judgment concerning himself, was this, in that though he had been painful, and constant in the work of the Ministry some years before this, yet he could not say, That God had made him the Instrument of the conversion of any one Soul, as the Seal of his Ministry, though afterwards he begat many Sons and Daughters unto God. Some short time after this great change, which he strongly judged and concluded Strange Providen∣ces. to be the first sincere turning of his Soul unto God: Being brought very low, both in his Body and Spirits, he apprehended that his Death drew near. But then was that Scripture brought into his Mind, Psal. 118. I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord: Yet afterward being again under strong apprehensions of his Death ap∣proaching, he, looking into his Bible, God directed his Eye to that Portion of Scrip∣ture (Psal. 53. 5.) There were they in great fear where no fear was: which drove away that temptation: And not long after, with God's blessing thereon, by the use of means, he regained strength to go on in his Service. Some short time after this, upon a Satuay, being very weak in Body, and almost despairing of recovery, he went up to his Chamber, as well as his seeble Legs could A strange Providence carry him, where he fell down upon his Knees in Prayer: And whilst he was in this Duty, he suddenly and sensibly found, at least in his apprehension, that a great mea∣sure of strength was given in unto him, to his great astonishment. Whereupon he attempted to arise, and to walk, which he accordingly did, two or three turns about his Chamber, very strongly. Finding this strange alteration, he called for his Wife to come to him, who soon espied the change, finding his pale Cheeks to be clothed with their wonted colour and complexion. And now he, that not many moments before, looked upon himself as drawing near unto the very brink of the Grave, was enabled to perform the Duties of that Evening; yea, the next days Duties (being the Lords day) with much vigor and strength. And after these signal marks of the Divine favour, and assistance, aford∣ed both to his Soul and Body, he joyned with some other Ministers and Christians in keeping a Monthly Fast to humble and afflict themselves for their own sins, and for the sins of their Families, and of the Nation. And after these his first turning to God, he found a more then ordinary assistance, both in his Studies and Ministry, the Lord casting in abundant matter, and suitable Affections in the delivery thereof. April the 30th i Anno Christi 1665. being the Lords day, Mr. Tregoss, whilst he More of them. was in Prayer, was much distracted about his intended Preaching in Publick, whereunto he seemed to be drawn by a very strange, though manifest course of Pro∣vidence, which he strongly resisted, till at last he was forced to yeild. That Week he had been wondering what the Lord would do with him. He could not study as for∣merly, but was induced, and over-ruled to read a Practical Discourse of Self-denial: And the Lord furnished his Meditations with many passages about Sufferings, and the Creatures Duty to be, and live in the Will of his Creator, and to resign himself whol∣ly to his disposal. And when he had ended his reading, casting his Eye upon his Bible, the first Words he met with, were those, Mat. 9. 36. When he saw the Multitude he had compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as Sheep having no Shepherd. At the reading of this Text he inwardly trembled, and the Lord seemed immediatly to intimate to him, that he should put on the like Bowels. But hereupon he question∣ed with himself, where he should find such an opportunity of Preaching in Publick? And presently Mabe (which is a Daughter-Church to Milar, and had Preaching in it; only every other Lords day) was presented, and suggested to his Thoughts: And after many Reasonings, and Disputes within himself, being backward to yield to the will
of God: He at last resolved to send thither to enquire whether any Minister would be there the Lords day following? And answer was returned, that there would be none. Yet still doubting whether he might look upon this as a Call from God, he cast his Eye upon his Bible, and met with that Text, Luke 11. 33. No Man when he hath lighted a Candle, putteth it in a secret place, or under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that they that come in may see the Light. This Scripture cleared all his doubts, and answered his objections, allayed all his carnal fears, and confirmed him in his resolution of Preaching in publick the next Lords day. And accordingly, when the Sabbath came, he went thither, and found the People willing to hear, and all things inviting him to embrace the present opportunity, and so he went on and preached without any distur∣bance, and the Lord assisted him in all the Duties till he had concluded them. The report of this Days work was soon spread abroad, and came to the Ears of Mr. Tho. Robinson, a Justice of the Peace. The next Lords day, being May the 7th, the Morning proving, rainy, Mr. Tregross preached in his own House, upon the Text, Luke 21. 19. In your Patience possess ye your Souls; not expecting any disturbance that Day by reason of the fowl weather. But after the Sermon was ended, Mr. Robinson came He is per∣secuted. to his Door, and having entred, took the Names of those that were present: And re∣quired Mr. Tregoss to put in Suretis for the Good Behaviour, or to render himself to the Constable upon his Order, the Munday Seven-night after; Mr. Tregross refusd to do the former, but promised to perform the latter. After Mr. Robinsons departure, they met again in the Afternoon, and went through with the Duties without any disturbance. The next Lords day he preached again at Mabe without interruption. But when the Exercises were finished, he was served His second Imprison∣ment. with a Warrant to appear before Mr. Robinson at Hellestone on the Tuesday following. At his appearance he justified his Preaching with much evidence, and boldness. But notwithstanding all that he said, he was sent to Lancestone Gaol, there to remain for three Months. This he submitted to, not only patiently, but joyfully. In his passage to Prison he embraced all opportunities for the comfirming, and comforting of such Christian Friends as he met with by the way. And whilst he continued in Prison, his Spirit was very free, and much enlarged with those Divine influences, and refreshings which God gave in to him. He spent his time in Prison in Reading the Holy Scriptures, in heavenly Meditations, in Fasting, Prayer, Holy Conference with, and Preaching to such as were his Prison Fellows, or that came to visit him. Few there were that came to him, but either they His Indu∣stry. did, or might be great gainers by conversing with him. Now the time of his imprison∣ment being expired, July the 29th, he was set at liberty, and after his return home he took the first convenient opportunity of keeping a Day of Thanksgiving, for the many experiences that he had of Gods goodness and mercies to him and his, during all the time of his Confinement. But he had not been at home above four Days, when Mr. Robinson gave out, that he would'speedily send him back to the Place from whence he came: And in order thereunto, upon the Friday or Saturday after, he prepared himself to ride to the Market, there (as it were reported) to meet with another Justice of the Peace, who should joyn with him in a Warrant for a second Conviction of Mr. Tregoss for a Con∣venticler, and to prosecute some others also. But whilst he was at a Tenement of his, his own Bull (which was never known to have hurt any before) followed him in a Field with much fury, and gave him some Persecutors plagued by God. mortal Wounds whereof he died soon after. August the 20th, Mr. Tregoss went again and Preached at Mabe Church, it being the Lords day; and he went through with his work without any disturhance: The like he did on that Day Fortnight after; spending the intervals with much activity in his Ma∣sters Service elsewhere. Yet had he many disswasives by Christian Friends from Preaching publickly; but al the Arguments which they urged, could not satisfie his Conscience: And therefore September the 18th, he was again committed to Lanceston Goal for publick Preaching: Whither he went with comfortable persuasions that God would be with, and carefully protect and provide for himself and his Family, which His third Imprison∣ment. God made good to the uttermost. This his Second imprisonment in that place, conduced much, through the Lords blessing, to the good of many Souls. For the report of his Bonds being spread abroad many came to visit him, to whom he imparted freely his Spiritual Gifts, and by God's Blessing upon his labours, some Onesimus's were begotten through the Gospel, in his Bonds.
During this Imprisonment he took several Opportunities of Visiting the com∣mon His Indu∣stry. Prisoners, whom he endeavoured to convince of their Sins, and there dangerous estate by reason of the same, &c. Also while he was under this Confinement he enjoy∣ed many Divine Suavities, and Spiritual refreshments in his Soul, especially in the time of Duties: He had also many sweet and gracious returns to his Prayers; and some Prophetick intimations of future Providences. As October the 2d. He praying earnestly that God would vouchsafe him opportunities A special Provi∣dence. of doing him Service, the Lord was pleased to cause him firmly to believe that he should shortly be released from this restraint, and that he should be no more imprisoned in that place; which God made good unto him notwithstanding many attempts to the contrary. Also October the 7th, being much enlarged in praying for Patience, and submissi∣on to the will of God, he grew very confident that e're long God would farther try him. So October the 23d. God seem sundry ways to intimate to him, that some great Af∣fliction was near at hand, but that he should be delivered from it, all which proved true, as will afterwards be shewen. Again, October the 27th. Being earnestly praying for the Nation, he was sttongly induced to believe that some great Judgment was not far off: About which time there was often brought into his mind, and cast into his Thoughts that Text of Scrip∣ture, Isa. 21. 16. Thus saith the Lord unto me, within a Year, according to the Years of an Hireling, and all the Glory of Kedar shall fall. He oft-times mentioned to some of his intimate Friends, what strong impressions this Scripture made upon his Thoughts, much wondring what it should mean: But a little before the Year exspired, the dread∣ful burning of London hapned, which fully Interpreted those afore-named Impres∣sions. December the 14th. He was delivered out of Prison, and upon his return home he His delive∣ry out of Prison. kept a Day of Thanksgiving; and shortly after he set apart every Tuesday, which he kept as a Day of Humiliation, or Thanksgiving, either with his Family, or with others more publickly. January the 8th, being the Lords day, he went to Mabe, where he Preached both parts of the Day without interruption, which was accom∣panied with this remarkable Providence, that whilst he was at Mabe, a Constable, with an Officer from Pendennis Castle, came to his House to seek him, but by that A special Provi∣dence. means missed of him. January the 12th. He begun a Journey towards the East part of Cornwal, and from thence he went into Devonshire. And the Lords day, and the Wednesday following his Another. House was searched for him; but Providence ordering his being from home, he escap∣ed their Hands. In this Journey he went forth on the South of Cornwal, and returned by the North, exercising in all Places where he came, and received great encouragement by the fruit of his Labours. At his return, February the 4th, going to Preach at Mabe, the Constable served him with a Warrant, to carry him under the Custody of the Mareschal, as a dange∣rous, and seditious Person; which yet he was so far from being guilty of, that nei∣ther in his Preaching, nor Conference he ever medled with the present Discipline, or Liturgy of the Church, much less with any State-affairs. Nay, he perswaded others to be obedient to the Higher Powers: And in his dayly exercises he put up many fer∣vent Petitions for the Kings Majesty. Being now under the Custody of the Mareschal of Bodmin, this his imprisonment His fourth Imprison∣ment. brought him into acquaintance with several Persons who reaped much good, and be∣nefit by his Ministry. The Mareschal used him civilly, yet did he meet with more difficulties then in his former Confinements: But yet the Lord honoured him with the Conversion of many Souls. And he continued in this Prison till about the midst of Sep∣tember, Anno Christi 1667. And being on a time very earnest in Prayer for his enlarge∣ment, a portion of Scripture was presented to his Thoughts, which made so deep an impression upon him; as that he was raised to a great condence, that if he was deli∣vered His release by the King. it should be by an Order from the Kings Majesty. And not long after, whilst he was under various Afflictions concerning his Family, the Mareschal received a special Order from the Kings Majesty for his enlargement. In February, Anno Domini 1668. coming to Penrin to Preach his Munday's Lecture, His Sick∣ness he fell sick of a Fever, which held him all that Week. And upon the Lords day Morn∣ing, the sence of his own weakness did somwhat affect him, because the People, who at∣tended upon his Ministry, had none to supply his room: whereupon he had that Scrip∣ture impressed upon his Thoughts, Isa. 40. 31. They that wait on the Lord shall renew
their strength, &c. This wrought so much upon him, that he resolved to arise: But all his Friends that were about him laboured to disswade him from his purpose, knowing His strange recovery. how weak he was, but they could not prevail. And when he had got on his Cloaths, he applyed himself to his Lords work; and as he proceeded, and went on in it, strength by degrees, was given in to him, so that he Preached thrice that Lords day, choosing that Text afore-named [Isa. 40. 31.] for his Subject; and to the great ad∣miration and astonishment, as well of himself as of his Friends and Auditors, he found himself well at Night, neither did he feel so much as any relicts of his Distemper after∣wards. In the beginning of the Year 1669. the number of his Auditors was so much aug∣mented, His remove to Penrin. as that the Rooms wherein they usually met would not contain them, which occasioned the removal of their Meeting into a large Barn, until, being summoned by the Proprietor of that Barn, to quit his House, he thereupon took up his Habitation in the Town of Penrin. Yet before his removal, a Mittimus came from the Quarter Sessions, grounded upon an Information given in by the Bishop of the Diocess, to send him to the Goal at Lanceston, for Preaching publickly. The Constables coming to serve the Warrant, one of them more violent and furious A Strange Provi∣dence. then his fellows, whilst he reasoned with Mr. Tregoss, holding the Mittimus in his Hand, sunk down in the place, seeming at the present to be dead: But by the dili∣gent endeavours of those about him, he was brought to himself again, whereupon he departed without executing the Warrant. And that which made this the more re∣markable, was, for that this Constable was a lusty strong Man, and never sainted in all his Life before. And though they came again, some days after, to execute the Warrant, yet had they not power to carry him to Prison: For which (as it was re∣ported) the other Constable was Fined at the next Sessions. At the Summer Assizes, Anno Christi 1669. Mr. Tregoss having some Affairs which called him to Lanceston, in his Journey he was invited to visit some part of the North west parts of Devonshire; from whence, for Preaching in a private House in the Pa∣rish of Great Torrington, he was sent to Exeter Gaol, with several others of the He is sent to Exeter. Goal, but bailed. Town, and of Bideford; who being all Bailed, had for that time no other trouble then to Travers a Bill for a Riot, which was preferred against them. In his return from Exon, he spent some few days at Crediton, in which place he contracted an intimate Friendship with a Person, who was Providentially cast there at that time, to whom he disclosed and unbosomed many of the choisest accidents, which befel him in most of his Life. And albeit they never saw each other afterwards, yet this Friendship was preserved inviolably, improved by Paper-Conversation, till Death made a disunion, or rather a Suspension for the present. This trouble which befell Mr. Tregoss in Devonshire, was an occasion of much good to many Souls in those parts; For it opened a Door to many Hundreds in Devonshire, who resorted to him in his Tra∣vels, and so became partakers of his Ministerical Gifts, which (through the concur∣rence of Divine Grace) were very effectual for the good of their Souls. This made him to lay out himself Day and Night to the utmost of his Strength, His Indu∣stry, and great suc∣cess. allowing his Body no more then extream necessity required, that so he might im∣prove all advantages and opportunitys for the advancement of his Masters Service. The Bill which had been preferred against him at Exeter, necessitated him to attend the two following Assizes, where he was at last freed by Proclamation. But in the mean while, his return into those parts was of no small advantage for the Propagation of the Gospel. Some of those Persons who discovered their Malice against Mr. Tre∣goss, for Preaching at Torrington, were shortly after taken away by unnatural Deaths, not without some signal tokens of Gods displeasure against them, as will appear by this his following Letter to an intimate Friend. Penrin, September the 16th. 1670. My dear Brother, AT this Assize at Exon I was called to my Tryal, but no Persecuting Person appearing to give in Evidence against me, my Jury acquitted me, and a Verdict of Not-Guilty was returned. George Smith, the Deputy Maior of Torrington, who was a grand Enemy in this business, when the Conventicle was surprized, was attending at Lent-Assizes, but the Tryal being then put off, by this Assize God did disabled him for such a Journey, he having received, in a drunken Voyage, a fall from his Horse, by which his
Shoulder-bne is dislocated, and he thereby rendred unable to dress or undress himself: And is lik to abide so, to the day of his Death. His Wife also (that violent Woman) dyed of a utors ued by God. Timpany; a fearful Spectacle to all Beholders. She departed hence the Night of the Lords day in which I exercised at Torrington, in my Journing now to my home. I suppose you heard also of the bad end of another Persecutor there, one Dennis, Smith's Brother in Law, who so much rejoyced when our Meeting was broken up, affirming that the surprisal of that Conventicle, did him more good, and more rejoyced him, then all his losses did sadden him. His Wise also bitterly belched out these words concerning me: Hang the Rogue; hang him on the Sign-post, or next Tree, and never send him to Exon. This poor wretch did hang himself in his own Study, and thereby his Estate is forfeited to the Town. Many take much notice how signally Gods hand hath been against them since that Meet∣ing was disturbed. There are a very precious handful at Chimly, South▪Moulton, and the adjacent Parts, who gladly receive the Word. Their ready submission to the Truth in my former Journey, engaged my Heart to visit them again; and I hope our seeing one another hath not been in vain. Your Memory is very dear unto many of them, and your scatterings there. I wish they might see you again. A fruitful heavenly Lip to improve Truths impart∣ed, by corresponding pressing Conferences, is much wanting among us: I pray you beg it for me, and your other Brethren now labouring. My complaints will not crucifie my unbelieve, Pride, and deadness: Pray you labour for me with God, with whom I leave you, and am Your much obliged Brother in the Lord T. T. Not long before his Death, he was strangly, he knew not how, taken up in con∣versing with the State of the Saints departed, who were Martyred for the Testimony His heaven∣ly-mind∣edness. of Jesus, as he himself acquaints us in his Letter to his Bosom Friend; as followeth. Penrin, October the 7th. 1670. My dear Brother, I Am a Sympathizer with you in dear Mr. R's loss of so choice a Mate: But I suppose his so Exemplary living on God, will do much to quiet him in the loss of the best enjoy∣ment, not everlasting: And the ground of Hope that she is safely Housed from the Storms we feel and fear, will, I believe, do more sweetly to reconcile him to this ungrateful, and Flesh-disgusting stroak. As for what God speaks to you by this Providence, I think 'tis plain: to wit: that you more effctually dayly Die to what is not God and Spirit: And that you enure your Soul to more deep and fixed Thoughts of your own Dissolution. I hear that many very precious ones have been lately at London (through a malignant Distemper in their Bowels) called home. The Lord more fully warn them who survive, and us also, of those black, and tempting days which, probably, are near us. My thoughts have been much, of late, settled, I know not how, on conversing with the State of departed Saints, Martyred for the Testimony of Jesus. I have observed in special two passages in Mr. Foxes Acts and Note. Mon. The one of Mr. Rogers, the Protomartyr in Q. Maries Reign: Who in his Pri∣son had this passage to the Printer of Mr. Foxes Book, then in Bonds with him. Thou (said he) shalt live to see the alteration of this Religion, and the Gospel freely Preached again: And therefore have me commended to my Brethren, as well in Exile as others, and bid them be circumspect in displacing the Papists, and puting good Ministers into Church, or else their end will be worse then ours. A Predicti∣on. The Printer accordingly lived, but what remains for us, who have shamefully frighted his Counsel, time will evidence. The other is from Mr. Holland; who thus bespake Bonner af∣ter his Sentence. This I dare be bold in God, to speak (which by his Spirit I am moved to say) that God will shorten your land of Cruelty, that for a time you shall not molest his Church: and this shall you in short time well perceive (my Brethren) to be most true. For A Prophe∣sie. after this day, in this place, there shall not any be, by him put to the Tryal of Fire and Fagot. After which there was not one burned in Smithfield. Herein I principally consider that expression: That for a time they should not molest his Church: The Lord prepare me for a suffering Day, and if fair weather succeeds, we shall be more watchful in its improve∣ment. As for our Condition it's full of Threats and trouble. Warrants are granted for the
levying of two Hundred and twenty Pounds on me: Yet God hath kept them off: but I am expecting daily to be stript of all. Our meeting Place is taken from us, through their threatnings of our Landlord. We now meet at my House, and once every Lords day ahove the number; but very few are free to attend unless with four. I am also threatned to be presecuted on the Corporation Law, so that I am constantly expecting an Imprisonment: But I shall endeavour to turn into the strong Hold as a Prisoner of Hope. I should very gladly understand more perticularly how it is with you in this troublesome and sickly time: However, the Lord clear up your in∣terest, and grant you an open Door, if called hence, into his Presence with exceeding Joy. I shall commit you to God, beseeching him to guid and use you, and to preserve you blamcless to his Kingdom. I am Yours most unfeignedly, T. Tregoss. And this indeed was a Prophetick intimation of the nearness of his Dissolution, and entrance upon that Life, which he was immediatly more fully to partake of. It was an old Observation from a great Master of Wisdom (Padre Paulo Hist. Con. Tent) That it is natural for Men near their Graves, from some intrinsick cause, unknown to themselves, to be distasted with humane affairs, &c. What this Wise Man observed of Men in general, I think, is most true of many holy Christians, who a little before their dissolution are frequently called off, and separated from humane affairs, to a fidu∣cial converse with coming Glories, and the Life of just Men made perfect: which was the frame of Mr. Tregosses Spirit, not long before his Death, though he himself was not apprehensive that his change was so near. After Mr. Tregoss came to reside at Penrin, he hired a House for a Meeting-place on the Lords day in the Parish of Mabe, where he Exercised without interruption, from Midsummer, Anno Christi 1669. to the Tenth of May, 1670. After which day there were two debauched Persons that turned Informers, hoping thereby to get God's Pro∣vidence. fuel for their Lusts: who having procured a Warrant, required the Officers to at∣tend them evety Lords day, and made Oath against Mr. Tregoss and some others for a breach of the Statute then in force against Conventicles: This scarred away most of his Hearers, especially those that had any considerable Estates. Yet, though there were many Fines laid upon him, which amounted to 220 l. yet the Lord so ordered things, as nothing he had was seized upon. This Meeting being thus dissolved and broken, he resolved to drive the Nail that would go, and to Preach the oftner to a Statute-number: And herein his labours were so many and great, as though his Body were of Steel, yet could he not long hold out. For he Preached five times every Lords day, and in the Evening made Repetition His extra∣ordinary. pains. of some part. He also continued the Tuesdays, and Thursdays Exercises, besides some others. He was often advised by his Friends to favour himself, and to moderate his pains: But the great Zeal he had for the keeping it on, and advancing the work of God did stop his Ears against all disswasives of this kind: But having at last worn out himself, and exhausted his Spirits, he fell into a Griping of the Bowels, occasioned by a Flatus Hypochondriachus, or Melancholly Wind, as his Physician affirmed; which brought him so low and weak, that his Friends judged him to be past recovery; and he himself expressed a longing desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. But the Lord was pleased to reprieve him for a little longer, and set him once more upon his Feet, though he took not the Air. And as soon as he perceived a small re∣cruit of his strength, he began to fall upon his work again: Yet this continued but for a very short time, before a Feaver seized on him, and put an end to all his La∣bours His last Sickness. and Troubles. His deportment during both times of his Sickness was like his Life, very sweet and heavenly. Upon the 18th of January, perceiving the Hour of his Dissolution to draw near, and be at hand, he took his Farewell of his Friends in a long Speech, whereof you have a part: as followeth, I thought I should have some more turns with my Lord in his Gallary, but he hath turn∣ed His last Speech. his Back and is gone, and calls me to come after him. Indeed though I had some Di∣stemper of Body, yet I did not think that Death was so nigh, till, putting my hand upon my Brow, I fel the tokens thereof. Think, Think not therefore that it is a foolish phantasie that moves me thus to speak: For I know it to be right reason: And seeing the Lord hath left with me a few mouthfuls of Breath; Let me, who am your faithful Pastor, at the taking of
my Farewel of you, drop a few words among you before he calls away this Breath of mine, and say, Breath no more through the Body, but lay it down in the Dust. O my Friends! My Friends! You know that I have often warned you of evil Days, and nw I must once more tell you that there is a dead Day, a dark Day a coming. O! what will this poor People do: O my Friends! Did we think that after so many Fasting, and Hu∣miliation Days, after so many Thanksgiving Days, after so many Sacrament Days, we should see such a Day as this? O! But it may be, you will ask me such a Question as this: Do you realy believe that you shall Die? Indeed, Friends, there is nothing but Omnipo∣tency that can bear me up. And if you ask what I think of my self? Truly Friends, I can say, that I have walked among you by the pure Copy of the Holy Scriptures, and Life of Christ: And through the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, I shall be presented spotless to the Fa∣ther. Indeed when I was young I had my youthly Vanities; but in the Year 1664. upon a New-years-day the Lord was pleased to meet with me, and then, and then, even then did he set all my Sins before me. And those very Sins which were small to me before, were, by the Spirit of the Lord in that Rod, made as bitter as Death it self: My slight Child-hood sins; my slender youthful sins, were now to me very hainous, and abominable. Wherefore, my Friends, I charge you to make Conscience of those sins: Yea, of the least of them which I have warned you f. Some may think me Passionate, and some may think me severe and uncharitable; but now I repent that I had not dealt more impartially and plainly with you. However, in the Truth of the Lord, according to mine ability, I have walked among you: And I hope that you will not think it tedious if I drop a few Words upon my Grave before I die. Then the Phy∣sician stopping him, intending to desire him to leave off speaking, lest he should spend his Spirits too much, Mr. Tregoss said, Give me leave to speak, for I am upon the borders of Eternity; and I think you all look upon m as a dying Man: You may therefore suffer me to speak as much as I can. I am going to my great, to my dear Father, to my best Friend, to him in whom I have Believed His Face I hope to see; in his Bosom I hope to lye down this Day. Oh! What unspeakable Glory is it to see the Glory of mine Everlasting God? O my Friends! I must tell you the Truth: Though sometimes there have been upon my pbantasie strange black Clouds, which made me to speak somewhat inconsistent, and were suddenly blown off again; yet little doth any one know the reviving Incomes I had then, even then from my God: And the last Lords day at Nlght, the Lord gave me some sweet turns with himself: O! It was a pleasant Nght with me: I was up with God: and God was down with me. O! It was to me as the going up to Paradise. O! how sweet was it to me? And, now my Friends, I must tell you, that through many Tribulations you must enter into the Kingdom of God: Some of you have told me your Thoughts concerning me, That I have walked in all good Conscience towards God and Man. O Friends! Whatsoever things ye have seen in me that were honest; whatsoever things were just; whatsoever things were of good report, pursue those things. Rely not upon the World; for the World will leave you cold and helpless. And now Friends, I must go to see the Lord, and this Body of mine must be laid in the Dust, and never rise more until the Resurrection Day. And must ma∣ny of you go from this place, and come naked before the Face of God? O Friends, If there be any Hope; if there be any Love; if there be any Consolation in you, think on these things? You know I have. When I came to this Town, some may think I came to fill an empty Bag, and to get a livelihood among this People: But, God is my Witness, I had not this in mine Eye. I sought not yours, but you. And now Friends, Flesh, and Blood will say, 'tis hard to part with dear Friends, to part with a Dear Wife, to part with Dear Children: But as the Lord hath given them to me, so I now leave them with the Lord. And I call you to Witness that I leave this dear Wife of mine with the Lord: and these dear Children of mine with the Lord, and to be protected by him; to be maintain∣ed by him; to be kept blameless to the Day of his appearance. Though Men may prove unkind unto them, as I suppose they will; yet the Lord, I know, will not. I must into Enternity. The Prophets do not live for ever; Neither can they Prophesie for ever. I have been but a young Branch, and you see, the Lord is cuting me down this. Morn∣ing. O Blessed Lord God! shall there not be a meeting in Paradise? Shall not thy Ser∣vant see thee, and love thee, and embrace thee, and be embraced by thee? Oh Lord! Give a good evidence to thy Servant, that he may know that he belongeth to thee. Lord, thou hast given him the working of an Heart purifying Spirit. And are not these
Tokens of thy free Grace? and of thine Eternal Love in Christ Jesus: And now Lord God, thy Servant must away, and be about other work, Thy Servant must away to holy Angels, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect. He must away to serve the Lord in his upper Cham∣bers. He must away, Lord, and never look on these Earth things more. And, now O Friends, one I thing tell you; I shall come again with my Lord in most excellent Glory; and you then must come before him. But I fear, I fear, that then some of you will be in a very low, poor, and mise∣rable condition. Well, I commend you to the Love, and Grace of God, the Eternal Father in Jesus Christ. And I pray you get your Hearts full of the Love of God, and of the Grace of God, and full of the Holy Ghost. And now think on these things that I have delievred unto you, in the Name of the Lord! I must go, and deliver up my accounts to God: And O, that I may deliver them up freely: That I may he able to say: I have run my Race; I have finished my Course: I have fought the good Fight: I have kept the Faith: And what remains but that I receive the Crown which the Lord Jesus, the Righteous Judge hath prepared for me. And now I commit my self to the Lord: And my Wife and Children to the Lord: I commit my Spirit to thee, O Father of Spirits. I commit my Soul to thee, O Dearest Lord: Keep these that do believe on thee. These Words he spake with a more audible, and clear voice then he was wont to do in his ordinary Preaching. And about an Hour and an half after he had ended this His Death. Speech, he departed this Life, January the 18th. Anno Christi 1670. Mr. Tregross was of a middle Stature, his Hair Black, his Face palish, not perfectly round, nor long. His Spirit was Masculine, Generous, and Great, agreeable to the His Chara∣cter. Condition of his Ancestors. There was a sparkling vivacity apparent in most of his in∣tense Actions. His natural Humour was not morose, but Assable; yet was he not with∣out a tincture of dark Melancholly, which yet his Grace improved to a great measure of seriousness. He had also some sparks of Choller, which being spirited with warm Affections for God, brake forth in a pure Flame of Divine Zeal. His natural Judgment seemed deep and solid; his Will firm, and fixed; His Memory tenatious and faithful: His Affections tender and active. And the whole capacity of his Soul fit for great im∣ployments. But the more Illustrious and bright part of his Character regardeth his gracious Ca∣pacity, and Dispositions. His Personal Holiness was eminent and remarkable. And pro∣bably, His Holi∣ness. few in this Age, have, for so short standing, made a larger proficiency in the Learning, and School of Christ, and his Service. After January, Anno Christi 1664. (From whence he Dated his Conversion) he banished both from his Heart and Life many Vanities whith he had been addicted to. Neither did he acquire his Godliness at so easie a rate as most Professors do. No, his Heart was first deeply wounded for sin, and afterwards delivered from it. He was for some while under many and great extremities by reason of a Spirit of Bondage, which yet made way for a Spirit of a Adoption. He was throughly and soundly convinced of his Spiritual Death by Sin, and that opened to him a Door of Life by Christ. And the intire change of his Heart much appeared, in the Change of his Life; and in his last end. Neither had he some particular Graces only, but a Combination, and complication of many amiable Graces, seemingly opposite, appeared visibly in him. How affable, and courteous was he, and yet how severe against Sin? What Meekness and Humility in his own cause? And yet what Courage, and Magnanimity in the cause of God, shone in him? How much fear, and Holy self-jealousie, and yet how much Christian boldness, and confidence was he possessed with? What an inflexible, and strong bent for God, and against sin seemed he to bave? And yet how flexible and complying with others for their Good was he? He did not, as some, take Christ to ease himself of his work, or to secure his Lusts, but to kill them, and to quicken himself to Duty. His Peace of Conscience was main∣tained, His Since∣rity. not by Peace, but by War with sin: It was not only from, but in God: He had not only a form of Christ in his Life, and Picture of him in his Fancy; but also the Image of, Union with, and Love for Christ in his Heart. He affected not so much to entangle his Thought with Disputes about the Controversies of Religion, as to get the Power of it stamped upon his own, and others Souls. His Faith did not lye level with Worldly Interest, but was opposite thereto. He climbed not, as some, to the top of an high Profession, without laying a deep Foundation in Self-denial: He bor∣rowed not, as too many do, the Mask of Religion to conceal a rotten Heart: but was unsatisfied in his Heart-enquires after Grace, till he arrived to such a full measure thereof, as is not attainable by any Hypocrite.
His daily Progress in the Mortification of Sin, was very remarkable, and conspicu∣ous. His Moti∣fication. He knew full well that one reigning Lust would darken his Comfort, and harden his Heart; yea, bring all into Bondage and Captivity, and therefore he durst not gra∣tifie any Lust in the least. He was content to give up every Lust to death for Christ, who gave up his Soul to Death for him. He thought it not much to part with any Be∣loved Sin for him who was his Beloved Saviour. Yea, he seemed to take more plea∣sure in subduing his unlawful Desires, then others do in gratifying, and fulfilling them. And lest his Flesh should impose upon his more noble part, he enured, and accustom∣ed himself to many Bodily severities, and denied himself of such Natural refreshments, which most others indulge themselves in. Yet did he not content himself with exter∣nal Mortifications, but maintained a daily Conflict with the whole Body of Sin in cor∣rupt Nature. Yea, he would oft blame himself much for Spiritual sins; as Infidelity, Pride, unbelief, &c. Which others could least blame him for. His weanedness from, and Crucifixion to the World was not less visible than his other His Cruci∣fixion to the Wold. Graces He seemed to have acquired a great indifferency of Spirit for things indifferent: To allow perishing things, but perishing Affections. As our blessed Lord Christ gave his Hea∣ven for him, so he thought it not much to give his Earth for his Lord: He could not part with Christ for any Worldly Good, and therefore was willing to part with all for Christ. The firm, believing views he had of future Glories, obscured, and darkened the Worlds Glories to him, so that he seemed to admire nothing but approaching Glorys; or what related thereto. Poverty in Christ's way was great Riches to him; yea, far greater then a flourishing Estate in the ways of Sin. He knew how to abound in his wants, by contentedly wanting what the Lord though not fit for him; and thereby Crucifying his Desires, he made the Cross of Christ the more easie to him. His De∣sires were low, and therefore his Spirit was high above the frowns, and flatteries of this lower World, He seemed far better pleased in his mean and low condition, then Worldlings are in their highest. His Mind was too great to put a great estimate upon the empty Nothings of this Life. He brought his Natural desires into a narrow com∣pass, and thence gained a great enlargment of Spirit. By his frequent and long Sufferings he gained a great skill and dexterity in bearing His art in bearing the Cross. the Cross. By starving sin, and crucifying his Heart to the World, he took out the stings of his Sufferings. He knew that the Divine Will was more eligible then his own, and there∣fore he endeavoured to conform unto it, as well by Passive as by Active Obedience. He knew that he could not glorifie God more, then by being content that God's Glory should gain by his private losses. He durst not make Sin a shelter against Sufferings: Or bear false witness against God, by repining under the Cross. He was not so well pleased with sin, as to perfer it before sufferings: or so ill pleased with Sufferings as to fly from them, when he was called thereunto. Heinured himself to the Yoak of Christ, and so gain'd the Art of bearing his Cross. His Conscience continued under a lively sense of Sin, and that made him Dead, and in a measure sensless under sufferings. His will was so far broken, as that it could chearfully bend, and submit to the Cross; yea, to welcome Crosses, when in God's way he met with them. When God brought him into any Affliction, or Suffering, he waited there till God brought him out. He knew himself to be nothing, and that made him to bear any thing from God with contentment: And by knowing his own vileness, he learn'd to justifie God in every cross. His Spirit was generous & noble, like that of the Eagle which is not clamorous when it wants Food. He studied Passive obedience as well as Active: To be well pleased with what God did, as well as to do what was well-pleasing unto God. He had a fit disposition, and qualification for the Cross, which made that easie to him which seemed intollerable unto others. As he durst not make men Lords of his Faith, so neither of his Happiness, by doteing on their Smiles, or fearing their Frowns; but as Worldy men content themselves with the World without God, so he en∣deavoured to content himself with God without the World. He had his present wants supplyed, by Ordinary, or Extraordinary ways and means, and therefore conceived it to be his Duty to trust God for the future. He knew that he had more of the Creature then b deserved, and therefore was not anxious, and solicitous about ha∣ving more. He was much taken up about the weighty things of Eternity, and there∣fore was little concerned about these lower, and baser things. He had many Noble and Generous Dispositions, and Qualifications, but no one ap∣peared more illustrious, and visible in him, after his Conversion, then his Zeal for His Zeal for God. and in, his Masters Service, and the good of Souls. O! What a rare, and excellent Qual∣lity is a Publick Spirit for God? And how much was this holy Man invested, and adorned herewith? How little did his hot and flaming Zeal care to live, when the
Honour of his great Lord seemed to bleed and die? How Moses like was he in Meek∣ness, as to injuries done unto himself? And yet how impatient, and Elias like, as to injuries done unto his Lord? How modest and backward was he in his own cause? and yet how Magnanimus, and undoubted in the cause of God? How little was it in the power of the greatest men to frown him out of Duty, or to flatter him into Sin? what a Masculine Courage had he, joyned with a fixed resolution not to displease God to please Men? Yea, how much vigour, and strength did his Zeal gain by oppo∣sition? He seemed indeed naturally to have an Heroick Spirit, put how much did Grace transform this natural quality into a Divine Zeal? How much of Divine flame, and how little of wild-fire, and sinful wrath was there in his Zeal? But notwithstanding his ardent zeal for God, yet was he of a very quiet and peacea∣ble Spirit. He did not (Salamanden-like) delight to live in the Fire of Contention, His Catholick Charity. but was of a uniting, healing Spirit. He was not only a Patient, but also an Agent in seeking after, and persuing Peace. He judged our Church-divisions to be one of our greatest Plagues. He had a Catholick Universal Charity, and love for all: And albeit he hated the vices of wicked and ungodly men, yet he loved their Persons. But he had a special and perticular affection for all Saints, and that as Saints, making their Graces not their Opinions, the measure of his love. His Spirit; and Principles were so peaceable, as that he desired to avoid all needless disputes, that might breed strife. But when he was called to dispute, or to confer with those of different Judge∣ments, he shewed forth much modesty, and meekness; Arguing not for Glory and Victory, but to inquire into Truth; Wherein he affirmed nothing, but what he en∣deavoured plainly and soundly to prove out of the Scriptures; and when he could not fully comply with other mens perswasions, yet would he not impose his own on them, as the Rule of their Faith, or Communion. And tho he could forbear, and bear with all for their good, yet he could not bear with Sin in any, but was a severe Admonitor, and Reprover thereof in all. Yea, His dexterity in admonitions and reproofs his very presence was a powerful and perswasive admonition to such as he reprov∣ed. For there was so much gravity and sweetness mixed in his countenance, that one word from him would oft effect more, then many from some others, especially by his Holy Conversation, exemplifying what he urged upon others. From the Word of God he much convinced such as were defective in their Duty, and subdued their wills to the will of God. I my self (saith mine Author) heard him, in the presence of several Ministers, sharply reproving the sins of Ministers in mispending their time whilst they were together, in frothy and unprofitable Conferences, which reproof he managed with so much majesty, and yet with so much Humility and submission, confirming all that he pressed from the Word of God, that all that were present could not but con∣clude, that there was much of God in his so seasonable admonition and reproof. Neither did his severity extend to the Sins of others only, but also to his own. He was a diligent, and curious observer of his own Spirit, its ends, intentions, His self exami∣nation. inclinations, motions, risings and fallings, as to Sin, or Grace. He alwayes kept a vigilant eye over his Heart, and every Night made perticular reflexions, on the passages of the Day past, with a strict examination how he had spent it: What his Conversation had been towards others? and how he had demeaned himself in his pri∣vate Duties towards God? He examined, not only what he had done, but also from what Principles he had done it. And thus, by the knowledg of what he had done, he came the better to know what he was to do; By studying well the book of his own Heart and life, he became a good Student, and proficient in the mystery of Godliness, and of Sin. He was a Man of great observation, and of nothing more than of his own Spirit, its various vicissitudes, turnings, and windings, &c. Thus he came to have an intimate, and thorow acquaintance with his own Heart, and an experimen∣tal sense of the Holy Spirits working in him. Hence also he came to know what Sins he had to confess, and humble himself for. What Mercies to bless God, or to petiti∣on for: What burdens to groan under. At sometimes he found himself under great deadness and distractions: At other times under sweet inspirations and breathings of the Holy Spirit, and enlargements of Heart. Sometimes he sighed under sinking despondencies, black unbeliefe, and base Fears; At other times he was upon the wing of Faith, and full of courage. He had his stated times for private and Family Duties. Faith and Prayer were his chiefe refuge in all his troubles. And indeed he seemed to drive a great Trade with His private Duties.
Heaven by Prayer, wherein he was very powerful and prevalent. He had a very strugling, wrestling Spirit in Prayer, bottomed upon a deep sense of his own need, large desires, and lively workings of Faith. What strength he gained by Prayer, he lost not by careless neglects after Prayer, but improved it for God. His Spirit seemed unsatisfied in duty till he had met with God or something from God. Sometimes he was dull and indisposed in the beginning of a Duty; but before he came off, he found great assistance. When he found weakness the Lord gave in unexpected supplies of strength. When he was dejected or cast or cast down under any perplexing, disturbing fears, or difficulties from within, or from without, he had recourse to his Bible, and thence received frequently such sweet, and encouraging Promises, set home by the Spirit of God, as afforded abundance of refreshing, and reliefe to him. His Family Exercises and Discipline deserve a perticular remark. He gave no tol∣leration to any known Sin, or omission of any Duty: He was very vigilant and dili∣gent His Family Government. in preventing, or reproving the profanation of the Lords Dayes, even to idle words. Neither was he less careful of the Pious Education, and instruction of those under his Domestick charge. Every Morning and Evening, for the most part, he read, and expounded a part of the Sacred Scriptures, sung a Psalm, and Prayed with them. Every Friday night he examined their proficiency in learning, the Assemblies lesser Catechism, explaining some part thereof unto them. Every Lords day at night (besides other Duties) he delivered the substance of what had that Day been preached in the Sermons. And after such exercises he examined his Servants, and such chil∣dren as were capable of what they remembred, not suffering any under his charge, who would not give an account of their Faith, and progress in knowledge. When he did not read a Chapter his course was to examine and instruct his Servants concer∣ning the Fundamentals of Religion, which was a great means of improving their knowledge. And, besides his private retirements and Family Duties, he had his set and stated times every Day to spend with his Wife in private Prayer. Neither was this his Religious care of instructing Souls confined only to his own Family, but it extended unto others also. He was endowed and invested with a sin∣gular His holy Con∣ference. Gift of personal conference, which talent he carefully imployed for the good of many Souls; Being ready to take, yea to seek all convenient opportunities to treat with them about their Eternal estate. He was much in pressing Men unto Holiness. He was wont to propose questions to those with whom he conversed, and desired the like of them, which course the Lord made very successful. He esteemed it no small burden to be cast into any Company, where his time was spent in unprofitable Discourse, and when he was, by Providence, cast upon such, his manner was to put a stop to such unedifying conference, by spiritual Divertisments, or turning it to some Holy Discourse. When he intended to visit any Christian Family, his Method was; First to call his Wife and Mother, that they might joyn with him in Prayer for a Blessing on his intended undertaking; And being greatly sensible of the advantages that are acquired by Christian conference, he gave those of his Hearers, whom he judged most judicious, diverse directions for the right management thereof upon all occasions. He had a great tenderness and regard to such as were sick: And when he was in∣formed of their sickness he stayed not till he was sent for, and invited to come to His visitation of the Sick. them, neither did he rudely intrude were he could not expect to be welcome; but first imployed a Friend that might intimate his willingness, and readiness to come to them; And then, where he might be received, he failed not to visit them, and to administer such spiritual advice and conusel as he judged to be most proper for the state of their Souls: And to those who wanted a competent supply of conveniences he imparted not only of his Spiritual, but also of his temporal Gifts, according to what God had blessed him withal. He failed not to pray with them before his departure, and not to spare any labor or trouble in the discharge of this Christian Office and duty. As for other more extensive parts of his Ministerial Gifts and labors, they were also very remarkable. His preaching was sollid and practical. He had a great pathos His Ministerial Gifts and La∣bours. and vehemency in seting home Truths upon the Conscience. His Sermons were full of plainness, and yet clothed with a Sacred Majesty. His words were familiar and yet very efficatious. He dwelt much upon awakning Truths, such as might pierce and sting the Conscience of secure Sinners. And yet to such as needed consolation, he was another Barnabas, full of sweetness. He had much of the Divine assistance
as well in composing, as in the hearing Sermons. He oft said, That usually his Sermons were given him upon his knees. His manner and practice was, when he had pitched on a Text, to apply himself to Prayer, and whilst he was in that Duty, he had oft the Heads of his discourse given in unto him. As for enlargements, he was never barren, having a faithful Memory that treasured up all that he read, and an Elocution apt and able to deliver what he had so treasured up, upon all occasions. Those that knew him much admired that he could preach so oft, and yet so well. He was likewise endowed with a large and excellent Gift in Prayer, which he alwayes expressed in Scriptural Language, wherein he seemed to have much communion with God. In brief, he was one of divine Lights and Heats for God. His zeal, in promoting His Characte in brief. the wayes of God and his Glory, was ardent, and flaming. He was affable and courteous in his Speech; Serious and Grave in his carriage and deportment: Invinci∣ble in his Courage; Charitable to such as differed from him in their perswasions, so long as he saw that their design was to promote Godliness and Holiness. Tempe∣rate he was in the use of the Creatures. Frugal in husbanding of his precious time. Spending his spare Hours in walking, meditating, Praying, and conversing with Christians about their Soul-affairs. And indeed, he was of so Holy and Heavenly a disposition and temper, as all good Men, who knew him, reverenced him. To con∣clude, his greatest ambition seemed to be this, to act and suffer something more than ordinary for God, that so he might by a singular exemplary conversation, silence the reproaches of ungodly Men, and give check to the pride, vanity, and carnality of too many Professors in these wanton Dayes, which he sadly bewailed, as a shrewd Prognostick and presage of future desolations: Only he hoped there were some, and that the Lord would raise up more young Converts, who should be furnished with Spirits, and conversations for the enlargement of Christs Kingdom. But more of his Hopes, Fears, and frame of his Spirit will appear by, and in these following Letters. Penrin. October the 5. 1669. My dear, and respected Brother: I May tell you sad stories of my Heart; O! how unbelieving, fearful, and faint found I it, on those short views I took of it: But that God, on whom my scandalous Heart hath raised so many false stories heretofore, and then gave my fears the lie, and yet continue I untouch't, and undisturbed to this hour. I do cast my self upon the disposing hand of God, to live and dye in my liberty, according to his pleasure. When I go forth, not expecting to see my Family again, and my frequent escapes, fill me with pleasing admirations of love, that (thro Grace) I return triumphing in his Goodness. How long this liberty may be indulged, I know not: But I know he will be a good God when he seizeth our freedom in the Gospel; And it will be the Rod of a Father, and may tend to our increase and settlement. I have had one very strange raising from the Grave since I saw you, the circumstances whereof compelled me and others to own a very visible finger of God; But a Narrative of this would be too tedious. I desire you would be importunate with God, that I might eye the approaching Glory, and the return of that great Shepheard, and might feed in hope, singly aiming at the Lords blessed interest, being contented with mine own greatest Decreases, might that be encreased and enlarged. Gods waterings and blessings must give life and fruit to all our poor and defective la∣bourings. O! Beg that these may be eminently with me. Poor England I think is near heavy strokes, for her barrenness, sensuality, and enmity against the power of Holiness. The Lord grant that this may not come as a snare on you and me, but that we may be sober, and watchful unto Prayer. The gracious Lord who dwelt in the Bush, be with you, to teach, strenghen and warn you, that in his Hand you may be serviceable and glorious. In him I am, and ever shall be. Your unfeigned Friend, yet unworthy Servant T. T.
Penrin Jan. 12. 1669. My dear Brother, I Should rejoyce to hear how God is dealing with your inward man, and what measures of success you are Crowned with in your labours of the Gospel, and interest of the Son of God in the world. We may justly guess what God will do with us in the Land by his breathings with his Truths. I desire with much earnestness to know (seeing you have so many advantages beyond us in these poor Corners) how the Spirits of Professors stand quallified, so far as a conjecture may be made, by the visible tenure of their carriages. I generally find a general secure, earthly, lasie frame hath seized on those among whom I occasionally fall abroad: I hope better things with you; and that a more engaging relish, and taste of God and Glory, is fallen on their hearts, and a more refined pure Lip, seconded by a more humble, self-denying converses before the world. O! what a blessed Omen would this be, that God is upon healing terms of Grace with England. I must confess, in the place were I now labor, God is Travelling forth with a measure of the greatness of his might. Some most stubborn and obstinate wretches, attend the means, and our Meetings grow; the Spirit of Jesus hath made some to fall under him, and our hopes of greater things are encreasing, if the Lord for our un∣fruitful walkings blast not all. My dear Brother, I need not tell you how sweet it is to be Tabernacling in Mount Tabor, by close believing Meditation, to see your Lord and mine, and on those veiws to rejoyce with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory: And by the same also to mourn over unkindness with bitterness, as for an only Son. Your received a∣nointings lead me, and keep you there: Only I must tell you, Sermons much wa∣tered in the Closet, and steept in fervent Prayer, will ordinarily prove most quick∣ning to the dead, and consolating to the Saints; And an heart dropt upon by such veiws, will lay a more than usual tincture of Heaven upon the mouth, which will have a choice influence in a Teachers treating with Souls, I must commit you to Israels Keeper, in whom you may repute me, Your unfeigned well wishing Friend, and engaged Brother, T. T. January 28. 1669. My dear Brother, I See you have taken up a more than ordinary care for me, the ground of which, I suppose, is somewhat of God, your conjecture is upon me: In which I beg the Lord you may not be mistaken. If I should confess the truth to my bosome Brother, my heart is such a confused disordered piece, its principles and ends lying so veiled and hidden from my self, that most frequently I am mine own stranger; I know not who, nor what I am; whether God or self swaies me. Only this stayes me, that were the eye of my heart levelled as directly, and in as much single∣ness at the Glory of God in Christ, as I would have it be in my greatest strange∣ness to him and my self, I think I should be sincere. This therefore being much my state, I may admire at the touch of Gods finger upon your heart, to turn it to such a worm. I had no sooner the Letter, but I saw much of God by it; and in such Providences (through the Redeemer) I desire to hold some Communion with him. I shall hint at a footstep of the blessed walk of God to me, so far as your lines may require. Seven or eight years since, I found among the Writings of a deceased Friend, two Bonds belonging to a poor Orphan; on the finding of which, I sent word to the Orphan of them, who came to the House where I dwelt, and gave order that one of her Debtors should be sued, for the calling in her mony. Accordingly that Bond was sent to a Lawyer, and the Debtor sued. But it being out of the way of my imployment to attend such a business, I acquainted the Orphan I should not fol∣low that affair, but leave it to a Kinsman of hers to manage it, and accordingly regarding it no farther, he promising all fidelity for the bringing in from the Debtor the mony to the Orphan. In process of time, not having heard of the
business, either from the Orphan, or her Kinsman, and therefore concluding that all things were regularly managed, and in equity between them. As I was alone in my imprisonment, I had a thought that stuck upon me: I must enquire what issue of the Orphans affair in her Kinsmans hand attained: And on an enquiry, sound out that the Orphan was abused and damnified 14 l. by this Kinsman, who yet had so saved himself, that no justice could be gained against him. On which I was under many disputes with my self, whether I were not obliged to take care the Orphan might be satisfied. I did propose the Case, but was informed in the Negative. However, because I intrusted it in his hand, I could not so clearly dis∣charge my self, and therefore lately borrowed the Mony and paid it to the Orphan: Resolving, notwithstanding my present condition, rather to be the sufferer my self than that the fatherless Child, by the others injustice, should be injured; and was determined to eye the Lord for away to discharge that mony so borrowed. Within a very little time I had borrowed that 14 l. yours came, and within a little season from another, and now you write me of more, which makes up the sum. I have been somewhat moved under the graciousness of God: The Lord make me fruitful in my seasonable improvement of this dispensation. I should be very glad▪ might I see you at Crediton in my passing up to the Assizes. Many things have I to say which I must silence, till God open a door for a more satisfactory converse. You are minded by us here, and I desire to live on your thoughts, when nearest God. I am yours in unfeignedness, T. T. May 12. 1670. My Dear Brother, YOurs of the 16th. of April, I received not till the 7th. Instant; your long silence I confess much amazed me: But now in your lines, and the reason in them given me of the suspence in those paper-intercourses, I rejoyce. Since my last lines to you, according to my engagement by Recognizance, I had an op∣portunity to spend some time with your friends at Crediton, Chimly, and South∣moulton; and am sorry, where there is an appearance of so encouraging an Har∣vest, so little stomack, and Spirit is found in adjacent Labourers. It hath been long my thought, that God hath yet a great controversie with the Nonconforming (tho the best) part of the Ministry of England; among whom, how few are there who naturally care for the state of the poor perishing Country, and what their hands find to do, do it with their might. This, with that Levity of Spirit, Un∣holiness of Lip, Reigning Selfishness, Earthly mindedness, Formality, Lukewarm∣ness in Worship, Security, &c. visible upon the professing Body, doth as appar∣ently, and dangerously threaten England, as the more branded Debaucheries. I could heartily wish (had the wise Lord seen it fit) your station had been fixed in your Native Soil, that you might be to the quickning of Bretheren, and Profes∣sing Saints; and also ready at hand to succour those poor Corners which seem to cry as the Macedonian in the Vision: Come over and help us. But you know your proper gift, and I presume, will carefully study, and answer your Calls. I did contract friendship in that Journy with Mr. S. whom I find of another Spirit, in whose society my Soul was refreshed. And Mr. F. of Dartmouth, I find a wel-tempered Man, whom else I met to rejoyce in, of my Bretheren, I scarce know any. The times now are very black, and clouds are gathering in every quarter: What the issue of our storms may be, a little time will much indicate. I wish I could say, Nubecula cito transibit. To give you my fears, I think this nothing to what must ensue. I have been long waiting for this, and do confidently believe this not the dearest Testimony that must be given to Gospel truths and duties. A National overwhelming Cluster of severe Judgments, I am sore afraid is at the door, sharper than what formally for some scores of years we have felt; tho, I hope, there will be a larger measure of God to sanctifie them for the reforming of his own, and converting the Rebels, then ever we yet experienced. This I con∣fess, is some stay to me, under what I am forced to believe. I have often begged, if the Lord sees I am like to prove a dishonour to his interest, he would first shut me up in the dust.
Dear Brother, pray for me that I may do my work according to my convicti∣ons, humbly, and with success; And that after my teachings of others, and small sufferings, I may not be a stranger to the Light, love, and life by which the Saints are quickened, and so at last, a cast away. The Lord make you useful, and keep up your courage, and grant you a deliverance from rude and unreasonable Men, which, with desires of the like requests from you on my behalfe, will be now all, From your most affectionate and engaged Brother in the Faith, T. T. The Life and Death of Mr. Richard Mather, who Dyed Anno Christi, 1669. RIchard Mather was born in a Village called Lowton, situate in the Parish of His Birth and Parentage. Winwick, in the County of Lancaster, Anno Christi, 1596. His Parents Thomas and Margaret Mather, were of ancient Families in Lowton aforesaid; But by reason of some unhappy Mortgages, they were reduced into a low condition in re∣gard of their outward Estate. Nevertheless; God so disposed and inclined their Hearts, that they were willing and careful to train up this their Son in good Li∣terature: His Education. Concerning which he (after the Lord was pleased to bestow not only Lear∣ning, but Grace upon him) hath sometimes expressed himself thus: By what princi∣ples, and motives my Parents were chiefly induced to keep me at School, I have not to say, nor do I certainly know: But this I must needs say, that this was the singular good Provi∣dence of God towards me (who hath the Hearts of all men in his Hand) thus to incline the Hearts of my Parents. For in this thing the Lord of Heaven shewed me such favour as had not been shewed to many of my Predecessors, and Contemporaries in that place. And now his Parents being strongly bent to have this their Son a Schollar, they Is sent to School. sent him to the School at Winwick, which was about four Miles distant from their House. In the Winter Season they boarded him at Winwick; but such was his eager de∣sire after knowledg and learning, that in the Summer time he went every Day thi∣ther on foot. But whilst he was thus at School he met with no small discouragment from his School master, who tho he had an excellent faculty, and ability to teach, His Masters se∣verity. and train up youth in Grammer Learning, and many were trained up by him, whom he sent to the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, to make farther progress in higher studies; yet did he much discourage his Schollars by his too great severity, and partiality in his Discipline. Mr. Junius was almost discouraged in his studies, when being a School-Boy, his Master would beat him eight times in a Day, whe∣ther guilty or not guilty of any fault: The like magisterial rigour caused young Mather earnestly to desire of his Father, that he would take him from School, and dispose of him to some other Calling. Yet himself afterwards, when he had waded through these difficulties, would say, That God intended better for him than he would have chosen for himself; and therefore (said he) my Father (tho in other things he was indulgent enough, yet) in this he would never condescend to my request, but by puting me in hope, that by his speaking to the Master, things would be amended, he would still over-rule me to proceed in my studies. And good it was for me to be over-ruled by him, and his discretion, rather than to be left to my own affections and desires. But oh that all School-Masters would learn Wisdom, moderation, and equity towards their Schollars, and seek rather to win the Hearts, of Children by righteous, loving, and courteous carriage, and usage, than to discourage and alienate their minds by partiality, and undue severity, which had been my utter undoing, had not the good Providence of God, and the Wisdom, and authority of my Father prevented it. But thus was that of the Poet made good. Multa tulit, fecitque Puer, sudavit, & absit: Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam. After he had spent sundry years in the School some Popish Merchants coming
out of Wales to Warrington, which is but two Miles from Winwick, made diligent enquiry whether there were not some pregnant Wits in that School whom they might procure for Apprentices? Presently our Richard Mather was mentioned to them as a pregnant A special Pro¦vidence. Youth; whereupon application was presently made to his Father to know whether he would thus dispose of him? who was found inclinable to accept of the Motion, because now his Estate was so decayed, that he almost desparied of bringing up this his Son as he had intended: But here the Finger of Divine Providence was very ob∣servable; for when the Father was thus ready to part with his Son, and the Child to go, the Lord raised up the heart of his Master to be importunate with his Father still to keep him at School, professing that it was great pity that a Wit so prone to Lear∣ning should be taken from it, (as indeed it was) or that he should be undone by Popish Education: And the perswasions of the Master so far prevailed, as that his Scholar was still continued under his care and tuition, until the fifteenth year of his Age. It was a singular Providence, and a great Mercy to young Mather, for that whilst he was yet in his Minority, he enjoyed the publick Ministery of one Mr. Palin, who was then Preacher at Leagh, of whom he would say, that the Remembrance of that Man was comfortable and honourable in his thoughts, even in his Old Age, tho his knowledge of him was in his Childhood; for he observed then such a plain, powerful and piercing efficacy in Mr. Palin's Ministry, as was not to be found in the common sort of Preachers in those days, by means whereof some illumination, tho not a through Conversion was wrought in him. Having thus continued long at School, he had a Call, and opportunity of leaving Called to be School-maste his Fathers Family, the occasion whereof was this: At a place called Toxteth-Park, near unto Liverpool, there were many Prudent and Religious People, who being de∣sirous of their own good, and of their Posterity after them, designed to erect a School among them for the better Education of their Children; and upon consideration, God put it into their minds to send to the School-Master at Winwick, to enquire whether he had any of his Schollars whom he would recommend unto them as fit for such a Service: And he having received such a message, presently communicated the matter to this his Schollar, and to his Father: The Son was rather desirous to have gone to the University, but the Father closed with the motion, and in conclusion, it was embra∣ced by all: And now our young Mather left the School and his Fathers House, and re∣moved to Toxteth, Anno Christi, 1611. there to teach School. Nor was it a disparage∣ment to his worth that he was once a School-Master, for many eminent Divines even of our own Nation have been so; as Mr. Hieron, Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, Mr. Richard Vines, &c. But rather it was his high commendation, and the like seldom known, that one should be found fit to teach and govern a School at fifteen years of Age: And yet the Lord helped him in those his young years to carry it with such Wisdom, Love, and Gravity among his Scholars, as was to admiration; so as that he was by them both loved and feared, beyond what is usual, even where there are more aged Masters. This his imployment was more ways than one advantageous to him; for by this The usefulness of it to him. means he became a more accurate Grammarian than Divines usually are: And being in∣dustrious in his Studies whilst he continued in this kind of imployment, he became a good Proficient in other Arts, as in Logick Rhetorick and in Theology: Moreover it after∣wards appeared to be of God, that he was called to such a work in such a place; for there the more effectual Conversion of his Soul unto the Lord was wrought in his tender years, even before his going to the University of Oxford, whereby he was pre∣served His Conversion. from those Vices and Corruptions which undid many of his Contemporaries, thro the Temptations which they met with in that place. The means of his Conversion was partly by observing a strange difference be∣tween himself and sundry in that godly Family of Mr. Edward Aspinwal (whom I knew when I lived in Cheshire, as also Mr. Mather himself) This Mr. Aspinwal was a Learned and Religious Gentleman; and Mr. Mather took notice of the way and walking of that holy Man, which was such as himself had not yet been accustomed unto, which caused sad fears to rise in his Soul, lest haply he might not be in the right way which leads unto eternal Life: Also Mr. Harrison (whom I knew also) then a famous minister at Hyton, preaching upon John 3. 3. concerning the necessity of Regeneration, and Mr. Mather at the same time reading a Book published by William
Perkins, shewing how far a Reprobate may go, and yet be damned: God blessed these three things, not only to Conviction, but to his Conversion also; which was Anno Christi, 114. The pangs of the new Birth were very terrible to him, insomuch as many times when others were at their Meals in the Family where he sojourned, he oft absented His Dejection. himself, to retire under Hedges, and in other secret places, there to lament his misery before God: But after sometime, the Lord revived his broken heart, by sending the Holy Spirit to accompany the Ministry of the Word, and to enable him to apply the precious promises of the Gospel to his Soul. His comfort. Being thus become a new Creature, he was more eminently a blessing in that Family, and in that Calling which the Lord had disposed him in, and such notice was taken of him abroad, that even from places remote Children were sent unto him for Instruction and Education; and by Gods blessings upon his labours and en∣deavours, His success. many were fitted for and sent to the Universities from his School. Ha∣ving passed over some years in this imployment, he resolved () to spend some time in one of the Universities himself; as apprehending that there, by conversing with Learned Men, by performing of Scholastical Exercises, and other advantages not elsewhere to be had, he might gain more profit than possibly he could by his pri∣vate Studies in the Country. Accordingly, in prosecution of his resolves, he went to Oxford, and was admitted into Brazen-Nose Colledge; and being settled there, he was variously affected: For Goes to Oxford. it much rejoyced him to find many there who had been his Quondam Scholars. It was also a joy to him, that he had now such leisure to follow his Studies; and by Disputations, Lectures, Conferences with learned Men, helps of Books, &c. He found marvellous advantages to obtain a rich Treasure of Knowledge: But his heart before this, being touched with the Fear of God, the superstition and prophaness which he was forced there to behold, was no small grief unto him. Soon after his coming to Oxford, by a good providence, he came into acquaintance with learned Doctor Woral, who was very helpful to him by directing him in the course of his private Studies; and among other things, he advised him to read over the Works of the Learned Peter Ramus; which Counsel he followed, and saw no cause to repent of his so doing. But having not spent so much time in Oxford as he could have wished that he might Called to Tox∣teth Park. have done, the People in Toxteth, whose Children had been trained up by him, sent to him, desiring that he would return unto them, to instruct, not so much their Children as themselves, and that not in meer Humane Literature, but in the things of God: And this Call, after mature deliberation, he accepted of. Being returned to Toxteth, he Preached his first Sermon, November 30. Anno Christi 1618. There was a very great concourse of People (the Word of God being precious His first Ser∣mon. at that time in those Parts) to hear him, and his Labours were highly accepted of by those who were judicious. Such was the vastness of his Memory, as that the things which he had prepared and intended to deliver at that time, contained no less than six long Sermons. His memory. The People having now had some taste and tryal of his Gifts, were the more im∣portunate in their desires to have him continue and fix amongst them; and because that could not be without Ordination, they urged him to accept thereof; and he, having not at that time studied that part of Ceremonious Conformity, yielded unto the motion, and accordingly, he (together with many others on the same day) was ordained by Dr. Morton, the then Bishop of Chester, after the mode of those times. His Ordinati∣on. The Ordination being ended, the Bishop singled out Mr. Mather from among the rest, saying, I have something to say to you, between you and me alone. Mr. Mather was hereupon afraid, that some informations had been given in against him to the Bishop for his non-Conformity, and because of his Puritanism, thereby to prejudice him: But it fell out to be far otherwise; for when the Bishop had him alone, he spake Note. thus unto him: I have an earnest request unto you, and you must not deny me; it is, that you would pray for me: For I know (said he) the Prayers of Men that fear God will avail much; and such an one I believe you to be. Being thus setled in his Ministry at Toxteth (where I was acquainted with him) he resolved to change his single condition, and accordingly he became a Suitor to Mrs. Katherine Hoult, the Daughter of Edward Hoult Esq; of Bury in Lancashire, she
had (and that deservedly) the repute of a very godly and prudent Maid: But the motion for several years met with obstructions, by reason of her Father's being not affected towards Non-conformable Puritans (as in those days they were, by way of dis∣grace, stiled) yet at last he gave his consent that Mr. Mather should marry his Daughter, His Mariage. and the Match was consummated, September 29th. Anno Christi 1624. And God made her to become a rich Blessing to him, continuing them together for above the space of thirty years. By her, God gave him six Sons; four whereof, namely Samuel, Timothy, Natha∣niel and Joseph, were born in Old England; and two, namely Eliazar and Increase in His Children. New. After his Marriage, he removed his Habitation three Miles from Toxteth to Much Woolton, having there purchased a House of his own; yet was he wont con∣stantly, both Summer and Winter to preach the Word at Toxteth every Lords Day. Du∣ring his abode there, he was abundant in his Labours in the Gospel of Christ; for His labors. every Lords-Day he preached twice at Toxteth; and once in a Fortnight, on the Tuesdays, he kept a Lecture at a Market Town called Prescot. Also faithful and powerful Preaching being then somewhat rare in those Parts, he did frequently preach upon Holy-days (as they were called) being often thereunto His industry. desired by godly Christians of other Parishes in that Country; and this he did, not as thinking that there was any Holiness in those days, or in other days besides the Lords-Days, but because there would then be an opportunity of great Assemblies, and he judged it good to cast the Net where there were store of Fish. And probably for this cause it was that the Apostles of Christ preached mostly in populous Towns and Cities; as also upon the Jewish Sabbaths in their Synagogues, even after their Abrogation as to any Religious tye upon Conscience for their observation. Yea, and besides all this, he preached many Funeral Sermons. 'Tis true, Mr. Cartwright, Hildersam, and some other famous Non Conformists have scrupled the preaching of Funeral Sermons: Also in some Reformed Churches, that About funera Sermons. practice is wholly omitted; yea, and Decrees of Councils have sometimes been made against it: But this hath been chiefly upon this account, because of the Custom of praising the Dead, and that many times beyond the truth, and their desert; which custom (as many Learned Men have observed) was Ethnical, having its rise from the Funeral Orations made at the Death of their great Persons. So Publicola made an excellent Oration in praise of Brutus, which the People were so taken with, that it became a custom that famous Men dying should be so praised: And when (as Plu∣tarch in the Life of Cirmillus tells us) the Roman Ladies had readily and freely parted with their Gold-Chains and Jewels in a time of need for the publick Good; the Se∣nate made a Decree, that it should be lawful to make Funeral Orations for them also. Hinc mortuus laudandi mos fluxit, quem nos hodie servanius, saith Polydor Virgil. Nor indeed was this Rite practised in the Church afore the Apostasie began. See Magd. Cent. 4. Cha. 6. Wherefore this faithful Servant of the Lords avoided that practice, his Speech at Funerals being directed not to the praise of the Dead, but to the instruction of the Living; as concerning Death, the Resurrection, the Judgment to come, and such like profitable, seasonable and suitable truths. Thus did he preach the Word, being instant in season, out of season, reproving, rebuking, exhorting with all long suffering and Doctrine. In his publick Ministry in Old England he went over 2 Sam. Ch. 24. Psalm 4th. and Psalm 16. Proverbs Ch. 1. and Isa. Ch. 1. and Chap. 6. Luke 22, and 23 Chapters. Rom. Chap. 8. the Second Epistle to Timothy, the Second Epistle of St. John, and the Epistle of Jude. After he had thus spent painfully and faithfully fifteen years in the Work of the Ministry; He that holds the Stars in his right Hand, had more work for him to do elsewhere, and therefore Satans rage must be suffered to break forth to the stopping of his Mouth. The Lecture which he kept at Prescot caused him to be much taken notice of, and so he became more, to the Adversaries of the Truth, an Object of Envy: Magnam Famam, & magnam quietem codem tempore nemo potest acquirere, saith Quint. Where complaints being made against him for his Non-conformity to the Ceremonies, he was suspended in August 1633. under which he continued till November following; Suspended and restored. But then, by means of the intercession of some Gentleman in Lancashire, and by the influence of one Simon Biby (who was neerly related to the Bishop) he was again re∣stored to the exercises of his publick Ministry.
But this restored Liberty continued not long: For Anno Christi. 1634. Bishop Neal Again suspen∣ded. (who was sometime by King James pleasantly admonished of his Preaching Popery, because by his carriage he taught the People to pray for a blessing upon his dead Predecessor) being now become Arch-Bishop of York, sent his Visitors into the Diocess of Chester; who being come into the Country, kept their Court at Wigan, where (among others) Mr. Mather was convented before them, and by them was suspended meerly for his Non-Conformity? And it was marvellous to consider how God was with him, causing a Spirit of Courage, and of Glory to rest upon him, and filling him with wisdom, when he stood before his Judges, who were not wil∣ling that he should speak for himself, or to declare the Reasons which convinced his Conscience of the unlawfulness of that Conformity which they required: Concern∣ing which himself wrote thus: In the passages of that day, I have this to observe, and to bless the Name of God for, that the terror of their threatning words, of their Pursevants, Gods mercy. &c. Did not so terrifie my mind, but that I could stand before them without being daunted in the least measure, but answered for my self such words of truth and Soberness as the Lord put into my Mouth, not being afraid of their faces at all, which supporting and comfor∣ting presence of the Lord, I account not a much less mercy, then if I had been altogether delivered out of their hands. Being thus silenced from publick Preaching the word, means was again used by Mr. Mathers Friends to obtain his Liberty. The Visitor asked how long he had been a Minister? Answer was made, that he had been in the Ministry fifteen years. And said the Visitor, How often hath he worn the Surplice? Answer was returned, that he had never worn it. What (said the Visitor, with an Oath) Preach fifteen years, and never were a Surplice? It had been better for him that he had gotten seven Bastards. The Case being thus, he betook himself to a private Life: And no hope appearing that he should enjoy his Liberty in the Land of his Nativity; Foreseeing also the Sapiens Di∣vinat. approaching Calamities of England, he meditated a Removal from thence into New-England. The principle Arguments whereby he was convinced that he had a Divine Call to engage in so great and hazardous a design, he drew up, and put them into form, which I shall not need to set down. Being now fully satisfied concerning the clearness of his Call to New-England, He resolves for New-Eng∣land. and his People at Toxteth, who did so dearly love his Person, and highly prize his Ministry, yet now thought that God called him to leave them; after many Pray∣ers, and extraordinary seeking unto God he resolved, and engaged upon the Trans∣portation of himself and family thither. His parting with his People and Friends in Lancashire, was like Saint Pauls ta∣king his leave of Ephesus, with much sorrow, many tears being shed by those that expected to see his face no more in this World. He began this Journy in April, Anno Christi. 1635. And Travelled to Bristow, purposing to take Shipping there: In this Journy he was forced (as sometime Brentius was) to change his outward Habit, that he might travel incognito, because Pursevants were designed to apprehend him; But by this means he came safe, and unmolested unto Bristow. From Bristow they set sail for New-England, May the 23d. Anno Christi. 1635 And the Lord after manifold Tryals of their Faith and Patience, brought them in His Voyage. safety to their desired Haven. 'Tis seldom known, that a man designed in Gods E∣ternal Counsel to any special services, doth not at one time or other experience emi∣nent Deliverances of Gods Providence: And so it was with this Servant of the Lord not once, nor twice. Sundry eminent Salvations from deadly dangers did the Lord vouchsafe unto him in his Childhood, which he would speak of in his old age: But the most remarkable, and memorable of all others, was that which hap∣pened to him on the mighty waters, where he that sits upon the flouds, and stilleth the raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof Rore, and whom the winds obey, shewed himself wonderful in Goodness. For when the Vessel that carried him was Providence extraordinary. upon the Coast of New-England, there arose a dreadful storm (called by the Marri∣ners a Hurricane) by means whereof they were in no small danger: And had not the Lord strangely turned the wind in an instant, they had all perished upon the Rocks which were just before them, and within sight of them that were in the Ship. The Relation of this signal Providence, we will here set down in Mr. Mathers own words, left written by himself in his Jornal from Lancashire to New-England; where∣in he thus writes.
August the 15th. Anno Christi. 1635. The Lord had not yet done with us, nor had he let us see all his power, and goodness, which he would have us to take notice of: And A Hurricane. therefore about break of day, he sent a most terrible storm of Rains and Easterly wind, whereby we were in as much danger, as (I think) ever people were. When we came to Land we found many mighty Trees rent in pieces in the midst of their bodies, and others turned up by the Roots by the fierceness of the Tempest. That Morning we lost three Anchors and Cables, one of them having never been in the water before. Two were broken by the strength and violence of the storm, and the third was cut off by the Marriners in extremity of distress, to save the Ship, and their own, and our lives. And when our Cables and Anchors were all lost and gone, we had no outward and visible means of deliverance, but by hoising Sail, if so be we might get to Sea from among the Islands, and Rocks where we had Anchored. But the Lord let us see that our Sails could not save us neither, no more than the Ca∣bles and Anchors: For by the force of the Wind and storm the Sails were rent assunder, and split in pieces as if they had been but rotten rags, so that of divers of them there was scarce left so much as an hands-breadth that was not torn in pieces or blown away into the Sea; so that at that time all hope that we should be saved, in regard of all outward appearance, was utterly taken away, and the rather because we seemed to drive with full force of wind, directly upon a mighty Rock standing out in sight above water, so that we did but conti∣nually wait when we should hear and feel the doleful crashing of the Ship upon the Rock. In this extremity, and appearance of death, as distress and distraction would suffer us, we cryed unto the Lord, and he was pleased to have compassion upon us. For, by his over∣ruling Providence, and his own immediate good hand, he guided the Ship by, and past the Rock, asswaged the violence of the Sea and of the wind. It was a day much to be remem∣bred, because on that day God granted us as wonderful and as signal a deliverance, as I think ever any People had felt: The Seamen confessed that they never knew the like. The Lord so imprint the memory of it in our hearts, that we may be the better for it, and be careful to please him, and to walk uprightly before him so long as we live: And I hope we shall not forget the Passages of that Morning, until our dying day. In all this grievous storm my fear was the less when I considered the clearness of my Calling from God this way. And in some measure (the Lords Holy Name be blessed for it) he gave us hearts con∣tented and willing that he should do with us, and ours what he pleased, and what might be most for the Glory of his Great Name, and in this we rested our selves: but when News was brought into the Gun-room to us, that the danger was past: Oh how our Hearts did then Thankfulness. relent, and melt within us! We burst out into Tears of Joy amongst our selves in Love unto our Gracious God, and admiration of his kindness, in granting unto his poor Servants such an Extraordinary, even and Miraculous a deliverance. His Holy Name be blessed for ever. Thus far is Mr. Mathers Relation of this signal Providence, as left written with his own hand. And this is the more to be taken notice of, because the lives of ma∣ny choice Instruments of Gods Glory were then saved. For not only Mr. Mather himself, but two of his Sons, who afterwards were faithful Ministers of the Gospel, were in that Vessel: And so likwise was that worthy Minister of Christ (Mr. Jonathon Mitchel) the late faithful, and famous Pastor of the Church in Cambridge in New-England, he being then a Child of eleven years old. Also this deliverance was the more remarkable, in that several Vessels were cast away in that storm. As A Ship called the Angel Gabriel, which set out from Bristow with the Vessel where∣in Mr. Mather was, being then at Anchor at Pemequid, was broken in pieces; And the very same strange and sudden turn of the wind, which saved the Ship in which Mr. Mather was, ruined the other which came from Old-England at the same time with him. Also there was then a Ship going between Pascataqua, and the Bay, which was cast away in this storm, and all the People therein lost, except two who were spared to report the News. And among others in that Vessel which then peri∣shed, there was a precious Minister of the Gospel, namely on Mr. Avery, who with his Wife, and five Children, all perished. This Minister every moment expecting that the next wave would be a wave of death, lifted up his eyes to Heaven and said, Lord I cannot Challenge a Promise of the preservation of my life, but according to thy Co∣venant Providence special. I challenge Heaven. Which had no sooner spoken, but a wave came immediatly, and swept him away, and so wafted him to Heaven indeed. And by the way, let it be farther noted, that this was the only Vessel which at that time had miscarried with Passengers from Old-England to New: So signally did the Lord in his Provi∣dence own the Plantation of New-England.
But to digress no farther; this storm being allayed, the Lord brought them safe to an Anchor before Boston, August 17th. Anno Christi, 1635. And Mr. Mather abode with his Family in Boston for some Months; And both he, and his gracious Consort joyned to the Church there. Being thus by a mighty hand, and out-stretched arm brought safe into New-England, He is chosen to Dorchester. Motion from sundry Towns were soon presented to him, desiring that he would im∣ploy the Talents which the Lord had enriched him with, for the work of the Ministry amongst them. At the same time he was desired at Plimouth, Dorchester, and Roxbury. But being in a great strait in his own mind which of these invitations to accept of, considering that in difficult Cases Counsel is an Ordinance of God, whereby he is want to discover his Will, he therefore referred himself to the advice of some Judi∣cious friends, among whom Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Thomas Hooker, were the Chief, who accordingly met to consult of this weighty affair. And the result of their ad∣vice was, that he should accept of the Motion from Dorchester. Which according∣ly being accepted of by him, he did by the help of Christ, set upon the gathering of a Church there. The Church which was first planted in that place being removed with the Reverend Mr. Warham to Conecticot. There was an essay towards gathering a Church April 1st. Anno Christi, 1636. But by reason of the Messengers of some Neighbouring Church, who were not satisfied concerning some that were intended for Members thereof, the work was deferred till August the 23d. when a Church was constituted in Dorchester, and Mr. Mather was chosen Teacher of that Church. Being thus again setled in the Lords work, he therein continued to his dying day; the Lord making him an eminent blessing, not only unto Dorchester, but to all the Churches, and Plantations round about him, for the space of almost four and thirty years. Its a true observation which many from Luther have taken up, to wit, that three things make an able Divine; which are First, Meditatio, Study. Such an one must give himself to Reading and Meditation. What makes an able Mini∣ster. Secondly, Oratio, Prayer. A Man of God must be a Man of Prayer; ever anon upon his knees before God, and Bene orasse est bene studuisse: He that Prays well, studies well: Mr. Bradford, and Mr. Cartwright studied kneeling. Thirdly, Tentatio, Temptation. As when our Lord Christ was to enter upon his Publick Ministry, he was grievously tempted by Satan: So it is wont to be with his Servants, and so it was with this good Man. The Lord having great services for him to do, he must undergo great Temptations, that he might be the better fitted for that work whereunto he was called. Wherefore before, and for some years after his accepting the Office of a Pastor in Dorchester, he was in much Spiritual distress, by reason of uncertainty cocerning his His Tempta∣tions. own Spiritual Estate. He did (as in Wisdom he was bound to do) keep these troubles secret from Men, only he revealed the distress of his Soul to that Great Divine Mr. Norton, then Teacher to the Church in Ipswich, unto whom (under And Comfort. Christ) God gave the Tongue of the Learned to speak a word in season, whereby his Soul was comforted. The Lord giving him to see that he was walking towards Heaven in the same way that David, Asaph, Heman, and many other Worthies had gone before him. During the time of his Pilgrimage in New-England he underwent not so many Changes, as before he had done. For he never removed his Habitation out of Dor∣chester, albeit that he had once some serious thoughts that way. When Prelacy was voted down by our English Parliament, some of his old People at Toxteth, sent to him, desiring him to return to them. But Dorchester was in no wise willing to forego their interest in him; And therefore he left them not. Nevertheless in New-England (as in a Wilderness might be expected) he had experience of many Tryals of his Faith and patience. That which of all outward afflictions did most grieve him, His Wife dies. was the death of his dear Wife, who had been for so many years the greatest out∣ward Comfort and Blessing which he did enjoy. Which affliction was the more grievous unto him, in that, She being a Woman of singular Prudence for the Manag∣ment A good Wife. of his affairs, had taken off from her Husband all secular Cares, so that he had leisure and opportunity wholly to devote himself to his Studies, and Sacred employ∣ments. After he had continued in the State of Widdowhood for the space of an year and His second Marriage.
a half, he again changed his condition, and was married to that pious Widdow, the Relict of that deservedly famous Man of God, Mr. John Cotton; and her did God make a blessing and comfort to him all the remainder of his days. Old-Age being now come upon him, he was sensible of the infirmities thereof, being in these his latter years somewhat thick of hearing: Also (as it was with great Zanchy) the sight of one of his eyes failed seven years before his death; yet God gave His healthful∣ness. him much health of Body, and vigor of Spirit in a wonderful measure, so as that in fifty years together he was not by sickness detained so much as one Lords-day from his publick labors; which continued health (as to natural causes) proceeded partly from the sound and strong constitution of his Body, and partly from his accustoming himself to a plain, wholesome, and temperate Diet: And Bona Diaeta est potior quovis Hippocrate: A good Diet is the best Doctor. He never made use of any Physitian, nor was he in his whole life ever sick of any acute disease; only the two last years of his life, he was sorely afflicted with that disease which some justly call Flagellum Stu∣diosorum, the Scourge of Students; namely, the Stone, which at last brought him to an end of all his labors and sorrows. Concerning the time and manner of his sickness and death; thus it was, there His sickness. being some difference sprung up in Boston, Counsel from Neighbour Churches was by some desired, to direct them in the Lord what should be done; and accordingly the Churches sent their Messengers; and Dorchester Church, amongst others, sent Mr. Mather their aged Teacher, who (with the rest) assembled in Boston, April the 13th Anno Christi, 1669. And Mr. Mather by reason of his Age, Gravity, Grace and Wis∣dom, wherewith the Lord had endowed and adorned him, was chosen Moderator in that Reverend Assembly. For divers days after his being thus in Consultation, he enjoyed his Health as for∣merly, or rather better than for some time of late: But as Luther, when with others he was assembled in a Synod, was surprized with a violent fit of the Stone, whereupon he was forced to return home, his Friends having little hope of his life; So it was with this holy Man: For April the 16th. Anno Christi, 1669. He was in the Night, being then in his Sons house in Boston, taken exceeding ill with a total stoppage of his Urine: the next Morning therefore he returned home to Dorchester: And truly great was the favour of God towards him, that he should be found about such a blessed business as he was then engaged in; for the Lord found him sincerely and earnestly endeavouring to be a Peace-maker. His being thus taken when at a Synod, A Peace-ma∣ker. brings to mind that of the German Phoenix [Philip Melancthon.] Viximus in Synodis, & jam moriemur in illis. In Synods liv'd have I, In Synods now I dye. Now, as usually Providence ordereth, that they who have been speaking all their Lives long, shall not say much when they come to dye: Blessed Mr. Thomas Hooker in his last sickness, when Friends would have been answered to some enquiries which might have made for their Edification after he was gone; he referred them wholly to the things which he had taught them in his health, because (as he said) he had then enough to do to graple with his bodily weakness, &c. Neither did this good man speak much in his last sickness, either to Friends that visited him, or to his own Children; only his own Son, who is now Teacher of a Church in Boston, coming to visit his Father, and perceiving the Symptoms of Death to be upon him, said unto him, Sir, if there be any special thing which you would recomend unto me to do, in case the Lord shall spare me upon Earth after you are in Heaven, I would intreat you express it: At which, his Father making a little pause, and lifting up his Eyes and Hands towards Heaven, replyed, A special thing which I would commend to you, is, Care concerning the rising Generation in this Country, that they be brought under the Government of Christ in his Church; and that when they are grown up and quallified, they have Baptism for their Children. I must confess I have been defective as to practice; yet His Advice to his Son. I have publickly declared my Judgment, and manifested my desires to practice that which I think ought to be attended, but the dissenting of some in our Church discouraged me: I have thought that persons might have right to Baptism, and yet not to the Lords Supper; and I see no cause to alter my judgment as to that perticular: And I still think that persons
qualified according to the fifth Proposition of the late Synod Book, have right to Baptism for their Children. His bodily pains continued upon him until April the 22d. when in the morning his Son aforementioned, coming to visit him, asked his Father if he knew him? To whom he replied, that he did, but was not able to speak any more to him: Whereupon his Son saying, now you will speedily be in the joy of your Lord: His Father lifted up his hands, but could not speak: Not long after, his Son again spoke to him, saying, you will quickly see Jesus Christ, and that will make a mends for all your pains and sorrows: At which words, his Father again lift up his hands; but after that he took no notice of any person or thing, but continuing speechless until about ten a clock that night, he quietly brethed forth his last. Thus did that Light His death. that had been shining in the Church above fifty years, expire, April the 22d. Anno Christi, 1669. And of his Age Seventy three. As some of the Lords precious Ones have had a real apprehension, and fore-sight of their approaching dissolution imprinted upon their Spirits; So its noted of St. Am∣brose, and of Gorgonia of Old; and of Gesner, Morney, Melancthon, &c. among Mo∣dern Death fore∣seen. Divines and Christians: Thus it was with this holy Man sometime before his Departure. The last Text which he preached upon, was that, The second Epistle to Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8. I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good Fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge will give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. And the Portion of Scripture, which before he had insisted upon, was Job 14. 14. All the days of mine appointed time will I wait till my Change come. And the Lord found this his blessed Servant so doing. Also the last Conference-Meeting which he was at in Dorchester, he had prepared to speak something upon those words, 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know that if the Earthly House of this Tabernacle were Dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House, not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens, But his bodily pains prevented him from speak∣ing what was in his Heart to have delivered; The Lord intending that he should no more speak of, but see that place which he had so much, and so oft thought on, and long prayed for, and which he longed to enjoy. He was, especially in his last Sickness, a Patern of patience. For altho ex∣tremity Death desired. of pain, without any acute disease, was that which brought him to his Grave, yet did he never so much as once cry out from first to last; And it was very rare to hear him so much as groan (but never to grumble) under his His patience. dolorous griefs. In his Sickness whereof he Dyed, he was much delighted in reading Dr Goodwins Discourse about patience; in which Book he ad till the very Day of his Death. Once in his Sickness, his Son saying to him; That in as much as several small Stones were come from him in his Urine, now possibly he might have some ease: His Father answered, with an affecting kind of earnestness: As for that matter, the will of the Lord be done; Such was his Grace and patience. And at the same time his Son saying to him; God hath shewed his great faithfullness unto you, having upheld you now for above the space of fifty years in his service; and hath implo∣ed you therein without ceasing, which can be said of very few Men upon the face of the whole Earth: His Father replyed, You say true; I must acknowledge the Mercy of God hath been great towards me all my days; But I must also acknowledge that I have had many failings, and the thoughts of them abaseth me, and worketh patience in me. His humility. When any one asked him, how he did? his usual Answer was, Far from well, yet far better than mine iniquities deserve. Thus did he (like Old Augustine, who dyed reading the Penitential Psalms) keep up a Spirit of Repentance to the last. As he was a Man faithful, and fearing God above many, so the Lord shewed great faithfulness unto him, both in making him serviceable unto the very last; yea, and continuing the vigor of his Spirits, and power of his Ministry until his end. Few Men tho young, are known to preach with such vigor as he did but ten days before his death. The Lord also was faithful and gracious to him in respect of his Chil∣dren. It was a special token of Divine Favour to some of the Ancients, that their Sons after them succeeded in the Ministry: So it was with the Fathers of Gregory Nazian∣zen,
Gregory Nysen, Basil, Hilary, &c. And the Lord cheered the heart of this his Servant in his Old Age, by giving him to see most of his Sons imployed in the Mi∣nistry many years before the decease of their dear and precious Father: He left four Sons in the Work; One of them, to wit, Mr. Eliazer Mather, late Pastor of the His Children. Church of Northampton in New-England, went to his Rest about three Months after his Fathers Death, with him to sound forth the Praises of God among the Spirits of just Men made perfect. The other three surviving were Mr. Samuel Mather, Teacher of a Church in Dublin: Mr. Nathaniel Mather, Minister of Barnstable in the County of Devon, and afterwards in Rotterdam in Holland; and Increase Mather of Boston in New-England. Mr. Richard Mather's way of preaching was plain, aiming to shoot his Arrows not over his Peoples Heads, but into their Hearts and Consciences; whence he studiously His manner of Preaching. avoided obscure Phrases, Exotick words, and unnecessary citation of Latin Sentences, which some men too much adict themselves unto. Holy Mr. Dod was wont to say, that so much Latin was so much flesh in a Sermon: So did this humble Man look upon the affectation of such things in a Popular Auditory to savour of Carnal Wisdom. And the Lord gave him an excellent faculty to mak Abstruce things plain, that in handling the deepest Misteries he would accommodate himself to Vulgar Capacities, so that even the meanest might learn something. He knew how to express, . He would often use that saying, Artis est celare artem: 'Tis a great piece of Art to conceal Art. And he much approved that of Saint Austin. If (said he) I Preach Learnedly, then only the Learned, and not the unlearned can understand and profit by me: But if I Preach plainly, then Learned, and unlearned both can understand, and so I may profit all. He was mighty in the Scriptures; whence Holy Mr. Hooker would say of him, Mighty in the Scriptures. My Brother Mather is a Mighty Man. Also his usual way of delivery, was very powerful, awakning, and zealous; especially in his younger years, there being indeed few Men of so strong a Body as he, which, together with the Natural fervour of his Spirit, being sanctified, made his Ministry the more powerful: And the Lord blessed his Labours to the Conversion of many, both in Old, and New-England. Tho his way of Preaching was plain and zealous, yet was it substantial, and very Judicious, even in his younger dayes, Mr. Gillibrand (A famous Minister of War∣rington in Lancashire: And the more famous, for that, tho he did much stammer in his ordinary Discourse, yet would he pray and Preach very fluently) having once heard him Preach, asked what his Name was? And answer being made that his Name was Mather: Nay (said Mr. Gillibrand) call him Matter; For believe it, this Man hath substance in him. Yea, such was the sollidity of his Judgment, that some who were his opposites, did yet therefore respect, and honour him. Dr. Par (who was then Bishop in the Isle of Man) having heard that Mr. Mather was silenced, la∣mented it, saying; If Mather be silenced I am sorry for it; for he is a solid Man, and the Church of Christ hath a great loss of him. He was very diligent as to the duties both of his General, and perticular Calling, His diligence. which indeed are the two Pillars upon which Religion doth stand. As to his Ge∣neral Calling: He was much in Prayer, especially in his study, where he oft-times Prayer fre∣quent. spent whole days with God, in suing for a blessing upon himself, and his Chil∣dren, and upon the People to whom he was related, and upon the whole Country where he lived. The requests which upon such occasions he put up to God in Jesus Christ, and also how his heart was moved to believe that God heard him, he left (many of them) in writing among his private papers; probably that so himself might have recourse to those experiences in the times of Darkness, and Temptations: As also that his Sons after him might see by their Fathers example, what it is to walk before God. It must needs therefore be a great loss to the world, when such Righteous Men are taken away. Well might Philo, Jerome, George Prince of Anhalt, &c. Weep bitterly when they heard of the death of any such men; because it portends evil to the places where they have lived, and served God. As he was much in Prayer, so he was frequent in hearing the word. For his manner was to frequent several Lectures in Neighbouring Congregations, untill his disease made him unable to Ride: Yea, and usually even to his old age (as it is Recorded of Mr. Hildersam) he took Notes from those whom he heard, professing that he found profit therein. As to his perticular Calling, he was ever from his Youth a hard Student. Yea, Studious.
his mind was so intent upon his Work and Studies, that in the very Morning be∣fore he dyed, he importuned those Friends that watched with him to help him in∣to his Study. And they urging that he was not able to go so far, he desired them to help him that he might try, which they did: But e're he was come to the Door of his Lodging-Room; I see (saith he) I am not able; Yet I have not been in my Study several dayes, and is it not a lamentable thing that I should lose so much time? After his entrance upon his Ministry, he was not only in Old England (as hath His Industry. been said) but also in New-England abundant in Labours. For (except when he had an Assistant, which was seldom) he Preached twice every Lords-Day, and a Lecture once in a fortnight, besides many occasional Sermons, both in publick, and in private. Also he was much exercised in answering many Practical Cases of Con∣science and in Polemical, especially Disciplinary Discourses. In his publick Ministry in Dorchester, he went over the book of Genesis to Chapter 38. As also Psalm the 16th. The whole Prophesie of Zechariah, Saint Matthews Gospel to Chapter the 15th. 1 Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chapter the 5th. And the whole second Epistle of Saint Peter. And yet notwithstanding those rare gifts and graces wherewith the Lord had a∣dorned His great Hu∣mility. him, he was exceeding low and little in his own eyes. Some have thought that his greatest errour was, that he did not magnifie his office as he might, and some∣times should have done. If a Man musterr, tis good erring on that hand. Humble enough and good enough was the frequent saying of a great Divine. And Dr. Harris used to say, that every Man hath just so much, and no more of true worth in him, as he hath of Humility. Saint Austin being asked which was the most Excellent Grace? Answered Humility: And which was the next? Answered, Humility: And which was the third? Replyed again, Humility. For this indeed is comprehensively All, being of great price in the sight of God: And if so, Mr. Mather was a Man of much real worth. It hath been the manner of some, in writing Lives to insert the Wills of those whose Lives and deaths they have published. The last Will and Testament of him whose Life and Death is here related, breathing forth a most Humble, Holy, and Gracious Spirit, we shall here subjoyn the Preface and Conclusion of it. It was written with his own hand, October 16th. 1661. Thus I Richard Mather, Considering the certainty of Death, and the uncertainty of the His Last Will. time thereof: And withal, knowing it to be the Will of God, that a Man should set his House in order before he departed this Life, do make this my Last Will, and Testament in manner following. First of all I acknowledge the rich and wonderful Grace and Mercy of Almighty God, whose Hands have made and fashioned me, and who took me out of my Mothers Womb, and hath made me a Man, who might have made me a Beast, or other Creature. He hath also by his good Providence preserv∣ed the Being and Comfort of my Life all the dayes of my Pilgrimage until now, even for the space of sixty five years: During all which time he hath not suffered me to want either Food or Raiment, or the service of any Creature, which hath been re∣quisite for my Comfortable subsisting in this world, which I acknowledge to be the bounteous gift of him who is Lord of all Creatures, and the high Possesser of Hea∣ven and Earth. Next of all, and more especially, I am bound to give thanks, and praise to him whilst that I have any Being, that I being a Child of Wrath by Nature as well as o∣thers, and being born in a place of much Profaneness, and Popery, he hath of his a∣bundant Grace vouchsafed to draw me out of that woful estate of Sin and Ignorance wherein I lay, and to make himself and his Christ known unto me by the Gospel, of which Grace I was most unworthy; and in his great patience and Mercy to bear with my manifold and great Offences, both before and since the time of his gracious Calling of me, tho for my unworthy walking in many perticulars, I might justly have been for ever rejected of him. Yea, and such hath been his rich Grace, that he hath vouchsafed to put me an unworthy Creature into the Ministry of the Gos∣pel of his Son, that I should not only know and profess the same, (which yet is an unspeakable mercy) but be also a Preacher of it unto others. In which imploy∣ment if any thing hath been done, which hath been pleasing to him, or any way beneficial to any Child of his, it hath not been I that have done the same, but the Grace of God which was with me.
For I must needs acknowledge, to the praise of his patience and Grace, that in my poor Ministration, for the space of these forty and two years and upwards, I have been much defective in Wisdom and watchfulness over the Peoples Souls, in purity, in faithfulness, in uprightness, in meekness, humility, and zeal: And because of these, and many other my defects, and offences against the Lord, I stand in much need this day of Mercy, and forgiveness through his Christ, and have no cause to look for any acceptance, either in this, or in another world, for any Righteousness of mine own, either as touching my Ministry or otherwise, but disclaiming all thoughts in that kind, mine only trust and hope is to be accepted of him, and (when this Life shall be ended) to be saved in his Heavenly Kingdom, meerly by his free Grace, and the Obedience, and precious passion and intercession of his dear Son. And as concerning Death, as I do believe that it is appointed for all Men once to die: So, because I see a great deal of unprofitableness in mine own Life; and be∣cause the Lord hath let me see such vanity, and cmptiness even in the best of those Comforts which this Life can afford, that I think I may truly say, that I have seen an end of all perfection: Therefore if it were the Will of God, I should be glad to be removed hence, where the best that is to be had doth yield such little satisfaction to my Soul, and to be brought into his presence in Glory, that there I might find (for there I know it is to be had) that satisfying, and Al-sufficient contentment in him, which under the Sun, is not to be enjoyed. In the mean time I desire to stay the Lords leisure. But thou O Lord, how long! Now concerning mine outward Estate, sith the Earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof, the Habitable World, and all that is therein; to him therefore belongs the praise of all that I possess in this kind: And for the Portion thereof which he hath given me, it is my mind and Will (if so be, it please his Highness) that after my Decease, the same may be disposed of as followeth, &c. Having thus graciously expressed himself, he proceeded to the disposal of his Temporal Estate, which being of private Concernment, we shall not here trouble the world therewith. But, after the disposal of that, he concluded with a most solemn charge to his Children, with the Rehearsal whereof we shall finish this dis∣course. It is this Concerning my Son Timothy, with all the rest of my Beloved Sons, as I hope, God hath already made them pertakers, at least sundry of them, of his saving Grace in Christ, for which they, and I have cause endlesly to be thankful; so I think it not amiss, for the furtherance of their Spiritual good, to lay upon them this serious and solemn charge of a Dying Father, that none of them presume after my Decease, to walk in any way of sin and wickedness in one kind, or another, or in a careless neglect of God, and the things of God, and of their own Salvation by Christ. For if they shall so do (which God forbid) then, and in such a Case, I do hereby testifie unto them, that their Father which begat them, and their Mother which did bear them, with all the Prayers which they have made, and Tears which they have shed for them; their Example, their admonitions, and Exhortations which they have ad∣ministred unto them, together with this my last Will, and solemn Charge; All these will rise up against them as so many Testimonies for their Condemnation at the last Day. But I have better hopes of them: And do hereby declare unto them, that if they shall seriously repent of their sins, believe in the Lord Jesus, and by his Grace, walk in all the wayes of God, and as becometh the Gospel of Christ, as this will be to the Honour, and Glory of him that made them, so it will redound to their own unspeakable Comfort, and benefit in this, and in another World: And their Fa∣ther that now speaketh unto them, with their Dear Mother, now with God, shall exceedingly rejoyce in the day of Christ, when we shall receive our Children unto those everlasting Habitations: And shall see, not our selves alone, but those also who have proceeded, and come forth out of our own Bowels to have their part and Por∣tion in that Eternal Glory. In desire and hope that it may be so, I Commend them all to the Lord of Heavens blessing: And let the Blessing of God in Jesus Christ be poured out, and remain upon them all for evermore, Amen.
The Life and Death of Mr. Joseph Allein, who Died Anno Christi, 1669. JOseph Allein was born in the Devizes, in Wiltshire, Anno Christi 1633. In his His Birth. Childhood he shewed forth a singular sweetness of disposition, and a remarkable diligence in every thing he was imployed about. When he was about eleven years old he was noted to be very constant in private Prayer, and so serious and intent in it, that he would not be diverted, or taken off by the coming of any ac∣cidentally His early seek∣ing of God. into the places of his retirement. This and other fruits of a serious and gracious Spirit were the concurrent observation of those in the Family. From this time the whole course of his youth was an even-spun Thred of agedly conversation, which was rendred more amiable by his sweet an pleasant deportment towards all with whom he conversed. About this time, his Brother, (Mr: Edward Allein) a worthy Minister of the Gos∣pel, dyed. whereupon our Joseph earnestly desired that he might be trained up to succeed him in the Work of the Ministery; which request was readily hearkned unto by his Father, who accordingly set him to School; and such was his diligence and industry there, that the time alotted to recreation was by him spent at his Book; His diligence and industry. insomuch as in the space of about four years, he attained to such a measure of Know∣ledge and Learning in the Latin and Greek Tongues, that he was judged by his Master to be fit for the University: After which, he abode for some time with his Father; and a worthy Minister of the Place read Logick to him. When he was about sixteen years old he went to the University, and was placed in Lincoln Colledge in Oxford, where he had not been long, before a Wiltshire Place He goes to the University. becoming void in Corpus Christi Colledge, he was chosen Scholar of that house, his own merits and worth, not any sinister, or indirect means bringing him in. Being thus setled there, he gave early and excellent proofs of his indefatigable∣ness and industry in his Studies, accounting it his great happiness that he had His industry. gained this opportunity of improving his Learning: And truly he spared no labour day nor night; he thought all time too little, no pains too great which he imployed for that end; by his good will he would do nothing else but pray and study: If Friends came to visit him in studying times, (tho at other times he was very civil and sociable in his converse with them) tho they were sure to find him within, yet not sure that he would let them in. He could seldom be found in Bed after four a Clock in the Morning, no, tho sometimes he went not to Bed till about One; and when he had opportunities of procuring sleeping days for others, yet would he not indulge one to himself. So covetous was he of time, that as he could scarce spare any for sleep, so neither for food: It was common with him to give away his Commons, at least once a day, Time precious. that he might gain the more time to his Study. When he had left the University and was married, an intimate Friend of his (who had thoughts of changing his condition) wrote to him for an account of the inconveniences of Marriage; to whom he merrily returned this Answer, Thou would'st know the inconveniences of a Wife, and I will tell thee some of them; Whereas now thou risest constantly about four a Clock in the Morning, a Wife will keep thee till about six; whereas thou usest to study about fourteen hours in a Day, she will bring thee to eight or nine; and whereas thou art wont to forbear one Meal a Day at least for thy Studies, she will bring thee to thy Meat; and if these be not mischiefs enow to affright thee from Marriage, I know not what will. By this his diligence and sedulity in his studies, he came on (through Gods blessing) exceedingly in Learning, so that his profiting appeared unto all men. He would His proficiency. often say, that he cheifly affected Rational Learning, valuing Skill in the Languages only for the sake of Things, and those things most, which were of all most likely to improve his Judgment; and the truth of his words was sufficiently evident; for all that were acquainted with him knew him to be, as a good Linguist, so an acute
Disputant, and an excellent Philosopher: When he performed any Academical Exer∣cises, either in the Hall or in the Schools, he always came off with Applause, or at least with the Approbation of all but the Envious, who yet had nothing to say against him. His pregnant Parts and early Accomplishments where so taken notice of, that no sooner was he a Batcheller of Arts, but he was even compell'd to become a Tutor, and presently was intrusted with as great a number of Pupils as any in the House: Some of his Scholars were Graduates in Divinity, and singular Ornaments to that Society, and profitable Instruments in the Church of Christ. During his abode there, a Chaplain's Place falling void, he chose that before a Fellowship, which, he knew, in a little time would fall unto him of Course; and this choice he never repented of; yea, he oft reflected upon it with a great deal of content and comfort; For he had always a very ardent affection for Prayer, insomuch as he and his Friend could hardly meet, but before they parted, at his request they must also pray together: What a pleasure than was it to him, twice a day to engage a whole Society in so dear and be∣loved His love of Prayer. an Exercise: And well was it for the Colledge that he so esteemed it: Scarce was it possible that any could have performed that Office better than he did; He did not trouble them with a great deal of noise, vain Tautologies, crude Effusions, unin∣telligible sense, or mysterious nonsense instead of Prayer: His Spirit was serious, his Gesture reverent, his Words few, but premeditated and well weighed, pithy, solid, and fully expressive of his truly humble and earnest desires: He hated the sauciness, which some call holy bouldness, and drew near to God, not as if he had been going to play with his Mate, but as became a Creature over-awed with the Majesty of his His manner of praying. great Creator: He prayed with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also: He con∣fessed Sin with real grief, inward hatred and detestation of it: He craved mercies like one that felt the want and worth of what he begged, with faith, fervency and humble importunity; his affections working, but working rationally as well as strong∣ly. And this (as doubtlesly it prevailed above) so on the Hearers it had the more power∣ful insluence, because they found it to be no meer Religious fit but exactly agreeable to His Devotion. the habitual frame and disposition of the Speaker. There are too many, who whilst praying and preaching appear very demure, and mighty devout; but take them out of the Pulpit, and they are as light, vain and frothy as any others; But it was far otherwise with Mr. Allein; he was always composed, serious and grave, above his Age; he set God always before him, and where ever he was, he still laboured to walk as in his presence: It was his care to make Religion his business, and his great endea∣vours to walk by Rule: His main design in all his ways, was to approve himself to his Heavenly Father which saw all in secret; and his Exercise was, to keep a Conscience void of offence, both towards God and towards Man. As for the pleasures and delights of Sin, he utterly abhorred them: yea, was so much Sin abhorred. above them, that he could not endure them. How sweet was it to him (as Saint Austin said) istis suavitatibus carere, To want those sweets? And as for lawful delights and pleasures, tho somtimes he entertained himself with them, yet was his Heart little taken with them. His conversation being in Heaven his sweetest Comforts, and most Divine refresh∣ments were holy and heavenly: His Soul took many a delightful prospect of Eternity, and hugged herself in a comfortable perswasion, that ere long she should enjoy those glorious Mansions; and this made him little to mind earthly Glory, or the poor emp∣ty delights of Sense. He was of a very sweet disposition, and of as highly civil a Conversation, as a His Assability. Man subject to the common frailties of humane Nature could be: He had scarce a Gesture which did not seem to speak, and by a powerful and charming Rhetorick, affect all whom he conversed with: Besides other moral perfections that he was en∣dowed with, it might be truly said (as the Historian said of the Emperor for his Clemency) that he was Totus ex Commitate, made up, as it were, of nothing else but courtesie and affability. He was a true and faithful Friend to those who had interest in him, and withal, as pleasant as a serious Christian could well wish: He was not rash in choosing, but A true Friend having chosen he loved intirely. There was no more but one only thing which he thought too much for any, for whom he thought not his Love too good; He could not sin (knowingly and willingly) for any Friend he had on Earth: He was a Friend
Ʋsque ad aris; So far as lawfully, and Conscientiously he might do any thing, he stuck at nothing, wherein he might serve or gratifie those whom he loved. Yet whilst to his Friends he shewed himself Friendly, good Nature as well as His Charity. Christianity, obliged him to be kind to all, and (according to his ability) to the poor, bountiful. He was too frugal to misplace his Charity, yet not so Covetous as to withold it when he met with fit objects. He did not think the little he had so much his own, as that his necessitous Brethren might not claim a part in it, and there∣fore he gave to them as if he had been paying a debt, and not bestowing an Almes. But above all, his Love and Affection to the Souls of others was most admirable, Charity to Souls. to whom he desired and endeavoured to do all the good possible, insomuch as some there were, and are, who do verily think that they should never have found the way to Eternal Life, if he had lived to himself, and not for the good of others. His Cha∣rity to the poor Prisoners in Oxford Gaol was very eminent, amongst whom (as Holy Mr. Perkins did at Cambridge) of his own accord, he began to Preach, and held on constantly (whilst he remained in the Town) once a fortnight, for above the space of twelve Months; encouraging them to give attendance upon his Mi∣nistry, by a considerable allowance of Bread, (that week he Preached) at his own cost and charges. He used also at other times, frequently to visit others, who in the world were but mean and low: His main design (together with the Relieving of their Temporal wants) being to assist their Souls in the way to Heaven. Indeed in all his converses, where ever he came, he was like fire, warming, refreshing, and His Commu∣nicativeness. quickening all that were about him; kindling in them the like zeal for God and goodness, which he had in himself: None there were that came to visit, or to be acquainted with him, but (if the fault were not in themselves,) they might get much good by him; yea, so much as to be for ever the better for him. It was hardly possible to be in his Company, and not to hear such things from him, as (if well weighed) might have been enough to make one out of conceit with sin, and in love with virtue so long as one lived. He thought that day wholly lost wherein none had got some good by him. He lived as if he had been quickened with that saying of Tertullian, Quid prodest esse, quod esse non prodest? To what pur∣pose is it to Live, and not to live to some good purpose? His ardent Love to Souls hastened his remove into the Country, where he might have opportunities of doing much good. Mr. Richard Allen, a near Relation of his, gives this Character of him. As a Man (saith he) he was of quick natural parts, and of great acquired abili∣ties. His Character. Of a grave, composed, and serious temper and behaviour: Not Morose, but full of Candour, Free, Affable, Chearful, and Courteous. As a Christian, he was in Holiness, Heavenly-mindedness, and Exemplariness of Life, much clevated above the ordinary sort of Christians. He had much delight∣full Communion with God, his Soul was much exercised in Divine Contempla∣tion: And to provoke others to the like exercise, he would often speak what inef∣fable sweetness and satisfaction his Soul had found in his stated Meditations upon the Divine Attributes distinctly, one by one. In Prayer he was not ordinarily so much in Confessing of sin, and complaining of Corruption and Infirmities (tho he expres∣sed a due sense of these) as in admiring and praising God in his infinite Glorious per∣fections, and in the mention of his wonderful works, perticularly of those wonders of his Love revealed in Jesus Christ. His whole Life also was beautified and adorned with the admirable Lustre of his perticular, Personal Graces. As First, He was made up of Love. His sweet, amiable, and courteous carriage was such as made him the delight of his acquaintance, and it made way for the entertain∣ment, His Love. both of his serious Counsels, and severe reproofs. His compassion to those in distress: His bounty to those in want, His forbearance in case of offences: His af∣fectionate Language, and deportment: His readiness to all obliging Offices of Love to all sorts with whom he conversed, did evidently shew how he loved them. Especially his Love was more fully let forth to the Congregation where he exerci∣sed his Ministry. His ardent Longings after their Souls: His rejoycings in the Pros∣perity of their Souls: His bleedings, and heart-breakings for their falls and in∣firmities: His uncessant Labours among them, both publickly, and from House to House: His frequent and affectionate Letters to them when he was absent: His
earnest desire to Live, to die, and to be buried among them, do all shew what a great room they had in his heart. Secondly, He was a Man of Courage: He feared no danger in the way of his His courage. Duty, knowing that he that walks uprightly, walks surely. In doubtful Cases he was inquisitive; but when once resolved, he was fearless. He feared not the faces of Men, but where just occasion was, he would boldly admonish, and faithfully re∣prove what he saw amiss, which ungrateful duty he managed with so much pru∣dence, and with such expressions of Love and Compassion to their Souls, as made His prudence. way into their hearts, and made his work the more successful. Thirdly, He was a Son of Peace: A zealous peace-maker among Bretheren in case of dissention: And of sober and peaceful principles: Of a healing Spirit as to His peaceable∣ness. factions upon the account of Religion. He had a Reverend esteem of Magistrates, abhorring all provoking and insolent Expressions, or Mutinous actions against them. Fourthly, He was a great lover of Truth and Righteousness in his own practice, His righteous∣ness. and a great presser of them upon others, especially upon Professors of Religion; whom he exhorted to be just in their dealings, and true in their words: Wary in promising, and punctual in performing. Oft did he bewall and sharply reprove promise breaking, and deceitful dealing. Fifthly, His patience was very Exemplary. Not only in his sufferings from Men; His patience. But in the time of his long and great weakness and Languishing distempers, which lay upon him for some years, yet all that while he had a constant calmness and serenity of Spirit, and was so far from murmuring, or discontent, that he was still blessing God for dealing so gently, and tenderly with him. Sixthly, He was eminent in Liberality: He not only did, but devised Liberal His liberality. things. He studied, and considered how he might both give himself, and how he might procure others to give relief to those that were in want. He dayly gave much Almes, both in the place where he lived, and where ever he came. When Collections were made for Pious, or Charitable uses, he stirred up others, both by his Exhortations and Example; and sometimes made addition in secret to what he had given publickly. He was very bountiful to many of his Relations who were fallen into decay: Yet his means was not above eighty pounds a year: Only his Wife, for divers years kept a Boarding School, which did considerably enlarge his Estate. He took great pains in Riding abroad to Gentlemen, and other rich Men to procure a standing maintenance for Non-Conforming Ministers that were in want. Seventhly, He was of an active Spirit: He went about doing good; and as he His activity. was incessant in his Labours in the Congregation where he lived, so where ever he came he would be scattering some good seed, not only among those of riper years, but among the Children where he came, asking them Questions; giving them Counsel, which sometimes he left in writing among them. Especially in his own Family, among his Wives Boarders, he so deported himself that in many of them he begat the awe and Love as of Children to their Fathers. Whilst he lay sick at the Bath he sent for many poor persons, both Aged, and Children, and gave them Catechisms, engaging them to learn, and to give him an account of their proficiency therein, and they came chearfully and willingly to him, being encouraged thereunto by his Familiar and winning carriage, his giving them Mony, and by feeding and feasting them. Eighthly, He was very Humble. Tho God had highly exalted him in the hearts His humility. and Judgments of others, yet was he low in his own eyes, and despised the praise of Men. His whole deportment favoured of Humility, and he was of a great Con∣descention to the weekest and meanest, As a Minister, besides his Labors in that great Congregation where the Lord had His great la∣bors. placed him, the care of many other Churches lay dayly upon him. He went abroad frequently into other Parishes about the Country, amongst poor ignorant People that lived in dark Corners, having none to take care of their Souls, preached to them himself, and stirred up many of his Brethren to do the like, whose forward minds readily joyned with him in setting up Lectures in several places. He had an Eye to the poor Welch, and had an influence upon sending some Ministers among them, Intending also to have spent some time among them himself, and was hardly with∣held
from it by all the perswasions of his friends, who told him his inability to Travel by reason of the great weakness that he lay under. The reading of this did so inflame the zeal of my Reverend Brother Mr. Thomas Gouge (as himself told me) that he was restless in his Spirit, till (having setled his affairs about London) he had liberty, and opportunity to prosecute this design: Since which time he hath made many Journies both into South and North Wales, where he hath done much good, and by the help of divers of his Reverend Brethren in the Ministry, and many others, hath placed out many Hundreds of poor Children to School to learn English, hath given them Catechisms, and other good Books: Be∣sides Bibles and New-Testaments in Welch, and hath procured the Printing of Welch Bibles (whereof there were very few to be had,) of the Practice of Piety, &c. To be distributed among them, as is well known to many who have put to their helping hands to promote so excellent, and worthy a work: See what Testimony Mr. George Newton, the Reverend Pastor of Tawnton, gives of Mr. Newtons Testimony of him. Mr. Jos. Allein, whose assistant he was. Mr. Joseph Allein (saith he) came to my as¦sistance, Anno Christi, 1655. being then about one and twenty years old, and we continued together, till the Black day came. He was a young Man of singular-accomplishments, both natural and acquired. His intellectuals solid, his memory strong, his affections lively, his learning much beyond the ordinary size: And a∣bove all, his holiness was eminent; his conversation exemplary; and in brief, he had a good head and a better heart. Much of his time he spent in private converses with God and his own Soul: His secret duties. He much delighted to perform secret Devotions in the sight of Heaven, and in the open air, when his opportunities served. Many dayes he kept alone, and then (by his good will) he would betake himself to a solitary House, probably, that he might freely use his voice as his affections led him to, (which he could not have done where there were Inhabitants) and that he might converse with God without avocation and distraction. His society with others was alwayes mingled with holy and heavenly discourses. His reproofs. He took all opportunities to instruct, exhort, and reprove, which he never failed to do (when he judged it necessary) whatever the event might prove. And tru∣ly his reproofs were accompained with such humility tenderness, Self-Condemna∣tion, and compassion, that they seldom, if ever did miscarry. In the Houses where he sojourned his Lips fed many, God freely poured grace in∣to His usefulness where ever he came. his lips, and he freely poured it out to others. None could live quietly in any open sin under his inspection. When he came to abide in any House, he brought Salvation with him, and when he departed, he left Salvation behind him. When he was transplanting himself from one Family to an other, (as his occasions some∣times required) he would call all the People, one by one into his Chamber, from whence (it was observed) that scarce any one returned with dry eyes. In the duties of the first Table he was very exemplary, and near to rigour. His He respected all Gods Com∣mandments. Righteousness exceeded even tha of the Pharisees: Yet also was he as exact in the duties of the second Table: A Man of morals; Never spotted with any unjust, or uncharitable act. The failing of many Professors in this kind, drew from him many Prayers, Tears, Complaints, and Lamentation. He had an eminent free and bountiful heart, to his power, yea, and beyond his power, as is before expressed. He did good to all; especially to the Houshold of His bounty. Faith: He was full of holy projects, for the advancement of both Spiritual and Tem∣poral good of others, which he so vigorously and prudently prosecuted, that they seldom miscarried. He was a Man of extraordinary condescention to the Infirmities of weaker Brethren, His humility. and used to deal with them in so humble, loving and sweet a way, as considering him∣self, lest he also might be tempted. In their Confessed failings he was not Supercilious and censorious, but laboured to restore them with the Spirit of meekness. He believed and hoped all things that were to be believed and hoped: And when he deeply con∣demned the action, he would not Judge of the Estates of the Person. And tho he was sufficiently mild in his Judgment of others, yet was he severe enough in his Judgment of himself. In matters doubtful and disputable, he was not peremptory: He laid not more His holy pru∣dence. weight and stress upon Notions, and Opinions in Religion than belonged to them:
He was not like many who are over-confident in their determinations, that they will hardly hold Communion, nay, scarce so much as a pleasing Conversation, with any Man (how gracious soever) who cannot think, and speak, and act as they do in every thing. He would freely and familiarly converse with those, who were sound in the Faith (as to the Fundamentals of Religion,) and Holy in their lives, of all perswasions. His Ministerial imployments were more facile to him than to many others, being His Ministerial abilities. of a quick conceit, of a ready, strong and faithful memory; of a free, and nervous expression; and (above all) having a holy heart that was alwayes boiling up with good Matter. He was apt to Preach and Pray, and ready on all occasions to lay out himself in such work; tho his warning sometimes was very short, he confidently cast himself upon the Lords assistance, who had never failed him, and so went free∣ly about his work without distractions. He began upon a very considerable stock of Learning, having gifts both Mini∣sterial His learning and improve∣ment. and personal, much beyond the proportion of his years, and grew exceed∣ingly in his abilities and graces in a little time, so that his profiting appeared unto all Men; and he waxed very rich in Heavenly Treasure, by Gods blessing on a diligent hand, so that he was behind in no good gift. God blessed him with all Spi∣ritual blessings in Heavenly things, and he returned all to Heaven again. He ser∣ved God with all his might, and with all his strength. He was abundant in the work of the Lord: He did not go but run the wayes of Gods Commandments. He did run, and was not weary; He did walk and was not faint. He pressed hard to∣wards the mark till he attained it. His race was swift and short, and his end glorious. He was insatiably greedy of the Conversion of Souls, wherein he had no small His zeal. success in the course of his Ministry: And to promote this end he poured out his very heart in Prayer and Preaching. He imparted, not the Gospel only, but his own Soul to his hearers. His Supplications and Exhortations were many times so affecti∣onate, so full of holy zeal, and Life, that they quite overcame his Auditors. He so melted over them, that he thawed, mollified, and sometimes dissolved the har∣dest hearts. But while he melted others he wasted, and at last consumed himself. He was not satisfied with these his publick employments, but constantly went from House to House, and there perticularly (where he had a free Reception) dealt He went from house to house. both with Governours, Children and Servants, instructing them especially in the great fundamentals, both of the Law and Gospel, whom he found to be ignorant: Gently reproving where he found any thing amiss: Exhorting them to diligence, both in their general and perticular Callings. And where he found any defective in it, he earnestly intreated them to set up the Worship of God in their Families, and to make them little Churches by their constant reading of the Word of God, that so the Word of Christ might dwell Richly in them; as also by a careful Cate∣chising both of Children, and Servants, and (according to the Governors abili∣ties) that they should, by conference, Repetition of Sermons, and especially by Mor∣ning and Evening Prayer, avoid that dreadful indignation which hangs over the heads of those families which call not upon the Name of Lord. He inspected, so far as he could, into the state of every perticular person, and accordingly Re∣proved, The benefit of it. comforted, and encouraged as he found occasion: Yet all, with so much tenderness, humility and self denial that he gained much upon the affections of all that entertained him, and wrought them at least to an outward Conformity; insomuch as such as were not visited at the first, at length came forth and called upon him to come and help them also. Thus did he wear out himself to give light and heat unto others. He allowed himself too little sleep to Recruit those Spirits which he had wasted with labor His early rising. and wakening. He rose constantly at four a clock in the Morning at farthest, and that in the cold winter time, that having had Communion with God he might be the earlier at his other studies and imployments. He was a very grave, strict, serious Composed young Man, yet not rigid in his principles. His Moderation was known to all that knew him. He held that Separa∣tion His moderati∣on. in a Church was many times necessary, from the known corruptions of it: But allowed not separation from a Church, where active compliance with some sinful evil, was not made the condition of Communion.
When he Catechised the greater sort in publick, he began with Prayer for a His Catechi∣sing. blessing upon that duty. Then having propounded some Questions out of the Assemblies Catechism, his care was, not only to make them perfect in rehearsing the Answers there set down, but also to bring them to a clear understanding of the sence and meaning of the said Answers, and of all the Terms and Phrases in which they were expressed: And to draw some practical inferences from the same. He farther instructed them, by proposing several other Collateral Questions. besides those in the Catechism, which himself had before drawn up, and sent them in writing. In the Evening of each Lords day, he used to repeat his Sermon in the Church to which very many people resorted, and when he had done, some Youths were His Repetiti∣ons. called forth who gave him an account of all the Heads of his Sermon by their Memories. When he went from House to House, he used to give them notice the day before: Desiring that he might have admitance, and that they would have their whole Family together against he came: Which being done, he used to instruct the young∣er His private instructions. sort in the principles of Religion, by asking Questions out of the Catechism, the answers whereunto he used to open, and explain. He used also to enquire of them about their Spiritual Estate, laboring to make them sensible of the evil and danger of sin. Of the Corruption and depravation of our Natures, the misery of an Unconverted state; provoking them to look after the true Remedy propo∣sed in the Gospel, to turn from all their sins unto God, to close with Christ up∣on his own terms, to follow after holiness, to watch over their hearts and lives, to mortifie their Lusts, to redeem their time, and to prepare for Eter∣nity. These things he explained to their understandings, and pressed upon their Consciences with the most cogent Arguments and Considerations he possibly could; Shewing what great priviledges they did injoy, the many Gospel Sermons they did or might hear, the many Talents they were entrusted withal; and the great account they were to give unto God of the same, &c. Besides, he left with them several Counsels and Directions to be carefully remembred and practised for the good of their Souls. Such as were serious and Religious he used to help forward in Holiness, by an∣swering His prudence. their doubts, resolving their cases, and encouraging them against their difficulties and discouragments: And before he left them he used to deal with the Governors, and with such as were grown up to years of discretion singly and a part, that so, (as much as possibly he could) he might know the condition of each perticular person, and the better apply himself to each of them. If he found them to neglect Family duties, he used to press them to set them up, by reading the word of God and Prayer, giving them directions therein, and exhorting them to the practice of secret Duties. He also perswaded Mistresses of Families to give their Children and Servants time for such secret duties, and to encourage them therein: And sometimes himself would pray with them before his departure. If the Family where he came was ignorant, he would insist the longer in instructing, and Catechising: If loose, in reproving and convincing; if Godly in encouraging and directing. He used to spend five afternoons every weak in these exercises, from one or two His great suc∣cess. a clock till seven: In which space he used to visit thr or four Families, some∣times more as they were Greater or less. Thus he went through the whole Town, and then presently began again: And he did often bless God for the great success that he found in these Exercises; saying, that God made him hereby as instrumen∣tal to the good of Souls as by his publick Ministry. He was a faithful Reprover of the miscarriages of Professors, whether high or His reproof. low, Ministers or private Christians; Yea, tho they were never so dear unto him, or never so obliging in their carriage towards him, whatsoever the issue and event might prove. Tho he was but a young Man, yet was his deportment very seri∣ous and grave. He was Humble, Courteous, and Affable, Condescending to dis∣course with the Poorest and meanest for their Spiritual good, as soon as with the highest and richest. He was full of Holy projects by what wayes and means he might most effectually promote the Honour of Christ, and the Salvation of Souls, and what he judged to be conducing to these ends, he prosecuted with the
Wisdom and vigour, that he seldom failed to accomplish it. He considering how much the Conscientious and frequent performance of the About selfe examination. duty of Self-examination might tend to the weakning of sin, and to the furthe∣rance of Holiness both in Heart and Life, he earnestly pressed this practice in his publick Ministry; directing his hearers for the performance of it: He dealt also with them in private about it, and drew a promise from most of them, that they would every night, before they went to sleep, spend some time in secret, to call them∣selves to an account how they had spent that day, by proposing several Questions to their own hearts, which he had drawn up in writing, and Communicated unto them under several Heads; and many confessed that this practice had been very ad∣vantagious unto them in their Christian walk. Before the Act of Uniformity came forth, he was very earnest with God day and night, to make his way plain unto him, that he might not be deprived of his pre∣sent advantages of saving Souls, with any scruple upon his Conscience: But when His Non-Con∣formity. he saw those Clauses of Assent and Consent, and renouncing the Covenant, he was fully satisfied against it; whereas before he was so doubtful that his intimate friends thought that he would have conformed, saying that he would not leave his Mini∣stry for small and dubious matters: Yet tho he must quit his Station, he judged that the Ejection of the Ministers out of their places did not disoblige them from Preaching to their people, nor the people from attending upon their Ministry: And tho upon that Black and Dismal Sabbath, he took his leave of his beloved People; yet he firmly resolved to go on with his work of Preaching in private, and Visiting from House to House, till he should be sent to Prison, or into Banishment. And accordingly he prosecuted this resolution, appointing the Thursday following to be a day of Humiliation, where he Preached in his own House to as many as durst ad∣venture to hear him; but there was not such an appearance as he expected: Where∣upon he applyed himself to those who were most timerous, labouring to give sa∣tisfaction to their scruples, and it pleased God, in a short time to give him such good success, that his own people waxed bold, and Multitudes resorting to his Meetings, whether they were by day or night, which so encouraged him that he went on vigorously in Preaching, Visiting, and Catechising from house to house. He went also frequently into the Villages, and places about the Town, whence most of their Ministers were fled, or at least, desisted for some considerable time; His indesatiag∣bleness. and where ever he came, the Lord was pleased to give him great success: Many were Converted, and the generality encouraged to cleave close unto the Lord. This much heigthened the rage of some Neighbour Justices, who much threat∣ned His Enemies. and oft sought for him: But it pleased God that he was preserved out of their hands longer than he expected. His usual saying was, that if it pleased the Lord to grant him but three Months Liberty before he went to Prison, he should account it a great favour, and should more willingly submit to it when he had done some work. Then did he sell off his Goods the better to prepare for a Gaol or Banishment, only he was desirous that his Wife should accompany him, which also was her great desire, it being more grievous to her to think of being absent from him, than to suffer with him. The Lord was pleased so far to indulge him, that he went on in this course from Bartholomew day, til May the 26th. following, tho he was often threatened, yet was he never interrupted, tho many, both of Town and Country came flocking to his His frequent Preaching. Meetings at what time soever they were held. He seldom missed of Preaching twice a Sabbath, and often in the week. Sometimes he Preached fourteen times in eight days: Often ten, and ordinarily six or seven, either at home or abroad, during all this time, besides his frequent discoursings with such as resorted to him: And for the better enabling him hereunto, he laid aside all his other Studies, expecting that his time and liberty would be but short. And truly the Lord did more than or∣dinarily assist him, as himself took notice, as well as all that heard him and con∣versed with him. Upon a Saturday in the Evening, about six a clock, he was seized upon by an Officer of Taunton, who professed that he had rather have been otherwise employed, but that he was urged to a speedy Execution of the Warrant, by one who was sent on purpose to see it Executed, because they feared that none in the Town would do it.
The Warrant was signed by three Justices, who required his present appearance His apprehen∣sion. at one of their Houses, about two Miles off from Taunton. He desired liberty to stay and Sup with his Family, expecting but hard entertainment whether he was going; yet this small courtesie was denyed him, till one of the Chief in the Town was bound for his speedy Appearance: At Supper he fed heartily, and was very chearful, yet full of holy and gracious discourses, suitable to the time and Company that were with him. After supper, having prayed with his Fa∣mily and Friends present, himself with the Officer, and two or three friends that accompanied him, went to the appointed place, where they charged him with break∣ing the Act of Ʋniformity by his frequent Preaching since it took place: This he de∣nyed, saying, that he had neither Preached in Church, Chappel, nor in any other place of publick Worship, since that time, and that what he did was in his own Fa∣mily, and with such friends as came to hear him. Then they charged him for being at a Riotous Assembly: He answered, that at their Meetings were used no Threats, no dangerous Words, no Staves, or Weap∣ons, neither were any put into fear, their only employment being Prayer and He is abused. Preaching. Here they much abused him with Scoffs and Scorns, the very Justices themselves with their Ladies, and such others as came to hear his Examination. One of them called him Rogue, and said that he deserved to be hanged, and that if he were not hanged, he would be hanged for him; and many other scurrilous expressions they used, which would but defile the paper if they were set down. They urged him much to be his Self-Accuser, but could not draw him to it, not∣withstanding which, they made a Mittimus to send him to the Gaol upon Munday Morning after they had detained him with them till twelve a Clock in the night. Commited. When he came home, which was about two a clock in the Morning, he lay down on his Bed about two or three hours, and then arising, he retired himself with God till about eight a clock: At which time several Friends were come to visit him, to whom he would have Preached, but that he was not suffered by the Officer, who had a strict charge to the contrary: Yet he spent the day in discoursing with the several Companies of his Friends, who out of the Town and Country came to Visit him; and as he could be permitted, he prayed oft with them. All this while he was very chearful in Spirit, admiring Gods Mercies to him, and encouraging all that came to see him to be bold and resolute in the cause of God and his Gospel, and for their Souls, and not to be discouraged for what befel him for their sakes. As for himself, he said, that he was nothing at all moved for it, nor did in the least, repent of any thing that he had done, but accounted himself happy, and under that promise which Christ makes to his Mat. 5. 10. &c. That he should be doubly and trebly happy, now that he was to suffer for his sake. He was also earnest with his Brethren in the Ministry that came to see him, that they should not at all desist from their Labours when he was gone, and that there might not be one Sermon the less in Taunton for his absence. He exhorted also the people, that they should at∣tend upon the Ministry with greater ardency, dilligence, and courage than before, assuring them how sweet and comfortable it was to him to consider how much he His courage. had done for God in those last Months: Adding that he was going to Prison full of Joy, being confident that all these things would turn to the furtherance of the Gospel, and the glory of God. Mr. Allein was not satisfied to go away till he had left some Exhortations with his people, and therefore requested them to come to him about one or two a clock in the night, and notwithstanding the unseasonableness of the time, many Hundreds of old and young repaired to him with whom he spent about three hours in Prayer and Preaching. And so with many yearnings of Bowels they took their leaves each of other, wherein a more affectionate parting could scarce be seen. On Munday Morning about nine a clock, he with two or three friends that de∣sired He goes to Prison. to accompany him, went for Ilchester. As he went, the Streets of Taunton were beset on both sides with people, and many followed him on foot, some Miles out of the Town with great Lamentations, which he could scarce bear: Yet the Lord so strengthened him that he went through them all with great courage and Joy, endeavouring both by his words and countenance to encourage and chear them up. He carried his Mittimus himself having no Officer with him, and when he came Himself carri∣ed his Mitti∣mus. thither the Jaylor was not at home, which opportunity he took to Preach before
he went into Prison, which his Adversaries accounted a great addition to his former Crimes. The Jaylor being come home, he gave him his Mittimus, and was by him put into the Bridewel-Chamber, where he found Mr. John Norman, late of Bridgwater, His Prison fellows. Committed a few days before him for the same cause: A Man he was of singular abilities, fervent in zeal and holy boldness for the cause of Christ: Constant to his principles in the most wavering times, and one, who for his Godly and Exemplary Conversation, was much esteemed among the people of God; and few that knew him, either of the sober Gentry or Commonalty, but for his choice parts, and spot∣less life had great respects for him. There were also five more Ministers, and fifty Quakers, which had all their Lodg∣ings in the same room, parted only with a Mat, which they had hung up for a little more retirement. Soon after Mr. Coven, Mr. Powel, and eight more were brought into the same place, being taken at Meetings. This added to the straitness of their room, and it was so nigh to the top of the Prison, that as they lay in their Beds they could touch the Tiles with their hands, which made it very irksome, the Sun lying upon the House all the day: Being so many of them together, besides the re∣sort of many friends to them, they much wanted fresh air, till they had taken down His convenient Lodging. the glass and some of the Tiles, for their better refreshment. In this Room they were forced to lie, and to eat their food, having no other place to retire into but a little Garden, adjoyning to the place were all the Common Prisoners were. In their Chamber they were molested with the noise of those wretches, the ratling their Chains, the Blaspheming of their Tongues, their Roaring and Singing night and day being a great trouble to them. And if they went into the Courts of the Prison, there they met with the sent and sight of their Cloaths hanging full of vermin, and of the Prisoners in their Rags and Chains. That also which most troubled them was that they had no place to retire into, neither alone nor together wherein they might have Communion with God. The Quakers Quakers wickedness. also much molested them, disturbing them with their Cavils in the times of Prayer, Preaching, and Singing, and would come and Work in their Callings just by them at such times, to their great grief. Want of air was most offensive to Mr. Allela, who had accustomed himself both in Oxford and the Country, to spend most of his secret hours in by-places in the fields or woods. So soon as Mr. Allein came into Prison, he Prayed and Preached, which he cal∣led, He consecrates his Prison. the Consecration of it. And after a day or two he desired to have his Wife with him or near him in the Town, to attend him, and to keep Company with such Friends as came to visit him: Whereupon he prevailed with the Keeper to have one Corner to himself wherein to set his Bed, which was more private than the rest. About this he made a Partition with some Curtains, whereby he might be the more private, and it was a great comfort to him: And after a few weeks he procu∣red leave of his Keeper, to walk out a Mile or more, Morning and Evening constantly, except the Weather, or his Keepers Churlishness did hinder him. Their Diet was good and sufficient; sometimes abundant, by their Friends kind∣ness Kind friends. to them. Here they Preached once a Day constantly: Sometimes twice, and many resorted to their Sermons, of which some came eight or ten Miles round a∣bout out of the Country, and multitudes came to visit them. Their Friends were exceeding kind to them, endeavouring by their frequent visits, by provisions of Food, and supplies of monies to take away the tediousness of their Imprisonment. Mr. His great la∣bors. Alleins Labours were the greatest, who spent almost all the day in conversing with his friends, and a great part of the night in his studies, and secret duties. Thus they continued for about four Months, and were tossed from Sessions to the He is brought to the Sessions. Assizes. July 14th. Mr. Allein was brought to the Sessions held at Taunton, and Indi∣cted for Preaching on the 17th. of May precedeing; but the Evidence was so slender that the Grand Jury would not find the Bill, and thereupon, by the constant practice Acquited and yet impri∣soned. of the Court, he should have been freed by Proclamation: Yet was he returned unto Prison till the Assizes: And to his Friends, who had hoped for his Deliverance, he said, Let us bless God that his Will is done, and not the Wills of such worms as we are. August 24th. He was Indicted at the Assizes, and tho the Evidence was but the same with the former, yet now the Grand-Jury found the Bill, and he was brought To the Assizes. to the Bar, and his Indictment was Read, which was, that May 17th. 1663. He,
together with twenty others to the Jurors unknown, did Riotously, Routously, and Seditiously assemble themselves together, contrary to the Peace of our Sove∣raign Lord the King, and to the great terrour of his Subjects, and to the evil Ex∣ample of others, &c. To this he Answered, That as to Praying and Preaching he Found Guilty and in. was Guilty, and did own them for his Duty: But as for Riotous, Routous, and Se∣ditious Assemblies, he abhorred them from his heart, and of these he was not Guilty. Yet was he found Guilty by the Petty Jury, and by the Judge Sentenced to pay a hundred Marks, and to continue in Prison till it was paid. To this he only re∣plyed: That he was glad that he had appeared before his Country: And that, whatsoever he was charged with, he was Guilty of nothing but doing his Duty; His Speech to the Judge. and that all which did appear by the Evidence was only that he had Sung a Psalm, and instructed his Family, where some others were, and both in his own House: And that, if nothing which had been urged would satisfie he should with all chear∣fulness and Thankfulness accept, whatsoever Sentence his Lordship should pronounce upon him for so good, and Righteous a cause. From hence he was carried back to Prison, where he continued a whole year wanting three days. Winter coming on, which they feared would make this place as cold as it had been hot in Summer (the Chamber having no Chimney in it) they endeavoured, and His remove to the Ward. with some difficulty obtained to be removed to the Ward, where they had more com∣fortable accommodations in all respects. Here they had very great Assemblies, both on week days and Sabbaths, and many days of Humiliation, and Thanksgiving; and tho they were much threatened both by the Judges and Justices to be sent be∣yond-Sea, or carryed to some remote Island, where they should be kept close Pri∣soners; yet the Lord prevented it, and so ordered it, that their Imprisonment tur∣ned to his greater glory, and to the furtherance of the Gospel, by their great la∣bors, to which God added a great Blessing: And Mr. Alleins sufferings did not in the least abate his Zeal, and Activity for God, but he embraced all opportunities His zeal and activity. of doing good. The Minister who was appointed, at some times to Preach to the Felons, falling sick, Mr. Allein freely supplyed his room as long as he could be per∣mitted, earnestly exhorting them that by Repentance, and Faith they would secure the Eternal welfare of their Souls. He was very forward to promote the Educa∣tion of young persons, both in Ilchester, and in the Country adjacent; for which His care for young persons. end he gave Catechisms to many Poor Families, that they might be instructed in the principles of Religion, exhorting the Elder to teach and encourage the Younger. He was a serious and faithful Monitor to his Fellow-sufferers, if he saw in them any thing which became not the Gospel for which they suffered. He was now, as formerly, a careful Redeemer of his time, rising about four a clock Redeeming time. in the Morning, and spending a considerable time in Meditation and Prayer, and then following his studies close in some Corner of the Prison where he could be pri∣vate: And sometimes he spent almost whole nights in these exercises, only lying down in his Cloths for an hour or two, and then up again. Those which visited him he did not entertain with frivolous and frothy discourses, but with such as His prudence. were profitable, and for their Edification, applying himself unto them according to their several capacities, exhorting them to such gracious practices, which by Reason of their age or temper, Calling or Condition, he judged them to be most defective in, and dehorting them from such evils, as he thought them most prone unto. He rejoyced that he was accounted worthy to suffer in the cause of Christ, and encouraged the timerous; by his own and others experience of Gods goodness beyond what they could have expected. He carefully observed that Rule, Mat. 5. 44. Love your Enemies, bless them that His candor. curse you; Do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightefully use you, and persecute you. He never exclaimed against those who were the chiefest instru∣ments of his Sufferings, but pityed and prayed with Saint Stephen; Lord lay not this sin to their charge. The greatest harm he wished them, was that they might be Con∣verted, Sanctified, and their Souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. During the time of his Imprisonment it could not be discerned that his health was impaired notwithstanding his incessant Labors. Yet, probably (as the Physicians afterwards judged) the foundation of that weakness which presently after surprized him, and occasioned his death, was then laid. At his enlargement from Prison he was more earnest in his work than before:
Yet willing to preserve his liberty among his people, who had no Minister that had the oversight of them, tho some came and Preached to them in his absence: And Multitudes resort to his Ministry. such Multitudes resorted to him, that he judged it necessary to divide them into four parts, resolving to Preach to them four times each Sabbath; But finding that to be beyond his strength, which was much decayed, he was fain to forbear it, and Preached only twice on the Sabbaths, yet oft on the week days besides, at home or abroad. He pressed all that feared God, especially such as were of a timerous Spirit, to be couragious and active for God, and to be much in mutual conversings toge∣ther, now that their Ministers were withdrawn, and to be much in praises and Good Counsel. thanksgivings unto God, delighting themselves in him, and denying themselves for him, and resigning themselves, and all they did enjoy, to him, that the world might see, that they could live comfortably on a God alone, on his Attributes and promises, tho they should have nothing else left. He much pressed the Unconverted to be more careful for the Salvation of their Charity to Souls. Souls, especially considering, that those were now removed, which longed for, and watched over their Souls, and they were fallen into the hands of such as wanted either skill or Will to promote their welfare: Shewing them, with most tender affections, what miserable Creatures they were whilst Unconverted, and how his heart did yearn for them: How he did pray and weep for them when they were asleep: How willingly he had suffered a years Imprisonment for them, nay, how readily he would shed his blood to procure their Salvation. But it pleased the All-wise God to take him off from this eager pursuit of his work His first sick∣ness. and designs for him, by Visiting him (in the latter end of August) with much weakness, within three Months after he came out of Prison. For being requested by a people, whose Pastor was absent, to Preach, and Administer the Sacrament unto them, the place being sixteen Miles off, he was so disabled by the Journy, that he could not perform both; yet, because many of them came far, he forced himself to Preach to them, tho to his great prejudice, and after three or four days, with much difficulty he returned home, and had the advise of the best Physicians thereabout, who, all of them judged that it proceeded from his abundant Labors, and Preaching too soon after his Meals, as he did, when he Preached four times a day. This had so abated the natural heat of his stomack that no food would di∣gest, nor oft stay within him. He felt no pain, but had a constant discomposure in his Stomach, and a failing of his His great weakness. Appetite, that for many weeks he could not bear the sent of Flesh-Meat, nor retain any Liquors or Broths, so that he consumed so fast, that his Life seemed to draw near to an end: But God was pleased so to bless the means that after two Months, he recovered of this distemper; yet, so lost the use of his arms that from October till April, he could neither put on or off his Cloaths, nor write any thing. His Physicians and Friends earnestly besought him to intermit his Labors, but could not prevail. For he continued to Preach once, and sometimes twice every Sabbath, and to visit from House to House all that Winter. In the Spring God was pleased to restore unto him the use of his Arms, for Hopes of his Recovery. which he was exceeding thankful, and they had great hopes of his Recovery: And the Summer following, by making use of some Mineral Waters, near the Devizes, his strength was much encreased, and he found much good by them. But trusting too much to that strength, his weakness returned often upon him the next Winter, and more in the Spring following. Yet his fits continued not long at a time, so that he Preached, not according to, but even beyond his strength, at home and a∣broad: His indefati∣gableness. Sometimes going into remote places, where they had had no Meetings since the removal of their Ministers, which was about the space of two years: And he engaged some of his Brethren also to take their turns, which they did with great success. Now was he again much threatened, and Warrants were often out for him, which He is threaten∣ed but deliver∣ed. he rejoyced at, that when (by reason of his distempers) he could do little for God, God would so honour him, that he should suffer for him in a Prison; and would of∣ten say with much chearfulness, that they could not do him a greater kindness: But God not seeing him fit for the inconveniences of a Prison, was pleased to spare him. The Five Mile Act now taking place, he removed to a place called Willington, five
Miles from Taunton, to a Dyers house in a very obscure place, where he preached on the Lords Days as he was able: But the vigilent eyes of his Enemies soon found him out there, and resolved to remove him, and a Warrant was put in the Con∣stables hands to apprehend him: And the Dyer was threatned to be sent to the Goal for entertaining him: Hereupon he returned to Mr. John Mallack's house, a Merchant, who had oft solicited him to take his house for his Home, and he now accepted of his courteous offer: But many of his Friends in Taunton were so earnest, that to sa∣tisfie them, he went to their houses and stayed with some a Fortnight, with others three Weeks or a Month, yet still taking Mr. Mallack's for his Home: And he went from no house without serious Counsels, Comforts or Reproofs, as their Condition required. He went from no house that was willing to part from him; nor could he satisfie the requests of one half that invited him to their houses: So that he would often His usefulness in all places. bless God, and say with holy Mr. Dod, That he had a hundred houses for one that he had parted with: And that tho he had no Goods, yet he wanted nothing, his Fa∣ther careing for him in every thing; so that he lived a far more pleasant Life, than his Enemies that had turned him out of all. He was exceedingly taken with Gods Goodness in Mr. Mallacks bountiful enter∣tainment of him, whose House, Gardens and Walks were very delightful to him, being so pleasant and curious, and all Accomodations within suitable thereunto; Gods faithful∣ness. which made him often to say, that he did [as Dives] fare deliciously every day; but hoped to improve it better than he did: And that God had inclined his heart to care for many Poor, and for several of his Brethren in the Ministry, and that now God did reward him, not suffering him to be at any expence upon himself or Wise. He was a great Observer of each Days Providences, and would every Night be∣fore he went to sleep, reckon them up to his Wife, to raise his own and her heart to Providence observed. praise the Lord, and to trust to him, of whose care and goodness he had such mani∣fold experiences. The time for his going to the Waters being come, he desired to keep a Day of Thanksgiving for all Gods Mercies to him and his Friends; and accordingly July the 10th. 1665. divers of his Brethren in the Ministry, and of his Friends in Taunton met at Mr. Mallack's House, about a Mile from the Town; where, af∣ter they had been a while together, came two Justices, with others attending them with Swords, and brake open the Doors by force (tho if they had pleased, they might have unhatched them) and with much dirision and threatning Language, took their Names, and committed them to some Constables, charging them to bring His apprehen∣sion. them the next Day to the Castle-Tavern in Taunton, before the Justices of Peace there. The next Day the Prisoners were broughr forth, and answered to their Names as they were called; and after two Days tedious attendance, were all convicted for keeping a Conventicle, and sentenced to pay three Pounds a piece, or to be committed to Prison for threescore Days: But few of them either payed their Fines or suffered their Friends to pay it for them. Whereupon Mr. Allein, and seven Ministers more, and forty private Persons were committed to Ilchester Goal. When Mr. Allein Imprisonment. came to the Prison, his Deportment, and Conversation was every way as exemplary as it had been in his former confinement. And notwithstanding his great bodily weakness, yet he constantly took his turn with the other Ministers in preaching, which they performed, mostly, twice a Day, besides other Religious Exercises, Painfulness. wherein also he did bear his part. Tho he had many of his Flock imprisoned with him, whereby he had the fairer Care of his people. opportunity of instructing and watching over them; yet was he not forgetful of the rest that were at liberty, but wrote many Letters to them, full of serious and pro∣fitable matter, from which they might reap no small benefit, whilst they wanted his bodily presence: He was also very solicitous for those that were with him, that they might be the better for their Bonds, walking worthy the many and great Mer∣cies they had enjoyed during their Imprisonment; that so, when they returned to their Houses, they might speak and live forth the Praises of God, carrying them∣selves in every respect as became the Gospel for which they had suffered; which he made to appear by that wholesome Counsel which he gave them the Morning wherein they were delivered, which consisted of two Heads. The first was of Exhortation. His advice at their delive∣rance. First, to rejoyce with trembling in their Prison Comforts, and to see that they kept them in a thankful Remembrance all their Lives.
2. To feed and feast their Faith upon Prison Experiences. 3. To let Divine Mercy be as Oyl to the flame of their Love. O love the Lord all ye his Saints. 4. To keep their Manna in a Golden Pot, and not to forget him, who hath said so often Remember me. 5. To let the Bonds of their Afflictions strengthen the Bonds of their Affections, to love one another the better. 6. To let present indulgence fit them for future hardships. 7. To cast up their accounts at their return home, and to see whether they have gone as much forward in their Souls, as they have gone backward in their outward Estates. 8. To see that the Snuffers of the Prison make their Light to burn the brighter; and that their course and discourse be the more savoury, serious and spiritual for this present Tryal. 9. To see that they walk accurately as those that have the Eyes of God, Angels, and Men upon them, to see what Gainers they have been by this Affliction. The second was of Dehortation. First, Revile not your Persecutors, but bless and pray for them, as Instruments of conveying great Mercies unto you. 2. Let not the humble acknowledgment of Gods Mercy, degenerate into proud, vain-glorious boasting, or carnal. 3. Be not prodigal of your Liberty upon a conceit that the Prison will be easie, nor yet fearful of adventuring in a way of Duty. 4. Do not load others with censures, whose Judgment and Practice differs from yours, but humbly bless God that hath so happily directed you. Having spoke thus to his fellow Prisoners, he spake thus also to Friends and Bre∣thren His Speech to Friends. with them. First, Let our experience be your encouragement. O love the Lord, ye our Friends; Love the Lord; Fear him for ever; Believe in him; Trust him for ever for our sakes. We have tasted of the kindness of God. You know how good God hath been to us both in Spirituals and Temporals. Encourage your hearts in the Lord your God: Serve him the more freely and gladly for our sakes. You see we have tryed, we have tasted how good the Lord is. Do you trust him the more, because we have tryed him so much, and found he is a Friend so faithful, so gracious, that we are utterly unable to speake his Praise. Go on and fear not in the way of your Duty: Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous. God hath given us a great Reward already; but this is but the least; we look for a Kingdom. 2. My desire to our Friends is, that they will all help us with their Praises: Our Tongues are too little to speak forth the Goodness and the Grace of God: Do you help us in our Praises: Love the Lord the better; praise him the more, and what is wanting in us, let it be made good by you. O that the Praises of God may found abroad in the Country by our means, and for our sakes. His Imprisonment prevented his going to the Waters, which was the cause of the His distempers encrease. increase of his Distempers all the Winter following, and more in the Spring; yet not so much as to take him wholly off his work, but that he preached, kept many Days, and administred the Sacrament to his People. Going to the Waters in July, 1667. they had a contrary effect upon him to what they had at first; for after three days taking them, he fell into a Fever, which Gods Mercy. seized on his Spirits, and his strength decayed so exceedingly, that he seemed to be near Death; but the Lord was pleased to spare him, and so far to restore him, that at six weeks end he returned to his People; yet then finding a great decay in his strength and weakness in all his Limbs, he was willing to go to Dorchester to advise with Dr. Lose, an able Physitian, from whom he had received many Medicines, but had never any converse with him, nor had seen him. The Doctor soon perceived his weakness, and therefore advised him to stay there He goes to Dorchester. for a Fortnight or three Weeks, that he might direct him the better, and alter his Remedies as he should see occasion, which he readily assented to. He had not been there above five days, but the use of all his Limbs was suddenly taken from him; first his Arms, then his Legs, that he could neither stand, nor move a Finger, nor His great weakness. turn him in his Bed. He was given over by Physitians and Friends, that saw him
for some weeks lying in cold sweets night and day; and often, for some hours His great weakness. half his body was cold, so that in their apprehensions he was dying, and receiv∣ed nothing but strong Cordials and Broths. Thus he lay from September 28th. to November 16th. before any amendment ap∣peared, all which time he was very chearful, praising and admiring God for his mercies: But his Spirits were so low that he spake seldom, and then softly. He was free from pain, and when his Friends admired his patience, he would say, that God had not yet tryed him any thing, but in laying him aside from his work, and keeping him out of Heaven. Being asked how it was with his Soul in all his His inward peace. bodily weakness? His answer was, that he had not those Ravishing Joys which he expected, and which some did pertake of: But he had a sweet serenity of heart and Conscience, and a confidence in God grounded upon the promises of the Gospel, and did believe that it would be well with him to all Eternity. The Ministers and Christians of that place were very compassionate unto him, Great kindness to him. Visiting, and Praying with and for him often. And Dr. Lose visited him twice a day for about a Quarter of a year together (except when he was out a Town) and yet would never take any Fees of him. The Gentry also in and about the Town, sent in whatsoever they imagined might be pleasing to him: So that he neither wanted food nor Physick, and he much delighted himself in the consideration of the Lords kindness to him, in the Love which he received from them, and would often say: I was a stranger, and Mercy took me in: In Prison, and it came to me: Sick and weak, and it visited me: There were also fourteen young Women that took their turns to watch with him. In this condition he kept his Bed till December 18th. And then, beyond hope, His amend∣ment. in the depth of Winter he began to revive and to get out of Bed: Yet could he neither go nor stand, nor move a finger, having sense in his limbs without motion. But it pleased God that by degrees his strength increased, so that he could with help, walk a turn in his Chamber, and when (after a time) he could do it without help, he was wonderfully taken with the Lords mercy to him: And by February, with a little help, he could walk in the streets, being asked how he could be so well con∣tented to lie so long under so great weakness? He answered, What? Is God my Father, Jesus Christ my Saviour, and the Spirit my sweet Friend, my Comforter, and Sanctifier, and Heaven mine Inheritance, and shall I not be content without His patience. Limbs and Health? Through Grace I am fully satisfied with my Fathers good Pleasure. To another that asked him the same Question, he answered: I have chosen God, and he is become mine, and I know with whom I have trusted my self, which is enough. He is an unreasonable wretch that cannot be content with a God tho he hath nothing else: My interest in God is all my Joy. Some of his Friends of Taunton coming to Dorchester to see him, he was much revived, and causing his Curtains to be withdrawn, he desired them to stand round about the Bed, His Speech to his Friends. and caused his Wife to hold forth his hand to them, that they might shake him by it, and as he was able, he spake thus to them. O how it rejoyces my heart to see your faces, and to hear your voices, tho I cannot as heretofore speak to you. Me∣thinks I am now like to Old Jacob, with all his Sons about him. You now see my weak estate, and thus have I been for many weeks, since I parted from Taunton; but God hath been with me, and I hope with you. Your Prayers for me have been answered many wayes. The Lord return them into your own bosoms. My friends, Life is mine, Death is mine, in that Covenant I was Preaching of to you is all my Salvation, and all my desire: Altho my Body doth not prosper, I hope my Soul doth. I have lived a sweet Life by the Promises, and I hope (through Grace) I can die by a Promise. The Promises of God are everlasting, and will stand by us. Nothing but God in them will stand us instead in a day of Affliction. My dear friends, I feel the power of those Doctrines which I Preached unto you, upon my heart. Now the Doctrines of Faith, of Repentance, of Self-denial, of the Covenant of Grace, of Contentment, &c. O that you would live them over now that I cannot Preach to you. Its a shame for a believer to be cast down under afflictions, who hath so many glorious Priviledges, Justification, Adoption, Sancti∣fication, and Eternal Glory. We shall as the Angels of God within a little while; nay, to say the truth, Believers are, as it were, little Angels already, that live in
the power of Faith. O my Friends! Live like Believers: Trample this dirty World under your feet. Be not taken with its Comfort, nor disquieted with its Crosses: You will be gone out of it shortly. When they came to take their leaves of him, he Prayed with them as He blesses them. his weak state would suffer him: And in the words of Moses, and the Apostle, he blessed them in the same words as he used after the Sacrament. The Lord bless you, and keep you: The Lord cause his face to shine upon you, and give you peace. And the God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen. Adding, Farewel, Farewel my dear Friends: Remember me to all Taunton. I beseech you and them, if I never see your faces more, go home, and live over what I have Preached unto you; and the Lord provide for you when I am gone. O Let not all my Labors and Sufferings: Let not my wasted strength; my useless limbs rise up in Judgment against you at the great day of the Lord. At another time some coming to visit him, he spake thus to them. O my Friends; Counsels them. Let your Conversation be as becometh the Gospel of Christ, whether I am present or absent. Live what I have spoken to you in the Name of the Lord: Now that I cannot Preach unto you, let my wasted strength, and useless limbs be a Srmon to you. Behold me! I cannot move a finger: All this is come upon me for your sakes and the Gospels. It is for Christ and you that I have thus spent out my self, I am affraid lest some of you after all that I have spoken to you, should be lost in the world. There are many Professors who can pray well, and talk well, whom yet we shall find at the left hand of Christ, another day. You have your Trades, your Estates, your Relations: Be not taken with these, but with God, O live on him? For the Lords sake go home and take heed of the World, of Worldly cares, of Worldly Comforts, Worldly Friends, &c. And then he added. The Lord having given Authority to his Ministers to bless his People, I accor∣dingly Blesses them. bless you: And so he did in the words formerly recited. And he conversed with all that came to visit him as he was able, looking alwayes chearfully upon them, and never in the least complaining of his Afflictions, except to his Taunton Friends to excite them to their duty. In February he was very desirous to return to his People, which his Doctor assented His return to Taunton. to; fearing that Dorchester Air in March would be too sharp for him: And Judged that it might conduce to his cure to have his mind satisfied. At his return he was much pleased with the sight of that place and of his people, who came flocking a∣bout him, and he so increased in strength that within a week after he was able to feed himself. But to prent any prejudice that might come by the frequent visits of Friends, he removed to Mr. Mallacks House where he found most kind enter∣tainment. There he increased in strength till the beginning of April, and then he declined a∣gain, and was soon after taken with Convulsion fits, whereof he had divers the first He hath Con∣vulsion fits. day and night: But by Gods blessing upon means, he was freed from them for a∣bout three weeks, and then, being alone in his Chamber, he was taken with a Fit, wherein he fell to the ground and hurt his Face; and his Nose bled much, which blood was clotted and corrupt, which made his Physicians to conclude that that fall saved his Life: For probably had not that blood come from his head, he had died in A special Pro∣vidence. that Fit. Going to Bed he slept so well that night, that he awaked in the Mor∣ning much refreshed, and full of the praises of God for his mercies to him. After this he lived alwayes in the expectation of death, saying often, It is but a He prepares for death. puff and I am gone, and therefore every night after Prayer he used to bid all the Fa∣mily Farewel, saying he might be dead before Morning. Whilst he was undres∣sing he would be discoursing of Spiritual things, and when he lay down to his rest, he used to say to his Wife, we shall shortly be in an other Bed. Farewel my dear heart, the Lord bless thee: His first Speeches in the Morning usually were, now we have one day more, here is one more for God, now let us live well this day, Work hard for our ouls, lay up much Treasure in Heaven this day, for we have but a few to live. Hence forward the strength of his Limbs were so repaired, that they feared not
his relapsing again. But about May 6th. he began to find weakness in his stomack, His relapse. which quickly so grew upon him that he lost the use of his Limbs again, and May 12th. having lain some dayes and nights in cold sweats (as formerly) he was again taken with Convulsions, and having continued in a trance about four hours, his friends weeping about him, he at last spake thus unto them, weep not for me: My work is done: And immediatly fell into a violent Convulsion fit, that held him two hours, and presently after fell into another, wherein he ratled and was cold, insomuch as they thought every breath would be his last. His Physicians said, that his pulse was gone, and that he would be dead in a few Minutes: But God shewed his power in reviving him beyond all expectation; yet was he not able to speak to them till the next day, nor did he perfectly recover till four days after. Thus he continued every weak until July, mostly confined to his Bed, yet chear∣ful, and free to discourse with any that Visited him, as long as he was able. A Proposal was made by his Wife to the Doctors, whether the Bath was not fit for him? Some were for it, others against it. But he himself was very eager for it. And a Horse-Litter being provided for him, tho he had not for many dayes been out of He goes to the Bath. his Bed, yet did the Lord so strengthen him that in two days he went almost forty Miles to the Bath. The Doctors there wondered to see such an object, and marvelled that he came such a Journy alive, and were very doubtful to put him in: But, a∣gainst their Judgments he resolved to adventure himself. At his first appearing in the Bath he was such a Skelleton that the Ladies were af∣frighted to see him, as if Death had come among them, and they could not endure to look upon him. When he went first in he could stay but a very little while, yet found much refreshing by it, and had no Symptoms of his Fits as was much feared. By Gods blessing upon this means, and drinking Goats Milk, in three weeks space, he could He somewhat Recovers. walk about his Chamber and feed himself: His appetite came again, and his strength increased: And thus he continued till his death drew near. During this time he grew exceedingly in Grace to the Joy and Edification of His growth in grace. those about him. He had much Communion with God, and often such Ravish∣ments of Spirit from the Consolation of the Holy Ghost, that he was not able to ex∣press them, nor his week Body to bear them. He was more chearful than former∣ly, and exceeding affectionate to his Wife, and to all his Friends, especially to such as were most Heavenly: And the Lord was pleased so to order it by his Providence that many such came to make use of the Bath, as Mr. Fairclough, Mr. How of Torríngton, Mr. Joseph Bernard, and divers of his Taunton Friends, and of Bristow Ministers, which was a great Comfort to him in that strange and wicked place. Here he had many Visiters both friends and strangers, who came to see and dis∣course with him, having heard what a Monument of mercy he was; and to all of He is oft visi∣ted. them he would so enlarge himself, upon all the passages of Gods dealing with him, as gave much content to all that heard him: And it did much affect many, who were Strangers to God and Religion as well as unto him. He found much fa∣vour even amongst the worst, both Gentry and others: Such as would make a Scoff at Religion in others, would hearken unto him; yea, tho he faithfully reproved His prudence and faithful∣ness. them for their Oaths, excessive drinking, wanton carriages which he observed in the Bath, and there was none of them but did most thankfully accept it from him, and shewed him more respect after than they had done before. In which he ob∣served much of Gods goodness to him, and would often say, O how good is it to be faithful unto God: One of the vilest of these Persons said of him, that he never spake with such a Man in his Life. His reproofs were managed with so much respect to their persons, and places, that they said, they could not but take them well, tho they were sharp and plain: His reproofs. And his manner was before he intended to reprove them, often in the Bath to dis∣course with them of such things as might be pleasing to them, which did so engage their affections that they delighted to converse with him, who was furnished with matter of discourse for any Company, designing to make use of it for Spiritual ends, by which means he caught many: Here tho he had many Diversions, by his constant bathing every day, and fre∣quent Visits, besides his weakness, yet he kept his constant Seasons, four times a day, for his holy Retirements. First in the Morning from five a Clock till seven,
at which time he was carried to the Bath, and again before Dinner, but then he spent less time, and about half an hour before two, just before he went abroad, He appointed his Chair-man, that carried him to the Bath, to fetch him about three a Clock, and to carry him to the Schools and Alms-houses, and to the Godly Poor, especially the Widdows, to whom he gave Mony: And would pray and confer He goes abou doing good. with them about their spiritual State as their necessities required, engaging the Teachers and Governors to teach them the Assemblies Catechism, whereof he bought and gave them many dozens for the use of their Scholars, and many other small Books which he judged useful for them; and about a Week or Fortnight after he would again visit them to see what progress they had made. He also engaged several Persons to send their Children once a Week to him to be Catechised by him; and he had about Sixty or Seventy Children that came to him every Lords-day, who profited much by his Instructions, till some took such offence at it, that he was forced to desist, and the Schoolmaster was threatned to be brought into the Bishops Court at Wells for it, which frighted him and some others. He also sent for all the Godly Poor he could hear of in the City, whom he entertained at his Chamber, and gave them Mony according to his Ability, as a Thank offering His Charity. unto God for his Mercy to him, and procured two of the aforenamed Ministers to assist him in keeping a Day of Thanksgiving for the same. Tho his Sickness had been long and his Expences great; yet, he thought he could never do enough for him from whom he had received all. He always gave Mony or Apples to all the Children that came to be Catechised by him, besides what he gave to their Tea∣chers and the Poor; and having made Provision for his Wife, he resolved to lay up the rest in Heaven; often saying, that having no Children of his own, Gods Children should have his Estate. His next work was to send Letters to all his Relations and intimate Friends, whom His Letters to his Friends. he exhorted to observe his Counsel, for it was like to be his last to them. He had a great desire to go to Mr. Joseph Bernard's, which was about five Miles from the Bath, to promote the Exercise of Catechising in Sommerset and Wiltshire. Mr. Ber∣nard having had a great Deliverance as well as himself, he proposed to him, that by way of Thank offering unto God, they should mutually engage to joyn in the prin∣ting His Thank-Offering. of six thousand of the Assemblies Catechisms, and to raise some Mony among other Friends to send to every Minister in those Counties that would engage in the Work, and also to give to the Children for their encouragment in learning of it: which Work was effected by Mr. Bernard, after Mr. Alleins Decease. Mr. Allein finding himself again to decline, judged that it proceeded from want of Bathing, and therefore returned to the Bath again, where (by the advise of the Doctor) he made use of the Hot-bath, the Cross-bath being now too cold for him, and for four days seemed to be refreshed by it; but upon the 3d. of November there appeared a great change in his Countenance, and he found a great alteration in himself; and some Friends coming to visit him, he desired them to pray for him, for his time was very short. After they had dined he was in more than an ordinary manner transported with Affections to his Wife, whom he thanked for all her care and pains about him, put∣ing His love to his Wife. up most affectionate Petitions to God for her; and the like also he did after Supper. After this, he called for a Practise of Piety, and turning from his Wife, he read to himself the Meditation about Death in the end of the Book; which his Wife taking notice of, He prepares for Death. asked him if he judged his End to be near? He answered that he knew not, but within a few days she should see. Then he desired her to read two Chapters to him, as she usually did every Night, and so he hasted to Bed (being not able to pray with them) undressing himself, more than he had done of many Months before. In Bed he complained of a stoppage in his Head, and had something given him to prevent his Fits, yet within a quarter of an hour he had a strong Convulsion, and God was pleased to deny success, notwithstanding all means used to remove it; these Fits con∣tinued for two Days and Nights without an hours intermission. His Fits were very terrible to behold; but Prayer being made, that if the Lord Prayer power¦ful. saw fit, he would so far mitigate his hand upon him, that he might yet utter his mind unto them before his departure; the Lord was pleased to return a gracious Answer; For whereas before he had not spoken from Tuesday Night before, upon
Friday Morning about three a Clock, he called for his Wife, speaking very under∣standingly (by times) all that Day; and that Night after he spake with an audible Voice for sixteen hours, such like words as you had formerly an account of: This continued, with some little intermission, till Saturday in the Evening, at which time he departed. His Death. About three a Clock that Afternoon, he had (as those about him conceived) some conflicts with Satan; for he uttered these words, Away thou foul Fiend; thou His temptati∣on and victory. Enemy of all Mankind; thou subtile Sophister: Art thou come now to molest me? Now that I am just going? Now I am so weak, and when Death is upon me? Trouble me not, for I am none of thine. I am the Lords; Christ is mine, and I am his: His by Covenant: I have sworn my self to be the Lords, and his I will be: Therefore be gone. Which words he repeated oft over, Be gone, Be gone. In his converse with his Wife he spent most His holy speeches. of that time in heavenly and profitable discourses; speaking much of the place to which he was going, and his desire to be gone. I was thinking (said he, as he was dressing) of my Marriage Day; it will be shortly: O what a joyful Day will that be! Having some Broth brought him, he said blessed be the Lord for these refreshments in the way home: But, O how sweet will Heaven be! And at another time he said, I hope to be shortly where I shall neither need Meat, nor Drink, nor Cloaths. When he looked upon his weak and consumed hands, he said, these shall be changed; This vile Body shall be made like unto Christs Glorious Body. And again, O what a Glorious Day will the Day of the Resurection be! Methinks I see it by Faith. How will the Saints then lift up their Heads and rejoyce? And how sadly will the wicked World look then? O come, let us make haste! Our Lord will come shortly, let us prepare for him. If we long to be in Heaven, let us hasten with our Work; for when that is done, away we shall be fetcht. O this vain, foolish, dirty World! I wonder how reasonable Creatures can so dote upon it! What is in it worth the looking after? I care not to be in it longer than my Master hath doing or suffering work for me; were that done, then fare∣well to the Earth. He was oft in commending the Love of Christ, and from that, exciting himself and others to Obedience to Christ; often speaking of his Sufferings and of his Glo∣ry: He admired the Love of Christ. As also of his Love-Letters; for so he stiled the History of his Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascention, and of his second coming; the thoughts of which, he was oft much ravisht withal. He would be often reckoning up the choice Tokens which Christ had sent him; As First, Pardon of Sin. Secondly, A Patent for Heaven. Thirdly, The Gift of the Spirit. Fourthly, The Robe of Christs Righteousness. Fifthly, The Spoils of Enemies. Sixthly, The Charter of all Liberties and Priviledges. Lastly, The Guard of his Angels; and this last he did frequently solace himself in, in the times of Imprisonment, and else where; and would say to his Wife, tho we have not such Attendants and Servants as the Great Ones of the World have, yet we have Gods blessed Angels still to wait upon us, to minister to us, and to watch over us while we are sleeping; to go along with us in our Journies, and still to preserve us from the Rage of Men and Devils. He was very much affected with the three last Chapters of St. Johns Gospel, espe∣cially with Christs parting Words and Prayer for his Disciples. In brief, his Heart, his Lips, his Life was filled with Grace, which did radiently shine forth both in Health and Sickness, in Prosperity and Adversity, in Prison and at Liberty, in his own House and in Gods House; so that few that conversed with him, but they would acknowledge that they were Gainers by him. At Mr. Allein's first coming to Taunton, he so journed with Mr. Newton, and after his Ordination, administred all Ordinances joyntly with him, tho he were but an His first com∣ing to Taunton. Assistant, who highly esteemed and dearly loved him. At this time he was in League with her whom afterwards he married, and Mr. Newton observing his restless Spirit, which put him upon many tedious Journies every Fortnight of twenty five Miles, to give her a Visit; thereupon he perswaded them to consummate their Marriage, which they did accordingly, October 4. 1655. After which they lived with Mr. His Marriage.
Newton almost two years, and were very kindly entertained by him. At the end of this time, conceiving that they might be more useful by turning House-keepers, they took an House, and Mrs. Allein having been bred to her Needle, Had many Tablers. set up a Boarding-School, and had many Tablers and Scholars: Their Family was seldom less than twenty, sometimes thirty; and her School usually contained fifty or sixty, many coming out of the Town and Neighbourhood besides their Tablers. And the Lord was pleased exceedingly to bless their Labours and Endeavours, so that within a few years space many of them were converted, who before were Strangers to God. All the Scholars called Mr. Allein Father; and indeed he had far Did much good among them. more care of them than most of their Natural Parents had, and was very tenderly affectionated to them, especially to their Souls. His Practice in his Family was twice a Day to read the Scriptures, to sing a Psalm, and to Pray; except when he Catechised, which was constantly once, if not twice a Week. Of every Chapter that was read, he expected an account, and also of every Sermon. He dealt with both his Servants and Scholars frequently, together and apart about the spiritual Estate of their Souls, pressing them to perform all Duties, both of the first and second Table: He also gave them sundry Books sutable to their Capa∣cities and Conditions, of which they gave a weekly account how they had profited by the same. His Lords-Days work was very great; for tho he preached but once in Taunton, yet he constantly was employed the other part of the Day, either in assisting some His frequent preaching. of his Brethren that stood in need of his help, or else went to such Places where a Minister was wanting. In his publick Repetitions and in his Catechising, his own Family, both Scholars and Servants answered him when their turn came as well as others, He was an holy and tenderly affectionated Husband towards his Yoke-fellow, to whom he expressed his Love by his great care for her both in Sickness and in Health; His Love to his Wife. in his provision for her after his Decease; in his delight in her Company, saying often that it was irksome to him to make a Meal without her: He used to impart unto her all his Affairs that were fit for her to be acquainted with, and to consult with her about them: He spared not to reprove her faithfully for whatsoever he judged amiss; and if himself had at any time given her offence, he would desire her to pass it by, professing that he was restless in his Spirit till he had done it. He was frequent in keeping Days of Humiliation, especially before the Sacrament. Sanctified the Sabbaths. He was a strict Observer of the Sabbaths, the Duties whereof he did perform with such joy and alacrity of Spirit, both in publick and private, as tended much to the Edification of those that joyned with him; the like practice he pressed much upon Christians, that they should spend the Sabbaths more in Praises and Thanksgivings, as being days of holy rejoycing in Christ our Redeemer. During the time of his Health, he rose constantly about four a Clock in the Morning, and sooner on the Sabbaths if he did awake. He would be much troubled His industry. if he heard any Smiths, Shoomakers, &c. at work in their Trades before he was in his Duties with God, saying, O how this noise shames me! Doth not my Master de∣serve more than theirs? From four a Clock till eight he spent in Prayer, Medi∣tation and singing of Psalms, which he much delighted in, and did daily practice when alone as well as in Company; then having refreshed himself about the space of half an hour, he ent to Family Duties, and after that, to his Study till about eleven or twelve a Clock. Having refreshed himself a while after Dinner, he retired into his Study to secret Prayer, and then went abroad amongst those Families which he was to visit, to His visits from house to house. whom he always gave notice the day before: He went forth about two a Clock, and seldom returned before seven: He would often say, Give me that Christian that ac∣counts his Time more precious than Gold. He Catechised once a Week in publick, and repeated the Sermon which he preached on the Lords-Day, on Tuesdays in the Even∣ing. In his visiting from house to house he found much difficulty, it having not been practised formerly; yet after in publick he had preached up the Ministers Duty to their People, and theirs to receive them when they came to promote the good of their Souls, he presently set upon the work, wherein his manner was thus;
He took a Catalogue of the Names of all the Families in each street, and a day or two before he intended to visit them, he used to send them word that so they might be at home, and that he might know whether they were willing to receive him or no? Such as sent slight excuses, or did obstinately refuse to admit him, he would notwithstanding go to them; And if they shut their doors against him His prudence. (as some would) he would speak some few affectionate words unto them, or de∣nounce Gods Threatnings against the obstinate that despised Christs Ministers, and so depart: And shortly after he would write to them with words so full of Love, and expressions of his great desires of doing good to their Souls, as did often mol∣lifie and overcome their hearts, so that many of them did afterwards entertain him readily. And in the practice of this Duty he baulked not; but visited the poor as well as the rich, tho some of their houses were very noisome and offensive to him: Impartiality. And tho his Labors were so abundant, yet for nine years together, he was not under the least distemper for the space of one Quarter of an hour. His Wise, suspecting that his extraordinary labors would bring him into diseases, labored to perswade him somewhat to abate of them, he answered, what have I strength for, but to spend it for God? Thou art like unto Peter, still crying, O spare thy self, but I must not hearken unto thee no more than my Master did unto him. He was very temperate in his diet, and tho he had a sharp Appetite, yet he would moderate it, knowing that it would much conduce to his health. His converse at His Tempe∣rance. Meals was very profitable and pleasant: Whether he was at home or abroad he would take opportunities of speaking something to the Edification of others. He was much in commending and admiring the Mercies of God in every Meal: Was still so pleased in the provision that was made for him, that he would often say, he fared deliciously every day, and lived far better than the Great Ones of the world, whose Tables were far better furnished. For he enjoyed God in all, and saw his Love and bounty in what he received from him every Meal. Whence (speak∣ing to his Wife) he would say, O wife, I live a Voluptuous Life: But (blessed be God) it is upon Spiritual dainties: Such as the world neither knows nor tastes of. He was much in minding the poor that were in want of all things, often won∣dering His charity. that God should make such a difference between him and them, both for this world, and for that to come: And his Charity was ever beyond his Estate. There were but few (if any) Poor Families, especially of the Godly in Taunton, but he knew their necessities, and did either by himself or by his Friends relieve them; So that his house was seldome free from such as came to make their complaints to him. He used to buy Pease and Flitches of Bacon, and distribute them twice a year in the cold and hard seasons. He kept several Children at School upon his own cost: Bought many Books and Catechisms, and had many thousand of Prayers Printed which he gave away among the poor. And when his Brethren of the Ministry were cast His bounty. out of their places, he himself gave 4 l. per annum towards making a publick stock for them, by which example he excited many others to do the like, yea, upon other occasions (which frequently fell out) he was so open-handed that he gave offence to his friends: So that many in the Town grudged to give what they had agreed with him for, because he gave so much. Besides all this, the necessities of his Father, and of many other, his Relations, where still craving his help, and he Ministred un∣to them without grudging. And when he had received a more than ordinary mercy, he would set apart some portion of his Estate, which he dedicated to the Lord as a Thank-offering, to be imployed in pious and Charitable uses. When his Wife would have moderated him in these expences, his answer was, that he was laying up for God, and God would repay him. And that by liberal things he should stand, when others that censured him for it should fall. That if he sowed sparingly he should reap sparingly: If bountifully he should reap bountifully. And not∣withstanding God blesses him the more. all that he did in his Life time in this kind, yet when he came to die he had something left to dispose of to his Relations, and to his Brethren of the Mi∣nistry, besides the comfortable provision that he had made for his Wife. In brief, his whole Life was a continued Sermon, holding forth the Doctrines which he Preached, of Humility, Self-denial, Patience, Meekness, Contentation, Faith, Love to God, his Church, and People, the blessed fruit of all which he now reaps in Heaven, where he is singing praises unto God and the Lamb, which was his great delight whilst he lived in this world.
Some of his Sayings. When the week began, he would say: Another week is now before us: Let us spend this week for God. In the Morning he would say: Come now let this day he spent for God. Now let us His holy Spee∣ches. live this one day well. Could we resolve to be more than ordinary Circumspect, but for one day at a time, and so on, we might live at extraordinary rates. In the day he would ask People: How did you set out to day? Did you set out for God to day? What were your Morning thoughts? As he walked about the House, he would make some Spiritual use of what ever did occur: And still his Lips did drop as the Hony Comb to all that were about him, to assist him in his weakness. To one that had done well: There are two things (said he) that we must specially look too after well-doing. 1. That we grow not proud of it, and so lose all. 2. That we grow not secure, and so give the Tempter new advantages. Speaking of the vanity of the World: He said, It is as good to be without the World, and to bear that state as becometh a Christian, as to enjoy the World, tho it were never so well imployed. If a Man hath Riches and layeth them out for God and for his Servants; yet it is as happy an Estate to receive Almes of another, so we bear our poverty aright, and are chearful and thankful in our low Estate: Tho yet its true, that Riches may be used to the good of others. And its more Honourable to give than to receive. Another time he said: How necessary a duty is it for a Child of God placidly to suit with all Gods dispensations. A Christian must not only quietly submit to God in all his dealings, but must ever be best pleased with what God doth, as knowing that he is infinitely wise and good. O how unbecoming a Christian is it to do otherwise. Another time he said: O what an alteration will shortly be made upon us? Now we are the Sons of God, but yet it doth not appear (to sight) what we shall be. Did we i∣magine only that we shall shine as the Sun; it were too low a conceptation of our future bles∣sedness. As he was dressing in a Morning, he said: O what a shout there will be when Christ shall come in his Glory? I hope all here present shall contribute to it. Again: I bless the Lord, I delight in nothing in this world, farther than I see God in it. In his weakness he said: There are three things that must be unlearned, as being mis∣takes among Men. 1. Many think their happiness lies in having the World, when its much more in contemning the World. 2. Men think that the greatest contentment lies in having their Wills, when indeed it lies in Crossing, Mortifying, and Subduing their Wills to the Will of God. 3. Men think it their business and benefit to seek themselves, whereas in∣deed it is the denying of themselves. His advise to his Friend was. 1. Value precious time while time doth last, and not when 'tis irrevocably lost. 2. Know the worth of things to come, before they come, or are present: And the worth of things present before they are past. 3. Value no mercy as it serves to content the Flesh, but as its serviceable for God, and to things Eternal. To one that Watched with him: He said, I hope to pass an Eternity with thee in the praises of our God, in the mean time let us live a life of praise whilst we are here: For it is sweet to us and delightful to God, its harmony in his ears, our failings being pardoned, and our persons and praises accepted through Christ. Not long before his death he said to the same person: O how much hath God done for you more than for all the World of unconverted persons, in that he hath wrought his Image in your heart, and will bring you at the last to his Caelestial Glory. See now that you acknowledge the Grace of God, and give him the praises of it. For my part, I bless the Lord, I am full of his Mercy. Goodness and Mercy have followed me all my dayes: I am full and running over. And now I charge you to walk chearfully, and to follow me with your praises whilst I am alive. When he heard that there were Warrants out for his Apprehension upon the five Miles Act, being then very weak, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, with a chearful Countenance, he thanked God that would so far honour him, saying, Blessed be the Lord, I shall now give up two lives for Christ; The one in doing for him; The other in suffering for bim. I am worn out in doing for him: And now I can do no more, shall I not suffer for his sake? I bless the Lord, I look not for any happiness in this World, and I am content to stay for it till I come into the other world. I forgive mine Enemies with
all my heart: I can put up all the injuries they have done me; But I am sure God will no put them up so except they repent. Speaking of Exhoration and Reproof he said: Its the sasest course (where it may be done) to take the present opportunity, and not to suffer our backward hearts to cheat us of the present under pretence of staying for a fitter time. By way of advice for profitable discourse, he said: Its good for such Christians as need it, to study before hand what to speak, that they may alwayes have something in readiness to bring forth for the benefit of others, which will prevent impertinence. The Life and Death of Dr. Edmund Staunton, who Died Anno Christi, 1671. EDmund Staunton, was born of the Ancient and Worthy Family of the Staun∣tons His Parentage and Educa∣tion. in Bedfordshire, Anno Christi, 1600. His Father, Sir Francis Staunton had divers Sons, of whose Education he was more than ordinarily careful, tho he should leave them good Estates, yet he thought it not enough that they should barely live upon the Estates which he should leave them. He was of Solomons mind, that Wisdom was good with an Inheritance (Eccle. 7. 11.) Yet was he of o∣pinion too, that an Inheritance was little worth without wisdom to manage it. He abhorred the two Epidemical Vices of too many of our English Gallants (which commonly are procreative of many more) namely, Ignorance and Idleness. He re∣solved therefore to train up his Children in Learning, not only that it might be an Ornament to them, but that thereby they might be the more useful in Church or State. Our Edmund (one of the Younger Brothers) being well furnished with Grammar Learning was sent to Oxford, and admited into Corpus Christi Colledge, where he so industriously followed his Studies, and was taken so much notice of for his pro∣gress in Learning, that whilst he was yet an under-Graduate, he was chosen a Pro∣bationer Fellow in that Colledge before eighteen of his Seniors, a Bedfordshire Fellow∣ship falling void by the death of one Mr. Andrews. Being about eighteen years old, he fell dangerously sick in the Colledge, was far A special Providence. spent, and near unto death, before those about him understood what his disease was, till a skilful Physician coming to him, he found it to be a Pleurisy, and ordered a Vein to be presently opened: Whereupon a Chirurgion was immediately sent for; But it was long before he could be found. At length the Messenger brought him from a Tavern, and tho he saw his way to the Colledge, yet he could not see to do his work when he came thither. He strake his Patients arm twice, but no blood came, having missed the vein. In this condition the Sottish Chirurgion left him (it being late) all night. But when he had slept himself sober, he came the next Morning very early, and knockt at the Colledge Gates, which being opened, he ran hastily to his Chamber, and ask∣ed if his Patient was alive? And coming in, he presently opened a vein, which (it pleased God) bled freely, and the Patient, half dead before, soon after re∣covered. Another strange deliverance he met with not long after. When he had com∣menced Batchelor of Arts, he went into the water alone to wash himself, and not Another de∣liverance. being skilled in Swimming, he fell into a deep hole, where his feet could feel no bottom: But by Gods good Providence, he caught hold of a tuft of grass by the Bank-side, and so made shift to recover himself, and to climb up the bank. Had this small help failed him, in all probability, he had there perished. These merciful deliverances and preservations, probably were preparatory to that good work, and gracious change, which God about this time began in his heart. For about the year 1620, he himself thus wrote. I had many sad, and se∣rious thoughts concerning my Spiritual, and Eternal Estate, and upon the advise of Dr. His Conver∣sion. Barcroft, bought Mr. Brinsleys Watch the second part, where the sins against the Ten Commandments are set down in order, and I fell upon the work of Self-Examination; wherein this seems remarkable, that reading over the several Sins therein mentioned, my
Heart (such was the blindness and deceitfulness of it) cryed, Not Guilty of any one of them. Hereupon I began to suspect my heart, and calling upon God to enlighten mine eyes, and discover my sins to me, and then reading them over again, I judged my self guilty, yea, very guilty of most of the Sins there enumerated and set down. After this I lay about two Months under a Spirit of Bondage, being full of fears and inward trouble, so that many times I durst not close mine eyes in the night; lest I should awake in Hell. I thought every night the Devil would come for me, and fetch me away: But anon the Lord was pleased graciously to shine upon me, and this remarkable passage I shall never forget. That being one Evening at Prayer all alone in the dark, (I remember the Chamber in C. C. C. and the Corner of the Chamber very well:) I was very earnest with God for the manifestation of his Love to my Soul, and the assurance of the Pardon of my sins, and at length I brake out into these Joy unspeak∣able. words (or in words to this purpose) Lord I will not out of thy presence; I will not go off from my knees till thou speak comfort to me, whereupon I was immediately filled with a strong perswasion of the Love of God to my Soul, and with Joyes unspeak∣able and full of Glory. From this time he diligently applyed himself to Reading and Studying the Sacred He chooses the Ministry. Scriptures, and Divinity; and when he was Master of Arts, his Father willed him to choose his Profession, either a Lawyer, Physician, or Divine. The latter he readi∣ly pitched upon, telling his Father that he had for sometime already applyed himself to those Studies, and that he esteemed the turning of Souls to Righteousness to be the most desirable work in all the World, and that it would have the greatest Reward hereafter, tho the other two Callings where like to bring in greater Wealth and Honour here. His tender Father would not cross, but rather encouraged him, and his pious re∣solution: And for that end he laid out to procure a good Living, or place of Settle∣ment for him: In the mean while our Edmund was not idle: But being invited to His success therein. Preach a Lecture on the Lords-dayes in the afternoon at Witney, a Town about ten Miles from Oxford, he accepted the Call, and Preached there, well nigh half a year and had comfortable Seals of his Ministry in that place. So acceptable were his labors during his abode there, that hearers from all pla∣ces round about flocked unto him, as Doves flye to their Windows. This was not very pleasing to the Incumbent, who therefore spent the more time in reading Com∣mon-Prayers, and when he had spun them out all he could, he himself would go out of the Church, being followed by none but his Clerk, whom he would not suffer to begin a Psalm, but either the Lecturer himself, or one Mr. Martin, a Godly Man was fain to do it. The Text of Scripture that he long insisted upon, was that excellent saying of Solomon, Prov. 23. 23. Buy the truth and sell it not; whereupon the Incumbent, as he met any going to Church as he went from it, would in a jeering manner say unto them, What? you are now going to buy the Truth? By his Father and Friends he had now a place provided for him, namely Bushy in Hertfordshire, and he was the more willing to accept of it, because his continuance at Witney was precarious, and the envy and opposition by the Minister of the place was not to be removed. To Bushy therefore he removed where he had a welcome enter∣tainment by the generality of the Inhabitants, but especially by those which had any favour to Religion. Here he Preached, and Catechized on the Lords-dayes, and other dayes, to the great benefit of his hearers that attended his Ministry, not His remove to Bushy. His labors and success. only of Bushy, but others that repaired unto him from Watford, and other adjacent places. An ancient Godly Minister yet living, gave this Testimony of him under his Hand: That that little time which Dr. Staunton (saith he) spent in Bushy, was not without good success, many persons in mine own hearing, have acknowledged that his Ministry was the means of their Conversion. During his abode at Bushy (which was about two years) he repaired, or rather rebuilt at his own charges, the dwelling House belonging to the Minister. At this time also he Married a Wife, the Daughter of one Mr. Scudamore of Watford, a Man of good account in those parts, both for his Estate, and Godliness: By her he had one Daughter. Also being appointed to Preach a Visitation Sermon, he per∣formed it with great applause and approbation: Yet because he sharply reproved Pluralites, and Non-Residency, some that were concerned and guilty were greatly
offended; and one of them said, he might the better Preach against holding many Livings, having got so good an one himself. And indeed Bushy was so good a Living, that one Dr. Seaton, of Kingston upon Thames in Surry, had a longing desire after it, and either finding, or making a slaw in Mr. Stauntons Title, he soon ejected him from it. But first there was a Tryal at Law about it, wherein the Attorny General Noy (who was of Counsel for Seaton, was so taken with the ingenuity of Staunton, that he moved for an exchange, and so brought it to pass that Seaton should have Bushy, and Staunton should have Kingston. Now both parties were well agreed: Staunton preferred work before wages, and liked Kingston the better because his opportunities of service would there be greater, being of that Reverend Divines mind, who was wont to say, that his opportunities were Dr. Winter. his greatest Riches. But whilst he thought of settling there, he met with a disap∣pointment: Seaton having now gotten Bushy would not part with Kingston, but ei∣ther Staunton must be his Curate there, or he must be gone from thence: Hereupon Mr. Staunton repaired to Noy, and Related to him the deceitful, and disingenuous carriage of his Client: Noy was of too generous a nature to approve of such base∣ness, and therefore sending for Seaton, he told him plainly, that unless he would re∣sign Kingston, he would soon pick an hole in his Title to Bushy. Divers also of the Inhabitance of Kingston (who highly prized Mr. Stauntons Ministry, and were wil∣ling His remove to Kingston. to purchase it at any rate, did so work with Dr. Seaton, that shortly after he resigned Kingston, to which Mr. Staunton had the Presentation, and soon after his Institution and Induction. At Kingston he continued about twenty years, endeavouring faithfully to discharge the Ministry which he had received of the Lord. There he Preached twice on the His great pains there. Lords-dayes, and Catechised the younger, and the more Ignorant sort of People: Yet did he not satisfie himself in thus Teaching them publickly; But (tho the Town was large, and Populous) he taught them also from House to House, (Act. 20. 20.) Here also he set up a weekly Lecture, which was supplyed, in their turns by as Eminent Ministers as those parts of England did afford. And in a little while, partly by his power∣ful Preaching, partly by his Holy and Exemplary Life, he wrought a great, and general Reformation, both among the Magistrates and People throughout the Town. He was dearly loved by all the Godly party, and feared by those that were wicked. The good Seed that he there Sowed doth spring up to this very day, and many yet living can hardly mention him with their Tongues without Tears in their eyes. Nor was there any love lost between them: He would to the last call the People of Kingston (As Saint Paul did the Philippians, Phil. 4. 1.) His Joy and his Crown; And would often say, that were it not for some wrangling persons; a Minister might live as comfortable a Life among them, as among any People in England. By his Ministry, as a work of Reformation was wrought upon the Town in ge∣neral, His success. so also a work of saving Conversion was wrought upon many Souls in perti∣cular: Himself in some Memoires hath recorded, that in the year 1648. When he was to leave the place, there were thirty Persons that gave him in a paper sub∣scribed by themselves wherein they owned him for their Spiritual Father; and doubtless there were many thires in and about the Town, who would and could have made the like acknowledgment. Anno Christi, 1635. Came forth the Book for Sports on the Lords-dayes, and an Injunction requiring that it should be read in every Church, such Ministers as refused to Read it, were for some time Suspended, among whom Mr. Staunton was one, be∣ing of Saint Austins mind, that it was better to go to Plow, than to Dance on the Sab∣bath day. During the time of his Suspension he took his degree of Doctor in Divinity in Oxford, He Commen∣ced Doctor. which he did (to use his own words) that he might put the greater honor upon his sufferings. When he Answered in Comitiis, and opposed in Vesperijs, he was won∣derfully Applauded by all that were present. There were several Doctors in the Ʋ∣niversity, whose fingers did itch to be dealing with him, because he was a Country Mi∣nister, and a Puritan, among whom was a Doctor of great note among them, who was so pittyfully Non-plust by Staunton, that the Auditors hissed at him, and one called out for a Candle that the Doctor might see his Arguments. Of this good Pro∣vidence Doctor Staunton himself took thankful notice, giving all the Glory to God,
and making use of that Scripture, him that Honours me will I Honour. At the same time also he Preached in the Ʋniversity, upon the Text, Mar. 8. 36. What will it pro∣fit a Man? to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul: Of which Sermon he saith, that God did both graciously assist him in the Preaching of it, and wonderfully prospered it when Preach't. When the Assembly of Divines was called at Westminster, Dr. Staunton was chosen One of the Assembly. to be one of that Learned and Reverend Assembly, and was of good esteem among them, insomuch that he was appointed to be one of the six that kept up that useful, and profitable Lecture every Morning in Westminster-Abby. He Preached also se∣veral times before the Parliament, and his Sermons were, by their Order, Prin∣ted. Anno Christi, 1648. Visiters were appointed for the Ʋniversity of Oxford, who dis∣charged President of C. C. Colledge. Dr. Newlin from his Headship in C. C. Colledge, and no Man was thought so fit to succeed him in that place as Dr. Staunton. That Colledge had been former∣ly happy in an Eminently Learned and Godly President, the Famous Dr. John Reynolds, and now it was blessed again with the Residence and Regency of this worthy Doctor. Here he continued above twelve years, in all which time his Deportment, and be∣haviour His deport∣ment there. was very Exemplary, not only to those that were of his own Colledge, but to the Heads of other Colledges also. Hear what account of his Conversation is given by a faithful Pen of one that was Scholar, and Fellow of that House most of that time when our Doctor was President there. Thus he writes, At his first coming to the Colledge, he put in Execution, and that Vigorously, all such His diligence and prudence. Statutes as tended most to the advancement of Learning, and Religion, and was himself fre∣quently present at all Lectures, and other Exercises, to Encourage the Studious and Re∣prehend the Negligent. He set up a Divinity Lecture every Lords-day, early in the Mor∣ning, in the Colledge Chappel, for the Initiating, and exercising of the Elder Students in order to fit them for the work of the Ministry. He constantly Catechized the Younger sort pub∣lickly in the Chappel every Saturday. He Preached once or twice every Lords-day, to the Edification, and comfort of many: Besides his constant course in Saint Maries, and the Col∣ledge Chappel, and several Lectures in Country Towns, whereunto he was alwayes most ready, rather seeking opportunities than declining them. He had every week a meeting in his own Lod∣ging for Prayer, and Spiritual Conference, as well of the Members of his Colledge, as of others, wherein himself alwayes bore the principal part, bringing out of his store of Experimental knowledge things both New and Old. He was constantly present at Publick Duties of Wor∣ship in the Chappel Morning and Evening, observing all, and reproving such as were negli∣gent and remiss. He took great care to Introduce, and Elect into the Colledge such as he either saw or heard to have some appearences of Grace; At least, such as were dociable, and inclinable towards that which is good. Spiritual discourse was his meat and drink; And when he sat at Meals in the Colledge Hall, his constant course was, either from the Chapter then Read, or from some occasion or other to speak that which might tend to the Instruction of those that were present, and to call up their minds to some Heavenly Con∣templation. Anno Christi, 1660. Being discharged from the Colledge, where he had been so e∣minent He leaves Ox∣ford. a blessing by his Prudent Government, and Pious Example, both which were so far effectual, that Religion and Learning scarce flourished more in any one Society in that Ʋniversity, than in that little Nursery, he judged it advisable to withdraw also from that City, in which he had sown so many Handful of precious Seed, which he alwayes well watered with his Tears. For few Preached with more Affection, and less Affectation: But when the time of his departure came, some yet Living know, and well Remember with what sad hearts his dear Friends, Scholars and Citizens, parted with him, as those did with Saint Paul, Act. 20. latter end: They all wept sore and fell on Pauls Neck and kissed him; Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his Face no more, and they accompanied him out of the City. So did these from the Famous University and City. Having left Oxford he Recommended himself to Gods Providence to choose a He goes to Rickmersworth. fit Habitation for him, where for the present he might six himself, and his first Station was at Rickmersworth, a small Market Town in Hertfordshire, where he had not been long but he had a very kind welcome from the Gentry, as a Gentleman, and from private Christians, as a Minister of Jesus Christ.
His first and principal design, after he had been there a while, was to make way His prudence and painful∣ness. for the Settlement of an able Minister among them, reckoning that one of the best accommodations to an House was wanting, where that was wanting: And he used to say that Rickmersworth were a good place if there were better water, meaning a better Ministry; and that his design took no better effect, it was not through any neglect or default of his, having used all means in his power to have brought it to pass: Yet himself quickly found the way to the Pulpit; and because the entrance was narrower than in some other places, he sought out a wider door, and more effectual, and indeed he found out above twenty more in other places, scarce one Sab∣bath passed, but he Preached the Gospel of the Kingdome in a new pulpit: And tho he was old and somewhat infirm, yet rarely did he content himself with once, but Preached twice a day. Thus this good Man, in labours more abundant than many others, in the Morning sowed his Seed, and in the Evening witheld not his hand (so liberal he was of his Spiritual Alms) not knowing whether should prosper, this or that, o whether they might not both be alike good (Eccles. 11. 6.) And like Saint Paul (Rom. 15. 19.) from Rick∣mersworth, even round about unto the utmost Borders of the County, yea, in the Neighbouring Counties also, he was willing to be spending, and spent in the service of his great and good Lord and Master Jesus Christ. Hereby we may easily see that our Doctor had not lain idle in the University, till he was rusted and Cankered away, and so fit for no other use in the House of God, but as it was said of Joseph, that his Bow still abode in strength; So was it with him, his parts memory, and affections still continuing vigorous. Thus he continued constantly Preaching till that black day, August 24, 1662. Which impo∣sed silence upon all Non-Conformists: Yet neither after this time was he willing to Fasting and Prayer. be idle: For almost every week he assisted in keeping one day at a private Fast, either in his own, or else in some other Godly Ministers, or Christians Family, as to humble himself for his own sins, so for the sins and abominations which had overspread the Kingdom: And it cannot be easily forgotten with what brakeness of Spirit, and with what a melting Soul he would still take up some hours in those dayes, either in Preaching, or Prayer, or both: For indeed he was mighty in Prayer, as well as in the Scriptures, as its said of Apollos. Having thus spent about two years, his Wife now labouring under some weak∣nesses, he gave over House-keeping, and retired into a Chamber or two in a private Family, at some Miles distance, where he was very useful, and quickly Leavened that He doth good. whole Houshold: His Ministerial gifts and graces were such, as he persumed all with whom he conversed. As long as he continued there, there was a little Church in that House, so that both Governor, Children, and Servants had great cause to bless God for his presence among them, and for his Holy Conference, and exemplary Conversation, which was so profitable unto them. From thence he removed to an another private Family (and probably his frequent removes were, that he might have renewed opportunities of doing the more good to men, and the more service to God) where he was entertained as an Angel of God. This Family was near to Saint Albans, in which Town he was an Instrument of doing much good, to correct extravagances among some people there, which he ef∣fected by his sober principles, and great moderation of Spirit, and the Noble exer∣cises of self-denyal, and Charity, being no burden to any, but being crafty, he caught them by guile, 2 Cor. 12. 16. His last remove was to a place called Bovingden, a little Village, which probably had never been taken notice of, if this eminent Servant of Christ had not made his abode, and ended his dayes there. He was brought thither by the Invitation of a very Re∣ligious and Noble Gentleman, who freely accommodated him with all the conveni∣ences of an Habitation of his in that place: But our Doctor told a friend of his, that His Charity. whatsoever he saved that way, he still expended it in Charitable uses, and made Conscience of giving it, either in Mony or Books to poor Families in that, or some Neighbouring places. He distributed several Hundred of Catechisms, and of Mr. Baxters Call to the Ʋnconverted amongst them. During this abode here he dayly attended the duties of that Family wherein he lived, instructing those that were therein; and if any of the poor of that place chanced His frequent Preaching. to come in, he would bid them welcome, and say, That Christ came along with them,
and tell them, that the poor hath the Gospel Preached unto them. In this place he en∣joyed great privacy: which he greatly prized: And had he been born for himself alone, he could alwaies have chosen to live thus alone. Many worthies in the world have preferred retirement before the greatest preferments in Church or State, and have Judged Scepters, and Myters not worthy to be compared with it: But he was of another Spirit, and could not thus satisfie himself: He had often that saying of Saint Paul in his mouth, Wo be to me if I Preach not the Gospel. He was of Reverend Mr. Calvins mind, who would not that his Lord should come and find him idle. Where∣fore he rode often to Saint Albans, or to some other adjacent place, and once or twice a year to London, and Kingston; And seeing he could not Preach in a Church to ma∣ny, he contented himself to Preach in a Chamber to a few. 'Tis not the place or multitude that commends our Preaching unto God, many excellent Sermons have been Preached in despicable places and Auditories. Saint Pauls meeting place in Macedonia was by a Rivers side, and his Auditors a few of the weaker Sex. Our Saviour himself once Preached a long Sermon to one timerous Nichodemus (Joh. 3. 4.) And some other times in the open Air; and to one silly Woman Joh. 4. 7. Thus this Eminent Man of God like a Candle or Torch, with giving light to o∣thers, His Sickness. consumed and wasted himself, July the eighth, Anno Christi, 1671. And of his Age seventy one: He was seized all on one side with the Dead Palsie, by reason whereof his Speech much failed him, so that he spake little and seldom. A friend coming to visit him, and asking him how he did? He answered in the words of the Prophet: In measure God debateth with me, and in the day of the East wind, he stayeth his rough wind: A while after he said to a Friend that stood by him; I neither fear Death nor desire Life, but am willing to be at Gods disposal. At another time he uttered these words very audibly; I know that my Redeemer liveth, and by and by he repeated the fifth verse of the thirty first Psalm in Meeter: Into thy Hand Lord I commit My Spirit which is thy due: For why? Thou hast Redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. So long as he was able to speak he pressed the By▪standers to many wholesome duties; as, to make sure of Heaven in the time of health: To keep their Eviden∣ces fair and unblotted. To remember, and keep holy the Sabbath day (whereof himself was a careful observer.) When he could no longer speak himself he desired others to read the Scriptures to him, directing them those Portions which he most desired, which were, for the most part, some of Davids Psalms. And he was either without any great pain, or without feeling of it. July the tenth his Speech was quite taken from him, but yet his understanding and memory continued: About the space of four dayes, he lay (as all about him might perceive) in a very comfortable condition, oft lifting up his Eyes and Hands towards Heaven with a smiling and chearful Countenance. An upright Life usually ends in a peaceable Death. A little before his Departure, a Minister Praying His Death.] with him, he shewed signs of great affections all the while, and Prayer being ended, he took him by the Hand, and held it fast, expressing great signs of Joy in God and of thankfulness unto him. And on the 14th. of July, this shin∣ing light went out, to receive his wages from his great Lord and Master Je∣sus Christ. He was Buried at Bovenden, afore-mentioned, July the seventeeth, Anno Christi, 1671. Whilst he lived at Kingston, and whas busily employed in begetting Sons and Daughters unto God, God gave him many Sons and Daughters begotten of his own Body, ten of which lie buried in one Grave in the Parish Church of King∣ston, upon whom he hath laid a fair Stone with this Epitaph fairly Engraven on it.
Here lies the Bodies Of Francis. Richard. Richard. Edmund. Mary. Edmund. Matthew. Sarah. Mary. Richard. Children which the Lord graciously gave to Edmund Staunton, D. D. Late Minister of Kingston upon Thames, now President of C. C. C. in Oxford, by Mary his Wife, Daughter of Richard Balthrope, Esq; Servant to the Late Queen Elizabeth. Ten Children in one Grave! A dreadful sight; Seven Sons, and Daughters three; Jobs number right. Childhood and Youth are vain: Death Reigns o're all, Even those that never sinn'd like Adams fall. But why o're All? In th' first Man every one Sinned and fell; not he himself alone. Our hope's in Christ the second Adam; He Who saves th' Elect from sin and misery. What's that to us, poor Children? 'Tis our Creed, God is a God to th' Faithful and their Seed. Sleep on (Dear Children) never more to wake Till Christ doth raise you, and to Glory take. He was very careful and dilligent in the great Duty of Self-Examination, which Self examina∣tion. Evidences from Heaven. also he often pressed upon others. Concerning which he thus writes. Evidences for Heaven, which (if my heart deceive me not) are in me, through the gracious workings of Gods Spirit upon me: They are, First, Effectual Calling. That this is a good Evidence appears from, Rom. 8. 30. 2 Pet. 1. 10. The Calling I had was about the year, 1620. Secondly, Change of Company: Choosing the Society of the Godly; shunning the Society of the wicked, Psal. 1. 1. and 26. 4, 5. and 119. 115. Act. 9. 26. To this my heart answers affirmitively, Feb. 4. 1629. And do thou so still, April. 3. 1663. And still so, May 2. 1666. And again, April 2. 1668. &c. Thirdly, Ʋniversality of Obedience, Psa. 119. 6. and 139. the two last verses. To this my heart answers affirmatively, Februrary 4. 1629. And doth so still, April 3. 1663. Fourthly, Love to the Godly as such, 1 Joh. 3. 14. To this my heart answers af∣firmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. &c. Fifthly, Sincerity. Endeavouring to approve my heart more to God, than my wayes to Men: Aiming more at Gods glory, than mine own profit, applause, &c. 2 Cor. 1. 12. My heart answers affirmitively as before. Sixthly, Kindly meltings and mournings for sin, upon the sense of Gods free Love in Christ, Zech. 12. 10. 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10. My heart answers affirmatively, &c. Going to Hemsteed to Preach, as I was Meditating on the Rode near Langely, of the Love of God in Calling such an one as I am, when thousands more Noble, more Migh∣ty, more Wise and Learned, &c. Lye in Ignorance and profaneness, I burst out into a fit of weeping, and my heart by and by was filled with abundance of Joy and rejoyceing. Seventhly, Zeal for God and against sin, John 2. 17. 2 Cor. 7. 11. My heart an∣swered affirmitively, &c. Eighthly, A Love of, and longing for Christs appearing: 2 Tim. 4. 8. Heb. 9. 6. Rev. 22. 17, 20. I cannot say there hath been such a longing in me after Christs com∣ing, at least, not so full and frequent, as in many others: yet in Prayer and Medi∣tation the thoughts of a future Estate wherein I should never sin more, but be sa∣tisfied with Gods likeness, have been very sweet and comfortable unto me. Once upon the Rode (in a day of my greatest rejoycing as to outward Comforts and Mer∣cies) it Lightned, Thundered, and Rained much. My thoughts were, what if this should be the day of Judgment? What if I should see Christ coming presently in
the Clouds? The answer of my Soul was, Welcome, Welcome, Welcome: This filled me with much peace and comfort. Ninthly, Speech gracious, or with Grace: Prov. 10. 21. Ephe. 4. 29. My heart answers affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. When I have met with any Ignorant persons willing to be instructed, it hath been my manner (to God be the Glory and praise of it) to set good discourse on foot, and to forward it, when others have be∣gun it. Tenthly, Blessing God for, and rejoycing in the gifts and graces of others. Joh. 29. 30. My heart answers affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629. &c. Tho my heart is apt enough (the Lord humble and help me) to envy and detract from others; yet (through mercy) I find. 1. An heart blessing God for others gifts and graces out-shining mine. 2. Rejoycing that others do greater and better services, and bringing more Glory to him than I do or can. Eleventhly, The Spirit of Prayer: Act. 9. 11. Rom. 8. 15. My heart answers af∣firmatively, Feb. 4. 1629, &c. Twelfthly, A careful Sanctification of the Sabbaths Commandments, 4th. Isa. 56. 45. and 58. 13, 14. My heart answers affirmatively, Feb. 4. 1629, &c. According to the Psalmists Counsel and other good Mens custome, he was wont Meditation. to commune with his heart in the night season, when there is the greatest silence, and least interruption. He also kept a Journal, or Diary, of Gods Mercies: And amongst his many A Diary of Gods provi∣dences to him. Collections in this kind, take these few instances which he wrote, and left behind him. When being about ten years of Age, I fell sick of a Feaver, and was given up for dead, of mine own accord (I think my good God suggested it) I asked for Butter-milk, which taking, by little and little, my Fever abated, and I reco∣vered. When I was about fourteen years old, swinging in a Rope in my Fathers Kitchin at Birchmore, which was paved with Freestone, and of an high Roof, which I endea∣vouring to touch with Back and Belly, when I was very high and my Face down∣wards, the rope brake, and I fell down flat, and there lay Speechless and as Dead. But anon (the Lord appearing for my help) I brake out into a violent bleeding at Mouth, or Nose, or both; And so by degrees (through the blessing of the Lord) re∣vived, and recovered. Going to Bed in my Tutors Chamber in Oxford, and having a Wax-Candle in a Roll by me, burning on a Deal-box full of Linnen, I fell asleep: The Box and Lin∣nen were burnt, but the Bed not touched, tho close to it, &c. When I was Minister at Kingston, I drank Ink one Morning instead of Muskadine, yet had no hurt. April 8th. 1659. at Oxford, my Wife being in her Closset very late, which was hung with much Linnen round about, and I in Bed and a sleep in the Chamber ad∣joyning, the Candle taking hold on the Linnen, set it on fire, which flamed round about her: She (the Lord assisting of her) bestirred her self, pulled down the Linnen, trod it under foot, and mastered the fire. I was not waked, nor she much damaged. Feb. 1. 1666. At the Bell-Inn in Aldersgate-street, London, between eight and nine a Clock at night, missing my way to my Chamber, I went upon the Leads unrailed, pitching my Staff before me; I went so nigh the Precipice, or downfall into the yard, that I found no footing for my staff: But a step between me and death! O what shall I render, &c. Another commendable excellency in this Holy Man was his Laboriousness in the Preaching frequent. work of the Ministry. Somthing of this you had before. His great care was to fulfil the Ministry which he had received of the Lord, his heart was in this work: He did Hoc agere: This was his , It was his Meet and Drink. He would often say, that he feared to hear that rebuke from Christ another day. Thou evil and sloathful Servant, Mat. 25. 26. Wicked because sloathful. When he came to visit his Friends, if they did not ask, to be sure he would offer his pains among them. What? He would say, is there no work for a Preacher here? But tho his Sermons were sometimes offered, they were never ordinary ware.
He never offered to God, in that way, that which cost him nothing. He alwayes His Preaching. disliked immethodical and indigested Preaching: Indeed he was a work-man that need∣ed not to be ashamed of his work, and yet he was as great an Enemy to quaint, as he was to Crude Preaching: Next to painfulness, he liked plainness in a Preacher, which two are not inconsistent. Ministers are termed Gods Interpreters, yet many times their Sermons are such, that they need others to be their Interpreters. It was a saying of Holy Mr. Dod, that many of our English Preachers shoot over the Head of most of their hearers. They are not alwayes low in Learning that stoop to the Ca∣pacity of their Auditors. The Life of Preaching lies in Application; And in this indeed he was alwaies most vigorous and lively. In his admonitions and Exhortations he was so affectionate, that he would impart, not the Gospel only, but his very Soul also to his Auditory. He was called the searching Preacher. In every Sermon he would still speak something by way of Trial, and Examination: He would frequently have his Marks of di∣stinction betwixt the precious and the vile; the sincere Person and the Hypocrite. This story he Recorded himself, that having a suspicion of one Man in his Parish, who made a great Profession of Religion, of whom he often thought in his distinctions, that very Person came afterwards to him, saying, You will never leave Distinguishing, till you have distinguished me into Hell. Dr. Staunton Preaching once at Warborough, not far from Oxford, one in the Con∣gregation Providence remarkable. was so affected with his first Prayer, that he ru to his House (which was near) and bad his Wife to make her self ready and come to Church; for there was one in the Pulpit that prayed like an Angel, so as he never heard the like. The Woman hasted to Church with her Husband, and God so ordered it, that that Sermon proved effectual for her Conversion, and she proved afterwards a serious and eminent Christian. He was familliarly acquainted with the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New-Testament, Scriptures studied. and (as Apollos) was mighty therein. His head was instead of a Concordance: It was a wonder to see how readily he could turn to any Text upon all occasions. He greatly loved the Word, and therefore could not easily forget it. He loved it more than the Bride doth her Ornaments, which run in her mind continually. The Testi∣monies of God were his delight and the Men of his Counsel, he read and meditated therein day and night. Where ever he went he carried the New-Testament, or Davids Psalms along with him. The first thing he did in a Morning was to Read a Portion of the Sacred Scripture, which Ministred matter of Meditation, and of Communication all the day after. When he was to seek for matter of good discourse (which was very seldome) or Conference. when no fit occasion was offered otherwise, then would he speak of some Scripture that he had read that Morning, from which he would raise some useful observations, or propose some Practical Questions to the Edification of the hearer. At Night when he went to Bed, he would search out some Scripture or other which suited with his present thoughts, and that was the subject matter of his Meditation in his waking hours. He seldom wrote any Letter but he added three, or four, or more Scriptures for a Post-script, and those very pertinent, either to the present occasion of his writ∣ting, or to the condition of the Person to whom he wrote: Or haply they should respect the times, and the Providences of God therein. He seldome visited, or met any Friend, but he would at parting, leave some Scripture or other with him. Pray you (he would say) let me leave one Text of Scripture with you, and think of it when I am gone. He was very frequent and servent in Prayer. What David said of himself may be Prayer fre∣quent. truly affirmed of him, I gave my self to Prayer. Its Recorded of Luther, that no day passed over him wherein he did not spend three hours at least in this duty, and it may be truly said of our Doctor, that he restrained not Prayer; not slightly passed it over. He was fervent in Spirit, thus serving the Lord: his manner was, when ever he came to Lodge at any Friends House, after he had saluted those that were present, he would presently retire into his Chamber; where he would spend about an hour by himself, before any Friend could speak with him: At Night also he would again be shut up in his Chamber for a considerable time before any Servant could be admitted to him He would often say to his Godly Friends that came to visit him; Come must we not pray together before we part? Indeed it may be said of him, what was said of another,
Mihi cibus & potus est Oratio: Prayer was his best repast, his meat, and his drink. Nor did he slubber over this duty as too many do, but he did it with all his might: He prayed in Prayer: He wrestled with God as Jacob did: He usually wept when he made his supplications unto God, he was not only affectionate when he prayed with others, but when he was alone by himself: This himself hath recorded, the glory be God were; I have shed one tear in Prayer with others, I have (I think I speak within compass) shed two in secret between God and mine own Soul. In Prayer alone, or with others, if he could have room, he would perform the Humility in Prayer. duty kneeling on the ground; Yea, tho he was sometimes almost lost in the Crowd by so doing. He used to say, that the humblest Gesture, as well as the humblest Spirit best became the duty of Prayer: And that he knew no way of wrestling with the Almigh∣ty, like that of lying at his feet, and prostrating our selves before him. He was a strict observer of the Lords-day. Some have observed, that the Sancti∣fication Sabbaths sanctified. of it is one of the first things that a Converted Person makes Conscience of. This good Man was every day watchful over his thoughts, words and actions, but more especially upon the Lords-dayes. It was rare to hear him speak one idle word, or see him do one unnecessary action on those dayes. His strictness was such herein, that some have wondered at it; and some (too hastily perhaps) have censured him for it. He went from duty to duty (as Bees do, from flower to flower) from pub∣lick duties to Family Duties; from Family duties to Closet duties, finding sweet∣ness in them all. He would say, we must alwayes be good Husbands of time, especially of Holy time. We must not spend that time which is not our own, about our own affairs. He kept many private fasts alone, and with his Family. This he did ordinarily Fasting and prayer. before he came to the Lords-Supper, and at other times when he found any Corruption to grow or get head in his heart. There are some Devils, and Devillish Lusts, that will not be cast out, or kept under by other means. This he himself Records, that when he was a young Preacher, he found himself to be very prone to be puffed up and exalted (its observed, that Spiritual pride is the special sin of young Mini∣sters) whereupon he set a day apart to seek to God for strength against that sin, and from that day forward he felt (as himself expresses it) that the neck and heart of Pride subdued. it was broken. He was a most lowly minded Christian: He was Clothed all over with the pre∣cious His Humility. Garment of Humility, that Treasury of grace, that Ornament of Religion. Neither his Parentage nor his parts, nor his applause, nor any thing else, did (to appearance) any way elate, or puff him up. Tho he was lifted up in the eyes and hearts of others, yet was he lowly in his own. It was usual with him to esteem others, that were far inferiour to him, to be better than himself. He was very Charitable unto all, especially to those of the Houshold of Faith. 'Tis His Charity. Davids Character of a good Man, that he giveth to the poor, and disperses Liberally, Psa. 112. 5, 9. And this was his practice; whilst others were for gathering and heap∣ing up, he was for dispersing and scattering abroad. As all graces were conspicuous in him, so this of Charity in a special manner, which is the only Grace (saith one) wherein God and Man Communicates. He devised Liberal things, and drew out, not his Sheafe only, but his Soul to the hungry (Isa. 58. 10.) He did not draw out his Purse only to relieve them, but his Bowels and Soul to pity them. Dat benè, dat multum qui dat cum Munere Vultum. His manner was, when he rode abroad to put so much Mony into his Pocket, as he could well spare for this purpose; And as he met with any Indigent person, he would fall into discourse with him; and if he found any knowledge of God or sa∣vour of Godliness, he would the more plentifully relieve them; Nor should the ig∣norant (if he judged them necessitous and not idle) part from him without some Counsel and relief. For Purse Alms, and Spiritual Almes together, very few were his equals. He used often to visit poor and needy Families, or call in, as he passed by them, and would ever leave something behind him for the good both of their Souls and bodies. God lent him a compitent Estate, (and which is better) gave him an heart to lend it back to him again. God Honoured him, and he again Ho∣noured God with his substance.
He was very eminent for Patience. Those that knew his circumstances, and his Lamb-like carriage under them, will readily confess that he was one of the great∣est His Patience. patterns of Patience that this Age hath produced. Among the various tryals wherewith he was exercised, he had one which was not ordinary, his Wife fal∣ling into a Distraction; Yet whoever saw him out of humor? Whoever heard him grumble, or speak a repining word for it? Yea, many that knew it have admired, not only at his patience, but at chearfulness under so sad a dispensation. He had learned that great Lesson, in every thing give thanks: It may be said of him as of that great Apostle Saint Paul, that he was Joyful, yea, exceeding Joyfull in all his Tribulations. His Conversation was made up of seriousness, tempered with chearfulness, how grave was he in all Company, and yet how chearful? I used my self (saith he) to be somewhat merry and chearful in Company, that standers by might for that reason be the more in Love with Religion, to shew that it was not inconsistent with harmless Mirth, and (through mercy) I have cause to think that I have sometimes attained that end. I have hereby drawn some to a liking of the good wayes of God. He much disliked, and lamented the unnatural heats and divisions that were a∣mong His peaceable∣ness. Christians. He was not Sceptical, and indifferent, nor yet rigid and morose: He seemed to tread in Saint Pauls steps, and did alwayes endeavour to accommodate himself, to those that differed from him so far as lawfully he might, and as his Love of truth would permit. Many Men prefer a petty Notion to the Churches peace and Communion, and are so capricious and over-confident of their own determinations, that they will hold no Communion, nay hardly have a pleasing Conversation with those who are not of their perswasion: But our Doctor was of another Alloy, and of a more excellent temper. He used to say, that all men must have their grains of allowance. The most knowing Christians know but in part. He would Familiarly converse (yea, and if occasion was, Communicate in all Ordinances) with those that held the head, and were found in the vitals of Christian Religion, tho in other things they were er∣roneous. This he much declaimed against, that Christians upon every little occasion, made nothing of separation. If they disliked a People, the next word was, we will joyn with them no longer: If they disliked a Preacher, presently we will hear him no more. His opinion was, that it will never be well with the Church of God in this Nation, so long as Christians are so prone to division and separation. This, this is Englands incurable wound. What was said of David and of our Lord Christ himself may be truly affirmed of His zeal. this worthy Doctor, The Zeal of God did consume and eat him up. Tho he seldome sinned in being angry, yet he often, yea very often was angry with sin. He could bear to be reproached and evil-spoken of himself, but not that God and his Name should be Blasphemed, and dishonored. Among other instances take one or two that are set down under his own hand. Being once (saith he) at a Wedding Dinner, at the Marriage of one of Mr. Va∣lentines Servant, I observed a Fidler to Swear, and to Sing very obscenely, at which I was troubled, and filled with Indignation, till anon I called to him to forbear, and gave him Mony to hold his peace, tendring therein the Glory of God, and was much comforted thereby. Supping once at an Inn betwixt London and Oxford, where many who travelled together did also eat together, one among the rest was full of vain, and profane dis∣course. I applyed my self unto him, and labored to convince him of the evil of sin, and of the curse and wrath of God which hung over his head: And then I told him also of the riches of Gods Grace to repenting sinners, of his readiness to receive them, and to be reconciled unto them. This made him more mute, but what farther op∣peration it had upon him, I know not; only this was remarkable, that the open∣ing Providences special. of the grace of God in the Gospel, fell upon a young Schollar that stood by, and (as he afterwards confest) it melted his very heart, and helpt him from under a Spirit of Bondage, wherewith he had been bowed down, and broken, for many Moneths past. Another demonstration of his great zeal for God, was his frequent projecting and Zeal. contriving how he might promote his Honour and Service in the world. He hath been ofeen heard to say to his Friends in a Morning; Come Friends, what shall we do for God this day? How shall we Trade with our Talents for the furtherance of his Glory? Never did that Ambitious Man Study and strive for the advancing of
himself as he did for advancing the Name and Honor of his God. He took much delight in, and excelled in Christian Conference, for which he Christian con∣ference. deserves to be Recorded to all Posterity. If he came behind some for Learning, Elocution, &c. Yet he went before them in this Grace and gift. As Men have their perticular sins, so they have their perticular Graces and Excellencies: Abra∣ham excelled in Faith; Moses in Meekness; Joh in Patience, and our worthy Doctor in Holy and Godly Conference. Whoever conversed with him, and was not a gainer by his Heavenly discourse? His Speech was alwayes with Grace, which as it argued grace in the speaker, so it was apt to work, or stir up Grace in the hearers, it was ever savoury, seasoned with salt, and good to the use of Edifying, Ephe, 4. 29. His heart was alwayes inditing a good matter, and therefore his tongue was as the Pen of a ready Writer, Psa. 45. 1, 2. His Lips fed many, Prov. 10. 21. They alwayes dropped as the Hony comb (Cant. 4. 11.) Grace was poured into them, and it flowed plentifully from them. He had a good stock, and Rich Treasure in his heart, and from thence (upon every occasion) he brought forth things both New and Old. Many have admired his skill and dexterity this way, who will never be able to imitate it. It was a wonder (when he sat at Meat with his Friends) how readily he would turn their water into wine, their merry and Idle into serious and profitable dis∣course. When any were talking of their worldly and secular affairs, he had a faculty of scruing in some heavenly Argument, which also he did so handsomely, that the most Ignorant, or Carnal person among them could not be offended at it. Those that would nauseate such discourse from others, would yet accept it from him, so handsomely and artificially did he manage it. He had an excellent faculty Discourse. in warning the unruly, and in comforting the feeble minded: But he was wondrous ready in instructing the Ignorant, even such as others would slight, not thinking them worthy of their pains, by reason of their meanness and Ignorance: He delighted in conversing with such, and instrucing of them; and would say, their Souls are as precious as the Souls of Nobles. When accidentally he met with any person (tho a stranger) as he was sitting in a House, or walking abroad, or riding by the way, he would instantly apply him∣self to him, and fall into discourse with him. Not long before his Death, coming to a Gentlemans House, and sitting down, he presently asked the Servant that at∣tended him, what Country-man he was? And where he was born? To which the young Man no sooner replyed, but his next Question was, I pray thee tell me: Dost thou think thou art born again? And by this Introduction he took occasion (as our Saviour Christ did to Nichodemus) to open to him the nature and necessity of the New-Birth. And his success in this way was somewhat answerable to his diligence, some having been Converted, and many others instructed, Comforted, and quick∣ened by his Godly and savoury discourse. His Modesty and Humility was such, that he never judged any of his Labors wor∣thy His modesty. of the Press; yet he consented that his Treatise about Christian Conference should be Printed, which, tho a plain, yet a profitable discourse. Thus you have one of the fairest Copies that this Age hath produced, presented to your view. A Man that was (as Saint Paul exhorts Titus to be) a pattern of good works: One that in Doctrine shewed uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, sound speech that could not be Condemned: One that in Conversion shewed integrity, unblamable∣ness, and good works that ought to be imitated. A few more such Ministers and Christians, would convince or condemn the ungodly Generation among whom we live, and make them of another mind who say and think, that all Professors are but pretenders to Religion; and that there is no such thing as Grace and Godliness, di∣stinct from Moral Virtue and Righteousness: There is not a more ready way to con∣fute and refel such Calumnies, than to refer them to the Conversation of such a Per∣son; as Diogenes confuted one which denyed that there was any motion, by geting up and walking before his eyes.
He lies Interred in the Parish Church of Bovingdon afore∣said, under a fair Stone, with this Epitaph Engraven'd upon it, made by the Reverend Dr. Simon Ford. In Memoriam Eruditii & Sanctissimi Viri Edmundi Staunton, S. T. D. Qui annum agens Septuagessimum primum, Decimo quarto Die Julii Anno Domini, 1671. Spiritum ejus in Manus Domini Jesu Christi summa pace deposuit. Scire cupis, Lector, cujus Lapis iste sepulti est? En lege, summissa, sed lege, voce precor. Se solum nota, latuit Pietate modestus, Erubuitque suis conscius esse bonis. Vnde haec, vera licet, si norit forte, verendum Ne fugiat Marmor, vel Cinis ipse loquax. Of Dr. Stauntons great care to promote Religion and Learn∣ing in C. C. C. whilst he was President, by Mr. J. M. Sometime Fellow of the same. I (Saith he) who had the happiness to be near him for many years, and observed the excellent workings of the Grace of God in him, cannot but speak of the things which I have seen and heard. In his younger years he was chosen Scholar of Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, and not long after Probationer Fellow of the same, before he was Batchellor of Arts; a thing seldome known in that House. There Men finding him to be not only in∣genious, but ingenuous also, shewed him great respect, bestowing one token thereof after another. And there God not for any desert in him, but out of his own mercy and grace did set his eye upon him: There did the kindness and love of God (which a great while before had run, like water, under ground) break forth and appear; saving him by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. For here God first opened his eyes, and caused him to see his wretched condition, which did greatly and deeply humble him, and made him to put up strong cries, with tears, to him tbat was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared, (Heb. 5. 7.) For at length he had his Conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ, by whom he received the Atonement. And the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, made him free from the Law of sin and death. And now he became a member of the most Ancient, Honourable, and durable Society in the world: Being, first chosen, and then admitted Fellow of Sion Col∣ledge, where an innumerable Company of Saints and Angels where his Collegues. And having received his Grace, he found himself strongly inclined to make others pertakers of the same. Wherefore, having taken his Degree of Master of Arts, after some few years he left the Colledge, and gave up himself to the work of the Mini∣stry. He spent most of his time and labors at Kingston upon Thames, where the pleasure of the Lord did prosper in his hands. From thence (as we heard before) he was
called to be a Governor of that Colledge whereof before he had been a Member: And as soon as he came to the place he manifested an earnest desire after the wel∣fare of the Society in every respect, exciting, and by his Example, leading such as were to assist him, to endeavour the same. His Government favoured more of lenity and mildness than of sharpness and se∣verity; yet he kept the Colledge in very good order and discipline. And tho the House, before his time, had been much troubled with division, he, by his Modera∣tion and Christian prudence, kept them all of a peice, and in the enjoyment of great Peace and Concord. He was indeed naturally of an exceeding good temper and disposition; gentle, affable, and courteous to all, which being embellished with Grace, made him exceeding amiable, and very useful in his whole Conversa∣tion. His great care was to promote Religion and Learning in the Colledge, which he prosecuted with both hands earnestly. Divine knowledge and humane learning are the right and left Eye of the world: And as the Sun and Moon are to the Ʋniverse, the Eclip∣sing of either of them leaves the World in darkness. One thing there was which made him more desirous to see Religion and Learning to meet together in conjunction, in all such as were to be chosen Scholars of the House, or if that could not be obtained, to have them joyned together afterwards. It was the Founders Will, expressed in one of his Statutes, that all the Fellows, and Scholars that were of the Foundation, should, about a year or two after they were Masters of Arts, be ordained to the Holy Mini∣stry; one only excepted, who ad Arbitrium, might be deputed to the study and Practice of Physick Parts and Learning without grace, make a Man capable of doing very good Service in the Common-wealth; but both in Conjunction are more requisite in one who is to make manifest the savour of the knowledge of Christ in every place, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Knowledge puffeth up, but Charity Edifies, 1 Cor. 8. 1. A Man of Learning without Grace, is like a Ship without Ballast, the least blast of applause is ready to drive him upon the Quick-sands of pride, or to carry him upon the Rocks of opposition to others, yea, some∣times to the truth it self, and that to his own great danger and the prejudice of o∣thers. Upon such accounts as these, this Godly wise Man was careful to prevent (if it might be) an error in the first concoction, knowing how hard it might be to prevent it in the second. Therefore when any Scholars place became void, if there appeared many Candidates for it, he appointed them, sometime before the Election, to attend him at his Lodgings, where he examined them privately, and set down in a Paper the Age, Standing, and Proficiency in Learning, of every one of them. He noted also what Testimonials he had received from Persons of Integrity, con∣cerning the good Conversation of any of them, and of their hopefulness as to God∣liness, together with his own apprehensions of them, upon his Examination as to that matter also. And if such a number of the Electors as was requisite, could not (after publick Examination) agree upon one of them, he upon whom the Election was in that Case devolved, if there appeared to him and Equallity, or near an equallity in o∣ther respects, he would alwayes let piety have the Honour to turn the Scales. His next care was to have these Twins, Piety and Parts fostered and cherished, and by all wayes and means, improved, and heighthened to the utmost of his Power: And to this purpose he came alwayes to all Colledge Exercises: Held every one to the Duties of their several Places, and observed every ones growth, and progress in Learning, by which means he was the better able to Judge whom to prefer when any of them came to be Competitors for a Fellowship. His care was no less to see Religion prosper and thrive: For which end he made choise of the fittest Persons that he could find to perform the Duty of Prayer, Morning and Evening; even such as would with Reverence, seriousness, and warm affections, engage the hearts of the Hearers in the Duty: And at this holy exercise himself was present as constantly, if not more constantly than the younger Scholars, as to joyn in the Duty, to bring down a blessing upon them from above, and upon their Studies, so also to see that it was performed Reverently, and to see that the whole Society came together duly. Every Lords-day in the Evening when the whole House met together to offer up their Sacrifice of Praise and Prayer, he examined the younger sort; calling them to
an account of what they heard that day; which was a likely means to engage them to the greater attention in hearing, and to make the truths, by their pondering upon them, to sink the deeper into their hearts. He took great pains to instruct them of the lower Rank in the Grounds of Religi∣on, calling them one day in the week into the Chappel, where he opened the great and weighty truths of Christianity to them: Endeavouring still, not only to inform their Judgments, but to make the truths reach their hearts. Whereas the Founder required, that the Fellows and Scholars should, at such a standing (as was said before) be Ordained to the Ministry; he, with the consent of such of the Fellows, as were impowered by the Statutes to make Orders for the good of the Society, decreed, that all of such a standing or above, should Preach every Lords-day in the Morning, by course, in the Colledge Chappel, before the Publick Sermon in the University. By this means they which were designed for the work of the Ministry, might hereby both prove, and improve, and also approve themselves to others to be Men Apt to teach; which is one of the quallifications re∣quired in the Apostolical Canons in them that are to be called to the Pastoral Of∣fice. Lastly besides the Conferences which he had often in his own Lodgings about Soul concernments, and Communion in the Lords-Supper in the Colledge Chappel, where he himself did administer, and many of the House with others from abroad were pertakers of that Sacred Ordinance: He would be often discoursing with such of the Society as came to him about any business, and that in such a manner as tended to the promoting of Holiness. For he seldome would let them part from him without some Instruction, Admonition, or hearty Counsel. Those especial, who by reason of their place and standing, were most frequently a∣bout him, received great benefit by their Conversing with him. For his Heart taught his Mouth and added Learning to his Lips. When a Portion of Scripture was read at Dinner (as usually it was) he did not only cause deep silence, and reverent Atten∣tion through all the Hall, that all, while they were feeding their Bodies, might feed their Souls also. But when the Chapter was ended, if there were any difficult places in it, he either propounded them to the Fellows that sat at Table with him, or else opened and unfolded them himself. If it contained Practical matter, it was a profitable, and pleasant thing to see and hear, how he, who applyed his Heart to the knowledge of God, and kept his words and Laws within him, had them with∣al fitted in his Lips. He lived to see some fruit of his Labors to his great joy and contentment. For divers of them who were, from the beginning, trained up under him, became Lear∣ned, wel-disposed and Pious Men; among whom was Mr. Joseph Allein, late Mi∣nister of the Gospel at Taunton in Sommerset▪shire. For as he was a great Comfort to this Holy Man whilst he was in the Colledge, so it did revive him to hear (for he was often enquiring after such as had been under him, as a Father after his Children) that he proved so eminently Pious, and useful a Man in the Church of God. We have seen how vigilant and indusirious a Governor this good Man was in His care of Souls. the Colledge: He was also one who in Compassion to Mens Souls, took every op∣portunity, when he was at home to Preach in, or near to the City of Oxford. One of the Impropriations belonging to the Colledge, having (before his time) but a small stipend belonging to it; not sufficient to afford a subsistance to an able Man to labor, and watch over the People for the good of their Souls, he first went himself, and afterwards he desired some of the Senior Fellows to go thither by course, and Preach unto the People: Which desire of his they readily and wil∣lingly embraced for some time, till the Lease of the Impropriation came to be renewed: At which time, upon his proposal, the Fellows consented either much to abate, or wholly to remit the Fine, in leiu thereof requiring a com∣petent Sum to be paid yearly, to encourage an able Man to labor constantly a∣mong them. When the Affairs of the Colledge called him forth into Places remote from the University, he was alwayes ready to take any opportunity of doing good to the Souls of Men. One who hath rode many Hundred Miles in Company with him, hath alwayes observed his deportment in all places, and towards all persons, to be
such as became an Heavenly minded Christian, and a true and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ. When he was riding on the way, he entertained his Company with Heavenly discourse: And as variety of objects did present themselves to him, His heavenly-mindedness. he alwayes drew excellent matter out of them; glorifying God for the Wis∣dom, Power and Goodness which appeared in the works of Creation, and Provi∣dence. When he passed by such as were about their occasions in the Feilds, he would His prudence. many times make an Alt, and enter into a short discourse with them. He used first to ask them some ordinary Questions, such as Travellers use to do, and then to take occasion from their answers, to propound other Questions of weight and con∣cernment to their Souls: leaving alwaies some serious word with them at parting, for them to Ruminate upon when he was gone. And probably there are many, who never saw his face, nor he theirs, but thus in his passage, that have blest God for him. When he came to his Lodging, either in a publick or Private House, as he had a better advantage there, so he constantly made use of it, for Gods glory, and the Holy discourse. Edification of whatsoever Company Gods Providence cast him. He had an excellent Gift and rare faculty to improve discourse so as to make it, not only pleasant to those with whom he did converse, but very profitable to their Souls, still aiming at the last, as that mark which he had constantly in his eye. When he came among persons of Quality (being himself well born, well His prudence Educated, of a Generous Spirit, and a chearful temper) his Company, and con∣verse was usually very grateful to them, which gave him an advantage to tell them (as he would plainly, yet prudently) of what he saw amiss in them: To mind them of the Vanity of the World: Of better things above; and to put them (as he often would) upon good designes to shew their Thankfulness to God for his Mercy and Goodness to them. Nor was there a person so mean, but he would readily and humbly condescend to him, as knowing what precious Souls dwell in the poorest Houses of clay. He alwaies spake to such in their own Dialect, and in such a Phrase as they well under∣stood; trying their knowledge and feeling the Pulse of their Souls. If he found them ignorant, or insensible of their Spiritual Estate, he would endeavour to awaken them by laying plain Texts of Scripture before them, for their Con∣viction. If he met with humbled, and burdened Souls, or such as were Babes in Christ, he would gather and embrace them as Lambs in his Arms, and gently lead them to the Wells of Salvation. If at any time there happened to be a mixt Company at the Table with him; some serious Christians, some Professors at large, his manner was to be very free and pleasant in Discourse with them, which caused them all to give great attention to him: Then might you have seen how ever and anon the Hony dropped from his Lips while the Company were hanging on them. How skilful he was in dividing the Word of Truth aright, giving to every one his Portion, and how wise in winning of Souls. If he observed any to take the boldness from his innocent Mirth and pleasant humour, to incline to vain and frothy discourse, he would very dexterously turn to some more profitable matter, and (as occasion was given) afford a serious reproof, tempered with much kindness and Love to their Souls, which was usually well ta∣ken at his hand. If his occasions required his stay a day or two at any place, he seldom departed before he had Preached to the people: And he found by much and long Experience
that a plain way of Preaching was the most effectual to the ends for which that Or∣dinance was appointed, and therefore he constantly used it, even in the Colledge and University, tho he could easily have appeared in an other strain, had he pre∣ferred an Airy Reputation with some, before the work of his Master, and the real advantage of his hearers. Laus Deo.
OLIM PASTORI E KETTON in. SUE: Aet. so. VERA EFFIGIS SAMUELIS FAIRCLOUGH A. M. Qui obiit 14 Decemb 1677 Aetatis 84. F. H. Van. Houe. Sculp: portrait of Samuel Fairclough The Life and Death of Mr. Samuel Fairclough, who died Anno Christi, 1677. THis Reverend and Learned Divine, Mr. Samuel Fairclough, was born April 29. 1594. at Haverill, an ancient Market Town in that part of His Birth. Suffolk which borders both upon Essex and Cambridge-shire; His Fa∣ther Mr. Lawrence Fairclough, was a branch of that very ancient Fa∣mily in Lancashire; from whence he was sent to the University of Cambridge, and thence removed to be Incumbent at Haverill, where he lived an able and worthy Preacher of the Gospel for many years. His Mother was Mrs. Many Cole, the Daughter of Mr. John Cole, chief Lord of that Town: so that he was well descended both by Father and Mother, and to be born so, is reckoned an honour even by divine testimony  filii illustrium, the children of il∣lustrious Parents, having a preference given them in sacred Writ, Eccl. 10. 17. This Family hath been very famous for Arts and Arms; one of this mans Proge∣nitors, as Mr. Peacham tells us in his Book of Heraldry, was Standard-bearer to the Earl His Family. of Darby at Bosworth-field, who under God was a great means whereby Henry the 7th obtained the Victory over Richard the third, an Usurper, whereby those civil Wars ended, with which this Nation was before almost ruined. Another of his Family for his great Learning and Skill in the Oriental Languages, as Dr. Fuller tells us in his Ecclesiasti∣cal History, was appointed by Commission from King James, to be one of the new Translators of the Bible; a work of great use and benefit to the Church of God. Dr. Daniel Fairclough, alias Featley, was a branch of this Family also, whose works do, and will always praise him in the Gates; But none hath heightened the reputation of this name more than this Gentleman, of whose Life we shall now give some account. He was the youngest Son and the youngest Child (save one) of his Father, all his His Brethren and Sisters. Brethren, who were four, were men of such great Spirits, as that so soon as they at∣tained the Age of 20 or 21 years, they all travelled beyond Sea, and some of them
took Commissions to serve in the Wars of the Low-Countries, where they did very eminent Service, and all of them but one (who returned and dyed a Batchelour of Eighty years old in England) dyed in the Wars, and slept in the Bed of Honour. He had four Sisters, all very gracious Women, and all married to pious Husbands. His good Father having preached a Sermon of Thanksgiving for the coming in His Fathers death. of King James, in the year 1603. caught so great a cold by it, that he dyed the next day, leaving this Son then but nine years old. From a child he was of a most ingenuous and ingenious temper; what the Greeks His Inclinati∣ons when young. call , good nature, or what the Latines call Ingenium, quasi ingenitum, inbred connate worth, was early discerned to be in him, and gave strong hopes of his being a brave person in due time: No man did ever arrive to any excellency, unless nature had first laid a good foundation for Art and Industry afterwards to build upon. There must be some naturales igniculi, some sparks of a generous Life hid and laid up by nature, which are to be blown up by Art; or as Plato expresses them, quaedam semina virtutum, some seeds of virtue, which education must cultivate and well water, or else no great things can be expected from any man. There were many pledges of a great and good mind, discerned in this Child when His Love of Learning, and being put to School. very young; which his Father perceived; but more especially he observed in him a natural bookishness, and a desire to study, and a love to search after knowledge. The Philosopher advises Parents to follow those ; those propensions of their Childrens tempers; and accordingly his Father upon his death-bed laid a particular command on his Mother to breed this Son a Scholar, and advised, that he should be put to School, and educated under one Mr. Robotham, the most famous School∣master of that age. His Master soon found him to be a Lad of very great parts, and moreover, (which is not ordinarily found in Children of quick Wits) he was very sedulous and industrious; By these advantages it came to pass, that before he was four∣teen years of Age he was sent to the Ʋniversity, with this Testimony from his Ma∣ster, That he was the best Scholar that ever went from that School, whereof he had been Master near 30 years. This could not but be a great comfort to his Mother; but there was something of A work of God upon his Conscience, at 13 years of age. another kind, which rejoiced her much more; and it was this, that God was pleased to begin a work of grace in his heart very early and betimes, by awakening his Con∣science by the terrours of the Law, and by bestowing a sincere repentance upon him thereby, and by working an effectual faith in him; and all this done by the mini∣stry of the word preached by Mr. Samuel Ward, then Lecturer of Haverill: Mr. Ward had answered for him in his Baptism, and had always an hearty love to him; who Preaching one Lords day upon Zacheus his conversion▪ and discoursing upon Za∣cheus his four-fold restitution in case of rapine and extortion; he used that frequent expression in that case, to wit, Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum, that is, no man can expect pardon from God of the wrong done to anothers estate, except he makes full restitution to the wronged person, if it may possibly be done: This was as a dart directed by the hand of God to the heart of our young School-boy; who together with one John Trigg (afterwards a famous Physitian in London) had the very week before, robbed the Orchard of one Goodman Jude of that Town, and had filled their Pockets as well as their Bellies, with the spoils of a Mellow-Pear-Tree. At, and after Sermon he mourned much, and took not any sleep all the night fol∣lowing; Restitution offered for unjust taking a few Pears. and early on the Monday morning he went to his companion Trigg, and told him, that he was then going to Goodman Jude's to carry him 12 pence by way of restitution for three penny worth of Pears, of which he had wronged him: Trigg (fearing that if the thing were confessed to Goodman Jude, Jude would acquaint Mr. Robotham their Master therewith; and that corporal correction would follow) did earnestly strive to divert this poor Child from his purpose of restitution; but Fairclough replyed, that God would not pardon the sin except restitution was made; to which Trigg answer'd thus, Thou talkest like a fool Sam, God will forgive us ten times; sooner than old Jude will forgive us once: But our Samuel was of another mind, and there∣fore he goes on to Jude's house, and there told him his errand, and offer'd him a shilling, which Goodman Jude refusing (although he declared the forgiveness of the wrong, yet) the youths wound smarted the more thereby, so that he could get no rest until he went to his spiritual Father Mr. Ward, and had opened to him the whole state of his Soul, both upon the account of this particular sin and many others, and
most especially, the sin of sins, the original sin and depravation of his nature. Mr. Ward received him with great affection and tenderness, and proved the good Sama∣ritan to him, pouring Wine and Oil into his wounds, answering all his questions, satis∣fying his fears, and preached Jesus to him so fully and effectually, that he became a true and sincere Convert, and dedicated and devoted himself to his Saviour and Re∣deemer all the days of his life after. Being designed for Cambridge, he was recommended by a friend of his, one Mr. Allington, unto Mr. Berry a Fellow of Queens-Colledge, to whom he went; and His going to the University having delivered Mr. Allington's Letter, he (with a most humble confidence) begged leave to speak a few words to him; and then informed him that he was the Son of a worthy Divine who dyed five years before, that he had continued at School ever since, and that his elder Brethren had carried away almost all his Fathers Estate with them into the Low-Countreys, so that he had but little to spend, and not any thing to recommend him to a Tutour, but the knowledge he had obtained in the Greek and Latine tongues, and, (which he was willing to promise) further diligence in his Studies, and a chearful observance of the commands of any Gentleman, who would make tryal thereof. He added, that it might seem a great piece of impudence, that a poor boy should thus address himself to so Reverend a person; but it was the report which Mr. Allington had given of his kindness, that made him hope now to find Charity there, where many other persons had experienced so much goodness at all times. Mr. Berry, (who was in truth a very kind and good many was mightily pleased to see a young youth deliver himself so humbly, and yet so freely; he therefore first Mr. Berry per∣mits him to Lodge and Study in his own Chamber. posed him himself in all School Authours, both Latine and Greek, and finding him a perfect Master (almost) of both those Languages, he told him, that if Dr. Tindall, (the then Master of the Colledge) would approve of him, he should then be admit∣ted into the Colledge; and he sent him to the Dr. accordingly; who had no sooner made tryal of him, but did also greatly approve of him. But there was yet a mighty difficulty in the way of his admission: for there was not one Study empty in the whole Colledge, and for want thereof, many Scholars had been rejected that year: But Mr. Berry would not upon this account reject him, but he set up a Bed in his own Chamber for him, and gave him liberty to study there, until another study should be∣come void. Thus was he admitted into Queens Colledge in Cambridge in an extra∣ordinary manner. I cannot say he was admitted Fellow-Commoner, but he was ad∣mitted Chamber-fellow and fellow-Student with his own Tutour. He had not been above two years in the Colledge before Spencer Lord Compton, eldest Son of William Earl of Northampton, was designed for the Ʋniversity, and for Earl of Nor∣thampton wants a Sub-tutour for his Son, and Dr. Tyndall bids him write for the place. that Colledge also. The Earl would needs have his Son to have two Tutours, where∣of one or other might always he with him; Dr. Towers, afterwards Bishop of Peter∣borough, was chosen by the Earl for his head Tutour, and the Earl wrote to Dr. Tyndall to provide a Sub-tutour, who might converse with the young Lord, and take care of him, as often as Dr. Towers was absent. The Master was then at his Deanery of Ely with some Fellows of the Colledge, where he received the Earl's Letter, which he had no sooner done, but he concluded with himself that this Fairclough would be a most fit person for this place; the next day therefore he sent for him to Ely, and told him that he must write immediately a Latine Letter to the Earl, and therein offer his Service to the young Lord, his Son. The task was very difficult for so young a person to undertake, but the imployment was honourable and profitable; the constant Sallery was to be 30 l. per annum, and thereby also a door of preferment was certainly opened for the future, if his genius should lead him either to travel beyond Sea with the young Lord, or if his inclination should prompt him to attend on the old Earl at home, who was a great Favourite at Court. All which, Dr. Tyndall did intimate to him, and then left him to compose such a Letter, whilst himself and the Fellows that were with him, and some of the Chapter, went to din∣ner in another room; where they had not fully dined, before the Letter was sent in finished as a third course. Mr. Preston, afterwards the renowned Dr. Preston, was one of the Fellows then at dinner. The Dean and the whole Company were amazed when they read the Letter, both for the manliness of the sense, the richness of the fancy, the sweetness of the expression, the elegancy of the Latine, and the bravery of the whole Texture, but Mr. Preston discerned especially the seriousness, sobriety, and a seeming Piety that breathed in every line; and from that time he received this
young man (although somewhat his Junior) into intimate Society and Familiarity with himself. The Epistle was sent by the Dr. to the Earl, who having read it, and observed The Earl likes the Epistle, and sends ma∣ny Goods and much money to him; to try his pru∣dence and faithfulness. much of accuracy therein, did rejoice that his Son should converse with, and in many things be guided by such a Scholar, who although but young in age, yet did manifestly appear learned, grave and prudent beyond his years. The next day therefore after the receipt of the Letter, there were many rich Goods and much Fur∣niture sent to this Lad to take care of, and orders were given him further to furnish the Chambers with every thing that should be wanting. There were several Trunks sent also full of rich Cloaths, and much money; the Keys of all which were delivered to him, with notice that the Earl's Son would be at the Colledge about three weeks after. This was done (and mention thereof is here made) because the Earl after∣wards acknowledged, that he did hereby make tryal of the Scholars temper, both as to his faithfulness, and also to his discretion. Democritus observing Protagoras his making up of a Faggot or bundle of sticks, when he was very young, more neatly and with greater skill than ordinary, pronounced of him, that (if he were set to School) he would certainly prove an accurate Scho∣lar and a subtile Philosopher; and Democritus his judgment (though taken but from such an observation) did not fail: Accordingly the Earl coming and finding all things that were sent, taken good care of, and all the money secured, and all things necessary provided, he declared, not only his present satisfaction, but his great confidence, that his Son would be under excellent government, both as to his civil, and also as to all his moral concerns; the Earl therefore putting two Broad-pieces into this Sub-tutours hands, told him that he had made tryal of his prudence and faithfulness in his Stewardship about smaller matters, and now he believed that he might safely trust him in greater concerns, and therefore he would commit the richest Jewel, and the greatest Treasure he had in the world, to the oversight of Dr. Towers and himself: but (in truth) the greatest care of the whole affair lay upon the shoulder of the Sub-tutour, in as much as Dr. Towers was much out of Town; and the Sub-tutour being constantly with him, had the fairest opportunities to forewarn him of evil, and to reprove him for any miscarriage, which he always did do, with that great prudence, deep humility, and apparent affection, that the young Lord loved him as his Brother, and valued his words as an Oracle. About this time did King James first come to Cambridge at the publick Commence∣ment; He is chosen to Act a wo∣mans part in Ignoramus, be∣fore▪ King James, and re∣fuseth to wear Womens Ap∣parel. and being much pleased therewith, he promised to give the Ʋniversity a se∣cond visit within a short time; The Heads therefore resolved to welcome the Kings second coming with a Comedy, namely, with that famous one called Ignoramus, and thereupon the greatest Wits and persons of greatest quality were selected to be Actors therein, among which, the Lord Compton was pitched upon for one, because of his great birth; and his Sub-tutour was designed for another, for his parts and ingenuity; but it so happened, that that part which was to be acted by the Sub-tutour (who was but little and of low stature) was that of Surda, an old Woman, and it required him to be cloathed in Womans Apparel, which, though it were not to be worn to deceive in the worst sense, yet it had an appearance of evil in it (as the young man thought) which by the Apostles rule was to be avoided; he therefore went to the Vice-Chancellour, desiring to be excused from acting that, or any other part; the Vice-Chancellour told him, that he was unwise in his desires, for, by his acting he would become known to the Court, and by acting well he would gain the Kings fa∣vour immediately, and get preferment in a short time. To which the young Scholar replyed, that he judged it unlawful for a man to wear Womens Apparel, even in a Comedy. The Vice-Chancellour at first laughed at him, and argued the point a while with him, but met with some such arguments at last as turned his smile into a frown, so that the contest between the Vice-Chancellour and him had proceeded higher, had not the Lord Compton offer'd, that he would act his own part, (which was that of Vince a page) and his Sub-tutours part also; which request could not be denyed to a person of such honour; whose kindness therein was very great to his friend. Thus did this youth choose to lose the smiles of the Court, and to bear the frowns His right choice. of the Vice-Chancellour, rather than to hazard the loss of the light of Gods counte∣nance, or to endure the least lash of his own Conscience. He well understood the meaning of that saying, Populus me sibilat, At mihi plaudo; for indeed he was al∣ways a Theatre to himself, and although he could not Histrionem agere, act the Co∣median,
or  play the hypocrite, either with God or men, or himself, yet he acted always as one that was resolved to die and go off the Stage of the world with a well done good and faithful Servant spoken to him by the King of Kings, and the great Spectator and observer of all men. However here was occasion given to many Scholars in the University, both to He becomes acquainted with many eminent per∣sons. envy him that he was preferred to the honour of acting, and to admire his self-denial in not embracing the opportunity: but in some of the University it excited a great desire of his acquaintance and of converse with him. Mr. Preston had already brought him into the Company, not only of Mr. Davenant, afterwards Master of that Col∣ledge, and Mr. Hildersham and Mr. Perkins; but now divers others that were emi∣nent for Piety and Learning came often to visit him. Bishop Tower's hereupon fore∣told his being a Non-conformist; but it was not his early converse with some, who af∣terwards did not fully conform (as he hath often declared) that begat Scruples in his mind, but (as he said) it was the reading of the very books writ in defence of the Ceremonies, together with the observation (as he thought) of a different temper and spirit in men on both sides; which made him study the Controversie, and to que∣stion the lawfulness of doing some things that were afterwards required. He could and did submit to the use of the Liturgy, though he made it not matter An account of his Judgment about Liturgy. of his choice. He was of the same opinion which Bishop Taylor afterwards declared himself to be of, in a late Book, One prays conceiving, another reading, (saith he) the one frames words to his mind, which is far more easie; the other frames his mind to his words, which is not so easie, yet both the one and the other prayeth and obtaineth, if they pray with good understanding and godly affections: Dr. Taylors Practice of the faithful, p. 7. Some persons (as he thought) were over zealous for forms, neglecting the power, whilst some others thought that the power of Religion ought to govern all uninstituted forms, as the Soul governs the members of its own body, using or not using them when or how it sees occasion; without constant receiving traverses or shackles from others (as young Colts may do for a time) but no man will enter into a battel so mounted. One particular occasion of more narrow searching into these things, was given by He is imposed upon by a strange pro∣leptical Ordi∣nation. one of the Fellows of Pembroke-Hall, who in those days came frequently to the Lord Comptons Lodgings, and played with him at Tables; and it so happened that a Game was begun when the Master of the Colledge came in and spoiled their sport; but they both parted not without an agreement to meet the next morning; which (unexpected to both) proved to be a Festival. In the morning the Fellow of Pembroke-Hall came and acquainted the Lord Compton, that he, being Incumbent at a Parish (near Cam∣bridge) could not play with his Lordship that day, except he would desire his Sub∣tutour to ride over to his Parish and read the Service for the day. Fairclough was then but Junior-Sophister, and replyed, that he was unordained, to which the In∣cumbent answer'd, that he would immediately ordain him by putting on his own Cap and Canonical Coat upon him, with which last, if he did ride, no doubt it would inspire him for the work (whether this was spoken Proleptically I shall not determine, but it is true, that he that was then but an Incumbent of a poor Vicaridge, became afterward Bishop of a large Diocess) Fairclough in compliance with his Lords request, Rides over, and finds none but the Clark of the Parish and one old Woman assem∣bled in the Church; whereupon (the publick Prayers supposing always a greater number to be present) he chose to pray only ex tempore; which having done, he gave charge and mony too, to his two Auditors to take no notice of what had past. The woman was most true to her trust, and kept silence, but the very next Lords day the Clark told the Incumbent that he had sent a substitute on the Wednesday before, who prayed without book. Hereupon the Incumbent went the next day again to the Lord Compton, and complained of his Sub-tutour for breaking the Orders of the Church. Thereupon Fairclough was called to make his defence, which was such, as the Incumbent seem'd to be non-pluss'd; and the Lord Compton moderating, told the Incumbent that he ought not to be offended with the Sub-tutours breaking of Church Orders, for he had first broken them by sending a person ordained only in Jest. To conclude, this man accounted that the life of all prayer consisted in the devo∣tion that was exercised therein, prayer being nothing else than  the assent of the mind toward God. He did therefore prefer ancienter Liturgies before those that are later, because the more ancient the more short, and most proper for exciting Devotion, such were the ancient sur sum Corda, and their . He did also
greatly admire how it came to pass that in Primitive times, when affections were most warm, the Church should then think imposing of Liturgies to be very inconveni∣ent, and that our less devout ages should now so rigorously enjoin them, but he would answer him self thus; that then Membership of Churches was voluntary, whereas now since that men are compelled to come to the Table, it can be no wonder that they should be forced to eat whatever the Master of the Feast shall carve them. Soon after this, the usual time came, (according to the custom of the University) He neglects his taking the Degree of Batchelour of Art. of this Students taking his first Degree of Batchelour of Art: He performed all his Acts and Disputations in the publick Schools in reference hereunto, with great ap∣plause; and he sate in the Schools to be posed by all or any Master of Arts that would examine him; and his Grace was passed in the house (as the Custom) is; but when the day came that he should actually Commence, and receive his Ensigns of honour, he withdrew from the Ʋniversity and went into the Countrey, and returned no more until Ashwednesday (the day of Commencement) was past; so that he continued a Harry Sophister, (so called) it being five years before he would have his Cap put on, and being asked the reason hereof, his answer was, that he came to Cambridge to study and gain Learning and Knowledge, and not to Commence or take Degrees. By his thus degrading himself, he obtained a mighty liberty, to read what kind of Au∣thors he pleased for a whole year; he being above the method of his Juniors, and being not necessitated to go along with the Graduates, who often engage in such Stu∣dies as they are not fit for. We must therefore look upon this person as an Hetero∣clite, being a pure Moneptote, and invariably engaged in a way by himself, but it was such a way, as did accomplish him in all the Arts and Sciences of Logick, Rhete∣rick; of Ethicks, Physicks and Metaphysicks, far beyond the rate of others. The next year he took his Degree. After which the Earl of Northampton designing to send his Son beyond Sea, wrote He is invited by the Lord Compton to tra∣vel into France and Italy. to this Junior Batchelour, offering him the priviledge of Travelling with his Son into France and Italy, unto which our young Graduate was very much inclined, but his answer to the Earl was, That so far as he had power over himself he did most thankfully accept of the Offer, but he was not his own, he had a Mother yet alive whose content he sought, and preferred it above his own, with whom he would first advise, and then return a speedy answer. His Mother being consulted with, made an answer something like that of Jacob In obedience to his Mother he refuses it. to his, Sons; Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and will ye take Benjamin also? Raphael, saith she, is not, Lawrence is not, (these were the names of her two elder Sons who dyed in the Wars beyond Sea) and will ye take Samuel also? All these things are against me, and will bring my gray hairs with sorrow to the Grave. She was proceed∣ing farther, but he prevented her, falling upon his knees and saying, dear Mother, although my inclinations are strong, and my desires great to travel with my Lord in such Company, and in such an Equipage as I may now do, yet since I know your pleasure, I can assure you, that I feel already far greater satisfaction in denying my own will for yours, than I am sure I can any way find in the Journey, should it answer all my desires and expectations. He therefore the next day went to the Earl's house in Northampton-shire, and begged his Lordships pardon that he could not serve him herein, and acquainted him with the reason which hindered his going; the work whereof (he declared) he valued as great as the wages. Such an opportunity of Travel would have tempted most Children to disobedience; but there was one tempta∣tion greater than all the other that presented it self; for while the Earl and the young Scholar were discoursing, there was one Mr. Herbert in the room, who hearing my Lord call him by the name of Mr. Fairclough, stept to him and asked him, whether he was related to Mr. Hugh Fairclough, Citizen of London; he an∣swered he was, and that his own Grandfather and the Citizen's Father, were Bro∣thers. Hereupon Mr. Herbert catches him in his Arms, and tells him, that if he should now Travel he would have an opportunity of going into Italy, and thereby of coming to such preferment, as that (for his part) he should value it above some thousands of pounds; withall telling him, that Alexander Fairclough the Son of the Citizen, was at that time Secretary to Cardinal Barberino at the Court of Rome, (from whence Mr. Herbert lately came) and that Alexander Fairclough was in such great re∣pute there, as he could raise any man, especially so near a Relation.
But love to God and stedfastness in Religion, were such a byass upon this Scholars He esteems true Religion before prefer∣ment. heart, that he professed to Mr. Herbert, that he was no more moved with this allure∣ment, than an old man would be tempted to exchange a fair Estate for a Childs Rat∣tle. Tbait he acknowledged would be very great to a person that would have been contented to have his portion in this life; but for his part (he declared) he had chosen God for his portion, and should cleave to him as long as he lived. Suddenly after that this invitation was given him to Travel, his old friend Mr. The Presenta∣tion of Halson is offered to him. Allington did procure the Presentation of the Living of Halson in the County of Suffolk from Mr. Muskett the Patron, which Presentation he sent to him; but Mr. Fairclough was not, yet, of age to receive Priests Orders, or to be instituted and in∣ducted into a Living; which being understood by Mr. Grouse a Fellow of the Col∣ledge, he did offer himself to go to Norwich and take the Institution (in his own name) and to allow the whole profit of the Living to this his young Curate, and to restore the Living to him so soon as he should be capable to receive it. At Halson in the very center of Suffolk was that Ministry first entred upon, which His entrance upon the Mi∣nistry. afterward proved so eminently useful to the Church of God. There was soon a greater Congregation gathered together to hear him, than the Church of Halson could hold; all people admiring both his Gifts and Graces at a great rate. But when the two years were expired, and Mr. Grouse had resigned, and Mr. Muskett had offered him the Presentation a second time, Mr. Fairclough was now grown so old, and so wise, as to think himself now not sufficient for these things. For though his Learn∣ing and Parts were beyond his Age, and his Labours were abundantly acceptable to the whole Corner, and almost to the whole Countrey; yet he did think himself not fully prepared and furnished for so great a work as that of taking the care of Souls upon him; he therefore resolved to retire from a stated publick Ministry again, and to betake himself to his private Studies for a year or two longer, desiring to enter in∣to the Family of some eminent noted Minister, where he might, go thorough again and compleat, a whole Cursus Theologicus, a whole course of Divinity-Studies, and by converse with some experienced Minister, he might gain a more full knowledge of the nature of his work, and attain unto greater measures and degrees of Grace in his own heart. Having therefore first consulted with his spiritual Father Mr. Ward, (who was yet He retires to the house of Mr. Richard Blackerby in Essex. living) he was by him recommended to the house of Mr. Richard Blackerby of Ashen in Essex, a man justly reputed one of the holiest men on earth, and accounted the greatest Scholar in that County, especially for his accurate skill in the Hebrew tongue, the knowledge whereof was far more rare in that age than it hath been of late, and in which Language our young Divine thought himself something deficient, and now he resolved to perfect himself therein; which he soon did; but not yet content∣ing himself therewith, he sought greatly to accomplish himself in all other pieces of humane literature; in which his delight and industry was such, that having a me∣mory proportionable to his design; it might have been truly said of him what Phocius said of Justin Martyr, , he became very Learned and highly knowing. He had undoubtedly consumed his whole Life and buried himself in History and Antiquity, and in the knowledge of all humane Arts and Sciences, if God had not touched his Conscience by that Text of Scripture, viz. The world by wisdom knew not God, which he one morning reading and meditating upon, became thereby convinced that he might possibly spend too much time in gratifying his own natural inclinations; his Conscience also told him that he was not born for himself, but for publick use and service. Hereupon he turned the stream of his Studies mostly into the Channel of Divinity. He changes the course of his Studies. The grace of God now so far prevailed upon him, that he was taught to judge of things aright. It is true, he valued humane Learning above all humane things, and did both covet and attain to a greater measure than most men usually do; but he was so happy as to know, that as the concerns of Eternity are greater than those of time, so the knowledge of things Spiritually and Eternal highly transcends the knowledge of things temporal and meerly humane. He was blessed in Learning that Lesson be-times, that many great Scholars learn too late, to wit, that the highest wisdom is to be wise to salvation, and the profoundest Learning is to learn the truth as it is in Christ Jesus. It is reported of that great Hugo Grotius (rightly reputed the most Learned person of his age) that he ended his life with this saying, Ah! vitam perdidi operose, nihil agendo, I have lost my life by being busie about trifles; by which trifles he un∣derstood
his less profitable Learning, such as diversity of Languages, Philology and meer critical notions. And he openly professed when dying, that he would gladly exchange all his Learning for the plain honesty of a poor man, one John Euri (whom he named) who was (though unlearned) yet a very devout and holy man. And the like also is said of the Learned Salmatius, that he left this world, professing openly, That he had lost his most precious time in studying unnecessary things, and declared that how long or how short soever he should live, he would spend all his remaining days in read∣ing and studying the Sciptures, especially of David's Psalms and Paul's Epistles; for, said he, all the Learning in the world without Piety and the true fear of God, is nothing worth. Our young Divine was happy in that he foresaw, that although humane Learn∣ing Humane Learning a Hand-maid to Divinity. is a good hand-maid to Divinity, yet it ought not to be taken into any mans bosom but only as Hagar was into Abrahams, reserving the choicest of our affections for Divinity as he did his, for Sarah. He afterwards always allotted four days in the Week for the Study of Divinity, He allots four days for Divi∣nity, two for other Learn∣ing. and but two for the studying humane Learning, and although he had left his stated Preaching (at any one particular place) yet he preached constantly every Lords-day in one place or another; and providence so ordered it, that he was sent for, far and near, and especially by Ministers and Congregations of Market-Towns, and those in divers Counties. In Essex he was invited often to Preach at Colchester, Braintree, Walden and Thacksted. In Suffolk he preached often at Hadleigh, Sudbury and Clare, in all which places his name and memory is precious to this day, and will be so as long as any of his Auditors shall be found alive, for in all places God gave him many Seals of his Ministry. In the year 1619. the Mayor of Lynn in Norfolk, and nine of the Aldermen of He is called to be Lecturer at Lynn Regis. that Town; having heard much of his worth, sent him a Letter by one Mr. Matthew Clark, subscribed with all their names, intneating him that he would come and be their Lecturer. He so far complyed with their desires as to go to Lynn and preached amongst them, who then offered him 50 l. per annum, and a fair dwelling house at the charge of the Corporation, if he would come unto them. The people also Petiti∣oned him to come thither, and promised to make his Sallery up an 100 l. per annum, if he would accept; but he desired some time to consider, before he would give his answer. And the reason of his desire was this, to wit, a little before his going to Lynn, the Town of Clare had invited him to be a Lecturer with them, and although the Revenue of Clare was not above a quarter so much as what was promised to him at Lynn, yet Clare was near Mr. Blackerby's House, whose Society he highly prized. Returning therefore to Mr. Blackerby, and advising with him, and with divers other friends, they all perswaded him to go to Lynn, which was a great Town, and thereby his opportunities of doing God Service would be far more and greater than at Clare. Hereupon he went to Lynn, and continued there some time. But it happened to him there, as it did to the Apostle, to wit, to be greatly envied He is envied and opposed there, and re∣turns to Clare. by some other Ministers of that Town, whose people flocked to hear this new Lectu∣rer; and moreover he was openly opposed by the generality of the Inn-keepers, Ale-house-keepers and Vintners, whose Trade became lesser; Drunkenness and De∣bauchery being restrained by the power of the Word, which the power of the Sword solely and alone had not effected. But above all, Dr. Harsnett began to be angry, he being informed that he had baptized Children without the sign of the Cross, upon which he was cited to the Bishops Court, where, although one Mr. Hare (an intimate Friend of the Bishops) told the Chancellour that he had himself lived many years formerly in Lynn, and had observed that the sign of the Cross had been very rarely used by any of their Ministers, and that he never knew any of them to be troubled by the Court for their omission thereof; and therefore he hoped that Mr. Fairclough should find the same favour as others had done; to whom the Chancellour replyed, that, what he said might be true, to wit, that former Ministers had been winked at, but Mr. Fairclough was grown to be a popular man, and therefore he must be nipt in the bud. Mr. Fairclough thereby perceiving that his enemies would soon make Lynn too hot for him, went to the Mayor and Aldermen of the Town, and beseeched them to provide themselves of another Lecturer; at which they were greatly trou∣bled; but Mr. Fairclough acquainting them with what had passed at the Bishops Court, and recommending to them a very Learned and godly man to succeed in his place,
one Mr. Ikon Fellow of Cajus Colledge in Cambridge, he obtained leave to return to his smaller Lecture at Clare. And now being resolved to sit down in this place, he considered about altering his condition, and of entring into a married state. At his first coming into Mr. Blackerby's Family, he had observed not only a great He marrieth Mr. Blackerby's eldest Daugh∣ter. Beauty, but a wonderful modesty in his eldest Daughter, and having lived for some years with her, he had discerned, that as she was of an excellent temper and sweet conversation, so she was also truly gracious and sincerely pious; he therefore having spent much time in prayer unto God for direction herein, resolved first to address himself to her Father, and then to her self; which he did do, and obtained both their consents; and they were a most happy couple, every way sutable to each other, and rejoicing in each others love. In the mean time the word of God at Clare ran and was glorified by his excellent Mi∣nistry, Sir Nat. Bar∣nardiston hear∣eth him at Clare, and of∣fers the Pre∣sentation of the Living of Barnardiston. upon which all sorts of persons (rich and poor) did attend; and amongst those of greatest quality was that renowned Knight, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston, a man famous for his Piety and Integrity, who frequented Clare Lecture with great constancy and abundant satisfaction. He was a man of a great Estate, and Patron to divers Livings; some of great Revenue; and some of smaller. The smallest of them all becoming void by the death o Mr. Mayes, the Patron immediately pur∣posed within himself to gain Mr. Fairclough (if possible) to be the Incumbent of that Parish, called Barnardiston, after the name of its Lord and Patron. Many per∣sons became Petitioners to the Patron for it, either upon their own account, or the account of their Friends, amongst which was one Mr. Weld, who afterwards went into New England; but Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston would think of no person but the Lecturer of Clare, and his grand reason was, because he was resolved to be himself his constant Auditor, once every Lords-day, that Parish Church being but little above half a mile from his own house at Ketton, where Dr. Gibson was then Incumbent, a man of good Learning, and a fine Oratour (presented by Sir Nathaniel's Grandfather) but his Preaching wanted something of weight (when compared with Mr. Fair∣clough's, if Sir Nathaniel did hold the Scales) who was pleased to say, that the teaching of the one was strong meat, for men, and the Doctrine of the other was only milk for babes. It seems the Patron was a grown Christian; and if that be true which Elihu saith, Job 34. 3. That the ear tryeth words, as the Pallate tasteth meat, it was no wonder that (when the Patron had liberty to carve for himself) he should seed on the best dish that was fairly within his reach. Hereupon the Presentation was sent to Mr. Fairclough; and because the Revenue was but small, the Patron sent a Letter with it, wherein he promised that whenever any of his greater Livings should become void, he should injoy the greater, than, if he would accept the smaller, now. But nei∣ther did the present offer, nor the promise for the future, so affect Mr. Fairclough, but that he sent back the Presentation; acquainting the Patron, that he understood that some other persons had moved in the behalf of one Mr. Weld, with whom he did heartily join in their Petition, himself having present imployment at Clare, whereas Mr. Weld was wholly destitute. Sir Nathaniel was much pleased with the kindness of Mr. Fairclough to his Friend, but was troubled at this answer; he there∣fore sent his Servant the same day back a second time to acquaint him, That he did not only offer the Presentation, but earnestly request his acceptance thereof; because that God had blessed his Labours already much to his own, and to his Ladies heart; and therefore it was their joint desires that he would come to be their Neighbour Mi∣nister, whereby they might once at least every Lords day hear him, without giving offence to Dr. Gibson, whom they would constantly hear in the Forenoon, if the Dr. did Preach. Importunity from such a person (in such a case) could not be long denied, and He accepteth Mr. Fairolough, who had spent some years in doing the work of an Evangelist, be∣gan at length greatly to doubt, whether he had done well, in not taking upon him some Pastoral charge, many places having been before offered to him. He therefore now (in some short time) removed and came to the Town of Barnardiston, where he constantly Preached twice every Lords day, and always Preached every Festival day (when the people could always best attend) and also once, every moneth, he Preached a preparation Sermon for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Here he also set up the great duty of Catechising of young and old; which duty he practised (as opportunity allowed) to his Lives end. Neither did he content himself with pub∣lick
Preaching alone, but he went to all the Houses in Barnardiston (they not being He visiteth every Family in the Town once in the month. many) once every moneth, and discoursed there with his People about the State of their Souls, and gave them assistance, and counsel and direction according to their present case and condition. He did compare publick Preaching to sowing of Seed, and private discourse he com∣pared to the Plow-mans harrowing, healing or covering the Seed, without which, the Fowls of the Air, that is, a multitude of diverting thoughts, and the Prince of the Air also, the Devil, (by his temptations) would soon pick up the word, without fruit or benefit. At another time he compared publick Preaching to that Rain, that falls upon many narrow mouthed bottles, the greatest part whereof falls besides the mouths of the Vessels, so that they were rarely filled; but private instruction and admonition, he would say, was like a mans taking a single Bottle into his hand, and pouring in water into it with a Funnel, whereby it was soon filled. Whilst he was Minister here (which was not above five years) he was desired not only by the People, but by the Minister also of one of the Parish Churches of Sud∣bury, He is conve∣ned by the High Commis∣sion Court for repeating a Sermon where he Lodged in Sudbury. that he woudl supply the place of the Minister, who was then sick, one Lords day; which was granted: and he Lodging at one Mr. Ruggle's house in that Town, he did in the Sabbath Evening repeat both his Sermons in that Family, where were present divers other persons of the Town also. Hereupon one of the other Ministers of the Town (whose Congregation had been but small that After∣noon) being displeased thereat, did draw up certain Articles against this innocent person, as against a factious seditious man; and exhibited them in the Star-Chamber, grounding his accusation barely upon this repetition of his Sermons in the Family where he Lodged: Hereupon he was convened before the Lords of the high Commis∣sion; where although he made a Legal, clear and full defence, yet that Court being Arbitrary, he could not obtain a dismission; till after two years attendance; the charge of his Journeys, and the Fees of Proctors, Advocates and Councel did swallow up (those two years) the whole profit of his little living; and he had continued longer in trouble if Sir Nathaniel Brent (his chief Councel and Advocate) had not at last humbly petitioned the Court in the name of his Client, that the business might be referred to the Petitioners Diocesan and Ordinary at Norwich; which being granted, a good number of Jacobusses procured a certain Lady in Norwich to gain such a Certifi∣cate from the Bishop, as obtained a full discharge. But that forementioned attendance upon the Court, and the gaining this discharge The Devils temptation conquered. from his Ordinary in this manner, viz. without any personal attendance upon the Bishop; did bring him very much into Debt; he had also four Children then born, and he looked for more. The Devil did now therefore hope to insnare him by his temptations; and he was very busie with his suggestions, prompting him to fear, lest that his Common should be over-stockt, and that he might continue long in Debt, which was a thing very burthensome and afflictive to him, as it is always to an ingenuous Spirit: but God was pleased to increase his Faith in proportion to the occasions that were given him for the trial thereof; and he hath recorded it, as an act of special grace towards him, that at that very time when he was most concerned (about his new contracted Debt) there was a strange impression made upon his mind, by that Text of Scripture, the 2 Cor. 6. 10. wherein the Apostle saith of himself, that he was, as poor, yet making many rich, as having nothing, yet possessing all things. Upon which words, this person did thus paraphrase in his own thoughts; if Spirituals be better than temporals, what need I then be afflicted at worldly want? for since God hath given me a Treasure of spiritual comfort in himself, with which I have (through Grace) enriched many others; there is yet undoubtedly enough left for my self to live on all my days, and abundance moreover yet to spare. While he thus mused the fire burnt hotter and hotter within him, so that he was forced to give himself vent in several Sermons upon this very Text; and in the handling thereof he so stu∣died the excellency of the Life of Faith in the want of Creature supplies, that the Devil was not only vanquished in his present assault, but was also subdued so; that he never dared to tempt him in this kind after to his dying day. And this account we have from his own Diary, which he kept constantly, from His Diary was begun at 20 years old. his age of twenty years, and (daily almost) wrote down in it a full History of all God's dealing with him, and of the daily frame of his own heart, and of Satans temptations (and of the assistances of Gods Spirit in them) and his victory over them. A great part of his Diary is penned in the Greek tongue, but the greatest part of it is
writ in elegant Latine, all which had deserved to have been intively Printed, had not some part thereof been lost in the many frequent removals of his Notes and Papers; yet what doth now next follow relating to his removal from Barnardiston to Ketton, is taken wholly from his own hand; and it was thus: Dr. Gibson (who was Incumbent of the Rectory of Ketton) had some Friends at His removal to Ketton. Court, who gave him some hopes, that in case he would come up to London, and Petition to the then Lord Keeper for a Prebendaries place, then void in Norwich, he might (by their mediation) probably obtain it. Up went the Dr. hereupon, but it pleased God to afflict him so soon as he came to the City, with a severe sickness, whereof he dyed. News hereof was presently sent down to the Patron, Sir Natha∣niel Barnardiston; and it was soon spread abroad in the Countrey. The Patron would have sent the Presentation of the Living immediately to Mr. Fairclough, but his Lady advised him to defer it a while, that so an opportunity might be given of Peti∣tioning, and a trial might be made, whether Mr. Fairclough would re-mind his Pa∣tron of the Promise which was made at his coming to Barnardiston, yea or no; the Patron therefore delayed till after he heard of the Doctors Interment, but no Peti∣tion came; and the Patron knew Mr. Fairclough too well really to expect any from him; he therefore after a while, sent his eldest Son (who was then but young) with a Servant, and with a Presentation of this Living unto Mr. Fairclough; who retur∣ned a very thankful Letter by the same hand, acknowledging his great obligations to the Patron for his respect and kindness to him, but withall told him, That he stood so engaged now to his present People, that without their consents he could not leave them. Hereupon his Patron did the same Week summon all the People of Barnardiston, (most of whom were his Tenants) to his House, and told them, that as in love to their Souls he had formerly presented this Minister to them, so in love now to the Souls of the People of Ketton, he was resolved to bring him to Ketton; but he still would take care that a godly and learned Minister should succeed, one that might watch over their Souls, naming Mr. Westley, the then Lecturer of Haverill. He farther added, that for divers years himself and his Family, had come from Ketton to Barnardiston once every Lords day, having built Pewes on purpose there; and if they did now value Mr. Fairclough's Ministry as he had always done, they might come once a day to Ketton. The nearness of the Parishes one from the other, the Authority of the Landlord, and his consciencious care in providing a good Suc∣cessour for them, produced a silence in them, and a half consent, which was interpreted by the Patron to be sufficient, because at Mr. Fairclough's first go∣ing to Barnardiston, the People had notice that he was placed there but for a time. One thing more must here be inserted, to wit, that the institution of him into His Institution granted with∣out going to Norwich. the Rectory of Ketton, was procured by the Patron from the Bishop of the Diocess, as the Institution into Barnardiston had been before, namely, without the Incumbent's taking the Oath of Canonical Obedience, or his subscription to the three Articles. How this was effected, we shall not here inquire; but it was done both times without the Incumbents personal attendance upon the Bishop. And thus now was he settled in Ketton in the Country of Suffolk, to the great joy and comfort of all persons, both in Town and Countrey; the Parish Church of Ketton being very capacious and re∣ceptive, whereas the former Church of Barnardiston was very small and strait. Mul∣titudes now therefore througed to be his Auditors, and were so to their unspeakable advantage and delight. He was about Five and thirty years of age when he came to Ketton, and he continued near five and thirty years there; all which time (saving a little Interval by reason of sickness) he constantly preached four times a Week (be∣sides his daily Expositions in his Family) to wit, twice every Lords day, once every Thursday (a publick Lecture) and once every Saturday night (in his own house) in preparation for the Sabbath. The frequency of his Preaching hindered not the ela∣borateness of his Discourses. He never Preached any thing which he had not first duly considered and penned down, and writ with great deliberation. It is true, he never used any Notes in the Pulpit, but he never Preached without them. He had amost stupendious memory. St. Austin I remember, reckons the faculty of mans His amazing memory. memory to be one of the Worlds wonders; memory being a power able to treasure up in it self a multitude of Pictures and Images of things which it hath seen, and being able to lay up conceived Forms and Images of things which it never saw, and to make such lasting impressions of them upon the brain; so as that long after it is able
(upon occasion) to call every of them forth from their dark hidden Abyss, and to rank them in their due order and place them in the light. This, to that Father, was very amazing, and in some instances indeed it is very wonderful and miraculous; and such was the power of memory which was found in this person. He seldom used any Concordance; for there was not a passage of the whole Scripture almost, that could be mentioned to him, but he would tell you not only the Chapter and Verse, but the place of the page where it was Printed in the Bibles of Barkers Edition, (of which only, he made use of near fifty years together) reading over the Bible four times in a year at the least; so that it might be said of him, that he was a walking Bible, both as to the Letter and Spirit. Indeed he was furnished with all rare intellectual parts, he had a quick invention, a lofty fancy, a solid judgment, which easily and readily weighed the nature of all His great parts. things, and constantly cast the ballance on the side of truth; he could dive into the bottom of the most abstruse matters, and fetch truth from thence; and having dis∣covered it, he did always cloath his apprehensions of things, with the most clear and most full and proper expressions, which they were capable of. His Thursday Lectures (the Licence whereof was purchased at a great rate) were all His Thursday Lectures were Conciones ad Clerum. Conciones ad Clerum, and those Discourses deserved to be so called, both for the accuracy of them, and also because they were actually Preached to so great a number of the Clergy; all the Ministers (for many miles compass) coming constantly to hear them; and there were frequently not less than ten or twenty Scholars (both Fellows of Colledges and others) from Cambridge. Indeed he was a man much acquainted with God, and with his mind and will. It might be said of him, that he had the mind of Christ, and had also the tongue of the Learned, and was able to oppress himself with the greatest  imaginable. He was a most profound Divine, and one of the best and clearest Expositors of An excellent Expositor of Scripture. holy Writ, which that age produced. It was an expression used concerning him by a great Scholar, sometimes Fellow of Magdalen Colledge, who was seldom absent from any of these Lectures, that though he would not say of him what Cicero saith of Plato, That if Jupiter were to discourse, he would do it in Plato's Language; yet he would venture to say, That if Angels were to Preach, they would do it in Mr. Fairclough's Stile. More especially he said, he loved him for his gift in opening the Scriptures, which he did so clearly, and so fully, that whatever Text he did under∣take to Expound, he did so extract the whole meaning of the Holy Ghost from it, as that he left never a drop of Spirit behind, which would either naturally flow, or could tolerably be squeezed thence. He had a most metaphysical head, and a very searching mind after truth, greatly His reason of not Printing divers excel∣lent discourses delighting himself in studying the nature of incorporeal beings; but above all, in contemplating the Divine Attributes and Essence. He was very much read in all Authors that did treat of such Subjects as these; and in his private Studies, he did compose and write divers excellent and elaborate Discourses about the Soul of Man, the light of nature, the freedom of the Will, together with a learned discourse about the Decrees of God; which he was very much importuned to have Printed; but he could never be perswaded thereto, giving this reason of his denial, to wit, That formerly, the Civil Wars, and of late, the great Impositions upon mens Judg∣ments and Consciences (about some things which were judged unlawful, and many things doubtful and disputable) had drawn too many (even of the Learned part of the world) into factions and parties, and had bred such animosities between them, that few Books could meet with impartial Readers. In his Lords-days exercises, which were ad populum, to a plain Countrrey People He studied to be understood by the plain∣est. of his own and Neighbour Parishes; he very rarely Preached about any contro∣verted point, and did never stuff his Sermons with nice speculations and intricate disputes. He loved not to meddle in his popular Sermons, with those points that lie out of common reach, and were apt to perplex honest minds. He industriously studied plainness, therein following both the pattern and example of his old acquain∣tance the Reverend Archbishop Ʋsher, and the special Counsel and Advice of his old friend Dr. Preston, who discoursing with him at his first entry upon the Ministry, told him, That although the Ancients did place the Statutes of Venus and Mercury in the Temple of Apollo; thereby intimating, that no man could be a perswasive Oratour, who did not join elegancy of fancy with strength of reason; yet it was Dr. Preston's judgment, That that man was the best Preacher, vvho delivered Gospel
truths in the plainest Scriptural expressions; and such a Preacher was this Reverend Divine afterwards all his days. His great design in his Ministry, was first to awaken the Consciences of obstinate That their Consciences might be a∣wakened. sinners; and then to make known to them the way of salvation. He understood his business and errand very well, and accordingly he endeavoured to approve him∣self faithful in the delivery thereof. He clearly saw that Souls were eternally lost, if they were not convinced of their sinful state by Nature, and were not renewed in the Spirit of their minds through Grace; whatever therefore he judged most pro∣perly conducing thereunto, he made use thereof, always chusing and insisting upon such subjects as were most concerning, and of greatest import; which he handled in the most convincing manner, and delivered himself with so much clearness, that although his Stile and Language was far remote from common talk or vulgar mean∣ness, yet he would be sure to strive to accommodate his expressions to the capacity of his Hearers, and would stoop to the weakest and lowest form of them. His great aim was to instruct the ignorant, which he found a very hard work to do. He sought not to shew his own parts, or to make himself admired, for that he found was a thing hardly to be avoided. He always esteemed it better to serve God in all things, than to serve himself in any thing. He knew that soft and inticing words of mans Wisdom would not save Souls; balking therefore all ceremonial Complements, he would make bold to pull and snatch (as it were) sinners, as brands out of the Fire, by any ways or means he could think of. He was one of those Puritan Preachers, whom Prince Henry loved to hear, because (said he) such Preach∣ing goes next the heart. Dr. Lloid, Dying mens words, p. 139. He always proved whatever he delivered, with the greatest rational evidence and He demonstra∣teth every thing by soundest Rea∣son and Scrip∣tural Argu∣ments. Scriptural argument; and his Doctrine being thus strenuously inforced, came from him with great authority, and did strike a very great awe into the hearts of his Hearers. None could be his Auditor, but that he must needs perceive that he was sent of God, and that it was no other than a message from Heaven that was delivered to them by him, which did greatly awaken the drowsie hearts of some, and restrained the Spirits of others, who were hasting unto ruine; and influenced all men (almost) one way or other: Such as were godly were greatly edified and built up in their holy Faith. To humble and tender, and broken hearts, he was a very Barnabas, a Son of consolation. He had a rare faculty in prescribing to the ease and cure of wounded Spirits. He knew how skilfully to search the wound, and to pour either Wine or Oil in accordingly; and to apply the most Soveraign balm in its most proper time and place. He had experience of the things he spake, and those Lessons that come from experience usu∣ally make great impressions upon others. He doth write most effectually who doth , dip his Pen in his own Soul. Hence many that came to him drooping and full of fears, went away from him comforted, established, and filled with all joy through believing. It is said of Pericles, that he ruled all Greece by the power of his Oratory; the like might be said of this great man, that he did even govern the minds of his Auditors as he pleased. He was able at all times to find out and set in order, both such acceptable words, and such cogent reasons and motives as did command a regard, and force a complyance; so that he was as another St. Austin, and did dominari in concionibus; acting the part of a Prince or Soveraign, speaking as one having authority (under his Master) and not as the Scribes. In a word he dispenced the truth of God as one acted by a mighty Faith, having He preached from his own head and heart, to both head and hearts of his Hearers. both a real inward sense of what he delivered, and so great a desire of his peoples Salvation, as that he seemed to be resolved to take no denial from them. He was wont to say, That when the heart of a Minister is truly inflamed with love to his peoples happiness, it is then impossible but that their expressions and exhortations should be very lively and warm, whereas the coldness and flatness of some mens discourses, is such as their words seem (as it were) to Freez between their lips, and do evidence how dead (or luke-warm at best) their inward affections are to the things of God. Not that h thought (as some have done) that the life of Preaching doth consist in noise, clamour or vocifecation, no, he knew that such bodily exercise profiteth little, except it be to keep men awake. The strength of his Discourses consisted in the clear∣ness and strength of his arguments, drawn form those affecting topicks; kindness to our selves, desire of our own good, true valuation of our better part, the import of our eternal state, the love, mercy, grace and goodness of God, revealed in the Gospel by his Son, the pleasantness as well as the profitableness of the ways of Wisdom, together
with the comfort as well as necessity of an holy life here in order to a blessed state hereafter. These are things which do properly influence the mind of man, and are apt to perswade; and with these were his Sermons greatly filled and im∣pregnated. And by the operation of the Divine Spirit they became very effectual, multitudes His great suc∣cess in con∣verting sinners from the error of their ways. being wrought upon, and turned from the errour of their ways. Few Ministers had such cause of rejoycing as he had, upon this account; so that (since the Apostles days) there was scarce any person more visibly instrumental in saving Souls than he. It might be said of him, that in his fishing for Souls, he went not forth with a single Angling Rod, to take here and there one (which is all the success of Ministers of late days) but he made use of a Net, (as the Apostles did) whereby he caught multi∣tudes at once, great numbers being added, not only to the visible, but also to the invisible Church of God by his Labours. He left in his Diary the names of some hundreds recorded there, who had all expresly owned him to be their Spiritual Fa∣ther, and the proper means of their first conversion, and of their future Salvation as they hoped; and in that Catalogue mention is made of some persons who declared to him, that the first work of Gods Spirit which they discerned in themselves, was at such times as they were joining with him in his Prayer before Sermon; wherein he being the mouth of the Congregation, he confessed such sins as he supposed some (at least) of his Congregation might be guilty of; and it seems the Spirit ordered his con∣fession to be such, as reached the case of divers that were present. With his confes∣sion was joined (as his usual manner was) such aggravations of the hainousness of those sins, as thereby a prick was given to the hearts of the guilty, so as some could not but follow him home, using the same words of the Converts in the Acts, Sir, What shall I do to be saved? God indeed had given him a mighty gift in prayer, and God did bless the use of Great Re∣formation wrought in the whole Town. both Prayer and Preaching to the great benefit of his People. The Town, when he came first to it, was very ignorant and prophane; being generally Aliens and Stran∣gers from the Common-wealth of Israel, and living without God in the world; there was not one Family in twenty who did then call upon the name of the Lord, or had the Worship of God set up in it; but in a short time after his coming, he had so preach∣ed to them, and so prayed with them and for them, as there was not one Family in twenty but professed godliness, and the Governours thereof did daily offer up their morning and their evening sacrifice constantly. Upon himself God had poured out an abundant measure of the Spirit of Grace and God poured upon him an extraordinary measure of the Spirit of grace and supplica∣tion. Supplication. Whatever either gifts or graces were requisite to make that Ordinance of prayer acceptable to, or prevalent with God, were communicated to him in an extraordinary manner. He always poured forth his very Heart and Soul before God with a great Faith; and from thence flowed a great freedom of expression, but al∣ways joined with the greatest reverence and deepest humility and prostration of Soul. It was very affecting to discern Gifts and Graces thus in conjunction. He well knew how to sute his expressions properly to every particular occasion, whether he petitioned for any special mercy to be obtained, or did deprecate the removal or amotion of any evil felt or feared; all which he performed, though with great fervour and zeal, yet with such intire resignation and submission to the divine will, as that, in all things it was manifested, that love to God and his Glory, were the great wheels and inward principles, that gave life and breath to all his desires. He had a tender heart, and in a day of Humiliation he discovered such brokenness and contrition of Spirit as did soon melt the hearts of others; and on such days his Church was commonly a Bochim; so that all that joined with him wished, and many found with Jeremiah, That their heads were rivers, and their eyes fountains of tears, they seemed so universally to lament after the Lord. Every Lords day (especially in his last prayer of his Afternoon Sermon) he was very large in the thanksgiving part of that Ordinance; which he performed as if he had been one of the heavenly Quire. At this new Service he seemed to recover new life and strength, and oh! how great were the raptures! how lofty were the strains! how wonderful were the inlargements of Soul which he experienced in the performance of that Angelical work of praise! He never for∣gat Zion, but begged as often, and more earnestly, that Gods Name might be hallow∣ed, and that the Kingdom of his Son might come, than ever he did for his own daily bread.
He prayed much for others, and desired the like from them; which that he might His stated times of pray∣er for his Friends. obtain, he appointed stated times, when he and his Friends engaged to each other to meet together at the Throne of Grace; which ingagement (on his part) was strictly performed. A Visitant once coming to him, and the question being asked, whether he had kept the promise of mutual prayer, the person blushed; and confes∣sed, that some omission had happened on his part; to which this holy man replyed, Well, but I have been true to my word; and could either this Table, or this Chair (near which I have prayed) speak, they might witness for me, that for seven years together; I have made mention of your name before God in prayer, (between four and five of the Clock every Saturday in the Afternoon) unless hindered by extraor∣dinary occasions. As he was a man much with God in prayer, so he was one whose prayers God Return of Prayers. did often (and sometimes very signally) answer. We must not transcribe the ma∣ny miraculous instances of that return of prayer which he hath recorded; but we should be greatly wanting and deficient in our present work, if we did not make mention of some instances upon that account. His wife, about a year after his marriage (being great with Child) became very His wife sa∣ved from Drowning. sickly, and continued very infirm, till within a fortnight of her time. He had all along wrestled with God very much upon her behalf, and had spent much time in prayer with her; but now he was resolved to spend a day in Fasting and Prayer, alone by himself, upon her account; and his Wife did see apart the same day for prayer by herself in another room: In the duty he did again and again mightily implore the grace and mercy of God for her, and earnestly begged of God to appear in her behalf, that she might obtain mercy, and sind help at the time of her need. In the Evening and close of the day, while he was the seventh time upon his knees, he heard a mighty shriek abroad, (but not far from the house) which he guessed to be the voice of his wife, and so it was; for his Wife having spent also most part of the day in prayer, did in the Evening, walk abroad, meditating upon the promises of God, made to persons in her case and condition; and contemplating of the infinite power of God, whereby he was able to make good his promise in the greatest difficulties and distresses. Her mind was deeply ingaged herein; whilst going by the side of a Pond in an adjoin∣ing Field, her feet slipped so, as she fell over head and ears into the water; but she shricked in her fall, which her husband hearing, and coming down hastily, missed her within doors, and therefore ran so hastily to the Pond, that although she had sunk twice, yet he caught her by the hand before she sunk the third time, and there∣by saved her life. This happened in the moneth of October, when the Water was exceeding cold; but it pleased God so to hear Prayer, that neither her fall caused Abortion, nor the Cold produced any evil affect, but that (in due time) her eldest Son was born, to their great comfort and joy. And yet a more memorable instance of the answer of prayer, is that which follows His youngest Son falls out of an high Garret window, with∣out any hurt. concerning his youngest Son; for whom, upon a Saturday, about four of the Clock in the Afternoon (which was one of his stated times of Prayer for his Friends and Relations) his heart was much inlarged in prayer (being then walking in the Fields, and pouring out of his Soul for all his Relations) but especially for that little one, who was his youngest, and then about two years old. This Child (at that hour) a Servant had taken up with her into the highest Garret of the house, and set him by the window of the Room, while she swept it, and so carelesly neglected to have her Eye upon the little one, as that the Child (looking out of the window upon a company of young Ducks, which were swimming in a Vessel of water right under the Casement) thrust its body so far out, as it fell down, and pitched first upon the Eaves of the next Floor, with that force, that it brake above a dozen Tiles off from the place, and with them fell down to the ground; but not into the Vessel of water, which stood perpendicular to the Window, but exactly between that Vessel and a large door which lay very near it, and upon which the meat for those Ducks was laid. Had it fallen a quarter of a yard on either hand, its Brains had been dashed out, either by the Door or Vessel; but God, by the ministration of his An∣gels, so ordered it, that although the heigth of the place caused a dizziness, and a swoon for a few moments; yet the Child was no sooner taken up, but immediately it came to life again, and there was not the least bruise or hurt inward or outward, no not the least razing of the very Skin by any of the Tiles that fell with it; but with∣in one quarter of an hour, it went up and down the House, as it had formerly
done. Plutarch reports of one Clusia, Daughter of the Duke of Tuscany, who throw∣ing her self out of an high Window to maintain her Honour, and to avoid a Rape; the length of her Garments gather'd so much wind into them, as did greatly bear her up, and saved her life. Plut. cap. 28. Paral. But the length of this Childs Garments could not be any second cause of its preservation; for its Coats were tucked up shorter than his body; he being a Footman but of a few Weeks standing. Our good Father looked higher than to any natural causes, of his Childs pre∣servation; His sense of mercy. for when he was returned from his walk (which was near half an hour after the fall) at which hour he had prayed so earnestly to God for this Child) being told the Story of the Fall, and having observed the heighth of the Window, the broken Tiles, the posture of the Vessel and Door, and the place where the Child was taken up safe; he presently called all his Family, and many of his Neighbours to∣gether, to join with him in giving God most solemn praise for his miraculous good∣ness, and for that wonderful return of prayer (made at that instant) for that little one. The next day (being the Lords day) he Preached two Thanksgiving Sermons in His Thanksgi∣ving Sermon, and Thank-offering and Vow. publick, upon that Text, Psal. 91. 11, 12. He will give his Angels charge concerning thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear thee up in their hands, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone. And in the close of the Evening Sermon of that day, he made and published this solemn Vow unto God, in these very words following. Brethren, after due consideration of the reasonableness, usefulness and possibility, as well as lawfulness, of making Vows in some cases, and of devoting part of a mans Estate un∣to God (in a way of thankfulness) for mercy received; and after an humble acknowledg∣ment of my own weakness and unworthiness; I having invocated the Grace of God both for strength to inable me to perform this, and all other my Vows, and for Divine favour in ac∣cepting me and it, through the Merits of Christ Jesus; I do solemnly Vow and Covenant with God, and expresly promise unto you, That I will give all the Tyth Wool of the whole Parish, which shall yearly become due unto me, during all the time of my future abode in this Town, unto the Poor of this Parish, to be yearly distributed amongst them, either in kind, or the full value thereof in money, before the first day of January every year, for, and towards their cloathing and maintenance. This Vow also, he did Register, and subscribe with his hand; and did always most piously and conscienciously, observe it yearly so long as he was Minister in that Town. Yea, he was so fully satisfied and pleased with what he had done herein; that A Pin strange∣ly discovered in his younger Daughters Ear an answer of Prayer, where∣by her life was saved. some years after he devoted (in the same manner) all the Tyth Lambs of that Parish also, towards the relief of the Poor, and that, upon this occasion, viz. God having yet given him a seventh Child, which was his last; it pleased God (that when it was about half a year old) it was strangely troubled and afflicted with pain and sickness; which neither Physicians nor Chirurgeons could give any account of. Many eminent persons (of both sorts) had inspected the Child, but could not in the least guess at (much less find out) the nature of its Malady or Distemper. Many Weeks passed wherein the Child languished, and did daily fill the Ears of its Parents with its frequent loud Shrieks, and with its constant and perpetual dolour. The Parents hereupon did set apart a day of Prayer, solemnly to seek God in their Family for this poor afflicted Infant; in which Service God was pleased to give him great assi∣stances of his Spirit, and inlargement of heart; and the very next Morning follow∣ing, while the Mother had the sick Child in her Lap, and rubbed its naked head with her hand, she felt a Pin to prick her hand; at which very much wonder∣ing, she looked narrowly into the Ear of the Child, and there espyed the small end of a large Pin that was gotten very deep into it. It was very difficult to discern the end thereof, and more difficult to draw it forth, (the head of the Pin being downward, and almost eaten up with Rust) but it being pulled out, the Child was presently at ease, and recovered its health and liveliness, and that in a very short time. Many other strange instances of the answer of his prayers might be given, which he always received from the Father of mercies, with great gratitude and thankfulness; but he contented not himself with verbal praises, without study∣ing, how to express his sense of Divine Favour, by an exemplary devoting himself, and his all, unto God; as a real Thank-offering, to his Divine Ma∣jesty.
The work of God thereby greatly prospered in his hand, the whole Town was Ketton a par∣tern to other Parishes. yet more and more reformed, so that his Parish was a pattern to all his Neighbour Towns; and it was expected, and often said, that every Inhabitant of Ketton should be distinguished from others, not only by the more savouriness of their Dis∣course, but also by the universal strictness and Piety of their Lives and Con∣versations. There was one great advantage which that Town and Corner had above most The advantage of a good Ma∣gistrate, his joyning with a good Minister. other places, and that was this, That the Magistracy and Ministry joined both to∣gether, and concurred in all things for the promoting of true Piety and Godliness, The countenance and encouragement which a man of great Estate and Power doth give to a Minister, is of great import and influence unto his Ministry. Great was the love, and intimate was the affection which passed between the Patron of the Li∣ving, and this Minister; so that they did mutually ingage to visit each other twice (at least) every Week, and did seldom meet without praying together before they did part. They heartily also joined hand in hand to promote both the form and the power of Godliness in that Town and County. Two things especially (in order hereunto) were endeavoured by them. First, To increase the knowledge of God, and of his Son; by Catechising both young and old, both governours and governed, one and other; and to the end that all (both rich and poor) might submit thereunto; this gracious and holy Knight, Sir Na∣thaniel Barnardiston, perswaded several Masters of Families in the Town to consent, that when any such question should be asked in publick by the Minister, as that neither their Children nor Servants could answer; the Masters and Fathers of such Children or Servants respectively, should answer for them; and the Knight himself did engage the like for his Family; which course being taken, it was in∣credible to consider how greatly knowledge was advanced thereby in that Town. Another thing which the Patron and Minister designed, was to hinder the intru∣ding, or approaching of the visibly prophane unto the Table of the Lord. To this The prophane are not admit∣ted to the Lords Supper. end it was unanimously agreed, that every one who should desire to Communicate, should first publickly own his Baptismal Covenant for once, before his admission to the Lords Supper; and that afterwards they should submit unto admonition, in case of the visible and apparent breach of that Covenant. Accordingly this renowned Gen∣tleman did first lead the way, and before all the Communicants, he did declare his Faith in God through our Lord Jesus; and did undertake (through the assistance of the holy Spirit) to perform whatever his Sureties had promised in baptism upon his account. He was then followed (in the same manner) by all the rest who were about then to receive. As for others, they were wholly silenced, being convinced in their very Consciences, of the reasonableness of what had been required, and what was now done, by all the serious and sober persons of that Town. The administration of Confirmation practised in this excellent way and manner, His use of right Confir∣mation. could not but make a very effectual Reformation in that Town. Former prophane∣ness was forced now to hide its head; Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing, Bastardy, and the like, as they were not practised, so they were scarce known; divers per∣sons having lived many years in that Parish, and in the whole time they never heard an Oath sworn, or ever saw one person drunk, as they have professed. His Ministry was highly valued, not only by his own Parishioners, but also by The high va∣lue for his Mi∣nistry, and the blessings which did accompa∣ny it. such as lived at a distance, of whom many did covet to come and dwell nearer, and to be of his Flock; and the rather, because it was generally reported, and upon good grounds believed, that there went a secret blessing along with the Gospel; and that as to Temporals as well as Spirituals. It was most visible, that many of the Farmers did mightily thrive, and grow rich, and the Landlords Revenue thereby did also increase, and was augmented. Many years thus passed, and was spent by this faith∣ful and painful Servant of Christ Jesus, wherein God was pleased abundantly to ina∣ble him with bodily strength to go through his Labours, and wherein God also did secure him from all molestation and trouble from abroad, which some others met with. But now about the year 1635. he was seized first with the Meagrim or Dizziness His hard Stu∣dy doth im∣pair his health in his head, which afterwards turned to a violent pain. His Physicians told him, that his Distemper proceeded from over much Study, and from a Sedentary life; for the Cure whereof, they advised him to forbear Preaching; which he did a while;
but found no relief thereby. Then they advised him to change Air, and commen∣ded unto him the Air about New-market. He went therefore and lived with the Lady Thornton, who had a Seat within a little more than a Mile of that Town; and God was pleased very much to bless that Air unto his Recovery; so that ha∣ving gotten a little strength, he was resolved to return to his work, and to lay it out about his Masters Service; which he did do for near two years space. Then it pleased God to exercise him with a greater trial; for upon a Lords-day morning, in his passage from his won House towards the Parish Church, he went He is hurt by a Fall. over a Gate in his way (which he supposed had been locked, as it was wont to be) but while he was almost over it, the Gate opened, and caused him to have a very great fall upon his Belly against the Ground, so that his Navel started out very much, and a very great Swelling followed upon it. His affectionate Wife beseeched him (thereupon) to return home, and betake himself to his Bed; but he considering that his Congregation was at that time met, and waited to hear the Word from his mouth; and finding that he was able still to walk, (although not without pain) he went forward to Church, and there Preached the former part of that day, but was forced to procure a supply for the Afternoon. The next day his pain increased more and more; and although he loved not to keep his Bed, yet he was confined thereto for some days, and unto his Chamber for some Weeks, until he had pro∣cured a Truss, which inabled him to Travel on Foot; but wholly hindered him from riding on Horse-back for several years. Which affliction, though it was very uncomfortable, in as much as it barr'd him from that Recreation he only delighted in; yet his not being able to Ride, was a sufficient Plea for his not appearing at the Bishops Court; and thereby it was providentially a means of his continuing in his Mini∣sterial work, longer than probably he might otherwise have done. For (about this time) the Book of Sports was injoined to be read, and many In∣novations He is cited to the Court at Bury. were creeping into the Church, which he neither did nor could submit to; and for this he was often cited to appear before the Archdeacon and Commissary at Bury: But return and answer was always given, that by reason of his Distemper he was unable to Ride so far. Hereupon Articles were drawn up against him; and the Commissary had order to Adjourn the Court from Bury, to the Parsonage house of Ketton; and now all persons feared that he would have been suspended, both ab Officio & Beneficio; but the providence of God prevented it; for the Com∣missary and Surrogate (who were deputed to examine him) were both hindered at that time by sickness, and none came but the Secretary, and one Minister with him, who did little more than take cognizance of his bodily lameness, and then departed; leaving him in liberty to go on in his work as formerly he had done; in which he was very diligent and constant; for although he was not well able to get up into the Pulpit for some years, yet he never failed, but always Preached twice every Lords-day, sitting in his Desk, and from thence delivering the lively Ora∣cles of God. But over much study (after some time) had almost brought his first Distemper up∣on His Distemper doth return. him; for his Spirits began to decay, and Dizziness began to seize his Head, (be∣sides the continuing of the starting of his Navel) about which having consulted with many Doctors, they all advised that he would go down in a Horse-litter to the Bath, which they counted would be a most proper and effectual remedy for him upon all accounts. But such a long Journey required more time than the Statute doth allow to any Incumbent to be absent from his place; this therefore put him upon Petitioning to the Archbishop for a Dispensation; which partly by money, and partly by Interest of Friends, was obtained. And it may be remembred, that one argument which the presenter of the said Petition used to the Archbishop, was this, to wit, That his Lordship had no man dwelling in his whole Province who was so like himself, as to bodily shape and face; but none more unlike his Lordship in tem∣per and opinion: To which the Archbishop answered, is it so? Then let him go to the Bath, or whether he please, for all me; and so granted his Petition. If any person (upon this occasion) shall desire to have some account of his His bodily shape and form. , his bodily shape and form, let them know, he was a pretty fat and corpulent man, full-faced, of a grave majestick aspect, and had a very quick and piercing Eye; but withal but low of stature: The greatest Wits have lodged in lit∣tle Bodies, and the bravest Spirits have been those that have been least clogged with Flesh. Varro saith of Marcus Tullius and Marcius Maximus, that they were men
but two Cubits high: I am sure that the Holy Ghost it self did give the great Apostle a title of real honour, borrowed from the lowness of his Stature. In short, he did wear ingenium acutum in decente vagina, a sharp wit in a comely body, although the Structure was not high or lofty, yet it was every where richly furnished; and the low Fabrick was excellently Tenanted. This Dispensation aforesaid, being obtained, he resolved to undertake his Jour∣ney to Bath, so soon as ever God should give his Wife safe Deliverance, she being His Wife dy∣eth in Child∣bed. then with Child: but this time never came; for his Wife (not going her full time) fell in Labour, and brought forth an Abortive Child, which also cost her her own Life. Great had been his Affection to her at all times, he striving to imitate at least (if He is blamed for his great sorrow for such a pious relation. not equal) if possible, his Lord and Master Christ Jesus, in his love to his Church. But now the good mans affection did (in the opinion of some) a little degenerate, and turn into unruly passion; and truly if in any thing this holy person did deserve any reproof, it was in this, to wit, That his grief for the loss of this Relation, did a little too much deject him. He seemed indeed to err in his love; and some that watched for his halting, were glad that they could spy a colour or pretence to accuse him for this his over sorrow, as they called it. But he had many things to say in his own defence; besides that, it is the common discovery of a sweet and good nature, and of an affectionate disposition, to be much affected, when the delight of a mans eyes, and the daily companion of his sorrows and joys, of his travel and rest, is taken from him. And are there not many Instances in Scripture of great affliction of heart for the loss of Relations? How did Jacob lament for his Son Joseph? How did David mourn for his Absalom? How did the Saints in the 9. Acts, bewail the death of Dorcas? And how did St. Austin weep for the holy Monica? This Wife was a non-such, a mirrour of Grace and Virtue, a person of great parts, great pru∣dence, and great piety. She was very beautiful and lovely in person, and of a most obliging Conversation, cloathed with humility, and adorned with all the graces of the Divine Spirit. A careful Instructer of her Children, and a pattern of Piety to them, walking closely with God all the day, in their view. In her Husbands absence she constantly prayed twice every day in her mily; and she prayed always thrice a day in her Closet, twice by her self, and once with her Children. It must needs make a deeper wound than ordinary, for an Husband to lose such a Wife. He must needs weep for his own loss, and more for his Childrens. What the Poet said of Peleus, That he could bear any affliction while Thetis his Wife was with him, be∣cause she always bore the weightiest burden, and the biggest end of the Log; this might be applied to them both. But now he is lest alone with a great number of small Children, and with a great Family of Servants; the education of the one, and the government of the other, was impossible for him to discharge, (as he knew that it ought to be done) by reason, that his Ministerial work did necessarily take up the most of his time, if not all of it. Yet he grappled with these difficulties for three years, and was then perswaded by Friends, to endeavour to repair the breach which God had made in his Family, by marrying a second time. And providence bringing an excellent Gentlewoman to live in that Town, she He is con∣strained to re∣pair his loss. was recommended to him by all his Friends, but especially by his first Wives Relati∣ons, as one that would take off much of the burthen of educating his Daughters, who were the youngest part of his Children; and who did most stand in need of sutable Instruction and Education. This Gentlewoman was a person of great Piety, and of a sweet disposition; she was the Relict of Mr. William Folke of Cambridge∣shire, and had but only one Child, a Daughter, an Heiress of a fair Estate; who was much of the same Age with his youngest Child and Daughter. After much prayer and seeking of God, the thing was accomplished, to the great joy and com∣fort of them both; she being a very affectionate Yoke fellow to him, and a most in∣dulgent Mother-in-Law to his Children; so that there never happened the least strife between them, but only this, Whether he should shew more kindness to her only Child, or she shew more love to all his seven Children? and this contest also was most pleasingly composed afterwards, by the inter-marriage of his third Son with that Daughter. He is nomina∣ted to be one of the Synod at Westminster, but declineth it. About this time the first long Parliament convened, who after a while, thought fit to call an Assembly of the most eminent Divines of the Nation; and those of diffe∣rent perswasions, to sit at Westminster, and to consult about making some alteration
in the Discipline and Government of the Church. His Patron being one of the Knights of the Shire for Suffolk, did then nominate him to be one of this Assembly. But although he had very much recovered his health by Gods blessing (without going to the Bath) yet the starting of his Navel was not so fully cured, but that he did come very seldom on Horse-back; and therefore he went not to London till that Assembly was met, and had sat some time; and a prospect of some differences, was given, like to arise amongst them; and the Dissenting Brethren had prepared their Apology; before he could go, to answer the Summons, which was given him to at∣tend on that Service. When he came to Westminster, and observed the state of things; he Petitioned to be discharged; and obtained of his Patron, to nominate another Suffolk Minister to succeed in his place; which being granted, he returned to his own Countrey charge. He was a great lover of Peace, and a great promoter of it; and was wont greatly to bemoan; that those who did so unanimously and heartily agree in the fundamental Articles of our Creed, and in the Doctrine of the Church, should (with great heat and animosity) contend about Modes and Ceremo∣nies of Worship, and Forms of Discipline and Government. In the year 1645. a very great number of persons in the County of Suffolk were He is Com∣missioned to sit on the Beneh at the Trial of a great number of Witches. apprehended, as being guilty of the damnable and Diabolical sin of Witchcraft; and divers of them had confessed themselves guilty thereof; but a report was car∣ried to the Parliament then sitting, as if some busie men had made use of some ill Arts, to extort such confession from them; thereupon a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer was granted for the Trial of these Witches; in which Commission Mr. Fairclough's name was inserted, with the name of another Reverend Divine; these were joined in Commission with the Judge of Assize, and the Justices of Peace of the County; that there might be a most special care taken, both of the executi∣on of the Law, and that also all tenderness might be used, in a matter wherein the Lives and immortal Souls of many were concerned. The Statute it self (in that case) is so worded, that none can be convicted thereupon, but such as are proved to have made either an express compact with the Devil, or an implicite one, by imploying Imps, that is, the Devils instruments, to the hurt of their Neighbours, in Life or Estate. Hence it comes to pass, that it is very difficult to Convict any person upon this Sta∣tute, but such as shall consess themselves guilty; and now great care was taken, that such confession should be purely voluntary and unconstrained; and the truth thereof might also be evidenced by many collateral circumstances, and other concurring and convin∣cing evidence. This Learned man therefore, before his first sitting upon the Bench, did Preach two Sermons to the Court in Bury Church; wherein he first shewed, that there was such a sin as that of Witchcraft, that is, of mens dealing and contracting with familiar Spirits; and did then confute all those arguments, which either former or later, Sadducees and Atheists have produced to the contrary; wherein he gave great satisfaction to the whole Auditory. He afterwards shewed the hainousness of the sin of those, who would violently prosecute, or unduly endeavonr to convict any person, except plain convincing evidence could be brought. These Sermons were of great use; and although it is possible that some that were guilty might escape for want of such evidence, yet sure it is, that none were condemned, who could be saved without an express breach of the Law; for both in the Pulpit, and on the Bench, he did very much influence the whole Court by his judgment, viz. by his learned, pious and prudent management of the whole affair. In all imployments, and in every trust committed to him, he shewed and approved himself a man of great Learning, prudence and integrity. Through his whole life, no blemish (upon any account whatsoever) did fall upon his Reputation; except that which is common to all men, to wit, such as is the result of envy, and hammer'd in the forge of malice it self. He was no Lawyer, and therefore might be ignorant of the legality of the pro∣ceedings of either party, during the late Civil Wars; and therefore he always chose His lamenting the Civil Wars. to be passive therein rather than active; but no man lamented more the sins of those times than he did, being greatly wounded when he heard of so much blood as was shed by Protestants, their fighting one against another. That expression of St. Cyp. de Sim. Prelat. was often then in his mouth, Proh dolor! quid facit, in corde Christianorum, Lu∣porum feritas & Canum rabies? The Wars were no sooner began, but he foretold the ruine both of Church and State thereby; for he discerned the designs of the Jesuits were, to foment the differences on both sides, till both Church and State should
be destroyed; which sadly came to pass in the year 1648. when the Emissaries of the Church of Rome (who had Listed themselves in both Armies) did so influence and leaven their Counsels, that the one Army rebell'd against the very persons from whom they received their Commissions, and offered great violence to them; first by excluding the most eminent Members of the House of Commons, with the whole House of Lords; and then killed the King himself at his own door; throwing the scandal of all, upon the Protestants; though a Learned Dignitary of the Church hath abundantly proved it to be the act of the Papists chiefly. Oh how greatly did the Soul of this worthy person bleed within himself for these things, and upon all occasions he constantly bore the publick testimony against those proceedings; which he mourned for deeply. When the Engagement for excluding the Kings Posterity was imposed upon him, He refuseth the Engage∣ment, and all Preferments of those days. upon the penalty of forfeiting his Living, he declared, That he would not only part with his Living, but with his Life also, rather than subscribe to that which his Soul abhorred. He was sometimes threatned (on the one hand) with Loss; at other times tempted by great offers of Gain: but nothing could prevail with him, to bring him to a compliance in any thing which he judged sinful. There was a Baronet, who being a great Friend of his, (and a great man in those days, being related to the Protector himself) had long waited to express his kindness to him, (whose Preaching he valued above all mens) and it so happened, that the Master∣ship of Trinity Colledge, which was one of the greatest Preferments (for a Clergy∣man) in England, fell void by the death of Dr. Hill; the Baronet (without his pri∣vity in the least) obtained a grant thereof for him, and offer'd it to him, but he would not accept it; which when his Friend pressed him to, he first repeated to him the Dystich of the Learned Funcius. Disce meo, exemplo, mandato munere fungi, Et fuge ceu pestem . Thus Englished: Discharge thy proper work; learn this by me, Don't deal in busie things, as Plague them flee. And withal he told the Knight this Story of Funcius, That he being a private Mi∣nister, was once invited to Preach at Court; which he performing well, he was intreated to stay there; and a while after he was preferred to be a Minister of State to his Prince: but thereby he soon made himself many enemies and enviers, and incurred the malice of many Courtiers; who after a little time, procured Articles to be exhibited against him, and so got him to be condemned to Death; which he suffered: but left the former Verses. for a warning to all future ambitious persons. Our prudent and humble Divine had it deeply engraven on his heart, for he He loved a private Life of Study and Preaching so well, as he avoided (as much as he could) the best other Imploy∣ment. highly approved that common saying, viz. Bene vixit qui bene latuit, A retired Life is an happy Life. 'Tis true, his Parts and his Employment would not permit him to be hid; but he always endeavoured it, and he counred a Life of Meditation and Study the sweetest Life in the World. It was from this settled Judgment, that he did avoid (as much as he was able) all places of publick trust It is too well known, how that, for some time, the Wall and Fence of publick Discipline being broken down, the Ministerial Office in those days, was strangely invaded; many ignorant, and some vile persons thrusting themselves into it; some men thought, that neither Mission nor Commission, Approbation nor Ordination, were necessary thereto; whereby many mischiefs did follow; till after a while, some persons were appointed to exa∣mine the Abilities, the Learning, the Gifts, and the Graces of all that should at any time be presented to that publick work and station: This work he thought greatly useful and necessary, but being himself (with many others) summoned to un∣dertake it, he thought that the distance of his Countrey charge from London, might justly excuse him, and might warrant him to devolve that work chiefly upon other hands; insomuch that he was very seldom amongst them; and when he did at any time come, it hath been universally acknowledged and declared by men of all parties, (who were referred to him for examination and approbation) that he ne∣never
respected any mans person or perswasion in reference to State affairs, or the kinds of Church Government. All that he would search after, was to inform him∣self of their fitness for their Ministerial work; as to their Learning and Abilities in dividing the Word aright, and as to the unblameableness of their Lives and Conver∣sations. This caused him to be greatly loved; and highly honoured by all men; some of whom are yet alive, and are dignified in the Church; who (afterwards) offered to have procured preferment for him, could he have departed from the way and path which he had chosen to take. But he was semperidem, always fixed as a Rock, to those Principles which (after He was sted∣fast to his principles. long deliberation, much reading, and full disquisition) he had established in his Soul; and upon this account he loved heartily those that even differ'd from him, when he once perceived that they were men of Conscience; and were not tempted by any outward interest whatsoever. He suspected men who were of the temper of him who was a Papist in King Harry's days, a Protestant in King Edward's, a Pa∣pist again in Queen Mary's, and a Protestant again in Queen Elizabeth's. Josephus tells us of some Jews, that kept two different Pedigrees by them, and were Jews or Samaritans, as Alexander either favoured them, or frowned upon them. And even in the Primitive times we are told, that there were some, who were Pagans when Dioclesian was Emperour, and turned Christians in Constantine's time; but the same men were Arians when Constantius Reigned, and became Pagans again with Julian the Apostate. He always pitied men in temptation, but valued those that were most stedfast, bewailing others, that thought it ground enough to change because the times changed; such as could say (without shame) Eamus ad communem errorem, Let us do the evil that most do; of whom it hath been said, Purpuram coluerunt non Deum: He was of another temper; and being always stedfast, it might be said of him, even what St. Cyprian saith of some Christians in his time, That their Faith was strong, even inter ipsas seculi ruinas. Cvp. Ep. ad Demet. and like St. Basil, who being allured by the Prefect to change his Opinion, made answer, That he would not part with one syllable of Truth, no not to save his Life. After near fifty years spent in Preaching the Word of God with faithfulness and He cannot de∣clare his as∣sent and con∣sent, by help of a distincti∣on commonly used. diligence, it pleased God now to honour him, by enabling him to suffer for adhe∣ring to the word of his patience, and for the testimony of a good Conscience. He had been eminently active, and had done much for Gods Honour and Glory; and now he was called to be passive, and to forsake all and follow his Master. Consciencious doing of the Divine Will, is a good preparation for Consciencious suffering of Divine pleasure. He that hath been sincere in obeying other of Gods commands, will obey this among the rest, of taking up Christs Cross; which is a Command as well as others. He was wonderful tender in judging any of his Brethren, who so far as he knew, might follow their light, in declaring their assent and consent to every pro∣position contained in several humane Books; but he himself had no such large Faith; much less had he the implicite Faith of making such Declarations upon trust, rely∣ing upon the judgment of others, delivered in Books, which he could not peruse As for the Opinion of Bishop Bramhall, who allowed men to subscribe, and declare their assent unto that which they suspect not to be true, provided they do subscribe to it only as unto an Instrumentum pacis, for peace sake; our Divine would never use such harsh Language in this case, as the Author of Naked Truth, (third part) calling such distinctions, Trap-doors into Hell; but this he hath said of that Bishops opinion; that by two or three such Equivocations, an easie Bridge might be made to carry men over from Protestantism to Popery. The case (to him) was very plain and easie to determine for himself. He had sat down and reckoned his cost on both sides; and then determined with excellent Bradwardine, That he would not do that, which he thought a sin, Quantiscunque bonis lucrandis, vel quantiscunque malis evitandis. And he was sure that he did not suffer as an evil doer, but only as a per∣son that was afraid to do evil. Neither were they little things which he scrupled, or suffer'd for not doing of He suffered not for small things, or such as were dispu∣table in his Opinion. them. No, he wrote upon the last Leaf of his Diary these words, Non propter pa∣leam relinquam aream Domini, neque propter pisces malos rumpimus retia Domini. He could submit to the English Episcopacy as an humane Institution; and to Bishops, as
unto the Kings Officers. He longed for Bishop Ʋshers reduction; and agreed with Bishop Andrews; Quaeris, num peccent Ecclesiae reformatae in jus divinum, non dixi. Caecus enim est qui non videat Ecclesias stantes sine hac politia, ferreus est qui salutem iis neget. Andrews Ep. 2, 3. His Judgment about Liturgies, hath been already de∣clared to be the same with Bishop Taylor's. In short, he judged it to be to him a sin, to say, he liked that which his heart was far from any approbation of. All his people were greatly desirous of his continuing with them, if his Conscience All his people (of all sorts) greatly lamen∣ted his remo∣val. would have permitted. The Poor thought they should greatly suffer by his leaving them; fearing a want of that Charity and Bounty which he was wont to extend towards them. Others thought of their great loss of an able and willing Peace∣maker, in case of differences and quarrels, (all which he always took up) for he made and kept agreement, as much as possible, between his Neighbours. Others doubted, that in his absence they should want a person that would appear for the Fatherless and Widdow, against their injurious Enemies, and cruel Oppressors; which he never failed to do. All these forenamed might desire his continuance out of love to themselves; but others came to him out of a principle of true humane Friendship (as they thought it to be) to him and to his; advising him to be kind to himself, and not to lose such a Living of 200 l. per annum, or to part with such a fine Parsonage house, or with such a fine Glebe, or with such a great Auditory, or with such a loving People, or kind Neighbourhood: And others did desire his continuance yet upon more weighty reasons; they questioned whether any would succeed, like-minded with him, who naturally had taken care of their Souls; by open∣ing the mysteries of the Gospel, and by revealing the way of Life to them, and that with great evidence and demonstration, with great power and plainness; they doubted also, whether they should ever have such another pattern of holiness, or such an example of mortification, or such an instance of heavenly mindedness set be∣fore their eyes again in this world: To all these, he replyed diversly. To the poor afflicted and oppressed, he answered, That he blessed God that he should leave a good Magistrate behind him in the Town; who had formerly done (and could still do) more for them than he could, in that kind; and he knew that he was ready so to do. To the second sort he answered, That their love was great, but not right, being of no other kind than that of Peters, when he disswaded Christ from going to Jerusalem; and therefore he desired them to desist from tempting him. To the last sort he used the words of the Apostle, Sirs, Why do you break my heart, for my own part I am not willing to be bound, but to die, rather than sin against the light of my Conscience; and for you I shall not cease to pray, That God would send you another Pastor; one after his own heart; and I hope God will hear me herein, and will direct your Landlord in the choice of such a one. He desired them therefore to join with the Patron and himself, in setting some time apart to seek God upon that account; which they did: and he did also in private, give himself earnestly to beg of God that he might have such a successor, as that he himself might not be wanted; imitating herein the good and just Aristides, who being banished unjustly from Athens, prayed this Petition only, That his counsel and direction might not be wanted by that City at any time thereafter. Indeed, upon the removal of so eminent a person, it could be no easie thing for the Patron, to provide a man who might bear any proportion to him who had left The Dean of Canterbury suc∣ceeds him. them; an universal search (in both the Ʋniversities, and in the City and Countrey) was made, for a man that might rise up in his place, and might tread in his steps. At length the Reverend and Learned Dr. Tillotson, was recommended to the Patron as a person of great worth and abilities, a man of a moderate and candid Spirit, and of a large and generous temper; to him therefore was the Presentation given, where∣by much of the loss was repaired; it being also no small ease to their former Ministers heart, that a man of that worth did succeed him. When the Act, requiring all Dissenting Ministers, to leave not only their Parsonages, His removal to Finching-field, where himself and four of his Sons do cohabit as in a Colledge. but their Parishes and People also, cameforth, this grieved him far more than the loss of his Living; for this hindered him, not only from Preaching to, but conversing with many of his Spiritual Children, whose education and increase of Grace, was dearer to him than any temporal concern. But where active obedience cannot be given, passive obedience must be shewn; he therefore resolved upon a remove; and the first place he went to, was to board with his eldest Daughter, who had married an Essex Gentleman, who lived in a very fair large House, called Sculpons in Finchingfield. He had also
two Sons, and two Sons-in-law, who were all Ministers, and had left their Livings also; the Father (and these his four Sons) had lived at great distance from each other, in five several Counties of England; but now they all agreed to live toge∣ther in one House, which made a very numerous Family, and erected a kind of little Colledge of Divines; it was as a constellation of Stars, every one whereof had afforded a very fair light when it was separate and alone; but being now all in con∣junction, they drew the Eyes of much People (in that Corner) upon them. Neither could so many Candles be so put under a Bed, or under a Bushel, but that they still yielded a most benigne influence to all those parts. Their habitation was about two Miles from the Parish Church, unto which (though some of the Family sometimes went) yet it was impossible for the whole Family to repair thither, especially for the aged among them, who were more than one or two. For This aged person was forced to marry (a third time) an aged Gentlewoman to be his Their Family exercise. Nurse in his old Age, (his second Wife living a very few years with him) more∣over, the House-keeper had an own Mother above threescore and ten years old, who lived with him. Upon the account therefore of these persons, and also of divers Children in the Family (whose tender years kept them also from the publick) the Father and his Sons, did engage to Preach constantly on the Lords-day in their turns, and once or twice on the week days in the Family, whither some Neighbours also did repair. Great was the comfort and joy, which the Father and his Children, took in each others Company. It was a most happy Family, and a very delightful Society. But to the great grief of all, it continued not thus above four or five years: for A pieasant So∣ciety dissol∣ved. although the Seat was (otherwise) very pleasant, yet the Air was bad, and proved very unwholsome, which caused a dispersion of the whole Family. His own Sons then removed to London, and his two Sons-in-Law into high Suffolk; and himself went and boarded with his youngest Son, who was then a publick Preacher at Kennet in Cambridge-shire. Here the Father did constantly go every Lords-day to Church (it being near) He doth Preach in pri∣vate, and hears in publick. and heard his Son, and usually Preached himself every Lords-day Evening in the Family. He was then near fourscore years old, yet his parts continued quick and strong; and although aged, yet he still retained much of the Smartness and vigour of his youth. The blade was metal to the back, and although it was much worn, yet it kept its keenness to the last. Those that stood without doors, and saw not his Face, might suppose the Preacher to be about fifty years old, or a man arrived at the achme of his excellency, and standing in the Zenith of his Noon-day glory, and that both as to the matter of his Discourses, and the manner of his Delivery. Although at this Age, he would often say, That he now might be discharged of his labour, both by the Laws of God and Men (the Jewish Law allowing the Levite at Fifty, and the Roman Law allowing the Soldier at Sixty, to b exempted) yet he loved his work; and therefore he would not leave the Altar, or quit the Field, so long as he could lift up his hand, or wield the sword of the Spirit; agreeing herein with the holy Bishop Severus, Si senex populo pro futurus sum, laborem non recuso. He lived at Kennet (with this Son) some years, where his last Wife died; she His last Wife dies. was the Daughter of Mr. Sorrel of Essex, and the Relict of a Reverend Minister formerly in that County; but she having never had any Children of her own, she was unacquainted with true Parental affection, the want whereof in her, was grie∣vous both to him and his; yet she was a good woman otherwise, and loved his Per∣son and Ministry. Sometime after whose death he removed to Heveningham in high Suffolk, to the He removeth to Hevening∣ham in high Sufflk. House of his second Daughter; who was there married to Mr. Jones, the Rector of that Town; there he also kept on his course of hearing in publick, and Preach∣ing in private, for about two years. At which time his youngest Daughter, who was married to Mr. Shute, the In∣cumbent Thence to Stow-market; which was his last place of abode on Earth. of Stow-market, was covetous also to have her Childs part of his presence and company; wherein he did gratifie her: and this was the last place of his abode in this world. He was above Fourscore years old when he came to Stow-market, until which time his parts and memory continued sound to that degree, as that all men admired him; but after that, a great change suddenly appeared; yet not so great, but that still he retained his understanding to a very good use and purpose,
none coming to visit him, but they went away bettered by him: When he was much decayed, and almost fallen, the ruines of the Building were such as did evidence the Fabrick had once been large and stately: When his natural heat and fervour was almost extinct, the remains thereof manifested that the Fire had been great, where such a heap of glowing Embers gave so much heat and warmth. He was now going off the Stage of the world; and before the Curtain be drawn, Some peculiar Instances of his great worth. that is, before an account be given of his last Exit, it will not be amiss to intimate to the world some peculiar excellencies that were discernable in him, worthy both of remark and imitation. In some few particular acts of Grace, 'tis possible that he might have some equals in them; but in many instances of Piety, I think this Age hath not known any to exceed him therein. None surely can be found, who walked in a more constant course of private duties, His strict wal∣king with God in his course of private du∣ties. such as Reading, Meditation, Self-examination and Prayer, which four duties he sel∣dom or never divided the one from the other; and by a daily continued perfor∣mance of them all, he had much of his Conversation in Heaven, and lived in close Communion with God. The Sun is not more true to its time of rising and setting, than he was to his stated course of secret Prayer, both Morning and Evening. So soon as he was awake (which was early every Morning, till he was very old) he did immediately rise, and prostrate himself at Gods Foot-stool; after which he con∣stantly read some portion of Scripture, upon which he did first peruse the best Com∣mentators, and constantly (for some time) did meditate thereon, observing the counsel of Pythagoras to his Schollars, , if you will not purifie your food, and ruminate upon it, don't eat. But he having thus digested truth himself, after some time he came down to perform Family worship; which he al∣ways began with a short Prayer, and then expounded that Portion of Scripture to them, wherewith he had first warmed his own heart; and then prayed again with them more largely than before; and so betook himself to his Study again. Through the whole day he kept a most strict watch over his Heart and Tongue, His constant watch, and spiritual Dis∣course, and heavenly min∣dedness, and felf-examina∣tion. and had obtained Grace so, as that when he was engaged in civil converse, and in worldly affairs, he was even in them spiritual and heavenly, his Discourse being sa∣voury and profitable. It was the Language of Canaan, and such as might administer always Grace to the Hearers. He also learned that excellent sort of Chymistry, to extract spiritual notions from earthly occurrences. He saw God in all things, and enjoyed him in all his appearances. , he managed all things, and in all things was managed by the holy Spirit, as it was said of Justin Martyr: In every Evening he constantly called himself to an account, examining and reviewing (as much as possibly he could) all his thoughts, words and actions. He lamented much, that Christians should fall short of the practice of some Heathens. Seneca tells us, that he used every night (when his Servant had taken away the Light out of his Chamber) to turn his Eyes inward, and ask himself, what good he had done? and what evil he had that day avoided? Pythagoras required his Scholars, that they should night by night examine themselves by these questions, . Virgil saith also of a good man thus: Non prius in dulcem declinant lumina somnum, Omnia quam longe repetiveris acta diei, Quid praetermissum, quid gestum tempore, quid non. At Night before soft Sleep doth cause thine Eyes to wink, Recall, review the actions of the day, and think What thou hast done amiss, or what thou hast forgot, What word or work was timed well by thee, what not. It was his business to live to Gods honour. He was full of designs for Christ, he His business was to live to God. endeavoured fully to copy out the life of his Lord and Master. All that saw him, saw (as it were) Religion embodyed, shewing it self the greatest reality, and making it self to appear (what in truth it is) the most sweet and pleasant life of the world. They that beheld him, saw it was possible for a man (while here on Earth) to have his heart much in Heaven; and while he is in the body, both to live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit.
He was eminently solicitous to discharge all Relative, as well as personal Duties. Careful of Re∣lative Duties. In his Family he walked as a man of understanding, and with a perfect heart, and was one of the Apostles Bishops, blameless, ruling his own House, and having his Chil∣dren in subjection. He was as another faithful Abraham, who taught his houshold (and his Children after him) to keep the way of the Lord. He designed to govern his Fami∣ly by the Law of God, who is the great Pater-familias, of whom all the Families in Earth are called. He commanded nothing, but what he knew himself to be commanded to command. He did not conceal, but declare what his own duty (as well as the duty of his Inferiours) was. He spake his mind clearly and intelligibly, and forgave all faults committed ignorantly, and by mistake; being angry for nothing but wilful disobedience. Great was the pains which he took to instruct his Family in the narrow way of His diligent Catechising of his Family. Life, by causing them to read the Scriptures frequently every day, and to abound in the knowledge of them; treasuring them up in their memories; which he would often inquire into: and by Catechising of them, first by a shorter Catechism of his own composing, and then in larger ones. All his Children (when grown up, and many of the Servants who lived with him) could not only answer every question in a very large Catechism, but could prove every answer by express Scripture Texts; for they answered not like Parrots, but as understanding the sum and substance of Christian Religion. He moved in his Family as an Angel, or an Intelligence in his Orb, ruling of it with perfect harmony and decorum. He beheld his Yoke-fellow with a pleasing, and pleased Eye of love; he looked on his Children with an Eye of watchfulness, as well as affection, and upon his Servants with an Eye of Authority and Government; so that all things were dispatched in his House, with Peace and Order. He would tell his Servants, that he hired them, first to be Gods Servants, and He is a good Master. then his; and required them to look through and beyond him, unto God; where∣by they might do two works, and serve two Masters (the one subordinate to the other) at once, and that they might be sure, that they should receive thereby dou∣ble wages, from God and from him; adding withal, that God may (by an holy person) be as truly served in dressing of an Horse, or milking of a Cow (in time and place fit, and in Obedience to God) as in their going to Church, or as in pri∣vate Prayer. He was careful in hiring of Servants, (which few are) if it were pos∣sible, he would gain the Children of godly Parents; and would never permit any to serve him, who refused to serve God in any of his Institutions. He reproved Idleness, as well in Soul concerns as in houshold-affairs, and carefully rewarded the improvers of time. When he happened upon any Servant of mean capacity, and a weak memory, he would give his Children charge to take so much the more pains with them, and be always very patient and gentle towards them. And God was pleased to bless him with many godly Servants, and such as were most faithful to him. He had one Servant that managed all his concerns without doors, a Servant And is blessed with an emi∣nent faithful Servant. very skilful, and very careful; to whom his Master once saying thus: John, Since I have left my Estate to your care, I must own, that God hath greatly blessed me; and I perceive, the less that I do meddle with the World, the more I do thrive; the more I give away, the more I have at the years end. The Servant then replyed thus; No doubt, Sir, but it is so; for I have taken notice, that the more you pray and study how to plant and water the Grace of God in your Peoples hearts, the greater blessing hath God given to my Plowing and Sowing in the Field; and the whole Town doth take notice, how much the Crop in your Ground is better than theirs, although nought but a little Hedge doth part them. Indeed this Servant was another Eleazar in Abrahams Family, or another Joseph in Potiphars house. Xeniades having bought Diogenes, and having seen his excellent and good behavi∣our, beyond the rate of all men (as he thought it to be) gave Diogenes his freedom, saying, That he believed he was some good Angel, and that he had cloathed him∣self with an humane body, that he might do good on Earth: Some also would have thought this Servant to be such a good Genius; of whom his Master said at his death, That God did take him away, least he should have grown over Rich and Wealthy in the World; as he had certainly done, if he had lived long.
As to the Children which God gave him, he did truly Travel in birth with them, He becomes a Spiritual, as well as Natu∣ral Father, to all his Chil∣dren. till he saw Christ formed in them. God made him not only a natural, but a spiritual Father also to seven Children. He did believe, that most Children are capable of discerning good from evil, much sooner than most Parents are aware of; he there∣fore began very carly to instruct his own Children, and (all of them) like Timothy, had the knowledge of the Scripture in them, from the very Breasts. He instructed them not only by precept, but by his own heavenly example; and he might have said to each of them as Aeneas to Ascanius, Disce, puer, virtutem ex me, verumque laborem, Fortunam ex aliis— —Virtue and Labour learn from me, dear Boy; Fortune to others leave for to enjoy. His whole Life was worthy of Imitation; it might be said thereof, as Chrysostom saith of the Life of Ignatius, it was ; a Teacher and Tutor of Piety. He prevented as much as possible, that no evil example should be given to his Children, and commanded his Servants, that they should not dare to do or speak any thing before his Children, which they would not do or speak before himself, well knowing, that great reverence is due to Children. He spake to them with much gravity, and some reservedness; but yet always kindly and affectionately, keeping Frowns only for their faults. And indeed his Children feared to see a Frown in his Face, as much as some other Children do fear a blow from their Fathers hand. He seldom corporally corrected any of them, and some of them never: As a Father he maintained his Authority, and as a good Father he did exercise great clemency. Vindictam ex necessitate, veniam ex dilectu exercebat. It at any time he was forced to be angry, he shewed that it was altogether necessary, by the sudden return of his kindness, immediately upon their repentance. He bore the Soul of every Child upon his heart; and daily prayed, that not one Gods Blessing on all his Children. who proceeded from his Loins, might ever stand at Gods left hand; and few men had ever greater comfort in their Children than he had. He died in the belief, that he should meet all his Children with comfort at the great day. He sent all his four Sons to the University, where three of them were preferred to be Fellows of Col∣ledges. They all four were called into the Ministry, and were able and faithful in their places; none having better repute than they, in the places where they lived, until they were removed, either by death or otherwise; and God blessed them in Temporals also, he and his, parting with above a thousand pound per annum, when they laid down their publick Ministry. He lived in an Age wherein great contempt was thrown upon the Office of the His esteem of the Office of the Ministry, and dedica∣ting all his Sons thereto. Ministry; this caused this Champion to appear both Doctrinally and Practically against such contemners of the institution of Christ. By his Doctrine he declared often, and proved, that neither gifts nor graces, single and separate one from the other, did fully qualifie persons for this work, nor doth the conjunction of them constitute a sta∣ted Officer in the Church, without due approbation by Church-Officers (upon exa∣mination) and Ordination (after Approbation) if possibly it can be obtained. Pra∣ctically be appeared against such Contemners; first, by the begging earnestly of God, that he would give Grace unto all his Sons; and then would incline the hearts of them all to devote themselves to this work. Secondly, By his administring all the helps and furtherances of Education that might qualifie them thereto. And to shew yet more his esteem of this Office, he married two of his Daughters unto Ministers; and farther, he did not only send his own Sons to the University, but he sent divers others thither also, and maintained some of them much at his own charge; and he also prevailed with his own Sons (after they were Fellows of Colledges) to assist him He sends di∣vers other young Scho∣lars to Cum∣bridge, and he and his own Sons takes care for their main∣tenance. therein; which they constantly did do. There are divers Ministers yet alive that will acknowledge, that unto some of them he was the sole founder, and many others confess him their greatest Benefactor, as to the University maintenance. He once hired a young man (of about twenty years old) to wait on him, and to Ride abroad with him, who was a good School-Scholar; but his Parents wanted an
Estate to send him to Cambridge: this his Master was ignorant of at his first coming, but a while after, accidentally observing him to be reading in the Greek Testament, he posed him therein, and in other Books, and finding him fit, sent him immedi∣ately to his eldest Son in the University, and provided for his sustenance. At another time, he Preached a worthy Ministers Funeral Sermon, who had fit∣ted his eldest Son for Cambridge, but he died Poor; whereby the Son despaired of proceeding on in his Learning; which he being made then acquainted with, at the close of the Funeral Sermon, he desired all those of his Auditors that loved and va∣lued the deceased pious Minister; that they would testifie their affection in contri∣buting towards the yearly maintenance of his Son; and after Sermon was ended, he called divers Gentlemen and Yeomandry together; and first he himself subscribed four pound per annum; the Gentlemen then subscribed Forty shillings per annum, and some Yeomandry Twenty; so that the young Scholar was provided for at the University, as comfortably as could be desired; and he proved very useful in the Church of God afterwards. He was an excellent Oratour upon all accounts; but he would use, and shew it most effectually; when he was desired to move his Auditory to be charitable; ma∣ny occasions whereof, were offered to him: and he did willingly embrace them. When the Plague was once in the University of Cambridge, the Vice-Chancellor He sends 50 l. to Cambridge, at the request of the Vice-Chancellour, during a time of Pestilence. thereof sent to him (and some other Neighbour Ministers) to make a Collection in his Congregation for the Town of Cambridge; which he did do, so effectually, that he sent him above Fifty pound within a few days after. And the Vice-Chancellour wrote him a long Latine Letter of thanks; calling his gift Pingue beneficium, a fat Sacrifice; and withal told him, that his gift was more, than he had received from any six Towns in all the County besides. At another time, when the Plague was at Hadleigh in Suffolk, he gathered near as The like to Hadleigh, when the Plague was there. much for that Town also. At which time, he did not only perswade the good people, but even compelled (as it were) many covetous Ʋsurers to be bountiful; as the Prophet Nehemiah did, Nehem. 5. 13. The case of the Prophet, was that of Famine, and this case, was that of the Plague; yet he thought, that both the words and the action also of Nehemiah, might well be applied hereunto; and used them (in this case) with the like effect; many hard-hearted persons professing, that when he shook his Garment (as the Prophet did) at that very action their hearts melted within them; and they so trembled, that had their Pockets been then full, they had given it all to him at that Collection. At another time, a Neighbour Ministers House being burned down, wherein his Goods (and the greatest part of the fairest Library in the County) being consu∣med, he in a short time, procured him above an hundred pounds towards the re∣pairing of his loss; and procured also his own third Son (then Fellow of Gonvile and Cajus Colledge) to take the distressed Ministers eldest Son, to be his Pupil, and to allow him good part of his maintenance. He was Charitable beyond compare, both to the Souls and Bodies of men; both His stated Charity. mediately (by interceding with others for them) and immediately, by contributing and distributing of his own plentifully to them; and that, not only occasionally, but statedly. He commanded all the Poor of his Parish to come, Weekly, to his door for relief; and required always that his eldest Daughter (first, before she married, then his next Daughters successively) should be his stated Almoners, and should di∣stribute Alms with their own hands; accustoming themselves to works of mercy and charity: wherein he commanded them to be very bountiful. Vast was the sum of money which he gave away with his own hand. He cloathed the naked, and fed the hungry. He put not only many young men to Cambridge (as hath been said) but many poor Children to School. He gave away, as many Bibles, Catechisms and good Books, as were asked of him; and they were many. When the sight of old People was decayed, he would furnish them with Bibles of a larger Print; and he gave an incredible number of Spectacles away (for their help) al∣ways speaking of the Invention of them by Metius, with expressions of love and praise unto God, for his great goodness to the Souls of men thereby. He loved all the Ordinances and Institutions of Jesus Christ. Preaching was his His love to all the Instituti∣ons of Christ. delight, Prayer his joy, Administration of Sacraments, the pleasure of his Soul. He counted the Sabbath honourable. He was most solemn in the observation of pub∣lick
days of Humiliation; and kept many days of private Fasting and Prayer by himself alone in his Study. But above all, he delighted in reading the Scriptures; which was always sweeter to him than the Honey, or the Honey-comb. He would never engage in the performance of any Ordinances rashly, or with∣out His prepara∣tion for every Duty, and eve∣ry Ordinance. due preparation. For his own part, he would never read a Chapter, or rarely suffer a Chapter to be read in his presence, without invocating God, for the co-ope∣ration of the Divine Spirit therewith. His preparation for solemn days of Fasting, for the Sanctification of the Lords-day, and for the Administration of the Lords-Supper, is not to be paralelled, as the whole Corner and Countrey where he lived, will unanimously testifie. He never kept any solemn publick Fast, but he Preach∣ed some preparation Sermons before the day came. He never administred the Lords-Supper, but that he first Preached three or four Sermons at least, in opening, either the Institution, the nature, the use or the end thereof; or in shewing the Duties of Com∣municants before, in, and after the receiving thereof. He hath left many Quires of Paper, written with his own hand upon those Subjects. His constant solemn preparation for the Lords-day is beyond all. It hath been already said, that he did constantly Preach every Saturday in the Evening, a Ser∣mon His preparati∣on for the san∣ctification of the Lords-day in order to the right sanctification of that holy day; there must now only be added in short; that he commanded all his Servants to lay aside all houshold work and business early upon Saturday Evening; declaring, that he desired and hoped, That when the World was taken out of his Servants hands, they would en∣deavour by Prayer, Reading and Meditation, to get it out of their hearts also; that so their Bodies and Souls both might be free, and ready for a most chear∣ful performance of Gods service the day following; which work, should always be done without the least distraction of mind. This preparation was not with∣out great reason; for it is, as he would say, no easie matter to cleanse our hands, and purifie our hearts too, before we compass Gods Altar; it is not easie to lift our Feet out of the Mire and Clay, unto which, they have too much cleaved, and into which, they have too much sunk all the Week before. The Royal Preacher therefore biddeth us, to look carefully to our Feet (that is, our affections) be∣fore we enter into the House of God. Holiness becomes his House for ever; therefore it be∣hoveth us, that our Souls be comely, dressed and adorned when we wait on the great God; and that our hearts be fixed and prepared, and our heart-strings screwed up, and rightly tuned, before we offer to sing and give praise to a God of infinite Glory; and all this, requireth time and pains before hand, with much diligence. Himself being thus prepared, how did this heavenly person welcome the arrival His joy at the approach of the Lords-day of the Lords-day! which he sanctified in a manner equal to his preparation. The Jews call the Sabbath the Queen of days; and he loved it accordingly. He rose ear∣lier on that day than on any other; and caused his Family so to do also: admonishing both Children and Servants to spend sometime with God in private in the Morning, if at least they desired to meet God in the publick Ordinances of that day. The Morn∣ing and the Evening Sacrifice was by him doubled upon the Lords-day; for he always prayed four times with his Family every Sabbath (besides six times in publick) to wit, im∣mediately before he went to Church, and immediately after his return from thence, in the Forenoon; and before Repetition, and after Supper, in the Evening. His Forenoon Sermon was usually repeated by one of his Children after Dinner. In the Evening he repeated it himself. After Repetition, he examin'd his whole Family, not only what they remembred of the Sermons, but what good they had gained by the worship of that day. After Supper, he caused some part of Foxe's Martyrology (or some other profitable Book) to be read; and having prayed, he concluded the day always with singing of a Psalm. Common Readers, and such as delight not in beholding the Image of God drawn upon More instan∣ces of his Piety. the hearts and lives of his Servants, would be tired; if one quarter of this persons excellencies should be related; therefore after an instance or two more given of his Piety, we will leave the rest to be admired only by those that personally knew him; but 'tis pity, that that almost perfect Victory, which he had obtained over the world by Faith, should ever be forgotten. Whatever is in the World, is either the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, His Victory over the world by Faith. or the Pride of Life; he therefore, who is mortified to Riches, Pleasures and Ho∣nours, hath very much vanquished the World; as he had done.
He contemned Riches as the dirt of the Streets. It is true, that God by his own His contempt of Riches. immediate hand gave him plentifully; but it is as true, that he gave away again most plentifully to others. He was so dead to the world, as that he would not scarce deal or meddle with it. After the death of his first Wife, and of that Servant with whom he had intrusted his Estate, he put off all his Stock, and let all his Grounds, and never increased his real Estate, or personal Estate, above Five pound per annum, for near Forty years together; and he never put out a Farthing of money to Ʋsury. He never sued any man in his Life: He had great advantages of growing rich ma∣ny ways; but if he had died Forty years before he did die, he had been just so Rich as he was at his death. He would often say, that we read not of any good man in all the History of Scripture, or of the Primitive times, that was Covetous, and it was a shame, that any that do now pretend to Christian Religion, should dege∣nerate. After the loss of his Living, though he Preached often, yet he never would receive one penny wages for that work; and some of his Children have imitated him therein. As to sensual pleasure, he did scarce know what any of that kind did mean. He was as temperate in his Diet as possible. He never used any sort of Recreation at any  crucifying the Flesh. time. It might be said of him as was said of Georgias Leontinus, , that he did never do any thing to please the Flesh. In his youth he did love Musick and Riding; in Musick he had good skill; but on the sad News of the death of Gustavus Adolphus, the King of Sweden, (that great Warriour in defence of the Protestant Religion) he hung his Harp on the Willow, and never touched any Mu∣sical Instrument after. He used to keep as good Horses as any man in the Coun∣trey; and was therefore by a dying Gentleman, bequeathed an Horse of very great price, in these words, That he might Ride on him about to Preach the Gospel; which he did do so long as he was able; but he never took a Journey of meer pleasure; except those when he visited his Children, who lived remote. He was far from ambition, as hath been already evidenced in his refusal of great He was far from ambiti∣on, or desire of Honour. preferments; and many more Instances thereof might have been added: He bound himself in a Bond, never to commence Doctor in Divinity; which did shew, that he was herein like St. Ambrose, Qui nihil fecit propter ardorem inanis gloriae, sed propter Charitatem felicitatis; he acted from love to God, and not for praise of men. He was great in other mens Eyes, but little in his own. Being once heartily thanked for an excellent Discourse which he made upon the 3 John 16. which Sermon proved successful to the saving Conversion of some there His great Hu∣mility. present; and this thing being related to him, he replyed thus, Pray friend, give God the Glory; no praise was due to the Rams Horns, though Jericho's Walls fell down at their blast; if God will vouchsafe that his Spirit shall breath through Mini∣sters; it is God, and not the means, must have the praise. And another time, being greatly assisted by God in a Sermon, which he Preached in Cambridge, he wrote these words on the back-side of the Notes of that Sermon, Earthen Vessels, and Leaden Pipes, are either full or empty, according to the measures which they receive from their head Spring and Fountain, though free Grace filled my Soul this day, yet let me take heed of Preaching this Sermon (again) in my own strength. As his heart was humble, so his behaviour was meek and lowly. Though his His behaviour grave, but af∣fable and courteous. Countenance was very grave and severe, yet his Conversation was full of sweetness and affability. It was a kind of Riddle in the Eyes of common beholders, to see so much worth and grandeur to be of such easie access. He would (and all truly noble minds will do the same) stoop to the meanest person who desired his Opinion in matters of weight and moment. He never despised (or spake haughtily to) any man; and from sober good men, he would never keep any distance. If any were godly, although never so mean or poor, he received them, not only with civil re∣spect, but with hearty love; but (on the other hand) he was a most bold and un∣daunted person in reproving the wicked and prophane; and had a Spirit which could abase the proudest Hector of them all, when he thought fit, and in its due time and place. His Humility (joined with so much Grace and Wisdom) caused, that he was of Very peace∣able and can∣did, although men did differ from him in Opinion. a very peaceable Spirit, and had a large Charity for good men, of all perswasions. His own understanding being great, made his Love and Charity also very large. He discerned, how that honest men do often mean the same thing, when they are apt to quarrel about their expressions of it; and therefore in dividing times, he was
always of an uniting Spirit. Whilst others sought to wound the Reputation of men who differed from them, he did what he could to heal and compose all animosities which might arise upon such accounts. He was abundantly sensible of that bitterness which some men were ready to treat each others with, upon small differences of Opinion, and what mischiefs did follow thereupon; the life of Religion, and the power of Godliness, being almost extinguished thereby; and while some men pressed Ʋniformity in little matters; Conformity to the weighty Precepts of Christ Jesus (such as those of Love, and Charity, and forbearance to each other) were neglected. He did much wonder, that since the very Canons which were made in 1640. Dissenters to∣lerated by the Canons of 40. but not by the Act in 62. allowed men liberty to dissent, and to differ in practice, as to the point of bowing towards the Altar, and at the name of Jesus, how it should come to pass, that the Sign of the Cross should be so strictly required in the Act of Uniformity in 1662. But he did rarely publickly express this his admiration; for he would say frequent∣ly, that as breaking of Bones is extreamly painful to all the members, except dead ones, so are Church-divisions grievous to every one that is a true Christian: and as all motion is stopt, or render'd uneasie, by the dislocation of a Joint in a Leg or a Foot, so all progress in Religion, is hindered by the quarrels and fallings out of Brethren by the way. He studied always the things that made for peace, and sought to allay and quench those heats, which others (by their breath and bellows) endeavoured more and more to inflame. He was an hearty lover of, and had a great kindness for, every man, in whom he saw any thing of Gods Spirit appearing; and he va∣lued men more or less, only as he saw more or less of the Divine Image stamped up∣on them. He intreated all that he conversed with, that the truth of Grace in others, might be the most powerful Load-stone to draw out their hearts towards them. He would often say, that for one man to love another, only because he was of his own Opinion and Party, and to neglect another, who might be acted in greater things by the Divine Spirit, because he differ'd in smaller trifles; such a temper as this, did manifest, that such an one had little or nothing of the true love of God in him; for while that such a man did pretend to love his Brother, he did do herein, no other thing than hug himself, and embrace his own shadow, which he saw falling upon anothers breast. Abundantly candid and charitable, meek and moderate, was this person at all Yet he always was zealous in a good matter. times; and yet notwithstanding, it must here be declared, That this meekness and moderation, and peaceableness of his Spirit, was such, as that it did not hinder, but did fully consist with, a mighty heat and activity for God, in all weighty and important matters. He wanted not Zeal, when the main Articles of the Christian Religion, the Articuli stantis & cadentis Ecclesiae, did call for, and require it. At the same time when he commended Constantine the Great, for his reproving the hot contest of the Nicene Fathers about Ceremonies; he also honoured that Emperour for his warmth, in opposing the Arian heresie, as Sigonius relates, Lib. 3. Imp. Occid. Indeed, this Learned Divine was (as to his Zeal) a most excellent pattern, wor∣thy of all imitation. He was in this Grace (as well as in other things) a burning Zeal guided with Light. and a shining light both. Heat and Light were never divided in him. His fire some∣times burned very hot, but yet always very clear, and without any manner of smoak. In his love to the salvation of Souls, he burned like a Lamp, consuming himself, his Body and Estate, (even all the Oyl that he possessed) and therein re∣joiced, if hereby he might guide men to Heaven, and might shew any one the way to God and Glory. And hence it was, that a great and learned Man (that often heard him) said, That no man was more judicious and weighty in the Doctrinal part of his Sermons, and none could be more affectionate and zealous (than he was) in the Application of his Doctrine. Indeed, it is a rarity to find a man of great read∣ing, and deep judgment, to be endowed with much Zeal, or with strong affections; but this mans Sacrifices were all kindled with a Fire which came immediate∣ly from Heaven; which did at once both enlighten his Head, and inflame his Heart also. He was a man of great prudence, as well as zeal. His Sails and Ballast were His great pru∣dence. exactly proportionate each to other. He could not be dull and sluggish in the Ser∣vice of so good a Master as God is; but he did never run before he was sent. He would always stand still to hear his full Errand, and would stay to understand perfectly and plainly all his Masters will; which being so made known to him,
he then was most bold and couragious in delivering of his Message, , A wise man loves in matters great To stay and think deliberate. His great prudence would not permit him to be rash, and his great zeal would not suffer him to be slow, negligent, or partial. He had always a great love for God, and no man could be more concerned, either A man of a very publick spirit. for Church or State, than he was. He had continually such a publick Spirit, as that he scorned (at any time) to prefer any of his own private concerns, before the least publick good; yea, he constantly valued and rated all persons and things, according as any man, or any thing, had either a greater, or a lesser influence upon the pub∣lick. Those that observed him, might easily discern, that the glory of God, and the welfare of his Church, were as the great Wheels, that did set on work and govern all his actions. He was a man most ready to deny himself at any time, if that in any thing thereby, he might promote and advance the Interest of another man; provi∣ded, that other person did move in an higher, and more publick place than himself. That saying ought never to be forgot, which he once used Preaching to a great Auditory, and then declaring to them, That he could never expect to see, or find Peace on earth amongst men, until the Spirits of men were so acted by the Spirit of God, as the Spheres are said (in the old Philosophy) to be acted above by Angels, where all the little smaller Epicicles and Circles of every particular Orb, do all give up themselves wholly to the conduct and motion of the larger and greater Spheres; and truly (said he) it is this, which (according to that Hypothesis) doth make the sweetest Musick in Heaven; and were the same thing found and practised amongst men, it would make the most pleasant, and perpetual harmony on Earth. But there are few men who are blessed with such large Souls, and such generous minds as his was; who did bear the interest of the publick, and welfare of the universal Church, so deeply engraven upon his heart. St. Ambrose formerly was of this temper; who lived little to himself, and was all for others; whose Motto it was, Partior mihi totus foris; and our Saint might have used the same words, for he had wholly de∣dicated and devoted himself to the Service of the publick; and so long as he had any strength left, he did most chearfully improve every Talent which God had lent him, to the honour of him who had intrusted him therewith. But at last, when (by reason of his extreme age) he could not openly and publickly The close of his old Age was spent wholly in prayer. do any other thing more for God or his Church, and when he could scarcely suf∣fer any thing more for the honour of either, he having parted already with all his stated maintenance, for the testimony of a good Conscience; he now gave himself wholly to pray unto God for his Church, in private; in which work, he usually spent four or five hours (sometimes six or seven hours) every day in the Week; indeed, he did not, (neither could he do at that age) little else but pray: and this he was constant in, both for the publick, and also for all his Friends and Relations. Every age of man hath its proper work and special imployment, and also hath its pecular excellency and blessing appertaining, and specially belonging to that age, according to that expression of the Greek Poet, . Young men are active, full ripe are Wise and Sage, Pray'rs most devout, suits and becomes old age. The life of Prayer was his imployment, during all those years wherein he exceeded Fourscore, which was four years, within a few moneths. He lived to be thus very oill, and it might be said of his Age, as it was of Abra∣hams, His old Age, a great bles∣sing. Gen. 25. 8. It was a good old Age. It was a good old Age on many accounts. It was good in respect of its length and duration. It is reckoned as a blessing, when God causes a man to fulfil his days, Exod. 23. 26. It is a mercy when a man comes to his Grave in a full Age, as a Shock of Corn, ripe in its due season, Job 5. 26. And it is very remarkable, that the most eminent Servants and Children of God (whereof mention is made in the Scripture, either in the old or new Testament) it is said of most of them, that they were long lived. Thus Adam and Methuselah before the
Flood; thus Noah and Sem immediately after the Flood; thus Abraham and Job before the Law; thus Moses and Aaron immediately after the Law; thus Eli and Jehoiada, high Priests of the Lord; David and Hezekiah the best of Kings; John and James the Lords Brother, the best-beloved Disciples; St. Luke and St. Paul, the most eminent Pen-men of the New Testament: of all these it is recorded, that they were eminently holy, and that they were blessed with length of days. The wise man tells us, That the hoary head is a Crown of Glory, as often as it is found in the ways of Righteousness, Prov. 16. 31. And it was thus in the Instance before us, as hath been abundantly demonstrated. His old Age was good, because he was good, and did good in it. His Age was good also, because it was an haile and healthy old Age (saving those He had an healthful Cra∣sis and Tem∣per all his days. times wherein he was dis-spirited, and troubled with a swimming in his Head, by reason of over much Study; which lasted not above two months the first time, and three months the last time) it might be said of him, that he never had one sick day for above Threescore years together, (the starting of his Navel was no sickness or dis∣crasie, although a great inconvenience in hindering from Riding; but it did never hinder him above ten days, either from his Study or Labours) so that almost all his days were Halcyon-days. His old Age was , sana senectus, or as Peter Martyr saith of Abrahams age, it was facilis senectus, an easie old Age, because free from those troubles that are usually incident thereunto. This , or health∣fulness in old Age, is reckoned as a double mercy, both by Moses, Deut. 34. 7. and also by Caleb, Josh. 14. 10, 11. There were many things found in him which (under God) did very much con∣duce Many things found in him conducing to Health. to his health, and subserved to lengthen out his days. As first, That he made great Conscience of taking care to preserve his health. He knew that (without health) very little of his Pastoral work could be discharged. He made Conscience therefore of keeping that instrument clean, which God had honoured, (and he hoped would more honour) by using of it. He valued health, not so much upon his own account, as upon Gods. His body being the Temple of the Holy Ghost, he did what he could to keep it in good repair. Again, he was a person that was very temperate, and did always use a very spare He was always very tempe∣rate in all things. Diet. He did not dig his Grave with his Teeth, as Gluttons do, or drown himself in strong Liquors, as too many others do. It is a true, and a witty saying of a late ingenious person, (well skill'd in Physick, but no Practicer) that when mens bodies are over-charged with Meats and Drinks, they recoil upon their owners, and instead of discharging their proper Offices, they burst out into Surfeits and Diseases. Again, he was a man of no violent passions, the over-agitation of which (saith the last mentioned Author) doth cause a too great fermentation of Heat, and often produceth Feavers; but calmness and sedateness of temper, keeps the blood cool and sweet. It is usually said, that mores sequuntur humores, that mens manners do answer the temper of their bodies; and it is as true, that humores sequuntur mo∣res, mens health depends much upon mens manners. But again, (he thought so himself at least, that) he was much the more health∣ful, because he avoided all unnecessary tampering with Physick. He counted Physick A governour of his passions an Ordinance of God, and he much honoured those that were able in that Profession; but he made as little use of any of them, as he could possibly do. He loved Kitchen Physick, but cared for none else. He would allow of Catharticks in some cases, but would always say, that the oftner the Kettle is scowred, the more clean it may look, but the thinner it grows. He did use Phlebotomy once or twice in his whole life, and not oftner; for he compared Blood-letting to the Snuffing of a Candle, which for a time, makes it burn a little brighter, but withal, causes it to wast much the faster. From the healthfulness of his natural constitution, it came to pass, that it might be truly said of him, That he died of no Disease but that of old Age. There was no Careful about taking Physick Thief in his Candle to hasten its Consumption, nor any acute distemper to be as an extinguisher to it; but his Lamp burned clear, so long as there was left one drop of natural Oil to feed it with. Some Weeks before his death, an accident had caused a little sore upon one of his Legs, which dried up of its self a very few days before his departure. The stopping of this Sore (the Chyrurgeon said) was a certain Prognostick (but no cause) of his death, although it be often so in younger persons.
He kept his Bed but one whole day before his departure, a departure which he He much de∣sired to be dissolved. had long longed and waited for; and the very day before his last day on Earth, some company being with him, he expressed how much comfort he did then take, to consider how that his Saviour had tasted death for him; and that Christ (by his Resurrection) had given him an assurance, that he was the first-fruits of those that sleep in him; telling some that stood by him, that it was very much the Duty of Believers to rejoice, that death had lost its Sting, and was now disarmed; and that the power of the Grave was quite vanquished and overcome. A while after, he broke out into the Apostolical , Oh the heighth, length, His dying Speeches. breadth, and depth of the unsearchable Riches of the Grace of God in Christ Jesus! Oh the height of that love, whereby God hath declared pardon to poor Penitents! Oh the freeness of his Grace, who doth offer Christ to all that will receive him humbly and believingly! that is, who will take him with an empty hand, joining nothing of their own works with the Merits of Christ in point of Justification: Some while after, some persons coming to see him, he told them, that he knew not how to requite them (for that love which they had shewn unto him) better, than by exhorting them to redeem the time, especially the time of youth and of health; for except there be first (in health,) an inward principle of Grace wrought in the heart, the time of sickness and old age would be very unfit for so great a work, as that of gaining evidences for Heaven: for, said he, times of sickness and old age, are times of considering, not of gaining such evidences. He advised them therefore (now in time) to prepare for Eternity; and told them, that that work was only to be done, by entring into Covenant with God, and making their Peace through Christ; which being once sincerely done, then neither a sick-bed, nor a death-bed, could do any of them the least hurt. The night after, he grew very weak, and his vital Spirits decayed more and more, His last Breath. till the Morning of the next day, viz. December the 14th, 1677. when he expired his last breath, and immediately entred into that Everlasting Rest, which he had so often prayed, and so much prepared for. St. Austin tells us, that he dare say, That no man can die ill that hath lived well, De Dis. cap. 6. If this be so, then no wonder that such persons as have lived well, to desire to be dissolved, as this man had ear∣nestly done, but yet always with submission: for although he had mortein in desi∣deriis, although he desired to die, yet he had vitam in patientia, he was not impatient to go hence. His desire was with an intire and absolute resignation to Divine pleasure. Neither indeed, had he any cause to be weary of the world, upon any other A great Fa∣vourite of Heaven. reason save this, viz. to be fully rid of the body of death; for upon all other accounts, he had lead as happy a life as most men ever did on Earth. He injoyed the best rate and proportion of true delight, of sufficient plenty, of real honour; higher or lower degrees than what he injoyed of these things, would have been either dangerous or troublesome. He was blessed with an excellent temper and crasis of Body, with great natural and acquired parts, with almost an universal freedom from any great affliction through a long tract of time, during his whole Life. He was blessed with pious, prudent and affectionate Relations, both Wives and Children. He was greatly useful and serviceable to God in his Generation. He was ingaged always in an imployment, where the very work is sufficient wages: but above all, he was blest with an holy heart, and beautified with an heavenly Conversa∣tion. He lived long, and lived well, and slept into Glory. Thus hath been given to the Reader, a small Picture of a man of great grace, holiness and virtue. It should have been more contracted, had it been fitting so to do; but it was considered, that what the Orator said when he was discoursing of that famous City Carthage, That it were better not to speak any thing of it, than to speak but little of it, was true in reference to our present subject; for it might be said of him, that he was indeed, Vir nec dicendus nec tacendus; for it was a hard matter to speak but little of his worth, and impossible to pub∣lish all. If any Reader, observing the great honour and veneration, which is herein paid The verity and impartia∣lity of this History. to the Name and Memory of this very learned and holy Man, (who was a Dis∣senter, and did suffer the loss of his Living upon that account) shall thereupon conjecture, that the Publisher hereof, is not only , of like Spirit, but was  also, of like Interest, with him of whom he writes, (having also lost a
Living for the same reason) let such Readers know that they are herein mistaken; for the Writer of this Life was never ejected for Non-conformity: Neither hath he gained or saved, or lost one penny for adhering to any one party of men; for he doth hate Schism on both hands; and if he hath at any time Preached since the Act of Ʋniformity, either in publick Churches, or in private Meetings, he hath never received any reward, or suffered any punishment for so doing. He doth studiously shun and avoid all things or occasions, which might Bribe, Blind, or prejudice his Judgment, or might tempt him to partiality. He highly honours all men of worth; and for this reason he did not dare to conceal those excellencies (of the deceased) which are here recorded; with whom he doth chiefly Harmonize in his universal and Catholick Charity. It hath been told, how greatly this Learned Man did love all good men, of all perswasions; which made him also to be beloved, and admired both by Confor∣mists and Non-conformists, who came jointly to visit him; and pay equally their due respects to him so long as he lived; and both sorts did greatly lament their loss in his departure: all the Neighbouring Ministers, and People of differing Judg∣ments, solemnized this Funeral with great con-joyned sorrow. A Reverend Conformist, now Dr. in Divinity, Preached his Funeral Sermon; wherein he gave as great, and as high a Character of his transcendent worth, as is here given. It is true, that he then being ignorant of the full History of his Life, and not having seen his Diary, his expressions could be only more general, of those things which are here declared more fully and particularly. And let the Reader yet farther know, that it being desired by the Publisher, that another Reverend, Renowned, and very Learned Conformist, (an acquaintance of the deceased) would also testifie and make known those things which he had observed in him worthy of remark and imitation, he was pleased to send the Publisher the following Letter in answer to his request. MR. Samuel Fairclough, the sometimes famous and justly applauded Rector of Kedington alias Ketton in agro Suffolciensi, was a Per∣son of great Renown, of eminent Note, and of Transcendent Abilities: He was like a City set upon an Hill, and as Saul among the People, so he among his Brethren, higher than any of them from the shoulders and upwards: whose name was exceeding precious, and as Ointment poured forth, 1 Sam. 18. 30.  The sound whereof gave so large an Eccho, not only in his own, but in the adjacent Counties, that he was generally owned, and justly esteemed (for his extraordinary Mini∣sterial Abilities and Labours in the work of the Lord) as the Primus in∣ter omnes; whom all the People were attentive to hear, and , hung upon his mouth in hearing him. Luc. 19. ult. Crit. sacr. He flourished first in those times, when publick, practical, and edifying Preaching was but too scarce, (for reasons commonly divulged, and not fit for me to take notice of.) But by his prudent conduct of himself and of his Ministry, he obtained the favour, and the happiness of continuing in his publick Labours, and weekly Lectures: by reason whereof, as I have been often credibly informed, his Church was so thronged, that (though, for a Village, very large and capacious, yet) there was no getting in, un∣less by some hours attending before his Exercise began; and then the out∣ward Walls were generally lined with Sholes and Multitudes of People, which came (many) from far, (some above twenty Miles) so that you should see the Church yard (which was likewise very spacious) Barri∣cadoed with Horses, tyed to the outward Rayles, while their Owners were greedily waiting to hear the word of Life from his mouth. And as that famous Mr. Rogers of Dedham was the Fairclough of Essex, so he
was the Rogers of Suffolk. I sometimes attended upon his publick Le∣ctures, and heard him with trembling and admiration; for he was a Boanerges in the Pulpit, not only in respect of the strength of his Voice, and terribleness of his expression, when he thundered against prophane∣ness, and enforced to Repentance; but in regard of the solidness of his matter; free from all light, rash, uncouth expressions; nauseating Tau∣tologies, indigested, crude and affected phrases (which have been noted, and justly censured in some others, although applauded and magnified by the injudicious and moveable Multitude) but closely compacted, ju∣diciously framed, and excellently methodiz'd though in a Stile and man∣ner peculiar to himself, (for I confess, I have seldom or never heard the like, with respect to all those admirable ingredients) and managed with such cogency of Reason, and strength of Argument, that he at once both drew, and conquered and compelled his Auditors. And I doubt not but he was a most happy and blessed Instrument (in the hand of the great God) to turn many to Righteousness. All this time I only knew him by report, and sight in publick, having for ten years and upwards (though then of the Vicinity) no private Acquaintance at all with him. And indeed, he had such a Majestick presence, and such a severe and reserved Gravity in his Countenance, that it (together with the Authority of his Ministry) had gained upon me, and did strike a kind of awful fear into me, which made me look upon it as an high degree of presumption, for a person so young as then I was, and sufficiently conscious of my own unworthiness, once to attempt the favour of so great a man, and so renowned and ho∣noured in his Generation. But I was quickly undeceived, and soon after, easily apprehended my great errour and mistake which I had so long la∣boured under. For about that time, being drawn by some others (in a matter of great concern) to wait upon him, I had such a friendly and ge∣nerous Reception, and found him so meek, so affable, so humble and familiar in his deportment and behaviour; and I was so surprised and captivated with the sweetness of his disposition, that I came away chiding my self for my former timidity, and conceiving a kind of indignation in my bosom, that I had deprived my self (for so many years) of such in∣comparable benefit, which I might have gained by a Converse so advan∣tageous to me, both as to this, and the other world. Yet I soon happily experienced an abundant compensation; for the truth is, from that time he cast an especial eye, and set a signal mark of peculiar favour and friend∣ship upon me; and soon took me for his most intimate acquaintance: and he was quickly the first occasion of that Preferment, the great God by his means hath graciously advanced me to. And now I frequently re∣sorted to him; and they were the pleasantest, and most delightful Jour∣neys I ever made in all my life: for what he said of his Friend, Semper a te doctior redeo, I could truly, and with a more happy addition say of him, Semper ab illo doctior & melior redii. His speech was gracious, and seasoned with Salt: His arguments nervous and cogent: His discourse sen∣tentious: His sayings Apothegms, and all tending to promote true Piety, and the power of Godliness. His Conversation such as becometh the Gospel of Christ Jesus; and I may justly pronounce of him that high and lofty, yet ingenious commendation Gregory Nazianzen pronounced on the great St. Basil, That he thundered in his Doctrine, and lightened in his Conversation. Orat. funebr. in laudem Basil. M. He was very exact in Family Discipline, and throughly digested that of the great Apostle, If a man know not how to rule his own House, how shall he take care of the Church of
God? 1 Tim. 3. 5. I have been often at his Table, and in Family-Duty with him, where his heart would be exceedingly enlarged; and his design was to engage all to love and fear the Lord. He comfortably experi∣enced the benefit and the blessing of it: Living to see all his Children grown up to great maturity in spiritual Wisdom and Understanding, and walking in the fear of the Lord; some of them especially, with whom I have had a more intimate converse, are true Inheritors of their Fathers eminent Virtues and admired Ornaments. In a word, I may truly say of him, he was as Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures, Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord night and day with incessant Prayer, and un∣wearied Supplications; and as Barnabas a good man, not gilded but Gold; having, as Demetrius, a good report of all men, and of the Truth it self; shining as a great Light in his Generation, and transmitting and sending forth eminent Rayes and Beams to enlighten others. I never observed any thing in him that a very Momus might, without abomina∣ble wresting, carp at. From this time I attended more frequently upon his Lectures, which I more and more admired, both for the excellency of the matter, his rare and choice notions, grave and ponderous Sen∣tences, soundness of Doctrine, solid Learning, and in a more sublimated and advanced Style, or as Lypsius phrases it, Stylo imperatorio, than what (I thought) I had before observed; and, as I apprehended, be∣yond the capacity of most of his Hearers: They were indeed elegant and rare Discourses, suited ad Clerum (many of which usually attended) rather than ad Populum; which, as I remember, I sometimes insinuated to him: But I found, he was now habituated and grown up to such a noble, generous and masculine way of expression; and it was become so familiar to him, that it was hardly in his power to take off himself from that Grandeur in his publick Discourses. And this I the rather be∣lieved, because even in Prayer, not only in publick, but in his Family (which sometimes, as I said, I had the blessed advantage of.) His way of expression was proportionable. And the truth is, he had a super∣eminent freedom in that Divine Exercise, beyond any I have known; neither making too bold with the great God, nor guilty of any indecen∣cies; which was then too common a fault and indignity, offered to the God of the whole world: but addressing himself with that Reverence and Humility to the supream and sacred Majesty of Heaven and Earth, with that abasedness of Spirit in enlarged Confession (which some had then almost quite forgotten) and with that ardour and earnestness of zea∣lous affection, that the Kingdom of Heaven seemed to suffer Violence, and he to be one of the violent that took it by force. He was a person of a most exact and solid judgment, and happy was he that could obtain and follow his Counsel; which I confess, I think some choice Friends only were enriched with; for (living in Critical times) he was very much (I am sure I thought too much) reserved: I my self yet found such success in following those advices which I gained from him, that I resorted to him as to an Oracle; and could I have obtained it, I should have been unwilling to have transacted any matter of moment, but by the Law of his mouth; which I always found guided within the bounds of pure Religion and undefiled, and by the exactest rules of profound prudence; and withal, he seemed to have more than ordinary foresight of Contingencies. He was an excellent Peace-maker, and very happy in his Decisions and Conclusions, which many have found much diffi∣culty
in, so to arbitrate and end a matter, as to send away the differing parties both equally satisfied. Once there fell out a difference between my self and a Neighbour Minister, we both centred in him to judge the Cause, and decide the Controversie: which he did, with so much gra∣vity, piety, meekness, moderation and strength of Reasoning (after he had summed up the whole matter, and shewn the inconveniencies on either side) without any the least partiality, that though neither of us both had our wills, yet both came away fully contented, and were loving Friends ever after. He was adorned and enriched with sound and sober Principles, very moderate in his Judgment, as to our late (and still con∣tinued) unhappy Controversies. I knew a Friend that went to him for advice upon the point of Conformity, and I had it from himself, that he received this Answer from him, You shall excuse me as to any posi∣tive Resolution, this only I say to you: though I cannot for divers rea∣sons (not so fit to be communicated) yield to all that is enjoyned; yet this I assure you, I judge what is injoined to be such, That if a man lives holily, and walks humbly with God, I shall ever love him, notwith∣standing his Conformity; and if he be proud, contentious and prophane, I will never think well of him for his Non-conformity. And he was so affected and afflicted with our Dissensions about lesser things, that hear∣ing some others and my self, debating some of those disputable things, He passionately brake off our Discourse with that Suspirium Bucholce∣rianum; Quis ne liberabit ab hac rixosa Theologia. He ever detested and abhorred that Regicide committed upon our late dread Soveraign; and was so affected with it, upon the first infaustous 30th of January that he had liberty to Preach, he chose his Text out of Hos. 1. 4. And was so exceedingly transported at that amazing and most blessed Revolu∣tion, in the miraculous and happy return of our dread Soveraign (whom God in mercy to this poor Nation, and his Church therein, long pre∣serve) that upon the first occasion, as I have been credibly informed, he vented his Joy in his publick Exercise to the People, from those words of Loyal Mephibosheth, who had been falsly and basely accused, 2 Sam. 19. 30. Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in Peace unto his own House. I much bewailed his exauthorising himself and his publick Ministry; and have often thought, that if there had been a Temper found, whereby such useful and sober spirited men (as I always observed him to be) might have been continued in their publick Function, under the shelter and protection of a legal Sanction, it had been a mighty strengthning to the Protestant Interest, and much better with the Church of England than now it is. Though far be it from me to censure or call in question the Actions and Decrees of our Superiours, to whom I have long since learned, in all things, not contrary to the Revelation of the Divine Will in the Sacred Cannons, to subject my self, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, whatever has been pretended or objected to the contrary. He lived many years after this, to the 83. or 84. year of his Age, and might have done much Ser∣vice to the Church of God in his publick Ministry, by his eminent worth and exemplary Conversation, made more manifest to the world: But his Spirit was then much broken with that dismal and abortive suddain change which he sadly experienced in that place, (wherein formerly his Mini∣stry had been so fruitful, powerful and successful) and he several times complained of it to me with great lamentation; and I doubt not but
this made his Remove the more easie to him. Though I must perswade my self (if other considerations, which he reserved to himself, had not preponderated) he would not have deserted his Charge, meerly upon that sole account; for his bowels did exceedingly yearn towards that People. Once I remember going to his Lecture, it happened to prove a Funeral Sermon for a poor Woman, that in her sickness never sent to him, nor gave him the least intimation of her desire to speak with him; and so far as I can recollect, he told me, that he knew nothing of it, living at a considerable distance, till it was too late. The good old Gentleman (in the pangs and throws of his Spirit, fixes upon that Subject, James 5. 14, 15. Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him—From whence, having most learnedly and judiciously asserted the Duty of the People, to send for their Minister at such a time; and shewn the great benefits might come to them thereby; he did so dolefully and passionately bewail his own unhappiness, that any (under his inspection and charge) should go to Eternity (he not having exercised his Pastoral Office towards them) that I believe it greatly af∣fected all that were present; and sent away many with weeping Eyes, and akeing Hearts, for what they had heard that day; so highly valued, and so dearly beloved, were the Souls of the meanest of his People to him. After his withdrawing from Ketton, I commonly once or twice in a year, (till he removed into high Suffolk) waited upon him, to tender my re∣spects and duty to him; and always found him chearful, full of sweet content; never complaining, but of the prophaneness and iniquity of the times, and Divisions of the Church of God, replenished with holy and heavenly motions, spiritual breathings, and blessed hopes of entring in∣to Gods eternal rest; and still maintaining his ancient freedom and famili∣arity with me, and that esteem he had (altogether undeservedly) con∣ceived of me. And I experienced him so true a Friend (though I ra∣ther justly honoured him as a Father) that neither difference of Opinion, nor distance of place, nor seldomness of Converse, nor any worldly re∣spects, did cause the least ab-alienation of his spirit from a person so un∣worth: which most of all appeared, in the last visit I gave him at Stow-market; when quite spent and worn out with Age, he delivered himself to this purpose; I am now going out of the world, of which I have had my full, and must leave you, and all my Friends; But I have charged my Sons when I am gone that you may have no cause to complain for want of me; but that they maintain and keep up, the same degree of respect and friendship to you, that I have done. So firm was his Love, and so stedfast and immoveable his transcendent Kindness, that he would have it out-live Death it self: In this degenerous and declining Age, such a faithful Friend who can find? With what Circumstances his Sickness and Death was attended, I know not, nor ever had any account of; being at that time hindered from paying my dutiful Respects to him, by the heavy afflicting hand of the just and holy God long upon me. But I per∣swade my self, the frame and actings of his Soul at his Dissolution, were proportionable and suitable to the eminent Holiness of his Life; and he whose Conversation was in Heaven, while detained here on Earth, could not but have much of Heaven in his heart, in his nearest approaches thi∣ther. These are but some of those many Excellencies (which on a sud∣den, and in a great hurry of business) I could hastily gather up, as Frag∣ments rather than Memoirs, to be remarked in this Worthy and Honou∣rable
Person. Which if you (Reverend Sir) and his other worthy Re∣lations, vouchsafe to take in good part, it will abundantly add to that satisfaction I have in my own Spirit, in delineating, and copying them out of my own breast to you. Though I doubt not, but many of his cordial Friends, Reverend Fellow-Brethren and dear Neighbours, that knew him longer, lived nearer to him, and were more frequently parta∣kers of his indefatigable Labours, and more happy in a continued Con∣verse with him, can help you with whole Sheaves of his worth and ex∣cellency, and of the various passages of his most strict and holy Conver∣sation; of which these are but some Gleanings only.
The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Wads∣worth, who Died Anno Christi, 1676. THomas Wadsworth was born of honest Parents, December 15. Anno Chri∣sti, 1630. in the arish of Saviours, or Saint Mary-Overees, in South∣wark. Whilst he wn Infant he had such a dangerous Thrush in his Throat, that the Milk which was en into his Mouth (not having a right, and free Pas∣sage) came out at his Noe. And he was grown so weak within the Month, that in the Judgment of those about him, he was given up for Dead. Yea, the Nurse that had him in her Lap, thought to have laid him out as a dead Corps, onely for∣bore till they had done Dinner; in which space (the Nurse thinking that he had expired with a Grone) the Child gave a Keck, whereupon she putting her Finger into his Throat, pull'd out the Core, which being taken away, opened a free and straight passage for the Breast-Milk to go down his Throat. In this Infants weakness, his Parents seeking God earnestly for his Life, did dedi∣cate him to the Office and Work of the Ministry (if God should please to make him sit and capable, as Hannah did her Samuel to the Lord; he was a very dutiful and obedient Son to his Mother. He was an ingenious and apt Scholler in the Free-School in that place of his Nativity, where the strict, yet Skilful Master (encou∣raged by the Liberality of his Father) found him every way ready to receive In∣struction, and about the sixteenth year of his Age, being fitted for Accademical Studies, he was sent to Cambridge, and his Father being familiarly acquainted with the Reverend and Pious Dr. Samuel Bolton, who at this time was Lecturer of that Parish, and Master of Christs Colledg in Cambridge, who had often examined him in his Fathers House, and found him not onely Religiously disposed, but well accom∣plished with School-Learning; by his adivce, be was admitted into Christs Colledge, under the Tuition of Doctor Outram, who much respected and valued him as long as he lived. Before he went to Cambridge, he shewed that he was one of a tender Conscience, for when he was a Boy, having taken a fair Tulip out of another Man's Garden he gave it to his Father, who (sometime after) asking him where he had it? Upon his Fathers admonition, and his own confession of his childish folly (as St. Austin did his) it was often afterwards a great trouble to his Conseience, and kept him humble and watchful. So early did he begin o be startled at the least sin. On a Lords Day, going into the Work-House in his Fathers Yard, and loitering there a while, he heedlesly clapt his hand on a Tenter-Hook, and tore it very much; whereupon he resolved no more to mispend his time on the Lords-Day; but wholly to apply himself to the Religious observation of it; which resolution he ever after adhered to, and observed, whether at home or abroad. Being now in the university, he made a good proficiency in the Learning which might make him most Instrumental for the winning of Souls to Christ, that being his cheifest Design in the Service of his Generation; in order whereunto, we find him associating himself with an honest Club of Schollers, of his own, and other Col∣ledges, who were not onely daily conversant in Philosophical Exercises, but did frequently meet to promote the great business of real Godliness, and growth in Grace, and to make experiments on their own hearts of that Religion when they should be called to impart to others. And it seems he began betimes to communicate what he had received of the Grace of God; for not long after his being of that Colledge, he observed a young Scholler of very good Parts, and of a good Humour, but having nothing of real Godliness, whom he would seek, and single out and talk with, to draw him off from vanity, and to engage him to mind the concerns of his precious and immortal Soul. And it pleased God that in a short time, that same Scholler fell sick unto Death, and upon his Death-bed sent for our Mr. Wadsworth, to whom he declared how much he was affected with what he had formerly said unto him in his Health, thanking him for the love and care he had shewed for the good of his Soul; he also
bewailed his own Folly in declining such an ones Company, and requested his ear∣nest Prayers with him, and for him. And Mr. Wadsworth dealt freely and most compassionatly with him, and afterward he so comforted this dejected Penitent, that he gave good evidence of a real work of Grace wrought upon his Heart, and Dyed very comfortably, to the great joy of the Instruments. He kept a Diary or Note-Book, which he began (as it seemeth) Anno Christi 1650. wherein it appears that he kept a strict narrow watch over his Heart, took notice of the abarrations and wandrings of it, and of Gods gracious dispensations to∣wards him; which for brevity sake I omit, referring t Reader to his Life writ∣ten much larger, and Printed for Tho. Parkhust, Anno Csti 1680. Anno Christi 1652. He being yet but Bachilor of As, it pleased God to take away his aged Father by Death, whereupon his worldly concerns called him home to the place of his Nativity. Here, when he had performed the last Offices to his Dying, and Dead Father, and was comforting his sorrowful Mother, and instruc∣ting the Family; he was importuned by some godly Christians of his acquaintance, to exercise, and imploy his Talents in Preaching the Gospel as occasion should be offered. And this motion upon their Invitation he readily Embraced; and by his Preach∣ing gave such evident Proofs of his Experimental Knowledge, Utterance, and his Zeal for God and his Glory, that upon the Death of Mr. Morton (a very Reve∣rend and Worthy Minister) the Parishioners of St. Mary Newington-Buts, having heard him Preach, and being satisfied of his Learning, Piety, and Ministerial Abili∣ties, Petitioned for him to those who were then in Authority, and Feb. 16. 1652. he was ordered to the Rectory, as a Godly and Orthodox Divine. And this was very Remarkable in his Election; yet, though the Parishioners were divided into two several Parties, and both went with their Petitions unto Westminster to have a Mi∣nister setled among them, neither Party knowing the others mind, yet, they both pitched upon him, for whom the unanimous Parishioners did easily obtain a Grant. Probably, much about this time, he was chosen a Fellow of Christs Colledg, whereof he was a Member before; yet, by the advice of Dr. Bolton, afore-men∣tioned, who was the Head of the House, and his special Friend, he resolved to ac∣cept of the charge at Newington, where he was so unanimously desired, and where he might (as he thought) have a better opportunity of doing good to Souls, which thing was most upon his heart. Having now a Pastoral charge, his next business and care was to proceed to Or∣dination, and having after a strict Examination, and Profession of his Faith, been solemnly set apart to the Ministerial Office by Fasting and Prayer, and the laying on of the Presbitery's Hands in a great Congregation, in the Church of St. Mary-Ax, London: He, like a good Husband-man, considering what course to take for the best advantage of the People, now committed by God to his charge, and re∣solved to Catechize them, which he was very zealous to do, which also he did with very great and good success. On the Lords days in his own Family, when his great work was over in the Pub∣lick Congregation, he had his Sermons repeated, and himself Prayed, and sung Psalms with them: And being well instructed of his Lord and Master, and remem∣bring the Apostles charge. 2 Tim. 4. 2. Preach the Word: be instant, in season, out of season, &c. About this time, there being a great and long Frost, when poor Wa∣termen were hard put to it for a Subsistance, he set up an expository Lecture, for four or five mornings in a week, which he continued at least two months together, and his Labours were attended with God's special Blessings: for it proved a means of turning several Persons from the evil of their ways to God, and some that had lived loosly, could, with humility and thankfulness acknowledge, that a work of Grace was then wrought upon them, so that there were the Seals of his Ministry, and of that Truth, Prov. 25. 11. A word spoken in season, &c. Thus this painful Servant of God continued in the work of his Ministry, till he was forced to resign that Benefice to one Mr. James Meggs, in the twelfth of King Charles the 2d. and in the month of August, he pretending a legal title to the place. Yet the great God, who had made much use of this choise Instrument in his work, would not as yet let him lye by useless. For besides his Lecture on Saturday morn∣ings
at St. Antholines, and sometimes also there at five a Clock in the evenings on the Lords day, and for some time on Munday-Nights at Margaret Fishstreet-Hill, Lon∣don; where, by the concourse of Auditors, it was evident that his Labours were much valued; he was, by the Parishioners of Lawrence-Poultney (in whose Hand the Presentation to the Place then was) chosen to be their Minister, where he con∣tinued (being then a Widdower) in the House of his worthy Friend, Mr. Robert de Luna, Merchant, till that Black Bartholomew Anno Christi 1662. at which time, he, with many Hundreds more of his Brethren, were cast out of their Places, and Imployments. At the request of his Friends, he Preached a Farewel Sermon to them on Satur∣day-night before that dismal day, though they spake not to him till that very day at Dinner, and requested him to Preach upon that Text, Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard, and a Book of Remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought on his Name. Having Dined, he went aside to his Meditations. He would often say; Blessed be God, if I have but a little time to premeditate and digest my matter, I am ne∣ver at a loss for words on my Masters Ambassy. 'Twas observed by his Friends, who most conversed with him, and in whose House he sojourned for some time, that he was a Praise-worthy man in all his Deportment, of singuler Piety, and a constant promoter of Holiness in the Families wherein he resided. He used to be much raised in his Spirit when he came from Preaching, especially from the Table of the Lord, being then as in an Heaven upon Earth. He would with much Prudence reprove sin in any Person, of what Quality or Rank soever. That might rightly be said of him, which is Recorded of Mr. H. Latimer, Martyr. He did behave himself as a faithful Messenger of God, being afraid of no man: Telling all Degrees their Duties faithfully and truly, without respect of Persons, or any kind of flattery. He cared not much to converse with the Rich, except it were to bring them off to works of Charity. When, in the things of this World he met with Disappoint∣ments, he used to pass them over as not much concerned. In Discourse he was ve∣ry mild, and would suffer others to speak, and having heard them, he would with∣out Passion, and with Judgment and clearness return an answer to them. If he heard one Christian speak bitterly against another, he would say, that pro∣bably he meant better than he expressed himself: and if what he said could be ta∣ken in two Senses, it ought to be Interpreted in the best. Those who were best ac∣quainted with him, observed that he was a Prudent Man, very serious, and usually very chearful. Going in Frost and Snow to Preach, a Friend meeting him, said, that he pittied him in regard of his bad Journy; to whom he charfully answered, that it was to do his Masters Work; and going, it was no Burden to him to serve so good a Master, though he passed through many Difficulties. He had early Impressions upon his Heart (as we heard before) for the strict Sanctification of the Lords Days, which continued with him so long as he lived. For several years it was his usual Practice, when he rose out of his Bed on those Days, with a chearful Heart and Voice, to sing a Psalm, or part of it; for the putting of his Heart into a spiritual frame for the Work of the Day; or to repeat that Sa∣lutation of the Heavenly Host, Recorded, Luke 2. 14. Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, Goodwill towards Men. And by such means his Spirit was much raised, zealously to perform the Lord's Work. He was for the due Sanctification of the whole Day, not only in the publick Congregation, but in his Family, and amongst his Friends: And if he heard any of them talk about Worldly busi∣nesses, he would with Candour rebuke them, saying, St. John when he was in Dalmos, was in the Spirit on the Lords Day. His Humility was such, that speaking to one of his near Relations; he said, if it were possible that I could do so much Work for God as any man upon Earth doth; I would not care whether it were known that there was such a Man as I in the World or no. So little did he regard the applause of men in what he did; and truly neither did he regard the reward of men: For when he was told of some Presents; which, by some of his Neighbours were sent to some of his Brethren in the Ministry, and being demanded whether they had been with him; he answered
no: Saying, that he was not sorry that he was passed by in that way. Yea, (said he) I am heartily glad that I had none of their Presents, that so I may receive my Reward from my Master; for I am never better pleased then to think that af∣ter I have done his Work, Jesus Christ hath all my Reward in Reversion for me. Yea, he used to express some trouble when any of the meaner People brought him any small thing. For though he thankfully accepted of their kindness, yet he would signifie that he desired not to be burdensom to them. Yea, he used great∣fully to accept of Favours though never so small. One bringing of him a little cordial Water, being ill after his Preaching, with his Eyes lifted up to Heaven, he said, what am I, or my Fathers House, that God is so mindful of me a poor Creature? Oh! Blessed be God. His impartiallity in judging of differences among his Friends and Acquaintance was remarkable. And he used to advise his Friends to watch for opportunites to seek God in private, wherein himself also was very frequent. When a Door was opened to him to Preach at Theobalds, though he met with many Difficulties, yet was he partly necessitated to abide there for the health of his Family, and God encouraged him by a great confluence of Hearers, to whom his Labours were very grateful. His Charity was manifested to his distressed Brethren, in making many Col∣lections for them in the places where he Preached; and he had a singular faculty in disposing his Hearers to give liberally. Himself was not given to filthy lucre, nor of a covetous mind; he was charitable to the Poor, and affable in conversing with Christians of the meaner rank. He would often say, he rejoyced to send them away in a chearful frame, because they were Gods Creatures, and it was God∣like to make the hearts of the Poor merry: he would not have those of his Family too hard in buying things of poor People; saying, they would rejoyce if they had a good price for their Commodities which they carried about to sell. And farther to shew his freedom from Covetousness: when T. S. the Son of his second Wife, by a former Husband, was dangerously sick of the small Pox, and by his Death Mr. Wadsworth would have gotten six hundred pounds; yet he called his godly Friends together, and again, and again, sought the Lord for the recovery of him, and prevailed, and upon his restauration to Health, in the like solemn man∣ner returned thanks unto God for the same. Whilst he was at Newington, many overtures and motions were made to him for the change of his Condition, but he hearkened to none of them; having before fixed his Eye upon one, unto whom, after mature deliberation, he made known his affections, and her Parents consented that she should match with him. She was a vertuous young Gentlewoman, of a good Family, being a younger Daughter of Henry Hasting, Esq; of the Parish of Newington-Buts. By her he had born to him, Octob. 3. 1661. a Son, named Henry Hastings: but the Pious Mother, lived not above ten days after his Birth; dying Octob. 13th. next following, and her Son soon followed his Mother, dying Novemb. 15. at Nurse. After which, he sojourned for a short time with his good Friend Mr. O. S. and af∣terwards with Mr. De Luna. And having continued a Widdower about two years, he was recommended to a virtuous Widdow Mrs. Margaret Sharp; Daughter to Henry Gibs of Bristol, Esq; and the Relict of Mr. Tho. Sharp, Merchant; about No∣vember 1663. to whom also he was conjoined in Marriage. She had a Son by her former Husband, who also left a Daughter (Lucy Sharp) whom he had by a former Wife: This Daughter being Consumptive, did not long survive the Marriage of her Mother in Law; but in her sickness did greatly bless God, for her being thereby Related to Mr. Wadsworth, whose Instructions, and Pray∣ers she found to be succesful for the good of her immortal Soul. Mr. Wadsworth, about this time, for his Health-sake, lived mostly at Theobalds, yet came to Preach to his Congregation in Southwark. By this Wife he had a Son born to him, Octo. 10. 1666. named Josiah; whose Mother became sickly, inso∣much as Jan. 3. 1667. left her Husband a sorrowful Widdower again. This Son Jo∣siah lived about five years and an half, to the great comfort of his Father; but March 25. 1672. he followed his Mother, he was very dear to his Father, who was much affected with, and afflicted for his loss, yet set a fair Copy to others of much Christian Patience, and submission to the will of God.
After this he continued a Widower about the space of Three Years, and then Married a Third Wife, Anno, the sole Daughter of Collonel Markham, of an An∣cient Family, and a Gentleman of his Majesties Privy-Chamber; by whom he had first Anna, then Hester, after her Thomas, and lastly Nathanael. These Four he left alive when himself died; but his youngest Son, when he was about a Year and half old, departed this Life to rest with his Father, who died about a Twelvemonth before. In the time of perfect Health he was mindful of a Change, and used often to Pray, That God would prepare him and his for Sickness, Death, and parting. About half a Year before his last Sickness, being taken with an exceeding sharp Pain, when it was over, he said, That he would not have been without it, because of those Joys which he found accompanying of it. About this time he left his House in Theobalds, and came to one in Pickle-Herring; this was about Three Weeks, and odd Days before he Died. About Octob. 16. 1676. He was chearful in the Morning, but in the Afternoon his Pain came upon him; yet did he possess his Soul in more then ordinary Pati∣ence, nor was willing to send for a Doctor till Octob. 24. after his having been in extream pain Night and Day for a Week together. Then by the great importuni∣ty of his Friends, he was prevailed with, and sent for one who was in great Re∣putation, both for Skill and Practice. The Doctor at his first Visit Judged it to be the Stone, not doubting but that he would do well notwithstanding. This was Octob. 24. the Night after he slept well, which he considering, said to some of his Friends, That he was like a Man that had gone over a Precipice, and looking back, trembled to see the Danger he had passed. For (said he) when I was in pain, God supported me; and now I stand amazed to consider how I got through. He would often say, when he saw others in great pain, That he was afraid of Dying, because of those Antecedent pains; but he was not afraid to be Dead, knowing that then he should for ever be with the Lord. On Wednesday the 25th, he rose pretty chearful, and spent some time in Read∣ing, but after Dinner his pains returned again; and he began to complain of Sin, saying, Ah! vile Sinner! God is carrying me back again into the Wilderness to afflíct me, and withal he expressed some sorrow of Heart, but without the least Mur∣mering. There he bad his Wife to Read the 88th Psalm; and by that time she had done, divers Friends came into Visit, and bemoan him; and about Seven a Clock at Night came in his Wives Brother, Mr. W. Gibs, and his Wife, who greatly respect∣ed, and loved him dearly. They discoursed with him about taking an House near∣er London then Theobalds: To whom he replied, with great calmness of Spirit; Yea, God will provide me a Country, viz. an Heavenly. Then his former Wives Son, [Tho. Sharp,] being to go to Sea, he said unto him thus, It is not likely that we Two shall meet again hear, and he (with Tears) gave him a most Pathetical Exhortation, to mind his Souls Spiritual and Eternal Welfare, to Serve God Holily, Righteously and Soberly, in this present World. The Night following his Pains returned with much acuteness. On Thursday Morning, the 26th Day, he had again sharp pains; and in the Af∣ternoon some Ministers, and Christian Friends met, earnestly to seek the Lord in his behalf. And his pain returning again, he said, He was in an Agony, but not in a Bloody one: And what are all my pains to those which Christ suffered for me. And his Friends Prayed earnestly, that God would give him Faith and Patience; he often said, Though thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee. And when they were importunate with God, that he would spare his Life, and restore him to Health, he said, Ah! poor useless, sinful, wretched Creature, that they should be so earnest for my Life. And when their Prayers prevailed not for his ease, he would be often stilling and quieting himself with this of Holy Job, What shall I say unto thee, O thou Preserver of Men? One Minute in Heaven will make amends for all this pain. On Fryday (the 27th) his pains continued, yet his Doctor said, There was no danger. Towards the Evening he had some intermission, and Read in his own Book, concerning the Immortality of the Soul, and Faiths Triumph over the Fears
of Death. That Night some choice Friends sat up with him: when being again Racked with grievous pain, he spake to this purpose, O! the wonderful Mysteries of th Providence of God! who can see a Job cast out upon a Dunghil, filled with Botches and Boiles, forsaken by his Friends, and worried by Satan: and yet at that very time God had not a more choise Servant on the Face of the Earth, nor one more dear unto him then he was. Two of his Congregation coming to see him, said, If it should please God to take him away, then they should be a scattered Flock, as Sheep without a Shep∣herd: To whom he Answered, The great Shepherd of his Flock liveth still, and shall to all Eternity; who, I doubt not, will take care of you. On Saturday Morning, (the 29th Day) his intimate Friend Mr. O. S. came, by whose help he made his last Will and Testament, Constituting his Wife his sole Execu∣trix: And when he had thus set his House in Order, he took his leave of the World, and told his Wife he had now done with Wife and Children. And being asked how it was with him, as to Soul concerns? he answered, I Bless the Lord, I have no Cloud upon my Spirit, yet if my God should give Satan leave, he may put me into an Agony before I Die. He also repeated that of Solomon, The Soul knows its own Bitterness, and a Stranger intermedleth not with his Joy. He told a Minister thus, All my Self-Righteousness I disown, and I trust only unto Christ, and hope that I have a Gospel-Righteousness. In the Evening, seeing his wife weep, he said, I pray thee weep not; but (with Hezekiah) turn thy Face to the Wall, and Pray. That Night as he grew weaker his pains grew stronger; but when an acute pain was over, he would oft say, Now this pain is over, I shall know it no more. And to one that stood by, whom he thought not to have walked acuratly, he said, Now see the benifit of a good Conscience: when they had given him something to provoke him to sleep, though his Speech was somewhat interrupted with pain and drowsiness; after a little slumber, he said, I long to see a People Rich in Spiritual Graces, as well as in Spiritual Priviledges: But surely God hath here a Peculiar People, a Royal Priesthood, that Serve him Day and Night in Sincerity. On the Lords Day in the Morning, (the 29th Day) his Wife asking him whether he knew her: what (said he) not know thee: not know my Wife: thou wouldst make me think that I am going to Triumph before I am. Yet was his Triumph not many Hours after: for about One Clock that Lords Day, (on which Blessed Days he had used to be much in an Heavenly frame,) this choise Servant of the Lord resigned up his Spirit into the hands of his Heavenly Father. After his Death, his Body being opened, there was taken out of his Bladder a Stone in the shape of an Egg, which did then weigh betwixt Three and Four Ounces. He Died October the 29th, Anno Christi, 1676. And of his Age, 46. An ELEGY on the Death of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Wadsworth. WEll may the Church now wash her Wounds in Tears, When her best Blood from ev'ry Vein appears: If the sound Members be cut off so fast, Sure the whole Body 'ill pine away at last: For when our Right Hands, and Eyes are gone, The sorry Stump will feel Consumption; And every one, like that Disciple, cry; John 11. 16. Let us go Partners in his Fate, and Die. The Ark is Israel's Charet; but when Death Pursues its chiefest Horsemen out of Breath, Well may our Wheels be taken off, and we Be driven to dispair of Remedy. If God proceed to fill his Garners so With Lab'rers which we need so much below,
Such Chaff as we do almost justly fear, God hath no Israel to be gathered here. And if provoked Justice should begin To whet its Sword, and thrust its Sikle in; O! dreadful Harvest: when the Reaper claims The whole for Fewel to Eternal Flames. God's naked Vineyard cannot but decay, If skilful Dressers be thus call'd away. And how can we expect but that they will, When we're thus Barren in a Fruitful Hill: Laden with such wild Grapes, as Veng'ance hath Adjudged to the Winepress of his Wrath. The firmest Stake in all our Hedge we see Pluck't up by the same Hand successively, And God's just Counsel sure of us in store, Is to lay wast, and to Replant no more. Hedges of Thorns there are, not for defence, But only set to gore our Innocence. Wild Bores of th' Roman Forrest may Invade, By us there can be no resistance made; For at these Breaches they'l come in, and then Whose skill or strength, shall drive them out agen? The little Foxes spoil our tender Fruit, And who can take them, 'nless the Keepers do't? Doctrine and Worship, like Two Clusters stand Expos'd to be snatch'd by ev'ry Hand; And they that boldly dare call Evil Good May give us Poison next instead of Food. Well may the Philistins now proudly Boast, When all our Champions leave the wounded Host, Now, that the danger's greatest, and they think In heat of War to give us Blood to drink: So we, who hop'd to see Goliah fall, Follow our Leaders to their Funeral. When such as these Defie God's Mighty Name, Who shall stand forth to vindicate the same? For they that knew best how, have left us here To strive at once with Ignorance, and Fear. Suspecting Error, 'tis an easie Crime In weaker Eyes to shun the Truth sometime: And when our Light is gone, Men in the Dark Will bring their Tinder to a Wild-fire Spark. When Reason climbs the Throne, we stand in doubt Whether our Faith may cast this Hagar out. But now those Eagles face the Sun, whose Flight Hath made their Faith to vanish into sight: No Vail's within the Temple: therefore they Have open Vision, and perfect Day. These Palm-Trees once adorn'd our Sion Hill, And though by Death cut down, they flourish still; But in an other Soil, and Country where They only now a weight of Glory bear, And other Pressures taken off, they soar Above those Skies they could not reach before. No other Canaan now, but that is known With Milk and Honey always overflown. Rivers of Pleasure run on ev'ry Hand, Like Chanels cut thro-out this Promist Land: From future danger they're escap'd, whilst we Survive to feel the threatned Misery:
For 'tis most certain when the Bridsgrooms Friends Are called home, God's Marriage-Treaty ends; Which, after such remisness, and neglect, Is but what Foolish Virgins might expect. Thus what they feared, and predicted too, May be accomplish'd in our final Woe: And though the Messengers are gone, we find Their Message in full force shall stay behind, Like to that Church above, Truth will appear To shame Despisers, yet Tryumphant here. Among that throng who have so lately fled Out of their Bodies to embrace their Head, This Man of God hath taken Wing, to tast whether the best Wine be reserv'd till last: There he is proving what he prov'd before; Now in the Ocean, then upon the Shore. That Immortality of which each Line Partakes, and thereby proves it self Divine: Thus in his Book, besides his own intent, He rais'd himself a lasting Monument, Wherein his Name shall live, and Readers come Like Devout Pilgrims, visiting his Tomb. And as his Faith the Fears of Death o'recame, So shall those Papers evidence the same. For what he had by Reason taught long since, He after learned by Experience. His Agonistic Tortures and his Pains Scru'd up his joyful Soul to higher Strains Of Tryumph, and when Nature strugled, he Obtain'd by Grace the greater Victory. Wonder and Pity both were mov'd in those Who were Spectators of his Pangs and Throws. Well might all such conclude, that saw him then, That Dying Saints are somewhat more then Men; For when he smarted most by's Fathers Rod, Still our dear Thomas cry'd, my Lord, my God; As seeing now his wounded Hands and Side, Whom he had Preach'd, through weakness Crucifi'd: Thus Patience had its perfect works: at length Like one, whose Conflict had encreas'd his Strength, He Tryump'd over all, and did commit His Soul to him that had Redeemed it: His Course so finish'd, he at last sat down, And he that first won Souls, then won the Crown. These works now follow him, while he's possest Of 'is full Reward in everlasting Rest: Faithful in all God's House, like Moses, still H'obey'd the Sov'raign Legislative Will; Observ'd the Pattern in the Mount, although Mens wanton Fancies would not have it so; But by God's Post attempt to set their own, As if that were too weak to stand alone. 'Twas not Event, but Duty, which his Eye Fix'd as the Measure to be guided by. His Courage in his Warfare was so great, Nothing could ever force him to retreat; But still he kept his Ground, as who should say, If I lose that, I also lose the Day. Therefore let Enemies do what they can, My fear of God hath drown'd the fear of Man.
Thus did he sow in Tears, till now at last To him this low'ring Stormy Season's past, And his full Sheaves of Glory make amends For light Afflictions, with what far Transcends, He liv'd Belov'd, and Di'd Bewail'd, and such Wh' enjoy'd him most, enjoy'd him not too much. His Bodies Earthen Vessel henceforth must Be laid up silent in its Native Dust Until that Matter when the Trump shall sound, Start with a better form out of the Ground. He walks in his Uprightness: But the Sense Of this his Sleep should make our Diligence. That when with Christ the Judg among the Train Of Saints and Angels he shall come again, Thus in that General Assembly, we May sing these Sion Songs Eternally. S. O. Not worthy to unloose The Latcher of his Shoos.
The Life and Death of Mr. Owen Stock∣ton, who Died Anno Christi, 1680. OWen Stockton was Born in the City of Chichester in the County of Sussex, His Birth and Learning. May the 31st, Anno 1630. He was the Fourth Son of Mr. Owen Stockton, a worthy Prebendary of that Cathedral, and was a younger Brother to that ancient Family of the Stocktons of Kiddington-Green in Cheshire. About the Seventh Year of his Age his Father Died, and left the care of this Owen, and his other Children to their Mother, a Pious Gentlewoman of the Fami∣ly of the Tilees, in Cambridgshire. And she being now a Widow, and but a Stran∣ger in Chichester, soon after the Death of her Husband, left that City, and return∣ed into her own Country, and setled her Habitation at Ely, where was a very good Grammar-School, under the Government of Mr. William Hitches, to whose care she commited this her Son, to be Instructed and Educated by him. From his very Childhood he was of great Hopes, which yet a little Grammar-Scholar: Hopefulness. His Ingenuity, and inclination unto Learning, was such, as presaged more then ordinary improvement. Once, accidentally looking into Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, which lay in one of the Churches of that City, and Reading some little part thereof, he was so affected with, and desirous of the fuller knowledg of that History, that he never ceased to importune his Friends, till he had obtained One Volume of it for his use. And having once gotten it, declining all Childrens Recreations which his School-fellows busied themselves in, and for some Years, he spent all his vacant time, and what he could redeem from his School imployment, in reading it. His Judicious Master discerning in him a ready natural capacity for Learning, and a desire after it, together with Industry, and diligence in his Studies, (for though he spent so great a part of his time out of School in Reading that Histo∣ry) yet withal, he so performed his Task and Exercises in the School, as that he never gave occasion to his Master, either to correct, or rebuke him. And also observing his Daily constant attendance upon the Worship of God, according to the Orders of the School: He earnestly commended him to his Mother, perswa∣ding her not to think of any other Trade, or course of Life for him, but that he should be prepared for, and sent to the Ʋniversity, in order to the Office, and work of the Ministry. Himself also being inclined to it, and was fitted for Accademical Studies, in the Sixteen Year of his Age, Jan. the 2d, Anno Christi, 1645. He was admitted into . Christs College in Cambridg, under the Tuition of the Learned Dr. Henry Moore. His Years were not many, but his Stature was much less then others usually are at that Age, so that for some time he could not pass along the Streets without spe∣cial notice taken of him, and expressed upon that account. His Residence in the College whilst he was an under Graduate, was so constant, Diligence. that he was not absent a Month in any one of those Years: And such was his So∣briety, that he abstained not only from Publick Houses; but in other places and company, from Wine and strong Drink, as judging Nature, in his Age, not to stand in need of such Helps. When he had taken his Degree of Batchelor of Arts, he resided still in the Col∣lege, seriously applying himself to the study of Divinity, which he always most aimed at, and intended. And in pursuance thereof, he went to London, and spent some Months there, acquainting himself with the principal Booksellers, from whom Goeth to Lon∣don. he took an account of the best Writers in Divinity of that time, frequenting Sion College Library, and the Lectures at Gresham College. He applied himself also to divers Learned and Worthy Ministers in the City, and attended on their Ministry, and the Morning Exercises, that he might observe the variety of Mens Gifts, and their several Methods in Preaching. By these means he Prudence. made so much improvement of himself, that he often said, That if it should please
God to give him a Son, disposed to the Ministry, he would give it him as his parti∣cular advice, before he ventured upon the Ministerial Imployment, that he should spend some Months in London, attending upon those Learned Divines, which excel∣led in the Gift of Preaching, wherewith the City is usually well furnished. Mr. Stockton being much affected, and pleased with these Studies, resolved to P pursue them earnestly, and to prepare himself for the work of the Ministry, he did privatly, and yet in a most solemn, and serious manner, by Fasting and Prayer, make as it were, a Dedication of himself unto God for that Ser∣vice. When he was middle Batchelor, he was removed from Christs College, and made a Junior Fellow of Gonvile and Caius College, about the begining of the Year 1651. where, after a Years continuance, and Probation of his worth, he was Translated from that to a Senior Fellowship, which also he enjoyed by the space of Six Years, in which time he discharged the Offices of a Steward, of Catechist, and Conduct, to the great benifit and advantage of the whole House. And here it was that the Lord trained up this his Disciple to be a Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of God, furnishing him so plentifully with Divine and Spiritual Knowledg, that he could readily bring forth out of his Treasure things both new and old, which he gained as well by Experience, and Observation of Gods dealing with him, and by the Operation of Gods Spirit upon his Heart, as by Industrious Study and Meditation. He was able to speak pertinently, suitably and seasonably to the various Capacities, Cases and Conditions, both of Saints and Sinners, and become a happy and powerful Instrument in Gods Hand for the Conversion, Edifi∣cation, Consolation and Salvation of many Souls. His design and desire being to serve the Lord Jesus Christ in the Office and Work of the Ministry, he directed the course of his Studies with special respect to that Service. And though his Place, and Exercises in the University obliged him to the Study of Philosophy, wherein he was equal to most, yet the Study of Divinity was his , his work: Not satisfying himself with the Reading of the Elaborate Writings of the most Learned Divines, wherewith he furnished his Library at the Expence of some Hundreds of Pounds; yet especially he adicted himself to the Study of the Sacred Scriptures, as containing the whole counsel of God, which, as a Minister, he was to declare unto Men. This course of his Studies God so blessed and prospered, that it may be truly said of him, as is said of Apollos, [Acts 18. 24.] He was mighty in the Scrip∣tures: His Head, Memory, Heart and Tongue were full of the Scriptures, where∣of he hath abundantly evinced by his Scriptural Catechism. And in the opening and applying the word of God, his Gift was excellent, and peculiar; so that all that knew him, or that were acquainted with his Discourse, Ministry or Writings, must testifie that with the holy Apostle St. Paul, he preferred the Learning gotten at the Feet of Christ, above all that he had got at the Feet of Gamaliel: And though he had the valuable accomplishments of other Learning, yet he determined not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. In this Knowledg, he was like to Saul, higher then most of his Brethren from the Shoulders, and up∣wards. Probably he propounded to himself for his Pattern, that Eminent and Powerful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Arthur Hildersam. But Knowledg alone is not sufficient for a Minister of the Gospel. He is best accomplished, whose Knowing-Head affects his Heart, and Governs his Life; who knows Revealed Truths, as well by Spiritual Sense and Experience, as by Specula∣tion. The Spirit of God is a Spirit of Truth, and of Life too: Communicates both Grace and Gifts, and teaches as well to Live well, as to Preach well: Both which met together in this excellent Person. The Word of God dwelt richly both in his Head and Heart, and was effectually the Law of his Life: He was both a Burning and a Shining Light. A Man more then ordinarily mortified to the Pleasures of the Flesh, and to the Vanities of the World: Freely and resolvedly devoted to the Fear of God: His Conversation was in Heaven: His Communion with God: His delight in the Saints: His Business was Religion: His Zeal for Holiness: His main Design, the Glorifying God, and the Salvation of his own, and others Souls. As for his Practice of Mortification, it cannot be better expressed then in his own words.
Having (saith he, in his Diary) been soiled by the Lusts of mine own Heart se∣veral times, and considering what I should do to get rid of those Lusts, which had so often prevailed over me, od directed me to three several means. The one was suggested to me as I was walking in my Garden, and meditating on the af∣fairs of my Soul, and that was, to be more frequent in eying, applying, and me∣ditating on the Promises. And the Scripture which the Holy Ghost set before me for this end, was 2 Pet. 1. 4. By the precious Promises which are given to us, we escape the Pollutions that are in the World through Lust: The other was suggested to me as I was hearing a Sermon, and that was; to be daily applying the Lord Jesus to my Soul; grounded on Rom. 13. 14. where the Apostle advises us to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, as an help against Chambring and Wantonness, &c. The third was suggested to me as I was riding abroad, and discoursing on the things of God, and that was Gal. 5. 16. walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the Lusts of the Flesh. In the pursuance of these means for the mortifying of the Lusts of the Flesh, I determined with my self to eye the promises of God more frequently then I had done; and to that end, I chose out some Promises that are of daily, and con∣tinual use; and intended, by the help of God, to salute and embrace them once a day, and not onely to take a vew of them my self, but in my Meditations and Soliloquis to spread them before the Lord, and to put God in remembrance of them. For supplying all the wants of the Day, I chose out that promise, Phil. 4. 19. For Growth in Grace, Hos. 14. 5. For subduing my Sins, Mich. 7. 19. Rom. 6. 14. For success in my undertaking, Psal. 1. 3. For turning all the events of the Day for good to me, Rom. 8. 28. For the Conversion, and Sanctification of my Children, Isa. 44. 3. For my Yoak-Fellow, and Servants, and all others in my Family, that they might reap good from me, and return to God, and grow in Grace, Hos. 14. 7. For Sanctifying mine Afflictions, Isa. 27. 9. Zech. 13. 9. For Audience of my Prayers, Mich. 7. 7. John 14. 13, 14. For Grace and Strength to mannage all the Work of the Day, to the Glory of God Zech. 10. 12. For Protection from Dangers and Casualties, Gen. 15. 1. For giving me eternal Life, in case the Day should bring Death to me, Luk. 12. 32. John 3. 16. For Counsel, and Direction in all Cases of difficulty, and unexpected emer∣gencies, Isa. 58. 11. Psal. 32. 8. I judged it also very conducible to the Glory of God, and my own Souls good, to mannage all my Imployments, as much as may be with an eye to the Promises, and as to my calling, where I am studying to compose Sermons (Deut. 28. 8.) when I go to Preach, Matt. 28. 19, 20. and for success in my Preaching, Isa. 56. 8.  65. 23. I was the more confirmed in this frequent, and familier converse with the Promises, not onely as is helps on our Participation of the Divine Nature, and our escaping the pollution which is in the World through Lust, but because the Lord commands us to be always mindful of his Covenant, (1 Chron. 16. 15.) and it pleases God to see us taking hold of his Covenant (Isa. 56. 4.) and it is for the Glory of God, 2 Cor. 1. 20. I determined also, when I should feel the working of any Lust, presently to look up to Jesus Christ. It being the Remedy which the Holy Ghost prescribes against such Sins as do most easily beset us (Heb. 12. 1, 2.) I have often been encouraged, and helped in this Practise, of looking unto Jesus to subdue my sins, from Act. 3. ult. God sent his Son Jesus to bless us in turning us every one from his Iniquities. Beza's Notes upon that Text is very good, and hat been of much use to me, viz. that the Greek Word for Iniquities, signifies the Roots, and Habits of sin. I saw it was my Duty, and concernment every day, to be more frequent in applying my Soul to Christ and Christs benefits to my Soul. In pursuance of the third means of Mortification, viz. Walking in the Spirit, I resolved to endeavour to do my Works and Duties, both to God and Man, more
Spiritually, and in order hereunto, to reduce my actings to some Word, and as oft as I could to eye some Word of God, as I was entring upon them: As for in∣stance, if I be called out by Oaths, or stirred up in mine own Spirit to visit the sick, or any afflicted Person, then to have my thoghts on, Matt. 25. 36. or Jam. 1. 27. when any poor People come to me for relief, or any object of Charity is presented to me, then to eye Gal. 6. 10. or Heb. 13. 16. Isa. 58. 10. Eccl. 11. 1. or Prov. 19. 7. when a poor Man comes to borrow, then Deut. 15. 7, 8. 10. when to write Letters, or to take a Journey, or be any ways imployed for others; then Gal. 5. 13. Phil. 2. 4. when to visit out of courtesy, or to do any thing which courtesy requires, then 1 Pet. 3. 8. when to instruct my Servants and Children, then Deut. 6. 7. Gen. 18. 19. when to Catechise the Youth that comes to me; then Job. 21. 15. Prov. 22. 6. when invited to exercise abroad to Poor or Rich; then Isa. 32. ult. when to administer a reproof; then Levit. 19. 17. when to confer about Spiritual things, then Mal. 3. 17. This was the wise and Holy method which this faithful Servant and Souldier of of Jesus Christ prescribed to himself by Divine direction, whereby to manage the spiritual warfare with the sin that dwelled in him, that he might not be overcome by it. According to which he also charged himself with the Practice of universal positive holiness, which he expresses in his Diary. Being (saith he) under the rebukes of God's chastening Providence, I set apart a day to humble my Soul with Fasting and Prayer, that I might obtain from the Lord a sanctified use of mine Afflictions, I sought God to pardon my sins, which were the causes thereof, and to make them work for my good. I spent a good part of the Day in Meditating how I should make a right use of these Cor∣rections. I considered that one main end of Chastisoments was, that God might make us partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12. 10. Isa. 26. 9. And I resolved in the strength, and by the help of God, to follow after Holiness more vigorously than I had done, and I engaged this resolution, because I saw from Isa. 60. 21. that by my being Holy, and Righteous, God should be Glorified. And seeing the nature of Holiness lyeth in our bearing Gods Image, in our be∣ing like to God, or in our conformity to the Divine Nature,) Ephe. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.) I resolved to endeavour to imitate and resemble God in Mercifulness, Luke 6. 36. In forgiving Injuries, Eph 4. ult. in doing good, Psal. 119. 68. in Justice, Deut. 32. 4. in Love, John 4. 16. in Humility, Psal. 113. 5, 6. in Long-Suffering, Exod. 34. 6. in not retaining Anger, Psal 30. 5. in Uprightness, Isa. 26. 7. in Kindness, Luke 6. 35. in helping the Fatherless, the Stranger, and the Widdow, Psal. 10. 14. and Psa. 146. 9. and whereas we come to partake of Gods Image. 1st. By beholding the discovery which he hath made of himself and his glorious Attribute in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 18. 2ly. By applying the Promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4. 3ly. By walking with him, Acts 4. 13. For we grow like unto those with whom we converse, Prov. 22. 24, 25 I determined to walk with God, to cleave to the Promises, and to meditate often upon his glorious Attributes. And seeing that our Holiness consiets in the conformity of Life to the will of God, revealed in his Word, as well as in the resemblance of the Divine Nature, I determined to set before me several Scriptures as my Rule to walk by, and often to ponder them, and if I cannot walk up to these Rules, yet my endeavours shall be (Grace assisting) to walk after them, and that will be accepted as a De∣monstration of my Love to God, 2 John verse 6. For guiding and regulating my thoughts, I set these Scriptures before me, Jer. 14. 14. Isa. 55. 7. Mal. 3. 17. Psal. 104. 34. Phil. 4. 8. Prov. 23. 26. Deut. 15. 9. Eccl. 10. 20. Prov. 24. 9. Mat. 9. 4. Zech. 8. 17. For regulating mine Affections, these, Col. 3. 2. 5. Gal. 5. 24. perticularly for my Delight, Psal. 1. 2. and 37. 5. my Joy. Phil. 4. 4. Psal. 43. 4. my Desires, Isa. 26. 8, 9. my Sorrow, Ezek. 7. 16. my Love, Matt. 22. 37. and Psal. 119. 97. my Hatred, Psal. 97. 10. my Fears, Luke 12. 4, 5. my Hope, Psal. 39. 7. my Trust, Psal. 62. 8. Isa. 26. 4. For regulating my Speech, Eph. 4. 29. Col. 4. 6. Deut. 6. 6, 7. Psal. 19. 46. and 7. 8. 24. Prov. 41. 26. we should lay it as a Law upon our selves to speak kindly to all sorts of Persons.
For my Works these, Tit. 3. 8. 2 Tim. 2. 12. 1 Tim. 5. 10. Tit. 2. 14. Matt. 5. 47. 1 Tim. 6. 18. Rev. 3. 2. Rom. 13. 12. Acts 26. 20. Our Works must be visi∣ble, as well as truly good, Matt. 5. 16. must be exemplary, Tit. 2. 7. Yet we must not expect Justification, or Salvation by our own Works, but by Grace, Eph. 2. 8, 9. Rom. 3. 28. Thus did this Man of God gird himself with the Sword of the Spirit, which he faithfully and successfully managed against his Corruptions, and Temptations. Thus did he put on the Breast of Righteousness, holding the Mistery of Faith in a good Conscience, applying the Word of God as an inviolable Law, and Rule to his Heart and Life; sincerely aiming at the Glory of God, and the obtaining that Blessed∣ness; which, by the Covenant of God, is secured to the undefiled in the way who walk in the Law of the Lord, and by his Life conformable thereunto, demonstra∣ted the strictest Holiness, to be Practicable, Eligible, and Delectable by his own Example. But though he was liberally instructed by Nature, Art, and Grace for the Of∣fice, and Work of the Ministry; Yet, such low thoughts he had of himself, and such deep affecting apprehensions of the difficulty, and weight of the Work and Office of the Ministry; which, as it is in it self, so it was to him, Onus tremendum, a dreadful Burden, and he thought with Saint Paul, who is sufficient for these things. And though it was his Design and Desire to serve God and his Church in that great Work, yet he was so discouraged, that he would not (as too many do) hastily ad∣venture to seek for Ordination, but would first prove himself well, ask Counsel of God and his Word, and to attend a call of God by his Spirit and Providence. Being now Master of Arts, he did sometimes exercise his Gifts in some Countrey Villages near to Cambridge. And he used privately to enquire what small Parishes were within ten or fifteen Miles of the University and destitute of Ministers. And unto these he Preached, yet with such privacy, as for some time none knew of it but himself and the People to whom he Preached: yet, to many of them, it was a long time unknown from whence he came, and who he was. This Service he performed Gratis, without exspecting any Reward from Man: Yea, it was some burden to him. Among these Countrey People God blessed his Labours, and gave him the first Fruits of his Ministry, making him Instrumental and Succesful in the Confession, and Edification of many: whereby he was endear∣ed unto them, and they to him; that, after he was called to Preach in a Parish in Cambridge, he would yet go often among them on the week days, sometimes in one Place, and sometimes in another, and the People would lay aside their Coun∣trey Businesses, and readily Travel several Miles to attend upon his Mi∣nistry. Yea, after he was removed some considerable distance from them, into Essex and Suffolk, he would for the most part, so long as he lived, go once a Year to visit them, Preaching to them, and Conversing with them. After a while that he had thus Exercised his Gifts among this Country People, he observed Three things especially, which much encouraged him wholy to give up himself to the Office and Work of the Ministry. First, The benifiting of his own Soul in his Meditations for Preaching. Whilst he was studying for others, the Lord made it a word of Instruction to himself. And he found it the best means of growth, to be watering of others. Secondly, He found his heart much diverted from other Studies. Philosophy was very tedious to him. He found little satisfaction in Humane Authors, not to be compared with Meditation on Divine things. Yea, he desired all other Studies, and they were very unsavory to him. Thirdly, The Lord had been pleased, in some measure to Bless his Labors in sun∣dry places where he had Preached, and God so ordered it, that it came to his knowledg, which much encouraged him wholy to devote himself to the Mi∣nistry. Anno Christi, 1654. He was chosen Catechist in the College for that Year. In which Election there was a special Providence of God; for whereas before, the Master used to nominate the Fellow to such Offices as they should bear, he, this Year bad the Fellows to agree, and chuse among themselves; which they did, and chose among themselves according to their Seniority. He being absent upon busi∣ness,
they cast the Catechist place upon him, which he accepted of, and according∣ly began to discharge it in Michaelmas Term. This was the first place where he fell upon a constant course of Preaching: wherein God also much encouraged and Honoured him. For the very first Night that he began his Exercise, one of the Fel∣lows came to him, and told him, that he had felt the Power of God in that Ordi∣nance upon his Heart. The Statutes of the College tied him to these Exercises in Term-time only, but towards the end of that Term, he began to consider whether he should not conti∣nue that Exercise as well out of Term-time, as in Term-time: His Zeal to take all opportunities of doing Good prompting him to it: Whereunto he was much quickned by a Sermon Preached in St. Maries, by the Reverend and Learned Do∣ctor Tuckney, Professor of Divinity there, wherein he shewed what a Blessed and desirable thing it was to have the Church of God multiply and encreased, and in his Application, directing his Speech chiefly to the University, he said, That he did earnestly beseech every one of them in their places to endeavor the encrease of the Church of God, both by adding themselves, and endeavouring to add others to it: He looked upon this word as directed especially to himself, and took encourage∣ment from it to proceed chearfully in his work. About Easter following a motion was made to him by one of St. Andrews Parish in Cambridg, in the name of the rest, to supply that place; this he assented not to, yet he promised to give them a Sermon. But afterward the motion being again renewed with more importunity, he advised them to seek to God for dire∣ction in a Business of that weighty concernment, commending to them others of greater Abilities, and that had more Grace then himself: Yet he said, He would not at that time neither deny, nor promise any thing. About Six Weeks after there came Eight or Nine of them, in the name of all the rest, importuning him that he would Preach with them on the Lords Days in the Forenoon. And after a Fortnights consideration, and seeking of God, and consulting Friends, he complied with their desire, and accepted of the Service. Here God so Blessed his Ministry, both to the Schools, and People of the Town, that his Encouragement was very great, for which he heartily Blessed God. And in the College he so well acquitted himself, that the Year now expiring, he was again chosen Catechist for the Year ensuing. And being now satisfied that God called him to the Office of the Ministry, he resolved thoroughly to Devote himself to it by Ordination: For which end he went up to London, and being their Proved and Approved of, [Feb. 13. 1655.] he was solemnly set apart to this Office by Fasting and Prayer, and laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery: To which also God seemed to set to his Seal, both du∣ring the Action, by very Gracious Influences of his Spirit upon his Heart, beyond his Preparations: And on the Lords Day following, being requested to Preach both parts of the Day at the Charter-House, he understood that divers in that Congre∣gation were much affected with those his first Sermons after his Ordination. In his return from London he experimented a very gracious Providence of God, with which his Heart was much affected, which was this, The Night overtaking him before he could reach Hasting-Mills, (where the Waters were very high by reason of a Flood) just as he came almost to the Water, a Man met him, who knowing the danger, and the safest passage through, offered him his Service, and very kindly lent him his Horse, which was taller, and stronger then Mr. Stocktons, and by Riding before him, conducted him safely over, which else he could not have done without the hazard of his Life. Mr. Stockton being now returned unto his Charge in Cambridg, with what Con∣science, Faithfulness, Zeal and Diligence, he applied himself to the work to which he had Devoted himself, and was now solemnly set apart for, we may judg by what follows in his own words. July the 7th, 1656. I set a part that Day for Fasting and Prayer, to seek for Counsel of God, whether I should Preach in the Afternoon at St. Andrews: And now my time for Chappel-Exercises being expired, having humbled my self, and sought unto God for direction, I was by Scripture fully perswaded that it was th mind of God that I should do it, and that from these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17. Necessity is laid upon me, and Woe is to me, &c.
Eccle. 11. 6. In the Morning sow thy Seed, &c. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Always abounding in the work of the Lord, &c. Gal. 6. 10. As we have opportunity, &c. Hereupon I resolved to Preach once a Fortnight in the Afternoon, to which I was encouraged from Isa. 41. 10. and Matth. 28. ult.—Lo I am with you, &c. July the 13th, 1656. I began my Afternoons Exercises; begining with the Do∣ctrine of Repentance, and found the Lord much with me, assisting and enlarging me, and Blessing my Labours to some, &c. April the 21st. 1657. I set this Day apart by Fasting and Prayer, for direction in a Business which had lain upon my Spirit near half a Year, which was, to Preach once a Fortnight on the Week Days in St. Andrews, where I was placed: Ad consulting the Scriptures, these came into my mind, Acts 6. 4. We will give our selves contiually to Prayer, &c. Rom. 1. 1. 14, 15. where I saw that one seperated to the Gospel of Christ was a Debtor, and should be ready, as Isa. 40. 9. O thou that bringest good Tidings to Zion, &c. This Scripture I found set home with Life and Power in reference to my present doubt, the rather considering that it is main∣ly directed to such as are sent to Preach the Gospel, by comparing it with Isa. 52. 7. & Rom. 10. 15. Then did he consider and lay before him sundry Arguments moving him to un∣dertake, and set upon that Lecture. And after these he also set down his Discou∣ragement, which yet he answered and removed, and thereupon set up a Lecture once a Fortnight on Thursdays at Three a Clock in the Afternoon: He began it the first Thursday in June, 1657. Though his constant Weekly work at St. Andrews Church was enough to exer∣cise more then ordinary Strength, both of Mind and Body, yet had he many o∣ther occasions of Services, not only in the College as a Tutor, which Trust he di∣ligently and faithfully discharged, both as to Learning and Religion: But in the Town, where he frequently Preached Funeral Sermons, and Trinity Lecture; and in the Country also, where he Preached sundry Lectures, both in the County of Cambridg and Huntington: All which he performed not in a perfunctory man∣ner, but as a Workman that needed not be ashamed: upon which account he never wanted a full Auditory, as well of Scholars, as of Towns-People. His Sermons were well studied and digested: His Matter substantial and Spiritual; His Argu∣ments strong; His Utterance clear, deliberate and grave: His Words apt, and na∣tural to express the Conceptions of his Mind, He affected not a strain of Words which Mans Wisdom teacheth, nor allowed himself a liberty of Words which Mans indiscretion poureth out. In all his Application unto God by Prayer, his Behavior, words and manner of Utterance, bespeak his solemn and affecting apprehensions of the Majesty and Ho∣liness of God whom he Worshiped, upon all which Considerations he was Nulli secun∣dus, if not a None-such in the University in his Day. Scarce Two Months were expired after he had begun his Week-Day Lecture, when the Mayor and one of the Aldermen of Colchester in Essex, (whether his Fame reached,) applied themselves to him in Cambridg, desiring him to accept their Lecturers place, then void: But he, only so far complied, for the present, as to promise to come over to them, and to Preach a Sermon or two among them; which he performed about Three Weeks after. After Preaching, the Aldermen and Common Councel met, and unanimously chose him to that Place. His Work was to Preach on Lords Days in the After∣noons, and every Wednesday in the Morning. He had also the Suffrage of the Godly People in the Town, and Country thereabouts. And as formerly, so here also, he had the same encouragement, God making his first Sermon effectual up∣on the Heart of a Dutchman that lived there: and his Second or Third upon an other Person noted for a Sinner, who came out of Novelty to hear him. Con∣cerning whom, he might say as St. Paul did, 1 Thes. 1. 9. They shew of us, what manner of entring we had. But it fared heer with him as it did at Cambridge, he thought he did not work enough, and going freely, offered himself to Preach on the Lords day Mornings, at St. Jame's Church, not desiring any Reward for it; And he was a very great Blessing
to this Town, not onely as to their Spiritual but Temporal concerns also. For it was observed that the during the time of his aboad there, the Town prospered, and flourished exceedingly in Trade. For even the good things of this Life doth the Gospel carry with it. Here he laboured faithfully and diligently, till by the Ast of Uniformity; he, with the rest of his Brethren, were debarred from the Publick Exercise of his Mi∣nistry. Yet thinking himself not bound to be his own Executioner, and there be∣ing mutual Obligations by Contract between the Town and him, that the own should not eject, nor the other desert without so long warning, he continued his publick Preaching, till having occasion to go unto Cambridge-shire, in his absence another was put into his place by the B. of L. From thenceforth (with Saint Paul, Acts 28. 30.) he dwelt three whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came into him, Preaching the Kingdom of God with all confidence, till God sent the raging Pestilence into the Town, Anno Christi 1665. wherewith he was greatly affected, and seeing many, both of the Shepherds, and of their Flocks hasting their Flight, and many others daily passing into Eternity, he was much moved with compassion, and out of a zealous de∣sire of their Salvation, he sent to the Magistrates, and offered freely, if that they would allow him the liberty of a Publick Church, h would stay and Preach to them, till either God should take him away by Death, or cause the Plague to cease: But this being denied him, he seriously thought of leaving the Town. Having sought of God a right way for himself and Family, he received satisfa∣ction for the lawfulness (in the time of the Plague) to remove, from Isa. 26. 20. Hide thy self for a little moment, &c. And he was encouraged to hope, that God would go with him, from Gen. 28. 15. I am with thee, &c. Adding therto, Gal. 3. 7, 9. And accordingly, August the 25th, Anno Christi, 1665. he rmoved to Chattisham in Suffolk, about Twelve Miles from Colchester. Being now come to a place where he was a meer stranger, without any ac∣quaintances, and considering the dangerousness of the times, he had many doubts and fears concerning the comfort of his abiding there: But he quickly received sa∣tisfaction from the Holy Scriptures, which were his daily delight, a Man of his Counsels. August the 27th, Being the first Sabbath after his coming thither, the Chapter which fell in course for his private Reading, was Ezek. 37. from whence he ob∣served, that though God brought the Prophet into a Valley, where were only dry Bones, yet there he had work for him, and made his Labours successful and pro∣fitable, &c. Accordingly God inclined the Heart of these Strangers, not only to respect and honour him, but indulged him the liberty of private Preaching, and opened to him a Door for the frequent Exercise of his Ministry in Publick, which was denied him at Colchester. The Minister of the Parish having another Cure, could not attend this but once in a Fortnight, and going, did not only willingly, but thankfully indulge to Mr. Stockton the liberty of his Pulpit: And his maintenance being small, and some Burdens lying heavy upon him, after a while he deserted this Place, and wholy left the People to shift for themselves: whereupon, at their request, Mr. Stockton supplied that vacancy; and his Zeal provoked others, both Ministers, and People, to do the like. For other Neighbouring Parishes wanting Ministers for want of maintenance, called in the help of Non-conformists, who enjoyed the liberty of their Ministry for many Years, if not until this Day. When it pleased the Kings Majesty to set forth his Gracious Declaratìon for Indul∣gence, Mr. Stockton was chosen both by a Congregation in Ipswich, and by another in Colchester: and both being very desirous of him, he undertook half the Service for either, and so, with others divided his Labours between them so long as he lived. His Labours were abundant: For besides his Preaching Twice every Lords Day, he many times Expounded, and Chatechised the Youth, and resolved Cases of Conscience to such as applied themselves to him for that end. He also Preached a Lecture at Ipswich on the Week Day once a Fortnight: And scarce a Week passed, but he assisted at some other Lecture: Or some Funeral Sermon, or help to keep private Fasts at home and abroad.
The Providence of God over him was very signal: For notwithstanding his Zeal and Constancy in these Duties, at home and abroad; and the severity of the Laws, the Malice, Watchfulness and Endeavors of his Adversaries, yet God suf∣fered not an Hair to fall from his Head, the Complaints, Indictments, Convicti∣ons, Warrants, Presentments, Excommunications, were made against him, yet was he never imprisoned, Apprehended, Distrained, or brought before any Court, or Magistrate: And he was much affected with this care of God over him, and thankfully accepted and Recorded it, as the Instance of Gods faithfulness, and performance of his Promise, as the answer of his own Faith, and Prayers, and as the Reward of his Love, and Zeal, and Courage for God and his Church: by the Power whereof, he lived above Fears and Dangers. For thus he Writes, April the 16th, 1665. Being the Lords Day, I awaked with that Scripture in my Thoughts, 1 Tim. 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, &c. I dwelt upon it, and drew comfort and relief for my Faith, through the help of God: The comfort I had, was, That Christ came to save the chief of Sinners. That this was a Faithful say∣ing, that it was worthy of all acceptation, or to be embraced of every one: And that this Salvation was from Sin as well as from Hell, Matth. 1. 21. And consi∣dering whether he would save me, I was satisfied from John 6. 37. Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out, &c. September the 19th, As I was Expounding Psalm 91. It being a Day of Humilia∣tion, I was much encouraged to go on in my Calling, though we had many Ad∣versaries, from Verse 11, 12, 13. Yea, though our Enemies were strong as Lions, as full of Venome as Dragons, as subtle and obstinate as Adders, (see Psal. 58. 4, 5.) yet the Angels have a charge to keep us in all our Ways: and the Pro∣mise is, That we shall trample them under our Feet. I observed also in Reading Dan. 6. 23.—No hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God. September the 22d, As I was Reading in my Family, Psal. 146. 9. The Lord preserveth the Strangers, my Faith was strengthned. In Colechester I enjoyed much Peace and Security; but coming into a strange place, having none to shelter or speak for me, I judged my self to be in more danger: But this word, The Lord preserveth the Strangers, did help my dependance upon God. October the 28th, Anno Christi, 1666. Being the Lords Day, I went to Preach at Manytree. That Morning the Lord gave me in that Promise, Isa 55. 12. Ye shall be led forth with Peace: It being a time of danger for Non-Conformists to Preach in Publick, this Promise was the more precious to me, and I was encouraged to go with the greater confidence. And I determined to Eye this Promise for the Fu∣ture, when Probably I should meet with Disturbance. December the 25th, 1665. As I was Reading Luke 6. I observed from Verse 11, 12. That when Christs Enemies were filled with Madness, and sought what they might do unto him, he went up into a Mountain to Pray, and continued in Prayer all Night. Hence I concluded, That it was my Duty to give my self much unto Prayer, as oft as I had Enemies that lay in wait to do me any hurt. Within a Day or Two afrer, one of the Constables came unto me, and told me that his Fellow-Constable, when he had drunk somewhat liberally, told him, that there had been some Communication hetween him and one of the Deputy Lieu∣tenants, about Presenting me at the Sessions for my Meetings. I thought upon the Text, Luke 6 11, 12. and went apart to Pray, when he was gone: And whilst I was Meditating on this, God brought into my mind that Text, Deut. 33. 12. The Beloved of the Lord shall dwell safely by him, and I was strengthned in my adhe∣rence to this Promise. And as I was pleading this Promise in Prayer, that passage was sent home to me: He shall cover thee all the Day long. And after I had been in Prayer, I considered Jacobs carriage, after he had wrestled with God about Esaus coming against him, he used means to appease his Brother: So did I to prevent trouble at the Sessions, and it pleased the Lord that I heard no more of it: For the Lord made me to dwell in safety. January the 22d, As he was Exercising in his House word was brought him, that the Mayor and Aldermen would come; but being near the end of his Exercise, he soon concluded, and dismissed the Assembly. And presently a Constable came to him, and told him, that he was sent to dissolve his Meeting: But added, that
he Blessed God, who had given him an Heart to come sometimes to it himself, and his Wife oftner. So that instead of doing him any hurt, he gave Glory to God, that inclined him to be a Hearer himself. Octob. Anno Chisti 1670. He was presented in the Ecclesiastical Court for Preach∣ing: but God incouraged him with the Word, Psal. 103. 31. And though his Ad∣versaries got an Excommunication against him, yet God raised up deliverance for him, that the Court took it off, without his appearing or paying any Fees. Yea, so far was he from forbearing to Preach for fear of sufferings, that being once perswaded by his Friends to forbear, many Souldiers being thereabout, who also had newly seised upon Mr. S. and imprisoned him; yet all that day, and the night following, was he under much despondency of Spirit, for missing such an opportunity of Service. But it was some stay to his mind, what he Read, Matt. 16. 20. whence he observed that the divulging of the most necessary truth, was at some times prohibited by Jesus Christ. And he was further satisfied from Acts 16. 6, 7. whence he observed, that at∣tempts to Preach the Gospel to some Places, may sometimes arise from the Holy Ghost. At another time, having missed an oppertunity of Service, he thought upon Psal. 52. 9. whereby he was convinced that he might praise God for the Providence thus attended with some afflicting circumstances. Once a very zealous & active Persecutor of the Non-conformists had gotten a War∣rant against him upon the Oxford Act, directed to all the chief Constables & petty Con∣stables in the County to apprehend him, & accordingly an Officer, a Stranger came to execute it; who, being come near the House, he espied two Men, whom by their Apparel, he judged to be Ministers walking in a Field; the one was Mr. Stockton, the other Mr. Senior of Hackney. He hasted to them, and told them that he had a Warrant againt one of them, but he knew not which. Against whom (said Mr. Senior) against Mr. Stockton, said the other, let me see it said Mr. Senior? He shewed it, verily concluding that he was the Man. Some little Girls were nere, who coming to them, clinged about Mr Senior as if he had been their Father, which confirmed the Officer in his error. Whilst Mr. Senior read the Warrant, and the Officer was intent upon him, Mr. Stockton walked away, and when Mr. Senior saw that he was out of the Mans reach, he convined him of his mistake. And by this good Providence he escaped that danger. And being thus secured by God through Faith and Prayer, he returned the whole Glory thereof unto God thus. In Reading 2 Chron. 20. 30. the Realm of Jehosaphat was quiet: For his God gave him rest round about; God caused me to take notice, that my living in rest and quietness was the gift of God, and came to pass by his good Providence, and not from the privicy of the place where I lived, or from the peacable disposition of my Neighbours. I was thence also Instructed, what I should return unto the Lord for keeping me from the Hands of mine Enemies, and giving me Rest and Peace, from Psal. 30. 1. I will extol thee (O Lord) for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my Foes to rejoyce over me. And from Psal. 31. 7, 8. I saw also that Gods gi∣ving me Rest from them, should put me upon doing some special eminent Service, from 2 Sam. 7. 1, 2. 1 Kings 5. 4, 5. 1 Chron. 22. 17, 18, 19. Thus with unwearied Pains and Zeal, in great Peace and Security, with Holy Rejoycing and Thanksgiving, did this Man of God fulfil the Course of his Mi∣nistrey. Yet he did not satisfie himself with his Work of Preaching, but applied himself also unto writing, for the greater Service of the present, and future Generations: His Counsel to the afflicted, and his Scriptural Catechism, are already Printed: and tis hoped that some others may see the Light. It pleased God in much Mercy and Faithfulness to give him a Meet-help, a most suitable Yoke-fellow, a very Prudent, Virtuous, and Gracious Gentlewoman, of a Worthy and Religious Family in Cambridg-shire, Mrs. Elianor Rant, Daughter of Roger Rant, of Suaff-ham, Esq; whom he Married within less than a year after his call to Colchester, who was a singular Blessing, Comfort, and Honour to him so long as he lived. Few there be to whom Solomons Commendations (Prov. 31. 26. &c.) doth more properly belong. By her, God gave him six Children, whereof he left one onely Daughter sur∣viving. But upon the account of his own, and his Wives Wisdom, Grace, Gravi∣ty and Government; many were desirous to get their Children into his Family,
(even those that were of different perswasions from him, both in Conformity and Non-conformity) for their better Education: In compliance wherewith he received some young Persons of the Female Sex, that might more properly belong to the care and inspection of his Wife. So that mostly he had a full Family; wherein, according to his Place he kept up his Authority over all under his Charge, but with so much Meekness, Prudence, and Gravity, that they all stood in awe of him, yet he was more loved than feared. As for his Wife, whom he worthily honoured, and intirely loved, there never arose any Passion, or Dispute between them. He frequently conversed with her about the matters of her Soul: enquiring how the Case stood between God and her Soul: what burthens lay upon her Spirit: what grounded hope she had for Eternal Life, &c. helping, and encouraging her in the ways of Godliness. The 9th. day of June, being the day of their Marriage, he never passed it over (if at home) without spending sometime with her in solemn Prayer unto God, and conference about the several paages of his Providence towards them since they came into that Relation: In the conclusion whereof, he was always more affect∣ed with, and thankful for Mercies, then dejected, or cast down for afflictions, though he met with some considerable trials, not onely in his Family, by the loss of so many hopeful Children, &c. but also abroad, and that from those that knew, and going should have practised better. It was his manner, not onely in his more private, and secret retirements; but also in his Family Duties to commend her in perticuler to God, at the Throne of his Grace. As for his Children, very early, even before they were past the lap, he himself, would be instructing of them in Gods Word, ordering them to get some Scriptures by heart, which best suited with their Childhood, and Capacity: Four of them died in their Infancy and Childhood, none having attained the full Age of five years; concerning whom he had much satisfaction as to their Eternal Sal∣vation. His first-born (a Daughter) attained to the Age of nineteen years, and then died; who had been so instructed by her Father, that before she was eight years old, she understood the Method of a Sermon, and if Preached by her Father, would give him an accout of the most considerable Heads and Passages therein, and before she was full nine years old, she would write a Sermon after him, with∣out missing the Heads, with some considerable enlargements also. About this time of her Age God suffered her to fall into sin in the open Acts, to the observation of others, which exposed her to the severe Rebuke of her Parents, which God was pleased to sanctifie to her conviction, and as she grew up, she quickly gave evidence of the truth of Grace, and power of Godliness, making progress therein beyond her years, having a very great love to the Ordinances, Ministers, and Servants of Christ: And she disembled her weakness and bodily in∣firmities, that she might not be kept from the publick Ordinances for the good of her Soul. She walked closly with God in frequent secret Duties, kept the Lords Days strictly; took special notice of the workings of Grace, and of sin, and of Gods providential dealings with her, which she recorded in her Diary: And under a long and mortal sickness, expressed a most Christian Patience and Submission to the will of God. As for his Servants, so soon as they came into his Family, he instructed them; first in their Duty to God, and next in the Duty of their places, giving them. Scriptures for that which he instructed them in, requiring them to get those Scrip∣tures by heart, which they were to repeat to him when he called for them. In his Family, after his own secret retirements, wherein he read the holy Scrip∣tures in course, and Prayed, Morning and Evening, first and last; his Family be∣ing come together, he began with a short Prayer, then to read a portion of Scrip∣ture, which also he oft-times expounded, and so concluded with Prayer. At Night he did the like; onely adding, that every Child and Servant, should repeat a verse of the Chapter which he would open, and explain unto them. Frequently exhor∣ting them to a Reverend demeanour of themselves, in the whole Worship and Service of God. Once a week usually he did Catechise both his Children, and Servants. And once a fortnight, if some extraordinary occasion put him not by; he opened, and
explained some Principle of Religion in a Catechistical way, which his Children and Servants were to give him an account of the next Fortnight. What Sermons they heard, either on the Lord's days, or upon other occasions, they gave him an ac∣count thereof as they could remember. He kept private days of Humiliation with his Family, so often as his publick Imployments would give him leave; wherein he used to deal in perticular with every one, about the concerns of their Souls. He required all in his Family to use secret Prayer as well as to be present at Family Duties. If any of his Brethren came to visit him, he was not content to let him depart without Prayer. His House was an House of Prayer. He was a strict observer of the Lord's Days, and took care that all under his Roof should do the same. He kept a severe watch not onely over his Words, and Actions, but over his Thoughts also, not onely when they were vain and sinful, but impertinent to the Holiness of the day, or of the Duties which he was about. His Charity was no less abundant then his other Graces; which he accounted one of the best Characters of a Christian; and would say, and that he did not value a Christian by his great knowledg, and eminent Parts, but by his great Charity, and by his love to his Brethren: And herein he observed these Rules. Towards those that were at variance one with another: He was an industrious Peace-maker, offering himself to interpose, to make up the breach, and taking Journies, when at a distance, in order to it. Towards those that had difference with him about worldly concerns (from which he was not altogether free; though altogether innocent) when he suffered wrong by any, his care was, that they should suffer none by him, or his, either in word or deed; always practising himself and advising others, to return good for evil. He would make the best construction that was possible, of the words and actions of his Adversaries, often making mention of that Text, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Charity thinks no evil. Towards his Friends his Friendship was hearty, ingenious, faithful, and open. He received them into his House gladly, entertained them liberally, conversed with them chearfully, simpathised with them in their Afflictions affectionately, and served them as he had occasion industriously. Towards those that persecuted him and others for their Consciences, he observed Christ's command Matt. 5. 44. he affectionatly pittied them, and prayed for them daily; and when he heard any passionate expressions against them for their vio∣lence, he would be offended, and charge People to pray more earnestly for them, and to seek opportunities to do them good. Towards thoe that dissented from him in the matters of God, he had a Spirit of meekness and forbearance, imbracing all with Christian love, whose Practice did not destroy their Profession of Christianity. At his first coming to Colchister, he found it a very divided place upon the account of divers perswasions among them: yet he so behaved himself with such Humility, Moderation, Tenderness, Brotherly-kindness, and Charitable Judgment; that they were generally united in their respects, and esteem for him. And tho he could not satisfie his Conscience so as to confirm, yet he judged many who did, to be very good Men, and had a real honour for them. Towards the Poor, and such as were in streights, he was pitiful. and bountiful. He devised liberal things, and drew out his Soul to the hungry; wherein he observed Christ's Rule, Matt. 6. 1, 2, 3. This was one of his great secrets, he did industri∣ously conceal his Charity all that he could. The Widdow, the Fatherless, and the Stranger, the Sick and Sufferers, were all refreshed with his compassions. Though he offered to Preach freely at St. Jame's Church in Colchister, neither desiring, nor expecting any reward; yet the civility of the People did gratifie him for his pains: The greatest part whereof he disposed to Charitable uses. By his own liberality, and by his stirring up others, he promoted the Education of some Poor Schollars, as were hopeful for the Work of the Ministrey. In his last Will and Testament, out of Love and Zeal for the benifit and good of
the Church, he hath bequeathed the best part of his well-furnished Library; even the best and choisest of them, to Gonvil and Caius College in Cambridge: As also five hundred pounds to be laid out by his Executrix, therewith to purchase a Free∣hold Estate, or an Impropriation, to be setled on the said College, for the main∣tainance of a Schollar and Fellow there for ever. Provided that such onely shall be Elected as are Orphans, or the Sons of poor Ministers, of the best, and most hopeful Parts, tying them to the Study of Divinity, and the Ministerial Work, ta∣king special care that they be well grounded, and established in the Orthodox Faith, and Reformed Protestant Religion; And in case he shall become corrupt in Doctrin, or Scandalous in Life, then after due Admonition, and Non-Reforma∣tion, his Place to be declared void, and another to be chosen in his stead, and none to enjoy it above Twelve Years. Besides which he also bequeathed, in Case his only Daughter should Die before she came to the Age of One and Twenty Years, Twenty Pounds per Annum to be setled upon the College in New-England, for the Education of a converted Indian, or to any other that will learn the Indian Language, and will be a Minister to Preach unto them. And when he heard of that consuming Fire which turned the greatest part of New-Boston into Ashes, he sent thither freely, a considerable number of his Books, Entituled, Counsel to the Afflicted, to be destributed among the Sufferers. He hath also given Twenty Five Pounds to other Charitable uses: which bequests he hath yet made with all due respect to his Family, not failing in his kindness to his Wife, or his tenderness as a Father to his Daughter, so ordering his Charity un∣to others; as with all securing to his Widow, and Fatherless Daughter, not only a Necessary, and Competent, but even a Liberal, and Plentiful means of Subsi∣stance; reserving unto them the Rent of what he hath bequeathed to the College, during their Natural Lives. In the last place, there is an account given (out of his Diary) of the Observa∣tions, and Experiences of himself, through which we may look into, the very frame and temper, the thoughts and affections of his Heart, which are largely set down by Mr. John Fairfax, in the Life of Mr. John Stockton; whereof, for brevity sake, I shall onely give you the Heads. His Observations, and Experiences, Jan. 10. Anno Christi 1653. These he conti∣nued during his abode at Cambridge, to the Year 1657. And at his removal to Colchester he intermitted it for a time: but resumed it again, in the Year 1662. and continued them to the Year 1676. And this he did that he might always have at hand before him, the manner and Method of Gods dealing with his Soul, the working of Corruption and Grace, his Lapses and Recoveries, his Combats and Victories over the World, Sin and Satan; His Perseverance and Progress in Holi∣ness, the secret intercourse between God and his Soul; the withdrawings and re∣turns of the Holy Spirit; the faithfulness of Gods Covenant; the truth of his Word sensibly felt in his Heart, Food for his Faith, encouragments for his walking with God, with experimental instructions how to comfort troubled Consciences. It was his usual manner in Preaching to fore-see, and raise such Objections as troubled Souls usually make against themselves, and to solve them with much clearness and satisfaction; and many applications of such Souls were made to him in private as to a Skilful, Experienced, Spiritual Physitian, whose advice God prospered with his Blessing to the encouragment of the Faith, and hope of many doubting Christians which before walked in darkness; which are here published, not onely as Instances and Demonstrations of that Spirit of Light and Grace, that power of Godliness which possessed, and governed his Heart and Life, and fitted him to be such a useful Instrument for the Service of Christ, and his Church, upon which account his Memory is worthily honourable, and pretious to all good Men. Especially for the Instruction, Direction, Relief, Support, and encouragment of others that are following him (though at a great distance) in that narrow way which leadeth unto that Life to which he hath attained. Hitherto we have seen some things of his Conscience of Sin, and Duty, his Indu∣stry and Zeal for advancing the Glory of God; his Combats with the Flesh and Satan: his Love to Christ and his Church: his Spirituality in Religion: his long∣ings and Breathings after God: his remembring God upon his Bed, and meditating
upon him in the Night-Watches: His wise Improvement of the Holy Scriptures, His due fulfilling of all Relations: His Holy manner of living to God: From whence we may rationally conclude, That surely he gave this Diligence to the full Assurance of Hope. That he tasted the Consolations of God, and received the Earnest of Glory. That he walked upon the top of Pisgah in the Light of Gods Countenance, and in the sight of the Heavenly Canaan. And this Priviledg the God of Peace and Comfort did not deny him. He was a Man, as of much Grace, so of much Peace; an Instance of that word, Psal. 119. 165. Great Peace have they that love thy Law. He received the Spirit which is of God: and knew the things which were freely given him of God, and rejoyced there∣in, 1 Cor. 2. 12. As for his Conversion, (which to some who had lived long in Ignorance, Secu∣rity, Sensuality, and forgetfulness of God, is very sensible,) yet he being from his Childhood restrained, and well inclined, it was not so remarkable to him. The most discernable part thereof, was, when he was a young Scholar in Cambridg: Nor did he then experience very notable Workings of the Spirit of Bondage; which occasioned some trouble to his mind, and he feared that his Humiliation was not deep enough: But he received full satisfaction from a passage in a Sermon Preached by that Eminent and worthy Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Richard Vinee, then Master of Pembroke-Hall. He also said sometimes, that he was not much acquainted with those Ravishing Joys which some have felt; but yet had that Comfort and Joy in the Holy Ghost, which gave him good satisfaction. He could not satisfie himself with the expectation, nor the apprehension of the immediate, sole Testimony of the Spirit, without the word, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. But he would compare himself with the Word, frequently practising the Duty of Self-Examination, searching for those Graces, Dispositions and Operati∣ons in his Heart, which are promised in the Word, and to which the Promises are made, which the Spirit of God enlightned him to discern, and enabled him in a way of Argumentation, to infer thence his Interest in Christ, and the Covenant of God, for his satisfaction and Spiritual Consolation. And the Assurance which he attained in this Method, and by these means, he Recorded in his Diary, where∣of I shall only give the Heads, 1. His Evidences of true and saving Faith. 2. His Evidences that he was one of Gods Servants. 3. His Evidences of the Pardon of his Sins. 4. His Evidences of his Interest in, and Union with Jesus Christ. 5. His Evidences that God was his God. 6. His Evidences of Gods Love to his Soul. 7. His Evidences of Gods accepting his Person and Services. 8. His Evidences of Eternal Life. Thus walked this Eminent Servant of Jesus Christ, in the Fear of God, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost. Thus he Laboured to approve himself to God, to o∣thers, and to his own Conscience: Thus answered he his Profession, Run his Race, pressed forward to the Mark; and he hath left such a Name and Character behind him, as may worthily commend him, both as a Christian, and as a Minister, to the Observation, Honour and Imitation of most, if not of all that Read his Life. He left some Manuscrips behind him; some of which he entitles, The best Inte∣rest: A Treatise of Glorifying God: The Cure of the Fear of Death. All which he well understood, not by Speculation only, but by Experience. He who had gain∣ed the best Interest, and could upon good grounds say: My Beloved is mine, and I am his. He who aimed at the best End, and Industriously pursued it, viz: The Glory of God: was doubtless so fortified with the Grace, Consolation and Covenant of God, as to Tryumph over the King of Terrors. Having the Testimony of his Conscience, that in Integrity and Sincerity of Heart, he had fulfilled his general and perticular Calling, and Served his Generation by the will of God, and having the assurance of Gods Holy Word for his Reward in a better World, it was no difficult thing for him to Die. He was so far above the fear of Death, that he seemed al∣together
unconcerned at it; as to the Terror of it, or Danger after it; and that both in Sickness and in Health. In his perfect Health, considering the Evil of the Days wherein he lived, he would often say: 'Tis a good time to Die: I am content to Live, and willing to Die: To me to Live is Christ, I have no other Design of Life then to serve Christ. He Breathed out, with Greg. Turn. Domine, si adhuc Populo tuo sim necessarius, fiat Vo∣luntas tuo. Desidero quietam; non recuso laborem. If God hath further Service for me to do, I am content to Live, and Labour; else I rather choose to Die. Such clear apprehensions he had of the Glory of Heaven, and such full assu∣rance of the Hope thereof, that (as he told a Friend) he looked upon all that this World could afford, as Dross and Dung compared with it. As Death was not Terrible, so neither was it unexpected to him. He presaged long before it came. He told his Friend, who frequently conversed with him more then a Year before he Died, that he had apprehensions that he should not live long: And that, for some time past, God had inclined his Heart to Study how a Christian might get above the Fear of Death, and what he found to be his Strength and Comfort against that last Enemy, he had digested into a Method, which, for his own and others use, he had committed it to Writing: And at the same time, he laid an Obligation upon his Friend, (in case he survived him) to Preach his Fune∣ral Sermon upon the Text, 1 Cor. 15. 57. as a Testimony of his affectionate and hearty Thanksgiving unto God, who gave him the Victory over the Fear of Death, through Jesus Christ our Lord. He had a strong Constitution of Body; was very Sober and Temporate, and was then in his full Strength, and the Maturity of his Age, without any sensible Declining. His Natural Temper did somewhat incline him to Feavourish Disea∣ses. And now a Feavor (having a Commission from God) seized on him, August the 31st, which Visitation from God he accepted with all Patience, and Holy Sub∣mission, casting himself on the Care, and resigning himself up to the Will of his Heavenly Father. His Disease increasing, and his Strength declining, he told some about him, That he had had some apprehensions that he should, and that he desired also (if God pleased) to have Died a Martyr, but now he thought he should not: Adding, God is wiser then I, and knoweth my weak∣ness. He discharged his Dying Office by Grave Exhortations, and Encouragements to seriousness in Religion, and a readiness to suffer for it. He directed his Speech especially to his only Child. He owned and confessed his Non-Conformity even to the last, as judging himself obliged thereunto in Conscience towards God: He Blessed God for his invaluable Gift of Jesus Christ to the Children of Men. He Blessed God who had called him to the Honourable Imployment of the Mi∣nistry of the Gospel, and had enabled him to be faithful therein; and had encouraged him with his Presence and Blessing under all the Difficulties thereof. He Blessed God who had lifted him up above the Fear of Death. He re∣joyced in the Peace and Testimony of a good Conscience, and Hope of the Glory of God: And after Ten or Eleven Days conflict with his Disease, which (after some hope of his recovery) suddenly and unexpectedly seised upon his Head, he quietly slept in the Lord, September the 10th, Anno Christi, 1680. and in the One and Fiftieth Year of his Age. This was that Blessed Exit of this Eminent Saint and Servant of Jesus Christ, who might say to those whom he hath left behind, as his Dying Saviour did to the Daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me: I have Died in Peace; am entred into Peace; am at Rest in my Bed; have passed through Jordan, and am come into Canaan. I am beyond Sin and Sorrow, Trouble and La∣bour: Am come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable Company of An∣gels, &c. To that Eternal Sabbath that remains to the People of God. May we not also add, Weep for your selves. You shall see my Face no more; enjoy Communion with me no more: You shall hear my Voice no more: I shall Dispence the Gospel to you no more. Ye shall come unto me, but I shall return unto you no more. Oh! what is the meaning of
this dark Providence, that in such a Day as this, God should call from his Work, One so fully Instructed; so willing to serve him and his Church in the Gospel of his Son? Whether God hath done this in his just Displeasure, for the unprofitableness unthankfulness, and itching Ears of those that enjoyed him. Or whether to warn us of some approaching Dreadful Judgment, from which he hath hid this, and many other of his Faithful, Able and Painful Servants in the Grave, it concerns us seriously to consider, and to lay it to Heart, Amen.
The Reverend Mr. Thomas Gouge. F. H. van. Houe. Sculp. portrait of Thomas Gouge The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Gouge, who Died Anno Christi, 1681. MR. Thomas Gouge, was the Eldest Son of Dr. William Gouge, an Ancient His Parentage, Birth and E∣ducation, at Eaton and Cambridg. and Eminent Minister in the City of London, when he was Pastor of the Church of Christ in Black-Friars, for about the space of Forty Six Years. This our Thomas was Born at Bow, near Stratford, in the County of Middlesex, September the 19th, Anno Christi, 1665. His Father was very careful that he might be well trained up both in Religion and Learning, and for that end, so soon as he was capable, he placed him in Eaton-School: And after he had finished the course of his Studies there, he was chosen from thence into Kings College in Cambridg, being then about Twenty Years old, which fell out to be Anno Christi 1626. Having continued in Cambridg, and followed his Studies, till he had taken his Degrees of Batchelor, and Master of Arts, his Reverend Father thought fit to withdraw him from the University, and so leaving the College, and his Fellowship, he came home. Not long after his return he was Presented to a Living at Colsden near Croydon, At Colsden. in the County of Surrey, where he continued not above the space of Two or Three Years, but from thence was removed to the great and Populous Parish of Sepulchres in London, Anno Christi, 1638. And being well setled there, the Year Sepulchres. following, he thought fit to change his Condition, by entring into a Married Estate, and after good advice, with the consent of Parents, he was Matched into a very
Worthy and Ancient Family, Marrying one of the Daughters of Sir Robert Marriage. Darcy. In this place he did with great Labour, Diligence and Faithfulness, perform all His Industry. the Offices and Doubts belonging to, and required of a Minister of Jesus Christ, for about the space of Four and Twenty Years, till that Fatal Bartholomew Day came, which made a Divorce between so many Pastors and their People. During his Abode in that Parish, he was indefatigable in the exercise of his Mini∣stry, Preaching Twice every Lords Day, besides Monthly Fasts, which continued for some Years, Funeral Sermons, &c. He was also very diligent and Charitable Charity. in visiting the Sick, to whom he Ministred, not only Spiritual Counsel and Com∣fort for the good of their Souls, but likewise liberally relieved the Wants and Ne∣cessities of those that were Poor, and destitute of Means wherewith to help them∣selves in that condition. Every Morning also throughout the Year he Catechised in the Church, especially Labors. the Poorer sort, who were generally the most Ignorant, and to encourage them to come thither to be Instructed by him, he used once a Week to distribute Money among them, yet not upon a certain Day, but changing it on purpose, as he thought best, that so thereby he might engage them to attend every Day. These were chiefly the more Aged Poor, who being past their Labour, had lei∣sure Prudence. enough to attend upon this Exercise. As for the other sort of Poor, who were well able to Work for their Living, he set them on Work at his own Charge, Buying Flax and Hemp for them to Spin, and what they Spun he took off their Hands, paying them for their Work, and then got it Woven into Cloth, and Sold it as he could, chiefly among his Friends, himself bearing the whole loss there∣in. And this was a very wise and well chosen way of Charity, and in the good ef∣fect of it, a far more excellent and useful way of Charity, then if he had given freely, and for nothing, to those very Persons so much Weekly as they Earned by their Labour. For by this way he took many off from Begging, and thereby re∣scued them at once from Two of the most dangerous Temptations of this World, [Idleness and Poverty,] And by degrees reclaimed them from an Evil, to a Ver∣tuous and Industrious course of Life, which enabled them afterwards to Live without being beholden to the Charity of others. Thus we have heard something of his Charity in his Younger Days, we shall hear much more of it, as he grew to greater Maturity, at which time most Men grow more Worldly and Covetous. But in the mean time let us take notice of some other Gifts and Graces which shone forth in his Life and Conversation. Graces. And First, For his Piety towards God, which is the necessary Foundation of all other Piety. Graces and Vertues; it was vere great and Exemplary, yet withal still and quiet, without any great stir or ruffle in the World: Indeed, much more in Substance and Reality, then in Shew and Ostentation. It did not consist in Censuring and finding Fault with others, but in a due Care and Government of his own Heart Humility. and Life, and in exercising himself continually, to have a Conscience void of Offence, both towards God, and towards Men: In which he was so good a President, that those which had long acquaintance, and familiar Conversation with him, could not easily Observe any thing that was Blameworthy in him. He more particularly excelled in the more peculiar Vertues of Conversation, Modesty, &c. viz. In Modesty, Humility, Chearfulness, and in Kindness and Charity towards all Men. So great was his Modesty, that it never appeared by Word or Action, that he Modesty. put any value upon himself, or hunted from any applause from Man; and this was very Observable in him, That the Charities which were procured chiefly by his Interest and Industry, where he had occasion to speak, or to give an account of them, he would rather impute it to any one that had but the least hands and part in the procuring of them, then assume any thing of it to himself. Another instance of his Modesty, was, That when he was ejected out of his Living of Sepulchres Parish, he forbore Preaching, saying, That there was no need of his Labours in London, where there were so many Godly, Able and Painful Mi∣nisters to carry on that Work.
According to the Apostles Exhortation, He was Clothed with Humility, and had Humility. in a very Eminent degree that Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which, St. Peter tells us, is in the sight of God of great Price: so that there was not the least appearance, either of Pride or Passion in any of his Words or Actions. He was not only free from Anger and Bitterness, but from all affected Gravity and Mo∣rosness. Affability. His Society and Converse was affable and pleasant. He had a very great serenity of Mind, and evenness of Temper, which was visible in his very Counte∣nance. He was very rarely Merry, yet never Melancholy and Sad; and so far as could be discerned, by some who had intimate acquaintance with him, he was upon all occasions and accidents, Semper idem, always the same, constantly Chear∣ful, and ever Courteous and Kind, of a Disposition ready to embrace and oblige all Men; allowing others to differ from him even in Opinions that were very clear to him, and provided Men did but fear God, and work Righteousness, he loved Prudence. them heartily, how different, soever from him in Judgment about things less ne∣cessary. But that Vertue which of all did shine brightest in him, and was his most proper Charity. and peculiar Character, was his chearful and unwearied Digence in promoting Works of Charity. A while after the London Ministers, among many Hundred of others, were eject∣ed out of their Places, and thereby deprived of the means of Subsistence for them∣selves and Families, Mr. Gouge with Two or Three of his Brethren, applied them∣selves to many Worthy and Charitable Citizens, of whom they received some considerable Sums of Money, whereby they relieved the Necessities of such as were in present Want. And this course they continued for some Years, till that Charity was diverted into other Channels. Anno Christi, 1671. When the Life of that Eminent Minister and Servant of Je∣sus Christ, Mr. Joseph Alleine was first Printed, he hearing that I was in London, came to me, and told me that he had been Reading that Life, and therein meet∣ing with that passage, (Page 33.) That Mr. Alleine had an Eye to poor Wales, and had an influence upon the sending of some Ministers to them. And he re∣solved to have gone, and to have spent some time among them himself. And by all the disswasions of his Friends, for his great Weakness, and unfitness for Travel, he was hardly with-held from his purpose. Reading this, (said Mr. Gouge to me) it hath set me all on fire, with Zeal to prosecute that design: and God seems (in some measure) to have fited me for it, having taken away my Wife: and his Children, being grown up, were disposed of in the World; and he was left alone; and God had given him a competent Estate where withal to defray the Charges of his Undertaking. Having heard his Reasons, I encouraged him in the Work, and left him till his Thoughts were brought to more maturity. About a Quarter of a Year after, (if I mistake not the time) he began his first His first Jor∣ney into Wales. Jorney into South-Wales, and in every Town where he came, he enquired what Poor People there were that had any Children whom they were willing to have taught English, and to Read and Write, and to learn the Catechism: And where he met with a competent Number, he enquired for fit Persons to Instruct them: A Man for the Boys, and a Woman for the Girls, and agreed with them, as afore, for a Penny or Two Pence a Week, which he undertook to pay. At his first going, he spent most of his time in the Borders and Skirts of Wales, Bordering upon England, where many could speak, and understand English, and therefore he Preached as he went up and down among them, where he could be ad∣mitted. But he had not long continued this Practice, before Satan, (who is an inveterate, and implacable Enemy to the Preaching of the Gospel,) stirred up some to molest, and impede him in this so free, and Charitable a Work. Whereupon a Citation was sent out, requiring him to appear in the Bishops A Citation sent out. Court at such a time and place. But Mr. Gouge thought fit to anticipate that time, going to the Bishops of his own accord, desiring to know of him the rea∣son of that Citation: He Answered, For Preaching without his Licence. Mr. Gouge replied, That he had a Licence for all England and Wales. The Bishop de∣manded, Who had given him such a Licence? He answered, The University of
Cambridg, and withal shewed his Licence. Upon this the Bishop discoursed with him in a friendly manner, and stayed him at Dinner, after which he departed friendly from him, thinking that he should hear no more of that matter. But when the Court met, Mr. Gouge was called for, and upon his Non-appea∣rance, Excommuni∣cation.  from his own Mth. an Excommunication was decreed against him. This coming to Mr. Gouge his Ears, he was fain to make another Jorney about it, and upon promise of not Preaching again, was dismissed. After he had made Three or Four Jorneys into South-Wales, some in North-Wales hearing of it, sent some unto him, requesting him to come into their parts to carry on the like Excellent and Charitable Work among them also. This he assented to, and went, at least once, if not oftner, into those Parts likewise. When Mr Gouge was engaged in this Pious, Necessary and Charitable Work, Want of Books in Wae. one thing did much Impede, and obstruct his Progress therein, which was want of Bibles, and other Books of Piety and Devotion, in the Welch Language, for the use and behoof of such as understood not the English Tongue. This made him look about where, and what Welch Bibles could be had, and upon diligent enquiry, he could find but about Twenty in all London, and some few in Oxford. The reason of which scarcity, perhaps was this; It hath been Observed, That the Scriptures were Translated into Two and Thirty Languages before they were Translated into Welch, which was not don till the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of Blessed Memory, by the Care and Industry of Bishop Hanmer: And about Fifty Years ago, when I lived upon the Borders of Wales, there were only Two Men that could Preach in Welch, neither could many of the common People at first understand them, the Scripture Phrase and Dialect being grown so much out of use. It was a great work incumbent upon Mr. Gouge, not only to have poor Chil∣dren taught to Read and Write, and to be carefully Instructed in the Principles of Religion, but the Persons of grown Age, the Poor especially, should be furnished with necessary helps, and means of knowledg, as the Bible, and other good Books, in their own Language: Among which were, the Practice of Piety, the Church Ca∣techism, the Duty of Man, with some other Pious and Useful Treatises, of which he caused a great number to be Translated and Printed, and to be sent down to all the chief Towns in Wales, to be Sold at easie Rates to those that were able to Buy them, and to be freely given to such Poor as were not able. In both these Designs, through the Blessing of God upon his unwearied Endea∣vors, he found very great and good success. For by the large and bountiful Con∣tributions, which chiefly by his Industry, and Prudent Application, were obtained from Charitable Persons of all Ranks and Conditions: From some of the Nobility and Gentry of Wales, and of the Neighbouring Counties, and of several of that Quality in and about London: As also from some of the Reverend Bishops and Clergy: And from that Inexhausted Fountain of Charity, [The City of London,] led on and encouraged by the most Bountiful Example of the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen; to all which he constantly added Two Thirds of his own Estate, (which was very considerable,) I say, By all these to∣gether, there were every Year, Eight Hundred, and sometimes a Thousand, Poor Children Educated, as afore is expreed. And by his Example and Perswasions with the Magistrates in all the chief Towns in Wales, he prevailed with them to maintain and bring up, at their own Charges, the like number of Poor Children, and under his Inspection and Care. He also gave a very great number of the Books, afore spoken of, both in the Welch, and in the English Tongues, to such of the Poorer sort as were unable to Buy▪ and willing to Read, and make use of them. But that which was the great∣est work of all, and amounted indeed to a mighty Charge, was this, He procured a new and very fair Impression of the Bible, and Liturgy of the Church of England in the Welch Tongue, to the number of Eight Thousand: One Thousand whereof were freely given to the Poor, and the rest were sent to the Ci∣ties and Principal Towns in Wales, to be Sold to the Rich at very reasonable and low Prizes, viz. at Four Shillings apiece, well Bound, and Clasped, which was much Cheaper then any English Bible, that was of so fair a Print, and Paper, was ever Sold for.
A Work of that Vast Charge, that it was not likely to have been done any o∣ther way, and for which Work, not only the present, but the succeeding Age al∣so, will have great cause to Bless and Praise God on his behalf. In these Pious and Charitable Imployments, he laid out most of his Time, and Pains, an his whole Heart was in them, insomuch as he was not much affected with matters of less concernments. He seldom minded, or (Athenian-like) wasted his precious time in telling of, or enquiring after News: or if he did mind them, he seldom talked of them. His afore-mentioned Work was that which he laid to Heart, and about which his thoughts were busied; and knowing that it was agreeable to the Will of his Heavenly Father, it was his Meat and Drink to be doing of it: And the good success which God gave him in it, was to him a con∣tinual Feast, and gave unto him a perpetual Serenity, both of Mind, and Coun∣tenance, [Sinceritas Serenitatis, Mater. Aug.] His great Love and Zeal to this Work, made all his Labour and Pain, yea, and all the Difficulties which he met with in carrying it on, to seem as nothing to him. Yea, he would rise early, and sit up late, to advance it, and continued this Pains, Diligence and Industry, to the last of his Days, though he was then in the Three∣score and Seventeenth Year of his Age. And Mr. Gouge, that he might manage the Distribution of this great Charity with his own Hands, and see the good effect of it with his own Eyes, he always Once, but for the most part Twice a Year, at his own Charges, traveled over a great part of Wales, (none of the best Countries to Travel in,) but for the Love of God, and Mens Souls, he endured that, together with extremity of Heat and Cold, (both which in their several Seasons there, are very great,) not only with Patience, but with great Pleasure. These things being seriously considered, will Patience. evidently shew how careful he was to imitate, and to tread in the steps of his great Lord and Master, Christ Jesus, of whom it is Recorded, That he went about conti∣nually doing Good. Thus we have heard a brief account of the Life and Labors of the Reverend, Mr. Thomas Gouge, who after all his Pains and Travels, Died in his Sleep, without His Death. any sensible Pain or Sickness, October the 29th, Anno Christi, 1681. and in the Se∣venty Seventh Year of his Age. Indeed few there are, (yet I have known some,) that desire a suddain Death, as fearing that they were not so suffifliently prepared for Death as they desired, and should be: But to him, the constant imployment of whose Life, was the best preparation for Death that was possible, no Death could be suddain: Nay, it more suddain, by so much the more easie it was. For thereby he was freed from those Pangs and Pains; from those Sighs, and Sobs, and Groans, &c. which most endure in the Agonies of Death. As if God had designed thereby to begin the Re∣ward of the great Pains of his Life, by affording him an easie Death. And indeed it was rather a Translation than a Death: And saving that his Body was left behind, what was said of Enoch, may not be unfitly applied to this Pious and Worthy Servant of God, with respect to the suddainness of his Change; That he walked with God, and was not; for God took him. And it may be said of him, as it is of David: After he had served his Generation, according to the Will of God, he fell a Sleep, Acts 13. 26.
Some Remarkable Passages in the Lives of divers Eminent Divines of the Church of Scotland. Of Mr. Hugh Kennedy. HUgh Kennedy, though he was no Minister, yet was he an Eminent In∣strument of promoting the work of the Gospel in the place where he lived. He was Provst of Air: Once when the Merchants Ships which belonged to that Tn, were at Sea, amongst whom was his Son John (who was also a choice Christian) he went early one Morning before Break-a-Day to the House of his Familiar Friend John Steward, desiring him to rise and to go with him to a private Room; whereat the said John was exceedingly astoni∣shed; but whilst he delayed, he said to him: It is no time to linger: let us go Pray; for my Son, with the rest of our Friends now at Sea, are at this very time upon the nick of perishing: And after he had spent some time in Prayer, he arose chearfully, and said, now they are safe. A while after John Steward, who had writ this down, with the Day and Hour, at the Return of the Ship, did most perticularly enquire, and found that it exactly answered all Circumstances; and that in that very Hour they were in appearance past hope of safety in a very dangerous place, and by an extraordinary unexpected Providence delivered from the same. One Day, being for many Hours alone in Prayer, while some of his Christian Friends did wait long for him, at last he came forth with an unusual chearfulness, and his Friends enquiring of him the reason of it, he said, That it was no wonder, for he that Day had obtained mercy of God for himself, and all his: which also came to pass, for there was not one of his Children but in the Judgment of Charity was truly Godly. Whilst he was Dying, Mr. Ferguson, a godly Minister said to him, you have cause Sir to be assured that the Angels of God are waiting about your Bed to convey your Soul into Abrahams Bosom: to whom he answered: I am sure thereof; and if the walls of this House could speak, they could tell how many sweet Days I have had in secret Communion with God, and how Familiarly he hath dealt with my Soul. Mr. Bruse, the Morning before God took him away (his sickness being mostly a weakness through Age) came to break his Fast at his Table, and having (as he used) eaten an Egg, he said to his Daughter, I think I am yet hungry, bring me ano∣ther Egg, but presently after, falling into a deep Meditation, after he had mused a while, he said, Hold Daughter, hold: my Master calls me, with which words his Sight failed him: whereupon he called for a Bible, but finding his Sight gone, he said, turn me to the Eighth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and set my Finger at these words, I am perswaded that neither Death not Life, &c. shall be able to seperate me from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus my Lord: Now said he, is my Finger upon them? And when they told him it was, without speaking any more he said, Now God be with you my Children: I have Breakfasted with you, and shall Sup with my Lord Jesus Christ this Night, and so he gave up the Ghost, Death shutting up his Eyes that he might see God. Of Mr. John Scrimger. MR. John Scrimger was Minister at Kinghorn: At which time there was a god∣ly Woman under his charge, who fell sick of a very lingring Disease, and was all the while assaulted with strong Temptations that she was a Cast-away. Master Scrimger often Visited her, Conferred with her, and Prayed over her: yet did her trouble still remain, and the terrours of the Almighty lay upon her. When she drew near to the time of her Dissolution, she being worse, both in Body and Soul, and sending for Mr. Scrimger, he took two of his Elders with him, and in their presence first endeavoured to comfort her, both by Exhortations and Conference, and then Prayed with her, and seeing that the nearer she was to her end, the worse
she was, he caused his Elders to Pray with her, after which himself Prayed again. But Satan still raged more and more, and her Soul was far removed from Peace. Hereupon he sat musing for a while, and then said: What is this? Our laying be∣fore her grounds of Comfort will not do it, Conference will not do it, Prayer will not do it, we must use another Remedy. Sure I am, that this is a Daughter of Abraham: Sure I am, that I am the Elder: Sure I am, that she hath sent for me: And therefore in the Name of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who sent him to redeem Sinners in the Name of Jesus Christ, who obeyed the Father, and came to save us: In the Name of the Holy and Blessed Spirit our Quickner, and Sanctifier, I the Elder command thee a Daughter of Abraham to be loosed from these Bonds; and immediatly Peace and Joy succeeded. Of Mr. Robert Blair. MR. Robert Blair in his Younger Days out-ran many others in his Studies. It pleased God to convert him by the Ministry of Famous Mr. Trochrig, into into whose hands (said he) it pleased God to put the Key that first opened my Heart. When he first began to Preach, by a remarkable Providence, he had Mr. Bruce (before mentioned) to be his Hearer; and indeed, he was desirous to have the Judgment of so great a Man about his Discourse, to whom Mr. Bruce said, I found your Sermon very well polished, and digested (which indeed was easie to one of his Parts) But there is one thing I missed in it; namely, the Spirit of God, that I found not. This made a great Impression upon Mr. Blair, and did him much good all his Life after, as himself oft acknowledged. For divers Years he was a Regent in the Colledg of Glasgow, where he made it his work to train up those un∣der his charge in the Study of godliness, as well as of humane learning: But by reason of the prejudice of some that had Power in that place, he could not stay there long. Upon the Report of a sinful Oath that was to be pressed upon the Masters of the Colledg, he enquired of one of his Fellow Regents, what he would do in that matter: his name was Gawin Forsyth, who thus answered: By my Faith I must live. Sir, (said Mr. Blair) I will not swear by my Faith as you do, but truly I intend to live by my Faith. You may chcose your own way, but I will adventure upon the Lord: That wretched man (to whom the matter of an Oath was a small thing) continued in the Colledg after Mr. Blair was gone: But many Years after Mr. Forsyth fell into such Poverty that he was forced to Petition the General Assembly for some Relief, at which time Mr. Blair was Moderator, and upon his appearing in so deplorable a condition, he could not but recall that for∣mer passage, and upon his Adress to him in private, he minded him thereof, yet with great tenderness, not in the least to upbraid him with his low Condition, but to let him see that he had been carried through by his Faith, at which Forsyth had formerly scoffed. When Mr. Blair was put from the Colledg, he went to his Brother then Minister at Dumbarton, to whom he confessed, that by the way, he could not but sing for Joy in the remembrance of Gods being with him, and helping him to be Instru∣mental for the good of the young Men committed to his charge. Afterwards he went into Ireland, having a Call to Bangor, and upon the sight of Land, his Heart was made to leap within him for Joy, so far, that (as himself professed) he was scarce able to bear it. When he came near to Bangor, he had a strong impression upon him that the Dean of Bangor was sick unto Death, and should rise no more, which at first he rejected as an impertinent suggestion; but going forward, it was with such power impressed upon his Spirit, as forced him to take notice of it. When he came thither he found indeed that the Dean was sick, and though he was a naughty Man, yet he made Mr. Blair very welcome, and encouraged him to hold on in his way, and told him that he was to succeed him in that charge: Yea, he spake so unlike himself, and in a strain so different from what was his usual man∣ner, that a Gentlewoman standing by, said to some others, that an Angel spake out of the Deans Bed to Mr. Blair, thinking that it could not proceed from such a Man.
Whilst Mr. Blair was a Regent in the College, once the Devil appeared to him like a crooked Boy that waited on him, and laughed in his Face, whilst he was se∣rious in his Chamber, but presently disappeared. Whilst he was in Bangor, there was one in that Parish, who carried over into Scotland some Horses to sell; and at a Fair met with a Man that was willing to buy them all: But pretending that he had not Money to pay for all at present, he gave him his Bond to pay at Martlemass: The poor Man, suspecting nothing, re∣turned home, and near unto that time, one Night as he went homeward from Bangor, his Merchant met him; who was the Devil. Now (said he) you know my Bargain how I bought you at such a place, and I am come as I promised to pay you the price. Bought me? Said the Man, trembling: You bought not me, but my Horses. Nay (said the Devil) you shall know that I bought your self: And speaking farther to this poor Man, who was confounded with fear, he said, you must kill some body or else I will not free you, and the more excellent the Party is, the better it will be for you, and in perticuler he mentioned Mr. Blair to him. The Man being overcome with terrour, and by the violence of the tempta∣tion, resolved to do it, and went to Mr. Blairs House, having a Dagger in his right hand, hid under his Cloke, and was endeavouring to get it out: But after Mr. Blair had for a while talked with him, he fell into an extream trembling, and upon fur∣ther enquiring what was the cause of it: he freely confessed for what end he came, and how he had endeavoured to draw his Dagger, but could not, and knew not what hindered: For now assaying to do it, it came out very easily. Mr. Blair Blessing the Lord for his deliverance, exhorted him to make God his refuge: Yet, afterwards he was much threatned, and terrified by the Devil, but nothing more followed. After some time Mr. Blair with some of his Worthy Brethren, were silenced by B. B. Ecklin, who in the Church of Bangor did himself pronounce the Sentence, whereupon Mr. Blair rose up publickly in the Congregation, and with great Au∣thority did Cite the B B. to appear before the Tribunal Seat of Jesus Christ, to answer for what he was doing contrary to the Light of his own Conscience against such whom he knew to be faithful Ministers of the Gospel; whereupon the B. B. was so astonished that he cryed out, I appeal from the Tribunal of God's Justice to the Throne of his Mercy: To whom Mr. Blair replied, Sir, your Appeal is rejected: For you know that what you are doing is directly against your Conscience: which hath made you to bear witness to us as the Servants of Jesus Christ. A few Months after the B. B. fell sick, and that Physitians enquiring of him what was the cause, he could only say, my Conscience, and so Dyed. Whilst they were under restraint, Mr. Blair was by his Brethren sent into Eng∣land to Petition the King for their Liberty: and as he was upon the way, he was taken with an extream fit of the Stone, which made him lye upon his Horses neck, not being able to sit upright, which much troubled him, beinga hindrance to him in so important a business: Hereupon he applied himself to God in Prayer, and immediatly after, trying if possibly he could lift up his Back, he found to his asto∣nishment his tormenting pain quite gone, and that he had perfect ease, nor did it return upon him for two Years after. A few Days after, in the same Journy, his Horse fell very lame, which much troubled him, having no opportunity to provide himself of another: and here∣upon also he made his Addresses unto God by Prayer, which the Lord graciously inclined his Ear unto, so that his Horse was (to his amazoment) perfectly cured, and without halting at all carried him to London. When he came to London, he endeavoured what he could to dispatch his business, but could get no access to the King: Yea, some that were his Friends at Court, after tryal, assured him that he could have no ground of hope to speed therein, Yet he resolved not to give over, but to cast the business upon the Lord: for whose Service onely he was importuning for an open Door. One Day going to Greenwich, where the Court then was, and being weary of waiting without success, he retired into the Park to Pray, and after much wrestling with the Lord, he had so clear a return that he could not but be assured that his way should be succesful: Yet, the appearance thereof being in an ordinary way so unlikely; he, in an humble man∣ner begged a sign of the Lord, and immediatly after the wind blowing hard,
which made a Noise among the Rushes, so great a Calm did suddenly follow, that not the least Plant did move or stir. Thence he went back to London, and within a few Days (in a strange manner) had his Petition presented to the King, who accepted of it, and in St. James his Park called for him, and with his own hand the King did not only Sign it, but Wrote in the Margin these Words, directed to the Lord Deputy of Ireland, Indulg the Education of these Ministers: For they are Scotch-Men. Whilst he was in England he had a strong discovery concerning the Death of his Wife, who was a very Gracious Woman, and of her lying in such a Bed, and of a Christian Friend being by her, who was his perticular acquaintance: When he came Home he found his Wife well, but a little after she fell sick, and Died in the same Bed, with that Friend sitting by her, and with all the other particular Cir∣cumstances. Of Mr. Andrew Steward. THere was in Ireland an Exercise held, whereunto a great Multitude of the choisest Christians in those parts Assembled, and while Mr. Andrew Steward, Minister of Dunagor, was Feeding his Flock in a large place (for the numerousness of the Hearers Imposed a Necessity upon him to Preach in the Field) an Horrid Black Cloud, and fearful to look upon, hung directly over their Heads, which, to all present, Threatned a strange pouring down of Rain, whereby the Exercise would have been interrupted: Yea, some drops began to fall: But Mr. Steward, being much enlarged in his own Spirit, craved their patience whilst he retired a little in∣to another place to Pray: And whilst he was Praying it was Observed, that the Cloud removed about half a Mile off to the Southward, and there fell in so mighty a Rain, as (though it was in Summer) it caused the Brooks so to swell, that some who came later then the rest, could not get over, but where they were Assembled there fell not a drop, so that he had opportunity to proceed with a full Gale, to the close of the work of the day, to the great Benefit and Conviction of the Hearers. Anno Christ, 1634. Mr. Steward being Invited to the Funeral of that Excellent Man of God, Mr. Josiah Welch, the Son of that great Mr. Welch before mention∣ed, he stood silent for a time at the Grave as a serious Observer of that sad dispen∣sation: Some that stood by, said, God knows who will be next, and when none Answered, he said, I do know, and so turning away, he went home to Dunagor a Foot, and entring into the Church, he Bolted the Door to him, where he continu∣ed about Two Hours, and then going home to his House, he fell asleep on his Bed through Excess of Grief, from whence he did never arise in Health, but was Buri∣ed that Day Month. When his Wife came home, whom he had left with Mr. Welch his Widow, she asked him what he had been doing? He Answered, I have been taking my leave of the Church of Dunagor, and I was there calling the Stones and Timber to wit∣ness, that in my short time I had laboured to be Faithful; and that, according to my Light, I have Revealed the whole Counsel of God to the People. After he had lain about Fourteen Days, Mr. Ridg, a choise English Minister, came to visit him, and said, I hope, Sir, you do not now Repent that you have been Faithful? He Answered, I am sorry for nothing but that I was too long before I began (he meant his Resisting for several Years, a Call to the Ministry, to which he had been much urged,) and I will tell you a strange thing, which hath much holpen me to be Faithful. These last Seven Years there hath not One Day passed, without thoughts of Death, and renewed Submission to the Will of God therein. Yea, this made me neglect my Body, which should have Served the Lord more, as if it had been Mire in the Street, which now troubles me. That Night wherin he Died, sundry Godly Christians were with him, when, for a long time he fell into a deep silence, which ended with Groanings of∣ten Intreated. A Christian there present, desired to know what it was that trou∣bled him; but he refused to tell: But being much urged, he at length said, I tell you that my Hair stands an end to foresee what is coming upon these Lands: And being farther pressed, he said, The Bloody Wars of Germany cannot be Ballanced with the Wars of these Three Kingdoms. What say you Sir? said one of the Company. To
whom he Answered, The Dead Bodies of many Thousands, who now despise the Glorious Gospel, shall lie Unburied as Dung upon the Earth. What then (said some) shall become of us and our Posterity? He lifted up his Voice and said, He that is for the Sword to the Sword: He that is for Captivity to Captivity: And he that is for Famine to Famine; for God shall be Avenged upon these Lands. And when one said, Is there no Remedy? He Cried Thrice, No Remedy, No Remedy, No Remedy, and so held his Peace. And a while after he said, The broken Covenant of Scotland must be renewed: The Formality of Ireland must be purged: The Prodigality of England removed, and the Sons of Saul must be hung up before the Sun: Of which last Words none knew his meaning. Some of his own Parish being present, Asked what he would say to them, to whom he Replied, Wo to thee Dunagor, for the Nettles and the long Grass shall be in greater Plenty in thee, then ever were People to hear the Word of God. And Three Years together after the late Rebellion, this was fully Accomplished. Some Asked him, if he would have his Children come to him? He Answered, No, He had done with them. And when they mentioned one of his Daughters to him, he de∣sired them to forbear, saying, She shall see Glorious Days after all this. Then having taken his Wife by the Hand (who had but Lien-in but Four Days, and now crept out of her Bed to give and take a long Farewel) he said, Thou hast in Faithfulness suffered many things with me in my Pilgrimage, and now whereith shall I comfort thee (My Love) (He left her with Four Children, under much Debt, and but Thirty Shillings Sterling to do all with) A Father to the Fatherless, and a Judg to the Wi∣dow, is God in his Holy Habitation. As God is God thou shalt never want, nor none of thine: But in all the Sad Days that are coming, you shall be a wonder of Mercy in eve∣ry place whether you are carried, and not a Hair of your Heads shall fall to the Ground. This was fully Accomplished, to the Conviction and Edification of many which saw it. Of Mr. John Welch. MR. John Welch, a very Holy Man, was not long since Minister of Kirckcu∣bright in Gatloway in Scotland, and afterwards Translated to the Church of Air, whom Mr. Rutherfort in one of his Books, calleth, an Heavenly Prophetical, and Apostolick Man, assuring us, that of each Twenty Four Hours, he spent Eight in Prayer, if other necessary and urgent Duties did not hinder him: Yea, he spent many Days and Nights in Fasting and Prayer for the Afflicted condition of the Church, and for the Sufferings of the Reformed Churches abroad. It was oft his usual manner in the Coldest Winter Nights to Rise for Prayer; and oft-times his Wife (who was an Excellent Woman) hath Risen to seek him, and found him ly∣ing on the Ground Weeping, and Wrestling with the Lord by Prayer: and some∣times he would be much of the Night in the Church of Air upon that account. One time especially she found him over-charged with Sorrow, whereupon he told her, That he had that to press him, which she had not, namely, the Charge of Three Thousand Souls which he must Answer for, whilst he knew not how it was with many of them. And at another time, when she found him alone, his Spirit was overwhelmed with Anguish and Grief, and when she Asked him the Reason of it? He Answered, That the Times that were coming upon Scotland for the Con∣tempt of the Gospel, would be very Heavy and Sad, but she should not Live to see them. Whilst he was a Prisoner in Blackness he Wrote thus to a Christian Lady, con∣cerning those large Joys which he had in his Sufferings for this Truth, That Jesus Christ is a King, and hath a visible Kingdom in the World, even his Church, which is as free to keep its Courts, and to Exert Discipline, by Vertue of an Intrinsick Power from Christ, as hath any Kingdom on the Earth: For which he was ready to lay down his Life; yea, that he would be glad and rejoyce to be offered up a Sacrifice for so Glorious a Truth. And in the close of his Letter, he foretold, that Judgment was coming upon Scotland, which should be Blood, first by an Intestine Sword, and then by the Sword of a Stranger, and that there should be a great Slaughter, both of Great Men and Mean; which many Lived to see Accomplish∣ed, who had the Letter among them long before the War began.
One John Steward, an Eminent Christian that lived at Air, coming to visit Mr. Welch in Prison, found him in a more then ordinary way troubled and sad, and enquiring of him what was the reason of it? He said, John, you should not be here, go home to Air; for the Plague of God is broken in upon that place; and cause Hugh Kennedy, Provest of that Town (who also was a choise Christian) to Convene the People in the Streets and Pray together, and the Lord shall hear Hugh Kennedy, and remove that Stroke. This at first Astonished the said John, and made him Question the Truth hereof, having come so lately from thence: But at his re∣turn, he found it so, and accordingly in every thing he found it so as this Man of God had foretold. The King changing the Sentence of Death that was passed upon him at Linlithgo, into Banishment, he went over into France, where in a short time he Learned the French Language, and acquired such a Dexterity therein as was thought strange by them that knew it. Trochrig, in his Comment upon the Ephesians, sets down this passage concerning him; that being called to Preach at Salmurz, before one of the most Learned Auditories in all France, he performed it with such Boldness and Au∣thority, as though he had been before a mean Congregation. Trochrig being Asto∣nished at it, and familiarly acquainted with him, Asked him, Whence he had that Confidence, Preaching before such a Judicious Congregation of Strangers, and in a strange Tongue? To which he Answered, In an Humble and Modest manner, as one rather Dejected then Elated, That when he considered his being before the Lord, and that he was delivering his Message, he could not regard the Persons, either of Great or Mean, &c. Whilst he was Minister at St. John de Angeli, a Protestant Town in France, where his Ministry was Blessed with great Success, the Civil Wars breaking out, that City was Twice Besieged by the Popish Party, during which time these Remarkable pas∣sages fell out; The Town being straitly Besieged, and ready to be taken, the Ene∣mies having Raised a Battery, and by their near approach, had made a considera∣ble Breach in the Wall, Mr. Welch, being informed hereof (who had much en∣couraged the Citizens by telling them that their Enemies should not prevail against them) he went himself with the Canonier, up to the Walls, and desired him to Charge such a Peice of Canon, and Shoot; for God would direct that Shot, and cause it to prosper, which accordingly was done, and to the Astonishment of the Spectators, it dismounted the Enemies Canon from that Battery, and the Lord was pleased so to order things afterwards, that the King Parlied with the Citizens upon good Tearms, and only himself and Court came into the City, without profering any Violence. Another marvelous passage was this, The Sabbath following some of the God∣ly in that place, fearing Mr. Welch his danger, did seriously deal with him, that he would not go forth, nor Preach that Day, for that the Court was there: But by no Intreaty would he be hindred from the discharge of his Duty, telling them, That he would adventure to Preach Gods Word to his People, and trust the Lord with what concerned himself (being much grieved at their Fear and Desponden∣cy) and had that Day a very great Auditory, both of Friends and others, who came upon the Fame of such a Mans Preaching: But whilst he was in his Sermon, a Great Man of the Court was sent with some of the Kings own Guard, to bring him presently before the King. And whilst he was entring the Church, with some difficulty by reason of the Croud, Mr. Welch turning himself towards the Door, desired the People to make way for one of the Great Peers of France, who was coming in: And when he was come near unto the Pulpit to Execute his Commis∣sion, Mr. Welch, with great Authority spake to him before all the People, and in the Name of his Master Jesus Christ charged him, that he should not Disturb the Worship of God, wherewith the Noble-man was so affrighted, that he fell a Trembling, yea, was forced to Crouch down, and make no farther Di∣sturbance. The Sermon being ended, Mr. Welch, with great Submission, went to the King, who was much Incensed, and with a frowning Countenance, asked, who he was, and how he durst be so Bold as to Preach Heresie so near his Person, and carry him∣self with such Contumacy? To which, with due Reverence bowing himself, he Answered, I am, Sir, a Servant, and Minister of Jesus Christ, whose Truth I
Preached this Day, which if your Majesty did rightly know, you would have come to it your self, and heard it. And for my Doctrine, I did this Day Preach these Truths. First, That Man is fallen, and by Nature is in a lost Condition: Yea, and that by his own Power and Abilities he is not able to help himself. Secondly, That there is no Salvation, or Deliverance from Gods Wrath by our own Merits, but by Jesus Christ, and his Merit alone. Thirdly, I Preached this Day the Just Liberties of the Kingdom of France; That your Majesty oweth Obedience to Christ only, who is Head of the Church: And that the Pope, as he is an Enemy to Christ and his Truth, so also to the Kings of the Earth, whom he keepeth under Slavery to his Usurped Power. The King for a time, being silent, and Astonished, turned to some about him, and said, Sure∣ly this is a Man of God: Yea, after he Communed with him, and dismissed him with great Respect. The Year following, The Differences continuing betwixt the King and Prote∣stants, that City was again Besieged, taken, and in part Plundered, as Mr. Welch did publickly foretel: At which time the King past a solemn Order, That none should in the least wroung Mr. Welch, or any thing that belonged to him under the highest Penalties, and afterwards gave him a safe Conduct to Transport him∣self into England, where he Died: King James refusing to give him leave to re∣turn into his own Country, though he was earnestly Petitioned by his Wife to grant that Favour to her Husband for his Health-sake. During his Sickness he was so filled and overcome with the sensible Injoyment of God, that he was some∣times over-heard in Prayer, to use these words, Lord hold thy Hand; it is enough: Thy Servant is a Clay Vessel, and can hold no more. Whilst this Mr. John Welch was Minister at Air, there came two Men with Packs of Cloath to the Towns-end from a Neighbour Town, in a time when a Plague was in some places of the Country, yet the Town whence they came was not at all suspected to be infected. The Sentry at the Bridg stopped them till the Magistrate came, though they had a Pass, and though he could not disallow their Pass, yet would not the Magistrate suffer them to come in, till he had sent for Mr. Welch, onely he bad them disburden their Beasts till he had considered what to do. A little after Mr. Welch coming, the Magistrate said to him; Sir, here are Men come from such a place; we have heard of no Plague there: Besides, they have a Pass from known Men: what would you advise us to do? Mr: Welch an∣swered nothing for the present, but uncovering his Head in the midst of the Com∣pany that followed him, and lifting up his Eyes to Heaven (yet without speaking) near half a quarter of an hour, at last he said, Bayly, cause these Men to load their Packs and be gone: for if God be in Heaven, the Plague is in these Packs. The Men going away, opened their Packs at Cumnock, which so infected the Town, that all the Inhabitants Dyed, not one being left to Bury the Dead. One night, being under an extraordinary pressure of Spirit to go and pour forth his Soul unto God: he left his Wife in Bed, and going out into a Garden, he spent most of the night in Prayer and Praise: But his Wife, missing him so long, at length went to seek him, and not finding him in his ordinary place, she went into other Gardens by such passages as she knew: At last she heard a Voice, and draw∣ing near she heard him speak these words with great fervency, and accompanied with a flood of Tears, O God! wilt thou not give me Scotland? O God wilt thou not give me Scotland? She being afraid to interrupt him, went home, and heard not the close. At length he came home, and going to Bed, his Wife mildly re∣proved him for his unmercifulness to himself: then she asked him what it was that he was saying? For she told him, she heard him: Well said he, you had better have been in your Bed: I tell you I have endured a great fight for Scotland this night, and hardly could I prevail that a Remnant should be reserved: Yet God will be gracious. Afterwards he arose another night (as his frequent manner was) but went not out into the Garden, but into another Chamber, where he so laboured and groan∣ed, that his Wife hearing him, went several times to draw him to Bed: but he stayed his time, and then returned. His Wife with a modest expostulation, bla∣med him for tarrying so long: Hold thy Peace (said he) it will be well with us:
but I shall never Preach another Sermon in Air. Then falling asleep, before he awaked, a Messenger came who was sent to carry him Prisoner to Edenburg Castle. Whilst he was Prisoner there, the Lord Uchiltry was Governour of the Castle, whose Sister was Mr. Welch his Mother in Law, being John Knox his Wife. This Lord being much imployed in King James his Court, had not oppertunity to shew his kindness to his Kinsman Mr. Welch as he should. But being sensible of his unkindness, he caused Mr. Welch to sup with him one night at his own Table, where also were several other Gentlemen, and among them a Popish Youth that sat towards the lower end of the Table: and Mr. Welch being by the Governour, sate at the upper end, laboured to entertain the Company with Grave and Edi∣fying Discourse, which all attended unto with seriousness, save this young Papist, who with laughter and derision sought to silence him, which Mr. Welch little regar∣ded. But after Supper, the Guests sitting still, this Youth stood up at the lower end of the Table, and whilst Mr. Welch proceeded from grave to gracious Dis∣courses, the Youth grew to that insolency as with his Finger to point at him, and to make wry mouths at him, whereby he so grieved that Holy Man, that on a suddain he was forced to silence. The whole Company, that were much delighted with his Discourses, were silent also▪ But a while after Mr. Welch, being moved by the Spirit of God: brake forth into these Words: Gentlemen, the Spirit of God is provoked against us, and I shall intreat you not to be afraid to see what God will do amongst you before you rise from the Table: For he will strike some one of you with Death before you go hence. All were silently astonished, waiting with fear to see the issue: And while all Men feared themselves: except this insolent Youth, he fell down Dead among them. One Day as Mr. Welch looked out of his Window in the Castle, he saw the Go∣vernour, to whom he said, God save you, my Lord: The Governour asked him how he did: and wherein he might serve him? In nothing (said Mr. Welch) if you be well, except you would carry a Petition to His Majesty for my Liberty to Preach the Gospel. I willingly will (said the Governour) therefore send it to me, Nay (said Mr. Welch) I am your Kinsman, and love you so well as to warn you not to undertake it except you resolve to deal truly in delivering it, and in getting me an Answer. I will bear the blame (said the Governour) if I do it not. I be∣seech you, my Lord, said Mr. Welch, undertake it not unless you resolve to do it; for the hazard is great; So Uchiltry undertook it: But when he came to the King, finding him in a great Passion upon some other occasion, he judged it not meet at that time to present it; and afterwards neglected, and at last, quite for∣got it, for which, his heart smiting him, he durst hardly be seen of Mr. Welch for Three Months after. Yet at length, his Conscience forgetting as well as he, he came to the same place where Mr. Welch at first called to him. And now Master Welch asked him how he did, and what was become of his Petition? The Gover∣nour being surprized, answered; I delivered it to his Majesty; but he being in a Passion, it seems that it was neglected: for I have not gotten an Answer. Nay my Lord (said Mr. Welch) you should not lye to God and me; I know that you delivered it not, and I am sorry my Lord for your Lot: I warned you not to be false to God, and now I tell you, God shall take your Estate, and Honours in Scotland from you, and give them to your Neighbour, and this in your own time. This much troubled the Lord Uchiltry: And as it was foretold, so it came to pass: For he being the Eldest Son of the good Lord Uchiltry (one of the Reformers) was forced in his own time to quit all, and to give both his Estate and Honours to James, the Son of Captain James, the Second Brother, who was the last of that House. Of Mr. Robert Bruce. MR. Robert Bruce, was by an extraordinary manner called to the work of the Ministry, having for a long time followed the Study of the Law both in Scotland and France, and had some reason to expect a place among the Lords of
the Session, his Father being a considerable Baron, and one that had many Friends: But a more pressing and irresistable Call from God, did otherwise de∣termine of him. Whilst he was Minister at Edenburgh, he shined as a Great Light through the whole Land: The Power and Efficacy of Gods Spirit most sensibly accompanying the Word which he Preached. He was a Terror to Evil-doers, and the Authority of God did so appear upon him, with such a Majesty in his Countenance, as forced Fear and Reverence from the Greatest in the Land; even from those who were the most Avowed Haters of the Power of Godliness. Yea, his Carriage had such an awful Impression upon King James himself, that he once before many, gave this Testimony of him, That Mr. Bruce was worthy of half his Kingdom. Mr. Bruce was a Man that had much inward trouble about his own Spiritual Condition, and had been oft assaulted by Satan to question that Fundamental Truth, whether there was a God: This cost him many Days and Nights wrestling before he could clear it up to his own Soul, which occasioned him, when he came up into the Pulpit, after a short silence (which was his usual way) he would say, I think it is a great matter to believe that there is a God: telling the People, that it was not so easie a thing as they judged. It was known unto his Friends with whom he was Familiar, what extraordinary conformation he had hereof from the Lord: what Familiarity he did attain in his secret converses with God. The great success of his Ministry at Edenburgh, Innerness, and other Places whi∣ther Providence called him, is well known to very many. Whilst he was confined at Innerness, that poor dark Country was marvellously enlightned by him, and many were brought home to Christ by his Ministry, and a Seed was sowen in those places which was not wholly worn out for many years after. Famous Mr. Henderson at his first embrace into the Ministry at Leuchars, was very Prelatick, and was, by the B. B. of St. Andrews brought in thither against the Parishes consent; So that upon the Day of his Admission, the Church Doors being by the People shut against him, he was fain to break a Window to get en∣trance. Not long after Mr. Henderson hearing of an Exercise where Mr. Bruce was to help, from a longing which he had to see and hear such a Famous Man, he would needs go secretly thither, and placed himself in a dark corner of the Church: where he might not be seen or known. When Mr. Bruce was come into the Pulpit, for a considerable time he kept silence, as his manner was, which somewhat asto∣nished Mr. Henderson: but much more when he heard his first words, which were these: He that cometh not in by the Door, but climbs up another way, the same is a Thief and a Rohber: This by Gods Blessing did so affect Mr. Henderson for the pre∣sent, and made so great an Impression upon him, that it was the first means of his Conversion. Mr. Bruce had the Spirit of discerning in a great measure, and did Prophetically foretel many things which did afterwards come to pass: Diverse distracted Persons, and others who were past hope of recovery by the Falling-Sickness, were brought to him, who by the Power and Efficacy of his Prayers, were fully Recovered. He was a great wrestler with God, and had more than ordinary Familiarity with him. A little before his Death, when he was at Edenburgh, and through weakness kept his Chamber, there was a meeting of divers godly Ministers at that time there, upon some special grounds of the Church concernment, who hearing that he was in Town, came to him, and gave him an account of the Actings of those times; Mr. Bruce went to Prayer, and therein spread before the Lord the substance of their Discourse, which was a sad representation of the State the Church was then in, at which time there was such an extraordinary motion upon all present, and so sensible a powring down of the Spirit, that they could hardly contain them∣selves: Yea, there was an universal motion upon others who were in other parts of the House▪ though they then knew not the cause of it: And Mr. Weems of Lothaker, being occasionally present, at his going away, said, how strange a Man is this: for he draws down the Spirit of God upon us all, by knocking his Fingers upon the Tahle, which indeed he many times did.
He was deeply affected with the wickedness and profanity of many Ministers then in the Church, and the unsuitable carriage of others in so high a Calling, and did express much fear that the Ministry of Scotland, would prove the greatest Pro∣secutors of that Church: Learned Didoclavius in his Preface to his Altare Doenasce∣num gives this Testimony of him: Robertus Brusius, Vir Genere, & virtute Nobilis, Magistate vultus venerabilis, qui plura animarum millia Christo lucrificit, cujus Anima, si villius mortalium (absit verbo invidia) sedet in Coelestibus: Anima mea, cum Ani∣ma tua, Brusi, si ex aliena Fide esset pendendum. Of Mr. Davidson. MR. Davidson, Minister of the Gospel at Salt-Preston, had an extraordinary Prophetick Spirit, and was Eminently Zealous and Faithful in a time of the Churches defection, whence Didoclavius in that aforementioned Preface, tearms him, Cato, & constans Cato sui temporis: King James pressing the setting up of Superin∣tendents in the Scottish Church: Mr. Davidson being present in an Assembly at Dundee, where many were drawn over by the King to consent to it, rose up boldly in the Assembly, and in his own Name, and in the Name of the Church of Scotland, did enter a Protestation against that step of defection, and in yeilding up so far the Li∣berties of the Church to please Men. Whilst he was Minister at Salt-Preston, the Building of the Church was much de∣sired by him, which also he much advanced out of his own private Interest: The Lord Newbattel (who had great Authority in that Parish) promising to promote it, from which, yet he afterwards drew back, so that the Work ceased; where∣upon Mr. Davidson said to him: These Walls that were begun to be Built shall stand as a Witness against you, that ere long God shall root you out, and your Estate out of this Parish, so that you shall not have a piece of Land in the same, which shortly after had a visible accomplishment. In an Assembly of the Church Mr. John Spotswood, and Mr. Law had a Process put in against them for some gross misdemeanours, where Mr. Davidson, finding a readiness in the Assembly to acquit them by reason of their good Parts and Gifts, onely with a reproof, he did with earnestness press their Deposition; But being crossed therein, he said, you will needs spare these two Men, whereat I am grieved: For the time is coming wherein they will trample upon your Necks, which prediction had shortly after its accomplishment. He being on a time at Dinner with Mr. Bruse, who was then in great Favour with the King, in returning thanks after Meat he had this expression: Lord, thy Servant hear is a great Favourite at Court, and had in much Respect: But he shall ere long be as much Persecuted as he is now Favoured, and shall go down the Streets when many who now Esteem him greatly, will not vouchsafe to give him a Salutation: which afterwards came to pass. At another time Mr. Robert Bruce and he, Dining together at the House of a Magistrate at Edenburg, who was then a Cordial Friend to godly Ministers, in his plain and free way, whilst he was giving of thanks, he said, Lord, this good Man for thy sake hath respect to thy Servants: But he little knows that within a short time he must carry us two, who are present hear to Prison: which words did much trouble that honest Magistrate, though afterward it came exactly to pass. A Gentleman neary related to a great Family in that Parish where Mr. David∣son was Minister, a violent hater of Piety, did upon that account Beat a poor ho∣nest Man that lived there, having not the least shadow of provocation from him; and among many sore strokes, he gave him one upon the Back, using these words, Take this for Mr. Davidsons sake: After which, this honest Man, was forced for a time, to keep his Bed, complaining most of the stroke upon his Back. The Sab∣bath following, in the close of his Sermon, Mr. Davidson speaking about the op∣pression of the Godly, and the Enmity which Wicked Men had to such, did parti∣cularly instance in that late Insolence, saying, That it was a sad Time, when Pro∣fane Men would thus openly adventure to vent their Rage against such as were Seekers of God in the place, having no cause of Provocation, saving the Image of
God in the Person. And then, with great Authority added, He who hath done this, be he the Laird, or the Lairds Brother, e're a few Days be past, God shall give him such a Stroke, as all the Monarchs in the Earth cannot do, and the Saturday following, as this Gentleman, stood before his Door, he was stricken Dead with a Thunder-bolt, and had all his Bones broken. This Mr. Davidson, not long before his Death, occasionally meeting with Mr. John Ker, a Young Gentleman who was lately come out of France, and had then no thoughts of entring into the Ministry, and was in a very Courtly Dress; Mr. Davidson did solemnly charge him to put off his Scarlet Cloak, and to lay aside his Guilded Rapier, and to betake himself to his Book: For you are the Man (said he) who must Succeed me in the Ministry at this place. This much Astonished the Gentleman for the present, yet did he Obey, and as it was foretold, did immedi∣ately Succeed him; and was a Faithful and Painful Pastor in that place many Years after. Of Mr. Patrick Simpson. MR. Patrick Simpson was sometime Minister at Cramond, and afterwards Tran∣slated to Sterling. In his Youth he attained to great Exactness in the Lan∣guages, and Read many Authors, and being told by some, that they wondered why he spent so much time in Reading Pagan Authors? He Answered, That he purposed to Dedicate all these Jewels which he borrowed from the Aegyptians, towards the Building of the House of God. He did much oppose himself to the Corruptions of the Times: And in the Year 1584, when the King gave an Express Charge. That they should acknowledg Mr. Patrick Adamson for Arch-Bishop of St. Andrews, or else lose their Maintenance, he with great Vehemency opposed the same, though that Man was his Unkle by the Mothers side: and whereas some were willing to Subscribe, with this Proviso, According to the Word of God, He told them, That this could not secure their Consciences, it being Contradictio in Adjecto, to Subscribe to any Humane Institution, according to the Word, when the Word did Expresly Condemn the same. He himself refused the offer of a Bishoprick, and afterwards, of a Yearly Pen∣sion, which he looked upon as a Design to Bribe his Conscience, which was more dear to him then all the World. And when the Assembly at Aberdeen was Con∣demned by the State, he did openly own and avow the same, and in a very so∣lemn manner Denounced the Wrath and Judgment of God against the Accusers and Convictors of those excellent Men at Linlithgow, who stood for the Liberty of that Assembly. And that notable Paper and Protestation which was given in to the Parliament, Anno Christi, 1606. was penned by him, and with his own Hand de∣livered to the Earl of Dunbar, subscribed by many Ministers, who met there upon that account. His Life was most exemplary for Piety, and Faithfulness in the Service of his Master, which Preached no less in that part of the Country where he lived, then did his Doctrine. His Wife, Martha Barson, a Gracious Woman, and the Wife of his Youth, with whom he had lived in great Love, fell sick, which proved her last Sickness. In her weakness she was sorely assaulted by Satan, who suggested to her, That she should be given over into his Hands: And it ended in a visible Di∣straction, which for a time grew upon her: So that, most unlike to her former practice, she would break forth into dreadful and horrid Expressions, and it was most violent on a Sabbath Morning, when Mr. Simpson was going to Preach; whereupon, with an heavy Countenance he stood silent for a time, and at last Kneeled down and Prayed, which she no whit regarded: After which, he, turn∣ing to the Company that were present, said, That he was sure that they who were now Witnesses of that sad Hour, stould yet see a Gracious Change, and that the Devils Malice against that poor Woman should have a shameful Foil. Her Distraction still continued until Tuesday, August the Ninth, which Morning, at the very Dawning of it, he went into his Garden, and shut the Door, where, for many Hours he was alone: But a Godly Woman, one Helen Garner, Wise to
one of the Bayliffs of Sterling, who had been with his Wife all Night; apprehend∣ing that Mr. Simpson might much wrong himself by much Grief and Fasting, by some help, she did climb over into the Garden: But as she came near to the place where Mr. Simpson was, she was terrified with an extraordinary Noise, which made her fall to the Ground: It seemed to her like a mighty Rushing of Multitudes running together, and withal, she heard such a Melodious Sound, as made her Judg, that it was more then Humane. Whereupon she Prayed to God to pardon her Rashness, which her Affections to that Man of God had carried her to. Yet afterwards, going forwards, she found him lying upon the Ground; she earnestly intreated him to tell her what he had from God? He (till she had pro∣mised not to Reveal it so long as he Lived, yet giving her leave to do it, after his Death) said, O what am I, being but Dust and Ashes, that the Holy Ministring Spirit should be sent by the Lord to deliver a Message to me? And he told her that he had a Vision of Angels, who did, with an Audible Voice give him an Answer from the Lord, concerning his Wives condition. And returning into his House, he said to all that were present, Be of good Comfort, for e're Ten Hours be past, I am sure that this Brand shall be pluck'd out of the Fire. After, he Prayed by his Wives Bed-side, and whilst he was mentioning Jacobs wrestling in Prayer, she sat upright in the Bed, and casting by the Curtain, said, Thou art this Day Jacob, who hast wrestled, and also prevailed: And now God hath made good his Words, which he spake this Morning to you: for I am pluck'd out of the hands of Satan, and he shall have no more power over me. This interruption made him silent for a time, but afterwards, with great melting of heart, he proceeded in Prayer, and magnified the Riches of Gods Love towards her. And from that Hour she spake most Christianly, and comfortably, even to her Death, which was the Fryday following, August the 13th Anno Christi, 1601. Her last words were with a Loud Voice, Come Lord, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Mr. Simpson lived several Years after, even till March, 1618. At which time he said, Now shall this Month put an end to all my Labors; and accordingly, towards the end of it, he was removed by Death; at which time he expressed much Joy: Blessing the Lord for all his kindness towards him, that he had not been perverted by the sinful courses of those Times: and that he might say, That as the Lord had sed Elijah in the Wilderness; so in some respect, he had dealt with him all his Life long. Upon some of his Books were these words written, Remember, O my Soul, and never forget the Ninth of August, what Consolation the Lord then gave thee, and how he performed what he spake, according to Zach. 3. 2. Is not this a Brand pluck'd out of the Fire?
Providences, Strange and Extraordinary. ANno Christi, 1636. Divers choise Ministers and Christians in Ireland, (Mr. Blair, Mr. Levinston, and Mr. Makleland, were Three of them,) be∣ing much Persecuted, intended to Transplant themselves into New-Eng∣land, not from any fear of their own Sufferings, but that they might have more liberty to Serve the Lord in the Work of the Gospel, when the Door was shut against them in their own Country: At which time there was a strange and remarkable Providence appearing in sundry particulars: As First, The Vessel wherein they went, in the midst of a Tempestuous Sea, and far from any Land, proved like a Riddle, by reason of its many Leaks, the Rud∣der of the Ship being also broke off, so that the Pilot and Marriners despaired of safety, not seeing any means of deliverance in an ordinary way: But then God made a poor Seamon, whose company they had shunned, to be an Instrument of saving the Vessel, and all that were in it; for by a marvelous dexterity, he fasten∣ed on the Rudder (which others had attempted in vain, and given over all hopes of affecting it) as one Eminently sent by God for that purpose. Secondly, Some of these Eminent Ministers had a strong perswasion of their safe∣ty and deliverance in the greatest Extremity, which they also declared before the Master and Passengers, whilst they were giving it over as a hopeless Business. Thus seeing an Invincible necessity of returning, though it was very Astonishing and bitter at the first look, yet it afterwards clearly appeared to be from the Lord. And one of the Ministers did express to the rest of his Brethren, That he was as∣sured, that since the Lord would not accept of their Service in America, they should not want Work and Employment in the place whether he was sending them back by so remarkable a Providence, which also within a short time came to pass; so that they could not but say, that the Lord did in a very marvellous and imme∣diate way appear in that cross Wind, to make them Instrumental for that great Harvest which afterwards followed. Thirdly, It was also most Observable, That none of those, who upon the ac∣count of their Consciences, to enjoy the purity of Christs Ordinances, undertook that Voyage, miscarried, whereas Five Persons who went upon another account to enrich themselves, and had unexpectedly slipt into the Ship, all of them, but one, Died upon the Sea. It was also wonderful, that the Lord, as he had stilled the Raging of the Sea, so did he also quiet the Raging of the People, which they found by Experience to their comfort, and the terror of their Adversaries. There was, not many Years since, in Scotland a Gentleman, whose Stile was Wastraw; a most Bloody Man, and Notorious for Profaneness, who made it his chief Business to stir up Quarrels, and to Engage Men in Blood. Amongst others, he provoked a Neighbouring Gentleman to Kill another in that place, which he did accordingly; but afterwards was much troubled in Conscience for it, where∣upon this former person told him, That more of that Practice would be the best Cure for him, saying, that himself had Killed Six, and that at the first he was much troubled, but the oftner he did it, it became the more easie. One Day as he was Riding to a place where Two had appointed to decide a private Quarrel by Fighting, his Horse stumbled on the side of a steep Rock, and he fell a great way down, his Sword falling out before him, yet he received no hurt. By this strange Providence God awakened his Conscience, so that stopping his Jorney, he returned home with much Anguish and Remorse, and a strange change followed, whereby he witnessed his Tenderness and Repentance: Before his Death he spent much time alone in Mourning for his Sins: And the Day wherein he Died (though no such thing appeared to them about him) he was heard in his Chamber wrest∣ling very much in Prayer: But after long continuance, when he answered not at their Knocking, they broke open the Door upon him, and found him Dead, but upon his Knees in a Praying posture; and all the Blood in his Body swiming about him in the Floor, all the passages of his Body being opened to give it vent. Thus,
though God giveth Pardon to his People, yet some Sins he will not let pass with∣out a visible Token of his Anger, but will take Vengeance of their Inven∣tions. There was a notorious Thief in the South parts of Scotland not many Years ago, called John of the Score, who for many Years had followed that Wicked Trade. At length he met with a poor Man Traveling with Two Horses, which Score took from him: The poor Country-man falling upon his Knees, earnestly Begged, that for Jesus Christs sake he would give him the one again; for he had no more to maintain his poor Family with, but what he could get by their Labor: But all was in vain: For the Thief carried both away to his own Home, leaving the poor Man in a very desolate Condition. But not long after, Score became very Dum∣pish and Melancholy, and could get no Rest nor Quiet, and yet knew not the cause, only he professed, that the Words which the poor Man spake, (though he was so great an Atheist, that he understood not what he meant when he spake of Christ,) did lie like a great weight upon his Spirit: And when he was sought after for his Robberies, he bad his Sons to shift out of the way, but for himself he could not flie, there being a restraint upon him, and something within him that bound him from going out of the way: And so he staid in his House till he was appre∣hended, and brought up to Edenburgh, and there put in Prison: whilst he was there, a Godly Minister [Mr. Henry Blith,] and a Christian Gentleman [Willi∣am Cunningham, Tutor of Boniton] who had sometimes known him, gave him a Visit, holding forth to him his miserable Estate, and the danger that his Soul was in (for he was Condemned by the Law to Die) and among other Words, they shewed him the necessity of Flying to Jesus Christ, whereupon he suddenly Cried out. O what word is that! for it hath been my Death: That's the Word that hath lain upon my Heart ever since the poor Man spake it to me, so that from that time I had no power to shift out of the way: Afterwards, being told what an one Christ was, without whom he could not be Saved, he Cried, Oh, will he ever look to me? and shew me Mercy, who for his sake would not shw Mercy to that poor Man, and give him back his Horse? Yet after further Instruction, a real and gracious Change did appear up∣on him, and he gave most convincing Evidences of the reality thereof: Yea, he attained to great Assurance before his Death, and upon the Scaffold, in the Pub∣lick Street, where he was Executed, spake so wonderfully of the Lords dealing with him, and that with such Knowledg and Judgment, as left a Conviction upon all present, that he had the Grace of God in reality. There was one Patrick Mackelwroth in the West part of Scotland, who had his Heart touched in a most remarkable way, by the Lord, and after his Conversion, (as he told many of his Christian Friends) he was so affected with the new World, into which he was entred, together with the discoveries of God, and of a Life to come, that for some Months together, he could scarce ever sleep, but was continually taken up in Admiration. His Life was very remarkable, for Tender∣ness and near Converse with God, in his Daily walk. One Day after a sharp Tryal (having his only Son suddenly taken away by Death) he retired into private for several Hours; and when he came forth, he looked so chearfully, that to those who asked him the reason of it, and wondred at it in such a time; he told them, That he had got that in his retirement with the Lord, that to have it again renew∣ed, he would be content to lose a Son every Day. It had been long his Burden, that he had such a bad Memory, so that he could retain almost nothing of what he heard: And bitterly complaining thereof to a worthy Minister, [Mr. James English] of Dally, he advised him, That when he heard any Truth which he desired to remember, he should commend it to the Lord, and intreat him to keep it for him, and to give it to him back again when he should stand in most need of it: Which accordingly this Holy Man did put in practice most seriously, and when he came to lie on his Death-Bed, to his Mini∣sters, and divers other Christians that were present, he did solemnly declare, how wonderfully the Lord had Answered his Prayers: For whereas want of Memory had been his great Burden, now the Lord had given him back all those Truths that he had put into his Keeping, so that what he had heard many Years before, was now most clearly brought into his Remembrance, which he shewed by repeating many particular Truths, and Notes of Sermons, which at such and such times he had heard.
All these Scotish Stories are related by a Godly old Scotish Minister, who profes∣seth that he hath written nothing but what he hath either upon his own knowledg, or else from the Testimony of such Faithful Witnesses, as that he had no reason to question the Truth of them. Not many Years since, in the Town of Air in Scotland, there was a poor Man Committed to Prison for the filthy Sin of Buggery. And before his Imprisonment, he was in the Judgment of all that knew him, a most stupid Brutish Person, far from God, and from the knowledg of him: But whilst he was in Prison the Lord did marvelous declare the power of his Grace, and in such a measure discovered to him his great Wickedness, that after many conflicts in his Soul, and great wrest∣ling in Prayer, a most kindly work of Repentance did appear in him, which was accompanied with great Assurance, insomuch; as when he came to the Stake, he could not cease from Crying out to the People, under the sense of Pardon, and that comforting Sunshine of Gods presence and favour, Oh! he is a great For∣giver: He is a great Forgiver. Adding these words, Now hath perfect Love cast out all Fear: For Jesus Christ hath paid all: I know that the Lord hath nothing to lay to my Charge; for Jesus Christ hath paid all; and such are free indeed, whom the Son makes free: And thus Died in a Ravishment of Joy and Wonder. Mr. Beza in his Younger Years, having his Heart touched by the word, being at Paris, went to the Protestant Church at Charenton, where he heard the Ninety First Psalm Read and Expounded, and God followed it with so much power, that he not only found it marvelous sweet for the present, but was sttengthened to be∣lieve it: Yea, had wrought in him a strong perswasion, that the Lord would make good to him all those Promises contained in it: which afterwards he found verifi∣ed, as with much comfort he Testified at his Death, saying, That a sat that time he had been holpen to close with that great Truth, Verse the Second, of taking the Lord for his God, and got a sure claim thereto: Yea, that he would be his Refuge and Fortress, he had found it performed remarkably in the course of his Life. That he had been delivered from the Snare of the Fowler, and from the Noisome Pe∣stilence, having in frequent hazards been delivered from many that did lie in wait for him: And sometime he was in great danger of the Pestilence, which was in those places where he was called to reside. Yea, in the time of the Civil Wars which were then hot in France, he had convincing Deliverances from many Emi∣nent Dangers, at such times as he was called by the Protestant Princes into the Field, where Thousands did fall on his Right and Left hand, &c. And upon his death Bed he did, with much comfort, declare in all the perticulars the Accomplishment of those Promises to him: Adding that he had found that God had given his Angils charge over him, and had often heard when he called upon him, and had been with him in trouble, and delivered him, yea, had satisfied him with a long life: And now (said he) I have no more to wait for, but the fulfilling of that last Promise in the Psalm, I will shew him my Salvation. Idem. The Laird of Raith of a known and Ancient Family in Scotland, in the begin∣ning of the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdom, was a Profess't Papist. But the Lord directed that great Servant of his Mr. Wiseheart, to come one Night late to his House, who, after some Repulses by a Servant, got access to this Gentleman, and told him, that he was come to offer the Gospel of Jesus Christ to him and his Family if he pleased to receive it. This was spoken with such Authority and Power upon the Gentlemans Conscience that he most kindly received him, and told him that he was Welcome. And it pleased God that a little after, this Visit was made so Succesful, upon Mr. Wisehearts Instructing him and his Family in the Truth, that they made a Publick Profession of the same, and the Gentleman Evidenced the Truth of his Conversion. Not long after, by that Subtilty and Malice of Cardinal Beaton, this Laird of Raith was seized upon in the Laird of Grange his House, and carried Prisoner to the Castle of Edenburg, and so hotly pursued by that Wretched Cardinal (who was then in his greatest Power) that within a short time he was Condemned to Dye. His Lady being overwhelmed with grief upon her Husbands Sufferings, and the Forfi∣ture of his Estate, (having five Sons and some Daughters to provide for) endea∣voured to draw him to a Recantation. But as one that was much with God, he told her that that God, for whom he Suffered (he was assured) would provide for his
Family, and Posterity; & that she should yet live to see her youngest Son to be in a better Condition than himself had ever been, in which also came to pass. His second Son went into France, & was there raised to great Honour, & upon his return Home, purchased a considerable Estate, and was made Lord Melvin, and he bought also part of the Cardinals Estate. His third Son was Lord Tongland, and one of the Judges of the Sessions, and another of them was Laird of Halhill. And which was most strange, the French King (moved by the great respect he had for that wor∣thy Gentleman Sir Robert Melvin the second Son formerly mentioned) did upon a Treaty with Scotland, move & procure the taking off the Forfiture of that Estate of Raith, whereby the Eldest Son was restored to his Inheritance. And its known to this Day, how graciously the Lord hath witnessed his respect to that Family, which is now enjoyed by the Lord Melvin, who, by a continued Succession is descended from that worthy Gentleman who so suffered for the Truth. Not long after the Sun of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ began to spread its Rays in the Kingdom of France, there was one James Faber, a Native of a Steeple in Picardy, a most Faithful and Eminent Minister of the Gospel there, who, in a time of Persecution, was forced (with others) to retire for Security to the Queen of Navar, who was at Albert in Gascoin, who had him in high esteem. On a cer∣tain Day the Queen gave him notice that she meant to come and dine with him, and for that end invited some learned Men, whose conference she took much de∣light in. At Dinner Mr. Faber became exceeding sad, and now and then brake out into bitter weeping, of which the Queen complained, and required of him the cause why he wept when she came to be merry with him? To which he answered, Most Serene Queen, how can I be glad, or make others glad, who am as wicked a man as the Earth bears? And what is that wickedness (said she) you complain of, who are known from your Youth to have lived so holily? He Answered; I am now an hundred years old, free from the touch of any Woman, and remember not that have committed any thing that should be a burden to my Conscience, or that should make me a∣fraid to leave the World, except one Sin, for which yet I am assured that there is a Propiti∣ation. And as she pressed him to declare what it was? He could scarse speak for abundance of Tears, and said, How can I appear before the Throne of God, who ha∣ving taught others in Purity, and Sincerity, the Holy Gospel of the Son of God, many of which, having followed my Doctrine, have constantly suffered a Thousand Torments, and Death it self, whereas I in the mean time, like an unconstant Doctor did fly, and tho I had lived long enough, and should not have feared Death, but rather desired it, yet did withdraw my self, and thus cowardly transgressed the Command of my God. Hereupon the Queen (as she was most Eloquent) did by Reason and Examples shew him that this had befaln divers of the holy Servants of God. Others there present also did add such considerations as made him more cheerful. And thereupon he said, there remains now nothing but that I go to my God, and having made my Will, I have an Impression that I must delay no longer, knowing that the Lord calls for me. Then ha∣ving fixed his Eyes upon the Queen, he said, Madam, I make you my Heir, and to your Preacher Mounsieur Gerard I leave my Books: And to the Poor I give my Cloaths, and what else I have. The Queen, smiling said, what then Mr. Faber, shall I have? The Care, Madam (said he) to see this Distributed to the Poor. It is well (said she) and I solemnly Prosess, that this Legacy is more acceptable unto me, than if the King my Brother had named me his Heir. After this he was more Joyful, and at last, he said, I have need of some rest: be you merry and joyful, and in the mean time adue. Having thus spoken, he laid him∣self down upon a Bed that was near; where (as they judged) he lay sleeping, but was indeed faln a sleep in the Lord, without the least sign of any previous indispo∣sition, and when they were about to awake him, to their great admiration, found him dead This Narrative the Queen of Navar did relate her self to Frederick the Second, Prince Elector Palatine, when he lay sick at Paris, and it was communi∣cated by a worthy Gentleman, Mr. Hubertus Thomas, a Counsellor to the said Frede∣derick, who was present at this Relation of the Queens, from whom Dr. Rivet had it, who hath set it down in an Epistle to his Brother. There was a Famous Christian in Scotland called John Stewart, Provist of Aire, who from his very younger Years was much inclined to Piety. He had a conside∣rable Estate left him by his Father: But considering the great straits and necessi∣tous
condition of many good People that he knew in the Countrey, and from his love to Jesus Christ and his Truth, upon deliberation he called them together in Edenburg, and having spent some time in Prayer, he took their solemn Promise, that what he was about to do they should not reveale so long as he lived. He said, he knew the straits that many of them were in to hold up their Credit, and there∣fore he had brought a little mony to lend to each of them; yet so, as that they should never offer to repay it, till he required the same. Some time after he had distributed this Mony, the Plague having been much in Air, and they by Trade decaying, himself fell under some straits, and some Pro∣fane Persons in the place began to make it their sport, saying, that Religion had made him poor, and his giving much to others, like a Fool, made him now wnt it himself: The Profession and Credit of Religion had been always dear to this good Man, which made him resolve for a time to leave his Country, and so, borrowing a little Mony, he went over into France, and coming into Rochel, he found that Salt and other Commodities were very Cheap, because of a long time they had had no Trading: hereupon he adventured to Fraught a Ship upon his Credit, which when he had done and sent it away, he himself came the nearest way into England, and from thence to Aire, expecting the return of his Ship. But after long waiting, he was informed for certain, that his Ship was taken by the Turks, which became a matter of great grief to him; not because he knew not how to be abased, as well as how to abound: But, fearing that the Mouths of wicked Men would now much more be opened, to reproach the Profession of Religion, which made him, for ma∣ny days keep to his Chamber. At length a Maid that had heard among the People that John Stewards Ship was Arrived in the Road, came running in, and cryed at the Door, that his Ship was come. But he, being at Prayer, would not stir till he had done serving his Master, and then went forth, and saw that it was a Truth. But as a further occasion of Exercise to him, there was a worthy Christian, and an Intimate of this [John Kennedy,] who for Joy, had gon forth in a small Boat to the Ship; but a suddain Storm arising, he was carried beyond the Ship, and in the Judgment of all that looked on, he and the Boat were devoured by the Seas: Yea, the Storm encreased to such an height, that they feared the loss of the Ship also, which did so deeply affect this gracious Man, that, retiring into his Chamber, he would be seen by none for three days. But at last, coming forth, he went to visit the Widdow (as he supposed) of his dear Friend: But whilst in that Family they were mutually witnessing their Grief, John Kennedy came in among them, who had not been cast away (as was supposed) but by a strange Providence had been driven far away to another part of the Coast. Hear many Mercies met at once: He vended his Commodities in the Ship, with which he payed all his Debts, and had Twenty Thousand Marks over to himself: Thus that Bread that was cast upon the Waters, after many Days was restored again: and by liberal devices the libe∣ral Man doth stand. This John Stewart when he came to dye, his Friends standing about him, he oft exhorted them to be humble: And concerning himself he said, It may be some of you doubt nothing of my good Estate now I am going the way of all Flesh: Yea, and I testify, that except when I slept, or was upon business, I was not these Ten Years without thoughts of God, so long as I could go from mine own House to the Cross, and yet I much doubt of my self, and am in a great Agony, and near the brink of Despair. But a day or two before his Death, he turned his Face to the Wall for the space of about two hours, and then Mr. Fergusson, a grave and godly Minister of that place, coming in, asked him what he was doing Here∣upon he turned himself, and said, I have been fighting, and working out my Salva∣tion with fear, and trembling▪ And now (I bless God) it is perfected, sealed, and con∣firmed, and now all fears are gone: and so he dyed comfortably. In the North of Ireland there was a Godly and Gracious Gentlewoman, where the Rebellion brake out there, Anno, Christi. 1641. who, with some other Per∣sons, and her three Children, whereof, one was sucking on the Breast, fled, They had not gon far where by the Irish they were stripped stark naked, yet (to admi∣ration) they spared their Lives; Probably thinking that Hunger and Cold would soon kill them. Afterwards, going on at the Foot of a River that runs into the Lock∣each, another Company of Irish met them, and would have them cast into the Ri∣ver.
This Godly Woman, nothing dismaied, asked only a little forbearance whilst she prayed. And as she lay naked upon the Frozen Ground, she resolved not to go her self to such an un-just Death. They called her and she refusing to come, They dragged her by the Heels along that rugged way to the River, to be cast in with the rest of her Company. But she turning on her Knees said, you should (I am sure) be Christians, and men I see you are. In taking away our miserable Lives, you will do us a Pleasure. But know as we never wronged you nor yours. Re∣member that you must dye also your selves, and give an account of this Cruelty to the great Judg of Heaven and Earth. Hereupon an Irish Priest, then present, said, Let us not take away their Lives, but we will put them into the Iland in this Lake, and a Boat being in the River, they put all these Eight naked Persons, and desti∣tute of all Food into it, and carring them into the Iland, left them there. After four days of their being there, some of the Company dyed of Hunger and Cold; but neither this Woman nor any of her Children; For she lived by Faith upon the Word of God, and not by Bread only. The day after two of her boys crept a side and found the Hide of a Beast at the Root of a Great Tree, which the Mother and they Endeavoured to cast over them, there lying upon the Snow. The next day a little Boat passed by, whom she requested, for Gods Sake to carry them out of that desolate Place; But they being Irish would not. Then she begged a little Bread of them, They said they had none there (seeing Fire in the Boat) she begged a cole of Fire of them, which they gave her. And so with some small Chips, they made a Fire, and the Boyes, taking a peice of the Hide, laid it upon the Coals, and began to knaw the Leather. But this, without an extraordinary support, could do them little good. Then they continued ten Days without any visible means of Delivery, and this good Woman professed that it was by Faith and Joy in God, that she so lived. Nor had they any Food but Ice and Snow, nor Drink but Water; yet she thought that God put more nourishment into them than ordinary, for she found them Clammy. Gods Providence so ordered it, that the next day a Boat carried them out to the side of the Band-Water, where yet they had Perished, but that she could not endure to see her Children dye in her sight: and tho her two Boyes were young, and so star∣ved that they were scarce able to go, yet she pressed them to go out of her sight, under a pretence of seeking some fire, and she bad them to hold their Faces to∣wards such a place, where (in that desolate Country) she knew they could have no Fire, yet, in such an Extremity, leaving room for God to work their safety, the poor Children had not crawled far before they saw two or three great dogs prey∣ing upon a Man that had been slain. At the sight of them the Children were much affraid (who needed not to fear any thing, but living in such a Condition.) One of these Dogs came running and leaping upon one of the Children without doing him the least hurt, only fawned on him, and would run a little before him, and then tarry till the Children came up, and so by degrees he led them to an House where Smoke appeared, which was an Irish Mans who was protected by the English of Antrum, by which meanes they were marvellously preserved; and the Mother was sent for, and sucored by a party from Antrum. The Husband of this Gentlewoman, was a sweat-humoured Gentleman and godly, and one who was used to frequent that famous Fridays-Meeting at Antrum before the Rebellion brake forth: But being ensnared by some Arminians that liv'd in those Parts, the worthy Ministers thereabout, after much pains taken with him, could not reclaim him; whereupon Reverend M. Blair said to another godly Minister, I am of opinion that this Gentleman shall either turn Patient, or Madder many Days: which was soon aftrr accomplished, for he fell so furiously mad, that they were forced to keep him bound; and thus he continued for a Year, only with some lucida intervalla. At the end of the Year, being very furious, the Devil taught him (yet by an over-ruling Providence of God) to feign himself sober: and then he intreated his Wife to free him from his Bonds, which she did accordingly: But rising at Breek-a-day, and wrapping himself in the Coverlet, he went to a Ri∣ver, with a Resolution to drown himself: Yet when he was at the very Brink, he had this suggested to him: what a Fool am I to drown the Coverlet, which may be useful to some Body, and there∣upon he went back a little, and laid it down at the Root of a Tree, and then was fully purposed to throw himself into the River. But at the very Brink, this also was suggested: were it not best to pray before I dye. Hereupon, turning a little aside, he fell down to prayer, and ere he had done, his Reason and Understanding were Restored to him, with Peace of Conscience, and assurance of Pardon in as large a measure as ever in his Life he enjoyed it before, to the great Joy and Comfort of his Wife and Friends. Tha End of the Second Part.
THE LIVES Of Several English Nobility And GENTRY EMINENT in this LATER AGE. CAVTERA  . PHILIPPVS SIDNEIVS Equ. Aur. obiit Ao Dn̄i 1586. F. H. van. Houe. Sculp: portrait of Philip Sidney The Life and Death of Sir Philip Sidney, who Died An. Ch. 1586. SIR Philip Sidney, was the first born Son of Sir Henry Sidney, who was a Man of an excellent wit, large Heart and conversation; and such a Governour, as sought not to make an end of the State in himself, but to plant his own ends in the prosperity of his Country; witness his sound Establishments both in Wales and Ireland, where his memory is deservedly grateful unto this Day. His Mother was Daughter to the Duke of Northumberland, and Sister to the Earls His Parentage.
of Warwick and Licester: She was by nature of a large ingenious Spirit, whence, as it were, even racked with native strength, she chose rather to hide Her self from the curious eyes of a delicate time, than to come upon the stage of the World with any manner of disparagement: The mischance of sickness having cast such a kind of veile over her excellent Beauty, as the modesty of that Sex doth many times upon their na∣tive, and Heroical Spirits. By this it appears that his Descent was apparently Noble on both sides. Yea, and it may probably be gathered, that this clearness of his Fa∣thers Judgment, and the ingeniousness of his Mothers, brought so happy a temper in this well mixt Off-spring of theirs; who as he was their first born, so was he not the contraction, but the extension of their strength, and the very aim, and perfect Type of it. A Noble Man of Eminent Parts, that was brought up with him from his Child∣hood, gives this Testimony of him: I (saith he) tho I knew him from a Child, yet I ne∣ver knew him other than a Man: With such a staidness of mind, lovely, and familiar gravity, as carried grace and reverence above greater years. His talk was profitable, and his very play tended to the enriching of his mind: So that even his Teachers found something in him to ob∣serve and learn, above that which they had usually read, or taught: Which Eminence, by Nature and Industry, made his worthy Father stile him, Lumen Familiae: The Light of his Family. Instance that Reverend Languet, mentioned for honour sake in Sir Philip Sidy's His Travails. Arcadia, learned usque ad-miraculum, Learned, even to a miracle; who wisely forseeing dangers at home from Rome and Spain, went abroad, and setled at Frankford, where he was intertained Agent for the Duke of Saxony, and an under-hand Minister for his own King. He lodged in Wechels house, the Printer of Frankford, where Sir Philip in his Travels, chanced also to become a Guest. This ingenious old mans fulness of knowledge, travelling as much to be delivered of abundance by teaching, as Sir Phi∣lips rich Nature and industry, thirsted to be taught, and manured by him. This Harmony of an humble Hearer, and an excellent Teacher, so equally pleased them both, as out of a natural descent both in Love and plenty, the Elder grew taken with a Net of his own thread, and the Younger was taught to lift up himself by a Thread of the same spinning: So as this Reverend Languet, became a Nurse of Knowledge to this Hopeful young Gentleman, and without any other hire or motive than this Sympathy of affections, accompanied him in the whole course of his three years Travels. And when the diversity of years, and courses of Life enforced these dear Friends to part asunder, there yet passed such a continual course of intelligence by Letters from one of them to the other, as in their loss there be buried many delicate images, and differences, between the real and large complexions of those Active times, and the narrow Salves of this effeminate age: Because in this excellent mould of their friendship, the greatest businesses of Estate were so mixed with the sweet Remissions of ingenuous good Will, as men might easily discern in them (as in unflattering Glas∣ses) that Wisdom and Love, in good Spirits have great affinity together. For a farther demonstration whereof, this same Reverend Languet (after he was sixty six years of age) framed to himself a journey into England, in the Company of Duke Casimire, only to see that excellent Plant of his own pruning, and polishing: By which loving, and unexpected meeting, neither of them became losers. At the Sea-side they parted, and made many mutual Tears ominous Prophecies of their never meeting again. That worthy Prince, William of Nassau, had long kept intelligence with Sir Philip Fame had, &c. Sidney, both by word and Letters, and that in affairs of the highest nature which then passed currant upon the Stages of England, France, Germany, Italy, the Low-Countries, and Spain; And this young Gentleman had, by his mutual freedom, so imprinted the extraordinary merit of his young years, into the large wisdom, and experience of that excellent Prince, that, as Sir Fulk Grevil (Sir Philips intimate Friend) passed out of Germany into England, meeting with the Prince of Orange in the Town of Delph, among other discourse, he spake of the dangerous fate, which the Crown of England, States of Germany, and the Low-Countries did stand threatned with, under an ambitious, and Conquering Monarchs hand, meaning Philip the se∣cond, King of Spain. And having instanced in other Countries, he became to speak of England, and a∣mong
other passages, he protested, that if he could judge, her Majesty of England (Queen Elizabeth) had one of the ripest and greatest Counsellours of Estate in Sir Phillip Sidney, of all that then lived in Europe; to the tryal of which he would leave his own credit engaged, untill Her Majesty might be pleased to employ this Gentleman, ei∣ther among Her Friends, or against her Enemies. His Uncle, the Earl of Leicester (after Sir Philip's death, and not long before his own) told a great Courtier, that when he undertook the Government of the Low Countries, he carried his Nephew Sir Philip over with him, as one among the rest, not only despising his youth as a Counsellor; but withal bearing an hand over him as a forward young man: Yet notwithstanding, in a short time he saw this Sun so risen above his Horizon, that both he, and all his Stars were glad to fetch light from him; and in the end, ac∣knowledged His Prudence and Conduct: that he held up the honour of his casual Government, and Authority by him, whilst he lived, and found reason to withdraw himself from it, after his death. Also, Sir Francis Walsingham, his Father-in-law, that wise and active Secretary of State who (as the world knew) upheld Religion and Estate, by using a Policy, wisely mixed with reflections of either: For he had influence in all Countries, and an hand upon all Affairs; yet even this Man hath confessed to some great Personages, that his Philip did so far overshoot him in his own Bow, as those Persons, which at first were friends to Sir Philip for the Secretaries sake, within a while became so fully owned, and possesst by Sir Philip, as now he held them at the second hand, by his Son-in-law's native cour∣tesie. He wan great respect and honor among the most eminent Monarchs of the time. As first with his most excellent Majesty, King James, then King of Scotland, to whom his service was affectionately devoted, and from whom he received many pledges of love and favour. As likewise with the Renowned King Henry the fourth of France, and then of Navar, who having measured, and mastered all the Spirits in his own Nation, found out this Master-spirit among us, and used him as an equal in Nature, and so fit for Friendship with a King. Also the gallant Prince Don John de Austria, Vice-Roy in the Low Countries for the King of Spain, when this Gentleman, in his Ambassage to the Emperour of Germany, came to kiss his hand, tho at first, in his Spanish haughter, he gave him access, as by de∣scent to a youth, of Grace, as to a stranger, and in particular competition (as he con∣ceived) to an enemy; yet after a while, when he had taken his just altitude, he found himself so stricken with this extroardinary Planet, that the Beholders wondred to see what ingenious tribute, that Brave, and high-minded Prince paid to his worth; giving more honor and respect to this hopefull young Gentleman, than to the Ambassadors of might Princes. Again, In what due estimation his extroardinary worth was, even among enemies, will appear by his death. For when Mendoza, a Secretary of many Treasons against us, heard of it, he said openly, That howsoever he was glad King Philip, his Master, had lost in a private Gentleman a dangerous enemy to his Estate; yet he could not but lament to see Christendom deprived of so rare a light, in those cloudy times, and bewail poor Widow England (so he tearmed it) that having been many years in breeding one eminent Spirit, was in a monu∣ment bereaved of him, by the hands of a Villain. Indeed he was a true Model of worth: A man fit for great undertakings: For Con∣quests, His rare Abili∣ties. Plantations, Reformation of things amiss, and what Action soever is greatest and hardest among men; and withal, such a lover of Mankind, and goodness, that whosoever had any real parts, found comfort in him; yea, participation, and prote∣ction to the uttermost of his power. The Universities abroad and at home, accounted him a general Maecenas of Learning, and learned Men: Dedicated their Books to him, and Communicated every Invention, or improvement of Knowledge with him. The Soldiers honoured him, and were so honored by him, as no man thought he marched under the true banner of Mars, that had not obtained Sir Philip Sydney's approbation. Men of Affairs in most parts of Christendom, entertained correspondence with him. But what should these be spoken of and mentioned, with whom his own ways, and ends did concur? Since his heart, and capacity were so large, that there was not a cunning Painter, skilful Engenier, an excellent Musician, or any other Artificer of ex∣troardinary Fame, that made not himself known to this famous Spirit, and found him his
true Friend without hire. Indeed he was the common Rendevous of worth in his time. Yea, it will be confessed by all that knew him, that this one ans Example, and His Learning. personal respect, did not only encourage Learning and Honor in the Schools, but brought the affection and true use thereof, both into the Court and Camp; so that his very wayes in the World, did generally add Reputation to his Prince and Country, by restoring amongst us the ancient Majesty of Noble and true dealing. His Heart and Tongue went both one way, and so with every one that went with the Truth, as knowing no other Kindred, party, or end. Above all, he made the Religion which he professed, the firm Basis of his Life: His Piety. For his Judgment was, that our true-heartedness to the Reformed Religion in the beginning, brought peace, safety, and freedom to us; concluding, That the wisest and best way, was that of the famous William, Prince of Orange, who never divided the consideration of Estate from the cause Religion, nor gave the sound party cause to be jealous or distracted, upon any apparance of safety whatsoever; Prudently re∣solving, that to temporize with the enemies of our Faith, was but (as among Seaguls) a strife not to keep upright, but aloft upon the top of every Billow: Which false-heart∣edness to God and Man, would in the end find it self forsaken of both, as Sir Philip conceived. For to this active Spirit, all depths proved but shallow Fords, he pier∣cing into mens Counsels and Ends, not by their words, Complements, or Oaths, all barren in that Age, but by fathoming their hearts, and powers by their Deeds, and found no wisdom, where he found no courage, nor courage without wisdom, nor either of them without honesty and Truth. The Ingenuity of his nature did spread it self freely abroad: None that then lived when he dyed, could say, that he ever did them wrong, or harm, but many there were that thankfully acknowledged that he had done them good. Neither was this in him a private, but a publick affection; his chief ends being, not Friends, Wife, Children or himself: But above all things, the honour of his Maker, and Saviour, and the service of his Prince and Coun∣try. Sir Philip Sidney shewed his rare wisdom and ripe parts, in his youth and first im∣ment, His Policy. when he was sent by Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, to condole the Death, and to congratulate the succession of Rodolph to the Empire. For under the shadow of this Complement between Princes, which sorted better with his youth than his Spirit, did he not, to improve that Journey, and make it a real service to his So∣veraign, porcure an Article to be added to his Instructions, which (as he passed) gave him scope, to salute the German Princes, who were interessed in the cause of our Re∣ligion, or their own native Liberty? And tho, to Negotiate with that long-breathed Nation, proves commonly a work in steel, where many blows hardly leave any print: Yet did this Master-workman quickly stir up their cautions, and slow Judgments to be sensible of the danger which threatened them hourly, by this fattal conjunction of Romes undermining superstitions, with the Commanding forces of Spain. And when he had once awakened that confi∣dent Nation to open their eyes, and to look up, he as easily made manifest unto them, that neither their Inland seat, vast multitude, confused strength, wealth, nor hollow-sounding-fame, could secure their Dominions from the ambition of this brave as∣piring Empire; Howsoever, by the like helps, there had formerly bounded the same Roman and Austrian Supremicies. He recalled to their Memories, how by this Brother-hood in evil (like Simion and Levi) Rome and Spain had shed so much blood, as that they were justly become a ter∣rour to all Governments, and could now be withstood, or ballanced by no other means than by a General League in Religion; constantly, and truly affirming, that to associate by a uniform bond of Conscience, for the protection of Religion and liberty, would prove a more solemn union, and Symbolize far better, against their Tyrannies, than any factious combination in policy, League of state, or other Traffick of Civil, or Martial humours, could possibly do. The next doubtful Stage which he had to act upon, was grounded upon a publick, His Prudence. and specious Proposition of Marriage between our famous Queen, and the Duke of Anjou: About which match, altho he saw the great, and wise Men of those times, suddenly carried down, and every one fishing to catch the Queens humor in it; Yet when he considered their difference in years, Person, Education, State, and Reli∣gion
between them; And then called to mind the success of our former Alliances with the French, he found many reasons to make question whether it would not prove Poe∣tical on their part: And if real, whether the Ballance swaied not unequally, by adding much to them and little to his Soveraign? The Dukes greatness being only in Name and possibility, and both these would either wither, or must be maintained at her cost. Her Estate was also in hand, and tho Royally sufficient to satisfie that Queens Princely, and moderate desires, or expences, yet perchance, inferior to bear out those mixt designs, into which his Ambition, or necessities might entise, or draw her. Again, Sir Philip considering the inconveniences, and mischiefs which came by Queen Maries matching with King Philip of Spain, tho he confessed that our Alli∣ance with the French to be less unequal; yet even in that he foresaw, that diversity in Religion would first give scandal unto both, and in progress, prove of necessity, fa∣tal to one side: Because the weaker party here, being fortified by strong parties a∣broad, and an Husbands name at home, must necessarily have brought the native Sover∣aign under a kind of Covert Baron, and thereby have forced her Majesty, either to lose the freedome and Conscience of a good Christian, the Honour of an excellent Princess, or the private reputation of an obedient Wife. Neither could that excellent Lady (as he conceived) with these, or any other cautions, have countermined the Mines of practice, whereby (it is probable) this Prince would have endeavoured, to steal the change of Religion into this her Kingdom. 1. As First, by cavelling at the Authors, and Fathers that upheld her Church. 2. Then by desgracing her most Zealous Ministers, through aspersions cast upon their Persons, and advanceing indifferent Spirits, whose God is this world, the Court their Heaven, and consequently their ends, to byass Gods immortal Truth to the fancies of mortal Princes. 3. By the subtile latitude of School-distinctions, publickly edging nearer the Holy Mother Church of Rome; and therein, first waving, the sounding the Peoples minds; If not with abrupt, and Spirit-fallen Toleration, yet with that invisible Web of Con∣nivancy, which is a snare to intangle great, or lesser Flies at the Will of Power. 4. By a Princely licentiousness in behaviour and Conscience, fashioning Atheism a∣mong her Subjects: As knowing that in Confussion of thoughts, he might the more easily raise up Superstitious Idolatry. 5. By a publick decrying of our ancient Customes and Statutes; and from that ground, giving Proclamations a Royal vigor in moulding of Pleas, Pulpits, and Parliaments, after the French mode, which in our Government is a confusion almost as fatal as the Confusion of Tongues. 6. By imploying no instruments among the People, but such as devise to sheer them with Taxes, to ransome them with Fines, to draw in Bondage under colour of Obe∣dience, so to bring the English People to the poverty of the French Peasants. 7. To lift up Monarchy above her ancient Legal Circles, by banishing all free Spi∣rits, till the Ideas of native Freedom should be utterly forgotten. 8. Also in the practice of this Marriage, he foresaw and Prophesied, that the very first breach of Gods Ordinance in matching Her self with a Prince of a diverse Faith, would infallibly carry with it some piece of the rending distiny, which Solomon and some other of the Jewish Princes, justly felt, &c. The course which he took in this great business, was not by murmur among equals, or His Wisdom. inferiours to detract from his Prince; but he made an humble Address of these reasons to the Queen her self, to whom the appeal was proper: So that altho he found a sweet stream of Soveraign humours in that well tempered Lady, to run against him, yet found he safety in Her self against that self-ness which appeared to threaten him in her. For this happily born and bred Princess, was not (Subject-like) apt to construe things, done reverently, in the worst sense: But rather, with the Spirit of anoynted Greatness (as Created to raign equally over frail and strong) more desirous to find wayes to fashion her People, than colours, or causes to punish them. After this he designed a Voyage, with Sir Francis Drake to the West Indies, pur∣posing (if God prospered them) to settle a Plantation upon the Continent of Ame∣rica; and when the Fleet was almost ready to set sail, he stole from the Court (un∣known to the Queen) purposing to have gone along with it himself; but before he could get off, the Queen being informed of it Commanded himback, promising to
him employment, under his Uncle, the Earl of Leicester, in the Low Countries; and upon Made Gover∣nour of Flush∣ing. his return to the Court, was instantly made Governour of the Garrison of Flushing, and for Field employment, General of the Horse: In both which charges, his demeanour testified to the World both Wisdom and Valour, with the addition of honor to his Coun∣try by them. For instance, How like a Soldier did he behave himself, first in contriving, then in executing the surprise of Axil? where he revived that Ancient, and secure discipline of order and silence in their march: And after their entrance into the Town, he pla∣ced a Band of choice Soldiers to make a stand in the Market place, for security to the rest that were forced to wander up and down by direction of their Commanders; and when the service was done, he rewarded that obedience of discipline in every one, liberally, out of his own Purse. Again, how providently did he preserve the Lives and honour of our English Army at that enterprise of Gravelin? where tho he was guided by directions given him; yet whither out out of Arguments drawn from the person of La Motte, Governour of His foresight. that Town, who had a general reputation of too much worth; either to deceive, or easily to be deceived; or out of the strength and importance of that place, precious to the owner in many respects, the least of which would redouble loss to the growing Ambition of a Conquerour; or whether, upon caution given by intelligence; or whatso∣ever light of diversion else, he was resolute not to hazard so many principal Gentlemen, with such gallant Troops, and Commanders, which accompanied him in that flattering expedition. Yet because he kept this steady Counsel in his own bosome, there was great labouring on every side, to obtain the honour of that service: To all which gal∣lant kind of competition, he made this answer; That his own coming hither was to the same end, wherein they were now become his Rivals: and also he assured them that he would not yield any thing to any man, which by right of his place, was both due to himself, and consequently a disgrace for him to execute by others. Again, that by the same Rule, he would never consent to hazard them that were his Friends, and in divers respects, his Equals, where he found reason to make many doubts, and so little reason to venture himself. Yet as a Commander, concluding that something was fit to be done, equally for o∣bience and tryal, he made the inferior Captains, try their chance by a Die upon a Drum head. The Lot fell upon Sir William Brown, his own Lieutenant, who with a choice Company presently departed, receiving this charge from Sir Philip, that if he found falshood, and not faith, he should presently throw down his Arms, and yield him∣self Prisoner; protesting that if they took him, he should be ransomed: If they broke Quarter, his Death should be severely revenged. On go these forlorn Companies with this their Leader, and before they came into the Town, found all outward signs exactly performed, and when they were entred, e∣very Street safe and quiet, according to promise, till they were past an easie recovery of the Gate; when instantly, out of the Cellars under-ground, they were charged both by Horse and Foot: The Leader, following his Generals command, discovering the the Treason, threw down his Arms, and was taken Prisoner: The rest of the Company retired, or rather fled towards their Ships, but were still wounded, and some cut off by their pursuing enemies, till at last a Serjeant of a Company, with fifteen more (all Sid∣ney's men) that is, such as could die to get honour and to do service for their Country, made an Halt, and being happily mixed of Pikes, Halberds, and Muskets, resolved to die with their backs to their Friends, and their faces to their Enemies: They retired, or stayed as occasion offered it self, and were in both hotly charged both with Horse and Foot, till in the end eight of them were slain, and eight left alive. The Serjeant was wounded on the side by a square Bullet out of a Field peice, who made this brave re∣treat within view, at last, and under the Protection of their own Navy; Bringing home, even in his Wounds reputation of courage, and Martial Discipline into his Country. In a quarrel between the Earl of Leicester, and Count Hollock (who was the Head of a Par∣ty against the Earl) how discreetly did Sir Philip ballance that brave Count? when putting himself between indignities, offered to his Soveraign, through the Earl of Leicester's per∣son, His great pru∣dence. he brought those passionate charges, which the Noble Count addressed upward to the Earl, by degrees down upon himself, where that brave Count Hollock found Sir Philip so fortified with wisdom, courage, and truth, beside the strong party of former friendship
standing for him in the Counts noble Nature: Yea, though sense of Honour, and ma∣ny things else, equal and unequal between them, were in appearance beyond possibility of peicing; yet this one inequality of Sir Philips right on his side, made the Count calm; and by coming to terms of expostulation, did only reconcile those two haughty Spirits, one to another, more firmly than before; But withal, through himself wrought, if not a kind of Unity between the Earl of Leicester and Count Hallock, yet at least a fi∣nal surcease of all violent jealousies, or factious expostulation. To be short, not in Complements, and Arts, but real proofs given of his sufficiency above others: In a very little time his Repututation, and Authority among the active people, grew so fast, that it had been no hard matter for him, with the disadvantage of his Uncle, and the distraction of our Affairs in those parts, to have raised him∣self a Fortune there. But in the whole course of his Life, he did so constantly bal∣lance Ambition, with the safe Precepts of divine and moral Duty, as no pretence what∣soever could have enticed this worthy Gentleman, to break through the Circle of a good Patriot. Now we are come to speak of his death; wherein he shewed in a short progress to a long home, passing fair and well-drawn Lines, by the guidance of which, all Pilgrims of this Life may be humbly conducted into the Haven of Everlasting rest. When that unhappy stand was to be made before Zutphen, to stop the issuing out of the Spanish Arms from a Siege; with what alacrity soever he went to Actions of ho∣nour, yet remembring upon what just grounds the Ancient Sages describe the worthiest Persons to best Armed, he had compleatly put on his: But meeting the Marshal of the Camp, but lightly Armed, the unspotted emulation of his heart, to venture without any inequality, made him cast off his Caresses, and so by the secret influence of the Wise Gods Providence, he disarmed that part, where God (as it seems) had resolved to strike him. Thus they went on, every man at the head of his own Troop; and, the Weather be∣ing Misty, they fell unawares upon the Enemy, who had made a strong stand to receive them, near unto the very Walls of Zutphen. By reason of which accident, their Troops fell, not only unexpectedly to be engaged within the level of the great shot that played from the Rampiers, but more fatally within the shot of their Musquets, which were laid in Ambush within their own Trenches. By this stand an unhappy hand, out of those Trenches, brake the bone of Sir Philips Thigh, with a Musket shot, above the left knee, which so shivered the bone that the Bullet could not be got out. The horse whereon he rode, was rather furiously cholerick He is wound∣ed. than bravely Proud, and so forced him to forsake the Field but not his back; which was the Noblest, and fittest Biere to carry a Martial Commander to his Grave: In which sad passage, going along by the rest of the Army, where his Uncle, the General was, and being thirsty with excess of bleeding, he called for some Drink, which was present∣ly brought him. But as he was putting the Bottle to his mouth, he saw a poor Soldier carried along (who had eaten his last at the same Feast) gastly casting up his Eies at the said Bottle; which Sir Philip taking notice of, took it from his own head, before he drank, and gave it to the poor man, with these words: Thy necessity is yet greater than Compassion. mine. And when he had pledged this poor Soldier, he was presently carried to Arnheim in Gelderland. In this place the principal Chyrurgions of the Camp attended his coming: Some mercenarily, seeking their own gain: Others out of a desire to honour their Art; but the most of them, with a true Zeal (compounded of love and reverence) to do him good, and (as they thought) many Nations in him. When they went about to dress his Wound, he, both by way of charge, and advise, told them, that whilst his strength was yet entire, and his Body free from a Fever, and his mind able to endure it, they might freely use their Art; cut, and search the bot∣tom: For, besides his hope of health, he would make this farther profit of his pains which he should suffer, that they might witness, they had indeed a sensible na∣tured man under their hands, yet one to whom a stronger Spirit had given power a∣bove himself either to do or suffer. But if they should now neglect to use their Art, and renew his torments in the declination of nature, the ignorance, or over-tenderness, Prudence. would prove a kind of Tyranny to their Friend, and consequently a blemish to the reve∣rend Science.
With love and care well mixt, the Chirurgeons began the Cure, and continued it sixteen Days, not only with hope, but rather with such confidence of his recovery, as the joy of their hearts overflowed their discretion, and made them spread the Intelligence of it to our Queen, and to all his noble Friends herein England, where it was received not as private, but as publick Good news. Only there was one Owl among all the other Birds, who, though looking with no less zealous eyes than the rest, yet saw, and presaged reason for despair. He was an excellent Chirurgion of Count Hollocks, who, altho the Count himself lay at the same instant hurt in the Throat with a Musket Bullet, yet he neglected his own extremity, to save his Friend, and for that end, had sent him to Sir Philip. This Chyrurgion (out of love to his Ma∣ster) had made bold one day to return to dress his Wound, and whilst he was doing it, the Count chearfully asked him, how Sir Philip did? and being answered, with a heavy countenance, that he was not well: At which words this worthy Prince (as hav∣ing more sense of his Friends wounds than his own) cryed out: Away Villain; never see my face again, till thou bringest me better News of that mans recovery; for whose redemption, many such as I were happily lost. Now after the sixteenth day was past, and the very Shoulder-bones of this delicate Patient were worn through his skin, with constant, and obedient posturing of his body Great afflicti∣on. to the Chyrurgions directions; He judiciously observing the pangs which his Wound stang him with by fits, together with many other Symptoms of decay, but few or none of recovery, he began rather to submit his body to these Artists, than any farther to believe, or trust to them. During which suspence, he one morning lifting up the Bed cloths for change and ease of his body, smelt some extroardinary noisom favour proceeding from him, differing from the smells of Oils and Salves; and either out of natural delicacy, or at least, his care not to offend others, grew a little troubled at it: which they that set by, perceiving, besought him to let them know, what suddain indisposition he felt? Sir Philip, as ingenuously told them what it was, and desired them, as ingenuously to confess whether they smelt any such noisom sents or no? They all protested against it, up∣on their credits: whereupon Sir Philip gave this severe doom upon himself, that it was some inward mortification, and a welcome messenger of Death. Shortly after, when the Chyrurgions came to dress his wounds, he acquainted them with these peircing intelligences between him, and his Mortality: which though they opposed by the Authority of Books, parallelling of accidents, and other artificial proba∣bilities; yet moved they no alteration in this worthy Person, who judged too truly of his own estate, and that from more certain grounds than the vanity of opinion of er∣ring Artificers could possibly pierce into. So that afterwards, how freely soever he left his body subject to their practice upon it, and continued a Patient be∣yond exception; yet did he not change his mind: But as having cast off all hope, or desire of recovery, he made and divided that little span of Life which was left him, in this manner. First, he called the Ministers unto him; who were all excellent men of divers Na∣tions, Piety. and before them made such a Confession of his Christian Faith, as no Books, but the heart can truly and freely deliver. Then desired he them to accompany him in Prayer, wherein he craved leave to lead the Assembly, in respect (as he said) that the secret sins of his own heart were best known to himself, and out of a true sense of them, he was the more properly enabled to apply the Eternal sacrifice of his blessed Saviours Passion and Merits to himself. And his Religious desires, were easily assented to by this humbly devout and afflicted Company; and he, in the performance of the Duty, however they were all moved, and much affected, and those sweet motions were witnessed by their deep sighs, groans, and tears: Yet could no man easily judg of himself, much less of others, whether these heavenly Raptures proceeded from sor∣row for him, or admiration of him: The Fire of this Phaenix hardly being able out of any Ashes to produce his equal as they conceived. After a while he concluded his Zealous, and fervent Prayer; whether to give rest to that frail, wounded flesh of his, unable to bear the bent of Eternity so much af∣fected, any longer: Or whether to abstract that Spirit more inwardly, and by chew∣ing (as it were) the Cud of Meditation, to imprint those excellent Images in his Soul; who can tell but God? Not long after he intreated these Divines, to recal to mind what was the opinion of the Heathen, touching the immortality of the Soul. First, to see what true know∣ledge
she retains of her own Essence, out of the light of her self. Then to Parallel with it the most pregnant Authorities of the Old and New Testament, as supernatu∣ral Revelations, sealed up from our Flesh, for the Divine Light of Faith to reveal and work by. Not that he wanted Information or Assurance: But because this fixing of a Lovers thoughts, upon those external beauties, tended not only to the cheering up of his decaying Spirits; But, as it were, a taking possession of that im∣marcessible, and eternal Inheritance, which was due unto him, by vertue of his Bro∣ther-hood in Christ. The next thing that he did, was the calling for his Will; which, tho at first sight Publishes his Will. it may seem a descent from Heaven to Earth again; yet he that observes the di∣stinction of those offices, which he practised in bestowing his own, may discern, that as the Soul of Man is all in all, and all in every part; so was his goodness equally dis∣persed into the greatest, and least actions of his short Life; which Will of his, will ever remain for a witness to the world that those sweet and large, even dying Af∣fections of his, could no more be contracted with the narrowness of pain, grief, or sickness, than any sparkle of our immortality can be privately buried in the shadow of Death. The last Scene of this Tragedy, was the parting between the two Brethren; the His Death. weaker shewing wonderful strength in suppressing his sorrow, and the stronger great weakness in expressing of it. So far did invaluable worthiness, in the dying Bro∣ther, enforce the living to descend beneath his own worth, and by abundance of Childish Tears, bewail the publick in his particular loss. Yea, so far was his true remission of mind transformed into ejulation, that Sir Philip (in whom all earthly Passions, did even, as it were flash, like lights ready to burn out) recalled those Spirits together, with a strong virtue, but weak voice; mildly blamed him for re∣laxing the frail strengths left to support him in his final combate of separation at hand. And to stop this natural Torrent of perfection in both, he took his leave with these admonishing words. Love my Memory, Cherish my Friends; Their faith to me may assure you that they are honest. But above all Govern your Will, and Affections, by the Will, and Word of your Creator; in me beholding the end of this world, with all her vanities. The manner of his Death and the mourning for his loss, his Exequies and Epi∣taphs made upon him, see in a brief account given of his Life and Death in my first Volume of Lives, page 35 in the third Alphabet. After his death the States of Zealand became Suitors to her Majesty and his Noble Friends, that they might have the Honour of burying his Body at the Publick charge of their Government. A memorable Example of Thankfulness, by honouring, and well handling the Dead, to encourage the living: Which Request, had it been gran∣ted, the Reader may please to consider what Trophics, it is likely, they would have erected over him for Posterity to admire, and what Inscriptions would have been devised for Eternizing his memory. A brief account of the Life and Death of Sir Charles Coot, who dyed, Anno Christ. 1642. SIR Charles Coot was a man of War from his youth; For (as Fines Morison He is bred a Soldier. His Valour. in his Irish Chronicle tells us) he came into Ireland, a Captain in Queen Eliza∣beths Reign, Anno Christ. 1601. September the fourth: And did brave, and me∣morable service against the Earl of Tyr-owen, and his Adherents. And those Wars be∣ing ended, as the Lord made him instrumental to promote peace, so was he as vigil∣ant to preserve, and continue it afterwards. Many combinations of Theevish Crews, His Prudence. and Trayterous Conspiracies, in the Province of Connaught, and in the confines of Ʋl∣ster, he dissipated; making some of the most notorious Offenders, by exemplary pu∣nishment, His Justice. a terror to the rest: And on the other hand, delivering the poor innocent from such as were too strong for them.
He brake the jawes of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of their Teeth. The blessing of them that were ready to perish came upon him; and he caused the strangers heart to sing for joy. He put on Righteouss and it clothed him, and his Judgment was a Robe, a Diadem, Job. 29. 12, 13. 14. Many years together did he shine as an eminent and bright star in the Irish Horizon. He was nothing daunted, or discouraged with the false Asper∣sions of some, or with the weak, and foolish credulity of others. For he knew, that as the shadow follows the body of such as walk in the Sun; so doth envy attend worth and virtue. In Sole ambulantes necessario umbra sequitur; In honore & Dignitate viventes He is envied. Invidia comitatur, saith Maximus. Before the eruption of the Irish Rebellion, it pleased God to visit him with sick∣ness, His Conversion and thereby to convince him of his sins, and of his need of a Saviour. And upon his recovery he sent for some Spiritual Physicians, to whom he ingenuously opened the Estate of his Soul, and took their Counsel what he might do to procure Pardon and Reconciliation with God, and he had fully observed what they said, and as carefully put it in practice to the everlasting good of his Soul. For he was obser∣ved ever-after, to be a very constant and due resorter to the Publick Ordinances, and a large contributer towards their maintenance, having in high esteem the faithful Mes∣sengers Ministers loved of Jesus Christ, for their work-sake, and expressing singular affections to the generation of Gods people. He was like unto Cornelius, that famous Centurion, frequent in Prayer, and abun∣dant in Alms-deeds. His Noble prowess rendred him terrible to his Enemies round about, and the Lord of Hosts made him very succesful in his undertakings. For as David said of Jonathan: From the Blood of the Slain, and from the fat of the Mighty his Sword returned not empty. His rare dexterity in animating and encouraging his Sol∣diers, his winning demeanour, affable and seasonable Speeches, and his Prudent or∣dering his affairs, made him great among his People, and accepted (with Mordecai, Hest. 10. 3.) of the multitude of his Brethren: For all saw that he sought the welfare of his Nation, and put his life in his hand to procure their safety. After the breaking out of that horrid Rebellion, which began October 23. Anno Christ. 1641. presently the State at Dublin had information that the design of the Enemies was to besiege Droheda, whereupon they presently sent all the forces, which could then be possibly raised, to the strengthening of that Garrison, after whose departue, they had no considerable strength left in Dublin for the defence of that City, which was the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and which being lost, all had been lost with it, and some of those which they had, were Persons little to be confided in. The numerous and subtile Enemies being quickly informed hereof, presently drew together all their strength, and begirt the City round. In this forlorn, and almost desperate condition, some of the Ministers pressed the Council dayly for a Publick Fast, as the only remedy left unto them: But it could not be obtained (through the a∣versness of some who should have been most forward in such a work) till the twelfth of November following: And it pleased God that very Evening after their General Humiliation, to give them a signal, and gracious return to their Prayers; whereby Prayer preva∣lent. they were experimentally taught, that their best weapons were (as Saint Ambrose speaks) preces & Lachrimae: Prayers and Tears. For as the Spirit of God came upon Othniel, and raised him up to deliver Israel in their deep distress (Judg. 3. 9. 10.) when they cryed unto him: So did the Spirit of Magnanimity and fortitude, suddenly fall upon this Noble, and magnanimous Sena∣tor, A special Pro∣vidence. and ancient, expert Soldier, who had long before that day, been aged and de∣crepit by reason of sickness, hardly able to set his Feet to the ground. Yet in the mighty strength of God he went in to the Council-Table, and tendred his service to go forth against the Enemy, accounting and esteeming it (as he told them) moe Eligible and desirable to die in the Field, than to be slain within their Houses. This motion was no less acceptable, than it was seasonable: But some judged that it would prove abortive, saying, The good mans Spirit is willing, but his Body is too weak for such a work. Others demanded where he would have Men for the service? But the present and pressing exigences would admit of no long consultations. The State knew his pristine valour, commended his present resolution, and pro∣mised him their ready and best assistance, at this time he only was left of all the an∣cient worthies who had been ingaged in the Wars of Ireland, whom time had ei∣er worn out, or age and infirmities had disabled from such an undertaking: But
the Lord renewed his strength as the Eagles. For when he heard the rueful and doleful outcries, and beheld the prodigious, and never enough to be lamented mi∣series of the stript and starved English, which surpasseth all expression, he was ex∣ceedingly Sympathy. moved in his Spirit, and prayed unto the Lord to endue him with strength from Heaven, that he might be able before he dyed to give three or four defeats to those bloody and barbarous Rebels, who were the Authors of such great Indignities, and of the numberless, and unconceivable sufferings of an innocent and helpless People. This Prayer the Lord hearkened and assented to: For immediately of weak he be∣came His Faith. strong, and to the admiration of all men, he went forth in confidence of the assistance of Almighty God, and by Faith put to flight those that rose up against him, so that all could not but see and acknowledged, that the Lord was with him. For having received the afore▪mentioned acceptance and encouragement from the State, he went forth, and with all speed took up all men which came next to hand, most of which were such as had been stripped, and half starved, and that never had been trained to the Wars. These e led forth, to the number of seven Hundred (at the most) into the County of Wicklow, where the strength of the Enemy was then con∣centred, and there he charged, and fell upon them: At the first encounter his raw Soldiers were disranked, and put into some confusion; But he with admirable skill and dexterity, soon rallied them together again; fell upon the Enemy, and by Gods special assistance routed them, and returned with the loss of any one man, excepting His Victories. one only, whom himself shot as he was running over to the Rebels. This mercy seemed to the Protestants in Dublin no less than a Resurrection from the dead, and afforded them cause and matter of joyful thankfulness to Almighty God the giver of Victories. By it also they were animated and encouraged to con∣tinue their weekly dayes of Fasting, Prayer, and Humiliation, unto which they had an exceeding great concourse of the English in their Congregation: And as Josuah and Israel prevailed, whilst Moses held up his Hand: So as long as they continued in Prayer pre∣valent. Publick Prayers and supplications, their Armies prevailed abroad till they became Ma∣sters of the Field, during the space of a whole year and an half. After that first action Sir Charles Coot went out again with his party, took and burnt Claneart, a place neer to the City of Dublin, which the Enemies had filled with Rapine and Blood: He took in also the Garrisons of the Naas, and Trim: He ex∣pel'd the Rebels out of the Navan. And lastly he encountered with the whole Body of the Enemy at Kilrush, where he fought a pitch't Battel with them, and routed their vast multitudes, and would have pursued them farther if he might have had his will, with such heat and vigour: But he was commanded back: And now the number of his desired Victories being made up, with some overplus, in his last battle neer unto Trim, he was slain, being shot (as it was verily believed) by one of his own Party, into the body, having a little before, with three or four Troops of horse, His Death. chased three or four Thousands of the Enemies for the space of two Miles, and left a∣bout four hundred dead upon the place. Thus dyed this Honourable Patriot, and Noble Champion in the Lords work, and Victorious, in the sixty fifth year of his Age, wherein (as Cato Major said of Q. Maximus,) Hic Bella gerebat ut Adolescens, cum plane grandis esset. He warred in his old age, as if he had been a young man. He was like Caleb for strength, as able Josu. 14. 11. for the War, both to go out and come in, as he was in the day when he was first sent over into Ireland, having a quarter of an hour before his Death, slain with his Sword, a Rebel of a great Stature, hand to hand. The greatness of the Adversaries rejoycing at the fall of this great Man, shewed the greatness of the Protestants loss, in the loss of him. But nothing befel him, but what hath befallen the dearest of Gods Servant. Sampson is reckoned in the Catalogue of Believers (Heb. 11. 32.) who slew more at his Death than in all his Life: Yet he perished among the uncircumcized Philistians. By the the Sword of the Philistines gracious Jonathan afterwards fell upon Mount Gilboa, which occasioned much re∣joycing to Israels unplacable Enemies. Faithful Ʋriah, was also betrayed by Joab at the Kings Command, and cut off by the Sword of the Children of Ammon. Yea, Godly Josiah, to whom there was none like, before or after him, among all the Kings of Judah, yet was he slain by the Sword of Paraoh Necho. The Sword devoureth one as well as an other: And all things fall a like to all, and no man can judge of love or hatred by all that is before him.
This Noble Champion counted it more eligible and honourable to die in the Field fighting for his Religion, and Countrymen against the Popish barbarous Irish, than to be murthered in his house by them: Wise men in all Ages have agreed upon this maxim, which was Augustus Caesars Motto, Oportet Imperatorem stantem mo∣ri. This was the Noble Knights desire, and God gave him his option: He was taken away by this eligible and honourable death; for he died on Horse∣back, being upheld by his Son, riding behind him, till he was brought into his own Quarters. One thing more was very remarkable, and therefore is not to be forgotten; that whilst they in Dublin continued their weekly Fasts, and Dayes of Humiliation, the Protestant Party constantly prevailed in the Field, and became Masters of the Field, for the space of a whole year and an half, as was hinted before: But some of the City Ministers, being sore pressed with this long continued burden of keeping two weekly Sabbaths, as they called it, made their address to the Lords of the Coun∣cil for mitigation, Alleadging that their Enemies were well brought under: That their Straits and Fears were removed: That now they were become their Enemies Superiors, and therefore they judged that a Monthly Fast might well suffice. And at length, their daily importunity prevailed, so that they were reduced to a Monthly Fast. But no sooner had they intermitted one of their former Fast dayes, but that the very next day came the dismal and deplorable News from the Army that Sir Charles Coot was slain. These things were attested and declared by faithful Teat, D. D. then Lecturer in Dub∣lin, in his Sermon Preached in Christs-Church, May the 14th. Anno Christi 1642: be∣fore the State, and chief of the Army, at the interment of the said Sir Charles Coot, Knight, and one of the Honorable Privy Council in Ireland. The Life and Death of John Lamot, Esq; who died Anno Christi, 1655. IOhn Lamot, Esq; and sometime Alderman in the City of London, was born at Col∣chester in the County of Essex, May the 1. Anno Christi 1577. His Father was Francis Lamot, Son of Baldwin Lamot of Ypres, a famous City in Flanders, who in the time of His Parentage. great Persecution in the Low Countries under the bloody and cruel Duke de Alva, was driven out of his Native Country, an came together with his Wife Mary, to shelter themselves and to enjoy the free Profession of the true Protestant Religion (for which they had left the fruition, and possession of all their Temporal, and worldly goods and en∣joyments, which were very considerable) under the protection of that famous Nursing-Mother of Gods afflicted Children in those bloody times, Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, here in England, in the fourth year of her Reign; taken up his Residence at Colchester aforesaid, where he lived many years in very good esteem, and was very for∣ward and industrious in setting up and promoting the great and useful Manufacture of making Sayes, and Bayes, first brought into England by those Exiles for the great good and profit of our Nation: and God exceedingly blessed him, not only in his Calling, but in giving him a hopeful issue. He died in a good Old Age in London. Now as both these Parents had made Piety their chiefest, and greatest interest, and the free exercise of Religion their best purchase, so they were alwayes exceeding diligent His Education. and solicitous to season their Children, and this their Son John especially, from the very Cradle, with the knowledge, fear, and nurture of the Lord, and that with such a blessed success upon their godly labours, that they hereby found the seeds of Piety springing up in him, which being watered by the constant use of the publick Ordinances, by Gods grace and blessing, continued and grew up to maturity, and he never departed from it to his dying day. His carriage and deportment through the whole course of his Life, both in his general and particular Calling, and in all his Relations, was not only inoffensive but exemplary. His holy carri∣age in his youth. For even in his younger years, he was never given to, nor delighted with those vain and sinful sports and pastimes to which youth ordinarily is too much addicted, and so hard to be
weaned from. His usual Recreation was to turn from one honest, or pious employ∣ment to another. He was from his youth brought up to the Calling of a Merchant, and was alwayes very careful, active, and industrious therein. And when he had leisure from it, or was tired with it, he would betake himself to reading the sacred Scriptures; To learning Languages, or reading best Histories, especially such as treated of the Per∣secutions, His industry. and deliverances of the Church of God: And that shewed how the Gospel was propagated and spread from one Country to another: All which he made (in a manner) his own: Such delight he took, both in the perusal, and rehersal of the same upon all occasions; and yet these were no hindrance to his attendance upon the publick Ordinances, whereby he might nourish Communion with God at any time. He used often to bless God, for that according to his earnest prayers, when he Thanksgiving. came first to London, he had kept him from bad Company, and from all allure∣ments, and engaging occasions of haunting Taverns, and such like places of Debauchery, whereby so many young men came to be ruin'd and undone. When he was grown up to some greater maturity of years, and grace, and of ac∣quaintance with God, he began to Trade for himself; wherein his singular care and punctual exactness in keeping his word and promise; His industry and prudence in ma∣naging his affairs, was soon taken notice of, and he had more credit given him in his first beginning, than many who had been for some time Traders before him. Every one was ready, yea, desirous to trust him, and to deal with him; which great advan∣tage he nevertheless used soberly and moderately, undertaking no more, than he was a∣ble His Prudence. to mannage, and what he had once undertaken, he with all vigilance, and industry at∣tended, following the Duties of his Calling diligently, and Gods blessing did so accom∣pany his endeavours, and affairs, that his Estate encreased apace, and yet he would often say, that he was not hastily rich. Having thus spent some time in hi wordly affairs, by Gods good providence and di∣rection His Marriage. he was guided to marry a Gentlewoman who had the benefit of the like good and pious education and disposition; and one that came of a Stock also, tryed, and grown up under Persecution: Her Name was Mrs. Ann Tivelin, whose Parents also flying into England for shelter, had setled themselves at Canterbury. She was now the Widdow of Mr. David King, Merchant, when Mr. Lamot married her. With this pious Consort he lived comfortably many years, and had by her several His Children. gracious Children, eight in all, whereof six (namely, two Sons, and four Daugh∣ters) died in their minority. The two Daughters which survived, the Elder Hester, who was first married to John Manning, Esq; an eminent Merchant of the City of Lon∣don, by whom she had three Children, but they all died before him. And after his De∣cease, she was married to Sir Thomas Honywood, Knight, of Marks-hal in Essex, who lived long and happily together, much beloved and honoured by all that knew them: By him she had seven Children, of whom two Sons and one Daughter survived the rest. The younger Daughter (Elizabeth) was married to a worthy Gentleman, Mr. Maurice Abbot (Son to Sir Maurice Abbot, sometime Lord Mayor, and an honourable Alderman of the City of London, and Brother to those two famous Abbots, Doctor George Abbot, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Doctor Robert Abbot, the eminently Learned, Bishop of Sa∣lisbury) His Issue. and she her self not long surviving, was exceedingly bewailed, for her singular Parts and Piety. Thus tho our Mr. Lamot, left but only one Daughter surviving, and four Grand-children, yet he lived to see two and twenty that proceeded out of his Loins. Mr. Lamot's first Wife deceasing about the year, 1626. The year after he married His second Marriage. Mrs. Elizabeth Monk, the Widdow of Levinus Monk Esq; one of the six Clerks, a Gen∣tleman of rare Parts, and of great experience, and trust in State Affairs in King Jame's his time, with her he lived eighteen years, but had no issue by her. During all this time, as he still advanced, and increased in the said Piety, Experi∣ence, and Estate, so (by Gods good Providence, and blessing upon him) he was accord∣ingly respected, and honoured: He bore and passed through with credit all the chief Offices in his Parish, Company, and elsewhere in the City and Commonwealth, and at His Offices. last he was chosen Alderman of the City. He was also one of the Elders of the Dutch Church in London, in which Office he served that Congregation for near thirty years together, with so much integrity, diligence, and zeal, as will not easily be paral∣leld, His Integrity. nor soon forgotten. And in all his other Offices he still demeaned himself
unblameably, being equally desirous, and zealous to advance Piety and Justice, Godliness and Honesty, and to oppose and reform iniquity, and abuses of what kind soever. For the nourishment and encrease of Piety in his Soul, and maintaining Commu∣nion His holy Duties with God, he was constant and diligent in attendance upon the publick Ordinance and means of Grace, not only in the Dutch Church, whereof he was made a Member, but also in the Parish Church wherein his Habitation was, and wherein were several Lectures, which he frequented, as I my self observed, who was his near Neighbour for many years. And in private by reading the Scripture, and meditating therein, he had so possessed and filled his soul with an heavenly Treasure, that most of his Di∣scourses, and letters to his Friends, favoured of an heavenly frame of heart, as one that had his Conversation in Heaven, whilst his Commoration was upon the earth: And he often expressed a great deal of heart-grief and astonishment, at most mens heedlesness His Zeal. and negligence about businesses and duties that did so much and so nearly concern the everlasting salvation of their precious, and immortal souls. His real piety and acquaintance with God appeared sufficiently, as by many other di∣scoveries; so in a special manner by those streams of true Christian charity, which His Charity. freely, and uncessantly flowed from him, as water from the fountain; or Life-hony that droppeth from the Combs without pressing. Yea, he was not only willing and ready to communicate, and impart himself to the wants and necessities of such as were in di∣stress, but was a great provoker, and encourager of others to the like duty; setting (all as it were) on fire with compassion that came near him. But his bounty did never run so freely as in those times wherein any publick ca∣lamities befel the Church and people of God: No care, no trouble, no pains, no cost was then judged too much, whereby he might testifie his Sympathizing bowels with His Sympathy. them, for their sorrows and afflictions, whether at home or abroad. They which are strangers to a bountiful heart, will scarce believe what sums of money he disburs∣ed in works of Charity since the year 1620, in the respective Persecutions, and trou∣bles in France, at Rochel, in the Valtoline, in Bohemia, in Germany: And more particular∣ly in the Lower, and Ʋpper Palatinate: And therein, above other places, in the long con∣tinued distresses of the City of Frankendale: Besides many other Cases nearer home in England, Scotland, and Ireland: And in that cruel and barbarous Massacre in Piemont, not long before his death, when a general Collection was made for those poor Crea∣tures who survived that storm, the Minister and some other of the Parish wherein he lived [Saint Bartholomews Exchange] going to his house to see what he would contri∣bute, and sending up word to him, what was the occasion of their coming, he came to His Bounty. them, and told them that they had a Collection in the Dutch Congregation for them, where he had contributed twenty pound. And (saith he) the Devil hath tempted me to put you off with this Answer; but he shall not prevail, and therefore here is ten pound for you more upon this occasion. This was told me by the Minister [Mr. Thomas Cauton] a day or two after. And that God who gave him such largness of heart and freeness of hand, gave him also wisdom and understanding, to mannage and order all his affairs with discre∣tion. His Prudence. He knew both when and where to spend, by which prudence he was still able to do more good; And he always found, and acknowledged both the Temporal, and Spi∣ritual returns, and comforts of this his Beneficence. And this made him always (as God blessed him) to lay aside a part and portion, which he as truly and carefully di∣stributed upon the first opportunity, that tendred themselves to him. But if God was pleased at any time to exercise him with Crosses and Losses of any kind, in his outward estate (whereof he had his share among other of Gods dear Chil∣dren) by casualties at Sea or Land, at home and abroad; in his several employments, or in his Relations; and especially in his body by divers great infirmities, and sick∣nesses, principally toward, and in the latter part of his life; yet in all these he shewed abundance of Christian patience, and holy submission to the good hand and pleasure His patience. of the All-wise God and his heavenly Father, and merciful Redeemer: Comforting himself very much by meditating upon the Example of Jacob, Joseph, Job, Da∣vid, &c. and of others of Gods faithful Saints, and Servants in all Ages, who had drunk of the same Cup before him; with whose Histories he was exactly ac∣quainted. He was frequent in praising God for his mercies extended to his outward man, His thankful∣ness.
who had so long vouchsafed, and continued to him the blessing of his sight and hear∣ing in such a good and comfortable measure, as that thereby he could partake of, and enjoy the benefit of Gods holy Ordinances both in publick and private: And for his in∣ward man, that in all his troubles and afflictions, God never long withdrew, or with∣held his Graious and Fatherly countenance from him, in Jesus Christ, whereby he found sufficient comfort to ballance and allay all his grief, and to prevent all murmurings and repinings in his greatest troubles. In the time of his last sickness, he did not much vent himself by discourses: But re∣tired His last sick∣ness. themselves and unbosomed his heart, and spread his condition before the Lord in Prayer. About three weeks before his Decease he was sorely afflicted with the Head-ach, in extremity, and with the Cholick, in so much as he began to find some impatience to seize upon him; But he soon recollected his thoughts, and checked himself, saying: How often, and how fervently have I besought the Lord, that he would be pleased to fit and prepare me for himself, and for his everlasting Kingdom; And why then should I find fault, and repine against his Dispensations, now when he thus really and effectu∣ally doth prepare me, making me by these very pains and torments, to loath this wretched world so much the more, and to long for my blessed and happy change and dissolution, and to be with His Death. my Redeemer. And thus he continued for the most part longing to be with. Jesus Christ, even to his last hour, which was July the 13th. Anno Christi 1655. in the seventy ninth His Faith. year of his Age. When death came, he looked it in the Face without consternation, as of which he was not afraid, being implanted into Christ, and thereby freed from the slavish fear of death. His Meditations and his Speeches were much upon this subject, whereby he la∣boured to familiarize Death both to himself and others; knowing that this was a very effectual means to make us apply our hearts to wisdom, that is to say, to the fear of God, the only Antidote against all base and servile fears. And as in his troubles and afflictions he shewed a great deal of filial submission to the good will and pleasure of God, his heavenly Father; so it was a great Comfort and refreshing to all that conversed with him, to observe and hear his continual Thankful Remembrances of Gods Mercies and Goodness to the Church, whether abroad or at Thankfulness. home: And to that Land or Nation wherein he lived: As also to any of his near Re∣lations, or dear Friends, as well as to his own Person. This was a string that he would be often touching: An Argument he delighted to hear and speak of: He would ever and anon cry out most feelingly. O what cause have we to bless and praise our good and merciful God, who yet preserveth, delights in, delivers and favours us, and passes by and forgives our ma∣nifold infirmities, trangressions, and provocations, which are aggravated by our great and brutish ingratitude! O that at the length we would love him, believe in him, and walk in his fear and o∣bedience to our everlasting happiness. His Feasts. Every year upon the 17th of November, which was the day when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, that put an end to the Maryan Persecution, he made a Feast. And before it was ended he would stand up and tell his Guests, what cause there was of re∣joicing upon that day for Gods signal mercy shewed to England, in restoring the Light of the Gospel; Quenching the Fires in Smithfield, and continuing the Peace and Liber∣ty of the Gospel for so many years, the Number whereof he would alwayes tell them what it was. Also upon other occasions of joy he would invite, and freely entertain his Friends, and tell them that he desired their Company to eat Bread with him before the Lord (as Jethro, and Moses did): And would take occasion to speak of some signal Mercies and Deliverances, whereof his Memory was a Living Library, especially of those grand Deliverances, both before and since the Reformation of Religion in England: As also the Deliverances of the Protestants in France, and in the Low Covntries, whereof he would often Discourse in so punctual, and feeling a manner, as if himself had been an Eye witness, yea, a sharer in them: Taking and using many Arguments from thence to stir up himself and others to have a sense and feeling of the Bonds and Miseries of o∣thers, remembring that themselves are in the body: And he would say, that their case might have been ours: And who knows but that it may yet be? He would often with holy Admiration and Thankfulness take notice of this Mercy, that when his Father (being for Religion forced to fly for his Life) stood doubtful (as many others did) whether he should repair for shelter, to Frankendale in the Palatinate, or into England, God was pleased to direct, and incline his heart to make choice of England for his place of Refuge: And this Mercy was much heightned, considering the sad ca∣lamities
and miseries that that place and Country afterwards fell into. And this made him to have the greater fellow-felling of their calamities, wherein himself and his might have been involved: whereas on the contrary, God had not only kept him and his in peace and safety, but had exceedingly blessed him in his outward Estate: And this made him very mindful and careful to send them relief upon all occasions. Prudence. Together with all these eminent Graces, God had likewise endowed him with a large portion of Wisdom, Judgment, and Understanding, in many things of moment and importance, grounded upon much experience, observation, and practice of his own, for which he was deservedly much esteemed by men of no small place, and account: He still brought out of his Treasury things both New and Old; and knew how so pertinently to ap∣ply, produce, and compare the same, that it was a great pleasure, and no less profit to hear him discoursing of the same. His pious and indefatigable care and pains which he took in bringing up his Children, Piety. and governing his Family in the fear and admonition of the Lord, was in part hinted before. And truly his constant endeavour was to bring them into acquaintance, and communion with God, and to make them to stand in a filial awe of him: He called fre∣quently upon them to read and meditate, and delight themselves in the word of God: To be well grounded, and setled in Religion, that they might not be carried about with e∣very wind of Doctrine. As also he admonished them to fly and shun all Idle courses, company, and dalliances. To be painful, careful, and diligent in the Duties of their perticular Callings, and Imployments: To be exact and orderly in all their Affairs: So∣ber and frugal in the use of all Gods good Creatures: Full of bowels of pity and com∣passion to the afflicted and distressed Members of Christ, and in general, to all that were in need: That they should be cheerful and ready to Communicate to all such: To be loving and helpful one to another; Obedient to all good Orders; Submissive to Magi∣strates and to all in Authority; Respectful to Ministry; Civil and Upright in their deal∣ings with all; And watchful at all times; to be in a readiness whensoever the Lord should call them hence, to give an account of their Stewardships, &c. And he would tell them, that in all these things he exhorted them to no more than himself endeavoured daily to practice before their Eyes. And that the great care which he had, both for their Souls and Bodies might remain with them after his Decease, not long before he di∣ed he left this Letter to his Daughter and Grand-Children for their Instruction. Beloved Daughter, Dame Hester Honywood, and Beloved Grand-Children Maurice Abbot, and Elizabeth, Thomas, John Lamot Honywood, I do wish you all the blessing and peace of Children dear∣ly loved. God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, his dear Son, our Saviour and Redeemer: And that his fear and love may be so rooted, and grounded in you, that it may knit, and bind your hearts together in love and amity, as my heart hath been to every one of you; ever praying for you all, that God of his mercy would bless you all, and plant his fear in your hearts, and unfeigned faith in Christ Jesus in your souls. I desire that no strife, nor envy, nor grudging arise about the dividing of the Estate which the Lord of his mercy hath lent me. For I setled my Land after prayer, by the best Counsels and ad∣vise I could: And my personal estate I have by Will (after Prayer) to the best of my skill, in all good Conscience, as equally drawn it as I could; so I would, after I am dead, have you receive it from God, with a thankful and contented mind, and pray to the Lord to bless it to you, and every one of you to his own Posterity. I having been by Trade a Merchant; what by Gods blessing I have advanced, I have endeavoured, and laboured to gain it honestly, and to keep faith, and a good conscience alwayes, ever acknowledging that these following Parties had a share in my E∣state, as in all other mens, viz. The Commonwealth, the Service of God, the Ministers, and the poor Members Christ; of whom, as I have endeavoured to be careful, so would I have every one of you to be zealous for the service of God, heartily affectionate to the poor Members of Christ; And to give, with the Relief, a comfortable word, when occasion permits. John Lamot. A Good Name is better than precious Ointment: And the day of death, than the day of ones Birth, Eccles 7. 1.
Sr Nathaniel Barnardiston of Ketton in Suff. K• Obiit A. D. 1663. Aet. 66. F. H. van. Houe Sculp: portrait of Nathaniel Barnardiston The Life and Death of the Eminently Religious, and much Honoured Knight, Sir Nathaniel Barnar∣diston. IT's certain that the Light of Nature, and of Grace also, hath ever set an high value upon the Memonies of all just and worthy men; such as have honoured and blest the World by their living in it; as we see proved and illustrated by the ingenious Writings of several Learned and Great Men, both in the Heathen and the Christian World; besides what we see bet∣ter discovered and confirmed in the sacred Text, where it is said, The name of the wicked shall rot, but the memory of the Just is blessed. Nature says, That the good Lives of men merit praise and an open acknowledgment; thereby to draw others to the same perfections, thereby to preserve the value of Mankind, and to better the circumstances of an idle impertinent World, with the good of King∣doms, States, Towns and Families: Grace says, That nothing is so good, sweet, and pleasing, both in Life and Death, as to imitate the dear Jesus, and to copy out the bles∣sed Rules of the Gospel; to the confirmation of this we may draw in all that is af∣firmed in whole Divinity, or treated on in the holy Bible: Referring to the case in hand, It was well said by a Worthy Divine, That it is barbarous Inhumanity in Nature, injurious Detraction in Morality, and wilful disobedience in Divinity, to bury the Me∣mory and Reputation of those in silence and obscurity, whom the Lord by the manifesta∣tion of his Grace hath raised to eminency, and exalted above the Standard of the World: For what is humane in Nature, or praise worthy in Morality, or commanded in Di∣vinity, but what belongs to good and holy Living? Then certainly we may make bold to caress the Memory of him who bears our Title, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston;
a Person not fit to be mentioned without a Preface, being so eminently Religious, and much to be Honoured; as we shall easily see, if we search into some only of the most memorable passages of his Birth, Life, and Death. First, To begin with his Birth. Both Natural and Divine: Natural, Thus: His Birth. Natural. He was born in Suffolk, in that admirable year One Thousand five hundred eighty and eight; A year that ever deserves to be with in Letters of God; a year in which the Pope and the Spaniard designed to have taken away the Lives of the English Protestants, and with them to have put an end to their holy Religion; a Design car∣ried on with the utmost Endeavours imagineble, and appeared, when it began to Act, much like the Title of the Navy, that should have managed it, to wit, In∣vincible; but it pleased God wonderfully to overcome and dash in pieces all this Pompous Strength, Pride, and Hope. It was no small Glory for a man to date his Nativity from such an Eminent Time; and this Gentleman would often please him∣self with the remembrance of it. And on the other hand, God did not a little add to the Honour and Grandeur of the year by his being born in it. He was not of a mean or low Original, though its possible for one arising from Not of a low Original. such a Fountain to be Great and Worthy) but he derived his Pedigree from an An∣cient Family, containing no small number of Noble Ancestors; He was the Twen∣ty Third Knight, lineally desended of that Family, which still enjoys the Paternal Estate they had before the Conquest. He wy one that knew the Countrey very well, styled The Top-Branch of the Suffolk Cequest. To be of a more raised, dura∣ble, and lofty Descent than the Vulgar, is a thing of note and value in the Judg∣ment of Infinite Wisdom, 2 Sam. 7. 9. speaking of David, there the Lord says, I have made thee a great Name like the Name of the Great men of the Earth. The Greater Men are, and the greater Blessings to all that have to do with them, if they be but truly gracious. Eccles. 10. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy Prince is the Son of Nobles, and not of an upstart Family: yet this is no other blessing but what is common to the more rude and immoral World, as well as to the best and most useful Believer; and so it cannot possibly have any such great excellency in it as some proud and carnal Minds do fancy; all Noble Blood without the Di∣vine Grace, being no better than tainted; Abel was of the younger House to Cain, but yet transcendently more Honourable.—Nobilitas sola est, atque unica, virtus. Inv. Sat. 8. It is therefore necessary and becoming to shew how the Almighty honoured him Divine Birth. in giving him another Birth, more Noble and Great than the most losty Unbe∣liever ever enjoy'd; here we may say , he was born from above; born (I say) not of bloud, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, BƲT OF GOD. And this his second Birth was eminently honourable and remarkable above others in three Particulars; 1. In the Time of his Conversion. 2. In the matter or occasion of his Humiliation. 3. In the Foundation of his Faith. 1. For the Time of his Conversion, it was when he was young, the Lord enabled The Time of his Conversion him to Remember his Creator in the days of his youth, by casting in the Seed of Re∣generation when he was at School, the very time when others of his Rank and Quality give up themselves to the greatest degrees of licencious Wantonness, and im∣moderate Excesses; pretending that the heat of Nature, and strength of the lusts of Youth, produce a sufficient Apology and Discharge for the same: But at that very time did Infinite Grace so effectually seize on him, That with the devout young Abel he did offer his First-fruits unto God. O how emphatical and thoroughly excellent it is for young Gentlemen to bear Christs Yoke in their youth, when brisker Nature invites and irritates, when the fawning blooming World hugs and most obsequi∣ously attends them; and Satan (in his most smooth appearance) strews their way with Roses, and puts on his most sugar'd Bait, and presents to unexperienced and forward Flesh and Blood, all the dangerous Things that are taking and desirable? O then to be abstemious, to be crucified with Christ, to be mortified and wholly dead to all these things, is rare and glorious! 2. For the matter or occasion of his Humiliation; this was eminently remarkable; Matter or oc∣casion of his Humiliation. the Lord being pleased to go out of his ordinary way or method he commonly useth in the Conviction and Humiliation of such as bear his date and character in the World, to wit, by charging upon their Consciences some notorious actual sin,
as we find by frequent experience, but yet it was otherwise with him; For living more innocently than (for the most part) young Gentlemen do, upon a time hear∣ing that of the Psalmist opened, Psal. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. From which words the greatness and odiousness of Original sin being demonstrated and pressed home, it pleased the Lord so deeply to awaken and affect his Mind and Conscience thereby, as that in the whole follow∣ing course of his Life, from that very time, it was a means to abase all high thoughts of himself, and to make him lye down at the Footstool of God in the mournful sense of his own emptiness and vileness; yea, he was more solidly and constantly humbled and broken for it, than for all the Fruits of it, which every day make their ap∣pearance by actual transgressions in the Lives of the most, yet by this means was happily prevented in him: For as Pliny says (in his Natural History, lib. 7.) That they that are once stung with Scorpions, are ever after priviledged from being stung with Wasps and Hornets, so he that is first deeply humbled for this Root, Mother, and Nurse of all Wickedness and Corruptions (to wit, Original sin) shall seldom have cause afterward to be wounded with the guilt of Actual transgressions; this was well confirmed by the following Life of this holy Youth. 3. For the Foundation of his Faith, it was more to be observed, or taken special notice of than the rest; for whereas the greatest number of Men ground their Faith Foundation of his Faith. upon that which can only be the Proof of it, that is, the evidences of their love to God; and others, having learned better things, ground it upon the discovery of the all sufficiency of Christs merit, revealed in the Gospel; and a third sort lay the ground of their Faith upon the general offer of God in the Gospel, tendering Christ to them; His Faith was not only built generally upon the Evidences of Gods love to sinners, but par∣ticularly upon the Gospel, as it is the Law of Faith, held forth unto him in the first Epistle of St. John 3. chap. ver. 23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. From which place was very happily urged by him that then Preached, That in the Gospel there was not only granted a liberty to be∣lieve in Christ, if we pleased, but a necessity imposed, that requireth us to believe, whe∣ther we will or no. It pleased the Lord by this Doctrine so to prevail with, and overpower his Heart by the Authority of this Precept, that he durst not refuse it, but submitted unto it; and so his confidence, or foundation of his Faith, was exercised in pure obedience unto God. Which, being the most Evangelical and sublime re∣ception of Christ; namely, upon no other ground but the authoritative Will of God, was that which produced this honourable second Birth in him; wherein his Faith was more established, than it usually is in most Believers through all the days of their Lives. Now we have shewed you the Birth of this Great Man Divine as well as Natu∣ral; you cannot but say, That as he was Genere nobilis, so he was Sanctitate nobi∣lior: Great by his Natural Birth, but greater by that which was Divine. Secondly, concerning his Life; which we shall find was as useful and gracious, as His Life. his Birth was raised and remarkable, if we compare those exact Descriptions we find of such a Life in the holy Text with the Actions and Practices of this holy Gen∣tleman. Whether we draw the Description of his Life from what the Psalmist lays down, Psal. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, which walk in the Law of the Lord. Or, from what Zacharias doth propose, Luke 1. 74, 75. Serving God in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our Lives. Or, lastly, from what Saint Paul did practice, Acts 24. 16. Exercising himself to have always a Conscience void of offence towards God, and towards Men. We shall find, I say, his Life to be a Copy or Counterpane of all these, and so to be very useful and gracious; and this we must draw from the whole of what is to be said under this General Head. For the illustrating this, I shall set before you Four Particulars. 1. His Personal Capacity as a Man, including part of his constitutive Character. 2. His publick Capacity, as a Magistrate or States-man. 3. His Relative Capacity, belonging to his Family. 4. His Religious Capacity, belonging to God and the Church. 1. For his Personal Capacity, as a Man, including part of his constitutive Character. Personal capa∣city, as a man. And here take him in the composition of his Soul and Body (say it was distinct from the stiperaddition of renewing perfecting Grace) and you shall see he was lovely; yea, so lovely, as to invite and please the observation of the Great and Wise. The make of his Body, even from Head to Foot (not to be too particular) was competently
Gentile and Brave; His Soul was Comprehensive, Vigorous, Noble, Great and Active; His Presence and Aspect smooth and pleasant, yet Grave, and often striking Reverence and Awe into the minds and deportment of such as looked upon him; especially, such as came before him when he was exercising the Office of a Magistrate. I may say of his, as was said of Basils Countenance, whilst he was performing holy Exercises, name∣ly, That so much Divine Majesty and Lustre appeared therein, that it made the Empe∣rour Valens tremble to behold it. And in like manner this most exact and holy Gentlemans severe deportment was so effectual, that it banished from his presence all those scurrilous and sordid Gestures and Practices, which the debauchery and impudence of too many of considerable Degree fear not to act in the sight of God and their Betters. This will be further confirmed, if we do but recite four Lines of a large Elegie upon his Death, writ by a knowing impartial Hand; thus, Shall I not once again on Earth behold That Countenance so grave, so brave, so bold, Which with a look could daunt the face of sin, And make offence to hide it self within. As there were none more flexible and complying than himself to the most easie desires of those who were just, honest, and good, be they of the lowest Rank of men in the World; so on the other side, there was none could put on a braver obstinacy, or move peremptory refusal, than he would do, to the most lofty Com∣mands, or most zealous Importunities, even of the greatest Men, if what was urged was unjust, or against his happy Rule of Life, the Word of God. This was the oc∣casion of what was said by another, of those many excellent Persons that con∣doled his Death, and justly adorned his Person and Memory by their Elegies; as follows, Most perfect Image of the God above, Without was Majesty, within was Love; One drawn with sweetness by an Infants hand, Not driven by violence or base command. It was said at his Funeral, That there was in him a blessed conjunction of those things which rarely meet in any other, to wit, an admirable facility and easiness to be intreated, with a great yieldingness of Spirit, even to Inferiours, when any good might be done thereby: and yet also a strong, resolute, unmoveableness and stedfastness of mind in opposing all evil in whomsoever: so that he was truly what was reported of Athanasius, Magnes & Adamas, a Loadstone for his sweetness in drawing on that which was good and holy, and an Adamant for his Courage and Stoutness in suppres∣sing Evil. In regard of the former, I may say as was said of Titus, the Emperour, that he was Deliciae humani generis, the delights of mankind; and in respect of the latter, he was Nathaniel, a true Israelite without guile. 2. For his publick Capacity, as a Magistrate or States-man. So, Publick capa∣city as a Ma∣gistrate. Justice of the Peace. As he was Justice of the Peace, he was exceeding active and useful; he ever ex∣ercised Justice in its own due time and way; he never befriended the Great to the prejudice of those that were little and mean in the World; he ever held the Bal∣lance of Justice in an even hand, and acted as impartially, as if all that came be∣fore him had neither had Interest in him, nor any Acquaintance at all; he was only a terrour to evil doers, but a praise and encouragement to all them that did well; by this means making Religion and Justice grow round about him. When he was High-Sheriff, (which he was in the One and twentieth year of the High Sheriff. Reign of King James) he was to God, his King, and the Country for which he served, one of the most exact that ever bore that Office. One passage here I must not let slip; As serving of God was one principal business in every place he was employed in through his Life; so here, though he neglected no business that be∣longed to his present Office, yet he had a special care to have God faithfully ser∣ved, and that even in the Week-day, taking with him his Sheriffs-men to a Weekly Lecture at some distance from his House; thereby dignifying that Office at an higher rate than usually, if not at any time, is performed.
He was also usually placed in the high Trust of a Parliament-man; for he was Parliament∣man. constantly chosen on every occasion as a Knight for his own Native County; not, that he had a Patent for the place, as some of his Enemies did report, out of envy at the Peoples honouring him by their constant Election, but because he was ever found to have a noble Resolution and Care to discharge the Trust that was committed to him; whereby it came to pass that no sooner was one to be chosen, who should be intrusted with a power over the Lives and Estates of his Country, but presently the thoughts, eyes and resolutions of all Men were fixed upon him, and all cryed for a Barnardiston, a Barnardiston. Which Trust he received upon him, not out of any Popular ambition, to advance his own greatness; nor, out of any self-end to raise his own Estate, by exhausting the publick Treasury, or to enrich himself by other mens ruine; nor out of lofty arrogancy that he might domineer and trample upon his Neighbours in the Country, under pretence of the Priviledge of a Parlia∣ment-man; much less to abuse that Peace to an impurity, and sheltering of him∣self in Riot, Excess, Pride and Lasciviousness; but out of a Mind and Conscience devoted to the Service of the Church and Commonwealth; beyond which neither fear, favour, nor flattery could draw him to Act or Vote at all, absolutely refu∣sing to defile himself by any miscarriage, let the inducement or temptation be what∣soever. Now consider him as a publick Person, and was he not Pater Patriae, a true Fa∣ther of his Countrey? which Title he did as certainly deserve as ever did Curtius, Claudius, or the Decij; for although he did not in every particular what is said of them, Pro toto terrarum orbe se devovere, devote himself for the defence of the whole Earth; yet for his Countrey and the defence of the just Rights and Liberties thereof, he did not refuse voluntarily to expose himself to a Gulph of hazards and sufferings; witness his suffering under the Imposition of Ship-money, Coat and Conduct-money, and the Loan; for refusing whereof he was a long time impri∣soned in the Gate-house, and afterward confined for a longer time in Lincoln-shire, above sixscore miles from his own usual abode. 3. For his Relative capacity, belonging to his Family. Here he was really what be∣came Relative capa∣city belonging to his Family. a good and holy Man. And here we'l consider him in his carriage and acting both as Inferiour, and Superiour. 1. As an Inferiour towards his Father, and Grandfather; where he did in every As Inferiour. thing answer that Relation he stood in to them. So that you will see he knew as A Son. well how to honour, serve and obey, as to command, cherish and love. He enjoy'd his Father a less time than his Grandfather, his Father being removed by Death long before his Grandfather; but yet we may easily gather what his carriage to him was, from the high and extensive value he set upon his Memory; as, he used to please himself to discourse of his Father, affirming that he was a very godly Man, and that it was a great disadvantage for him to part with him so young; these things, and others, he would often declare to his Children and Friends, dropping many Tears, to shew his great and strong Affection; and when he made his Will, he there exprest an importunate desire to his Executors that the Bones of his Father might be digged out of the Earth, (where they were buried) and laid by his own Body in a new Vault, he ordered his Executors to erect for the same purpose; thus, though he could not live with his Father as long as he would have desired, yet he designed that their Bodies or Relicks, should lye together till the happy Resur∣rection day; which certainly did denote a noble Veneration, and a most raised Filial Affection. As to his Grandfather, he always behaved himself in all suitable∣ness A Grandson. to his Relation; Two things here we may record, as First, how the Grandfa∣ther when young was educated under the Great Mr. Calvin in Geneva, being sent thither by his Guardians in the miserable and most unhappy days of our Queen Mary; and this we can say, that if the Grandfather failed to live according to that Education in some part of his Life, yet his Grandson endeavoured to live it for him; which he not only did in an eminent Degree, but for that reason also; looking upon the Goodness of God, in extraordinary Mercies or Providences to Progenitors, to be obliging to Posterity, so as to invite to a good Improvement, as the best way of thankfulness, the best way of preventing the Divine displeasure, and the best way of reconciliation to God, and true advantage to a Mans own Soul. Again, Secondly, There was another thing fit to be recorded, to wit, his constant importu∣ning his Grandfather, upon every vacancy of Church Livings, to give him leave to
Present, because he was likely, according to the common course of Nature, to have the longest enjoyment of such men; which, his Grandfather submitting to, was the occasion of eminent and worthy Divines being put into such Livings as became void, there being many belonging to that Family. This was much to the credit of his Grandfather, more to his own comfort and joy, and most of all to the pro∣sperity and happiness of such Towns and Parishes as this Blessing fell upon. All the days of his Grandfathers Life he was ever endeavouring to do him good, and help him in any of his Affairs, all which he did with great Humility, Respect, and Honour. 2. As a Superiour; and here his Relation honoured the Degree of an Husband, As Superiour. a Father, a Grandfather, and a Master; in all which he appeared and acted in an eminent way. As, An Husband; he seemed here to imitate the practice of the Lord Jesus towards An Husband. his Church, in his conjugal love, protection, and full contentation and delight, un∣til he became a Pattern and Mirrour of Matrimonial sweetness and faithfulness: and as it is said by one of the Rabbins concerning Methuselahs Wife, That she had nine Husbands in one, for age and years; so I may say of this Gentlemans Lady, that she had nine Husbands in him alone, for his amiable Carriage and Graces. These were, it is true, acted while he was Living, but he left a Testimonial in his Will of his living Affection after his own death, over and above the Marriage Cove∣nants, to shew his endearedness of her, by his affectionate remembrance when he himself was gone. A Father he was also; and what manner of one his Children have declared in As a Father. their hearts, lives, and filial deportments; they have always affirmed that he ever performed not only the part of an earthly Father, in the due discovery of all be∣coming bowels and tender affection to their Bodies, but also performed the Office of an heavenly Father to their Souls, by a constant endeavour and serious study for their Education in the most exact and strict way of pure and paternal Religion; one te∣stimonial of which was his continual bestowing on them spiritual Counsels and gra∣cious Instructions, the grand scope and end of which was to incite and stir them up to a strict watchfulness over themselves, and a close walking with God; and it was usual with him, after the giving such Instructions unto them severally, to take them into his Closer, and there pray over them and for them. If at any time they had displeased him, so excellent was his moderation and wisdom towards them, that he would never correct them, nay, not so much as reprove them in his displeasure, but still waited the most cool and convenient time, wherein they seldom disco∣vered that he was angry, by any other effect but his silence. And, on the other side, he was so ready to encourage them in any Acts of well doing, that for the most part his extraordinary respects and favours towards them, were bestowed ra∣ther under the notion of rewards of their Duty, than the issues of his Bounty; still professing before them (as he usually did to his Friends upon their discoursing con∣cerning the extraordinary Blessings of God upon them in their Travels abroad, and their Returns home again) that he took infinitely more content in beholding one grain of Grace, and evidence of true Regeneration in his Children, than if their Estates and Gains abroad had been multiplied an hundred fold; if withall they had come back again prophane, or no more than meerly Civilized, without the power of God∣liness.—He was ever a kind and dear Father for Affections and Wishes, for Advice and Prayers; and for numerous Letters constantly sent to his Children; many of which, being very excellent, might have been inserted for the good In∣struction of others, only they would have swell'd his Life beyond what is thought convenient.—Though he was ever importunate to have all his Sons em∣ployed, not taking it as becoming to have any of his live out of useful Callings; whereby they might bless and better their Generation, yet he ever desired rather to have them good than great.—In his Will he exhorts them all to fear God, and love one another; and that, if any difference happened amongst them, as ever they bore any duty or love to him, or as they would expect the like from their own Children, they would leave all such differences to the Arbitrement of the rest of their Brethren, and would stand to their Award.—In the said Will he also leaves Ten Pounds to the Re∣verend Mr. Fairclough, his Parochial Minister, with this desire, That whilst he lived he would give good Advice and Counsel to his Children. Thus you see he was a most dear, most affectionate, and most Religious Father. You shall also see more of this, when we come to speak of his Death.
He was also a wise and careful Grandfather, not only instructing these little As a Grandfa∣ther. sweet Relations while he lived, but also using endeavours to command them to be good, honest, and obedient when he was dead; as appears by what he lest under his Hand in his last Will, so often mentioned, where he bequeaths them several Legacies, but with this Proviso, That if any of them would not be ruled by their Pa∣rents, it should be in the power of their Parents to lessen or take away what he had left them, first giving it under their Hands to his Executors. He was also an excellent Master to his Servants; giving them all that was just, due, and necessary for their maintenance and encouragement. He ever gave them As a Master. good Example in himself, and failed not to instruct them in the most useful things for the benefit of their Souls and Bodies. As he walked within his house with a per∣fect Heart, so he hated the work of them that did turn aside; and did not permit any prophane person to stand before him, or to wait upon him; his eyes were ever fixed upon those that were faithful in the Land, that they might serve him, Psal. 101. This was the reason that he had so many excellent Servants; his Family being a true Nur∣sery for the qualifying and accomplishing such; so that one, who was well ac∣quainted with his Family, affirms, that at one time he had ten or more Servants so eminent for Piety and Sincerity, that he never saw the like, all at once, in any Family in the Nation; such, whose Obedience, joyned to their Governours care, produced so rare an effect, that they truly made his House a spiritual Church and Temple, wherein were daily offered up the spiritual Sacrifices of Reading the Word, and Prayer, Morning and Evening, of singing of Psalms constantly after every Meal, before any Servant did rise from the Table: also the chiefest of them did usually, after every Sermon they heard, call the rest into the Buttery, (a place of most dis∣order in other Houses) and there repeat the Sermon unto the rest, before they were called to the repetition of it in their Masters presence. By this time you may easily see how excellent this Gentleman was at Relative Duties; he was not a Saint abroad, and a Devil at home, as is but too truly said of some that make no small show in Religion, but he was a Saint in all places and Relations; which will appear by what follows. 4. We are to consider him in his Religious Capacity, belonging to God and the His Religious Capacity be∣longing to God and the Church. Church: In which he was no less excellent than in any of those that went before. Here we may (first) see with how much Piety ond Devotion he exercised him∣self towards God; he ever lived and acted with such a reverential Awe, and most devout respect towards the Almighty, that his Life seemed little else but one entire Belonging to God. Seies of Devotion. Yet we will a little see what he was in particular Duties of Religion; and here whether we instance in secret or publick Exercises, he did so earnestly devote himself unto them, that for my part (saith a Godly Divine that was his close Observer) amongst Persons of his Quality, I think he hath left very few Superiours behind him, if any Equals. 1. In Private Duties. It's recorded to the everlasting praise of the young Lord Harrington, so famous for Piety, that it was his constant use to Pray twice every day in secret, twice with Private Duties some choice Friends and Servants, besides his Family Duties. But I am assured, by those that closely observed this gracious Knight, that it was his practice to pour out his Soul before the Lord in secret thrice every day, and sometimes oftner, if he could gain opportunity; besides his Family Duties, and days of extraordinary Humiliation, which he importunately embraced upon every occasion. This I can testifie (saith Mr. Fairclough) upon mine own experience, that for many years to∣gether when I was first acquainted with him, I seldom visited him or he me, but if any convenient place could be found, we might not part except we had prayed to∣gether.—Nor was he more frequent in secret Prayer, than constant in secret reading the Scriptures; which he ever made sure work to begin and close up with Prayer, that he might obtain the blessing of God thereon: afterward he ever read other choice Authors, of which he had store; but not long before his Death he took singular delight to read Mr. Baxters Saints Everlasting Rest, and Preparation thereunto; which after his death was taken notice of to be nothing else but the gracious event of the Divine Providence, sending it as a Guide to bring him more speedily and directly to that Rest.—His constant converse with single Persons, was so Divine, as to merit a place among his private Duties unto God; for his
Speech was ever free from the least unsavouriness, boasting, or passion; consisting of nothing but love, sweetness and modesty; all his Discourse ever ministred Grace unto the Hearers, it was ever a pure Stream from the pure Fountain of his Heart; so far from the least appearance of lightness, or excessive Mirth, that in Thirty years together none ever heard one syllable from his mouth tending to any wan∣ton expression, that might offend the most chast Mind or Ear; but as the Poet affirmed, Vernas efflat ab ore rosas, his Tongue dropped Honey, and his Breath was as sweet and fragrant as Roses in the Spring.—Thus you see with what an industrious Holiness he used his precious time when less or more retired, so that Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus, is a true saying of him, He was never less alone, than when alone, his God and he was most abundant company. 2. In Publick Duties. Publick Du∣ties. Though in private Duties, his noble Actings in or for Religion, were so much hid, as to be only like the Beams of the Sun striking under, or through a cloud; yet in his Publick Exercises unto God his Graces and Activity had their Tabernacle in the Sun, so that they did shine in a most resplendant way. If we begin with his Sanctification of the Sabbath, we shall find he addrest him∣self thereto with so much delight, that notwithstanding he rose early every day in Sanctification of the Sab∣bath. the Week, yet he rose more early on the Lords-day, so early, that usually he was the first up in the Family; then called his Children and others up, that they might have sufficient time to prepare themselves for a more reverent and devout attendance upon the Lord in his Publick Ordinances; and for himself he usually spent much time every Sabbath Morning, before he came to the Congregation. His value of, and constant attendance upon, the Ministration of the Word publickly dispensed, shewed him so eminent, and zealously concerned, and taken up therein, Attendance on the Word Preached. that it was difficult for any in the whole World to out-do him. What the Apo∣stle James requires in a blessed Hearer, was his punctual practice, that is, He was swift to hear; he could never satisfie his own Conscience, if he was not present to joyn with the Congregation before there was one word spoken, or one Petition sent up to the Lord; his unweariedness in this course while he lived, was always visible to them of those Congregations where he resided. You'l see something more when we come to speak of his Death.—The Congregation being dismissed, the first thing which he did usually, after he came within his own Doors, was imme∣diately to betake himself to his Closet, to beg a blessed dew from Heaven, to water the seed sown in his Heart that day. His Preparation for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was transcendent; though Preparation for the Sacra∣ment of the Supper. he ever exceeded the most in diligence and reverence in other Duties of Gospel Worship, yet in his consciencious preparation for, and fruitful improvement of the Lords Supper, he did exceed himself; for the most part he spent all the time he could redeem in a fourth night before the Sacrament, in his Closet in reading, pray∣ing, and examination of his spiritual state, with other Duties of Preparation ten∣ding thereunto; and what he practised himself in this kind, he constantly called upon others under him to do the like. We shall presently see further how eminent he was in preparing for the Sacrament, as also in advancing publick Catechising under the next Head; which is, in the (Second place) To consider him in his Religious Capacity, belonging to the Church of God: in which His Religious Capacity be∣longing to∣wards the Church. Love to the Ministry. we shall fully see his incomparable use and worth, if we seriously weigh the follow∣ing four Particulars. 1. His warm Love, and durable Affection to an holy Ministry. They who were faithful and godly in this Function, had not of his Quality a more faithful and hearty Friend and Well-wisher in the whole World; none so earnestly and frequently prayed for them, none so highly prized their Calling and Labours as he did; he was fully of that good mans mind, who openly professed, He had rather fall with the Ministry of England, than stand in greatest power with their Enemies. When some talked of mortal bloody times, and dark, black days a coming upon us, he replied, That those would be accounted dark black days indeed, when the Lights of the Ministry were extinguished, than the shortest Life would be accounted best. It was said at his Funeral, whosoever in the Congregation have been losers by his death, We of the Ministry have the greatest loss; if the Hearers put on blacks, the Preachers have cause to mourn in Sack-cloth.
2. His extraordinary care and endeavours constantly to present to every Living where Care to make good Present∣ments. he was Patron, such as were right qualified and holy Men. You may refer to this Head what was said before, in speaking to his behaviour to his Grandfather; to which I shall add, That he was not only careful in his Grandfather's time, but ten times more in his own; so that when any Place belonging to his Gift was vacant, he would spend many daies in Fasting and Prayer to invite the Direction of God, to guide his bestowing thereof; professing many times with all possible seriousness, That his Spi∣rit did more tremble to set his hand and Seal to a Presentation, than to any other Writing or Deed whatsoever; lest (said he) I should thereby bring the loss of the Peoples Souls to be required of me or my Posterity, through my negligence therein. And therefore when by all his own eare, and advice of Friends, such an one would not be procured, as for sufficiency and abilities could give satisfaction to the conscience of this rare Patron, then he left it wholly to the better sort of the People in that Place, to chuse their own Minister and Pastor. Oh how happy was all those Towns where he was Patron, for they might be sure to have fair play for their Souls. 3. His doing all he could to draw his Neighbours to the Life, Power and universal practice of Religion. This was admirable kindness to the Church: for she is little be∣friended Drawing his Neighbours to the Life, &c. of Reli∣gion. by like-warm, much less by lifeless Professors. He alwaies heartily joyned with his Minister (the fore-mentioned eminent Mr. Fairclough) in every Design that might advance holiness, and make the Church to grow; nay, engaged him∣self to do all things that could be proposed for that end. I will here mention two excellent Practices of his tending directly to the design in hand; the first was about Catechizing, the other the Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord. As to Catechizing, he saw it was necessary for Old People as well as Young, in or∣der to the obtaining Saving Knowledge, that he proposed it to the Heads of the Fa∣milies in the Town and Parish of Ketton (both rich and poor) That when the Children or Servants were Catechized, if they could not give Answer at any time to the Question asked, the Father or Master should answer for them; he engaging that he would do the like for his Children and Servants; he, having laid out some time and several importunate Arguments, did preyall to the setting up of this practice, which by his Example succeeded well; which, through the grace of God, was of admirable Advantage to the informing of ignorant Minds, and the building up them and others in the most holy Faith. In the next place, as to the Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord; here he did all he could to assist the Minister in hindering the openly wicked from participating of this holy Ordinance, to their own great disadvantage, as also the scandal of the Church; in order hereunto he agreed with the rest of those that were to communi∣cate, That publickly he and they should declare their owning of the Baptismal Covenant; accordingly this gracious Knight did himself begin this holy undertaking, and be∣fore all the Communicants did declare his Faith in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and did undertake, through the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to perform whatsoever his Sureties had promised in his Baptism upon his account; in which he was imitated by all others that did communicate; which did silence and keep the visibly Profane from medling with that sacred Justification and Action, they being fully convinced of the reasonableness of the practice. This surely was doing what he could to advance the Life, Power and Ʋniversal Practice of Religion among his Neighbours? and I am sure it was advantageous to the Church. But so was also, 4. His constant commemorating and rejoycing in the Deliverances of the Church. Al∣though his practice was herein universal, and did contain his abundant joy in the success and deliverances of the Churches abroad, in any part of the World; yet we shall consine his Actings to our own Church in this Nation, and tell you that he did Annually commemorate and solemnize The thrice happy Day of Queen Elizabeths In∣auguration, her entrance upon the Crown of England, to the glorious rescuing of the Reformed Religion, from the bloody designs of the inhumane Papists. He also did every year observe and celebrate the Fifth of November, with all becoming expressions of Joy, from the wonderful deliverance from the Gun Powder Treason, a Treason as black as Hell it self, attempting the utter destruction of our King, Prince, Nobles, principal Church-men, and all the Leading States-men of England, in or∣der to the change of our Religion and ruine of our Church. But because the Pa∣pists, many of them to this day, like the Whore in the Proverbs, wipe off this disco∣very of their sin and shame, saying, There was no such thing; notwithstanding
the finding their cruel Preparations, owned and vindicated by the desparate Traitors, with many other undeniable circumstances; I shall add one farther confirmation of their undoubted guilt, often affirmed and mentioned by this excellent Knight, not a little adding to the confutation of these lying Pseudo-Christians, to wit, That a day or two before the perfect Discovery of this Horrid Plot, (which was when Faux was apprehended) he being for some considerable time in the Temple Garden, where he was then a Student, did observe several men walking there together, and constantly whispering, looking and acting much concerned, all of whom within a few daies after he found to be those bloody Conspirators, by going to view them in Prison. Well, on these daies, (I say) of our Churches Deliverance, he did annually express all becoming joy and thankfulness, by Divine Praises, and other usual civil waies of re∣joycing. See Esther 9. 22, 26, 27, 28. Thus I have shewed you something, and but something, of what this Holy Man was in his Religious capacity towards God and the Church. I have, I confess, but mentioned (as I say) something of his Graces and Excellencies, for divers are omitted wherein he was as eminent as in any I have named. It's necessary indeed that I in∣stance in one, I mean, his Charity to the Poor, in which he did Cloath and Feed great number of those that dwelt round about him constantly year by year while he lived, and left them Legacys in several Parishes when he dyed; yea, so extensive was his Heart in the practice of Charity, that it reached even as far as the Poor in New-England, whose necessities he did highly commiserate and supply. But thus much for his Life. Thirdly, And lastly for His Death: and surely if their Death be blessed, That (with His Death. St. Paul) have finished their Course, and kept the Faith: That (with good old Simeon) have beheld the Salvation of Christ; or that rest from their labours, their Works follow∣ing them? then it will appear that his Death was as blessed, as his Life was gracious, and his Birth Honourable. Here we shall find six Things remarkable. 1. His Preparation for it at some di∣stance. 2. His welcoming the Messenger thereof when it drew near. 3. His unwil∣lingness, even then to be absent from holy Ordinances and Exercises. 4. His most fervent performance of such Duties as he was capable of. 5. His excellent farewel Ad∣vice to his Children. 6. His peaceable and joyful Departure. 1. His Preparation for Death at some distance. He was unwilling to be surprized, and therefore did use endeavours for several years before it came to be ready, but His Prepara∣tion for Death. especially for two years before he was, ever thinking of it and fitting for it: then he made his last Will and Testament, and writ it with his own Hand, upon this very ground (as he there expresseth) that after he had so disposed his Affairs, and set his House in order, he might have nothing in the World to look after, or to look upon, but his blessed Saviour, and Salvation by him. In which last Testament, he disco∣vers so much Assurance, and confidence, of the Lord's everlasting grace and love unto him, as if at the same time, like the fore mentioned Simeon, he had embraced the Lord Jesus in his Arms. As in the beginning of his Will he heartily begs the guidance of God to direct him in the wise disposal of what Divine Goodness had be∣stowed upon him, so in several other places he doth annex and twist in so many hea∣venly Counsels and precious Instructions, tending to the everlasting Inheritance of his Posterity, that it rather resembles our Saviours Testament, conveighing the Legacys of the Covenant of Grace, or an heavenly Sermon, then any political Instrument to dispence only earthly Possessions. It was observed of him, That after his Will was finished, he seemed to have little to do, but to be gone to the better World, be∣ing so much at ease and rest, as if he had indeed wholly done with this World, in which he continued (as is said) about two years after, but alwaies acted at the same rate of willingness and readiness to be gone. 2. His welcoming the Messenger of Death, when it drew near. He did not then, ac∣cording His welcom∣ing the Mes∣senger of Death. to the usual method of most, seem shy and averse to be gone, as if so be he were not ready, but was heartily ready; for as soon as ever there appeared on his side a small swelling, in which none but himself conceived any danger, he being then at Hackney, did send Fifty Miles for Mr. Fairclough, his Minister, to discourse him, and taking him to walk with him, presently fell into conference of the worth and immortality of the soul, of the manner of its Subsistence and actings, when it was separated, of the Joyes of the other World, and the vanity and emptiness of all things in this as being most suitable to his present condition; and herewith he was so deeply
and spiritually affected, that at their parting he exprest himself in the following manner to Mr. Fairclough. Sir, I now much wonder that any man, that fully believes these things to be realities, and not meer notions (being in my condition) should be unwilling to dye; for my own part, I will not be so flattered, with any carnal content, as to be desirous to live longer in this World, where there is little hope left that the Lord hath any more work or service for me to do, except it be to suffer for keeping a good Conscience, in witnessing against the Apostacys and impieties of the Times; and now it is a great favour of God to be sent for speedily. After this, he being removed to London, for greater conveniency of Phy∣sicians, he there made the same profession, Of his desire to be desolved and be with Christ, unto several Friends, and Visiters. 3. His unwillingness even then, to be absent from holy Ordinances and Exercises. His pains and weakness growing so fast upon him that he was thereby hindered the en∣joyment, His unwilling∣ness to neglect Ordinances. first of publick Ordinances, in the Church, and presently after sometimes of those that were private in the Family; which was the greatest grief that burden∣ed his Mind, as you shall see in what follows—One Sabbath morning observing the People of the Family, where he lodged, getting themselves ready to joyn with the Congregation belonging to that Place, He fell into a great passion of sorrow, and wept very much, and with David, Poured out his Heart, because he had gone with the multitude, and led them to the House of God, but now was necessitated to want the benefit of that, which his Soul so much thirsted after.—Again, The Week before he died, he was perswaded in respect of the extremity of his pain once or twice to go to bed before Family Prayers; but the night following, being again perswaded to it, he told them he would not be intreated to do so any more, for he said, He was sure that he slept the worse those nights for the want of it, spiritually using the Proverb, Whet is no Let. 4. His most fervent performance of such holy Duties, as he was capable of. Because His perfor∣mance of all Duties as he wa able. he could not enjoy those that were Publick, as I have said, he therefore gave up him∣self so much the more earnestly to the exercise of secret reading the Scripture, Me∣ditation and Prayer, so long as his strength would hold out; but one Wave followed another so fast, that he was disabled thereby to be so frequent and constant in those secret Duties of communion with the Lord as he desired; for which he made many complaints to his Sons, and others, as they came about him. 5. His excellent Advice to his Children. The day before his Death, his Children His advice to his Children. being about him, as Jacobs were, after he had blessed them all, and put up his Prayers to Heaven for them, and gave them his last Advice and Counsel; in four Particulars. First, He admonished them to take heed of Worldliness and vain glory. Shewing what a vast difference there was between a gracious, humble Man, and a proud graceless Man, both in the estimation of God, and all men that were good and wise. Secondly, He perswaded them to live in love and unity together; yet so as they should ever count it their Duty to wrath over one another, and never be afraid to tell one another of their faults lovingly, and not be Mealy-mouth'd, as his expres∣sion was. Thirdly, That they should take heed of timorousness, and sinking from the Truth, by reason of the oppositions of the Times against the Scripture-power of Godliness, shewing the danger of complying with man against God. Fourthly, He commended them unto the Word of Gods Grace, and the Word of Grace unto them: Requiring them to be constant in reading the Scriptures, and to joyn Prayer thereto, for a blessing before and after. After these Counsels, one of his Sons (telling him, how much he hoped the words of a dying Father would be regarded by them) desired him to deal impar∣tially with each of them, and discover unto them what Evils he had noted each of them most prone unto, and what Duties he had observed any of them most negli∣gent in; he did perform what was desired with so much plainness, that one of his Brothers standing by, desired him to use the same fidelity to him, which accord∣ingly he did: A piece of Affection rarely found expressed with wisdom. 6. His peaceable and joyful departure out of the World. He enjoyed just before his His peaceable and joyful de∣parture. death, and even to the last, such an abundant Peace and ravishing Joy, as could not be hid, his Soul being so filled therewith, that it even overflowed, and poured up∣on all those that enquired after his condition. This appeared, First, to his second Son, who observing him to grow faint, did desire him to be chearful; to whom he answered, Son, I thank the Lord, I am so chearful in my heart, that I could laugh
whilst my sides Ake.—Then to his Brother at the same time, enquiring how he found himself, he answered much to the same purpose, saying, O Brother, blessed be God, I have abundance of ravishing joy within me. The same answer he gave to his Eldest Son, who being called to him, he enquiring of his Father, How it was with him? he presently fell into an earnest Prayer, That the Lord would be pleased to give him an happy deliverance out of this World, and a glorious Meeting with his Saviour. Which Prayer of his was so graciously answered, that as long as he enjoyed any use of Speech, he acknowledged the sence of this inward Joy; and after he had said, I have peace within, I have peace within, he spake no more, but lying for a while (as it were) in a slumber, at last he opened his eyesagain, and lifting up his hands towards Heaven, fell asleep in the Lord. Thus you see that his department of Life was as comfortable, as his entrance into it was Honourable, or his abode in it gracious and acceptable both to God and all good men. He left the miserable, and went to the happy World, on the 25th of July, in the year 1653. when he had lived full Threescore and five years. His Corps being carried down from London, was met about twenty Miles from his own House by Two hundred Persons, most of them of Quality; and his Fune∣ral, at Ketton on the 26th of August following, was attended by many Thousands. When his Body was just going to be Interred, it was said of him, by one equal∣ly impartial and holy, who knew him much better than other men, That his Life had been so free and pure from any scandalous sin, or any other actual Evil course, that for thirty years together, he did not remember, that ever he knew him soiled with any spot, which might give occasion to any to suspect his eminent integrity and sincerity, but his heart was yet upright before God; a thing very rare to betaken notice of in this World. The observation of his admirable holy Life (to all that were intimately con∣versant with him) rendred him, The Beauty of Grace, and Glory of Christianity, as was once said of a German Divine. His gracious Accomplishments and Practices, be∣ing numerous and more illustrious than all other Ornaments, presented him Ho∣nourable to all men while he lived, and being Dead (as so many redulent Flowers stuck upon his Hearse) did give such a pleasant and odoriferous perfume in the no∣strils of all Spectators, that the memory of them surely will ever remain among all future Generations, who shall have the advantage to understand, how the Lord was pleased to dignifie and honour him, first, with a Spiritual Birth; and after with a Gracious Life; and last of all, with a most blessed Death; for of these we may truly say, as Eusebius says of Constantine, Faelix Nativitas, felicior vita, felicissima Mors, his Birth was good, his Life better, and his Death most glorious of all.
Sr Thomas Barnardis¦ton Bt. Pelatia Nathaniel William Sr Samuel Bart Arthur Stephen Ann John Jane CALCAR VIRTVTIS HONOR Insignia Dignissimi Dom: D: NATHANIELIS BARNARDISTON Equitis Aurati Goddard sculp S Morgan Inuen The Mourners Blazonry. HArk how the doleful Bittern sadly moans, And tunes her withered Reed, to dying groans. The Streaming Spots of Ermine, seem to weep That Innocence it self (their Type) doth sleep. The Crosses, once dyed Gules, with Saviours blood, Turn Pale with Grief, as if they understood The Gospels loss in his: The Azure Field (Heav'ns Hieroglyphick) shews, Faith was his Shield. SA. FAIRCLOUGH. Fell. of Caius Colledge.
The Life and Death of Mr. John Row, who Died, February Anno Christi, 1659/60. IOhn Row the Son of Lawrence Row, was born in the Parish of Shobrook in Devonshire, His Parentage in that remarkable year, 1588. And when he was an Infant, he was laid aside in his Cradle for dead: But it pleased God that one of his Sisters, having a little more courage and resolution than the rest, went to look upon him once more, and putting her A special Pro∣vidence. hand to his mouth, she thought that she felt a little breath, whereupon, some means be∣ing presently used, he began to revive, and probably by this early and signal Providence, the Lord intimated that he had reserved him for some more than ordinary service, and this the future course of his Life did evidently shew. Being arrived to a competent Age, he was by his Parents set to School at Crediton, His Education. where he profited so much, both in the Latin and Greek tongue, that he was almost fit for the University, and had accordingly been sent thither in order to his training up for the Ministry, but that it pleased God to take away his Father a little before the intended time, concerning which himself would often say, that we frequently err in our judgments of things: And that, God sees not as men see. Being frustrate of the hopes he had of going to the University, however he would not lose that little Learning which he had got at School, only the Greek through dis∣use was somewhat worn out with him: But he still retained the exact knowledge of the Latin Tongue, which was of great use to him till his dying Day. He was of a sharp and pregnant Wit, of a great, deep, and penetrating Judgment: His Character. Himself indeed complained of some deficiency in his Memory, but others discerned it not. For they judged him to excell in that as well as in other Abilities of the mind. As for his natural temper and disposition, he was a man of great ingenuity, of much can∣dor and sweetness: They which knew him intimately, judged him to have as noble and generous a soul, and to be as far from any thing that savoured of a base, disingenuous, and sordid Spirit, as ever any that they knew. He was exceeding Affable, and Courte∣ous unto all, and that without the least shew or suspition of seeking his own ends in it: His temper inclined him to be pleasing unto all, without morosity; and there was not the meanest Person which could say, that he was neglected or despised by him. He was very careful to give a due respect unto all, and never was any more curious to pay a just reverence to those that were above him in rank and quality. In his Deportment and Behaviour he was humble, sweet, and candid; as ready His Deport∣ment. to hear others speak as to speak himself, and usually he would give others leave to speak before him. This (together with his Grace) was elevated to such an height, as that, the worst of men had not any evil to speak of him. And yet (that which is not com∣mon, but somewhat rare to be met with) altho his natural Candor and Abilities were such, yet was he a man of great Presence and Authority. He seldom spake in any se∣rious matter▪ but his speech carried with it a wonderful and peculiar kind of Authority: And such a Majesty shined in his Conversation, as that some (and those reputed both Pru∣dent and Pious) taking notice of the excellency of his Spirit, the Lustre of his Graces, and how much his conversation differed from the most of men, have professed, that when they have been in his Company, they had a kind of awe upon them, and they could not be so free, whilst they were with him, as when they were among others. When he was young, his tender Parents (according to their measure) instructed him in the grounds of Religion, and caused him, together with themselves to attend upon the publick Ordinances, by which he came first to have a taste, and relish of Religion in his heart. When his Father was dead, he went to live with Doctor Bodley (Brother to the famous Sir Thomas Bodley who was the Founder of the University Library in Ox∣ford) a man of eminent Piety and Exemplary Holiness, who at this time was Minister His Conversion of the Parish where Mr Row was born, and where his Parents lived. From this holy man Mr. Row learned much, yea very much of the work of God upon his soul: And as
he learned much from him, so he was not a little beloved of him, the Doctor bearing as tender a respect to him as if he had been his own Child. Living thus with Doctor Bodley, and afterwards, for a while with another Godly Gen∣tleman [Mr. Thomas Gale of Crediton] he had opportunities of frequent going to London, where he heard those Preachers as were in the greatest Repute in those times, as Doctor, His Progress. Gouge, Mr. Stock, &c. and by them he was much holpen forward in spiritual knowledge and quickned in his love to the ways of God. But Doctor Bodleys Counsel, together with his holy Example (he being a man of an Austere Life, and most strict Conversation) seemed to be that which had most influence upon him, and to have the greatest impressi∣on upon his Heart: For nothing was more familiar with him, through his whole Life, than to be speaking, upon all occasions, what he had seen, and heard, and observed in this worthy Doctor. The Sermons also and Preaching of Doctor Bodley was of great use to him. For this was Mr. Rowes observation concerning him, that whatever the subject were that the Doctor had been treating of, yet still, when he came to the Application, the use that he would be sure to make of it, should be to drive men to Christ. The Doctrine was so firmly rooted and rivited into Mr. Row, that all which knew him intimately, could not but say that they never knew any man that was a greater advancer of Christ, or that did more inculcate this great principle upon all whom he had occasion to coverse with, namely, That they should have a great care to deny themselves and to live upon Christ. More particularly what were the first gracious workings of God upon his heart, him∣self set down in a Paper under under his own hand, where having before related the Mercies of God towards him, and his care and providence over him in his Infancy, and Childhood, he goes on thus. Neither did my gracious God cease to do me good in the days of my youth, whereat I may Note. justly admire: O the depth and riches of his unchangeable Grace! For here were I able to set out the true Idea of my then deformed heart and life: But better it is to confess the same to my gracious God, and to pray him not to remember those sins of my youth: Both which I have done; to wit, both confessed them and begged pardon of them, and by Gods Grace intend to do to my dy∣ing day. Yet thus much I think good to unfold, for the praise of the glory of Gods Grace, that, whereas I was by nature prone to all sins, of all kinds, especially to those two Monsters, Pride and Voluptuousness and in the latter of these an Inventer of new kinds of sinning, yet the Lord gave me not up to mine own hearts lusts altogether: But even then began, not only to restrain me, but also by the means of Grace to do me good. O Lord, my Salvation is of thee alone. For if ever any should be saved by their own Merits, very likely was it that I should be farthest off; For thou resistest the Proud. But the Gifts and Calling of God are without Repentance. Hence it came to pass that the same gracious God (who out of his unchangable Love ordained me unto Life) stirred up the Spirit of Doctor Bodley to admonish me to take heed of Pride, and those overweaning conceits of my self, which he espied in me, and counselled me to buy a Bible and to read the same: which Admonition and Counsel the Lord was pleased to bless in such wise, that ever since that time, I have in some weak measure kept a constant course of reading the Scrip∣tures, except some few short intermissions; By which means, I do acknowledge to the Glory of my God, that my poor soul hath received no small benefit. By this it appears that Pride and the love of Pleasure were his Master sins in the dayes of his youth; which caused him often to say in his familiar Discourse, that Ease, Pride, and Pleasure were the great sins of youth. He would also very frequently speak of this passage, that there was but one thing which he mainly desired in the days of his youth, which if it had been granted, would have proved his ruin; And that was, that he might have had the same liberty, that another young man of his acquaintance had granted unto him, who after∣wards came to a miserable End. Afterwards he often acknowledged what a Mercy it was that he was so restrained by his Parents, and that God gave him not his own Will. The Lord having thus begun the good work of Grace in Mr. Rowes heart, it was His Growth in Grace. much improved by the Counsel, Ministry, and holy Conversation of Doctor Bodley, with whom he continued for sometime, even till the Doctors death. And the Doctor, after some experience of him, perceiving his Ingenuity, Fidelity, and Inclination to Religion, bare a very great and tender affection to him; yea, such was his love to him, that, hav∣ing no Child of his own, he intended to have done much for him at his Death: But be∣ing surprized with somewhat a suddain sickness, whereof he died, and not being able by reason thereof to do what he inteded, Mr. Rowes hopes were wholly frustrated of
enjoying any thing that the Doctor purposed to do for him. And this Event he look∣ed upon (as he was ever wont to construe it, in his familiar Discourses with his Friends) as the wise Providence of God towards him, that he might see his whole dependence to be on the Lord for what he had. About the twenty fifth year of his Age he was disposed of in Marriage, about which His Marriage. there were some remarkable Providences which he thought fit to Record in these words. When I was desirous to enter into the state of Marriage, I was assayed with Cove∣tousness, Voluptuousness, and Ambition, and would surely have undone my self by some, or by all these evils, had not my gracious God, by disappointing my unsanctified desires for seven years space, or more, prevented my Folly. Oh what a misery is it for vain youth to have its will! O what a Blessing to bear the Yoke betime! Especially when God will open the Ear to discipline, as (blessed be his Name) he did mine at last. And here I may justly break out in admiration of the riches of his Grace, that brought light unto me out of my darkness, I mean, a great light of Grace into my soul, by oc∣casion of the great darkness of mine own sin into which I fell. My Pride went before my fall; so sin drew on sin: and sin was punished with sin: Yet (O depth of Grace!) this Fall was the cause of my Rising; I mean, in Grace. Thus my Gracious God did me good by mine own evils, and made my greatest sins the occasion of my greatest humiliation. And though Voluptuousness, Ambition, and Covetousness were the Idol sins of my youth, yet my Gracious God preserved me from the gross acting of those sins, either by Murther, Adultery, Fornication, Theft, or any other unlawful way of gain: I say, that it was my gracious God that preserved me, and therefore let his Name have all the Glory. As for me, I should have run mad in Pride with Nebuchadnezzar, and burst asunder in Covetousness with Judas, and drowned my self in a daily course of delicacy with the Glutton that Saint Luke mentions, had I not been kept by the power of God alone. Only, only to thy Name, O Lord be the praise. My desire of Marriage was corrupt through Covetousness, Voluptuousness, and Ambition, as I said, and my gracious God crossing those unsanctified desires of mine for divers years, did at length teach me to desire Marriage for better Ends: And hav∣ing begun to set my mind in order, he also brough on the blessing. For first he pre∣pared my heart to seek him by Prayer for a meet helper, and then he opened his Ear, and granted my request; so that even in the same day wherein he had stirred me up in a more than ordinary manner to seek a blessing in my Marriage by Prayer, he was pleas∣ed to give me evidence that he had heard me, in sending me an honest Christian, which came to me on purpose to break the matter for Marriage with her, which afterwards God gave me to Wife. This Match Satan attempted to hinder, y stirring up a near Friend of mine to fail in performance of his promise made to me, for my preferment, which justly might have alienated the minds of my Wives Parents from me, but that my gracious God would not suffer Satan to do me that mischief; yea, more than so, he gave me Grace to seek Reconciliation with that Friend of mine that had so deeply wronged me. The Family into which he matched was godly, who rather embraced Mr. Rowes mo∣tion, because of that which they had heard concerning his good Affections to Religion. She whom he took to Wife was a very godly and sincere Woman, though she walked in darkness and had no Assurance of Gods love the greatest part of her life, yet when she lay sick and was upon her death-bed, she complaining that she had no assurance of Gods love, or that when she died she should be received into glory, Mr. Row besought the Lord very earnestly for her, and the Lord was so far prevailed with, that a little before her death, he gave her assurance of being received into his heavenly Kingdom, and this in a more than ordinary manner. After Mr. Rowes Marriage he continued in his Father-in-laws house at Pinhow in De∣vonshire Prayer pre∣valent. four years; a place enriched with divers worldly contentments, but all imbitter∣ed for want of the Ministry Gods word, as himself recorded it. There (saith he) I had just occasion given me to repent of my former fulsomness and weariness of that heavenly Manna. But here again my gracious God that never ceaseth to do me good, did as well provide the Plaister, as give the wound, He wounded my Conscience by want of the Ministry, thereby bringing to my remembrance my sin in undervaluing the plentiful Ministry which I once enjoyed: But he healed the breach again, not only by forgiveness and repentance, but also by providing for me the Ministry of a worthy Servant of his in a neighbouring Parish. Mr. Row being now weary of living any longer in the house of his Father-in-Law,
for the aforesaid reason, and hearing that there was an able Preacher at Crediton, he re∣moved His remove to Crediton. his Family and habitation thither, on purpose to enjoy the means of Grace, and continued there to his dying day: And he would often exhort his Children and Ac∣quaintance, that in choosing an habitation, their first care should be to plant themselves under a godly and powerful Ministry, and for this purpose adding that Text, Cant. 1. 8: Go forth by the Footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids besides the Shepherds Tents. Not long after his coming to Crediton, he was made High Constable, in which office he continued twenty years; in which place his care, diligence, and zeal was such, for sup∣pressing and punishing of Vice, that his name became a terror to the wicked and prophane. And his prudence, charity, and compassion were not inferior to his zeal. For he used first to seek to win Offenders by good Counsel, and gentle Admonitions, before he would use the severity of the Law against them; and he had a special care to let men see that his heat was not against their Persons but against their Vices: And such was Gods pre∣sence His Zeal. with him, such the Authority and Majesty which shone in his carriage, that al∣though he was forced to punish many for their misdemeanours, yet none had power so much as to lift up an hand against him. One instance is remarkable. A certain Rustian being punished by him, for some gross misdemeanours, vowed that the next time he met him he would stab him, and being put into the stocks, his rage was such, that not being able to have his Will upon Mr. Row, he struck at the stones with his Knife for very madness: Yet afterwards when he met Mr. Row, and might Special Provi∣dence. have had opportunity to revenge himself upon him, yet the Lord so overpowred him that he was as a man struck dumb, and had not a word to say. Many of his Friends that knew his abilities, often solicited him to take the Office of a Justice of a Peace, but such was his humility and modesty, that he would by no means yield to it, saying he had neither Abilities, nor an Estate fit for it, and that it was a way Humility. to make Authority contemptible when Inferior persons were put into such Places. He was very circumspect to cut off all occasions of Offence from such as would be ready to take it. Being used in his younger days to shoot in the long Bow for his Recreation, once meeting with an Offender against the Law, he rebuked him for it. The man an∣swered, Why may I not as well do this as you shoot with a Bow? Upon this he laid it aside His Prudence. and would never shoot afterwards. He was of a very peaceable temper: He would never soment differences, but sought all he could to compose them. If any jarring was between him and any others, the fault was usually theirs, because he could not comply with their corruptions, but sought their Reformation. He was a great Peace-maker, and spent much of his time in A Peace-maker. composing differences among neighbours and friends: Many Law Suits he prevented; many differences between near Relations he reconciled; and the Lord so blessed these his endeavours, that he was seldom free from such imployments. Upon an occasion he said to a Relation of his, that he might have encreased his Estate much more, had he spent that time in prosecuting his own affairs which he spent in the businesses, of other men. He made made other mens occasions and conditions his own; he deeply Sympathized with their distresses, and in his Prayes he would as affectionately Pray for them as for himself: And when he had undertaken their businesses, he would Act as vigorously in their behalf as if it were his own concerns, though he neither sought nor reaped any advantage to himself by it. He was Forty years old e're he attained that great blessing of Assurance; But having once obtained it he never lost it; so that he enjoyed the comfort of it for above Thirty Assurance. years: And as himself said, he maintained it by a diligent and constant use of all the means of Grace, both publick and private, and by taking an account of his heart, at least once every day. And that at sometimes he had more special Experience of the Witness and Testimony of the Spirit, together with that of his own; concerning which himself thus expresses it in a Letter to a Friend: In answer to your desire to receive a few of my thoughts and experiences concerning the Witness, or Testimony of the Spirit in Assurance; I do acknowledg (to the glory of God) that God hath given me some Experience of his Love (and at sometimes more than at other times) in the Testimony of his Spi∣rit bearing Witness with my Spirit concerning mine Adoption, and so consequently of my Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life. But this is better felt than expressed; yet in some measure (as the Lord shall enable me) I will endeavour to answer your de∣sire herein. First, that there is such a priviledg given to some of Gods Elect on Earth, as to have Gods Spirit to bear Witness with their Spirits that they are the Children of God, appeareth, Rom. 8. 16.
Again, that this Testimony is given to Believers after that they are effectually call∣ed to Grace, appeareth, Eph. 1. 13. by which they are assured of the Grace of God: But that every one that is effectually called to Grace hath this Testimony presently given, I dare not affirm; but do rather think that some may wait a longer time than others before they do receive it. For mine own part I believe that I was effectually called divers years before the Lord gave me this Assurance. Again, the truth of the Testimony of this holy Spirit in mine own Soul, I have di∣scerned from false flashes, and unsound comforts by this, that this Testimony doth al∣wayes when it comes, raise the Soul to more desires after more intimate Union and Communion with God: Works more Self-abhorrency, and more to please God, and fear to displease him, and (in a word) drives me nearer unto God, whereas false flashes leave the Soul loose. Again, for the continuance of this blessed Testimony in the Soul, I do find that an holy, humble, constant waiting on God and Communion with him in his Ordinances, joyned with a constant care and endeavour to walk with God, in uprightness in all the duties of my particular Calling, and Relations, are blessed means to keep up and encrease this Assurance: But the neglect, or remiss usage of these doth diminish the Oil of this blessed Lamp, and unsanctified Liberty so far grives the holy Spirit as to suspend his Testimony for a time. Another asking him about the Testimony of the Spirit, he answered, It is a secret o∣verpowering, that I am his and he is mine: I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine. He observed that the likeliest means to attain Assurance was, to propound Spiritual ends to our selves in desiring of it; not so much that we might be quiet and free from trouble in our Consciences, but that by the knowledg and apprehension of Gods love to us, we might be able to give to God the glory of his own Grace, and be carried out to higher pitches in our obedience. For (said he) there may be much selfishness in seeking peace. I find it best when I am come to the greatest heights of Peace, to study my duty; what it is that God would have me to do, and to follow him therein: Otherwise I meet with a Cloud. In his accounts which he made up every day, the method that he used in his Medita∣tion, Meditation. was to consider what God had done for him, and what his carriage had been to∣wards God; And he said, when he consider'd what Gods carriage towards him had been, there he saw that God had been doing him good in a constant tenor: But when he re∣flected upon himself, there he saw many failings: whereupon he said, there was no A∣ction done by him that was ever so good, but there was some circumstance or other that he saw himself imperfect and defective in: And he said, I have accounted it a great pitch, when the Lord hath shewed me some defects in my best Actions that I may go clean out of my self unto Jesus Christ: By this constant practice of his in reviewing his Life and Actions, he kept much inward peace of Conscience: And usually, at the close of the day, after the casting up of his accounts and fervent Prayer, the Lord made it out out to him, that all was pardoned: And by this means at the last he attained to as an habitual a perswasion of the love of God as most have attained unto, so that he walked in the light of Gods coun∣tenance from day to day. Much of his Prayers were, that his faith might be so strengthened as to see and behold the love of God in all the passages of his Life, that (with Abraham) he might give the Lord glory by believing. He was very jealous of losing this blessed priviledge, namely, the sense that he had of the love of God and the light of his countenance that he walked in. He said, they were two things that he mainly desired of God: First, that having been a Professor of Religion so long, he might be kept frame scandalous sins. Secondly, That God would not hide his face from him; Saying, that he was a man of a low Spirit, and that with∣out Gods presence he could not subsist. And therefore (said he) I saw it necessary to be kept under Affliction, that I might be humble. Knowing that God would not reveal himself to proud persons. Besides this habitual Peace and assurance, he had many particular comforts from the Lord at several times, and upon several occasions; usually when he laid him down His Comforts. to rest at night, he had the promise Sealed to him; Fear not—I am thy shield, and thy exceeding Great Reward. When he had been begging such a pitch of Holiness, the Lord hath hinted to him, I will satisfie thee: When the Lord took away his first Wife, whereupon he was troubled how to dispose of his Children, the Lord comforted him with this: They are thine but for a time, but they are mine for ever. Having been exer∣cised
with a sit of the Stone, he wrote thus to a friend: These are to let you know how Fatherly the Lord dealeth with us: Tho afflicted, yet not forsaken. That which sweetens all my Afflictions is, the inward Peace which the Lord is pleased to give me in all my out∣ward pain. When he was in any special strait or difficulty, and needed Counsel what to do, the Lord did always, first or last (after his earnest seeking to him) make his way plain unto him. The Lord did also many times give him secret hints what he was about to do, Discoveries of future events to him. which also came to pass according to these Scriptures, Psal. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: Gen. 18. 17. Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do? When any great thing was approaching Relating to himself, his family, or the Church, he had usually some intimations from God before-hand concerning it. On a time he was observed to be very sad, saying that God intimated to him that he would make some change in his Family, but what it would be he knew not; and he made this use of it, to set his House in order; and not long after the Lord took away a near Relation, which proved a great affliction to him. And tho the Lord did many extraordinary things, and such as were not usual or common, yet did he not expect them, neither did he (as Luther speaks of himself) indent with the Lord that he should give them unto him, much less would he boast of things of this (whereof he had many) unto others. He was content with the plain, naked word of God, which he magnified, and all his study and delight lay therein: And tho he met with ma∣ny extraordinary things in his own experience, yet spake he of them seldom, and but to a few; which (he said) he did, partly to prevent Spiritual pride, and partly lest weaker Christians should be discouraged, who had not attained to what the Lord had done for him; and partly that such as never knew what belonged to such things might not make a Scoff at them when they heard them. He was much in Prayer, and had a singular ability in Meditation, and this made him a wise Man, and a wise Christian, He would seldome answer any serious mat∣ter, Meditation. but he would first pause a while. He was much delighted in a saying of Dr. Prest∣ons, That the Greatest Musers are the best Artists. He was so much taken up in Medita∣tion, that he found himself much spent by it, and would say, That Meditation was a spending thing. Sometimes in a Morning before he rose, he would be Meditating an hour or two together: When he was riding, or walking abroad (if he was alone) he would still be in Meditation. When he went about his worldly affairs, he would contrive them before hand, and spend what spare time he had in Heavenly contem∣plation: He seldom prayed in secret, but would fit himself for it by Meditation; Say∣ing, he preferred a short Prayer after long Meditation, before a long Prayer without Meditation: When ever he heard a Sermon, he spent a considerable time in Meditat∣ing upon what he had heard. He used to say, That if he were in a place wherein he might have opportunity of hearing more than two Sermons a day, he should not like it so well to hear much, unless he could have liberty to digest it by Meditation. In Meditating upon the things he heard, he would diligently look into all the Texts that were quoted; often speaking of that famous Instance of the Bereans, of whom the Holy Ghost testifies, that they were more Noble than those of Thessalonica, because they searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so. This Meditation helped him greatly, insomuch that by a diligent inquity into the Scriptures, and musing upon what he had heard, he was sometimes carried much farther than what the Minister had touched upon: And when he came to repeat those Sermons in his Family (as his constant Practice was) having Medi∣tated upon them before-hand, he would clear up those passages as had most diffi∣culty in them, or that had been delivered more darkly. And if the Preacher was of meaner parts and gifts, and what he had delivered might not seem so useful, he would so explain, and illustrate what he heard, that the Sermon was always ren∣dred profitable in his Repetition of it. After his Repetition on the Lords days, he used to call his Children and Servants to an account of what they had learned of that which had been taught; If any had been careless, he would admonish and reprove them for their negligence, and shew them the danger they were in, by reason of their unprofitableness under the means of Grace: Such as were apt and forward to remember, he would commend and encourage them, often mentioning that Speech of our Saviour, To him that hath, shall more be given; But from him that hath not, shall be taken away even that which he hath. And,
tho where there was occasion, he would speak with great Authority, yet when he came to discourse with his Children and Servants about these things, he would speak with much familiarity and condescention to the meanest of their capacities, thereby insinu∣ating himself into their affections, begetting a Love in them to the word, and taking opportunity thereby to make things more plain and easy to their understandings. He was much and frequent in Prayer: He often prayed with his Wife alone; And Frequent in Prayer. when any great occasion fell out in the Day, he would retire into his Closet to ask Counsel, and a Blessing from the Lord. Every Month he kept a private Fast by him∣self, (besides what he did upon emergent occasions) to seek the Lord, and the better to prepare himself for the Lords Supper, at which time also he had much upon his heart the concernments of the Church; when ever any affliction befel him, or any in his Family, or of his Relations, his constant course was, to seek the Lord in an extraordinary way. And if there were any great business that he was to undertake, or any great strait wherein he needed divine Counsel, or Protection, he still set time apart in a more than ordinary manner, unto which he used to have some gracious return or other. And besides his set times of Prayer, he was frequent in holy Ejaculations, which proceeded from the Spiritual frame of his heart; he was very punctual in keeping his times and seasons for Prayer, Reading, and Meditation. Tho his worldly bu∣siness were sometimes very urgent, yet was he always very loth to abridge himself in his wonted course for holy exercises, and if at any time he was abridged of his full time, he would redeem the next opportunity, to regain what time he had lost. He used to say, that when he did hasten over holy duties out of an eager desire to follow his worldly business, he did many time meet with a cross in them, but when he did spend his ordinary time, God did make his other Business to prosper the better; or if not, his mind was brought to submit to the Will of God. In all his Prayers, whether alone or with others, his heart was greatly affected and A holy heart. carried out with much holy Zeal and fervency. In his old age his heart would of∣ten melt and be dissolved into Tears, and his affections seemed to be as vigorous as the affections of young converts; when he joyned with others in Holy duties he was far from remiss and careless carriage. His deportment was so Reverent, and mix∣ed with such affections that the Minister under whom he lived, would profess, that he found himself much quicked by observing his lively affections: If at any time he found a deadness coming upon him, it grieved him more than any outward afflicti∣on. In a Letter wherein he had spoken of a bodily distemper, he adds this; That which troubles me now is the distemper of my Spirit; because I find my self less lively in holy thing, and more unactive than formerly: Yesterday (blessed be God) I found some re∣viving. If he awoke in a Morning before his ordinary time, yet he would get up; and his manner was to spend some time in Meditation, for the most part about the great work of our Redemption, and on the Eternal Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus which he offered up to his Father for the taking away of his peoples sins: And he used to Counsel his Children, every morning to take a turn at the Cross of Christ, and to think of his Sufferings, which (said he) will be a means to make you love Christ the more. As he dressed himself in a morning, he would drop some holy Instructions or other a∣mong those that were about him; and when he was ready, his first work was to retire into his Closet, where he spent a considerable time in Reading, Meditation, and Prayer. Every morning he read some part of the Scriptures, with some Commentary upon the same, especially with Calvins Exposition, which he much delighted in for the Spirituality, and solidness thereof. Having ended his private Devotions, he used to call his Family together, to whom he Communicated what he had learned by his own Meditation, and by what he had His Exercise in the morning. learned from the Authors which he read: And whatsoever his worldly business were, he would rarely omit this excercise in his Family. And such was his modesty and humility in mannaging this business, that he would tell them, that he would not take upon him to interpret the Scripture, but only would communicate to them what he had learned from Judicious Divines. By this constant course of Reading and Me∣ditation he became expert and mighty in the Scriptures, so that in his Family duties, he would open the Scriptures with much clearness of Judgment, the Lord enduing him
with a more than ordinary ability to make things plain and familiar to the meanest capacity: And when he came to apply things to those of his own Family, he would carefully consider every ones condition, and those whom he feared to be still in the State of nature, he would lay open to them the danger of their present condition, and what a sad thing it was for them to remain out of Christ; And whatever the matter was that he had been speaking of, his Exhortation still was, to press them to look after Christ, in whom the Father had laid up all Grace, and from whom they must expect to receive all Grace; And his exhortations were set on with great Au∣thority: And there was so great a presence of God with him, that many (besides his own Family) who occasionally came to his House, and heard him, will have cause to Bless God for him to all Eternity. Having spent a quarter of on hour or little more in these exhortations, he would close up the duties with Prayer, wherein he would not be long: but his Prayer was so substantial, that he would comprehend the whole of Religion in a short Prayer. His Prayer seemed to be nothing but a digested Meditation acted by the Spirit of God; every passage in it had its weight, and not one Sentence could well be spared. Tho he varied in his Form, yet the substance and materials of his Prayers were for the most part the same, yet still he took in the other necessities of his Family, as the va∣rious Providences of God gave occasion. The main scope at which his Prayers were levelled, was the glory of God; he was still carried above himself to eye and aime at that, and still he would thus be expressing it; Lord glorifie thy self in our Salvati∣on: Glorifie thy self in bestowing this or that Grace upon us. The matter of his Prayer was still commensurate to the word; what the word required of us as a duty, either in our general or particular Callings, or in Relation to the various Providences of God, that was still the matter of his Prayers; he was most eminent in this, for hav∣ing a very large and comprehensive Charity, he would still take in the concernment of the Church Catholick, and would constantly pray for all that Election where ever they were. In the Evening, before Supper, if he could get liberty, he spend would some time in His Evening Exercise. Reading the works of some Eminent Divine; and he took most delight in Dr. Prest∣ons Books, wherein he was so conversant that most of the choifest passages in his Writings, became very familiar with him. Then he betook himself to his constant course of Prayer and Meditation. After Supper he caused his Children, and the young Scholars that were in his House (which for many years was never empty of such, who were sent to the Grammer School, and by their Parents were placed in his Family, to enjoy the be∣nefit of his Instructions and holy Example,) each of them to Read a Chapter; which being done, he would call together his whole Family, and would spend the rest of the Even∣ing in Catechising, or in repeating some Sermon that had been Preached in the week day. When the Sabbath was approaching, he would endeavour so to order his affairs, that he might dispatch his worldly business in due season, and so have the more li∣berty Sabbath pre∣pared. in the Evening to set his heart in order for the the duties of the Lords Day; when it was come he would spend most of the Morning in secret Prayer and Medita∣tion, and he used to be shorter in his Family duties on that day than on others, that so they might not be hindred from attending upon the Publick Ordinances. And his care was to be there at the Beginning; and he used to say, that it was fitter for them How spent. to wait for the Minister, than that the Minister should wait for them; And he would often mention the example and Speech of Cornelius (Act. 10. 33.) We are all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God: The Morning Ser∣mon being ended, he would spend the little time he had before Dinner in looking o∣ver his Notes, and in Meditating upon what he had heard. Dinner being ended, he used to repeat the Sermon to his Family, and so hasten to the Congregation. After the Sermon he used to spend a considerable time in secret, and the rest of the Evening was spent in Repetition of the Sermon, and in calling his Family to an account of the things which they had learned. He highly esteemed and Reverenced Godly Ministers, tho they were very mean and of low parts and gifts he would shew much respect to them; And according to his His high e∣steem of Godly Ministers. own practice, he would often exhort his Children, and those about him to have an high esteem of the Gospel Ministry, often pressing upon them those words of our Saviour Christ, He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, dispiseth me, and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. He would mind them also of what Saint Paul said, that Faith came by hearing, and hearing of the word of God.
He would often tell them, that God could, if he so pleased, speak unto them himself; but choosing to condescend to our infirmities, he rather speaks to us by men like our selves: He could have spoken to Cornelius himself, or have caused the Angel to Preach to him; but he bids him to send for Peter, who should tell him what to do. He could not endure that any should account our Ministry Anti-Christian, but upon all occa∣sions would vindicate them against all opposers, and would say, That unless we firmly be∣lieve the Ministry to be the appointment of Jesus Christ, we cannot so profit by it as we ought to do. He would say that it was lawful for us to covet the best gifts, if we might enjoy them, but we must not despise the meanest. He said, When you come to the Ordinance, the bu∣siness is between God and you, and whether the Instrument be of meaner or greater Parts, yet this is the Portion that God allots you. And he said, That there was not the weakest Ser∣mon that ever he heard, but the Lord did him good by it. When I meet with a Sermon that doth not like me, I first look into my self to see if there was nothing amiss there; And if there were no fault there, I would then scan it over again. For we many times blame the Mini∣ster, when as the fault is our own, that we have not prayed for him as we should have done. His love to the word was such, that tho there were two Ministers in the place where he lived, and a weakly Lecture, yet even in his old age he would ride six or seven Miles to enjoy the benefit of a weekly Lecture at Exeter. His desires were much carried out for the Conversion of Souls. He seldome pray∣ed Conversion of Souls desired. but he would pray with great affection for all in his Family, and for all others that belonged to Gods Election, that were yet uncalled: And in his Family exercises he would still be speaking somewhat that might make them see their need of Christ; and that which he pressed most was, that they would labour to get into Christ, and to make sure of Christ. He was full of bowels of compassion to those that were under Temptations, and di∣stress Compassion to the Tempted. of Conscience, several of which did resort to him, and some did abide in his Fa∣mily for a season, the better to enjoy the benefit of his Counsel and Prayers; and God was pleased so to bless his endeavours, that they went away with peace and satisfacti∣on. Himself also was not without his Temptations, tho his assurance remained unsha∣ken. Temptations. Once indeed in sickness, he was strongly assaulted by Satan, who suggested to him that he was an Hypocrite, and that all he had done was in hypocrisie; But the Lord put it into his heart to answer, Be it so, yet now I will cast my self upon the grace of God in Christ, and hereupon the Temptation immediatly vanished. And he was not without other Temptations, especially unto Infidelity. A day or two before his death he complained to a near Relation, that he had been troubled with grievous Temptati∣ons, as to question whether there were such an one as Christ, and whether there had been such Actions done by him as are Recorded? But the Morning after, these words were dropped into him: I was Crucified for thee: I shed my Blood for thee. This melted his heart exceedingly, that when his Temptation was of so grievous a Nature, yet the Lord should so condescend to him, that he could not speak without Tears. He had had also several other conflicts, so that he once brake out into this ex∣pression: O it is hard keeping up till we come to Heaven: It is hard fighting: And again; Before we receive our Crown, we must strive and finish our course: Temptations will arise. His benefit by Afflictions. But blessed is the man that endures Temptation; For when he is tryed he shall receive the Crown of Life. He said, that he had been Ten years striving against one corruption, and at last the Lord brake the neck of it: As also, I have been striving against the heighth of my Spirit these forty years. And as he had his inward conflicts so he was seldome without some outward Tryal and Afflictions. He said, it was one of his exercises e∣very Morning, to expect what God might try him with in the Day, either by Af∣flictions or Temptations: Adding, I thought I had undergone many Tryals, so that now I might hope to be quiet, but still the Lord provides some new ones. And in a Letter to a near Relation, he said; That his life was made up of mixtures of encouragements and difficulties: And, I do think it may be much conducing to the glory of God, and to our Advantage, if we still expect such mixtures, knowing that we are thereunto appointed, and that so we may in every days success intreat the Lord for Grace suitable to our infirmi∣ties and necessities; whereas, if we should limit the Almighty to have our Wills satisfied, we may displease him and create crosses to our selves: And as he was seldome without some
affliction or other, so they were of singular use to him. He said, whenever I was out of the way, the Lord shewed me clearly that I was so, and that this or that was not right, and this he did usually by Afflictions. He sayd, He never had any Chastisement in all his Life, but the Lord had shewed him some miscarriage by it. His afflictions made him pray much; and that was his constant course when any Tryal befel him, to set time apart to seek the Lord in an extraordinary manner: And in all his afflictions, his great request to the Lord was: That he might be made par∣taker of his holiness thereby. When his Family was visited with the smal ox, he was mightily stirred up to pray, that this Visitation might end in the Reformation of it, and that they might set to the work of God with all their might: And this was usually the fruit of all his Afflictions, to make him more active in the ways of God. When one of his Relations had been sick, he wrote thus unto him: Truly I per∣ceive the Lords mind is to wean us from the world, and from Self: Now the Lord ac∣complish the good pleasure of his Will in us to the utmost, that we may cleave unto him whol∣ly and fully, by the wisdom and strength of the Lord Jesus in us: Be not dismayed at your Afflictions; the Lord will turn them to Good. A few years before his Death, the Lord tryed him by suffering his house to be on Fire, upon a Saturday-night about A special Pro∣vidence. ten a clock, most of the Family being in Bed, and himself asleep: Being awakened by some that first descried the danger, and called upon to arise for his safety, the first thought that God put into his mind was, that God in Judgment would remember Mer∣cy; And God in mercy answered his Prayer: For only his Out-houses were burnt, and his Dwelling-house was preserved, which yet joyned to the other. Yet the Pro∣vidence of God was wonderfully seen in its preservation, and his Friends, Neigh∣bours, and the Poor of the Town came in to his assistance, and tho all his Goods were carried out, and there were many necessitous people, who might have convey∣ed away several things, yet such was their Love and Respect to him, and the ex∣perience they had of his Charity, and readiness to do them good, that he lost not any thing, but all his goods that were carried forth, were preserved intire, without the loss of any one thing. And that which added much to the Mercy, was, that the Fire was so soon quenched, and his Goods set so soon in order by the help of his Friends, that he had liberty to attend upon the Ordinances the next day, and to Sanctifie the Sabbath according to his wonted manner. This affliction he attributed to his not putting away an evil Servant (whom he had Afflictions sanctified. often admonished, and yet he was not reformed) tho he oft had thoughts of putting him away, but being slack in doing it, he thought that this was the reason why the Lord so corrected him. When at an other time the Lord had made some breach upon his Estate, he said, The Lord had hereby shewed him, that if he leaned too much upon these things, God would take them all away. Also speaking about afflictions in ge∣neral, he said, For mine own part I do acknowledge to the glory of God, that our only wise God and heavenly Father hath taken the best course with me. O how lazy had I been and worldly, if the Lord had not hedged up my way: But blessed be God who will not suffer me to live after the Flesh. He was very sensible of the least Mercy, and a curious observer of every Provi∣dence. Mercies sancti∣fied. When at another time his House had been in danger of burning, writing to a near Relation, he thus expressed himself. The Lord make us really Thankful, and teach us what to render for all Mercies and deliverances; Especially for that great deliverance from wrath to come; and for the hope of Eternal Life, which God, who cannot lye, hath pro∣mised. He was very curious in observing the least check or rebuke from Providence in every thing that befel him. And upon the least cross, he would presently hum∣ble himself before the Lord, and pray that he might understand his meaning in it. His great design was, that he might glorifie God in his whole Conversation; He studiously watched all opportunities for that end: And his great Prayer was, that Gods Glory sought. werever he came, he might either do or receive good: And prayed, that we might not only Glorifie God, but that we might do it intentionally. He did not speak of the things of God customarily, or because others spake of them; but if opportunity were not offered, he would seek it, and fasten some good discourse upon those with whom he conversed. The Minister that Preached at his Funeral had this passage: The Ge∣neral bent (sayd he) and biass of his Spirit was towards God, and towards his Name;
The very quintessence of his Spirit carried him that way, and that intensively and constantly: I could never observe in him that he intended any thing more, or minded any thing so much as the Glory of God. Did you converse with him about Worldly affairs, he would reduce you by little and little, to some Heavenly discourse: There would all the Lines of his Cir∣cumference Center. His humility and Modesty was such, that if any godly Ministers were present, or o∣thers Humility and Modesty. whom he took to be his superiours, he would wait to see whether they would speak any thing for Edification; if they were silent or more slack, he would endea∣vour to engage them in good discourse, or else, before they parted would set in on foot himself: He used to be troubled if he was long in any Company, and nothing was spo∣ken to Edification. When he spoke of the things of God, he did it with much Autho∣rity: The weight of the things he spake of, was much upon his Spirit, and he had his heart wholly taken up with them. Religion and the things of God were become na∣tural unto him: and look what vehemency of Spirit others had in prosecution of their worldly affairs, the same did he manifest in the things of God; and as himself was affected with them, so did he for the most part affect others. When he either Coun∣selled, or Reproved any, he would choose, as much as might be, to do it in Scrip∣ture Language, that so (as he spake) they might rather hear God speaking, than His Prudence. hear him speaking, and so consequently, what was spoken might carry the more Authority with it. In his reproofs he would use great wisdom and compassion, and he so ordered his reproofs, that it might appear, that he only aimed at their Reformation, and the good of their Souls. And he greatly loved such as would faith∣fully reprove him for what was amiss. He often sayd, that he had never met with but one in all his life, that would be so faithful a Friend to him, as to tell him of what he apprehended to be amiss in him, and he loved him the better for it all the days of his Life. He was very eminent for his Heavenly-mindedness, and his Heavenly Affections. Heavenly-min∣dedness. He constantly prayed, that our Conversation might be in Heaven, whilst our Habi∣tation was on Earth. And as he prayed so he lived: He sayd, Methinks that I look upon all things in this World, as Pictures of the things in the other World. And again; Sure∣ly if God shal be All in All hereafter, the less we have to do with the Creature here (more than needs must) the more like we are to that life. And again; I am ashamed very much sometimes that I should delight in the Creature so much, and delight in God no more. When some of his Children were coming to visit him, fearing, out of a Godly Jealousy, lest they might be too much transported with a meer natural, and carnal Joy, and not make that Heavenly and Spiritual improvement as they ought, he wrote thus unto them before their coming: When Moses and Elias appeared in Glory, at the Glorious Transfiguration of Christ in the Mount, the talk they had (as Saint Luke saith) was touching the decease of Christ, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem: And we (a∣mong other things) may thence also learn, that its an Heaven-like disposition, in the midst of all our Earthly enjoyments, to think and talk of our departure hence. And as I write this to you, so I speak of it here, that both you and we may mingle our meeting here on Earth, with such thoughts and discourses, as may mittigate the bitterness of any afflicting Providences, and may contain our Spirits in an even temper by the expectation of that uninterrupted and Eternal Joy that we hope one Day to enter into, when we shall meet, never more to be se∣parated. And in an other Letter he thus expressed himself: We have but an inch of time upon Earth, and then we enter into Eternity: O then let us pray continually, effectu∣ally, fervently, that our way may be right, and our hearts upright to the finishing all Gods Wills in Duty, according to our Relations in all well-pleasing. He had a very tender Conscience, sensible of the least slip and failing; and tho A tender Con∣science. none was known to be more Charitable unto others, and to make a more Charitable construction of what was done by others, yet none was ever more severe against him∣self, or more curious to espy the least sinful defect, or irregularity in himself. When he discerned the Ebullitions of Pride, Self-love, Covetousness, Infidelity, &c. When he saw the least mixture of carnal and self-ends in his good Actions: When he ob∣served how prone he was to be biassed by Man-fearing, and Man-pleasing, from his Duty; this was an inexpressible trouble to him, and he would bewaile these infirmi∣ties with more bitterness, than many are wont to do for their grosser Sins. If he had at any time unawares, and on a sudden spoken a word which he judged un∣comly, and unsuitable to the gravity which he conceived became a Christian, he
would bewail it greatly, and could not be at rest in himself till he had desired those whom he supposed might take offence, to pass it by. He was often complain∣ing of his Infirmities, and he rarely spake of his Comforts or Spiritual Joyes, but oft of what he found amiss in himself, and many things which are much slighted by others, were curiously observed by him. In a Letter he thus expresses himself, My unthankfulness (besides mine other sinful Infirmities) grieveth me sore, and I am jealous of my self, lest the fear of the Lord doth trouble me more than grief for sin. And Again: I have found and do find a great difficulty (as in other things) so in this of health, to keep that narrow way of the Lord, for I find by woful experience that I am often slipping out, either too much indulgence, or too much severity, which may rather be termed cruelty: The Lord make us wise to avoid both these extreams. His great care was to keep himself, not only from such things as were in themselves sinful and unlawful; But to abstain from all appearance of evil, and to cut off occa∣sions of offence from such as might seek them, or to be apt to take offence. He sayd, he had found by many years experience that the great difficulty that lay upon Saints, was, in the use of things lawful and indifferent: Saying, that he had been often o∣vertaken unawares this way, sometime by the leading aside of his own corrupt nature, which was ever willing to take the largest size, and sometime, by the mistaking of others who had misapprehended his intentions, and made an evil construction of his Actions; Yet God hereby made him more wise and circumspect. And hereupon he would advise to forbear lawful Recreations at some times and in some place, rather than by the use of our Christian Liberty, occasion the censures of any that are loose and large walking, tho unjustly raised. He was eminent in Resigning himself, and all he had to the Will of God. It was His Prudence. his constant practice to pray his Will into an one-ness with the Will of God. He observed that it was very incident to our natures to desire to bring down Gods Will to ours, but it was much better to pray up our Wills into his. When any difficulty did occur, and his natural affections, and inclination would have carried him such a way, his first work was, not to pray so much that he might obtain that which na∣ture would desire; but that his Will might be brought up to the Will of God, and that his Spirit migh be brought to an Holy indifferency, and the Lord eminently an∣swered him herein. Whereupon, before the issue of Providence was discovered, his Will was usually brought up to the Will of God, and in several great Cases and emergencies in his Life, wherein he was much concerned, he hath sayd. Touching the issue, and success of such a business, I have received power (through Grace) to acquiesce in the Will of God, when it is manifested. He made it also his endeavour to resign all he had to the Lords wise disposal. Having heard of the welfare of some of his Children, he thus ex∣pressed himself, and now what thanks can I render unto God for you all? Only I desire to give all up to God, that hath given you to me for a time. His advice also to his Children was to follow his Example herein, and to give up their nearest comforts to God dayly. He much desired to be Spiritual in all he did, and that Grace, and not Nature, or fleshly wisdom might sway him in every thing. When a near Relation asked his Counsel in a business of concernment, before he would give his advise, he sayd: O that I might be wholly Spiritual; that no carnal respects might blind mine eyes? Wherever he was engaged in any difficulty, or was to mannage any business of great concern∣ment, as to the issue of it, his first care was to mind his duty, and to study which way Grace would teach him to act, and his great care was, that grace might have the principal sway in all his actions. He used to say, That duty was ours, but the issues and success of things belonged unto God. We should go study what our duty is, and then leave the issues and successes unto God. One that had desired his advice in a business of importance and great difficulty, he wrote back thus unto him: This one thing let us with incessant importunity crave of the Lord, that in this, as in all other things, he would teach us the way wherein we should go, and that we may walk with God, and follow him fully in the Integrity of our hearts, and then leave the success on his care, who is the only wise and Almighty, and our Father. He advised that in all cases of Conscience we should seek resolution from the Word; and that in difficult cases we should ask Counsel of some able, faithful Minister. For His advice in difficult cases. (said he) The Priests Lips must preserve knowledge, and we were to enquire the Law at his Mouth: And God hath appointed Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of Saints. And
concerning Ministers advice, he would say: That which they speak out of the Pulpit is to be perferred before that which they speak occasionally, and in a more private way of discourse: For it is to be supposed that they have consulted much with God, and have studied, and prayed hard for that which they deliver in publick and therefore more authority is to be given unto it, than to any occasional, or suddain Counsel. His desire was to be always in the exercise of grace, and to mind and attend pre∣sent duty. He was much pleased with the saying of a Godly Minister: That a Christi∣an His exercise of Grace. ought to be always in duty: And according to this, he made it his great study to con∣sider what it was that God called him unto for the present, and what the present duty was that God put him upon. When he went to visit any one, he would consider what his Call was to go, and what opportunity he might have to do or receive good: And he much bewailed needless and Complemental visits, as things that did eat up, and consume much pretious time. When he used any bodily Recreation, he would do it as Duty, saying, That it was the Will of God that we should endeavour the preservation of health: And when he followed his Earthly affairs, he would do it as Duty, saying, That it was the Will of God that we should honour him in a particular Calling. And his great care was to make this particular Calling subservient to his General Calling: And his great endeavour was, so to order his Earthly affair, that they might not justle out the duties of Religion, nor himself to be abridged by them of convenient time for the more immediate service of God. By these means Religion was become so Spiritually natural to him, that he seemed wholly to be turned into it: Whatever he did and spake, for the most part, did not Religion be∣came natural to him. only favour of Grace, but it seemed to be wholly guided and acted by Grace: Not but that he had the remnants of the body of Death, which he bitterly complain∣ed of, but Grace had so great a sway and command in him, that there was little else but Grace that appeared unto others. He hath sayd, that when he was Carnal, he could have wished many of the Com∣mandments razed out of the Bible, but now he found his heart in some measure made suitable to the Law. He never thought his heart to be in a right temper, but when he could delight in the ways of God, and he used frequently to mention that Text: Blessed is the Man that feareth the Lord, and delighteth greatly in his Commandments. He took such delight in the ways of God, and found so much satisfaction in them, that he spake thus with much seriousness: If I were sure, that as dies the Beast, so dies the Man; yet would I not chuse to be otherwise than I am. One of his most eminent Graces was his faith and living upon Christ, which was the true Root from whence his other great attainments in Christianity did arise. It His living by Faith on Christ. was the great work of his Life to go wholly out of himself, and to live wholly upon Christ for all. These were some of his frequent expressions in Prayer: Take us wholly out of self, and let our whole dependance be upon Christ Make us one Spirit with Christ, and let us be acted by his Spirit, that so we may not live so much as Christ may live in us. It hath pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness dwell: Out of his fulness let us receive grace for grace. Thou hast appointed him to be Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, even all in all to thy People: Lord make him so to us. This was his constant and most familiar kind of Language, and as the bent of his Spirit lay most this way, so he counted it his greatest perfection. To some that high∣ly esteemed him for his great measure of holiness, he sayd: The highest thing that I have attained to, is to go quite and clean out of my self, and to role my self wholly upon the grace of God in Christ. Herein he imitated the holy Apostle Saint Paul, who, after the greatest measure of holiness that he had attained, yet was it his great desire to be found in Christ. This Holy Man was so curious in this point, of living intirely upon Christ, as that he never suspected himself more, or thought worse of himself, than when he found a secret inclination to look to somwhat in himself, and could not find himself so clearly brought off to acts of Self-denial: Whereupon he sayd: I have been apt to question my condition much, of late, because when I have found things amiss in me, and have found out any Salve, I would be quiet, and did not deny my self fully to rest on the grace of God in Christ. He often exhorted his Children that they should labour to deny themselves more and more, and study Christ, and learn him more and more: He was scarce ever known to give any holy Exhortations (in which he was most frequent and abun∣dant) but still he would be sure in the close to advise them to look to Christ for all Grace; and whatsoever duty he exhorted them to, he would still put them in mind
that the Grace and strength by which they were to perform this, was to be expect∣ed from Christ alone. He was as eminent for living by Faith on the Promisses as on the person of His Faith on the promises. Christ, resting upon the Lord in all his straits. When he could but take Sanctuary in some promise, and find out some word of God for his Faith to rest upon, he thought himself safe: He delighted to speak of that passage of Abraham, that Abraham gave glory to God by believing: He thought that the highest way of honouring God was to trust him upon his naked word and promise. Indeed he was often assaulted with Temptations of Infidelity, but these did but quicken him to pray more fervently, and in the conclusion, by these shakings his Faith got the deeper Root. The chief stream of his Prayers in his Elder years ran this way, that he might not stagger at the promise through unbelief: That he might be established in the Faith; and that his Faith might not fail; And the Lord answered him herein: For his Faith held out in its strength to the very last. Whenever he was in any strait or difficulty, and knew not which way to turn, the Lord did so bear up his heart by believing, that he would make out his way at last, and provide for his comfort some way or other. Speaking to a near Relation, of some touches of the Stone, and other infirmities that he laboured under, he added: But the Lord supports me; in whom I trust also that he will support me. Telling his Friends that he endeavoured to answer their request in praying for them, he sayd, that he did in∣deed pray for them daily, but it was with much weakness and infirmity; yet (sayd he) our trust is of acceptance in the Lord Jesus Christ, who sits at the right hand of the Father, and makes request for us. That which was the Crown of all his Graces was his great Humility. As his Gra∣ces His great humility. and experiences were extraordinary, so he had more than an ordinary measure of Humility. He frequently used that expression of Saint Paul, that he was the great∣est of sinners. There was no corruption that he set himself more against than Spi∣ritual Pride. He would often mention that of the Apostle Saint Peter; God resists the Proud, but giveth grace to the humble. Whenever he begged any other Grace of God, he still begged Humility, as that which must prepare him, and make him capable of receiving that Grace. He used thus to express himself: Empty us of self, that we may be full with thy fulness: That we may receive more grace, make us more humble. He used also to warn and admonish others to beware of Spiritual Pride: Watch (sayd he) against that Stratagem of Satan, wherewith he usually assaulteth Souls in the Growth of Spiritual Gifts, which is, to puff them up with Pride. He also would speak thus: As he sayd, Fight not against small or great, but only a∣gainst the King of Israel; So say I, above all, fight against self, and Pride. Writing to a near Relation, he sayd: Truly I find in every Days success the Ebullition of that re∣mainder of pride in me, and I rejoyce at your sensibility of it, and I have you in remembrance as to this very thing, I think I may say, dayly. Tho he was most sensible of the stiring of Pride in himself, yet by his long and daily praying and striving against it, he got so great a Victory over it, that others who beheld him, never saw greater demonstrati∣ons of Humility in any than in him. He was never known to boast of his own Excellencies, but he would often speak of his Infirmities, that so (as he used to say) God might have the more Glory, and himself shame. When he spake of God or in the cause of God, he would speak with great Authority, as ever any one of so private a capacity used to do: But when he spake of any thing relating to himself, he would still abase himself, and manifest the greatest lowliness of mind and self-denial; and he liked not that others should think too highly of him. Writing to one whom he feared to esteem him too much, he sayd: Think of me no otherwise than you see me: Only I hope I have obtained mercy to be faithful. His great care was to put off all from himself and to attribute all to the free Grace Gods Glory sought. of God, as Saint Paul sayd: Not I, but the Grace of God in me. And when he was carried out to any special or eminent exercise of Grace, he would say. I have received Grace to do this or that duty, or to believe this or that particular Promise. It was his fre∣quent saying: Let us remember to expect all from him, and to ascribe all to him. When he heard of the Grace of God in others, he used much to rejoyce in it, and he was never known to envy the Gifts or Graces of others, but rejoyced exceedingly to hear of them, and blessed the Lord for them as for himself. He loved holiness for holiness sake,
and therefore when he saw it in any, he rejoyced in it as much as if it had been in him∣self. Hearing of the Grace of God bestowed upon some, he sayd: Blessed be the Lord for ever and ever. Who are we that we should be able to will any thing after this sort? The Lord keep it in the purpose of our hearts for ever, and prepare our hearts to him. The great thing which he begged of God for himself, and his near Relations was, that God would make use of him and them to be some way servicable to him whilst they live: And then sayd: One thing more I have begged of God, and shall beg, that both I, and you, and all that do receive the benefit, may look up, and give to God alone all the Glory. Herein lay the perfection of his grace, and wherein he came nearest to the Saints in heaven, that tho he desired to be most servicable, and to be carried forth in the high∣est way of exercising grace, yet when all was done, he desired not to be eyed, or look∣ed upon the more; but his great desire was, that all that was done, might be seen to be of God, and that God might be admired the more. Writing to a near Relation, he sayd: I pray that God will make use of my self and you in such a way, as that God alone may be seen, and we not taken notice of at all: That be may have the Glory, and we not be seen. He mightily rejoyced to see Religion honoured. When an old Christian, that had been a professor of Religion many years, died, and had held out in his Profes∣sion to the end, without any stain upon his Conversation, he seemed to be transport∣ed with an extraordinary joy, and could hardly speak of it without Tears. O, sayd he, such an one hath left no stain behind him. He was greatly affected with a sense of Gods dispensations towards the Land: If Fasting and Prayer. there were any signs of Gods displeasure, and Judgments from God seemed to be ap∣proaching, or if the Land lay under Judgments for the present, his course was to hum∣ble himself in a more than ordinary manner, and stirred up himself to pray with the more fervency. He used to say, that he looked above the Instruments, and second causes, and to transact all between God and him, and to consider what it was that God aimed at in every dispensation. In the time of our late troubles, he wrote to a near Relation thus: We had here with us as loud a Thunder as I ever heard. Our House Note. in which I was did shake: The Lightning also was extraordinary, such as I never saw in all my Life. I stood to see how it came forth at the breaking of the Clouds, and I saw (and so did many others with me) that out of the midst of the Lightning there came forth diverse times the likeness of fresh burning Coles of fire, so red and sparkling as any hot Iron can be when its heated to the uttermost in the Smiths Forge. These signs from Heaven, with the Sword drawn out upon Earth, do seem to speak aloud that our Provocations are very great. Joyn with us to intreat the Lord for Pardon and Reformation. Stir up your godly Friends to do the like: It may be the Lord will hear and spare, because he warns; or it may be such seekers may be hid, or marked out from the common destruction; Or if the outward Man pe∣rish, sure I am, that Soul shall find mercy that seeks the Lord in truth; He will in no wise cast out such a Soul. In an other Letter he wrote thus: At such a time fell abundance of Rain, and the waters were so high as have been seldome seen; many Mens Harvest is yet behind, and great loss likely to ensue: Our heavenly Father shakes now the Rod of Famine, as formerly of the Sword. O let us pray, that grace may turn all of us that are his, from our iniquities. In an other Letter speaking concerning the troubles and publick distractions that were in the Land, he thus expressed himself; Methink the voice of the Gospel, considered with the uncertainty of all things here below, doth seem to put us most seriously to resolve upon the set∣ting our affections upon things above; I hope it is our resolution with yours: But yet I think both you and we need more firmness in Resolution; else why should our wise, heavenly Father hold us at such uncertainties, if he did not see this to be best for us? In an other Letter, speaking of the publick troubles, he thus expressed himself: I believe that one end of our troubles may be to keep us up in a fervent frame of praying: That we may pray our selves more and more, into that heaven like Conversation; in wich the Antient Saints have been inabled to out-live their troubles; and so I trust shall we. He was a man of a sound Judgment and most stable in the Faith, insomuch that, His soundness in the Faith. tho he had been a professor of Religion for many years, and lived in such a time wherein so many opinions and errours sprang up, yet he never took up, much less was fond of any private, particular, or Novel opinion. But he always preferred the old Divinity, and liked that Doctrine best, which he knew to be held and maintained, by the generality of Godly, Sober, and Orthodox Divines. When he
perceived that any were led aside into unsound and corrupt principles, by Satans subtilty, and their own weak Judgment, he would pray with great compassion and tenderness for their reduction and recovery. Indeed herein he was very eminent; instead of censuring others or quarreling with them about their opinions, he did Conscientiously set himself to pray for them; and as he had opportunity, he would, in the Spirit of meekness endeavour, by setting be∣fore them the clearest and plainest Texts of Scripture that opposed their opinions, to inform them in the Truth. And being sensible how much the work of Christ was hindered by the falling away of many that had newly taken up the profession of Re∣ligion, to vain opinions, his Prayers ran much that way, that the Lord would please to reduce wandring Souls, and he used to exhort others to do the like: O (sayd he) let us be earnest with our God to establish us and ours, and all his People in the truth of the Gospel. His Charity towards others was very Exemplary where he saw any thing of Christ His Charity to Souls. or sincerity, tho mixed with some errours in Judgment, and accompanied with other infirmities; his Charity would pass over those defects, and embrace that of the grace of God that he apprehended to be in them: He loved to make the best con∣struction of the Actions of others, and if it could possibly admit of a Candid inter∣pretation, he would be sure to construe it in that sense. It was a Rule with him, never to speak of the faults and failings of others behind their backs, except it were in two cases; either that it might some way or other tend to the persons Reformati∣on, or else to warn others to take heed of such an one that might do them a mischief. Neither could he patiently endure to hear an evil report concerning others; and it was the most unpleasing discourse to him, to hear the infirmities of others blazoned without a cause. He was ready to distribute to the necessities of others to his power, yea many times be∣yond Charity. his power. His House was free and open at all times for the entertainment of God∣ly Ministers, and other good persons that came to visit him. He was a Lover of Hospi∣tality, and spent a great part of his Estate that way. Few weeks passed wherein his House was not a receptacle to entertain, and lodge some Godly person or other. And none could be freer, more hearty and ingenuous in the entertainment and respect that he gave unto others, whether they were his familiar friends, or strangers. His Love was truly according to the Apostles Rule: Let Love be without dissimulation: And all the en∣tertainment he gave, might easily be discerned to be done with all his heart; and he rejoyced that he had an opportunity to express his kindness to them. He did Consci∣entiously set apart some portion of his Estate yearly for pious uses; Some part where∣of he gave to godly Ministers, another part in a yearly allowance to young Students at the University, and the other part to poor and necessitous people, as providence gave occasion: Besides, his Doors Ministred a constant relief to the poor of the place where he lived, who were very numerous. He was very just and righteous in all his dealings with men: He would rather part with his own right than do the least wrong to any. When he drew near to his end, His Justice. having been intrusted with the imployment of considerable summs of Mony that be∣longed to several persons, his great care was to dispose of things so, and to put all into such an exact Method, as that every one might have his own, and that none might re∣ceive Prudence. the least wrong or prejudice, which he did to the general satisfaction of all. When any came to complain to him of their dissentions, he would exhort them, first How he made up differences. of all to make their peace with God and to endeavour to set all right betwixt him and them, and then God would quickly turn the hearts of their Enemies to be at peace with them. He had the general repute of a Man so just and unbyassed, that many times both the dissenting parties would refer the whole business to his single determination, and they were content to yield and stand to what agreement he should bring things to. When he went about such businesses, he would usually begin with Prayer. Being once called to make up a difference between some neer Relations, he moved that they might first begin with Prayer, but one of the persons there present declared his unwillingness thereunto, whereupon he soon took his leave, and sayd to a Friend that came away with him: O! we shall be able to do no good in it. In making up breaches, he was as careful to make the disagreeing persons friends, as to compose the differences that were between them: And he had an excellent dexterity to use Motives and Arguments, taken, as well from the Laws of the Land as from the Laws of God to press them to come to
an Agreement. Such was his Love of peace, and desire to promote it, that when it hath been a matter of cost and something hath been to be paid, and the party that was to pay it hath refused to part with the Mony, rather than the breach should not be made up, he hath paid it out of his own Purse. Many times he had mony put into his hands by some Godly persons, to dispose of as Prudence and Piery in cha∣rity. he saw cause; which being known, when some poor people have come to him for re∣lief, he would always give them some Spiritual Alms, before he distributed the o∣ther: And if any of them were guilty of any notorious and scandalous sin, he would en∣deavour to make tham sensible of it, and to bring them unto Repentance for the same. He was a great promoter and upholder of the meetings of Christians for Prayer and holy conference which tended to Spiritual Edification; but an Enemy to such meetings where they met together to discourse of State affairs, or to talk of opinions, and con∣troverted points, or where the time was spent meerly for an Ostentation of mens parts and gifts, not aiming at the Spiritual Edification of one another: And this appeared by the caution which he used in setting down Rules for the Ordering and regulating such Christian meetings; which were these. 1. They ought not to be in the time of publick Ordinances. 2. Nor to the hindrance of Family duties. 3. Nor in places, or with persons of an evil report. 4. Nor to the hindrance of Mens particular Callings. 5. Nor by night, or other suspected times. 6. Nor for controversies of disputation. 1. But for the clearing and setting home of Truths received in the publick Ministry, and in clearing of Cases of Conscience arising thereupon or otherwise. And in such Exhortations, Admonitions, Counsels, and Consolations as conduce thereunto, or that are otherwise necessary. 2. In some convenient time of the day, for an hour or two at the most, and once in the week at most, except in some urgent Cases. 3. In some family of good report, and with persons of good report. 4. That every one present may have liberty to speak one by one. 5. That they begin and end with prayer for a blessing. 6. That the Minister of the place, or some other godly Minister may be desired to be present. 7. All being ended, that presently every one departs to his place and duty, and to walk sutably, that the ways of God be not evil spoken of. When he first began to set up this way of Christian conference, some godly persons were offended, fearing that such a meeting might minister opportunity for the venting and spreading of Errors, which were to rise at that time. And others feared that it might take off some from the love and esteem of the publick Ministry: But when this paper (drawn up with his own hand) came abroad, it was sufficient to satisfie all inge∣nuous and unprejudiced persons; and this meeting was so far from giving occasion of spreading Errors, that the godly of that place, were by this means kept stedfast in the Faith. And this arose much from the wisdom which God had endowed him with: For his His Prudence. prudence was such in ordering those meetings, as the time which was spent in them, was taken up, for the most part, in discoursing of some main Article of Religion, or some Ca∣techetical point; by this means the Christians in that place were so rooted and grounded in the faith, as that they were not so soon shaken by Temptations, as many others were in other Parts of the Kingdom, who had not the principles of Religion infused into them, nor rendred so familiar with them. But that which did most of all commend him, and most set forth the grace of God The conjuncti∣on of Graces in him. in and towards him was, that he did not only attain to an eminency in this or that grace, but he arrived to a great degree in every grace, so that there was no grace but might be clearly seen and discerned to be in him, and in each of them he seemed to excel: As holy affections, and a spiritual fervour in prayer; zeal for Gods glory, faith, humili∣ty, meekness, patience, submission to the Will of God, heavenly-mindedness, charity and compassion unto others, &c. And there was such an eminency in every grace, as that it was hard to say in which of them he excelled most. As he thus walked with God many years, so he kept his integrity to the end: And
that which was most remarkable was, that in his Elder years he seemed to excel him∣self: His Progress in Grace. He did not only retain the lustre of his former Graces, but he was still more spi∣ritual, active, and lively in the ways of God: he spent more time in Prayer, Meditation, and other holy Exercises: He was more abundant in holy Counsels and Exhortations. He oft said, Since our time is short, let us work the faster, and watch and pray the more fervently. Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his Garments. He minded little else but spiritual concernments: Grace seemed to have the whole command of him. Being asked by a friend, how it came to pass that now in his elder years he had more command over his Affections, and Passions, than in his younger? He answered, That it was not, because he found not the same things in his nature still: For he found himself more inclined unto Passion than before: But because the grace of God had now overcome, and overpowred him, and reduced him to the present temper wherein he now was. He had a long and constant remembrance of his change before it came, accounting Death expect∣ed. himself but a Pilgrim and Stranger upon Earth. Divers years before his death, he seldom Wrote a Letter to his near Relations, but he expressed his sense of his ap∣proaching change. In a Letter to some of his nearest Relations he thus expressed himself: Our time of our departure hence, draweth near. O pray for us as we desire to do for you, that we may be found blameless at that day. And in another, after he had been sick, he Wrote: Pray for me that I may not be taken hence unready: Nor yet my life be longer de∣sired than all Gods work by me, and in me be done. A year or two before his death, he much rejoyced to think that so much of his race was run, and said, That he would not for a great deal be set back, and to have those years to live again that he had already passed o∣ver. About five or six weeks before his last sickness whereof he died, he thus expressed himself: I am old (as Isaac said) and know not the day of my death: pray for me that I may be faithful unto the death. About the beginning of December Anno Christi, 1659, he fell sick of a lingring distem∣per, His last sick∣ness. which continued upon him about the space of ten weeks, before the Lord was pleas∣ed to put a period to his Race. In the beginning of this sickness he had some intimati∣on from the Lord about his change: And the Lord, the better to prepare him for it, had fastened the impression of it upon him before it came. When the Minister of the place where he lived came to visit him, and said, he hoped he might recover: He an∣swered, He knew not how God might deal with him: But he had received the sentence of death in himself: A little before, he thus Wrote to some of his near Relations: Beloved in the Lord, I am yet (through mercy) alive; and continue sick: My God dealeth bountifully with me, who do from my heart acknowledge that I am a chief of sinners; yet hath he pardoned me, and will e're long receive me to be with Christ, which is best of all. Pray for me that I may give God his due glory by believing, and by a holy submission and conformity to his Will in Life and Death. Blessed be God, I have in my weak measure set my house in order, &c. Whilst he was able, he continued to pray in and with his Family, and speaking some∣thing to them out of the Word read; and when he found his spirits so low, and so much spent that he could not do so much as formerly, he told them, that it was the grief of his soul that he could do no more for them. His deportment all the time of his sickness, and at his death, was suitable to his Life. As he had lived Exemplarily, so he died Exemplarily. The whole of his carriage was (as one who was judicious, and an Eye witness of it, testified) as if it had been a stu∣died piece. His great care was, that Grace might be seen to act in him at his death, as his chief care had been to express it in his Life. He was naturally a man of a time∣rous and fearful spirit. But when he came to die, Grace had so elevated him above his natural temper, that he was not only willing to die, but he triumphed over death, without being afraid of it. He delighted not to speak much in the time of his sickness, but imployed it for the most part in holy Meditations: yet he sometimes spake to such as came to visit him, in some short sentence or other. His usual Exhortation to them was this: Make sure His dying Speeches. of Christ: Remember that one thing necessary. Once, when some of the younger sort were about him, he said, Make sure of Christ: And for your encouragement I tell you, that Reli∣gion is no vain thing: Is no notion: 'Tis a reality; and I tell you so from mine own experience. And at another time, seeing some young ones talking familiarly together, he said to them, He knew not what they were talking about, but commended their Love: only they should be sure to speak something to the edifying of one another: And that they should have their speech seasoned with the salt of the word: For the Lord hearkened, and heard,
and there was a book of Remembrance Written for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And when a person of quality came to visit him, he said: Hold on as you have begun: Make sure of Christ. If I had as much gold as would reach up to the Skie, it would do me no good: My interest in Christ is all my happiness. At another time his Wife and Children coming about him, he said, I hope you have made choice of Christ: And he exhorted them to cleave unto him: Be diligent in the use of means, but when all is done, be sure to depend upon Christ: Take heed of the World, for that is your greatest Enemy: I have found it to be so. And particularly to his Children, he said, deny your self sinful self-pleasure, and self-profit, and the delights of the world; and seek your All in Christ, and in him you shall find All-sufficiency. When some good people, who used to have private meetings, came to visit him, he said to them; conti∣nue in prayer: Hold on: I am confident it is the way of God you are in. To the Minister of the place, who often visited him in his sickness, he said: Preach to win souls: Let all your Preaching be to win souls. And to his own Son he Wrote thus: My Son, take heed to the Ministry that thou hast received of the Lord, that thou fulfil it This will tend to the glory of God, to the good of Souls, and to thine account in the day of Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep. And to some that were going to a Fast, he said: Pray for me; but especially for the Church of God. During all the time of his sickness he had not the least Cloud upon his Spirit, nei∣ther Freedom from Temptations. was Satan permitted in the least to disturb his Peace. When a Minister that came to visit him asked him, whether he had any Temptations? He answered, No: Blessed be the Lord he had none: So that although all his Life time, he had been full of Conflicts, yet when he came to die he had perfect peace and serenity. When he had been sick some weeks, he wrote thus to a near Relation: I yet live through Gods mercy, but do continue weak: Yet the Lord deals very gently with me: For my outward afflictions are tolera∣ble, and my inward consolations are full of Grace and Heavenly sweetness. These Com∣forts continued with him to the very last: For at several times in his sickness, and the same day he dyed, he was heard to say: God hath left with me the Comforts. And when about an hour before his Death, his Natural Spirits being almost spent, he brake forth into this expression; My grief is great: One of his Relations that stood by, sayd, you do not mean in respect of your Spiritual Estate? He answered, with a little seeming dis∣pleasure, No, No: He hath, and doth, and will support by his Eternal Spirit. Thus the Lord was pleased to answer him, in that which had been his great desire for a long time, which was, That his Faith might not fail, and that he might be kept up in the Faith to the last. The Night before he dyed he spake thus: I have waited upon God for my Sal∣vation; and blessed be God I shall not be disappointed. As was his manner in his Life, so at his Death, he was much in the acknowledgment His self-denial. of his own nothingness and vileness, and much in magnifying the free Grace and Mer∣cy of God to him. The Minister that Preached at his Funeral had this passage concern∣ing him: He was much (sayd he) in Self-denial even to the last; Looking on all that he had done as nothing; As dross and dung in comparison of Christ. Once when his Wife came to him and sayd, she prayed that she might follow his steps: He replied; Follow Christ: Follow Christ: He hath given you an Example: Blessed be God for Friends; But blessed be God for Jesus Christ, who hath saved us from wrath to come. His great desire was to be perfectly resigned up to the Will of God; and therefore his great request to his Friends, when they came to visit him was, Pray me up into the Will of God: And to some of his near Relations in the time of his sickness, he wrote thus; Pray for me and your self, that we may be taught, and made able by the Spirit of Christ in us, to resign and conform to our Fathers Good-will, that when Gods time is come, I may depart in Peace, unto that longed for everlasting Rest, which the Lord Jesus hath pur∣chased for me, and to which he will bring me: Even so Amen. And in an other Letter he wrote thus: I desire your Prayers for me whilst I live, that I may abide steadfast in the Faith of the Lord Jesus, whose I am, and by whom alone I expect Salvation: And that I may by Faith in the Lord Jesus have power from him, by his Spirit to submit and conform to his Will, both in life and death. In the time of his sickness he was full of Holy Ejaculations, and Soliloquies. He Soliloquies. often used that passage of Hezekiah, I am oppressed; Lord undertake for me. And that of David: In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul. He often caused the 16th. Psal. and the six first verses of the 26th. of Isaiah to be read to him; And speaking to himself alone, he often repeated these words, (Isa. 12. 2.)
The Lord Jehovah is my strength and my Song; He also is become my Salvation. Some∣times he would say, Come Lord Jesus; and then would answer himself, Yea, he doth come: He comes leaping over the Mountains, and skipping over the Hills. That which greatly comforted him was to think that he should immediatly be with the Lord as soon as his Race was at an end. A Christian Friend that visited him, u∣sing such an expression as this: That the bodies of the Saints should rest in the Grave as in a Bed of Down: Yea (sayd he) But this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Intimating; That tho it were matter of Joy to think that his body should rest in peace till the General Resurrection; Yet his greatest comfort lay in this, to think that at the instant of dissolution, his Soul should enjoy the immediate sight of God. This appeared in his many ardent breathings which he used, saying: Come Lord Jesus. O how doth my Soul thirst for God! Go forth my Soul to meet thy God. He was not only willing to die, but he longed to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Death desired. The last Sabbath but one before his death, he sayd: O what a blessed Sabbath would this be, if this might be my entrance into my everlasting Sabbath! At an other time he sayd, Why should we not be willing to die? Christ came from Heaven to the Earth to free us from sin and misery: And why should not we be willing to go from Earth to Heaven to be freed from sin and misery? Two or three days before he dyed, he had a sore fit, and thought that he should then have died: But reviving a little, he called for his Wife and Children, to whom he sayd: This is the true Grace of God, wherein I stand; that I expect Salvation by Jesus Christ▪ and by him alone. And this he repeated again, and withal exhorted them; that they should give up themselves to Christ, and live upon him. A day or two be∣fore he dyed, when he saw his Children weeping about him, he sayd, Weep for your sins: And when his Wife was lamenting, saying, what should she do, when God took him away? He sayd, You must Repent for that word. Did Joseph say, without me God shall provide for the Life of Pharoah, and shall not God provide for you? Yes he Will: Only cast your self upon him. His understanding and memory continued with him to the last, insomuch that he wrote a Sheet or two of Paper a few days before his Death, for the better direct∣ing of those that were to dispose of things after his Death. His Will was made long before for the setling of his Estate. And having finished this, he sayd, Now I know not any thing more that I have to do. And among these directions he gave a par∣ticular charge that there should be no Blacks worn at his Funeral. The day wherein he dyed fel out to be on the Lecture day in that Town. And a near Relation coming to see him, he would not suffer him to stay with him, but seemed to put him off with his Hand, saying, Away, Away; You will come too late. For he would not have him lose the Sermon, tho it were the last time he was like to be with him. When his End drew neer, one that stood by, sayd: You see that a Holy Life brings a blessed Death: Whereupon he, lifting up his Hands, sayd, Yea: Yea: Yea: And a little before he dyed, he sayd: Lord Jesus receive my Soul. His time being now come, that he must leave the World, and go to the Lord, he called for something that he used to take in his sickness, which being brought, he (as his manner was) set himself to lift up his heart to the Lord in a short Ejaculation, and in that posture he breathed out his last, with his Hands clasped together, February the 7th. Anno His Death. Christi. 1659/60. And of his age the seventy second. Laus Deo.
The Life and Death of Sir Matthew Hale, Knight, sometimes Lord Chief Justice of His Majesties Court of the Kings Bench, who Died, Anno Christi 1676. MAtthew Hale was born at Alderly in Glocestershire, November the first, Anno Christi His Parentage. 1609. His Grandfather was Robert Hale, an eminent Clothier in Wotten Ʋnder-Hedge, where he, and his Ancestors had lived for many Descents, and had given several parcels of Land for the use of the poor, which they enjoy to this day. This Robert had got an Estate of Ten thousand pounds, which he divided almost e∣qually among his five Sons, beside the Portions he gave with his Daughters. His se∣cond Son was Robert, who married Joan, the Daughter of Matthew Poynts of Alderly, El{que} of which Marriage there was no other issue, but this one Son, whose Grandfather by the Mothers side, was his Godfather, and gave him his own name of Matthew. His Father was a man of such a tender Conscience, that he gave over the practice of the Law, whereunto he had been bred, because of some things commonly practised by Lawyers, which seemed to him contrary to that exactness of Truth and Justice which be∣came a Christian; whereupon he withdrew himself from the Inns of Court, to live on his Estate in the Country. And thus we see what care he had of his Soul, which made him forsake so gainful a Profession, which might have enabled him to have raised his fami∣ly much higher. He was in the Country, very charitable to his Poor Neighbours whilst he lived, and at his death, he left out of his small Estate (which was but an hundred pounds per annum) twenty pound per annum to the poor of Wotton, which this his Son confirmed to them, with some Addition of his own, and with this direction, that it should be distributed a∣mong poor House-keepers, not to such as received Alms from the Parish. For to give to such, was only to ease the Rich, who by Law are bound to relieve them. But our Matthew was soon deprived of the happiness of his Fathers care, and instru∣ction. For as he had lost his Mother before he was three years old, so now his Father died before he was five: So early he was cast upon the Providence of God, which pro∣vidence soon made up this loss in some good measure. For after some Opposition, he was committed to the care of Anthony Kingscot of Kingscot, Esq; who was his next Kinsman after his Uncles by the Mothers side. Great care was taken of his Education, and his Guardian intended him for a Divine, Education. and being of those who were then called Puritans, he put him to such School masters as were of that party: And in the 17th. year of his Age, sent him to Magdalen-Hall in Oxford, where Mr. Obediah Sedgwick was his Tutor. During his being at School, and for some time after his coming to Oxford he was a Corruption. hard Student, and an extroardinary proficient; till some Stage players coming thither, he was so much corrupted by seeing their Plays, that he almost wholly neglected his Stu∣dies. By this he, not only lost much precious time, but found that his heart came there∣by to be fill'd with such vain Images of things, that were at best unprofitable, if not hurtful unto him: And being afterwards sensible of the mischief of this, he resolved of never seeing any more Plays, which he constantly adhered to. His mind, being thus corrupted, he set himself to many other vanities which youth is addicted to. He loved fine Cloths, and delighted much in Company, and being of a strong body, he became a great Master in all those Exercises that required much strength. He learned also to Fence, and to use his Weapons, and grew so expert therein, that he worsted many of the Masters in those Arts. He was now so taken up with those Martial matters, that instead of proceeding in his Studies, he resolved to be a Soldier; and his Tutor Sedgwick going into the Low-Countries,
as a Chaplain to the Renowned Lord Horatio Vere, he resolved to go along with him and to trail a Pike in the Prince of Oranges Army. But a happy stop was put to this resolution. For he was engaged in a suit at Law with Sir William Whitmore, who laid claim to some part of his Estate, and his Guardian being of a retired temper, He was forced to leave the University, having been only three years in it, and to go to Lon∣don to solicite his own business there: And being recommended to Serjeant Glanvil for his Counsellor, and he observing in him a clear apprehension, and a solid Judgment, and a great fitness for the Study of the Law, took pains to divert him from his thoughts of Study of the Law. being a Soldier, and to apply himself, to Study the Law, which so far prevailed, that when he was above twenty years old, November 8th. 1629, he was admitted into Lin∣colns-Inns, and being deeply sensible how much time he had lost, he resolved to redeem it, and for many years after he Studied sixteen hours in a day. He laid aside fine cloths, and used a plain fashion, which he mostly continued to his dying day. Yet he did not at first break off from keeping Company too much, till a sad accident drove him from it. For he, with some other young Students, going to be merry out of Town, one called for so much Wine, that Mr. Hale could not prevent it, but he drank so long till he fell down as dead among them. This much affected Mr. Hale, who go∣ing to another room, and shuting the door, upon his Knees begged earnestly of God that his friend might be restored unto life, and that himself might be forgiven for coun∣tenancing such excess: And he vowed unto God that he would never so keep Compa∣ny again, nor drink an Health while he lived. His friend recovered, and he religiously observed his Vow. And though he was oft pressed to drink Healths, yet would not he Dispence with his Vow, though he was sometimes treated roughly for it. Now he forsook all vain Company, and divided his time between the duties of Re∣ligion, Industry. and the study of the Law. He took a strict account of his time, for which end he drew a Scheme for a Diary, wherein he set down what his first work must be in the morning; what his days Imployment; what his Refreshments, whether alone, or in Company; what his Evening duties. Mr. Noy, the Attorney General, one of the Greatest men of that Profession, took early notice of him, call'd for him often, and directed him in his studies, and shewed such friendship to him, that he was called young Noy. Whilst he was thus busie in his studies, he kept the hours of the Hall constantly in Term time, and seldome put himself out of Commons in the Vacation time, but continu∣ed his studies with unwearied diligence. And he was soon found out by the great and learned Antiquary Mr. Selden, who came to such a liking of him, that he continued a close friendship, and at his death made him one of his Executors. It was this acquaintance which first set Mr. Hale on a more enlarged pursuit of Lear∣ning, which he before had confined to his own Profession: But soon becoming a great Master in it, he who could never lose any part of his time, found leisure to attain to as great a measure of knowledge, in as comprehensive a manner as most men have done in any Age. He studied the Roman Laws, and judging a readiness in Arithmetick as a thing that might be useful to him, he became very exquisite therein, and in all other Mathematical Sciences, sparing no cost to get exquisite Instruments. He read, observed, and writ much upon these Subjects, which he called his Diversions. He had good skill in Physick and Chirurgery. He searched greatly into Ancient History, and particularly into the crabbidest part of Chronology. But above all, he applied himself to the study of Divinity: So that it is al∣most incredible that one man in no great compass of years should have acquired such a variety of knowledge, and learning. His industry was almost indefatigable. His parts were quick, his apprehension, lively, his memory great, and his judgment strong. He rose constantly very early, and was never idle. He spent little time in eating and drinking: For as he never went to publick Feasts, so he gave no intertainment but to the Poor. He always ended his Meal with an Ap∣petite. Temperance. When our unhappy Wars began, he not only avoided all publick Imployments, but the very talking of News, and was always both favourable and charitable to the depressed party, and would never provoke any in particular by reflecting on their A∣ctions. He was imployed in his practice by all the Kings party, and was assigned Counsel to the Earl of Strafford, to Arch-bishop Laud, &c. Afterwards being Councel for the Lord
Craven; he pleaded with that force of Argument, that the then Attorny General, threatened him for appearing against the Government: To whom he answered, that he was pleading in defence of those Laws, which they declared they would main∣tain, and that he was doing his duty to his Client, and therefore not to be daunted with Threats. Cromwel seeing him possest of so much practice, and being one of the eminentest Advancements. Lawyers, resolved to take him off, by raising him from the Bar to the Bench. Mr. Hale saw well the snare that was laid for him; for he had a Commission sent him to be a Judge in the Common Pleas, which he a first scrupled to receive from a Ʋsurper: But having considered well of it, he Judged that it being absolutely neces∣sary to keep up Justice, and Property in all times, it was no sin to take a Commission from Usurpers, if he made no Declaration of his acknowledging their Authority, which he never did. He was thus made a Judge, Anno Christi. 1653. Sometime after he was chosen a Parliament Man by his Country. For there being at this time no House of Lords, Judges might be chosen to sit in the House of Commons, and thither he went, on design to obstruct the Mad and Wicked projects then on foot. And he continued Administring Justice till Oliver dyed: But then he both re∣fused the Mourning that was sent to him, and his Servants, as also to accept a New Commission that was offered him by Richard. He lived a private Life till the Parliament met that called home the King, to which he was returned Knight of the Shire for the County of Glocester. And in that Parliament he bore his share, in the happy period then put to the Confusions that threatned the ruine of the Nation. His great prudence and excellent temper led him to judge, that the sooner an Act of Indemnity were passed, and the fuller of graces and favours, it would sooner settle the Nation, and quiet the minds of the People; and therefore he applied himself carefully to the framing, and carrying it on till it was compleat∣ed. Presently after when the Courts in Westminster-Hal, came to be setled, he was made Lord Chief Baron: And when the Lord Chancellor delivered him his Commission, he told him, that if the King could have found out an honester and fitter Man for that Imployment, he would not have advanced him to it. Its ordinary with such so promoted, to be Knighted, but he studiously avoided it, till the Lord Chancellor ob∣serving it, on a time when the King was at his House, sent for him, and when he came, told his Majesty, that his Modest Lord Chief Baron was there, whereupon he was unexpectedly Knighted. He continued eleven years in that Office, mannaging all the proceedings in it with singular Justice. He was also one of the Principal Judges that sat in Cliffords-Inn about setling the differences between Landlord and Tenant, after the Conflagration in London, in which he behaved himself so to the satisfaction of all; so that the sud∣dain, and quiet Building of London is in no small measure due to him. For he, first by way of Scheme, contrived the Rules, upon which he and the other Judges after∣wards proceeded, in which his readiness in Arithmetick, and his skill in Architecture, were of great use to him. Bt it will not seem strange that he behaved himself so well as he did in his place, if we consider what Religious and excellent Rules he drew up, and proposed to him∣self to walk and act by in all his Imployments in the Station and Calling wherein God and his King had set him, which he stiled Things necessary to be continually had in Re∣membrance. 1. That in the Administration of Justice, I am intrusted for God, the King and Country. 2. That it be done. 1. Uprightly. 2. Deliberately. 3. Resolutely. 2. That I rest not upon mine own understanding or strength, but implore, and rest upon the direction and strength of God. 3. That in the Execution of Justice, I carefully lay aside mine own Passions, and not give way to them, however provoked. 4 That I be wholly intent upon the business I am about, &c. 5. That I suffer not my self to be prepossessed with any Judgment at all, till all the business, and both parties are heard. Divers other such like excellent Rules he set down, which for brevity sake are here omitted. He would never receive private Addresses, or Recommendation from the Greatest Persons, in any matter in which Justice was concerned. Once, one of the first Peers
of England, went to his Chamber, and told him, that having a Suit of Law to be try∣ed before him, he was come to acquaint him with it, that he might the better under∣stand it when it should be heard in the Court. Upon this the Lord Chief Baron interrupted him, and sayd, he did not deal fairly to come to his Chamber about such Affairs. For he never received any Information of Cau∣ses, Courage. but in open Court, where both parties were to be heard alike, and so he would not suffer him to go on. Hereupon his Grace (for he was a Duke) went away not a little dissatisfied, and complained of it to the King, as a rudeness which was not to be endured. But his Majesty bid him content himself that he was no worse used, and sayd: He verily Believed, he would have used himself no better, if he had gone to Sollicite him in any of his own causes. One of his Rules was still to favour those that were lowest. Besides his great Chari∣ties Prudence. to Non-Conformists, who were then as he thought too hardly used; he took care to cover all he could from the Severities sore designed against them, and discouraged such as inclined to stretch the Laws too much against them. He thought many of the Non-Conformists had merited highly in the matter of the Kings Restauration, and at least deserved that the terms of Conformity should not have been stricter than they were before the War: And he lamented the too Rigorous proceedings against them, saying, they were good Men, but they had narrow Souls, who would break the peace of the Church for such inconsiderable matters. He was a strict observour of the Lords Days, in which, besides his constant atten∣dance Piety. upon the Publick service of God twice a day, in the Evening he called all his Family together, and repeated to them the heads of the Sermons, with some additi∣ons of his own, which he fitted for their Capacities, after which, he constantly shut himself up for two or three hours, which he spent in his secret Devotions and profi∣table Meditations. Of which contemplations two Volumes in Octavo were printed a little before his Death. Anno Christi 1671. The Lord Chief Justice Keyling Dyed, and May the 18th. He Advancement. was promoted to be the Lord Chief Justice of England, with the great Applause of the People. One thing was highly commended in him, that when there was a great ine∣quality in the Ability, and Learning of Counsellors that pleaded before him, he thought that it became him to enforce what the weaker Counsel managed but indifferently, not to suffer the more Learned to carry the business by the advantage they had over the other, by their quickness and skill in the Law, till all things were cleered, in which the merits and strength of the ill defended cause did lie. And in this Court did he spend the rest of his Publick Life and Imployment: But about four years and an half, after this advancement, he that had hitherto enjoyed a firm health, to which his great Temperance and equality of his Mind did much conduce, he on a suddain was brought very low by an Inflammation in his Midriff, which in two Days space brake the Constitution of his health, which he never after Recovered. And he became so Asthmatical, that he could not fetch his breath, without great difficulty, which determined in a Dropsy, of which he afterwards dyed. He had so His Sickness. much skill in Physick, that considering his age, he concluded that his disease must carry him off in a little time, and therefore he resolved to have some of his last Months to himself, that being freed of all worldly cares, he might be preparing for his change. Now the businesses of his Profession were become ungrateful to him, and he desired wholly to apply himself to better purposes, as appeared by a paper which he wrote on this Subject, which for brevity sake I omit. By this we may see that he continued in his Station upon no other consideration, but that being set in it by the Providence of God, he durst not leave the Post assigned him by God, without preferring his own inclination to the choise of God: But now that same Providence having by this great change dissenabled him to the execution of it, he was resolved to Resign it: Which so soon as his Friends discovered, they en∣deavoured all that possibly they could, to disswade him from it: But all in vain. For he applyed himself to the Kings Majesty for a Writ of Ease, which the King was very unwilling to grant, and offered to let him hold his Place, doing what business he could in his Chamber▪ But he sayd, he could not with a good Conscience continue it, not being able to discharge the duty belonging to it.
At last having wearied himself and all his friends with his importunate desires, and growing sensibly weaker in his body, he died February 21th. 2675/6. Therefore before a Master of the Chancery, with a little Parchment Deed, and there Sealed, and Delivered it, acknowledging it to be Enrolled, and afterwards bringing the Original to the Lord Chancellor, formally surrendred his Office. He had the day before surrendred it to the King in Person, who heartily wished him the return of his Health, assuring him that he would still look upon him as one of his Judges, and would have his advice, and in the mean time would continue his Pension to him during his Life. The good man thought this bounty too great, and an ill Presi∣dent to the King, who yet ordered it to be paid Quarterly. When the first payment was received, he ordered a great part of it to charitable Uses saying he would do the like with the rest so long as he received it: And dying upon a Quarter day, some questioning whether that Quarter were due, the King decided the matter, and ordered it to be paid to his Executors. Having left his place, he returned home with as much chearfulness as his want of health could admit, being eased of a burden which he had lately groaned under, and so was made more capable of enjoying that which he had much wished for, according to his Elegant Translation or Paraphrase of those excellent lines in Seneca's Thyestes. Stet quicunque volet Potens Aulae culmine Lubrico; Me Dulcis saturet quies, &c. Let him that will ascend the tottering Seat Of Courtly Grandeur, and become as Great As are his mounting wishes: As for me Let sweet Repose, and rest my Portion be. Give me some mean, obscure Recess; a Sphere Out of the Road of business, or the fear Of falling lower, where I sweetly may My self, and dear retirement still enjoy: Let not my Life, or Name be known unto The Grandees of the Time, tost too and fro By Censures, or Applause: But let my Age Slide gently by, not overthwart the Stage Of publick Actions, unheard, unseen, And unconcerned, as if I ne'r had been. And thus while I shall pass my silent days In shady privacy, free from the noise, And bustles of the mad World, then shall I A good old innocent Plebeian die. Death is a mere surprise, a very snare To him that makes it his Lifes greatest care To be a publick Pageant, known to all, But unacquainted to himself doth fall. Having now attained to that privacy which he had no less seriously, than piously de∣sired, he called all his Servants that had belonged to his Office, and told them that he had now laid down his Place, and so now their Imployments were at an end, advising them to provide for themselves, and gave to some of them very considerable rewards, and to every one of them a Token, and so dismissed all but his Domesticks. From February 15. he lived till the Christmas day following, but all the while in so ill a state of Health, that there was no hope of his recovery. Yet he continued still to retire often, both for his Devotions, and Studies, and when his infirmities so encreased that he could go no long∣er, he caused his Servants to carry him thither in a Chair. His Pains so encreased on him, that no strength inferior to his own could have born them: yet to the last he expressed a great submission to the Will of God: Desiring to Patience. be dissolved, and to be with Christ. He could not lie down in his Bed above a year be∣fore his death, by reason of the Asthma, but rather sat, than lay in it. When ever a god∣ly Minister of the Parish prayed with him, he forbore his Complaints and Groans; But
with his eyes and hands lifted up, he was fixed in his Devotions. He had some secret Presages of his death, saying, that if he did not die on such a day, he should live a Month longer. He injoyed the free use of his Reason and Sense to the last minute, which he had often prayed for during his Sickness. He had for many years a particular devotion in Celebrating the day set a part to Commemorate Christs Nativity, and commonly Wrote a Paper of Verses in honor of his Saviour: Seventeen whereof were formerly Printed, and others not Printed before was this which follows, being a Paraphrase on Simeons Song. Blessed Creator, who before the Birth Of Time, and e're the Pillars of the Earth Were fix't, or form'd, did'st hug that great Design Of mans Redemption, and did'st Define In thine Eternal Counsels all the Scene Of that stupendious Business, and when It should appear, and tho the very day Of its Epiphany concealed lay Within thy Mind, yet Thou wast pleas'd to shew Some glimpses of it unto Men below In Visions, Types, and Prophesies as we Things at a distance in Perspective see: But Thou was pleas'd to let thy Servant know That that bless'd hour that seem'd to move so slow Through former Ages, should at last attain It's time, e're my few Sands, which yet remain Are spent, and yet these Aged eyes Should see the day when Jacobs Star should rise. And now thou hast fulfilled it, Bless'd Lord, Dismiss me now, according to thy Word, And let my Aged Body now return To Rest, and Dust, and drop into an Urn. For I have liv'd enough, mine Eies have seen Thy much desir'd Salvation, that hath been So long, so dearly wish't, the Joy, the Hope Of all the Ancient Patriarchs, the Scope Of all the Prophesies, and Mysteries; Of all the Types unveil'd, the Histories Of Jewish Church unridled, and the Bright, And Orient Sun arisen to give Light To Gentiles, and the joy of Israel, The Worlds Redeemer, blest Emanuel. Let this sight close mine Eyes, 'tis loss to see, After this Vision, any sight but Thee. And truly this day which he, with so much Spiritual Joy, had frequently spent, prov∣ed to be the day of his Jubilee, and Deliverance. For between two and three a clock in the Afternoon of that Day, he breathed out his pious Soul. His end was Peace. He seemed not to be in any pangs in his last moments. He was interred in the Churchyard His Death. of Alderly among his Ancestors. He used to say, that Churches were for the Living, and Churchyards for the Dead. His Monument was plain, and decent, a black Marble Stone, upon which he ordered to be engraven this Inscription. Hic Inhumatur Corpus Matthei Hale, Militis: Roberti Hale, & Joannae, Uxoris ejus, Filli Ʋnici. Nati in hac Parochia de Alderly, Primo Die Novembris, Anno Domini, 1609. Denati vero Ibidem Vicessimo Quinto Die Decembris, Anno Domini, 1676. Aetatis suae. 67: His Motto was, Festina Lentè, which he ordered to be engraven upon the head of his His Motto and Character.
Walking-staff, and often heard to say, that he found many Witty men to run into great Errors, because they did not give themselves time to think: But the heat of imagination making some Notions to appear in good colours to them, they without staying till that cooled, were violently led by the impulses it made upon them; whereas calm and slow men, who pass for Dullards in the common estimation, could search after Truth and find it out, as with more deliberation, so with greater certainty. He laid aside the tenth Penny of all he got, for the Poor, and took great care to be Charity. well informed of proper Objects for his Charity. And when he was made a Judge, many of the Perquisites which belonged to his Place, as his Divident of the Rules, and Box mony, he sent to the Jayl to discharge poor Prisoners, who never knew from whence their relief came. It's a custom for the Marshal of the Kings Bench to present the Judges of that Court with a piece of Plate for a New years-gift, that for the chief Justice being larger than the rest: This he intended to have refused; But the other Judges told him, that it be∣longed to his Office, and that his refusing of it would be prejudicial to his Successors: So he resolved to take it; but sent word to the Marshal, that instead of the Plate he should bring him the value of it in money, which so soon as he received, he sent it to the Prisons for the relief and discharge of the poor there. He usually invited his poor Neighbours to Dine with him, and made them to sit at his own Table: And if any of them were sick that they could not come, he would send them warm meat from his own Table. And did not only relieve the poor of his own Parish, but sent supplies to the neighbouring Parishes, as there was occasion for it: And he treated them all with the tenderness, and familiarity that became one, who consider∣ed that they were of the same Nature with himself, and were reduced to no other neces∣sities, but such as himself might be brought unto. For common Beggars, if any such came unto him as he was in his Walks, when he was in the Country, he would ask such of them as were capable of working, why they went about so idly? If they answered, because they could get no work, he would send them to some Field to gather Stones, and lay them on heaps, and then would pay them liberally for their pains, and would afterwards send his Carts to carry them into such places in the Highways which most needed mending. When he was in the City he liberally extended his Charity, even unto street Beggars, and when some told him, that thereby he encouraged Idleness, and that most of them were notorious Cheats, his Answer was: That he believed most of them to be such; But among there were some that were great Objects of Charity, and prest with grievous necessities; and that he had rather to give his Alms to twenty that might haply be Rogues, than one of the other sort should perish for want of the small relief he gave them. He was a merciful Landlord to all his Tenants, and was ever ready, upon just com∣plaints, A good Land∣lord. to abate their Rents: and a poor Widdow that lived in London, and had a small Estate, near his Land in the Country, from which her Rent was ill paid, and with some charge returned to her, she bemoneing her Case to him, he ordered his Bailiff to receive it, and to return it for her without any such charge. And when there was a general falling of Rents, and of hers among others, he would have this abatement to lie upon him, and so she had her full Rent as formerly. His Justice did notably appear in this, that when any ill money was put into his Justice. hands, he would never suffer it to be put off, judging that would be no excuse to him to put off false money to others, because some had so deluded him. He had ga∣thered much of this together: For many had so abused his goodness, as to mix corrupt money in the Fees which they gave him. Probably he had intended to destroy it: But some that had seen that great heap, brake into his Chamber, and stole it, which he used to speak of with some pleasure, conceiting how the Couzeners were couzened them∣selves. When he was made a Judge, he would ever pay more for his purchases, and other Prudence. commodities than they were prized at: and being told that he made ill Bargains, he answered, that it became Judges to pay more for what they bought than the true va∣lue, that so those with whom they dealt, might not think that they had any right to their favour, by having sold them such good Penny worths. How little minded to raise to himself a great Estate, may appear by this: whereas, at the first he had a hundred pound per annum, he never advanced it to nine hundred per
annum: which, considering the great practice he had whilst a Counsellor, and his constant frugal, and retired way of living, was but a small Fortune: and of this a very considerable part came in by his share in Mr. Seldens Estate, who had made him one of his Executors. He valued Books, and Manuscripts above all things in the world: and himself had made a great, and rare Collection of Manuscripts, belonging to the Laws of England. He was Forty years in gathering them, and they cost him about fifteen hundred pounds. These all he left to Lincolns-Inn, where had most of his Education. Liberality. Having thus Mastered things without him, his next care was to overcome his own Piety. corrupt inclination. He was (as he said) naturally passionate; yet this appeared not to any about him, save only at some times his Colour would rise a little: But he so go∣verned himself, that those that lived long with him, never saw him disordered with an∣ger, though he met with some great Trials of his patience, which the nature of man is Prudence. as little able to bear as any whatsoever. One that had done him a very great injury, some time after came to him for ad∣vice Forbearance. about setling his Estate: And he gave it him very freely, and would take no Fec of him for the same; and thereby shewed, both that he could forgive as a Christian, and that he had the Soul of a Gentleman in him, not to take money of one that had wronged him so hainously: and being asked, how he could use a man so kindly, that had wronged him so much? His Answer was, he thanked God that had taught him to forget injuries. In his Family he was a very gentle Master. He was tender of all his Servants; Family Go∣vernment. he never turned any away except they were so faulty, that there was no hope of re∣claiming them. When any of them had been long out of the way, or had neglected any part of their duty, he would not see them at their first coming home, or till the next day, lest when his displeasure was quick, he should chide them undecently. And when he did reprove them, he did it with that sweetness and gravity, that it appear∣ed that he was more concerned that they had done evil, than for the offence given by it to himself: But if any were immoral, or unruly, he then turned them away, saying, that he, who by his Place ought to punish disorders in others, must by no means suf∣fer them in his own Family. He advanced his Servants, according to the time they had been about him, and never gave occasion of envy among them, by raising the younger Clerks above those that had been longer with him. He treated them all with great affection, rather as a Friend than a Master, frequently giving them good instructions. Such of them as had more profitable places under him, he caused to give some of their profit to such as had no more than their Wages. In his Will he left Legacies to every of them; and one of them, in whom he put much Confidence, he made him one of his Executors. He was of a most tender, and compassionate nature, which evidently appeared in his Compassion. Trials, and passing Sentence upon Criminals, in which he was very careful, that not a circumstance should be neglected, which might any way clear the fact. He behaved himself with that regard to the Prisoners, as became, both the gravity of a Judge, and the Pity which was due to men, whose lives lay at the stake, and no jeering or ex∣treme severity fell from him. He took care that Witnesses should be put under no confusion that might disorder their memories. When he came to give Sentence, he did it with that composedness and decency, and his Speeches to the Prisoners to prepare them for Death, were so weighty, so free from all Affectation, and so seriously devout, that many were much edified by his Speeches, and behaviour therein. The passing of this Sentence of Death, was the most against the grain of all his Imployments, yet therein could he never be mollified to any tenderness which might hinder Justice. His Mercifulness extended even to his Beasts. When his Horses which had done him much service were grown old, he would not suffer them to be sold, or put to any hard labour; and he used his old Dogs with the same care. He was a great encourager of young Persons that diligently applied themselves to their Books, and would give them directions about the method of their studies, with much humanity and sweetness, and with smiling and pleasant ways he would admonish them, if he saw any thing amiss in them. As if they were too fine in their Cloths. He disliked to see young students to wear long Perukes, or for Atturnies to wear Swords. He was very free, and communicative in his discourse, which mostly fixed upon some good and useful subject, and loved for an hour or two at Night to be visited by his friends,
and herein he used a simplicity that was both natural to himself and very easie to others. He never studied Modes of Courtship, yet he knew not what it was to be rude, or harsh with any, unless he were impertinently addressed to in matters of Justice. For then he would raise his voice a little, and so shake off those importunities. In his Furniture, and Service at his table, he liked the old plainess so well, that as he would introduce no new fashions, so he rather affected a coursness in the use of the Old, which was more the effect of his Philosophy, than that of his disposition. For at first he loved finery too much. He was always of an equal temper, rather cheerful than merry. Many wondred to see the evenness of his Deportment in some sad passages of this Life. Having lost one of his Sons, the manner of whose death had some grievous circum∣stances attending it, a Friend coming to see him, and to condole his loss, He said to him, those were the effects of living long: For such must look to see many sad, and unac∣ceptable things; and having said that, he went to other discourses with his ordinary freedom of mind. For he gave no occasion by idleness to melancholy, to corrupt his Spirit; but by the perpetual bent of his thoughts, he knew well how to divert them from being oppressed with the excess of Sorrow. He had a generous and noble Idea of God in his mind, and this he did find, above all other considerations to preserve his quiet. And indeed that was so well established in him, that no accidents, how suddain soever, were observed to discompose him. He would never Discourse of publick matters in his private Conversation. But in Questions of Law, when any young Lawyer put a Case to him, he was very Communi∣cative, especially whilst he was at the Bar: But when he was promoted to the Bench, he grew more reserved, and would never suffer his opinion in any Case to be known, till he was obliged to declare it judicially. And he concealed his opinion in great Cases so carefully, that the rest of the Judges in the same Court could never perceive it. His reason was, because every Judge ought to give Sentence according to his own per∣swasion and Conscience, and not to be swayed by any respect of another mans opinion. And by this means it hath faln out, that when all the Barons of the Exchequer, have de∣livered their Opinions, and agreed in their Reasons and Arguments, yet he coming to speak last, and differing in Judgment from them, hath exprest himself with so much weight and solidity, that the Barons have immediately retracted their Votes, and concurr'd with him. He hath sat as a Judge in all the Courts of Law, and in two of them as Chief; but still, wherever he sat, all businesses of consequence followed him, and no man was con∣tent to sit down by the Judgment of any other Court, till the Case were brought before him to see whether he were of the same mind. And his Opinion being once known, all did readily acquiesce in it: And it was rarely seen that any attempted to bring it a∣bout again; and if any did it, he was lookt upon as a very contentious person. Nor was his Opinion and Judgment Reverenced in Courts of Law only: But his Au∣thority was Great in Courts of Equity also, and the same respect and submission was paid to him there too: And this appeared not only in his own Court of Equity, in the Exchequer Chamber, but in the Chancery too, for thither he was often called to advise and assist the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the time being; and if the Cause were of difficult Examination, or intricated, and entangled with variety of Settlements, no man shewed a more cleer and discerning Judgment. If it were of a great value, and Great Persons interressed in it, no man ever shewed greater Courage and Integrity, in laying aside all respect of persons. When he came to deliver his Opinion, he alwayes put his Discourse into such a method, that one part of it gave light to another; and where the proceedings in Chancery might prove inconvenient to the Subject, he never spared to observe, and reprove them. And from his Observations, and Discourses, the Chancery hath taken occasion to establish those Rules, by which it governs it self at this day. He did look upon Equity as a part of the Common Law, and one of the Grounds of it: and therefore as near as he could, he did always reduce it to certain Rules and Prin∣ciples that men might study it as a Science, and not think that the Administration of it, had any thing Arbitrary in it. Thus Eminent was this worthy man in every Station; and into what Court soever he was called, he quickly made it appear, that he deserved the chief Seat there. As Great a Lawyer as he was, he would never suffer the strictness of the Law to
prevail against Conscience: As Great a Chancellor as he was, he would make use of all the niceties and subtilties in Law, when it tended to support Right, and Equity. But nothing was more admirable in him than his patience. He did not affect the Reputati∣on of quickness and dispatch, by an hasty, and captious hearing of the Counsel. He would bear with the meanest, and gave every man his full scope, thinking it much bet∣ter to lose time than patience. In summing up of an Evidence to a Jury, he would always require the Bar to interrupt him if he did mistake, and to put him in mind of it, if he did forget the least Circumstance. Some Judges have been disturbed at this as a rudeness, which he alwayes looked upon as a service, and respect done unto him. His whole Life was nothing else but a continued course of Labour and Industry: And when he could borrow any time from the publick Service, it was wholly imployed, ei∣ther in Philosophical or Divine Meditations; and even that was publick Service too as it hath proved, For they have occasioned his Writing of such Treatises as are become the choicest entertaiment of wise and good men. He that considers the Active part of his Life, and with what unwearied diligence and application of mind he dispatched all mens business which came under his Care, may justly wonder how he coul find any time for Contemplation. Again, he that con∣siders the various studies he past through, and the many Collections and Observations he hath made, may as justly wonder how he could find any time for Action. But no man can wonder at the Exemplary Piety and Innocence of such a Life, so spent as his was; where∣in as he was careful to avoid every idle word, so it appears that he never spent an idle day. But men who despair of attaining such perfection, are not willing to believe that any man else did ever arrive at such an heigth. He was the Greatest Lawyer of the Age wherein he lived, and might have had what Practice he pleased: But though he did most Conscientiously affect the Labour of his Profession, yet at the same time he despised the gain of it. He took more pains to a∣void the Honours, and preferments of the Gown, than others do to obtain them. His modesty was beyond all Example: He was the most obliging man that ever practised. If a young Gentleman happ'ned to be retained to Argue a Point in Law, where he was on the contrary side, he would often mind the Objections, when he came to repeat them, and would always commend the Gentleman if there were room for it; and one good word of his Mouth was of more advantage to a young man, than all the favour of the Court could be. He was twice Married. His first Wife was Ann, Daughter of Sir Henry Moor of Faly in Berk-shire; by her he had ten Children, whereof the four first died young, the rest liv∣ed to be all Married, yet he outlived them all, except his Eldest Daughter, and his young∣est Son. His second Wife was Ann, the Daughter of Mr. Joseph Bishop of Faly in Berk-shire, by whom he had no Children. In his Will he gave her a great Character, as a most dutiful, faithful and Loving Wife, to whose care he committed the breeding of his Grand-Children, and left her one of his Executors. This Life was Written, and Printed far more largely by the Reverend, and Learned Doctor Burnett, Anno Christi, 1682.
THE LIVES Of Several Excellent LADIES AND GENTLEWOMEN IN THIS LATER AGE. The Life and Death of Mrs. Mary Gunter, who died about the year, 1633. MRS. Mary Gunter was by Birth a Gentlewoman, but descended of Popish Parents, who dying in her infancy, she was committed to the Tuition of an old Lady, honourable for her place, but a strong Papist, who nursed this Orphan in Popery till she came to be about fourteen years of Age: At which time this Lady dying, it pleased God (who had a merciful purpose towards her Conversion) by his good Providence, that she was brought into the Family, and service of that Religious, and truly Honou-Lady, Leitice, Countess of Leicester, who entertained her with more than ordinary re∣spect, both because of her young and tender years, as also because she was allied unto Sir Christopher Blunt, then Husband to this honourable Countess, at whose request, this Lady had taken her into her care. To this honourable Countess she came a most zealous Papist (according to princi∣ciples of her Education) and was resolved, so soon as possibly she could meet with a fit opptunity, to convey her self beyond the Seas, to become a Nun. For she then thought that that was the surest, and most likely way to get to Heaven; which, as she had an earnest desire to attain, so she would take the neerest way, which she thought would bring her thither. But she could not so closely carry on her secret devotions or intentions, but that by the vigilant, and careful eye of that Honourable Lady, they were soon discovered, and not sooner discovered than wisely prevented. For presently her Lady took from her all her Popish Books, Beads, and Images, and all such Trumpery, and set a narrow Watch over
her, that she might be kept from her Popish Prayers, and not absent her self from the daily Prayers used in the Family, which were constantly and Religiously observed there∣in. Farther also she required her to read those Prayers which her Honour daily used to have in her private Chamber with her Women. Her Ladiship also carefully prevented her meeting with any of her Popish Companiens, or intercourse with them by Letters, not suffering her either to Write or Receive any Letter without the view or consent of her Honour. She also caused her to give an account of the Sermons, which were Preached in the Family, which were constantly two every Lords day, that thereby she might attain to sound knowledge, which is the great Hammer to beat down, and enervate Popery. And it pleased God so to bless these means in a short time, that she became helpful unto o∣thers, by Communicating to them the substance of those Sermons which she heard; and she had the greater opportunity to do this, because it was constantly observed by all the Women in that honourable Family, to come together after the Evening Sermon, and to improve their time by repeating both Sermons. But all this she as yet did out of fear, keeping still this reserve that she would devote her heart to Popery, and (as Naaman) trusted that God would be merciful, because she did all through fear, and constraint. But God (who in his own due time, and by his own means) bringeth about his own purposes, began to work in her a staggering first, about her former old way. For when she saw, and observed the grave and holy Con∣versation of that Reverend man of God, who then was Chaplain to the Countess [Mr. J. W.] she began to apprehend and perswade her self, that surely this mans god∣liness must needs bring him to Heaven: And hereupon, the Reverend respect which she did now bear to the man, made her to lend a better ear, and give more heed to his Doctrine, to examine his proofs, and to reverence his Ministry, whereby (in a short time) she came to embrace the Truth in the Love of it, and to renounce her former su∣perstitions, and to bewail her ignorance. And, as it is the property of a true Convert, being Converted her self, she much endeavoured the Conversion of others, and was a great help, and furtherance to the publick Ministry, in her place and station. And this was a thing which that hono∣rable Family took special notice of, and there were many that had great cause to bless God for her, for the benefit which they received by her. But presently after Satan (that subtile Serpent that watcheth to devour every man∣child that is born unto God) began to rage, and roar upon her, by strong, and Hellish temptations: First, terrifying her with an apprehension that she had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, having been a deep dissembler; For that, having been in heart a Papist, yet had she joyned in worship with the Protestants whom she held to be Here∣ticks, and did all this against her knowledge and conscience: And so incessantly, and violently did he pursue her with this Temptation, that she was brought to believe that it was impossible that this sin should, or could be pardoned. And this Temptation was edged and sharpened with that foul and unnatural suggestion of making away her self by murther; as if the remedy of the sin against the Holy Ghost, were to de∣stroy ones self. While she was tossed and molested long with this Satanical suggestion, she (by conceal∣ing her grief) was brought so low, by bodily distempers, that she almost despaired of recovery. But in the nick of time, it pleased God to direct that Reverend Minister (who was her Father in Christ, and whom she ever after embraced with the most intire Love of the most natural Child) to discourse, and treat of this sin, and to shew what it was, and by whom, and in what manner it was committed. To this Doctrine she attended with great diligence, and by examining it, and comparing her self and her own condition with what she had heard of it, and finding that she had not so sinned af∣ter illumination, nor with obstinate malice against God and his Truth (for that was it, when she was most superstitiously devoted, she desired to find out) it pleased God to calm and quiet her mind for that, and so freed her from that Temptation. But Satan (who departed from our Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, only for a season) was not long absent before he again set upon her with new suggestions, and upon his return brought with him seven other spirits (if it were possible) worse than himself, and now his name might fitly by called Legion. For now he cast other siery Darts at her, to confound and destroy her: And this he endeavoured by injecting multitudes of blasphemous thoughts into her head. For now she must believe that there is no God:
That the sacred Scriptures are not the Word of God, but a humane policy to keep men in order: Or if it were Gods Word, who must interpret it? Or how could she, a silly woman, get the understanding of such deep Mysteries as were contained in the same? Besides, as she was of mind that she was gotten out of one Error, so she knew nothing but that she was misled into another? For how could she be assured that this was the Truth which she now embraced, and professed, seeing there are as many, or more Learned men of the one Opinion as of the other; and all of them defend, and maintain their Opinions by the Scriptures? Thus was she vexed and molested with Armies of roving, and unsetled conceits for the space of five, or six years together, till God (whom she often implored and impor∣tuned by fervent prayer, for direction and assistance in the Combate brought her to this resolution, that she would hold these Conclusions whatsoever Disputes Satan might vex and weary her withal. 1. That there was, not only a God in himself, but a God that was her God: 2ly. That whatsoever Opinions there were in the World, that yet there was but one Truth, and that was to be Learned out of the Scriptures: And that, though there was much in the Bible which she did not understand, yet she was perswaded, that if she would di∣ligently read, and search the Scriptures, with earnest prayer unto God for a good under∣standing in them, she should attain thereby, such a measure of knowledge, as would be sufficient to bring her to Heaven. And holding strongly to these grounds, she found her Temptations to vanish and wear away by degrees, and was her self daily more con∣firmed, and setled upon the foundation. Neither was she only (through Gods Grace,) a Conqueror over these Temptations; but (as the Apostle Paul speaketh) Rom. 8. more than a Conqueror by them. For God (who bringeth Light out of darkness) made these Temptations a sweet seasoning of her; by occasion whereof, she tied her self to an exact▪ and strict course of godliness, and to the constant practice of Christian duties, which she religiously observed and pra∣cticed even till her dying day. For first, That she might be established in the Truth, and confirmed against her former waverings, and weaknesses, she resolved that (God assisting her) she would every year read overy the whole Bible in an orderly course, which course she constantly observed for the space of fifteen years together, beginning her task upon her Birth day, and reading every day so many Chapters as to bring it about just with the year: By which exercise she gained a great encrease and measure of knowledge, and no less strengthening of her Faith. For she did not read carelesly and negligently, but always kept a Note of such Places as she did not understand; and would be still enquiring after the meaning of them, as she met, either with Ministers, or with other understanding Christians, who as she thought, were able to help her therein. And her custom was, ever before she opened her Bible, to direct, and send up a short Prayer unto God for the opening of her blind eyes to the understanding of those sacred Mysteries, that they might be as a Lamp to guide her feet in the ways of holiness, until she should attain the end of her Hope, and Faith, even the salvation of her Soul. And yet not herewith content, as a good Mary, she pondred the good Word of God in her heart. For by her great industry in the Scriptures, she had gotten by heart ma∣ny Select Chapters, and more of the Psalms: and in every Book of the Scripture one choice Verse; all which she repeated every week in a method and order which she had propounded to her self. And being asked, why she took so much pains in getting and retaining those Scriptures in memory? Her Answer was, that she knew not what dayes and times of Trial, and Persecutions might come, wherein she might be deprived of her Bible, and other good Books and helps; But so much of the Scriptures as she could get into her heart, she knew that no Tyrant, or Enemy could bereave, or rob her of them. Secondly. For that time of her trouble, she resolved upon Daniels Practice, where∣in she was constant also; namely, that besides Family duties, which were performed twice every day, by the Chaplain in the Religious house in which she lived, till within one year of her death: And besides the private Prayers which she daily read in her Ladies Bed-Chamber, she was thrice on her Knees every day before God in secret, like a true worshipper, whose delight was frequently to present her self before the Lord: And by means of this days exercise (besides all other comfortable fruits) she attained to a singular sweet gift in prayer, whereby she could both strongly wrestle, and happily
prevail with God, whose gracious disposition inclines him to be prevailed with, yea, to be overcome by the Prayers of his weak Servants. She also knowing that religious fasting, is the Whetstone of Prayer, she tied her self to set apart six dayes in every year, wherein she did in an extraordinary manner humble her self before God by fasting and prayer for her own sins, and for the sins of the times wherein she lived. At all which times she was in a special manner earnest with the Lord, that he would be pleased farther to reveal his whole Truth, needful for her Salvation, and keep her constant in the Obedience thereof unto the end. And because she knew that the right and worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, did afford to a Christian some special strength, and much stability in the course of Godliness; as she diligently laid hold on every opportunity, wherein she might partake thereof; so for many years she laid a bond upon her self never to receive it, but the day before, to sit, and examine her self seriously, and deeply to humble her self before the Lord in fasting and prayer all the day long. Thirdly. The troubles of her Conscience made her ever of a tender Conscience, so that she was ever fearful of offending God and her own Conscience, for which end she always kept a strict and narrow watch over her heart. And to keep her self in the greater awe, for the space of about five years before her death, she kept a Catalogue or Register of her daily slips, yea, she set down the naughty thoughts which she observed in her self, that one day in every Week she might extraordinarily humble her self for all the failings of that Week; and at such times her abstinence was more than ordinary, using only so much food as might best fit her weak body to humble and fervent pray∣er. All these private duties of Religion were carried on with so much fervency, that none in the family, besides her bosom friend, knew of their performance. And as she was fearful of sins present and to come, so was her Conscience as tender in respect of sins past, as will appear by this memorable instance. Whilst she was a Child, bred up in the Family of that afore-mentioned old Lady, she was enticed by some lewd Servants, who fed her with Figs, and such other Toys, fit to please Children withal, to steal for them money out of her Ladies Cabinet, which often stood open in her Chamber, and which they knew, she of all others had the fittest opportunities to do: And her childishness giving way to these enticements, she found that it was not missed, and therefore was encouraged to continue it, for about the space of seven years, without any great check of Conscience: But when the Light of Gods Word shone into her soul, and made a privy discovery of the secrets of her heart, and thereby made her able to take her self with the Fact; Now she was ashamed and confounded in her self, and her awaken'd Conscience gave her no rest; neither could she concieve a∣ny hope of quiet, because she saw that she had done that which she could no way undo. When she looked at the Sums of money taken by her, and given to those wicked Enticers, she conceived that by continuing in that course, for so many years together, she might have wronged that Lady of Thirty, or Forty pounds. If she thought of mak∣ing Restitution, she was no way able to do it. And thus she groaned under the bur∣den of this sin for a long time, easing it as well as she could, by taking up a firm re∣solution, that if God pleased ever to make her able, she would make full Restituti∣on to the Heirs of the deceased Lady, which afterwards she did accordingly. For when that honourable Lady, whom she had long served, at the time of her Mar∣riage, gave her a large and bountiful Portion, she soon after made choice of a Reverend Minister, to whom she enjoyned secrecy; and because she would be sure to make full Re∣stitution, she delivered to him Threescore pounds to make tender of it to the Ladies heir, as from a concealed Servant of the Ladies, who had unjustly taken it away from her. And when the Gentleman returned Ten pounds of it again, such was the tenderness of her Conscience, that she would receive none of it to her own use, but gave it away to the poor, and pious uses. And this childish miscarriage God turned to her good. For in all the two and twenty years service to that honourable Lady, she never made use of any thing which was under her charge, whether small or great, but she set it down in Writing, and once every day did make it good, either in the very kind, or in some other thing which she bought for her Ladiships use. Fourthly. The sense of her own weaknesses and wants made her of a pitiful and charitable disposition towards the wants and miseries of others. She had ever a very large heart to the poor, especially to the godly poor. She did never see or hear of any
that were in want, but her heart did mourn if she had not wherewithal to relieve them▪ Neither yet was her hand shut; for she did yearly lay aside a portion of mony, to the uttermost of her ability (if not beyond it) for their relief. Thus she lived, and therefore happily, and desiredly. Neither could so gracious a Life be conclud∣ed, but by an answerable, that is, a happy death and dissolution, which accordingly, through Gods mercy, she attained. True it is that the Life of a Christian should be a continual meditation of death, as it is a continual motion towards Death. And such was the latter part especially of the Life of this gracious woman, who was of a weak and sickly constitution for many years before her death, which made her the more and better prepared for her last combate and sickness, which continued for the space of ten Weeks; in all which time she certainly apprehended, and expected her approaching dissolution, it being the principal, and almost only subject of her discourses, for six Months before it came to pass. But Thirty days before her departure, she finding her pains increasing and growing very sharp and tedious, she spent an hours discourse with her Husband, concerning her desire about the things of this Life. And having imparted to him what she purposed, she thus con∣cluded her Speech. And now sweet-heart, no more words between you and me about any world∣ly thing, only let me earnestly request you, and charge you, that as you see my weaknesses to en∣crease, you will not fail to assist me, and to call upon me to follow the Lord with prayer and pa∣tience. For now, I know, that Satan will shew all his malice, because his time is but short a∣gainst me, and he will easily espy my weakness, and make his advantage of it; and therefore now especially help me with your counsel, comfort, and prayers. In all the time of her sickness, her gracious God, who, as a fast friend, standeth close to his Servants, when they have need of him, shewed his merciful presence with her, as in all other comfortable supplies, answerable to the depth of her distress, so especially in hearing, and answering her prayers, and desires of her heart. For There were four things, which in her prayers, she especially begged of God, in the time of her sickness, and in none of them was she denied. First: That she might be armed with strength against Satans assaults, and temptati∣ons which she expected would be very fierce and frequent: From whom (according to her request) she was mercifully freed. Only about three days before her death, she began to be dejected in the sight and sense of her present dulness, and hereupon began to call in question, the love of God towards her, and the truth of Gods Grace in her. For (said she) were I the Lords, why should not I now lift up my head with Joy, seeing the time of my dissolution draweth on so near? But, through Gods mercy, these complaints continued not above six hours, before she had much comfort and chearfulness again, which she expressed in earnest and excellent prayers (wherein her Gift was more than ordinary for her Sex) as also in many hearty and chearful Praises, and Thanksgivings unto God for his great mercy, in that he had so chained up Satan, at this time of her great weakness; whereas she had been former∣ly molested, and daily vexed with his Buffetings, and fiery Darts, for above the space of six years together; yet now, God would not suffer him to spit out his malice against her for above the space of six hours. Her second request was, that the Lord would support and strengthen her, patiently to endure, and cheerfully to undergo all the pains he should lay upon her, even to the end. And herein also was she graciously heard, as well as in the former. For though she was full of great pains, and endured many strong fits, in which no part of her bo∣dy was exempted from racking, and deadly torments, and every of these fits conti∣nued for many hours, yet was she never heard to utter any impatient word concerning her self, or of discontent to any that were imployed about her: Much less did she charge God foolishly, in whose hands she judged her self to be, as the Clay in the hands of the Potter. Her third request to God was, that she might in all her sorrows be supported with some sense and evidence of his Love, and with the assurance of the pardon of all her sins. And that God was comfortably found of her in this request, also was very appa∣rent in her joyful expectation of death, the time whereof she truly foretold five days before it came to pass: And as this time approached, her Joy encreased, so as she was able to comfort her mournful Husband and Friends, saying: Mourn not for me, but for your selves: For I shall very shortly be more happy than the wishes of your hearts can make
me; and therefore cease your mourning, and help me thither by you prayers as fast as you can. Her fourth and last request was, that she might have her memory continued to her until the last period of her life, that so by no idle or light speech, she might dishonour God, or bring a scandal upon her profession. For she said, If I through pain, or want of Sleep (which indeed she much wanted) should have any foolish, or idle talk, I know what the Speech of the world useth to be. This is the end of all your precise Folks, they die mad, or not themselves, &c. And as the prayed, God gave her her memory to the last gasp, so that she died pray∣ing. For a little before her departure, she called her Husband, and her Friends that were about her, and hasted them to prayer: For now (said she) I shall be gone presently (which words they then believed not) but prayer being ended, she said with more strength than she had spoken any thing for four hours before, Amen, Amen, Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit, Lord Jesus have mercy on me, and receive my Soul. And thus with her breath and words, she breathed out her soul, which by the Angels was carried into Abrahams bosom in the highest Heavens, to which her eyes and hands were lifted up. About the year of our Lord, 1633. Praised be God. The Life and Death of the Lady Alice Lucy, who Died, Anno Christi 1648. HEr Birth was none of hers, and therefore cannot be either her vertue or her praise. High descent, and glorious Names, far fetcht, are but Names; and the Names of others too—Vix ea nostra voco. Scarcely can we call ours what our selves are not the Authors of. And, not many Generations, and a multitude of mouldy sta∣tues, but Virtue only gives the Character of true Nobility, as some of the Heathen hath said: How far then should Christians be from committing of Idolatry with Stocks, and worshipping of Images! Ascribing so much to Families, and esteeming themselves or others truly Noble, if their Progenitors have been so. Nobility is not Hereditary, but Inherent; not Relative and transmitted, but Moral, and Personal; or at least, not so much: Though we are very apt to give much honour to the very shadow of Nobility. But when to the shadow there is added the substance; Nobility Inherent to Nobility He∣reditary, there truly we owe a debt of double honor. And such a debt was due to this noble Lady, so conspicuous in both. Her entrance was early into the Conjugal State and Condition (such Fruit so rare, so Her Marriage. soon ripe, could not continue long ungathered) yet not sooner than she was fit for it. She knew that her taking of a second self, was a self-denying work; and therefore she resigned both her reason, and her will unto her Head, and Husband; to whom she was, Her Humility. as Monica, the Mother of Saint Austin, was to her Husband Patricius, Reverently ami∣able, and admirable: And from whom, for all the Virtues which an Husband can A good Wife. wish for in his Wife, she received as much honor as she could expect, or desire. After they had drawn together in one yoke for about the space of Thirty years, Her Husband, Sir T Lucy of Charlcot, dies. with much mutual dearness, and delight, it pleased God to dissolve the Knot; by tak∣ing away her support and honour, far dearer to her than her very Life. But then it pleased God also, to shew himself abundantly gracious unto her. For when he had made her a Widdow, he made himself her Husband; supporting her, comforting her, and enabling her prudently to mannage her great Estate, and to order her numerous Fa∣mily, with so much Wisdom as was admirable; especially if we consider that her bo∣dily Her Prudence. infirmities did most commonly confine her to her Chamber, and seldom permitted her to stir abroad. Its no wonder that the Turkish Bassa's, and Privy Counsellors carry themselves so regularly and exactly towards him, though he never come amongst them: For he hath his dangerous Window (as 'tis called) where he can hear their Words,
and see and observe all their behaviour, though none of them can see him: And won∣derful it was that all in so great a Family as this Ladies, should be so regular, so dili∣gent Good Servants. in their places, so faithful to her, who, as she scarce ever came among them, so had no Window through which she might over-look them. Gods Wisdom is every where visible, though himself be not: So her Influence extended to all her affairs, though her self were so retired. She continually carried about her the burthen of a weak body; but she did hear Her great weakness. it with singular Patience, and improved it to her spiritual advantage. Its a blessed weak∣ness which causeth us to make God our strength: A blessed Consinement, which sets the soul at liberty, and set it a longing after more Communion with God. Her great affliction it was that she could not visit the house of God and attend upon the Publick Ordinances, where God hath promised his presence, and where we may expect his blessing What many in those giddy days departed from, she most earnestly desired to repair to, and en∣joy: But because she could not go from her house to Gods house, she made a Church of her house, where for sundry years, she every Lords day in the Evening (unless she Her Piety. were hindred by extroardinary weakness) heard the Preaching of the Word; strictly requiring the presence of all her Family, and shewing her self an example of great reverence, and singular attention. It was observed that she never removed out of one Room into an other, but she Prayer. used some short Ejaculations, with lifting up her Eyes and hands to God. Her first imployment every day, was her humble Addresses to Almighty God in se∣cret: Secret duties. Her next was to read some part of Gods Word, and of other good and pro∣fitable Books: And indeed she had a great Library, well stored with most of our choice English Authors. No sooner could she hear of any pious Book made publick, but she endeavoured to make it hers, and her self the better for and by it. Much she was in reading, and able to give as good an account of what she read as Children well Educated. most are: She had an excellent understanding, as in secular so in spiritual things. And finding the benefit of this course, and practice to her self, she commended it to her Children, whom she caused, every day to read some Portions, both of the Old and New Testament in her own presence and hearing. In the Afternoon she spent some time in the same manner as she had done in the Morning. About an hour before Supper, she appointed some one of her Children to read some godly and useful Sermon in the presence of her self and of her other Children: Fre∣quently taking occasion of instilling into them some sweet and profitable Instructi∣ons, and of exhorting them to a constant religious walking with God. In the Evening a little before she betook her self to repose, she commanded them all to come into her Lodgings, where they joyned in singing of a Psalm (as the Servants did also con∣stantly after Supper, before they rose from the Table; the men-servants in the Hall, and the Maid Servants in a more private Room) And whence, after many pious Exhor∣tations, and her Motherly Benediction, she dismissed them: And then closed the day, with secret duties, as she began it; begging Gods blessing upon her self: And thus she did constantly every day. By what hath been said, we may observe that she was of a precious, and gracious spirit her self, and as careful to leave such holy and gracious impressions upon her Children after her. A very Fruitful Vine she was, and many were her Olive Plants Her fruitful∣ness. about her Table. Some of them tasted of death before their dear Mother, yet she left Ten living after her; the same number of either Sex, who were all present at her Fu∣neral. Whilst she lived, they daily tell down and craved her blessing: They also rose up, and (with the Children of Solomons Virtuous woman, Prov. 31. 28.) called her blessed. Next to her golden Chain of Graces, mentioned by Saint Peter (1 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.) wherewith she was eminently Beautified) and the Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, (1 Pet. 3. 4.) she accounted (with Cornelia, that noble Roman Matron) her Children to be her chiefest Ornaments; and therefore her desire, and earnest endeavours were to beautifie and adorn them with all virtuous Habits, and to make them the true Chil∣dren of God. She knew, and would have them know too, that if they would be happy, to their Great Birth there must be added the New Birth: To great Kindred and Allies, there must be Relation to the Family of Heaven: To a great Estate, the State of Grace, or else it would come to pass that they would one day wish, that they had ne∣ver been born. She often inculcated into them, That true Grace is true Greatness▪
And that the more any of them feared and served God, the greater portion of Love they might expect from her. The last Link in Saint Peters Chain is Charity. And this Elect Lady (2 John 1.) Her Charity. was much in those gracious practices, whereby she might make her Calling and Election sure. Much she was in the duties of Piety: Much in the duties of Charity: Many Coats and Garments did this Dorcas make whilst she was alive: She had not a hard heart, nor a withered Hand. She was none of those, who having this worlds goods, and seeing their Brother have need, do yet shut up their bowels of Compassion from him. She may be a Pattern to all that come after: God gave her the blessing of a great E∣state: Yea, he gave her a greater blessing than that, an heart to make a right use of it. Every day she stretched out her hand to the poor; yea, she reached out her hands to the needy. A great number she relieved at her Gates, and gave her charge to her Porter, that when there came any that were very Aged, or that complained of great losses in those dismal Times of our Civil Wars, especially if they seemed honest, that he should come and certifie her of it, that she might enlarge her Charity to such; which if he had neglected at any time to do, and she had known of it, probably she would have been as much displeased with him, as once she was with another of her Servants, for neglecting a Command which she had given him in reference to the refreshment of some poor. In those Times of scarcity, every Week she sent many Loaves of Bread to many Neighbour Towns: She caused her Corn to be sold in the Markets (as it were) by Retail, in such small quantities as might not exceed the Poors abilities to purchase. She allowed certain Meals in her House to sundry poor Neighbours, whose empty Bellies were discernible in their pale Faces; and when hereby they had recovered their former Complexion, and received (as it were) a new Life by her means, she with Joy professed, that the sight of such an alteration in them, did her as much good, as any thing which she her self had eaten. She continually imployed many poor old men and women in such works as were fit Her Prudence. and sutable to their skill and strength. When the Physitian came at any time to her house, she used to make inquiry whe∣ther any were sick in the Town; That if any were, they might partake of the same benefit with her self: But at all times when any wanted health, she presently had intelligence of it, and most chearfully Communicated whatsoever she conceiv∣ed conducible to their recovery; having, not only great store of Cordials and Re∣storatives always by her, but great Skill and Judgment in the Application of them. And as our Saviour Christ said unto the Woman of Canaan (Matth. 15. 28.) great is thy Faith, so may we say of this Virtuous, and Religious Lady, Great was her Chari∣ty. For she knew right well, and considered; That Faith is but a fancy without the Labour of Love. For true Faith cannot be idle, its never out of work, 1 Thes. 1. 3. And it worketh by Love, Gal. 5. 6. That the greater any are, the better they should be: The more Goods they have, the more Good they shoud do: And as they have opportunity they should do good to all, Gal. 6. 10. That such as are rich in this world, have a great charge. For they are charged, not to be high minded, and close handed (which they are too apt to be) But to do good, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to Communicate; So laying up in store for themselves, a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Tim. 6 17, 18, 19. That the Wisdom that is from above, as 'tis pure, and peaceable, gentle and easie to be intreated: So 'tis full of mercy, and good fruits; without partiality, and without Hypocrisie, Gal. 3. 17. That pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this: To visit the Fatherless and Widdows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world, Jam. 1. 27. Thus unspotted she ever kept her self. As the Apostle S. Paul saith; Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifieth, &c. Rom. 8. 33. So may we say, who can lay any thing to the charge of this Elect Lady? God had sanctified her: Yet not so as to free her from the Inherency of sin (for so he sanctifies none in this Life), but
so, as to free her from the Regency of it, and from all such acts as would have proved a spot, and blemish to her, which all that knew her must needs acknowledge. And this also, that she, like unto a choice and dainty Garden, was free not only from emi∣nent Weeds, but richly furnished with all manner of fragrant Flowers and delicate Fruits. Or like the glorious Sun, not only free from spots, but full of Light. All the Countrey knew her; as Boaz said of Ruth, all the City knew her to be a Vir∣tuous woman. At her entrance into her last sickness (which was about a fortnights length) she Her last sick∣ness. conceived her Life to be but of a very short continuance, and therefore prepared and com∣posed her self for her dissolution. Yet durst she not but make use of her Physitians, whose singular ability and fidelity she had frequently experienced, having been rais∣ed Death prepar∣ed for. up by them, when she was faln almost as low as the very Grave. And now, had she been recoverable, they (by Gods blessing) would have recovered her. But as he faith; Non est in Medico semper relevetur ut aeger: Interdum Doctâ plus valet Arte malum. Ovid. de Pont. The most able and learned Physitians cannot keep Life when God calls for it. There is no Antidote against death: No doses will free us from paying our last debt. Go we must when our Life-Lord bids us come. The last words of this virtuous Lady were; My God I come flying unto thee. Presently after which, her Soul took its flight from Her Death. hence, and she quietly slept in the Lord in August, Anno Christi 1648. Such was her humility and modesty, that although in that Magnificent Monument Her Humility. which she made for her Husband, Sir Thomas Lucy of Charlcot in Warwick-shire, she caused her self to be laid by him in her full proportion; yet would she not suffer her Epitaph to bear any proportion with his: She conceived the most that could be said of him was too little, and the least that could be said of her self was too much. Unwilling she was to have any thing at all said of her self: But when that might not be, she would by no means allow of any more than this; Her observance of her dearest Husband while she enjoyed him; her remembrance of him by that Monument, when she had lost him. Only one thing more was added, but full sore against her will; Namely, that her other exquisite Virtues were forbidden by her excessive modesty, to make their appearance in that Marble. See her Funeral Sermon Preached by Mr. Thomas Dugard, August 17th. 1648.
THE HONOURABLE Ye: LADY MARY VERE F. H. Van. Houe. Sculp: portrait of Mary Vere The Life and Death of the Right Honourable, the Lady Mary Vere, who Died, Anno Domini 1671. THis Noble Lady was born of high and Ancient Families on both sides. For Her Parentage. by her Mothers side she springed from the best Family of the Throgmortons, and by the Fathers side, she was extracted from the Ancient family of the Tracies, at Todington in Glocestershire. She was the youngest of fiften Children, and was born May the eighteenth, Anno Her Birth. Christi 1581. being the three and twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth of blessed me∣mory. Her Mother died three days after she was born: And her Father when she was but eight years old. Thus she was soon left an Orphan: But indeed, they only are Orphans, who have not Her Motto. an heavenly Father. So when her Father, and Mother thus forsook her, the Lord took her up. And the experiences which she had all her life-long, of Gods most tender care over her, ministred occasion to her to chuse this for her Motto (which was found written by her in the Front of most of her Books in her Closet) God will provide. She took much delight in speaking of one of her Ancestors, as one of the great∣est Her Marriages. honours, to her Family, [William Tracy of Toddington, Esquire] mentioned by Mr. Fox in his Martyrology [See the Story of it in my English Martyrology. p. 395.] who in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, for the sound profession of his Faith, set down by him in his Last Will and Testament, was, two years after his Decease, condemned to have his body taken up, and burnt, which Sentence was Executed accordingly. This virtuous Lady was twice married: First, to Mr. William Hobby, her first Hus∣band, when she was nineteen years old, and by him she had two Sons, who were by her relgiously educated, and the happy, and comfortable fruit of this her care she reaped at their pious deaths (they going both of them, young to heaven, having lived long
in a short time) the younger died in the fourteeath year of his Age, and the Elder in his three and twentieth, who in his Life was much admired for his parts, and as much beloved for his piety. Her second Husband was Sir Horace Vere, afterwards Baron of Tilbury, a Person not to be named without some Honorable Character, a Man whose Coat Armour made more Renowned than his Coat of Arms, and whose Personal Atchievements in the field (especially at the battel at New-port) ennobled more, than the high blood derived from his Ancestors. But his unstained piety gave him the highest Character 1. Veres Cha∣racter. of all. By the other indeed, he purchased a Great Name, like unto the Great Men that are in the Earth [2 Sam. 2. 19.] But by this, he procured a Good Name. And even Tacitus himself, (the Roman Historian) prefers the praise gotten by Goodness, before that which is obtained by Greatness. And therefore speaking of a noble Roman, he saith, that he was, inter claros potius, quam inter bonos censendus: Rather to be num∣bred amongst the Famous, than among the good men. This noble Lord was one, that could as well wrestle with God, as fight with men, and may be thought to have gotten his Victories upon his knees in his Closet, before he drew his Sword in the Field. And when he had overcome his Enemies, he could over∣come himself also, being one of the humblest souls, in whom so much true worth lodged, that we have heard of. His good Lady used to say, that she honoured him for his valour, but most, for the grace of God which shined in him. And hence it was, that she did Coruscare radiis Mariti, shine by the Rays of her Husbands excellencies: But yet not only with these; for she had rare, and radiant beams of her own, by which she cast the like honour upon him. So happily was this noble couple suited, as in the high extraction of both their Births, so also in the rest of their accomplishments, that they mutually illustrated each the others honour. But passing by all her Civil, and Secular Prerogatives, we will now present her in some of her spiritual excellencies. These indeed are those that give an intrinsick value to a person. For he that would take the true height of a man, must not measure him with the advantage ground he stands upon. We may say of this gracious Lady, what Nehe∣miah said of a noble person in his time: She was a faithful woman, and feared God a∣bove Her Piety. many, [Nehemiah 7. 2.] Some there are so prodigiously wicked, and profligate, that they seem to have wedded the Vices of many others: But this good, and virtu∣ous Lady may be said to have collected, and espoused the excellencies of many Christi∣ans. For in her might be seen these various Graces, which grow to an eminency, but severally in others, met in her altogether in one knot or Nosegay. To instance in some few of them. First, The Fear of the Great God was very great in her: Wonderful tender she was of of∣fending 1. Her fear of God. him by any known sin. She hath often been heard to say, and that very so∣lemnly. Oh! I would not sin against my God. She professed that she dreaded Hell most, as a place wherein God was blasphemed. O precious Saint! To dread Hells Sin, more than Hells Fire. Secondly, Her Zeal to the worship of God, was very eminent. First to the Publick: 2. Her Zeal. This was evidenced many ways. First. By her great care and Zeal to get able, and faithful Ministers for those Li∣vings whereof she had the disposal, and by her improving her utmost interest to procure the like for the Parish wherein she lived, in its several vacancies. And herein the noble Patron, did most kindly gratifie her by giving her the nomination, thereby deeply ob∣liging, not only her Honour, but the whole Parish also: So that they which lived in that place, enjoyed a Goshen of Gospel Light for a long season together, and are able also to tell, how comfortably she spake to them who preached the good Word of God among them, which countenance, and real encouragement she gave them in carrying on the Lords work, without sparing her Purse to do it. Secondly. By her constant attendance on the publick worship, so long as the Lord vouchsafed her health to do it: yea, she did not only attend on it her self, but took care that her Family should do the like also: And they that would not serve God with her, were no Servants for her. Thirdly, She was not less devout, than constant at the publick worship. She durst not Her holy walk∣ing. trifle with holy things, nor in holy duties, which gave occasion to one to say of her: That the Lady Vere by her solemn, and reverend deportment in Divine Worship, would make
one believe that there is a God indeed. And as for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is so wofully neglected by too many, her desires were eager, and ardent to per∣take of it frequently: Saying, that she durst not neglect, no not any one opportunity that was offered for the enjoying of this Sacred Ordinance. And Oh! How serious, and in∣tent was she in her preparation for it? The whole preceding week, was taken up by her for that work; in which week also she would always have a private Fast kept for her Family, or a secret one in her Closet. Hereby she declared, that she meant to storm Heaven, and to take it by violence. Secondly, For her private Worship of God, let us follow her from the Church to her Private Devo∣tion. own House, and we shall find that she brought her Religion and Devotion home with her, and did not leave them in her Pue behind her, till she returned thither a∣gain the next Lords Day, as too many do. For some there are that can Complement Almighty God, before their Neighbours on the Sabbaths, but care not to acquaint themselves with God at home all the week after. But if ever any private dwelling, might be called a Chappel, or little Sanctuary, Hers much more. There you might find her, and her Family twice every day upon their knees, solemnly worshiping the Great God: There you might see them humbly sitting, at his feet, to hear Gods most Holy word read unto them: Concluding constantly their Evening Service with one of Davids Psalms; what strangers soever were there present, there was no putting by, or adjorning the Service of God to a more convenient time. On the Lords day, you might hear the Sermons Preached in publick, repeated to Sabbaths Sanctified. the Family: The Servants called to give an account before her, of what each of them remembred: And the high praises of God sounded forth by the whole Fa∣mily joyntly, and together. Also after Supper, you might hear the Servants in their Room, exercising themselves in the like Heavenly duty of singing Psalms: And no sooner did this good Lady hear them begin their Melody, but away she would go to joyn with them in that duty. If you followed her up the Stairs, there you should be sure to find her, twice e∣very day, shut up for some hours, in her Closet, (which was excellently furnished with pious books of Practical Divinity.) Here she redeemed much precious time, in reading the sacred Scriptures, and other good books, that might give her further light into them, and edifiy her in her most holy Faith. Here she poured out her devout Soul, with such fervour of Spirit in Prayer, as could not be hid (at least sometimes) from those of her attendants, and Maidens, whose occasions, drew them at any time, near unto her Closet door. And yet are we not at an end of this choise, and pious Ladies Devotions. For every night she used her self to pray with her Maidens before she went to Bed. And now, is it any wonder, that she grew so rich in Grace, who drove so great, and constant a Trade in the use of the means of Grace, and that had so many ways to bring her in Spiritual gains? Thirdly, Her Love to God, (beside what hath been already sayd) did many ways Love to God. make it self evident to be in a high degree in hr. First, By her mournful complaint which she frequently made, because she could Love God no better. The reason indeed of which was, because she loved him so much: Therefore she thought she loved him so little, because she knew that she could rver love him enough. The truth is, she had such raised apprehensions of Gods glo∣rious Excellency, as caused her to think her highest affections unworthy of him. For none indeed that have such high apprehensions of the Divine greatness, and goodness, can love him little, or think their Love, when highest, to be great. Secondly, By her vehement desires and longings that she had to be gone hence, that she might be with Christ, which she accounted best of all. She was one of those very few Christians, which stood in need of old Mr. John Dods Use of Exhortation, which he would make to the Saints in his Preaching; That they would be content, and pa∣tient, tho they were not taken up to Heaven so soon as they desired. This Good Man (who was one of the most Heavenly Souls that this Age brought forth) having lived to a great Age, and finding that to do this was something difficult in himself, thought that it was ordinary with others to do the like: Whereas (God knows) that most Christians, are of a lower form in Christs School: Prone rather to linger too much here, than to be too hasty of going hence; So that they rather need a Spur than a Bridle, and Ministers have more reason to take hold of them, with the strongest Arguments they can invent, and find out, to draw them from the Love of Life, and the world
(As the Angels drew Lot out of Sodom) than to perswade them to be willing to continue here. But this gracious Lady knew, and enjoyed so much of Heaven, as made her stay here Death desired below, tedious unto her. The earnest option of her Soul was, Come Lord Jesus; Come quickly. For she found to her great grief, that her imperfect State on Earth, made it impossible for her, to serve God here as she would, and heartily desired; and therefore did oft wonderfully complain, that she was unprofitable, and unserviceable; and her deep sense of her unserviceableness (even whilst others admired her fruitfulness, and usefulness) did still encrease her desires to be, where all these infirmities and imper∣fections would be perfectly cured, and where she knew her abilities should perfectly cor∣respond with the largest of her desires which she had to serve and glorifie God. Thirdly. By her love to the Saints, who were born of God, and had his lively I∣mage Love to the Saints. stamped upon them. And this in Scripture is made one of the fairest evidences of our Love to God. For every one that loveth the Father that begat, loveth him that is begotten, [1 Joh. 5. 1.] A man may love the Child, and yet not love his Father: But he cannot love him because he is his Child, and because he is like his Father, but he must needs love his Father. Yea, love him first and most, because his love to the Child springs from his love to the Father. This good, and gracious Lady then, was doubtless a great Lover of God himself, be∣cause she had so dear an affection for his Children. She did not praise the dead Saints, and Persecute the living. She did not pretend love to those that lived far from her; but shewed kindness to those that lived near her. She did not factiously love some of one Party, and reproach those of another. In a word, she did not love the Saints in an equality with others, from a natural tender∣ness, which disposes some to be kind unto all, good and bad: But her love was a Cordial, spiritual, special, and uniform Love to them; where ever she saw any thing of God, her Love was drawn out towards them, and she had the most Love for those, that discovered most of God in them. She loved them so as to de∣light in Converse, and Communion with them; yea, and the chiefest of her Charity was extended to them. As for the faithful Ministers of Christ, whose Office and Function lifts them up a∣bove Love to Mini∣sters. private Christians, few ever exceeded her, in loving and honouring of them: yea, she loved first the Ministry, and then the Ministers; professing seriously, the great love, and high esteem she had for them, was for their dear Masters sake, whose Ambassadors they were: So that what was said, concerning her worthy Son-in-Law, in Norfolk [Sir Roger Towsend], that for his love to the Ministry, he obtained the Title of being cal∣led Deliciae Cleri, The Ministers delight; May be truly given unto her. Fourthly. By her works of Charity, which were remarkable upon many accounts. First, By the largness of her Charity: so great indeed it was, that it may well be Her Charity. admired, how this Tree should not long ago have killed it self with overbearing. The Trees in our Orchards yield us Fruit but once a year: And take so long a time to re∣cover heart before they can bear again: But her Charity was as Fruit dropping all the year long. Many ways it diffused it self. She had mony for the empty Purse, meat for the empty Belly: Medicaments for the Sick: Salves for the Wounded, or that had Sores. Abundance of good she did this way in Town and Country. She was not only liberal, but devised liberal things. If her Servants knew of any that were in great need, and did not acquaint her with it; when afterwards, by other ways she came to hear of it, she would be very angry with them for it. It fell out that an honest poor Neighbour died, before she knew of his sickness; for which being troubled, she asked her Servant that attended her, whether he had wanted in his sick∣ness? Adding, I tell you I had rather part with my Gown from my back than that the poor should want. Secondly. In the Prime objects of her Charity: She did indeed cast her Seed upon all sorts of Ground, but especially upon Gods enclosure. The Houshold of Faithful had her fullest Handfls. To such she never thought that she gave enough. Thirdly. She was wonderful secret in what she gave. For when she could do it, she did not give her Charity as some throw there mony into a Basin at a Collection, so as that it might Ring again: but it fell like Oil into a Vessel, without any noise. Fourthly. We may take notice of her self-denying spirit in all this. She (good Lady) was no Merit-monger. She never thought to purchase Land in Heaven, with
the money which she gave on Earth. She was no Merchant to sell her Charity, but a faithful Steward, acknowledging that what she gave, was not her own, but her Lords Money. She was notwithstanding all her Charity, carried out to a naked Christ, de∣siring to be sound alone in him, and his righteousness, as earnestly as if she had not done any one good work in all her Life. Fifthly. By her Sincerity. This indeed was as her under Garment, which she wore Her Sincerity. nearest to her, and which gave an excellency to all her other Graces. And truly, many notable Testimonies there were to demonstrate the singleness and soundness of her heart. As First, The uniformity of her holy walking: Her Religion was not like the drift snow, which lies thick in one place, and leaves the ground bare in another. The hypocrite hath always some naked plot in his Conversation, that gives others some just cause to suspect him. You may (with Herod) perswade him to do many things: But can never, make him (with S. Paul) willing in all things to live honestly. But this Pious Ladies Con∣versation, one part did admirably correspond, and agree with another. An happy Symetry appeared in her whole course, both towards God and man, both abroad, and at home; among her Domestick Relations, those that lived constantly with her, who saw her (as we usually say) hot, and cold; In her Night-cloths, as when dressed to go abroad. Surely few have had an higher Testimony for Piety, from those that have lived near, and long with them, than she hath from all that lived under her Roof. Secondly, The great freedom which she gave to her Friends in speaking to her of what they saw amiss in her. She used much to applaud that priviledge, and advan∣tage of having a faithful Friend; saying, that others might see more by us than we could by our selves: She also used to say, That it was a great mercy to be convinced of any sin. Thirdly, Her Faith, which used then to be strongest when death seemed to be Her Faith. nearest. Like that great Soldier we read of, who would tremble every joint of him, whilst his Armour was puting on in his Tent, but was dauntless when he came to fight in the Field. And to a Captain in Ireland, who using to wear his Sword, if any, though but a Child handled it, he would fall a trembling, yet in a Battel, he would fight like a Lion. Somewhat more than a twelve month before her death, she fell in∣to a long swound, which continued about half an hour, without any sensible hopes of recovery: But as soon as she came again to her self; she said, I know that my Redeemer liveth, &c. And being conveyed to her Chamber, there again she said: I know whom I have trusted: whereas an Hypocrites hope is compared to the giving up of the Ghost, [Job 11. 20.] And in this particular, is not unlike it. For as in a dying man his breath grows shorter and shorter, till at last its quite puffed out; so commonly the Hypocrites hope lesseneth, as death groweth nearer, and usually expireth before the man himself dies. Impius dum spirat sperat: Justus cum expirat sperat. Sixthly. Her Humility was rare, and signal. This we may call her upper Garment, with which she strove to cover her other excellencies, though their beauty was ren∣dred Her Humility. the more conspicuous and amiable, by casting this Veil over them. Grace in∣deed is like a precious ointment, which the closer its held in a mans hand, the more strongly it sends forth its sweet Savour. O! How meanly did she think of her self? She saw not how brightly her own Face did shine, whilst others beheld, and admired it. Her frequent complaint was, that she was useless, and unprofitable, and that she did no good. She did never speak of her perfections; but frequently of her imper∣fections, wants, weakness, and unworthiness. Yea, she would often say, I abhor my self: Indeed I do. How easie of access, even for the meanest to come into her presence? How affable, courteous, and lowly was her deportment to the poorest? many times when her very Servants had done a business well, which she had set them about, she would thank them for it. The Law of kindness was in her Tongue to whomsoever she spake. But we are now come to her gracious behaviour in her last sickness, wherein her Her last sick∣ness and pati∣ence. pains were very strong, but her patience were stronger. Never was she heard to mut∣ter, or to utter any one repining word: But still she justified God in all his Dispen∣sations towards her, and dealings with her. Yea, more, she was much in admiring, and blessing God for his mercies, in her accutest pains, and greatest Agonies. How doth this blessed Soul now Carol forth the Praises of God in Heaven? who could
Sing them so sweetly whilst these sharp Thorns were at her breast? Or that could keep her heart in tune for this high Note, in her greatest bodily pains and dolors? She was not wholly fee from assaults of Satan. It would indeed have been strange if he had not considered this pretious Servant of Jesus Christ, and offered her some disturbance at this time, whom he had found so great, and old an Enemy to him, and his Kingdom of darkness. But he came only to be beaten back with shame, and to add more Trophies to all her former Victories over him. The last Words which were observed to be spoken by her, before that fatal Lethargy, seized upon Her last words and Death. her poor, weak, and out worn body (which in two days carried her off the Stage of this world unto a better) were: How shall I do to be thankful? How shall I do to praise my God? Thus she ended her life here in the exercise of that duty, which was to be her constant, and endless work in that Life, which she was then entring in∣to. She thus blessedly dyed December 25th. Anno Christi. 1671. In the nintieth year of her age. In Obitum Nobilissimae, Lectissimaeque Heroinae, Mariae, Illustrissimi, fortissimique Ducis Horatij Vere, Baronis de Tilbury, Viduae: Carmen Epitaphium. Nobilitas tibi Vera fuit; Prudentia Vera; Vera tibi Pietas; & tibi Vera Fides. Vera Dei cultrix fueras, & Vera Mariti: Quaeque nitent, aderant omnia Vera tibi. Acciderit tandem quod Mors tibi Vera, dolendum: Excepto hoc, de te singula Vera juvant. Simon Ford. S. T. D. Dr. Sibs Dedicated his Book which he calls The Bruised Reed, to the Right Honourable, Sir Horatio Vere, Knight, Lord Vere of Tilbury, and to his Pious Con∣sort, the Lady Mary Vere, whose Virtuous Life, and Blessed Death, you heard de∣scribed; And in his Epistle Dedicatory, he thus writes. They that follow the Wars are generally taken to be men not most Religious, Rara Fides, Pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. The more respect therefore (saith he) do those of that profession deserve that have learned upon what terms to Live and Die; that are sure of a better Life, before they leave this, that have laid up their Lives in Christ: Among whom (Right Honour∣able) the world hath long taken notice of you, in whom both Religion and Mili∣tary imployment, meekness of Spirit, with heigth of Courage, Humility with Ho∣nor, by a rare and happy Combination have met together. Whereby you have much vindicated your profession from the common imputation, and shewed that piety can enter into Tents, and follow after Camps, and that God hath his Joshua's and Cor∣nelia's in all Ages. And (Elect Lady) I would not divide you from your Honourable Lord and Husband, both being one, as in other bands, so in that above nature, in hearty love to the best things: Both exemplary in all Religious courses: Both, in your places, having been imployed in great services for the common good: So that, not only this, but forraign States, are bound to bless God for you both. Go on in these ways, and you will find God making good his promise of honouring them that honour him. An Epitaph upon the Right Honourable, and Religious, the Lady Vere; Wife to the most Noble, and Valiant Lord Horatio Vere, Baron of Til∣bury, who Dyed, December the 25th. Anno Christi. 1671. In the nin∣tieth year of her Age. BEneath this Marble stone doth lye Wonder of Age, and Piety. So Old, so Good, 'twas hard to say Which striving in her won the day, Or had most power to bow her down, Her age, or her Devotion. Her piety made the world confess Old age no bar to fruitfulness. Her age again so wonderous great, Prov'd piety ne're out of date.
Well may she then a wonder go, When as to prove her to be so The two grand Topicks do agree, Both Scripture, and Antiquity. Thus was she like (none ever more) That Widdow of above fourscore, Who serving God both day and night, At last of Jesus got a sight: Nay, still like her, in Temples she Her Saviour waits once more to see. On her sleeping three days together before she Dyed. Deaths Brother, sleep, her senses ty'd Three days, and then she waking dy'd. Sleep was the Essay of Deaths Cup, Which first she sipt; then drank all up. Thus Swimmers first with foot explore The gelid stream, then venture o're. Thus Martyr, for a trial, first Into the fire his Finger thrust, To ship a pattern of the flame, Then cloths his body with the same. Thus Spies in Canaans Land are sent, To view the Countries ere they went. Sleep was the Mask, in which she saw The promis'd Land, Incognita. Which done, she only wak't to tell By-standers that she lik't it well. Then, Reader, if thou wondrest at Her three days sleep: Remember that Three days to view the Triple Heaven, (One day in each Court) makes even. But, Reader, when thou think'st upon Her third days Resurrection, If th' art amaz'd, wonder no more: Her Saviour did so before. On her dying just upon the day of Christs Nativity. Long time she sleeping lay, but could not Dye Until the day of Christs Nativity. No wonder then she slept and slumbered; It was because the Bridegroom tarried. On her Nobility. Noble her self; more Noble, 'cause so neer To the thrice Noble, and Victorious Vere. That Belgick Lion, whose loud same did roar, Heard from the German to the British shoar. His Trophies she was Joyntur'd in (so say The Lawyers) Wives shine by their Hus∣bands Ray. See therefore now, how by his side she stands, Tryumphing 'midst the Graves, those Ne∣therlands. Rather in Heaven, those only we confess, Are truly called Th' Ʋnited Provinces. Charles Derby. Ʋpon the Death of the Right Honourable Lady Mary Vere. WHat Marble heart can chuse but drop a tear At the sad Funeral of the Lady Vere! Whose Death's a Publick loss. Our Spring is dry That many an Empty Cistern did supply. God deck't her Heaven-born Soul with Gems divine Of various lustre, which did make her shine. That all that stood about her saw the light; She made it day, even in the darkest night. Her bounteous hand, and truly noble heart Did noble gifts to multitudes impart. She was a flowing Spring, a Mine of Tre∣sure; To serve her Lord, and do good was her Pleasure. Pattern of goodness, and a Pillar too: A few such losses may the world undo. She gave her self to Christ, with heart and might, And was with him in Spirit day and night. And when his Festival began on Earth, But kept in Heaven with purer Joy and Mirth, She longed to be there, which made her sing Her Nunc Dimittis, and her Soul took wing, To sing her Carol among those that are Without Temptation, fault, offence, or Jar. But when arriv'd, no mortal can declare What joys in Heaven; And what wel∣coms are. For this devoted Saint whilst here on Earth We mix sin with our Songs; tears with our mirth. She's gone, but never perish shall her name, Her works abide to Eternize her Fame. ANAGRAM. Vere mira. Mirrour of blessings! For what Tongue can tell, For Grace and Greatness wher's her Pa∣rallel? Edward Thomas.
On the Death of the Right Honourable, and truly Religious, the Lady Vere. Anag. Marie Vere Ever I arme. A Tribute who can here pretend To pay, but he that hath to spend? Whole Indies of refined Ore, Ready to bring out of his store; Which after all will prove to be, Too mean; yea, Bankrupt Beggary. See Name, Relation, State of grace Do march in correspondent pace, Daring all Enemies to withstand Her generous Soul, or Countermand Its resolution ne're to yield, But still to fight, and win the field. Ever I arm, and so do wait My Captains Word, on foes deceit: Or when he Musters up his strength, Hoping to vanquish me at length: Yet then I faint not, but being Arm'd Thro Grace I stood, and was not harm'd. Here, here's a She maintain'd the fight, Remained Conqueress in despite Of all his forces, till at last, Praises, and thanks were her repast. Thus Faith, and Hope, and Patience Tryumphant rode ith' Chariot hence. But how sounds this, Ever I arm, Suiting a Lady once 'ith' Arm Of such a General, whose story Embalms our Nations dying Glory; Embroiders Records with his Name; Out-bids the narrow mouth of fame. Gurnal display thy Magazine, Here thy whole Armour may be seen Bright and well us'd, well buckled on, A Curashier, who having won Many a battel, now receives The Crown which her great Captain gives. Maria Vere Jam re Vera Anag. Jam re Vera feror super Astra, beata Triumpho, Expectans{que} diu spes{que} Fides{que} satur. Anthony Withers. An Epitaph. THe Casket of this Jewel rare, With deep Laments we here inter In hallowed ground which yet grows proud, Of purer Earth to be the shroud. And thou fair shrine, in whose close womb, This holy Relick we intomb; Preserv'd with care, and on it try What may be done by Chymistry. That when the Trump saith, Dead arise, Thou mai'st send forth thy wealthy prize: Ev'ry particle well Calcin'd, And ev'ry Dust double refin'd. Richard Howlett. Besides what is said before of this Honourable Lady, some of her neer Relations have informed me that every Friday night she caused her Family to be Catechised, and that on Saturday in the Evenings, she had solemn Preparatory Duties for the Sabbath en∣suing: And that she was in the ninety first year of her age when she dyed. The L. Veres Motto was, Vero nil Verius.
M.is KATHERINE CLARKE F. H. van Houe Sculp: portrait of Katherine Clarke The Life and Death of Mrs. Katherine Clark who Died, Anno Domini 1675. KAtherine Overton (for so was her Virgin Name) was born at Bedworth in the Coun∣ty Her Parentage and Birth. of Warwick, four miles from Coventry, February the Twenty fifth, Anno Christi, 1602. of Godly, and Religious Parents. Her Father was Mr. Valen∣tine Overton, Rector of Bedworth, where he lived a constant, and painful Preacher of Gods Holy Word, till he was almost Eighty two years old. Her Mother was Mrs. Isa. Overton, a gracious Woman, and an excellent Huswife, who took off the whole burden of Family affairs, both within, and without Doors from her Husband, that he might with the more freedom attend his Holy Calling. Our Katherine was, by these her Parents brought up Religiously, and it pleased God Her Education. betimes to plant the Seeds of Grace in her Heart, which first discovered themselves, when she was about fifteen years Old: At which time God was pleased to discover un∣to Early working of Grace. her the corruption of her nature, and some common miscarriages which are inci∣dent unto youth: And these made such a deep impression upon her tenders years, that whereas she was naturally of a chearful Sanguine Constitution, she now became serious, and somewhat Melancholy. Hereupon Satan, that Old Serpent, and Enemy to our Her Temptati∣ons and sup∣port. Souls, assaulted her with many, and various Temptations, whereby he sought to quench these Heavenly Sparks, to stifle this New Creature in its first Conception. But by frequent reading the sacred Scriptures, diligent attending to the Word Preached, and secret Prayer, it pleased the All-wise God to support, and strengthen her against him, and all his Devices. Yet did these conflicts continue the longer, because she had none to whom she durst unbosom her self, and make her Case known. When she was about seventeen years old, she was by her Parents sent to Siwel in More Trou∣bles. Northampton-shire to wait upon a young Lady, that was somewhat Related to her.
Yet this kind of life was so tedious and irksome to her, that at the end of Six Her return home. Months she prevailed with her Parents to send for her home again. Hear the Nar∣rative of it in her own Words as they were found Written in her Cabinet after her De∣cease. When (saith she) I was but young, my Father being at Prayers in his Fami∣ly, Her own ac∣count of her Conversion. I many times found such sweetness, and was so affected therewith, that I could not but wish that my Heart might oftner be in such a frame. But Childhood, and the Vanities thereof soon cooled these Heavenly Sparks. But my Father caused me to write Sermons, and to repeat the same; As also to learn Mr. Perkins his Catechism, which I oft repeated to my self when I was alone; And therein especially I took no∣tice of those places wherein he had set down the Signs and Marks of a strong, and weak Faith, being convinced in my Conscience that without Faith I could not be sa∣ved; And that every Faith would not serve turn to bring me to Heaven. Hereupon I fell to Examination of my self, and though I could not find the Marks of a Strong, (through Gods Mercy) I found the marks of a true, though but weak Faith, which was some Comfort, and support to me. And that God which began this good work in me, was pleased to quicken and stir me up to a diligent use of such means as himself had ordained and appointed for the encrease thereof: As hear∣ing the Word Preached, Receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and use of other private Duties. But when I was about seventeen years old my Parents sent me to wait upon a young Gentlewoman in Northamptonshire, the only Daughter of Sir W. W. At which time being sent so far from my near and dear Relations, and meeting with some other dis∣couragements in the Family, through want of the means of Grace, which I formerly enjoyed, I grew very Melancholy. I began also to have great workings of Conscience in me, and Satan (that deadly Enemy to the health, and welfare of our Souls, who like a Roaring Lion walks a∣bout continually seeking whom he may devour) took his advantage (through my Ig∣norance of his devices) to raise up fears, doubts, and terrors of Conscience in me, by reason of my manifold Sins, and for walking so unworthy Gods Mercies whilst I did enjoy them, and for being so unfruitful under the means of Grace, and so unable to obey God, and to keep his Commandments. And by reason hereof I had no Peace, nor rest in my Soul, Night nor Day, but was perswaded that all the threatnings contained in the Book of God against Wicked and Ungodly men, did belong unto me, and were my Portion, as being one of them against whom they were denounced; Insomuch as when I took up the Bible to read therein, it was accompanied with much fear and trembling; Yet being convinced that it was my Duty frequently to read Gods Word, I durst not omit, or neg∣lect it. Thus I continued a great while, bearing the burden of grievous Temptations, and inward Afflictions of Conscience, yet durst I not open the wound, nor reveal my con∣dition to any, as thinking and judging my condition and case to be like no Bodies else: But God who is rich and infinite in Mercy, and Jesus Christ, who bought his Elect at so dear a rate, would not suffer any of his to be lost, and therefore he was graciously pleased to preserve, strengthen, and uphold me by his own power from sinking into Hell through Despair, and from running out of my Wits. Thus by reason of my continual grief and anguish of Heart Night and Day, I was so weakned and changed within the compass of these six Months, that when I came home my Dear Parents they scarce knew me. Some years after her return, she (for the most part) continued in her Fathers Family, Her growth in Grace. where by a diligent and conscientious use of the means, both publick and private, she did thrive and grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, as she increased and grew in Days and Years; and therewith also learned and ex∣ercised all parts of Huswifry, which might fit her for the Government of a Family, when God should call her thereunto. February 2, Anno Christi, 1625. Which was the same Day on which King Charles the Her Marriage. first was Crowned, she was, with the consent of Parents on both sides, married to Mr Sa. Clark, who at that time was Minister at Shotwick, four miles beyond West-Chester, who looked upon this Match as the greatest outward temporal Blessing that ever God bestowed upon him; whereby he could experimentally say, That a Prudent Wife is the Gift of God: And that in the enjoyment of her, he enjoyed more Mercies than he could
well enumerate. But to descend to particulars, and to take notice of some of those Virtues and Graces wherewith God had beautified, and adorned her Soul. First her Piety was signal and exemplary from her first Conversion to the Hour of Her Piety. her Death: Her life was not stained with any scandalous Sin, which might be a ble∣mish, either to her Person, Profession, or Relations. She was a constant, and di∣ligent attender upon the publick Ministry of Gods Holy Word; And when she lived where she had the opportunity of hearing Lectures in the week day, she made choice to attend upon those who were most plain, practical, and powerful Preachers, from whose Sermons, and Gods blessing upon them, she always sucked some spiritual nou∣rishment and came home refreshed from them. And when days of Humiliation, or Thanksgiving came, she never failed to make one among Gods People in the Cele∣bration of them. The Lords Days she carefully Sanctified, both in publick and in private; rising ear∣lier Sabbaths Sanctified. upon them than upon other's, especially when she had many young Children about her, that so she might have opportunity, as well for secret, as for Family duties, before she was called away to the publick. She was like unto Davids Door-keeper, One of the first in, and last out of Gods House. Her constant Gesture at Prayer was Knee∣ling, thinking that she could not be too humble before God. Her usual manner was to write Sermons to prevent drowsiness and distractions, and to help Memory, whereof she hath left many Volumes, and her practice was to make good use of them, by fre∣quent reading and Meditating upon them; And if at any time she was cast into such Places, and Company as were a hinderance unto her in the strict Sanctification of this Holy Day, it was a grief and burden to her. There was no Day that passed over her head (except Sickness, or some other una∣voydable Scriptures read. necessity hindred) wherein she did not read some portions of the Sacred Scriptures, both in the Old, and New Testament, and of the Psalms; and in Read∣ing she took special notice of such passages as most concerned her self. She was frequent, and constant in Secret Prayer, and Meditation. She also read much in other good Books, especially, in the works of those Eminent, and excellent Divines, Mr. Am∣brose, and Mr. Reyner: And in reading of them she used to transcribe such passages as most warmed her heart. She never neglected any opportunity of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per, Sacrament preparation. and before her coming to it, was very strict, and serious in the Duty of Self-Ex∣amination, and for her furtherance therein, at those times she read some of those Books that treated upon that subject. And the Fruits of her holiness manifested themselves in the exercise of those Graces which God required of her. She was not a Wordy, but a Real Christian: A true Israelite, in whom was no guile. Her endeavour was to yield universal, constant, cheerful, and sincere Obedience to all Gods Commandments, and wherein she failed, and came short, it was her grief, and Burden. Her Medita∣tions upon what she heard and read were frequent: And her heart having indited a good matter, her tongue was as the Pen of a ready Writer, taking opportunities to speak to the Edification of those with whom she conversed. She filled every Relation with the Exercise of such Graces, and Duties as were suit∣able thereunto, knowing that where Relative duties are neglected, and not made Con∣science of, there also our pretended Religion is in Vain. First, As a Wife: She was singular, and very Exemplary in that reverence and o∣bedience A good Wife. which she yeilded to her Husband, both in Words, and Deeds. She never rose from the Table, even when they were alone, but she made courtesie. She never drank to him without bowing. His word was a Law unto her: She often deny∣ed her self to gratifie him: And when in her sickness, and weakness he mentioned her Case in particular unto God in his Prayers, the Duty being ended, she would make him courtesie, and thank him. In case of his absence she would pray with her Family Morning, and Evening: The like she would do in his presence, in case of his Sickness, and inability to perform the Duty himself. Her Modesty, and Chastity were rare, and remarkable: But fitter to be conceived by those which know what belongs to them, than to be expressed in words. For there is a conjugal, as well as a Virginal, and Vi∣dual Chastity. In Case of her Husbands Sickness, she was a tender, diligent, and painful Nurse a∣bout him; Skilful, and careful in making him Broths, and what else was needful for him. If at any time she saw him in passion, with sweet and gentle words she would
mollifie and moderate it. She was often a Spur, but never a Bridle to him in those things which were good. She was always well pleased with such Habitations, as (in their many removes) he provided for her; And with such Apparel, and Diet as his means (which was sometimes short) would allow. She never grutched, nor grumbled at any of those Dispensations which Gods All-wise Providence carved out unto them. Secondly, As a Mother to her Children (whereof God gave her nine, four Sons, As a Mother. and five Daughters) she nourished them all with her own breasts; was very handy and handsome about them in their minority; Kept them sweet and cleanly; In neat and modest Habits; Knew how to order them both in Health and Sickness. She loved them dearly without fondness; Was careful to give them Nurture as well as Nourishment, not sparing the Rod when there was just occasion. And as soon as they were capable, she was vigilant and diligent to season their tender years with Grace and Vertue, by instilling into them the first grounds, and Principles of Religion; And as they grew up, she did more freely discover her tender Affections to them, by Instructi∣on, advice, and good Counsel as there was occasion; And when they were disposed of abroad, by her gracious letters, and hearty Instructions at their meetings, she la∣boured to build them up in grace and godliness: And God was pleased to let her see (to her great Joy and Comfort) the fruit of her Prayers, and pains in keeping them from scandalous Courses in these corrupt times, and in working Grace in most of their Hearts. When they were married, and had Children, she was frequently making one thing or other for them. Thirdly, As a Mistress to her Maids: She was careful (so far as she could) to bring As a Mistress. such as were Religious, at least, seemingly, into her Family; And having occasion to be much in their Company, she would take all occasions, and opportunities to mani∣fest her love and care of their Souls, by frequent dropping in good Counsel and wholesome Instructions; By Chatechising; Enquiring what they remembred of the Sermons they heard; Reading her Notes to them; Encouraging them in what was good, and with the Spirit of meekness blaming them for what was evil. And for Huswifery, and Houshold Affairs, she instructed their Ignorance, commended and in∣couraged what they did well, and her self (being of an active, and stirring dispositi∣on, and having her hand in most businesses) set them a Pattern, and gave them an Example how to order the same. She was careful (so far as possibly she could) to prevent all spoil, and to see that they did not eat the Bread of Idleness. Towards her friends, and her own, and her Husbands Relations she was courteous As a Friend. and amiable in her deportment, free and hearty in their entertainment. She would have plenty without want, and competency without superfluity; And all so neatly and well ordered, that none which came to her Table (whereof some were Persons of Honor and Quality) but Commended her Cookery, and were well pleased with their en∣tertainment. In her Houshold Furniture she loved not to want, nor desired more than was need∣ful. Her Hous-wis∣ery. It was, though not costly, yet cleanly, and she was frequent in repairing and mending decays, and what was amiss, both in Linnens, and Woollens. For her Apparel, she was never willing to have that which was costly for the mat∣ter, Her Habit. or gairish for the manner: Rather under than above her Rank. For the Fashion of it, was grave and Exemplary, without Newfangledness and Levity. She follow∣ed, Peters directions which he gave to Christian Women in his time [1 Pet. 3. 3 &c.] whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting their Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel. But let it be the hidden man of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which it in the sight of God of great price. For after this manner in old time, the holy Women who trusted in God adorned themselves being in subjection unto their own Husbands. And whatsoever Apparel she had, she was careful to keep it from stains, and rends, and so soon as any thing was amiss, presently to amend it, insomuch as she made it last long, and yet it was always whole and neat. All her own, and Husbands linnens, she made her self, and much of her other Apparel: And at leisure times she imploy∣ed her self in knitting Stockings for her self and Grand▪Children; and was as care∣ful, and handy in mending her Husbands Cloaths, as her own. She was very Charitable to the Poor where ever she lived, according to that Estate Her Charity. wherewith God had entrusted her. She was ready to relieve such as were Objcts of
Charity, with Meat, or Drink, and to lend them Mony, and to minister some Phi∣sical things (whereof her Closet was never empty) according as their necessities re∣quired. She had a very melting Heart, and truly Sympathized with the Church and People of God, whether at home or abroad, in all their sufferings, and rejoyced in their Pro∣sperity. Her Sympathy. She was much affected with, and afflicted for that great loss which the Church of Christ had, when so many able, Godly, faithful, and painful Ministers were eject∣ed; not thrust forth into, but thrust out from labouring in Gods Harvest; wherein her Husband, and two Sons were co-sufferers, to the loss of their livelihoods; yet the loss of their Liberty lay nearer to her Heart, and was a far greater Grief to her than the outward wants they were exposed to. Her Humility was not inferior to her other Graces. She had always a very low e∣steem Her Humility. of her self, and was ready to prefer others before her self, and would not take it ill when her inferiors were set above her; She well remembred the Apostle Peters charge, All of you be subject one to another, and be cloathed with Humility. For God resisteth the Proud, and giveth Grace to the Humble. And that of S. Paul, Rom. 12. 10. In honour prefer one another. Her Love to God, to his Ordinances, and to his Children was hearty, and with∣out Her Love to God and Man Dissimulation. She abhorred that which was evil, and clave to that which was good. She was of sweet and meek a disposition that she never used to speak evil of any, but was ever prone to forgive and forget wrongs. She was very prudent in managing her Houshold affairs to the best advantage. She Her Prudence. would have divers Dishes of Meat with little cost; yet so dressed and ordered as made them geateful and pleasing unto all: When they were alone, she had such variety of Dishes and Dresses as prevented nauseousness. She was careful to see that nothing was lost or spoiled. By her wise and frugal managing her Houshold, though her Husband had never much coming in, yet at the years end he could always save something: So that her price to him was far above Rubies: His Heart trusted in her. For she did him good, and not evil all the Days of her Life, Prov 31. 10, 11, 12. In her Younger Days she was healthful; Of a cheerful and active Spirit, and ab∣horring Her Activity. Idleness; She would have her Hand in every business. In her Old Age, though she was crazie, yet whilst she could stand, she would be about one kind of work or o∣ther. She bore her weakness and Afflictions with much Patience and holy submission to the will and good pleasure of God; she was so uniform in the frame of her Spirit, Her Patience. and so maintained her Peace with God through her Holy and humble walking, that when Death, many times in her sickness, threatned to seize upon her, She feared it not, as knowing that it would be gain and advantage to her: Concerning which hear what she her self left in writing which was found after her Decease. In my younger Days (saith she) my spiritual Afflictions, and inward troubles con∣tinued long before I could attain to any assurance of my Salvation: But of late years it hath pleased God of his infinite Mercy, and Free Grace to give me more Assurance of his unchangeable Love to me through Faith in his Rich and free Promises of Life, and Salvation, through Jesus Christ, who is pretious to my Soul, and who is the Au∣thor and finisher of my Faith; God blessed for evermore: To whom be Praise and Glory World without end Amen. In her converse with her Friends She opened her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her Her aimiable∣ness. Tongue was the Law of Kindness (Prov. 31. 26.) which made her Company grateful unto all, and burdensom, or undervalued by none. Divers years before her Death, upon catching Cold, she had many fits of sickness, and weakness, and some of them were so violent, as brought her near unto Death; Yet the Lord had mercy upon her Husband and Family in raising her up again almost beyond hopes, and expectation: And she was always a Gainer by her Afflictions, God mak∣ing good that Promise to her, Rom. 8. 28. All things shall work together for good to them Afflictions san∣ctified. that love God, To them who are Called according to the purpose. For after those fits she walked more humbly, holily, fruitfully, and faithfully, both in her General, and par∣ticular Calling, as one that waited daily for the appearing of her Lord, and Master. The Winter before her Death, she enjoyed better Health than she had done for some Winters before. May the 25th. Anno Christi, 1675. Some Friends came from London to dine with her, and that morning (according to her usual custom in such Cases) She was care∣ful,
and busie in providing for their kind entertainment: But it pleased God whilst Her last sick∣ness. they were at Dinner to strike her with a kind of Shivering, which made her look pa∣ler than ordinary, and after Dinner her Distemper continued, so that she was soon con∣fined to her Chamber, and not long after, for the most part to her Bed. But herein God shewed her great mercy, and had respect to her weakness, in that, during all the time of her languishing she was free from Sickness, and pain, only sometimes she was troubled with some Stiches, which yet were tolerable, not violent: She was also troubled with some Vapours which made her Breath very short; Yet had she a pretty good Stomach, and she relished her Food well till about two Days before her Death; Gods Mercy. But then, though she did eat, yet she found little tast in her Meat. Her sleep was pret∣ty good, and always very quiet. She was never ill either after Food or Sleep. Only two Days before her Departure she slept little, by reason of the continual ratling of Flegm in her Throat, when she wanted strength to expectorate it. As for the State of her Soul during all the time of her sickness, she enjoyed con∣stant Peace and Screnity, and had (through Gods Mercy) much Joy, and Peace, by believing; Satan (that Roaring Lion) who uses to be most strong when we are most weak being so chained up by God, that he had no power to molest her. She often cryed out Hold out faith and patience; She told her nearest Relation, when she saw him mourning over her, that she was going to be joyned to a Better Husband. Her youngest Son, taking his leave of her the Day before her Death, she gave him much Heavenly Counsel for the good of his Soul, and Blessed him, and all his, as she did the rest of her Children and Grand-Children. She earnestly desired to be Dissolved, and breathed after a fuller enjoyment of Jesus Christ, which she accounted best of all: She would sometimes say, that it was a hard thing to die: And this is a hard work. Her Understanding, Memory, and Speech continued till within two Minutes of Death; Death. And a little before, her Daughter speaking to her of Jesus Christ, She replyed, My God and my Lord: And so June the 21, about five a Clock in the morning, She fell asleep, exchanging this Life for a Better, without any alteration in her Countenance, but on∣ly that her colour was gone. She closed up her Eyes her self, as who should say, It is but winking, and I shall be in Heaven. She changed her place, but not her Company. She sickned May the 25th. Anno Christi, 1675. She concluded her Days June the Twen∣ty First, being Munday, about five a Clock in the Morning; when having ended her last Sabbath upon Earth, she began to Celebrate an Everlasting Sabbath in Heaven. She was Aged Seventy three years and about four Months, and had been married almost Fif∣ty years. Thus did this Holy Woman wear out, not rust out: Burn out, was not blown out: Yea, she flamed, not smothered out, she served God in her Generation, and then reti∣red into that Place where is Health without Sickness: Day without Night: Plenty with∣out Famine: Riches without Poverty: Mirth without Mourning: Singing without sigh∣ing: Life without Death: And these, with infinite more to all Eternity. There is un∣spotted Chastity: Unstained Honor: Unparalleld Beauty. There is the Tree of Life in the midst of this Paradise. There is the River that waters the Garden: There is the Vine flourishing, and the Pomegranate budding: There is the Banqueting House where are all those Delicacies, and Rarities wherewith God himself is delighted. There shall the Saints be adorned, as a Bride, with rare Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds of Glory. A Glory fitter to be Believed, than possible to be Discoursed. An Exceeding, Excessive, E∣ternal weight of Glory (2 Cor. 4. 17.) Even such a weight, as if the Body were not upheld by the Power of God, it were impossible but that it should faint under it: as an emi∣nent Divine speaketh. After Mrs. Clarkes Decease, there was found in her Cabinet a Paper, which by frequent using, was almost worn out. It contained a Collection of these several Texts of Promises to strengthen her Faith. Scripture which he had recourse unto in times of Temptation, or Desertion. Who is among you that feareth the Lord: That obeyeth the Voice of his Servant: That walketh in darkness and hath no Light: Let him trust in the Name of the Lord and stay upon his God, Isa 50. 10. For the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower; The Righteous run unto it, and are safe, Prov. 18. 10. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose Mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth on thee, Isa. 26. 3. Blessed is the Man that maketh the Lord his trust, Psa. 40. 4.
Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputeth not Sin, Psa. 32. 2. Though our hearts may fail us, and our flesh fail us, yet God will never fail us, Psa. 73. 26. For he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. And again: I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 18. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mind own sake, and will not remember thy Sins, Isa. 44. 25. My Grace is sufficient for thee: For my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9. By Grace you are saved through Faith, and that not of you selves, Eph. 2. 8. I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall not perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my Hand, Job 10. 28. Who are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. The foundation of God standeth sure, having this Seal; The Lord knoweth who are his, 2 Tim. 2. 19. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Felsh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8. 1. Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believeth, Rom. 4. 10. It is God that justifieth; who is he that condemneth? Rom. 8. 33, 34. The promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off; Even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2. 39. The Gifts, and Calling of God are without Repentance, Rom. 11. 29. These Texts of Scripture having been as so many Cordials unto her in Times of Temptation, it is hoped that they may prove so to others, and therefore for their sakes they are here set down. And hereby it appears that she was not without some shakings, but through Gods Mercy, they were such as made her root the faster: And by her pru∣dent, and seasonable holding forth the Shield of Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit, she became more than a Conqueror, through him that had loved her. In another little Book, which was found after her Death, she gives this account of her self and of Gods gracious dealing with her. From the beginning (writes she) of Gods shewing me Mercy in my Conversion. Her Conver∣sion. I here set down Gods gracious dealings with me, not for mine own Praise, but for the Glory of God, and to stir up my Heart unto true Thankfulness for such invaluable Mercies. And then she set down the time, manner, and means of her Conversion: And afterwards proceeds thus. What have been my Experiences of Gods gracious dealings with me at several times under Afflictions: As First when Personal Afflictions have lain upon me, in regard of Bodily Sickness or Spiritual Distempers. Secondly. Or, Family Afflictions, when God hath taken away my dear Chil∣dren. Thirdly: Or, when I have been under fears that God would take away my dear Hus∣band, by some dangerous sickness which he lay under. Fourthly, Or when I have been under great fears in the time of our Civil Wars. Fifthly, Or when I have been under spiritual Desertion, by Gods hiding his Face, and Favour from me. Or by reason of weakness, and wants in Grace: Or by reason of strong, and prevailing Corruptions. Or by reason of Satans Temptations: In all which Cases she left a memorial of Gods gracious dispensations towards her. I shall set down only a few of them. It pleased God (saith she) for many years, to keep me (for the most part) in a sad and disconsolate Estate, and condition, not cleerly Evidencing the certain Assurance of his Love to my Soul: So that many times I questioned whether I was a Child of God or no: Whether I had part in Christ Jesus or no: Whether I should ever attain to Life and Salvation or no: And this made me walk with a drooping, and disconso∣late Spirit, so that I could take no true comfort in any thing: But though heaviness endured for a Night, Yet joy came in the Morning, when the Lord caused the Light of his Countenance to shine upon me, which was better than Life.
It pleased God upon the Death of my youngest Child, that it lay very heavy up∣on my Spirit, insomuch as I was brought oft upon my Knees to beg support from God and to crave his Grace and assistance that I might not break out to speak, or act any thing whereby Gods Name might be dishonoured, or the Gospel discredited: And that he would be pleased to make up this outward loss, with some more du∣rable, and spiritual Comforts. And I found a seasonable, gracious, and speedy an∣swer to these my Requests. For though I lay long under the burden of that loss, yet in this time did the Lord sweetly manifest his special Love to my Soul, assuring me that he was my gracious and reconciled Father in Christ; whereby my Love to him was much encreased, and even inflamed; so that, by his Grace, it wrought in me more diligence, and carefulness to maintain and preserve these Evidences of his Love, and to yield a holy submission unto his Will, as well in suffering, as in doing: As also by avoiding whatsoever might provoke him to withdraw the Evidences of his Love from me, without the sense whereof I could take little or no comfort in any thing. And furthermore, I bless God for it, and speak it to the praise, and glory of his rich and free Grace, my Prayers, and earnest desires have been answered, by Gods giv∣ing me comfortable Assurance, both from the Testimony of his holy word, and the witness of his Blessed Spirit, of my Eternal, and Everlasting Salvation in, and by Jesus Christ. Yet have I not been without fears, and doubtings many times, through want of looking over my Evidences, or by neglecting to keep a narrow watch over my heart: Or from weakness of my Faith, and all through my own default and negligence. The Lord pardon it, and make me more circumspect for the time to come. By all these I have gained this Experience. First: That God is true and faithful in making good all his Promises seasonably unto us: As, That all things shall work together for our Good. And that God will never fail us, nor forsake us &c. Secondly: That it is not in vain to wait upon God, and to seek unto him in our straits, who is more ready to hear than we are to ask. Thirdly: That I desire to see: Yea, and the Lord hath shewed me the vanity, and incertainty of the most satisfying Comforts that this world can afford, and what an emptiness there is in them, that so I may, and I desire so to do, keep weaned affecti∣ons towards them and to sit loose from them, that I may be ready to part with them, when God calls them from me, or me from them. Again in regard of Bodily weakness and sickness, my Experiences have been these. First: That as a broken Shoulder can bear no burden; so the least Distemper, when the heart is not in an holy frame and temper is a burden insupportable. If God hides his Face from us, and withdraws the Evidences of his Love, and denies to as∣sist us by his strength, we can neither do, nor suffer any thing. And on the Con∣trary, I found by Experience, that I could with much cheerfulness, holy submission and willingness, bear great Distempers, when I enjoyed the favour of God in them: So that then I could readily say, Good is the work of the Lord as well as is his Word. And, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord because I have sinned against him. Mich. 7. 9. And, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Job. 13. 15. Secondly, I found by experience also, that by my pains and sickness I was the bet∣ter able to Sympathize with, and to pity and pray for others in the like case. Thirdly, Hereby I learned the more to prize Health: And that: First, Because in Health we have liberty, and opportunity to enjoy the Publick Ordinances with o∣thers of Gods People, whereby the Graces of Gods people are quickned, strengthen∣ed, and encreased in us, which otherwise (by reason of our corrupt natures) are apt to grow cold and languish, as will our bodies when they want food. Secondly, Because in health we injoy the benefit and the comfort of sweet, and quiet sleep, which much refreshes and cheers, and which commonly we want in sick∣ness. Thirdly, Because in Health we find sweet satisfying comfort in the use of Gods good Creatures, whereas in sickness the daintiest food is lothsome and troublesome. The consideration of these things made me the more to prize Health; To be very thank∣ful for it, and the more careful to imploy, and improve Health and strength, to Gods glory, and the furtherance of mine own salvation.
In regard of Publick Dangers I have had a great deal of Experience of Gods good∣ness towards me and mine several ways, and at several times. For First, When in the beginning of our Civil Wars and distractions I was sometimes overwhelmed with base and distrustful fears, occasioned by my not acting faith upon the promises, and not remembring my former Experiences, nor considering Gods love, power, and fidelity to his Children, in performing his so many gracious promises, made unto them in all estates, and conditions, and to me among the rest: Hereupon I resolved, by Gods grace and assistance not to give way to this distrust and diffidence, praying God to assist me therein, and found more courage than formerly, so far as I know mine own Heart (though truly the Heart is very deceitful, as I have found by sad experience) The Lord teach and enable me to rely upon him with more courage and constancy, and more to live by faith upon his promises than formerly I have done. Indeed I have been apt to fall into new fears upon approaching dangers; Yet upon successes, and glorious deliverances, I have oft resolved never to distrust God again, and yet my naughty heart hath deceived me, and made me ready to faint. But this I found by Experience, to the praise of my Gods free grace, that as troubles have aboun∣ded, my consolations have much more abounded. For God brought seasonably into my mind many pretious promises, which were as so many sweet Cordials, which much supported and comforted my heart, and upheld my Spirit, when also new storms have arisen, and unexpected deliverances have followed, I have, and do resolve, by Gods grace, not to distrust him any more. Yea, though more and greater dangers shall a∣rise, yet will I trust in, and stay my self upon him, though (as Job said) he should slay me. The good Lord establish my heart in this good and holy resolution, who is able to keep us to the end, and hath promised that he will preserve us by his power, through Faith to the Salvation of our Souls. In regard of Satans Temptations; Especially concerning my coming to the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper, my Experiences have been these. Finding often that I was very unable to fit and prepare my self for a comfortable ap∣proach to that Sacred Ordinance, I used to desire the Prayers of the Congregation un∣to God in my behalf, and I used the best endeavours I could in private, as God ena∣bled me, though I came far short of what was required, and of what I desired: So that I did trust, and hope, through Gods mercy, to find a comfortable day of it, and to have it a Sealing Ordinance to my Soul. But on the contrary, I found much deadness, and little spiritual tast, relish, and comfort in the use of it: So that my spirit was oft much troubled, and cast down in me; fearing lest I had some secret sin undiscovered, and unrepented of, which caused the Lord thus to hide his face from me. But then my gracious God brought this into my mind, that the Lord doth some∣times afflict us for the exercise, and improvement of our graces, as well as to humble us for our sins. I also considered, that as the Lord doth tender great Mercies to us in this Sacrament, renewing his Covenant of grace, and sealing unto us the Pardon of our sins in the blood of Christ: So he gives us leave to engage our selves (by renew∣ing our Covenant with him) to believe in him, and to trust upon Christ for Life and Salvation: And it pleased God to give me faith to apply this in particular to my own Soul: And a while after, to shew me, and to make good to my Soul that pretious, and comfortable promise, That though he hide his face from us for a little moment, yet with Mercy, and Loving kindness he will return to us again. This was a wonderful comfort, and support to my dejected Heart: Blessed be the Lord for ever, I desire to treasure up these Experiences, that for the future, I may resolve in the like case to put my whole trust and confidence in him, that so Satan may not entrap me in his snares through unbelief, but that I may resist him steadfast in the faith: For I am not altogether ignorant of his De∣vices. Gods promise is, that in all these things we shall be more than Conquerours, through him that hath loved us: And hath said that this is the Victory which overcomes the World, even our faith, 1 Joh. 5. 4. In the year 1669. There came to us the sad news of the Death of my second Son Mr. John Clarke, a godly, faithful, and painful Minister, sometimes before ejected out of the Rectory of Cotgrave in Nottingham-shire, who died the 18th. of September. Thus as the Waves of the Sea follow one another, so God is pleased to exercise his Children with one Affliction after another. He sees that whilst we carry about with us this Body of sin, we have need of manifold Trials, and Temptations, as saith the A∣Apostle.
1 Pet. 1. 6.—now for a season ye are in heaviness (if need he) through ma∣nifold Temptations; to keep us under, and to make us the better to remember our selves. Indeed it hath been the Lords course and dealing with me ever since he stopped me in the way as I was posting to Hell, to raise up one Affliction or other, either inward or outward, either from Satan, the World, or from mine own corrupt Heart, and na∣ture, not having Grace and Wisdom to behave and carry my self as I ought under his various Dispensations and Providences, as appeared at this time by his laying so great and grievous an Affliction upon me in taking away so dear a Son, from whom I had much Soul-comfort, and ardent Affections, which he manifested by his fervent Prayers for me, and by his spiritual Letters, and Writings to me, wherein he applied himself sutably to my Comfort in those inward troubles of Heart and Spirit which lay upon me. This caused my Grief and Sorrows to take the greater hold on me, upon the loss of one who was so useful to me: Yet hereby I do not derogate from my Elder Son, from whom I have the like help, and Comfort. Upon this sad occasion my Grief grew so great that I took no pleasure of any thing in the World: But was so overwhelmed with Melancholy, and my natural strength was so abated, that little Food served my turn, and I judged that I could not live long in such a condition. Hereupon I began to examine my Heart why it should be so with me, and whether carnal and immoderate Affections were not the great Cause of my trouble, which I much feared; And having used many Arguments and laid down many reasons to my self to quiet and moderate my Passions, and yet nothing prevailed to quiet and calm my Heart, and to bow me to the Obedience of his revealed Will: And withal, consi∣dering that it was God only that could quiet the Heart, and set our unruly, and carnal Affections into an holy frame and order, and, That he was a present Help in times of trou∣ble, I often and earnestly sought unto the Lord with many Prayers, and Tears, be∣seeching him to quiet my Heart, and to over-power and tame my unruly Affections, so as to be willing to submit unto him, and to bear his Afflicting Hand patiently and fruit∣fully, and to be ready and willing to submit (either in doing or suffering) to whatsoe∣ver he pleased to impose upon me: And to be ready to part with the best outward Com∣fort I enjoyed whensoever he should please to call for the same. And it pleased God seasonably to hear my Prayer, to regard my Tears, and to grant my Requests, by calming, and quieting my heart, and spirit, and by giv∣ing me much more contentedness to submit to his Holy Will, and good Plea∣sure, who is a God of judgment, and knows the fittest times and seasons to come in with refreshing comforts, and who waits to be gracious unto those that trust in him. Yet surely I was not without many Temptations in this hour of Darkness from that subtile Adversary who always stands at watch to insinuate and frame his Temptations answe∣rable to our Conditions, and like a Roaring Lyon walks about continually, seeking to de∣vour poor, yet precious Souls. Then I called upon the Lord in my distress, and he answered me and delivered me. Bless the Lord O my Soul; and all that is within me Praise his Holy Name. For he hath remembred me in my low and troubled estate, because his Mercy endureth for ever. Having thus had new experience of Gods readiness to hear and help when I called upon him; And having found that it is not in vain to seek to, and to depend upon God in all our Straits, I could not but record these things, that so Every one that is Godly may seek unto him in a time wherein he may be found, who is a present help in times of trouble, and who doth for us abundantly above what we can ask or think. The Lord knows that I write these things for no other end, but that God may have the Glory, and that others, especially my Relations, may be encouraged to seek God in their Straits, and to trust in him at all times. Amen. After her Decease there was also found in her Cabinet a Paper with this Superscrip∣tion. My Will and Desire is (with the leave of my Husband) to bestow upon my Children these things as tokens of my Motherly Affections, and that I may be remembred by them. She began with her Husband, and what she gave to him and all the rest, were all wrapped up in several Papers, and each Name endorsed on the outside to whom it did belong. And then concludes all thus. But above all, my Prayers unto God are, that he would especially bestow upon you, all needful
Saving Graces, whereby you may be enabled to glorifie his Great Name, in those several places and callings wherein he hath set you. Amen, Amen. She left also Legacies to some poor Neighbours: As also ten shillings to Mr. W. the Minister of the place, to buy him a mourning Ring: Concluding thus, If God shall please to bring me to my Grave in Peace, let this be the Text at my Funeral, Ephes. 2. 8. For by Grace ye are saved, through Faith, This Scripture I was oft put upon to have recourse to in times of Temptations, and Desertion. In an other little Book she had collected sundry Texts of Scripture, which might minister grounds of great Comfort against Satans Temptations, whereby he labours, by setting before us a black Bill of our Sins, and daily Infirmities, and our great ina∣bilities to every Good Duty, to blot out our Evidences, to stagger our Faith, and to make us go heavily, and drooping in our way to Heaven. Isa. 1. 17, 18. Cease to do Evil, Learn to do well:—And then, Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow: Though they be red as Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy Sins. Ezek. 16. 6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy Blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy Blood, Live: Yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy Blood, Live. V. 8. When I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold! Thy time was the Time of Love: And I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy Nakedness. Yee, I sware unto thee, and entred into a Covenant with thee (saith the Lord God) and thou becamest mine. V. 9. Then washed I thee with Water: Yea, I throughly washed away thy Blood from thee, and anointed thee with Oyl. Ezek 36. 26, 27. A New Heart will I give you, and a New Spirit will I put within you: And I will take away the Stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. Lam. 3. 31. The Lord will not cast off for ever. Joel 3. 16. The Lord will be the Hope of his People. 1 Job 1. 9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. He that believes shall be saved. Rom. 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that Justifies: Who is he that Condemneth? 2 Tim. 2. 13. If we believe not (that is, If sometimes we are not able to act Faith) yet God is faithful: He cannot deny himself. Eph. 1. 4. According as he hath chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World. V. 5. Having Predestinated us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will. V. 6. To the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved. V. 7. In whom we have Re∣demption through his Blood, the forgiveness of Sins, through the riches of his Grace. 2 Thes. 5. 9. For God hath not appointed us unto Wrath: But to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ our Lord. Joh. 10. 28, 29, 30. I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, nei∣ther shall any Man pluck them out of my Hand. My Father which gave them me is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand: I and my Father are one. Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his Servant; That walketh in darkness, and hath no Light: Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Psa. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is the Man whose iniquity is forgiven; Whose Sin is covered. Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputeth not Sin. Ephes. 2. 8. For by Grace you are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves: It is the Gift of God, Rom. 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: For you are not under the Law, but under Grace. Rom. 8. 1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Psa. 73. 26. Though our Hearts may fail us, and our Flesh may fail us, yet the Lord will never fail us.
Jer. 31. 3. For he hath loved us with an everlasting Love. Isa. 26. 3, 4. Thou wilt keep him in perfect Peace, whose mind is staid on thee, because he trusteth in thee. Trust in the Lord for ever. For in the Lord Jehovah is e∣verlasting strength. Promises of Protection, Assistance, Comfort, and deliverance, whereby our Hearts may be upheld in the evil Day. Ezek 9. 4. Go through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the Foreheads of them that Sigh and Cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst thereof. Psal. 34. 6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard, and saved him out of all his troubles. v. 19. Many are the Afflictions, of the Righteous: But the Lord delivereth them out of them all. Psal. 46. 1. God is our refuge and strength: A very present help in trouble. v. 2. Therefore will not we fear, &c. Psal. 42. 11. My Soul, why art thou cast down, and disquieted within me? Hope thou in God: for I shall yet Praise him, who is the health of my Countenance, and my God. Isa. 3. 10. Say ye unto the Righteous, it shall be well with him. Prov. 3. 25, 26. Be not afraid of suddain Fear, neither of the desolation of the wick∣ed when it cometh. For the Lord shall be thy Confidence, and shall keep thy Foot from being taken. Psal. 3. 8. Salvation belongeth to the Lord: Thy Blessing is upon thy Peo∣ple. Psal. 4. 3. Know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself: The Lord will hear when I call unto him. v. 8. I will both lay me down in Peace, and Sleep For thou Lord only makest me dwell in safety. Nabum. 1. 7. The Lord is good: A strong hold in the Day of trouble, and he know∣eth them that trust in him 2 Tim. 1. 12. I know whom I have believed; And I am perswaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that Day. For, Gen. 17. 2. He is God Alsufficient. Promises made to Gods People in the most dangerous Times. What confidence we should have in God. Psal. 27. 1, 2, 3. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid. When the Wicked even mine Enemies, and my Foes came upon me to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an Host should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear. Though War should rise against me, in this will I be confident. v. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after: That I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the daies of my Life. v. 5. For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his Pavilion: In the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me: He shall set me up upon a Rock. There∣fore. v. 9. Hide not thy Face from me. Put not away thy Servant in Anger: Thou hast been my Help; Leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my Salvation, v. 13. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living. v. 14. Wait on the Lord. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy Heart. Wait I say on the Lord. Psal. 40. 4. Blessed is the Man that maketh the Lord his trust, and respecteth not the Proud, nor such as turn aside to Lies. Psal. 32. 1. In thee O Lord, do I put my trust: Let me never be ashamed. v. 3. For thou art my Rock, and my Fortress; therefore for thy Name sake lead me and guide me. v. 23. O love the Lord, all ye Saints: For the Lord preserveth the Faithful. v. 24. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your Heart, all ye that hope in the Lord. Psal. 94. 14. I will say of the Lord: He is my Refuge: and my Fortress. My God, in him will I trust. Psal 91. 2. For the Lord will not cast off his People, neither will he forsake his In∣heritance. v. 19. In the multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts delighted my Soul. Psal. 102. 2. Hide not thy Face from me in the Day when I am in trouble, incline thine Ear unto me. In the Day when I call, answer me speedily.
Psal. 115. 11. Ye that fear the Lord trust in the Lord. He is their Help, and their Shield. Psal. 112. 7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings. His Hearts is fixed trusting in the Lord. Psal 118. 5. I called upon the Lord in distress: The Lord answered me, and set me in a large place, v. 6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear, what can man do unto me? 1 Pet. 4. 17. The time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God: And if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? v. 19. Wherfore let them that suffer according to the Will of God commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7. It is a Righteous thing with God to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from Heaven, &c. 2 Thes. 3. 3. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil. These I have thought sit to transcribe, hoping that by Gods blessing they may prove Useful and Comfortable to many others as they were to her. But besides she had colle∣cted many others, whereof (to prevent tediousness) I shall only give you the Heads. Promises to strengthen our Faith. For Deliverance from all evil. For assistance in times of trouble. For the Resurrection of our Bodies. For Eternal Glory with Christ. That God will preserve his Children from Afflictions so far as it is good for them. That God will qualifie, and moderate their Afflictions when they do come; and proportion them to their Strength. That Afflictions are Soveraign Medicines to kill Lusts, and to cure spiritual Dis∣eases. Promises made to such as suffer in a Good Cause for the Truth. Promises of Deliverances from the Evil World. Of Comfort to such as fall through Infirmity. Promises made to such as are Ignorant. Comforts against doubts and fears of losing the Love of God. Comforts against forgetfulness of Good things. Comforts against fears of falling from God. Comforts against dismayedness under many and strong Corruptions. Comforts against troubles arising from the want of the means of Grace, either in the whole, or in the Power of them. Comforts to Gods Children in case of spiritual Disertion. Promises of the Continuance and Unchangeableness, of Gods Love. Promises of Gods special and gracious presence with his Children. Promises of Gods Protection and Providence over his. Promises of bestowing Christ, and of many Blessings with him. As, of Redempti∣on: Effectual Calling, Justification: Reconciliation: Adoption: Of bestowing the Spirit, for their Sanctification; And all Spiritual Grace, as Faith; Confidence in God; Hope; Joy; Love to God, To Christ, To our Brethren, To Enemies: Of Obedi∣ence: Of Repentance: Of Knowledge: Of Audience of their Prayers: Of Mortifi∣eation of Sin, &c. Promises of assistance in Holy Duties. Promises of Gods acceptance of our spiritual Sacrifices. Promises of a blessing upon Holy Ordinances. Promises made to the conscientious performance of sundry Duties. As to, Prayer: To a careful seeking of God: To watchfulness: To conscientious Sanctification of the Lords days: For the preservation of his Church, &c. Inreading of practical Authors she had collected and set down many things which she found useful, and Comfortable to her Soul: As Certain grounds of Comfort to build our Faith upon in times of Temptations. Signs whereby we may know whether we be in Covenant with God or no.
Reasons why God made this Covenant with fain Man. What are the Gifts and priviledges of this Covenant. She hath also set down many Helps to provoke, and enable us to wait Gods leisure for the accomplishment of his rich, and free Promises, though his Providences seem to run cross to them. And how we may be enabled to apply Gods Promises. And in the Conclusion of all she thus Writes. It was the goodness of my God to remember me in my Youth, that so I might not forget him, neither in my Youth, nor in my Old Age. By all this it may appear what were the Gifts and Graces wherewith the Lord had a∣dorned her, and what her inward Beauty was: And as the Jewel was rare, so was the Ca∣binet wherein it was lodged, comely. And the Poet tell us Gratior est pulchro veniens è Corpore Virtus. That Virtue hath the greatest Grace. That shineth through a Beauteous Face. And such truly was hers in her younger Days, and some Characters, and Lineaments of it continued in her Old Age, even to the last, as sundry Persons observed. Hallelujah. What was long since said of Mrs. Katherine Bretterg may be fitly applied unto her Katherina Pura: Christo quam purgata, Vita, Christo preparata, Morte, Christo dedicata, Coelus, Christo conjugata. Prov. 31. 30. Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a Woman that feareth the Lord she shall be praised. On the Death of my Dear and much Honoured Grand∣mother, and to my Honoured Grandfather Mr. Samuel Clark, on her Life written by him. I EArly or late All things give way to Fate; Nothing in Nature's lasting found; Death and destruction tread a constant Round: No Heart Escapes the fatal Dart: Beauty from Death can no exemption bring, Wit, Wealth, or any other Charming Thing; No Menaces can work him into fear, Nor glitt'ring Colours take his eye, no gentle sounds his ear.
II. O how it discomposes to behold The good and bad in one black List enroll'd▪ Whatever Admiration can beget, All that's Noble, All that's Great; Or that Affection may invite, All that's moving, All that's Bright; Mixt with the Croud of worthless things, to stand An equal Prey to the Destroyers hand! III. We'll challenge all that's knowing to declare What are those Charms, or where they are, Whose mighty Vertue can make Death to stand, Or strike Remorse into his senseless Hand; If Liberal Natures gifts might find a Place, Or those Accomplishments that are acquir'd Or the Effects of a Celestial Grace In thee, Blest Soul, we these admir'd If all that merits Praise in Womankind, Graces of the Body, Beauties of the Mind; We still had sat in the diffusive Beams Of that Perfection, Whose loss we die to think upon; We still had tasted the refreshing streams Of that sweet Nature, and Compassion, Whose Fountain now is gone? Frail happiness, and putrid Breath, That lies expos'd to the capricious hand of Death. IV. These are our Tears, thus, Sir, we make our moan, When unexpected blasts have blown Our blooming Hopes away, or overthrown The Tree with riper Fruit thereon; Thus when we feel the warmer influence Of some brave Soul that scorns the Narrow Fence Which limits common Minds, we bless the Ray That makes so fair a Day, And nestle in the Sun-shine, while we may, If the cold hand of Death Stops the beloved Breath Astonish't at the mighty Blow We know not where to go, Nor what to say, Poor easie Prey To every Evil: passive, shiftless ones we be; As our Affections lead us so go we; To Love, or Joy, Fear, Hope, or Lust, As their respective Objects call them out, Reason the Soveraign, nor true, nor stout, Commits the Conduct of his Trust: Grief the most childish Passion of the Soul Here helpless Grief commands the whole, Fills every Corner, Issues out in Cryes,
Flows out in Tears, flys out in sighs; Sometimes within the troublesome Symptoms stay, When by tumultuous thronging out they choak their way; Hither the sum of all doth rise, A stupid silence, or an empty Noise: Perhaps we vent our Passion in a verse, And pin the Inundation to the Herse; Here we our Aery wishes breath, Bestow hard Epithets on Death, Publish our kindness for the Soul that's gone; And this we think is all that can be done. V. But your magnanimous Sagacity Does not so tamely yeild, Death has but half a victory, And you divide the field: When the fell Victor manages his dart, Into its principles the brittle Compound flyes, Which are not able to subsist a part, But that thats mortal dyes; You can releive the life doom'd to Oblivion, And give it a new subject of Inhesion, As your immortal Name long lived, Not, as the former, subject to Corruption: Thus the Grave Heroes of the Church reviv'd And this same Life which once so shone in its effects, By your great art retreiv'd, Still a bright pattern stands to all the Sex. J. CLARK, Aetat. suae 18/19. The Life and Death of that Excellent Lady Mary, Countess Dowager of Warwick, who died Anno Christi. 1678. THis Eminent Laday was the seventh Daughter of the Right Honourable Richard, the first Earl of Cork, in Ireland, who being born a private Gentleman, and Her Parentage. the younger Brother of a younger Brother, yea, to no other Inheritance then is expressed in the Motto, which his humble gratitude inscribed upon all the Palaces which he built, Gods Providence, mine Inheritance. By which Providence, and Gods blessing upon his own Prudent industry, he raised himself to such an honor and Estate, and left such a Family as never any subject in these three Kingdoms did, and (which is more) with so unspotted a Reputation of inte∣grity, that the narrowest scrutiny could find nothing to except against, in all the Me∣thods of his rising, tho they were searched into most severely. This Noble Lord was blessed with an ample Progeny, having five Sons, whereof he
lived to see four of them Lords, and Peers of the Kingdom of Ireland, and the fifth, tho not equal in Titles, yet as truly famous and honourable for his piety, parts, and learning. He had also eight Daughters, whereof the Eldest, the Lady Alice, was Married to the Lord Baramore. The second, the Lady Sarah, was Married to the Lord Digby of Ireland. The third, the Lady Laetitia, to the Eldest Son of the Lord Goring, who dyed Earl of Norwich. The fourth, the Lady Joan, to the Earl of Kildare, Primier Earl of Ireland, and of the antientest House in Christendom, of that degree, the pre∣sent Earl being the sixth, or seven and twentieth of Lineal descent from the same. A great Antiquary hath observed, that the three Antientest Families in Europe for Nobility, are the Veres in England, Earls of Oxford, and the Fitz-Geralds in Ireland, Earls of Kildare, and the Momorancies in France. The fifth, the Lady Katherine, was Married to the Lord Viscount Ranelaugh. The sixth, was the Lady Dorothy Lofius. The eighth, the Lady Margaret unmarried. But the seventh, our Lady Mary, which shut up, and Crowned this Noble Train, was Married to Charles, Earl of Warwick, of whom it may be truly sayd; Many Dughters, all his Daughters did virtuously, but she surmounted them all. She was great by her Marriage into the Noble Family of the Earls of Warwick, which Her Marriage and Character. yet received accession to its Grandure by the lustre of her Name and virtues: For she was great in all natural endowments and accomplishments of Soul and body, in Wis∣dom, beauty, favour and virtue. Great by her Tongue; for few Women ever used one better: For she spake so grace∣fully, promptly, discreetly, pertinently, and holily, that many admired the gracious words which proceeded out of her Mouth. Great by being the great Mistress and Promotress of the Art of obliging; in which she attained that Soveraign perfection, that she raigned over all their hearts with whom she did converse. Great in her Nobleness of Living, and in her free, and splendid Hospitality. Great in the almost unparallelled sincerity, constant, faithful, and condescending Friendship: And for that Law of kindness which dwelt in her lips and heart. Great in the managment of her worldly Affairs, and in her great dexterity there∣in. Great in her quickness to apprehend the difficulties of those her affairs, and to find where the pinch and stress lay; yea, to untye the knot, and to free them. Great in the Conquest of her self, and mastery over her passions; and this did in a special manner appear in her deportment at the death of her deer and only Son, wherein her behaviour was so submiss, serene, and quiet, that (with holy David) she could say: I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord didst it. Great in a Thousand other things which the world admires; yet did she despise them all, and counted them but loss and dung in comparison of the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. This Excellent Lady had good Education, and had been principled in the grounds Her Education. of Catechism in her Childhood, and yet (as she confessed) she understood nothing of the Life and Power of Godliness till some years after her Marriage. She came with prejudice, and strong apprehensions, as to matters of Religion, when she was engraf∣ted into that Family, wherein afterwards she lived and dyed in so much Honour. For she was almost frighted, and discouraged with the disadvantagious report which was made of it. But when Gods Providence had brought her into it, and she came to be∣hold the regular performances of Divine Worship therein; and had heard the most useful, and powerful Sermons upon the most useful, and practical points of Divinity; And withal, had observed, the good order, and Government of that Family, and re∣ceived encouragment from her Right Honourable Father-in-Law, Robert, Earl of Warwick, (who had always an extraordinary respect for her, and affection to her) her prejudice, by degrees, wore off, and an approbation followed thereupon. God was pleased to make use of two more remote means of her Conversion, namely, Afflictions, and Retirement: The kind of the first, and the occasion of the se∣cond need not here to be named. Only the divine Wisdom, and grace is very much to be admired and adored, for adapting and fitting suitable means to bring his pur∣poses to pass; as these also were in her circumstances. For she did afterwards acknow∣ledge, that her great Remora and difficulty was her love to the pleasures, and vani∣ties
of the world, which she neither knew how to reconcile to the strictness of Religi∣on, nor yet could she be content to part with for that whose sweets and better plea∣sures, she was not then acquainted with; God therefore gradually weaned her, by ren∣dring those things more insipid and distrustful, which before had been too much plea∣sing to her, and by giving leisure, and freedom from distractions, and to acquaint her self more throughly with the things of God: And hereby she was enabled to set her Seal to that Testimony which God gives to Spiritual wisdom, That all her ways are pleasantness, and all her paths are Peace. And to her friends she would freely, and frequently assure them, that she had no cause to repent the change which she found of the solid and satisfying Pleasures she met with in Religion, for those empty and dis∣satisfying ones she had left in the ways of vanity: Thereby encouraging them to try, not doubting but that upon experience, they would become of the same mind. Two more immediate helps which God blessed to promote the work of grace in her Her Conversi∣on. heart, were; The Ministry of the word (which God hath ordained to be the Power of God to Salvation to every one that believeth, Rom. 1. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 21.) and Christian Con∣ference. Before her Conversion, her Conversation was sweet, and inoffensive, yet would she Her Growth. confess that her mind was vain: But afterwards she walked with God most closely, circumspectly, and accurately: And (with Mary) having chosen the better part, few have walked with God more resolutely, and devoted themselves more unreservedly to Gods Love and fear, and service, learning to be Good in good earnest, and to encrease and grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And to promote this great and excellent work, like the wise man in the Gospel [Mat. 7. 24.] she digged deep to lay her Foundation on a Rock. And she made a strict scrutiny into her Soul, and weighed the reasons and motives of this her choise in the ballance of the Sanctuary, and (with the other builder in the Gospel) she sat down and considered what it might cost her to carry on and finish her Spiritual Edifice, and whether she were furnished to defray the charges thereof. As also whether the grounds of her hope were firm, and such as would not abuse her, and shame her, and her evi∣dences for heaven, such as would bear the test, and that the sacred Scriptures would approve and own: And this she drew up at large with her own hand many years be∣fore her Death, judiciously, soberly, modestly, and with humility. Having thus put her hand to the plough, she looked not back, but minded Religion as her business indeed; and never gave any so much as suspicion of her trifling in so serious a work. And for her practice of it, it was her great design to walk worthy of the Gos∣pel in all well pleasing, and to adorn her Professed subjection to the Gospel, by a Conversa∣tion becoming it; And to shew forth his Virtues and praises, who had called her out of darkness into his marvelous Light, and had translated her into the Kingdom of his dear Son. First therefore she was circumspectly careful to abstain even from all appearance of Abstinence. evil; and in all doubtful cases, her rule was, to take the surest side, saying, I am sure it will do me no hurt to let such things alone. And tho none were further from censuring others or passing Judgment upon others liberties, yet for her own practice, she would never allow her self the help of artificial beauty (for she used neither patch nor paint) and was pleased with the saying of one of her Spiritual friends, upon the reading of a book which Apologizes for it (O Lord I thank thee that thou gavest me not wit enough to write such a Book, unless withal thou had'st given me Grace enough not to write) Neither would she play at any Games, because besides many other inconveniences, she judged Prudence. them great wasters of pretious time, of which she was always very thrifty. And tho she was known to be a Lady of good understanding, yet, she would say that there were three things which were too hard for her: and would confess that she could not com∣prehend them. First, how those who professed to believe an Eternal estate, and its dependances up∣on a short inch of time, could complain of time, lying as a dead commodity upon their hands, which they were troubled how to pass away. Secondly, how Christians, who would seem devout at Church, could laugh at o∣thers for being serious out of it, and slight the very Bible, and turn Religion into a mocking-stock, Thirdly, how knowing men could take care of Souls, and yet seldom come among rhem, never to look after them.
And though, in the aforenamed particulars she was content only to give an Exam∣ple of forbearance; yet from the Play-Houses, since the Stage hath taken so great li∣berty, she would openly dehort her Friends, and that with the greatest earnest∣ness. She, long before her decease, began to keep a Diary, and took Counsel with two, A Diary. whom she used to call her Souls Friends (and ever esteemed such to her best Friends) con∣cerning the best manner how to mannage it. At the first, what she set down in it she used to perform in the Evenings; But finding that time inconvenient, by reason of her Lords long ilness (which gave her many inevitable diversions at that season) she changed it into the quiet, and silent morning, and for that end, she used to rise early. And therein, among other things, she used to record the daily frame of her heart to∣wards God: His signal providences to her self, and sometimes also, towards others: His gracious manifestations to her soul: Returns of Prayer: Temptations prevailing, or resisted, or whatsoever might be useful for her caution, or encouragement: That might afford her matter for Thankfulness, or Humiliation, &c. And by this, and such like means she had arrived to, and attained such a measure of experience, that she could conclude, or at least, make strong conjectures of the issue, and events of such things as she spread before God in prayer, and that by the frame of heart in the performance of that Duty: as might be instanced in many particulars, if it were convenient. She used to call prayer Hearts-ease, because she often found it so: And though her Prayer. Modesty was such, and she was so far from a vain affected ostentation of her Gifts there∣in, yet this may be affirmed, that she was mighty and fervent in Prayer, yea, constant, and abundant in it. For she sometime used her voice in prayer, and thereby hath been overheard, and her own Lord (knowing her hours of prayers) once convey'd a Grave and Godly Minister into a secret place, within hearing, who (being a man very able to judge) much admired her humble fervency: for in praying she prayed, and when she did not use an audible voice, her sighs, and groans, might be heard at a good distance from her Closet. And the very day before she died, she was shut up for above an hour, which time she spent in fervent private prayer, notwithstanding her bodily indisposition, and weak∣ness. And indeed prayer was the Element wherein she lived, and actually died, and it was as the vital breath of her soul, and the Wing that wafted it immediately to Heaven. But if she excelled her self in any thing, as much as she excelled others in most Meditation. things, it was in the Divine Art of holy Meditation. This was her Master-piece. For she usually walked two hours daily in the Morning to Meditate alone, in which rare Art she was an accomplished Mistress, both in that which was set, as also Occasional. For the first, choosing some select subject, which she would press upon her heart with most in∣tense thoughts, till she had drawn out all its juice, and nourishment: And for the se∣cond, like a spiritual Bee, she would suck Honey from all Occurrences; whole Volumns of such she hath left behind her. After this Consecrating of the day with reading the Scriptures, Meditation and Pray∣er, and using but a short dressing, and ordering her Domestick affairs, she spent the rest of the Morning in reading some good Book, till she was called to Family Prayers in the Chappel, from which she was never absent, and at which she behaved her self with much reverence and Devotion, thereby giving an excellent example to the rest of the Family. She was a strict observer of the Lords days, which is truly, and fitly called, the Hedg and Fence of Religion: And though some please themselves in calling it Judaizing, to excuse the liberties which they indulge themselves in breaking it, yet our Church hath enjoyned all to cry to God for mercy for the breach of it, and for Grace to incline our hearts to keep the fourth Commandment, as well as any of the other nine: And it's not hard to observe, that the streams of Religion are deeper or shallower, according as these Banks are kept up or neglected. She used great Devotion when she came to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and Devotion. seldom omitted to prepare her soul by solemn Fasting and Prayer, and renewing her Covenant with God at that time. And to encourage others to such a serious preparation to that sacred Ordinance, to that Dreadful Table (as S. Chrysostom calls it) which she her self used before it, it will be worth the while to transcribe, and to take notice of the sweet advantages which she reaped hereby, as she her self hath left it upon Record under her own hand in her Diary, concerning one of the last Sacrament Days she ever enjoyed in this World; which is as followeth.
November 25th. Sacrament Day. As soon as I awaked, I blessed God. When I had read in the Word, the Chapters of the sufferings of my blessed Saviour, I spent much time in meditating of his dy∣ing Love: By which thoughts I found my heart much drawn out to love him, and to be melted by his love. Then with great awful apprehensions of God upon my heart I went to pray. In which Duty, my heart was lifted up in the high praises of God, for both Spiritual and Temporal mercies: And my Affections were much drawn out in the Duty, in which my heart did follow exceeding hard after God for a nearer Com∣munion with him in the Sacrament than ever yet I had; I then renewed my Covenant with God and made promises, that, by his Grace enabling me, I would walk more close∣ly with him for the time to come. That which in a special manner I begged of God at this Sacrament was, more love to him, more holiness, more contempt of the world, and the glories of it: that I might be more useful to the souls and bodies of my fellow Christians than formerly I had been. Those mercies that I was in a special manner grateful for, were the Creation, and Redemption of the World; and for the Gospel, and the Covenant of Grace, and for Justification, and for some measure of Sanctification: And for so much patience ex∣ercised towards me, before my Conversion. And in order to it, imbittering Creature Comforts, that I might seek for Comforts above. And for a Sanctified Affliction, and for some degree of patience to bear it; and for supports under it by the warm, and lively Comforts of the Holy Ghost. And for returns of Prayer. And for so many op∣portunities to seek unto God. And for the sweet reviving hours I had enjoyed with God in solitude by Heavenly Meditations. And for the Word and Sacraments, and the sanctifying motions of Gods spirit. I was in a more than ordinary measure melted in the Duty, and shed a very great plenty of Tears in it; which when I came from, I found a longing desire to pertake of the Lords Supper, and a great Joy that I was going to pertake of it. Then I went to Hear.—The Text was. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man cometh to the Father but by me, I was attentive at that good Sermon: and by what I heard of the excellency of Christ, had my heart much warmed with Love to him. Afterwards at the Confession before the Sacrament, I found my heart in a more than usual manner broken for my sins, which I bewailed with great plenty of Tears, and from my heart judged and loathed my self for them. After I had received, I found my heart in an extraordinary manner warmed with love to God, and my soul did follow very hard after him to be made more holy, and for Grace to serve him better than ever yet I had done. I had very lively Affecti∣ons in the Duty, in which I received much Joy, and had sweet Communion with God in it. After at the Table of the Lord I had given to the poor, I came from the Sacra∣ment with my heart in a sweet, grateful, and heavenly frame, and then in private I bles∣sed God for that blessed Feast, and begged strength to keep my promises I had made to God of new Obedience. In the afternoon I heard again the same person, upon the same Text: I was in a serious, attentive frame at that good Sermon. The Subject of which was to shew, that Christ was the only way for poor penitent Sinners to come unto the Fa∣ther. I meditated upon the Sermons, and prayed them over. And had also Meditations upon the Joys of Heaven, with the thoughts of being ever freed from sin, and of be∣ing ever with the Lord: where I should enjoy him in his fullest Love. I found my heart much revived, and my soul did then make strong Sallies, and E∣gresses after that blessed Rest. After Family Duties were over, at which I prayed with fervency, I did before going to Bed commit my self to God. O Lord, I do from my soul bless thee for this sweet day, in which thou wert pleased to vouchsafe unto me, thy most unworthy Servant, more soul joy, than thou didst give for a long time before. She was a very serious, and attentive hearer of the Word, and constantly, after Ser∣mons, Her Hearing. recollected what she heard, sometimes by Writing, always thinking, and cal∣ling
it to mind that she might make it her own, and turn it into practise; not con∣tent to be a forgetful, fruitless Hearer only, but a doer, that she might be blessed in her deed. And such she was for the external performances of Religion. And though this was beautiful and lovely, yet her chief Glory was within, in the Her inward beauty. hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, in that dress of Graces which adorn∣ed her soul: This string was all of Orient Pearls, and evenly matched; not one of an ill water, or of an unequal size. There was not one withered limb; not one member wanting or defective in the New Creature: She was compleat in Christ; all of a piece. Her head for knowledge was comprehensive and clear, The Eye of her Faith was piercing and steady. The Ear of her Obedience was open, and swift of Hearing, and boared at the Door Posts of Wisdoms House. Her Pallat was quick and relishing, to which Gods Word was sweeter than the Honey, and the Honey-comb, and preferred by her to her necessary Food. The Cheeks of modesty were fair and ruddy. The Arms of her de∣sire were stretched out after God, and were flexible to embrace him. The hands of her Justice and Charity were strong and open. The Breasts of her Bounty were well fa∣shioned, and full of Milk: And the Bowels of Compassion were tender and fruitful. Her Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness was even greedy and insatiable. The heart of her sincerity was sound and lively, and the Pulse of her Conscience smooth and e∣qual. The feet of her affections were swifter than the Roes on the Mountains of Be∣ther. The natural heat of her Zeal more fervent than the Coals of Juniper; And the Radical moisture of her Repentance more fluid than the Springs of Pisgah. She was seen with dry Eyes under Tear-moving circumstances, which very neerly concerned her self; and being asked how she could refrain? She replyed: I desire to weep for nothing but my sins. Her Name was as an ointment poured forth, which made her the desire and de∣light of all that were good; yea, she may fitly be called a She-Jedidiah, a female Lemuel, the Lords delight: She with whom God was. Now the soul of this excellent Body which animated all its goodly Parts within, Her Love and Humility. was the Love of God: And the gorgeous robe which clothed it without, was her deep humility. These were as the Sun and Moon in this great Firmament, all whose Stars were of the first magnitude, and the least of which would have been a great Luminary in an other Orb. Such was this Beauteous Spouse of Christ; so like her heavenly Bride∣groom, that for that resemblance sake, we may say of her, she was exceeding lovely. Nor was she less solicitous to make others good than to be so her self. She well re∣membred Love to other Souls. our Saviours charge to S. Peter, when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. She set her heart to promote the building of Gods Spiritual Temple, and therefore she applied her self to it with all her might. She had holy Transports for the Glory of God, and she was a great lover of souls, and these two engaged her to promote Re∣ligion with her utmost industry and zeal, which that she might carry on with the grea∣ter advantage. First, She made it her great design to represent Religion as amiable and taking, and free from Vulgar prejudice as possibly she might, and not as might affright and scare men from it; but rather, that it might allure them, and insinuate it self into their love and lik∣ing. And for this end she was affable, familiar, pleasant, of a free and obliging Conver∣sation, unaffected; not sowre, reserved, morese, sad, dejected, melancholy deportment, which presents Religion most disadvantagiously. She was, even naturally of a most sweet temper, and Grace inoculated into such a Stock, thrives to admiration; whereas some crabbed, peevish, sullen natures starve the best Cien they are grafted with. And she made grace and nature subservient to the good of others. Secondly, She kept her self free and disinteressed from all Parties and Factions, that Her Prudence. none might suspect a design of making Proselytes to any but to God. She was neither of Paul, or of Apollos, or of Cephas, but only of Christ. Her Name was Christian, and her Sirname Catholick: She had a large and unconfined Sou not Piety. hem'd in, or pounded up within the Circle of any mans Name: But whosoever feared God and wrought Righteousness was accepted of her. She, very inossensively, regularly, and devoutly observed the Orders of the Church of England in its Liturgy and Publick Service, which she failed not to attend twice a day with exemplary Reverence; yet was she far from placing Religion in Ritual Obser∣vances.
She used to perfume her Company with good savoury discourse to prevent idle or worse Communication, yet not abruptly, upbraidingly, or importunely, which is very nauseous and fulsome: But she was like a spiritual stove: you might fell the heat, but not see the fire. She would drop a wise Sentence, or Moral, Holy Apothegm (with which she was excellently furnished, some of her own making, others of her Collection) that which suited with, or at least was not far remote from what was spoken, and talk∣ed of, and commending, or improving that, she would wind about the whole discourse without offence; yea, with much satisfaction and pleasure. She kept a book of such wise, pithy Sayings, much valuing words which contained much use and worth in a little compass. Where she had particular kindness, or personal interest, she would improve the autho∣rity of her Friendship to gentle, but free reproof, and would argue, and perswade so stre∣nuously, that her Bow (like sonathans) seldom returned empty; and would plead the Cause of God, and of their own souls; and to whom she spake, she would do it, with such winning, and insinuating sweetness, that it was hard to resist the Spirit she spake by; and her Zeal for their good, would cause her to argue with her friends, that she might by a holy Violence attract and allure them to be good and happy. She was of an extensive Charity, and would make people good by believing them to Her Charity. be so, and by this engagement make them ashamed to deceive her hopes, and disappoint her expectation. She had a tender, conscientious care to provide good Ministers in places where she had any thing to do, and to encourage them, would augment their maintainance where it was small, Leez, Braintree, Foulness, &c. may be her Witness in this. She had had a great care of the souls of her Servants; And her Ambition was, to be the Mistress of a Religious Family, which appeared in these particulars. Family Go∣vernment. First, In requiring their Attendance upon Gods Publick Worship, and their reve∣rent Behaviour there. Her Eye surveyed her Chappel, and none could be absent but she would miss them. Secondly, In personal Instruction, and familiar perswading them. There were none that served her but can Witness that she took occasions to do them good. Thirdly, In preparing them for, and perswading to the frequent participation of the Lords Supper. Fourthly, In laying good Books in all the common Rooms, and places of attendance, that those who waited might not lose their time, and have a Bait laid of some useful, practical Books, and fitted to their capacity, which migh catch, and imploy them. Fifthly, In making it the footstep to preferment. For she made the 101 Psalm the Rule of her Occonomicks: And though she treated all her Servants friendly, yet they were her Favourites which more signally feared God. She was not a First Table Christian only: She did not halt, but walked in the ways of God with both her feet. She had learned Saint Johns Lesson: That he who Loves God must love his Brother also. She was exactly Righteous. Eminently Charitable. Severely Just, both in Word and Deed. Her Word was as Sacred as an Oath, and Her Justice. as good security as any Bond. No inconvenience to her self would make her recal or flinch from the Obligation she had brought upon her self by her own mouth. Yea, she had such an abhorrence of a dishonourable recess from express, or but intimated pro∣mises, that it would render her esteem of such persons exceeding low and mean, who by little Arts and Shists would loose and free themselves from their engagements, and that would disappoint the expectations they had raised in others to save charges, account∣ing their money spared, a very poor shift, and base Redemption of their Repu∣tation. She abhorred a Lie, and used modestly to give this Testimony of her self: You know I Her Truth. dare not: I will not Lie. And her Lord knew this so well, that though he was posi∣tive enough, yet would he never persist, if there hapned any contest against whatsoe∣ver she affirmed peremptorily. And a Lye was the foulest blemish any could stain themselves with, in conversing with her, and the most unpardonable fault a Servant could contract, to whom she used to say: Tell me the truth, and I can forgive you any thing. About a Month before she died, she was (though then in perfect health) determined Preparation for death.
to alter her Will. And whereas she had before given many large Legacies in Money to persons of great quality, she said, she would alter them all, and that for this reason: They are (said she) rich, and do not need money, but she would give it in some other thing that they might keep, as memorials of her Love to them: And when she had set down all their Names in a Paper, she bethought her self what probably might be most ac∣ceptable to each of them. For (said she) that renders a Gift most pleasing, when it suits with the fancy of the Party to whom it is given. And then surveying her own store, she resolved what to give to most of them: But not finding her self fully provided of what she might bequeath to all, she resolved to insert all in a Codicil, to be annexed to her Will: And added, I am now (God willing) going to London, when I have finished my Will, and then I will by Discourse, find out, undiscerned, what will be most pleasing to every one of them, and will provide accordingly. Yet when the draught of her Will was made, she would put into the Will it self: For the Right Honourable, the Countess of Scarsdale, I bequeath a Set of Silver Sconses, which are in mine own Chamber. And being asked, why she would not leave the Gift to be put into the Codicil among the rest? She returned this Answer: Because (said she) She is the only person living, to whom I ever intimated that I had put her into my Will, and I would not die and have it found otherwise, and so be under the suspition of having told a Lie, or Dying with a Lie in my mouth. She had perfectly learned S. Pauls Lesson: To speak evil of no man: And where she Her Prudence. could not speak well, the worst injury she would do would do was to be silent, and say nothing, unless it were to some single friend, of whose prudence and taciturnity she was secured by her own experience. Nor would she invidiously diminish the just praises of any who deserved them. Nay, she would rather study to extenuate their other failings, by presenting the light side to hide the dark one. And would commend them for one good quality or action, to cover many bad ones: And would say, when others spake against them; yet I must do them this right, they are so, &c. Or for all this. She was no less exactly just in deeds than in words. She not only gave goodly words but good performances. Justice. And because the faithful discharge of Relative Duties is one of the most signal evi∣dences of Righteousness, and the greatest Ornament of our holy profession, let us hear briefly how she used to acquit her self in that regard: And that first as a Wife to her Husband Living, and as an Executrix to his Will, and a Trustee to the Estate, after his De∣cease. As a Mother: As a Daughter: As a Sister: As a Friend: As a Mistress: As a Landlady: And as a Neighbour: In all which she was, as a singular blessing to all her Relations, so an eminent Example unto others. First, As a Wife: The heart of her Husband did trust in her: And she did him good, and As a Wife. not evil, all the days of his Life. She was truly a Crown, and an Ornament to him. She always lived, with the sense of the Covenant of God which was betwixt them, upon her heart. She was an equal mixture of affectionate obedience, and obediential affe∣ction in her deportment towards him. Her care and endeavour was to hide, and conceal his infirmities: She deeply Sympathi∣zed in his long, and tedious indispositions: She attended, and to her uttermost relieved him under them, with great tenderness. She loved his soul, and would both Counsel him with prudent Zeal, and pray for him with great ardor and fervency; Neither was he ever wanting in praising her. He hath with vehement protestations said: That he had rather have her with Five Thousand pounds (though she brought him much more) than any Woman living, with Twenty. Yea, when the very Tor∣rent of his sorrows was at the highest for the Death of his only Son, he made That the most aggravating circumstance of his grief, That it would kill his Wife: Who (said he) is more to me than an hundred Sons. And to seal up his Love, he gave to her his whole Estate, as an honorary Testimony of his grateful esteem of her merits towards him, and left her sole Executrix: A high Testimony of his confidence in her integrity. This Trust, though it cost her very much labour, and she encountred with great di∣fficulties in the management of it, yet did she discharge it with such indefatigable pains, such scrupulous exactness, and admirable Prudence, that she failed not to perform his Will to the least tittle: So that she neither gave, nor left any occasion to any of Com∣plaint, though they were interressed persons; but they rather applauded, and admired
her prudent, and honourable conduct of that great Affair; which she owned, with great thankfulness unto God, as no small blessing, and mercy to her. And for that Noble Estate which was to Descend unto others after her Decease, she would not imbezel, or wrong it in the least, to have gained the disposal of the whole. And therefore was at vast Expences in Repairs upon the Mansion-House, and of Farms belonging to it, though her self was but a Tenant for Life. And it was her usual saying, That whatsoever she lost her self, she would never give occasion unto them that came after her, to say, that she had damnified the Estate, or wronged her Trust, or them. Her Noble and Splendid way of living, proceeded not from Pride and Ambition, but Her House∣keeping. at least principally out of Conscience: For she would not contract her Family, or make an abatement, because she would not deceive her Lords Trust, who, the rather gave her the Estate to keep up the Honor of his Name, and Family, in a place where it had long flourished, and had been famous in that kind for many years. She was an incomparable Mother, which she made to appear in the Education of As a Mother. her only Son, and of three Daughters committed to her Trust. For she never had but two Children of her own: one Son, the gallant, hopeful, young L. Rich, and one Daughter, who died young. Those three Excellent Ladies to whom she performed the Office, and Duties of an own Mother, though she were but an Aunt in Law to them, who by their Cousins death are become such vast Fortunes to their Husbands, being left with less plentiful Portions, even whilest her own Son lived, she would never leave pressing her Lord to make Noble Provisions for them, and to settle on them Portions answerable to their Birth, and Quality. She was a Dutiful Child to her Parents, and upon all occasions would make honoura∣ble As a Child, Si∣ster, Friend. mention of them. She was a more endearing Sister than in a few words can be ex∣pressed. A friend so faithful, so kind, so condescending, so free, unreserved, and unsuspi∣cious, as the like is hard to be found. She was a rare and excellent Mistress, in a double care both of the Spiritual, and As a Mistris. Bodily welfare of her Servants, whom she as much loved to please, as other persons Servants can be to please their Mistress, it being her delight to render their Lives a∣bout her, easie, and pleasant, and free from discontent, that so they might serve the Lord with the greater chearfulness. And when she was to leave them, she left not off her kindness to them, or care for them, but provided to the uttermost of her power, for their comfortable subsistence, according to their rank, and time of Service with her: Giving them Noble and Liberal Legacies, to some four hundred, to others three, two, and one hundred pounds a piece: And to others eighty, seventy to buy them Annui∣ties for their Lives. To others, Fifty, Forty, Twenty, and a full years Wages to every one not specified by Name; and three Months entertainment, with Lodging, Diet, and all other accommodations, as in her Life time, to seek out, and to provide Services for themselves, before they should be removed. She was a Noble, and compassionate Land-lady, and would usually say of her Te∣nants: As a Landlady Alas poor Creatures! they take a great deal of pains, and I love to see them thrive, and live comfortably, and I cannot endure to see them brought into straits, and therefore I would have all things made convenient for them, and if they have sustained any great losses, I would have it considered. And for her Copy-hold Tenants, she would urge earnestly the timely fi∣nishing of the Court Rolls, and delivery of their Copies to them, professing that she could not in Conscience suffer it to be neglected, because it was all they had to shew for their Estates. Lastly, as a Neighbour: She was so kind and courteous to them, that it advanced the Rent of the adjacent houses out of a desire to be near unto her. Her House and As a Neighbour Table, Her countenance and very heart was open to all persons of quality within a considerable distance; and for the meaner sort, if they were Sick, or Tempted, or in any Distress either in Body or Mind, whither they should go but to this Countess, whose Clo∣set was always furnished with things necessary, either for Physick or Chyrurgery. And her self would visit the meanest of them, and would send Ministers unto them for their Spiritual Edification and comfort: But as her Love to God was the soul of her Religion, so her extraordiaary Charity to∣wards Her Charity. those who needed it, was the conspicuous Crown which beautified all her sweet∣ness and goodness towards Men: For in this she was forward to her power; yea, and be∣yond her power. For she would, upon occasion anticipate her Revenues and Incomes,
rather than want wherewith to be liberal, insomuch that it was said of her: She was the Lady who would borrow money to give away. She would not live poor in Good Works that she might die Rich: Yea, though she had chosen Executors in whom her heart could trust, yet she would make her own hands her Executors, and they were very faith∣ful to her enlarged heart. But to instance in some particulars. When in her Lord, and Husbands Life time, she had an allowance, setled by Articles before Marriage, she enquired of an able Neigh∣bour Minister, in whom she much confided about the quota pars, what proportion one is obliged to Consecrate unto God out of his Estate? He answered: That it was hard, if not impossible, to determine, or six a Rule, which might hold universally; but the cir∣cumstances must be considered in which persons stood; their Qualities, their Incomes, their Dependances, &c. But this, not satisfying her, she urged a more particular Answer as to her own case, what would be fit, and becoming her to do? He answered: That he supposed, a seventh part: But she replied, that she would never give less than the third part. And she made good her resolution with advantage, ever laying by her a third part for Charitable Uses, and would sometimes borrow of that which remained, to add to it, but never defalk from that to serve her own occasions, tho sometimes they were pressing enough. When she came to the possession of so great an Estate as her Lord left her for her Life, she in a good measure made true what a Great Person said: That the Earl of War∣wick had left all his Estate to pious uses. Meaning, that he had given it to this bounti∣ful Lady, who would so imploy it. And she hath professed, that all the satisfaction which she took in it, was, the opportunity it afforded her of doing good: And she hath seriously affirmed; That she would not accept of, nor be encumbred with the greatest Estate in England, if it were offered her, upon condition, not to do good to others with it. Her liberal heart devised liberal things. There are Objects of real Charity, which are not so to Vulgar Eyes or Purses, on whom she would confer, and whom she would surprise with Noble and sutable assistances: Such struck deep, and drew a whole Bag at once, but made no noise. Forreigners who were forced to exile themselves to preserve their Religion, or to embrace what they were convinced of to be the Truth, she was always open-handed to such. A great many young Scholars of hopeful promising Parts, she wholly, or in a good measure maintained in the Ʋniversities, allowing to some Thirty, to some Twenty, to some ten, to some eight, and to many five pounds per Annum, and to some who had more helps otherways, less. Abundance of young Children she put out to School in the Neighbouring Towns, even all that were poor, and willing to learn. Yea, her Charity in this kind reached as far as unto Wales, contributing Nobly unto that pious design, set on foot, and pro∣secuted with indefatigable pains and earnestness by that Reverend, Charitable, and Pious Divine Mr. Thomas Gouge. And for those poor Children about her, she did not only pay for their Schooling, but gave them Books, oft-times Clothing. Many godly Ministers, both Non-Conformists, who wanted means of subsistence, and Conformists, whose Livings were so small that they could not live on them, she bounti∣fully relieved. She turned not away her Eyes, or her Ears from occasional Objects of Charity, whereof there was no want. And though she was sometimes imposed upon, and de∣ceived by those that neither needed, nor deserved what she gave, yet did not this discou∣rage her from giving again. For (said she) I had rather relieve ten that only appear meet Objects, and are not, than let one go unrelieved who is so indeed. She thought it bet∣ter to seed two Drones, than to starve one Bee. For though they deceived her in giv∣ing, she knew that God would not deceive her in accepting what was sincerely done for his Name sake. The poor which she fed at her Gates were very many, not only with broken meat, but with liberal provision, purposely made for them. She was full of compassion, yea, a great lover of the poor, and she built a convenient Receptacle for them at her London House (as they had one at Leez) to shelter them from the injury of Weather till they received their Dole. And during her abode at London, having no Family at Leez, yet even then were the Poor provided for there. For twice a Week there was plentiful
provision of Bread and Bief for the Poor of four adjacent Parishes: And in her Will she took order that the same should be continued for three Months after her Decease. And by her said Will she gave an hundred pounds to be distributed among the poor of Braintree, Felsted, Little Leez, and French Waltham, either at, or shortly after her Funeral. It is not doubted that every year after she came to enjoy that great Estate, she gave as much in works of Charity as would have purchased Lands sufficient to have endow∣ed a Free-School, or an Alms-house. And that Pious and Liberal Foundation of Roch∣ford Alms-house, which, though Founded Legally by a Patent granted under the Broad Seal for its Confirmation, by the Ancestors of this Noble Family, of which she bore the Title, being by the Death of the Founder not endowed: Yet (as all her Predecessors had done) she always gave to the Alms-people their full designed allowance, and or∣dered, by her last Will, that it should be so continued for a full year after her De∣cease. This is farther very remarkable in this rare Lady, that she was not notoriously defe∣ctive Her Growth in Grace. in any Virtue, or Grace, but as eminent in all, as most have been in any one of them. She did abound in every Grace. She was never stained with any scandalous deformity, or sin, which was a rare mercy: For though sometimes she might slip, or stumble, she fell not; much less lay, or wallowed to defile her Garments, concerning which, hear what her self hath written. After God had thus savingly (I hope) wrought upon me, I went on constantly, and comfortably in my Christian course, though I had many doubts, and fears to contend with. And did truly obey that Precept, of working out my Salvation with fear and trembling; Yet God was pleased to carry me still onward. And though I, too often, broke my good Resolutions, yet did I never renounce them; and though I too often trip't in my Journey to Heaven, yet I never forsook my purpose of going thither. Her very defects, and failings, were such as some others would have been proud of: Her Weeds would have been accounted Flowers; her Thistles, Roses in another Gar∣den. For her two great faults, for which she was blamed, by the most curious Observ∣ers of her, were First, Excess of Charity. Faults charged upon her. Secondly, Defect of Anger. But even these admit of an Apology more easily than they need it. For First, What was accounted excess of Charity in her, was her easiness to believe most People to be Good, or at least better than they were. She did indeed somewhat bend to this Right-hand Error: But if it were a bad effect, it proceeded from a good Cause. They that have clear, innocent, and sincere hearts themselves, are ready to judge the like of others. Charity thinketh no evil. Yet she used this her good opinion of others, as a means, and motive to make them, what she was so willing to signifie she thought them to be. And though she would never despair of any man, while she found them under the a we of Gods Authority and Word (for even those may receive some nou∣rishment who Eat against stomack; and the Sieve under the Pump may be cleansed, though it hold no Water) yet if she discerned any to scorn, or deride, and mock at the Scriptures, to despise Gods Ordinances, and to turn that which is Sacred into a laugh∣ing stock, she used (as her Phrase was) to set her mark upon that Man. Neither yet was she so often, nor so much mistaken in her Judgment of persons, as some supposed, who more misinterpreted her Civility, than she did the others sanctity. As for her defect of anger, which implies (if the charge be true) a want of Zeal Her Zeal. against Sin and Sinners, and then it is unjustly charged upon her: For though she could not, she durst not rage and storm, and vent her Anger, as some do, whose An∣ger is a short madness (For indeed, her calm, serene, and sedate mind, and amiable dis∣position, was not capable of such furious storms, so contrary to her nature) yet would she with less noise, make deeper impressions of her displeasure for great faults, than those who appear most furious: As we see, that a still, soaking Rain wets more, than a furious, driving storm. And therefore it was observed, that if any Servant had of∣fended, and been faulty, they had rather have run the Gantlet thrice, of their Lords most furious expressions, than to have been once sent for to their Ladies Closet, who treated them with soft words, but hard Arguments against their misdemeanours. Her words were
like that silent Lightning, which, without the noise of Thunder, melts the Blade, but singes not the Scabbard. What Presages she had of her approaching Death, she discovered not to any; but her preparations for it had been of a long time habitual. It was one of the most constant Subjects of her retired musings, and she used to call walks to Meditate upon it, her going to take a turn or two with Death. And surely that could never surprise, or find her unprepared, who made it her great work to be fitting her self for it. There are some passages worthy our most serious remarks concerning the watchful Eye of Gods Providence over his own Hephzibahs, alarming them to trim their Lamps (as the wise Virgins did) against the coming of the Bridegroom, and allowing them fit opportunities to do it; as in much mercy, he did unto her, as will appear by this Tran∣script taken out of her Lords Diary, containing an account how she spent the last Lords day, before she fell into her sickness, which proved mortal, and was Written but the ve∣ry day before she was taken ill; by which, it will be evident how God, in a most remark∣able manner, made some impresses upon her Soul of her approaching dissolution, though as then, there were no visible Symptomes of it upon her body. March 24th. Sunday. As soon as I was up, I blessed God. Then I Meditated, and endeavoured by think∣ing Sabbath Sancti∣fied. of some of the great mercies of my Life, to stir up my heart to return glory to God. And those thoughts had this effect upon me, to melt my heart much by Gods Love, and to warm it with love to him. Then I prayed, and I was enabled in that duty to pour out my soul to God, and my heart was in it, carried out to praise God, and I was large in recounting of ma∣ny of Gods special mercies to me. And whilst I was doing so, I found God migh∣ty upon my Spirit, and upon my heart, in a much more than ordinary manner, carried out to admire God for his goodness, and to love him: and I found his love to make great impressions upon my breast; and melting me into an unusual plenty of Tears. Those mercies, which in a special manner I was grateful for, were the Creation, and Redemption of the World; and for the Gospel, and for the Sacraments; and for Free-Grace, and the Covenant of Grace; and for the excellent means of it which I had enjoyed; and for the great Patience God had exercised towards me before, and since my Conversion; and for Checks of Conscience when I had sinned; and for re∣pentance when I had done so; and for a sanctified Affliction, and supports under it; and for so large a portion of wordly blessings. After I had begged a blessing upon the publick Ordinances, I went to hear Mr. Wood∣roof. His Text was, Pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. And after a summa∣ry account of the Sermon, it follows in her Book. In the Afternoon, I heard again the same Person upon the same Text. And then follows a concise, and methodical recapitulation of that Sermon also. And after that she adds. I was in a serious and affected frame at both the Sermons, and was by them convinced of the excellency of fearing God, and of spending the remainder of the term of my life in his service. And did resolve to endeavour to spend the remain∣ing part of my time better. At both his Prayers I prayed with fervency. Afterwards I retired and meditated up∣pon the Sermons, and prayed them over. And I had also this Evening large Meditations of Death, and of Eternity; which thoughts had this effect upon me, to make me in an extraordinary awaked frame, in which things of another Life were much realized to me, and did make very deep im∣pressions upon me; and my soul did follow hard after God for Grace to serve him bet∣ter than ever yet I had done. Then she concluded with this Prayer. O Lord be pleased to hear my Prayers, which did not come out of feigned Lips: And to hear the voice of my weeping for more holiness, and for being more weaned from the world, and all things in it, Amen. After Supper I committed my self to God. This was Written the very last day of her health, being Monday Morning. In which we may see how God realized to her, and gave her extraordinary impressions of Death, Eternity, and the Life to come, when he was about to bring her to it. For the very next day she began to be ill of that sickness whereof she died.
This Phaenix: This excellent Lady was far from their humours whose Consci∣ence are so bad, and unquiet Company, that they hate solitude, and dare not be alone. For she loved, and even hugged her Retirements as her most pleasing hours which gave her the greatest satisfaction. And tho when she was called to it, she would deny her self, and her particular inclination to comply with a duty of a larger spread; yet she cheerfully sustained that hurry of businesses which was inevitable to the acquitting her self of the trust reposed in her, by her Lord and Husbands last Will and Testament. But never did Bird take Wing, when disentangled from a Net, with greater chear∣fulness, nor chirp out the pleasures of its unconfined freedom, more merrily than she did solace her self, when she had escaped the noise and Croud of Worldly Affairs, which ruffled and turmoiled her quiet repose, and suspended the enjoyment of her self, and when as, in the begining of her last winter, her dearest Sister was about to leave her, the last farewel that she took of her was in these words. Now I have done my drudgery (meaning her worldly business) I will set to the renewing my preparations for Eternity. And accordingly, she made it the reiterated business of that Winter. In the beginning of March, Anno Christi. 1677. She set to the making of her Will anew, and signed, and sealed it on the twelfth day of the same month: And on Tues∣day before Easter [March 26th. 1678.] she was take with some indisposition of body, loss of Appetite, and an Aguish distemper, whereof she had four or five fits, which yet, in that season of the year were judged both by Physitians, and her friends, like to prove more advantagious to her future health, than dangerous to her life. And in this state of body she continued, freed from her fits, both in her own appre∣hension, and in her friends hopes that were about her, until Friday, the twelfth of April following, on which day she rose with good strength; and after she had sat up some time; being laid upon her Bed, she discoursed cheerfully and piously: And one of the last sentences she spoke, was this, (turning back the Curtain with her hand), Well, Ladies, if I were one hour in Heaven, I would not be again with you, as well as I love you. At this time a neighbouring Lady, having given her a kind visit, at her departure, she arose from her Bed to her Chair, and sayd, that she would go into her Bed; but she first desired that one of the Ministers that was in the House, would go to Prayer with her; and asking the Company which of them they would have? She presently re∣solved her self to have him who was going away, because the other would stay, and pray with her daily; and immediatly he being called, and come, her Ladyship sitting in her Chair by reason of her weakness (for otherwise she always kneeled) holding an Orange in her Hand to which she smelt, almost in the beginning of the Prayer, she was heard to fetch a sigh, or groan, which was esteemed Devotional, as she used to do at o∣other times: But a Lady, who kneeled by her, looking upon her, saw that she had lost her colour, and looked pale, and her hand hung down: Hereupon, being affrighted, Her Death. she started up, and all applied themselves to Minister help unto her, but all in vain. For as tho she had faln into a sweet sleep, her Soul left its earthly Mansion, and by the Holy Angels was transplanted into Abrahams bosom. Thus lived, and thus dyed this Right Honourable Lady: This Noble Woman: This blessed Saint: This incomparable pattern of flaming zeal for the Glory of God, and of burning Charity for the Good of Men; and that in the actual exercise of Prayer, in which duty she so often anticipated Heaven by pregustation, and which now wafted her longing Soul into the Holy of Holies, within the Vail; At the kiss of Gods Mouth (as the Hebrew Doctors say, that Moses dyed) and tho not full of years, yet full of mature, and ripe fruits and graces (for she had lived long in a short time) when all men judged her worthy of more days. But God, the only unerring Judge, had made, and now found her fully ripened for a better life, and therefore translated her from this vale of Tears into his everlasting Kingdom. Thus she faithfully served and honoured God in her place, and Generation, and God likewise honoured her, according to that promise by the Prophet Samuel: Him that honours me I will honour. And that of our Blessed Saviour: He that serveth me, him will my Father honour. For God gave her Riches and Honour in abundance, as he did to Jehosaphat [2 Chro. 17. 5, 6.] and yet her heart was not puffed up by them; but lifted up under them in the ways of the Lord. He gave her a Heaven upon Earth (after some trembling scruples and shiverings)
even the blessed calm of a purified, pacified, serene, and well assured Conscience. He gave her the fragrant perfume of an odoriferous Name, and of a bright, and resplendent Reputation. He gave her many dear and Cordial Friends; faithful to her as her own Soul, to as∣sist, Counsel, comfort, to help, and carry her through her greatest difficulties, and most entangled affairs; concerning one of whom she used often to say with much thankfulness, that he was a Friend of God Almighties giving, even beyond her own ex∣pectation. He gave her many great merciful deliverances: One, very like to that which Gregory Nazianzen insists so largely upon, in his Funeral Oration for his Sister Gorgonia, the Mules in whose Chariot running away, not only bruized, but brake her bones, and yet A great deli∣verance. God miraculously restored her again. So that when the Horses in our Ladies Coach, throwing the Coach man out of his seat, ran furiously away with her, God, almost miraculously, hung the Coach against a Post in the way, whereby he stopped their fu∣ry, rescued her Life from most eminent hazard, and healed the bruises which she recei∣ved, with safety. This happened, July 23d. 1661. He gave her a hearty Love, and affectionate esteem of all her Neighbours, so that (with Titus) she might have been fitly stiled, Deliciae humani Generis: The Delight, and Darling of her Country. And with so cheerful willingness did they delight to serve her, that you might have seen fifty brave, lusty, and gallant Teams, day after day bringing in her provisions, and that without any other invitation, than the bare know∣ledge of the time (which also themselves would diligently enquire out) and nothing would grieve them more, than to be prevented of paying this Tribute of Honorary respect to her. He gave her such an high esteem for her prudent integrity, and discreet, and im∣partial Her Justice. Justice, that she began to be (tho it was an imployment not usual to her sex) the Arbitress, and Umpiress of all the Controversies among her Neighbours: Many of which she happily, and succesfully reconciled, and decided their quarrels, both with wisdom and equity. He gave her the universal approbation, Love, and admiration of all that knew her, whereby that Proverb was confuted, Who hath no Enemies hath no friends. For either she had none of the former: Or her ways so pleased the Lord, that he made her Enemies to be at peace with her; For Noble and mean, Rich and Poor; Persons of all degree, and which is more, of all perswasions, paid her most kind respect, honoured, and loved her. Finally, God prevented her withe blessing of goodness, and Crowned her with loving kind∣ness, and tender mercy. He made her glad with the light of his Countenance, and satisfied her as with Marrow and fatness. He granted the requests of her lips; and shut not out her Prayer from him. He gave her time and ability to discharge her trust, and to settle her worldly af∣fairs with honour and satisfaction: And he gave her opportunity, space, and a heart to recollect her self, and to redeem that time, which an hurry of business had deprived her of, and wherein to renew her evidences for heaven. He took out the sting of Death before she came to die, and the pains of death when she dyed, and sweetly drew up her Soul to Heaven, to be immersed in that fulness of Joy, and bathed in those Rivers of Pleasure which are at his right hand for ever∣more.
The Life and Death of Mrs. Margaret Baxter, the Wife of Mr. Richard Baxter, who died June 14th. Anno Christi. 1681. MRS. Margaret Baxter was born in the County of Salop; Her Father was Her Parentage. Frances Charleton, Esq; who was accounted one of the best Justices of the Peace in all that County. He was a grave, sober, and worthy Man: But not Mar∣rying till he was aged, dyed when his Children were very young. His Children were three, a Son and two Daughters. He had one surviving Bro∣ther, Robert, who after the Death of Francis, maintained a long, and costly suit for the Guardianship of his Heir: But his Wife and Good Mother [Mary] durst not trust her only Son in the hands of one that was his next heir. She thought also that nature gave her a greater interest in him than any Unkle could have. This falling out in that heat of our late Civil Wars, Robert being for the Parlia∣ment, had the advantage of strength, which occasioned her to seek relief at Oxford from the King, and afterwards to Marry one Mr. Hanmer, who was also for the King, to improve her interest thereby. Her House (which was a kind of a small Castle) was made a Garrison by the Kings party: But Robert procured it to be besieged by some Parliament Soldiers, who took it by storm, where the Mother and her Children were, and saw some part of their Housing burnt, and some that were slain, lying dead before their eyes: And thus Robert got possession of the Children. But, after some time, she by her prudence and watchfulness, surprized them, and conveyed them away secretly to one Mr. Bernard, in Essex, where she secured them against all their Unkle's endeavours to recover them. Those unhappy Wars being ended, and she, as Guardian, enjoying her Sons E∣state, managed it with as much prudence, care, and industry, as if it had been for her self, and out of it, Conscionably paid her Husbands just debts, repaired some of the Buildings which were burnt down; till her Son, Marrying, took his Estate into his own hands. Not long after, she went to Kederminster, to Mr. Baxter, (tho a stranger to her) Twenty miles distant from her, and desired him there to take an House for her alone. His answer was, that he would not be guilty of doing any thing which should separate such a Mother from her only Son, who in his youth had so much need of her Coun∣sel and conduct: And that, if Passion in her, and any miscarriage in him, had caused a difference, that love which had carried her through so much trouble for him, should teach her with patience to bear it, rather than to withdraw her self from him. Here∣upon she went back, yet shortly after returned, and took a House her self without his knowledge, or privity. She had not been long there, before her unmarried Daughter [our Margaret] came to her, who was then about seventeen, or eighteen years old, resolving not to forsake her Mother who deserved her dearest Love; yet sometimes went to Oxford, to her Elder Sister, who was Married there to Mr. Ambrose Opton, at that time a Canon of Christ Church: At which time her good old Mother lived as a blessing among the poor, but honest Weavers of Kidderminster, who (tho strangers to her) yet for their pieties sake, were presered by her before the ruffling vanities of the world. In her younger days, Pride Vanity and Romances, and such like Company, were her delight, and an imprudent rigid Governess, whom her Mother had set over her in her absence, had done her much hurt, by possessing her with hard thoughts against strictness in Religion: Yet had she a great Reverence for some good Ministers, e∣specially for one Mr. Tho. Wright, and she thought that she was not such an one as she should be, but something better (tho she knew not what the better was) must be sought after and attained.
With these thoughts she came to Kederminster, where she soon took scandal at the Po∣verty, and strict precisness of the people there, tho her great love to her Mother drew her among them: Here she attired her self in costly, and glittering Apparel, and delighted in her former Romances: But not long after she heard and understood what those bitter things were which she had thought must be attained. For being at Oxford, she heard a Sermon Preached by Mr. H. Hickman, upon that Her Conversi∣on. Text, Isay. 27. 11. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not save them, &c. This wrought much upon her, and the Doctrine of Conversion, Prea∣ched by Mr. Baxter, and afterwards Printed by him, in his Treatise of Conversion, was received on her heart, as a Seal on the wax. Whereupon she presently fell to self-judging, frequent Reading, and Prayer, and serious thoughts about her present and future estate. A Godly, and Religious Maid that waited upon her, taking notice of this change, and of her secret duties (which she concealed all that possibly she could, as was her practise all her life time, tho to her great prejudice) she acquainted her Mother with it, who (tho before, probably, she loved her last, and least of all her Children) now began to esteem her as her Darling: And all her Religious Friends, and Neigh∣bours, rejoyced much, and praised God for so sudden and great a change. About this time Mr. Baxter Preaching upon that Text, Rom. 8. 9. Yea are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you, &c. Upon which occa∣sion he gave them sundry marks whereby they might know whether they had the Spirit of Christ or no. These she carefully set down, and among many other papers which were found after her death, this was found among the rest, wherein she had set down first the Mark, and then her self-judging, and self-condemning thoughts upon it. And at last she thus concludes. It is now evident that I am a graceless person. Tho all things be imperfect in the best, and some are more wanting in one particular than in an other: Yet where all their contraries are predominant (as they are in me) that person is told by this Ser∣mon that he is none of Christs. How much doth my behaviour at this time, make this to appear, when I can with an hard heart, and a dry eye, and with a steady hand, declare my self at present an heir of Everlasting wo? But the longest day will quickly come, tho I strive to put it far from me. Next to this there was a full paper containing the great necessity of self-judging; the reasons for it, rules how to perform it, together with the due manner thereof, e∣specially in times of danger, before the Lords Supper, and before we presume to make any conclusions about our state of grace. These Convictions did neither dye, nor drave her into dispair: But, through Gods mercy, grew up to serious conversion, yet they put her to struggle hard against back∣wardness to secret duties, and caused her to abandon some vanities which she had been formerly addicted to. Shortly after God seemed sharply to intertain this New Convert, for whilst her friends were rejoycing in her sudden and signal change, she was seized upon with a Cough, and seeming Consumption, insomuch as her friends began to despair of her life, and when her Country Physicians were at a nonplus what to do, they described her distemper to Dr. Prijean, and Dr. G. Bates, who both judged that it was a Consumption, and both prescribed the same Remedies, which yet prevailed nothing towards her cure; where∣upon the honest Weavers resolved to set a day apart, that by fasting and prayer they might commend her case unto God, and former experience had much encouraged them to make use of that last refuge. For they had lately prayed for one that was judged to be possessed, who was sudden∣ly freed. Also for their Pastor, Mr. Baxter in a dangerous ilness, and he had speedy help. He had lately swallowed a Gold-bullet, and it lodged long in his bowels, and by no means would come away, till they met to fast and pray, and that very morning it came away. A young man that fell into a violent Epilepsy, and after great means used for a long time, remained uncured, they set to fasting and prayer (he being pre∣sent) and the second day he was suddainly cured and never had fit after. In all these duties there was no Minister with them: But that day that they met to pray for Mrs. Margaret Charleton, Mr. Baxter was with them, and Compassion to her made them ex∣traordinary fervent, and God heard them, and she was speedily delivered, either with∣out means, or by an undesigned, and unexpected means. For, without any advise
of her own accord, she drank a large quantity of Syrup of Violets, and the next morn∣ing her Nose bled (which was altogether unusual) and her Lungs were cleered, her pulse amended, or Cough abated, and her health soon after was restored. She was naturally of a tender, and timerous nature, which was heightned by the sharp work of Repentance, under which she still lay, which she by concealing, made more burdensome. Not long after her recovery, her Mother invited all those that had so prayed for her, to keep a day of Thanksgiving for her signal Deliverance. And she being asked, what things in particular she would have them give Thanks for in her behalf? She, before they began, gave them in a Paper, what her desires were upon that account. Also the same Day she left under her hand in Writing a Paper, containing the renewal of her Covenant with God, wherein she thus Writes. This being a day set apart for returning Thanks unto God for his Mercy in delive∣ring me from the Gates of death, these people being those that have earnestly suppli∣cated the Throne of Grace on my behalf; I here now renew my Covenant with Al∣mighty God, and resolve by his Grace, to endeavour to get, and keep a fresh sense of his mercy upon my soul, and also a greater sense of my Sins. I resolve to set my self a∣gainst my Sins with all my might, and not to take its part, or to extenuate it, or to keep the Devils Counsel, as I have done, to the wronging of God and wounding of my own soul. I resolve (by Gods assistance) to set upon the practice of known duties, and not to study shifts, and evasions to put off those, which are either troublesome, charg∣able, or like to render me dishonourable, or vile in the Eyes of the carnal Persons of the World: And then she set down the considerations, and reasons that moved her here∣unto, which for brevity-sake, I omit: And conclude thus. April 10th. On Thursday night at Twelve of the Clock at Night. A Day and Night never to be forgotten by the least of all Gods Mercies; yea, less than the least, Thy Unworthy, Unthankful, Hard-hearted Creature, M. Charlton. Yet she continued under great fears that she had not saving Grace, because she had not that degree of holy affections which her soul longed after. Hereupon some of her Friends Wrote Consolatory Letters to her, which she kept by her, and transcribed, for her use and support. What her striving against fear and sorrows were, she expressed in a Paper under her hand, in these words, April 3d. The sadder my Condition is, the greater the mercy is that I am yet alive. Why then should I not give God Thanks for that, and beg the rest which yet I want? And though my Life seems a burden to me sometimes, it is my great mistake: For the greatest Afflictions are nothing to Hell Torments. Were they as great as ever any were, while I am alive, and on this side Eternity, there is hope. The time of Grace is yet continued: If I be found in Mercies way, I know not but God may yet be Gracious, and give in my soul as he hath done my Life, at his peoples Prayers. For I cannot but look on my Life as an Answer of their Prayers: And surely they desired my Life only that I might live to God; I desired it my self on no other terms. It was my earnest request that I might not live, if not to him. Why then should I be perswaded by Satan to think, that God will not give me Grace as well as Life? May I not rather be encouraged with Patience to wait for further Mercy? It is a Mercy that I am in any measure sensible of my danger, and have any desire to be holy. I will therefore stir up my soul to Thankfulness, and to be humbled that I can be no more Thankful. I will acknowledg the Mercy that I have received, and the probabi∣lity of future Mercies. And this (by Gods assistance) the Devil shall not hinder me from doing. An other Paper shewed what Resolutions she took up after her Recovery, whereof I will only give you a brief hint. December 30th. (saith she) was my worst day: I little then thought that I should Recover. But January 1st. being New-years Day, my Nose bled largely, after which I amended, so that April 10th. was a day of Thanksgiving for me, &c.
During the time of her Sickness, an honest Kinsman of hers, Mr. Eleazor Careswell of Shefnall in Shropshire, made this Anagram on her Name, and Verses upon it. MARGARET CHARLTON ANAGRAM. Arm to later change. THe prudent soul refin'd from Earth, doth ever Arm to her later change, and fears it never. Those glittering Monarchs, who seem to com∣mand This Ball, shall by Deaths impartial Hand Put out, and doom'd to an eternal State, (No mortal sinner can decline this Fate) Death conquers Scepter-swaying Kings; but I Shall conquer death, being now Arm'd to dy. Arm soul for this one change, and wed thy heart To Christ, and then no death shall ever part Your joyned souls; And thou, because that he Hath Life, of life shall still possessed be Death will but this snarl'd knot of life untie To unite souls in a more blessed tie. When Faith, renewing Grace, repenting Tears, Hath clear'd the soul from filth, and she ap∣pears Ʋnspotted, Holy Pure, invested in Christs Milk white snowy Robes, quite freed from sin, Wholly delivered from this fleshly thrall, And Hells black Monarch, and adorn'd with all God's perfect Grace: Triumphantly these sing, Death, and Hell conquer'd are by Christ our King. Faith, Hope, and Love, such souls now for∣tifie, And armed thus why should we fear to die? Though death divorce those long acquainted Friends, And lodg Earth in the Earth; the soul ascends To those high, glorious Regions, whereas she With Christ, and blessed Souls shall ever be. Soul-troubling sin shall then molest no more, Which clog'd, which wounded her so long be∣fore. Poor souls go fetter'd here with flesh, and sin, Death doth her great deliverance begin Thy soul renew'd by Grace shall quickly see How blest a change that day will bring to thee! Death shall those weeping Eyes dry up, and close, And pained weary flesh to rest repose: The Grave will be a safe and quiet Bed, To that frail body when the soul is fled. This aking head shall there be laid to rest, Whilst thy glad soul of Glory is possest. As banisht griefs end in that quiet sleep; Thy dust is holy, it thy Lord will keep Till the last Trumpet; and he shall raise The Just, and Ʋnjust at the last of dayes; Then the refined body shall again Its late dislodged soul re-intertain. And re-united chant well-tuned laies Ʋnto the Lamb, whose soul-enamouring raies Shall ravish Saints with blessed, perfect joy, Freed from whatever would their rest annoy: Where they with flaming Love, and pleasure sing Holy melodious Praise to God their King. Rise then my soul: Thy thoughts from Earth estrange; The first is wrought: Arm to thy later change. The Soul whilst it is in the body, works much according to the bodies temper and disposition. She was of an extraordinary sharp and piercing Wit. She had natural reservedness, and secrecy, which was encreased by her judging it necessary Prudence not to be open, by which means she was oft-times misunderstood, even by her nearest friends, and disappointed by those whose intent was to please her. And as she could understand others much by their looks and hints, so she expected that all should know her mind without her expressing of it: but this bred frustrations and discontents. She had a natural tenderness, and troubledness of mind upon the crossing of her just desires. Too quick, and ungovernable a sense of displeasing words and deeds. She had a diseased, unresistible timorousness, and to encrease it, she said, she was four times in danger of death; once by the small Pox: And the more to encrease it, her Mo∣thers house [Aply Castle] being a Garrison for the King, was stormed whilst she was in it, by the Parliament Soldiers, taken, part of the houshing burnt down, dead bodies lying
before their Eyes, and themselves stript of their Apparel, that they were enforced to borrow other. The great work upon her soul in her Conversion, which moved all her passions. Add to these her dangerous sickness, wherein she received the Sentence of death, which to so young a Convert must needs be a very awakening Providence, and coming upon her before she had attained any assurance, did the more increase her Fears. Thus living by the Church-yard side, she saw also all the Corpses that were brought to burial, and kept a dead mans Skul in her Closet, and the use of such mortifying specta∣cles, they increased her sad dispositions. Beside, the extraordinary Love she had to her Mother did increase her grief, when she expected death: And all was much increased by her Wisdom, whereby she so stifled all appearances of it, that it wrought the more inwardly, because it wanted vent. She had also keen Spirits, and their sharp blood, which caused much Head▪ach once a Month, and many times oftner, from the Age of fifteen or sixteen years: All which together, tended much to hinder her from a quiet and comfortable temper: All the o∣perations of her soul were intense and strong; and when God shewed her what Holi∣ness was, she expected to have it presently in as great a measure as the highest Saint doth here attain unto; And because she had not so much as she desired, and would fain have had, she concluded that she had none in sincerity. The first discovery of her change to her Mother and Friends, was her fervent Prayers in secret. For living in a great House, whereof the middle part was ruined in the time of our Wars, she chose her a Closet in the farther end of that House, where she thought that none could hear her; yet some did over-hear, who said, that they never heard such fervent Prayes from any Person. Anno Christi 1662. September the 10th. Mr. Richard Baxter and she were married toge∣ther in Saint Bennet Fink-Church, London, having been contracted before in the presence of some Christian Friends: But before their Marriage these conditions were concluded upon. First, that Mr. Baxter should have nothing that before Marriage was hers, that so he (who wanted no outward supplies) might not so much as seem to marry her for Covetousness. Secondly, That she should so order her affairs, that he might not be en∣tangled in any Law suits about the same. Thirdly, That she should expect none of his time, which his Ministireal imployment should call for. After her Marriage her sadness and melancholy vanished away, for Advise and Coun∣sel contributed towards the cure of it, as did content, and imployment about Houshold Affairs; And with her Husband she lived in inviolable Love, and mutual complacency: For nineteen years after their Marriage, there was never any breach, either in point of love, or interest, save only that she somewhat grudged that he had perswaded her for quietness sake to Surrender so much of her Estate, as disabled her from helping others according to her earnest desire. But that it was not from any covetous desire, may appear by these instances. First, whereas her Portion (which was two Thousand pounds) beside what was so setled as is mentioned before, she had in her Mothers life time, lost two hundred pounds, and two hundred pounds more before her Marriage, by ill debtors, yet did she never complain, or grudg at the loss which was occasioned by poor debtors. Secondly, She knew before that the Lord Chancellor that then was, had profered, her Husband a Bishoprick, which would have stopped the Mouths of some of her Rela∣tions, who thought she undervalued her self by matching so low, and also might have been desirable as to the Wealth and Honor accompanying it: Yet was she so far from perswading to embrace and accept of it, that probably had he done, it would much have weakned her love, and esteem of him, though she had no prejudice against Episcopal Go∣vernment. For she abhorred a worldly, mercenary mind in a Minister of Jesus Christ. Thirdly, Another trial of her affections to Wealth and Honor was, at the fatal time when her Husband, and so many hundreds of other Godly, Learned and painful Mini∣sters were cast out of their Places, and hopes of Ecclesiastical maintenance; exposed to scorns, and reproach, whereof her Husband had already some sense and feeling, when the Bishop of Winchester before that, had forbid him to Preach, and the Bishop him∣self, his Dean, and many others had Preached fiercely against him in his own Pulpit in Kederminster. So that to choose an ejected Minister at such a time, was to expose her self to certain suffering, which in prospect, had no end on this side death. Among other troubles which her Marriage exposed her to, one was their frequent re∣movals
unto which they were necessiated: And such as have experimented what it is to take Houses, to be bound to Landlords, to fit, and furnish them, cannot but be sen∣sible both of the charge, and trouble of it. The first House they took was in Morefields, from thence they removed to an other at Acton: And after that, to an other in that Town, and soon they were necessitated to return to one of the former again. And after that to diverse others, in an other place and Country, wherein the greatest trouble is incumbent upon the Mistress of the Family. She never came to any place, but she did exceedingly win upon the affections of the Inhabitants, and Neighbourhood. If she had had so much of this worlds wealth, as she had a heart to improve it for the good of others, how much love would she have gained when she had it in so eminent a manner in her low, and meaner condition? Her deportment and carriage won her more Honor, and Love, than her Liberality. She could not endure to hear any one give to an other, sower, bitter, or hasty words: Her own Carriage was always kind, courteous, and loving to all with whom she con∣versed. And all her kindness tended to a better end, than barely to supply peoples bodily wants, even to oblige them to some duty that might promote the good of their Souls; or to deliver them from some streights, which fill'd them with noisome cares, which became matter of great Temptation to them. If she could hire People to hear Gods Word, from Conformists, or from Non-Conformist, it answered her end and desire, and many Hundred of good Books she gave to the poor for that end. Whilst they lived at Acton, her carriage and Charity so won the People there, that she had the Love, and esteem of all. And she being earnestly desirous of doing good, fitted, and prepared her House for the entertainment of such as would come in to be instrcted by her Husband, between the publick Morning and Evening Exer∣cises, and after them. And people that had never enjoyed such opportunities, tho many of them were accounted worldly, ignorant Persons, yet gave great hopes of their Edification and Reformation, and would accompany Mr. Baxter, and his Fa∣mily to the publick. And after Mr. Baxters removal, this People hearing that he wanted a House, being Ten Miles from them, they Unanimously subscribed a request to him, to return to his former House, offering very kindly to pay his Rent if he would come among them again. Surely his Wives carriage did much contribute to∣wards the winning upon them. When Mr. Baxter was carried from Acton to the Common Goal, for this Instruct∣ing of them, he never perceived his Wife to be troubled at it, but chearfully went with him into Prison, brought her best bed with her, and did much to remove the remov∣able inconveniences of the Prison: And intruth did never live a more pleasant Life than when she continued there. And whereas people upon such occasions were not unapt to shew their liberality, it was much against her mind to receive more from them than necessity required. Only three Persons gave them just so much as paid Lawyers, and the Prison charges, and when one offered more, she refused to receive it. But all was far short of the great charges of their removal to an other Habitation. About this time the Parliament made a New and sharper Act against Dis∣senters, whereupon Mr. Baxter was forced to remove into an other County, and his Wife removed such Goods as were moveable, from Acton to Totteridge, yet still they were engaged for that Rent of the House which they were driven from. At Totteridge few poor people suffered such hardship as she was put to: They could have no house but part of a poor Farmers, where the Chimnies did smoak so extream∣ly, as was very prejudicial to her health: For the smoak was so gross, that it almost choaked them: And she had ever a great straitness in her Lungs, which occasioned the smoak to be the more offensive to her. Yet such was her Charity to her poor Land-Lady, that she placed out her Son an Apprentice, who afterwards lived well. After some time they took an other House to which they removed, yet it wanted such great alterations, and reparations, as took her up much time and labor; Which yet was much alleviated by the coming, and Company of Mr. Corbet, and his Wife, who about that time came to live with them. When the Kings gracious Declaration came forth, which gave to Non-Conformists Licenses to Preach, and to build places to meet in: She disswaded her Husband from
removing to London till others were settled, lest he should anticipate them, or draw any Auditors, who otherwise would joyn with others, especially with their old eject∣ed Pastors: But when others were setled, she than importuned him to go for the exercise of his Ministry. When they were going to London, out of a tender care of her Husbands Health, which might be prejudiced by want of a good Air, she sought out and took a most pleasant and convenient House in Southampton Square, where they continued, and in which she dyed. At her first Converson, and in the time of her sickness, she wholly devoted her self and all that she had to God, and earnestly set her self to perform those resolutions all her life after. At first she gave but the Tenth of her Income to the Poor: But her Husband soon convinced her that God was not to be stinted, but as all was his, so all must be used, for him, and to him we must give an account of all: Only we must do it in his appointed order: As 1. For our own natural necessities. 2. For publick necessities. 3. For the necessities of Children, Family, and near Relations. 4. For the Godly poor. 5. Then for the necessities of the common poor. And lastly for conveniences. As for her private Charity which was great, its thought fit not to make mention of it, but to conceal it till that day wherein it shall be Proclaimed before all the world. She was earnestly desirous of winning of Souls, and of the utmost improvement of Ministers labours, to that end. We heard before how she promoted, and encouraged it at Acton, and Totteridge out of Church time: And after her coming to London, she feared that her Husband was too backward in seeking out imployment, staying till he was called: And most of the places in London being well supplyed, she questioned her Husband, what place he most desired to bestow his pains in? He answered, in Saint Martius Parish, where it was sayd, that their were forty Thousand Persons more than could come into the Church, especially among the new buldings in Saint James's, where many of the Inhabitants live like the Indians in America, having heard no Sermon for many years. Having heard this (unknown to her Husband) she laid out to find a large and capa∣cious Room, for him to Preach in; but none could be found, save diverse Rooms laid together over the Market-House; This she imployed a Friend to take, which he did. And they two importuned Mr. Baxter to Preach there every Morning, and in the Afternoon to get by turns the ablest Ministers, whom they could procure in London: And for that end she sent for a Minister that lived an Hundred Miles off, to come and help her Husband, to whom she engaged her self to give him forty pound per annum, to go from day to day to supply the places of such Ministers as should be so gotten as afore. The charge of this, besides paying a Clerk, and a Woman to look to the seats, rose high: part of it the people, the rest, she paid her self. From this place the Lord was pleased ere long to remove them by a strange, and al∣most a miraculous Providence. The Roof of the House was of a vast weight, and was ill contrived, the weight lying much upon one beam in the midst of the floor. The Place being greatly crouded, the beam gave so great a crack as put all the People into a great fright; But a second crack, set them all a running, and crying out at Windows for Ladders. Mr. Baxter reproved them for their inordinate fears, and would have gone on Preaching. Upon hearing the first crack Mrs. Baxter got down the stairs through the Croud, where others could not get that were far stronger. Being down, the first Man she met, she asked him what Profession he was of? He answered, a Carpenter. Sayd she, Can you suddenly put a prop under the middle of this beam? The Man lived hard by, had a prop ready, suddenly put it under, while all above knew nothing of it. But the Mans knocking encreased the peoples fears and cry, so that all were glad to be gone. The next Morning, they took a skilful Workman to take up the boards, and search being made, they all saw, that the beam had two great Rents in it, long and wide, and that the sound part which was left, was so slender, that it was a wonderful Pro∣vidence that the House fell not suddainly. This Providence increased Mrs. Baxters diseased frightfulness, and she could never get off the effects of it so long as she lived. The fear, and the marvelous deliverance made her promise to God two things. First, To keep the Anniversary memorial of it by a solemn Thanksgiving, which she did all her life after.
Secondly, To build a stronger place, where they might meet with less fear and danger. And she was the deeplier affected with this danger because she was the per∣son that took the place, and occasioned their coming thither: And if eight Hundred Persons had there been maimed or lost their lives, (as the Papists were served at Black-Fryers) what a dreadful thing would it have been, and what a greivous and publick scandal? Mrs. Baxter according to her promise, paid for the place, and presently imployed one to seek out a fit Ground, and to build an house upon it: But there was no fit ground near it, save in two places, of which one was in Oxendon street, which could not be had except she would give Thirty pounds per annum, Ground-Rent, and to be at all the charge of building, and all but for a Lease, which yet was not long. To perform her promise, and desire, she imployed a friend to take it, and by request, procured among her Friends Mony wherewith to build it in the form of a Chappel: And, by ill advise was perswaded also to take the Front ground to the Street, and to build two little Houses upon it, to their great loss; all her own mony, and much more, being laid out upon them, against her inclination. When the Chappel was finished, Mr. Baxter Preached but one day in it, being to go on the Morrow into the Country: And it so fell out, that Mr. Secretary H. Coventry's House was on the backside of it, who resolved that they should not settle so near him. And accordingly, the next Lords Day, (Mr. Baxter being from home, and having left his Wife behind him,) she procured one Mr. Siddon, a stranger, newly come up to London (an humble, pious Man, who had suffered Imprisonment under Oliver, for be∣ing for the Kings Restauration at the rising of Sir George Booth) to Preach in that place: But Secretary Coventry, thinking that Mr. Baxter would Preach, had got three Justices, with a Warrant, to apprehend him, and to send him to the Goal: But this storm fell upon Mr. Siddon: Yet after some time of his Imprisonment, the Warrant being against Mr. Baxter, and having some other flaws in it, he had an Habeas Corpus, and by the Justice of the Lord Chief Justice Hale, and some other Judges, he was re∣leased: But he being a tender Man, and Mrs. Baxter very sensible that she was the oc∣casion of his troubles, the burden lay upon her to maintain, visit, and chear him up, to pay the Lawyers, and his Prison Fees, all which cost her about twenty pounds. When Mrs. Baxter found that she could not keep up Preaching in that place, which ac∣cording to promise, she had prepared for it, she was glad that Dr. Lloyd, and his Parishi∣oners would accept of it for the place of their publick worship, asking them no more Rent than she was to pay for the ground, and the Room over it for a Vestry, demand∣ing nothing for all the money laid out for the building: Yet the purchase of the Fee simple for the Ground on which the Chappel was built, cost Mr. Baxter two hundred pounds, and two hundred more for the Ground adjoining, to his great loss. Yet so much was her heart set to help the poor untaught People about S. James's, that she set up a School there to teach Children to read, and learn the Catechism, and also re∣lieved an honest poor man who taught them, who had a Wife, and many Children [Mr. Bruce] and no other means to relieve them. And she would fain have set up more, if her Purse would have held out. For this she begged a while of her good Friends, and when after some time, they seemed to grow weary, she paid him six pounds a year, mostly out of her own Purse, so long as she lived. When she found that her Husband could not make use of the Chappel which she had built, she presently hired another that was near, and ready built for gain, in Swallow-Street, that the poor People, where her Husband had begun, with considerable success, might still be instructed: But when he had continued there a while, he was kept out by some Officers, who stood at the door, with a Justice's Warrant, for many Months together. Up∣on this she referred it to divers good Ministers, to chuse such an one as would better be en∣dured than her Husband. And a faithful, painful, self-denying man was pitched upon, who hath done much good there. When Mr. Baxter was driven from the place, her desire was that he should go each Lords day to Preach to a Congregation of poor people there. And when Dr. Mantons place in Covent Garden was void, she desired him to Preach once a day there, because be∣ing near, many of the poor of Saint James's might come thither, which they did ac∣cordingly. She also procured from her Friends, money, wherewith to build another con∣venient Chappel, for an other Minister, among a numerous people, where much
good was, and is still done, and she promoted the building of two or three more such Places. She was much troubled to see the publick Collections, which were made for the Mi∣nisters, and to pay the Rent for their Meeting houses, as sounding ill, and being also pre∣judicial to the Ignorant, and covetous, and was a trouble to the Poor, who wanted money to give, and therefore she did what possibly she could by her own purse, and her Friends to avoid it; knowing that Rent must be paid, and Ministers, with their Families must not be starved, and should not be under the cares of want. Mr. Baxter for the first nine, or Ten years after his Ejection, never took any Gift to supply his necessities, except ten pound per annum from Serjeant Fountain, which his im∣portunity and Mr. Baxters modesty would not suffer him to refuse. And this was so far from troubling his Wife, that it was altogether according to her mind and desire. It was a great Testimonial of her Piety and Charity, that when her own Estate prov∣ed much too short to maintain her in the exercise of such good Works as she was de∣voted to, she refused not to accept thankfully the Liberality of others, and her self to live partly upon Charity, that she might be enabled to open her hands to such poor as could not so easily get it from others as they could. When Warrants were out from a Justice of Peace to distrain of Mr. Baxters Goods for Fines for his Preaching, she did encourage her Husband to undergo the loss without repining, and underwent the trouble her self of removing, and hiding his Library that it might not be distrained, and some time after she freely gave it away, partly to the Col∣ledge in New England, the rest at home. And his danger of paying forty pounds for e∣very Sermon, besides imprisonment, was so far from inclining her to discourage him from his Office-Work, that if she did but suspect that he feared, or was doubtful what to do, it was so great a trouble to her that she could not conceal it. Her expectation of liberality to the poor from others was too high, and she was too much troubled at the backwardness of some. When she saw a worthy person in debt, or in Prison, she would promise to gather him such a sum of money, and when it came short, she was sain to pay the most of it her self. Not long before her Death she pro∣mised to get twenty pound more towards the relief of one of known Name, and Worth, and when she could get but about 8 l. she made it up her self: Many poor Widdows and others thought they lost a Mother when they lost her. To her Husbands poor Kindred she was liberal, but not to maintain them in idleness, but to set them to Trade, or to help them out of great straights. To her own Kindred she did bear a very tender love; And she prevailed with her Husband to be the Motioner of a Wife to her only Brother, which was sayd to be worth twenty thousand pounds to him; and her Sisters Children she loved as if they had been her own, especially her three Daughters. She had in her youth been tempted to doubt of the Life to come, and of the truth of the Scriptures: But she was so fully settled, and resoved herein, that the confident As∣surance of it, was the life of all her life, and practice. After all the doubts of her sincerity, and Salvation, and all her fears, and sadness thereupon, she so far overcame them all, that for near nineteen years that she lived in a Married Estate, her Husband scarse ever heard her to speak a doubting word of her Salvation; but oft of her hopeful perswasion, that they should live together in Heaven for ever. Her former saying was, that if she were but in a condition, in which Gods service was costly to her, it would make her know whether she were sincere or not: And she had her desire, and proved her sincerity by her constliest Obedience. For it cost her, not only her labour, and Estate, but somewhat of her trouble of body and mind. For her Knife was too keen and cut the sheath. Her desires were more earnestly set on doing good, than her tender mind and head could well bear: Her great infirmity was the four Passions of Love, desire and trouble of mind. Of anger she had very little, or little made it known: She rarely spake in an angry manner. She could not well bear to hear one speak loud, or hastily, or eagerly, or angerly, even to such as deserved it. She as much disliked the silencing of so many Ministers as any other could, but she did not love to hear it much complained of, save as the publick loss: Nor to hear Con∣formists talked against as a party: Nor the faults of the Consciencious sort of them ag∣gravated in a factious, siding manner.
She had a diseased fearfulness, against which she had little more Free-will, or Power, than a Man in an Ague fit, hath against shaking. Her nature was prone to it; and ma∣ny sad accidents, together with trouble of mind made them her malady: Namely. 1. She was four times in danger of Death. 2. The Storming of her Mothers House, firing and burning down part of it; plun∣dering, and killing some, and threatning the rest. 3. The awakening in her Conversion. 4. The Sentence of death in Sickness, presently before her Peace was setled. 5. The Fire next her Lodging in Sweetings Alley. 6. The burning of a Merchant, with his Wife and Family, in Lothbury, over-against her Brother Ʋptons house. 7. The common terror and confusion in the Church of Dunstans in the West, when the People thought that the Church was falling on their Heads, whilst her Husband was Preaching in it; and the People in that consternation, cast themselves down out of the Galleries. 8. The loss of her Mother by Death, and the friendless State that she then thought her self to be left in. 9. The great and dreadful Plague that swept away above an Hundred thousand with∣in the Bills of Mortality. 10. The dreadful Conflagration of London. 11. The Crack, and danger of her Chamber in Aldersgatestreet. 12. The Crack, and confusion, in S. Jameses Market-house. 13. The many Fires, and threatnings of more. 14. The frequent, and common Rumors of Murthers, and Massacres. 15. The death, and dangers of many of her dear Friends. 16. Her Husbands ilness, and craziness. She dreamed much of Fire, and Murders, and these dreams much augmented her Fears; so that she could not endure the clapping of a Door, nor any sudden noise, or that had fierceness in it. Yet by the power of Grace she had overcome most of her Fear of Hell, and of Gods desertion, and was very free from the Fears of Persecution, Imprison∣ment, and of Losses, and Poverty, few attaining to the like. She had earnest desire after the Conversion and Salvation of her Servants, and she was much troubled that so many of them (though tolerable for doing their work) yet went away ignorant, and strangers to true Godliness. And such as were truly Converted she loved as Children. She used to say, that she had imprinted on her a deep hatred, and fear of Hypo∣crisie, which much hindred her from performing the outside of her duty, especially, as to the speaking part. There were very few abler to speak long, and to cloth their mat∣ter with good Language, without Repetitions, even about Religion: and few that had more desire that it should be well done: And yet she could not do it her self for fear of seeming guilty of Ostentation. In good Company she spake little of that which she most desired to hear; In her Husbands absence, she would not pray in her Family, tho she could perform it very well, for fear of Hypocrisie: Yet she would privately confer with her servants, and read good Books to them. She would often say: Its a great mercy of God, never to know what will befall us in this world; Nor how we shall be sick, or die, that our knowledg may not anticipate our sorrows, tho in the general we should be always ready. She was a great honourer of her Mother, and loved her most sincerely. She believed the Promise in the fifth Commandment, and believed that it implied an answerable Curse to them that broke it, according to those Scriptures, Prov 30. 17. the Eye that mock∣eth at his Father, &c. And Deut. 27. 16. Cursed be he that setteth light by his Fa∣ther, &c. She was much troubled with a great pain in her Head, which held her from her youth two or three days every fortnight, and upon every occasion that did irritate the matter, she had a onstant straitness in her Lungs, a great incapacity of much exercise, motion, or any heating thing. About three years before her decease, by the ill advise of a Friend, drinking against the Collick a spoonful of powder of Ginger, every morning for near a quarter of a year together, and then falling into some overwhelming thoughts, it overthrew her head for some few days, but through Gods mercy, she was soon restored again.
Ever since that time her Head-ach abated, and she complained of a pain in one of her Breasts, which through her timerousness filled her with fears that it would prove a Cancer: And several Neighbours, Friends, and Relations about that time dying of Can∣cers, increased her Fears: Yet she seemed to be prepared chearfully to undergo it. The many rumours of Plots, Firings, Massacres, &c. much encreased her fears: And the death of very many Neighbours: Some of them young, strong, and choise Christi∣ans, of great usefulness, and many near Friends, did greatly add to her sadness, and ex∣pectation of death. But little of this appeared unto others, for she purposely carried it chearfully, and merrily with her Friends, when yet she was troubled within. About ten weeks before her last sickness, most of her pain went out of her Breast, and fixed in a constant pain in her right Kidney, and withal, her Urine stopt, and little (com∣paratively) came from her for about ten Weeks. Some things which she took did work too powerfully upon her Brain, and suddenly cast her into a strong disturbance, and Deli∣ration, in which though the Physitians with great kindness and care, did omit nothing in their power, yet she died the Twelfth day after. She fell sick on Friday, June 3. Anno Christi 1681. and died June 14. Though her understanding was never perfectly restored, yet she had a very strong re∣membrance of the affecting passages of her Life, from her very Childhood: Mrs. Cor∣bet (whom she dearly loved, and had newly gotten her into her house to be her Compani∣on) with some others being present; she said to her Husband, my Mother is in Heaven, and Mr. Corbet is in Heaven, and Thou and I shall be in Heaven. She did oft make it appear that her soul did work strongly towards God, and (com∣plaining of her head) she cried out, Lord, make me to know what I have done, for which I un∣dergo all this? Lord I submit: God chooses best for me. She requested her Husband to Pray by her, and quietly joined with them to the end. She heard divers Psalms, and a Chap∣ter Read, and repeated some part of what she heard, and Sung part of a Psalm. The last words that she spake were these: My God help me, Lord have mercy upon me. She was buried June 17. in Christs-Church, in the Ruines in her Mothers Grave: On which she had caused a fair, rich, and large Marble Stone to be laid, Anno Christi 1661. about twenty years before: upon which her Husband had caused to be written her Titles, and some Latin Verses, and these English ones. Thus must thy Flesh to silent Dust descend, Thy Mirth, and Worldly Pleasures thus will end: Then Happy Holy Souls: But wo to those Who Heaven forgot, and Earthly Pleasures chose: Hear, now this preaching Grave without delay, Believe, Repeat, and work while it is day. But Christ's Church on Earth is liable to those changes of which the Jerusalem above is in no danger. In the doleful Flames of London 1666, this Church among many others, being burnt, the Roof of it falling, broke this great Marble Stone all to pieces, and it proved no lasting Monument: But this Paper Monument, is like to be more durable than was that Marble Stone. This Narrative is Written much larger by Mr. Baxter himself, the substance where∣of I have contracted into a lesser Volumn, endeavouring not to omit such things as are most material.
The Honourable the Lady Mary Armyne. F. H. Van Houe. Sculp. portrait of Mary Armyne The Life and Death of the Lady Mary Armyne, who Dyed Anno Christi. 1675: THIS Honourable and Excellent Lady, was a branch of one of the most An∣tient, Her Parentage. Noble and Illustrious Families in England, whether we look to De∣scent, Degree, or Actings; The Family of the Talbots, for a long Tract of time, Earls of Sbrewsbury, whose Heroick performances, both in Civil and Milli∣tary Affairs, done by them in their Native Country, are upon Record to the perpetua∣ting of their Names, and Renown. But especially their Conquests, and Tryumphs in France were so signal, that the Memory of them continues until this day, and withal so dreadful, that Mothers quieted their crying Children by telling them that Talbot came. And to be Children of such Nobles, is Honourable, even in sacred Writ, (which usually overlooks such minute things) and especially when they are found in the way of Righteousness, as in this pious Lady. As to her Feature and beauty, it was more considerable even unto old age, than in Her Beauty. most of her date in the world, by which we may judge what it was in the spring of her life. And Gratior est Pulcro veniens è Corpore virtus. That Virtue is of greater Grace, That shineth through a Beauteous Face. She was of a lively and Active Spirit; and herein she was much above ordinary▪ Active and Healthful. For even to the close of her days, she was very active and stirring; able to walk with agility and continuance, without help of hand, or staff. As to her natural parts, she was quick, vivacious, and comprehensive in Judging Her Prudence. of things even to the last hour of her Life: Tho she was considerably above fourscore
years old, yet could she discourse as rationally, the very day she died, as others can in the very flourish of their Age and Life: Neither yet was this only a lightning before her death; for she was the same all the time of her weakness even to the last. Now as Rationality raises men above Beasts; so the higher use that any have of it, the near∣er they approach to the blessed Angels. And indeed these excellent endowments highly advance men beyond those imaginary ones of Riches, Honors, &c. And thus some of the old Philosophers (tho poor and mean in the World) did wonderfully tran∣scend and excel the great Conquerors, whose Name were dreadful in the World. Thus have we a brief account of her Priviledges, and natural Accomplishments. Next let us hear, and consider what her acquired parts and endowments were. First, in general: She had attained to a great skill and dexterity in the knowledg of all those things which belonged to her Sex, Degree, and Place, which were very numerous, and therefore required such attainments as she had in an high measure arriv∣ed at, which also appeared in these perticulars. 1. She was not without some competent skill in more Languages than her Native Learning. Tongue: particularly, in the French and Latin. 2ly. She was considerably skilled in Divinity, and History. In Divinity, not only knowing practical things, but was very intelligent in matters National, and Polemical, or Controversal. In History she was well versed, not only in the Jewish and Roman Histories; but especially in the Historical part of the Sacred Scriptures, and Ecclesiasti∣cal affairs. And as to both of them, many may and do speak with much more confi∣dence, but with far less Skill and Judgment, than she used to do. 3ly. She was one, who well understood how to manage her affairs and concern▪ whether at a distance, or near at hand, to the best advantage, to the last of her days, Wisdom. and that without so much a small miscarriages. Surely few were to be compared with her Ladyship herein. 4ly. She was of a very obliging deportment, and carriage to the utmost date of her life. In this she was a Critick: Few could excel or go beyond her. With her humble and courteous carriage and Speeches, she obliged all with whom she conversed, or had to do. For as she was the owner of an active Body, so of pertinent and pleasing speech, even to the end of her days, and this dexterity she used to imploy in the entertain∣ment of her Friends and Visiters, both in health and sickness. And truly this peice of humanity, or candor, is a very lovely thing, much commended to us in the holy Scri∣ptures, both of the Old, and New Testament. As for Grace, without which all afore-mentioned had been but perishing accom∣plishments, only Ornaments in meer humanity. Some persons beyondsea men, have nervously attempted to prove, that it is only Religion, and not meer Reason that dif∣ferenceth men from Beasts. This honourable Lady was of a holy, and exemplary Life. She used to affirm, that a holy Life, and Graces of the Gospel did far excel, and were more dignifying than Birth, Estate, and then all the great and shining Titles which the World could bestow. She was of the mind, and judgment of that godly Emperor Theodosius, who used to say, that he accounted himself more honoured by being a Christian than by being Emperor of Rome: And she used to say, That what Saint Paul affirmeth, was a great Truth, upon her long Observation and Experience: Not many Wise Men after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many Noble are called, [1 Cor. 1. 26.] She was also often heard to affirm: That the new Birth deserves to be (as undoubtedly it is) in highest, and greatest esteem. Born, not of blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God, [1 Joh. 1. 13.] Through Gods goodness this pious and excellent Lady was not like a fair house with an ill inhabitant, but had a noble Soul, which dignified all her other excellencies. The many other things raised her to an high pitch of greatness, yet none did so much ho∣nour, and beautifie her as her Religion. And that which made it the more Orient, and splendid was its Regularity, Universality and Perseverence. More particularly, her Religion and Grace appeared in these six things. 1. In that she loved it in others. She loved those that led a godly and gracious life: And Saint John makes this an infallible mark or Testimony of a gracious Person: By this we know that we are passed from death to life because we love the Brethren. He that loveth not his Brother abideth in darkness, [1 John 3. 14.] She affected not, nor indeed could be at ease in evil and bad company. She could, in a good measure say with the holy Prophet David, The Saints, and they that Excel, in these is all my de∣light, [Psal. 16. 3.] And I am a companion to all them that fear thee, &c. [Psal. 119.]
She loved holiness, not only in those of her Family (choosing her Servants by this Stand∣ard) But also in Strangers, which was a good Evidence that she loved it for its own sake. 2. In that she really endeavoured to promote and advance Religion in others, not only by Counsel, Conference, Admonition, Exhortation, &c. But also by many gra∣cious Letters written with her own Hands; She used to give good Books to some, and Money to others to draw on, and encourage them in their progress towards the King∣dom of Heaven. She gave large yearly Contributions to promote the carrying on of the work begun in New England for the Conversion of the poor Indians in those parts: And this she continued, even to her dying day. And of the success of that under∣taking, she had an annual Account to her rejoycing. When that fatal Bartholomew day came, wherein so many hundreds of godly, able, and painful Ministers were ejected, to the undoing of themselves, their Wives, and Chil∣dren, and all other ways being prohibited whereby they might get a subsistance; out of Sympathy, and commiseration of their sad, and deplorable Condition, some few days after, she came to Mr. Edm. Calamy, and brought him five hundred pounds (at which time I also was with him) to be distributed among the most indigent, and necessitous Families of them. She was ready to embrace, yea joyful for any opportunity of serving God in publick or private, upon ordinary, or extraordinary occasions. She could truly say with the ho∣ly Prophet David: I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord, [Psal. 122. 1.] She was as eagerly bent, and forward to joyn in holy duties, and Ordinances, as others are, or can be to run after worldly Vanities. She did highly reverence, and esteem godly Minsters, yea, she had great respect to such of them as were of the lower Form, and of meaner Gifts, if she observed them to be serious, and industrious. She demeaned her self with very much gravity, and humi∣lity in Gods house of Prayer. She never mentioned the Names of God or of Christ, but with a reverential awe upon her Spirit. Her Speeches and discourse alwayes dropped as an Hony-comb: It was always savou∣ry, and seasoned with Salt, fit to Minister grace to the Hearers, according to Saint Pauls advise, Col. 4. 6. She was frequent and constant in giving to Charitable uses. She in her life time, erected, and endowed some Alms-houses in three several Counties: And upon special occasions, gave away many large sums of money upon charitable accounts. She was not weary in well doing whilst she lived, and at her death, she left Forty pounds per annum for Fourscore and Nineteen years for the like uses. She was always constant in her secret devotions of reading the Sacred Scripture (wherein was her delight) and other choice Books; And private Prayer, at least twice a Day, which course she continued to the close of her dayes. In her last sickness whereof she died, she shewed some notable Testimonies of the sin∣cerity of her Graces, and Religion. First, In the servour of her Spirit to continue in well doing even to the last of her life. Secondly, In her breathing after Christ, and desiring to be dissolved and to be with him, which is best of all. Thirdly, In her warm, and bleeding sense of the low estate and condition of Re∣ligion, and the Profession of it in the World. Her heart trembled for the Ark of God, as did Eli's, 1 Sam. 4. 13. Fourthly, In her submission to the Divine Will and Disposal. She freely offered up her self to her great Lord and Owner, to do with her, as for Life or Death, as he pleased. Fifthly, In her peace of Conscience, and freedom from Satanical Molestations and Temptations. In former Sicknesses she had enjoyed much serenity, but never had a more peaceable and submiss frame of soul than at this time. So that in her that Text of Scripture was made plain and true. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: For the End of that man is peace, Psal. 37. 37. Sixthly, In the strength of her Faith, appearing by her commending Christ as the highest, and most proper Cordial in a fainting hour when all comforts forsake us, which were some of her last words before her death. Seventhly, In the continuance of her fervent Prayers, in the midst whereof she re∣signed up her Spirit unto God. A Learned, and Experienced Minister, who lived not far from her, was sometimes with her. The occasion of his going, and his business with her, cannot be better ex∣pressed then in his own words, which I will therefore here set down.
Tho (saith he) I was seldom with her my self, yet these fifteen years I lived so near unto her, as that I might easily have heard the noise of Fame, if she had laid under a∣ny manner of scandal: But such was her holy and blameless Life, that obtrectation it self durst not so much as nibble at it. That little converse I had with her gave me opportunity to know her more inti∣mately, than many, that did but see her blameless, and pious Conversation. For her business with me was no other than to open the State of her Soul, and to confess her infirmities, and to produce her evidences for Heaven, and to desire my Judgment of them, together with my Counsel for her further strength and comfort: And to ask my advice concerning such works of publick Good, which she charitably intended, and did afterwards liberally perform. Upon trial I found that she had a safe and well setled State of Soul; not free from all degrees of Fears, and lesser doubtings of her self: And far from a presumptuous, unhumbled, and self-justifying. But her evidences were sound, and her discerning of them was so clear and sure, as enabled her to conclude her Right to everlasting Life, and so with the greater peace to think on Death: which, as she had opened to me not long before, so did she it over again at large in her Sickness, not many days before her Death. At which time, after complaints for such imperfections of Grace as were her trouble, she professed the full Dedication of her self to God, her firm consent to the terms of his Covenant, and her longings after perfect holiness, and her trust in the Merits and Me∣diation of her Redeemer. After this those about her had some hopes of her recovery, but she hearing of Mr. Baxters troubles, sent her Servant to him to hear of his Case, before whose return to her, she was dead. As she lived to God, so God gave her a long life accompanied with many and great Mercies. Tho she had been long troubled with a sore and dangerous disease [void∣ing Stones by the Intestines, supposed to come from the Ga] and which had pain∣ful, and perilous Paroxyms, and Critical Fits; yet it pleased God in her later years to give her great ease, and freedom from it. Tho it is not unlike, that it was the Root of that fainting Aguishness which put a period to her days. Yet to near the fourscourth year of her Age she served God in competent health, and serenity of mind. Tho she sprang from an Ancient and Honourable Family, inclined to the Romish Sect, yet God was her Teacher, and did confirm her, not only in the Protestant Religi∣on, but also in the true love of practice, and seriousness in that Religion which she pro∣est. She was not like those deluded Formalists, who contend most furiously for this Religion against that, or for that against this, while in truth they are of none. And with zealous Papists, or zealous Protestants, or zealous in more singular Sects, but will never be perswaded to be zealous Christians. They will furiously Persecute, or at least Re∣proach those that are not of their Church, or Side, or Way, as Erroneous, Irreligious Persons, while nothing can prevail with them to be themselves on Christs side a∣gainst the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, &c. But she was not addicted to Sects, or Novelties upon pretence of rising to the highest Form; but she truly took the heigth of her Religion to consist in the heigth of Love to God and Man, and in close and constant obedience unto Christ, and confidence in his Mediation. And they that do so with all their hearts shall have sound and durable Comfort, which will bear them up both in Life and in Death: Whilst the formal, Dogmatical, and superstitious Hypocrite, hath a Consolation which will live, and die with his prosperity, or which is heartless and delusory, as living but on the flattery of himself or of his party. Tho according to her Rank, she lived in the Decency of a plentiful Estate, it was accompanied with Humility, and lowliness of mind. Her Prudence, Sobriety, and Gra∣vity were very Exemplary; and her Impartiality in loving all that were truly Chri∣stians was signal. Yet she much disliked their Divisions, and contentious wranglings. She was not of their mind, who take it to be a mark of Christs Disciples, to be Accusers of the Brethren, and to Reproach, and Villifie, and Persecute his Disciples, and to deny them tobe his, that they may do these things with less dishonor, and remorse. She took it to be no countenancing of Schism (as some do) to relieve such Servants of Christ in their distress, as men accuse and afflict as Schismaticks, tho she was an Adver∣sary to real Schism. When she first heard of above eighteen hundred Ministers ejected,
and silenced, Anno Christi 1662, and deprived of all ways, and means of subsistance for themselves and families, She gave freely a considerable Sum of money towards the re∣lieving of the most necessitous of them (as I have shewed before) and the good works which she did before her death, we hope will live, and declare themselves, and be an encouragement to others, that are intrusted by God with Riches, to follow her Example, and so make themselves Friends of the Mammon of Ʋnrighteousness. To live as this honourable, and excellent Lady did, in Gravity, Prudence, Humility Temperance, and in a Charitable, Peaceable, impartial Religiousness; Studying the, Realities, even God and her Redeemer, Grace, and Glory, and her own Heart, and Du∣ty, and how to do Good, and to prepare for her day of account, will prove more safe, and comfortable at the last, than the Proud, Wrathful, Turbulent Religion of such, as strive to set up the Church and Christ (they mean in truth themselves) by Persecution, or Divi∣sion, by hurting or destroying their Fellow Christians, or Reproaching them, and avoid∣ing them, as unworthy their Communion, &c. Upon the much lamented Death of the Truly Honourable, very aged, and singularly pious Lady, the Lady MARY ARMINE. HAil Mary full of Grace, 'bove women blest; A Name more rich in Saints than all the rest; An Army of them fam'd in sacred Story: All good, none bad, an unparallel'd Glory! The blessed Virgin well may lead the Van: Next follows Mary the Bethanian: Next Mary, Wife of Cleophas: Another Mary was of James and Joses Mother How much is spoke of Mary Mgdalen? Of Mary, John, Marks Mother, we read agen. At Rome a Mary commended by Saint Paul; All Saints; yet not to pray unto at all. A Mary was the Mother of our Lord. A Mary 'twas laid up in heart his word. A Mary 'twas that chose the better part. A Mary 'twas that wept with broken heart. A Mary 'twas that did anoint Christs feet: A Mary pour'd on's Head the Spicknard sweet. At Christs Cross standing Maries three I find. When others fled, they were not so unkind. Christ dead, interr'd, at the Sepulchre door Two Maries stand, I find no Women more. So that from Cradle to the Passion: From Passion to the Resurrection: From Resurrection to the Ascention, Observe you may a Mary still was one. The Army of such Ladies so Divine, This Lady, said, I'le follow, they all Ar-mine. Lady Elect! in whom there did combine So many Maries, might'st say all Ar-mine. Thou Mother, Sister, Spouse wa'st of the Lord, In that in Heart and Life thou kept'st his Word. With th' other Mary, chose the better part: With Mary Magd'len had'st a most tender heart. On Christ a Mary spent all that she could: Tho others grudg'd, more if she had she would. To th' Head above could'st not, on the feet below Thou did'st not spare much cost for to bestow. Thy name a precious Ointment, and the Ar∣mies Of Saints, and Angels are the Lady Ar∣mines. Now God and Christ are thine, and what's Divine In Heavens enjoyment. Blest Soul! Now All are thine: Jo. Sheffield.
The Life and Death of the Right Honourable, the Lady Elizabeth Langham, who died, Anno Christi, 1664. THE descent of this eminently pious Lady was from a Noble Family; the Her Parentage. House of Huntington, the Earldom whereof hath continued long in the name of Hastings, and, in the person of her Brother, sets its foot upon the seventh round of the Scale of Honour; yet this humble Lady was never known, ei∣ther in word or deportment to shew any elation of Spirit upon that account: Nor was she ever observed, with regret, to behold herself exceeded by the vain pomp, and Her humility. more splendid Retinue of diverse, that were inferiour to her in quality. Yea, when her Husband, [Sir James Langham] sometimes modestly excused the tenuity of the con∣dition she had espoused (by marrying where she found an Heir in being to a great part of his estate) in comparison of what she descended from: She would interrupt such discourse, professing the high satisfaction she took to find herself in such a state of life, wherein she had both liberty and assistance to the works of severe Piety; and withal the addition of an Honourable and comfortable worldly competency. Her Education was in a School or rather Acaedemy of Learning, and Nursery of Vir∣tue; Her Education. namely the constant inspection and converse of her vigilant Mother, the Coun∣tess of Huntington, from whose great parts and Graces, she was formed into a more than ordinary Woman and Christian. Under her (mostly) she injoyed an Education in a religious retiredness, which she often took notice of, and blessed God for, as that which not only secured her from the knowledge of Vice by Domestical examples (no such thing daring to appear under that Noble Ladies Government) but also re∣moved her from the very News of those evils which were acted abroad: So that she had the happiness to be ignorant of the vitiousness of other great Personages, even by hear-say. As for those principles, that might qualifie her for a vertuous life, as she had the opportunity of learning them from the practices of those with whom she conversed, so (cheifly) from the grave and frequent instructions of her Lady-Mother, who, that the whole compass of her duty might be the more facily and firmly imprinted in her memory, took the pains to digest all into verse, whereby she the more easily insinuated them into the hearts and heads both of this and her other Lady-Sisters. By this means it pleased God that the Mother had much comfort in all her Daugh∣ters, but especially in this Lady, whose Soul was so pliable and ductile to receive the impressions of so excellent a stamp, as appear'd by the proportionable improve∣ments, which she attained in every stage of her life; as we shall hear by what fol∣lows. 1. For her Childhood, which tender Age had something of rare excellency in it, Her childhood. besides the presage of what it promised for the future. St. Paul himself noted it as a rare thing in young Timothy, that from a very Suckling he had known the Scriptures, (2 Tim. 3. 15.) Nor was it less to be noted in this excellent Lady, how early the seeds of true Piety and Devotion put forth and shewed themselves: Not only in the Her early growth in Grace. blade but blossom also and fruit, insomuch that from a Child, such impression of the fear of God possess'd her heart, as made her a diligent performer of religious Duties, and a strict observer of the Lords dayes, even to a degree of exactness beyond most Persons, and yet not beyond the Rule set down, Isa. 58. 13. in so much, that she would neither discourse, nor willingly hear others discoursing of any common ordi∣nary matters upon that Holy Day. And as she grew to more capacity, so to this ne∣gative strictness, she added a positive conformity to the rules of severest godliness: Not only by a diligent hearing of the Word preached, but digesting it by Meditation and Conference; being no less studious (on that day especially) to learn the Myste∣ries of practical Godliness, than in those of the rest of the week to furnish herself with what other knowledge tended to civil accomplishments. She was also from her Infancy ever conscientiously dutiful, and obedient to her Her dutifulness to her Parents.
Parents (yea to the very smallest punctilio's) wherein so ever she had the least intima∣tion of their pleasure: Insomuch as her Lady-Mother, upon a special occasion, per∣ceiving her, from the misapprehension of some advice she gave her, to be more af∣fected than she desired, was fain to expound herself to her, and to give this as a general Rule to her, That sundry things, which she had spoken to her, were never intended as peremptory Commands, but only as Advices and Counsels, which, in things of Indifferen∣cy, must not be overcharged. Yea, her Lady-Mother hath been heard to say, That she was the Child that never offendeded her in all her Life. As she grew to more maturity of years, she was observed to be precise in Her Justice. Justice and exactness of keeping her Word; which, that she might be the better enabled unto, she was very circumspect and sparing of making Promises, and not lavish of Discourse; a quality, which undoubtedly kept her from much Sin, which Her taciturnity is not wanting in multitude of words (Prov. 10. 19.) which also contributed much to her perfection, which (as the Apostle St. James tells us) doth much consist in the Government of the Tongue (Jam. 3. 2.) She spake much with herself, and little unto others; insomuch that a Noble Person, of a very discerning Judgment, and no less a severe Piety, who had the advantage of being a Witness to almost all her Life, hath been heard to say, That she believed this Lady had the least account to give for words of any that ever she knew. Yet she laid not this restraint upon her Tongue for want of Abilities to discourse, or for want of Matter to discourse of: For she had great intellectual accomplishments, and those improved by much secular Learning, whereby she was enabled to converse with Persons of eminent Scholarship. She was exceeding modest, and decently grave in her whole Behaviour; Not Her modesty. from any dulness of Constitution, nor affection of morose and reserved Virtue: But from a just apprehension, how unagreeable to an exact strictness of Life (which she had designed for her self) and how unconducing to the Reputation of her Sex, a too Sanguin Deportment is often found: Yet that she was not Cynically averse to a de∣cent and convenient degree of Affability and Courtesie (a Virtue which was also very Affability. conspicuous in her) appeared, in that she used to receive the Visits of the meanest of her Neighbours with very great kindness, and would converse with them with a great deal of becoming condescention: And as any of them appeared to her to savour more of Godliness, she would (upon occasion) add a decent Proportion of Familiarity: For she studiously declined to admit any into her Bosom, but such as by exact observation she found to answer that Character of worth, by which she first valued herself, and then chose her intimate Friends; namely, not Greatness but Good∣ness. This her Courtesie she extended to all sorts of Persons, even to such whom we Courtesie. look down upon with a supercilious Countenance, to wit, whose necessities made them Petitioners to her Bounty: For even such she entertained with great affability: So that what was once said of Titus the Roman Emperor, might be truly said of her, That no Person departed out of her Presence discontented: Yea, even to those to whom she denyed her Alms (and some Persons are not meet Objects for a discreet Charity) she would so handsomely reprove for not using their bodily Abilities to get more honest and Prudence. more creditable Bread, that they seemed to go away no less satisfied with her pru∣dent and seasonable Counsel, than they would have been with her Alms. Her inviting Countenance did so embolden the Poor to implore her help and Pa∣tronage; Charity. her compassionate Heart rendered her so sensible of their Conditions, and her Prudence so enabled her to manage their Causes, that as she was most fre∣quently imployed in many of their important Addresses to several of her Relati∣ons on whom they depended, so she prosecuted their Suits in such a manner, that mostly she proved successful, meeting with such a Blessing from God upon her Chari∣table Endeavours, as the Justice of the Causes in which she engaged might warrant her to expect. Her very Servants had a share in the obligingness of her Conversation; For tho Meekness. she well knew her own Quality, and could keep them at a convenient distance, yet she attempered her carriage even to them, with so much mildness, that she was never observed to let fall a hasty or passionate expression to any of them, tho sometimes she was much provoked thereunto. She was of so innocent a Deportment, even from her Childhood, that one, of capacity enough to observe, and of Integrity enough to clear the Relation from the least suspicion Innocency.
of Flattery, gives her this Character; That during the space of ten years, wherein she lived in her Mothers Family, she could never observe any intemperate Word or Action; or any thing, which, if all the World had been acquainted with, would have in the least tended to her just diminuti∣on or disparagement. She studied much how to gratifie the Tempers, and to content the Dispositions Prudence. and Propensions of those with whom she conversed in all lawful ways; insomuch that she hath been often observed to deny herself for to please others, according to the Rule of the Apostle St. Paul, Rom. 15. 2. And this quality rendered her, even in matters of Argument (which she wanted not Abilities to mannage to good purpose) not obsti∣nately tenacious of her own Opinions, but obligingly compliant to the Judgment Humility. of others, where Conscience of Duty required not the contrary: And this she did, that she might give offence to none, but be (as far as possible) profitable to all; which was the more observable, because Owners of great Parts commonly affect a Dictatorship in Discourse. These qualities rendred her of an excellent composure for a Friend, and accor∣dingly Her Friend∣ship. a rare Friend she was. She indeed did not rashly admit any to the Honour of her Bosom Acquaintance; but having once lodged any there, she was candidly free and open in communicating what her Judgment (which was always riper than her years) suggested to be most for the profit and advantage of their Souls concernments, whether Advice, Comfort, or Reproof: For which last, she always reserved a Li∣berty, even towards her choicest and most intimate Friends, which yet she constantly managed with abundance of winning meekness and tenderness: And so severely conscientious was she in the discharge of this truly friendly Office, that having fre∣quent Occasions to receive Visits from, and to return them to Persons of her acquain∣tance, that made the Reverend Names of Jesus and Lord, Interjections in their or∣dinary Discourse, that she made it a Case of Conscience, whether she did not great∣ly neglect her duty in not reproving them for it. And that she might not appear more rigid unto others in this kind than she was Tender Con∣science. to herself, her own Life was a Comment upon that Text, Eph. 5. 15. See therefore that ye walk circumspectly, &c. For so exactly did she walk, that her care was to avoid not only what she condemned, but what she did but suspect in the Conversati∣on of others, insomuch, that her Conscience would not permit her to pardon herself what her Charity taught her to indulg in others. And indeed she was always of a tender and delicate Conscience, sensible of the least and smallest Sin, or but probable appearance of it; amongst which take these two Instances (of many others that might be given). That in her younger years, she addressed herself to her Governess with Tears, intreating her to forgive her, for that in her very Childhood she was Conscious that she had been defective in Affecti∣ons to her; for she thought that she did not then love her. A fault (surely) which others are far more guilty of, and yet are less troubled for it. Another time, in her more mature Age, when she had mildly enough, threatned a Child, over whom she had some inspection committed to her, that if she did not such a thing she would not love her, she presently recalled that, as too hard a word, saying, Alas! God deals not so with us, notwithstanding our continual Disobedi∣ence. Friendship. As a Friend, she observed, that exchange of Kindness is the Fewel that feeds the Flame of mutual Affections, and keeps it from burning dimly, or going out, and therefore that it was a Nourisher of Ingratitude: And she accounted it the greatest Solecism in Friendship to be suspicious in receiving, or parsimonious in returning Kindnesses; and therefore what of this Nature she received, she would not (tho sometimes possibly there were probable grounds so to do) interpret it amiss; pro∣fessing that she abhorred the suspicion of a Design in Kindness, as the very bane of Gratitude: And in her returns she was always nobly obliging, as studying rather to stand in her Friends Book a Creditor than a Debtor. We heard something before of her Devotion as an early Blossom: But it had not the Her growth in Grace. Fate that usually befalls such Precosious Flowers, to be blasted and fall of before it come to maturity; For as she grew in Years, she grew also in Grace, and in Acquaintance and Communion with God, and kept a constant correspondence and intelligence with the Court of Heaven; which Heavenly Trade she followed so close, that her Lady-Mother, whilst she was under her Government, observing how she laboured at
it more than the constitution of her Body could well bear; and being afraid, lest by overstraining the Bow to reach the Mark she aimed at, she might be in danger of breaking it, once in a friendly manner told her, That if she intended to hold on that course, she was not fit to live in this World. To which this humble Lady (probably reflecting upon herself that term of unfitness to live, in another Notion than it was meant) answered with much meekness, No indeed, Madam, I confess, I am not. When she was married, she abated not of her Devotion, and thereby rendred her∣self Her great De∣vetion. a singular instance of exception, to the difference which the Apostle St. Paul puts betwen a Wife and a Virgin (and which the Romanists make so much use of to ad∣vance a Vowed Virginity, which invention of theirs they prefer before marriage, an Institution of God) 1 Cor. 7. 34. We may better judge of her Devotions by the proportion of time which she assigned for them every day; and her constant retire∣ments for that purpose were answerable to Daniels thrice a day (Dan. 6. 10.) And since the Decease of her precious Sister in Law (Dr. Langhams Wife) who dyed some Weeks before her (as if hereby she had taken the Alarm to prepare for her own Dis∣solution shortly to follow) she more than doubled that proportion, even to David's seven times a Day, Psal. 119. 164. In her Devotions she busied herself, not only in secret Prayer and Meditation, but Time impro∣ved. also in constant reading and studying of the Sacred Scriptures, which always took up a considerable part of her daily hours of retirement, together with her reading of some∣thing or other of the Writings of some Learned, Practical Divines, with which Books her Closset was well furnished. She also made it part of her task to read over one Sermon a day, mostly out of her Note Books (for she constantly pen'd the Sermons which she heard) by which practice of hers (which she learned from the mention of the like in the life of the young Lord Harrington) and by frequent inculcation, she fixed in her Memory all that she heard, and had it in readiness for the direction of her Conversation, whensoever she had need to make use of it. Some, it may be, hearing how great a part of her time she spent thus in secret, may be desirous to know, what time she could allow for triming and adorning her Body: Or haply may suspect her to have been some strange deformed piece, who be∣ing faln out with her Glass for telling too much Truth, had neglected all care of auxiliary handsomness as meer lost labour; and that she addicted herself to the beau∣tifying of her Soul, out of despair of ever rendring her Body tollerably handsome, Soul preferred to the Body. much less beautiful. To satisfie therefore such as may entertain such thoughts, they may be informed, that her Person was such, as to a decent and middle Pitch, accom∣panied with a just proportion of all Parts, wanted not a Face, whose amiable Linea∣ments, might, by the ordinary Artifices of that kind, have been advanced to the Re∣putation of a Beauty, had she thought fit to have made use of them. Yet she neg∣lected not to bestow upon it so much time and pains (after the necessary concerns of her Soul) as decency required, tho haply not so much as curiosity (had she studied it) would have called for. And this may satisfie such Questionists. To this proportion of constant Devotion which she tasked herself for every Day, if we add her great care to fill up all the rest of her time in profitable Converse, we Time precious. cannot but look upon her as a great Example of that Command, Eph. 5. 16. For she did buy Time out (as the word signifies) of the Hands of those Wasters of preci∣ous Minutes, which buy it all up, even from the most Religious imployments, to la∣vish it out in Pass-times and Recreations. Whence it was, that (tho she did not rigidly censure others) yet she never allowed herself to see any Masks, Interludes or Plays; or to play at Cards or the like Games; and that because she doubted whether the ex∣pence of so much time, as commonly such Diversions do require, would be allowed upon her account or no. Much unlike to many great Persons, whose Time so lyes upon their Hands (as a dead Commodity) that they study always possible to put it off, because they know not▪ what profitable use to put it unto: A Prodigality, which how much cause they may have to repent of, they may come to understand, when, upon their Death-Beds, they find the want of those precious Hours and Minutes for more serious uses, which formerly they so lavishly wasted. The Heathen will rise up in Judgment against such, who purposed to allow a whole Day to no Converse that would not make him amends for the precious Time expended in it. (Sen. de Tranq.)
But we left this excellent Lady pursuing her daily design of acquainting herself Bible prized and studied. with God in her set hours of Devotion; accounting it (as she said) a singular Mercy that the Great God of Heaven and Earth, would vouchsafe his Creatures such plen∣tiful discoveries of himself both in the Books of Nature and Providence: Yea, and beyond both those, in his written Word: and therefore she prized them all, but the last especially with an infinite Affection, insomuch, that she often rose early in the Morning to read and meditate therein: Nor would she, when she was engaged in that holy Work, suffer any interruptions how necessary soever, without evident signs of trouble and discomposure, till she returned to her Beloved Bible again: Yea, to∣wards the very Book it self, out of her love to the excellent matter contained therein, she expressed such a respect, that she resented, with a pious displeasure, any undecent usage of it, or careless throwing of it among other ordinary Books. She had an high esteem of every part of the Holy Bible, yet there was one part Psalms delight∣ed in. of it, namely the Book of Psalms, which she seemed to be most passionately affected withal (perhaps, because Similitude being the ground of Love, according to the Great Philosopher) she found such agreement betwixt her own Heart, and the Spirit of that Book. This her affection she shewed by reading, or causing to be read, one or more of them constantly at her hour of repose in the Evening, which by Meditation and Discourse, she used to improve, to her own benefit and theirs that were about her. And in her Bed she was wont to lock up her lips till morning with the repetition Pious Pru∣dence. of some one Psalm, that she had by heart, to which, having added some pious Ejaculations with wonderful fervency, she usually dropped a sleep in some holy Ex∣tasie of devotion. And as she shut up her lips, and heart too in this manner at night, so she constantly opened them again in the morning with the same Golden Key: So that her sleep seemed to be but a Parenthesis betwixt her evening and morning devotions, which discontinued indeed, but did not disorder them; Yea, rather connexed, and united them into one intire piece, of which (probably) her very sleeping phantasie, by holy dreams made a part, seeing it was next to impossible, that even they, being hedged in between too such immediate acts of devotion, should not receive a proportionable tincture from the same. These her set devotions (probably) she methodized usually according to her own discretion; Yet did she not so tie up her self to her own designed order, as not to leave to herself a latitude, upon any extraordinary occasions, to vary as they re∣quired. This appeared in that upon the solemn Great Festivals, at least so observed in our Church, she would accommodate them to those seasons respectively. In the course of her life she was precisely careful to avoid all manner of sin; And very Sin avoided. solicitous in all Emergencies, that were of consequence, to understand what her du∣ty was, that so she might practise it according. For as she made Gods Testimonies her delight; so did she make them her Counsellors, as (Psal. 119. 24.) insomuch that she never determined any doubtful occurrence without great deliberation, and the best advice she could procure. But especially after her marriage, she made frequent use given by the Apostle St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 35. When she desired to learn any thing, to ask her husband. And indeed, herein was she singularly happy, in being by Gods good providence directed to such an husband, as abundantly answered that character given by another Apostle, dwelling and conversing with her as a man of knowledg, 1 Pet. 3. 7. One who was very able, and no less propense to entertain such kind of converse, especially with so near a relation as the wife of his bosom. And herein indeed, (besides the advantage which, by this means, she reaped to herself) she highly gratified him, by supplying him with opportunities of an imployment, which was so sutable to his own Genius and disposition: And withal, she herein practised the advise given her at her marriage by her prudent Lady Mother, to make herself fit conversation for her husband; Whereof this is a notable instance; That if at any time in her sollitary discourse with her husband (with which kind of converse she was much delighted) there had happened acessation on both hands for a little while, she Time impro∣ved. would be presently apprehensive of the loss, and would desire him not to let her time pass unimproved; But either to renew the conference; Or to read some good book to her. Talents impro∣ved. And yet (so eager she was of improving her Tallents by all good means) that she did not alone make this advantage of his society; But also she constantly attended the publick ordinances, from a due respect unto which she was too weighty a Christian
to be unsetled by the pitiful prejudices of those giddy times, as too many then were, to the unsufferable affronting of Gods goodness: Who vouchsafes them to us, and (it is to be feared) too often, to the forsaking of their own mercies, in the perti∣cular benefit which they might receive by them. And that she might make the best improvement of the presence of Gods Ministers, whose Lips God hath appointed to preserve Knowledge, she would according to his Command, (in private conference, when occasion was offered, as well as by publick ordinances) seek the Law at their Mouth, as Mal. 2. 7. An Instance whereof of special remark, was this, that when she met with any Her Prudence. Divines of Note, at her Father in Law's [Sir John Langham's] Table, with whom, from the time of her Marriage till her Death, she continued (and that plentiful Table was seldom without Divines of Note) she would request her Husband to set on foot some profitable Discourse, which might minister to the Company advantage of their presence and converse, professing that she judged it altogether absurd and in∣congruous to Reason as well as Religion, that Physitians and Lawyers should be so ordi∣narily entertained, with discourses proper to their respective Functions; and that Di∣vines only should be treated with things out of the Verge of their Profession; indeed with matters altogether Heterogeneous and Excentrical to the Sphear of their Holy Calling and Office. Such as we have heard was her Devotion towards God; and she had learned as well her Duty towards her Neighbours, which she made to appear in every Relation and Capacity. When by her Marriage she was to be transplanted into her Husbands Family, her Lady-Mother failed not to give her such Instructions, which, as Maxims of Duty, she constantly practized in a just proportion to all her Relations. For; The first place in her Affections she gave to her Husband, whom she so intirely loved, that she hath been heard to profess that she could even die for him: And this As a Wife. her Love she expressed in an eminent Degree, by her dutiful compliance with whatso∣ever she observed to be acceptable unto him: For she never received the least intimation of his pleasure (tho delivered in the terms of a request) but it found with her the force of a Command, with which (waving her own Opinion in Case of difference from his) she alwayes respectfully complyed; insomuch, that no instances of conjugal Happiness in others, ever minded him of any deficiency in his own, but rather pro∣duced a greater complacency in his so great felicity, whilst he found himself happy in his own Choice, even beyond the most eminent Examples. And not only her Love and dutiful deportment, but her rare Learning also, ren∣dered her to be a meet Help for him, as being thereby made capable of conversing with him in Points, both of Divinity and Humanity, and that very knowingly and judiciously, and that in more Languages than one; for she was able to make use of learned Authors in other Tongues, not needing the help of Translations. As for Latin, that learnedest piece of Peter Martyr [his Common Places] she frequently had recourse unto, and made good use of. For French, she was intimately acquainted with the Works of (That Prodigy of Learning and Language, Doctor du Moulin, out of whose Buckler of Faith, she was enabled not only to defend her own Protestant Faith and Religion, but (as she had any occasion to converse with any Popish Ladies) to batter and overthrow theirs. And for the Italian, she could make as good advantage of what Learning that Language afforded. And notwithstanding (which, in an accomplishment wherein she so much exceeded most of her Sex, insomuch that more it was remarkable) all these her rare and great parts, she was not at all elated or puffed up with them; that swel∣ling conceitedness (which the Apostle St. Paul tells us, doth too often Fly blow emi∣nent Gifts, 1 Cor. 8. 1. and which is the very Bane of our Times) she was not tainted withal: So that her Husband was a perfect Stranger, and wholly unacquain∣ted with all those inconveniences, which some have fancied, do necessarily accom∣pany a Learned Wife; for even herein she would alwayes lower her Sails to him as to her Lord and Head; making use of her own Knowledg and Learning only to capacitate her to make the best improvement of His; from whom she would (as one, who, together with her other Learning had learned her Duty from the Apostle, to) receive Instruction in all submissive silence or quietness. To her Lady-Mother she did not forget her Duty in the least; no not when her As a Daughter
married condition had manumitted her from under her Government; but she still al∣lowed her the next place in her Affections to those of her Husband, and so demeaned herself towards her, that she always esteemed her, not only a very dutiful and deser∣ving Daughter, but (as her own Phrase was) an excellent Friend also. To her Father in Law she payed the same Duty (according to the particular di∣rection given her by her Lady-Mother at the time of he Marriage) which she per∣formed to her own Mother, as considering, that where the Ordinance of God makes of two Persons one Flesh, it makes also a proportionable Union to their respective natural Relations on both sides; they being but Reliquiae Carnis nostrae, the remainder of every ones own Flesh in other Bodies: As both Arias Montanus, and our own Mar∣gin from him, render those words, by which neerness of Kin is expressed, Levit. 18. 5. To the Memory of her Predecessor in that Relation wherein she stood to Sir James Langham, she testified (contrary to what is usual in such Cases) a very singular and signal Respect; enquiring with some eagerness, after her special Virtues, which she designed for her own imitation, and by giving the Good which she heard of her a just Commendation. To the Children which Sir James had by his first Lady (Providence having denyed As a Mother. him any by this, except one in expectation, to whom the Death of the Mother ren∣dered the Womb a Grave) she was in her great care and tenderness so much more than a Mother in Law, that it was wholly impossible for any but those which knew otherwise, not to have mistaken her for their natural Mother; and if with them she had had any of her own Body, surely she could hardly have told how to have tender∣ed her love to her natural Issue (in any considerable indication) more Emphati∣cal. So solicitously did she interest herself both in the Education of, and Provision for them; and so concerned herself in all occasions of never so little bodily Distemper, that she deserved thereby to have rendered the Name of a Step-Mother a Name of Honour, and herself an Example, from whom even natural Mothers themselves might not disdain to learn a Law of kindness towards the Children of their own Bodies. From the Daughter, who was then about eleven years old, she constantly requir∣ed a repetition (by heart) of the Sermons, which she heard: And for this Task she had by her instructions so Logically methodized the memory of this young Child, that she was able to Analize a Sermon containing thirty or forty perticular Heads, with the most remarkable inlargments upon them. And this Religious care of her Children she not only continued during her health, but even in the time of her sickness also, so far as her weakness would permit. And to shew that she minded them as long as she minded any thing in this world, even up∣on her Dying-Bed, she requested her Husband (tho he needed not any such Spur to quicken him in his Duty) to breed them up in the Exercises of severe Godliness; And to see them taught such Evidences of Salvation, as might support them one Day in their Dying Agonies. To her Servants, she demeaned herself so mildly, as if they had not been so properly As a Mistress. Servants as Humiles amici (in the Moralists Phrase) a Sort of inferior Friends: which de∣portment won her from them a great deal of awful Love, and Heart Service instead of Eye Service, which is the common vice of those in that Relation. She extended her care even to the meanest of them, and that, not only for their Bodies, but for their Souls also: Calling them, who were more immediately under her inspection (her Maidens) to an account in writing (if they could write) of the Sermons which they heard, and used to help and supply their wants out of her own more exact Notes. She would call upon them in the Morning to go to God, that is, to wait upon him in their Mor∣ning Devotions before they came to wait upon her: And if any one of them (for she would examine them severally) confessed, or by silence bewrayed a neglect thereof, she would immediately dismiss her from her present attendance upon her to go about that work, and that, not without some reprehension for giving her service the precedency to Gods. And this care she took (as she would frequently express her∣self to her husband) from a deep conviction of this truth, that Governors of families are to be accountable unto God for the souls of the meanest under their inspection. A course which (so far as she could bear it) she continued even in her last sickness. For when the importunities of her own bodily distemper kept any of them from the
Church, to attend her necessities at home on the Lords-day, she would tell them, that nothing, but an absolute necessity, should have been reason sufficient for her detaining them about her: But yet (said she) your minds are at liberty: let God have as much worship as you can give him, lift up your hearts, lift your hearts: remem∣ber it is the Lords day. Here you have a rare example, very fit to be followed by others of her Sex, and Quality. Yea well it was, if those, which are far inferior to her in Birth and breed∣ing, would learn so much Religion from her, as to consider that servants have souls as well as themselves, yea immortal souls, that require sometime of triming and dressing as well as their Ladies and Mistresses bodies: And that these persons will surely give but a bad account of their servants souls, whose tedious dressings spend the greatest part of every day (not excepting the Lords day it self) and will scarce allow their Maids a minutes retiredness to lift up a short prayer in secret, where∣with to sanctifie their imployments in the day. Neither did she extend this care of her Servants, only whilst they continued with her, but enlarged it to such as went away from her: An excellent example whereof may be this: when a mean servant came to take her leave of her, she gave her (to∣gether with some other expressions of her kindness and charity) much good counsel; and intreated her husband to make some additions thereunto; but especially to dis∣miss her with a second largess of good advice. Her charity to the poor was very eminent, not staying till they made known their wants, but even pressing out of them those complaints which their modesty would Her Charity. have suppressed, by her strict enquiry into their conditions, that so she might find out wherein she might be beneficial and helpful to them. And when she was infor∣med of any of their wants that exceeded an ordinary work of charity, she was ever solicitous how she might procure a proportionable relief for such parties so concer∣ned. Neither did her charity extend only to the bodies of those whom she releived: for she gave to most, especially to those, whose great Exigencies (in probability) rendred them more careful and inclinable to follow it, a double alms, both of her bounty, and Christian counsel also; which last (tho the other was not mean) was con∣stantly the best of the too. But a thousand instances of her great and frequent Charity, have escaped the ob∣servation of any, but of those that received it, (she being in acts of this nature con∣tented with the notice of God and her own Conscience:) so that our blessed Savi∣ours Rule in this, was hers: Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth (Mat. 6. 3.) And yet, to Gods Glory and her own deserved commendation and Honour, those good deeds of this nature (which she studiously concealed in her life∣time, to avoid vain glory, which she alwayes abhorred) came to light in a great Her Humility. measure after her death, as appeared in the passionate resentments of those great crowds of poor People, who came thronging to have a sight of her Hearse whilst it was exposed to view, and shewed that it was not so much curiosity as affection that brought them thither, which they declared by their bitter Lamentations and Tears wherewith they bewailed her Death (as the Widows did Dorcas's, Act. 9. 39.) as their common and irreparable loss. In the exercise of this her Charity and Bounty, out of her great Fear (as we heard) Her Prudence. lest she should be too well thought of, if others knew the proportion of it, and that she might be the more assured of it, that it was not diverted from the right Channel, she commonnly trusted no Hands with it but her own; making it her care before she went abroad at any time, to furnish her Poor-mans Purse with such Monies as were fit to be distributed and divided, amongst such necessitous People, which Providence, before her return might cast into her way. One remarkable passage must not be omitted under this Head of her Charity, tho it only so far concerns her as to shew her Judgment in the choice of fit Subjects to lay it forth upon, and it was this; She was once told of the prodigious Bounty of some of her Ancestors towards Religious Places and Persons; as also for the training up of young Studients in the Ʋniversities: As soon as this last sort of their Charity was mentioned, she applauded this especially, thus expressing her thoughts of it; Indeed (said she) it is the best Charity to promote the Good of Souls; and in that respect it is a much nobler Bounty to be the means of consecrating the Life of one, than relieving the Age and Infirmities of twenty.
She always professed a great detestation to Tale-bearing, which is the bane of Love and Charity, from which she had a high degree of abhorrency. She always suspected Tale-bearers hated. a Passionate Accuser, as being commonly more faulty than the Party accused; it being the usual Artifice of Malice, to endeavour the concealing of its own guilt by stopping the Ears of Justice with a prejudicate Opinion against those from whom it fears a Recrimination: And in all differences of this nature which came under her Cognizinee, she constantly used this healing Method; first to allay the acrimony of the conten∣ding Spirits, and then to accommodate the difference it self. Indeed her Charity in all points, did answer the Character which the great Apostle St. Paul gives of that heavenly Grace, 1 Cor. 13. which to read, is to comprise the whole History of her Life in an Abstract or short Epitome. Read it, and accommodate the several parts of it to the former Relation: Charity (and such was hers) suffereth long, and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, doth not behave it self unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, rejoyceth not in Iniquity but rejoyceth in the Truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endu∣reth all things, verse 4, 5, 6, 7. And truly to so eminent a progress in all manner of perfections, there could hard∣ly be made any accession in this World; so that it was high time for her to be transplan∣ted from hence to the Society of the Spirits made perfect in the other World. And God (whose manner it is to gather his Fruit when it is fully Ripe) having now made her meet to be a pertaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, accordingly thought fit to translate her thither, March 28th. Anno Christi 1664. Her Sickness of which she dyed, surprized her on a sudden, being the Small-Pox, Her sickness. disguised under the reliques of a Feaver, which to appearance was almost dispelled: And truly such a surprize of Death, in the very borders and confines of expected Health, might well have discomposed and put out of frame any Soul, but such an one as hers, which always kept so good a Guard, that no event could befall her for which she was not well prepared. During the Twilight of Hopes and Fears, which sometimes held both her Physitians and Relations in suspence concerning her, she always seemed in her own inclination to desire St. Pauls choice, Phil. 1. 23. To have a desire to depart and to be with Christ, Begging of her Dear Husband, who was (as he had great cause) humbly importu∣nate Her deport∣ment therein. with God that he might have a longer enjoyment of her, that he would not pray for her Life but for her Soul, that God would make her fit to die; or if he pleased to gratifie the desires of those who so affectionately desired her Recovery, that he would so sanctifie his Hand unto her, that she might obtain Grace of him to pay her Vows. For truly her great aim and design was, to be perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God: And the great request, which she made for herself in the midst of her Feverish Paroxism, was, that by the burning heat (as she said) she might be purified and re∣fined: and conformable hereunto was that request of hers (taken notice of in a for∣mer Sickness which fell out a little before her Marriage) which she expressed with most Emphatical vehemency; O that I could do the whole Will of God! In other times of this her last sickness, when her Husband praying by her, prosecuted with earnestness his constant request for her recovery to Health, and a longer Life; when the Duty was over, she would kindly chide the exuberancy of his affections, and desire him to rest content in Gods Promise, That all things should work together for his good, Rom. 8. 28. and to submit (as she wholly did) to his Sovereign Will, telling him withal, that he had no reason to let lose the Reins to Sorrow, if he saw her dye with good evidences of her going to Heaven; and to allay his passions in his greatest fears of that separation, which he so much deprecated; We came not (said she) into the World together, nor can we expect to go out of it together; yet is it a great satisfaction to me that I am going thither, whither, after a while, you shall follow me. And she was some∣what inquisitive (probably in order to the advancement of that satisfaction) what degrees of Communion the glorified Saints have one with another, and what measure of Knowledge they have of each other? A Question which is often asked by graci∣ous Souls, but surely impossible to be fully answered from clear Grounds of Scrip∣ture, the Arguments on both sides being alike probable; neither need it create any trouble unto us, tho we still remain in the dark about it; 'tis but a little while before comfortable experience will decide the controversie to all that wait for the coming of the Lord Jesus, beyond all our uncertain Disputes; yet this we may conclude of,
that if it will add any thing to our comfort and happiness, it shall not be wanting in that place where is fullness of joy, &c. During the whole time of her sickness, she was very solicitous of her deportment Her Patience. and carriage, under the afflicting hand of God, and afraid lest the restlesness oc∣casioned by her Disease might be the fruit of Impatience; for which reason she would oftentimes (with a holy jealousie of herself) ask those about her, whether she did not seem to them to be deficient in Patience? And would seem to be troubled at the remembrance of the carriage of such Christian Friends, with whom she had been on their sick-beds, as conscious to herself how far short she came of them. Some conflicts with Temptations (if they may be so called, and not rather the Her Temptati∣ons. tenderness of her own Conscience apt to smite her (as Davids did, for cutting off but the Skirt of Sauls Robe, 1 Sam. 24. 5.) for the smallest omissions, of which yet, those that knew the strictness of her walking with God, thought she had little cause to complain) and yet those very complaints in the nature of them, argued a very great prosiciency in Holiness. Take one Example whereby you may judge of the rest: She bewailed that she had not been so sensible as she ought to have been, of the State and Condition of the Church of Christ. A thing which (I fear) most of us may more justly charge upon our selves, considering the woful havock at this day made in it by the Eastern Wild Boar out of the Forrest, and by the Foxes, the Romish Emissaries in several disguises, which seek to spoil its tender Grapes: Surely we do not as we ought, prefer Jerusalem before our chiefest Joy. But it pleased God that these thin and light Clouds were soor dispell'd and disap∣peared, the light of Gods Countenance breaking through them and filling her Soul Her Comfort. with comfort; so that she told a Friend that visited her, that she thanked God, that instead of a World full of troubles and miseries, God now had given unto her the sight of a better Country, and the Prospect hereof, together with the clearing of her title to, and interest in it (a thing which in her best health she expressed a great deal of solicitousness for, insomuch as she hath sometimes said, with an Emphasis of zealous earnestness, who is there than being once assured of the Pardon of Sin, would not be willing to dye the next hour?) made her now she had attained it, so willing and ready to re∣sign up her Soul into the Hands of God her heavenly Father, as knowing whom she had trusted; and to lay down her Earthly Tabernacle in exchange for that House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. And thus fell what was Mortal of this precious and incomparable Saint, to her own infinite gain, but to the inexpressible loss of all her surviving Friends and Ac∣quaintance, but especially of her near and dear Relations. And indeed it was her counsel to her tenderly loving and affectionate Husband in the time of her health, to take heed of overloving her, wishing him to be ware of it, as he desired not to be rid of her; for (said she) God will endure no Rival. May not the Story of this Lady Saint, Make many Lady blush thro Patch and Paint? On the Memory of the Right Honourable the Lady Elizabeth Langham. HAD I a Subject of a meaner size, Methinks I could write Volumes, and mine Eyes Land-flood whole Quires of Paper with a Tide Of Elegies. Deep Rivers silent slide. Great Contemplations tye the Tongue, that Mind That's wrapt to Heaven cannot utterance find. So Commentators on an easie Text Are endless in their Paraphrase; But vext
With a Mysterious Place pass'd by (be sure) And veil your Bonnet with Vot serviture: So holy Cloysters veneration's dumb, Their Walls being motto'd with Silentium. But as the Heralds blazon Princes Coats, Not by mean Colours, but coelestial Notes; By heavenly Planets, thence to signifie Their near approaches to Divinity. So an inspired Angel from the Muse Of Jesse's Son, this equal task should chuse, With Quil pluckt from a Cherubs wing to paint The great example of this illustrious Saint. Her Apparition makes me all agast Like her of Endor, or th' Enthusiast, Scar'd and convuls'd with his own Oracles. Thou Constellation of Miracles, Epitome of the whole Sphear of Excellence, Extract of all that Nature could dispence; Where Great and Good, Noble and Humble meet, Learned and Modest Wit without deceit. That skill in Scripture, and in Tongues she got, Made her a living Bible Polyglot. These did not puff her up, she did descend To the kind Offices of Wife and Friend; Mother and Sister as if Ethicks were Not so much taught her as transcrib'd from her. O what a glorious Creature, and how rare A Saint 'twould be, that had what she could spare! Where hath she left her equals now in Fame, But in the noble House from whence she came: Too small, alas! where Vertues sacred Fire Retires in Embers: O may't ne'r expire: Dark Lanthern of the most resplendent light, There is the Goshen, all the rest is Night. Alas! our Pharos is blown out of late By which we did prosperously navigate, And Trade both Indies for more precious wealth; A nobler Traffick with heaven and her self: But whilst we did expect so rich a Cargo, Death on the sudden made this sad Imbargo. We only expect a Restitution there Where Saints shall bereveal'd, and th' Revelation clear. William Langham. FINIS.
The Life and Death of the Right Honourable Susanna Countess of Suffolk, who Died, May the 19th, 1649. THis most Excellent Lady was Born in or about the Year 1627. She was the Second Daughter to the Earl of Holland: And came into the World by Accident, Six Weeks, as they accounted it, before her time; Nature, if we may so say, or rather Providence, being importunate to bring her forth, because she would be so admirably useful, and had but so short a time to continue here below. How happily and zealously she Improved her short Time and Life, I will, with all sincerity, endeavor to shew. And now, where shall I begin? and how shall I make an end? both seem alike difficult to my preparations; whereon shall I lay the Foundation to Build a Precious Name and Memorial for her, who her self had Purchased it so many ways? shall I tell you of her Natural Parts and Indowments? shall I tell you how her Parents and her self had perfected those by careful Education, Art and Industry? shall I let you know how those were made Graceful, by a meek, pleasant and affable Deportment? How they were adorned with the choisest Jewels, which every Vir∣tue could afford her, or which is rarest, that all these were Consecrated by a re∣ligious, even, frame and temper? and Lastly, which is the highest Perfection at∣tainable on Earth, That she and they were Sanctified by the visible opperations of the Spirit of God, whose Image sat Bright and Glorious on her Soul, and did shine through all her Conversation? These are the solid sure Foundations of a Good Name, and all these Crouded so into my Thoughts at once, that they were easily lost in the many fair paths and turnings, through which (look which way soever you would) her Excellencies, Parts, Virtues, Graces, were ready to in∣vite and draw my Meditations. But that this Universality may not disorder your Thoughts, as they have done mine, I must not seek such Arguments for her Praise, being dead, (as have no fast bottom for an Inward Good Name, and) for which she would not only dispraise, but sharply censure me, if she were living. Namely, for any thing she had by Nature; although from that too in this regard, seeing whatsoever Nature had given her, she made a Vessel to lay up some Grace or other in. If I should tell you of the Sharpness of her Wit, I could not better instance to Her Wit. prove it, than that in Questions of Religion, chiefly Cases of Conscience, and dif∣ficult places of Scriptures, she was most sudden at making Nice Doubts, and ex∣traordinary happy in resolving them, at least to the satisfying of others, although such was her Humility, and low esteem of her own Gifts, that she would earn∣estly labour for the resolution of others, rather than trust to her own. Her Judgment was most sound, as did appear, as by her concurrence with the Her Judg∣ment. Wise and Learned in Opinions about Secular Affairs, private or publick, so chiefly in the Controversies in Religion; that amids all those differences and varieties of Opinions, (to the Knowledg of which she was drawn by her curious Soul, which had a mighty Thirst after all kind of Knowledg, especially in matters which con∣cerned God, Religion, and Eternity, I say, though she knew all, Good and Evil, yet) she had a Discerning Judgment, and Exercised Senses to chuse the Good, and refuse the Evil; not only in Points simply necessary to Salvation, in which we may believe the Spirit of God would not let her fall, but in Speculative Truths her Opinions were not tainted, nor her Mind shaken, with any of those plausible Errors, wherewith the Times did then so miserably infest and distract the Church of God, and led Captive many well-meaning Souls; but her knowing and well∣grounded assent went along first with the Sure Rule, the Writen Word of God, then with those, who for sticking to that, have been held the Soundest and most Classical;
VVheresoever, in cases, she differd from the most received opinions, it was com∣monly in Practical points, and seldom but she inclined to the more strict, her ve∣ry Error (if it were one) deserving its own pardon. Her Phancy was most Divine, and although she sed it very much with Humane Her Phancy. Authors, delighting in VVit, that was Pure, and filled with ingenious and artifici∣al conceit, Poetry especially, in the apprehension of which she was very Dex∣terous, and would ever set a Mark upon such expressions as were most emphatical and quaint, many times adding a Grace by her particular interpretation, even be∣yond the intention of the Author, but with exceeding fitness and significancy; yet she most confined her Phancy to Gather Flowers in Paradise, in Gods Garden, in his Book, and in such as exercised their VVits in that Field, especially in Divine Poetry, in which kind she took an excessive delight to be conversant in Mr. Herberts Temple, in which she found out such fit and significant Elegancies, that when she read or re∣peated them, it was hard to determin whether the Author or she made the sence, such innumberable Descants would she make upon every single expression there; And to shew what delight she took in that heavenly VVit, I have heard her more than once, seriously aver, that if there were no more extant but her Copy, some hund∣reds of pounds should not purchase that little Book from her; and if it had come to the offer, I am well assured no money (of which she was no admirer at all; of Wit, Devout Sanctified Wit especially, very much) could have gain'd it from her. Her Memory excelled not her other Parts, and yet was even to admiration Hap∣py, Her Memory. of which the proofs were not so many in secular affairs, because her exercises in them were but of discretion, Necessity, and to please Others; Her joy and de∣light were in such things as adorned her Soul, and in such her Memory was the most Faithful Servant that could be imagined; she did not make it her I ask to get things without Book, but what she liked, her Memory, like a good Steward, would carefully lay up, even without bidding; Begin a Religious Ode of Mr. Herberts, which she had read, and she would ordinarily repeat the rest without sticking or missing; nay scarce could you begin any verse in the Bible to which she would not persently add the latter end, as to the Psalms of David, and some other places, I have been an Ear-witness at the tryals, and this only by the willingness of her Me∣mory, not any tasking of it; These she had at her Heart, therefore might say them by Heart, she had them rooted in her Heart and Affections, and therefore might more easily rebearse them, they lay uppermost, and therefore were ready at all occasions. Out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaketh. I must not forget to give one pregnant instance of her Memory, when imployed about these better things, she hath sometimes the day after the Lords Day, locked up her self in private, and from her Memory committed to writing a Sermon, which she had heard the Day before, so perfectly that little was wanting in the very words wherein it was delivered. Several were Eye-Witnesses of one Sermon which she thus took from the mouth of a Grave Prelat; This she had propounded to her self to do constantly, and with great alacrity pleased her self in the thoughts of it, but necessary occasions on the day following, for the most part robbing her of her much-desired privacy, she was with great grief (and I have heard her complain) compelled to lay that practice aside, until God should give her more fixed oppor∣tunities. When I think what Nature made her, I cannot also but remember that Grace re∣stored her, even her Body, to be a living Temple of the Holy Ghost, and these Three choyce Ornaments of hers, her Memory, Judgment, and Phancy, may find some fit resemblance with those Three peculiar Treasures, which were laid up the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple of God; namely the Pot of Manna, the Tables of the Covenant, and Aarons Rod that Budded: Her Judgment was as the Pot of Man∣na, in which she could find all wholsome soul-feeding Doctrines; her Memory as the Tables of the Covenant, Gods Law being her meditation Day and Night; her Phancy as Aarons Rod that Budded fresh, Buds of refined Wit and invention, always sprout-from it. Besides these she had a most Methodical Head, to dispose of all her affairs Per∣sonal, Domestick, Civil, Religious, into the clearest order that might be; And to this natural Aptness to any Art, or any Imployment, even to Tongues and Scien∣ces,
Musick, Needle-work, Cutting, Drawing, and whatsoever was useful, or harmlesly delightful. As these Natural endowments might procure her a Good Name with those, who look no higher, than meer Nature, so if I should touch at those Vertues, which gain reputation for Morality, I might advance her esteem in this Sphere, as one, who was the most absolute Governess over her own Passions, that these times could instance in; she was seldom angry, so far as to chiding, and if it came to that, she commonly checkt her self, and if she observed any did mark her, it should end in laughing at her own Passion; it being often told her, that she knew to do any thing more skilfully, than to chide, especially if it were for any worldly matter; But if it were for any thing that concern'd the Cause of God, she would be more serious in it; and often turn her Anger into a zealous reprehension and displeasure; An Oath in her hearing, or if by Chance some scurrilous, light, or prophane Speech should slip from any, it Would make her blood to rise in her Face, if she had inter∣est in the offenders, they were sure to be reproved, and on many, to reduce them from their rash inclinations in that kind, she would invent to impose some handsome Penalties; if they were strangers she would let fall some witty Check, consistent with civility, or by withdrawing her self signifie her dislike. Notwithstanding this, she had a Natural Comity, pleasantness of Behaviour, and Her Behavi∣our. Civil Urbanity, by which seldom any who fell under her reproof could depart sor∣rowful out of her presence, except it were because they did depart, or for that by not setting a Watch to the Door of their Mouths they had given just offence to her tender Christian Ears. These Vertues I name, because where discretion puts them forth in Society, they are as Precious Balms to heal the wounds, which others sin∣ful behaviour infflict on Company, or go uncured by that fullen absence of those, who are morose, and know not how to apply remedies in season and out of season, fit and suitable to the maladies. It were an endless labour to speak of her Behaviour, which for the most part was innocently cheerful, unaffected towards Superiours and Equals, undislembled to∣wards friends, familiar towards inferiours, affable and accessible to all, and in much conversation her Words were commonly Gracious, and seasoned with Salt; she was Constant in her Frindship, and none more useful, willing to take any pains, where she pretended that; unapt to hear ill of any, of whom she had once con∣ceived well; nothing was so great a disease to her, as an accusation of those, of whom she had a good opinion; her Servants fared not the worse for being Servers, to whose errours she could be as Indulgent, as to Friends, and never lookt on any Servant which she had, and believed Faithful and Vertuous, but as upon an humble Friend. This, and her diffusive kindness, which extended to all she knew miserable, did (I dare say) much increase the tears which fell for her Death, none understood Relations, none could possible observe them better than she, I appeal to Husband, Parents, Kindred, Friends, Servants, Neighbours, to witness this truth. I would not inlarge on these, which seem to be but Moral Vertues, if they had been indeed no more but meer Morality; but I am assured they flowed from a gra∣cious disposition in her; they were the streams from Jordan, the Laver of Regene∣ration, and we may well baptize them Christian Vertues in her; For it is well known, that all her actions, which deliberation did give birth unto, she did them out of a Conscience of duty, and as in the Sight of God. Hence was that Holy Fortitude and Boldness for Truth, for which she durst be Va∣liant, Her Holy For∣titude. she would suffer any inconvenience, rather than she would tell an Untruth, or make an Excuse, or let any of her Servants do it, or by any Equivocation de∣ceive or elude a question; For this have I known her much afflicted, when she had business, especially her Religious Task, how to shun company, and shun a Lie, that she might not be found out; but any Rock would she venture upon rather than an Untruth; and indeed it is to be doubted, that the not fearing to split against this hath made many make Shipwrack of Faith and a good Con∣science. Her Charity I need not speak of; the Poor and Distressed, whom her pitiful heart Her Charity. had often relieved, did at her Death and long after Mourn over her loss, and much Praise her abundant goodness in releiving them; this she ever did without the least
Ostentation imaginable. Indeed she was made up of Christian kindness and Pity; and though I told you she was a Perfect Governess of her Passions, yet her Com∣passion always governed her; nor did I ever know her shut her hand, when any in want opened their Mouth for an Alms, she could not excuse her self by some∣times having no Money about her, if any of her Attendants had, they were sure to be Almoners. But her High-way Charity was not the Tithe of what she gave, they need not come to her to ask, but Clothing, and Food, and Physick, and other Comforts, were sent to their Habitations, that had any, nay, and these provided also for some, who must otherwise have lyen without Doors, and her self a frequent Visitour to be truly informed of their Persons, and Condition. But what do I speak of her Charity to the Bodies of the Poor? she had a Way of relieving the Souls of all by her Daily Alms of Prayers offered up; by her Instructi∣ons where she found the Ignorant, by her Counsels to the Doubting and Scrupulous? How hath she been moved to see some Wretches by distraction deprived of their Reason? how she would inquire after the known and secret causes of such Distem∣pers, and cast about to have some Cure if possible? I am sure she hath spoke and wrote, and travell'd, for one, well known in her time, whom it pleased God to let fall into that to be lamented Condition. But still she had more kinds of Charity than I have named, one was in forgiving Injuries, which might be by mistakes perchance, but if wilfully or maliciously cast upon her, it was the same thing, indeed the same Nothing in her account or Memo∣ry. I told you of her Memory, how Tenacious it was; but truly if it were to lay up an ill-Turn, it had no hold at all; Benifits and Good-Turns, Good-Deeds, and Good-Sayings, were Ingraven in her Heart, as if written in Adamant, never to be blotted out, Offences and Injuries never came near it, her Memory was Water to them, even the Water of Lethe, which makes them that drink of it forget all things, all things of that nature I am sure was soon forgot by her; An Unkind∣ness indeed, for the time might make a deep impression, a great wound in her Heart, where all things were so contrary to it, so made up of Kindness, Pity, and Charity, but it could never beget the like unkindness there. I could now speak of the lively Sings of her Faith and Hope, by which her Soul Her Faith and Hope. mounted even into the Bosom of Christ, above all fears and griefs, which these Times brought thick upon her; Fear indeed, if it came suddenly, would a little surprize her, an incidency to that Sex, and the tenderness of her nature, but as∣soon would she recollect her self, and by Reason and Religious Arguments dispel all carnal Fears. So did her Grief yield to Faith and Patience, and the Comforts which she could fetch readily out of Gods Storehouse, and pertinently for her present malady, and the cure of it. When her first-born Son, her then only Child, had the Pangs of Death upon him, she (after Prayers and Tears) sat very disconsolate, and when at the report of his departure, Floods of Tears would needs Flow from her Eyes, to stop these Flood-gates she took her Bible, and fell to singing of Psalms, until she had broken the violent torrent of her Passion, and brought her Soul to a cheerful Submission to the Will of God. I have spoken of her natural Parts and Endowments, a little touch I have given of some of her Virtues and the Ornaments of her Mind. Those more outward of her body, as she undervalued them, so I pass them over: yet one thing let me Her Humility. tell you of her Apparel, and indeed the chief, which she delighted in, and that which was seen above and over all the rest, was that Garment which the Apostle commends, Humility, she was clothed all over with that, the Ornaments of her Mind and Body all shined through that, and the Veil of Modesty. But for her Attire and Dressing, this I can aver, that her self had the least af∣fection Her Attire. for it, for her self, but only for those who were related to her, that she might not seem mean or unworthy their allyance or affections. This resolution she had taken up long since, and avowed to wear no other Garments but Black, so long as she should live, not only presaging what those Tragical Times might require, but as being the gravest and most suitable to her disposition. And to check all thoughts of Phancy or delighting in outward Ornaments, amongst some Places in her Bible, at which she set a Memento, and a Mark to be often read, there did af∣ter
her Death stick a Pin, which she fastned with her own Hands in the Margent, against that Place in the Third of the First of St. Peter, where the Duty of Chri∣stian Wives to their Husbands is prescribed, but particularly it did point at the Third, Fourth, and Fifth verses, Whose adorning, let it not be the outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of putting on of Apparel, or of wearing of Gold, but let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price; the place is worth the consideration of all, especially of that Sex. A rare mark of modest Gravity of one of her Place and Age, she being at her Death (which adds much to all that I have said or shall say) but just past the Two and Twentieth Year of her Age, not come to her full strength and flourishing, such a Blossom I think can scarce be paralleld. Having, as I said, spoken a little of her Endowments, and the habits of her Mind, spare me a little time to let you see that her Practice was according to those Habits, which she had not as Talents Buried in a Napkin, but with mighty diligence and vigour improved them to her Masters use, to Glorifie God the giver of those Gifts, to edifie and benefit those to whom she related, and to make her own Cal∣ling and Election sure. I shall speak but of those which were the constant Practice of her life, and such as may seem preparations for her Death, and I will be as brief as it is possible to be in such an Argument. She began the Day with God, and as she open'd it, so she shut up the Evening Her great De∣votion. with the same Key of Prayer. Most commonly as soon as she could break sleep from her Eyes (or because she would not take her fill of sleep, which she thought she loved too much, others must wake her) gliding into her Closet, and before she dressed her Body, (except some urgent occasion required it) she perfumed her Breath with Prayer, and then read her daily Task in the Bible, which was the Psalms of David usually observed for the day of the Month, and six Chapters, intending by that course to read the whole Bible over twice in the Year, which I am confident she did not fail of, for these last seven Years; for if necessity did compel her to omit once or twice, she doubled or tripled her number at the next opportunity. She ordered her Soul first, and then all other things were set in exactest Order, Her Digesting her Time. Books, time, &c. she had digested her hours into methods for affairs, repasts, read∣ings of Books of Humanity, Divinity, Devotion chiefly, as may appear both by the Books marked in the Margent, and noted with her own Hand, as also by her Papers and Memorials, when she began to read any Book. Besides reeding her Task in the Bible, which she did for the daily Bread and Food of her Soul, she for pious recreation and more exact knowledg, had set time apart to examine the hard places by Diodates Notes, and others, which she had by her, and because she could not stop her current of reading at that instant to stay and search every dif∣ficulty, she set a mark at them to be searched at her further leisure. She had marks of several kinds, some for difficulties, some for Memorials of choyce places, or pertinent to some peculiar purposes, but I know it was her resolution to have read the Bible together with Expositors in a daily Task, besides her number of six Chapters a day, and the Psalms, and besides that she noted such Places as she intended to confer with Divines or others about the meaning of. I shall not need to name the other Books, which fed her Devotion, indeed on some she desired to have a holy surfet, to name a few, were to injure her, none came in her way, which she would not tast, and if they relisht, feed on; When she began to read an Author, is sometimes to be found in her Calendar, and in those Books wherein she most delighted, how far she had read, and with what she was most affected, is to be seen by marks in the Margent. She had a Zeal for the observation of the Lords day, and times set apart for De∣votion, Her Zeal for the Lords Day. but especially before she received the Holy Communion (which she did strive to do very frequently, as finding much comfort by it) then she used all ex∣act strictness and serious Preparation. She sometimes her self would Repeat with some of her Family, what she had re∣membred of the Sermons; which she could also note in the Church, and used it for a time, until she either found it a little damped the devoutness of her
attention, or because she had a purpose so to order it, that she might afterwards have privacy and leisure to write down what her memory would retain (which how much it was I have told you before.) If I would pursue particulars, it were hard to find any shore in the wide Ocean of her Praises, and yet in describing her life, I need not fear flattery, for truly to set out only some part of her Worth, and to keep back the rest, or to draw her Picture with my rude Pencil, is far beneath the true and genuine Beauty which was in her large Soul, so there is no fear of exceeding. But if any should say, why nothing but praise? had she no Errours, no infirmities or sins? truly yes, she had, and, as if she had desired with the Apostle, only to Glory in her Infirmities; as if the World were not envious or not prying enough to find them out, she hath left a Catalogue of them upon record under her own hand, as hath been seen since her death amongst her Papers; as if she had rather wished this solemnity might have been spent in rehearsing them, than any of her Virtues: She had written down 46 Particulars, which she used to bewail as faults, or infermities, or wants. But her Sins and Infirmities, so often by her bewailed, and buried in the grave of Christ, I doubt not but your Christian Charity will think fit to be buried with her, or in a deeper Grave, the grave of Oblivion, whilst her Vir∣tues, and Good Name due to them, shall live, and flourish, and find a perpetual Monument in every one of our Hearts. She was, as all Gods Children are, some∣times under great Sorrow and dejection of Spirit, and tryed by great Temptations, under which some few years ago she lay for a time, and it cost her many Tears, which God at the last regarded, and heard her Prayers, delivered her out of the snare, and set her on an high and sure Rock by Faith. so I shall have done with that part of Practice, wherein the course of her Life was seen; I desire to add something of that, which might seem to fit and pre∣pare her for, or at least to attend her at her Death. Indeed her whole Life was that, which sound Philosophers, or rather sound Christians would have it, A Constant Miditation, or Preparation for Death; She was Her Prepara∣tion for Death. never long unprepared for that; the assurance of which, how great a Comfort it has been to her surviving Friends, is not easily imaginable. For it pleased God to let the violence of her Disease seise upon her choycest and most exquisite part, her Intellectuals (although with some short and sweet returns) for Three or Four days before she dyed. Her Behaviour on her Death-Bed was the most sweet, and the most comfortable, and Christian, that ever I heard of, She was Twice thrown down upon the Bed of Her Behaviour on Her Death-Bed. Death, she might say indeed she Dyed daily by renewed acts of mortification; But in a true and proper sence, before this expiring, she had totally resigned up her self, and expected every moment when the Angels should fetch her Soul from her body once before. The story is famously known to all that knew her, about Six Months ago (in The cause of Her Death. the Month of November last past) she having reckon'd her self to be with Child, and finding unusual Symptoms, such as in that case she never had experience of, she thought that God did now admonish her to set her House in order, and to set her Soul in order, for it was very probable, he might finish her days on Earth, at her bringing forth. The time past, which she expected should be the hour of Deliverance, and af∣ter it some weeks, which caused great doubting of her Condition, whether she had conceived at all, and sometimes Physitians and those about her conclud∣ed the Contrary, but no doubt did she make of being Prepared for Death, of which she often discoursed, and what thoughts she had of its Nearness; and be∣cause she had bodily strength and went abroad, she took the opertunity of gain∣ing Spiritual Strength to her Faith and other Graces, by pertaking of the Holy Com∣munion; Six days or there abouts after that, (a Month after her time) she fell into the Pangs of Women in travel, and when the Midwife had spent all the day, and could give no help, but totally dispared, in the evening it was discovered, that it was no living Child, of which she labour'd, but of that, which in the Judge∣ment of all about her, must within a few hours (or days at most) make her a dead Woman. She soon apprehended their fears, and earnestly beg'd now (as she did at all
times) that she might be plainly dealt with concerning her condition for Life or Death, which she would in no Case indure to be dissembled to her, or concealed from her; her friends did observe her Desire, and confessed their hopes of Life to be small or not any, but desired her to submit to Gods Will in her disso∣lution. How would you now imagine she received the Sentence of Death? with Frights Her receiving the Sentence of Death. or Fears; or Sorrow and Grief to part with the World, and her dear Relations in it? Truly with a very contrary guise. She sent for those, who most nearest related to her, and her Kindred and Friends, and composing her Countenance and gesture to the most Majestick and undejected Gravity that I ever beheld, She fell to taking leave, bequeathing, not her worldly Affairs, but spiritual Comforts, her fervent Prayers, Divine Blessings, her Weighty Counsells and Admonitions fitted particularly, and made proper to every one to whom she gave her Heavenly Legacies, especially to her Lord, her Children, her Allies, and Servants, and all were such as might tend to direct them in wayes of well-doing, by which they might through Christs merits, meet a∣gain in Glory. But all this with such Affection, such Zeal, such Courage, such De∣monstration of Faith and Assurance of her going now from Pain and Misery to Joyes unspeakable, that the Image of that Day and her Aspect will never depart out of the Memory, of several who looked on. If you had seen Her on her then suppos∣ed Death-bed, you would have thought of Moses on Pisgah, or Jacob on his Death-bed, dividing his blessings, of dying Joshua, or of David, or the best Composed Saints. To see her dearest Pledges and Relations, Friends and Servants standing by, flowing with Tears and Lamentations, and her self stedfast and unconcern'd, Coun∣selling; Comforting, Blessing them with her last breath (as she and they eved) it made an appearance, as if all they had been the Parties, which must dy, and She only to give them Christian advice to Suffer Death with Patience, as if she had been in perfect Health, they in present danger of Death, such was her Assurance and Joy from the Holy Ghost, as if she had begun to tast Eternity, and the Happiness of that Life in the very tidings of Death. Her Legacy left to her two dear Children was her desire to her Lord, that what∣soever Her Legacy to Her two Chil∣dren. Provision he should make for their outward condition, (of which she was neither distrustful, nor yet solicitous, but fervently she besought him) they might be brought up in the strictest way of Religion and Life, even in that strictness of life, which the World might count Puritanisme. The strictest ways were alway ac∣counted best for her own self in her Life, and now at her Death she bore witness to them, and commended them  the Dearest Pledges of her Love. After, she spent her time in declaring the Affiance she had on the Merits, and Her Affiance in Christ. the Assurance she had on the Love of Christ; She did not conceal also how she had wrestled with Doubtings, and did propound the greatest Scruple, which lay upon her Conscience for the sincerity of her Repentance. She spake of the Comfort she had at her last ceceiving the Sacrament, she confest indeed, that she might have soyld her self after; but yet the last night she had also beg'd pardon (and I was told by those, that know it that she had then been a whole hour in private upon her knees, although at that time no danger of Death was feared) and further profess∣ed, that now nothing was a greater burthen than this, that although she was Will∣ing to Dye, yet she found also a willingness in her heart to Live, which she much blamed in her self. Although that might proceed from the consideration of the good of those she was to Leave, rather than that it was better for her to stay. And so it seemed good to our Heavenly Father, that she lived Six Months after her time might seem to have been expired; as Nature seem'd importunate to gain her into the World, (as was said in the beginning so she was as unwilling to let her depart out of it, to loose one of her choycest Children) It seemed good to Almighty God, even to let the Sun of her Life go back some few Degrees, after it seem'd to be in the very lowest point of Setting; his marvellous Providence pointing out such ways, and making all Circumstances so concur even beyond hope, (whereof if any one had failed, there could have been no possibility of recovery) that she seem'd rather by a Divine Miracle raised from the Dead, than hy any humane help or hand restored from danger. And indeed as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11. 35. Women received their dead raised to
life again; so did they then look upon this not as a Recovery, but as a Resurrection. And if you please, reckon her Death from that very hour, that she resign'd up her self to it so freely, and if we look upon her walking since, we may believe she was as one Dead to the World, as one that was Risen with Christ, and had her Conversation in Heaven intentionally, her affection, I am sure on things above not on things on Earth. Account her now as Dead, as one whose life was hid with Christ in God. For shall I speak plainly, she walked on Earth, but she lived not after this, as to her self, to others indeed she did, and to their especial Comfort. I have observed Two or Three things for which God in his Providence might bestow this little time, and lend her to her Friends on Earth; he might seem to spare her a little, and give her space for these Reasons. One was in mercy to her Father. Another to her Dear Relations at home. A Third was to finish some Work upon her own Soul, for the good Example of others, her own Work was done; however in all these I may say She lived not to her self as in the World. To her Father in his extream affliction God made her an unexpressible Comfort. I speak not in regard of any temporal things, which God had determined, as we saw, to cut away wholy from him, as to this life, and all the Comforts of it; which not withstanding to procure. What Pains, Travel, Watchings, Fastings, in that extreme cold season did she undergo, (even boyond what Her Duty to her Father in the Time of his Im∣prisonment. might be expected from her Sex, but especially one of the tenderest breeding in it) was very ob∣servable by all, and Satisfactory to him abundantly. But to shew that it was the service of his Soul that she aim'd at, as if her Soul had been held in life, for that purpose that she might be an Instrument to draw her Fathers with her to Eternity. Let me tell you but this. When all hopes of Life were past, and after She, with the rest of those Her Love to his Soul. who were dear to him, had taken their final leave, that the rest of his hours might be spent with his spiritual Comfortors, She could not give sleep to her Eyes, nor Slumber to her eye Lids, untill she had once more visited and discoursed with him, but yet in matters relating wholy to Eternity. And therefore coming betimes in the Morning, first timorously into his Chamber (after she had watch∣ed all night in a room hard by for that purpose) when he had with joy discernd and welcom'd her, they presently fell into Conference; in which she, with an humble boldness, did so question and answer, rip up and stich together again, gently wound and then give balm to the State of his Soul; In a word she did so apply both Law and Gospel to him, that being refreshed with these comforts, he cryed out, Happy I that I should from a Child of mine own receive such Consolation, And after that he told a Reverend Divine, who came to administer the like Consolation, That he thanked God he had a Child there, who, (though he said it before her face) was able to be his Counsellour in all his doubts. Also another Divine present, heard her half an hour to admiration as he professed. After her Fathers death none, so nearly relating, bore all with the like Christian patience as she, acknowledging it the wise Method of Almighty God thus to bestow Mercy on a Soul, which, with∣out Her bearing his Death. so great a measure of Affliction, in Health and in the Glory of his prosperity, could not, or would not ever have so humbly and sincerely sought it from the Bed of sickness, if death should have taken him from that Place. She likewise said that she could not (if it were possible and lawful) with her heart and judg∣ment with him alive again, although it were well known, that never Parent lay deeper in the Af∣fections of a Child than he in hers. But she durst not wish him so bad a change, as to leave Hea∣ven for Earth, especially this earth as things now make it. To another she said, that now, if God would give her leave, she would go into the Country, and she had cast her Family-business into such a way, that for her self she would have nothing to do Her setting her House in Or∣der. but to be Ready to Dye. For, this let me note, there was not a night in Six Months since her last recovery from her mortal sickness, that she rose from off her knees from her prayers without Tears running down her Cheeks, as I am certainly informed by those who had reason to know it. And now she desired conference with one, whom in her Souls affairs she had trusted, from whose Hands she intended to receive that Holy Mystery, she discovered her spiritual codition to him plainly and Clearly; and Charged him to deal as severely and impartially with her, and still would urge him again and again, after this manner, O but you deal more gently with me, than you would with ano∣ther I beseech you let me know the worst. Although her disease got into her Brain and bred some disturbance there, yet it pleased God to afford her many clear and bright Glimpses; One remarkable I shall mention wherein she poured forth her Soul in a large Prayer, the words of which cannot be recollected, but in effect, it was of such most fervent, melting, moving passages, as if she would out-wrestle God, and rend from him his mercies by unresistable violence, and take the Kingdom of Heaven by Force out of his hands, espe∣cially, as for laying before him his Name, his Attributes, his Bowels, his Christ, all his Cimfortable Promises, which she fetch't with most admirable skill, choyce, and Fluency from every precious Vein in the Rich Mind of his Word: This was the last continued Act of Reason, which she per∣formed; only, when her strength was even spent, she owned her Dear Relations, when they came unto her, and did let them understand, she was now marryed to Christ? joyn'd with most heedful attention in Prayer, with one, whom she then desired to do that office, gave signs of approbation, and requested that he which poured it out on her behalf would not go out of the room; after that, within little more than an hour, in a quiet kind of sleep, the Passages of Life being stopped, she yielded up her Spirit unto God that gave it, the 10th Day of May, 1649. leaving behind her the most Her Death. Bitter and most Loud Lamentations of her Friends. To whom she was the most desired Creature, that God ever placed in their Eyes or Relations. FINIS.
